THE FIRST BOOK OF PRIMALEON of Greece.

Describing the knightly deeds of Arms, as also the memorable adventures of
Prince Edward of England.

And continuing the former History of Palmendos, brother to the fortunate
Prince Primaleon.

LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at his shop by the
Royal Exchange. 1595.

The first Book of Primaleon of Greece: Describing his Knightly deeds of
Arms, as also the memorable adventures of Prince Edward of England. And
continuing the former History of Palmendos, Brother to the fortunate Prince
Primaleon. etc.
CHAP. I.
How the Ambassadors of France came to Constantinople, where they were
Honorably received by the Emperor, who having heard the effect of their
Embassage, and conserred thereon with the Prince Arnedes: affianced him
immediately to his Daughter Philocrista, by whose hand the Ambassadors
presented the Letters of credence from the King their Master.

IN the History of Palmendos, after which this Book of Primaleon follows,
you have heard of the Love between the Prince Arnedes (...) Philocrista,
Daughter (...) Emperor Palmerin, and (...) a Courtier was sent to advertise
the ^ing his Father thereof: That he might ^n^ay the like good fortune, ^s
Palmendos had done with his mistress Francelina, and thereby confirm a
general rejoicing. The messenger being careful to dispatch this business,
made such haste in his journey, as in short time be arrived at the famous
City of Paris, where the King understanding the will of his Son, quickly
resolved to conclude these assures: Electing as chief in this Embassage, the
Duke of Orleaunce, a very wise and prudent Lord, commanding also that the
Marquess of Oliuet, and the County Peter (one of the bost knights in his
Court) should be are him company, with many other Barrons so sumptuously
accoustred, as euidentli declared, how far the French exceeded al other Nations
in magnificence and good parts, whereof at this time we have no leisure to
speak. The King having given them his Letters of credence, and instructions
concerning the sum of their charge: he delivered them sundry precious gifts,
which he sent to Philochrista and the Prince Arnedes. But before their
departure, there came a Knight to the Court from the King of Castile, to
advertise Recinde, how his Brother being deceased without issue, all the
people verse much rejoiced, that the Scepter of the Kingdom should fall to a
Prince so valiant.

When the King of France heard these news by the gentleman of Spain named
Pinedo, be made answer, how Recinde was gone with his Son Arnedes to
Constantinople, where (as he heard by credible intelligence) he daily won
great honor and renown. Hereupon, Pinedo determined to pass into Greece with
the Ambassadors, and coming to Tolloain Prouence, they embarked them selves
on the Mediteranean Sea; where sailing with wind at will, it was not long
before they arrived at Constantinople, even at such time as Arnedes was in his
wonted passions of love. No sooner were they entered the Port and bad cast
Anchor, but the Duke of Orleaunce commanded a general iouysance, in applauding
heaven for their happy nanigation: whereof the Emperor being advertised, he
sent to know the cause of this rejoicing. When he heard the arrival of the
French Ambassadors, he was right glad thereof, hoping Arnedes would now
recover health by some good tidinges: and therefore sent speedily to acquainte
him therewith, entreating him to be of good courage, seeing the Lords of his
Country were come so happily. It were needless to demand if Arnedes were
well pleased with these tydinges, considering the present cure he found in one
moment he reby, which showed, that herein consisted the only medicine for
his malladie: this made him leave his bed, and go with Primaleon to the
Emperor, who seeing him come so (...), was not a little glad of his good
recovery, and said: Me thinks Sir Arnedes that the arrival of these French
Gentlemen, has revived and very well strengthened you. Well have you said my
Lord (answered Arnedes) because it is the only means of my restoring.
Philocrista (who knew full well the depth of his amorous desiers) rejoiced
maruellouslie at this fortunate occurrence, so that by outward view of her
countenance, might easily be discerned the inward content of her bart, and
whence proceeded this alteration: wherein (by silence) she bewrayed to the
French Prince, what boldly she durst not utter in speech, and whereof he
needed no interpreter, but with like signs returned thankful requital,
minding to go presently to the Port, to see by whom the King his Father had
sent this long expected message. The Emperor commanded many of his Barrons
with him, for more Honorable accompanying the Ambassadors to the Palace, and
in sign of greater favor, Primaleon himself went with Arnedes, who sent his
divarse before, to let them understand his coming to the Port: Whereupon, the
Duke of Orleaunce with his company immediately la^ded, where first beholding
their young Prince, they ran hare-headed to kiss his hand, when he haning
severally embrased the, thus spoke to the Duke of Orleaunce, My noble Cosen,
how many pleasures has your art shall here enriched me withal, in sooth
far more than you can easlie think on? But tell me (I pray ye) ere we
pass any further, how sares the King my Noble Lord and Father? So well as
your heart can desire my Lord, answered the Duke, and as one wounderfull
longing speedily to see you: wherefore his will is, that making so little stay
here as possible you can, you use some have in returning to your Country of
France. Herein shall I most gladly obey him, replied Arnedes, ere many days
after this he expired: in mean space, give honor to Primaleon here the
Emperors Son, who has vouchsafed to come in person to welcome ye.

Primaleon marvelled that these French Lords and Knights so humbled themselves
to Arnedes, which made him imagine that he was Son to their King: in regard
whereof, using the greater kindness to the Duke of Orleaunce and the other
Ambassadors, he desired the^ to resolve him concerning the estate of Arnedes,
who hitherto had not disclosed himself to any one. My Lord (said the Duke)
this young Prince is out Sovereigns Son, who in respect of his earnest desire
to be service to the Emperor your Father: thought it meetest for him to come
unknown to this Court, and here to remain so concealed, till he should
perceive his private deseignes fall out to his own contentment. Concerning
which, the present message committed to our trust by the King his Father, I
hope will sort to good and successful end; with the help of him whom I pray
so speed us, as herein our enterprise may not be disappointed. In good faith
said Primaleon (turning himself to the French Prince) I have very great reason
to complain of you Arnedes, that you would thus long hide yourself from me,
for although you resolved in coming hither, that no one should know ye: yet
you might have exempted me from that universal number, considering the
habitude and secrec^s you might boldly have reposed in me, that I should not
have continued so long ignorant of your royal race. My Lord (answered Arnedes
embracing him) herein I beseech you hold me excused, in respect that straying
so far from the French Court, I determined to do somewhat in actions of Arms,
that might be worthy report of my progeny, before myself were known to any
one: And being concealed, I might best do it, considering no way else could I
reach the top of my desire: but any thing wherein I employed myself, might
rather redound to my disgrace than commendation. Certainly (replied Primaleon)
if by deeds of Arms you desire to publish our name, me thinks you should
hasten the day of Turney, considering your Royal geniture, and thereby
express your knightly valor and resolution. Ah my Lord (said Arnedes,
interrupting him) it pleases you to account me among men of desert, though
far unworthy am I to be seen in any such assembly. Notwithstanding, if good
will may incite forward a generous mind, by puissaunce to witness some part
of his strength: I hope I should not be reputed amongst the weakest. No truly
(answered Primaleon) but rather amongst the strongest, where honorable
victory will set on your head a triumphall Crown.

But leave we these speeches till some better convenient time, and go we to
the Emperor, who will be most joyful hearing these news. So mounting on horse
back with the Ambassadors, they rode to the Palace, where gracious
entertainment was commanded them by the Emperor. And in this time Pinedo made
known to the Prince Arnedes, how he past into France to find Recinde, whom
now he came to acquaint with the death of his Brother, and how all the Barrons
and people of Castile, would willingly accept him for their Lord and King.

Of these tidinges was the Frenchman not a little glad, that his Cousin Recinde
(whom he loved as himself) was heir to the Scepter of Castile: But yet was
he as sorry on the other side, because he could hear no report of him,
wherefore persuading Pinedo, that he hoped of his short return, in that the
Tourney at his marriage would be a mean thereof, which was published through
all the parts of the Empire, he thought it needless any further to pursue his
search.

Now the Emperor (who in this space had understood the descent of the Prince ^
Anedes) when he saw him enter the Hall with his Son Primaleon, arose from
his seat to embrace him, saying: How happens it my Lord Arnedes, that you would
all this while so cunningly dissemble with us, in shade wing of whence and what
you were? wherein you have done us g^^at discourtesie, and lest such honor as
your virtues deserved. Tell me I pray you, wherefore did ye so conceal your
self, knowing how happy I would have thought my self, to have understood of
you with out thee sayning:

My Gracious Lord replied Arnedes, most humbly I in treat ye, use no such
words on my behalf, because I know my self unworthy of them, much less of
the honor I have received in your Country, which a better man than I can no
way deserve. But never could any quiet enter my thoughts, till I beheld the
Maginficence of your Court, and that to my poor power I might do you service:
poor and slender in truth is it in respect of my good will, which is equal
with the most affectionate servant you have, among whom I desire your Grace to
repute me, as the man whom no one shall out-goe in zeal and devotion of
mind. And a great discountenaunce of heaven have I accounted it, that no
occasion hitherto would happen, whereby I might lively express the true
affection imprinted in my heart.

It suffiseth (answered the Emperor) what already you have done, proof
enough to give you the reputation of one of the best Knights in the world.
And as for me, if I be not deprived of the favor (considering the love I bear
ye) I shall evermore continue my former opinion, and repute my self happy in
making alliance with you, when you shall think expedient to yield thereto.

Arnedes, who saw the passage open, whereby his soul might soonest be
conducted to rest, and by him likewise that had the only key thereof: was
marueilously overcome with thy, when taking the Emperor by the hand, to kiss
it in sign of thanks, he said. Well may I now vaunt my self to have attained
the height of humane solicitie, being offered by your Grace an alliance so
honorable, for which I know not how to show my self thankful (in discharge
of the duty wherein I stand bound) but only by continuing your humble (...),
and day by day to confirm the indissoluble bend, wherein I am everlastingly
wrapped by this extraordinary favor. Notwithstanding, if my vnsayned
affection, to remain your obedient servant, or dutiful Son if you please,
may stand for an earnest penny: Then entreat I you to accept thereof as I
present it, to the end I may hereafter be so ready in performaunce, as now I
am in heart. For even as the greatest clap of thunder follows the fairest day,
and nothing else in suddennes may be compared thereto: as ready shall I be
upon receipt of the very conjectures of your desires, to satisfy the same,
than if I should give attendance upon commandment.

The Emperor being marvelous glad to hear him use such honest speeches,
gathered very well with what shaft he was wounded, and that the matter now
opened by conference, was but only to seek a speedy balm or medecin for the
hurt received. Hereby he took occasion to let him ^it by him, which drew on
many glaunces still to the same purpose: but among the rest, when the Emperor
heard the whole story of Recinde his Cosen, he could not choose but greatly
wonder thereat. Hereof was M^lioia joyful beyond measure, because she entirely
loved the Spanish Prince: yet could she not compare with Philocrista in
contentment of spirit, by reason she wanted the amorous object which she had,
nor could she participate in those unspeakable pleasures, wherewith the hearts
of the other twain were specially delighted.

On the morrow, the Emperor caused the Palace to be richly adorned with
tapistrie of gold and silver, and his most sumptuous Iowels to be placed in
open show, that the French Ambassadors should behold his stately pomp: they
likewise coming into the Hall, attired in their fairest and costl^est
habillimentes, were received by the Emperor with exceeding Honor, and to him
(by fair Philocrista) they presented their Letters of crdence, the effect
whereof hereafter follows.

The Letter sent from the King of France, to the Emperor Palmerin.
To the most high and magnanimous Prince, Palmerin, de Oliua Emperor of
Constantinople, true mirror of Chiualry: Jews, by the grace of God, King of
France, wishes health condign to his excellent mightines.
THe assurance given me of the renown of your generositie (my most dear
Brother) which is spread to the very furthest, most barbarous, and hidden
regions of this hemisphere: caused me immediately dispatch my Ambassadors
toward your Majesty, to entreat that you would consent to an alliance, which
I have purposed (if you please) between our houses, according to the
ordenaunce of the last will, which the into king of famous memory my most
Noble Father (whom God absolve) left me when he paid his mortal tribute to
nature. And because I have instructed the bearers hereof, in all the points
and articles which on our behalf you are to be acquainted withal: I shall
need to use the less discourse by Letter, reposing only on then sufficiency.
Requesting you that in this cause you will give them credit, or what else they
shall think meet and determine, concerning the marriage of Arnedes Prince of
France my Son, as if I were with you my self in person: and look what
honor shall be done to them in your Country, I will account it as received by
my self. But least happily you should repute it strange, that thee ^est Son
of so great a house as this, should come to your Court so meanly attended:
therein I desire ye consider his earnest affection, to accomplish some
memorable deed unknown, whereby you may easly gather, how gladly he would go
beyond, or equal the best.

Your affectionate and perfect friend. The house of France.


This Letter being read, the Emperor took the Ambassadors into his Chamber,
where after he had heard at full the sum of their message: immediately he
called together the Princes and Lords of his privy Council, to let them
understand his intent concerning these affairs.

This by their advise was immediately confirmed for good, as well to accomplish
his promise to the deceassed King of France, as also in respect Arnedes
behavior was so generally commended, being a virtuous Knight, and very
forward to Martial exercise. But above all the rest, Primaleon was most
willing and ready in consenting to this alliance, knowing the earnest desire
of his Sister, to see herself the wife of Arnedes another Adonis: and for
beauty, well might Philocrista be resembled to Psyches, or rather (if you
will) a second Venus.

The marriage being concluded, on the morrow following they were affianced
together, with very stately and magnificent triumphs, so that both in the
Palace and thorough the City, was nothing but disportes and pleasure: to the
no little content of the Emperor and Empress, as well for the coming and
knowledge of Palmendos, as for this love knot between Philocrista and the
Royal Prince of France. And now does Primaleon arm himself for knighthood,
that hereafter he may bestow his time in those commendable occasions.

Here the French Author confesses his fault, for having intiteled the whole
book the first Book of Primaleon, both that which goes before, (called by me
the History of Palmendos) the name agreeing with the discourse, and this, where
Primaleons chivalry does now but begin. His reason is, that the young Prince
being very daintylie brought up, and not of years to receive the order of
Knighthood: he took occasion (in mean while) to report the brave behavior of
his brother Palmendos. But now shall we speak of the gentle Prince himself,
the only mirror of honor and Arms, as by reading his History you may
perceive.

CHAP. II.
How Primaleon entreated the Emperor Palmerin his Father, in the presence of
the French Ambassadoures (who prepared themselves to the Grecian ports) that
he would give him the order of Knighthood. And how the Lord of the enclosed
Isle sent him a Sheeld and a Sword, wherewith he took his order. And what
he sent to the Emperor, which he afterward sent to the King Florendos his
Father, requesting his presence at the marriage of fair Philocrista.

TO begin the narration and discourse of the deeds of our Primaleon, who in his
youngest years exercised himself so well in virtuous Disciplines (whereof
according to his very natural inclination and desire, he declared himself a
studious lover,) as one might justly name him the true miracle of perfection:
So among other endowments, for the spirit of wisdom he might be compared to
Solomon, for beauty both exterior and interior, to the gentle Greek
Alcibiades, and for magnanimity, council, millitarie strategemes and such
like, to valiant Scipio the African, or the subtle Hanniball of Carthage,
especially in this time of his youth, when he had not received his order of
Knighthood.

But now fit time therefore being come, he sell on his knee before his Father,
armed with a light C^^ret, which had no other beauty or bravery then the
plain fashion which most he affected for his help in fight, and with humble
gestures he entreated one request: The Emperor very willingly made him grant
thereof, as the like, he did to diverse others, who this day demanded his
gracious favor, seeing him so bountiful in honor of this feast.

My Lord (said Primaleon) the request which at this instant I desire your
Grace not to deny me, is, that I may be armed Knight by your hand in this
armor, on the day of the feast for the nuptials of Philocrista my sister,
for to make the same the more magnificent, I hope to provide a Tourney worthy
the view of your Majesty, whereto I beseech you grant me license of safe
conduct for all Knights whatsoever, because I intend to have it published in
diverse Countries.

This had I granted (quoth the Emperor) with all my heart, albeit thou had
not bound me thereto by promise, because these are the things that highly
please me, and very honorable is it to see such solempnities at marriages,
especially of such a Princess as thy Sister is. My Lord (said Abenunco to
Primaleon) I humbly beseech you to prefer me in this action, in that I
likewise earnestly desire to receive my order of Knighthood with you, so please
the Emperor to honor me with so much favor. The like request made Arnasin
son to Duke Ptolome, who was equal with them in youthfulnes of years,
wherewith Primaleon was not a little content.

Immediately were Heralds of arms dispatched into diverse Regions, to publishe
the Tourney, and the day purposed for the beginning of the sportes, which
should continue during the feast, with Court royal openly kept, at the
marriage of the Princess Philocrista: assuring all knights that pleased to show
themselves there, to be entertained with honor every way equal to desert.
Mean while was Arnedes seated by his affianced Mistress, (more fair and
brauer adorned, than the daughter of Tindarus, when Paris Alexander was
euercome with her love) they both ioying, yet with modesty and bashfulnes, as
neither durst enterprise the hardines to speak the first word: in which mute
passions, they rather resembled the two beautiful stars Castor and Pollux,
than human creatures possessed of life and moving, whereupon Melicia
smiling, thus spoke to them.

Ah that mine eyes were so happy, that they could now behold him, for whom my
heart indures most passionate martyrdom, I would not show such pusillanimitie
as you do, seeming as though you scantly knew each other: why then do you
not give some recreation to your affectionate souls, but stand thus as dead
bodies deprived of life? Madame, (answered the Prince) marvel not to see me
silent and dispossessed of speech, in that love by nature sealed up my lips,
for seeing us in greater content with the thing more conformable to our
desires, he took the benefit of speaking from us, least the one should not
please our ears so well as the other does our hearts. Moreover, I have till
this hour so extremely desired that, which now I am persuaded is altogether
mine, as I shall never enjoy any quiet in mind, (so yrksome is the thought of
time to me) till I may see the Crown of France on the head of fair
Philocrista. As for you Madam, be you certain, if my Cousin Recinde as yet
lives, one day to rule the Realm of Castile: for so perfectly does he love
you, as his return hither will not be long to conclude this affair, which for
my part, I would be glad to hasten, in regard of the desire I have to pleasure
you both to my power.

At these words Melicia began somewhat modestly to blush, nevertheless being
prudent and well advised, she cunningly dissembled this youthful feminine
shame, saying. My Lord, the Prince Recinde is of such a virtuous and gentle
nature, and so well his valor and prowess known where he trauaileth, as each
one ought to rejoice at his good fortune: especially my self, beyond all other
that love and honor him, if it be so, that he bears me such good will as you
speak of.

These speeches of Melicia so imboldned Arnedes, that now he began somewhat
to cheer up himself, and entered into further conference with his Lady,
taking of her the first ernest of their love, which were many dainty kisses,
soft touchings and such like, yet so honest and comely discharged, as it was no
scandal or offense to the beholders, but rather moved them to wish, that they
would longer continue this agreeable and pleasing behavior.

Now the Emperor amongst those that were of greatest regard there present,
highly esteemed and honored his son Palmendos, in that the cheifest joy and
pleasure of this feast proceeded from him: heeruppon he remembered the sealed
book which he sent him, with so many other precious things from the Isle of
Delphos, as in the tenth Chapter of Palmendos has been declared.

To make known therefore to the french Lords the magnanimity and virtues of
his son Palmendos, he commanded the rich and exquisite chair (wherein the
Idol sat) to be bright before him, and the book likewise, which he had caused
to be kept in his treasury, amongst matters of greatest account.

To open the book he made proof again by many of his Knights, but there was
none could come near it, which he perceiving, delivered it to Palmendos
saying. My son, make some little proof of this book, for if you bring not
this labor to end, I am assured we may set our hearts at quiet, for reading
or beholding any thing theerin contained. Palmendos turning aside his head, and
making a lowly reverence to the Emperor, took the book from forth the hands
of a Knight that endeavored to open it, and with such ease did he open it, as if
the same had never been closed before: heerat the Emperor was exceeding
joyful, and turning toward the Noblemen of France, he could not contain,
but needs must express before them a most evident sign of fatherly affection
to Palmendos. Then taking the book, he turned over the leaves from one end to
an other, finding no matter or discourse written therein: only he beheld the
figures of two Emperors painted in the midst thereof, the one attyred after the
greekish manner, holding a sheeld upon his arm, wherein was the blazon and
description of the arms of the Empire: the other was armed cap a pe after the
Turkish guise, with a naked sword in his right hand, wherewith he seemed to
menace the Greek, and with his left hand very furiously he snatched the
shield from his arm.

If the Emperor were highly pleased with Palmendos opening the book no
doubt, but he greatly marueiled what sinister presage these figures
delivered by their show and fashion, wherefore he said aloud, that these did
signify mighty matters: hereupon all the Lords and Knights approached nere him
to see the figures, and passing the book from hand to hand, they all could
conjecture nothing but matter of astonishment. But as each one delivered his
opinion, according to such reason as best seemed unto them: there entered the
palace a young Gentleman in very rich habilliments, carrying it Sheeld, and
one of the very best Swords for Arms, that ever Vulcan God of the Forgers
could devise to make by his divine Art: and being come before the Emperor, he
set his knee to the ground, speaking in this manner.

Sir, the Knight of the enclosed I Will, sent me directly to this Court, to kiss
your hand on his behalf, being the man who^ he loves, honors and
esteems, more than any other person this day living under the celestial
Spheres: Albeit as yet he never saw ye, neither knows ye, but only by the
renown of your manhood and generositie, which has so far commended ye, and
gotten such conquest over him, as he cannot by his Magic Arts, Necromancie,
Cabalist and hidden Philosophy, (wherein he may well be named the second
Zoroasbres,) foresee any thing, that may turn to your grief or discontent of
mind: but he imagines himself bound to let ye know thereof. Wherefore, that
ye may wade no further in the depth of doubtful opinions, which the two
figures in this enchaunted book may cumber your thoughts withal: he tells ye
by me, that as ye behold here these Images, even so (one day) shall the Empire
of Greece, and the glory of her good Knights, be abated and destroyed by the
enemies of our faith. So that for the sins and iniquities of the Christians,
God will suffer between the Greeks and Turks mortal divorce a hatred, which
shall end by a most bloody discomfiture, whereto you and your Son Palmendos
have already given beginning. Nevertheless, this rain and decadence shall
not happen in your time, neither of him or your posterity, because all their
lives (even to the last day) shall be most glorious and triumphall, not any of
your enemies erecting one Trophe over them: therefore receive no grief at this
fatal judgment, considering we can no way escape the inevitable destenie,
whereto God has appointed us.

I see well then (replied the Emperor in great heausnes) that man shall not
have any one entire pleasure in this mortal life.

Ah sovereign directer of all things, most devoutly I entreat thee, that thou will for ever imprint within my soul, the true caracters of thy holy catholic
faith, to the end I may both live and die thereafter, without any other desire,
than to accomplish thy most blessed will. And albeit that Greece (in my time)
shall not receive this wound, yet must it needs marueilously offend and
displease me, that so good people (by a false and miscreant Dog) should be so
outraged.

Nevertheless, seeing I can no other way redeem it, I swear and protest
before ye all, hereafter to be a cruel and capital enemy to these harbarous
and unbelieving helhounds, making them dearly to buy before hand, the
infelicity destinyed to this moane-worthie country. And even so it came to
pass, in that both he, and Palmendos in his Kingdom of Thessalie, did great
and infinite damages to the Turks, for ever after there was continually open
wars between those Nations,

But the Emperor then somewhat mittygating his choler, with a more pleasing
countenance and milder terms, thus spoke to them about him.

Wherefore should I offend my self with such things as we shall never behold?
I pray ye (for all this) let us not leave the fruition of such pleasures, as
God has sent us at this instant: for seeing it is his will, that happy
success shall betyde the affairs of my time, and they that follow of my
posterity likewise: I have no reason to passionate my self, but rather to
repute me the most happy Prince, that this day inhabiteth between the two
Poles.

Therefore I pray you (quoth he to the Messenger) on my behalf, thank the Lord
of the enclosed Isle your Master, for putting me out of those doubtful
imaginations, striving to understand what these two figures should signify:
assuring him withal, that he has no friend in this world, who can make more
account of his goodwill than I do, nor shall he find any jot less in me
toward him, when pleases him to make any trial thereof: so breaking off, the
Gentleman went a little lower toward Primaleon, who likewise was there present,
and thus spoke to him: Happy and fortunate Prince, the Lord of the enclosed
Isle my master, who lover you as himself, has sent ye this good sword and
rich shield, the two best and most exquisite weapons, that at this day are to
be found in all the world, and them he thinks meet for so valiant a Knight
as you will prove, aduertising you, that the cloven rock, being thus
separated, as you may behold here figured in this shield: signifies the
partiality and little love between you and her, who in after time shall make
one sole heart of twain: so that on the day of this riciprocation happening
between you, this impregnable rock shall then remain intyre and closed
again, and without any impeach, to testify your reconciliation.

Tell your Master from me (answered Primaleon, as one abashed to hear such
speeches,) that as it has pleased him to send me this fair present, which I
shall well and carefully hope for his sake: so would I have him command me any
thing wherein I may do him pleasure, when he shall advertise me, as the man that
may command my uttermost, and whom I highly thank for his curtesis, albeit I
cannot but remain in pensiuenes, (...) I understand more clearly the matters
you have told me.

The time will come (replied the young Gentleman,) when you shall know them
sufficiently, although at this instant they seem so hard and obscure to ye:
and then shall ye recompense the service, which now ye receive from my Master.

Then commanded Primaleon, that one should fetch a rich present for the Lord
of the enclosed Isle, in requital of the excellent Arms he sent him, and
another in like manner for the Gentleman that brought them: which immediately
was performed in every respect, when the youth (with great reverence taking
his leave) returned presently toward the Isle, leaving all the Court
meruayling at the news before rehearsed.

The Emperor and his Barrons long looked on the weapons, each one commending
the artificial workmanship of them, and meruayling what the strange
separation of the rock should mean, being thus foretold, that one day it
should ioyn together again, which made the Emperor deliver these words
before all there present. I am persuaded we shall behold great matters of
importance, when this half divided Rock shall knit together again: So that as
seems to me my Son (speaking to Primaleon) for thee are reserved many
adventures, which none but thou can effectually finishe: Wherein I pray God
to be thy directer, enduing thee with such strength and hardines, as thou
may honorably make an end of them.

So do I devoutly pray my self (answered Primaleon) else shall I repute all
my life very carelessly bestowed, and I unworthy to come in company of so
great personages, if I should not resemble (in some good part or other) the
noble Lord that begot me: and that I may attain thereto, it is necessary I
should pass through many perilous tranayles, knowing that without exceeding
endeavor, it is impossible to reach such honor, as does for ever make men to
be esteemed. For this may serve me as a most worthy crample, yea and an
infallible mirror of all virtues, proceeding from your excellency so great a
president, as not only has sweetly conquered the love of your subjects, but
gayning likewise a privilege of every ones good will, has beside constrained
the enemy and most barbarous Nations, to admire and honor ye for all
perfections, being the cheifest piece of workemanshippe that ever Nature made.

These gentle and gracious speeches of the Prince Primaleon, made the Emperor
his Father so pleased as possibly might be, hearing from him such honest
commendations, yet collourably aiming at a third person, as thence forth he
reputed him verse magnanimous, and remembering Achilles, Alexander,
Themistocles, and other such valiant Champions, which Greece in former time had
brought forth, he began to conceive some hope, that one day he should see him
go beyond all other of his time. Whereupon he gave commandment, that the
weapons sent from the Lord of the enclosed Isle, should be very charilie
laid up, and for this cause, if afterward in any place Primaleon would not be
known, he named himself the knight of the cloven rock. From that time all
the whole day, there passed no other speeches among them, but of the meruaylous
knowledge of this great Magitian, the Emperor entering into so good opinion of
him, as he could never forget that the Empire of Greece should be sacked by the
Turks, which was a continual grief to his heart: yet would he not outwardly
deliver any show thereof, but with Princely iestures shadowing them still,
seemed as pleasant as ever be was before.

Primaleon likewise on the other side was very pensive, desiring also to know
her name, who already by the very words of the young Gentleman, had inflamed his
thoughts with the heavenly fire of Venus: for till this hour he had no
knowledge of amourous passions, but now his heart was so lively touched
therewith, as there they had taken a perpetual dweling place, as ye shall
perceive by the following discourse of the History.

But now he fell to make provision with the other knights, giving order that
all things might be ready against the triumph day, which was appointed for
the Nuptialles of his Sister. And for the more magnificent gracing thereof, the
Emperor grently desired, to see the king his Father and the Queen his Mother
there present, which made him send a pest in this behalf to request them. The
like did he to the king of Sparta and Arismena his Aunt, whom he had not
seen since their espousalls: he sent for King Frisoll also, with the residue
of his chiefest friends, that they would honor him with their presence at his
Daughters wedding, because soon after she was to depart for France.

The Horseman which the Emperor sent for Macedon, found king Florendos in
exceeding pleasure, in that he had married Belcar with Alderina, Daughter to
the Duke of Pontus, and as yet the feast endured, where Recinde was enforced to
abide, at the earnest entreaty of Belcar, who promised afterward to accompany
him to Constantinople: So that when the Post arrived there, they were
providing to set forward on the way.

Now were the king and Queen not a little joyful, when they understood that
Palmendos was their Nephew, and Philocrista should marry with so great a
Prince, as was the son to the king of France: Hereupon they concluded, not to
frustrate the Emperors desire, which he had to see them at this solemnity.
Then the messenger recounted to them, how Arnedes had remained unknown in the
Court, without any intent to make him self known, until the Ambassadors of
France arrived there. With whom (quoth he) there came a knight of Spain,
that enquired after Recinde Son to the Castile king: because his eldest brother
being deceassed, the Subjects of the Realm desire him for their king.

Recinde hearing these news, being unable longer to endure, delivered forth
meruaylous sorrow for the death of his Brother, saying that he more desired
his life, than all the Kingdoms in the world.

Sundry other mournful speeches he proceeded in, when the king and Balcar
(wundring that two such knights had so long concealed themselves) reioysed not
a little, thinking themselves happy, that they had done such honors to
Recinde: with whom they used many reasons and sweet persuasions, to comfort
and put him from his sorrowful dumpes.

The messenger being likewise glad, because he had found the end of the
Spanish Knights perigrination, thus spoke.

My Lord Recinde, cease these tears, which serve to no purpose, for recovering
the thing that is out of all hope of men, but rather to hinder the Castillians,
who desire shortly to see ye as their Lord and King Sovereign: For which (me
thinks) ye have greater occasion to thank God, than thus to torment your
self against all reason, considering that the Scepter of Castile, is one of
the most rich and honorable in all Europe. And if ye mean shortly to see the
Prince Arnedes in Constantinople, who is not a little pensive for your cause of
heaviness: ye will procure great joy both in him and the whole Court of the
Emperor, because each one does wish your presence there, especially upon so
good occasion as is now offered.

When Recinde heard the Gentleman use such speeches, he began to remember
himself, that now he was to deliver some Heroical spectacle, for better
attayning his Lady Melicia, whom, by the sad and certain news of his
Brothers death, he thought the sooner to recover as his own. Wherefore he
determined to make one in this Tourney, and as he resolved on this honorable
purpose, many secret discourses combatted with his spirit, which he generally
imparting to Belcar, received this answer from him.

My Lord and Brother, although I durst not enterprise to go so soon to
Constantinople, yet would I gladly bear you company, as well to grateste ye
herein, as any thing else I am able to devise, because you are the man, to whom
I would have my nearest thoughts known throughout my whole life, with this
assurance beside, that ye shall not find any man less sparing of him self,
in such matters as may be deemed agreeable to ye.

Seigneur Belcar, answered Recinde, I may well say, that if Fortune heretofore
has slenderly favored me, entertayning me often with very rigorous terms,
yet might it be interpreted but as a presage of unspeakable content in future
prosperity: for the joy I take in being of so good account with you,
surmounteth all the mishaps that have befallen me.

So knitting up these courteous entercourses, they purposed to take order for
their voyage, each one according to his own best contriuing, desiring the King
not to make over much haste, because they minded to travail together: For
Belcar, Recinde and Tirendos required to go thither before, meaning to
perform some matter at honor and worthy commendation, in the sight of the
Emperor, who had never seen any deeds of Belcar and Tirendos, whereto King
Florendos agreed very willingly, who notwithstanding he was above threescore
years old, yet was he nevertheless of strong nature, able to endure the
pain of travail.

Now when he had appointed every thing in equipage, with a goodly company,
he set on toward Constantinople, whither the Duke of Pontus could not come so
soon as he, for certain business of importance that had befallen him, to
the great grief of the Princess Alderina, that she should so long be absent
from her dear spouse Belcar. So leave we them voyaging as time favored, to
speak of such things as happened in the Emperors Court in mean while.

CHAP. III.
How Ozalio entreated Palmendos to accomplish the promise he made him, and he
unwilling to deny him any thing) gave him Marencida to wise, as also the
Kingdom of Tharsus. And how they both embarked themselves, with a gallant
company of Knights to go thither: And what happened the Queen, Mother to
Palmendos, at their arrival.

WHile the Horsemen and messengers were thus busied about their charge, the
Emperor commanded preparation for the great triumph, feasting his Son
Palmendos and the French Lords, and entertayning them with all pastimes his
heart could devise: so that the whole Court exercised themselves in nothing else,
than in such things as might yield greatest pleasure to this honorable
assembly.

Among them all that were thus contented, Ozalio had little mind of
pleasaunce, seeing his Cosen altered from the Law of Mahomet, wherefore he
entreated him according to his promise, that he would give him the Princess
Marencida to wife, with leave to return again to Tharsus: which motion highly
pleased Palmendos, knowing that (by these means) the Queen his Mother should
hear certain tydinges of him.

Marencida on the other side was in no less pain than Ozalio, and albeit the
Princess Philocrista evermore comforted her, with such honorable means as
became her calling: yet could she not fasten upon any thought of pleasure, but
continuing daily solitary, like solitude it self, would not come forth of
her Chamber, but there all the day streamed forth fountains of tears,
complaining (without ceasing) of her adversity. Of one thing she might justly
make vaunt, that her eyes were become sources, dishlling forth water more
clear than Crystal: and if she took any final pleasure or recreation, it
was only with Ozalio, who every hour failed not to visit her.

At length Palmendos went one day to confer with her, concerning the former
determination, of joining her in matriage with Ozalio: but so soon as he
entered the Chamber, she began to renewher wonted griefs and passions, saying.
Alas Sir Knight, wherefore come ye to renew my sorrow, so extreme and
insupportable, as death it self is ready to seize on me in this place? I
entreat ye, seeing the destinies have fatallie appointed me to this endless
torment, that ye would not urge it the more by the means of your presence.

Madame, answered Palmendos, if heretofore I have procured ye any injury or
grief of mind, I hope at this instant to make a final end thereof, by the
means of an inestimable gift which I mean to bestow upon ye, giving ye the
Knight to your husband, who esteems and loves ye above al things in the
world. Nor could the King Ocurites compare with him for valor and virtue, the
heavens bearing witness of his prowess and dexterity in Arms, as I know no
Gentleman of the Turkish Nation, seeing him once manage deeds of Chivalry,
that dare meet him in Tourney or fieldbattaile, without repenting it dearly
afterward, Neither could King Ocurites equal him in riches and possession^
enuoying the kingdom of Tharsus which hereafter shall be his, a state more
wealthy than the Province of Culaquin. For this cause (Madame) appease the
violence of your passions, and consider, that your coming into this Country
will bring ye great honor and felicity, if ye please to accept as your
lawful husband the Prince Ozalio my Cosen, whose affectionate diligence ye
behold in your service. But should ye be so unmerciful as to refuse him, ye
may easly hill both life and soul together, a matter too irregular and
differing from Ladies reputation, in that by nature they are rather benign and
pitiful, than bloody and cruel, though (very often) over firm in perverse
obstinacy.

Lord Palmendos, quoth Marencida, how is it possible to condescend unto the
matter you propound me, but by forces well may you guess (by the small
delight I take in being in this Country) I will never do this with my good
will: as^^^t Sergnent Ozalio seems unto me such a one, as I could not better
bestow my love upon any, who meriteth more savor at my hand, than he does: but
alas my fortune has reduced me into so pitiful terms, that I cannot
accommodate my self to any thing which delights my spirits. Notwithstanding,
if so it be, that against the good will of your handmaide and captive, you
have determined to effect this business, I pray you before I espouse the
Prince Ozalio your Ecse^ that I may see the king Ocurites my ^^st husband, to
the end, I may advertise him of my disaster: (...) of that which I am now
forced to do, being not able by my reasons any way to resist.

Thereunto do I accord most willingly, answered Palmendos, and addressing his
speech to Philocrista, thus he proceeded. Madame I humble beseech you after
dinner, to take her with you into the Emperors great chamber, to gratify her
in that which she has presently requested.

So sell it out, after the Infant had constraynedly made her to (...) on her
richest habillunenis, in which it was a godly sight to behold her, for she was
both fair, and of the best grace. Being come into the presence, where the
Emperor was conferring with the king of Theslalie, and with many other Princes
and great Saigneurs, Palmendos commanded by and by to send for the king of
Culaquin, who seen after was brought thither, looking so lean changed, and
meager of countenance, that Marencida did not know him: and had not Palmendos
showed him to her, she could not will have guest it to be he. Then she rising
up from a chair where she sat, went to embrace him, the tears standing in
her eyes: when she cried out. Alas! king Ocurites, which of the Planneds have
we provoked, that does submit us both to this sinister fortune and
inexplicable mischaunce, even by the means of one only knight? the same who
vanquished and took you prisoner in the Leuant-seats, has brought me away by
force out of my Country, from my Father and friends into this place, where
not contented to held me as his slave; but will moreover (in my despite, give
me to another husband. And that which I have received of him as great savor,
is this, that he has only permitted me to let you understand hereof, to the
end I having once told you, you may not blame me hereafter, knowing not for
my part how to remedy it otherwise.

Ah, I wish the fatal Goddesses, would quickly shread a two the third of my
life, before I consent by my will to any such occasion. Ah! If it might so will
befall me, I should repute my self happy, as receiving the only contentment
which I desire, is to save me from contaminating the exceeding love I bare
you: But unfortunate and miserable woman that I am, seeing death shows
himself herein inexorable, I must spend in extreme sorrow the rest of my
days. Alas, poor King Ocurites who was wont to be so much esteemed off among
the Princes and Kings of Turkye, whose prowess and haughty courage did far
surpass all the brauest and hardiest Knights of Asia; where are now become thy
riches and great estates? who has dimmed the so signal and samous renown of
thy Heroical gestes, captiuing both thee and thy loyal spouse? How did
fortune ungently abandon thee in this manner? O it was ambition and desire of
winning he nor, which has put this slavish chain about thy neck, placing
thee among Gallie-slaues, where it shall be vest for thee to die immediately,
seeing the Emperor is our mortal and capital enemy? O divine prouidenes,
how have thou permittet fortune to rebel thus, and to execute against us so
enorme and woeful a mischiefe's Assuredly I can well vaunt that the celestial
bodies have more favored us, than thou have been friendly and gentle toward
us.

She uttered many other lamentable discourses, still detesting her accursed
life. When the King Ocurites, who had given attentive ear to her (knowing that
she was Marencida) felt him self so confounded, and out of his wits; that he
could not pronounce above five or six such like words: Alas Mahomet! did it
not suffice thee to have so austerely afflicted me, but thou must reduce into
so pitiful and base extremity the soul which did not merrite the least of
all these sorrows, which does so much the more agrauate my torment? Ah, the
most outraged King that ever was borne of his mother, see allows down
patiently the potion mixtured with bitterness, which thou haste prepared for him.

Speaking these words, he fell his height to the ground, and Marencida fell
down heard by him, where they used such strange gestures, that some supposed
they were stricken with the falling sickness, insomuch, that they m^^ed all the
standers by to compassion: and the Emperor for his part would willingly have
delivered them, had he not perceived Palmendos could not honestly frustrate
Ozalio, of the promise which he had made him. By means whereof, not to abide
beholding them any longer in this pitteous Tragedy, he commanded incontinent
to recarry Ocurites to his lo^ging, and Marencida back into her chamber: where
she would willingly have done that for him (to save him from death) which
Alceste whilom Queen of Thessalie, would only have enterprised for Admetus her
husband, after she understood by the Oracle, that any one of his friends, who
would die in his stead, might save his life, which else in no wife might be
preserved.

So great was she hearts grief Ocurites felt, during his trance; that
refusing to eat or drink a long time afterward, he weakened so much his
members, and spent his natural vigor so far, that his soul was constrained
to take leave of his body: which was interred afterward (by commandment of
the Emperor) in a rich tomb; whereof Marencida never knew any thing: for they
sought means express^^y to conceal from her this mischaunce, fearing lest she
should go after, to heepe him company in the other world, as might be
misdoubted by the conjectures gathered of the anguish she endured, seeing him
in so miserable estate, when she sounded in his presence, as you have read
before. And for that Ozalio did solicit at the length her departure with all
diligence, Palmendos caused two ships to be made ready with all things
necessary, granting him freely his departure (albeit there was much grief on
both sides, for that from their infancy they had been both brought up
together) they gave each other their last adieu, not without bedewing their
faces with store of tears, their minds being touched inwardly with the
strict and more than fraternall amity between them: so that every one
marvelled, why he would not for this only respect renounce Paganism, as
Palmendos had done: which he would surely have done, if the love of Marencida
had not so prevailed with him.

The Emperor gave them many sumptuous presents, to carry from him to the
Queen of Tharsus, which being bestowed in fit place on ship boorde, he
commanded to hoyse sails, and so incontinent launched into the maine sea,
which was so calm and still, that within few days he fell within the coast
of Tharsus. So soon as he was arrived in the have it, all the Cinso began to
make bone fires, and many other tokens of joy, thinking to recover their true
and liege Sovereign Palmendos: But soon after changed their rejoicing into
sadness; when they knew certainly Palmendos was so far from that plate, where
they thought him to be present, all the people doing nothing else but cur^^e and
ban the old Beldame, who (...) the lost of so made and gentle a Prince. At
this time ^ay she Queen very grievously sick in her bed, for the absents of
her son Palmendos, so that seeing Ozalio (...) for into the chamber, her
heart felt present he such an (...) anguish, that she had neither sinew, vein,
artir, nor mi^scle, which was not deprived of their usual functions. So that
without hearing the Embassage, which the Emperor (...) to Ozalio to oster her
with his presents, she died more (...) ever ^^erre through (...)

This honorable Lady having thus accomplished the last law of nature, and
yielded before God her mortal homage: Ozalio gave the principals of the
Kingdom to understand of the ordenance of Palmendos his Cosen: whereby upon
calling them together soon after the decease of the Queen, he showed them
fast scaled, and so subscribed as they ought to be: by which means they all
knowing him to be a most sage and valerous Prince, accepted him gladly for
their King.

Thus having peaceably invested himself in the kingdom, he married forthwith
in great triumph and magnificence, his dear Marencida, who seeing the love her
husband bare her, to increase more and more every day, converted her mourning
and sorrow into thankful gladness: so that within few days she quite forgate
all things past, loving afterward so perfectly the good King Ozalio her second
husband, that she had by him many goodly children, many whereof proved very
brave and hardy Knights.

Thus feasting them whom he took from Constantinople, for to accompany him
homeward, at length he returned them back again with such news and rich
gifts, which the king Ozalio sent to his Cosen Palmendos, as he (in memoris
hereof) continued the same every year following in like manner, for tribute
and homage of the high estate, which he confessed only to hold of him.

No sooner were the Knights arrived in the Emperors Court, but Palmendos was
aduertized of the death of the Queen his mother: whereupon he grew into great
mellancholle, and made woeful lamentation, seeming to him that his absence was
the principal cause of her death: but he loved Franchelinaso ardently, that
he could not well busy his spirits in any other thing, than in those which
he knew might cause her delight and pleasure: wherefore in time he forgot the
sorrow which these heavy news caused, especially feeling himself so
comforted by his love, whom we will now leave to take the gracious pastimes,
wherewith those that are (...) affianced and wont to sollace one another,
attending the wished day of their Nuptials; And now return we unto Rifarano,
whom we shall find yet in the house of the Countess, of Island.

CHAP. IIII.
How Rifarano being departed from the Countess of Island, to go to the
Tourney which was to be held in Constantinople: met with his companion Ledefin,
with whom he fought to revenge a pore Damsel, whose husband he had slain.

RIfarano, who Combated Dioll the Earl of Island^ brother, if you remember,
remained sometime with the Countess his widdowe, as well to heal his wounds
thoroughly (especially that in the scull of his head, which he was feign to
cauterise, and have thoroughly se^^ched) as also for the pleasure and grant of
amourous favors, which he received daily of her: by means where of he could
not leave her, till he was advertised how the Emperor Palmerin would holds
open Court in Constantinople, and of the great Triumphs, which were here in
preparation, to solemni^s the alliance and Nuptials of the infant Philocrissa
with Arnodes Son is the King of France, and likewise of the Princess
Franchelina with Palmendos. But not to loose so good occasion, to present
himself in so honorable a company, which he hoped would there m^ete at this
solemn feast: he demanded license of the Countess to go see the Prince
Palmendos, at whose hands he had heretofore received so much favor, that us
though that held his life but of him and the immortal God who might end it
when ^^ best pleased him: Whereunto very loath and unwilling she accorded
doubting lest, be should not return again to her so soon as he had
promised, and that in there he would for ^Word her; For when a thing is far
out of ^ight, it is the sooner out of remembrance.

And she good Lady, the digger she self her self with (...), so much more did
her sorrow redouble: therefore with a very seeble voice, which did
sufficiently demonstrate the trouble of her mind, she praide him of all loves
he would sometimes remember her, whom his departure lest in a weartsome
distress. Against the which I cannot long time hold out, quoth she, but death
will prevent me, unless you purpose speedylie to make your return: and thereby
shall I know if you desire to prolong my life or no, which I put altogether
into your hands.

Madame, answered Rifarano, too insupportable a pain would it be to me; if I
should frustrate you of my speedy return, for in steed of one only torment
(which per adventure I should suffer more easily, making mine absence but of
small continuance) too intolerable a ^art sorrow might suffocate my soul,
hearing say you should conceive some misconceit against me: so that I pray you
believe, no object whatsoever which may present it self before mine eyes,
shall ever be said or seen; that therefore I will deface your Image so I fuely
figured within my soul: which suffices (many mind,) to take away the scruple
you may allege, that I (...) you willingly: For I assure my self you do not
(...) knowing well the testimony of my loyalty, and perpetual (...) toward
your excellence, shall always put you out of (...) fear.

The Prince having undoubtedly assured the Countess, to return as speedily no
he could possibly, she was a little (...) thereby: and giving him for a present
a most (...) coat of Arms of green color, praide him to wear it for her
sake: Likewise to take one of her Squires with him, to the end she might at all
occurrences understand (...) him, for she misdoubted much, he would not (...)
as she would have him, as hereafter you sshall hear: so that many times she
was purposed to take away her own life, as did sorrowful Phillis; seeing there
arm expired that Demophon should espouse her.

Rifarano being departed from the Countess, he rode three days without
finding any adventure, and on the fourth passing very early near unto a
Castle, be saw before the Gate the Lord thereof dead upon his bed, covered
and clothed with many clothes of stike: at whose beds head sat a young Damsel
making most strange and pitiful lamenting, that the very panting breath of
her sighs did well show, in what manner her heart did beat within her breast.
All about her were many Damsels and others, whose countenances and piteous
cries which they powered forth into the air, did plainly bewray the great
grief they had to see this dead corpse, the which they made as though they
would carry to burial, when Rifarano approached, to know what moved them to
lament so much, promising them for recompense to work his revenge according to
his power, if in case there were any need to do it.

Then the Damsel (thanking him much for his so gracious and courteous offer,)
began in this manner to be speak him. Fair knight, although my misfortunes be
so extreme, that I cannot well imagine whether I live or no, yet the assurance
which I conceive, that you have taken some pity of my mishap, will give me
argument to deliver you the whole discourse: albeit it would be better
peradventure I should conceal it, to the end I may no further stir up the
sorrow and heaviness seated in my soul.

Know then my Lord, that this my dead husband going yesterday abroad on
hunting, ^^t by the way a Knight, whom for his curtesse sake, he brought home
to lodge here all night, and (for his better entertainment) commanded me to
do him all she service I might devise, in that he seemed to him to be
descended of some great house: albeit he knew him not before, for he would
never tell his name nor whence he was. I having therein freely accepted the
commandment of my Husband, did him all the honor I could druise; so that we
supped together in great joy and content: but afterward, I perceived be never
removed his eyes from off me, which made my heart as cold as ice, when I saw no
body about us, for all our servants were gone to Supper, so soon as they had
done feruing us.

Then the Traitor began to give some enterprise to the dislanie which he
devised forthwith, saying he was going to the Court of the Emperor of
Constantinople, to present himself at the magnificent Tourney which was
prepared for the Nuptials of his Daughter: This was the cause that my husband
(for he loved greatly the exercise of Arms) rose suddenly from the table to
command his Squiers to have all his equipage in a readiness to depart the
morrow morning with him: by this occasion the disloyal man shiding the tune
and place bite for his purpose, used unto me these speeches: Truly saire
Lady, paragon of the most perfect Damsels, I think it had been far better for
me, never to have entered into your house, than to remain long time in the
pain which I feel: for your excellent beauty has so ravished my heart, that
if the balm wherein consists the only cure of this wound be not quickly
applied there unto, I must needs dse, through the violent and too excessive
heat which has set it on fire. Further did he prosecute his sugared and
deceaning language, when I who could not endure to hearken to it, was very
wrath with hun, saying: It seems fair sir, you are a Knight little courteous,
and wanting good manners, seeing you will use such an act against him, who has
done you so much honor.

Madame quoth he again, think not I am come to displease you, nor to procure
you any damage, but to sauegaide my self from the variable and periltous
accidents, into which the burkenes of the night does expose sometime these who
are wandering out of their ways, so that I pray you not to blame me nor
reprehend me therein of indiscretion, but rather accuse your own Graces, which
have provoked, nay (...) me to use these terms unto you: no reason being
able to sway over the impatient desire which tormenth me: when he had thus
said, he put forth his arm to embrace me: whom I resisted withal my might,
and being inflamed with an insupportable choler, I rose up from the table,
crying (...) In an ill hour camst thou hither yesterday, fellon, to commit so
great a contempt in these Countries: I spoke thee^ words so loud, that my poor
and unfortunate husband heard me easily, who perceiving the treason of this
treacherous wretch: as an in raged person, ran furiously to his Arms, menacing
him, that he would make him dearly buy his villainy: not withstanding the
wicked villain, who had then his weapon at his side, hearing him make these
threats, set hand quickly to it to stand upon his guard, and before my husband
could assail him: he thrust his sword up to the hills with such a
violence, that it ran clean through his body. Which these sorrowful eyes
of mine beholding, I began to cry out like a woman deprined of her wits, and as
ill suck happened, there was not found one in all the Castle, who had power or
courage to take Arms, to revenge me of this Barbarian, for that the two
brethren of my disceased husband, (who are indeed both so hardle Knights, that
he had not dared to have perpetrated this homicide in their presence) take away
the day before, all the men of desence with them into the Country. By means
whereof this fellon and cruel murderer, had time enough to arm him self,
and to make away from the Castle, where (after the massaker) he (...) not
above a quarter of an hour: in which short spare I could not advertise my
neighbors, the place where I dwell being far in the fields, and remote from
all other habitations.

Now you have heard who by word ^ir Knight, the verity of my disgrate, seeing
it has pleased you to understand it: wherein, beside she disaster of my
husband, (which cannot now be remedied.) I account my self much dissauored of
the heavens and fortune, having no mean so find out one, who will for me
enterprise vengeance against Author of thy final (...).

(...), Rifarano, I (...) there is not that (...), who will not affirm him to
be a (...), and you shall (...) Knights, who (...) him upon this quarrel, of
whom I offer my self (...) In my learn what ways he has taken, and the
coat of Arms which he hears, is the end I may have some knowledge of him
the better: in the mean time, pray unto God that I may meet with him, if you
desire to he revenged: for to that effect do I purpose to bend all my forces,
or else they shall sail me at my greatest need.

Fair Knight, a thousand thanks I yield you, answered the Damsel for your
courtesy and good will, the which certes I knew to be no less when first you
began to speak, which puts me in some good hope, that I shall be revenged by
your hand: and through this mean shall you bind me to so great obligation
toward you, that bardly shall I ever be able to cancel it, if of your grace
you may not accept for satisfaction thereof, the desire that I have to employ
my self for you in at honest requests wherein it shall please you to
command me.

This Knight having learned the way and the marks, whereby he might discrie
him who had slain his host, he took leave of the Damsel all so be
blubbered with weeping, that whosoever had seen her, would have judged two
channels to have been made artificial upon her cheeks, through the
abundance of tears falling incessantly from her two eyes: He rode all that
day without meeting him; but nowes he heard at the entering into a forest, that
he went that ways not far before him: where being overtaken by night, he
purposed to repase himself till day. But he could not sleep a wink, because
he fell into a deep thought, how he might depart after the Courney, to take
his vayage into Almaine toward the Emperor Trineus his Father: herewith was
his spirit so disquieted, that he was forced two hours before day to remount
on horseback: And galloyping as lest as he could, he was gone before the
sun rising (...) leagues, which they counted from the forest to a little
village, where lay that night the Knight whom he sought, enquiring after him
of those whom he met, he was a ware of him where he was mounting by the side
of a hillocks, not far from the place whence be was not a quarter of an hour
before dislodged, and went an easy pace: Rifarano well a paid hereof, spurred
his horse to euertake him, which he did before he was gotten to the foot on
the other side of the hill. As soon then as the murderer entered the plain,
and began to set spurs to his horse to go a little faster, Rifarano called
alond unto him descending into the bottom: Hola Sir Knight tarry: I shall
keep you from vauting to have slain traitorously a gentleman, who received
you with all humanity into his Castle, and that you did a little to rashly
ravish your self with the love of his wife.

When the Knight affailed heard his menacing, he presently turned bridle, and
vayling his lance, staide for him couragieuslie, without stirring a foot: for
seeing him in company of one only Aquire, he was nothing amazed but answered
him very stoutly: Knight you are come to revenge the death of him, who will
make you loose your life: I think therefore it were better for you (if you
desire ever to see her again for whom you resolve to combat me) to withdraw
your self from so great an enterprise, leaving to counterset the butterfly,
who after she has found the light, can never go from it, till in the end she
have set her self on fler.

We shall quickly see, replied then Rifarano, howr God can chastise the over
weening and Arrogancy of Traitors, such as you are, who for the lust of their
sensual appetites, corrupt the inuie late laws of hospitality: speaking these
words, they encountered with such a power, and breaking both their Lances one
upon another, as Rifarano was a little wounded with that of his adversary,
whom he sent in so bad case to the ground, that he could hardly rise again.
Nevertheless being magnanimious, and could manage Arms well, he quickly put
hand to his sword, and thrusting his arm into his shield as soon as he could,
he gave so pesant a blow upon Rifaranos horse head, that he made him fall
down dead between his legs; from whom he leapt off nimbly, saying all in rage
and choler: Now I see well your occupation is to betraye folk, seeing you
have so discoueteous^ ^laint my horse, for which I hope to makke you (...)
dearly before you pass^.

With those words began Rifarano to strike home, and to how him in such
strange manner: that (being near valiante and stronger made for Arms than his
enemy,) within a small space he laid him on the ground at his feet, where
seeing him lie a long in a trance, he ran upon him to give him the mortal
guerdon of his demerits: which he had done, if the Knight (who felt himself
in extreme peril of his life) had not cried out, saying: Alas! My Cosen
Rifarano, where art thou now, that thou can not succor me in this necessity
wherein I see myself? Certain I assure my self, full sorry will thou be,
when thou shall bear tidings of my death. It was Lecefin his companion, who
for the cure of his wounds, which he received in fighting with Arnedes Prince
of France when he slew the Hermit who would have parted them (as you have
read before,) retired himself into a Nunnerie: Where by means of a Religious
sister, who did very well understand the method of Chirurgerse, he was
carefully looked unto till his perfect recovery. Notwithstanding, during his
cure, the Abbess who was Daughter of a great Parentage, fair, young, and
comely, knowing that he did not boudge from the Emperors Court, came often
times to visit him; insomuch, that this continual visitation engendered some
sparks of amorous passion: the which by little and little kindled in them both
in such sort, that it could not be long dissembled; but Lecefin was
constrained (by the way which seemed most commodious unto him) to discover unto
his Lady the servitude into which her love had reduced him, praying her to have
regard to the infirmity which he felt in heart, far more corroswe than that
of his outward griefs.

By means whereof the young Nun, who felt her self scorched with the like
flame, and who in this matter did not desire to be a long time praide, to yield
the keys of the Forts which was assailed, resolved one day with Lecefin to
meet together to parley thereof secretly, out of the presence of witnesses
unrequested to stand by when such a fortress is to be scaled.

Upon which platfourme, at the first encounter were delivered some rudest
occadoes on the assaylours side, whilst the defendant rewarded valiantly with
her buckler of proof: And afterward so often renewed this Alarm, which was
expedient to use against a fortress, that could not well be won at the first
proster (because of the small breach that one only blow of Cannon can make:)
that the Abbess would willingly have left her breuiarie behind, thus to have
managed still the Iauelin, and at all times to find herself in such
Shirmishes: Whereby it fell out that Lecefin (after his recovery) remained in
garrison within the Abbie, until he was so weary with being every day on
horse back, with his Lance in rest (which for the same purpose he was feign
to have very strong, well pointed, better steeled, and tempered) as he
departed to put himself in quest of Rifarano, of whose absence he was
assured, and of the very day that he departed from the Court of the Emperor
Palmerin. He resolved to take the way for Almaine as soon as he should find
him: for he meant to return no more to Constantinople, because of the touch he
had served Arnedes, which he knew well to be made, known over all Greece: but
traversing many clymates without any news of him whom he sought, he purposed
to go unknown to the Nuptials of Philocrista, hoping to meet him there, or
else in no other region of Europe.

So traveling that way, he met (as you have read) with the Knight whom he
slew in his house: wherein no marvel though he rashly discovered his unchaste
and lascivious affecte to his wife, for he was never better conditioned: nor
was there found in him courtesy, loyalty, or any other virtue, by the which a
man of good behavior may be esteemed: nor did he ever change this his lewd
nature and detestable manner of living, till he was enamoured very strangely
on out of the Emperor Trineus Daughters, for to please whom he began afterward
to use a little more honest civility.

CHAP. V.
How Rifarano knew Ledefin, whom he caused afterward to be cured of his
wounds: reprehending him much for his discourtesie: and how they arrived in
Constantinople unknown, and embarked themselves afterward to go to
Allmaine, where they were honorably entertained by the Emperor Trineus: and
what befell Rifarano afterward.

TO return to our matter, when Rifarano heard the lamentable words of
Ledefin, he marvelled as though he had entered into some news world, and
knowing not what to think, demanded him forth with his name: but Ledesin hurt
with the fall, and sore astonished with the fear her had to end his life, could
not answer him one word. By means whereof he went presently to disarine his
head, and as soon as he had perceived him, he felt within himself such a
sorrowful passion, that he fell down in a trance hard by him: which his
Squire seeing ran to him to unlace his helmet, for to give him air that he
might come to himself again. Suddenly he called his speech to him again,
beginning so pitiful a complaint, that by the strange exclamations which he
continued, Ledefin at last opened his eyes, and beholding hard by him Rifarano
his faithful friend, whom he had called to his succor: we need not ask
what astonishment he was in, when he said to him thus.

Dear friend, if now I die presently, my soul shall go in great toy to
repose in heavenly bliss: seeing I see you before it depart from my body,
which feels it self very sore wronged, by the weight and force of your
hand. If so it be (quoth Rifarano) that you die by this encounter, well may I
assure you that all the days of my life, no man shall ever see me merry: and
demanding whether he felt himself so ill, that he could not go thence to
seek some cure, he answered him, he should peradventure endure to sit a
little on horse back, albete he had brought him but into a very bad taking.
Then Rifarano this Squire disarmed him, and wrapping up his wounds as well as
they could, they conducted him unto the next Cittle from thence, where they
committed him into a Chirurgians hands, who assured them of speedy recovery.

Whereof Rifarano was full glad, but more it chased him, when each one
recounting their fortunes past to one another, understood the outrage offered
by Ledefin to the Prince Arnedes. He reprehended and rebuked him greatly
therefore, saying, these were not parts be seeming knights extracted of so high
Parentage: and that he reputed it a great indiscretion in him; a Moore, to
love Philocrista being a Christian, and of a Law contrary to his.

Moreover he blamed much his great impudency toward the Gentlewoman, whose
husband be slew: requesting him in the end very amiably, he would use no more
those tricks of youth, too far distant from the virtuous honesty of an
illustrious and generous heart.

Ledefin ashamed to hear him preaching thus on his imperfections: promised to
leave all lawdnes, and to follow such good counsel as it should please him to
give him: And as they had determined of their voyage, they concluded to send
Rifaranos Squire to Constantinople, to the Knights who came with them from
Persia, to advertise them, that they should have the Master of their ship in
a readiness, to depart without making speech thereof to any man living. So the
Squire was presently sent away for this purpose, whose arriualt caused great
gladness in the Persians, having not a good while before heard any news of
their Masters. Afterward when Ledefin felt himself strong enough to endure
travail with his Arms, and Rifarano had refreshed himself well, they came
both to Constantinople, where they found no small number of knights, arrived
there before, to show themselves in the Tourney: at the which they would not
be present, fearing it would be some disturbance to their Navigations, but
embarked themselves on the morrow before day, which displeased Rifarano very
much, for that he could not take his leave of the Emperor, nor of Palmendos,
whom he destred to see above all other.

Wherefore calling to him the Squire of the Countess who followed him, he
commanded him before his departure from thence, he should present himself
before the Emperor, and to tell him that Rifarano recommended himself most
humbly to the good grace of his Majesty: beseeching him of excuse if he could
not come him self to do the message: for that by reason of some business
which was of great importance he was coniured to depart in all haste, to the
end to arrive with more sp^d in Germany, and that he would ere long return to
make amends by his humble service, for the Honor which he had received in his
Court: Then giving him many rich presents as well for himself as his Mistress,
commanded him as soon as he had discharged his duty toward the Emperor,
he should return to her strait, to pray her learn him she should not think
amiss of him, if during his above with her, he never told her the name of his
house and lineage: For which he would come to make amends, having remained some
few days in Almaine, whether he was going with Ledefin to see the Emperor
Trineus his Father: and that in the mean time she should make account of him,
as of the most affectionate servant she might find in the universal world.

After these speeches the Pilot began to cut with his ship the spacious pliane
of salt waters, leaving upon the shore the Squire very pensive and sorrowful
to abandon thus his Master: but after he had called his courage to him, he went
to do his embassage to Palmendos and the Emperor, who was will sorry for his
secret departure, because he would soon have sent Rifarano home to his Father
wish more honor.

The Countess of Islande understanding by her Squier that her Paramour was an
Infidel, and had n^^eadie taken his way toward Germany, she had almost
(...) for sorrow: So that tooing afterward some ^^llere penance for her
offense, after the end of nine Months, she brought into this world a goodly
Son, who inherited the ^ar^^dome of Island after the discease of his mother:
and following military Discipline did atchieue (...) many strange things in
France, whether he went to see his Father who was Duke of Burgundy, as you
shall understand by the discourse of our History.

With this Child the Countess took so great comfort that by little and
little she forgot the love of Rifarano, whom' we will now come to find
making sail in the Adr^aticke Sea, where he had so happy Navigations, that
within few days he came upon the coast of Germany: and casting his ankers
in a Port four days journey distant ^^om the Emperor Trineus Court, they
went thither in complete arms, except the head.

In brief being arrived at the Palace, Rifarano sell on his knees before his
Father, demanding his hand to kiss it. The good Prince Trineus who
understood long time before, by letters from the Emperor of Greece of his
Sons arrival in Constantinople, (which he then presently imparted to the
Empress his wife, who greatly desired to know what they were,) seeing these
two strange Knights, mistrusted lest the one should be him: whereof served for
a good testimony the gladness which he showed in his heart when he said:
Sir Knight to give you my hand, I may not willingly consent, before I know who
you are.

My Lord replied he again, in places where I am known they call me
Rifarano, and this my companic^ ^echefin, Son to the Solton of Persia, and to
(...) most affectionate friends.

O then you are thrice welcome quoth the Emperor into the place, where your
arrival overcomes me with gladness: So said he embracing them, having for
very ^ole so r^re the tears in his eyes, that he could hardly abstain, but
some one did fall to the ground, when he began thus.

Ah! my son, happy may I think the peril and danger I past to be get you,
seeing that I see you no (...) proved such fruit of my labor, that all my
life I shall for my part, praise God for so great a grace: but how could you
stay so long away, before you would come to see me, considering your valor and
Chivalry did much increase my desire thereunto ^ Alas, It was the heaven which
being en^^ous and jealous of my bliss, could not permit me to enjoy your
presence.

Having done this speech, he welcomed very courteouslye Lechesin, and in the
mean time they had this honest and gracious communication, came in many Nobles
who understood news of Rifarano, to entertain him the most Honourabl^^ they
could: So that the Emperor who knew very well the Empress would be most glad
of this occurrence, taking the two Knights, the one in the right hand, and the
other in the left, went to find her in her Chamber saying.

Madame these Princes the one who is of the Sultan of Persiaes sons, and the
other over whom you have absolute power to command, come to do you their
humble reverence, and to offer you their service in any thing whatsoever
wherein it shall please you to employ them.

Then the Empress rising from her (...) to embrace them both with great love,
especially Rifarano to whom she said: My son I have now good occasion to
rejoice me of your presence, and to cherrish you as mine own Child, seeing
you resemble him so naturally, who following his destante, gave you your
essence among men, whom I love above mine own person, with zeal so entire
and perfect, that it extends and redoundeth far over yours.

Madame quoth Rifarano, nature has so fully accomplished you with all
virtues, that there can proceed from you nothing but a sincere good will, for
which I thank you most humbly in mine own behalf, albeit it much surpasses
my little merit: which shall cause me to put this kindness into the number of
many others which you have so well heaped on me, that all my life I shall
find my self much bounde^ unto you.

Then be kissed her hand with the honor and reverence which appertains to so
high a Lady, and next did embrace Vernan her eldest son, a Prince surely
carefully instituted in good manners and virtuous education: which well he
could show by the gentle entertainment he made him in recognisance of this new
fraternity, albeit he were very young of years. He held the second place of
three male Children, and of two female which they had at one birth: whereof the
first lived not long: and because this was not in age marriageable, the
alliance of the houses of Almaine with that of Constantinople could not be
redoubled giving him to Philocrista, whom the Prince of France had never
other wise espoused; their eldest Daughter of the age of fourteen (called
Bellerisa) was very fa^re, yet not so fair as the younger. But the Emperor
caused the two Knights to be disarmed, and by and by to invest two magnificent
robes which he gave them with many other rich presents, and likewise to all
the Persian Knights who came with them, determining as well for their arrival
and the marriage of his niece Philocrista, as alse for the recognisance of the
near affinity of Palmendos to make a sumptuous feast, and to hold the eight
days following open Court: During the which Bellerisa showed her self so
quaint and curious to entertain with gracious discourse her brother Rifarano,
that thence forth Lechefin ^^ering himself with her love, as long as he lived
could never quite ^rtinguish this fire out of his heart, wherein served him for
a bai^e the favor which she showed him to gratify her brother, devising many
tunes together which gave some refreshing to his burning sever.

After a few days come and gone, the Emperor gave Rifarano to understand she
great pleasure that he took of him arrival: Notwithstanding it would be far
greater, when (...) should perceive in him some destre to receive the bolid
order of Christianity: so that quoth he, if I do not see you very quickly
to condescend unto the belief of our faith, I shall think you make account to
return into Porsia, which would plunge me in a gulf of griefs, and
insupportable sorrows.

God forbid answered Rifarano, that I should ever cause you to take any
displeasure at me: I had rather tear my self in a thousand pieces, than not
to accomplish that which it pleased you to propound me: with this answer was
the Emperor well apaid, such at to make it to some effect, he went with him
on the morrow to the Fount of Baptism, where by the hand of a discreet
Bishop he received the first Christian Viction, where at Lechefin took such
a grief, that all that day and the next he could not show a merry countenance.

Which Bellerisa marking, who honored and governed him continually, prayed him
not to take any displeasure at the act of Rifarano his companion: for that when
he had not speedily resolved to do it, his esteem had not been so great,
especially of the Emperor, who thought himself (...) beholden to him, in
that he had fulfilled his mind therein. And seeing you love him quoth she,
with so cordial affection as you say, I marvel much w^y you do not the
same, being that you know the superiority of our God does much abase yours:
whom if you will renounce, you need not doubt but riches, estates, and
whatsoever you shall demand of my Lord and Father, shall want you no more
here, than in your own Kingdom.

If you fair Madame, replied he then, will promise need one favor, only for
the love of you will I be Baptized incontinent, for the devotion which gives
me that which I demand you, constrayneth me to hate alcedie the Pagan Sect.

Surely Seigneur Lechefin, quoth she again, I should repute myself during and
after my life unfortunate, and unworthy to come into any good company, if to
be a mean of so great good, I should refuse any thing which were in my power:
assuring me that you will not request me of any thing which may offend the
Honor of the one, nor of the other of us two, the which being saved, I will
do my best to satisfy your desire, as much as in me lies.

Now may I call my self thrice, and four times happy, quoth Lechefin,
seeing I see so precious a good so freely offered me, whereof I lost all hope
that it would never he by me acquired, which I will not demand of you Madame,
until that you shall see me accomplish my promise, which by this occasion has
willingly made me accept of your commandment: whereunto to give some
beginning, be said unto the Emperor, that seeing his Son had left the
Mahometicall law, he would do no less than he had done: because their more
than Fraternall amity might not suffer a diversity of says between them.

If the gladness of the Emperor were great for the conversion of Rifarano, it
was doubled so much more, hearing Lechefin use this fair language: so that
remitting his pomp but till the morrow morning only, he was received into
the Catalogue of Christians by the same Bishop, and in the same Fount that
Rifarano was, having for his Godmother the Empress, and the Emperor for his
Godfather, who when the Ceremony was finishet, bespake him in this manner.

You have now my Godsonne, done the act of a virtuous and worthy Knight,
forsaking the erroneous and detestable Doctrine which you held, to embrace our
holy and Catholic religion.

By means whereof I will how and account you hereafter for mine own proper
Son, giving you such Estates in my Country whereby you may most Honorably
live by, and maintain your self after your own content.

Lechefin thanked him most humbly, and prayed him not to repute him less
affectioned to his service, than the most loyal and faithful kinsman or allis
whom he had to his race* Whereof the Emperor thanked him, who for this
regard ordainted to continue a feast throughout all his Court, and the
Empress gave the name Trioll unto Rifarano for the love of his Father, because
she would not have him called any more by that name which he brought out of
Barbary. But Lechesin took no great care to change his, having in hand
matters which did much more move his spirit, to the which he would assay to
give some tranquillity: so that finding Bellerisa one boure of the day fit for
his purpose, he used this gracious speech to her.

Madame it seems to me I have obayed your commandment, which I reverence and
will reverence all my life as an oracle, and God grant you may by this means
knows the extreme devotion I have to your service; This is the matter, I would
humbly beseeth you to call to mind the promise you made me presently
thereupon, having some pity of an insupportable torment that my afflicted
heart has felt ever since the first time I saw you. You know the offer that the
Emperor your father has made me of his Grace: as touching which I hope not to
demand of him anything else but you in marriage: and if so great happiness befall
me, that I be not there in frustrate, I shall reckon my self the most
fortunate Knight who ever matched under the celestial Machine.

Alas quoth the Damsel, how could you weaue so subtly the snare where in I
now see my self entrapped? In good says I never thought making you promise,
that your carriage sended to this end: Nevertheless, seeing you accorded (...)
so is easily no mean matter, which makes me surely much bounden to you, for
my part I will acquit my promise, so that we do not transgress the limittes
and bounds of honor, which I must hold as dear as my life. And to the end to
show by a good beginning that I am not ungrateful for your so gro^^^ favor, I
accept you for my Knight, with assurance to own you hence forth no less amity
than to Trioll my Brothers Wherein if my Lord and father command me any
thing farther, I shall consent with a very good will, to return you the
guerdon, which so good will as yours does merit: we may well imagine what was
the case and content of Lechefin, knowing there was given (and that by his
very Lady) some refrigeration to the burning of his flame: which began to
live and kindle so lively afterward in Bellarisaes heart, that it was within a
while no loss vehemente than that of her lover: Who by this mean became more
hardy and courageous than ever he was before: committing afterward nothing
which might stain his honor, but in Ioustes Tourneyes which were held in
those quarters, he carried away still the greatest part of the honor, as the
best Champion ne^te after Trioll, who far surmounted all those of that
Country: Therefore both the one and the other were greatly esteemed by the
Emperor and the Potentates of Almaine: where we will leave them a while, to
pass their time according to the renown and commendation which they shall
win, to recount the Cournies and great magnificentes made in the mean time in
Constantinople in attending the Courney, held at the Nuptials of Palmendos and
Franchelina.

CHAP. VI.
How the County Peter one of the French Ambassadors, determined to hold eight
days together continual Iousles against all comers to Constantinople, which
he did for the honor and beauty of Ladies, attending the opening of the
great Tourney, which Primaleon caused to be published before: And how the Duke
of Drante vassal to the King of Thessal^^, was the first who entered the
listes against him.

YOU have understood heretofore how the Emperor Palmerin, sent to inuit
mean great Princes and Signeurs of Greece, to be at the Nuptials of his
Daughter Philocristat wherein the Posts and Messengers did so well their
^ingenes, it as in short time after, there arrived the (...) part of the
Barrens stem all Countries under his obedience, in the best equi^age they could.

Amongst the Princes of ^arque, there arrived first, the King of Sparta and the
Queens Arismene his wife, Aunt to the Emperor, who brought thither with them
one only Daughter which they had, being not twelve years of age, but very
beautiful, and of the best grace, called Amandria: Before whom the Emperor
came forth to welcome and entertain them, commanding his Fourriers a
Har^ingers to mark out for them all the body of the great Serraglia nee^rst
his quarter: But the Emperor had Philocrista and two other young daughters,
whereof the eldest who was called Flerida between thirteen and fourteen
years of age (certes as fair as the day) resembled very much the Empress her
mother. She after the marriage of Plulocrista, was put in her place, being
given unto her many Damsels and the same Estate that her sister had, so that
she kept the Empress always company as did her sister Philocrista before. To
be brief, as for the graces and perfections where with nature di^med worthy her
gentle and divine spirit, she was the pearl of honor, the Idea of beauty, and
the matchles Paragon of all good grace: seeing that even from her infancy she
was reputed in sagesse, vi^acity and quicknes of spirit, a new or second
Pallas: being a Princess fayrer demeanured and well advised, she acquainted
her self, and grew into such league of amity and lo^ing kindness with her Cosen
Amandria, that they did never part company.

At the arrival of the King of Sparta, thither, the Emperor his Nephewe
conceived a marvelous joy: The which was redonbled when he understood that
the King his father come accompanied with Belcar and Recindes the future King
of Cast^le: whereof Prince Arnedes was not glad a little: nor the Spanish
gentleman who did attend for him in that Court, and the Infant Melissa was
most joyful of all, for the hope she h^d to see him q^^cly her husband.

From diverse other strange Regions and Countries, came every day Knights to
the Court, where they were all courteously reccaued by Primaleon: Especially a
great Eroupe of Thessalian Barrons, who came thither to kiss their Kings hand:
and also to see Palmendos whom they blessed, and by their prayers lodged him
above the heavens: lawding God who gave the^ such a Prince for Seigneur: whom
for his part he cherished and honored in the best manner, which contented
them most of all. Moreover thither came the good Knight Frisoll King of
Hungary, whether could not his Queen accompany him because she was very
sicks: And the Emperor stayed but for King Florendos his Father, before he
would begin ^^e feast and solemnity of the Nuptials, when the French
Ambassadors who were there (seeing so many Princes and brave Knights gathered
together) pricked forward through desire of glory, determined to enterprise
some Martial exercise to pass away idleness. The foremost of whom was the
Earl Peter, a very brave and hardy Knight, who loved (as his own soul,)
Isortine the Duke of Sauoyes Daughter: the same man whom the Emperor Palmerin
vanquished in Gaul, who afterward espoused Lucimine, Daughter to the King of
France: by whom he had three male Children very brave knights, and that only
daughter fair in perfction, whom he caused to be brought up in the Court of
his Father in law.

The Earl desired extremely to have her in marriage, and for that purpose did
he marvelous deeds of Arms as her Knight: for the great love that he bare
her redoubled his forces, and increased his courage in such sort, that he was
esteemed one of the best Champions of the Kingdom; which was cause the King of
France those him for second Ambassador in this treaty of marriage between
Arnedes and Philocrista. Upon a day whilst the Emperor was conferring with the
King of Sparta, this French Earl came to beseech him in presence of the
assistance, to give him lea^c to make a close ^ilt yeard in the great place of
the Palace, where (if it pleased him also) he had enterprised to abide eight
days together from Sun to Sun, maintaining Ioust and Combat against all
comers, who should come to show their valors in protection of their Ladies:
For that he desired to maintain her who possessed his heart to be one more
Accomplished in virtues and graces correspondent to her extreme beauty, than
any other loved or served of any Knight, except Philocrista and Franchel^e, the
two glorious Startes of their age.

This did he establish for a Law of the Combat, that all knights vanquished
by him, should leave their coats of Arms behind them hanged upon a pillar,
which he caused to be erected at the end of the Lists, hoping to carry them
with him away into France, if so it fortuned that he staid out his eight
days journey without giving over his enterprise: Contrariwise he would leave
his to his vanquisher, who could hold out the rest of the prestred time under
the honor and defense of the Lady whom he served.

The Emperor who heard the County talk thus brau^ly, was in so profound a
thought: calling to mind the happy tune that he purchased so much renown in
traversing the ^eltique and Belgicke Gaul, that he showed outwardly some
apparent token of gladness: and seeming to be in the Countess thoughts, and to
feel the same pleasure which he received, remembering the perfections of his
Lady, answered him merrily in this sort.

My Lord, I foresee well the pain and travel which will lie upon your neck
in this charge, and how much courage she gives you whom you love so
perfectly, that in her favor you enterprise so Knightly an exployt: Whereupon
I assure my self that beside the praise which shall remain unto you, she
shall esteem you much more, considering the great hazard into which you expose
your own person: But that I may condescend unto your request (albeit I should
be very sorry, if I should accord you any thing which might turn you to any
hurt) I grant you freely to execute your enterprise therein, and in all other
honest and loudable (...) of Chiualry.

Gracious Lord replied the County, as long as my soul shall dwell in his
passible body, I will always endeavor in all places to manifest the praise of
her merit, according to the small puissance that it has pleased God to give
me, wholly vowed, yea fatally destinated to her service: and when my forces
shall not answer my heart, which in this respect is mexpugnable: I shall augment
only but the number of these, who cannot bring their driftes about, thanking
you in all most humble affection, of the favor which you showed me, in giving
me such license in your house.

After these speeches and many other which they had together, the County
retired himself into his lodging: whereas soon as he was come, he commanded
that on the morrow they should plant in the place before the Palace an
enclosure which should have in Diameter and circomference of the Center unto
the ends four and twenty sethome in latitude, and eight and thirty in
longitude: which was done with high railes in so sufficient proportion, that
six Knights might easily fight together afront, besides he would have a door
made hard by, where he gave order to set up a Tent, a Bed, a Kitchen with
Offices, and al which was necessary for so sumptuous a recreation. The next
day at Sun rising be armed himself at all points, and mounting upon a double
Courser, he came to appear within the listes, where were many Knights
disarmed to keep him company, whom he used very magnificently in the feast.
The first man who came within the listes was the Duke of Drante, vassal to the
King of Thessalie, young in age, but lusty and very skillful in managing
Arms, who loved with a singular affection a da^nsel his subject, fair and
marvelous gracious, who finding the door of the Tilt shut, thrust it open
with the great end of his Lance to enter in: therefore soon mounted the Earl
on horseback, and taking his sword in his hand demanded the Duke whether he
would Iouste or Combat wi^^ him.

I will have but the Iouste quoth the Duke, for that I think quickly to make
you confess her whom I love, to excel in beauty and good grace, the Lady
for whom you enterprise an exploit, which seems to pass your cunning.

It were a thing almost miraculous, replied the Earl, if with so great reason
as I have to make good mine enterprise, I should be vanquished by the first
assailant. Saying so they went to camp themselves at the two ends of this
place, then coming violently to encounter, they shiuered both their Lances,
and dashing one another with their shields they passed bravely the rest of the
carriere: whereof the Earl was very sorry when he cried to his adversary:
Knight take yet one staff more; for the encounter of this first Iouste having
been so favorable unto you, I will see how you will behave your self in the
second: Then shall be seen manifestlye the just occasion I have to Iouste,
answered the Duke, taking another Lance, with the which coming couragiouslye
to charge him, he mist his blow in striking, which the County did not: but
running aright carriere, sent him over his horse croupper with a tumbling cast
down to the ground: Saying with a joyful courage; An other time venture not
with me in the listes, if you have no better reason to combat.

To that the Duke answered him nothing; for he found himself ashamed to have
voyded the A^son before Francheline his sovereign Lady, and many other Lords
and Knights, who beheld them through the Palace windows. But rising up, he
put off gently his Coat of Arms, and afterward being remounted he departed
out of the Tilt-yeard, to go whether it pleased God to conduct him: whereof
Palmendos had so great remorse, because of the vassalage which he owed unto
the Father of his affianced Lady, that with some appearance of reason, he
would have entered the listes himself to have revenged him.

Afterward there appeared nine or ten Knights, from whom the County still
carried away the honor and hanbergions: So that about Sun setting, when he
retired for that day, he felt himself very weary and ouerpressed with the
burden that he was feign to sustain: notwithstanding the i^i^ which ravished
his spirits more and more, made him forget the dolor and wearines of his
members. Thither came Arnedes with all the French Knights, to feast him and to
keep him company the greatest part of the night: where to stay our selves no
longer, the Earl continued sir whole days before he was vanquished of any,
doing marueils of Arms, as well at the Iouste, as at the Combat at the sword,
and making great cheer and banquetes to those who visited him: whereof the
Emperor meruailed much, no less of his prowess and valor, than of his
magnificence and sumptuositie, which he continued until the seventh day
following, when there came thither two Knights, one whereof took away within
few hours from the Earl, all the honor he had won in the former days, as
you shall presently hear.

CHAP. VII.
How Belcar, Recindes and Tyrendos, being departed from Constantinople passed
by the Duchy of Bort, where Tyrendos vanquished at the Iousts, the Knight who
kept a passage out of the City for the love of the Duchess, and what fell
out afterward upon this occasion.

WE declared a while since how Belcar, Recindes and Tyrendos departed unknown
from Macedon to go to Constantinople, and riding great iournies passed by the
Duchy of Bort, whereof was Lord an aged and grayheaded father, who in his
youthful years loved rest and his delights, better than the Courtly life, or
any millitarie exercise.

He had two fair Daughters, and one Son esteemed a very valiant Knight, who
against his Fathers will was gone to Constantinople: and at his second marriage,
did this oldman take to wife a very young Lady exceeding his daughters in
beauty, whereof a rich and gentle Knight called Dirdan was much enamoured,
before and after the Duke had taken her to wife. By means whereof knowing there
was no better nor more expedient remedy to see her and speak often with her,
he contracted great amity with the Duke her husband, giving him to understand
he would be very glad to espouse his youngest daughter coming once to age, it
he might please to bestow her on him in marriage.

The Duke who smelt his subtilty a little, would have willingly debarred him
from his house, had it not bin for the scandal which he feared: and on the
other side the Duchess (who being put to choice would not refuse the young and
vigorous Champion to take an old and decrepit man to her Husband) seeing him so
passionate as he was, albeit she being married before, could no less gratefie
him, but must by just and reasonable guerdon, love him again with the like;
which nevertheless she dissembled, bidding him many times not to torment him
self for her, and not to feed his vain hope, which in the end would deceive
him, for it would not have so good success as he expected.

Notwithstanding she could never dissuade him from his purpose, but resting to
the ancient Proverb which says thus. (All pain deserves recompense,)
resolved him self that if not very quickly, yet at the lenght he might gather
some fruit of his sweet Lady, which did not frustrate him by some conjecture
which he had seen after: for that he hearing he say she would go willingly
to see the Triumphs which were to be held at the marriage of Philocrista at
Constantinople, he purposed to show her some pastime, to the end to dissware
her from that affection: and to this end complotted with a Brother and cosen
German of his, to guard a passage in the wide field before the City where the
Duke was resident always.

This Dirdan then having upon this occasion obtained license of him, who at the
instant prayers of his wife and daughters, sometime did walk into the plain,
began to defend thy passage: wherein he gat honor be seeming a good knight,
(...) himself before her who augmented the forces of his body by the one
half: whose judgment in his favor, he esteemed more than that of all the
rest of the spectators; who held all no other than a good opinion of his
deeds, so that he loved him more than before.

But Belcar and his companions passing by the City of this Duke, knowing
nothing of the Iouste, Tyrendos who rode before the other somewhat pensive,
looked not abent till he saw a Squier very nere him, who began to charge him
that he should not pass any further. Wherefore quoth Tyrendos?

For that replied he, if you go on still forward, you must Iouste against a
knight, who will easily lay you along from your Horse, so that by this mean
you shall be forced to leave him behind, because here is established such a
law; and when peradventure you should dismount him, yet must you encounter two
other hardy Knights, therefore you thrust your self into great danger.

For all this quoth Tyrendos, I will not ride a step out of my way: and
dashing on he saw the Tents of the Knight, and also of the Duke, who was in
them with his wife and his daughters, to see the Iouste that day.

Dirdan who saw him come a far off, stood still minding to give him the shock
and the branado, and when he perceived him to be ^ere he called unto him. Ho
Knight, seeing you will pass (...), you must Iouste with me: for upon such
paste keep I this strait.

Seigneur defendant answered Tyrendos, nothing but the desire I had to break a
lance with you, caused me to pass this way. As Soon as he had said, they
came so violently to encounter, that Dirdan breaking his staff in a thousand
shi^ers, and giving the Assailant a little wound, to the ground fell he
strait, where by the grievous and lourish fall he had, he sound himself
frushed with his Harness: By reason whereof Tyrendos taking his horse by the
Bridle, said very lawde.

This horse appertains to me by reason of his encounter, those who were
present much marueiled, principally the brother of Dirdan, who chasing
monstrously said as he was mounting his horse: Knight think not to have
done, for you must I cust with me, who will make you pay dearly for the
misad^enture of my brother.

Well may you replied Tyrendos seek the same, if if please the divine bounty
but to savor me. As he had done this speech he gave into Belcars hand the
horse of the vanquished Knight, who arrived thither during their altercation',
marvelous apaide seeing his companion be have him self liken valiant and
hardy Knight.

Then running one at another with a right carriere, Tirendos sent his Assailant
top^^turlie with a vengeance over his horse tail, whose staff by mishap
ran into his horse head: whereby he presently died between his legs, which
constrained ryrendos to leap strait out of the saddle, to mount up with a
trice upon him which Belcar held by the (...), which the brother of the two
vanquished Knights ^^ing, ^an furiously upon him to charge him in a great rage,
saying they would die in the place, or be revenged of them ^or th^^
misfortune: but it was not long before he went to keep them company upon the
green grass, which was died red with their own blood in many places: This
made the Duchess then call to mind the Metamorphests of Hyacinth^s, and
Recindes and Belcar to receive great joy in their spirits.

Tyrendos then sent by a Page the two Horses of the vanquished, to the Duke,
who was marvelous glad of the Manor that Dirdan lost in the Ionste: and the
Knight who had vanquished him seeming to him no less co^^tentis and (...) than
valerous and magnaniunous, he ro^e out of his Chairs to entertain him and his
companions, (...) them to refresh themselves in his house. By (...) whereof when
the Duke, Duchess and all the rest were mounted on Horseback, they rode
strait to the Castle, where the Duke ^^^^^maunded that the Knights were
quickly disarmed, and (...) that they should with all speed dress Tyrendos
wound, to whom every one did great honor: for albeit they knew his
companiens to be very virtuous, beautiful, and better proportioned of their
persons, yet for some respect, they did esteem and presume more of Tyrendos.

Then supper time approaching, the Duke commanded they should cover in a
pleasant and delicious garden which joined hard to the Castle, where they were
very honorably served with diverse dishes, of most exquisite and rare viandes:
and after the repast was taken, the Duchess with her daughters came in singing
and playing upon ^arps, U^ols and Lutes, with so excellent a grace, that to
bear the sweet harmony which resounded as well from their coral mouths, as
their cunning touchings with their white and delicate hands, playing upon those
lericall instruments, the Assistances thought them selves in the Elis^an
fields among the nine Muses, Apollo and all the rest of the must all consort.

The Knights surely took great recreation and pleasure, surpassing almost the
capacity of their spirits, in the which if the hands and mouth of the
Duchess were occupied to make such melody, their eyes did no less omit their
office to behold Tyrendos, and by that they had well beheld and admired him,
at that instant was there a sudden change made within her heart of the love
which she bare to Dirdan, with that which Cupido presented her unexpected on
the behalf of Tyrendos.

And as she well saw how she perseuered a great while in this contemptation,
(the excellence and singularity of her graces pleasing him very much on the
other side) was as prompt an she to give essence to this bargain of change.

During the accomplishment whereof, the Duke reasoning of many things with
Belcar, demanding him in the end who Tyrendos was, perce^uing nothing the
prime wound he had (...) made in ^he heart of his wife. We are quoth he
Knights of the King of Macedons Court who go to the (...) which is (...)
Constantinople.

I believe replied the Duke, in all the assembly which shall be seen, there
will be found few men at Arms who can come near this, for as much as I can
presage, by the proof I have seen him make to day. You say true quoth Belcar,
and yet you would say more if you knew who he is. The Duchess who making no
semblance, heard all these discourses pass, imagined presently Tyrendos must
be some Knight of great and illustrious blood, therefore she made greater
account of him than before, being thrice happy to have changed Dirda^ for
him, whom she loved already so ardently that before they parted company,
she whispered unto him very softly these words, so that no body heard her:
Fair Knight you must repair the sorrow and grief you have procured vain
vanquishing these Knights of our country, whom we must esteem of. God forbid
replied Tyrendos, I should be borne into this world, to work you fair Lady
the least spark of displeasure and miscontentment that any humane spirit may
lightly receive: Nevertheless if the Plannets have so much dissa^^red me, that
I have given you any cause to be sad, I beseech you Madame, to appoint me any
penance as you shall know may suffice to blot out this offense. which against
m^ will and before I was aware I have committed thereby: then said the
Duchess, I verilye believe you will not fail to accomplish that which your
heart commaundets you to speak, the generousnes whereof I know already: and I
pardon as willingly this oversight, as I hope you will accomplish hereafter the
liberal offer you make me, to (...) it according to my discretion. I thank
you most humbly quoth he then, to grant me so quickly pardon in so great ^
misdeede as to provoke the choler of Ladies, which shall (...) me to say ever
hereafter, to have found in you courtesy and ^^manitie, surmounting the forces
of my tongue: In recompense whereof assure your self Madame, in all occasions
presented to me for your service, I will employ my self with (...) sincerity
of denotion, as I desire to be made known unto (...) when it shall please you
to give me full fruition of that (...), which I shall repute second to no
other, in retayning me for your Knight: so much I never offered yet to any
Lady living, for that I acknowledge my self far unworthy to serve any Lady.

If so it he replied the Duchess, I may well glory to have made this day so
precious and inestimable a purchase, gayning him for my Knight, who is a very
pe^rle and representation of Mars: wherein I find my self so much beholding
unto you, that I see my self out of all hope to be ever able to cancel
toward you the Obligation of my spirit: if of your favor and grace it do not
please you to accept in part of payment and satisfaction thereof, the extreme
desire which I have to show you in effect, I love you even as the same soul
which gives me comfort and good hope that you shall reap condign recompense
for the pains you offer to endure for my sake.

These last words she spoke so softly that none but he could hear them, and
so fair and softly prosecuting their matter, Tirendos told her that his heart
would be very well content, if any accident did fall out to constrain him to
make some abode to do her humble service there.

That would be answered his lover, the most agreeable thing which I could
desire: so that I beseech you depart not hence yet these two days, during
which time peradventure some opportunity may serve to bring about this
business.

Tirendos promised he would (when the Duke prayed them altogether, because he
was come in talk to the same points with the others) they would not depart on
the morrow: whereunto they consented, to the great contentment of the Duchess,
who showed by all signs she could devise, to make known the extreme love
she bare Tyrendos.

And as she ^nsred her self the day following, to druist some invention to
prolong the soiourning of her lover, behold there entered into the Palace a
woman clothed in black, who demanded of the Duke if the Knight vanquister of
Dirdan and his companions were in his house; who be^^ng shewe^ unto him, she
fell prostrate at his feet, praying and coniuring him by the thing which he
loved best in this world, that he would grant her one boon.

The knight having accorded this woman's request, she began again after humble
thanks to say in this manner.

Fair Knight you have now promised to go into a place with me, where I hope
by means of your valor and prowess (whose fame yesternight came unto my
ears) to find me remedy for a wrong, which the worst of all Knights
caused me wickedly these last days to endure. Tyrendos promised her again to
employ himself for her, so that she should remain content: and seeing he must
yet have another Combat in that quarter, he liked very well his occurrence,
which was a mean for him to stay longer nere his dear Mistress, who
thereupon was almost ravished for joy: but if they two were well pleased,
Belcar and Recindes, who would not soiourne there any longer, (to the end they
might come before the King Florendos to Constantinople,) were as much
displeased when they understood of the injured Gentle woman, that Tyrendos must
needs abide about ten or twelve days in that place. Wherefore he prayed them
to be going always before, saying that be must needs stay there to exploit
some act which might make more famous the reputation of his person: Assuring
them he would not be long after them, and that the great desire which he had
to be at the Triumph would keep him from so^ourning long in any other place.
His companions seeing they could not get him along, thanked the Duke and the
Duchess for the good usage and honorable entertainment they had made them, and
leaving Tyrendos in Bort, (being a little displeased to separate their Trinity)
they took their journey strait to Constantinople: whereby the Duke was
marucylous glad of this Knights abode with him, misdoubting nothing that be
would lie in ambush for his wises honor: who hoping to take some pastime in the
amorous chase with her new Parramour, made a great deal the better cheer to
the Gentlewoman, who was cause to retain him with her ^ where we will leave
them to the liking of their loves, to recount what befortuned Belcar and
Recindes after they had parted company.

CHAP. VIII.
How Belcar and Recindes being arrived in Constantinople unknown of any,
vanquished the County Peter, and continued the law of his Ioust, doing
maruels of Arms: and how the Emperor sent Palmendos and Primaleon to know who
they were.

BElcar and Recindes perceiving the will of Tirendes their companion, prayed
God to preserve him from all sinister accident, then bidding him adien, they
fell into their way again: wherein riding many days iourneys, they arrived at
the last in Constantinople on a Sunday morning, the seanenth day of the Ioust
that County Peter enterprised (as you may call to mind) whereof they heard
some news by the way as they came. By means whereof they determined before
they would make themselves known, to prove themselves against him as Knights
errant: Belcar praid his companion to let him have the first course, which he
willingly granted, albeit he could have desired to win the honor or shame
first himself.

Entering then into the City, they made directly to the Tilt-yeard, where they
found the gate fast, by reason the County dined then in the company of many
Knights with great joy and sollace, as they were accustomed within his
Pauilion: So that being saint to stay the fit hour, they leaued upon their
Lances, until they saw the Emperor take his place on the left hand, to
whom the King of Hungary who fate at his side begins to say: My Lord, behold
those two ^nights who will I (...), how brave they govern themselves ^^
horseback.

Truly brother you say well (quoth he) I beliue it will do a man good to see
them at the shecke. When Belcar perceived the Emperor whom he had not seen
long time before, force and courage increased so in his heart, that he
purposed to show this day some pleasure in his house, where because his was
nourished and brought up in it from his infancy, he knew not King Frisol his
father who was with him in company, being brought from Hungary thither in his
swaddling clouts.

But the Earl seeing the Seigniory and Noblesse in the galleries, caused forth
with his Helmet to be brought, and by and by all his strings, leathers and
buckles, to be laced and tied: Then mounting he commanded the Trumpets and
(...) to sound, and to open the Gate of his repairs: Whereinto Belcar being
first entered, the Earl asked him, whether he would Ieust or fight, I will
quoth the Assailant, do all that I shall know to be necessary, but let us
first Ieust to see what will follow.

Having thus saluted each other, they encounter with (...) a fury that Belcar
lost his (...), and the Earl (breaking in, dashing together the pe^^rall and
the girths of his horse) went mangre his nose to lust his greater and mother,
but ^^^ soon got up again, being greatly ashamed and vexed, to lo^^ an
instant the honor he had conqurred in six days.

Sir Knight then quoth Belcar, I have w^rme your Coats of Arms, if I be not
given to misunderstand in declaring ^^^ the Law of your enterprise: According
to which you must depart this field, which I purpose to guard and defend in my
turn as you have done before me; if seen body (...) not by force of Arms. My
Habilliament shall I (...) give you answered the County) without departing the
Tilt, (...) be not by Martial exployte performed by you or some other, which
shall force me to do it. You will seen your (...), replied Belcar;
nevertheless, seeing you will (...) hathly, and con me thank for she courtesy
(...) which I show you.

Then set the Earl foot to stirrup again, and in the mean time the Emperor
being greatly astonished at the magnanimity of this Knight, said to the King of
Hungary, he well knew who he was; the two Champions began with their swords
a terrible and furious skirmish, hewing out another in so bruske and strange
manner, that it terrified the b^^ olders to be are them only: For the County
through rage and despite which surmounted his reason, laid on without fear,
and most desperately.

But his adversary, who was a little more nimble, and could manage a little
better than he, did tiggle his ribs with such sound flashes which eastly
tamed him at length; so that being weary to make him languish so much, he
(...) in the end a fell stroke upon his Murrion, which l^ude him in a stonny
upon the bare ground; saying: Now Knight must you condiscende by force, to that
whereunto you would not accord by your good with: a thing surely proc^^ding
from your rash presumption, which make you think the honor of Chiualry dwelt
only among Frenchmen.

At this spectacle and words (...) the Prince Arnodes, and had it not been
through the ^^disposition of his person, and that Philocrista would never have
permitted it, he had endossed his Arms to (...) the County and his Nation of
this reproach.

In the same pain and choler were all the rest of the French Nobility who
seeing they could none other remedy, listed by Earl Peter from his fall, and
bare him into his lodging to cause the Surgeons to ^^ke unto him, and search
his wounds.

Belcar who thought in the (...) time what he ha^ ^^ do, took the coats of
Arms, and giving it to one of his Pages, commanded him to be are it from him
and one of his companions to Melissa the King of Hungaries Daughter: whom they
(...) all comers, it she would vouchsafe them so (...), to let them Combat
under her (...).

And gave charge more-ouer to the young man, to tell the Emperor and those who
were about his Majesty, that whosoever would Tourney against him, should
always find him ready within the Listes: Where if per adventure he were
vanquished by any of the Assailants, the field should remain tol^s companion,
who should second him therein, which they did desire to did in attending the
opening of the general Triumph.

The Page understanding thoroughly his Masters will, went strait to the Palace,
where kneeling before the Empress, h^e besought her to show him which of her
Ladies was Melissa, King Frisols Daughter: wherein being by her graciously
certef^ed, the youth rose up, and with a most lowly reverence began to say in
this manner.

Madame Melissa, the Knight who vanquished Earl C^^^ kisseth the hand of your
Excellency, and sends you by (...) this his spoil, the which he knows
beseeming your worthiness, whom he loves more than any Lady of this company:
And although he never saw you, he assures himself nevertheless, she for
whose love the French Lord fought, is not so perfect in beauty, but she
yields and gives the first place into you. Aduertising you more-ouer, that
he and his companion remain from this present hour, your most (...) and
obedient Knights, as hoping (if it please you to do them so much honor, that
they may accomplish the Law of the Ioust of County Peter under your name) to
employ themselves so in this place, that the renown of your beauty shall fly
throughout all climates of the Leuant.

He that had there seen the comely beauty of Melissa, should not have sailed
to have ludged of the tamour a^ her two Alabaster cheeks, covered with a
transparent and (...) Lawne, for the shame that seized her, hearing him spea^^
^^ in her favor: Nor could she answer a word to the youngman, she found
her self so confounded; when the King her father (who was there with the
Emperor) (...) this Embassage in good part, said unto her; Daughter I will not
believe but the Seigneur who sends you such a present knows you; and though
it were for no other respect, at least you ought to receive it, and to honor
him who sends it you for love of his generous mind.

I know not my Lord (quoth Melissa then) who may be the Knight, whose
courtesy seems not to approach his force; taking this hardlesse to give a
present to a Damsel whom he knows not: which notwithstynding, for that it is
your pleasure I will accept of it.

You shall aduertize your Master (quoth she to the Page) he greatly mistaketh
to presume so much of my beauty, as to continue the Ioust of the Earl for me,
who have deserved no such honor at his hand: Nevertheless, I thank him for
his good will, in ^ccompence whereof, if I can do any thing for him, you shall
assure him from me, I will employ my self with as good will, as I pray God to
preserve him and his companion also from all encumbrances which may impeach his
valiant enterprise; for the small occasion they have to charge so heavy a
burden for so little beauty as mine, makes me fear they will be vanquished, if
their prowess and dexterity do not supply this default.

Then the young youth making a low obeisance to thank her for this courteous
answer, took his leave graciously of her: And turning to Duke ^ustace who was
near es^ ^e^ought him to tell the Emperor and his company, that who so ever
had any desire to ioust against this Knight-vanquisher, and his companion,
should appear upon the Battiers, where he should find them always ready;
which he did without delay: The Emperor misdoubting one of these Knights to
be Belcar, told if incontinent to King F^isol, who assured him the contrary;
for that he supposed he had hardly lest the company of Florendos.

Now did Belcar all that day nothing but break stanes, for there was no French
Knight but came to do his best against him, hoping every one to revenge the
County Peter: but the like chance befell them, as did to him before, for this
Desendant was rough, and a very good horseman, which was his inheritance he
held from King Frisol his father, who was esteemed one of the best men at
Arms of his time. That same day Belcar dismounted beside the Frenchmen about
twenty Knights the most redoubted of the Court: whereat the Emperor wondered
much, so that he sent Primaleon to them to know who they were; who gladly did
this Embassage with Palmendos; entreating them to repose that night in the
Emperors Court, who gave them such charge, for the great desire he had to know
them.

Gentlemen answered Belcar, desire his Majesty to pardon us this once, for that
we cannot leave this place without incurring some blame, being departed from
our houses, with full detemination to make our selves known to none.

This is a point of small courtesy (quoth the Constantino Politan) to refuse
the honest offer which the Emperor makes you, with so simple excuse as you
find now.

And who are you fair Sir, quoth Belcar, (faining not to know him) who term
us discurteous:

I am Primaleon (replied he) Son to the Emperor, who sends to entreat
you by me to do him this honor.

I have done then (presecuted the Desendant) because I know you have not as
yet received the order of Chiualry: Assuring you, that for your prayers, nor
for the entreaties of the Emperor, shall you prevail further with me than as
I told you before.

I will not importune you any further (says the young Prince) then being
somewhat offended, and when he had so said, he returned into the Palace with
Palmendos, who was so wrath with this thwart answer, that he purposed on the
next morrow to Arm himself, to the end to chasti^e his arrogance.

When the Emperor understood they had disdained to grant his request, he did
but laugh at it, saying; they must he let alone in their obstinacy, to see
what might be the (...), Nevertheless, Palmendos would be revenged, and
without saying ought to any body, went secretly to endosse the Coat of Arms,
in which he vanquished the Tourney, which we have described before, and came
withal with a great Eaunce in his hand within the Barriers.

So soon as Recindes spide his Armor he knew it, and who carried it on his
back; which he let his companion know, requesting him not to Ioust against him
for the Emperors sake: Whereunto Belcar answered, be could willingly
forbear; notwithstanding he o^^ht not to refuse so good occasion to proone his
valor against so (...) a Knight; for if he dismount me at the Ioust, quoth
he, I shall not think it any shame or dishonor for me, seeing he is the
Achilles of our age, with whose valerous exployts all the Orient reseundeth.
When he had done his speech, he did his best endeavor to make him feel his
forces, and running one against the other very roughly, such was their
encounter, that Belcar had taken measure of the earth, had he not taken hold of
his horse-maine. And Palmendos liked not very well the knock which he gave him,
but it was needful for them to breath a little. Then charging a fresh with
new Lances (for that the first flewe in pieces to their Gauntlets) they met
together with so sudden a sury, that they made the ground tremble under them,
where Belcar sound himself much bruised, what with the blow and the fall in
his Armor. Then Palmendos who lost only his stirrups, glad of this revenge,
demanded his Hanburgeon, aduising him if he would not fight at the sharp, to
depart the field. Other battle quoth Belcar, seek not I against thee, for
small hope have I to gain more honor by the sword, than I have already at the
Ioust: and for that also I esteem and love then too well, to make further
trial against thee; knowing right well by this encounter, I should have but
ill speed if I proceeded further. Palmendos hearing him say so, mittigated a
good part of his indignation, and taking his Coat of Arms, went directly to
the Palace, where the Emperor and the King of Thessalie, very glad of this
act, received him with great pleasure, the Emperor saying thus to him.

Son the Knight did wisely not to accept the Combat of the sharp against
you, otherwise he might have sped ill, considering his success at the Ioust:
Now God grant (I wish it with my heart) that all your future enterprises may
sort to so good and honorable end, as the passed have received a most
fortunate and favorable issue.

Palmendos kissing his hands, thanked him humbly for this good wish, then sent
he Belcars Gabardine to his fair Francheline, who was not a little glad
thereof: Therefore she would needs come to disarme him with her own hands,
casting about him a fair and rich mantle surd with white sables, for fear he
should take cold.

CHAP. IX.
How Recindes continuing the ^oust after Belcar vanquished the Marquis of
Penerad, and a Cosen of his, with many others after them: and how the Prince
Arnedes his Cosen lousted against him, which caused the Emperor to come into
the field to know who he was.

BElcar seeing Palmendos depart the Listes, rose up very angry for his fall, to
retire himself to the Earls Pauilion where Recindes was: who galled to the
heart for his companions misfortune, purposing to revenge him if any man
appeared within the Barriers: So that being mounted his f^uced lively up and
down, when the Marquess of Penerad, (esteemed a good Knight, as descenting of
the race of the Emperors of Constantinople) came into the field.

He being advertised, that the two Knights who kept the Ioust ofter Earl
Peter had sent his Coat to Melissa, whom he desired extremely to have in
marriage, began to bear them a mortal and secret grudge; and purposing to
chastize them for their over bold rashness, came richly armed into the field,
where without any word speaking, provoked with raging anger, vailing his
Lance, dashed his horse suddenly.

Which Recindes perceauing, set spurs quickly to his likewise, so furious was
their encounter, that the Marquis went arse over head, over his horse head to
kiss the ground, taking such a grievous thulch, that he remained in the place,
wagging neither hand nor foot: whereupon one of his cosens proper and valiant
of his person, a heavy man at this accident (in the mean while they carried
the Marquis into his Chamber) ran speedile to Arm himself, thinking to
revenge his mishap: Bimer was the Marquis Cosen called, who began to Ioust in
such a heat, that he mist his blow against Recindes, who contrariwise hi^ him
so full pat, that he sent him castly to take the Marquis place: but he rose up
again lightly, saying to the Defendant, he should not think to have yet done
with him, seeing he would know how he could handle his sharp.

At these words the Spanish Prince alighted, and putting his shield on his Arm
with a courageous stomach, they began a fierce combat, which for all that was
quickly finished. For Recindes being a better warrier, and more spruce than
his adversary, made him recoyle to the place where he was vanquished: then
pulling off his Gabberdine, left him wounded in many places of his body among
his people, who carried him thence into his Cosens lodging.

That done, he gave that and the Marquis coat to Belcars Page, to bear them
to Melissa, beseeching her to accept them, as coming from one her most
affectionate seruitour, that she might find under the two Tropicks of heaven.

She who was with Philocrista in her Chamber, when the Page came to do the
message, answered thus: I know not what these Knights mean to send me such
presents without knowing me: yet feign would I learn their names, and what
moves them to do it: Madame (quoth the youth, they are such, that when you
shall know them, you shall think some great good Fortune will befall you, in
being able to do them some honor for your part in recompense of the extreme
desire that I can assure you they have to serve you in the things wherein you
take some pleasure: For all that they shall have none other thanks of me
replied the Princess till I know more, well will I take that which they send
me, where with I find my self greatly content: albeit far more should my
spirits be satisfied, as you may tell them, if I might perceive openly their
drift. Few days shall pass Madame, quoth the youngman, before you see the
true end of all: so that I beseech you do not vex your self, but attend the
fit honor which shall be breefely as I hope.

Finishing his speech, he took honestly his conge of the Ladies, whom he
left very pensive, and curious to know who these valiant and courteous Knights
might be. In the mean time Recindes who held on his Chiualries, Iousted
against ten or twelve Assailants: all whom he laid bravely along, winning by
this mean their Coats, which he caused to be hanged on high upon the Pillar,
where County Peter hoped to erect his Trophie: After this he took his sollace
and recreation, before any one presented himself within the Lists, every one
fearing to adventure against him, whose prowess and derteritie was so great:
Whereupon Arnedes who felt himself better at ease than he was wont, hearing
the Emperor say the Defendant might well remain with the honor of the Ioust,
seeing that no man entered the field any more, answered him.

I do not think my Lord, they cease c^mming for fear of him, for the number
of brave and hardy Knights of this Court is not so little that he can long
time hold out against them, and as he had said, he went presently to fit
himself with Arms, putting on a Murrion well tempered with steel: then came
he into the place mounted on a mighty Courser, who did nothing but neigh and
some at the mouth.

When Recindes saw him enter the Barriers, he discovered him soon by his
devise, and as he thought how to avoid Iousting with him, he was forced to
set spurs to his horse, because he saw his Cosen Arnedes do the like:
nevertheless approaching within the reach of their Lances, he hau^^ed his and
would not couch it against him.

By this mean Arnedes easily broke his staff, albeit he could not wagge the
Champion an inche out of the Saddle, so that in manner abashed to see him do
so, turning bitte he incontinent charged upon him thus: Sir Knight let us have
another bout yet, and use no more this courtesy toward him, who will con you
no thank for your favor: So takes he another staff and fetching his
carriere to run the second time, Recindes did as he had done before: Arnedes by
that means or else by choler, missing his attainte, in a great rage threw
his Lance to the ground, and setting courageously hand to his sword, said to
the Knight: As God me help now will I know for what reason you would not
Iouste against me, as well as against the rest.

That shall you never understand by my means quoth the Spaniard: hereof can I
well advertise you, that happen to me what may, I will not couch my Lance
against you.

You will tell me then a reason quoth Arnedes, or you shall presently die of
my hand. Such inhumanitie shall I never see in you, replied Recindes, albeit I
had no will to desend my self.

By the living God said Arnedes hastily, you will constrain me to be
discourteous indeed, and therefore at your own peril be it.

I can no longer forbear quoth the Emperor then (who heard this controversy)
but I must needs know who are these two Knights now in field: for me
thinks I see none other than the true representation of Belcar and Recindes.

When he had thus said, he descended with many Nobles after him, and finding
the two Combattants yet in dispute, the one seeking to know why his adversary
would not encounter him, the other excusing himself that he might not tell
the cause, willed Arnedes to go aside: And taking Recindes Horse by the
Bridle, he prayed him of all love that he would satisfy the great desire
he had to know him.

My Lord quoth he, I cannot do it without ins^^^ging my faith, therefore I
pray you urge me not to be per^urde. Assure you, replied the Emperor, you
shall never see me depart from hence before I know and look you in the face:
so that by excuses you may not prevail.

Therefore I pray you put off your helmet, and think in so doing you shall not
break your faith and promise. For Gods s^ke, replied Recindes, do not offer to
force me in your countries. This force will I offer you, answered the Emperor,
for that in my mind, it stayneth neither your honor nor mine. The Knight in a
perplerity not knowing what to say further, seeing it was a matter of
constraint, held his peace and not a word. Then Belcar who had verse well heard
all the whole circumstance (seeing he could no longer conceal himself,
threw incontinent his helmet to the ground and went to fall on his knees
before the Emperor, in kissing whose hands her said.

My Lord pardon us if it please you; if we have not been so prompt to obey
you as your greatness requires, for we determined at our departure out of
Macedon, to come unknown into this place, to exployte before your eyes some
honorable attempt, wherein you might take some delight and pleasure:
Notwithstanding seeing we are frustrate of one intention, having performed
nothing worthy to give you contentment, it is the very reason, why we
dissembled our selves unto your Majesty: of whom both the one and the other of
us two reputeth himself a most happy man, to have received so great honor.

Ah my dear friends quoth the Emperor then, you be exceeding welcome into my
Court, wherein I may well assure my self cannot be found two Knighte, in whom
can be found so much an^^rosity as in you only: but tell me I pray you
whether the King my most honorable Father, will come speedily unto this City.

My Lord answered Belcar, I am sure it will not be a week before he arrive
here. For he was ready to depart, when I entreated him to let us go before,
to bring you news thereof. The Emperor marvelous joy full of this answer,
turning himself with a laughing countenance toward the King of Hungary,
saying to him: Brother receive to you Belcar your Son, whose virtues and good
manners make him so amiable, that every brave man of good judgment, would be to
him in steed of a Father in this behalf.

As the Dominators of Greece spoke these words, Belcar falling upon his knees
kissed honorably his Father King Frisols hand, who embraced him with great
love, the trickling tears standing in his eyes, and at length the French
Prince seeing his Cosen Recindes in face, ran unto him with open Arms to
give him the accollad^e, and could not almost speak for extreme gladness,
which seized his heart in recognizing him.

Which the Spaniard perceauing, alighted quickly from his Horse to embrace him,
and after they had showed many familiar and loving cherrishings one to
another, he went to do his duty to the Emperor, who received him most
joyfully, as did likewise all the ^eigneurs and Barrons of the Court: whereof
the greatest part esteemed themselves very happy if they might come next to
offer them the gentle welcome: and if all the beholders were very glad of this
sudden and inexpected joy (whereof every one had a good share) that of
Pinedes was so abundant, that it could not be expressed: having seen him
perform the valiant and famous acts, which you have to fore understood.

Then took the Emperor Recindes by the hand, and the King of Hungary his
Son Belcar, whom they lead strait to the Palace, where being disarmed,
they went honorably to kiss the Empress hand, who entertained them with most
kind speeches.

During which, Melissa who heard them (by the only instinct of the unspeakable
joy which she felt in mind, reuested in the superficies of her face, such a
natural beauty, that it was an admirable thing to behold.

Full well did the two knights mark it when they came to do reverence to
Philocrista, Francheline, and to her who represented the third Goddess. So
that thinking her self thrice happy, to have bin known worthy the presents
of two worthy and excellent Princes, embraced many times her brother Belcar
amiably: Nevertheless with more than a singular affection, and without any
mean, (as it falls out many times to those who are stricken with the same
Dart that she was) she entertained Recindes her loyal and perfect lover. And
believed firmly, by that which her Brother sent her, when the youngman brought
her the first coat of Arms, that she knew indeed the whole discourse of
their secrets: wherein she found great consolation, showing oftentimes to her
lover by many signs, gracious aspects, and other du^^^ Embassages of love,
what was her intention, which Recindes did the like for his part toward her.

In this mean time Belcar was busy in beholding the extreme beauty of
Franch^line, whereof he was greatly astonished not without thinking Palmendos a
most happy man, to have won so much honor in winning her for his wife, And
albeit he was well contented with Alderine the only Lady of his heart, yet
he could have wished to have had this for his Mistress, which passion could
not be so well dissemble, but in embracing Palmendos he must needs tell him
in smiling manner: Truly Sir it was for my great good, I was not present at
the bridge of Carderie when you arrived there, for obtaining now so cast
victory of me, what would you have done when your heart was so much pricked
forward to purchase so rich a treasure as Francheline is? No marvel then if
you have showed that prowess upon me which every man has manifestly known
in you, seeing before your eyes, a beauty sufficient to make able the most
coward and faint hearted knight that is, to perform any strange adventure, were
it never so hard and difficult.

My dear Cosen replied Palmendos, (being very glad to hear him self given
this honest conunendation by so good a Knight as Belcar,) you are as much
bounden as my self to the Princess Francheline, for seeing the desire to
conquethes, caused you in the guard of the bridge to win the honro which shall
for ever immortalize your fame: Where I was very happy not to meet with you,
avoiding great danger thereby of loosing my life, which God has preserved me
hither to.

Further would they have prosecuted these gracious speeches when Arnedes who
approached with his Cosen, said: Seigneurs leave off these matters now, seeing
that all men see the valor and dexterity of you both, wherewith you Brother
Palmendos do make many sick through your beauie and puissant strokes: whereof
I shall all my life bear good witness, by that which happened to me once, which I
account no dishonor, seeing it has pleased God to accomplish you in all
Martial perfection.

At these lawdable reproaches blushed Palmendos a little, when be answered them
both in this manner: My Lords let us not talk of things that are past among
us, when we knew not one another, albeit thereby is clearly seen with what
valor and Chinalry you were both endued and enriched: so devising together of
many adventures, they returned to the Emperor, who made them kind
entertainment, and like wise King Frisoll, being not able to sat^ate himself
with the ^ight of his Son: So that the feast was much increased by their
arrival in this Court; where we will leave them, attending the coming of the
King and Queen of Macedon (whom the Emperor understood would be there
within four days) to recount you what Tyrendos did in the Duke of Borts house.

CHAP. X.
How Tyrendos revenged the Lady clothed in black, who came into the Duke of
Borts house, of an iniutie that was d^^e her by a Knight named Alegon, and how
by his mean the Duchess and Tyrendos attained to their hearts desire.

THe Knight Tyrendos desiring with an incredible affection to do some
pleasurable setuice so the Duchess of Bort, made tariance with all his heart
in her Castle, hoping to bring quickly some end to his amorous passions: During
which he declared once more to her, how since his first arriual in the plame,
he was so e^flamed with her love that he pretended never to forsake her,
whereof she was a meruailons glad woman, a much more when he manifested unto
her his race.

By means whereof making more account of him than she did before, they
determined together to give some solace to their desires, after he had
accomplished the promise which he made to the Dame^^ll clothed in black, so
that to dispatche quickly he departed thence a joyful man on the next morning,
not without the great entreaty of the Duke to repasse by his house if his way
didlye any thing that way.

In the mean^ time the Duchess gave one or two presents to the Dame^^ll, and
discovering unto her the love which she bare Tirendos, desired he^ to be
careful of his health: and that she would requite it, which the good Lady
promised her frankly: so that taking her leave of her and her husband, she
went her way with the Knight, who demanding her afterward, wherein she had
need of his aid, she answered him thus.

Know fair Knight that two of my Sons being this other day at the marriage of a
sister of a naughty Knight called Alegon, they got there so great honor in a
fortress that the Bridgroome and many others defended against al others, that
the wife of Alegon (some little kin unto them) did cherish them the more for
that, especially the elder, who was a spruce youth and well experienced in
feats of war: For this occasion her tr^yterous husband conceived in his mind a
deadly grudge against him, which increasing more and more, at one time among
all other, when he espted him devising with his wife, he fell into a furious
choler, that without any word speaking, he came upon him with his naked sword
and slew him easily: My poor son being disarmed and taken at unawares: And
afterward running upon my other son with his Catchpoules, put him
incontuient into prison for fear lest he should revenge the death of his
brother; saying further, he would put him to some cruel death within the
prison. But I sorrowful and heavy Widdowe, void of kindred and friends, who
may for medem ^^d Justice for this injury done; hearing the same of your
Prowess, built some hope to be revenged by your mean, b^ing as assured as I am
to dye, my sons were innocent, and intured without any reason; and therefore
would I most humbly pray you fair Sir, according to the promise you made me,
to go bid him de^^ance in his Castle, telling him if he refuse the Combat you
will accuse him of treason before the Emperor. If such be (quoth Tyrendos) the
disaster and misaduenture of your children, as you tell me; the homseide it
self cries vengeance against the traiterous and fellon murderer, who has
perpet^ated it; which I hope by Gods aid to make him confess, promising you
to employ my best ^orces there^^, with such a courage, that I will either dye
or else you shall ^emaine satisfied.

The Damsel gave him great thanks for his good will and taking two Squiers for
guide and company (...), they arrived the third day after about six a clock
before the Castle of Alegon: Where Tirendos ^^d the Porter (...) his Master,
there was come thither a Knight from the Emperor Palme^u^ Court, who would
speak with him.

Whereof the ^eigneur being aduertized, stey^ to a window over the Ca^^^^
gate, demanding what was his e^^a^^, I would willingly desire you (answered
Tirendos) to ^urcease the inhumanity which you use toward a poor widow,
restoring her youngest son to her, whom you detain in prison unjustly: and
if you will so do, I promise to obtain you pardon for the death of her
eldest, whom you slew against all right and reason, otherwise I denounce you
the Combat, saying that you have wronged your honor.

Truly I had not thought replied Alegon that at the persuasion of a woman who
complains without any cause, a Knight had been so credulous, whom I may
suspect of cowardice: assuring you that I have done, but what I ought in reason
to do toward her Children, who sought to dishonor me: so that I think you
will gain more to be gone again unto the Emperors Court, where you shall
find opportunity at this present to show your prowess, and to brave your
belly full, rather than to enterprise here any thing, which might peradventure
cost you dear.

With that he got him from the window over his portall, when Tyrendos in a
marvelous rage, began to speak many heinous villainies to him, reproching his
cowardlinesse, and assuring him (if he would not Combat against him) to accuse
him of fellonie before the Emperor sovereign Seigneur.

Which being well wayed by Alegon, was somewhat afraid, and persuading
himself it were better to end that quarrel there than before the Emperor,
resolved to sally out to Combat him: which he did after he had well harnessed
himself with Arms and a good Courser, telling his enemy he made little
esteem of his braues, were he the most redoubted Knight of the Emperor
Palme^ius Court. Upon this contention they coming to encounter with a
marvelous fury, Alegon mist his blow, but Tyrendos pearcing his shield and
his ^uy race, thrust the point of his Lance so far into his breast, that he
ouerturned him shrewdly wounded to the ground, whence the wretch could not so
soon rise up again, but Tyrendos (who leapt nimbly from his Horse) was at his
back to cut a two quickly the laces of his helmet^ then setting the point of
his sword at his throat, said: Thou art dead Alegon, if thou causest not
presently come hither the Knight with his Arms and Horse, which thou hold
wrongfully in prison: Gentle Knight cried the vanquished, for Gods sake save my
life and I will obey you willingly in what soever your pleasure is. Then he
commanded his people to fetch the prisoner quickly with all his millitarie
equipage, so that the Gayler having set him at liberty, it was not long
before he appeared in the place; whereof Tyrendos was glad without measure,
when he asked him whether he were him, for whom he had Combated: I am the man
quoth he, who will serve you as long as my soul shall dwell within my body,
which you have so well relieved now: And as he had said, Tyrendos put up his
sword into his sheath, then mounting all three to horse, he said to Velican (so
was the rescued Knight named) these words.

Let us now Brother depart this place, where I believe this false and cruel
Tyrant will not commit hereafter, so many mischeefes as he has done
heretofore, which was most true: for his servants having brought him home to
his chamber, and disarmed to visit him, they found his wound so great and
dangerous, that he lived but three days afterward, and in the mean time
Tyrendos, Velican, and his Mother, arrived in her Castle, which was a delight
full and pleasant house, within term mile of the City where the Duchess of
Bort dwelled.

But this Damsel showed such kind of cherrishing to her Son, that it were
impossible to write them, thanking many times the Knight who had rescued him:
who having his spirits occupied in nothing but upon the Duchess, took this
Damsel a part to discover likewise to her his passion, praying her to go
make his excuse to the Duke, if he could not return onto his house as he
promised him at his departure: for that upon some sudden news which were
brought him, he was feign to make in all haste a voyage to Constantinople.

Moreeuer prayed her to talk secretly with his wife, to know her intention
concerning the conserence between them in taking their plot touching the
future accident of this occurrence, and that in any wise he would ^^ay for her
answer in that place where he would sollace himself until she should do
him that favor.

The Damsel assured him to employ her self in this so dangerous a message,
albeit she were certain to loose her life, finding her self too much bounden
and behelding to him, to refuse any thing which he would command or desire: by
means whereof, taking her son with her, they went strait to the Dukes house,
who entertained them very amiably, enquiring himself what was become of the
Knight and of the issue of his promise: The which Velican told him from print
to point: and after that which Tirendos would have said from him, whereat the
good Seigneur was not a little displeased; for he would willingly have seen
him yet once more in his Castle, as being the man whom he esteemed more than
any other Knight of the Countries adjoining to his Duchy.

But the Lady and her son aduertising him, that they resolved from
thenceforth to live under the protection of his service, for the little
assurance they had elsewhere, because of Alegons kindred, whom they feared as
death.

The Duke for fully welcomed the Knight Velican, and the Duchess entertained
his mother for one of her Ladies of honor: and had a singular pleasure in
hearing her recount how Tirendos her loyal Lover vanquished so easily Alegon
the murderer.

When the Damsel afterward spied a sit time for their purpose, she imparted to
her the principal point of her secret Embassage: Whereupon the Duchess (who
loved him as her own soul) began to make this sodain^ answer: Alas dear
sister, the great valc^r and prowess of Tirendos makes me commit this error,
against the Duke my husband; for since I first s^we him, my heart felt it self
wounded and inflamed with his love, that it is impossible for me to endure any
longer in this ardent flame, which bath almost dried me up, and no good humor
in me.

Madame quoth the Damsel, it was well foreseen of you to fire your amorous
fancy upon so brave a Knight, of whom I can well assure you, for the small
time I have frequented him, in a better place could you not have bestowed it:
and furelie the Seigneur Tyrendos meriteth such reciprocation, were it but for
the extreme desire he has to make you know how his devotion toward you,
surpasses that of the most affectionate seruitor of Cupid. So cunningly knew
the Damsel to use her eloquence, with the good will that the Duchess bore
the Knight: that falling from one matter to another, they concluded so soon as
it was (...), Velican should go secretly to fetch and conduct him to the door
of a Garden which joined fast upon the Dutchesss lodging, by which way he
might easily enter into her Chamber, and remain there hidden as long as they
thought good: For that the Duchess had two or three fatre Cabinets, into which
never any entered but herself: in one whereof she made account to keep Tyrendos
as long as ^he could.

This determination quickly sorted to effect, for Tyrendos pricked forward with
such desire as every one may (...) an hour before day to the Garden door,
where attended for him the Damsel, who conveyed him afterward into the
chamber of the Duchess, whom he kissed many times sweetly as soon as he was
arrived saying: Now can I say I have attained the height of the blis, which
love prepares for his favorites, and I cannot imagine Madame, how I may ever
recompense the courtesy and favor you show me, in receiving me for your
servant: If it be not to offer you the sincere and incorruptible: affection
that I have to continue your perpetual ^laue.

Ten thousand thanks for your good will, answered the Duchess: nevertheless
if you see now a poor and simple lover forget so much her chastity, as to
de^^le her marriage bed, I beseech you not to a^^gne the fault unto me
unfortunate and desolute woman, but refer the whole unto your beauty,
prowess and valor, which has brought me into such a taking, that no reason
being able to prevail over the flaming desire of my heart, which you infused
into me when I gave you mine, I am constrained to abandon mine honor unto
you. Wherein I cannot but merualle to find my self so quickly over taken
with your love, (regarding the small time I feel this burning passion in my
breast,) for to make you know the weight, you see presently how I have feared
nothing which may stain the reputation of a Lady Illustrious and of great
renown.

The Duchess perseuering in these her courteous Ceremonies, the Damsel
began to cut her off thus: Maddame, it is now time to bring into some
harbor the two Barks so tossed with the amorous storm and tempest: So that
to preach is not now required in this place, rather let the Pilots thereof
alone to do the deuoire of their office.

By this means Tirendos having well understood the watch word, set up the
Mast with one hand, and lifted up the Sails with the other, then laying down
his Arms of steel required in mortal battles, he helped himself with
those which are more esteemed between two Courtaines, couching himself near
the Duchess side: where took some end the anguish of two Lovers, who remained
in that manner, until they thought it high time to give order for the rest of
their Navigations, a Chamber was appointed for the Knight in a secret corner.

There he soiourned nine or ten days in the greatest pleasure and
contentment, that as yet he ever tasted in his life, for the Duchess who
loved him as dearelye as her own life, was fair and gracious in perfection: in
such sort that the departure and discontinuing of this felicity, and
pleasure, was a most grievous thing to both these vassals of Love.

For fearing lest at length this secret mystery would be discovered, the
Knight must needs go out of his sweet and voluntary Prison: albeit the
Duchess did not much fear her old and gray headed Husband: who may be an
example to all other, (that every one should seek his match) lest the other
inconvenient happen.

But Tyrendos in taking leave of his Lady, promised undoubtedly to see her
again, which comforted her a little: and afterward in going out of the Garden,
he was met by Dirdan, who loving the Lady as you have before understood,
could by no means rest or sleep, but walking all night long about her lodging
to be within sent of his Paramour, in mean while to allay (as he thought) the
restles fit of his burning fever.

He seeing Tyrendos sally forth of the Orchard, was vexed to the gall, as
every one who has tasted the bitter fruit of iealousse may presume: insomuch
that to know who he might be, he drew near, raging, and grumming between
his teeth these words: Ah, a cursed death may thou die who come now from
the place, the issue from whence has wounded and peirced my heart in twain:
wish that he would have laid hand on his choler to stay him: but Tyrendos
who had at the instant set hand to his sword reached him a blow upon his
coxcombe, which cleft him down to the shoulders, continuing his purpose thus:
Now shall the martyrdom end, which has hitherto tormented thee for her, whose
shoosole thou wast unworthy to kiss.

Then making have to the place where Velican attended him, he mounted strait,
and without any other company but this Knight, who would never leave him, went
directlye to Constantinople, where they arrived in good time for the Turney.

On the morrow morning was Dirdan found dead hard at the Garden door, whereat
was great murmuring, the people saying he was slain for love of the Duchess,
which brought her into some suspicion of her honor.

As soon as she knew thereof she quickly deemed who was the author of this
Homicide, Tyrendos her lover, whom she never saw afterward, albeit all the rest
of her life, he, was the chiefest Darling of her destres.

The Duke who was old and loved his Lady above measure, never enquired farther
of Dirdans death: nor cared he much what the world might think: But
misdeemed the Duchess had caused him to be dispacht to banish him for ever
her presence, for which deed he esteemed her the more, and had better opinion
of her than before; and so we will let them live, the one joyful of this
perswation, and the other passing sorry to depart from her sweet lover, whom
we shall find hereafter in Constantinople at the Tourney to behave himself
better in other Combats.

CHAP. XI.
How the King Florendos arriving with his Queen Griana his wife in
Constantinople, were most honorably received by the Emperor Palmerin their
Son, who met them with a great train a days journey from the City: And
how Primaleon Abenuncq and Arnasin received the order of Knighthood.

THe King Florendos and his Queen Griana being departed from Macedon, in the
company of the principal Barcons of their Kingdom, took by their way all
the pastimes they could devise: But being entered within the bounds of the
Empire, they were joyfully received by the Emperors commandment. who had
given order to his Subjects for the same effect: as also for that the Queen
Griana his Mother was their natural and Sovereign Princess.

All this Troop being arrived within a days journey of Constantinople, he
came to meet them, accompanied with the greatest part of the Nobles of his
Court, with all the honor, and most kind entertainment, as a Son so well
brought up as he, might show toward his Father and Mother: who having first
gr^eted him, received and chearished Primaleon and Palmendos his Children, who
did unto them all the reverence possible to be thought of: The like curtosie
used Arnedos toward them (whom they reputed as their Son,) and in like
manner all the rest, both Kings and Princes who accompanied the Emperor: So
that these interchaungeable greetings and welcomes were so long a doing, that
they could not reach Constantinople: but took up their rest for that night, in
a most pleasant place four miles distant from the City, where the Queen
could not fill her eyes with beholding her son.

To be brief on the morrow they entered the City with the greatest joy, that
was ever heard of, the Empress, Queen Arismene, the three Infantes, and many
Ladies of high renown, who kept them company being at the first Gate of the
Palace to receive them more Honorably: who entertayning first the King and
the Queen, after them came the three Infants to kiss their hands, and then
all the other Princes one after another.

These welcomming Ceremonies of the Ladies accomplished, all this Royal
company mounted into the principal Hall of the Serraglia, where the Emperor
sat down next to the King his Father, and the Empress (bringing her three
Daughters with her) next the Queen, who could not faciate her self furuaying
with an vnspea^eable joy, so Heroical and Illustrious a ^rue: In so much that
in this profounde contemplation, she could not countermaunde her spirit, but
her eyes must shed same tears for gladness, when she thus brake forth.

Lord God, now let me leave this mortal world when it shall please thee,
seeing thou dooest me this Grace to represent before mine eyes, the things
which I so extremely destred to see.

Scant had she finished these few words but the enchaunted bird, who was within
the ancient chamber of the Emperor, sent forth two most lamentable screeches,
and had not at their coming showed any sign of gladsomnes, as she was
always accustomed to do at the arrival of the Emperors favorites. So that
the Emperor (who was very sorrowful for this presage) gave great heed unto
it, with many other Seigneurs who knew the nature of this animal, believing
verily by her hoarss chattering, some siniser accident was presaged: But he
dissembled it as well as he might, without showing any outward appearance, but
said incontinent to the Queen.

Madame, I beseech you most humbly, let us not talk in this happy time of
recreation, of any thing which may drive us into melancholy, seeing you being
yet far from death, shall see your self long time served and reverenced of
all these who are assistant before you; and therefore do not dismay your self
by any thing which may bring you into a vain and fantastical opinion.

My son replied the Queen then; Death has this by nature, that there is
none living in this world, who can stew himself so strong against it, that he
may anoyde it; our predestmation being such, we cannot prolong or abridge it
one little minute; whereby ensues, that for any thing I have now said, I can
neither retarde it, nor hasten it any thing the sooner.

When she had spoken these words with a very good grace, she embraced the
Infant Flerida, who seemed unto her the ^aprest and gracious creature she had
ever seen in her life before, and kissing her sweet cheeks many times she
said.

Fair Daughter, I pray God, he suffer you to live so long as your beauty and
sweetness of feature deserves; wherein I think well, neither maid nor wise
can be found, to come once near your Paragon: Most true was that which the
Queen spoke; for whosoever beheld this young Princess, judged her to be a
Venus in beauty, and a Pallas in prudency: But this day they past in great joy
and sollace throughout all the Court, and in the evening, Primaleon besought
the Emperor again, that he would the next day following, give him the order
of Knighthood, and the same he entreated him also to do for Abenu^^cq and
Arnasin Duke Tolomus son which be accorded unto very willingly.

Therefore on the morrow every one doathing himself pompeously in rich and
sumptuous Habits, except Primaleon and his ^ead companions, who watched all
that night their Arms within the Chapel, whether the Emperor coming with
his father and the other Kings and Princes there was asolemne Mass begun.

You must understand since the first time that Abenuncq saw Amand in the King
of Spartaes daughter, he was so attainted with her love, that no other thought
than of her dwelt within his breast: So that in mean time while the Mass was
saying he resolved to become a Christian, to show more evidently unto his Lady
and Mistress, the extreme desire which set him on, and especially to enter
the Tourney as her only Knight, wherein he hoped to add unto his praise,
that which he could make good there.

The Mass being ended, he humbly besought the Emperor, he might be
partaker of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, before he came to the order of
Knighthood: For knowing how much the Law of Christ was more sublimate and in
blessedness exceeding that of the Mores, he would no longer live in Paganism.

Which the Emperor and all the Assistants hearing, were passing glad of his
renouncing of Infidelity: So that uncovering his head, the Patriarck of
Constantinople did baptize him presently, che^sing for his Godfather the King
Florendos, who commended him greatly for so virtuous an act.

For testemony whereof, he promised strait to make him so great and puissant a
Prince, that he should have cause to put in oblivion the estate and riches of
his father. Whereof the new Christian returning him humble thanks, the
Greekish Mona^ke turned himself toward Primaleon, saying; Sen, request of my
most honorable father, it would please him to arm you Knight with his hand,
for if. I have purchased some little honor in this world, I can assure you all
proceeded from him, who inucsted me first with this honorable degree of
Knighthood; which I hope will be augmented more in your person, if it please
him to enrich you therewith. Then you shall give it unto the young Arnasin, and
I unto Abenuncq your companion.

Primaleon having heard what the Emperor his Father said, went full joyful to
kneel before the King his Grandfather, beseeching him he would put on his
spur and girde unto him his sword of Arms: whereof he excused himself,
saying it were better to be done by his Suns hand: But the Emperor himself
and all the other Princes, who were there prayed him so instantly, that in the
end he was constrained to condescend thereunto: and giving him as well his
fatherly blessing as the military acolado^, he soon made him Knight: the
Emperor armed Abenuncq Knight, and afterward Primaleon himself dubbed
Arnasin of the same order. The ceremonies were done with so great pomp, that
it was noone before they departed out of the Chapel: so that the dinner
staying for them (after that the Yeomen of the Pantry had recovered the Tables
round) the Squiers of the kitchen were not long before they served in their
first service: So coming from Church they went strait to dinner, where the
Emperor sat down with his father, the other Kings and great Lords being
served most honorably, and as such a magnificent Feast ^e seemed so Royal a
company of Princes.

After the tables were taken up, the Queen Griana and the Empress whose
provision was no less; came to them with all the rest of Ladies so richly
attired, that the only aspect of them put some gladness into the Knights
hearts who beheld them; and amongst the rest filled some of their breasts with
such amorous and pricking desires, which took so deep root therein, that
they could never afterward he (...).

Then began the dancing and other reuelling, in midst whereof thy enter
laced interchaunge able talk of many matters: Belcar took in the mean time
Recindes by she hand, whom he brought to sit down hard by Melissa with this
language: Dear Sister I must esteem great and marvelous the felicity which
God has within this little while sent you, to make you Lady and Mistress, of
one of the most valiant Knights, who lives under the zodiac, besides he is
in all other things, a Prince so accomplished that there are few at this day
found to be his like in valor and worldly riches. He of whom I speak is
the Prince Recindes, whom ye see no less affectioned toward you with an
entire love, than desirous to show you the experience: by mean whereof I pray
you of all favor between you and me, you will reciprocally love him, for that
he deserves it, and his virtues of themselves should inuit you thereunto; and
I promise you to employ my self so well for you both, that with in few days
your hearts shall find some case and content.

The Damsel who was sage and as courteous as might he, hasht a little at her
Brothers speeches, and made him this answer: You say true Brother; that the
Seigneue Recindes, is virtuous, valiant and a rich Prince, and I should (...)
my self to want manners and grace, not to obey you in that which it pleases
you to command me, seeing between you two so perfect amity is confirmed: so
that you and he may he assured all my life I shall reverence him in such
sort, that you shall know with what sincerity she speaks, who will remain
perpetually servant to you both.

Now may I quoth Recindes, repute my self truly happy about all these, who
think to ha^^ attained (...) of their felicity, seeing you so prompt Madame,
(...) which it pleases my Lord your Brother to preserve in my (...), and if I
rejoice in any good which God gives me, it is only but for the hope I have to
make you the Lady and Mistress of me and of the kingdoms of Spain.

The Emperor who was a (...) and we (...) Prince, casting his eye round about
(especially suruaying the quality of those, who were in any conference with
the young Princess) that it would be a very sorteable match between Recindes
and Melissa: in so much that in time he purposed to put it in effect. Likewise
he spied Abenuncq sitting nere Amandria Daughter to the King of Sparta his
Uncle: whom he permitted also to give unto him in marriage: to the end to
recompense him there with, because he had forsaken his Mahometicall law: and
whilst the Emperor had this in his mind Abenuncq boorded her thus.

Only Mistress of my servitude, you might see this morning the victory which
love has gotten over me, making me renounce mine own proper religion, to take
a new which is strange unto me: During which Combat, the poor slave of Cupid
so fortefied himself with your lively and rare beauty, which he shooting off
at his eyes, has so imprinted it within his soul, that no other thing were it
never so highly esteemed can take that place from it.

Nevertheless, if to make sufficient proof of his Magnanimity, finding this
precious treasure near him, it would please you to let him enter into the
Cour^^ey as your Knight, (which is the most Soueraignety of his desiers) you
may well assure your self, you never saw so much hardiness in a young and
new made Knight as in him.

If for the love of me, quoth Amandria then you have renounced the Pagan law,
I am greatly bounden to bless God, and to thank you for the good will you
bear me, albeit I merit not the least parcel of any such honor, in
recompense whereof I might he judged ungrateful and too discurteous, if I
should refuse the honest request it pleased you to make me, being but newely
Knighted and issued out of so Royal a house as you do: Wherefore I am
content, and think my self happy, that in my name you will enter the ^istes,
wherein I hope you shall win such Honor among the rest, seeing you had so
good knowledge and deuors^^ of yourselfe to come to our faith.

Madame replied he, you only have been the occasion, in that to insinuate my
self into your favor, I get the knowledge of the Sovereign God.

For that regard shall I love you the more quoth she smiling, and will
esteem you ever more than any Knight, which may offer himself to mine eyes:
in sign whereof there is a ring which shall serve you for a favor in the
^ourney.

This ring replied he, which now I have by your gift, shall give me so much
force and courage, that when I should have a thousand lives, I would employ
them all one after another, seeling it fast upon my little finger: so that
having it in my possession, I shall prize it far more than the fatal ring of
Gyges.

This was the parlie these two new lovers had together that day: which made
Abenuncq in so great joy (having understood thereby his Ladies will) as he
past away merrily that night with the other Knights.

CHAP. XII.
How the Prince Arnedes was espoused with Philocrista, and Palmendos with
Franch^line, and afterward lay all four in two beds, which the Knight of
the Isle-Close sent the Emperor with eight Musicians to make them all kind of
harmonious mellodie: And how the next day following they opened the great
Triumph wherein Primaleon bore away the prize.

ON the morrow which was the day when the Nuptials of Arnedes with
Philocrista, and of Palmendos with Francheline should be solemnized, come
every one forth richly arrayed to accompany them to the Church of Saint
Marie the round: but before they came thither they staire an hour by the way,
so full were the streets and windows stuffed with Knights who came thither to
the ^ourney.

At the last they came thither, and presently was there begun a high and
solemn Mass by a Bishop, who giving his benediction to the new Epouses,
finished incontinent the Ceremony which the Greeks had accustomed to use in
their Nuptials: then returning to the Palace in the same order they came, it
was past twelve before they came back thither: by means whereof these new
married Princes sitting down^ to cable with the King their Uncle, the Emperor
their Father and the other Kings and Princes, and great Seigneurs, began
presently a Consort of Musitions to sound on al kind of Instruments.

In brief they so feasted all that day that it were impossible to recount it:
afterward bed time being come, the Queen of Thessalie and many other Ladies
of Honor brought Philocrista to her Chamber, where they laid her in a rich and
stately Bed: whose Curtains and Canope were cloth of gold, wrought with
little figures of Birds, spread clean over a Couerture of fine crimson Velvet,
diapred every where with great oriental Pearls. The couch (beset round with
Imagerie of P^rle, in form of Pomgranets holding two great and brave Medailles
of massiue gold) had the sour principal pillars of the Mother of Emraude
wrought infashion of bathes, underpropped by four Dragons of green marble
planted upon the bases of Ca^cidonie, and foot stalles of Ia^per: and upon
the top of the pillars, stood four S^hinges of ^^ne ^gate, coming so^ere the
natural creatures, that you ^ould have said there had bin nothing in the^
wanting but the speech.

The like did the Empress to Francheline with many other Ladies in her
Chamber, and in a Bed of no lesser (...) and ar^^fice tha^ that of Philoorista,
as comm^ng both out of the man's shop, and from one and the same worke-master
that made them.

Afterward did the Emperor and all the other Kings, conduct the Bridegroomes
each of them into his Ladies chamber, where leaving the^ alone remained not
long, but there ^ayned a new Metamorphesis to Philoctista and Francheline, for
that of virtuous maidens they were within a small time translated into most
fair and gracious wives: Whereof (...) gave a good testimony to them that
beheld it then, ^ lively ^^r^^llion blush, which after the sudden mutation
remained a good while upon their cheeks: During which cha^^ge of name and not
of person, came four young men from forth their Ch^mber doors bringing a
Nuptial Ditty which the Knight of the Ile-Close had composed, and sent into the
Court at the same time, with the two Beds where in the new married Princes lay.

I doubt not but some of you perfect Lovers, reading this passage, will wish
with some private affection to see your selves near your Paramours in like
joys as were the four loyal Lovers; and it were but for the delight which
your spirits might take, in remembering these things so rare and pretio^s.

So then the Seigntur of the Ile-Close loving the Emperor wi^h ^uch entire
amity as he did, would needs by skill o^ his Art make the ^east of his son
and Daughter more excelling and magnificent, when he sent him the two beds
and a Cons^rt of eight voices: who seeing the vower fit for their purpose began
to sing an Epithalme thus:

GOD Hymeneus chief of Nuptial Rites,
Ye Bacchus, Cupid, Ceres, Hymen's powers
Be present here, hale hence with all your mights
All mo^^ning sorrow: Bring us happy hours:
And Flora Summers Queen for our delights,
Bestrew this Royal Court with choice of flowers.
Your favors show to four Knights Combatant,
Who try their Valors in the closed field,
But if the Victor do his foe supplant,
Or if the vanq^i^^t be constraind to yield;
Upon the Conquerours head a Garland plant,
And him that is foild from further perrill sheeld.
Be ye conductors of these valiant Knights,
That every one may win his Mistress favor:
Entering the Listes in Arms redoubted Wights,
To show their prowess worthied to have her,
At the next Iousting, Tornements and fights
Proclaimed by the Greekish Emperor.
Permit no worthy favorite to dye,
Who is a Iouster in this Courtly crew:
Let none behold that fatal tragedy,
Lest all the Court do his misfortune rue,
For death always does part good company,
All mirth is dashed when sadness does ensue:
In mean time let no duty be surceaste,
By help of gentle Cupid God of Love:
To marry many a Nimphe this solemn feast,
Who in this Court do shine as Stars above:
With haughty Knights who think their fortune blessed,
For their sweet sakes adventures strange to prove.
The Emperors Royal seruitour am I,
In humble duty ready to fulfill:
What it shall please his Sacred Majesty,
I may not disobay his Royal will:
From the Close-^le I sent this melody,
To honor him set by mine Art and skill.
This Confort of Musitions so harmoniously deseanted upon this Nuptial dittie,
that many young Damsels, who ran unto them like Bees to the herb Thy me,
would needs have a Coppie thereof: as well because it was partly composed in
their favor, as also because the Music thereof seemed almost divine, filling
the ears of all the hearers with a marvelous content.

Of this great curtesse of the Knight of the Ile-Close was the Emperor passing
glad; and for that kindness and many other, he loved him all the days of his
life: in so much that be redoubled the feast upon this occasion, and would not
on the morrow permit the Tourney to be opened, nor until the third day after:
after which we will begin to reocunt the glorious exployts, the meruaylous
and triumphant Ioustes of our valiant and hardis Primaleon.

To come then to the beginning of his Martial Chiualries, be commanded his
Fathers Ingenour to choose out in the plain field, a plot wherein he should
set by a Tilt-yeard environed with high bars and railes, in Longitude and
Latitude aunswering just his Diameter, and in form Ouall, so that at the least
fine hundred Knights might Combat afront.

The first day he purposed to appear therein himself, as the Emperor did
when discovering himself to his Father, he was elected to the Empire of
Greece: to wit, that within the close field should not enter more than four
hundred Knights of choice, half on the one side and half on the other,
putting the Imperialles with the strangers altogether pell-mell. Whers Abenunq,
Arnasin, Peynedin and many other valiant Knights were on the one party, and
on the other side Belcar, Recindes, with many other gallant Champions of the
Kingdom of France, Sparta, and Thessalie.

The Emperor and the other Kings having dined, they went with the new
Bridegromes upon the Seaffolds which were set up for them in the plame: And in
like manner the Empress and the Queen with their two young Brides upon theirs,
where every one placed himself as well as he could at their best case, behold
Primaleon enters at one of the gates of the Theater accompained with all those
of his part, and Belcar and Recindes at the other; for there were two doors
made, and at every one whereof was a Pillar of stone, very rich and sumptuous;
upon the top of the one stood the shape of Mars holding in his hand a Globe
crowned with an imperial Diad^^n^; upon the other that of Venus, having her
divine Duiu^^ burning on the one side, and her son Cupid on the other, who
leaned on her say.

So did Primaleon give order they should be made, to the end they might as
well perceive the ^ngen^ousnes of his spirit, as his corporal dexterity^:
Thither would her not bear his shield of the Roche-sendue; but his sword he
had girded to his thigh, because it was superlatine in bounty. Now after that
the one and the other side had made a turn about the field, the Clarions,
Drums, and F^les began to sound the Assault: And then might you see this
Caualery hurry one against another with such sury that it was wounders to
behold and hear the encounter of both sides clashing together* Primaleon
before he broke his first Eaunce, dismounted more than half a dozen Knights,
being all shrewdly wounded, or else in danger of death: Then drawing his sword,
he began to strike so thick, that every one gave him place, avoiding his
presence as if it had been Medusa the terrible Gorgon. By means whereof, the
Emperor who could discern the good and perfect Knights from the other,
better than any of the slanders by, seeing him so hardy and so spruce, judged
he would one day prove a very good and an accomplished Knight; whereof he
greatly thanked and prayed God to preserve and keep him from mischaunce.

Abenuncq shel^ he were a little younger than he, nevertheless made his
Prowess there very well known, and that he was the son ^f the good Knight
Olorick Sultan of Ba^^lo^ and of Ar^^d^^na: Of like valor and hard^esse showed
himself Aruasin the third new created Knight: But Primaleon who besturd him
more than any of the rest, (laying on sore blows and so thick, that it seemed
thunder passed the place where he went) behaved himself so, that albeit Belcar
and Recindes did merualles of their persons, he drove for all that by force
of arms his aduersartes out of the place of combat, for that one being first
gotten forth, all the rest followed him as fast as they could at one an others
heels: insomuch that Belcar, Recindes and some othere of their pertakers, who
held out stoutly against him: could not at the length endure the stresse of
their adversaries because they would not fight at all extremities against
Primaleon; in the end they were so constrained to retire them selves, and
avoid the Barriers.

The Tourney then being vanquished by Primaleon, he was received by all the
Barons of Greece with an incredible joy, saying with a common voice, he should
be one day more valiant than the Emperor his father, who then returned into
the City more joyful than he ever was before: and giving the honor of the
Tourney to Abenuncq, he said that he well showed himself to descend of so
rare and accomplished Knight, as was the Sultan his Father.

But the King Florendos many times embracing Primaleon with the tears standing
in his eyes, praide the Almighty God that he would to so fair a beginning,
give also a better end: Wherefore the young Prince kissed him, b^ie his hand,
thanking him for so favorable a wish.

Afterward the other Knights being arrived at the Palace, the Emperor
honored greatly Recindes and Belcar, saying they of purpose suffered
themselves to be vanquished, for that they had no lust to fight against the
principal of their adversaries: which he spoke to no other end but to comfort
them only in the discouragement they took at this misaduenture: knowing
nevertheless that none in the Troop could equal themselves in hardlesse and
dexterity to Primaleon his Son. And for that none of the Principal died not,
nor was not hurt in this first tourney, the feast was redoubled which they held
afterward the space of fifteen days together with open field for all
comers: wherein some days entered more than ten thousand Knights exployting
strange and admirable deeds of Arms. In the which Primaleon being every day
present, carried away from all other the Honor and prize, as at the first: for
albeit Palmendo, and Arnedes the new Bridegroomes entered twice into Battle
with him, and did acts that every one was astonished at, they were forced for
all that to leave him the upper hand.

Notwithstanding let us speak of a Knight who was slain during the Triumph,
whereupon it fell out that many defied him afterward accusing him or Treason,
for that he had assured al Knights who would come unto his Tonruyes, of safe
conduct and return throughout all the Countries of the Empire.

CHAP. XIII.
How Perrequin of Duas the King of Pollands Son coming to the Tourney at
Constantinople to kill Primaleon, and to revenge Gridonia the Duchess of
Ormedaes Daughter, was slain himself by the hands of Primaleon.

NArdides Duke of Ormeda, being vanquished and done to death by the Emperor
Palmerin, which Duke of a ^roth came to Constantinople to revenge the two
Cosens of Tarisius his Brethren, whom the Emperor himself and King Frisoll
slew with their own hands, as writes the Author of his History; his people
returned with these sorrowful tidings to his Mother and the young Duchess his
wife, who made such lamentable complaints and moan for him, that it was a
pitiful thing to behold the issue of so miserable a Tragedy. And to the end
to make more memorable her mourning and funeral ceremonies, she commanded to
erecte a fair and rich tomb within the Chapel of her Palace, upon the
which for her last expiation (after many other Honorable Pempes required in
such a case) she shed ever it an infinity of tears (as if the body so much
deplored had been therein buried.) But what? Surely he was not there, and I
believe that if she might have recovered it, she would never have enclosed it
under that lamine, but rather have done as Arthemisia Queen of Caria, who
after the death of Mausolus her husband (for the more Honorable interring of
him) caused to be builded a magnificent and sumpiuous monument, which was
afterward called one of the seven wonders of the world: and nevertheless
seeing that edifice finished (which she called Mausolus, after her dead
husbands name,) she then judged it unworthy to receive the so precious and
rare treasure of her amity: Therefore she caused to burn the body to
cinders, and the said cinders afterward to be aromatized, distilled, and
resolved into water, that she might be her self his Sepulcher: supping up
that distillation as the most exquisite potion which she could find, for
always afterward to conserve in her the integrity of her love toward him.

Now this young Duchess being every day after her mourning ready to be brought
a Bed, the anguishes and throngs which happen to women in that case, came upon
her at the report of this news, so that she was speedily delivered of a very
fair and beautiful Daughter: unto whom for that she was borne in a
sorrowful time, and in that Country they call to lament, or to cry, Gridar,
was her name given Gridonia.

The old Duchess (who had no other heir but this one lie Niece) caused her to
be carefully brought up: and with so great diligence that she grew to the
sight of the eye, so fair and perfect in all features and lineatures of her
visage, that her mother seeing her such a quaint piece, swear she would never
marry her, but to him who should revenge the death of Nardides her defund
husband. And upon this condition did she then presently set down the marriage
of Gridonia, who coming to the age of fifteen years was required and
demanded of many Princes in marriage. Nevertheless when they heard the law
and vengearnce which was to ensue, none would be so hardy as to accept the
match.

So radiant and admirable was her beauty, that through all the Countries and
Marches round about the Duchy of O^medes they could talk of nothing else: By
means whereof Perrequin of Duas. Son to the King of Polland, who was Brother
to the Mother of the same Gridonia, hearing a report of so erquisite beauty,
had great desire to see her: Insomuch that he be sought the King his Father to
give him leave to go visit the Duchess his Aunt, whereunto he easily
accorded.

He then commanding to rigge and equippe a good ship with all that might be
necessary for such a voyage, soon after took the route of Ormedes: where
being with a favorable wind and fair weather arrived; the Duchess rejoicing
much at his coming, entertained him very amiablie, which G^^donia also knew
full well how to do. She was so courteous and gracious, that Perrequin seeing
her so beautiful, comely and well nurtured, found himself in a moment
surprised and enamored, swearing for a small resolution to marry never any
other Wife but her: which caused him to break thus with his Aunt.

How he coming into her Countries to see and serve her in that wherein she
should please any way to employe him, he felt at the first encounter his
heart so privily ravished by Gridonia her Daughter, whom if he were refused
to have her to his Wife, he did think he could not live long afterward,
and concluding his preamble, besaught her most humbly she would condescend to
make her Queen of Polonia, and that he would procure a dispensation from the
Pope. Ah, dear Nephew quoth the Duchess then, of this alliance should I be
more glad than you, if she and I might in any wise consent thereunto: But
having sworn long since, never to give her in marriage but to him, who should
revenge the death of her defemet father, I may not expose you to so great
hazard of your life, the Emperor Palmerin being so mighty and puissant a
Prince, that I am half in despair, you will never be able to compass our
request.

I will not therefore let, replied Perrequin, to employ my best forces, to the
end to practice so just and reasonable a vengeance: For as well I clearly see,
I am but a dead man if I enjoy not my Cosen briefly to wife. If God would so
much favor you then (quoth the Duchess) that you might bring your purpose to
pass, assure your self not only to have in recompense Gridonia mine only
Daughter to your wife, but my self also for your humble and perpetual
servant, with the whole estates and riches that God has given unto us both:
wherein I shall esteem my self the most happiest of all step-dames, winning
such a son in law, as I could not choose a better if I should seek one
throughout all the inhabitants from the one to the other Pole: So that I
beseech the Almighty that he will so direct your actions, that the end may be
as prosperous and happy, as I poor and desolate widdowe do wish it. The
Knight thanked her courteously for this good affection; and if he were very
glad on the one side, he found himself far more pensive, counting with
himself what was to be done, to conduct so tigglesome an enterprise to an
issue: The which being understood by Gridonia, she rejoiced as the Lover who
could have been willing to have committed the condition of this vengeance, to
the end to hasten sooner the consummation of her marriage; nevertheless, she
would not gainesay or strive against that which her Mother and Grandmother had
resolved therein.

As Perrequin was in profounde consideration how to lay this Ambush, being
able to devise no mean, which might seem easy enough to effect it with
sanegarde of his soul and body, he had news by certain Merchants who came
from Constantinople, of the ^ouste which Primaleon had published throughout the
Empire: whereupon he conceived exceeding gladness, hoping to go thither
quickly, and under pretense of Iousting in that for full spectacle to kill
Primaleon by treachery.

So declaring to the Duchess and Gridonia amply his desire (after he
understood they should be very well satisfied with Primaleons death, as
being the thing which would much trouble and disturb the Emperors Court)
purposed to depart speedily accompanied with fifteen Knights of choice, whom
he gave to understand all the points of his conspirarie: But when he came to
take his leave of the Duchess and her Daughter, they could not prevail so
much over the weak and feminine nature, but must plainly show by apparent
tokens the sorrow and discontent which this departure did cause their spirits,
especially Gridonia, who for all the demonstration of her anguish, prayde the
Sovereign above to safeguard and preserve him from mortal danger, for that the
Emperor and his people were in all their affairs most fortunate. Perrequin
comforted her as well as he could, and seeing the tears distilling from her
fair eyes, deemed himself beloved of her unfeignedly; which increased so much
the more his force and courage; then embarking himself, and setting sail, he
came ere long after to surge in the Road of Constantinople, where he
commanded to strike sail to go a shore, and Camp himself in the Plain as
did the other Knights.

It was now the sixth day of Primaleons Iousts, when the Polonian understood by
all men that he did marvelous Acts of Chiualry, behauing himself like a
Hector in midst of the field: which was a cooling to him, fearing least he
should not at his ease have his will of him. Yet he encouraged himself, and
prayed his fifteen confederates to bend their eyes and heart only upon
Primaleon, caring not a rush for the rest, and that he would do the like to
set him quickly packing out of this world: in such sort that this night he
would not go to the Palace for fear lest the inchaunted Bird should reveal
by some token the plot of his treason; the nature of that creature being well
known thorough out all the Countries and Frontiers of the Empire.

On the morrow arming himself with a rich and proud Harness, he entered with
fifteen Knights within the field, being showed unto Primaleon by the devise
of his Arms; whom he knew otherwise before he had been long within the
Barriers by his great Prowess: For so soon as the Clarions and Trumpets had
founded the Alarm he began to do strange and marvelous deeds of Arms.

Which the two Knights of Perrequin seeing, they crept near him before he was
aware, and had he not had his ^uy race of proof well tempered with the finest
steel, they had wounded him sore.

Nevertheless, he who felt himself thus outraged, as a Lion assailed with
two bloud-hounds, turned toward them full of furious choler, and reaching
either of them a downeright knock upon the Helmet sent them soon to the
ground.

Then began Primaleon so fell a fight, skirmishing on the right hand and on the
left, that Perrequin could no longer suffer this brave, but taking a Lance
without ever speaking word, ran with all his force at his back behind, so
that he made him loose his stirrops, and piercing his Armor, scrateht his
flesh a little.

You need not demand whether Primaleon found himself more ashamed of this
encounter, than sorry not to know who might be the Knight who set upon him in
this cowardly sort: So that turning bridle he after him bravely beaking him
lust^ly. In the mean while Perrequin stood not still but did the like to him,
as he who desired nothing else but to make him quickly loose his life. Recindes
who perceived this sharp and cruel battle, stepping between them parted
them for that time; and on the morrow also when they renewed the like: Whereat
Perrequin grew wrath, that he might not have his will, albeit he feared much
the sturdy and beauy blows of his adversary. Then began Primaleon to take it
in dudgeon finding him always before him offering such fashion of Combat,
feeling rather a mortal and bloody fight, than an exercise of joy and pastime;
wherefore he swore to be revenged of him, if he encountered him any more in the
Tourney: which fell out even so; for that upon the morrow seeing him with his
Lance in his rest to come amain upon him, snatched another out of his Squiers
hands quickly, saying alowd in great indignation: Discurteous Knight, I know
not who you are, who filled with such a fury and malice against me, will not
suffer me to be one minute of an hour at quiet. Nevertheless I will see now
whether I can uncase this fellow, who thinks to dispatch him, who never (as
far as be knows) offended him in his life.

Finishing these speeches, he went to charge him with his sword, which he
thrust so right into the midst of his breast, that it ran more than a foot
and a half cross thorough his shoulders, and at that instant sent him as dead
as a Dog to the ground, prosecuting his talk thus.

Now shall thou leave me manger thy malice, who have dogde me so these three
days, that I could never keep thee from behind or before me: Then in great
hardiesse hurring into the thickest of the press, he charged them so
courageously of all sides, that ere long he forced all his adversaries to
turn their backs.

To make a short abridgement, he got always the honor of the victory, as
long as the Tourney lasted: Whereof the Emperor and all the Nobles of Greece
were passing joyful of his generosity, valor and Chiualry. But let us now
before we conclude this first part of our History, see what good luck befell
the Spanish Prince, who has lately left the Iousts to Court his fair Lady
Melissa.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Recindes having espoused Melissa returned into Spatue, Arnedes into
France with Philacrista, and all the other Kings and Princes into their
Kingdoms; Except King Florendes and Queen Griana who died in Constantineple
to the great sorrow and mourning of the Emperor and all his Court.

WHo might ever be able to recount the great magnificence and meruallous
things which were done during the feast of Philocrista and Francheline? Surely
the sumptuositie thereof seemed so pompous, and the feats of Arms so
admirable, that to describe them well, they surpass the cloquent tongues of
Demosthenes or Cicero: For there was present so great a number of brave and
valiant Knights, that you would have judged the whole assembly, to have been
the choice and flower of all the men at Arms in the whole world.

But above all Recindes made his valor well known there, for the earnest
desire which provoked him to do his best endeavor in some thing which might the
more recommend him to his dear and best beloved Melissa: Therefore the
Emperor, who esteemed him highly, told the King of Hungary, that he should
get a good Son in law, if he purposed to give him his Daughter in marriage.
King Frisoll answered, he would be very willing of this alliance, and causing
his Son Belcar, Recindes great friend to be sent for: demeunded him his advise,
and what conjecture he had concerning his will in this matter: Whereunto
making answer, that it was the most affectionate point of the Castilians
honor: began thus to set this business abroach.

Lord Recindes, your valor and chivalry shows it self so Heroical among
this Illustrious Troop, that I love you as much as my Son Primaleon: so that
to accquite my self in part of satisfaction of the good turns I ow you,
having done me this great Honor, to come and visit me in my house, I am
content to give you for wife Melissa my niece, Daughter to so Honorable a
King, as is my Brother of Hungary: As for the perfections of the Infant,
seeing you know and see them every day your self, I will not labor to dilate
further upon her praise, seeming to me that the amitle between you and my
Son Belcar should be far more inseparable when the accomplishment of this
alliance should be consummate.

The Knight most attentively giving ear to the Emperors talk, bowed himself
with a lowly reverence to (...) his hand, and likewise King Frisols, accepting
him for his father, and reputing himself for the happiest Spanish Knight that
ever set sail toward the Fennes of Meotis, for that he alone had compassed
such a marriage: the which was solemnized the morrow after with so much pomp
and a new supply of Tourneying and Tilting, that Primaleon had leisure enough
to show his singular prowess and valor: nor happened there any thing during all
these Triumphs which disquieted the Emperor in mind but the death of
Perrequin, knowing that he was not the least of his faction, for otherwise he
would not have cared so much for it.

When all the feasts were finished, the Emperor gave many presents to many
Knights, sending them home most joyful men into their own houses and
countries. And in the mean while he showed good cheer and countenance,
Arnedes solicited by his Ambassadors, demanded leave to return into France
with his wife Philocrista, and so likewise did Recindes with his.

The Greekish Daminator denied them not their suits, but bestowed great riches
upon his Daughter, to the end she should go most honorably into France,
and in like manner to Melissa his niece. Then he commanded to rigge out a
fleet of ships well equipped with all things necessary for such a voyage. The
King Florendos gave moreeuer many rich and precious Jewels to his neeces: the
King of Hungary not forgetting to do the like to his Daughter, with whom he
sent a certain number of his Knights to accompany and sauegard her home. And
if the Empress became very sad at the departure of her two Daughters, no
less was the grief of the two Princess: But for that they went away
gallantly married to their content, they easily forget all sorrows past.
Every one then taking their leaves, they be took themselves to the salt
water, and so well were they favored by Zoylus and Neptune, that with a
prosperous gale and a calm Sea, they soon arrived in the Coasts of Prouence:
where Recindes bidding adieu his cosens Arnedes and Philocrista, followed the
ro^t of his voyage with Melissa. And commanding to single toward the strait
of Gibraltar (which lies between the two mountains Calpe and Abylas, at this
day called the pillars of Herculos, because the one of them in Spain and the
other in Barbary, were long since by him separated, to nauigate from the Ocean
Sea into the Mediterranian) came to land in the city of Civil, where he was
most Honorably received: From thence he took his journey toward his City
Toledo, where the King his Fathersoiourned, who was passing glad of his
arrival: most of all when he heard the reputation he had gotten in feats of
Arms: In so much that going from his Palace to entertain them lovingly could
not forbear weeping, seeing him in so good disposition; and Melissa his Wife
so sage, be autifull and virtuous: So at the first, Fatherly embraced them
both, and after that he had welcomed them with a thousand welcomes, he led
them both into his lodgings, purposing quickly to solenmize the marriage in
his Court: Which he did, and after warces li^erally bestowed many presents
upon the Greeks and Hungarians, which came to accompany Melissa, who returned
all very well pleased from him toward King Frisoll their Sovereign. But the
Princess Philocrista was received with no less sumptuosl^y by the King of
France and all other Dukes, Marquesses, Carles and Barrons, of that Kingdom,
where they held many Ioustes and Tournyes for her new and joyful entrance:
wherein purchased great honor Arnasin Duke Tolomus Son; and Peynedin, he
who reseued so brauelye the French Prince, when Leche^^ slew the Hermit in
combatting him, as you may yet very well remember: Yet did he nothing in
comparison of Tyrendos, who would needs go along with this new married couple
to conducte them into Gaul: For that falling there in love with a very fair
and beautiful Princess near Cosen to Prince Aruedes, and she likewise
being ina^^^red of him, did meruallous things in Annes to get her further
favor: In so much that the King, and the Prince his Son, perceauing their
Loves, married them together soon after: and gave them so great Treasure for a
dowry, that the feast being ended, they returned all to Constantinople,
feeling the liberality and bounty of the King of France.

But to return to the order of our History, the Emperor remained almost
alone by reason of the departure of the new married Princes, and of somany
other Knights which did accompany them: Likewise the King of Thessalie took
his leave of him, to the end to go visit a little his Kingdom, where
Palmendos and Francheline were most Honorably received with great signs of
joy and gladness. And the King lived three years there only after his
return: After whose death immediately was the Knight Palmendos Crowned: who
by means of his valor and prowess (...) greatly the consines and demaynes of
his Kingdom: waging continual war against the Turks, having conquest in
many battails, skirmishes and assaults of Cities.

Like hostility received that nation by Belcar, who incontinent after the
Tourney and all their Feasts were finished in Constantinople, departed thence
to return to D^uace: where as soon as he had solemnly celebrated his
Nuptiais, he set forth on foot a numerous and blood Host to go against these
Infidels, and to revenge himself for fair Laurena.

In like manner every one of the other great Princes which came to
Constantinople took their way homeward toward their Countries: Especially
King Frisol and the King of Sparta; and very willingly would the King Florendos
have returned into Macedon, had it not been for the Emperor who be sought him
humbly, to tarry a little longer with him: Nevertheless, many days were not
come and gone, before the good old Prince found himself cast down with a
grievous sickness, wherewith by reason he was already drooping and decrepit he
died within one month afterward. The Queen Griana saing him abandoned by the
Physicians, and out of all hope ever to recover again, fell also sick with
the sorrow and grief she took for him: And a marvelous thing it was, that
these two both rendering their tribute unto nature, left on one day this mortal
and transitory life.

The Emperor and the Empress conceived such inward grief and anguish at
this occurrence, that thorough the continual tears wherewith they bewailed
them, or through the abundance of melancholicke humors which stufft their
brains, they made account to go keep them company in the other world: Yet
for all that, afterward recomforting themselves as well as they might, they
caused them to be both buried in a rich and most stately Tomb, with great
funeral Pomp and Ceremonies. And if this Court had a long time before
continued in sollace and gladness, yet was it now as far in mourning and
grief, after this death, without any token of joy or mirth at all. So that
Primaleon all this time of tribulation and heavy chears, gave himself to
nothing but hunting and hauking, retayning many brave Knights with him who
always kept him company which way soever he went.

CHAP. XV.
How after that the Duchess of Ormeda had knowledge of Perrequins death, her
Daughter Gridonia made anoath never to marry with any man, if first he did not
revenge her upon Primaleon of Greece: and for what occasion the Castle of the
Coc-fendu was builded, whereinto the old Duchess with Gridonia retiring
themselves, how as they rested themselves hard by a fair Fountain there
issued out of a Forest a Lion, which put all their train to slight, and the
Princesses in great fear.

PErrequin being slain, the greatest part of the Knights who beheld him in
this lamentable taking, being always at his side, alighted strait complaining
greatly for his so great disaster: but knowing his life irreuocable, blamed him
without any dread, who had separated it from his body, the which they took up
and conuayed out of the field. And after long lamentation and shedding of many
tears over it, they did most honorably bury it in an Abbey that stood in the
suburbs of the City.

Soon after without any long so^ourning there, they embarked themselves
again, and set sail to the first Port of Ormeda, not daring to return into
Polland; so that the Duchess and her Daughter had the first news of this
mish^p: At the coming whereof, it were impossible to recount the sorrow and
wayling that they made; but especially Gridonia who loved Perrequin with a most
perfect lone: Bymeanes whereof she vowed and swear an oath in presence of
many, never to accept of any other man for her husband, but him only who
should give her for an earnest of her marriage Primaleons head: And if she
and her mother made great mourning for the death of Perrequin their kinsman; it
was nothing in respect of that of the King his father, and of all the Kingdom
of Polland, having knowledge of this mischance.

It fortuned that many Princes afterward sending to the Duchess to demand
Gridonia in marriage, when they understood the conditions, they doubted
greatly whether they might ever be able to accomplish it or no: Albeit some
surceased not for all that to prosecute their demand; menacing the Mother,
that if she would not give them her Daughter with a good will, they would ere
long take her away by force: And the principal who used these threatninges was
the Prince of Clarence, a most proud and arrogant knight. Insomuch that the
good Lady fearing left for this effect he would come to make war upon her,
sent both her Daughter and the old Duchess her Mother unto one of her Castles
called the Roc-fendu which the great Grandfather of Gridonia had caused to be
builded inform of a Fortress for this occasion.

This ancient Duke had an elder sister, who ^ell in love with a young man son
to the Steward of his house, a youth very beautiful and wise, and so excessive
was the passion of her love, that she was constrained to discover unto him the
affection of her heart. The young gentleman who showed not himself slow to
chase in this a mourous Park, vanquished with the beauty and provocation of
his Lady, loved her so extremely, that to come to the paint, she fell her
belly to swell by his deed; wherein she used such cunning to cover the matter
(after the example of the poor deceived Nymph Calisto, for fear she had of
the Goddess Diana) that when her prefixed time was expired, she was delivered
of a most fair daughter, none living being privy thereof, except one waiting
Gentlewomen, to whom she did impart the secret, by whom this Princess sent
away this Babe to the young Gentleman who was father thereof, who receiving it
as soon as it was brought, strait ways went with it up to the top of a little
mountain not far from the City of Ormeda, whereful sore against his will he
was constrasited to commit it to the hands of Fortune, to anoyd the scandal
and dishonor which might have come thereby.

And to the end this little Baby should not be found out of any person, he
laid it down a good way within a thicket of bushes and brambles, near unto a
clear fountain, whose water distilled from a high Rock which ouershadowed
it: But the true directour of all things would not permit this innocent and
immaculate creature dying without Baptism should bear the sins of her
Parents, but ordained for it a sweet mean of comfort as presently you shall
hear.

At the top of the hill there dwelt an old Hermit leading a holy life in a
little Cell which he had built as well as he might best for his purpose
between two open Rocks, separated only by one Cleft thorough the which day
might easily be seen to appear on both sides, wherein it seemed nature had
done her endeavor to cleave them expressly with her own hand.

This holy man descending from his Cell (as his custom was) to draw water at
the Fountain, heard the crying and moan of one whom he knew full well not to
be horn long time before, and appreching the place where she was laid,
moved with pity, took her in his Arms, to carry her with him into his
Hermitage, praying God of his goodness to preserve it from death: Afterward
baptizing it, and giving it to name Poncia, he nourished it with the milk of
a Hind^ which came every day into his Cave, having by good fortune not long
before that time fawned near the place.

So the good old father brought her up carefully, and she growing daily more
and more became very beautiful and gracious in the appearance of her person:
In such manner that the venerable Hermit instructed her very well, teaching
her about all things how she should serve and Honor God. And she might be
abought thirteen or fourteen years of age, when the blessed old man
departing this mortal life passed into life everlasting, and left behind him
this comfortless ^^^i^ng Hermitesse in the austere desert: Nevertheless ^^ is
unfortunate little soul being sage and well brought up, ^^mmended her self
devoutly unto God, that it would please him to take her into his protection,
which did not fail her of his pitiful (...) and succor, never refused to
any which crave it at his hands: for that the Duke her uncle delighting much
in hunting, upon a day made a meeting at the root of this mountain: where it
fortuned by chance that all the hunters dispearsing themselves in the wood to
discover some game, a fawn by the opening of some dogs being put up, made
way before the Duke (who at that time was accompanied but with one only
Squire) after which he gallopped his horse, thinking to give her a turn by the
swiftnes of his horse gallop. Notwithstanding the feartfull fawn seeing it
self pursued so nere, never stayed till it was at the Fountain, where the
Hermit was wont to fetch water: and there breathing a little, whipped presently
into the hole wherein Poncia was: for it was one of the Fawnes of the Hind
which had suckled her: and for so much as it knew her well, and suffered her to
handle i^ gently, it did quickly also leap into her lap with his two
forefeet.

The Duke who pursued it to the very month of the cave, allght^^ (...) from
his Horse, and entered the cave with his naked sword in hand^, wherewith Poncia
was sore afrast^ and dismayed at so strange a sight: because that since she
had any knowledge or remembrance, she as yet had never seen any other person
in this world but the good Hermit now dead, having never in her life gone
further abroad, than to the Fountain which was at the Forest side. If the
maiden were abashed, the Duke was no less in a great maruelle, when putting up
his sword into his scabberd he thus bespake her.

For thy love my Darling will I spare to kill this Heart which I have taken so
great pain to chase hither: But tell me of courtesy, who brought you hither
into this deser^? but for that she made him no answer, he approaching somewhat
near, and taking her by her Lilly white hands, he held and handled them
gently, knowing well by their fashion, that the V^rgin was came of some high
and Noble blood: By means whereof fluding her a little strange by reason of
the fear which might have seized her heart, he began to show her all
turtelies he could best devise: so that after a little the young Hermitesse
emboldened her self to answer him in this sort.

Fair Lord I cannot tell what has moved you to come in to this place to
affright, and to put almost out of her wit and poor creature dedicated to
the service of God: seeing that you seem to me a man of a far diverse and
strange manner than was my Father who lies a sleeps behind this Alter, and is
she only person of this world, that I ever saw in my life until this present
hour.

I cannot tell who engendered thee quoth the Duke, well I can assure thee that
thy beauty has so ravished my heart, that I account it a most happy hour
wherein I have pursued thy little Fawn hither: and know that I am Lord of
all this Country, who destre to do thee some great good: if thou can
resolve to credit me in the thing which I shall tell this: seeing it has
pleased God replied Poncia to guide me into this Hermitage, I beseech you
permit not that any wrong be ^^ered to mine honor: Fear not daughter said
the Duke, but you shall be greatly loved and tendered of me.

The God of heaven grant if quoth the young Nun, that it may be according to
the decree of his divine pleasure: The grace this Maiden had in her honest
tattle, pierced so deep in to the heart of the Duke, that what by promise, by
flattery, or otherwise, before an hour was past he appeased the first of his
passion, making her of a maiden dedicated to Pallas, a wise ready to offer the
Seston or Girdle to Venus, to present him her service, whereof he was the
gladdest man that might be: Nevertheless well bethinking with himself
afterward what was best for him to do, (for that he was already married)
purposed to build in the same place a strong and invi^sible Castle, there to
keep her within it, with all the pleasure and contentment that her heart might
desire: For this cause he sent word by his Squier to she Hunters, who ch^ced
in the wood, that they should every man (...) City: And having showed to him
the Hermits Daughter, and afterward making him understand his determination:
commanded him to cause his Architect to come thither with a number of
Artificers to build a Fortress in that same place: Whereunto his Squire gave
present order, and returned with many rich robes for the young Damsel into the
Cell: wherein none ever entered but himself alone, all the rest remaining under
Tents which he had pitched before that same place. From which the Duke would
never depart, until he saw the Castle finished, which he had caused to be
builded upon that clo^^^ Rock, whereof it bore the name continually
afterward, and was one of the strongest and fairest in all that Country, for
the Sea environed it on the one side, and on the other side was a most steep
and in accessible Rock, except only on that side where the fountain was.

Therein did the Duke enclose his Love Poncia, the which when her time was
come, she brought him forth a very fair and goodly Son, who was
afterward Grandfather of Nardides, Father of Gridonia and of the (...)
Knights whom the Emperor and King Frisoll show in a Combat which they had
together: But these Love tricks could not so well be concealed, but the
Duchess had intelligence thereof: who seeing herself so much contemned by her
Husband, (...) for grief and rage: Whereupon it fell out that for the entire
love which the Duke hare to the Child which he had by Poucia, he espoused
her afterward in second Marriage, living together in great pleasure and joy,
until the very end of his days when he know that she was his own Niece.

Now in this Castle retired Gridonia with the old Duchess, for fear she
had of the Prince of Clorence, and arrining at the Fountain (for that it was
both ^^pleasant and a delightful place) she would have ^a^ne gone (...) to
^^to refresh her self: But she was not so soon set down upon the br^nke of
it, but the remembrance of her dead (...) Per^^quin coming in her thoughts,
renewed in her a pitiful and lamentable be wailing of his death, for that
fortune favored so much the Emperor Palmenn, who slew first the Duke Nardides
her Father, and Primaleon afterward this her Cosen, with whom she hoped to
pass joyfully the rest of her life: Mean while she made these strange
complaints, which might provoke almost the unreasonable and insensible
creatures to compassion, behold there rusheth out of the wood a huge and
furious Lyonrozing so terrible, that all the company of gentle women being
wonderful scarred, every one got away as well as they could: leaving with her
only the good old Duchess who was not able to run away as the others did.
We need not in the question how great might be the fear of a simple and
timorous Damsel, as of Gridonia, who supposed undoubtedly that to be the last
hour of her life. Yet perceauing this Lion to come right upon her, she soon
perceived the contearie: for that he began to fawn upon her with his paws,
and to play with his taste, as though he had been familiarly brought up with
her all his life. In such sort that h^e put his head into her lap, and
beginning gently to lick her hands, made her as much amazed, as if she had
seen before her eyes some new and strange wonder: Wherefore by little and
little assuring her self of the tamenesse of this brute beast, she stroked
her hand upon his head, flattering him in most gentle and gracious manner:
wherein the Lion seemed to have so great pleasure, that Gridonia and her (...)
there putting away all fear, called to them again their company, which was
dispersed in the Forest. And if some of them came back greatly ashamed ^o
have thus abandoned ^he two Ladies in their greatest necessity, yet she was
more joyful to see this beast so loving and (...), meruayling much that a Lion
by nature cruel and humane, should be made so (...) and gentle before Ladies:
to whom nor to any of their Dam^sels and waiting gentle women he never showed
him self ^urious nor angry: but unto all Knights who did approach the Intent,
and unto others whom ^^ knew not, he did (...) some displeasure, either he
scratcht them with his paws, or (...) them outright. Glad then without all
comparison was Gridonia of this good fortune, and lead this Lion with her into
her Castle where he would never forsake the sight of her: In such sort that
she still^ed him with her own hand, and from thence forward he was a sure
Gardean of her person, being very t^^me, quiet and familiar with all the
servants of her house, even as it had been some little Dog, which seemed a
most rare and strange case to all those in the Countries round about which had
knowledge thereof.

CHAP. XVI.
How Valido the King of Bohemiaes son, hearing the renown of Gridoniaes
beauty, came to see her in the Castle of the Clouen-Rocke, and how hoping to
have her in marriage, he went to Combat with Primaleon in Constantinople,
where he was by his hands slain outright.

Fair Gridonia then being within her Castle of the Clouen-Rocke, the Duchess
her Mother who remained at Ormeda, for the government and administration of
Justice in her Countries, had every day messengers sent from diverse Princes
which did demand her in marriage; as well for her superexcellent beauty and
good grace, as for that they hoped she should one day inherit the Kingdom of
Polonia, because of her mother the Kings sister, who never had any Children but
Perrequin whom Primaleon ^lewe in his Tourney: yet when they understood with
what condition they should marry this Princess, every one did furcease to make
any more earnest suit, fearing the perrill of death which might en^^e.

But the King of Bohemia, the same who took Diartes and Cardonia, whom the
Emperor delivered afterward (as you may have read in his History) had two
male children, the youngest whereof named Valido, who was a valiant and hardy
Knight, bearing the renown spread abroad of the great beauty of Gridonia
departed his fathers kingdom, accompanied with many brave Knights to take his
voyage toward Ormeda: Where being arrived, he was honorably received by the
Duchess, unto whom after he had a little refreshed himself and his train,
he thus imparted at large his mind.

Madame, to the end you should not be ignorant of the chiefest cause of my
coming into this Country, know ye that I being provoked with an incredible
desire to do you service, am departed the Kingdom of Bohemia (the proper
place of my nativity) where the King my father happily swayeth the Scepter at
this present day: and this upon confidence, that you shall know the sincere
affection which I have to obey you in all things, you will not refuse to accept
me freely for your son in Law. And albeit, that I do not repute my self at
this present very rich in earthly riches, having as yet my father living, yet
may I well vaunt to be in bart and good will to serve and defend you from
your enemies, a man more forward than any other Prince of Europe: For this
occasion I pray you grant me in marriage your Daughter Gridonia, whom I
shall be able to uphold in her honors better than any other Knight that at
this day lives.

Fair Knight replied then the Duchess, to give you my Daughter to wife could
I well be content, if by any means it might be, knowing very well the
illustrious blood from whence you descend: Notwithstanding she has sworn
never to marry with any but with him, who for the Jewels of her marriage, shall
first present her with the head of Primaleon of Greece, son to the
Constantino Politane Emperor.

This is no small demand quoth the Knight again, albeit when I should have
some just and reasonable occasion, I would embolden my self so far, as to
dare to go to de^^^ him at his own home to effect the same. I will tell you
occasion good enough, said the Lady then; you should know that in a Tourney
which he caused to be published at the Nuptials of his sister Philocrista, he
gave safe conduct to all comers, when for all that he slew felloniously (as if
it had been in a mortal Combat fought at all destance) Perrequin of Duas,
son to the King of Polland my Brother, who entered the Lists only to the end
to assay himself against him: So that by good reason you may upon this death
accuse him of felony and disloyalty.

Madame answered he, that is not sufficient to urge this evil act upon him,
because the Knight who enters into a Tourney is as the man that plays at
Dice, who before he sit himself down to play, must make account that he may
sometimes loose and sometimes win: Even so the true Knight should appear
within the Lists in hazard to leave his life there behind him, as soon as to
bring it away with him again.

Notwithstanding, seeing that I have no better occasion, I will combat him,
alleging that he slew him in anger and malice which provoked him thereunto:
Whereupon I do assure thy self that he trusting in Prowess and reputation,
will answer me arrogantly, and provoke me with some injurious words which
will give me more apparent reason to combat him.

And to the end that you should know I speak nothing with my mouth which my
heart forethinketh not; I promise to depart incontinently hence, and to take my
voyage to Constantinople, where if I dye in the battle, it shall be for me a
perpetual honor and praise, to dye for so perfect a Lady as Gridonia is; and
if I chance to vanquish mine enemy I shall purchase the most exquisite and rare
treasure that Nature might present me on this earth. True it is Madame, that I
would greatly desire that it would please you of courtesy to let me see the
Princess your Daughter before my departure, for that having once imprinted her
lively beauty within my heart, she shall double augment my force and courage.

That will I not refuse you said the Duchess, but I accord it unto you with
all my heart, yet not without aduertising you before hand, that you shall put
your self in great perrill of your life, by reason of a Lion which gardeth her
continually: the which wareth fierce and cruel so soon as he per^^aneth
any Knights come near my Daughter.

For all that will not I let to go see answered then Valido, hoping I shall
well enough defend my self if the beast come to assail me. Having then taken
this resolution, the Duchess sent with him, one of the Gentlemen of her house,
with express commandment not to suffer any other to enter within the Castle
but this Knight only: where when he came afterward, and that Gridonia knew
that it was the King of Bohemiaes Son, who would go to combat Primaleon for
her Love, she commanded to bring him up into her chamber. Which the Prince
understanding, he took bravely his buckler in one hand, and his naked sword
in the other, then entered ^^ without any fear like a hearty and valiant
Champion: But the Lion seeing him approach in this equipage, began^^ (...) and
narre, lifting up his head furiously out of the Damsels lap, where he was
wont for the most part to repose it. Nevertheless she held him back by great
force, by a lease made of gold-twist which held by a rich collar buckled to his
neck: and for that Gridonia was not strong enough to stay him, Valido came
full upon him with his brandished sword to strike him, but she cried unto him
that he should not do it except he would die: and that he should depart only
out of the Chamber, and they would find means to speak together.

The Bohemian did do so much willingly, and much ^ do had the Insant to
keep her Lion foom running after him: yet by stroaking and making much of him,
she shut him ^^ within a great Chamber, wherein seeing himself thus
imprisoned, he began to roar in so strange manner, that he made all those who
heard him fore afraid: Whereat Gridonia was so vered, that going out of her
Chamber to speak with the Knight, she spoke but thus much.

Fair Knight my mishap and disaster will not permit me at this present to
have any long talk with you: therefore I beseech the Almighty so to
strengthen your Arm against Primaleon, that you may make him pay dearly for
his treason: wherein I remaining satisfied, shall repute my self a most
Fortunate woman to be revenged by means of the best knight, who ever put
foot in stirrup.

So much astonished and ranished with her great beauty was Valido, that hardly
could be answer one only word: never fearing to be accounted lumpish and of
small discretion, he hazar^^d to break silence in this manner: Madame sore
should the heavens punish me, and Fortune should show her self too too
mutinous against me, if seeing so rare and perfect a Paragon as is your
personage, I should not employ my body and soul to their utter most^, to
revenge you of the wrongs which are offered you: for that he should be very
blind and deuoide of natural reason, who having once seen your self, if he
should not judge you unworthy of adversity, and for so much as you cannot stay
here any while, taking my leave of you, I will now presently depart, ^oying
never to rest quietly in my bed until I have brought this mine enterprise to a
good pass.

God be your guide and conduct replied Gridonia, and so well direct your
actions, that you may obtain a triumphant victory over your enemy: to the
end he may have no more occasion to redouble the anguish which he has so
lively imprinted in my soul. And upon this point giving him the last adieu,
she retired strait to her Lion whom she could not abide to hear him make
such terrible roaring: which seemed to every one to signify some great (...).
Likewise Valido returned to the Duchess very pensive and doubtful to obtain
for his wife so beautiful a Damsel: in so much that licencing all the Knights
who accompained him unto this place to depart, he took along with him but two
only; the one being son to the Earl Marco (the same whom the Emperor
Palmerin slew, because he accused Diartes and Cardonia of treason) to revenge
himself of the Emperor pricked forward Valido very much to pursue his point,
and the other who was Diartes Son, would willingly have hindered him: for that
it angered him to the very death, that in his company should be any ambush
plotted against the Emperor: in such sort that the Prince of Bohemia went
accompanied with two persons contrarying one another in desire, whereof he knew
nothing.

Afterward imbarking himself he had so prosperous and gale, that within few
days he came to surge within the haven of Constantinople, where he
disembarked, being west appointed with his two Knights both disarmed: and
being arrived before the Palace, he sent the Emperor word he was a Knight
who required safe conduct into his Court, because he came thither to defy his
Son upon a treason which he had committed: who being aduertized thereof,
meruayled greatly that any man would be so hardy to come to accuse him of that
whereof he never thought, much less ever put in effect: especially being an
act of a Traitor, which was the vice he ever had in greatest detestation.

But the Emperor as he was sage and well advised, imagined incontinent that it
proceeded but of the death of Perrequin, for the which he was so sorrowful a
man; by means whereof he thus schooled Primaleon.

My Son, let us consider the different whereupon this Knight purposes to
accuse you, wherein for ought he can say unto you, answer him not arrogantly,
nor with the least injurious word: For so much there is nothing more in
bes^eming Princes and Knights descended of noble houses, than to use
discurteous and vile speeches. Hearken what he shall say unto you, and answer
him honestly, alleging what you shall best think meet for the justifying of
your innocencye: For oftentimes the proud language gives occasion of
encouragement to the adversary; and in battle the best Champions are known
to be vanquishers in deeds, and not contenders in words.

Therein my Lord and Father answered Primaleon, and in whatsoever as it shall
please you to command me will I never whilst I live disobay your will. At this
instant Valido entering the great Chamber, bowed not himself toward she
Emperor, so much felt her him self troubled and perplexed with this Battle:
but looking round about him a prettye while (after he had a little cooled his
choler) he drew near unto the throut where the Emperor sat, making unto
him this speech.

All over the globe of the earth, is your generous conrage Noble Emperor of
Constantinople, well known and made famous, since the time when as a wandering
Knight you passed like a pilgrim over the greatist part thereof, seeking ne^s
of your Father, whom anyed you know not: And since you have been placed in
this honor and highness of estate, no man can say you have done the least
iniust set to great, small, or mean: which thing I foreseeing on mine own
behalf, I have (...) as to come (...) to domain^d a Combat, hoping for good or
badde which may befall me, I shall have no wrong offered me herein.

So (...) I say, for that I come to complain of Primaleon your Son, touching
the death of Perrequin of Duas whom he new in Tourney, wherein he would
needed be and present to honor the more (...) feast of (...) Children:
trusting he will not ^enie but that upon the assurance which her gave to
every one, he has massacred him very trecherouslie: And you Primaleon ^f
you hear this, I know not what excuse you may allege against me, who does
avouch it to your sat that it was done in Treason against him.

Primaleon who gave attentive cure to these injurious speeches, rose up with
many other Knights and Barrons aunswering him thus: Good Sir, it (...) you are
very ill advised to come to seek his riuenge, who following this fatal and
unlucky destriue, ^^ded his ^^yes in a Tourney: wherein I do not dertie but
that I flewe him with my Sword upon the like assurance no you do name at
thi^ presence, because of ^^ disloyality: For during the space of three months
together, I could never get me rid of him, but still I found him before me
or behind me at my back, with full intention to have ^^aine me by his own
hands: But God the only searcher of hearts, who knew well his disloyal
malice, favored me so much that I prevented him before the execution of his
trecher^^^ dessein, giving him that measure which he would hau^ offered unto
me. Notwithstanding if you have so hot a desire to combat me upon this point
as you make semblant, behold I am ready to enter the Listes when it shall
please you, to the end I may by my best endeavor show to all the world that
the quarrel is false, and wrongfullie vndertake^ on your behalf.

This contenteth me wonderful well replied Valido to see you not to refuse the
combat, which shall be a sufficient witness before all, that the truth is such
as your conscien^e (...) well tell.

Then Primaleon fell on his knees before the Emperor, demanding leave of him
to enter the Combat for this effect: and afterward in token that he accepted
the Combat, he^ presented him a glove which he took at his hands very sor^
against his will, being ignorant which of the two had the better right on his
side: for if he had perceived the least smoke of the peruers^ and malicious
intent of Perrequin, he would never have mistrusted that his Son should be
^anquished. Which the Bohemian Prince seeing (to show he was very gl^d of
this acceptance) did reach unto him one of the lappe^ of his Harness, which
the Emperor took also: Deputing presently the Dukes P^holomey and ^ustace for
Judges and Marshals of the field: to the end they should with all equity
maintain the right of bold the Combatants.

These Dukes who stirred not from the Emperors Court; to obey their Masters
commandment, con^ucted Valido incontinently within the Barriers where they
en^ampe^ themselves on ^oe one side, mean while Primaleon Armed himself: who
for that he was of a middle stature, but otherwise very well proportioned in
hi^ members, did manage himself with a wonderful dexteritye both on foot^
and on horse back; and soon had his Armourers sitted him carefully in all
pieces, so that he came lightly to present himself before his father, who
spoke unto him in this manner: My son, I pray God above to preserve you from
death in this conflict, and to manifest thereby, that you are not ^^lpable of
this mischief which they lay to your charge.

Sir (quoth he) I can well assure you, that what I did, was done but with great
reason, knowing before that h^^ sought nothing more than to have (...) for this
cause I hope, be who knows that I proceeded not with any ^^^litions intent
will exempt me from death, if he ^^e that my life ^e as yet necessary.

Having ended these speeches, he kissed his hands, which embraced him
quickly, then mounting on horse back, he took his way toward the Barriers,
accompanied with many other Seigneurs an foot^: And in the mean while Valido
who felt his heart boil in a vehement heat to finish victoriously this
enterprise, calling to (...) the beauty of Gridonia, said; that a final time
should his enemy stand before him: Who after place was made by the M^r^^^,
within the running place came with a fury. his Lance couched in rest upon the
Bohemian, who vasting his Lance in like manner, brake it to the handle without
ever moving the Constantino Poli^ane out of his saddle: where also this
Assailant lost his stirr^ps at the attaint of his, and was also a little hu^t
in the right side. Nevertheless, being an (...) and a skkill all Knight in
Arms, he seated himself quickly again in his saddle, and began fiercely to
say upon Primaleon, with his sword, but he who exceeded him far in Prowess
and dexterity, b^eing ashamed he had not at the first encounter made him kiss
the ground, began to hew him with such fell and heavy blows, that with. a
while every one perceived who bear bear away the victory. And he himself
knowing that his enemy (who lost his blood by great drops) waxed feeble in
sight of every one, delivered him such a mighty back stroke upon his Morton,
that he clo^^^e a two both his head and head piece down to his shoulders, in
such manner that presently falling under his horse feet; Primaleon spoke these
words alowd: see what you are come so far to seek: then making clean his
sword, he put it up into his (...), and the Judges put him forth of the L^sts
with greatioy.

Of this victory was the Emperor and all the other Lords of the Court
marvelous joyful, seeing so ^^^dently the verity of this false accusation: By
means whereof, causing Primaleon to be disarmed, and afterward dressed of
some wounds which he had received of his adversary, communded the vanquished
Knight to be fetched out of the Barriers, and to be honorably enterred.

But the two Gentlemen who came in his company, made a marvelous lamentation
for his death especially the son of the Earl Marcus, who in bewailing him
vtter^^^ strong things; so that by this means the Emperor knowing who Valido
was, sent for the Knights saying thus; A merualle very much how the King of
Bohemia, whom I hold for my friend, has permitted that his (...) should (...)
my Com^ to d^^ here an exploy^e, whose sorrowful (...) greatly grieved me,
which if I had fore seen it, and (...) him as now I do, to be the accuser of
my son, I should by no means have granted him this combat, as you may well
assure him from me.

Sir (answered then the son of Diartes) willingly will I obey your
commandment, even as I desir^ also to (...) you my best service; wherein when
you shall know my (...), you will not say that I came hither of mine own
accord with Valido, but full sore against my will, and as not knowing to the
King my Master my thing of his (...) case.

When the Emperor understood that this Knight was Diartes son, he made him
many kind offers, tha^king him for the good will he bare him.

And then the son of the ^arle Marcus ((...) with extreme (...) to the
gall): could not forbo^ye to speak thus much.

Emperor of Greece, (...) has bee^^ to you: (...)uourable, since you (...)
which I cannot bear (...) to see my self revenged for his death.

He had no sooner spoken the^t words, but for his best advantage he quickly
(...) of the Palace, because that many setting (...) him by the ^ares, ^ad not
the (...) them not to stir after him, but to let him go whether he thought
good; which was strait to the (...) with his communion: where embarking in
Validoes ship they reformed into Bohemia, to tell the King the sorrowful
news of his son^e: Whereupon he conceived great (...) her for the principal
occasion of this his death, for the which mischance she was no less
sorrowful than he could be for his life.

CHAP. XVII.
How Lurcon a Giant son to (...), whom the Emperor ste^e in (...) the
Damsel Esm^rinda, came to defy Primaleon upon the same quarrel as Valido
had done before and what success befell unto him after his defiance.

IN Romanie was there long since a Giant named Lurcon, whom the Emperor (...)
slow to deliver the Damsel (...), as you may sometime have read in the
beginning of this History. This Lurcon being esteemed a very brave Knight, was
not misshapen (...) so inhumane and savage as the other Giants, but a man very
active (...) amongst his friends: and even when the Nurse carried him in her
Arms who had given him suck ever since his fathers death: after the which,
he recovered by force of Arms the Castles which they kept from him in his
minorly ^y, and vowed never to marry before he had revenged so great wrong
offered him: So he began to make so cruel war upon Crispin the hus band of
Esmerinda, that he kept him at home within doors from walking to far abroad
in the fields: and now her entered into the eighth year of his Knighthoode,
when Pertequin died seeking to accomplish, his promise to Gridonia.

Of whom on a day having understood the discourse, imagined presently with
himself, none could (...) Primaleon about better than he, nor sooner enjoy
the Lady, so that rejoicing greatly in himself upon this conclusion, he cared
not at all to go to see the Duchess nor her Daughter, hopingth have her to
wise by force or free will.

Whereupon he embarked himself in a Frigot, rigged with all necessaries to
voyage into Constantinople; where being arrived in safety, he sent away a
Squier to the Emperor to demand a safe conduct for him to come into his Court
to combat with Primaleon; which if he should refuse him, he would make his
vaunts abroad, how he durst not grant it for fear he had of him.

When the Emperor heard the Gentleman talk in this manner, he began to be
very angry, judging presently that he came to continue the accusation which
Valido began; therefore he answered him thus.

Tell your Master again from me, that when I shall grant him the assurance
which he demands at my hands, it shall he but to chastlye him for his
proud and arrogant speeches, which are more used in Giants mouths, than in
any other persons; being often cause they work their own ruin, and confusion
therein.

Then spoke diverse Barrons who were there present, Sir, under reverence of your
Majesty, (...) unto us that this (...) by no means to be (...), say so (...)
in that of the Bohemian Prince all the words (...) manifestly the truth of the
matter from the false and (...) which he presented (...) of Perriquin: So that
you should rather (...) of Lurcon, than to accord him any (...) appearance of
truth.

In the mean (...) whilst this was bruied through the Court, Primaleon
returned from (...), who woondre^ greatly to hear such a marmuring stir:
whereof when he heard the occasion he waxed a little angry, as every one
might (...) by these words which (...) to his Father.

I wonder (...) that you (...) who has (...), you will clean (...) opinion of
your Knights, who seem to have fear of a beast being an enemy to God:
wherein I beseech you of your especial savor, that you will suffer rather
your Son to dye, than she least act of cowardice should be reproched and
(...) unto (...): Give (...) permission to have Combat with me, and to all
those hereafter who shall came to (...) me upon (...) will (...) as him who
never thought to him offended (...) will.

The Emperor (...) and that (...).

^.

Which when the Giant understand, because it was already late, would in no
wise that Evening go a short, but being made priuse of all that which happened
in the Palace upon this sudden, did but laugh and make a scotte thereat:
saying that if Primalcon did show himself hardy and of great courage, if
would stand him in good steed on the more (...) before the conflict was ended;
so that to provoke him the more, and to the end he should not sail to enter
the field with him, he sent his Squier back incontinent with a letter of
destance which be wrote with great expedition to this effect.

A Letter of Defiance written by the Giant Lurcon, to Primalcon of Greece.
TO thee Primalcon of Grecce, the most soolish and cowardly defender of
Cournyes, the Giant Lurcon Son to Dermaquus, who will eternize his renown by
thy death sends this destance: for so much as the (...) having favored thee
so much, as to make thee he borne of Noble and Royal blood, thou have stained
that famous marks of nature, beside all the reputation which thou may her
^aster (...) in military discipline, beginning thy ^^ertise by a most absurd
dishonor able and villainous murder. I mean by the death of the gentle Knight
Porrequin of D^^s, Son to the (...) king of Poland, whom thou ^^e west
felloniously in the Turney which then heldest at the marriage of thy sister,
where he would feign be present the more to honor her (...) myself thou shall
not dare to deny (to confess manifestly the ^reason) but that thou have
shamefullie and (...) massacred him under the pretense of the assurance which
thou gave to all comers: Wherein I know not what excuse thou may pretend,
except it be a sp^die and liberal offer to give in recompense and satisfaction
of his life the dead of him who has committed so disloyal an oversight: The
which I am now come to fetch, to offer it up unto her who remendeth vengeance
therefore: aduising thee that when with thy good will thou would not consent
to so just and reasonable a thing. I hope to constrain thee by force of Arms
if thou have so much courage as to enter the close field with me, there to try
it out by single combat.


So soon as this Destance was quickly read over by Primaleon, he returned to
the Squire who brought the (...), whom very ^ough^^^ and in great choler he
a^nswered, that if it had not been so late, he would very willing her have
Combatted his Master that ^ight without any longer attendaunce: Whereupon the
Emperor his Father gave him advise by (...) reasons, that though are not to
be done upon a hot spur: (...) should be the best way to see a little
what the Giant would say further.

But the Empress and her Daughters being troubled without measure by the
remembrance thereof, could not all that night once close their eyes to take a
little (...): And ^^ less was the inconvenient of the (...) which did
importunately (...) and trouble the Emperors spirke, quite contrary to
Primaleons, who for all that did not forbear his sleep never a whitte the
more, but took his rest well enough as her that before (...) Annin^ himself
very strongly (...) the (...) morning, being as merry and (...), not if he^
should have gone but to (...) for she (...) of soon amiable Lady.

But the Giant as soon as the day appeared went a sho^re, and mounting upon a
strong and mighty (...) arms at a^ po^^tes except his head, took his way
with his people toward the City: where by reason of the brute of the arrival
of this (...) which was already spread abroad every where; both little and
great came about him to ^^ him, so that ^^^ing maruelously (...) of the sight
of his person, they prayde unto God that he would succor and give their Prince
victory against him: the same did in like manner the knights of the court: who
were in great doubt of Primaleons life, seeing before them so deformed and huge
an adversary: nevertheless the Emperor who was accustomed to talk with such
Colo^^es and skarbabes being but lumpes of flesh without any (...) of spirit
or body; made light account of him: and would willingly have accepted she
Combat ^^nsesse to have ^ased his Son Primaleon^: But as he discoursed thus
with himself, behol^ Lu^con (...) before him who begins with this abrup^e
speech to him a^owde.

Emperor of Constantinople, I rather with thy ruin than that of any other man
who lives under the celestial Globe, for that thou slewest ^oth my Father and
Brother, two the very flowers of Chivalry: whereby I have ever since se^^ an
(...) anguish in my heart, because I could never find any mean to be
revenged of so cruel an homiride. Notwithstanding seeing God has now opened
(...) the way I hope soon to (...) with me upon (...) and a ^reason, which I
stand upon to make him (...) before he escape my handi^ (...) Knight quoth
Primaleon I am resolved to fight (...) the (...) which thou (...) to revenge
his death, without giving thee any reason how or wherefore I ^lew him ^ seeing
I have given to him account sufficient already; who ^ot willing ^^ content
himself therewith, I have made him buy the refusal dear, as I hope to pay
she for the pain which thou have taken to come so far to this place.

Very glad was the Giant (...), seeing Primaleon ready to enter the Barriers
with him, Into which the Emperor commanded the Duke of Pera and the Earl of
Redon to conduct him, and to assure him from all men except from his enemy: in
the mean time there remained not almost any person within the City which
came not thither to behold this Battle: every man devoutly praying him in
whose hands are all victories, to show favor to their Prince, for whom they
should be in great despair, were it not for the confidence they have, that
he will never forsake him in this necessity: as in him who never abandoneth
nor rejects those who Arming themselves with true says, do build their rain
part on his refuge.

The Giant then after he had laced and buckled the strings of his headpeece,
took a strong lance in his hand, and seeing his enemy come Armed, conceived
so great pleasure, that flourishing his Lance he thus began: This staff
imbr^ed to day in the blood of my adversary, shall take vengeance on that
(...) who has with his, pierced the bosom of mine ancestors.

^old thy tongue, for shame great animal, quoth Primaleon, hold thy tongue,
and cease to vaunt thy presumpt^ous (...), till thou see thy self
banquisher, for their is the hour to brag and not before: Then the Judges
seeing these two Combatants in good will every one to do his best for him
self, they departed the Barriers, and presently the sign of the assault
being sounded by the Trumpets, the Knights encountered with such fury, that
they (...) their (...): For the height of Lurcon constrayning him to carry his
Lance lower against Primaleon, than if he had been of his ^oulenes, so that
he could attaint him but on the ^ippe, where peareing his Armor he scracht his
sk^^e a little: But the Constantino Politane, who came full upon him with a
right carriere with his Lance (...) him clean through the cuirace into the
(...): so they dashed their sh^elds and rusht their bodies together in such
sort that they both smoked at it: In this ^^counter the Giants Horse had such
a shouldering, that he could go afterward but upon three legs: by meane^
whereof feeling the heavy burden which he had upon his back, he kept such a
capering, rearing and flinging, that he laid his loutish Master upon the bare
ground: who in falling did so entangle one of his feet in his stirroppe, that
his horse t^a^ld him a long time from place to place: Which Primaleon seeing
ran upon him with his naked sword in his hand, and before he could get up
again, he gave him so sound a blow upon his leg, that he cut the bone
almost quite a two: whereat he cast out so horrible a noise, that he ^erristed
all the assistants, but not him who he (...) him with the Cemitorie which the
Knight of the Closed-Ile had sent him, which he so be labored then with all
his might upon his Helmet, that cutting a two the stringes that he showed
quickly his bare head: Whereupon Lurcon entered into so intolerable a
phrenzie, that being unable to defend himself from the fell blows of his
adversary, he purposed to gripe him by the body, thinking to dispatch him
that way: But for all that Primaleon kept himself at the point of his sword,
and with a back stroke upon the Mazzard, field him as dead as a Dog to the
ground saying: It is now that thou may exe^te thy Trophies to Palla^ and
Mars for the victories they have sent thee, and not before thou haste
Combatted, as not long since thou did vaunte to do.

It were very difficult to recount the joy and gladness that every one
conceau^d, seeing the happy success of this spectacle: The which to the end
to make it publicly known abroad, the Judges and Martials of the field
perceauing the Giant to have breathed his last, did accompany Primaleon with
victorious acclamations unto the palace, where they presented him to the
Emperor, who received him with great joy.

Then came forth the Empress and her Daughters to entertain him as if he had
been newly arrived from some for^en Country, praising and blessing God for so
signal a (...) torie; the which began to bring some comfort and rejoicing
to the Court, which was before all in (...), very sad and mournful for the
death of King Florendos and his Queen Griana Father and Mother to the Emperor.

Afterward there arrived many Knights to Combat Primaleon upon the same
quarrel, but it cost them all dear, as being those who defended a wrong
quarrel, the Prince behauing himself every day more valiantly than other:
whereof the Greeks reputed themselves most happy men, to have after the
Emperor so sage and valiant a Prince for their Seigneur: wherefore from diverse
Countries were presented him many good offers to marry a wife, the which he
would accept of in no wise, for the little desire he had to marry so young:
But let us discourse a little of the great perrils and traualles that another
Knight made him endure, who came to Constantinople to defy him upon the same
pretended treason of the Polonians death, as you shall in the next Chapter
hear more at large.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Prince Edward the eldest Son to the King of England was inamoured of
fair (...), seeing her picture against a wall, and how he was afterward
conducted by a strange adventure into a Monastery of Nuns, and what befell
him there in the mean time he was within the Nunnerie.

KIng Frederick of England brother to Agri^la Empress of Almaine, had by his
wife many Male Children, the eldest whereof called Prince Edward, was no less
accomplished and excellent in the exercise of Arms, than very well (...) in
most civil and good manners, and in all other laudable virtuous and honest
things: So that having received the order of Knighthood, he held daylse
Ioustinges and Tournyes, to exercise and make himself skillful in military
profession: And for as much as he delighted also in hunting, one of the brauest
Knights called Robert, sent him a fair dog which he recovered of a woman who
was a great Mag^rian, as you shall understand hereafter.

This Knight Robert being in the prime of his youth had a great desire to see
the adventures of the world, by means whereof embarking himself among other
Merchants, who went to traffic and to fall Arms in Turkey being tossed by
tempest and foul weather on Sea, come to an anchor in the Island of Malfada,
where they were all enchaunted except him only, who pleased much the Lady of
the I Will. Whereupon ^^ fortuned that he lived there in very great pleasure,
about the space of two years; at the end where of calling to mind upon a
time his own country, he fetched a great ^igh from his breast, so that this
Fayrie who never was far from him, desired to know the cause of that sigh, unto
whom he revealed the whole matter.

In good faith fair sir quoth Malfada then, seeing you find it not best to
dwell any longer with me, I am of advise that you depart as soon as it shall
please you, to the end to take your ^ourney where you may find better
entertainment than here: And for that I have loved you extremely, I will
present ^ou a ship very well rigged, with all that is needful for your
commodious navigations unto your own Country.

Ten thousand thanks I give you Madame, replied Robert, for the good will you
bear me: and albeit I do not mer^ie the least part of this favor, yet will I
not cease to remain your perpetual bounden, and a great deal the more, if
you refuse not to give me this Dog which I would cra^^ at your hands.

Surely I should be verse ingrately and little courteous quoth the Fayrie, if I
should deny you so small a thing, albeit that heretofore this beast has been
a Giant, Lord of the I Will of Escania: who that I may in three words count you
his History, desiring at eighteen years of age (when he received his
Knighthood) to do some seats of Arms in the world, embarked him self near
his own house for the same purpose: And such was his fortune, that a great
storm which rose upon the Sea, cast him a shore in this Island, where presently
he found himself inchaunted under the form of this Beast that you see, which
I give you also freely, as a thing wherewith you may help your self at you
need and shall be peradventure sometime occasion for you to call to mind the
remembrance of me, which I recommende unto you as much as you have known the
singular and perfect love I too hear you.

After many accustomed embracinges Robert took his leave of Malfada thanking
her again for his Dog, to whom, (for that the Giant of whom he had once the
form, was called Maiortes, and for that he was also the greatest of all that
Island) he gave the same name of Maiortes, and afterward setting sail
toward England passed by hard passages, where his Dog stood him in good
stood.

But in the mean season whilst Prince Edward was so highly esteemed in his
fathers Kingdom, the Knight Robert fell sick, who knowing the end of his
days were at hand, purposed to make him inheritour of his Dog, as the person
of all the English Nation whom he knew worthy of such a present; and sent the
Dog to him by a Squier of his, beseeching him to take him always with him in
company, and that he would not neglect him, in that he should make great
account of him one day when he knew his quallities better.

The young Prince was wonderful glad of this Dog, when making as much of
him as might be, he showed him self so loving and gentle as if he had
brought him up from a little whelpe: therefore he sent in recompense of this
Dog great riches to the Knight Robert, who in the mean season passed out of
this world into the other.

Ever the Prince would have Maiortes at his side, whom he loved as a humane
creature: But facre more he esteemed him, knowing the wondrous things he did
in hunting, to which sport he lead him forth almost every day.

During which idle and pleasant life, it befortuned him upon a day, to see a
thing which caused him afterward to have i^^umerable travels: For that the
Knight his Father delighting much to build as well Castles as other pleasant
and delightful houses, for above all his most sumptuous buildings, he caused
to be builded with all magnificency one sumptuous Palace, whither he was wont
to go to take his disport with the Queen his wife.

It fortuned that amongst many master workmen who did work in this new
building, there was a Painter of Ormeda, who by chance was present at the
Fountain, when Gridonia was met there by the Lion; who to the end he might
at his ease fully behold the favor of the Princess, he followed her into the
Castle with others that were there; for those of that profession are very
desirous to see the Idea of so perfect beauty with whose lineament and perfect
feature, they may help themselves in their portraitures.

And for that he found not any store of work to employ himself in the City
of Ormeda, he resolved to go seek in other Countries; So that being arrived
in England, after he had gotten acquaintance to be known, he took charge
to paint this goodly Palace, which the King caused to be built near his
chief City.

Wherein among many excellent things which he invented there by his Art and
skill, having as yet fresh in his memory the beanties of Gridonia, he
pourirayed her so natural, that she seemed a living creature, seeming ever to
them which beheld her, that she would open her mouth to speak unto them;
and there he set her in a place as it were in a prison, sei^^ate upon a Rock,
and a Lion couched upon the sky it of her Coat, holding his head between
this Ladies hands, who did gently stroke his head and all the rest of his
body.

Prince Edward who went much abroad to hunt (...) oftentimes so make his
m^^ing in this place, where beholding upon a time the work of this Painter,
saw there amongst other things Gridonia painted as you have heard: And
woondring in himself at so admirable beauty (especially to see a Lyckrepayre
so peaceably near a woman) could not cheese but ^all for the Paynter unto him
saying; I pray thee interpret unto me a little the meaning of this picture,
and how a Lion may be made so tame, that one may see him couched so still (...)
a Damsel; for that it so m^th to me to be a thing fit rather for little
Dogs, than for such savage animals, which are cruel and ind^mptable by
nature.

You say very true, quoth the Paynter, but know ye my Lord, that in the
world are many strange things a among the which, I swear unto you by him that
gives us life, to have seen with mine own proper eyes, the true Model of
this my poor among living creatures.

Thou he began to make discourse unto him of the Estates and perfections of
this Princess: Whereat the Knight remained much amazed and troubled u^minde,
but answered him thus.

It is a very rare example that a beast without reason, (as this especially)
has so much foresight, as to know the valor and bounty of a Lady so well
accomplished, and that she presumes in her self to recover the head of
Primaleon for the earnest of her marriage.

The Painter affirmed to him again, it was as true, as he had in every word
recounted to him.

Whereupon Prince Edward began to behold a little better than he did before
his business; and because he reputed him one of the best Artists that as yet he
had ever seen to handle Pensill, he researched with such diligence, and
remarked so exactly many times the lineature and grace of Gridonia^s
countenance disputing in himself whether she might be so fair a creature as
he saw her painted and colored in that place) that from thenceforth he fell
into a more vehement alteration: For that the little (...) who lay in ambush
for him, during this his contemplation, shot off out of his Qu^uer so sharp
and piercing an Arrowe against him, that wounding him to the heart, this wound
caused him so strange a Passion, that for to find remedy for it he purposed
to seek all means which might take away his pain, and to eschew no travel
whatsoever, in gaing to that place where he thought he might recover her.

The Prince then considering, that to purchase this Lady he must needs combat
with Primaleon, thought he should commit too soul an oversight, seeing the
amity so long continued between their Fathers: Nevertheless for all that he
thought with himself he should not surcease, Palmerin having heretofore taken
away by force from his Grandfathers house the Princess Agriola his Aunt; and
that under the pretext of revenging that injury (after the example of the taire
Trojan, who insteede of Hesione his Aunt, stole away the wife of King Meuelaus
in Greece) he had good occasion to go to combat the Constantino Politane.

Upon this conflict of opinions which came to trouble his mind, he cast
himself upon a bed, where sighing without ceasing he thus complained to
himself.

Alas Gridonia, how much had it been better for the ease of mine afflicted
heart never to have heard thee named, nor seen the Pourtrait of thy face
before my eyes? whose sight has into small time penetrated so deep into my
breast, and weakened my members in such sort, that they cannot well prevail to
perform the only of their office? Wherein if by the only object of thy
(...) I feel to exceeding torment; what will it then do, when I shall indeed
see the natural and lively composition of such a pierelesse Paragon of Nature?
Ah! it is expedient for all that, that I put my self in search to find thee
out, to the end that in seeing thee in deed, I may give some refrigeration to
this my burning and new flame: For if the savage and inhumane creatures
forgetting their fiercenes, yield themselves so meek and gentle in thy
presence, what shall he do who has some knowledge of humane reason? Certes
albeit I were sure to end my life, yet must I employ for thy sake my person
with all the goods and estates that God has giuen^nes, seeing thou art so
worthy a creature: which I think the heaven has revealed unto me as it were
by a fatal oracle, to the end that thou should be mine, and I shine
perpetually. To atchieue unto which point, I promise thee to refuse no
adventure nor perillons attempt which may present it self to make me refuse
it: Considering that by how much more Knights are issued of noble blood and
illusterous lineage, by so much more it behooves them to enterprsse more
generous and heroical acts. And to this may inuit thee the example of
Arnedes Prince of France, who for the love of Philocrista Daughter to the
Emperor of Constantinople, departed from his Fathers Kingdom. and in like
manner Recindes Prince of Spain for Melissa the King of Hungaries Daughter: I
then being of no less house than the one or the other of these two Princes my
neighbors, it behooves me to follow their steps in the like enterprise.

So long time was the spirit of this young Knight so occupied in making such
like discourses, that being not able to forbear, he lost not only all
appetite to eat, and desire to sleep, but also therewithal all pleasure of
hunting, wherein he had so much delighted before: In such sort that having
none occasion neither to hear no) to see any recreation, he shunned the
company of those whom he knew desierous to be near him to make him merry
and pleasant.

One only content he enjoyed during these his anguishes, which was to find
himself before the Image of Gridonia, whose infinite beauty so ravished the
vigilance of his eyes, that it did constrain his tongue to reason with it,
even as if he had been hard by her proper person: being otherwise never
satisfied to devise with the painter of the graces of this Princess.

It chances upon a day, that being wearied with this storm and wavering of
mind, he went forth into a wood which joined hard upon the ditches of his
Palace (where he passed the greatest part of the time of his passion)
without taking with him any other weapons but his rapi^r by his side: So that
walking up and down, he sat him down under abroad and thick beech tree, to
discourse as his fancy showed him of some things which might give him some
contentment. And after he had long time mused with himself, bethinking by
what means he might best go see Gridonia, be fast up his eyes, which he had
before fired on the ground, as it falls out many times to a man that is
perplexed and irresolute in mind to do: Whereby he espied near him a wood man
who would bind a burden of wood together in a little string, so that being
vexed with some thing else, and to see him loose his time be said.

So God help me villain, I perceive it proceeds of thy great blockishnes or
froward nature, that thou do labor in vain after this impossibility:
whereupon it seems to me that thou should leave the wood behind, or else
if thou will carry it away to have a longer cord to bind it withal.

The pesant who heard himself miscalled, turning himself and looking behind
him answered, Prince Edward thou do behold very near my folly, who can
not take beede of thine own which touches thee a little nearer. I tell thee
that even as thou see me look my labor in binding this burden of sticks,
even so just shall it fall out with you in all the travails that you shall
undertake for her who reserueth her self for a better knight than you.

When the prince heard these speeches, setting hand to his sword, he can
incontinent after this wisard, saying in a great cage: In an evil hour for
thy part great clown ca^^st thou ever to publish so near me so soul a lie:
For that in the circuit of the round world is there no Prince who does
deserve her better than myself, who love her so perfectly that no living
creature is able to attain to the height of my love.

The woodman who heard him speak in such a rage ranye away as fast as he
could through the woods, and Prince Edward after him with speed:
Notwithstanding he was not far gone before an Armed knight came right upon
him being mounted upon a very lusty and brave Horse, saying unto him thus.

Gentleman let the villain go, otherwise you are but a dead man. Rather shall
thou loose thy life answered the English man, than I will not be revenged of
him who has injured me thus villanouslie: Now advise thy self if thou will
defend him. Yes indeed replied the Knight, and yet I will crave none adventure
at thy hands.

After these words he alighted from his horse and seeing his enemy disarmed,
he would not draw his sword but closed with him, which Prince Edward did in
like manner, and so they tugd a good while together. In the end fortune would
so much savor the Prince, that he laid his enemy a long, and setting his
knee upon his breast, he cut a two the stringes of his Helmet: thinking
presently to cut off his head, but as he was about to do it, he pecceaued it
was a very fair woman: so that maruelling much at this mummery he rose up
incontinent being in great admiration. Fair Lord then ganne the Damsel,
admire not to see now a woman in Arms, seeing that there have bin and as yet
are some which are courageous and warlike, and take it not in disdain that you
have sought against one of them, for Ac^illes esteemed that one of his most
signal victories which he obtained against Penthasilia the Nun of
Amazonians: and the valiant Mithrid^tes King of Pontus, never craved better
aid than that of Hipsicratea his wedded wife: the which being in man's attire
after the Persian manner, did enter into all dangers unto which her husband did
adventure himself, during the war which he had against Pompeius. So much I
say because I see you make a wonder at this strange novelty: Nevertheless if
you will grant me but one been, I will conduct you into a place where you
shall see things far more admirable than these.

Uerie willing will I accord thee whatsoever it shall please thee to demand at
my hands, answered the Knight unto her, for the great desires sake which I have
to follow strange adventures.

Mount then replied the Damsel upon my Horse, and come presently away with me.
But Prince Edward would first go fetch his Arms, and make his people privy
to his departure, to the end they should not trouble themselves to seek after
him, then the Lady told him, that to compass their attempt, it was expedient
for them to set forward of their journey forthwith. So then he mounted upon a
Courser, and she upon a pal^r^e which attended not far from thence. Five
days journey they made, and met nothing which might hinder them in their way;
and upon a Saturday morning they arrived at a fair Cloister of women built
upon the top of a high Mountain in a very solitary place. There did the
Damsel cause this Knight to alight, whom she lead afterward into a fair
Chamber, whether the Abbess and all her Nuns came to entertain him, when
his guide began to utter these speeches unto him.

Fair Knight, know that in this Monastery there is a most strange and
marvelous adventure, which as they say cannot be ended but by one of the best
Knights of this age: and for that you are reputed one of those whom the
celestial plannets have adorned with so many excellent graces in pre-eminence
of Chivalry, we have hope that you will bring it to a final end.

Now within the precinct of this Religious house is enclosed a very fair
Orchard, planted with diverse sorts of fruit trees, which in their seasons do
bring forth their fruits in abundance, and within the whole compass of our
Convent is there none more delightful place than that, except on the north
side, from whence out of a fearful cave every Saturday about Euensong there
comes forth a most hideous and ill favored old woman, bearing a rich
Faulch^on in her hand, where with she strikes flatting, when she meets by
chance with any Religious Nun so furiously that she sends her quickly
to the ground: in such sort that the poor wretch can not rise again, nor a
long time after get out of this trance, so much does she feel her self
astonished with the blows this ^lend of hell gives her: Which done, she
returns within her den lamenting in most strange manner: And I tell you fair
Knight, that a great number of valiant Knights have come hither, thinking to
follow her and to see the place of her residence, toward which none can
apprethe nearer than ten paces, but he is immediately repulsed very rudely: so
that we have no hope ever to see an end of this adventure, unless you
accomplish it now. For this effect have I brought you hither, hearing by report
in diverse places that your prowess and valor does exceed far, that of the
most hardiest Knights of all the West.

Madame replied Prince Edward then, it falls out some times, that many
Knights which are esteemed hardy and valiant Champions, show in the end the
contrary of this vulgure opinion: And upon me first of all may such an
example be showed: Notwithstanding seeing I find my self brought unto this
place, I will not let to prove what I can do in the adventure, whereof I have
heard so great speech: Toward the which feeling not my self endued with the
force and address which is expedient for him to have, who shall finishe it, I
should not presume to be so hardy as to march my self: so that being not
able now to bring it about, I will only leave as others have done, the honor
thereof to whom God has reserved it.

CHAP. XIX.
How Prince Edward entered the Cave, where he vanquished a Knight, who would
have kept him out of the gate of the Palace which was there within: And how
passing further in, he found two Gentlemen within a Marble Sepulcher, whom
he delivered out of strange pain and the sequel.

THe hour of Evening prayer approaching, Prince Edward Armed himself carefully
with a Harness that some Knight who had been there to prove himself in the
adventure of the Cave, had left behind him in the Abbye: then being brought
into the Orchard by the Damsel, and by one of the Nuns, he put himself
near the mouth of this hole, where he stayed not long before the old trot
came forth, and quickly popt in again seeing the English Prince before her
eyes: who was not slow to follow her in, when she casting her arms about his
neck, by no force or strength soever that he could employ, he could never
stay her nor once loose her from him: but still the further he went in, so much
more did his labor and pain increase and torment him: for that finding the
farther he was in, the way more dark and obscure, it seemed unto him that some
body stroke him on every side, pushing him backewards to make him recoyle: But
he who was magnanimous, enduring this pain, thumping and thrusting, without
ever letting go the old trot, came at the last into a great Palace very
sumptuously wrought and set forth. Then the old woman crying for aid, there
came a Knight upon him very richly Armed, bearing a shield upon his arm,
whereon were painted two Damsels, whereof the one which appeared very
beautiful, held between her hands a heart wounded, which the other that had a
veil upon her face, made semblant to take away from her by force.

Help me then cried the old woman, in presenting him the sword, against this
Knight who will take from me by force the rarest Jewel in this world, which
he is not worthy so much as to look upon. Whereupon he began to speak
unto the Prince in this manner.

Knight let that good Lady alone to deal with me, who hoping to chastise you
quickly, for this great presumption by which you have been so hardy and bold
as to enter within this place in despite of me. I am very glad quoth Prince
Edward to have to do with thee, seeing the small honor a man may purchase to
vanquish women being but feeble creatures by nature, and of small resistance.

After these speeches they began a terrible skirmish, in the which albeit the
Prince charged his enemy with many fell: strange knockes, for the ardent zeal
he had to finish this adventure; his adversary nevertheless having in his
hand the best sword which was to be found in the circute of the earth,
delivered few blows but made the maile of his harness or shield upon his
arm fly in pieces: By reason whereof Prince Edward seeing his life ineuident
perrill (knowing not well what to do) resolved to put this Battle in hazard:
so that couring himself as well as he could with his buckler, he cared not to
endure two or three blows of his enemy to come to gripes. Which he did when
the Knight which found himself a little weary, having not strength enough to
holdeing with him, was constrained to fall with him to the ground: where it
fell out so well on the English Knights side that he was uppermost;
Notwithstanding being out of breath, he could hardly wind himself from his
adversary. Who by reason of his lumpish and heavy fall, sounded under the
Prince, who seeing him in that passion would not wrong him further, than to
ceaze upon his sword: then looking round about him, he perceived at that
instant how the old woman vanished away behind a little iron door.

He resolved to follow her, to know what might be the pursuit of this
adventure, seeing by the clear brightness of a clear glass window some
light within the next Chamber, which did provoke him the rather: upon this
occasion clasping on the vanquished knights Arms to play the surest part, they
fitted him so just as if they had bin forged for his back: Moreover he took
his shield which he began to be hold with great admiration and feeling
afterward his force and courage to increase double, entered without fear into
the next room: In the midst whereof he was a ware of a fair Sepulcher of
Marble, whose covering was so high and so much separated from the sides, that a
man might easily behold all that was within.

In this place he heard some body make such a (...) noise, that approaching
softly near it to know what strange matter it might be, he saw two armed
Knights, (...) couched flat upon their bellies did cruelly wound one (...) with
daggers whch each one of them held between their hands. Whereupon having
compassion of so much blood inhumainely spilt under them, by the wounds which
they give themselves without ceasing, remained a while perplexed what he should
best do in so tragical a spectacle. In fine, beseeching the divine providence
to aid him to pacify them, he pushed the covering of the Sepulcher off with
such a violence, that it remained uncovered: which of a ^roth had never any
other Knight been able to do but he or Primaleon who was more valiant than
himself. The two Knights seeing the heavy Marble thrown down, which had a
long time kept them locked fast in that Sepulcher, rose upon their feet
incontinent, and after they were come forth, they call themselves down, at
Prince Edwards feet, saying; Praised ^ee she incomprehensible goodness of God
who has endowed you with such prowess and magnanimity, which delivers us
now at the last from this intolerable martyrdom which we both did endure; the
which we know right well could never be brought to end, but by the virtue of
the best Knight who was ever borne in the house of England, and the one of them
proceeding did.

Know fair Lord, it is a long time that we were in this pain, and that we
descend of the most Royal blood of the English Nation, as I will recount unto
you, seeing you have delivered us out of this torment.

At this strange accident the Prince much merualled, especially for that these
two personages as soon as they were out of the Sepulcher had received the
perfect healing of their wounds, and that of so cruel enemies, they were so
soon become peaceable friends: so that taking them both by the hands, he made
them stand up saying; my dear brethren, happy may I term my self at this
present, to have freed you from this mortal passion, offering my self beside
to pursue your entier deliverance, if peradventure any further encumbrance
molest you: Likewise to continue your perpetual friend in all places where you
shall know my small power may stand you in any steed, beseeching you to make
relation to me of your hard adventure, the History whereof I would willingly
enjoy

Then began one of them; we are brethren, and sons to the Duke of
North Wales, and to the sister of the King Prince Coward; in the house of whom
(for he loved us both as his own children) we were brought up from our
infancy; But afterward as our evil fortune would, knowing nothing one of
another love, we were both enamoured only by the same and renown of the
Duke of Borsa^s Daughter, esteemed at that time the fairest and most virtuous
Lady of the western world. Now in a Tourney being held at a certain time in
pre-eminence of her at this Dukes principal Palace, we purposed both to be
present at it in good equ^page of furnitures, to the end the better to enter
in grace of this Princess: So that her father (being a wise and learned
Magitian) knowing our neerenes of lignage with the King, entertained us most
honorably into his house: And after that we had seen the Damsel in face,
the flame which from day to day consinned the force and vigor of our vital
spirits did augment in such strange manner, that had not the hope been which
fed us with future fruition of case, we had made both some lamentable and
tragical end; being ignorant one of another pursuit, and aduising it for
the best, never to make privy to one another of our loves. Both of us
performed marvelous seats in this Tourney to incline this Princess to love
us the more: wherein I exceeded my brother, because I was his elder by birth:
So that having by this means more opportunity to speak unto her, I made her
prmy to my desire, whereupon there succeeded such a conclusion between us,
that she assured me to be content to accept me for her husband: Then I
adventured my self to speak unto the Duke her father, who answered me, he
had already promised her to the Carle of Brabant: Which answer made me in such
a rage, that I had almost run mad for spite.

Nevertheless, for the last refuge which I hoped to find in this my frenzy, I
prayed the Damsel to bear me a word or two insecret: Whereunto she answered
me, that I should come the very same evening into her Chamber by a little door
which was seldom times opened, where she would be to bear what I would say
unto her.

The appointed hour being come, I would in no wise permit so good opportunity
to slip my hands, without reaping that sweet fruit which might restore the
heart, to the which all other liquor seemed gall and bitterness: But soon
clasping on mine Arms, I went strait to the door with my privy watchword, in
the most secret wise which might be possible. Yet I could not carry my self
thither so well, but my brother who began to mistrust my draft (as it falls
out sundry times, sealousie causes to comecture things which have small
appearance of truth) so that he arming himself in like manner, (...) slily to
the very place where I staide for the opening of the door; and without making
himself known unto me, began to let drive at me, saying he would take order I
should never attain that where unto I did aspire.

Then seeing to defend my self whether I would or not, I must needs in that
extremity put my self in deuoyre as well as I could; and in the mean time the
Duke who heard our cople, ran unto us with many of his servants, erclaiming in
a great rage: How now disloyal knights, go ye about to dishonor me with so
great an infamy. By the living God I shall make you dearly buy this so great
presumption. He presently working by his Art of Negromancie, made us both
remain as dead at the very instant: and being in this trance suddenly
transported into this place, he enclosed us fast within the Sepulcher, with
this instance of words; ye combat to dishonor me and my Daughter, well
continue hardly your battle, till a Knight of your race may by his generous
courage come to part you.

When he had thus said, he vanished from our presence, and we remained there in
a wonderful rage, striking one at an other, as you have seen even unto this
present, so that we know not how long this deadly quarrel and malice between
us has lasted: and the extremest point of the disaster unto which this
sorcetie did bind us was in that we could not dye by any of those stabbes and
wounds which we received one of another.

Marvelous things are those which you tell me quoth tho Prince, and know that
it is now a long time since the Duke inchaunted you here, because Prince I
dward of whom ye speak, was my great Grandfather: Nevertheless, let us
depart out of this place to go a while some whether else to refresh us all
three together: And as he set his soote upon the threshold of the door of this
Chamber, he spied an old woman which thus be spoke him.

Fair knight, long time before you were borne, did the Duke of Bo^sa know by
mean of his knowledge your valor and magnanimity, and how you should finish
this adventure: therefore left you the sword which you have gotten, and keep
it well as being of that virtue as I assure you has few fellows at this day,
especially for as much as if you shall held it in your right hand, no
enchauntment shall ever be able to hurt you.

In like manner is the shield which you have there won most wonderful and
most rare, for that you shall see the discourses of all your life pourtrayed
out most lively therein: the which not withstanding you shall never knew but by
lapse of time, following the desteny, whereunto God submitted you even from
your birth day: so that having now accomplished that which was by great
learning foreseen and directed in this adventure you may go hence, when it
shall seem good unto you: And for that the two Knights who go with you, cannot
long time remain in this world: counsel and admonish them to remember the
mercy of God, who by his divine grace has given you power to deliver them
from the misery and calamity wherein they have remained this hundred years
last past.

The old woman having spoken thus much vanished away, whereat the Prince was
amazeo, when making far greater account of the sword and shield than he did
before, he departed out at the door with his companions: And seeing no more
the Palace wherein he had sought with the Knight of the Cave, nor the Arms
which were given him at the Monastery, his admiration was much more redoubled:
Yet as he came back he found the way to be very dark and obscure, which
as he came was as clear and light some, as at the mouth of the hole; where
being arrived they got out easily without any disturbance, and from thence
forth was it for ever shut up, the Palace resolved into smooke, and all the
enchauntments thereof undone and brought to final end.

Afterward walking together toward the Gardengate, there met them the
Abbess and her Nuns, who entertained the Prince with joy and the greatest
gratulation that might be, maruelling much at the two companions whom he
brought with him: which caused the Abbess to demand who they were, and who
had given him the ^^ch Arms she saw him being on his back out of the Cave.

Madame quoth he, these two Gentlemen say they are two Brethren and Knights
descended of noble race, who by the great skill of the Duke of Borsa, were
enclosed fast in the place from whence I have now delivered them out of a
torment far worse than the cruellest torture which they might endure. The
Arms which you see, I have conquered from a Knight, who would have kept from
me the entrance of a Palace, where combating with him upon that refusal, I
changed mine Arms, being bewed and piece meal broken for these which you see;
but in steed thereof will I leave you my sword, for a testemony of the
affection I have to give you far greater things when the time shall come: for
that sword which I have gotten of the old woman will I carry with me unto the
Kings Court, whether I hope by the help of God speedily to conduct these
Knights.

That may you not well do quoth the Damsel who guarded him into this place,
before you accomplish first that which you have already promised me: Well may
these two Knights in the mean time in this place attend your return, which
will be in very short space as I hope.

Prince Edward answered he would go with her willingly, into what place soever
it should please her to bring him: Nevertheless, being already late in the
evening, they departed not that night out of the Monastery: Where the Lady
Abbess and her sisters could not satisfy themselves to feast the Prince and
the two Knights, the which at their instant prayer, made once more unto them
the whole discourse of their History, after that they had all supped most
daintely.

The morrow morning Prince Edward rose at the point of day-breake and departed
alone with the Damsel, leaving the two brethren among the Nuns in the
Convent, where the Abbess made them good cheer for his sake, and kept very
carefully the sword which he gave her, whereupon it fortuned afterward that he
being King, he augmented much the revenues of this Nunnerie, remembering the
promise which he had made to the Abbess, and to all the religious Nuns her
sisters.

CHAP. XX.
How Prince Edward was brought by the Damsel into the house of the Duke of
Borsa, where her sister thought to enchaunt him to make him marry a Niece of
hers being Daughter to the Duke, who was inamoured of him, only by the great
fame which was bruted of his valor, and what ensued there upon.

THis Damsel who guided the English Prince, waited in the house of the Duke of
Borsa, Nephewe to her for whom her father enchaunted the two brethren within
the Sepulcher: the which was afterward married with the Earl of Brabant, unto
whom he had promised her, as ye have read before.

But this Duke had only one son and one Daughter which was his eldest,
excelling far in beauty all others of that country, for which cause, her
father loved her a great deals the dearer: so that more carefully to have her
nuctured in all feminine ciuility, he caused her to be brought up in the
house of a sister of his being a widow, a most prudent Lady, being well
aduized and very well seen in the Art of Magic and secret Philosophy, a
Profession very peculiar to the most part of their family.

This Dukes Daughter called Rene, hearing the famous report of the generous
valor of Prince Coward, so publicly talked of in the mouth of all men, tell
so far in love with him without ever seeing him, that she became wonderful
pensive and melancholy: and by reason of the continual tears and complaints
which without ceasing she powered out to the wind, when she could secretly
retire her self into her Chamber apart, to ease the passion of her mind a
little, she so defaced her beauty in few days, that the Duke her father was
aware thereof.

Whereupon seeing her sometimes to fetch deep sighs, dearly requested his
sister (for he loved his Daughter entirely) to sound by some subtle means from
whence this her melancholy sadness might proceed.

Whereunto the good Lady made reply, how she had not as yet perceived any such
matter, notwithstanding she would work so wisely, that she would learn
the truth. And from thence going strait to her Neeces Chamber, she found her
continuing her daily complaints: So that sitting down by her, she began to
pray and to conjure her, that she would no longer conceal from her the cause
of her grief: then the young Damsel with a bashful and blushing countenance
answered to her with these words.

Madame, I know not what to answer you in this case, but that I am the most
wicked and most disastred Damsel that was ever borne under the celestial
Spheres; seeing that I have imprinted in my heart a thing which redoundeth
more to my total ruin, than to the least lote of any contentment, whose ^s^ue
shall be my speedy death which shall bring an end to my detestable and too too
languishing life. Then she proceeded to tell how she loved with a most
vehement and excessive flame Prince Edward of England, who would be the only
cause that she should speedily see her self dissolved to dust and ashes;
forasmuch it seemed altogether impossible, ever to have any fruition of her
desire, because the Prince and she were not of equal estates. The Aunt who
saw her in such a pitiful taking, would not prolong her furthee torment, but
presently began thus unto her. Dear Near, I pray you govern your self with
some constancy of mind in this passion, and in the mean time blotte out of
your mind this impossibility, which you allege for the principal point of
your anguish: for I promise you so to imploye my Art, that the Knight (who will
love ere long, more than any living creature,) shall arrive in this place to
espouse you: So great and unspeakable was the joy of Rene, that taking her Aunt
about the neck, she embraced and kissed her many times saying.

O my sweet Aunt, if you procure me now this bliss and felicity (inferior
to none in this world) you may well vaunt, and say you have delivered a
sorrowful and desolate Niece of yours out of the most in^^icate Laborinth
which ever was devised in this earth, yea, if it were that which Dedalus
invented so artificially in Crete, to include the infatiable Min^taure.

My loving Niece, take you no care (replied the Lady) but have a little
patience that all things may be done in these due time. With that she departed
from the Chamber to confer this business with the Duke her brother, with out
whose privy consent she would in no wise begin to set this work abroach: and
discoursing to him at large the whole matter, told him what hope she had to
carry this business to circumspectly, that ere long Prince Edward should wed
his danghter: so that after their conclusion, she went to turn over her books
of Negromancie, where she found that the Knight was sure in love already of
Gridonia: Notwithstanding hoping to cross and revoke his affection by her
Magic, she dispatched away immediately the Damsel of whom you have
understood before, to bring him unto Borsa: True it is, she commanded her not
to lead him unto the adventure of the Cloister, but thither she conducted him
her self, because of a sister of hers who was a Nun in that place; from
whence departing together as ye have read before in the former Chapter, in two
days he arrived at the City of Borsa: But before the Knight did enter into
the City, the Damsel prayed him to stay for her a while in a Hermitage near
the Suburbs, till she returned from doing a message to her Mistrisse, who
was very willing so to do: And abiding with the Hermit, she went to the
Infant Rene, who right glad of his ^^rsual, trickt up her self most richly to
entertain her Lover, sending back with speed the messenger to conduct him
secretly into her Chamber.

She being quickly arrived at the Hermitage says thus to the Knight; Sir you
must leave your horse here, and come on foot with me, who will bring you into
a place, whether you shall find your self a glad man to be arrived.

I pray God quoth the Prince then, that I be not deceived nor circum^uented by
you in any thing.

Alas! That God whom you have innocated forbid, that I should ever seek to
entrap my Liege and sovereign in any Ambush; I pray you only come with me
assuredly, and without any fear of ill encounter, upon condition (if it should
fall out otherwise by my mean) I will be reputed the most false and
disloyallest woman that ever guided Knight into any unknown place.

Being put in this assurance of sauegard by his guide, he went on fair and
softly his pace by that false gate (before which the two brethren long since
fell together by the ears) even till he came within the Chamber of Rene:
where as seen as they were entered, quickly was the door well barred:
Whereupon by fortune Prince Edward called to mind that which appeared unto him
in the wood, and moreoner that which the old woman foretold him touching the
virtue of his sword.

By means whereof, mistrusting some inchauntment, he speedily set his hand
upon it; and then marched toward the Infant, which he saw so beautiful and
so Pompously attired, that any Knight would have taken great pleasure in her
sight only: And for he came without his Helmet on his head, with so
magnificent and rich Armor upon his back, he pleased the Damsel so much,
that rising up from her seat she came to prostrate her self at his feet,
saying.

Prince Edward, in truth I was out of hope with my self, that the heavens
would favor me so much, as to make these mine eles behold you, which have
shed so many tears to deplore my future calamity; if it please not you to
succor me: Whereby my heart has been by an impatient desire provoked to rage
and exclaim against fortune, which having blown your renown unto mine ears,
would frustrate my sight of so rare a creature.

Notwithstanding, now my luck is so prosperous, as to make me the happiest
Damsel of all Europe, seeing the pain you take to visit me, I perceive well
that not without great reason it has made me altogether the slave and captive
of your love.

The Knight greatly maruasling no less at the singular beauty of this Damsel,
than to hear her use such eloquent and cunning terms; took her by the hand
to lift her from the ground, and to seat her in her chair again, near unto
which, the Damsel who was the messenger before, having already set another,
the infant caused the Prince to sit down hard by her side, reentring the
former talk with this instance.

Fair Lord, know ye I am Daughter to the Duke of Borsa, one of your most
faithful vassals, who hearing the brute of your generous actions, on every
side published round about us, began so extremely to love you, that I forgot
the very zeal which I bare unto my self: Whereof shall be a good testemony
the extreme passions which you shall understand do daily debilitate my life
that depends only but upon your humanity: the which I hope to see so
pitiful toward me, that it shall have compassion of the grievous anguishes,
which without intermission do martyr me with more painful torment than that
which king Phalaris caused Perillus to endure within the brazen Bull, which he
himself invented for the cruel torturing of others: And you may well think
fair Prince, I could not in any other Knight of base condition have known
how to ground so much hope as I have now in you, and therefore I pray you to
have regard to the reason and carriage of all good and sound judgment.

Madame, replied the Prince, I could not imagine the mean to exempt from you
the recognizance wherein I find my self bounden to you, considering the good
will, which of your grace you bear me without any merit of my part:
Nevertheless, if death do not prevent the affection which I have to show you
how it is not to an ungrateful person, or one of small power to whom you
address your self, I will use such munificence and liberality toward you
and your father, that you shall have chiefest cause of any living in this
kingdom to give me thanks.

And believe me (sweet Lady) if I had known your will (setting apart all
mine own affairs) I had come unto you to do you all the service I could
possibly have devised; yet not with intent to obtain of you any thing which
might stain your honor, or abase that virtue which I see shining in you, as
does Virgo the maiden sign in the Zodiac of the heavens: For So Much as
thereunto could he never consent who shall think himself all his life time to
be your loyal and obedient servant. Thus much I say, because I may not have
you in marriage to be my wife, my heart being vowed in another place.

Albeit, to assure you of my sincere and true devotion toward you, there is
nothing so difficult or hard to be accomplished, which it shall please you to
command me, but I will erecute most willingly, in the best sort which I may or
shall be able to devise.

Judge ye whether the Lady were perplered and greatly troubled in her mind
or no, hearing the resolution of the Knight (whose mind was only fixed and
established on Gridonia) for so much as her very speech which she lost for a
while, showed evidently a most true and perfect token of her sufferance.

Which her Aunt perceiving, who in the mean time employed her best skill to
bring her in grace with the Prince, was sore difended to see her in such a
swowne.

Knowing also that she labored in vain, by reason of the sword which he got
in the Cave, she came into the Chamber where they were together saying.

Prince Edward, so favorable are the heavens unto you, that they will happily
conduct you to the end of all your enterprises, except of that one which you
have so lively now imprinted in your breast. For the Lady which you purpose to
serve with infinite pains and travels, is long since dedicated to a more
accomplished Knight than your self: So that as I think you should do well to
leave that way which shall be so hard for you to keep, to take this which
has no difficulty nor disturbance in it.

That cannot I do by mine own consent quoth the Prince, having already
surrendered the conquest of my liberty into a place, whence when I would, I
cannot well call it vacke at my pleasure: Wherefore I beseech you of all
favor make me understand so much as I perceive you know, and withal who
shall be that so fortunate Knight who shall go before me in the fruition of
the Princess Gridonia, Nay seeing you have no pity (replied the Inchauntres)
of this fair Lady whom you see almost breathless in your presence, I am not
purposed to tell you things wherein you may take delight, but rather not to
drowned my self in sorrows seeing you before mine eyes, I will presently depart
out of this Chamber: with that she went her ways, leaving the poor lauer in
a Sea of tears, continuing her exclamations with lamentable ^ighes, thinking
to move her Narcissus to some compassion: But he who cared little for these
santasles, supposing what was said of Gridonia, was spoken only to win him
from her love, he comforted the Damsel as well as be could, telling her bow
he would confer with her Father, and if he would condescende thereunto, he
would come thither ere it were long to marry her.

In the mean time her Aunt went to speak with the Duke her Brother, with
whom (after she had given him to understand that ^ot knowledge was not to
(...) to work Prince Edward to this pass, she advised him to go accompanied
with twenty Knights Armed into his Daughters chamber: Where sayning himself
ignorant of the matter, and showing himself fore displeased against them
has, he should ^eaze upon his body and put him in prison, and so they might
work their matters as they lifted.

The Duke than putting in pr^^tize this stratage^^e, came with twenty men all
in Arms who the chamber door, wherein he (...) entered all alone, (...) ^ignes
of ad^^cation, began thus to say.

Alas my God what a bay^^^^ case ^^ Isle: Am I awake, or do^ I meaning behold
this (...)? Ah! I should have thought to have had a virtuous (...) and chaste
^^^den to my Daughter, more (...), than any other in these Northen Regions, and
(...) I trustrated of mine opinion: for I see before mine own eyes she is more
vicious and corrupt than ever was (...) as Messalina, Truly I may well vaunt
my self to make th^^ both dye in prison by the most (...) torment that may be
(...), seeing they have shamefully dishonored (...) all my posterity.

Enter then and come in my Knights to ^^ hand^ upon this murdering Pallia^d,
to the end I may know who be is and who has counseled him to enter to r^shly
into my house; for all those who are cul^able and in any (...) cons^crate in
this misdeede, I shall make them pay deare^^^ for it by a most (...)
shamefullend of their (...). (...) that he ^ept out of the Chamber door to
^et ^^ his (...), who (...) come in, did nothing anim^^^ nor terrif^e the
English Prince. who setting band to his sword and with an invincible (...)
putting his shield on his arm (...) them thus.

Come now hardly who (...) to (...), and I shall show him, ^ ^ (...) from all
(...) this (...) of (...) and (...) gath^ring (...) (...) ^ ^ ^et for all that
(...) and (...) about him so (...), that he (...) them all, (...) not the (...)
after gone to work with her magic spells as you shall hear: She forsooth
darkened all the light of the Chamber, making a sulphurous and obscure air
(...) dark than hell itself, in steed thereof: then delivering forth the
Knights with the Infant^ (...) (who would willingly have bin in his place who
was dead) she shut Prince Edward fast within the Chamber until the morrow
morning when she saw seven of the Dukes Squiers lying along on the ground one
stain outright, and other (...) sore wounded. Now could not the Duke tell what
it were best to do with him; because if he should deliver him, it seemed to
him, but to hasten too shameful a death for himself, and if he should keep
him any longer in his house, it should but encourage him to forethinke all
means to put him to more cruel torment; so that he passed the night in this
conflict, until the morrow morning when an ancient Knight reprehending him
sharply because he suffered himself to be governed by women, counseled him
to cause Prince Edward to be secretly conuayed out of his house by the same
Damsel which giuded him thither.

The Duke who liked well of this advise, caused the Damsel who had been the
messenger to come before him, unto whom after he had showed some signs of
great heaviness, his made this speech.

It grieueth me much, that my sisters pretense has not sorted to so good
effect as she expected, and for so much as you are the cause, having conducted
the Knight into the adventure of the Cloister, where he has conquered such a
it well which safe-gardeth him from all her enchauntments, needs must you your
self get him by subtle means from hence, saying you only have means so save
his life; and for you should think your self greatly culpable of his death,
if it should chance to happen, upon the assurance which you gave him bringing
him into my house, you will willingly set him free from hence into the fields,
if he will promise you never to seek any revenge of the Duke, nor of any of
his family.

Hereunto willingly condescended the Damsel, when departing from the Duke,
troubling like an Daken lease, she came to the Chamber where Prince Edward
was, who studied already how he might break open the door to sackage them who
would come against him: She prostrating her self before him, with the tears
in her eyes, begins thus the ^enour of her words.

Fair Prince, great is the occasion which I have now to complain of fortune,
for I having brought y^u into this house under a protext of the extreme love
which my Mistress bears you, they have devised a speedy and most shameful
death for us all three: for you especially whom the Duke has surprised with
his Daughter, whom albeit he should pardon the vainousnes of the case, which
he supposes falsely to have been a^^^^knowing you should (...), will (...)
there own bosom with some sword, or (...) some now kind of death as did
^ortia, the Daughter of Cato where she heard of the death of her husband
Brutus. As form you may well think, my Lord the Duke (...) of the sour^^ of
this occurrence, as he begins already to do most tractly finding out at
last my privy practi^es (which I protest before God I never went about to carry
to any evil end) I shall be most sharply punished of us all three:
Nevertheless, yet i^ I dye, will I not surcease (as being the person of this
Trinity which know I have best deserved, as well I know I must die for it) to
employ my self in some subtle inventions to make us escape this imminent
perrill, so that ye will a^^are me never to seek any revenge for the offense
which has been offered you in this place: Wherefore I beseech you fair Lord,
most humbly to grant me general remission, to the end that declaring it to
the Duke at the article of my death, he may be moved to compassion to pardon
me also himself; and this is the means whereby we may peradventure save our
lives from the mortal punishment which they prepare for us every day. So well
knew the Damsel to color her speeches, that she wone the mercy of the Prince,
who answered her thus.

Fair maiden for the love of Rene, who surely meriteth much more at my hands,
I have willingly pardoned this injury to the Duke and to all his family,
albeit it is one the most vilest touch and outrage which might be offered to
any Knight: And albeit the death which they determine to make us die, be
horrible and cruel, yet I should take mine in very good part, if I might
execute upon those va^less who would lay hands on me, such a massacre as they
deserve: Nevertheless seeing the occasion presents it self, to avoid this
scandal I am content to follow it, so that no greater damage may ensue. Ah
my Lord replied the Damsel, I give you leave to show your surie on me the very
first of all, if ever I bring you into any further perrill, with that she kissed
his hand, and letting him forth by the same door he came in at, she
conducted him to the Hermitage, where taking leave one of another, the Knight
took his way toward the Cloister, being most joyful of the virtue of his
sword which he had purchased there: but very sorrowful and pensive for the
words which the Dukes sister told him, which he also saw so have some
relation to the Presage of the figures painted upon his shield.

Afterward being arrived at the Abbey, after the entertaimnents and
welcommings accustomed, taking the two Knights whom he had delivered along with
him in company, he returned strait unto the Court of the King his father, who
for that he could hear no news of him was in great heaviness and melancholy,
the which at his arrival was all changed into extreme joy and gladness, when
embracing him, h^^ thus began to welcome him.

My dear son, I cannot sufficiently wonder how ye departed without making
me any thing at all privy to your intent. My Lord and father (answered the
young Prince) I beseech you to pardon me, for so much as I was forced sore
against my will so to do; and then he recounted unto him the brauad^ of the
Damsel in the wood, who carried him afterward to prove his valor in the
adventure of the Num^ey, where he delivered also these two with the whole
discourse of their History.

Whereat all those who heard him wondered greatly: and espeacially the King his
father, who being filled with an unspeakable joy, welcomed them in the best
manner unto his Court, and with kind speeches embraced them, whereby they
thanking him in most humble manner, bowed themselves very low to kiss his
hand: so that after this Royal entertainment they had great honor done them by all those of the Court: who could not be satisfied with beholding them, but did
extol unto the heavens the invincible valor of their deliverer.

The Duke of North Wales the verse same who was at that time Successor to their
Father, came to visit them as his nearest kinsmen, with many other Knights and
Lords of his blood, whereof they were wonderful joyful, especially to see
themselves in the place where they were brought up in their tender age, and yet
not knowing any one body of all those whom they beheld there.

And after they had made some abode in this Court for the love of the King and
of Prince Edward his Son, so soon as he departed they went their ways also
to yield themselves religious men within the Monastery of the Cave, where they
vowed the small residue of their lives unto the service of God, The King and
all the great Lords of his Court, beheld with much admiration the rich sword,
and all the rest of the Princes Arms, esteeming the knowledge of the ancient
Duke of Borsa to be most wonderful, who had ^^^ented so cunning matters in his
house: where to return to the Infant Rene, after she saw her hope desperate,
she besought her Father to make her a Nun in the Monastery which had been
cause of her disafter, protesting never to love any other Knight but he:
Whereunto her Father easily condescended, because this Ahbie was within the
Country under his obedience, and long since founded by his ancestors.

In this place the Damsel living at her great case, felt cuerie day more and
more some access of the languishing passion which she endured for her dear
and perpetual friend Prince Edward: who after he was Crowned King of England,
knowing of the austere life she lead after his refusal, came to see her as
far as the Connent was from him, where he bestowed great riches on it, for
the love of her and of the Abbess, who by means of his sword which he left
there, remembered his promise,

The English Prince then being greatly esteemed of his father, and of all the
Lords and Barrons of his Realm; he made small account of that reputation,
for that his spirit was rather occupied to seek out the means how he might
secretly depart to go follow strange adventures, by the which he might
find out her, whom he loved more entirely than himself.

In the mean time, he took his chiefest delight, to visit many times her
image and representation, unto the which he discoursed and recounted the
extreme affection be bare her, as if he had been in presence of the living
creature; and by this mean took he some comfort, when upon a day fortune
presented before his eyes a fit opportunity to depart, and to go into any part
of the world, whether so ever he desired, which was in this manner.

When he was walking upon the banks of the Thames mere London be spied a
vessel laden with merchandise ariue, which a rich Merchant of Hungary
accompanied with diverse others had laden together to sell and to tra^sique; by
whom understanding whence the ship was (for he knew long before how the Duchy
of Ormeda bordered upon the kingdom of Hungary) advised himself that he
might secretly depart with this ship, when it should be ready to set sail
toward the North.

By this occasion being returned into his Chamber (purposing to get his
equipage in a readiness) calls aside a Page of his who was very faithful
named Clawde, of whom he demanded if he knew not the Master of the ship
with whom he had spoken: Who made answer he did: then he told him further,
how he must needs make a voyage into Hungary, and to Constantinople, about
matters of great importance: And because this ship sailed directly into those
Countries, he commanded him to certefie the Pilot how a Knight who desired to
pass into Hungary, would give him willingly what he would demand, if he
would speedily make for those parts.

The Prince made no creature privy to his departure, for that he meant to carry
no more company along with him, but his man Clawde only and Maiortes for to
make him pastime by the way.

Claudius having thoroughly understood his Masters mind, went incontinent
strait to the Haven, where he concluded with the Master for the time of their
embarkement; and delivering him a good sum of money to provide necessary
furnitures, returned back to his Lord and told him all, who was very joyful
of this opportunity. And as secretly as he could by night time be caused his
Arms to be carried a boorde the ship, with such sea provisions as were
necessary for this voyage; and after that the Merchant had made good traffic
of all his merchandise, Prince Edward embarked himself with his man Clawde,
and his Dog Maiortes only.

The King and the Queen missing Prince Edward at his vprising, as he was
accustomed to salute them, were in great he a^nes for him, and yet supposing he
had but absented himself from the Court for a while, they comforted themselves
herein, being well assured wheresoever he was in the world, he would make his
valor and prowess be known. Nevertheless, commanding to seek for him
thorowout their whole Kingdom, where being not heard off, they supposed he was
traveled into some far strange Climate, wherefore they prayed devoutly unto
the divine Majesty, that it would preserve him from all misfortune and
distress.

CHAP. XXI.
How Prince Edward sailing toward the Coast of Hungary, he took within a
ship of Mores which assailed him Zerphira Daughter to the Sultan of Persia,
whom he sent to dwell with the fair Gridonia, and of her entertainment when
she came at the Clou^n-Rocke where Gridonia dwelt.

PRince Edward sailing in the North sea, concealed himself as much as he
possibly might, le^t he should be descried of any: but coming to surge near
the Coast of Hungarin, there rose a contrary wind to the course they held, so
that they were constrained to strike all their sails; and their vessel going
sower days at the mercy and fury of the tempest, the first day that the
tempest began to cease, and the sea began to be calm, they discovered a far
off floating a Brigandin^ of Mores, within which was Zerphira Daughter to the
Sultan of Persia, and to the fair Princess Zerphira, h^^ whom the Emperor
Palmerin loved so tenderly in his young yo^ers.

This Infant being sister to Lechesin, for her rare and great beauty was
demanded in marriage by the king of India, unto whom the Sultan sent her with
wonderful and infinite riches, being accompanied with the brother of the said
King of India, a most magnanimious and valiant Knight, who come into Persia to
captiuate the articles of this marriage. ^ee as the storm and tempest had
parted all his other vessels, came alone tossed too and fro with the huge
waves, when he discried the Hungarians to be Christians: Whereupon commanding
his Pilots they should put forth all their cloth to fetch in the i^ ship, who
grappeth with them ere long afterward: For all his Mariners were very expert
in sea affairs, and especially in Pira^ie, as having been all for the most
part chosen out of the cunning off Rouers and Pirates which might be found out.

The Merchants who perceived by the flags and pondents of their vessel, that
they were infidels, began to cry out for aid: whereupon the Prince who heard
that noise, lated his Helmet incontinent, and mounted upon the batches, where
he found many Mores who had already taken his Mariners.

When he knew they were Miscreants, (his courage rising at an instant was
redoubled in valor) he began to lay upon them so courageously who presented
themselves to the battle, that with the first blow he charged with his good
sword he sent one into the other world, saying in a great rage; If it please
the almighty to have pity on us this day, I hope you shall not make us so
soon prisoners nor slaves as ye ween a at the least it will cost some of you
dear before ye bring out feet into the chains.

Which the brother of the Indian king perceiving, for that he entered first the
ship, came upon him with a great bravery whom the English Prince received
with some shrewd flashes of his sword: and beginning to he we one another in
furious manner, for that Prince Edward was more nimble and better shilled than
the Moore, putting him out of pain to receive the triumphant crown of his
sea-victory, he made him speedily go give account of his Paganism before the
hellish Lucifer: For whom the other knights of his sect being very heavy and
sorrowful, came (...) him in round about to lay upon him on all sides more
easily at their advantage.

Then the English Prince knowing he must either bye shamefully, or defend
himself from these misereants, spared none of his forces; but like unto a Bull
assa^led with many Mas^^^es, did so drive them all before him, that not one
ever could approach him, but he made him feel the smart of his sword,
remaining dead or wounded, or else forced to lie astonished on the ground: which
his good Dog Maiortes perceiving ran upon them to tears them in pieces, or
else to make them drowned in the midst of the sea.

The Merchants who thought themselves utterly undone, seeing at the first
encounter how valiantly Prince Edward behaved himself against his
adversaries, tanne to Arms to succor him; by means whereof they showed such
vnlour, that within a small while there remained not a More within Zerphiraes
Bark, who passed not the edge of the sword, and was incontinent thrown
headlong into the waves of the sea, which happened to none of the Christians.

Prince Edward and some few of the Merchants were hurt a little, but had no
dangerous nor mortal wound.

Afterward, the knight and the Master of the ship being entered into the Mores
Brigandine, they found within a Cabin near unto the bottom of the vessel
the Infant Zerphira, most sumptuously attyred with twenty other Damsels,
pouring forth many strange and lamentable complaints, where above the rest
one might easily hear the young Princess, as her amongst them all, whom the
disaster of this conflict touched nearest.

Nevertheless Prince Coward had no sooner espied her, but he judged the Lady
to be issued of great blood, and to be Mistress of the rest, as excelling
them all in beauty, and among the brauest showing her self the best equipped,
therefore he approached near to comfort her.

But what? the one understood not the language of the other: for Zerphira
besought him to kill her, as he had done her people; and the Prince entreated
her to let him understand something touching her affairs: Whereupon a Mariner
(whose life the knight had saved to use him for an interpretour, because he
could speak diverse languages) answered how she was the Sultan of Persiaes
Daughter, who sent her as then to the king of India, who had demanded her in
marriage.

Of this news was the Prince very joyful, especially hearing him say she
descended of so illustrious and noble place, for the hope he had to send her
for a present to Gridonia; in such sort that causing her to be put in good
comfort by the Mariner his Interpretour, he commanded him to abuertize her
how she was in the power of a knight, who upon his life would not permit the
least dishonor in the world to be done unto her. And the young Princess
being willing to know whether he were allied to the blood of the Emperor of
Constantinople, because she would willingly have made an end of her sorrow and
grief, Prince Edward caused her to be answered incontinent, that he was not:
Nevertheless she should not therefore want any thing she desired, and that he
purposed to send her into a place where she should find her self in the
greatest content her heart might require.

Ah accursed and unfortunate that I am cried she then out, I doubted greatly
that fortune would not be so gentle and so favorable unto me, as to make me
fall into the hands of any Knight who were issued out of that so noble and
generous race of Palmerin de Oliua: Notwithstanding seeing without doubt it is
an in^uitable extremity, I must patiently yield my self his humble captive,
beseeching God I may find so much curtesse in him, as once did my mother in
the like accident receive of the so redoubted Prince, Palmerin de Oliua.

Prince Edward afterward having understood by the More the interpretation
which the Infant had accompanied with so heavy a sigh, he would take the charge
of her himself, saying to the Master of the ship, that of all the booty they
had taken, he demanded nothing else for his share but this Damsel. So Prince
Edward lead away into his Chamber, the Princess Zerphira with four of her
principal Damsels only, who carried with them their rings and jewels, giving
the rest of the pillage to the Merchant and his companions; then proceeding in
their voyage, the Knight called to mind how there were diverse Christians
within his ship, who did him service with great reverence: whereupon
mistrusting lest they should know him; he took aside a little the Master of
the Ship saying thus unto him; my friend I perceive you know who I am,
whereby men may think great simplicity in me to conceal my self hereafter:
Understand therefore that I departed out of the King my fathers Court, with an
unspeakable desire to come to see as well the good Knights which are in the
Court of King Frisol, as also in that of the Emperor of Constantinople;
therefore I must request you not to manifest me to any one, considering that
what I do now is but for some good respect: And ^o the end we may avoid the
inconvenience which might ensue by the enquiry made of me, you shall do me
hereafter the least honor you can; reputing me but for a simple and poor
wandering Knight whom you shall call the Knight of the Dog, and say I am of
some far Nation to you unknown, who wandering thorough the world to seek
strange adventures, and arriving at the King of Englands Court, soiourned there
a while with Prince Edward his son; with whom I was so well acquainted, that
he would have kept me there a long time with him; whereby it proceeds that I
can better speak that language than any other, yea than mine own natural
tongue: And if ye do so, and God give me grace to live the age of a man, I
will reward you so that you shall think it a blessed hour, wherein you first
met me.

Sir replied the Merchant, you have already done me more grace, than I shall
ever be able hereafter to deserve at your hands; which may well assure you, I
shall never dare disclose you, seeing the great care and diligence you your
self use, not to be descried of any whatsoever; and whereas there is others
beside in this vessel who know you as well as I do, I will make them all
come before you to the end they may promise not to make known your name, but
when and to whom you shall please.

So it fell out when they arrived afterward with great gladness at Arriace,
which was the place of the birth and dwelling of the chief Merchant who was
owner of the ship: Being a City very strong and of good defense situate in
the Kingdom of Hungary, on the one side confining with the Countries of the
Soloan of Nicea. There came they into a Haven, and for the Merchant was rich
and had a fair lodging, he took the Knight with him into his house: who
would needs bring along Zerphira with him, leading her by the arm, where they
were Honorably entertained by the Merchants wife, who at their arrival
understood secretly by means of her husband the discourse of this Navigations.

But all those of this ship having purchased by the help of the Knight of the
Dog great riches from the Instdels, the brute thereof came quickly to the
ears of this Lady: who found her self at that instant in a woeful case,
because King Frisoll went about by his Soueraign^ty to take from her this
City to fortesie it, as being the next frontier to the Mores Country: And
also because her deceased husband had rebelled in his tune against Netrides his
Father, when after the conquest of this Kingdom he sought to inuest himself
with the principal Cities, wherein no man gaintsaide him, but he only who
died in this reuolte.

Under this pretexte then sent King Frisoll for this Lady to come unto him, so
dispossess her of the City, promising nevertheless to recompense her in
good sort: But she who had but one only Son, as yet a tender pupil and
under age, would not exchange it for any other City of his Kingdom, as well
by reason that hers was well seated for all kind of commodities, as also for
that she saw all her subjects and inhabitance grown very rich and wealthy. So
that this Lady had no more but eight days of term remaining when she was to
appear before the King, when also Prince Edward arrived at Arriace, and having
not as yet found out any that durst appear to answer for her, so that she
wared very sad being in perplexety: knowing not how to resolve what was best
to be (...) in this cale, when she understood of the prowess and magnanimity
of the Knight of the Dog bruted abroad in her City.

Whereupon it fortuned that she sent incontinent for the principal Merchant
to come to her Castle, who arrived there soon after with two handmaides of
Zerphira, which fell to his share, whereof he made a present unto her, and
declared unto her as much as yon have read before: wherewith thee had her mind
so troubled, that she lost almost both her sense, and reason, and therefore she
prayed him to move the Knight to have some compassion of her woeful distress.
Whereupon he protesting unto her of a troth the great courtesy and generousnes
of Prince Edward, she made no farther inquiry; but being accompanied with
the Merchant and with some one of her Damsels, she went presently to him, and
falling down prostrate before him thus she began.

Brave Knight, if the affliction of any poor desolate widow has ever found
place of pity in your noble mind, I beseech you most humbly you will now
vouchsafe to regard me in the necessity wherein I am. And after she had
unfolded the whole matter unto him, the Prince made her this answer.

Madame I am very sorry and sore displeased at your sadness and cause of
melancholy; on the other side I am very glad that so good an occasion does
offer it self now, to make you know the desire I have had ever since mine
Infancy, to help and succor to my small power all Ladies, who would employ
me, and especially those who feel themselves oppressed, and destitute of aids
and counsel. And for this cause will I willingly present my self before your
King, making him to understand, that corrupting the inviolable laws of
Justice, he does you wrong and great injustice, to take your City away from
you by force and authority. And if there be any Knight in his Court will
maintain the contrary, I hope by the help of God to make him confess it by
force of Arms.

Thus much he said for that he knew before how Belcar one of King Frisols
Sons was lately married with Alderine the Duke of Pontus Daughter, and
brought away his wife into Hungary, whereupon that occasion they held great
feasts and Tournies: so that growing upon this quarrel in this contention
with him or with the Prince Dutreus, and killing him in single combat he hoped
to do acceptable service to his Lady Gridonia, being this house near allied
to that of Constantinople.

The Lady thanking him for this honest and courteous offer, told him that if
it pleased him to bare her company, she feared nothing, and that leaving her
Son under good and sure guard, she purposed to depart very soon with some
number of Knights for her safer conduct. Whereunto the Knight answered that he
was ready at any time when so ever she pleased. And therefore she caused good
order to be taken for all things which might be needful in this voyage,
desiring before her departure, to get into her possession for the Knights sake
the Damsels of Zerphira, which remained still in the Merchants hands, paying
for every one of them a reasonable ransom according to their estate.

All that night was Prince Edward very sad, for he could not resolve with
himself, whether he should first go to Gridonia to present unto her the
Infant Zerphira, or whether he should pass unto Constantinople, to end the
Combat with Primaleon.

In fine after many resolutions he concluded that with himself, which he put in
execution very early on the morrow morning; for he came to request the
Merchant his Host that it would please him to command a son of his called
Diazan to go do an errand for him as far as the Clouen-Rocke, wherein he
was more willingly obayed, than he could command; then went he strait to the
Infants chamber, whom he told that he would send her to an excellent Lady who
would honor her, and use her with all humanity, and he besought her to be
willing to go, hoping to come to visit her there ere long, and to bring her
such news, which should give her no occasion to repent her going thither.

The young Princess albeit this offer went near her heart, answered him
nevertheless in this manner: In good faith it is great reason sir, that as
your prisoner and captive I should obey your requests without any
contradiction, especially knowing they derive from the sincere and honest amity
which it pleases you to bear me, albeit I am sure I shall never be able to
merit it on my behalf; nevertheless I beseech you to cause my Damsels to be
called hither, unto whom if it please you I will speak some few words before
my departure; most willingly will I cause it to be done replied the Knight: So
he caused them to come into her Chamber forthwith, where these young Damsels
seeing their Mistres in strange manner to hate her own life in deploring and
bewayling her unfortunate disaster, they began altogether to make such a
strange and pitiful complaint, that the Knight was constrained to separate
them, and soon after to send away Diazan with the Infant Zerphira toward the
Castle of the Clouen-Rocke, to present her to the Princess Gridonia from a
Knight unknown, with a letter whose tenor followed in these words.

Prince Edwards Letter to the Princess Gridonia.
TO the rarest Paragon of Princesses the Lady Gridonia, the only Phoenix of
her time, future Queen of Polonia, and lawful heir of the Duchy of Ormeda, a
Knight who desires to serve her perpetually, sends greeting, kissing with
all courtesy, the hand of her Excellency. The perfect Idea of your never
perishing beauty, accompanied with so many other singular gifts of grace, which
the celestial providence does distribute equally to diverse persons, has so
dim^ned the cleere-seeing eyes of her burning and unquenchable beams, that
the Artizan in pourtraying of his liueliest pieces helps himself with your
divine lineatures, as it were beauty it self descended into these lower
Regions to be seen amongst us: Such an example seen with mine eyes, besides
the testemony of another strange accident, have (as it were a fatal arrow) so
lively pierced my breast, that I can take no rest, but in traveling to aspire
unto that, which should give me the sweet fruition of so precious a rarenes
of fortune: which is only to revenge the death of Perrequin of Duas your
Cosen, upon the false traitor and fellonious bom^^^de Primaleon of Greece.
Continuing which tranqu^^lity of spirit by traueile of my body, I sayl^d
merrily toward Constantinople, and for the same effect; when by great fortune
I met a Brigandine of Mores tossed by tempest of weather into the North sea,
which would have taken me prisoner: But the Sovereign of all Gods,
constrayning these mine enemies to pass the edge of my sword, has safegarded
and reserved me to the end to be your comforter, and the revenger of your just
quarrel. For assurance whereof in attending that happy season, I send you in
Hostage a Damsel issued of great parentage, whom I found within the vessel of
those nuscreant Mores; whom so I pray you to use and entertain as you shall
know her virtue and Princely de^^anor does deserve, as well in regard of the
anguish which she shall suffer perceiving her self thus captive, as also in
respect of the sincere and perfect amity which she will show unto you all her
life time.

He who has not his match in good will to do your Ladyship all dutiful
service.


So then departed Diazan with Zerphira, and all her sewels, accompanied with
many Merchants who conuayed them very willingly; and holding on their journey,
they arrived at the Castle of the Clouen-Rocke, where after they had given
Gridonia to understand that there was a Damsel which they had brought her in
the behalf of a Knight. Incontinent the Draw-bridges were all let down, and
the great gates set wide open.

Then Diazan took the Infant by the hand, to lead her strait into the Chamber
of the Princess, who seeing her so richly attyred and so courteous to do her
honor and reverence, supposed she must needs be extracted from some high and
illustrious Lineage: wherefore she came to welcome and to entertayn^ her
honorably: and perceiving that the Lion (which never styrd from her, began to
fawn upon her, she said alowd; Sister I cannot believe, but that this Lion
knows you, considering the gentle semblant and joyful entertainment be
shows you, which as yet I have never seen him do to any, since he was with
me.

Zerphira understood nothing she spoke, but steadfastly beholding her excellent
and perfect beauty, reputing her self most happy to become into the power and
custody of so gentle and rare a Princess. Nevertheless, Diazan who understood
her well, speaking for her, set one knee on the ground and made this answer.

Madame, in very deed I believe your Lion never saw this Damsel before,
because she comes but now from a (...) Land, far distant from these
Countries; but he presageth the great desire which the Knight who sent her
unto you, has to do you service; and also can judge of the high choice of
this Princess, being Daughter to the Sultan of Persia, for so much, as the
Lions by nature (as being Kings among the four footed Beasts) do recognize
and know perfectly the illustrious and royal blood.

So he proceeded to declare the Embassage which Prince Edward gave him
incharge to deliver by word of mouth, beside the letter which he had already
given into her hand, praising him in valor and courtesy above all the Knights
to whom the four Elements had ever lent any influence of harmonicall
constitution: And told her moreover, how he caused him self to be called the
Knight of the Dog; by reason of a very great and fair Dog that he carried
along with him, which was of so good knowledge, that he aided and succored
him greatly in his necessities.

Squire my friend, replied the Princess Gridonia, I make no doubt but that the
Knight of the Dog is both magnanimious and of great Prowess, seeing that
without knowing me, he has had this remembrance of me; wherein I pray the
Lord God to give me the favor, that according to his merit, I may return him
his due guerdon and rewards, and give him so much power and strength, as by his
happy victory he may chase from my heart the languishing and bitter sorrow which
has ceazed it a long time. And for a testimony of the love and duty I too owe
him reciprocally, I take and accept this Infant (his present) in the place and
steed of a sister and a good friend; and so will I love and honor her, as if
we were both issued out of one womb.

For this acceptance and courtesy did Diazan thank her most humbly, in
kissing her hand; then did he interpret to the Infant what she said, whereat
Zerphira bowing her self very low, did give her also thanks for her part: and
then did Gridonia take her by the hand to make her sit down by her, praying
her to be of good cheer, and to devise what pastime she pleased; all which
Diazan expounded unto her as well as he could.

Then she who perceived so much honor was done unto her in eating and
drinking always with Gridonia, which made her greatly comfort her self, and
drove away all yrkesomnes of the place, but not that she could in any wise
altogether forget her adverse and sinister fortune: Nevertheless, she never
showed any evident token thereof, but very wisely dissembled it, whereat
Gridonia marvelled not a little, but much more at her great riches and jewels
which she carried about with her.

Diazan after he had rewarded the Merchants of Arriace with some present, sent
them away home to their houses, because he meant to abide there to serve the
Infant Zerphira, whom he aduertized by the way, to take heed least she should
speak any thing in favor of the Emperor of Constantinople to Gridonia, nor
to show by any token or sign that she loved him, or any of his stock or
kindred: Which she who was both sage and well advised, took for so good a
forewarning, that she was never heard in her presence to speak any thing by
affection of this family.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Knight of the Dog presented himself with the Lady of Arriace before
King Frisol, who at his entreaties let the widow alone with her City, and
how afterward he got the best in a Tourney which was held in his Court, and
what fell out by occasion thereof.

DIazan being departed with the infant Zerphira, Prince Edward, and the Lady of
Arriace, accompanied with twenty knights whom they took for their safe
conduct, took their journey toward King Frisols Court, so that arriving there
the third day afterward about evening prayer, the Knight being in his complete
armor except his head-peece and gantlets only, led the Lady by the hand, even
up to the chamber of presence: for in this place did the King recreate himself
with his children, and with many other Lords, who were come the there of purpose
to see and welcome Belcar not long time before arrived from Durace: and there
was besides the Queen his Mother, accompanied with Esquiuela and Alderine, the
wives of D^treus and Belcar his two Sons, with many other Ladies, devising
and sporting themselves together, every one according to their pleasure. The
King seeing the Lady come in, knew presently she was Lady of Arriace, and
beholding the physiognomie and honest countenance of the Knight, judged with
himself he descended from some high and great linnage: when the Lady
prostrating her self at his feet, thus began to frame her complaint.

Sir, it has pleased you to cause notice to be given me to appear before your
royal Majesty, to the end that under the color of fortification and
assurance of your kingdom, you may dispossess me of my town of Arriace,
because it is situate upon the frontiere confining upon the Moors your
enemies, from whom ye suppose putting therein sure guarde and good garrison,
to shut up all passage that way, and to cut off the hostile invasion, which
they might other wise make into your Majesty's dominions; wherein I marvel
much that you address your self to me, being but a poor widow, rather than
to any other of your vassalls, to use such rigor and extremity toward them:
considering if you allege that my son is too young to keep quarter, and to
hold so dangerous a passage. I will answer you, this reason seems not
sufficient to execute injustice toward him, but rather ought you as his King
and soueraigue Lord, to take him into your protection and safegarde. Nor can
you find justly any fault, that my city is not well guarded and fortefited,
seeing I ordinarily keep in pay a great number of Knights and Soldiers, who
do not neglect their duty and diligence, as well in placing Sentinels and Scouts
both by day and night, within and without my walls, as likewise in maintaining
all other things which are requisite for a frontire town: besides every one
may presume, that in loosing of it I should most of all be endammaged, as being
deprived of the principal city of my domaine, which I will not exchange for
any other which you shall offer me in recompense to have it. This is the matter
I am come to let you understand, hoping to find some pity and compassion in a
Prince so full of clemency as you are, otherwise I would never have presumed
to have been so bold to appear before your presence, assuring my self if you
cause the charters of your Royalty to be exactlie looked over, you shall find
it appertains not to you by any vassellage, but has always been the chief
city belonging to the whole stock of mine ancestors.

The king having given good ear to the speech of the Lady, perceived the
Knight whom she brought thither came to defend her in a good and just combat,
if she should stand in need: and forasmuch as he knew the brave and valiant
Knights by their countenance, this seemed unto him a very resolute and
sufficient man to maintain her quarrel, which was not grounded of her part
upon any light occasion: by reason whereof he some what repented himself, in
that he had caused her to be summoned upon that business, albeit to see what
the Knight would say, be made her this answer. Lady, it needs not too many
words to you, determine you to render into my hands speedily your town, or
else I will send to surprise it by force, and will give you no other
recompense, but that peradventure which your Son has inherited from his
father, which is to be a disloyal traitor to his King.

O immortal God, then exclaimed the Lady, what is that which these mine ears
have now heard: Surely sir you may do and say of us your pleasure, because you
are our Prince and liege Sovereign: but if I were as good a Knight as I am a
woman, I would make good against the hardiest Knight of your Court, that my
deceased husband never committed any treason in his life. Moreover, if my Son
be wrongfully deprived of the city, which by hereditary succession
appertains unto him, we shall have force, and not justice offered unto us. I
will do justice, and that which I ought to do, replied he: and I will see who
will contradict me therein. Then Prince Edward who had hitherto remained silent
without any word speaking, advanced himself toward the King, saying: I
cannot sufficiently marvel of you, O King of Hungary, having heard heretofore
the renown of your valiant and marvelous feats of arms, blown abroad into
the world with perpetual fame and praise, that ye will now upon so small an
occasion obscure and dim it.

For understanding well the discourse of this affair, it seems to me that
rather upon some malice and grudge which you may have conceived against this
Lady, than otherwise upon any just and apparent reason you will put her from
her own good. In so much that I must of favor entreat you, that you will not
suffer your self to be carried away with envy, nor be blinded by covetousness,
seeing she will swear unto you, to be for ever hereafter your loyal vassaile,
as heretofore she has ever been, and to keep so strong a guarde within
Arriace, that you shall not need to trouble your self, but remain content in
assurance of all tranquillity and peace, so that if you refuse this reasonable
condition which she offers you, I shall be constrained to say you do her
wrong, with intention to make it good by single combat against whomsoever
would maintain the contrary. Belcar who was of great courage, standing then up
with many other Lords who were present, answered him as it were in chollar.
Knight, you come very presumptuous and arrogant into this place, not respecting
in what manner ye speak before a King, whom I suppose you guess has no
children near him. who dare quallifie your pride: you shall not be denied the
combat if you so feign desire it; and the Lady shall sustain more damage in
this her coming with you in her company (for your sake) than she shall get
profit.

I know not who you are (replied the Prince) who give so discurteous language
unto Gentlemen being strangers; unto whom ye ought to hearken attentively in
their demands. Indeed I heard before I came into this Country, that the King
was both valiant and active in feats of Arms, whom his sons did second and
imitate very near. Nor was I ignorant he had many other brave Knights in his
Court, which notwithstanding could not debar me from undertaking willingly
the protection and defense of this Lady; so that if ye will upon her quarrel
enter the combat with me, I am ready to go into the field, upon condition, if
you be by me vanquished, the King shall never lay further claim to the Lady,
nor to none of hers for the City of Arriace.

Belcar accepted with a very good will the battle upon the same condition,
and gave him to understand who he was. Whereat the Knight of the Dog was
most glad: For all this, the King would not hazard his son to perrill of
death, but commanding him to sit down again in his place, told them he
would in no wise accord unto this battle; because he was already resolved to
do that which the Ladies Knight had entreated him too, remembering himself
what occurrences he had passed in seeking strange adventures: So that Belcar
having seated himself again, in a great chafe, the King turned himself
toward Prince Edward with this language. Gentleman, for your sake have I
released the town of Arriace unto this Lady, conditionally she shall swear to
keep it safe with sufficient gartisons of Soldiers able to defend it; that
neither she nor her son shall hereafter be rebels to my Crown, and that
you shall do one pleasure for me beside.

Most willing will I employ my self in whatsoever it shall please you to
command me (replied the Prince) so it be not to reveal my name, otherwise
reputing the grace and favor that you have showed to this Lady, as if I had
received it my self. Then directing his speech to the Lady be willed her to
kiss the Kings hand; the Amstants who saw how secret he kept himself, not
bowing to do the like, they preshmed he was some Knight descended of high
Parentage. In the mean time, Belcar and the Englishman were in some
contention, but the Queen who took pity of the Lady of Arriaces tears,
besought the King not to procure the death of her son by this mean; so that
for many respects he gave the Lady her content, who swear solenmely unto him to
observe all that he propounded to her faithfully: and to send him also her
son unto his house, to be brought up to serve his Majesty. King Frisol
requested the Knight to soiourne in his Court until the next sunday, to show
him some Chiualries in a Tourney which should be held there; whereunto he
answered he would willingly abide with him, albeit he had great affairs to do
in another place. And hereupon the King commanding they should go to disarme
him in some good chamber of the Castle, the Knight thanked him greatly for that
courtesy, excusing himself that he would not lean the Lady of Arriace.
Whereupon the King commanded his Harbingers to see them very well lodged
without his Palace.

Every body stood gazing upon Maiortes the Dog which Clawdius lead in a
Lease, maruelling much at his height and goodly proportion, amongst whom were
many which did much desire to have him; and above all, there was the Earl of
Oregua, agreat hunter and chacer in Forests ravished to enjoy him. Wherefore
reputing himself a hardy Knight, be determined to lay an ambush for Prince
Edward to take him away by violence as you shall understand. But the Lady being
a very joyful woman to see her business have so happy issue, would not depart
until the Tourney were finished; which her Knight also purposed to attend; who
in the mean time was fore offended with himself that he combatted not Belcar,
because that slaying him in battle, he thought to do great pleasure to
Gridonia, who hated mortally the partakers and lovers of the Emperor of her
capital enemy.

But the King and all the Lords there present, had no other talk but of him;
so that Belcar who felt himself some what displeased hearing all the praise
powered upon him, said thus much in all their hearings; The hour approaches
when we shall see what he can do: Notwithstanding I marvel much of you my
Lord (looking upon his father) that you suffer your self so soon to be
overcome with words. I have done it son (replied the King) to prevent the
peril of your life, having no better right on my side, and let me hear no
more, for good Knights ought to be honored and maintained by Princes.

After this commandment this pleacame no more in question, but every one
provided to make himself brave against the Tourney, attending with an
incredible desire to sir how the Knight of the Dog would be have himself.
Sunday being once come, the King went accompanied with his Barrons, and the
Queen attended by her Ladies to the Scaffold, and presently the place of the
Iousts was opened, where were about two thousand Knights, what on one side and
other, and the Duke of Borsa and the Earl of Oregua held upon the Courtiers
side, being both very valiant Champions. A^ the first encounter many knights
were seen go to the ground then beginning to strike one upon another
^dgeling, ^^^^ling, and point wise, making such noise as if a Legion of Smiths
had been beating upon their Anuiles. But King Frisol looked about on every
side, thinking to recognize the English Prince, who hearing say that the
Skirmish was already begun (supposing some one or other of the Kings Sons
would be within the lists) he came thither accompanied with the xx. Knights of
the Ladies: so that seeing the courtiers at the point of carrying away the
victory, he purposed to relieve the feebler side: and dashing Spurs to his
Horse, before he brake his Lance, he laid many a Knight along; then setting
hand to his sword he did marvelous things: By this means knew him many
Courtiers, who came to prove themselves against him. Amongst others, the Earl
of Oregua coming very near him lent him two sound blows with his Mace: for
which he sustained sudden revenge by one blow which Prince Edward crossed him
over his Helmet, wherewith being sore hurt he fell to the ground. Surely, quoth
the King then, who beheld the conflict, I perceive now that which my heart did
presage unto me, of the prowess of the Knight of the Dog, to be true: things
which every one may judge as well as I, by his honorable seats of arms which do
advance him far above all those of the whole troop. And as he uttered these
speeches, behold Belcar and his brother Ditreus who enter the lists unknown,
and for they said they would not be seen in the Tourney that day, to the end
to avoid as much as might be, the clamor of the vulgar sort as soon as the
Nobility were placed upon the Scaffolds, they went secretly to arm themselves,
to thrust in among the crowd, as being no better than simple Knights only:
where being arrived, Belcar ran his Lance cowched with great fury against the
Knight of the Dog; who seeing him come with such a powder, attended him covered
with his shield: whereupon he received one lively attaint, wherewith had it not
bin for the band of the Armer or, who fatally tempered it, Prince Edward had
bin in danger of his life. Then began they to charge one another with
invincible courage, nevertheless their conflict continued not long: because
the Englishman who excelled Belcar in chiualry, feeling himself somewhat
moved, lighted so fell a knock upon his Helmet, that he cleft it a two, and
wounded him deep in his head; so that he was constrained to fall astonished to
the ground. When the Prince of Hungary saw his brother Belcar lie so piteously
vanquished, and the Courtiers overthrown, he ran as a mad man against Prince
Edward with so terrible a fury, that his blow glauncing within the plates of
his pouldrons under his shield, he gave him a little wound in his arm: but he
went not far from the place to vaunt himself thereof, for the Knight of the
Dog reached him two so sound blows upon his left shoulder between his
Habergion and his headpeece, that he sent him to keep his brother company.
Afterward with the aid of the most valiantest on his side, he brusht his
adversaries in such sort, that he made them all discampe to save themselves:
and seeing himself victorious, being very weary and over traveled, he retired
himself into his lodging, where he was by the Lady and her Knights disarmed,
and his wound carefully looked unto. Mean while the King, who knew nothing of
his sons disafter, showed himself to be very joyful to see that which he
presumed of the Knight of the Dog to be in effect most true: and supposed
thereby he had done very well not to grant his son Belcar the combat
against him: nevertheless being arrived at the Palace, and finding them both in
so ill pickle, he changed his sudden joy into sorrow, saying: Alas! I deserve
this well, who did my self entreat the knight to attend the Tourney, to
procure me this mischief: now let him go his ways on Gods name, and that no
man be so hardy as to disturb and vex him.

The English Prince, understanding how Ditreus and his brother were wonderful
ill at ease, through the wounds which they received of his hand, was the
gladdest man in the world, for the respect which you have heard before: and
considering how it was not very good to soiourne any longer in this court,
requested the Lady to take her leave of the King, and that it would please him
to pardon him if he abode no longer there: which she did most willingly, not
without great enquiry of the King to know who her Knight might be, wherein the
good Lady being not able to satisfy him any otherwise, but that a Merchant of
Arriace had taken him into his ship in England as a passenger: He took her
conge honestly of him to return home to her own house, whether the knight of
the Dog would needs accompany her a good part onward of her way: whereof the
Earl of Oregua being aduertized, who hated him mortallie, for that he had
been dismounted by him in the Tourney: desiring also with an extreme
affection, to get his fair Dog Maiortes from him, encouraged a brother of his,
who was both a valiant and a hardy champion, to seek to be revenged of him,
all^dging he durst not leave the Court without incurring great suspicion. He
framed so cunning a speech, that he sent his brother after Prince Edward with
xx. Knights very well appointed and armed, praying him not to assail him,
until he had intelligence by his spies, that he had taken his last leave of
the Lady. And then taking some good opportunity they might overtake him to
massacre him, getting into their possession as soon as they could the Dog. They
followed him until the second days journey, when he took his farewell of the
Lady with this fair semblant. Madame, will it please you to excuse me, if I
bear you company no farther: for having matter of importance to be done in an
other part, I see the term at hand when I must needs take my journey the that
where my business lies. Moreover, I hope now you shall do well enough
without my aid, being almost at your home, where ye shall live hereafter in
all peace and at your hearts ease.

The Lady who saw him speak in good sooth, finding herself greatly beholding
to him, durst not by any entreaty withdraw him from his voyage: which
notwithstanding she would willingly have done, at the least to have gotten his
company but unto her Castle, to have feasted him there, and to have bestowed on
him some presents beseeming his estate: wherefore taking her leave with tears
in her eyes, she offered him some rich Jewels, which he would in no wise
accept, only he recommanded the Merchant unto her who brought him out of
England, upon whom afterward for his sake she bestowed many greatfauours: so
will we suffer her in great joy and contentment to go home to her City, to
tell what befell Prince Edward after he was departed from her company.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Prince Edward vanquished the twenty Knights whom the Earl of Oregua^s
brother had laid in ambush to kill him, and to take away his Dog: and how
afterward he was brought by strange adventure into a Cave, where he dreamed a
terrible dream, and the sequel thereof.

THe Knight of the Dog bidding the Lady of Arriace adieu, took his way toward
Constantinople, when the Earl of Oreguaes brother who followed him by the
foot, had aduertisment thereof by one of his spies, that was always at his
elbowes: by whose means learning perfectly what way he was to hold, rides a
great galloy to overtake him by a little path, which lead into a wood, hard by
which he was to pass: where ambushing his xx. Knights, he went before, to the
end that discrying him a far of, he might meet him full in the teeth, to
make him endure the charge of his ambuscado. In brief, behold he comes his
lost and easy pace, as he who had a great journey to make, when the Earls
brother, who marched already against him, measuring by his eye how far he had
to go to the place of the Ambush, eased a little the pace of hi^ horse, to
meet him just in the same place: where being arrived, he thus began. Knight,
is it not you, who now go from the King of Hungaries Court, with so good
penyworths of the disorders and outrages which ye have there committed? By God
I will save you a labor from going far this ways to make your vaunts thereof.
O it is I whom it concerns replied Prince Edward to save you from this
reproach of treason, which might be laid hereafter in your dish to your shame
and dishonor, which I hope to do at this present by the aid of him, unto
whom all injustice is odious and detestable. With that he came and charged his
Lance with such a powder against the Earls brother, that piercing him clean
therein the body, he had no need to call ford Barber or Surgeon to dress his
wounds, which the twenty Knights inambushed (who had already compassed him in
round that he might not fly from them any ways) perceiving, ran two or three
upon him at once, the one whereof failed his stroke, and winding himself
aside at the attaint of the other, he hit the third which came carreering after
the^ with such a sound blow upon the pate, that he sent him from his saddle
between his horse heels, wherein falling down he burst his neck.

Then the English Prince, seeing himself in extreme danger of life, made
choice rather to loose it valiantly, than to save it by cowardly flight, so
that in a moment his courage came to him in such sort, that he made his
adversaries well know, they had sought him out but for their own mischance:
For as a furious Lion he made such a bloody massacre of them, as the very
grass being green before, and now all stained with their goare blood did give
sufficient testemony thereof. But whilst he stood to enclose with a great
troop of them, the rest flew upon his man Clawdius saying to him; let go the
Dog Rascal, or else thou shall dye presently without repenting thy sins. I
will let him slip indeed (quoth the Page) but it shall be small for your
advantage; before he had well spoken these words, ^etting slip one end of the
Lease, be let Maiortes loose amongst them: the Dog spying his Master in that
perrill, ran so furiously to bite the horses that made front against him,
pulling out with his teeth their buttocks and flanks, that they were forced to
alight from their backs: Then began he to play the devil amongst them, nor was
there any plate of their Harness so fast nailed, but he rent it in pieces with
his teeth; then fastening in his sharp jaws in the places which he saw
unarmed, he brought the flesh still away with him, until the greatest part of
the twenty Knights were dead or wounded in the place; the rest betook them to
their heels as fast as they could run, because Maiortes had made such work of
their horses, that they could not stand them in any steed; such was the rage
and fury of this Dog, that whosoever had beheld him tearing the flesh of their
horses, and pulling their armor in pieces, might easily have remembered the
Seian or Bactrian Dogs, whom they ^eede with the flesh and blood of men, to the
end to make them more fierce and eager against their enemy.

Prince Edward for his part received but two or three little wounds, and to
recure the same, went into a little City not far from thence into a rich
Bourgers house, who feasted him very honorably during the time of his mallady,
which lasted but eight days, because none of his wounds were dangerous at
all; but being healed and closed up, he purposed to betake himself again to
his former journey with his man Clawdius and Maiortes his good Dog, whom he
loved and made more account of than before. Already was the greatest part of
the day ouerspent, before Prince Edward had made an end of the conflict which
ye have heard recited, whereof the Earl of Oregua being aduertized by one of
those who saved himself by virtue of his heels; he was ready to dye through
rage and despite: and causing the bodies of his Brother and the other slain
Knights to be enterred, could not tell how to conceal this ignominious
oversight (as in like case the true Judge of all, does permit such heinous
disloyalties to be quickly made known) but the bruit came to the Kings ear:
Who forthwith imprisoned him as a transgressor of his commandment, thereby to
manifest unto the world his own innocence in this treason, considering the
conjectures which might be gathered by the hard measure which his two wounded
sons received at the hands of this stranger: Which deed if it caused him to
be highly honored throughout all his kingdom; no less did every one commend
the prowess and valor of the Knight of the Dog, who being recovered of his
wounds, as ye have lately read, has taken his leave of his Host to prosecute
his intented voyage. And traveling five days space along the sea Coast, on
the s^^t he entered into a forest, and found not in all that whole day any
Cabin or Tent wherein to make his repast, but one only old house where some
shepherds had set by a lodge covered with thatch; so that he was constrained
to lodge therein all that night with Claudius his Page, who led along with him
his great Dog: nevertheless before any sleep could close up his eyes, he saw
from a corner wherein he was couched upon a little straw, coming into that
homely Cell, two goodly young Stags, casting forth of their eyes an admirable
glistering, whom as soon as Maiortes espied, he started up forthwith, as if he
would have rusht upon them furiously. But it tell out to the contrary, for they
went out again all three one after another, as quietly as if they had been
brought up in one house together all their life time: so that the Prince no
less astonished with this new accident: than desirous to see the end which
would follow thereof, went forth of the Sheepecoate for the same purpose; and
beholding the three beasts run very lovingly and quietly into the wood
together, he said. Now so God help me, it would greatly vex me if I should
lose in this sort the Dog, which I have heretofore so well defended: therefore
Claudius bring me my horse, that I may go after to save him if I can. He had
not scarce spoken the word, but the Page was come with his horse, upon which
mourning he was soon in the same way which he saw they had taken: and albeit
he gallopyed amain, yet could he never overtake them, and nevertheless he
never lost them out of his sight. So that following them all night long, being
very glad to see them trip so lovingly together before him, yet was he far more
joyful when he perceived them hide themselves within the narrow month of a
Cave; where he being arrived, leaving his horse with his Page who followed him,
entered in presently after them with his good sword in his hand. So farwent he
within that dark hole under ground, that he at the last drew near to a goodly
rich Palace, joining hard unto a most pleasant garden planted round with all
sorts of fruit trees: betwixt which he saw many channels running with clear
streams, coming all forth of a most sumptuous and magnificent fountain,
whose basen of fine Insper stone, was supported by three Harpies of Oriental
Christolite. There Prince Edward encouraged him self to go on, and as he went
a little farther, he found under a Pauillion of cloth of Gold, a most
beautiful and gracious Lady sitting between the two Stage, and his Dog just
over against her: whom the Knight seeing before him, laid his hands upon the
heads of the two Fawnes, of whom immediately was made a wonderful
Metamorphosts, for they became two young men very richly attired, unto whom the
Prince drawing near, being greatly amazed of that sudden transmutation, they
began to show great reverence unto him, and the Lady by and by fell upon her
knees, saying: Fair Knight, by the thing ye love best in this world, we
beseech you pardon us; if with this trouble and disease of mind we have caused
you to come so far: for it has not bin without good occasion, considering
the long time we attend you here with great denotion: and ye may be
undoubtedly assured not to suffer any disease in this place, rather will we
serve you here as him, who ought to reestablish unto us, that which God and
nature had prepared for us after the death of our father. Behold here your Dog
whom my Brethren brought into this place, not to the end to steal him from
you, but to cause you only to come into this place. Prince Edward having heard
this Damsel speak, whom in the mean time he took up from the ground by the
hand, appeased his choler, and answered her thus.

Madame, of a troth I was in very great care, fearing to loose this Dog, which
I loose more than ye may imagine, notwithstanding, seeing I have recovered
him, I pardon you willingly wherein soever you say ye have offended me: and if
ye can devise wherein I may employ my best endeavors to do you good in that
which they detain from you wrongfully, I shall as willingly do it, as any
Knight whom ye may find within the circute of the Horkon, or in the whole
center of the world. Then the Damsel thanked him most humbly, and taking him by
the hand, lead him to sitdowne by her in a Chair, where the two yongmen
disarmed him: then brought they him out victuals to break his fast, and (after
he had well eaten and satisfied his hunger) they prayed him to lay down his
head upon a rich pillow, which they laid for him upon the side of a sent, there
to repose himself, which he did willingly, being very weary with the travel
which he had endured the night before, wherein he never slept wink. The Lady
covering his legs with a Scarlet Mantle furd with Wloluerings, he fell a sleep
presently, and in the mean time the two brethren went to fetch Claudius, who
stayed with his Horse looking for him as yet at the mouth of the Cave. After
that the English Prince had slept a good while, he awaked suddenly out of his
sleep, being fore affrighted with a terrible dream which he had dreamed: It
seemed to him to arrive at Constantinople to defy Primaleon, where entering
within the City, he met a Lion, and a fierce Lyonnesse, which as he would set
his foot within the Gate, issued forth and ramped against him, tearing away
with her paws the forepart of his Haubergion, in such sort, that making still
a wound bigger and bigger in his breast just against his heart, it seemed to him
that his soul did presently depart out of his body. And as he thought beside
that the Lion and he being furiously in fight together, he could in no wise
prevail to vanquish, nor in good sort defend himself from him, he was so much
in nature resembling to the Lyonnesse: which caused him in a great fright to
starte out of his sleep, saying: Lord God help me, and permit not I beseech
thee, that I receive any shame or dishonor in the battle which I hope to have
against Primaleon: with that Olymba rose up (for so was the Lady called sitting
at his s^oe) saying. Sir, ye awake very sorrowful, and I know not what may
give you occasion thereof, if it be not some dream, which ye know better than
I, men account but false, and abusiue imaginations: for when they should be
true, and should presage and foretell to credulous persons some token of future
occurrences, ye are not ignorant but that the noble and generous minds must
pass through many strange and hard adventures. In good faith ye say true
Madame, replied the Knight, seeing that to find you in this place with your
Brethren lately transformed, I reputed a thing most strange and marvelous:
wherefore I beseech you declare unto me the whole discourse. Sir, replied
Olymba, most willingly will I obey you in this request, since that it pleases
you to understand our great disaster.

Know ye, that we are all three children of the deceased Sultan of Nicea, the
same who dyed by the most disloyal and tycannous mischance that ever was heard
of: for this good Prince our Father, being by nature meek and gentle, loved
most dearly a younger brother that he had, called Gelon, who of a troth never
showed him any part of reciprocal love again, because from day to day he
sought out all means to kill him, to seize himself wholly with his estate and
Seigniories, which fell out after a while as they were both together Hunting
abroad. For my Father upon a time making an assembly near unto a thick brake
wherein his Hunters had enclosed a great wild Boar, and spread the ^oyle
about it, to show him some pastime, the traitor seeing himself still near my
father, with three or four of his faction, as he espied him a strait passage,
beset and covered every way round with thick bushes (by which way he doubted
the Boar would issue) lanched at him behind his hack a very sharp Iaueline,
which he carried in his hand, with such violence, that it ran him clean through
the body, being constrained to fall at that very instant from his Horse back
to the ground, in the self same place: so that the Boar coming foaming and
grinding his teeth in furious manner, toare and rent in pieces the Carcass
already dead, the fellon murderer our Uncle, making the world believe how
the Boar had slain him, and would have done the like to him, had he not
shifted himself a little aside: so that some Hunters who saw very well the
contrary, durst never open their mouth so much they feared lest some mischief
would be done them if they should make any speech thereof. This lamentable
murder being committed, he went strait to Nicea, where inuesting himself with
the whole Estate in less than fifteen days he proclaimed himself Soidan
without any contradiction, my brethren and I being too little to resist so
damnable a creature; and yet for all that the cruel and bloody minded monster
would have slain us then in that our pupillage, had it not been for the aid
of a Knight called Osmaquin, very well learned in the Art of Magic and
Negromancie, who by the virtue of his secret Philosophy could foretell to our
father, that he should take heed of Gelon his younger brother, unto whom he gave
no credit, whereby this mischief happened unto him. But the good old man as
soon as our father was deceazed, conducted us three into this place, where by
means of his knowledge he has built these goodly magnificences which you
see, and dwelt here about four years, using us as his own children; but at
the end of that term he fell into a grievous and contagious mallady, with the
which fearing to infect us (knowing assuredly he should then dye) would not in
any wise we should frequent near him; but upon a time, feeling himself at the
very last extremity of his life, caused us to come before him saying; My
children sorrow ye not for my death, seeing that God being pitiful and
merciful, will remember you before it belong; for a Christian Knight issued of
Royal blood, revenging the death of your father, shall restablish you in the
goods which are wrongfully detained from you, and you shall know him by a fair
Dog which he has, being a great deal better than he is supposed to be, in so
much, as it is a man and a very valiant Knight. In fine, be commanded us having
once met you, to pass with you unto Constantinople, where he foretold us you
should receive a wound in Combat, whereof you might never be cured in all your
life time, albeit it should be to your honor and immortal renown: For the
better direction of which voyage, and to avoid all shipwreck in this
Navigations, he told us we should find a Frigot ready rigde with all things
necessary not far from this place: then giving us many other wholesome
admonitions, for want of his breath which began to sail him, be yielded his
soul unto him who demanded it, in the same place as ye see, from whence my
brethren have issued forth diverse times to see if they might find you: And now
I praise God it is not in vain, because the Dog which Osmaquin told us off,
makes me doubtless believe, all the rest will prove as true as this. You
recount me great matters (quoth the Knight then) I beseech God with all my
heart they may have a happy end, that I may revenge you of so soul a treason.
Mine advise being to go as soon as may be toward Constantinople, where the
great affection I have to see the adventure which is reserved for me, makes me
think every hour a year. Then the young men bowing themselves very low, and
doing their obeisance to the Knight, thus bespake him. Noble Prince, since that
by fatal destiny it falls to your good hap to relieve us out of this misery,
we hope also our valor will be something more advantage to us, in receiving
the order of Knighthood from your hand, the which I humbly kiss at this
present, quoth the Elder called Mosderin, in token of the perpetual service
which ye shall always find at my hands: the like did the younger named
Bellager. Prince Edward embracing them both, was very glad to see Claudius her
Page there also, to the end he might make more speed away: so coming forth of
the Cave, he mounted the Infant behind himself, and Mosderin upon Clandius
horse, and his Page behind him (for Bellager would go on foot) they began
fair and softly to set forward through a Forest. And because they could not
that evening reach the Seacoast, they rested within a wood in a very thick
place all covered and beset with trees full of leaves and green boughs, where
the Knight could not sleep one wink, so much was his mind troubled with
thinking of Maiortes, whom the Damsel had told him to be a man, and of the
other things which Osmaquin had prophested of him, which did all iumpe right
with the imagination of his dream: wherein his thoughts were still occupied
until it was day, when they remounted on horse back, and marching along the
sea coast, they came at last unto a little creek lying between two Rocks,
where they found the Frigot at an Anckor, whereinto they went all aboard to
Ship themselves.

In this vessel were two little Chambers either of them garnished with a fine
bed, and with whatsoever provision was requisite for such a voyage: therein was
also found two rich Armours varnished black, with two very fair swords for
the young Gentlemen which Osmaquin had laid in that place before he dyed,
together with all the treasure of the Sultan their father, foreknowing well by
means of his Art, what would ensue after their fathers decease. So soon as
the young men syied these Armours, they besought Prince Coward to Arm them
Knights before they set sayie, whereunto he most willingly condescended; and
causing them to endosse the Armours, he buckled on the spurs unto them both,
and gyrded both their swords unto their sides, giving them the gentle accolado
with these kind speeches; I pray God to make you as good Knights as your
aspect and phistognomie does prognosticate, that the prowess and valor which
shall hereafter apparently proceed from you, may deface the want of this act
not accomplished according to the ceremonies requisite in the honor of
Chivalry.

When they had thus received the order of Knighthood, they hoysedsailes, and
without ever setting eye of any other ship, they rowed so long, that within a
while they found themselves in the maine Sea: where the Infant Olymba was so
glad, seeing her two Brethren Knighted, that she could not satisfy her self in
her dilligent attendance upon Prince Edward. So that sailing with a prosperous
and a calm sea, they came to surge within the coast of Thrace, whence Prince
Edward discrying Constantinople a great way off, his heart began to rise, not
knowing what fortune would befall him in that City.

And for that he would not directly put into an Haven, they Anckored in a
little gulf about five miles off, where never any Ships used to ride: and yet
thither haunted some poor Fishermen, whose dwelling was not far of.

As they were all gotten a shore: My friends, quoth Prince Edward to the young
Gentlemen, I must of necessity go into Constantinople; where I hope to have
the combat granted me against Primaleon of Greece, son to the Emperor
Palmerin, for indeed for no other cause am I come into these climates: wherein
if God so much savor me, that I may escape with my life, I promise you to be
here again quickly, to aid you with all my power: and if peradventure I die,
ending my life in this Combat, heaven a grant ye may speedily recover your
estate and succession. Therefore mine advise is; that ye abide here to
accompany the Infant your sister, for I am determined to pass thither alone,
as I came when ye first found me out.

When Olymba heard the Prince speak in this manner, she began to fetch a deep
sigh, saying; Ah Noble sir, God for bid your death should be so sudden, I hope
assuredly, you shall return victorious in this battle; therefore trouble not
your self with any of these thoughts and cares, but have your confidence in
God only, who shall be your Protector.

Then Bellager interrupting this her speech, requested the Knight he would not
for any thing in the world abandon him, whereby he might not see the end of
this combat; so that he must needs go along, and Mosderin, who would feign
have made the same voyage, was feign to keep his sister company: where we will
leave them to bring the two Knights unto the City of Constantinople.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Prince Edward being arrived in Constantinople to defy Primaleon upon the
death of Perrequin of Duas, found himself surprised with the amorous and
gracious regard of the Infant Flerida the Emperors daughter: and how he and
Primaleon fighting afterward a Combat at all (...), were by her parted, and
what fell out thereupon.

PRince Edward and Bellager having taken the way of Constantinople, had not
traveled above two miles, but they met with many Knights who were walking
abroad in the fields: For this place being very pleasant and of great
recreation, the Emperor would needs show some pastime of hunting to Torques
son to Kings Toma^ of Griesca and of Romata, him whom he had before delivered
out of the hands and dangerous assaults of the Sultan of I'ersia.

This Torques a most gallant Gentleman and very actius ^^eats of Arms, pricked
on with the spur of virtue to win brute and renown among the best
Knights, hearing every day such high commendation of those in the Emperors
Court surpassing the best accomplished and most valiantest Knights in all
Europe and Asia, he besought the King his Father upon a time to give him
license to go the there to see them.

Whereunto he most willingly gave his consent, and she rather because the good
Prince Palmerin was one of the gretest friends he had, a thing which might
easily be judged by the sumptuous and most honorable entertainment which he
made his son at his arrival, unto whom Primaleon opened the secret gates of
his amity, love, and faithful friendship, in such sort, that they were never
shut unto him afterward.

Now by this time Prince Edward being come just to the place where was pitched
the Emperors Cent (who was then walking abroad with his Empress along by a
little fresh stream which was very near unto that place, Primaleon and
Torques with the Infant Flerida, and diverse other Ladies walking after them)
he was greatly amazed and astonished for a time, but at the last he asked of a
Squire who it was.

Sir (quoth he) it is the Emperor of Constantinople, who came hither
yesterday to take his disport and pleasure at the Chase: Accompanied with the
Prince of Griesca, who arrived but this other day within his Court; And if you
be a stranger in this place (as it seems unto me you are) I will presently
show you the Emperor if you know him not, for behold where he is himself
in person walking with the Empress.

Kight joyful was the knight of the Dog to behold the Emperor, calling to
mind the marvelous deeds which he heard reported of him, and approaching
nearer, be did not alight at all from his horse, to show that he came not to
do him any service. But a little he bowed himself on his horse mane, saying:
Sir, of your favor I would request you, it may please you to show me if
Primaleon your son be in this tronye or no, for that before you (esteemed the
most just and equitable Prince living at this day under the firmament) I will
des^s him upon the death of a knight whom he felloniously slew in his tourney.
Jesus Christ, (quoth the Emperor, then being some what affended) and when will
this demand have an end? I tell ye knight, that both you and all those who
shall come to take this revenge, seem unto me rashly advised, since the truth
of the act is so manifest and notorious. But the Prince who saws him speak
thus in choler, marvelled at the manner of his answer, for that he reputed
him a little more modest and discreet than he seemed to be at that time, so
that being not able to contain within his heart the burning ^eale which
provoked him so far, he was forced to reply upon his former purpose thus:
Sir, I did not think to receive so rigorous an answer from so benigue and
courteous a prince as ye are, nevertheless to use no superfluity of speech, ye
shall know from me, that if Peregrim of Dugas have not bin yet avenged, tho
small courage and cowardice of those who came hither for that purpose has bin
the cause thereof, as I hop^^rs long to shew^ you plainly, if ye will grant me
the combat against your see. I will see, quoth the Emperor, what you can do
more than others who have entered the field upon this quarrel, whom I esteem
of more, or at least of as great valor, and as expert knights as your self.
At that word prince Edward thought great scorn, and would talk no longer with
him, but being become saturnine, and dreaming built castles in the air, when
Primaleon and Torques, who lead between them fair Flerida by the hands,
arrived at the place where this protestation was made, and coming in the same
manner all three nearer unto the knight, Primaleon who knew what the matter was
before, sainteth him thus My frind I am Primaleon, would ye any thing with me ^
Naught but vengeance, replied the Englishman, for the death of Perregrim of
Ducas, whom ye slew cowardly, and not as an honorable and loyal knight. It
suffices (quoth the Constantinopolitan) hereupon ye shall have the combat with
me, which shall not be deferred any longer, than till I come from arming my
self. For God forbid that such stains and reproaches imputed to mine honor,
should ever: for me be deferred or remitted unto farther dispute and longer
process of time to decide them. Oh my God, began the infant Flerida, what
unreasonable destances are these? I never heard of any demand more impudent
and more, inconsideratly propounded than this, since that so often the truth
there of has been tried, as every one can tell, and I cannot imagine what
other guerdon those knights pretend to have, who come to revenge this death
upon my brother, but only to and my days, without any show of other honest
reason. These speeches uttered she with so great a stomach, that the very
grief which her heart apprehended, caused the fair superficies of her
angelical face to show so perfectly, that there is no man living but would
have remained marueliously a bashed to beheld her so natural and accomplished
beauty. She enoing her exclamation turned toward prince Edward her wit in
eyes, ^^dewed with tears; which distilled from her brain, thorough the
vehemency of the anguish which she felt in her breast, seeing her brother whom
she loved as her own soul, so chafed, and so perverse against her, to perform
the battle. The gracious and pitiful regard of these two glistering stars
wounded in a moment the heard of the knight in such strange manner, that
loosing almost all sense, he clean forgot Gridonia also, and the passion of
this his gr^^ne and new wound was so vehement, that he found no physician nor
surgion who could understand the method of his cure, except the very same from
whom his wound was inflicted. Alas, what might he then do: Surely,
willingly would be have desisted with his honor from this battle, only to
have done some acceptable service to the Princess Flerida, whereby to have
gotten some access to be near her. But what? Primaleon his a adversary
departed to go arm himself, and the infant more than his mortal enemy (for
without dying all her forces failed her, and her very fine we^ did shrink for
^^ard) she retired herself incontinent with the Empress into her sent:
Alas, the poor desolate lover remained as it were ravished and in a trance,
thinking on the dream he had within the cave of Osmaguin, and on the words
which Olymba told him: likewise he called to mind the two figures pictured
upon his shield, and of that which the Duke of Borsaes sister, and the ye sent
in the wood had forewarned him of. All these things coming into his
imagination, made him so perplexed and irresolute, as he could not tell what to
do, it seeming unto him that for some one of these things whereof he was so
many times sorewarned, began to be true in deed. And on the other side,
considering the high valor of Flerida, and (...) whence she descended, he
saw many reasons which did inuit him to lo^^ her about Gridonia, whom he had
not as yet ever seen, nor promised any other thing but only by his Letter to
combat Primaleon, to do her service, so that he said within himself: O God
of Gods, how great and admirable are all thy judgments? Who is able to
overthrow the things which are by thee established? Surely no living creature.
Then if I may acchieue the fruition of mine unhoped for desire, which has now
assailed my soul, I shall have none ocsion to complain of Fortune. Wherein
(to make my first a^saie) either I will suffer my self to be vanquished in
this combat, or else I will employ all the forces which God and nature have
lent me, to overthrow Primaleons and it behooves me to do my best, least I
appears to be of small valor in presence of so fair a Lady, for if it be in
my power to kill her brother, and I for her love save his life, shall I not
thereby purchase her grace and amity? Mean while the knight of the Dog had
these imaginations it: his head Primaleon, who had taken post to go arm
himself in Constantinople, returned mounted upon a puisant courser, who^ the
Emperor mitigating his sudden indignation against the knight, began to view
him better, and judging by his very look some excellent thing in him,
commended him highly in his opinion and Bellagor likewise who accompanied him
thither: then cesting his ^is toward Claudius and his saire Dog, Maiortes
marvelled much more what he was, so that Primaleon being arrived, the Emperor
his father used this speech unto him. Son, take ye heed ye behave your self
valiantly in this battle, for your enemy seems to be both magnanimious and
generous. My gracious Lord and Father, replied Primaleon, it shall stand him
then in good stead, seeing he comes to sustain a quarrel so unjust and
repugnant to all reason. Then the Emperor who saw them both in a readynes to
do their deuoires, commanded the Earl of Rhedon Captain of his Pen^^oners,
that assembling all his A^chiers with their halberts, he should make a round
in form of a close field, wherein none should dare to stir from his place,
nor speak any word: and so was there made a great circle furnished with the
gardes standing arm in arm one by another, except on the side of the
Emperors tent, to the end both he and the Empress, and their daughter, might
easily behold this combat. The Dukes Eustace and P^holomey were appointed for
judges, who brought them both within the lists, and equally without any favor
distributed to them the Sun. Then placing themselves at the one side of the
circle, and causing the word of the assalt to be given by the Herald, the
knights, who had great desire to come together, displaced themselves to fetch
their carier^ as fast as they could galloppe one against another, with so great
a bravery and furious violence, that the very earth seemed to sink under
them at their encounter, which was such, that breking their lances one against
the other, they went both roundly over their horse croupers to the ground,
either of them being wounded a little. But the desire to vanquish, and the
shame they received in being both cast out of their faddles, (Primaleon before
Torques and prince Edward in presence of Flerida, whom he imagined had still
her eye upon him) made them make quicks speed to recover themselves, and
embracing with an invincible courage their shields, they began a most fierce
fight with their s^ordes being both right exquisite and singular good.
Wherewith be laboring each other roughly, in a short space they covered ye
ground round about them with the pieces of their shilds, and with the broken
plates of their armor, so that disarming each other at every blow they stroke,
they never lighted any foil or touch, but presently the blood followed to the
ground, the beholders affirming they never saw the like cruel combat, whereof
they could not discern as yet who should bear away the victory. The two
knights then having a long time buckled together in this manner without
perceiving anis vantage one of an other, felt themselves very feeble by reason
of the great heals which they endured under their harneys, and also for the
smell intermission they took to continue this hot and fearful ^ight of their
first assault. Wherefore they returned from choler to repose and breath
themselves a while, when the Empress seeing her son in so evil case, cried
out to the Emperor, saying: Alas my Lord, what a disaster and mischief is
this? Will ye than permit that I behold the mortal issue of so tragic a
spectacle? Ah heavens for bid, for if Primaleon die, I shall presently bear
him company. If then either love of a child or of a wife ^^ay find any place
in the heart of a father and a husband, I humbly entreat you have pity of us
both, considering the great danger wherein he is now, and the extreme anguish
which I feel, which ye may soon remedy, praying them to proceed no farther
in this their deadly fight. Willingly would I accord, quoth the Emperor, were
it not for the shame and dishonor which thereby would fall upon my head, for
the world would then sai^, I had done it expressly fearing my son should be
discomitted in the battle: albeit I perceive no sign of advantage that the
one has over the other, assuring you that by the death of two so valiant
knights, the world should receive great loss, for the good fruit which might
come of their persons. Rather let your daughter Fl^rida go to entreat them for
her love they would end, and desist this combat, and doubtless I suppose they
will sooner sur^^ase it for her than for any other, and by this means shall I
auo^^ the danger of being ^a^ed therefore by mine enemies and evil willers.
Scanthad the Emprour spoken these words, but the Empres who seemed greatly to
fear the death of Primaleon, for this effect sent the infant her daughter,
accompanied with many damsels, who coming with all speed unto the knights who
had already renewed their assalt more furiously than before, called unto them
aloud. Stay your hands my Lords, stay I beseech ye, and hear me a little what
I would entreat ye to do for me. Thou prince Edward seeing her before him who
had wounded his heart clean thorough, could not lift up his arms to strike a
blow, seeing himself vereft again of all his forces, which caused him to
retire backwards a little, when Primaleon cha^ing with great indignation
against his sister, spoke to her very rigorously. Sister Flerida, what mean
ye get yet gone from hence presently, and let us pursue our assault, for I
will die in the place, or I will make him die who has put me to this plungs.
Dearchrother, replied the infant. I beseech ye above all favors that ye will
ever do me, desist the desire ye have to finish this combat, wherein I think
your enemy so courteous, that he for his part will be content to agree for my
sake. Then turning toward prince Edward, Fair Knight, quoth she, albeit I
find my self of small trierite in your behalf, yet must I needs request ye by
the says ye owe to knighthood (which is to have compassion of all Ladies) and
by the zeal and sincere affection ye bear to her whom ye love most, to
absolve your aduersaris as touching this different, which I may no longer
endure to behold so bloudity tried between ye, so invincible seems unto me
the high valor and extreme prowess of ye both. And if for my s^l^e ye do
any thing herein, I shall have cause to s^ie, I have found more favor and
courtesy in a stranger, than in mine own natural brother: which shall not be
without honest reward, when it shall please ye to imploie me in any thing
wherein I may manifest my good will to requite this undeserved courtesy of your
hands. The knight seeing with what grace his sweet enemy entreated him,
reputed himself more than happy by this opportunity to find me and to do
some thing which might please her, so that be framed her this answer: Madame,
ungrateful and voice of all good judgment should I be, if I should refuse
so high a Lady as your self the ^^ing ye demand of (...) your sweet save,
who deserve much more at my ^auden, then may ever come from me, I absolve
Primaleon of the controversy for which we entered the combat, or else
yielding my self vnnquished by him, I give him the honor of the battle:
(...) it for your self, quoth Primaleon then, for since it is not (...) by
right, I will not enrich nor glorify myself therewith. Then shall ^^ triuth ^^
my pleasure, when I shall (...) over ye. Therefore sister Flerida get ye hen^^
speedily, or otherwise ye will make me show my self discourteous toward ye,
for I will not have this knight make his vaunts how he brought me to this bay.
Do then your pleasure, replied the ^ainfall, nevertheless I will never consent
(...) ye strike one another any more; because too lamentable (...) end of
this battle if ye be let alone. Hay what may, quoth Primaleon, we will finish
it now, seeing we have begun, and with that he approached his enemy, unto
whom he let drive a puisant blow, which he warded with his shield, for all
which he never p^t^and to his sword to strike again, or to revenge himself,
which the Emperor perceiving, departed from his pauillion in great indignation
against his son, whom he came to pull by the arm out of the field saying:
What indignity do ye now make your sister endure, refusing her utterly a
thing, which a knight of strange Country (who never saw her before,) has
with all courtesy granted her? This act by your opinion, is it heroical and
(...), or base and ridiculous? So and disarme your self quickly, and know you
have highly displeased me. And ye knight, withdrawing your self on Gods name
whether it (...) unto ye, praise your good fortune hardly, to have purchased
his day so great reputation at (...), (as well in (...) all ^^^ghtes whom I
over (...) or frequented, that if it ^ad pleased God you had never come into my
court to make demand of this sorrowful combat.

Wonderful glad wereall the assistantes of it is worthy act of the
Emperor, and doubtless prince Edward himself knew full wall (...) the (...) of
his enemy, whom the two Judges were sai^^ with all their might to lead out of
the field in to his tent (...) him. But he was in such a rage and extreme
madness with himself, that do they what ever they ^^uld, in an hear^ they
were not able to apply any e plaster unto his wounds. (...) in the mean
(...) the fair Princess Flerida withdrew her self toward prince Edward, to
the end to (...) him heartle thanks ^^ the great (...) and favor he had
showed her, presented him many honest offers, and amongst other told him these
two or three words. Brave knight, I have found such courtesy in you, that
whilst my soul shall make habitation in this possible body, who therein
greatly confesses himself bounden to ye, I shall remember the great graces
ye have showed me this day, for the condign thanks due unto ye therefore,
the heavens grant me so much grace, that some occasion may present it self
unto me, wherein I may have mean to testify that in effect, which I cannot in
words sufficiently protest unto ye. Longer would she feign have discoursed
with prince Edward, (for love discovered already both to the one and the other
I know not what fatal liking) if the Empress had not gone her self to see
her son disarmed, by means whereof she giving him a gracious farewell (such
at the least did he interpret it) took her conge of her secret lover. Who
seeing her depart so of a sudden from him without any leisure to answer her,
was so perplexed as he knew not well what to do nor to say, until that his
page Claudius and Bellager coming toward him brought his horse, as it were
awaked out of a sound sleep, he mounted incontinently on horseback, taking
back the same way to the place where he left Olymba and Mesderin, and as he
traveled thither, Bellager, who was no less astonished of the bloody battle
which he saw him sight, than of his great valar and prowess, as they were on
their way bespake him in this manner. Sir knight, of a troth you have showed
at the request of the princes a great token of your honest and milne
disposition toward Primaleon. Companion (quoth the princes) I know not what I
should answer thee, but that he is one of the most valyant and skillful
knights whom I ever saw in my life: nevertheless much more did the delicate hand
and the eloquent tongue of the infant his after urge me, than did his heavy
and sound blows, or all the skill of his fight, whereby he can so
aduantagiously help himself. Bellager hearing the Englishman speak with so
great affection, began to smile a little, when he prosecuted his point,
saying: Surely I believe the cruel wound which Osmaginni prophesied you should
receive there, is in deed no other thing but the extreme beauty of the
princes, which I should never have imagined to have bin so accomplished had I
not ^^ne her before with mine eyes. And prince Edward saying moreover, that God
and nature had made her so (...) a paragon only to plague him prayed him to
wrap up his (...) a l^le. (for he loss much blood and had in dured a crued
phlebotomie, which he and Clau^us did as well as they could, until they came
to their lodging, where they arrived very late, for whom Olymba and Mesderin
were in great pain, knowing not well what was become of them, or what success
they had. When afterward they saw Prince Edward, they entertained him with
unspeakable joy, asking him many times how he did: Ah Madame, quoth he, better
had it been for me never to have stirred from home this day, for so much as
I have seen a thing which has cruelly wounded me, nay rather has brought me
into more than a mortal (...). Lake no care for that, replied the infant
Olymba, because he who has wounded you, shall himself apply the free and
sovereign plaster to your griese. With that she disarmed him with her own
hands, then spreading singular (...) which Osmaguin left her, upon his
wounds, she caused him to sat him down in the (...) hedd^ within the F^egot,
where he slept foundly, not without great need: and in the mean time Bellager
recounted the success of ye battle unto his brethren, commending him highly,
who doubtless deserved it. In fine, aduising with themselves what they were
(...), according to the ordinance which Osmaguin had left them, they soy^ed
with so good a gale all that night, that about the point of d^i^ they found
themselves in Mora^a a city scituat^, within the (...) of the (...) of Nicea,
where dwelled at the (...) time ^ brother of the sage Osmaguin, a very gallant
knight and the principal man in that place, whereof the princess Oly^^b a
^^ing (...) as soon as she was up to visit prince Edward, (...) of him how he
did. Merg well made me, (...) out ward wounds, but (...) of one which I have
(...) well remedy sound for that as for the other, replied the damsel, and I
till you that your desires shall have a most happy end: for to obtain the
which, when time shall serve, I will show you the way which etc (...), so that
now at this present ye sta^^ in need of nothing but of refreshing, and to make
you strong, to the (...) may speedily succor us, for we are already in one of
the (...) of the souldan our uncle, where dwells Osmaguin (...) whom we
repose great const^ence, as in one of the principal servants of the souldan
and of our best friends. Madame, replied the Knight, it shall be yours to
command me, and mine to they ye until death. I yield ye a thousand thanks,
quoth the damsel, albeit for my life I should not dare to use any command
toward you, seeing it is I whom it near ^y comes to do ye the bast service
I can. Notwithstanding, se^^ing aside the circumstances for this present, it
shall please you to understand, how we three have, whilst ye three (...)
resolved and made absolute determination (...) that which we are come to do in
this place, according to the (...) which Osmaguin lest us at his ^^th. And ^^
have thought i^ best that Bellager should go attired like a (...) unto (...)
(so ^^ the knight named) to understand of him how (...) behave our selves to
proceed in this business. This advise was (...) best of all by prince Edward,
therefore Bellager entering into a (...), apparelled like a civil merchant,
wi^e a Span^, went into the town as far as Maruins house, unto which every
one he met directed him easily. As soon as he was g^^ieu unto his house, after
salutations, he gave him to understand how he would deliver a secrate message
unto him, which no man (...) but himself. So with drawing themselves (...),
Bellager r^^ al^^ unto him who he was, (...) appointment of his brother they
came th^ther, accompanion with a valyant christian knight, to recover their
estate. When Maruin understood the matter (s^^ing Bellager so goodly and
villane a Gentleman) he was marvelous glad, and listing up both his hands to
beauens for joy, thus besp^ke. (...) be the (...) tie God, who is mindful of
ye in the end, my (...) sovereign Lords, he^ yes most heartily (...) with
that house, as those who shall want nothing which I may ^^ for ye, to
reestablish ye in your own estate, and as shine as the evening shall come, see
that you, your sister, and all the other who accompany them, come secretly
into this place, where I will keep you until I impart your arrival unto many
others who have like desire as I have to do you good, to the end we may advise
together how to bring this our enterprise best about. Bellager having received
this advertisement, went directly toward the company, who attended his
coming with great devotion, so that as soon as the hour of the night was
come which Maruin and he had agreed upon, they all went ashoar^ in a place
where they found one of his sons, who waited there for them of purpose to
guide them the way: and presently the bark wherein they came, vanished out of
sight, and was never seen afterward. They being all safe arrived at the
house, and lodged in the most commodious part thereof, where none of the
servants did frequent, when Maruin saw his fittest time he^ went to visit the
children of his true liege and sovereign, unto whom he wept for joy in
welcomming them thither. Then having given such courteous entertainment to
prince Edward as beseemed a man of his calling, he used such care and diligence
in all things to do him good, yt within a short space be cured him of all his
wounds. But let us suffer them to rest here a little, while Maruin work his
complo^s with other his conductors, to make an end of the first book of
Primaleon, whose generous and heroical ^^ates of arms are continued in a
second parts, no less profitable than pleasant, and full of all sweet
recreation to delight the readers, with infinity of amore and martial
discourses, the like never read of in any history before.

FINIS.

