A FRVITEFVLL AND BRIEF DISCOVRSE IN TWO BOOKS: THE ONE OF NATVRE, THE OTHER
OF GRACE, WITH convenient answer to the enemies of Grace, upon incident
occasions offered by the late Rhemish notes in their new translation of the new
Testament, and others.

Made by JOHN PRIME fellow of New College in Oxford.

1. Cor. 10.15. I speak as unto them which have understanding judge ye what I
say.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier for George Bishop. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE S. FRAVNCIS WALSINGHAM KNIGHT, chief Secretary to her
Majesty, Chancellor of the order, and one of her highness priuye Counsel, all
grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
NOW a long time, there has been, no less learned then large writing in our
English tongue, touching the just confutatio^ of sundry points in popery,
specially of their private Mass, Prayers in a strange language,
Transsubstantiation, the real presence, the Supremacy, and the like. But all
this while concerning the Nature of man, and of the Grace of God, of Free will
in nature, of concupiscence in the regenerate, of meritoriouse perfection,
faith, works, and the whole substance of justification, the adversaries have
brought us hitherto no great matter. Of late in their English Rhemish notes as
the great mistress, and in M. Martins discovery as the handmaide thereunto (for
so he terms his book) there is somewhat said, and shifts devised. The most of
al, that may seem material is borrowed of M. Stapletons dictates, their
controversy reader at Doway. In regard whereof and in some other respects in
this discourse I have dealt more with him, then with any Latin writer else, and
yet so that the greatest benefit thereof may redound to the^ that have greatest
need, and can not happily so well understand the Latin tongue, from whence most
of their slights are first derived, and now put forth into English scholies
and small pamphlets. Wherein if this my doing shall displease M. Stapleton, more
then he would, or I wish, as perhaps it may, may it please him (for they of
Rhemes are otherwise like to be occupied) wast vagaries set apart, even as in
the sight of God, without fraud and ambiguitie, plainly, directly and shortly,
to oppose as him likes, for more trial herein, and he shall soon perceive,
that the servant of truth, will not be ashamed in due sort by reply, to
declare whose servants they are. The whole book of his lectures in convenient
time shall be answered (if God will) by a most godly, learned, and painful
father. In the mean season (right honorable sir) this present duty, which I
have performed, without recital of farther circunstances in many words,
always troublesome to greater affairs, I offer in most humble manner I may, to
your honors favorable, and experienced protection. The Lord God bless and
preserve your honors person, your virtuous Lady, your godly cares and
counsels all in Christ Jesus always.

Your honors most humble and bounden JOHN PRIME.

THE CHIEF POINTS HANDLED IN THE 1. BOOK.
1. Of the fall of Adam, and of original sin in his posterity. page 1 2. Of
the blindness of man's understanding. page 4 3. Of the frowardness of his
will. page 6 4. Of the sin of concupiscence yet remaining even in the
regenerate. page 9 5. At large of the whole question of free will, and of the
natural man's impossibility to observe the Law. page 15
THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS TREATED IN THE second book.
1. Of the freeness of the Lords graciouse love and favor. page 41 2. Against
curiosity in the search of unsearchable mysteries. page 43 3. Of election,
vocation, and reprobation, and of a contented knowledge therein. page 46 4. Of
justification, the fulness, freeness, and comfort thereof. page 61 5. Of
righteousness by imputation, and of inherent justice. page 64 6. Of the
regenerate man's imperfection to fulfill the Law exactlie. page 75 7. Of the
question of merits, and that there is no deserving at Gods hands. page 95 8.
How only faith does justify. page 115 9. Of the most comfortable doctrine of
the certainty of salvation by faith and hope, to be in every man particularly
touching him self. page 141 10. Of sanctification and the means thereunto in
this life. page 176 11. Of glorification in the life to come, and of due
sobriety in questions therein of some moved. page 192
A SHORT DISCOVRSE OF NATVRE, AND GRACE, AND FIRST OF NATVRE CORRVPTED.
LIBER. I.
IN the discourse of the qualities of humane nature corrupted, Man's creation.
we can not but lay the falt in man, where we find it, and not in God where we
find it not. For above all things it is a truth most certain, Genesis 1
that in the beginning God created all things in their kind good; but man he
made the perfection of all his works, and therefore most perfitly good: in
dignity, little inferior to the Angels; in authority Lord of the world; by
right the inheritour of life eternal; and in all resemblances of divine
properties, in holiness and righteousness like himself. Thus he framed man at
the first. For, only lo (says the wiseman) this have I found out; Eccles. 7.31
that God made man righteouse, That is, sound of body, sincere in soul, and
perfect in both. And yet anon after this his so excellent a condition by
creation there ensued a maruelouse alteration, Man's fall Pet. Lomb li. 2. did.
25
both in his body subjected to corruption, and also in his soul so strangely
blasted, that the better qualities thereof all, were quite rased out, and clean
defaced.

The story is plain and known in all the world how Satan assaulted Eve, The
propagatio^ of sin. Genesis 3
and Eve entised her husband to consent to eat, who in disobedience did eat
of the forbidden fruit, and thereby (he being no private man, Romans 5.12 Council.
An rasic. and Mileuit. can. 2
but the root and head, and first of all posterity succeeding) from race to
race along in and from him, though not personally then, when men yet were not,
yet properly enough, in the guilte of sin we all became sinners; and now
each man in his own person is polluted with the stain thereof, Ephesians. 2 3 Job.
25.4
by a natural, and therefore by a most necessary propagation of sin one from
another.

For nature can not but necessarily work always after one and the same
fashion, in all things naturally like comes of like, in qualities many times
worse, in kind always the same, insomuch that the children of Adam well may
they be worse, better then their father from whom they came they can not be.
Wherein for to view how bad we be, making as it were an anatomy of our selves,
we may apart consider each part of the whole man severally by it self.

Concerning the body first in general, Sin in the body and every part thereof.
Esaias. 1.6.
may not the prophets words be avouched of the natural man literally as they
lie? From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is no sound
part? Totum est pro vulnere corpus, All is full of boyles and corruption.

In particular, fancy occupies the head, and pride the heart, and impudency
is seen in the eyes; the natural man's ears are stopped to good, and itch after
evil tidings, his throat is an open sepulcher; the poison of Aspes is under
his deceiptfull lips; stiff necked is he and obstinate in every wicked way;
his feet are swift to slaughter, his hands embrued and bathed in blood, and his
right hand an apt instrument of all iniquity.

These enormities appear not ever at all times, nor in all persons. An easy
answer to no hard objection.
For certain men seem to be and be less unruly then some, but those that are
ouerruled only by naturs conduction, without any secret divine restraint, 1.
Ioh. 2.16.
have always ranged out of order without end or stay in any one member. And
what if some did keep in, or rather have bin kept in from such so manifest
outragiousnes? Nevertheless God counts the body, and the parts thereof
accessarie to, and guilty of all the faults of the soul, as inferiors
consenting to their superiors intent. Mat. 5.28
And because of their near conjunction in one person, albeit the external act
does not ever follow or outwardly appear.

The residence and chief throne of sin in deed, The chief seat of sin
is in the soul, whence it rises, and takes head, where it remains and
reigns most: and therefore this part requires more special consideration.

The chiefest parts of the soul most spoken of among divines, and commonly
known to Christian people are of the mind and the will. The parts of the soul
If the mind be wise, it is likely the will is better advised, and will the
rather endeavor to do the better. But if the mind be out of her turn, the will
can never be well in due order. Now let us see a little how it fares with the
natural man in both these.

The blindness of man's understanding.
THe natural man perceives not the things that are of God, 1. Cor. 2.14
because they are spiritual and he natural: and therefore in Gods matters he is
not only weak sighted, but quite blind. Genesis 19.11
The case of the Sodomits that groped as men in the dark, and could not find
Lots door is one with the co^ditio^ of the vnregene rat, who sees not the way,
verily seeks not, certainly finds not the door that leads and opens
unto heaven. For in our selves we are not only darkened, but darkness: 1. Pet.
2.9 Ioh. 1.5
and can darkness co^prehe^d the light? If the blind lead the blind, the one
falls under, and the other upon, but both into the dike. If that which should
be thine eye to thine affections be dark how perverse also is the wilfulnes of
all thy lusts? But he that believes not, but rests only in the imagined
purity of naturalls, as the Pelagians, or is in some good liking of natures
ability, as is the Semipelagian the Papist, he sees nothing, co^ceiueth
nothing, understands nothing as he should, Stapl. de vniuer. iustif. doctr.
lib. 2 cap. 10
neither is he capable of heavenly thoughts. For seem he never so mighty,
potent, politik, wise, discrete, honest in all kind of honestye, yet because
he has not faith the true root of godliness, those fruits that he can
bear, things fair in show, yet in truth they are but bastard fruits, and
unpleasant to a good taste. For without faith and a sure confidence that we do
well, Romans 14.23 Heb. 11.6
which proceeds of a true faith in God, Philip. 1.29
it is impossible to please the Lord. And this faith is not of nature but of
grace as shall be showed afterward. For nature being thoroughly poisoned
brings forth nothing but poison; and who fedeth thereon, fedeth on poison,
eats and drinks foolishnes, and is nourished with folly, crawleth upon his
belly, and groueleth upon the earth like the sinful serpent.

The wisdom of the world is foolishnes in Gods judgment, who knows best what
is true wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.19 Esaias. 29.14 Ierem. 5.5.
and has pronounced, that the prudency of the prudent, and worldly wise men he
will reprove, because they and he agree not in any one part, neither in the
entrance, end, or midway of any one action. Our ways are not his ways. Esaias.
55.8 Psalm. 99.8
Our inuentio^s provoke him to wrath, our devises are diverse and contrary, and
therefore not for him.

The perverseness and frowardnes of man's will.
NOw if the mind be ignorant and unskillful in that, that is to be wished for,
how can the will, which takes all her instruction thence rightly desire she can
not tell what? Does any man ame at the mark he never saw? or desire the
thing, he never heard of? Christ our Savior told the woman of Samaria, Ioh.
4.10
if she knew with whom she talked, she would crave the waters of life of him,
but therefore she begged the^ not, because she knew him not, and could not tell,
neither what, nor of who^ to ask. The very philosopher could tech his scholars,
and common experience does testify the same, (...).
that no man loves or longs for the thing he never looked upon. And how
little insight, or rather how perfectly blind by nature we are, is already
showed.

Farther, no man naturally wishes for any thing, but he has not only an
insight, but also a delight therein, and it is grateful to his nature, and
pleasant in his eyes, or at the least so supposed either in comparison of
somewhat else, or in some sort or other so reputed.

Herupon I will suppose an impossibility, that man has a clear eye in that
great mystery of godliness, 1. Tim. 3.16
which the Apostle describes and which is the ground of all knowledge. But I
ask, how is he pleased, how is he delighted therewith?

Be we Greeks reckoned the wisest of the Gentiles or Jews once the people and
peculiar chosen of God? The mystery of Christ crucified to either of these, is
either marvelous folly, or wonderful offensive, and to both of them alike, if
God in justice leave them to them selves, the preaching of the Gospel, 1. Cor.
1.23
which should be the odor of life, if they could believe, love, and embrace it,
is become a savor that they cannot brook, a savor of death to death
everlasting, and in fine they perish in their sins, wherein their faithles
nature took such delight.

Wherefore if a natural man, and an unbeliever, would bear good men in hand,
that naturs case is not so hard: Orth. expl. lib. 3
if Andradius the co^mentator of the Counsel of Trent, as being privy to their
secret meaning, herein speak never so honorably of the state of heathen men
to be saved without Christ: if Pigghius or the schole of Colen, Contro. Ratisb.
1 Dial. 2 Sarc. in did. Schol. Doct
or all the scholemen in the world, would qualify or alay the strength of sin,
with vain reasoning, and fond but gay distinctions as they think of
conueniency and congruity etc. What is to be done? touch these fair apples of
Gomorrha with the finger of the holy Ghost, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 21. c. 5
and they will fall straight all to dust. Or be it, that the wine that the harlot
offreth be strong, the spice of distinctio^s sweet, the harlot subtle, her
allureme^ts many, fine, and forcible, yet the truth is stronger, and wholsomer,
1. Esd. 4.4
will and must prevail.

In flesh dwells no good, so says the spirit of God. Romans 7.18
Whereupon without contradictio^ it follows, if no good, no degree of good at
al, either spark of knowledge, or inclination of will, or ability to reach out
hand toward the receiving of any good. For eue^ the good willingness which is
granted by grace, is hindered by nature as much as in her lies.

Therefore the old man must be quite put of, the old leven clean purged out,
our lusts not proined, but dug up by the roots, and thrown away, our flesh
crucified, and of our selves altogether denied. O Israel how long will thou
tarry in a strange land, woo worth the man that delights in his natural
corruption: O sinful flesh happy is he that takes thy young children, I mean
the very beginnings, even the concupiscences and first motions to sin and
dasheth them against the stones, or smothereth them in their cradle, or kills
them in their mothers womb. For of flesh can come no good, and happy is he
that makes away a rebellious evil.

Concupiscens is very sin in whom soever.
ANd even these by name are full of evil naught and wicked, and very sins,
although they come not to age, and thou consent not unto them, even in the
regenerate man it is so, much more so in the natural. So speaks S. Augustine
in plain terms in handling one of the Psalms, Non illis consentis, etc.
Aug. in Psalm. 75.
whom I the rather here mention because he is much alleged to the contrary
very unskillfully, and chiefly for that our late Ce^surer sticks not to vaunt
and brag of S. Augustine, and that Master Charke has neither show nor
syllable in this case out of him.

If thou be a scholar I refer thee to the place coted in the margent: Defen.
of the cens. page 133.
if thou art but only exercised in the word of God, the scripture alone may
content thine humble mind, M. Traue. in his answer to the epist. suppl. p.
252. Romans 5.
and instruct thy conscience most abundantly.

It is forbidden in the Law, we being newborn in Christ are bidden to pray
against it. S. Paul does sigh in respect of it, and calls it sin, I trow,
properly enough when he says it is the body of sin, and bond of death:
although men that follow their lust, Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. dec. 1.
write never so hotly in defense of lust, saying that S. Paul spoke not
properly, and cursing all them that say the contrary.

S. Paul saw many things in heaven, 2. Cor. 12.4.
that he might not utter on earth, but the sin he spoke against, was an
inhabitour in the tabernacle of his body, and within his bosom, he felt the
sting thereof sharp, and could not but complain, how truly, how properly,
and with how convenient words, they that have S. Paul's spirit, sense, and
feeling, can say with tears and utter with grief.

S. James when he would clear God of sin, he says, God tempts no man:
Iam. 1.13.
as who would say, if he did, then were the case altered. C oncupiscence a
mother sin.
But every man (it is generally and in particular true) every man is tempted
of his own lusts. This is the spring, the root, the cause of sin, which
issues out into diverse streams, and is deduced into sundry branches by
consent, and then it is called commonly and named sin amongst men, who
otherwise judge not but by the external act. And then also, (which in deed
is S. Augustines meaning) God is more provoked to wrath, Tom. 7. etc.
and without repentance foreprised counts man quoad reatum crimen and regnum
peccati, more guilty, and blameable, and thrauld to sin then, when by
co^senting to the sway of his sinful lusts, he is carried away wilfully with
the stream of them.

But S. Paul considering the weight of sin, as before Gods exact judgment in
the merit thereof, shows that whereas we ought to serve and love him with all
our powers, the least defect in the least part whether habitually or actually
in the nature of sin is perfect sin, Rhem. notes: Romans 7. verse. 7.
expressly against the commandment of the Law. But we will go on a little,
and reason with them.

Concupiscence tempts, haleth back from good, and helps forward to evil.
This is without question. Now whether thou consent or dissent, that is somewhat
to the will, it is nothing to the lust, except to make it more manifest, if
thou consent, and if thou dissent, Rhem. not. in Iam. cap. 1. verse. 15.
yet in the nature of sin it is nevertheless sinful, though it be stayed
in the first degree.

But if I be not deceived, concupiscence of nature corrupted, whereof I
principally speak or in whom soever, jointly and indiuisibly imports always
a consent withal immediately ensuing.

To lust, to desire, to will, for doctrine and exhortions sake well they may be
distinguished, I can not see how they may be separated or stayed, if we had
rather hew at some bow of them, then strike at the root.

The children of darkness are wise in their generation, Matt. 16.2.
in natural causes or signs to foresee a tempest, in policy to forecast the
woorst, to stop the beginnings, to give no place, no not a little to the raging
sea. Why do we not the like? why are not spiritual harms discerned and
prevented?

M. Harding in some sort uses a vain defense of an unchaste toleratio^ of the
steewes at Rome, Confut. of the Apol. page 16 2. Deiect. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Censur. of M. Chapter artic. 3. and Defense p. 113. Did. 34. Fraternitatis.
by reason of the hotnes of the country, as if Italy were hotter then Jury
which is not so, or if it were, what then? and for concupiscence he and his
breathern have since written much. But does the Law of God melt away with the
heat of either nations or nature, of places or men?

Me thinks after so great light spread into the world, after so long
debating though of sundry other sorry quaestions for the Church against the
scriptures, for works and merits against faith, and mercy for ignorance
against knowledge, Stapel. lib. 3. Epist. to the LL. of the Conc.
yet men should not come to this point to be so badly affected, and to excuse
them, when they are oppugned. Verily if they had either conscience or remorse,
their learning should not be thus abused, ad prostituted by open writing to
maintain sinful lust.

The midwiues in Egypt preserved the children of Israel, Exodus 1.17
it was well done: if the midwiues of Israel would destroy the children of
Egypt it were better: and if the bo^d mother with her brats were quite cast
out and banished, it were best of all, if God so would: but concupiscence the
mother, and the first motions, and perverse will to sin as twins that come
of her, together with froward minds, that foster up both mother and daughters
can hardly or never be voyded in this vale of sinners, and proctors for sin:
yea the perfitest men are imperfit, the cleanest unclean until the evening,
Isych. lib. 5. in Leuit. cap. 15.
which as Isychius alludeth, is till men in repentance agnize and crave pardon
for there faults, which shall be accomplished to the full in the evening, that
is, in the end of the world.

Yet if in the mean season we suffer natural corruptions and co^cupiscences
to have their motions, Sudden motions entangle a man before a man can
deliberate upon them Rhem. not. 7. Romans v. 15.
motions naturally move their foot forward, and cannot stand at a stay, and
will seek incontine^tly to provoke consent and will, and these once joining all
in one, the hole man is become bound, head and heart, hand and foot: his head
can not devise, his heart desire to do, or any member execute a good duty.

And thus is man by these means subjected, made a servant, captiued, and kept
prisoner, and as a slave sold unto and under sin.

The whole question of free will handeled at large.
THis being thus, Osor. de Just. lib. 7.
we can not but marvel what our adversaries mean, when they cry out amain,
we are free, we are free. Are they mad, or do they dream thus of a freedom in
so great subjection of liberty, in the midst of captivity and extreme
bondage? As if a man could or would look for health in sickness, for life in
death, Ephesians. 1.2.
for the living amongst the dead. For naturally we are not only sick, but
also dead and buried in sin. And I pray you, what sense, what ability, what
will is there in a dead man, to perceive, desire, or endeavor to be revived?

But stay: are men blocks say they and stones? yea a great deal worse. For
timber and stones lift not up themselves against the carpenter, and mason:
but man though he be dead from righteousness, yet he lives and is quick, and
full of agilitie in all evil, herein he has a will free enough, Fulgent. de
incar. Chr. 19. cap.
as it were a stream running down an hill, and yet not properly free, being
thrawled to sin, as Augustine using the word (free) seems to correct
himself by and by upon it. Sermon. 13. de verbis Ap. Male agimus libera
volu^tate, quanquam non libera, sed serua ad peccatum. Conc. Aurasic. can. 7.
For concerning godliness his will is wounded, and maimed* it can neither look
up, lift up hand, or stir foot to goodness, it was lost long ago and is not
now to be found.

Yet when God gives grace, and inspireth from above, we are without comparison
far better then the senseless matter, but all this is else whence, that we
are thus enabled but to receive the printe of his spirit.

I will take away your stony heart, says the Lord in his Prophets, Ezech.
36.26.
first he takes away that which is ours, that he may give that which is his.
Before this, if a stone may boast of his softnes, then may we, if not the
stone, then neither we. For our hearts are all of stone and ragge, wherefore I
will give you a new heart. This is more then to renew the old, and this will
he do, and when he has done so, then he will write his awe in our hearts, and
make us to walk in his ways.

Create within me a new heart, Psalm. 51.11.
The Prophet David prayed, and if he prayed a better prayer then the sons of
Zebedy, Marc. 10.38.
that is, he knew for what in truth and verity, and for the thing he wanted,
then is it plain that our heart (for this is not David's case alone) must be
created, as if it were not at all. And then observe that, that which is to be
created is neither of counsel nor consent in a freenes of good will to the
creator, or in a willingness toward his own creation. For how can it be,
before it be framed first, and have his being?

God often tells us and we ought always to agnize that he does all, and we
nothing in good things. He it is that preuenteth with his grace, prepares by
his word, enclyneth us by his spirit, and works both the beginning, and the
end, and the continuance of our good conversion at the first, Objections of
the adversaries answered.
and conversation in his laws ever afterward, notwithstanding all quarelings
to the contrary.

In the beginning say they when God had made man, Eccl. 15.14. Stapl. lib. 4.
cap. 3.
he left him in the hand of his counsel, gave him his commandments and
precepts: if thou will, thou shall observe the commandments, and testify thy
good will. Water and fire, good and evil I, life and death are set before him:
he may stretch forth his hand to either, as he list, and likes best. All this
is true.

In the beginning the case was so. But this is not the question, what man in
the beginning by creation could, but what by nature now he can do. He is a
fond Physician that to comfort his paciente, can say nothing but this, this
man once had a sound body, and a perfect constitution: it was in him to have
lived long. The diseased comes to the art of Physic, and seeks help, not
because he was once whole, but for that he is now sick.

I will show in a word or two by an easy similitude, how sillely they conclude
out of that place: I have this or that put into my hand, I may hold it fast
or let it go. Here is a choice, a free will, but when once I have let go mine
holdfast, or wilfully thrown away that which I held before, shall I still say,
August. de Nature. and Gra. contra Pelag. cap. 53.
my hands are full, when I have emptied them? or when I have wounded mine own
arms and hands in such sort, so that they are not able to reach forth
themselves, and now being unapt and unfit to apprehend, or receive any thing
else but infirmities, because these were otherwise, therefore shall I
presumptuously conclude they are so? In Paradise it was so with us: ergo, it is
so also in other places. What Logic does reason after this fashion? it was,
ergo it is. It was in Paradise, ergo elsewhere. God cast man out of Paradise,
Genesis 3.24.
and at the east side of the garden of Eden, he set the Cherubines (his Angels)
with a shaking naked sword in terrible manner to keep man from entering to, and
so from eating of the tree of life. Where is now, reach forth thine hand to
death, and unto life, etc. whereas he is barred from the better which is life.

In considering this place of Jesus the son of Syrach, Cap. 15.14.
and also beholding the canonical scriptures wherein the ancient blisfulnes of
man is described, as his agilitie of body, his ability of mind, perfection
in both. I know not how, I cannot but record a profane story or two. Milo
Crotoniata when in his weak old age he beheld such as himself had been, Cic.
in Cat. Maio.
young men mightily contending at some exercise of strength, he cast his eye,
and looked upon himself, wept and said: These arms were arms once, but now
they are dry and dead, and are not. Likewise Alexander the great at one time
when he had cut but his finger, Plutar. de discrimen. amici and aedulator.
and at other times perceiving his affections subject to choler, lust, and the
like faults, though his flatterets bore him still in hand, that he was a gods
son, and a god in deed, he told them, no: the gods were not wont to bleed
with pain, and live at pleasure fancifully as himself did.

These stories need little application, if we consider our weakness, and
conceive aright of our infirmities, these flattering colors, that want the
oil of Gods truth, wherewith they labor to paint out our deformednes to
Godwarde, would soon be washed away and come to nothing.

The best and fairest show at the first sight for free will is that of water
and fire, life and death, good and bad, set before mankind in Adam. But look
upon the place directly, albeit it be not Canonical scripture, and therefore
not sufficient to inform thy faith, Hiero. praefat. in libr. Solom. Idem ad Le
tam. Ruff. in expositione in Symb.
or to be alleged in a doubtful matter, look upon it with a single eye, and
by way of comparison consider thereby thine own power. In the place thou shall
find the first word (...), in the beginning, to refer thee to an other
time, as has been declared, and as Augustine does show, Hyp. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Stapl. lib. 2. cap. 15. Iosu. 7.19.
and the wiser Papists see well enough, and of thyselfe (O frail and mortal
man) speak the truth, and shame the Devil, and so consequently glorify God.
And if thou have but a spark of humblenes, thou will franckely confess that
thou art far from the liberty which these words importe.

And as for us what can it avail us to debase man's corruption, if it were as
good or better then they make it? have we not equally our parts therein as
well as they? If our fields had no blasted corn, our gardens no weeds, our
garments no spots, our trees no shriueled apples, if our flesh were spirit,
and not flesh, our wisdom right, and our will free, what harm can the
protestant take for yielding to these things, if they were true?

Only we know, that the friends of nature are enemies to grace, 2. Cor. 3.5.
and that all our sufficiency or aptnes is of God: and therefore nothing, but
insufficiency in man. And this being known, shall it not be acknowledged? or
may we join with them that are at variance with God in his word, which
teaches a quite contrary lesson, showing that the very frame of ma^s heart is
only evil always. only evil: Genesis 6.5.
therefore perfitly naught and in no part good: always evil: ergo never good,
and therefore extremely bad, whether we respect the nature of sin, or
continuance in sinning.

Moses has the like place in sound of words to that out of Ecclesiast. Deuteronomy.
30.
much alleged, and in every particular circumstance urged and driven further
then the Prophet means, or in truth can be maintained. where, of the
commandment, which in Deuteronomy. is commanded, it is protested before heaven and
earth, that it is not hid from the people, or far of in heaven or beyond the
sea, but near unto the^, in their mouth, and in their heart, life and death,
blessing and cursing are set before the people, and they commanded, and
exhorted to choose life.

Here, say free will men, here is an election or choice, a free will. Choose
life: neither is the matter hard to do, life and death, cursednes and bliss
are set before us, it is in us to receive either. and reason so: say they: for
if we might not dissent, or consent, but were at a point, to what end serves
the exhortation? or if we could not consent to good (which is the harder
thing) why are we commanded to choose life, to embrace it, and to consent
thereunto, and to do accordingly.

In all this. I note three things, that the adversary would infer, first a
knowledge of the Law, then a will to receive it, and thirdly an ability to
put it in practice. it is near thee, not above thee, nor beyond thy reach,
not distant in place, thy mouth can talk thereof, thy heart meditate thereupon.
choose. An abylity, Discou. of haer. transl. cap. 10.
obeyed, executed, and put in ure: vt facias illud. M. Gregory Martins great
skill in grammar, can urge this matter no farther.

All this being granted, the presumptuous Papist is never the near his
purpose, to prove a free will, or any other ability in the natural man. For
first God speaks to a people, whom he had chosen, and called, and whom he
had culled out of all the rest of the parts of the world.

A long time (who knows not this?) God was chiefly worshipped amongst a few,
in the family of Abraham and his race, 4. Esd. 5.23
that vinearde only was his, allother trees were the trees of a forsake forest.
He took and selected from out of all the multituds of men, that only peculiar
people, who^ he loved and gave a law, his statutes and ordinances he made known
unto them: Psalm. 147.20. Matthew. 15.26.
to other nations he did not so. The childrens bread was made for children,
who^ he had made his children, and not for dogs. No uncircumcised person, no
Cananitish foot might tread within his courts. But of this his people not
only the heads, elders, and officers, Deuteronomy. 29.11
but also the drawer of water, and wood cleauer, were such, as unto who^ the
Lord reueiled himself in familier manner. And hence comes the knowledge that
is here spoken of, and hence also is the willingness of a good choice, when God
by the hand of his spirit did circumcise there hearts, paring away the
obstinacy of nature, and enduing them with faith, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
embracing Christ, and so in him fulfilling all that is required.

And thus does S. Paul expound this text (the word is near thee, etc.) calling
it the word of faith which was preached in the Gospel. Romans 10.8.
And so we grant, Ihon. 8.36.
that who^ God does teach, they are skillful, who^ the son does set at
liberty, they are free, and who have Christ have all that is Christ's, the
satisfaction of the father, the fulfilling of the law, and what ever else. Let
us bear this yoke, Rhem. not. Mat. 11.30
it is sweet: take we up this burden it is light, sweet and light are they to
them that are in Christ.

But why are these very things also exacted even of all without difference,
Stapl. 4. lib. cap. 3.
as may appear by other Scriptures, if yet some, and the most, and all whom
nature rules, be so blind, so unwilling, and unable to do accordingly as is
commanded? or wherefore are there such fair rewards, generally to all
proposed, if in some certain it lie not, to go so far forth as to think a good
thought, or to will well, much less to run out the raze, and to win the
crown of their salvation?

One answer will serve for both these demands. The substance of the Law was
given to Adam though not written till Moses time Mar. 12.30. and 31
Although the Law were not written, till Moses time, yet was it given to Adam
and to all in him at the first, as to love God above all things, and his
neighbor as him self. Which is an abridgement of the decalogue. Then might
the commandment have bin obeyed, and the reward obtained. Afterward when it
was to be written, no reason it should be less perfect, then God made it,
because man became by his own default more imperfect then God made him,
specially whereas yet, there remain most evident, and excellent ends, and
fruits thereof, as to know our duty, Gal. 3.24
though we can not do it, and thereby to endeavor to find that else where, that
is not in our selves. And when we see that we are out of the way, which leads
to the reward of life, we may by Christ's help compass it an other way, and
come to the same end in him.

They say a dronken man has a desire to seem sober, when his feet can not
carry his body. There is no drunkenness like to that, which comes by the
wine of pride in vain men. Wherefore to repress this natural vanity in all,
and to keep us in a sober opinion of our selves, God gives us a perfect law
to measure our imperfections by.

For otherwise we presume to touch heaven with our finger, till we see the
distance. What burden can not our sholders bear, till we feel the weight?
Eagles eyes have we till we look into the son: we seem gould til the
touchstone reprove us, straight, til the rule tells us the contrary: like
sores that seem to be sound till they be deeply searched.

The young man in the Gospel though that the keeping of the Law was but a
trick of youth. Mat. 19.20
All this have I done from my youth upward: But our Savior as a skillefull
Physician, touching the vain that went directly to his heart, Aug. Sermon. de
Temp. 124
bade him to go and sell all that he had, and to follow him, and the case was
straight altered, and his hypocrisy displayed.

And in deed these are singular uses of the law well expounded, and fitly
applied, Ends and good uses whereunto the Law serves.
both to convince infirmity, to accurse sin, and also to discover
dissimulation, to root out ignorance, to bring a knowledge and a feeling that
we have offended, to breed in us humility, and to lead us to Christ, and
being now in Christ, that it may be a rule of living well to us who ever we
be: and if we be public persons, that we make our Laws all according to the
Lords Law. And albeit we cannot attain to perfection, yet the imitation
thereof in his own children he accepts. Neither is it reason whether in the
regenerate, or in the unregenerate, that the Law should be such, as might be
performed of any, either as it were a mark set up, where every man may hit
it. For the level of our actions must be straight, though our deeds be
crooked, the balance even, though our works deceiptfull, and the glass clear,
though the face that looks into it, have his natural deformity. And whereas
they argue, that therefore man has free will to good, because it is
commanded, they may make the same reason also, that man naturally without
grace may fulfill the whole Law, in work as well as in will, if he will. For
the one is commanded as expressly as the other.

It is manifest, that our ability or inabilitie is nothing to or fro, to the
commandment of God. Neither is his commandment any thing to our ableness
or inabilitie. Whether I can or can not pay my detter, my dettes are due:
whether they be required or not demanded, they are equally still in the same
nature of debt. And though by negligence or other casualtie, I become
bankerout, yet my hand writing and promises stand in their full force and
strength.

In like manner our strength by sin is less then it was, but our duty is
the same that it was ever. For Adams fall, and men's faults, rather bind
straighter, then set either him or us at greater liberty. As it is commonly
seen in men, that grow in det further and further, when they begin once to
break but a little.

Among diverse presents, Dion. Nicae in vita Augusti.
that were brought to Augustus by the ambassadors of India, there was
presented unto him a man without shoulders. How that should be, the
historiographer says he can not see only he reports a report. Verilye I see
thus much in the view of our a duersaries arguments, that their reasons have
neither shoulders to hold up their head, nor feet to go or stand upon, albeit
they would seem to present them to the Church of God, as perfect and preciouse
jewels.

We are commanded to pay our detts: Stapl. lib. 4 cap. 3.
therefore we can pay them: we are exhorted thereunto, and promised our general
acquittance, if we so do, and are threatened if we do not, Mat. 18.26.
ergo we are able to discharge the ten thousand talents! the reason will not
hold. The parable of the detter teaches us a better way to crave forgiveness:
and a man of common sense, can see and say that this reasoning wants reason.

The partridge gathers an hoord of other birds eggs, sits upon the^, Ier.
17.11
and hatcheth them: but when they are flushe they fly a way from her: for they
know that of right they belong not to the partridge: semblably the Papist,
gleaneth arguments sometimes out of the Canonical Scripture though seldom,
sometimes by drift of his own wit, when they are hatched, and come to light,
they fly away from him, or stand him in little stead, or rather make against,
then for him. In the Lords commandments we learn our duty, in his
punishments we feel the correction of our sinful demerits, and in his
rewards proposed we record whereunto we were created, and agnize from whence we
fell: And because we find an impossibility in the Law, Romans 8.3 Job. 14 4
and no remedy in nature, we do not as men ready to be drowned, catch at every
straw, that cannot help, but appeal to the throne of grace, and lay handfast
only upon his endless favor, and everlasting mercy, that exceeds all his
works.

I dwell upon their chief places and reasons of theirs, longer then the intent
of a brief treatise may seem to permit. The rather, because one of our late
writers dares auouche, Alen. apol. of E^ngl. Semi. c. 5. p. 59
(with what face, let the world judge) that in our show of answer we further
their cause rather then our own: we only look backward a little, and bark,
and fly from the light, and bay at them. As if this were all, that might be
done in a matter of truth. And such are their crakes of victory, in disputing
etc. But I guess few of the^ can speak better, then the most and best of them
have written. Neither is it likely they can do more in the valleys, then in
the mountains, I mean they can not do more with their tongs and disputes now,
the^ their betters have hertofore done with their pen and writing. By the bysh
of Saru^. M. Nowell. D. Calfild and others.
Wherein they have received full and just answer. Wherefore no cause of fe are
for all their in finit and intolerable vauntes.

For mine own part (I speak the truth and ly not eue^ before Christ, that
witnessed a good witness under Pontius Pilate) as in few I have declared man's
undoubted imperfection out of the word of God, Hosius contra Brent. prolo. Mart
Eisen. de Eccl. vind. Pigg. Hierarch. Sand Monar. vis. Stapl. de doct. pr. etc.
so in reading the adversaries books and namely touching this matter of man's
corruption, I find that as all their labor elsewhere te^deth only to the
advancing of human po^p under the name of the church, so under the title of
nature they contend chiefly for the setting up of man and flesh, in extenuating
original sin, in excusing concupisce^ce, in praising the works of infidels,
in upholding the wisdom and will of corruption.

To speak of all that has been lately written, Stapl. de universe. Iusti
ficationis doctr. 1582
were to general. The las that I have seen, and the largest is Master
Stapleton, whom I quote often in the marge^t. The man I remember to have been
of the College, whereof my self am now. In respect whereof, and in Christian
charity I wish him the best. And if Samuel may awake Elie, 1. Sam. 2.23
if the younger may warn the elder, to that end I have thus called upon him,
and pulled him by the sleeue, that he go not away in a sleep.

He knows Elie suffered his children to break his own neck. Verily the
fancies and affections, that are bred in and of man, if he cocker them up, they
will bring him to a worse end then Elies was, or if he correct and beat them
lightly but with a fether, this will not amend the children of Belial, or the
sons of Adam.

Elie demanded of his sons, why did they such and such things? Do no more my
sons, it is no good report, that I hear of you, which is, that you make the
Lords people to trespass: yet more the^ speaking roughly, he did not: but let
them have their full fourth in sin: as if he had chidde them with his tongue,
and stroked them fayrely on the head with his hand. Wherefore God denounces
that he loved his children above him, and therefore he would do a thing in
Israel whereof whosoever should hear, his two ears should tingle at it. So
the Papist can not but confess and say: The issue and offspring of nature
corrupt, can not be but corrupt. As the mother sin is, so are the daughters
of sin. Of a thistle a prick, of a bramble comes a bryer. And namely as
concupiscence in the unregenerate man for some causes must needs be sin:
Stapl. lib. 3 cap. 3
so in the regenerate no good report there goes of it, neither yet of man's
wisdom nor of his will.

The Papist can chide a little on this fashion, but yet the natural man will
honor his children, and make of him self more the^ of his maker. For he
tells every man (to speak a word of that, Suprae pa. 9.
which in order was touched before) albeit concupiscence be evil and sin,
yet is it not so properly, and in precise manner of speaking, but only because
she leads the way to sin, and as it were causes the Lords people to
transgress. Stap. l. 4. c. 5
Likewise man's wisdom is darkness for sooth in the Gentiles, and his will
stony and obstinate, that is, say they, only depraved.

Fie upon such fondness, fie master Stapleton. If our wills were only
depraved, and but some way prone to evil, and not perfitly imperfit, and past
all good, had the holy Ghost no softer words to show the imbecility thereof,
but by stone and brass, and iron etc. And S. Paul when he tells the
Ephesians, that they were once darkness, in deed they were Gentiles, what the^?
what does that distinction help? The unregenerate man's father is an Amorite,
Ezech. 16.3
and his mother an Hittit, and all men are Gentiles, or in as bad case as any
man may be, if they be respected in them selves, not lightened by his spirit,
and instructed by grace. And as for concupisce^ce is it sin only, because she
te^pteth, and not in proper terms of speaking?

A foolish woman and a sinful is described in Solomon to be troublefom. Prou.
9.13
She is ignorant, and knows nothing, sits at the door of her house, and
entiseth them that pass by out of the right way. These properties prove the
sinnefulnes of the woman sufficiently and properly. All which appear to be in
the concupisce^ce of man. The one is as ignorant, and as busy as the other.
Only the one provoke openly, and sits at her door and allureth to her, the
other lurketh in thy bosom, and therefore is the more dangerouse, and never the
less sinful, but to all purposes to be taken as a natural sinner. But
hereof before more at large.

These figg leaves then, fetched out of the orchard of man's brain, will not
cover between God and us. Lib. 1. cap. 4
Your self M. Stapleton and others begin to mislike, both certain schoolmen,
and certain late writers, for falsely maintayning naturs ability in preparing
her self meritoriously toward God, and ingeniously you confess the hissing
out of the opinion of merits de congruo, of deserts of conueniency. God grant
that as he has begun that good work, so he vouchsafe to make it perfect in
you more and more in great measure, that you may see and detest the length and
breadth and infinite deepenesse of man's natural transgressions: and likewise
with joy of heart embrace the Lords unspeakable mercy revealed and given in
the only and sole Savior of the world Jesus Christ the righteouse. Amen.

David was better, 1. Sa. 17.47 2. Sam. 11.2
when he kept his fathers sheep, then when he got the Kingdom. If the sin of
Adam were less, and namely if the powers of man were more, and his will of
greater ability, and more orderly, then I have proved it to be, yet I guess it
were good that an horse should not know his strength. What need we flatter a
wanton and a way ward thing, which is the^ best, when it is most kept short,
and naturally it is never good, but always naught?

When God intended to take just reue^gment of unthankful men, Romans 1.24.
that became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were full of
darkness, what did he? He gave them over to their own lusts, that is to say,
to their own will and wilfulness.

This grievous punishment had not bin great, August. 6 Tract. in Epish. Ioh.
if the flexiblenesse and towardness of their wills had bin so good, or but so
indifferently il, or else inclinable, and ready or free to receive, either good
or evil, or able to consent, when grace is offered, which is the very hinge in
deed, Stap. l. 4. c. 1.
whereon the question of free will most depends.

Now but to consent to good is a good thing, have thou this consent? what have
thou that thou have not received, 1. Cor. 4.7.
and if thou have received of an other, then is it not in thy self. Again no
goodness grows out of the earth, but descends from above. And again flesh
and blood, Mat. 16.17
does neither reveal nor receive any good, but is enimity to all good, and
therefore cannot consent (which is a point of frindship thereunto) Nay in the
regenerat, Cic. de amic
the flesh still lusts against the spirit, which we have received, and
therefore doubtless in the unregenerate it much more doubtless in the
unregenerate it much more dissenteth before grace be received, and less
embraces it when it is offered.

When his graces are generally offered, man is recusant by nature, shuts his
eyes, claspeth his hands, and is altogether auerse in heart, but yet whom God
takes and choseth effectually, he turns their hearts, as he did the Purple
sellers heart in the Acts, Act. 16.14 Act. 9.18
haleth and smites Paul down from his horse, does away the scales from his
eyes, and works mightily the conversion of the^, that shall be saved, and this
he makes men willing to receive that, which before they wilfully refused: and
herupo^ to imagine this willingness to be of man, because at length by Gods gift
it is in man, is a vain imagination to give that to man which is Gods gift, as
M. Stapleto^ does, saying, Stap. l. 4. c. 4
that capacity of good things is of nature, and actiuity of Grace. No. both the
beginning and the end, both capablenes and agilitie, to will and to work is of
him.

Fulgentius was troubled with the like fancifull men, Fulg. de incar. Christ.
cap. 24
that thought, that because we were enabled by God to good, therefore we are also
able of our selves. The co^seque^t is naught. For as the flesh of man has no
feling and sense of it self, but the soul does give it life and sense, and so
it may have both: so man may (God so working in him) be well willing, but the
life and soul of this willingness, is the mere and sole mercy of God.

The wisdom of the Lord, Prouer. 9.1
in the book of proverbs who^ he possessed from all beginninges has built here
an house and hewed out her pillars etc. This bilding and house is his Church
and chosen. Now eue^ as an house can not rere up it self, so is it with man,
nether the first stone, nor any part, of it self ca^ it self lay or set in
the frame. And as the carpe^ter choseth his timber, the mason his stone, the
potter his clay, and not contrariwise, the clay his potter, the stone his
mason, the timber his workman, the house her bilder, so God choseth the Church,
not the Church him. That is a true word. I have chosen you and not you me. Ioh.
15.16
in any kind of choice.

A wra^gler may stretch a similitude farther then may stand with christian
humility. As the carpenter in deed chooses out (...) tree out of the wood,
and works it alone, yet he chooses the fairest, the fittest, and the
straightest, because these qualities ar in the timber: So God chooses of men,
the best qualified by nature, because of naturalles, that were in them first.
No not so. He knows (who foreknoweth al things) no doubt what persons will
best serve his building, who ar fittest, who unfit. But there for ar so^e fit,
because he makes the^ fit? For otherwise by nature we are utterly unfit all.

And to demonstrate that all stands upon mere choice, he chooses the weak to
confound the strong, the simple to confute the wise, 1 Cor. 1.23 Iohos. 6.20
as it were the blast of horns to overthrow the mighty walled city Jericho. He
chooses the least likely, and the most unwilling to show that neither in man's
will or any part of his corrupt nature else, is ought to this purpose.

But of this his exceeding mercy, favor, and free grace more in special in the
process following.

Hitherto in the plenarie view of man both within and without, in body and
soul, in whole and in part, appears nothing since his fall, but misery,
bondage, pollutio^, uncleanness, darkness, confusion, frowardnes, obstinacy,
rebellion, and (in a word) perfect sin and corruption. God looks down from
heaven upon all the children of men in earth, and finds not any one,
considered as he is in his own nature, Psalm. 14.2
with whom it fares better then has been declared.

OF THE FREE GRACE OF GOD. LIBER. II.
OF man's corruption has bin declared: tuching almighty God, in the Scripturs
amongst other proprieties uttered after the manner of men for the better
understanding, are chiefly set forth his righteouse judgments, and gracious
mercy. His judgments pronounced by the Law, and executed in his wrath against
the children of unbelief and disobedience: his mercy prepared for the elect
in his son, and published by the gospel

This Gospel and message of the ioyfullest tidings that ever were, Luc. 2.10
was imparted first to Adam in paradise as a present remedy, immediately after
his fall, applied to the weaker part affected, by name to Eve. Thy seed shall
bruise the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15
Afterward declared to Abraham. In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. Genesis
12.3
Then renewed again in Isaak, and so foreshewed in the sacrifices and old
ceremonies, likewise enforced by the Law, and foretold by the Prophets, and in
the fulness of time presented in the person of our Savior, and lastly by his
Apostles, and still by the work of the ministry (the partitio^ wall being
taken down) spread abroad and shed into the ears of all the world.

Herein if we make search and diligent inquiry, for the first cause, and end
of this so glad a message, wherefore, and to what end it was made to us so
sinful men, we shall find nothing else to be the cause, but his love, and the
end to be man's salvation, and his own glory, whereof he is a iealouse God.

The singular love of God.
In the cause which is his only grace and favor, if we consider it aright as
it is, we shall agnize it, worthily to be the singular love of God, Whereby he
so loved the world, John. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have life ever lasting: thus and so he loved, as never love was
like, so steadfast without change, so sufficient without want, so free without
all desert, which is the point I now ame at altogether.

To love where a man is loved, no great thanks: Luc. 6.32.
the gentiles and sinners do so. The storke will leave one of her young ones to
the owner of the house where she is permitted to make her nest, and breed up
the rest. But to love where pure hatred is rendered for perfect love, that is
excessive love. 1. Ioh. 4.19
He loved us first, and even then when we were his enemies.

And because he knows the frowardnes of man's perverse heart, how lightly we
esteem of his mercies, and how quickly we presume of supposed merits, as if
because he loved us, therefore he must needs love us for some cause in us
first, every where providing for the honor of his own glory, he makes
continual mention of his innumerable benefits, and of the root whereon they
grew, which is his love, to the end that the mindfulnes of his graces, and
thankfulness for the same so often required, may bridle presumption and repress
a natural pride incident to all flesh.

Is the father beholding to the son, or the son (especially the adopted) to
the father? Romans 8.16.
we are all the sons of God not by nature: for by nature were we not all the
children of wrath?

Likewise does the infant tender the nourse, or the nourse tend the infant?
God is he that nurseth us up, that carries us, as the eagle her young ones in
his arms from our youth until our gray hears, as it is in the Prophet.

Again is not the prisoner bound to his deliverer, Deuteronomy. 32.11. Esai. 46.4.
and not backwarde the deliverer to the captive? Who has delivered us from the
body of sin, but the grace of God through Jesus Christ.

In all the strong and golden chain of man's salvation there is not any one
link made or framed by man himself: Romans 7.24. Romans 8.2.
whether we consider the Lords free choice before all worlds, our vocation by
the preaching of the word, justification in his son, sanctification by the
spirit, or our glorification in his kingdom to come.

Against curiosity in the search of unsearchable mysteries.
The translatours of the English Testament at Rhemes tell us, that the
consideration of the place in S. Paul, Curiosity in Gods matters.
wherein are set forth plainly Gods eternal predestination, purpose, love,
etc. both has been always, and in this age is a gulf wherein many proud
persons have worthily perished. Proud persons? what then? we grant. For pride
will have a fall in the playnest ground, and further when they say, these
mysteries of Christian faith ought to be reverenced of all men with all
humility, and not to be sought out, or disputed upon with presumptuouse
boldness: verily presumption, rashness, and all boldness we detest, as much as
they, but they in thus saying insinuate an other matter: and feign would they
have Christian men to tremble and starte back for fear, or else with a light
foot to trip over that altogether, which the spirit of God does stand so
much upon.

Secret things belong unto the Lord, but things revealed to us and our children
for ever, in which sentence of scripture we may see that there are secreats of
two sorts, either still secret like the round ring, 2. Esd. 5.42
whose beginning and ending are in it self, and known only to the maker: or
there are secrets revealed to the children of men, the meditation and study
whereof appertains to us. According to this the Apostle speaks the will of
the Lord, who has known, 1. Cor. 2.16.
that he might instruct him? We have the mind of Christ, the former of these
sayings must be left to God, the latter of these do belong to us.

Augustine finds fault with curiouse heads, and bold minds, In Psalm. 8.
whom he resembles to fish, that plunge themselves in over deep questions
and that walk in the paths of the bottomless seas, in matters to excellent
for their knowledge. And truly who that modest is, and has learned to be wise
with sobriety, does not utterly mislike and condemn the fact of the
Bethshemites prying into the Arc, or the like pressing into hidden mysteries?
1. Sam. 6.19.
Is not he an unwise man that when he may safely upon the pauement go in and
out in the Lords courts, yet has a fancy to try, whether he can get up and
trace it upon the high pinacles of the temple? and yet because the pinacles are
as ornaments to set forth the majesty and the glory of the building, and
builder, who dare hudwinck men's eyes, that they may not veiw the things that
are therefore set in sight that they may be seen?

These five chief points (which I intend some of them to touch, some of the^
to treat of more largely, and of them all reverently to speak) are they above
me^cioned, our Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and
Glorification.

These mysteries verily are as holy as the mountain, Exo. 19.23. Exodus 3.5.
wherein God himself appeared, and as the ground, whereon Moses stood.
Wherefore above all things first put we of our shows, I mean all profane
cogitations, terrene and earthly thoughts, while we stand upon these matters,
while we consider these his graces, and secreats in his word revealed in this
behalf.

Of Election, Vocation, and Reprobation.
THat God electeth some unto salvation before the beginning of the world:
Election.
some and therefore not all, before the beginning of the world, and therefore
not for the desert of them, who then were not, (which also the very name of
Election does import) is so manifest, that the Apostle demands in vehement
manner: who art thou, Romans 9.20.
that wilt dispute hereof, and reason to the contrary, and gather absurdities
thereupon, as if the case were not so? Wherein also it may be demanded: who art
thou that coynest distinctio^s to shift of the freenes of the Lords choice? and
dare thou avouch that albeit he chooses before all worlds, yet he chooses
not freely, but for works foreseen, and likewise refuses? S. Paul is amassed
at the matter, and adoreth the Lords both certain and secret mercies, and
justice herein, and can thou distinguish with ease?

Touching our vocation both inwardly by the finger of his spirit, Vocation.
and externally by the outward delivery of his word effectually to certain,
and not so to some certain, is no less plain by our Saviors prayer in S.
Matthew, Matthew. 11.25.
I give thanks O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened them to
children. It is so O father, because thy good will is such.

Wherein I observe three points,

1. I thank thee O father, or I confess, 1. Thankefulnes. Sermon. de diuersis 3.
all is one. For, as Augustine says, they are very meanly learned, that know
not that there is a confession of praise and thanksgiving, as well as of
sins. Christ thanketh his father, of whom Christians may learn to be
thankeful for themselves, for shall he pray for us, and not we for our selves:
or shall he be thankful in our behalf, and shall not we also be thankful
in our own cause?

If one grape wax ripe and red, Vuaque co^specta liuorem ducit abvua.
they say that the grape over that, does ripen the faster, and take color the
sooner. It behooves us that are green, and sour, considering the example of
Christ, and his sweetenes to grow in grace and like thankfulness to our God,
confessing always, from what spring are derived our waters, or rather from
what sea they issue, or rather from what heaven, or rather how from the father
of heaven and earth they descend upon us, Genesis 18.27
which are but dust and ashes.

He gives us all that we have: only he reserueth the praise of all unto him
self. Esa. 42.8.
He is the freest Landlorde, that may be, father of heaven and earth, and Lord
of all, and we his servants and the workema^ship of his hands. Yet he
suffers us to have and enjoy freely the fruit and use of all, yielding him and
paying nothing but this, that we acknowledge and confess that we hold of him
and that we are his tenantes.

2. In special, for what is our Savior thus thankful unto his father? 2.
For What.
Because he had hid the secreats and treasures of the Gospel, from the wise
and learnedmen, and had revealed them unto babes. Consider your vocation says
S. Paul, 1. Cor. 1.26.
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called, I add, were chosen. For whom he calls in time, those he forechoose
before all times, and whom he calls not at al, no manner of way, those he
never chose.

What then? is all learning and wisdom utterly condemned hereby, or are the
baser and weaker sort only called, are women and weauers and beggars and young
students to be admitted to the search and understanding of holy writ?

We know and profess, that these have souls to save, and are bought with as
dear a price, as the best doctors and rich men are. There is no kind of good
learning but we commend it in the highest degree of due commendation: and yet
withal we say: Godliness is great learning. Act. 18.^4.
Apollos was eloquent, but his might was in the scriptures. We despise not the
inferior: we prefer the greater gifts. Notwithstanding both eloquence, and
all other whatsoever excellent qualities of either natures wisdom, or good
arts, etc. except the person qualified with them be also endued with faith from
above, they rather be occasions of evil in him then otherwise, greatly
increasing his greater condemnation.

If Agar can be content to obey Sara, 1. Sam. 3.1. Revel. 4.10.
if our wisdom can submit it self to the Lords wisdom, if our learning
will serve as Samuel did in the temple, if the potent and mighty man subject
his scepter and crown, if he can stoop and fall before the throne of God,
these former qualities are sanctified, and God accepts them in the persons,
whom he accepts in faith. Not many wise welthy or mighty, the scripture says
not, Not any are called.

Because it is commonly seen, that Agar will contend with her mistress, the
Grecian presumes of Learning, the subtle head of his policies not meanly
menaged: therefore of the usual practice, and not how it goes better in some
specialities the scripture shows. For God would have all (of all sorts)
saved, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and yet I say not all in general without any restraint. For who then could
resist his will, if he will so have it? Or why are any damned, if he will have
all to be saved without exception? The Lords mercy is above all his works,
and the sinful works of man can not be greater to his own condemnation,
then the mercy of God to salvation, if God would so have it in all.
Notwithstanding the commandments are given forth in general. Likewise the
exhortations are uttered to all, grace openly offered, and publicly
proclaimed. Many are called, and yet few are choosen. i. inwardly touched,
Matthew. 20.16.
and well accepted of the Lord. According to this general offer, there is
somewhat, that may be said for the just, and deserved commendation of many,
because al obey not their calling, all receive not their salvation proffered.
And yet the conditional will of God to have all saved, if all would, is but a
fancy. For many seek with endeavor, which is more then a will, to enter the
straight gate, Luc. 13.24.
and shall not be able. Truly none shall be saved, but whom God will, whom he
will indurate, his heart is hardened, as Pharaoes was. But most miserable were
the condition of man's salvation, if it hung upon his own mutable, frail and
froward will.

Origin thinks, August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 17.
perchance upon occasion of this saying, God will have all saved, that it will
follow, that all and every one whosoever even the very devils, finally and
one day shall be saved in the end. Concerning Origin it is well said that
where he wrote well, no man wrote better: and where evil (and therefore not
ever well: and in this, very badlye) no man writes worse, so manifestly
against the Scriptures, and so fondly beside the universal, catholic and
Christian faith, Epist. ad Alexandr.
touching the everlasting damnation of the damned, either spirits or men, in
so much that him self else where was feign to excuse him self therein, and
likewise utterly to detest the error.

What sense then bears that sentence: God will have all men saved? The
Apostles meaning is not hard. God will have all saved, that is to say, of all
sorts some, (as I said before) and therefore expressly by name, he wills
that prayers be made for magistrates, and for men in authority, among whom
also he has his chosen. Act. 10.34.
Neither does he respect any person, in regard of sex, place, time, degrees,
and the like external circumstances. For though not all, and every one of
these sorts, yet out of all these he calls some, and those not for any
special properties naturally in them more then in the rest, that are not
called.

In the days of Elias when Achab had sold him self under sin, 1. King.
19.10.
and the people adored Baal, Romans 11.5.
and Idolatry getting the upper hand was openly practiced in Israel, the
Prophet complaining thereof, and that himself was left all alone, received
answer of comfort from the Lord, that he had left 7000. that never had bowed
knee to Baal. Whereupon Augustine does well observe, and the text is pregnant to
prove, that these who were reserved, Aug. de bono perseue. cap. 7.
left not them selves to the Lord, but reliqui mihi, I left them to my self
says the Lord. For it is he alone, qui facit vt and accessamus ad eum: Sic and
ne recessamus ab eo: Our first access to him is by him: and also that we
recoyle not from him, relapse and fall away again, but to persevere to the end
is a work of God, and not of our selves.

M. Allen in his Apology of the seminaries assures himself that no wise man
can be a Protestant 23 years, In the Apol of the Semi. and in epist. ad. Greg.
13 before his book of the Sacraments and sacrifice.
or any long time together, and yet he sees the contrary and is grieved
thereat. But suppose that our religion were false, and his superstition right,
does it yet go by worldly wisdom, whereof he speaks? Or are our Rabbis and
masters of Rhemes ignorant of this, that though God has his kings and Queens,
and worthy, noble and learned men, Esa. 49.23.
as foster fathers, and nurse mothers, and good instruments in and of his
church, yet many times (and may I not say, most often?) the lettered, the
prudent, the politic, the mighty, the noble, and the wise of this world are
shut out of doors with God, neither are they able by natural reasons, or
moral experience to discern no not a falsehood in the principal points of
true Christianity. Wherefore God gives entrance to poor and simple babes,
and little ones, the lest of all their tribes, and smallest of account in their
fathers house.

Humility a necessary virtue.
As in plu^pes and wels, where men draw water, from deep places, the bucket
descends low, that the water may be brought up: so they that are to receive
the waters of Gods graces proceeding from the depth of his endless mercy in a
true and an unfeigned humility must desce^d full low. For the lowly of heart, and
meek of mind, he only fills: The rich, which are rich but not in God, thee
proud and presumptuous ar sent empty away, and the poor receive the Gospel,
strangers from the east come to see Christ, and simple sheepehards are they
that hear and carry the first tidings of his bearth. This has be^ the Lords
usage and dealing from the beginning. The younger breathern ar preferred before
the elder, the weak before the strong, the simple before the wise, the
unlettered before them that love to be saluted as venerable Rabbis in long and
side gowns, at the corners of the streets and in open places. So was Moses
preferred before Pharao, the afflicted Israelits before their hard taskmasters,
and the poor widow of Sarepta before all Israel, so was Peter the fisherman,
and not Pilate the judge, Paul the te^tmaker and neither Tertullus the orator
nor Nero the Emperor: And as Daniel the child was esteemed before Darius
princes, so he chooses and he calls, such as those children were in the oven,
humble and innocent men and none other. But first he makes them as children
and babes, that they may be (not because they are already) aunswerable to his
everlasting choice in their effectual calling, and (as it were) first he
mollifieth the wax and then after a sort he imprinteth his own image in them
afresh, which once also they, as well as others had defaced.

For naturally as has been declared in the former treatise, what was there in
one, that was not in an other, and in all alike? What was there in Abraham,
that was not in Nacor? what in the Jews, that was not in the Gentiles? Before
God called them, and not the Gentiles, all alike without exception we are
detained in the self same darkness of mind, and disobedience of will. And
afterward when the natural olive, not natural by nature, but right by choice
and calling, began to wax wild again, when of children they became a bastard,
a froward, and a perverse nation, God left them to them selves, he gave the^
over to their corrupt nature, and withdrew his grace, whereby they were a
righteous seed. And now the best among them were worse than others, the
scribe than the ignorant, the pharisee far worse than the publicane. Act. 4.6
For these most resisted the preaching of the Gospel. And this was the just
judgment of God, that rather opened the eyes of the simple amongst them, then
of the greater personages. In the one appears his grace, in the other his
justice: which does the more set out his grace, and in respect of both Christ
gives thanks to the Father, Ps. 145.17
who is to be praised in all his works, and worshipped in all his ways.

To prove that he has gone this way, and wrought these works, blinded some
eyes and opened some, stopped and hardened some ears and hearts, and (as the
Scripture says) circumcised and mollified some by his especial grace, is so
clear, that if there were nothing else, but our Saviors thanks for the same,
Reprobatio^.
what needs farther proofs? 3 Why?


3. Now but why does God so? Ioh. 12.40
elect some, and reject some, clear some eyes, do out and darken some? Great
cause why it should be so. Even so great, as is the wisdom of the eternal
God, who provides, that neither the willer, nor the runner, Romans 9.16
do any thing, but him self taking mercy does all in all, in the salvation of
his saints, to the end, that the branches bear not the root, but the root
the branches, that whosoever rejoices, may rejoice in the Lord, and his good
pleasure.

Yet all this rather concerns his election and good choice in some, but why
does he reprobate any? why are not certain as effectually called as others?

Who art thou that do thus, why it and quarrel it with God? Job. 9.4
May the vessel reason with the potter? Esaias. 10.15
the axe with the carpenter? the saw with him that draws it? dare any servant
pry into all the councels of his masters closet? can thou follow and track the
way of the fish in the waters, of the foul in the air? If thou can do
impossible things then may thou see and discern things also invisible. For
there is the like impossibility in both. If God should do equally well to all,
then were he after a sort so much the less to be praised of some for his
benefits more in special, Aug. de dono persevere. cap. 12 Mat. 20.15
and singularly to them, then to others. Neither yet is there any iniquity in
so doing. For may he not do with his own what he will, and that without man's
witting? why? may he not illuminate what eye he list, lighten which candle he
pleases, or shoot away what arrow he is disposed, without thy certain
knowledge of his secret counsels in his most just doings?

In this curiosity of searching farther, the^ may stand with the sobriety of
creatures in the Creators works, a man may as well demand, why all in the
field is not pure corn, and no chafe, why trees bear leaves at all, and not
all fruit, why there are as well frogs as fish in the pond, as well goats,
that will not hear, as sheep that hear his voice in the fold of Christ?
Christ the second person in Trinity adoreth the council of his Father herin,
and confesses that the reason of this is this: So it is, because it pleases
thee o father so. The Papist dreameth of a better will in some, then in some,
and that makes much as he thinks to the matter. I ask: will darkness
willingly become light, will weeds be corn, goats, sheep, will thorns be
vines and bear grapes? Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 2. Violentia fit cordi etc
Does the natural man savor of the things of God? would a wound be handled? can
the flesh yield to the spirit? would sleep be awakned? Does the dead in sin,
that wants sense of a better life, desire to be revived any one more then an
other. But hereof before. All are earthly by nature, hated by desert, condemned
by justice, and reprobate in them selves. Why yet some are by grace beloved,
saved by mercy, vouchsafed heaven by adoption, chosen in Christ, called to the
Gospel, and receive it willingly, the highest roundle in the ladder, that man
may ascend unto, is the Lords own pleasure, and this, that contented Christ,
must content Christians.

For the condemnation of the wicked, Prou. 16.4
there is more then sufficient desert in the reprobate, and albeit thou hear
that God also is agent therein, yet beware thou imagine evil in the Lord, who as
the Sun shines into dark places, and is not darkened, and likewise as the rain
moisteth the evil tree, and therefore it bears his unhappy, and a bitter
fruit: but mark: in that it bears frut it comes of the moisture: in that it
bears evil fruit, it comes of his own nature, and therefore worthily
calls for the axe to be cut down, and justly deserves to be thrown into
the fire: And know this that in one and the same action diverse may be agents,
and they diversely to be termed, their intents and ends purposed, and also
means in proceeding being diverse, according as the persons are diversely better
or worse either affected, or skild: even as the keeper (as Seneca says in an
other case) many times has his prisoner linckt to his girdle or hand wrest,
Senec. lib. 2. epist. 5
and so they two may be detayned both in one chain, notwithstanding the
keeper be an innocent man, and a necessary officer, and the prisoner a very
Barabbas, and an unprofitable member of the common wealth. I end this matter
without farther debating. God has to do, and sucketh out his own glory out
of all things, especially he shows his goodness to his Saints, and his
justice upon sinners. To feel the one is a heaven on earth, to find out the
other altogether by reasoning is utterly beyond the reach of flesh. Quod lego,
credo: non autem discutio. What thou read that believe, and go no nearer,
either to the fire for fear of burning, or farther in to water, for fear of a
whirle poole. Walk in thy vocation, follow the thread of thy calling, contend by
orderly means to the end, God has prefixed to the faithful in Christ his
Son and thy Savior.

Of justification, the fulness and freenes thereof, and the comfort that
comes thereby.
THe free pardon for sin, and the sufficient ransom thereof concur always
and meet ever in the justified man. For whom the Lord forgiueth, to them also
he gives the possession of his Son, in who^ all are made righteous, and
without whom none shall be justified. And when he does the one, he does the
other, and both jointly in full mercy.

M. Stapleton says no, but shows no reason nor glimse, Lib. 7. ca. 10.
or show of reason to the contrary, but this: that because our justification
stands not in remission of sins alone, therefore remission of sins
infers not the imputation of righteousness by Christ, as coherent with it,
and don also by God: as if the Lord in his doings would work five days him
self, and leave the finishing and perfection of that which he had so carfully
and graciously begun, to be accomplished the sixth day, or at leisure by some
others. But his eye sees not, that therefore in deed are our sins remitted,
because Christ is imputed, and that neither are these forgiven, but to whom
Christ is given first and in order before, though both without distinction of
time are given together to the faithful man.

The Physicians speak of a body neutrall, Corpus (...).
neither whole nor sick, because they want a name to express the sickness
by. Truly by true divinity we have no such either bodies or souls. Either we
be whole or sick, quick in Christ, or dead in sin, either justified by him,
or still remaining in our old corruption. There is no middle stay, Mat. 12.30
either we gather with him, or we scatter. All are to be sorted, either among
the righteous or unrighteous, holy or profane, sons or bastards. As in the
day of doom or general judgment, all shall be either sheep or goats, corn
or chafe: when the judge shall have but a right or left, no third hand, to bid
these go unto, who have their sins pardoned, and yet (as is feigned) are void
of justice in their Savior. Then that blessedness whereof David speaks,
Blessed are they, Psalm. 32.1
whose sins are not imputed, and whose iniquities are covered, shall be
either utterly denied men, or in full delivered, so pronounced by the Prophet,
because of the not imputing of their sins, which cannot but imply the
imputation of righteousness by Christ withal, The d ctrin of forgiveness of
sins in Christ most comfortable.
which is the covering of sin.

This blessedness most happy must be sought for ever, til it be fully found
out here, and perfitly enjoyed in heaven. So we preach and so we believe, and
this we pray for: the glad year, the acceptable time, the release of dets, the
remission of sins, and the imputation of Christ with his merits. Verily, the
very hinge of Christianity, the key of religion, the peace of conscience, the
water that allayeth the whirl winds and tempests of a troubled soul, the wine
that gladdeth the heavy heart, and the oil that cheereth the countenance of
the sorrowful man that droupeth, and hangs head as the bulrush in remorse of
his offenses, are contained herein, and depend upon this happy and heavenly
doctrine, of our free justification in Christ Jesus. The parts of justification.
The parts whereof properly taken to be are but two: the remission of sins,
and imputation of righteousness: the sins are ours, the righteousness
Christ's. The remitting of them unto us, and the imputing of that which is none
of ours, are freely bestowed by special favor upon the faithful: and so of
sinners and unjust, we are reputed just, and become saved souls for Christ's
sake.

Of the righteousness of Christ imputed unto, and not inherent in a Christian
man.
FArther, fitly to declare how far remission of sins stretches, and in what
manner precisely Christ's righteousness is rekoned ours, requires the longer stay
herin, because the adversaries have enwrapped, and hedged in the matter round
about with thorns, that an unwary hand can hardly come to the truth without
danger of pricking. For of remission of sins, Stap. li. 5. et lib. 7. ca. 10
they have made a rasing out of sin quite, as if no sin remained at al after
baptism: and of imputation, The. Note. To. c. 4. ver. 7.8
they make a very imprinting of a perfect righteousness in us: in both points
erring very wide from the truth. For albeit the guilt of sin be remitted, and
that no sin has any such sting, as can wound to death everlasting: Yet the
full abolishing of sin is not in this life, but after death in the life to
com. And albeit upon our effectual calling, faith in Christ (which is the gift
of God) straight way in convenient time frames a new by grace in Christ all
our thoughts, Phil. 3.29
Council. Mileuit. can. 3
proineth our lusts, schooleth our affections, and orders a right the whole
race of our life to a better course, and likewise although it be truly said
Christ dwells in us and we are his holy temples, and that we have in us his
righteousness, his, because it proceeds from his spirit, when we believe
rightly and live accordingly, yet that righteousness whereby we are justified,
is resident only in the person of Christ, and is not inherent at all in us,
for this were to make us not only his faithful servants, and obedient
children, which is our duty and must be so: but to make our selves very
Christ's and Saviors of our selves, And. ortho. expl. li 6. ca de iustific.
if not in whole at the entry of the first receiving him, yet in the chiefest
perfection thereof, in the end of our justification, purchasing it to be really
inherent and perfect in us by means of deserts.

The later Papists, Rhem. not. 2. Romans
especially since the council of Trent have most mistaken our justification,
which when thy have granted it to be fre, calling it a first free
justification, yet by glozing to and fro thereupon, have much also impaired the
freeness thereof, and then in justification, which is but one, being very ill
understood (as the madman thinks he sees two moons for one) they have
found out another in the^ selves, Stap. lib. 10 cap. 2 Iustificatio imporiat
ius ad vita^ aeternam.
which being made up of good works, must present them just before the
tribunal seat of God, and deserves ever lasting life, and this they call a
2. justification.

Verily we for our parts can not but ingeniously protest and confess: we have
not so learned Christ, and herein nothing can comfort us more the^ this, that
we have not been brought up in the school of Tre^t by Andradius, or as
auditors at M. Stapleto^s feet at Doway, or else at Rhemes under our late
translatours there.

Our righteousness is Christ. We are just in him, not in our selves. For his
sake our sins are not imputed, Coloss. 1.20
but his innocence is imputed. In him it has pleased the Father to be
reconciled. Ephesians. 1.7
And so ar al justified freely by grace through the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus, both is in him, and by his means. But I say which is in him
inhere^tly, and not cleaving to us. For the truth is, the woman is clad with
the Sun in the revelation: that is to say: Revel. 12.1
the church is covered with the righteousness of Christ, the Son of God. But as
a garment sticks not to the body, no more does the perfection of Christ cleue
or stick in the person of any Christian neither is he, or his righteousness, 1.
Tim. 2.6 (...).
or a righteousness in any degree in this life perfect imparted, or gotten, or
purchased by any way of co^mixture and confusion, but he only is ours by
imputatio^, the pay and ransom of our dets, though we personally defray and pay
no farthing theru^to.

The sons of men that meant to build a tower that should reach to heaven,
when they all spoke one language, every one understanding his fellow in the
same tongue, their work went forward. For an understanding consent is much to
farther, either the evil intents of the wicked, or the godly endeavors of the
good. Wherefore the Lord descended and co^fou^ded their tongues, that they
might not all speak with one lip and language, and so was their building
interrupted, and it came to nothing, the place receiving a fit name (Babell) of
a deserved confusion. Our adversaries, whilst they nestle them selves,
agreeably together in an opinion as it were legions of unclean spirits in the
bosoms of the simple, they beguile the sooner, and the more. But in this their
building, whereby they would pile up merits and works of deserts, and mortar
the^ together, in the land of their own flesh, the top whereof should reach
up to heaven, the Lord could not suffer such proud giantes so ungraciously
to impair his glory, and to have their forth, but by his providence has
descended, and divided their languages, among them selves. One says one thing,
another says another thing. Pigghius a chief master workman with his fellows,
and M. Stapleto^ a fine builder after the newer fashion with his mates, can not
agree together about the foundation of the work. Pigghius will have works
preparatory, and deferring the grace of God, Lib. 7. cap. 9
to be the ground work. M. Stapleto^ likes not that so well. Again which way
the frame should rise, and upon what pillars it should rest, they vary more. M.
Stapleton would have man's righteousness to rely and be in and upon man himself.
Piggh. being better skild, in this cause of more remors and hu^blenes of mind
misliketh that, and shows by manifest demonstrations it must be otherwise. Yet
Pigghius good advise largelye laid forth in this respect in his books, could
not be heard in the convent of Tre^t, amongst whom if any were wiser and better
then others, they were least regarded, Sess. 6. ca^. 11
and soonest rejected. But whether it were by reading M. Calvin, and in him the
Scriptures of God fitly and forcibly applied, or otherwise God opening his
heart by what and whom as isntrumental means I can not tell, certainly
Pigghius lets not to speak the truth in plain terms, and concludes it
with evident and like sound reasons. M. Stapleton notwithstanding still
builds his tower of Babel, without lime and sand, or rather upon the sand of
frail and weak man, the fall whereof can not choose but be great in the day of
trial.

Very well and wisely (says Pigghius) we are taught being void of
righteousness to seek it, Controuers. Ratisb. 2
extranos without our selves, in illo in him, in Christ. Wherein if it be
demanded how and by what right I ca^ be righteous by the righteousness that is
in an other: John. 15.14 Romans 5.19 A rule of the Law and a good reason in
Philosophy. Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 3. That what a man does by another, after a
sort he does by himself, and it is so accepted, except ever where a personal
performance is required.
It is easily answered: by the right of friendship, wheru^to Christ has
vouchsafed to accept us, communicating, and laying all that he has in common
unto us his frinds. And as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
even in the guilt of sin, then whilst they were but yet in the loins of
Adam: so by one man comes righteousness upon al: and albeit we and his person
be distinct, yet that which he the head has paid for us the members of his
mystical body is as sufficient, as if we the members had paid it our selves.
And a great deal better it is, that such treasures should be kept rather in the
hands of a strong and safe keeper, then of them who once had been prodigal
children and might be again, if their patrimony were delivered them now in as
ample or more ample manner then it was at the first.

This is once: harm there can com none by this doctrine, but good: For as the
justice and mercy of God, hereby is the more perfitly established, so our
righteousness is as well obtained, and likewise better confirmed in Christ our
elder brother, under whose perfumed, and most fragrant and sweet attire, and in
whose absolut perfection we appear perfect before God, and receive the
blessing, as Jacob did in Esawes garments, and not in his own, at his father
Isaaks hands: Genesis 27.27 Ambr. de Jacob. and vita beat. lib. 2. cap. 2 Genesis 27.1
which story S. Ambr. and others by way of all usio^ conveniently allege to
this very purpose, of man's justification before the Lord.

Yea, but God is not like Isaak in his old age, when his eyes were dim, that
he will take one brother for an other, or impute righteousness to a man that is
not righteous.

In deed when we show, both by the natural propriety, and common use of the
word Iustifiyng: that it does not import any imprinting or an indument of any
quality in a man, but an absolutio^, as in judgments and in the co^sistories
of men, so before God, Stap. 2. prol in 5. lib.
when we are absolved, the reply is made, that God will not absolve the
unrighteous man, and that he discerns, who are who, well enough.

And who denies this? we know and acknowledge, that so great is the jealousy
of our God, that he will not suffer the ungodly to take his * covenant in their
mouths much less to enjoy his blessings. Psalm. 5.16
* No unclean thing shall enter the holy city, Reu. 21.27
the workers of iniquity shall not come nigh him, Luc. 13.27
for his face is against them, to root them out. Thine eyes are clear o Lord,
and thou can not behold iniquity. Psalm. 5.6


But what shall we say then? Shall I say, we are righteouse, and that we have
no sin? Of sanctification shall be spoken afterward which they blind and
confound with justification. 1. Ioh. 1.10
If we say we have (not only have had) but yet have no sin, our tongues will
faulter, for our hearts can teach us a contrary lesson: 1. Ioh. 3.20
or if our hearts be a sleep, God is greater then our hearts. If he enter
judgment not with his enemies, Psalm. 130
but with his servants, who shall abide it? who can answer one for a thousand?
Job. 9.3
who shall appear innocent, and be pronounced righteouse.

The case is weighty, and requires dilligent attention. If we confess our
unworthiness, health may seem to be far from sinners. For the wicked shall come
to naught, yea and their hope shall perish. If thou dare deny thine
unrighteousness, then art thou the more past grace, and the deeper in sin. And
yet as when the Patriarks had throwe^ their brother into the pit, they went
aside, Genesis 37.25
and without remorse fell to their meat, afterward their old sin, and
unkind dealing, came fresh to their mind, so the fat heart that can not feel
when he sins, and how he wounds his soul in sinneing, the time shall come
when it shall have a lively and a bleeding sense thereof, Wisd. 5.3.
and a sentence accordingly.

Then, belike, whether we feel and confess our unrighteousness, or else brag
and presume of a righteousness, all is one. No, not so, for happy are they,
that findeing their infinite defects, and innumerall wants, nakedness of good,
and guilt of sin, thereby come to that grace and wisdom, by grace to seek
for supply of better things, and helps in him, that is able and sufficient in
this behalf. Wherein an humble agnition of sundry our imperfections
unfeignedly made from the heart, and truly in respect of trespasses ineuitably
committed even of the best men, does not repugne or withstand, but establish,
as I said before, and meruelously settle in men's hearts, and greatly set forth
and commend the righteousness and grace of God, whereby we obtain in Christ,
that which is not in our selves: perfect wisdom, true holiness, entire
righteousness, and everlasting redemption. For look what he our mediator surely
did in our names, and for our sakes, that the Lord accepts as done to him
self, by us conditionally, that we still rely upon him, trust in his mercies,
embrace the promises, renounce our selves, and lean to Christ.

The Prophet Esaias foretold what Christ's office should be, Esaias. 50.11
and was to do: that he should justify many, and by what means, by bearing and
sustaining their sins, which he did upon the cross, when he made due payment
for them and full purchase of that holiness, which he began at his birth, and
continued in the hole race of his life, and finished with his death, but
declared more apparently by his rising again. As the Apostle speaks to the
Romans: Rom 4.25.
He died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Who as in earth
taking our nature upon him, became the mediator between God and man, so also
now still in heaven, he is remaining an intercessour for us, to the father in
our needs and necessities whatsoever. And this his continual intercession for
us, amongst other things does manifestly declare, that which a good Christians
conscience does often tell him of, every night, when he goes to bed, and every
morning when he rises, and every hour when he thinks on his so many duties,
that he owes to the Lord, that questionless he has not such a righteousness
in him, as every sinful Papist prateth of, but in deed in account before
God, has no more true goodness, then proud men can have, and how much that can
be, let the humble judge. But towching perfection or imperfection of
righteousness more distinctly it shall be said in that which follows.

Of the regenerate man's imperfection, yet remaining, and of an impossibility
of the exact keeping of the law.
Our Savior prefers common strumpets, Mat. 25.31 Luc. 15.3.
profane Publicanes, and gross sinners before proud Pharisaicall boasters.
Yea the very Pelagia^ in show is better the^ the hauty Pharisey, though also
so much the worse, because in words he is more modest confessing his
unworthiness, and yet in heart believing the contrary, and recknoning of a
natural perfection, and of a fautlesse integrity. But who taught him to make
a divorce betwixt his tung and his heart? if his heart be pure, why dissemble
his lips? if his lips speak truth, why does his heart dissent? The Lord
resists the proud in heart, and the lying lips he will destroy. Psalm. 12.3.
This fine trick of hypocrisy, the Papist has borrowed of the Pelagian. For
they be of great familiarity, and near kin, and therefore may be bold one
with an other.

Ask any Papist, one or other, whether he think himself righteous or no: he
will say no, and deny it with open protestation. Ask him what he thinks of an
other, he will answer if a man will contend, and endeavor thereunto, the Law is
not so hard, but it may be done and fulfilled: Works of supererogation.
Rhem. not. 1. Cor. 9.16.
nay he will go farther and defend a greater perfection to be in Friars,
Monks, Jesuits etc. then God either of his wisdom could, or of his justice
would command in his law. But ask the Prophets, Esaie, Daniel, and David,
Psalm. 31.6. Daniel. 9.7 Esa. 64.6.
what their judgment is, and these because they are of an other spirit, will
make a diverse answer: that there is not a Saint, but does pray to be
pardoned, shame and confusion belongs to all, the very righteousness of man
is as a stained cloth.

Unto these last words out of the Prophet Esaie, Lib. 6. cap. 22.
Master Stapleton agnizeth, that: Now adays the writers of his own side,
have answered, admodum vary, very variously. But is it possible? I had thought
Papists could not have iarred, or varied on jot one from an other: for so they
can falsely brag. I grant the spirit of an interpreter may be examined, and
judged by others. 1. Cor. 14.32.
For men are men, and being diverse, because all have not all truth in such
measure and knowledge of every circumstance, they may write diuerslly. But what
is the cause of this their so great variety in a matter not hard? Verily,
Bert. de pro pri. verb. lib. 18. cap. 68.
no marvel if you run sidelong, and a slant (like a hare down an hill) or, to
and fro, some one way, some an other, and not forth out right and directly all,
when you come near a text, that makes after you, and in pursuit can not but
overtake, and quite overthrow your errors.

To omit all others, because you omit them to, how take you, M. Stapleton,
the Prophets meaning to be? Marry, that their former righteousness in the
corrupt times under Achaz and Manas. was stained with their latter
unrighteousness, the^ abou^ding, not that the words concern the works of the
Jews, that were good then, or may be applied to the righteousness of Christians
now, and that the Prophet speaking as of himself among others withal, does
but after the manner of Preachers reprehe^ding the peoples vices seem to
include them selves with the rest, howbeit, they be free from such popular
enormities.

So you say master Stapleton, and a man would think to the purpose
altogether, if he see no more then you do, or no farther then you are
disposed to show him. The Prophet does not preach but pray in this place, and
he gives forth the confession of the whole Church, as may clearly appear by
these words. Esai. 64. verse. 8.9. etc.
O Lord we are all thy people, etc. It is true, that they had not only
stained, but changed their righteousness into unrighteousness, the place of
justice into a lodge of murderers, their wine into water, their goulde into
dross, etc. Yet in the Prophets prayer there was more then this. For the
Lord being provoked to just wrath, by unjust dealinges, as he will punish
their grosser faults, so will he not pardon, the imperfections of their best
virtues, except they be content in humility to prostrate themselves, and
confess their own unworthiness, not only when they openly sin, but also when
they seem to do well, and to serve him most. Job. 9.28.
So Job a just man, yet fears nothing more the^ his works: and Esaias knows
with how true words, he conceiueth his prayer.

Let not M. Stapleton reply herein also, that Esaias includes himself generally
in terms, and not in truth. For a man cannot abide a false rich beggar,
specially if he knew him to be rich, and yet hear him to protest his poverty,
and craving relief, and needs none. But howsoever man may be deceived, or
persuaded with the hypocrisy and fained tears of importunate dissemblers,
certainly God will not be mocked. As we believe, so must we pray, and so did
Esaias, whose prayer is therefore written, that it might be a pattern to all
posterity, to believe, pray and confess in like manner.

Neither does the examples, of Noe, Job, Zac. and the like disprove that which
we avouch, that the righteousness of the best being exactly tried at the
touchstone of the Law, shall be found drossie, impure, and even as a defiled
garment, which is not cleansed, but with that soap which purges all. And woe
worth them who ever, that seek to admixe their own sweat, with the blood of
Christ.

Noah was a just man, No^.
that is, was justified in expectation of the Messiah to come, and very just
was he in comparison of the iniquities of the old world, unto whom he was a
preacher of righteousness and godly life, Genes. 6.8.
but the Arc that he made was a tipe of his salvation to be sought for in
Christ, for whose sake he found grace and favor in the eyes of God.

Likewise Jobs confidence was not in him self, Job.
but in that he certainly knew that his redeemer lived in whom also he should
be revived, and whereas somewhere he pleads his innocence, what sick man
being extremely affected has not now and then an extraordinary pang? Yet Job,
as he complains of his grief and heavy sorrow, so withal he makes
confession of his grievous sins, (which are, we know as well the causes often
of sorrow and sickness, as the instruments of trial) and in plea of his
innocence he does it not against God, but against his enemies, as likewise in
respect of the folly of his unwise frinds, who like miserable and unskillful
Physicians, misapplied their phisik, otherwise good enough, he terms them,
as they well deserved. And when he appealeth to the holy throne of God. What
does he? he lays forth the ground of his heart unfeigned, because he defied
the hypocrisy wherewith they falsely charged him.

Zachary and Elizabeth.
So Zachary and Elyzabeth a just couple, paterns of godliness to all, and namely
to all, that are in holy state of wedlock, and a most fair example, for
ministers, and ministers wives, both for the lawfulnes of their marriage, and
also for their upright living therein, notwithstanding that condition of life.
For these both though married, yet were they, Rhem. not. in Luc. cap. 1. verse.
6. Stapl. lib. 6. cap. 13.
Just before God and walked in all the commandments and iustifications of
the Lord without repoofe. Which is as great a commendation as may be attributed
to man. Just before God: walking in all the commandments (moral) and
ordinances (ceremonial) without reproof. And verily at the first blush these
words carry a great show of an absolute perfection against all, that hitherto
has been avouched. For, these two are said to be just, and we hold speaking
strictly, no man is just. These ar termed just before God, and we teach that
no flesh shall be justified in his sight of right in it self. These are here
commmended to have walked in all the hestes of God without reproof, and we
show that this much was fulfilled only and solely of Christ.

The solution and full answer of all this, has been well made of many, and not
very long since in writing by sundry learned, Fox. Ser. de Christ. cruc. L.
Tomson against Feck. etc.
and godly men. I will but dippe the same cloth in the same die again, because
still our adversaries cease not to obscure and deface the true color thereof
as much as in them lies. And first, these were just before God, not because
God could not, but because God would not find fault with them. Psa. 130.3
For if thou observe what is done amiss, O Lord, who shall abide it? shall just
Zachary? or is not Zacharies distrustfulnes recorded, and therefore the use of
his tou^g taken away for a time? or may we think diffidence and distrustfulnes
to be no fault? or if he offended but in this one fault alon, was he not even
for that one fault in the rigor of justice made an offender of the whole law?
Iam. 2.10.
but how then says the scripture, that Zachary was just? no doubt, not if God
should have measured the righteousness of Zachary, by the rule of the law, and
yet no doubt was he a just man as Job and so accepted, Job. 1.1. Genesis 5.22.
and walking with God as Enoch in the Lords sight, in singlenes of mind and
not in an heart, and an heart: but in sincerity, that is to say, before God,
and that in all the commandments, endeavoring the observation of all without
exception, and not specially keeping some and omitting the rest, as if a man
would ward a gate of the city, and suffer all other places else void without
their watch: neither is (all) so taken, as if al had been sim^ly performed to
the full: For he offended in part, as is plain, in not believing the message
from God, and it is said, they walked, which does somewhat argue that they were
but in the way, and not at their journeyes end, whereunto they con^ended one
ward, reverently before God, and carefully before men without reproof.

And in this their iorneie to pass away the way, and the tediousnes thereof
Zachary sings a joyful song concerning the Lords merciful visitation and
his delivery from the hands of our enemies, and of remission of sins, and of
a strong salvation in the house of David to be purchased by Christ, to
Christians, and not by Christians to the^ selves. And Zachary was very well
exercised and skillful in such ditties, and in none other but these. For
whereas he was a Priest, his use and dewty was to offer for sins, both for
the peoples, and for his own first. Epist. 95. ad Sext.
Which thing (says Augustine) some seem little to consider, who urged
Zacharies example in like sort, as the Papists do, unto whom he answered
then, Rhem. not. Romans cap. 3. verse. 10.
as we do to the Papists now adding withal, as Augustine does, that the
sacrifices of Christian prayers: Forgive us trespasses, imports remnants of
imperfections in Christians, even as the old oblations did in the Jews, both
priest and people, till this our imperfection in this world be changed into
perfection in the world to come. And although some be iuster the^ some, as gold
compared with dross, or silver with tin, or gold with gold, or silver with
silver, that is to say the good with the bad, or the good with the good, (...)
or the best among themselves, or though all in common whom God vouchsafes
favor and pardon may be called just, because they are justified, and reputed
so, and acquitted in Christ, yet this being well considered, that men after
grace received, they have received but a measure of grace, is it not a folly to
dream of perfection? The Philosopher could tell them, that that is perfect,
Arist. lib. 1. de coel. cap. 1.
which wants nothing. But how many and how great are the defects even of the
best? And then if the strong men fail what shall the weak do? If the horsemen
yield and fly, shall the footmen undertake the battle, and win the field? If God
find imperfections in his chiefest Saints, and dearest frinds, and loving
^est children, in Abel, Enoch, August. de Nature. and Grac. cap. 36. Rhem. not.
Mat. 19.21 Lib. 6. cap. 6
Melchisedeck Abraham, and the like: a great number of who^ ar reckned up by
name in Augustine. Shall a begging friar, or an idle monk, or a seditious
Jesuit vaunt of perfection before the Lord. To help out the matter M. Stapleton
does distinguish of perfectio^s, though not perfect, yet perfect in suo genere,
and suo modo, in their kind and after their own manner. In deed so may they
be perfect in the hiest degree, in their own kind, and after their own fashion,
that is to say, perfitly bad, and so much the worse, as they more presume of a
good perfection. But that imperfection in one kind, should naturally be a true
perfection and yet imperfect in the same, is very strange and a monstrous
speech in our ears. What? not after a sort? nor in his kind? no southly. For
Pelagius might the^, eue^ as truly have answered with such kind of distinctio^s
for the perfection of his pure naturals, that they were perfect in their kind.
So ma^gle a man, and cut of the chief parts, head and all, and yet you may say
it is a perfect body in that kind, as in such a case it may be. But where is
Aristotels definition: there is nothing perfect, that wa^teth his parts? Yet
because we build not upon me^, what does the word of God require? all our
soul, all the body, all the powers and faculties of both. If ought be wanting
in either, there wants that perfection, that the law requires and Christ
commands: Be you perfect even as your father is perfect. This is the mark,
endeavoring toward it, shooting fair, or coming near is no perfection, except
by way of comparison to the^ that are stark naught, or worse then they. For the
law requires more, and our duty is greater then so, they reply, no, not so,
as though no more were exacted, then personally of our selves can be performed,
or else that there is an exe^ption from such exactnes.

The sick woman in the Gospel, Mar. 5.26.
the more she went to physic, the worse she was: so an error, the more it is
defended, the bigger it grows. And so it fares, with these that would be
their own saviors and shut out Christ. First they strive for a perfection:
when that is disproued, they would be perfect with an imperfection at the least,
and when we show, that that is a mere toy, as they mean it, then they say
God requires no more at our hands, then we can do. Now whether God does so,
or no, in process yet a little further shall be considered, albeit hereof has been sufficiently debated before.

Our Savior Christ, that justly could, unjustly would not, and never falsely
vpbraided, the people whom he loved so tenderly, Ioh. 7.19.
objected unto them, the breach of the Law: Did not Moses give you a Law, but
none of you kept the Law? and least he should seem to touch some and those of
the wickedder sort only, and not all in general the best amongst them are
not excepted: None of you does the law. None. Or be it (which I take ^pperly
to be the meaning of the place) Christ speaks only to the just reproach of
the ungodly, and no meruail. For the godly agnize their imperfections most
willingly, but the godles stand at staves end with God, and plead, not guilty,
against their own conscience. Wherefore in special were such rather to be
convinced of sin, then those that in humblenes of mind, confessed, they were
sinners, and craved pardon for their sins. Yet in respect of either the
voluntary confession of one sort, or the pretended hypocrisy of the other,
reprehended of Christ, it is more then manifest, that the law was tra^sgressed
of al.

But this was De non facto: they did it not: but might they not have done the
law? or if they being naught, could not do well, could not their betters, or
can not the best perform the law?

I would be loath to call that, or them impure or polluted, Act. 10.15.
or any way imperfite, whom God has sanctified, and perfited in his son. But
this is not the question, what we are reputed to do in Christ: neither should
this be the question, whether by the spirit of God and grace through Christ,
we can fulfill the Law. Romans 11.
For the Law exacteth full obedience proceeding as from our selves, if we once
seek to be justified thereby. Yet because our adversaries call that now only
into controversy, what man can do by the help of grace, thereby at least to
maintain somewhat in them selves, as if they would say, that they could swim
if they were held up by the chinne, and they can keep the law, The. notes To.
c. 8. v. 4.
by the grace of Christ, and spirit of God. I confess by the grace of God we
are that we are, and the grace of God is not in vain in his own children: yet
not in so full measure, or rather without measure, as it was in Christ, who
only was able to undertake that, that no man ever has done else, or shall do
herafter, or can do at any time. For if it were otherwise, what singular thing
ascribe we more to him, then to some other? A greater matter then the fulfilling
of the Law is hardly found. Therefore they set the birth, and life, and passion,
and person of Christ, at a very small, and vile prise, that make no more
account thereof, then to be as it were but a pair of oars to convey us
somewhat the easilier thither, August, de verb. Apost 13
whither happily with more leisure, and some greater labor we might come at
length, whereunto in deed we can never attain, but by him, and by him alone,
as an wholly agent therein.

M. Stapleton demands thus much: whether grace and power divine, have not
that force, as to remove that our old corruption, which was contracted and
drawn from Adam, and likewise to restore again the perfection that was at the
first? whereunto his own simpering answer is such that it seems to burn his
lips in the utterance of certain allegations out of Austine and Jerome. For
both of these are more for us, he knows full well, then for him in all their
discourses hereof, if they be well wayed and wisely considered. Who disputing to
and fro, do rather precisely teach the omnipotent ability of God, then exactly
define, that man is or may be, or certainly ever either was or shall be of such a
perfection in this life. M. Stapleton him self, does but say, Hierom.
Non abhorret Ieronimus ab ista sente^tia: Ieromes stomach does scant serve him
to taste of M. Stapletons corrupt viandes.

The Law is possible, and the Law is impossible, two contrary sentences in
sound, and yet they both true in some sense, as the two cherubins sitting
opposite each to other yet both looking into the propitiatory: so these sentences
though seeming contrary, yet respect either, a known truth in divinity. If we
consider man either in his first creation, or in his glorified estate after
this life, The substance of the Law remains in force eue^ in the next life.
the Law was possible, and shall be easy. By the way if any ask whether Moses
Law shall serve in the world to come, I am of opinion in substance, as of
loving God above all things, and others as our selves, it shall be the same,
though not in circumstances which must needs suffer alteration, with the
change of the whole world. Then again the Law is possible to be done, for it
was done of Christ. And again in some sort it may be said to be possible, and
done of Christians, for God deputeth all to be done, when he forgiueth all that
is not do^e. But the Pelagian thought him self a trim man, when he could say
as the Papist does say, God does not command impossible things. Yes (says
Augustine,) and shows the end why, to humble men, and to teach the^ the
goodness of the forgiuer, and also their duty in craving forgiveness of the
Lord.

The same Augustine some where does also in as express words as may be,
Augustine
avouch that the Law is possible. True. But withal it is worth the labor
the while to observe in so learned a doctor some certain circumstances, the
better to attain to the true meaning of his doctrine, that the bare name of
such a father carry no man away. If he did simply say so, yet the foundation of
our belief is not grounded on man, Ep. ad Hier 19. ad Vincen. Don. 48.
as Augustine him self shows full well in nombers of places. But concerning
the present question, Augustine was far enough from a Papisticall pride in an
imagined ability of humane perfection. When his auditors waxed slack, and weary
of well doing, and yet because sin is never without a shift, they used to
say: that they would do this or that, but could not do according to Augustins
exhortations. For example. I can not love mine enemies, says one, I can not
refrain my self from drinking, says an other, I must needs be drunk,
especially when such or such a personage enforces me: Austin replieth: Nolle
in cul pa est nostra, Sermon. de Temp. 232
and non posse praetenditur. O sinful man when thou will not, thou prete^dest
that thou can not do thy duty, either in loving thy neighbor, or in
forgoing thy lusts. God that gives more grace then so to his children, knows
best, what thou can do, and that so idle, and friuolouse excuses will not
serve. Neither does Austin argue the plenarie fulfilling of the whole Law
exactly in all points, but only endeavoring to persuade to charitable dealing,
says, though thou can not do this or that, fast, sell all, etc. Yet can
thou not love? can thou not have charity? whereby I gather, as out of him so
elsewhere out of other writers, The Law is not impossible in part, but in
perfection.
that this word impossible is not taken for an impossibility in every kind
of degree, which no wise man will yield unto. For albeit we can not possibly be
so perfect in the same equality as is required, yet a desire by imitation, and
in some degree by grace may be and is in us: Clem. Alex. poedag. lib. 1 cap. 6
Virg. aen. l. ^
as it is in the Poet of the son that follows his father, though he could
not keep pace with him: Sequitur que Patrem non passibus aequis: we may
follow, though we can not or run cheek by cheek, (as the proverb is) iumpe
so fast, or just so far, as is commanded: yet no wise man dare call this
that perfection that the Papist would have.

But the nature of man is like the lazy houswife, that when she had more to do
the^ she knew she cold well dispatch, takes and sits her down, and lets
al undone. (...) farther, from meriting. For imperfection meriteth nothing, but
craves pardon, because of default.

But we will go on in precise terms to speak of merits. As grace is free,
and can not stand with merits, so merits deserve, and need not grace, if they
be merits. The East and west, will sooner meet together, then grace and merits
will meet together and agree in one in the salvation of man. For if thou will
be saved by the one, thou can not by the other. Neither may thou part
stakes betwixt them both. For the Apostle takes away desert, before he
establishes favor and grace.

M. Stapleton sings in a quite contrary tune to this: Lib. 10. c. 2
and tells us in plain and shrill words, that the inheritance of salvation
(albeit the very word inheritance might have taught him an other lesson) is
given to the sons of God, not because they are sons (freely by favor) but
because they are his good children: neither yet because they are good, but
(withal) because they are children and good. As if partly we inherit by faith,
whereby we are his children, and partly by works, which must make us good, and
whereby in great part we deserve, which Austin shows to be no safe way.

I ask this question by the way: may we be good, and yet not his children,
or can we be his children, and yet consequently not good? What God has
coupled, why does M. Stapletons vain strength endeavor to hale, and rent a
sunder? If we be not sons, then are we naught, nether posibly can we be good
by any working. For all good works, before they deserve the name of good, are
first hallowed in Christ, sprinkled with his blood, wrought by his Spirit, and
offered in his name upon the alter of faith, as proceeding from his dear
children, or else they be naught, and being naught, they can make nothing
better. Act. 15.9
But we be once his sonns by faith, which pufieth the heart, and indueth with
his spirit, which sanctifies the soul, how can we be but good? And now being
his sons by a vouchsafed privilege, not of desert but of adoption, the^ ar
we also heirs, coheirs with Christ, in this life here both to do well, that
(...) graciouse a father may be glorified in his children, and many times to
suffer evil (...) the worlds hands, Rhem. notes Romans 8.17
that we may be glorified with Christ in heaven, which is a condition expressed
in S. Paul not as a cause precedent to make us sons, and so heirs, but as a
consequent of duty, because we are sons, and heirs, that therefore we ow
all duty, and in reason must, being members be correspondent, and aunswerable
to the head, that in the end we may enjoy most freely the performance of what
so ever was in most free manner before promised. For as the promis was fre at
the first, so the performance being greater and more comfortable in the effect,
can not be less free in the end, then was the promise at the first offered.

The greatness of salvation in our state to be glorified after the
consummation of all things comes afterward in due place to be spoken of. In
the mean time to show how little such so infinite a blessing can be worthily and
of desert attained unto, is thereby manifest, because that glory is infinite,
and the desert, if it were desert, yet were it finit. For the glory is
eternal, and the merit temporal, the one ended in a small momentary time, the
other everlasting without end, in so much that whereas there is with out all
dout, no proportion nor comparison of equality betwixt the desert and the thing
deserved, who can avouch that he can deserve, or who dare say, I merit, or I
purchase with the rustie money of mine own frail works, the glorious crown
of everlasting salvation, even as a hireling or a journey man does his wages?

As in bargains there is no even buying or selling, but where a penny worth is
to be had for a penie, and a penny is a penny worth: so properly there is no
desert, but where there is an aunswerable rate in deserving, which because it
can not possibly be between us men and God, between God and man's salvation,
farewell merits, as they are properly taken. Improperly how the word may be
taken in sundry of the fathers is not directly to the point of the question
concerning the prise, desert, worth and valor, of works and the nature of
merits, Rhem. not. 1. Cor. 3.8
as the Papists take the name of merits.

Wherefore with much a do M. Stapleton against the hair, and perforce, can not
choose but grant, that in deed there is no equality in the former respects as
we be me^, but yet as we be Christian me^, he says there is an equality and
his reasons be these: because the adopted sonns heritage be it never so great,
Stap. lib. 10 cap. 2
(as he thinks) exceeds not the worthiness of the person adopted: De
nostro meremur, we merit of our selves.

There is never a true word in all this proud folly: for what should I call it
else?

No-desert is thereby the more manifested, and ought a great deal the more
openly of the adopted son to be proclaimed. Moreover if the father would not
require ought, de nostro saved, by works, be it far from Christian, and
humble minds. For shall a man begin with Christ and end in him self, or begin
with the Gospel and end with Moses? Arist.
The end of every thing is the perfection thereof: but are our works so perfect,
perfiter then grace? does God but the first, and least part, and are our selves
authors, causers, and finishers, of the chiefest, the latest, and the greatest
parts? who would think that the cloth of righteousness were thus patched up
of some small piece of purple died in the blood of Christ, and all the rest to
be made of man's own rags? Cost it so little to redeem sinners? why did the
holy man fear his works as nothing more? was he like the simple bird, that
ducketh at the barn door, where the door is high enough, and no fear of
hurting her head? No. Job was well advised in his saying. For might or did he
merit, why did he fear? But therefore he feared because he knew that he could
not merit, demerit he could a just condemnation, if he should rely upon the
worthiness of his own works. And therefore he feared the lightness and
insufficiency thereof, and leaned only to a better stay, to the mercy of God,
and to the merits of Christ his Redeemer, which should buie out and pay for
the unworthiness that otherwise was in his works.

I never find the adversary without some shift. Rhem. not. 1. Cor. 3.8.
But of all tricks, that is most fond, and an impudent folly, Quicquuid in rei
veritate habea^t tamen etc.
whereby they say that Job, and Jobs like did merit, yet would they not glory
in their merits, professing ever in words the contrary, as who would say in
plain speech man might glory, Sta. l. 5. c. 17.
having sufficient matter of merits to glory in, yet of courtesy would not,
but was content to yield the glory to God: to whom forsooth otherwise in full
right, and in whole it did not so directly, and duly appertain: so that if good
men were not beneficial and favorable in this behalf, the glory of God were
and might be much diminished, and greatly impaired, if every one would but
challenge his own and take his due.

Our Savior Christ schooleth his disciples after an other fashion, Luc. 17.7.
telling the^, that when they had done all (if yet they could) that was
commanded them, yet should they say that they were improfitable servants. Sta.
l. 5. c. 17
What? say so, and not think so? that were hypocrisy. Say so, and it were not
true? that were a ly, and therefore sin. Say so, for modesties sake? There is
no modesty, no humility against and without the truth, yet say so. Why?
Psalm. 16
does God stand in need of man's glozing? No. he needs not our best works.
But why do not the Papists then say so much? Why say they not flat, without
sta^mering that they are unprofitable servants? Nay, why say they that they are
deseruers? what they are, they will not redily say: what they are not, they
brag, or at the least pretend that they are.

As things (especially spiritual) are in their own nature, so must we
conceive of them, or else we conceive amiss. Esaias 5.20
And as we conceive, so must we confess of the^ and speak by them. Wherefore
doubtless of our selves (what ever boasters patter in pride to the contrary)
we must both conceive humbly, and confess truly and plainly that we are in
respect of meriting, but unprofitable servants.

It is granted of all parts, that God has ordained, that man should be
profitable to man, and one commodiouse to an other, each man lending his help,
and helping hand to his neighbor, wherein yet because frail flesh sometimes in
the duties and many times in the degrees of charity offe^deth, we are to crave
pardon, even in this respect also. But when we speak of meriting with God,
Rhem. not. Luc. 17.10.
we must show that we are profitable to him, or else of him we merit not
profitably to our selves, as our new notes would have it, but that is
impossible. For what profit takes the spring by him that tastes of the waters
that issue from the spring, Aug. de ciu Dei. l. 10. c. 5
or the Sun by the eye, that sees by the Suns light? Or God by our works,
which proceed from him self, and therefore if yet they be profitable to him,
yet are they not properly ours, and so not profitable to him as from us
deserving of him, but as his own to him self: Rhem. notes 2. Tim. 4.8.
and therefore not worth thanks at our hands, much less vailable to merit
truly and properly as they speak, and truly in that they but pass thorough
us, they take some kind of our imperfection along with them, in so much, that
albeit God the giver be perfect, and his gifts clean, notwithstanding man's
unclean and leprouse hand in the very receiving and usage of them does after
a sort soil them, so that there can be no claim of worthiness by them at
all. Now as for servants to be profitable to themselves, is a strange shift,
and I will not spend labor to confute that which common experience does detest.
For who will count him a profitable servant, that is profitable to him self
and not to his master.

It were better for man to enter low into him self, and to common with his own
soul in these, and to common with his own soul in these cases especially that
so nearly concern the soul, Iud. 16.5.
and as Dalila relied in Samsons bosom to know where his strength lay, even
so never to leave of till he has traced and found out, his own weakness in good
things, and his strength in sin, and then shall he the better be able to sit
in judgment, and give sentence upon him self, no dout against the merits of
man with the mercy of God, in whose sight otherwise no flesh ever shall be
justified, or profitable unto him self in that respect.

The Papists do but daly and play with Gods judgments. The Prophet is plain,
and speaks from a conscience well informed, that in the sight of God none
shall be justified: None, that is to say, none before grace, says a chief
Papist. But Hosius, and out of him Stapleton, and others like not that: For
David a man according to Gods own heart, and therefore in state of grace, yet
said he of himself, and that none in the Lords sight shall be justified. For
that which is right in the sight of man (because his eyesight may be deceived)
yet therein Gods sight can not be deceived. He sees the inwards, searches,
and sounds the bottom of secreat, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
and unknown sins. Wherein if flesh will flatter it self, and lie, and say
it has no sin, yet God has an eye that perceth farther, and a stretched out
arm, and he will reach his hand into the cocatrice nest, and pluck thence,
and display abroad the serpent that lurketh and lodges in the den of a dead
and rotten conscience, that has no feeling nor sense of stinging sins. For in
his sight hidden faults shall not so escape, and therefore it is good praying
ever: Cleanse us, O Lord, eue^ us they people, from our secret offenses: we
know and confess, that no flesh can be justified in thy sight.

But I know not what M. Sapleton and Hosius mean to labor to prove that this
saying of David, Stapl. lib. 6. cap. 1. Hos. lib. conf. ca. 73.
is spoken by way of comparison, and that in his sight, is in comparison of
God him self. For does God in judgment mean to compare us to himself, and so
to condemn us? Yet what gain they by this? we confess this is true, whether
it be the natural meaning of this text or no. For in comparison of the sun in
his strength, what is a candle or a star, or all the stars of the sky? in
comparison of the almighty what is man? at his presence the mountains melt,
the earth does shake, the very Angels are not clean in his sight, how much
less flesh and blood, that dwells in houses of clay, and whose foundation is
but mortar? All this is true. But one truth is not contrary to an other. None
shall be justified before grace. It is true. None shall be justified in comparison
of God, it is true to. And it is most true also that David says, and Jerome
expounds, that not only in comparison, Hierom. in Ier. 13. cap. Where he
terms this their exposition the exposition of heretics and of the patrons
of heretics.
but also in the knowledge of God in his sight, no flesh shall be justified. And
all these truths prove this one truth, that none shall be justified by their
merits neither before nor after grace, but altogether by grace, which works
not only at the first all and afterward somewhat, but begins all,
continues in all, and ends all in all if they will be justified in deed.

This is S. Paul's doctrine throughout all his Epistles, who shows that God
works in us both to will and to work to the end that we may will
effectually, Phil. 2.13.
and all for his own good will he works in us to will. I ask then where is
free will? he works in us to work: the^ I ask where are merits? he works
in us to will and to work, and all: and the^ I ask, where is any thing in man?

It is not in the willer, nor in the runner, but of God that takes mercy.
Romans 9.
It is not in the willer, and then I ask once again, where is free will? it
is not in the runner, and then where are works, and worthiness of works? If it
be replied that therefore the Apostle, says it is not in the runner nor in the
willer, but in the mercy of God, Rhem. not. Romans cap. 9.16. verse.
because it is not only in either of both these, but in them and withal in
the mercy of God to: then see, if it be so, the sentence will be true, if we
turn it backward thus by the same reason: It is not in the mercy of God, but
in the runner, and in the willer, because as the Papist says: al is not in
mercy, but part in mercy, and part in fee will, part in works, part in
merits, and therefore they may as well say: it is not in mercy but in merits,
in works, will, and well deserving.

The adversaries would seem to favor much catholic words, and catholic
manner of speaking. Was there ever Catholic or Christian under heaven that
spoke thus, as they in effect do, that our salvation is not of God, that
takes mercy, but in deserts?

The name of merit in Canoni. scripture is not only not commonly used (as they
now can say) but no where found, Rhem. not. 1. Cor. 3.8.
the nature of meriting is flat against all scriptures. And must yet merits be
set up in eue^ place, with mercy? or rather displace mercy quit? For S Paul
teaches, Romans 11.
that works and mercy ca^ not stand together in respect of glory: truly no
more then could Dagon and the Arc in the temple of the Philistines. Establish
mercy, and let fall, (I say not the use) but the glory of works: set up
works, and what need mercy? set them up I mean in the throne of meriting.

Austine mentions the name of merits: Aug. epist. 105.
Barnard says he is not without his merits, but both in an other meaning, the^
the Papist means. For a merit with Augustine is no other matter, the^ good
works, merely proceeding from the spirit of God, done in faith, and only
accepted by mercy, and then rewarded, and so crowned, and neither as issuing
out of free will, nor as equal mate, conjoined with grace, neither in working
perfect, not in value deserving Bernard says that he has merits: Bar. in Ps.
Qui habitat. de 14. ver. Sermon. 15. Esai. 50.1.
for the Lord has mercies. Other merits Bernard has none, that is, no
merits in deed, but as it is said in the Prophet, that we must come and buy
the waters of life freely, and that without money: which is in truth no buying,
no more is the other meriting. The stipende of sin is death properly: that is
true, but is life everlasting, the stipend of merits? Romans 6.23.
no: the Apostle alters the course of his speech. Yet might he as easily have
so said, and most aunswerable to the tenor of his former saying if it had
been so, but he says, everlasting life is the gift of God, Rhem. not. 2. Tim.
4.8.
a gift, ergo not the stipende of deserte, as they expressly term it in these
words: good works done by grace after the first Justification, be properly,
and truly meritorious fully worthy of everlasting life. And thereupon heaven is
the due stipend which God owes to the persons so working by grace. But S. Paul
calls everlasting life a gift, and not a stipend as Austine well notes:
these me^ call it a just stipend. Now let the indifferent reader compare these
contraries together and he shall soon discern the truth of them.

M. Harding a man that could set a fair show upon a foul cause, presses,
Har. detect. lib. 5. cap. 12. Mat. 20.1.
and disputes the parable mentioned in S. Matthew, where the kingdom of God
is likened to a man that went out early in the morning, to hyre servants into
his vinearde: some he hired at one hour, some at an other, some at the third,
others at the six, some at the tenth, and others at the eleventh. When evening
came he gave every one alike, and then they which came first, and had borne
the heat of the day, and the burden of the whole labor, murmured, because of
the inequality of their pay. One of the^ was answered, that he should take his
penny, wherefore he was hired, and if the householder would be more liberal to
them that labored less, what was that to him, that wrought more and longer
time, and yet perchance less then of duty he should, may not a man do with
his own, which way he will? out of this M. Harding reasons in sense this: (I
will spin his argument as far as it can run). The householder is God, the
laborer is working in our vocation, the penny is life everlasting, the
householder bid the murmuring laborer to be content with his hyre, and take
that, which was his: then was it his: the price of his hyre is the penny for
his labor, and the penny is life everlasting, here is sufficient proof, for
meriting, I trow, Rhem. not. 1. Tim. 4.8. Mat. 25.27 Luc. 16.8.
and so does the Rhemish notes tell us. But soft, every part of a parable is
not a good proof for a doctrine in belief. For so can I prove usury to be
lawful, unfaithfulness to be laudable, and all most, what not? In proper
words, without parable this is plain, we ought to serve the Lord withal our
strength, and powers both of body and soul, all the hours of the day, that
is, all the days of our life, and when eeuening is come and our life ended,
after all our labors in the vineyarde of the Church militant, We have done
but the duty that we ought, and dew debt is no desert: quae debuimus facere,
Luc. 17.10.
fecimus. This is plain and true, and shall we force some parts of a parable
to prove it false? But the householder says: Take that is thine: wherefore it
was his, what? his that murmured, his whose eye was naught? repiners, and
envious persons shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, the penny of
salvation is not for such. For such I say, without repentance, much less for
such as call for it of precise desert. Nay the equality of a penny given a like
to all, does evidently declare, Ambros. de vocat. Ge^t. lib. 1. cap. 5.
that though their are diversities in time of vocations, which is the chief
end of the parable, yet the reward stands only upon mercy, which gave to
the last as to the first. If all had gone by desert, then the greatest
labourer, might duly have required the greatest wages. But I pray you, are we
hirelings? nay, we are sons and heirs: we look not for a penny, as of hire,
but yet we expect our penye, and that of mere gift, even because our God may
do with his own what him please: and he will in time bestow it upon us his
own, even for his Christ's sake, in whom alone we only trust, and not in our
selves.

O, this opinion will decay good works meruelously, and greatly increase
either idleness, or swarms of evil livers. Why? It was meruele then that
Christ foresawe not the inconueuience, when he gave to the last as he gave to
the first. In deed if we be vagabondes, or lazy drones, or if ^^ke the greedy
Zuytzer that will not fight but for his guilt, it is an other matter. But if we
be sons and children, we obey our father not to the end to merit but to show
all duty, and because we are sons.

The difference then betwixt us and the adversaries stands on these points,
both they and we work, they to merit, we to show our duty: they for hyre, we
for love, they as servants, we as sons, they to purchase, and we because
Christ has purchased for us life everlasting, they work and seek glory in
their works, we work and glory only in Christ, they work and talk of
perfection, we work, and agnize our imperfections in working. They if they do
but a good deed, if it be once done, they stand upon it, walk and iet
thereon, though it be but the ice of one nights freezing, we when we have done
all, we say we are unprofitable servants. Ios. 7.21.
We dare not bury our sins like Acham in the earth, nor wrappe them in a
sort of fair green figleued distinctions: we speak with the words and in
the sense, that Christ has taught us, and in none other. We run, we labor,
we fight, we keep the faith, and yet not we, but Christ in us. And when we
have done all, yet have we done but our duty, and not deserved. And this is
our judgment in few and plain words concerning meriting: wherein if we have
spoken evil, let them convict us of error, Ioh. 12.48. Act. 17.11.
let the world bear witness, and the word be judge.

How only faith does justify and save.
IF then justification come not by works, nor salvation by merits, what is the
mean whereby both the one and the other is apprehended? First it has been
clearly proved hitherto, that there is no meriting without perfection, and
likewise that perfection there can be none, Act. 15.10.
the yoke of the law being heuier, then that the fathers strong shoulders could
bear it up: and therefore to great a burden for their children, who came after
and were weaker: and that not only in respect of the ceremonial Law, (which
Master Stapleton supposes) but rather in regard of the Law of deeds. Lib. 6.
cap. 6
For their ceremonies were neither so many in number, nor in observation so
hard: and how troublesome soever they were to the priesthod, notwithstanding
generally to the people were they both very few, and very easy, to speak of.
But yet because by the ceremonies, as namely the circumcision, if they trusted
therein, they were become debtors of the whole Law, therefore was the Law an
insupportable yoke, and whereby possibly came no perfection, in consideration
whereof S. Peter preaches in the Acts, that by grace in Jesus Christ, through
belief salvation is attained. The hand of favor reaches it forth, the hand
of faith receaueth it offered, and the spirit of adoption reposeth it in the
hearts of beleuers, and seals it fast up in the assurance of a certain hope
against the day of everlasting redemption.

Herein we lean not to a broken reed, neither feeke we for moisture, Job.
6.20.
as they that went to Tema and Scheba, in the wilderness, where the waters were
dried up: we look not to try balm out of the hard flint. For worldly
promotion comes neither from the West nor from the East, much less eternal
salvation. Only by grace we believe to be saved, and neither in part, The
meaning of these words says alone does save expounded.
neither in whole by any thing else. And this is our meaning, when we say:
Faith alone does save, and justify: that is: we are wholely saved, and solely
justified by God alone, in whom we believe and neither by the preparations of
nature, nor by the liberty of will, or else by the worthynes of any deeds as
parts and causes of our justification, our whole repose is only in the mercy
of the father, that gave us his son, and in the merit of the son that laid
down his life to save us then, when we were his enemies, and much more no
doubt, now saves he us when we are his frindes, Phil. 1.29.
by faith in him, and that not for the dignity of faith. For the merit of
salvation rests still in him the Savior, and not in us the persons saved.
And faith it self although it be no cause of procuring, but a mean of
receiving salvation, yet is it also the gift of God, who knows only, (as
Augustine speaks) how to give to, and not to take of his creatures, and
therefore, we trust in him, and only in him. And this is the doctrine of faith,
and of all the faithful of all ages, and of all places, that it is only faith,
that receaueth salvation, that is in effect, that God alone and only he does
all as the sole cause of saving the faithful, that they may believe steadfastly
in him, and in him alone.

A while in these latter days and corrupt times, when the ruins of true
doctrine were gretest, with bold faces a sort of ignorant and vnreaden
scriblers bore the world in hand, that Solafides, only faith was a mo^ster
never born, nor heard of til Luther forged it first. Since, being compeld to
lay aside a little their school brablers, and to take in hand the ancient
fathers, and old doctors, whereunto they were skilfully directed, by the learned
of this last age, their outcries, that those words (only faith) in good record
can not be found, are well slaked.

At length even M. Stapleton him self, can cite redily, Stapl. lib. 8. cap. 35.
Hylary, Origin, Chrisosto^, Basile, Austine, and others, and he quoteth places
in plain and pregna^t words as clear as cristall that only faith does
justify. But now when he has found, the words which were first found to his
hands: Rhem. not. Iam. 2.24
both he and out of him our M. of Rhemes reioine: that the fathers never wrote
the^ in sensu Protestantum, in the sense and meaning that the Protestants take
the^: as if belike, they were very like our Papists, that sometime speak well,
and mean il, not only of the Prince, and the laws in the common wealth, but
also of Christ, of his grace, and of the scripture in the Church of God. But
concerning the point of this matter: Only faith does justify. So say we, as
said the fathers before us many years ago, their words be the same with ours,
and why not their sense? First forsooth in saying that only faith does
justify, is meant that the Law cannot justify without faith. Does then the
Law justify with faith, and faith together with the Law? and do the
fathers mean so? truly children would be more the^ ashamed of such
contradictions, you let not most falsely to father upon those good men and
fathers of reverend and godly memory. For if faith do justify alone as say
they, and say truly, then doubtless without the law does it justify, or if
not without the law, or if the law with it, then not alone. For whosoever does
any thing alone, he does it without the help of any other. Wherefore faith
justifying alone does it without the law, or any thing else except perchance
alone signify not alone, which may be true in Rhemes, and Doway, verily we that
tarry at home, and rome not abroad, never hard the like interpretation in any
of our schools

Again only faith (they say) excludes the works of nature, as the virtues of
the Gentiles, and in case of necessity where time wa^teth only faith is
sufficient, nether are external works required, as of the thief on the cross.
Farther, only faith is opposed either to the misbeleef of heretics, or unto
the vnbe lefe of infidels, likewise is it set up against the pride of vaunting
Phariseis, and also against the fond busy curiosity of vain heads. In
these senses only, is only faith meant and taken in the fathers. Well, if this
were so, what of all this? for the first of all these last answers heaped up
together, be it agreed upon, that faith alone does justify, without natures
work at all. For so upon good occasion and warrant out of the word of god,
have the fathers spoken, and so you seem to agnize that they have. Well then, be
it concluded as an everlasting truth, that in the case of justifying, nature
has not to do at all. And will you grant this? no not so, and why not so?
because (as you dream) faith alone does justify, is as much to say, as nature
does not justify without faith, but with faith it does. This was the former
starting hole: where faith alon was faith and the law, and here faith alone is
faith and nature. Verily this is not faith alone, but sport alone for Satan:
but to us that morn and thirst for your salvation, what a singular grief is it
to consider how me^ that bear the name of Christians will needs be thus
wilfully deceived, dancing and skipping up and down in the netts of their own
devising, and think no man discerns. The fathers intend by this word only
faith to exclude both the Law of Moses and the Law of nature. But they conclude
all together, and include the works of the one and the other within faith.
Call ye me this excluding? then to go on with the rest, you say when some of
the Fathers by only faith exclude, pride, infidelity, heresy, and
curiosity, you may as well say, verum est, without faith: and yet
notwithstanding conioyne them altogether faith and infidelity, faith and
pride, faith and heresy, faith and curiosity, making up (as it were) a
Daniels image of contrary metals, Dan. 2.33
that can not possibly cleave or hang together. But if excluding be including,
you may say and conclude what you will, and distinguish at pleasure, and defend
with ease, and all is well, specially if you get but favorable readers, that
can and will think what soever comes from beyond seas must needs go for
good. Not withstanding that the simple may see the childish fondness, and the
extreme falsitie of this so absurd dealing, I will show it then in the like
reason: I would have a garment made only of cloth, meaning by only cloth to
exclude stitching, lacing, and facing with silk: shall the Tailor come, and
stitch, lace and face my garment, and face me out, that when I willed it to be
made of cloth alone, that without cloth forsooth, I would not have it stitcht,
laced and faced: but with cloth I would. Verily it had need be a very broad
cloth, that ca^ cover over all this folly, it is so broad: and a very cunning,
not a Tailor but a Rhetorician, or rather a Magician that must persuade me so,
and so bewitch a man against all sense and reason in the world.

As for the thief, that was saved by faith alone without external works
alleged by the Fathers, that does very well prove that faith alone in saving
does the deed, Ambros. in Romans 3
and not works. For the way to heaven is but single, and one and the same to
all. The thief was saved and entered Paradise by faith only: therefore also
must all so do, if they will enter. For God will not save some by him self in
mercy, and save others by them selves, partly in mercy, and partly by their
own works. If the thief had lived longer time he should and would have lived
well: but his believing was the wing that carried him up, and the key that
opened the door of heaven. When time wants not, only faith excludes not
either works or the goodness of works in earth, but the meritoriouse
deserving by works with God in heaven, and hereby both in heaven and in earth
the free mercy and grace of God is believed, embraced, and gloriously set
forth, by this most excellent confession of only faith, whereby we agnize the
gift, the free gift of God according to his purpose, promis, favor, grace, and
mere mercy.

In the story of the Gospel in particular, by examples thus much is proved,
and where only faith is named, exacted, and commended even in bodily cares,
much more in ghostly causes of the soul, where our Savior does not so much
respect the tears of some, or in others their fear and trembling, nor their
crying and calling after him, but their faith, and the greatness of their
faith. Mat. 9.22 Luc. 7.50 Mat. 15.28 Luc. 8.50
Thy faith has made the whole Thy faith has saved thee. O woman great is thy
faith. I have not found so great faith in Israel. And in the eight of Luke,
and fifte of Mark. Believe only. Only mark that. And withal mark, if you
will the Papists doubling answer herunto. Rhem. not. Mar. 5.36
Only believe, that is either especially, or only in cases of bodily
diseases. What? I pray you why say you or and or? If only be not only but
especially and principally, then say so. Or if only be only, then say so, and
houer not up and down like the bird that was sent out of the ark, Genesis 8.9
and could not find where to set her foot. But in deed neither is only,
especially, neither is only, only in bodily sickness alone, as shall
plainly appear. And therefore herein ye have made us not only one lie alone,
but two loud lies, and those together without taking breath one upon an
another head. For, as for the first, was Christ like your Physician, that
bids his pacient be of good cheer and only have a good heart, yet withal
a good diet must be kept, and potions received, as things more requisite? O M.
Allen, and M. Martin, and who ever else had finger in that your late gewgawe
translation: was there, I say not were there other things, but was there any
one thing, not only more requisite, but in equal degree as necessary as
faith? Luc. 8.44
For would Christ require the less, and omit the more necessary? or if many
things were to be required, would he say, only believe. No. when all other
helps failed, then they came to our Savior. And therefore other helps being
preternecessarie he well required the^ wholly to put their trust in him: not that
he could not cure, yea revive without their believing that he could, but that
duty would he have at their hands, and only that in such respects.

Wherefore when this former shift served not the turn, you added, though only
faith be requisite and nothing else, yet that concerned the healing of the
body, and not the saving of the soul. Of healing the body I grant: but
withal of saving the soul, that these words are not spoken, is not so easily
proved. For Christ Jesus the Savior both of body and soul, most principally
saves the most principal part, and therefore to show what, and how alone he
works specially in recuring their souls diseased with sin, view those
miraculous cures done so evidently upon their bodies. Wherefore by convenient
reason it follows, if faith alone be required in the^, much rather in the
other, wherein consists the greater cure in us, and whence arises the
greater glory to him self that cures.

Contrary to this in the example of Mary Magdalen somewhat is brought forth
as who therefore had her sins forgiven, Rhem. not. Luc. 7.50
because she loved much. So that love also was required, and not faith alone.
Consider we the story a little for our better understanding: wherein it is said
to her: Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. and a little before both of and
to her: Many sins are forgiven, because she loved much. Our of which I
observe 4. notes, remission of sins, peace of conscience faith embracing
salvation, and due love ensuing thereupon. Peace of mind comes after ward in
place to be spoken of. The sole mean of receiving remission is faith, the only
cause of remitting is mercy. For otherwise remission were no remission. And
were not faith the only mean, but her love also as the Rhemish note is: Christ
when he said: Thy faith has saved the, he should have said nay thy love and thy
faith, or thy faith and thy love have saved thee: especially were love so
noble, and so co^pendious, and so effectual a disposition theru^to, Lib. 8. c.
30.
as M. Stapleto^ bears us in hand it is, and in her was, Many sins were for
given her, because she loved. The Greek word does signify therefore, (...)
as well as because But they urge the word because, as a precedent cause. But se
the like even in the same word: we say, this apple tree is a good tree. why?
because it bears good fruit. Yet is not the fruit cause of the tree, nor the
goodness of the apple cause of the good tree, but indeed because the tree is
good, therefore it brings fruit according to his kind, and this is the proper
natural cause, but we in common speech say it is a good tree because we taste
the goodness in the fruit. But this kind of cause is an after cause and a
cause in reasoning, but no making cause as nether was Mary's love, of her sins
remitted. But therefore she loved, not that the dignity of her love was
precede^t to the pardon of her sins, but having received favor and pardon,
co^seque^tly her dutiful love ensued thereupon. This appears by that saying
inserted: to who^ less is forgiven, he loves less, to who^ more, he loves
more. Mary had many sins forgiven her, and therefore she loved accordingly:
and therefore Christ said. i. concluded, many sins were forgiven because she
loved much. This objection has bin answered more the^ 1000. times. In a word I
will show that nether did she, nor could she, love and love so entirly, before
her sins were remitted. For beig not in the state of grace, what could her love
be but lust, and no love, fancy and no true dilection? a notorious sinner she
was, and therefore very far from loving, and nothing near loving much
aright. They that love God, keep his commandments: so do not sinners: then
did not she. Calls M. Stapleton this a noble disposition? God be merciful
unto us, as he was to Marie, that we may show tokens of a true love, as she
did, not before, but after the multitude of all our sins pardoned, and done
away in Jesus Christ our only Savior.

The fairest argument of all other to the show is a conclusion that S. James
makes: and at the first sight, would make a man think, greatly making
against the doctrine of only faith, where he says: ye see then how a man is
justified of works and not of faith only. whereas notwithstanding S. Paul
every where inculcateth nothing more then faith without works. Doubtless these
noble Apostles are not contrary the one to the other: neither are the
Scripturs as a house divided in it self. God forbid they should.

S. Paul teaching that we are saved by grace, and therefore not by works, yet
for that there were certain vain persons crept in among them, he exhorts
withal that they should not receive the grace of God in vain. Likewise, when he
had showed, that life everlasting was the gift of God, and therefore no
purchase of works, yet withal also he warns them, that they beware also how
they turn the grace of God into wantonness. As Saint Paul is vehement in
this case, so upon greater occasion S. James was most worthelie as earnest as
Saint Paul.

For whilst some heard that faith without works did justify (unstable and
unlearned minded men, as they were) perverting that Scripture, as also, other
Scriptures to their own damnation, they bade adieu to all good deeds, saying
in their foolish hearts, if faith without works can save, we can believe, that
there is a God: and if only faith will serve, we can believe, and what need
more? And thus contenting themselves in a generality of their profession of
faith, falsely so called, little reckoning was made, how bad soever their
conversation were.

For remedy whereof S. James asks, what such a faith could avail them? for
either it was no faith and so nothing worth: or a devils faith, and so worse
then nothing. Yet lest any imagine that S. James plainly and simply grants a
devils faith to be faith, mark further how he does not. For when he speaks of
faith in deed, and properly in the first chapter, he says it is no wave that
is to say, no trembling leaf, no shiuering reed, fully in S. Paul's meaning
that it is an evident probatio^, and a certain, stable, grounded, strong thing.
Wherefore S. James when he likeneth this supposed faith to the quaking faith of
deuilles, he speaks not properly but by comparison, and means an other
matter, then either himself speaks of in his first chapter, or else S. Paul
elsewhere in his Epistles. For properly he terms this manner of faith a dead
faith, that is, no faith at al. And this he proves by asimilitude: that as a
man may argue that a body is not quick but dead, without the spirit, that is,
without all spiritual motions, life and sense, so is faith without works. For
faith appears quick and lively in her operations and working. Yet not, as
the Papist dreameth, that works are the soul of faith, but I say as the spirit
and vital breath of faith, (...).
wherein it likes well, and greatly deliteth, and manifestly shows it self.
For if a man be a faithful man, verily also that man will live uprightly, and
walk honestly, and do works worthy of his faith, not that faith is made of
works, but that where faith goes before, works ever follow after. In so much
that a man may well conclude, a faithful man, ergo fruitful, a fruteles man,
ergo faithles. Thou will say, thou have faith. that is a verbal faith, and
nothing else. Faith is not made of words, but showed in deeds. As the Su^ne is
not without his beams, no more is faith without her bright shining works.
Yet the Sun is not made of beams: no more is faith of works. Yet may I well
argue thus. If it have no beams, it is no Sun, and so faith, if it have no
works, well it may be called faith of vain men, in truth it is not. For the
Christian faith of saved men, works ever in time convenient by charity, Gal.
5.6
and can not be idle.

For as by it, and by it alone we have access to God, and trust in his
promises, without all wavering embracing the benefits of Christ's death and
passion, which is the chief duty of faith, so also where it lacks root in
the good ground of godly hearts, it brings out, and breaks forth into
other fruits. And those of sundry sorts to the use of men according to the
diverse duties of discretion and charity. But still before God in the actio^
of justifying, whereof Paul disputes most, faith alone does al, or rather
receaueth all of God that does all. In other respects she never is without her
train, and as the eye and only the eye in beholding the serpent in the
wilderness, recovered the children of Israel, and yet their eyes were not
without the rest of the parts of their faces, and their eyes served the^ also,
for directing their feet otherwise, so the only eye of faith, or only faith
as the eye of the soul beholds Christ of whom the serpent was but a figure,
and thereby only in him are we saved, yet although in this regard alone it does
the deed, yet is it not alone, but continually accompanied with godliness,
and all good woorks, in so much that where we find not good works, it is
bootlesse to seek for faith, for faith will no where lodge or live without
works: the mother cannot be without her daughers. If you kill the children, you
kill the parent to. So that chase away works, and faith will not tarry after. If
a man will say, he retains her, and retains not her retinew, well may he say
so, but in sooth and verity, in steed of a justifying faith he lays hold on
an unprofitable deuelish faith, a dead faith, a verbal faith, a shadow of
faith, a faith which he so calls, yet is not faith at all, neither has it
any affinity with the justifying faith, which justifies alone, yet is not
alone, as has been declared in many words and happily in mo then was
needful, but only for the simpler sort.

As there is a double taking of this word faith, either true or verbal, so
also is there a diverse acception of this word justifying, either for a
believing and an apprehending the justice of Christ imputed, or for a
declaration that we are such persons to the opinion of others by just living,
which is a justification before men. Of the former meaning Saint Paul does
argue, the later sense S. James forces and stands most upon. For says he, I
am a man (and not God) that sees the heart. I am but man show me thy faith
etc. So that these Apostles, Paul and James, albeit they use the same terms,
both of faith and justifying, yet because they treating in deed things
diverse, they can not be said, to vary, when as they speak of sundry
matters, and not both specially of one, and the same thing, though seeming so
in terms. For Saint Paul treats of one faith, and S. James of an other:
S. Paul of one justification, Saint James of an other. Saint Paul upon a
certain doctrine, and Saint James upon a supposition.

If we look to heaven, faith only ascends thither, or rather grace
descends unto faith in true manner of speaking. Works are left below, who
only justify before men in earth. For otherwise men can not tell who is
justified, and who not, but by works. But as only works do justify here, so
no doubt does only faith there in respect of heaven.

The example of Abraham cleereth all, Genesis 15.6 Romans 4.5 Gal. 3.6
and gives great light hereunto. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto
him for righteousness. (that is) he was justified before God by faith. And
then in offering his son was he called the friend of God, and so justified,
called, and pronounced so. And so was his justice thoroughly completed, and his
faith in proof perfited and allowed of. In the former of imputation of
righteousness, Paul and James in express words, both agree. In the latter
they disagree not. For Paul speaks not thereof, but only James, who upon
great occasions presses the necessary sequeles of a true faith, and
justification to ensue, before men, straight upon a justification praecedent
before God. Whereupon as it were word for word, and in sense he reasons thus:
If thine offenses were pardoned in Christ, thie sins remitted, and Christ's
righteousness imputed: that is, wearest thou justified by faith before God, it
would follow necessarily, that thy faith would show it self, and thy deeds
without, would declare what thou art within, and therebie should thou be
reputed a just man, and so be justified before men also. But he that wants
the necessary consequences of such a cause, may it not be concluded, that he
wants the cause it self?

In the Gospel there were that boasted of the line and race of Abraham. But
the children of Abraham, that are in deed his children are a posterity
according to faith, and not after the flesh. Mat. 3.9
Wherefore says our Savior unto them. If ye were the children of Abraham by
faith, ye would do the works of Abraham, as Abraham did. No workers, ergo no
faithful children of his for all their vaunting. For though works made them
not his children, but faith, yet where such works lacked, Christ thereupon
reasons the wanting of faith it self. And it is true both in the nature of
the things, and in the judgment of the world. Yet all this does not
disprove, that faith alone does justify before God, nether does it infer,
that works do otherwise justify the^ only before me^, and by the necessity
of due conseque^t to ensue. Works have their uses, though not that use: one key
will not serve for every lock. They show our faith to me^, they are no parts of
faith to make it up, they are good duties that follow of faith, and so they
justify and no otherwise, in the eyes of men the behoulders. I am over long
herin.

Touching the other example of Rahab the harlot: what were her works? she
received and preserved Iosues messengers: thereby was she justified, that is so
reputed in the ca^p. This one fact could not make her just. But being justified
no doubt before by believing in God, opportunity seruinge well, she declared
what she was in giuinge such entertainment to the Lords servants. Which story
well shows, that God has his where a man would little think, even in that
cursed city. Let no man despair. Rahab an inhabitante of wicked Jericho, and
she sometime an harlot is accepted, but see withal she changes her former
life, and of an harlot became the hostess of Gods servants. Wherein I note: an
harlot was far from meriting and therefore as afterward her good works are
recorded, so yet is not her former fault omitted, both to show what she
obtained first by favor and pardon of her fault, and then in duty what she
did is spoken of, whereby she became known to the Lords people, and this was
her justification ensuing upon a belief that went in favor before. Whereby it
appeared how S. James in these examples forced the use of good works not to
justify before God, but in service, duty, and opinion of and to men.

Greater amplificatio^s may be brought, by the skillful in these cases, to this
purpose. In effect, this is all that either the Apostle means, or I can say
upon his meaning: and so much is plainly meant, that though in some functions
they may be diversely occupied, yet true faith, and good works ever meet
together, and jointly rest in the justified man.

But marvelous are the adversaries in their conceits. Rhem. not. 1. Cor. 13.13
For they imagine a faithful man to be without all faithful and good dealing,
as if they could find us out great springs without the issue of many waters,
or much water without any moisture, or a burning fire without his heat. We may
distinguishe matters in their natures by teaching, although we find them not
sundred in the persons in whom we find them. And we do usually distinguish
faith and works, but in the faithful they are never found apart: and therefore
we do not separate them there. So that contrary to that, which sometimes we are
charged withal, we ever set forth a faith adorned with virtues, and not make a
naked faith stripped out of her attire, and still we tell them faith neither is
nor can be found alone in the man justified, as has been proved at large, in
the examination of the place of James.

But they to disprove this, labor by all means possibly, Rhem. not. 1. Cor.
13.13
and in special they alleadg S. Paul to the Corinth. in whom say they, faith
is severed from love, and if from love, then from all good works, true, if from
love. For all good works are summarily comprehended he^ded in love, which
therefore is said to be the fulfilling of the law, because it is of a greater
span, co^taining the works both of the first and second table in loving God
above al things, and our neighbor as our self. Then if faith be separated from
love, the^ also from other works. Now that from love it may be severed, S. Paul
speaks say they in his own person: If I had all faith, and had not love,
etc. ergo all faith may be had without love.

S. Paul as he had faith, so was he not void of love, whose love was so great
that he had care of all co^gregatio^s, 1. Cor. 11.28. Supposing does not ever
prove the thing supposed.
and therefore he does but only put a case, nether is it generally granted,
that al faith does signify all faith in all kinds, but in some one kind all
the degrees of that faith. And herein many judge that S. Paul means a
miraculous faith, and not the justifying, because he says, If I had all faith,
so that I could remove mountains, that is all such faith, and yet had not
love, etc. But if this be the sense, then does it not import that the
justifying faith may lack love, but the miraculous faith, if yet it prove so
much. Whether S. Paul mean a miraculous faith, or no, or whether a miraculous
faith (let it be a faith) can be severed from the justifying or no, I will not
greatly strive. There is no edificatio^ in multiplying of impertinent
questions. This must be considered well, that the Apostle says not down right,
he has faith, and that he has not love, but If I had faith. Now I trust they
will not prove matters with ifs and ands. Our Savior said touching the beloved
Disciple what if he would that he should tarry still till his coming? Ioh.
21.23.
upon this conditional (if) an error was straight spread abroad, that John
should not die. In like manner S. Paul also says, If I spoke with the tunges
of men, 1. Cor. 13.1.
and of Angels, etc. You will not go about hereby I trust, to prove that the
Apostle had a very Angels tou^g, or that Angels had tunges. S. Paul makes
supposels, and thereupon he sets forth the excellent commendatio^ of love,
which verily in sundry points is far more comme^dable then faith it self, in
so much that a man may use the Poets words in a better matter, O matre pulchra
filia pulchrior? A beawtifull mother faith, Horat.
a fayrer daughter love. But S. Paul does no where disioyne them, but
concluding the praises of love, says: there are three that remain (together)
Faith, Hope, and Charity: faith believing in the promises, hope looking, and
longing for them, charity loving the promiset, and in him and for his sake
loving all that is to be beloved. Of all these the last is the greatest, what?
in justifying? no. S. Paul debateth the matter to the contrary every where.
Wherein then? in the multitude of other duties, and for the everlasting durance
thereof both in this world, and also in the world to come. For when knowledge
shall cease, and faith shall have his date, and hope shall be expired in the
lease of this life, in the life to come remains love. And this is all that
the Apostle means, which neither confuteth the adonnes of faith in her proper
office of justifying, neither yet does it any way confirm, that in other
respects she can be alone in the man justified. And thus much of only faith,
and yet of faith that is never alone.

Of the certainty of grace and salvation by faith and hope in every
particular man.
Now then being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. For so the Apostle
infers to the Romans upon former debating of the self same truth upon the
self same grounds of justification, whereof we spoke last. So that necessarily
the man justified by his faith, by faith also has he the good fruits, that
grow up withal. i. peace with his God, quiet in his soul, and firm
possession of assured salvation in a certain hope.

Whereof M. Stapleto^ speaking with the same spirit, that Tertullus did in the
Acts, Act. 24.2.
terms this doctrine a pestilent, and a pernicious teaching, te^ding only to
presumption, pride, and security. M. Stapl. you speak your pleasure out of the
abundance of a choloricke heart. If we presume, God be praised, Presumere de
gratia Christi non est arrogantia, sed fides. Aug. Sermon. 28. de ver. dom. 2.
Sam. 6.14.
we presume not of our selves as you do, and if we be proud of Gods
everlasting favor, it is a godly pride, and in security thereof we leap, and
dance with an holy joy, as David did before the arc, though you like Michaol
deride us as fools and reproach us therefore. Sir, ill words do neither prove a
good matter, nor disprove a bad. Wherefore to let pass the rage of your heat,
let us a little consider the weight of certain reasons you would seem to
produce: you say, the certainty of salvation by faith is common to sundry
heretics, 1 Lib. 9. cap. 9.
contrary to the fear of God, 2 3 4
repugnant to the order of praying, and against the nature of the Sacraments.

1. The first of your four allegations is that heretics also assure them
selves in a vain persuasion that their opinions are most true, and that
thereby they shall attain everlasting blis, and yet be deceived, and there fore
that there is no certain salvation by faith. We speak of the faithful, and
you of heretics, we of faith, and you of fancy, we of a verity and the truth,
and you of a pertinacy in prete^ding truth. And how then can you conclude from
the one against the other? notwithstanding, The abuse of things does not
abolish the necessary and good usage of the^.
if heretics could be faithful, and also heretics, which is impossble, yet
being by faith well persuaded, suppose they were heretics withal, we must not
refuse the good they have, because in other respects they be not good. For then
belike (I will use an easy example and but one) when the Philistines took
away the Lord's ark, and had it in their keeping, because the Philistines have
it, Israel should not long to have it again, or when it was brought home,
receue with joy. But in very deed unbelievers, and perfect heretics in capital
points, as they have no faith, so have they not the good persuasion of the end
of faith, 1. Pet. 1.9.
which is salvation of their souls. For they shall never be able, either to
take from us, or to keep in the^ selves the arc of a quiet conscience. And
albeit they be suffered sometimes to rejoice in the light for a season, and to
grow green in the filde, yet all this is but a glimse, and in the end to
their greater sorrow, as it were by a slender taste, to let them know what
perfect joys the faithful man feels in him self, and feeds on in his
soul to everlasting life. But now if your saying concerning the persuasion of
heretics were true, yet were your reason naught, but your saying being false,
your reason is to to bad.

2. Secondly you say that this persuasio^ is contrary to the fear of God,
verily we teach, and no men more either with better words in speaking, or in
more due manner in thinking rightly of the fear of God, that it is the root of
all wisdom, and when we would express the enormities of any place or
persons, we speak with the scripture, and as Abraham and David did, and as we
take it, with the words of greatest dispraise: Gen 20.11 Psalm. 36.1.
The fear of God is not in this place, or the fear of God is not before their
eyes. Wherefore we exhort them to stand in aw, and sin not. The fear of God
expels sin. Matter timidi nunquam plorat: the timerouse child is wary in
all his ways and loath to venture further, then is behoouefull, and therefore
seldom causes the careful mother to wet her eye for him.

But we speak of the fear of God in his children, The diverse acception of the
word Fear. Mal. 1.6.
and his fear in them is twofold: either a reverence of the worthiness of his
omnipotent majesty: If I be your father, where is my love? If I be your Lord,
where is my fear? or else the fear of God is taken for the dreading of his
justice against sin and iniquity: Prou. 3.7.
Fear God and depart from evil. But these and the like fears, which are
lawful and profitable, and are required, certes, the certainty of faith does
establish them and they it.

There are other fears of other sorts: a fear of the enemy, a fear of man's
power, (...) fear of death, hell, and damnation, etc. in regard whereof we
teach on this wise. Fear ^our own captain, fear not thine, and his enemy. I
will not fear, what man can do to me. Have a confidence, Ioh. 16.33. 1. Ioh.
5.4.
I have conquered the world, says Christ. This is your victory even your
faith, which overcomes not in one or two skirmishes, or co^quereth some one
part, but gets the upper hand of the whole world. Wherefore quite your
selves like me^, and trust in the Lord. O death where is thy sting? Hell gates
shall not prevail against you, There is no conde^natio^ to the^, that are in
Christ Jesus. If God be with us, what can be against us? and why should we
fear any thing but him? and yet not him otherwise then before I showed, not as
the dog the whip: the slave his master, or the thief the gallows, but as an
honorable Lord, a reverend father, and a just but a good God withal. Whom we
must serve (as Zacharies song is) in all respects in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, without servile fear: nothing distrusting least happily
he should not keep promises where he once promises. For this kind of fear
of all others directly oppugneth hope, and hope it, is flat against faith, and
faith against it. If you mean such a fear, we grant faith is contrary to
it, and laboreth still more and more to root it out. This we grant. Feign
would we hear what you or any of yours ca^ say herein, without dallying in
the diverse acceptio^s of the word (fear) directly to the contrary.

3. In the third place you say, the assurance of faith overthrows the use of
praying. For what need man pray that he be not lead into temptation, if his
faith be assured that he shall be saved notwithstanding temptation? O M.
Stapleton, will you te^pt God? The Lords determination, concerning the ends in
things does not take away means and duties in the mid way of perfourming all
that is commanded to man. My life is fixed, and the bounds and limits thereof
certain: Shall I therefore in reason thereof refuse ordinary meat and drink, and
daily food, or physic in time of sicnes? what a folly were it, beside an
extreme fault, conte^ning the Lords ordinance? Likewise God suffers no man to
be tempted above measure. 1. Cor. 10.13
Therefore because there is a measure set, shall no man power forth his prayers
in that respect. Paul teaches a better way. Pray always, and Christ wills:
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. And yet none can not be
tempted neither with inward, nor outward temptation above his measure, and how
the^ does the certainty of Gods defense therein abolish ma^s duty, that he
should not pray therefore? Iam. 1.6.
I pray show us more at large, or rather briefly in plainer manner if you ca^.
We teach no prayer is good but that which is made in faith and why the^ does
the certainty of faith take away the office of praying.

4. In the last and fourth place, you say the certainty of faith peruerteth the
doctrine of the Sacraments. Well, I see either you do not see, which is gross
ignorance, or of a frowardnes you will not understand what we mean by the
assurance of faith. We tell you, our salvation is built upon a sure ground, the
Lord does know who are his, and they who are the Lords, they know they are his.
This is a firm foundation: the scripture and writing of the house of Israel,
that the faithful are registered in the book of life, and this assuredly we do
believe. But that there be no other helps to assure our faith we never denied.
For herein as the word is a known writing to us, so the sacraments are the
seals to double our assurance, as Pharao saw two dreams to ascertaine him one
thing, Genesis 51.25
neither does the assurance that must be by faith destroy the helps that
farther that assurance in faith, nay the assurance that should be therein is
proved the rather by the helps thereto.

But now as we have hard your tale (M. Stapl.) so give us a little leisure to
show our own euide^ces for our own selves. It is God that promises, and al his
promises ar yea and amen. Then if he promise why should we doubt? again the
spirit does testify to our spirit, that we are his children. Shall we
extinguish the spirit, and aba^don these motions? again if we be faithful,
faith is no wave, no watrish slippery matter (as Nazianz. word is) and why the^
should we not be assured? In Orat. de Pasc.
if we be Christ's house, we hold fast, Heb. 3.6.
the glory and confidence of hope, but if confidence, then no doubting, if
glory and gladness then no pain, and so no fear, much less despair. The
Papist doubts not to say he can merit, and why should we more doubt in
faith to believe and with mouth to confess, to the glory of God that we have
found mercy? Forsooth they say, because debt is certain and mercy is
uncertain: and when a thing is deserved, it may be chale^ged. They say well:
for debt is certain, if it be due debt, and if it be lawfully demanded, it
must be paid without question. To the confutation of which proud folly, I
have spoken sufficiently before in the question of meriting. Concerning
mercy, and the uncertainty thereof, if we speak of man, that can change his
mind, and whose will is variable, it is true. But God is always the same, his
gifts are without repentance, whom he loves he loves unto the end, and yet
if his mercy were kept in secret, in his own bosom, and not made known to the
sons of men, they might be uncertain. But being solemnly made by promise,
fayrely drawn forth in autentick scripture, openly published by proclamation,
and preaching, confirmed by the oath of him that can not lie, ratified by the
best rites that can be devised, sealed with holy sacraments, and with the holy
ghost, and after all this fully finished by will and testament, why should we
yet doubt, as if the matter were not certain enough?

You reply, Lib. 9. c. 10.1
that all this assurance is general and condicionall, general and therefore
not sure in particular, 2
condicionall, and therefore uncertain depending upon a doubtful expectation.
I will answer both these cauils.

1. First, as for general supposels without their truth in particulars it is a
mere toye in Philosophy, and in Divinity it has no sense. For God does not
promise generally at auentures, katch who catch can, but directly and in
special to all that receive.

As soundes and colors are open abroad in the air, and yet in the senses of
hearing and seeing are made particular, and in special both hard, and seen,
so Gods promises are uttered generally to all, but of the receauers, and
believers are they particularly apprehended, or else not apprehended at all.
For general apprehensions are dreams and no apprehending. If I believe
remission of sins in a common generality and no more, without special
application to my self, what avails that: Wherefore Christ says: My son
have a confidence: thy sins are forgiven thee. Hold fast that, Matthew. 9.2.
for there is the comfort, and there arises the certainty of faith and hope.
And general promises why are they made to all, but to the end they may be
believed of every one in special?

If a mortal Prince under seal and writing proclaim a general pardon, there
is no subject that has offended, but would crave a particularitie in the
general, little doubting thereof for the safty of himself and pardon of his
offense: or were he wise, or in his wits that when the prince had pardoned all
that would receive the pardon, notwithstanding would stand amazed
distrusting still whether he be one of the number, of that all which should be
pardoned in special? If thou be a scholar, I say to thee in thine own terms,
when thou hear a general Mayor out of the word of God, examine whether
thou can find the minor in thine own conscience, and then doubt not, but the
conclusion will follow necessarily upon thine own self. As for example for
the simplers capacity: all believers shall be saved: art thou a believer? then
conclude, thou shall be saved.

2. The other cavil was, that these promises were made under condition and in
some meaning, your saying is not amiss. For the promises are made with
condition, If we believe, and if we believe not, be the promises never so
general, yet the^e can never profitte unbelievers. Even as when the Sun is
in his greatest strength as bright, as bright may be, yet the blind man
receaueeth neither light, nor comfort, for all that: so be the promises never
so fair clear, and large, yet if the eye of faith be wanting, the faithless
infidel has no benefit by all this. Esaias. 7.9
Wherefore the Prophet Esaias foretold Ahaz specially of this fault and defect of
faith: If you believe not, you shall not be established. We mislike not this
condition. But you mean that Gods promises are co^dicional in an other sense,
and that not only in respect of them, to whom the promises are intended, God
is not changed nether in essence nor else in his purposes and doings.
but on Gods part that makes the promise, as if he reserved an alteration to
be made if need were. Which assertion and speech is perfect blasphemy, flat
against Saint Paul, that says, Gods gifts are without repentance and
therefore absolute, and so not condicionall: and full contrary to S. James that
says, that there is no variableness, Iam. 1.7
nor shadow of turning, with the father of lights, that is, of turning now up,
now down, now rising, now falling, now one way, now an other, of promising
and vnpromising, etc. our God omniscient that made the eye, sees, and forseeth
all at the first view what is best, so that he need not appoint with condition
to change his mind, and repeal his purposes, upon better devise or advise,
afterward taken. What he determines shall stand, and what he promises, he will
perform. I am God, and am not changed. Whence follows a good argument, if
he could be changed, he were not God, I say, if he could be changed, either in
the essence of his being, either in the decrees and purposes of his own
devising.

Common Philosophy taught the Heathen that principle, Eternal things suffer
not contrary passions. And shall Christians imagine the Eternal God to be
subject to varieties, that stand upon the fickleness of uncertain
conditions? Heaven and earth shall pass, but neither God nor his word, which
is as firm as is him self shall pass. And how then says Master Stapleton,
Gods promises are so condicionall, as that they may be uncertain in respect
of God that promises? And does he not know but thus much, that the greatest
difference between the faithful and faithless man consists herein, that
the godly having received of God any promise, are thereby resolved, that
coming he will come, and show his saving health in time convenient. For he is
righteouse and never disapointeth any, that trust in him: but the wicked, are
not so satisfied, and therefore when God speaks, sometimes they look to the
right hand, sometimes on the left, sometimes before, and sometimes behind,
sometimes into themselves, when they should only and steadfastly direct their
hope and faith to God alone that will not fail? Psalm. 78
Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? Can he give them bread? Or is he
able to provide flesh for his people? For his people, being in number so many
thousands? bread and flesh in the wilderness, a place so barren and void of
plenty? These and the like promises either temporal or eternal, are unlikely
in the eyes of flesh that are dull of sight. And no marvel. For might we
perceive near at hand the way, and the means, then were there no trial of
Faith, nor exercise of hope. For faith and hope are of things that are not
seen. But when the matter passes our reach, and we judge it not possible,
then is God glorified, if we believe.

And to this end, concerning your examples are used the words: Siforte: if
happily, by Daniell to Nabuchadnezzer, and Peter to Simon Magus in their
exhortations, to equity, alms deeds, prayers, or in the like cases: not that
any should believe, and believing remain doubtful, of the remission of their
sins, but that forecasting the difficulty of such a great change to be made
in their conversion, they should be ravished with a longing desire thereafter,
and be enflamed the more, and so if it were possible believe, and in believing
then no more to doubt.

When this will not serve, 1. Cor. 4.4
you bring forth the example of Paul, whom you say doubted and durst not
judge himself. We shall consider the circumstances of your allegation, and
of the text it self. There were amongst the Corinthians, that by odious and
friuolouse comparisons facciouslie held some with some, some with others, as if
Christ were divided in the ministration of his servants, and of Paul a
preciouse vessel of chief choice, they esteemed less then either his office
required, or was expedient for their salvation. Whom Paul in effect schooleth
on this wise: for mine own part as I am not altogether careless, so yet I
pass not greatly to be judged of you. Nay I judge not my self much less
should you. And albeit I know nothing by my self concerning my ministry (for
thereof was the question) yet am I not therein in this, he says not, in any
thing else, but in this I am not justified. He that judges is the Lord.
Therefore judge not you, and that before the time of judgment. Now I ask
wherein and why Paul would not judge him self? He speaks of his function, and
therein to claim that which some of them gave to some that deserved happily
little or less then he, in such sort and in so high a degree, he told them
flat, albeit he were better then the best, and not guilty to him self of
default in this behalf, yet he would not judge nor justify him self. Why?
for judgment belongs to an other person, and to an other time, and not to be
usurped either of the^ or of him, by the way of deciding definitiuely like a
judge. But God whose ways are not man's ways, and who sees farther into man,
then man into him self, in that day shall lighten things, that were hid in
darkness, and make the councels of hearts manifest, And then shall every man
have praise of God: which last words of praise to be had then, ar no trembling
words of a doutfull mind, but a joyful good remembrance full of comfort, and
of an infallible expectation. And all this upon occasion against them, 2. Cor.
10.12
that would needs in contempt of Saint Paul set the garland upon their
heads, that were least worthy to wear it, if all were known, as one day it
shall appear. Lib. 9. cap. 6
But Master Stapleton and before him the censure of Collon, Andradius, Hosius
and others, and our new notes now, Rhem. notes 1. Cor. 44.
urge this: S. Paul would not judge, nor justify him self: and who is
comparable to Paul? ergo there is no judgment now, no certainty of conscience
in this world. But stay and know, upon a particular in one kind, you may not
infer well, no not a general in the same kind: much less comprehend those
things, that are of another sort. For not out of a generality of one sort, may
you infer a particular in an other kind. Wherefore of the uncertainty of all
men's facts, God examining them in the day of trial, you may not conclude the
unstableness of faith, which is of another property, and founded, not in
works, but on God himself, which can not fail. If I would justify my self
(says holy Job) mine own mouth shall condemn me: Job.
If I were perfect, he shall judge me wicked. In consideration of works and
worthiness of deeds. Job renounceth all, and stands in fear therein to com
to the touchstone. Malac. 3.6
For there can be no certainty built upon the sand of them. But in
consideration of hope in God, he will trust in him, though he kill him: and
concerning the life to come, he staggereth not at all, but is most assured: I
know my Redeemer lives. So Paul when he had treated of salvation, Job.
how it depended upon God, shuts up the whole matter, with full assurance
of a thorough persuasion, that neither death, which is a bitter herb to many,
nor life which most men much love, nor celestial spirits, nor the greatest
powers of heaven, nor height, Romans 8
nor depth, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any creature shall be of
ability to sever him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus the Lord.
For in him is the root, of all bliss, and the sure bond, and certain seal
of this assurance. The words of Scripture herein are so plain, so vehement, so
resolute, that they can be never answered without infinite shifting. Let the
reader turn to the viij. chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and consider
what goes before and what comes after, 38. ver. with begineth with certus
sum, I am sure, as their own translations are. And withal to the places,
where ar mentioned the obsignation, the cry, the pledge, the earnest penie of
the spirit in the faithful, etc. and then let him on Gods name judge of all
that has been or shall be brought, either of the adversaries, or else of us.

First of all, the chapter of Trent does nothing but rage and storm at the
matter, Conc. Trid.
as the manner of it is ever, in so much that as a man may know a Lion by his
pawe, or a bird by her feathers, so is that council discerned by nothing more
then by banning and cursing. Controu. Ratisb. lib. 2
Pigghius better bethinketh him self, and calls his wits about him, or
rather calls a counsel of all his fancies, and at length deuiseth four
aunswers and never a one against that we teach. 1
Either S. Paul spoke not of all the faithful, or not of every faith, 2 3
or not of him self at all times, 4
or, but of him self with condition if he him self perseuered.

1. Not of all the faithful? yes. For those who were predestinate before all
times, called and justified in time, God also had glorified, (says Paul)
whereupon I note, both the word (Those) to comprehend al, that shall be saved
and glorified, and then that the Apostle says: you has God glorified, using
the preter tence, because of the certainty of that which shall follow as surely,
as if it were already past. And personally beginning with him self, I am
sure, he ends, with shall sever us, including others, as well as him self.
And elsewhere he says generally, writing to a whole church prove your self,
whether you be in faith or no, 1. Cor. 13.5
Know you not that Christ is in you, except ye be castawayes, counting it a
great absurdity in Christianity, not to be assured in particular knowledge of
every man's own state.

2. Secondly Paul speaks not of every faith. Does he speak of a true
faith? of such a faith we mean. The pretiouse faith of the Saints which is
like in all. But let us agree upon this, that there is a certainty by some
faith. Wherein as you agree with us, meaning a good faith, so yet you disagree
both with the counsel of Tre^t, and likewise with Lyndan a great stickler on
your side, who avouches that the certainetie of everlasting life, quae est ex
fide, which is by faith, never happened, Lind. panop lib. 3. ca. 21
non modo Christianis omnibus vere credentibus, sed nec ipsis Apostolis in hac
vita vnquam. Not only not to Christians truly believing, but not to the
Apostles themselves at any time in this life. Yet we had rather take Pigghius
grant, being reasonably understood, and so leave Lindan to them, that like him
better.

3. Thirdly Paul does not speak of him self, how he felt him self at all
times. Perhaps so, and yet no man knows what was in Paul, but the spirit of
Paul that was in him. We deny not but that the degrees of faiths assurance
may be variable, not only in diverse men, but in one and the same man at
diverse times. Yet more or less in a degree does not abolish the nature of
faith, nor quite extinguish her propernecessarie qualities, whereof assurance is
the chief. Which though it be eclipsed as it were by an interposition,
sometimes of gross and heavy flesh, which the best carry about with them, yet
in the end faith will return to her course, show her face, and break out
again, neither can she be ever frustrat of the effect of assurance. For sorrow
may lodge with us for a night, but mirth will return in the morning.

As the wicked may feel some joy a while, that they may have a greater
feeling of sorrow in the end: so sometimes the godly may suffer even the
anguish, and terroures, as it were of cast awayes, therebie afterward to
increase their joys the more. And this is a sure doctrine worthy to be
embraced of all, that albeit we stumble, yet he will not suffer his to fall,
or if to fall, not finally to fall away, if God wound he will heal, if he
kill, he will revive, and if he break down the walls of thy faith, that they
seem to shake and totter, and fall, doubt not, he will build them up, he will
turn all to the good of his children, and if he darken thine eye, that is
fixed upon him self, be assured he will not do it out, neither will he take
his holy spirit from the holy and faithful, as he did the Spirit of the
Regiment and fortitude from Saul. No, though he bring thee to hell, he will
not leave thee there. Why then? What if faith be much assaulted, and sometimes
brought into narrower straightes then some, God knows best how long it is
best to hold his own upon the rack, and it is the teachers duty, and it is
Saint Paul's endeavor thereby to give out doctrine of comfort, and not
therebie to empaire the faithful man's assurance as Pigghius does.

4. Fourthly he says Saint Paul's faith, and confidence is with condition of
his own perseuering to the end, if he perseuered. No For without ifs as of
douting, though not without condition of duty, the Apostle proves that God
will not alter, nor disco^tinue his everlasting favor to his dear children,
and in the recital of sundry things, he says that neither things present,
nor things to come would disioyne Gods love. Wherefore in respect of the future
time to come, he religiously is most confident of Gods goodness, and his own
final salvation. Wherein to end, thus briefly we se Pigghius objections are
little worth.

Now let us hear how Master Stapleto^ can help out the matter. Lib. 9. c. 13
Who being instructed of the Colonistes says, that when Saint Paul said, he
was sure (for that place troubles them much, and if they could answer that,
they would wrangle in like manner with other scriptures as they could) by his
assurance he means a certain kind of hope not certain any otherwise the^ but
as a charitable man may and must morally conceive one of an other, as Paul
himself did of Timothy, and of the Romans. This is strange and inopinable.
For did not Paul know him self better, then he knew others, or if he did (as
do doubt he did) did not his greater knowledge therein assure him self more of
him self then of others. Rhem. not. Romans 8.38
The men of Rhemes to persuade us herein say, the Greek word (...) does import
only a probable persuasion: and yet they could not but fumble in their tale,
and add withal that which they found in Hosius, that the Apostle might have
some special extraordinary revelation, but they see evidently that the Apostle
in that place speaks of no revelations, but of ordinary doctrine to the
Romans, or if he had a revelation special, it makes more for his own
assurance, and nothing against the assurance of others. Wherefore they seem
to fancy the other opinion more, that Saint Paul was but probably
persuaded, and uncertainly certain. I might alleadg that where their vulgar
Latin is certus sum, I am sure, or certain. Hierom uses, I am confident. Gr.
Mar. di seo. cap. 12
For that this assurance was not a probability, but a certainty, and a
confidence, which is more. But let us rather reason the matter. Is Paul
persuaded, and but probably persuaded? A man would think the Apostles
persuasion in such a case were sure enough a very standing light, and no fading
flash, as it were of lightning.

Young scholars are taught and it is true, that there are probabilities of
sundry sorts, either whereunto a man may answer indifferently yea or no,
because of the vnaparent notice of them, for they may be or theye may not be,
and whether part a man holds, it skilleth little. For both parts may be
mainetayned with like reasons. If they mean such a probability to be in
Saint Paul, he that defied boeth high and low, will little pass for such
dreaming coniecturals, in respect of his knowledge of the mark that he shot
at, or of the infallible means to attain theru^to.

There are probabilities of an other kind absque formidine oppositi, proved
and approved without fear and doubting of the contrary upon due trial, and
just examination premised. If you mean, (but you are far from so good a
meaning,) such a probable persuasion, you hitte upon the Apostles meaning, who
upon former discourse is certain and most certain, and upon the best
certainties well persuaded. For thus he argues, If God be with us, who can be
against us, with us by his election, vocation, justification, etc. who can be
against us? who shall lay to the charge of his chosen? who shall condemn, who
sever? and reckoning many hard assaults, yet against all, he is sure that the
elect, that is, the faithful in all these become more then conquerours (...).
more then conquerours, and common conquerors, whom they have thoroughly
conquered, they are not probably nor half a feared of them, and then comes in
his persuasion, I am persuaded, I am certain, I am sure, I am confident. Take
which interpretation they will, upon the proofs premised, that neither
principalities nor powers (and therefore not a sort of uncertain Papisticall
distinctions) can remove from the eternal love of God in Christ the lord. But
were our salvation no more certain, then are their answers, then were their
answers somewhat, and our salvation very uncertain.

As for the old objection out of the book of the Preacher, Eccl. 9.2
it has been answered, and washed clean out long ago. In deed Master
Stapleton has latelye done the part of a diligent Papist, Lib. 9. cap. 8
that seeks all means to deceive him self, and saving that he wants the
oil of truth, he has set a few fresh colors thereon, then ever yet I could
set eye on in any other, as I well remember, facing us out that Solomon first
puts it down generally, that there is no certainty, and that al things
are uncertain, and that man knows not whether he be in case of love or
hatred. And whereas we show out of the text, that it is meant that there is no
certainty touching the event of our affairs, he tells us that that is a
second saying, and a particular confirmation, and no restraint of the former
general unto such casualtyes as may beefall a man either in this life, or in
the kind of his death. Again where we euidentlye prove that a man may
assure him self of the hatred of God (who hates sinners) if he be a sinner.
And therefore where Solomon says a man knows not whether he be hated or no,
he respects necessarily not the sense and touch of an inward conscience,
either of the love of God, if he be faithful, or of his hatred, if he be
sinful, and faythlesse, Master Stapleton says, the certaynetie of love,
and hatred are not a like, and therefore that there is mention made of hatred,
because when a man begins to question whether he be to be believed straight
way in that very moment, he misdeemeth whether he be not worthy of hatred
also.

Unto all this I answer briefly. But in the mean season well we perceive
that, (as the wiseman says) a dead fly may mar the good smell of the
sweet ointment, so a cursed gloze may corrupt the fairest text. But I answer
and ask: are all things detained in an uncertainty? he that says all,
seems verily to except nothing, and nether can any thing be exempted, which
is subject to that all, which he means that says al. But that al things
should be uncertain with ever (either in sense, or in faith, whereof
Chrysostom says, though sense may be deceived, Orat. 9. in 10. c. Heb.
yet can not faith) is far from Solomon's thoughts in this place. So that he
makes no absolute general saying, and then afterward comes in with a
particular matter of external euentes, he proves a general uncertainty
thereof and in that kind, and yeldeth the cause why, which must needs be as
large as the effects, and the cause of like compass with the effects, eo quod,
because all things fall out alike to the just and unjust, to the good, and to
the bad, etc. And verily this is only the wise man's intent to show the
vanity of mortal events under the sun, and therwithal to teach me^ not to
decide by the outward face of things concerning Gods favor. For had he mea^t to
speak generally without exception of any thing, or specially to exclude the
assurance of faith, a particular allegation of the eue^ts of afflictions or the
like, had been but a cold co^clusio^ or a slender proof. Wherefore (M. Stapl.)
if you will argue an uncertainty of faith, which we deny, and disprove the
certainety thereof, which we affirm, you must show an uncertainty to be in
God the promiser, or in the holy Ghost the confirmer, or in the like grounds,
whereupon we build, and not dispute of common events, which fall out
indifferently to the one, and the other, either good or bad, and sometimes in
heavier sort, as it may seem to the godly, the^ to the wicked man. For among
the good the best, or among the best, the very best: or among the bad the
better, and the less bad may be in the same case outwardly, as may be the
worst. Whereof only, Solomon treats, and not in general against al
knowledge. For if he mean that nothing ca^ be known, how knew he that he knew
nothing? But we know of Solomo^s know ledge the scriptures speak much, and
that of M. Stapletons uncertainty in knowledge, and no assurance in faith, they
are altogether silent, and speak nothing at all, no more then they do of that
which he tells us very impertinentlie to the text in Solomon, that when a
man examineth his state, whether he be in the love of God immediately ever the
doubt of hatred comes always to mind. What frail flesh will do, is not
our question. What faith ought to do is that, which we contend for. But if
flesh doubt, yet must faith resolve all doubt. Thy flesh will suggest and bring
into thy memory thy many sins, but inco^tine^tly thy faith must record the
mercies of God, that are more in number, and greater in value, and most
certain to this use to pardon and remit sins. The world does storm, the
flesh oppress, the Devil ly in wait, yet the Christian which is founded on
the rock which is Christ, ca^ not fall. Bernard says well, Ego fidenter, quod
ex me mihi deest; Bern. Sermon. 61. super Cant.
vsurpo mihi ex visceribus Domini. Look what is wanting of my self unto
myself, with confidence I usurp that unto my self, out of the bowels of the
Lord. An excellent sentence full of comfort, and special confidence. M.
Stapleton would qualify it, but can not, and therefore thought it better to
misreporte it otherwise then he found it in Bernard him self, Lib. 9.14.
and first of all he misquoteth the place 6. for 61. but that may be the
negligence of his Printer, and so would I easily think, if there were no ill
dealing otherwise. Secondly he says this confidence is taken not for a
confidence, but so far forth, as it is opposed to an astonishment, as if when
I did a thing confidently, I did it only not with astonishme^t. Whereas a man
astonished is past doing, but doing confidentlie, is doing, and doing with
great boldness. Thirdly for fidenter he says fideliter, changing Bernardes
word, and fourthly he says fideliter-dico, as if Bernard spoke of faithful
speaking, and not of confident usurping and taking, specially in the singular
number ego, I, and properly mihi, to my self, take from the bowels of Christ,
what is wanting to my self. The reasons of this his assurance Bernard yeldeth
elsewhere, Sermon. 3. de frag. septe^.
upon three strong co^sideratio^s, of the love of Gods adoption, the truth of
his promise, and ability to perform, and the^ he pronounces that he knows
whom to believe, and in believing how to be assured.

In truth, if we either rest or reckon of your selves, so as M. Stapleton
requires, we cast the anchor of our hope in an unstable place, and not upward
into heaven, (as the Apostle teaches) and then no marvel, if hope be no
hope, and faith, not faith. For what scripture ever teaches us to hope or
believe in our selves? Accursed is he that makes flesh his arm, or puts
his trust in man, either in himself or in an other man: in him self, for that
is a dangerous pride, in an other, that is as Augustines word is, an
inordinate humility: inordinate humilis non leuatur, Hom. 84. de temp.
periculose superbus praecipitatur, The proud man will hurl down himself
hedlong, but the inordinate humble no man can hold up. Wherefore pride,
despair, and folly be far from us. Our hope, faith, and help, is only in the
name of the Lord. We are ashamed of our selves, and of men like our selves,
but not of the hope, which is in us toward him.

The matter is weighty, yet would I be loath to be over long, I will end with
remembrance of a story out of the book of Nombers, Numb. 13.
where Iosue sent certain to suruaie the land of Chanaan, who upon their
return, reported of the goodness of the land much, but more of the strength of
the people, of the cruelty of the inhabitants, of their stature like gia^ts,
and in comparison that Israel were but grasshoppers, their towns meruelously
defensed, and that every way it was impossible to go up, and prevail against
it. But Caleb, whom the Lord had endued with a better spirit comforted the
people on the contrary side and said cheerfullie: Come let us go up,
undoubtedly we shall possess it, little considering the strength of the
people, or their cruelty, or the walls of there cities, but only rested upon
the promises of God, and therein he stayed him self, and would often have
stilled Israel. Semblably notwithstanding the force of all the world, the
difficulties of flesh and blood, the subtelties of sin, the arguments that
certain adversaries like Iosues spies make against us, yet if we have Iosues
faith, we must rely upon the Lord, and in the end we shall obtain a better
land, then the land of Chanaan, even the land of the living, with the living
God.

He that sometime doubts may remember he is a man, but because he is also a
faith full man, he must not continue therein but shake away distrust, and
co^quere al doubts, and be well armed with the shild of faith against all
assalts. The faithles they are at an other point, and they ame uncertainly
without a mark, beat the air, bath themselves in the pleasures of the world
for a while, and in the end they die as they lived, they lived without hope, and
perish everlastingly. But we who are beleuers, and know we are beleuers (as
August. speaks). For faith is no fancy, as we are risen again in newnes of
life in this life, so shall we be received again to life eternal in the life
to come, our conversation and traffic is above, our hearts are set on heaven
and heavenly things, we are frindes with God, distance of place, diversities
of periles, and doubts of dangers can not disioyne or cause distrust, for we
also shall finally dye as we lived, we lived in his fear, and reverence, we
dye in his faith: he is our God, God, and therefore able: our God, and
therefore willing to bring his promises all to pass one day, and in the mean
season there can happen nothing neither inwardly, nor outwardely, but it may be
patiently borne, quietly disgested, and with suffrance passed over, knowing
always (as the Prophet says) that the time shall come, either in this world,
or in the world to come, when all shall confess: verily of a truth, there is
fruit for the righteous, doubtless there is a God, Psalm. 58.11
that judges the earth. The teeth of the cruel, the jaws of the Lion, the
arrows, and all the arguments of proud imaginations shall come to nothing,
and we shall certainly be saved.

Of sanctification in this life and the means of direction therein,
ACcording to the order, which I proposed to my self to show forth the frenes
of Gods grace, and favor, it remaineeth in this place next to speak of
sanctification. For albeit S. Paul makes it no express link of that chain
wherein God does all in all: and wherewith out of al controversy, there can be
nothing in man, yet where he speaks of ma^s duty to God, he shewethe ever
necessarily, that they who are justified by faith in Christ, are likewise
sanctified by his spirit. For being manumitted or freed from sin by Christ,
we are there withal made the servant of God to bring forth fruts unto
sanctification.

Their own Roffensis saw somewhat when he said: fides iustificat ante partum.
Stapl. lib. 8. cap. 31. Illyr. in cla. par. 2. tract 6.
Faith is the mother, works of sanctification are the children. The mother does
justify in order before the children be borne, and then she brings forth a
godly offspring, who like good children cherish their mother, and comfort her
with natural respect again.

That no man mistake me, it would be observed, that the word sanctification is
taken, either for justification in Christ, who is our wisdom, our
righteousness, and sanctification, or else for holiness of life in Christians,
who having received the spirit of adoption, and a measure of grace, are
sanctified, renewed in their minds, and reformed in their lives, dying to the
world, and living unto God. Both these sanctificatio^s, ar ours For Christ is
ours, and therefore his holiness and his righteousness are ours also. But there is
a difference betwixt that which is in Christ being perfect in nature, precede^t
in order, and made ours but by imputation, and between our sanctification,
which is imperfit in it self, issuing from his goodness, and really inherent in
our selves. The one is received by faith, the other consists in good works as
of piety toward God, of up right dealing with me^, and of te^perate usage of
our own persons, of faith in Gods promises, of hope in his mercies, of loving
his goodness, of zeal in religion, of praising his name, of continuance in
prayers, of confession of sins, of severity against vice, of increase in
virtues, of patience in troubles, of goodness toward al men, of meditation of
death, of spiritual joy and intentive expectation of the joys to come. I am
not to debate particulars, with intent to dilate any thing. For that is not my
purpose, and the rather because look what has been spoken of many the former
matters, may with ease, or else without great labor be applied to this present
argument.

Philosophers make a difference of bodies. and it is evident in sense, how
some bodies are gross and dark, as wood and stone, some clear and lightsome,
and perspicuous, that a man may see through them, of which sort, are the air,
fire, crystal, common glass, oyld paper, and the like. Whereunto I may
resemble the outward actions of man, either his words or deeds. For through
these a man does as it were through a glass window look into a man's mind, from
whence as from a spring both words and deeds do issue. I believe, and therefore
I spoke says David. Will you know a justified man? look whether he be
sanctified and holy according to so holy a calling: will you know the goodness
of the tree? try whether he bring forth according to his kind as it is in
Moses.

In the second of Kings, Genes. 1.2. Reg. 1.
king Ahaziah fell through a lettasse window from his upper chamber, and thereby
fell into an extreme sickness. He calls for his servants, sends certain of
them to go and enquire of Beelzebub the idol of the Ekron concerning the
recovery and event of his disease. Upon this the Angel of the Lord appears
unto the Prophet Elias, and wills him to go and to meet Ahazias servant
and to say unto the^: Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that he
seeks to beelzebub? etc. Wherefore of Ahaziah the Lord says: He shall not
come down from the bed that he went up into but shall die the death. Elias does
the message to the servants, the servants return to their king: he museth
at their sudden return, declaration is made what befell. The king demands
what manner of man it was, that met them? they show him, that he was an hearie
man, girded with lether. Then said he straight, It is Helias the Thesbite.

Out of this story sundry instructions may be gathered. First that as the ox
does eat up the thistle, so may the axe overthrow the oak. i. as the poor
sinful people shall surely be punished, so the unsanctified mighty man shall
not ever escape. Again in destresses sinful men seek for simple helps, and
not unto God the God of help, and al to no purpose, but to their greater hurt.
Where as the holy man knows that our very hears, our tears, our names ar in
accou^pt with our almighty Jehovah, our hears are in his register, our tears
in his bottle, our names in his kooke. But the purpose, why I record the story,
principally is, to show how readily Ahaziah did guess by the Prophets attire,
that it was Elias, and thereby, by this example to declare, not that the
hearines of our apparel, because happily therwas some singular thing in Elias
attire, as likewise in John Bapt. apparel, which was an other Elias, but that
our attire and apparel in most modest manner generally be seemly, and that all
our behavior be such either in gate, words, or deeds, that when report is made
thereof, a man may straight avouch, verily there is a Christian.

There is no doubt, but dissimulation is spun now adays of so fine a thread,
that it is hard to discern who is who. Gardener could make a book of true
obedience, and Bo^ner made the preface thereto, and now we lack not, and if time
served (as God forbid) we should have experience, that we want nether subtle
Gardiners, nor cruel Bonars. But because some can semble to be that they are
not, and dissemble to seem to be what they are, therefore yet may not the
godly cease both to be in deed, and profess to be also true professors.
Colors can not long continue. A grape may ketch, or hang upon a brier, it
grows only and naturally upon the vine. Dissimulation is like Hermogines
learning, Volater. lib. 15.
very towardly to show a while, but after a while it becam flush and flue away:
whereas the sincere holy man grows still from faith to faith, from strength to
strength, from virtue to virtue, till he become a perfect man in Christ Jesus,
knowing that this is the will of God, even his sanctification. 2. These. 4.3.


And were there nothing else but the will of God, and his commandment in this
behalf, yet were this alone cause sufficient, that we offer up the sacrifice of
our obedience to our God, and we should be holy, because he is holy, who has
commanded us so to be, Ier. 35.14.
even as the children of Ionadab, the son of Rechab obeyed their father, and
abstained from wine, because their father, so commanded them, but infinite are
the reasons that should move us to a godly life as not only his commandments
thereunto, but the inhibitio^ of the contrary, denu^tiatio^ of penalty, if we
live ill, or promise of reward if we live well: the hindra^ce of Gods glory and
the hurt to common weals, by the one, the edification of many by the other.
Examples of good me^ to be followed, who were honorable me^ in their
generatio^s, and well reported in their times as Enoch, Noe Abraham, and many
more, or the effect of sin upon sinners, that threw Adam out of paradise,
turned Nebuchadnezzer into a beast, and Judas into a Devil, slew kings,
overthrew thousands, swallowed up rebels, drowned Pharao and all his host,
burnt up whole cities, and wasted nations. But what shall I stand to reckon up
reasons, to prove that day has light, and that the night is dark, that virtue
is good and vice is naught, or that the one ought to be embraced, and the other
avoided? For, he is far gone, and past common sense, that will not confess
all this. Howbeit in the practice of doing, it falls out clean contrary.
And the reason thereof, I take to be in them that have any knowledge (for to
speak of the wilful ignorant it is bootlesse) because their knowledge
occupies only some small room in their brains, but has no firm possession
of the heart. My son give me thy heart (says God by the pen of Solomon.)
Keep it not they self but give it me, Prouer. 23.
bestow it not upon pleasures which fester, nor upon meats wherein is excess,
nor upon riches, which will take the wings of the eagle and soon fly away, nor
in honors, which man enjoying becam a beast, nor in any corruptible vain thing
under heaven. Give me thy heart, says the wisdom of God, and he will teach
thee to understand and follow righteousness, and judgment, and equity, and
every good path. And as for riches, honor, pleasures, etc. know this, godliness
is great riches, and as the highest honor, and as the true and perfect pleasure,
and what not that good is?

Direction in the way of sanctification out of the word of God and by his
spirit.
And now for direction herein in the way of godlynes, who^ should we rather
follow then God him self? etc. and not the vain words of others, but (as the
Apostle advises) walking as the children of the light, bringing forth the
fruits of the spirit. Wherein we may note that to vain words we must oppose
the word of God, and that the fruits of the spirit are specified to be good
works, to teach us from whence good works come. The one sometimes is
distinguished from, sometimes contained under the other. The word serves to
direct in the right way, and whereby we discern who are out of the right way.
The spirit is Christ's vicar on earth: and as Christ him self the son of
righteousness, and the day star in our hearts, a consuming fire of all distrust,
and burning up the very roots of disobedience, and of all the stumbling
blocks in the world. The one of these lightly is never received without the
other. For the word is unprofitable without the Spirit. The Spirit of God
leads into all truth. The things of God no man knows, but the Spirit of
God. But yet the Spirit of Christ to them that have age and opportunity never
comes but with the word.

The Anabaptist. The Atheist. The Papist
There are three especial enemies of this word of God, and therefore enemies to
the rule of goodness, and to the level of all sanctimonie. The first is the
fantastical Anabaptist, that dreameth of Revelations: the second is the
wilful Atheist, that thinks the word of God to be to troublesome, it
hinders his fancies, it forbids his delights, and stops all the bathes
of his vain pleasure, it talks to much of sanctification. The third enemy
is the wily Papist subtiller then all the beasts of the earth beside, he
knows his coin is adulterate, and therefore he fears the touchstone, his
chafe would not be winnowed. And no marvel. For would false prophets be
sifted, or vain spirits be brought to their trial? Wherefore the man of
sin goes about to dissuade me^ from hearing, and reading this work of God,
and in steed of the waters of the Scriptures they have dug up puddles of
wilworshiping and such like mud, fitter for the horse and camel, then for
Christian souls: and in room of the light of Gods word they have substituted
false and mocklights of their own, in place of virgin wax, they have given us
tallow, in room of a candle, they have reached us a snuff, and the candle of
the Lords word, they have detained, under a bed or a bushel, that the
faithful men might never know what they did, nor discern what they believed.
As if to believe well, were to believe a man knew not what, or to live well, were
to live in ignorance, and to do the works of darkness. And yet they pretend
great reason for all this, and so did he, that said of one that could be mad
with reason. I can not debate the controversy, I shall but touch a reason or
two. The word is uncertain, the word is obscure, ergo not to be read and
heard absolutely of all, etc. Uncertain? I know not what is blasphemy, if
this be not. Where and in what place dare they thus speak? in the Church of
God? before whom? before the Congregation of Saints? The word is as a candle,
which gives light both to the house, and shows withal what it self is, and
is it then uncertain? but it is obscure. So you say. We ask to whom? we
answer to them, that perish. It is harder somwhere then in some, to stir up
thine attention, and therefore it is commanded, Search the Scriptur, dig for
wisdom, seek for knowledge as after silver and gold. Be it that it be
obscure. Yet as that saying in great part is most false, so is the reason most
faulty. The candle burns dim, therefore top it. It is a good argument.
There is a knotte in the week, therefore open it, that the light may have
easier entrance. It is a fit reason. But the candle burns obscurely,
therefore put it out, or throw it away, or any such like conclusion is stark
naught. Yea the more obscure the Scripture is, the more it must be labored,
and the more incessantly studied, because it is that, wherein we know is life
everlasting, and the way of life which is sanctification.

To let go them that will not hear us, seek after this way, there are of
those, that seek sundry sorts. Some seek only to the end they may be
known, to be very skillful men in good things: this is an ambitiouse
vanity, some only to know: this is fond curiosity, some to enstruct them
selves: this is true wisdom, and some to edify others, and this is perfect
charity. The two former sorts are naught, the two later holy and good. For
true religion and perfect holiness, is made neither of bragging words or
peevish fancies: but this is true devotion, to visit the sick, the widow, the
fatherless, and to keep a man's self blameles from the soil of the world. He
that never saw honey may talk and think how sweet a thing it is: but he that
tastes thereof, can better tell what a gracious taste it has in deed.

Again there are others that though they cared little for seeking them selves,
yet are they content to let others alone with such matters. But all their care
is as they are carried away with some conceit or other. They rise up early in
the morning, and go to bed late, and eat their bread in great care to compass
purposes. But alas what mean they? Suppose thou be a Monarch, a noble, a
merchant man, or what thou will, if thou gain all, and lose a good conscience,
and thereby thy soul, thy loss is greater, then thy gain. Thou art a iollie
fellow in thy country, a king of a welthie land, a peer in a Realm, thou
can prevent foes, and join in with mighty friends, all the sheaues of the
field must bow to the, the Sun and the Moon must stoop at thie presence: or
if thou be a meaner man as of a town and corporation, thou can cudgel, and
compass matters, and convey things at pleasure, or if thou be a private
occupier or a man of trade, thou can buy cheap, and sell dear, all these
and the like are but miserable comforts in the day of death or judgment. One
sanctified soul then will be more worth, then innumerable sinners. O Lord
sanctify them and us with a lively understanding of thy truth. Thy word is
the truth, teach us, O Lord, good ways therein, that we may know and do thy
will.

I will record a story: David being certified of Saules death among his
lamentations he breaks forth on this wise: 2. Sam. 1
O, tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ascalo^, lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the children of the uncircumcised
triumph. Gath and Askalo^ were of the chief cities of the uncircumcised. David
wishes, that Saules death might be concealed from them: that it might not be
told to the enemies of Saul, and of God. With like affection it is to be
desired, that either there were no Saul's at al, or that they might die either
obscurely, or live otherwise then to the slander of the profession they seem
to be of, but in truth are not. They that have dwelt or dwell in Gath, and
Askalon, in Louain, Doway, Ro^e, or Rhemes, the enemies of us, of our Land, and
of our God, will be glad to hear that he which is reckoned a justified man by
faith, were yet a profane person like Esau in the race of his life. The
stream of sin is strong, and carries the world with it, but he that thinks
he stands, let him take heed he fall not. If a pillar fall, the house is in
danger, if a mighty tree fall, it bears down many bows and sprigges with
it. O, what a shame were it for any that have begun in the spirit to end in
the flesh, to rejoice in the light and afterward to love darkness more then
light, to receive as it were a portion of faith, and then to mispend it? The
children of the uncircumcised will make great triumphs, when they shall hear
hereof, supposing they have gained much, when they can find a man that has
fallen from his God: but to the godly what sorrow is like to this, where such
euentes are found? Wherefore let every man look to his ways, and stand to
his watch, that he offend not God, neither that he give place to Satan, cause,
of joy to the adversary, or of grief to the godly, that he defile not him
self, drive away the spirit, receive the word in vain, stayne his profession,
and that he be not like the Ass and Mule, that carries on his back, wheat,
or bread, or wine, and yet eats only chafe, and drinks nothing but
water. To carry the name of a Christian is little worth, except you feed on
the properties of Christianity, and express them in a good life. For not to
talk of Christ, but to live in Christ, is indeed to be a Christian, unto whom
it may and should be said, as it was unto Mary: thou shall bear a son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus. For they that hear Gods word with pure
affection, Luc. 8.22
and bring forth the fruits of the spirit, they are as it were, Christ's
brethren and as dear as his mother, and after a sort his very mother, as in
the wo^b of whose faith Christ is conceived, and in whose holy life Christ is
spiritually born into the world daily. And this is true sanctification,
always to be performed in us, taught in the word, imprinted by the Spirit,
granted of God through the merits of Christ, in whose name we pray ever, to
be sanctified more and more continually. And eue^ as Anna prayed that God would
give her a man child, and she would give him the Lord again, so we pray that
God will make us his holy adopted children. But the benefit of this holiness
and of this adoption, as likewise of our creation, when we were not, and of our
justification, when we were naught, and of all things else, as he gives them
us, so we must give them him again, and render all the praise, to him alone
the only giver of all good gifts, who is to be blessed for ever, both for all
and of all. So be it.

Of Glorification in the life to come, and of sobriety in certain questions
that are moved therein.
WHen sanctification ends in this life, then glorification enters, and
takes his beginning for the life to come. And then when we shall have escaped
all the ginnes of mortality, when the times of temptation shall be passed
over, when the stream of this world shall have quite ru^ne out his course:
then this corruption of ours shall be endued with incorruption, the old Phoenix
shall be renewed: and even as Moses did put his leprouse hand into his bosom,
Exodus 4.7
and pulls it forth a clean and a sound hand: so this frail flesh of
ours, that is sown in dishonor, 1. Cor. 15
and must rotte in the mould of the earth, shall yet rise again in honor with
great perfection in that gloriouse day.

Saint Paul shows that there were amongst the Philippians, Phil. 3
that walked much amiss, in number many, in conditions earthly minded men,
servants to their belly, and enemies to the cross of Christ, and therefore in
fine whose just end was to have an heavy doom, and a deserved damnation. But
speaking of him self and of the godly he says: our consolation is in heaven,
from whence we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus, who shall change our
vile bodies, that they may be like his gloriouse body according to the
working, wherebie he is able to subdue all things unto him self. Wherein
these four points are expressly set down: of Christians to be heaue^lie, Reu.
14.13.
Wherefore without all question as the spirit says in the revelation, Blessed
are they that die in the Lord, for they neither fry nor freese, as the
Papists suppose, in purgatory, but rest from their labors. Now to die in
the Lord, is to die, either in his cause, and quarrel for righteousness sake,
or otherwise in his faith and fear, and in the course of their calling. And to
die is to be dissolved, Eccl. 12.7
the body to the earth, from whence it was taken, and the soul to be rendered
into the hands of God that gave it.

Thy dead (says Esaias). Esaias 26
O Lord shall live, even as my body shall they rise again Awake and sing, ye
that dwell in the dust. For thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth
shall cast up her dead. Not that all the dead, but that the Lords dead shall
live the second life. And not who dye in their sins and in old Adam, but who
die in the Lord, and who lived in Christ, and Christ in them, and die in
Christ, Mar. 12.24 Mat. 22.29
and in the Lord, They shall rise in glory. Let no man be deceived, as were
the Sadduceis, and Libertines, and as now is the whole family of love. The
dew of Gods power is as the dew of herbs. Herbs appear not in winter time.
The dew from heaven softeneth the ground, does away the frost, and opens
the earth, and the herbs spring again, and flourish a fresh. Likewise the
moisture of Gods omnipotency and power divine, will cause and commau^d the
earth to give an account of her dead, to yield forth the bodies of his
Saints, that they may live. Even as my body (says the Prophet) and puts
the matter out of doubt, points to his own body, and proves the
restitution of Gods people from banishment by this infallible argument,
teaching that because they doubted not of this the greater, they should believe
the less which was their restitution.

So in Ezechiell the people seemed to be in a dead and desperate case, Ezech. 37
as if their very bones were dried up, their hope gone, and them selves clean
out of God shows in a vision, to the Prophet; a plain field, full of dead
bones: he will give them senewes, flesh shall grow over them, and he will
call the dead, out of their sepulchers. And by this, god means that he will
restore his people, and convey them home, even as if they were taught and well
knew, he would revive the dead.

The Articles of our Creed touching the resurrection and life eternal is most
largely proved by Saint Paul to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 15
But Christ confuteth the Saduceis sufficiently with this, Mat. 22.32 Mar.
12.26
that God is the God of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob. And that God is the God of
the living, and not of the dead. Of them that live, and therefore are, and not
of them that live not, and therefore are not, and of them that shall live, in
whole and not only in part. And it is spoken in the present tence, of the
living, as well for the certainty of the bodies rising, as for the assured
being of the soul in the mean season in the hands of God. And herein
concerning the soul (for of the body I have said sufficiently) what becomes
of it when man is dissolved: I can not but marvel what M. Bristow means to
mention, Reply to D. Fulk cap. 8 part 2
that there be many texts to make it probable, that not any one enters into
heaven, no not since Christ's time, till the general resurrection. Bez. li.
Theol. Epist. 2 Epist.
Al these probabilities are answered by a learned man of our own age in perfect
manner particulerly upon occasion, and hear I read it needless to trouble the
simple with impertinent disputes. Immediately upon the departure out of this
mortality the soul is received into the joys of heaven. Luc. 23.43 2. Cor.
12.2
It may suffice them to know that while we are in this body, we are pilgrims
from the Lord, ergo not, so when the tabernacle thereof shall be laid aside.
But then we shall be as it was said to the thief, even in the day thereof with
Christ in Paradise. And what is Paradise, but heaven? for so Saint Paul when
he talks that he was taken up into Paradise, he terms it the third
heaven. Every man says Austine, sleeps with his cause, and shall rise with
his cause. But in the middle time, as in our common sleeping, some sleep
quietly, some have heavy and sorrowful dreams: so when we go into the common
bed of the earth with our bodies, yet our soul has her rest with a sense of
joy, or has a feeling of sorrowefull pains. Habent omnes animae, Tract. in
John. 49
quum de seculo hoc exierint etc. All souls when they depart out of this
world (straight) they have their diverse places of receipt, if they be good,
they have joy: if they be naught, they have torment, and when the general
resurrection shall be, the joy of the good shall be more ample, and the
torments of the wicked more grieuouse, when with their bodies also they shall
be tormented, and this is only the difference. Wherefore in the hour of death,
let no faith full man doubt, but that he has a present entrance into heaven,
and that he shall be with Christ there, and that he may pray, looking upward
into heaven, both with Christ and with Steeuen: Into thy hands O God I commend
my spirit. O Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

And this is a kind of glorification, which shall be consummated after the
consumption of all things. In the mean time while we yet remain in this
world, there are duties to be done, and every man has his talentes, few or
many, or at least one, Mat. 25.14
and that one he may not hide in a napkin, like the idle man, nor dig it in
the earth, where it may rust, much less throw it to the dunghill, that is
bestow it upon bad and vile uses.

The noble man is gone into a far country, the master to a wedding: but
they will certainly return again, but when, that is uncertain, whether at
the first, second, third, or fourth watch, Why the coming of Christ is not
specially in the circumstances of time certainly known.
whether in the evening, or at the dawning of the day: and therefore is so
uncertain, the rather to excite thy care, and stir up thy diligence, to
provoke thy watchfulness, to set thee always in a continual expectation,
both of his coming particulerlie to thee, and in general to judge the world.

But if thou like the evil servant say, tushe the Lord differreth to come,
and being absent can not see what is done amiss, and cruelly shall misuse thy
fellow servants, or riotouslie mispend thy masters substance, wasting all in
wantonness and excess, living in pleasure, and fatting thy self, as in the
day of great slaughter and much feasting, and shall common with thy soul,
after this manner: O my soul take thy rest, this iolitie will not fail, this
case on earth is everlasting: behold suddenly when thou think least, Luc.
12.46
this night before ever the morning can come, death is at thy door, thie days
are numbered, thy deeds are waighed, thy doom is come, and thy soul shall
depart, not only this life and so an end, but shall be sundred from the number
of the living with God, and shall live in torments everlastingly with Satan
and his angels without end

Nay rather let us imitate the faithfulness of Saint Paul, who in respect of
others, and namely of his brethren the Jews, what a continual sorrow
conceived he, how hearty was his desire, how fervent his prayers in their
behalf? Yea, he had care of all congregations. Who is weak and I am not
affected? Who is offended, and I not grieved? And in respect of him self he
ran his race, he kept the faith, he fought a good fight, and knew that there
was a crown reposed for him. And because we may not think, that this
touches only Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 4
he adds, not only for me, but unto all, that love, and therefore look for
Christ's coming, even with loins girded, that is with diligence, and with
lights in their hands, that is, with skill, as it is in the Gospel.

But he that in steed of running his race, shall sit him down lazilie, or
divert before he come to the goal, or in steed of keeping, shall make
shipwreck of the faith, and in steed of fighting, shall strive unlawfully,
there is laid up also a reward for such, even the reward of iniquity, and
when he little thinks, the day of the Lord shall come upon him, much like to
a thief in the night, and as the travel of a woman, suddenly in the
twinkling of an eye, and then he shall be sent into his own place, as Judas
was, when he hung him self. But as for the godly, Act. 12.5.
we hope and pray for prepared minds, and though by infirmity we sleep, eue^
as the wise virgins did, yet we shall not sleep to death, Mat. 25.2.
or without oil in our lamps as did the foolish.

Natural men can judge the face of the evening, if it be red, they say we
shall have a fair day, if the morning red, we shall have rain, and it is
true, if the figtree or the mulbery sproute forth their leaves, every one
knows, summer is nigh. We are to discern natural euentes by natural
signs. Have we no skill (I trust we have as many as be spiritual) in
spiritual matters?

In the last times and waines of the world, men shall attentively harken to
spirits of error, the doctrine of Devils shall be spread abroad and be taught,
marriages and the lawful use of meats as a matter of conscience shall be
interdicted. Antichrist shall sit in the holy place, and as Austine says
according to the Greek text, Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 19.
in templo Dei, and shall challenge him self to be the Church of God. Know we
not what these things mean. (...)


I will go a little farther, and come from matters in religion unto men's
manners. Charity shall wax cold, 1. These. 2.4
iniquity shall be rife and ab^^nd, and almost run over all the world like Noes
flood, men shall be selfelouers, there shall be wars and rumors of wars in
every corner, skant faith shall be found in the earth except here and there, as
it were an ear or two left after harvest. Is there nothing to be looked for
upon consideration of this? verily almost there remains not any sign to be
fulfilled, but the Sun to be darkened, or the Moon loose her light, and that
the stars drop from heaven, and the very celestial powers be shaken and
removed. The evening is red, yea blood red, will not the morrow therefore be
fair, and joyful to all the godly? Lift up your heads, ye that mourn, for
your redemption draws near. Yea, the morning is red also, and shall not a
tempest overtake the wicked? Clouds like woolpacks houer over our heads, and
thicken in every coast, the harvest of the world is white, and calls for a
sickle. The end of all is at hand, yea the ends of the world are come upon
us. Life eternal is the gift of God, and even anon he will make full
delivery thereof. Every man shall receive his penny, his palm into his
hands, his crown of life for his head, the white garmente that never soyleth,
the everlasting food, that never perishes, the waters that never fail, the
candle that never goes out shall even anon be delivered unto all. They who
sowed a wind, shall reap a whirlewinde, but they that sowed in justice shall
reap mercy, they who gathered Manna on the six day, shall rest on the
seventh. They that sowed in tears shall reap in joy, and their joy shall no
man take from them.

As the Geometrician by the measure of Hercules foot, proportionally
coniectured of the stature of the whole body, so by human similitudes we may
conceive somewhat of those joys, and that glory, which in this day shall be
accomplished, but perfitlie to the full to set them forth, because they are not
yet revealed, it passes all words, all writings, all imaginations of all the
tunges, or pens, or hearts of mortal men.

Wherefore the question that some move of higher or lower, The question of
equality or inequality of glory not much material to faith and godliness.
greater degrees of more glory, in some then in some in the day of glory is
to no great purpose. For in the highest degree, there is no difference of
degrees, or if so, yet our glory shall be so much, as we will either desire,
or can contain. And what need further reasoning in a matter not taught in the
scriptures? wherefore both in this and all the like questions, I answer with
the words that the woman of Samaria used to and of our Savior. The well is
deep and I have no vessel to draw up such water. Ioh. 4.11.


Concerning a question, that in this place is much moved by some, and thoroughly
resolved by none that I know, Whether we shall know on another in the next
life.
I will say what I think, and the rather to take away the question if it may
be then to decide it.

Upon the apparition of Moses and Elias in mount Tabor in our Saviors
transfiguration, it has been thought of some, that in our glorified state we
shall know and be known one of an other. But by the way I will first give a
more necessary note because of occasion of Moses appearing. Moses was buried,
no man could tell where, but yet here he appeared. Dei
Whereupon arises a comfortable consideration, that though man can not tell
what becomes of men's bodies and the bodies of many Matters, that are thrown
to the lions, devoured of dogs, cast into Sequana, or thrown into the sea,
burnt to ashes, etc. Yet God knows, and as he made Moses here to appear, so
here after the bodies and souls of all his afflicted Saints, shall appear at
his second coming, even at the blast of the trumpet.

Now for the question how could those be known and discerned? there were many
hundred years between Elias time, and Peter's, and John's, who were with Christ
in the mount, and there was a thousand years betwixt Moses time and theirs,
and if there were but an age difference, yet how could they be known at the
first blush? and then if they being before unknown were so soon known in
this but transfiguration, how much rather shall we know them in our
glorification, with who^ we were acquainted, of whose bones we were bones, of
whose flesh we are flesh, and of whose race we descended, whose kindness we
loved, whose love in all manner of godly familiarity and tender friendship we
enjoyed.

For this, that Moses and Elias were discerned the text sets down, how they
were discerned it sets not down. A simple answer is easiest and truest as
I take it. God who made the apparition to Peter and John, gave unto Peter and
John the knowledge to discern who they were that appeared, whether he will
give them the like knowledge in the life to come because the scripture is
silent, I dare not definitiuely say or argue to or fro.

Farther it is reasoned: Adam in his innocence straight way, notwithstanding
he were asleep, when Eve was taken out of his side, yet he knew, who Eve was:
semblably, when this corruption shall put on incorruption, when sinnefulnes
shall change for innocence, like to or else more perfitte then Adams in
Paradise, when our knowledge in part shall be made perfect, and our charity
intended to an higher degree and exte^ded to more in number, then we may, if
know the things that we knew not before, much more know the things, and
recognize the persons we knew once.

I will not dispute against this opinion, much, for peradventure it may be true.

Farther it is reasoned, that if the damned spirit of the richman in hell,
notwithstanding the great distance and chaos betwixt, could discern Lazarus
and Abraham in heaven, that the souls of the just and perfect me^ shall much
more see with a clearer eye the society of all, but especially certain in the
city of the Saints.

I will not answer this to be parabolical, and that every part of a parable
does not ever prove every matter, that it may be fitted unto. For it may be
that this very part thus urged, is not of a thing altogether impossible.

But that which I shall shortly remember by occasion of the question moved, is
most true, and much to be considered.

First it is true that death is a passage into a better life to all that
believe, a door, and entrance into heaven, a ready means to be with Christ, and
not where Christ is only (for Christ according to his Godhead is excluded no
place) but with Christ, and in Paradise are they, who die a corporal death,
but yet live unto Christ. And then this being thoroughly considered it does
lenifie such natural passions as are incide^t to the sons of Ada^, it makes
the bitter cup to have a sweet taste, it breeds a desire to be dissolved, and
a longing to be at our long and last home. For the things here are nothing to
the things there: yet are we hardly induced to leave them, and herein they
serve and love us most, and we them.

But let us consider, when we die, we depart from the world, and therefore from
worldly affections also we should depart, and betake our selves wholly to a
better habitation, and utterly to have nothing to do, with the things that are
done under the sun after the disposition of our house and temporalities, as
Esaie exhorted the king.

A wet eye and an affectionate mind does neither discern aright, nor judge
uprightly in this case, and when we should be ravished with the love of his
face, to whom we go, we look backward, whether we shall see the faces of our
old frinds any more.

In the resurrection they neither marry nor are married, marriage is the nearest
conjunction amongst men. But then the respects of man and wife shall be swalowed
up as it were a candle put out at the rising of the Sun. Therefore the
affections toward father and mother, children and kindred, of consanguinitie and
blood of affinity or amity which are less, shall also cease then. For they
will either hinder somewhat, or do much hurt in the quietness of our passage.

I read of one Rotholdus (of whom Sigibert does write) a man of name, and a
Duke, when he should be baptized, he would know whether there were more in
heaven or in hell, and what acquaintance he had in either place, was not this a
great folly?

In the second book of Samuel David makes offer to an old aged man Barzelai,
2. Sam. 19.
that elswhen, had showed him kindness, and that now God had blessed David, and
had brought him to the kingdom, he would requite the old man, and offered him
that he should go with him, and be in his court at Jerusalem. But Barzelay on
the other side makes a contrary request unto David, that he may return to
Gilead, and die in his own country, and be buried in the graves of his
ancestors, and as for any pleasure that he could take in the kings palace, he
said he was ouerspent and worn, his sense of tasting was gone, and so of
hearing, the voice of the singers and the court music did not affect the old
man.

In the story we see a contentation in the aged man, and also a love to his
country whereby he preferred Gilead before Jerusalem. I do not altogether
discommend every point in his affection. But, by application, if I may speak,
there are over many Barzelaies now a days both in their lives, and in their
deaths. They are so long time accustomed to the worse, that they disdain the
better, they cannot taste the truth, they will not hear the music of the
charmer, charm he never so cunningly. They began in superstition, they have
long continued in error, and they will needs be buried in the idolatry of
their forefathers, and they will go whether they think they have most
acquaintance. But true religion goes neither by the most, nor by those that
seem to be most near a man commonly.

In our life, the word is our direction, the spirit our guide. In our death we
must, as we resign our bodyly substance unto godly uses, and our bodies for a
time, into the bosom of the earth, so without more ado, and without
forecasting of doubts, or scruples, of curious, fancifull or affectionat
questioning must we wholly yield up our souls unto God our father a safe keeper
of them unto the gloriouse resurrection in Christ Jesus, to whom with the holy
spirit three persons, and one everliving God be everlasting praise, Amen.


