A DISCOVRSE Of Housebandrie.

No less profitable then delectable: declaryng how by the Housebandrie, or
rather Housewiferie of Hens, for five hundred Frankes or French pounds
(making English money lv. li. xj. s^. i.d.) once employed, one may gain in
the year four thousand and five hundredth Frankes (which in English money,
makes five hundredth pounds) of honest profit: all costs and charges
deducted.

Written in the French tongue by Master Prudens Choiselat. And lately
traslated into English by R. E.

Jmprinted at London by Jhon Kyngston, for Miles Jennynges dwelling in S.
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bible.

1580.

A Souse, if twelve French pence.

Xij. Souse makes a French Teston, which is four grotes. English.

Three Souses, make a grote.

A Frank or French pound, is twenty Souses, xviij. Souses make two
shillynges, after nine Souses to a shillyng. So remains of the Frank two
Souses to make up the Frank of twenty Souses.

Nine French pence, make one English penie, nine Souses, one shillyng: nine
Frankes one English pound: nine hundredth, one hundredth: nine thousand, one
thousand.

To the right honorable the County Rotchfort, knight of the order of the King,
and capitainc of five hundred men of Arms of his Ordinances.
MY lord, having from my youth in memory the precepte of Apelles, most
excellent Painter of his time, who commanded his Prentices not to pass one
day, without drawyng of a line, to the end to keep them in breath and
continuance (as does the Hunter his Greybound) he seems by that precept to
show how great idleness is to be avoided, and how great is the loss of
time, to leave the exercise of trauaill. And therefore, not to transgress this
precepte in these tumultuous and turbulente times, composed of more then civil
wars in the bowels of France, J have addressed my self for the auoidyng of
Jdlenesse, to draw my line upon an humble and low subject, to make a
discourse of domestical Housbandrie, and to she we how a diligent man may of
one little sum, draw great gains by honest means. Which doing, J
greatly recreate my spirits among my books, and forget a great part of my
sorrowful thoughts of these troublous times. And for as much as J know, that
after long practice of Arms, and the great travail which you have had
therein, the trauaill of letters shall be greatly delectable unto you, when with
equal pase, you join wisdom with magnanimity, I have taken upon me the
boldness, to present unto you this my little labor, by the readyng whereof
you may take one hour of recreation. I have addressed this little Housbandrie
in such order that the practice being therein well instructed in buiyng, and
conseruatio^ of things bought, with discrete distribution of the same, may
assure himself to lack no merchantes. This little discourse, is of the time of
the troubles of the year 1567. before that the wind Caecias drew the Cloud of
troubles into the Countries of Poictu and Lodunoys, where I appoincted the
merchant to make his emploit, as shall be seen in the readyng.

Yours most obeisant, Prudent Choyselat.

The Aucthour to his freende afflicted with the troubles of the Civil wars
in France, in the year of our Lord, M.D.LXVII.
THe calamities and encombrances, the miseries and sorrows, which proceed of
the insolency, into the which the people of this time is plonged in this age
of Iro^ (of Iro^ I may say, hardened to misfortune) has well witnessed unto
us, how true is the ancient Proverb, which says: That Jupiter is slow to
visit the skin of the Got: Yet that in fine, he permits not an evil
fact unpunished. We have seen with our eyes, and felt by effect in our
France, at the risyng of these Iaste troubles, falling upon us like tempest of
Hail unlooked for. The which, as coming out of the Box of Pandora, or out
of the brosten infected prison, was so spread among men, and has made such
ouerture of vice and mischeef, that all sorts of evil are set at liberty.
Mars the Executor of the wrath of the gods has vomited his Eholour without
measure, that the burning thereof has chafed them, not only to sociall
wars, but to all Deuilishe attemptes, more then Megariqu, to Robberies and
Murders, and (as says Cicero) to Phalarismes and most cruel inhumanities.
Vulcan leauyng his proper Region, has followed these miseries, and searched
these habitations, to exercise these operations: In such sort that it is
easy to Judge, that these mishappes are fallen among men, to put them in
memory of their sins, found in the said Goats skin, of the which you
have paid your lotte: as I have known by the complaints, which you have
made for your great losses of money, and menage spoiled and destroyed by
sackcage, and pillage also of your Nobles. In the which I lament your fortune,
as a common Shipwreck: but patience must surmount. And to help you, I have
none other mean then by advise and counsel: you know that all my life, I
have spent little time in hourdyng of richesse, and things caduke. And that
rather I took pleasure to content my Spirits, in readyng and searchyng of
such things, as few men have found. Yet not to refuse the help of a friend
in necessity: and understanding that there yet remains unto you, five or
six hundred Frankes, which you have hidden, forseyng so great a mischance,
it seems unto me, to the end that you in nothing diminishe your state of
living, so to redress the same, that you may easily in short time, reenter
into as great and ample revenues, as you had before the said troubles.

Your reuenewe doubtless, consists in Housbandrie of all sorts of cattle,
as Beeues, Kine, Mares, Sheep, foul, and such other things as reioyseth
them, which are given to the country life. I can be a witness how your table
was ever ready for your familiar friends: And your wife and daughter were of
worshipful estimation, and of careful provision for your family, entertained
by honest sparyng and frugalitie, requisite in due time and season. At which
time also you were well esteemed, for your liberality toward your neighbors
and friends. But seeing that Fortune has courned her visage (as she is
accustomed to do, when the time agrees with her) you must needs retire, and
not suffer her to remain with you in like regard as before. And therefore you
must forget those losses, and think of a gain to come: to the which you
shall attain easily, with this little sum remainyng, if you will emploie it,
as I will advertise you. And this without spott of villainy, or filthy and
excessive gains. Furthermore, your Housebandrie shall florishe, and your name
shall be more known in France, then was among the Greeks, the name of him
that burnte the Temple of Diana in Ephesus.

And to make no longer discourse: advise your self to bestow your sum of
money in buiyng of Hens: not Meleagrides, the which Bellonius in his
Peregrination affirms, to be our Hens of the Indies (being the true
Graniers of Otes) but common Hens of our Country: and Housebande or employe
them in such sort, as I will show hereafter. And be not impacient to attend
the conclusion.

First of all, it is necessary to have them, near unto the City of Paris,
famous and of great renoume throughout all the world, to be the mart and
seat of all good Arts, and Sciences, and populous of all sorts of men, if
there be any other under the Sun. There consider the situation of some
commodious place well builded, having good rooms and Stabies, with a Court or
yard enclosed of two Acres of ground, more or less, and walled of
sufficient height. With also two other Acres enclosed, for an other purpose,
whereof we will speak hereafter. Of these are enough to be found, in the old
rural buildings about the City of Paris. So then can you not say, that you
are straightly lodged. For Quintus Cincinnatus Citezine of Rome (so named for
wearyng his heir combed and breaded) possessed no more when he was called to
the dignity of Dictator, as writes Valerius Maximus in his fowerth book.

The aforesaid Manor place or Ferme, with Yard or Court enclosed, you shall
take by Lease for certain years, paiyng yearly rent for the dwelling of you
and your family. You shall dispose your Stables commodiouslie, for your Hens
and Chickins, with the vewe or prospecte toward the Winter Driente, that the
Sun may give the good morrow to your He^nes, which greatly delight at the
Morning Sun, as notes Columella in his nineth book of Housebandrie: also
Varro in his third book.

The Hen houses, shall be commodious and profitable, if they be alone or
solitary, and the Plankes well covered with claye, because the Hens delight
to pruine and toumble them selves in duste, and to be kept warm. And
therefore bodrdes or plaster, are not convenient to this purpose.

The Lathers, or Perches must be from the ground two foot high. Also flat, and
not round, because the Hens do not bend, or crook their claws or
Talantes, as do other graspelyng fowls.

The said Hen houses also, in the day time must be open, that they may be
euented with wind and Air. And that the night air may more easily tra^spire
and breath out, that it may cause no disease by close air, which in short
time causes putrefaction, and diseases thereof procedyng.

Under the Hen houses, and all about the stables shall he hanged many Panyers
of conuement bigness, stuffed with Hay, to receive the Hens when they lay.
For Hay in this case, is mutche better then Straw, because it is softer and
warmer, and is not so apt to engender Lice or Woormes. I do not mean that it
should be so dear as was that which was sold for four Attiques the handful,
for men to eat, at the time of the great Famine in Jerusalem, as writes
Josephus in his seventh book of the war of the Jews, the four Attiques
amountyng to xiiij. French Souses, after three Souses and six French pence
for a Souse, as much as the Roman penie, as writes learned Budaeus in his
book De Ass.

When you have thus disposed your Hen houses, and made them sure and saffe
against all hurtful beasts and vermin, that may enter by Day or Night,
and have well placed the Panyars, to receive and harbor them, you shall
bestow the sum of three hundredth Frankes, in buiyng of good Hens, which
may cost you after the rate of five Souses (which is six pence and two
thirdes) the piece, by reason of the dearth which is now, xxv. Fra^ks iv. s^.
vj. d. and ij. thirdes of j. d.
by occasion of wars. Which shall be twelve hundredth Hens, after five and
twentic Frankes the hundred.

The Countries of Angeou, Touraine, and Lodunoys, have been the countries with
Britaigne, less troubled with the said Civil wars: and therefore Hens are
there better cheap: Also very good, strong, well membred, and of the best
race to make your emploite.

You shall choose the youngest, which are apter to lay then the old: And the
cammo^, more then they of kind: or the Black, Read, and Taunie, which are
more fruitful then the Graie or White, as Aristotle affirms in his History
of beasts in the first book, the first Chapter. And also they which have
their creaste or comb double and upright, as witnesses Pliny in his natural
History. Also Palladius and Petrus Crescencis in his book of Housebandrie.
Likewise Carolus Stephanus a man of our time, and a diligent gatherer of
things Economike, parteinyng to Household and Housebandrie.

They of a mean bigness, are the best, having their breast large, their
body well fleshed, not with long spurs like unto Cocks, for they commonly
break their Eggs. Take heed also that they be not to fat. Witness the
good wife, which being in love with her Hen, fed her so well, and made her
so fat, that she left laiyng, as rehearses Esope in his Fables.

You ought to think, that the good woman loved her Hen no less, then the
Emperor Honorius, Soonne of Theodosius loved his, named Rome. Who
understanding that Alaricus king of the Goths had taken Rome (which was the
ancient City of Rome) was very sad, supposyng that Alaricus had taken his
Hen, which he so mutche loved, as Zonar the Greek Historiographer has
written, in the life of Honorius. I say the aunciente Rome, because the
Emperors of the East parts, called Constantinople, new Room.

In like manner you shall buy Cocks, to sort or match them: six score Cocks
shall suffice for the twelve hundredth Hens. v. li. vi. s^. viij. d.
For one Cock, may suffice for ten Hens. They may cost you ten Souses
the piece, over and above the price of the Hens: which amounts to xlviij.
Frankes. They of the age from a year and a half, unto two years, are the
best.

To know them well, you shall consider the Plumage, or Feathers. The Black,
Red, and Taunie, are the best. Also they that have their Comb or Creaste
upright, and double, or divided. Their eyes read and glisteryng: Their beck,
short and hooked: well spurred: their going, hautie and proud: Their voice
strong and soundyng: and such as crow mutche, representyng such a
Majesty, as did the Cock of the Persians, which among them was reverenced,
and honored for a king, as recites Aristophanes. At the least, that they
show a certain hardiness, as they which the Carians, people of the less
Asia, bore upon their Morion or Helmet, going to battaill: as Alexander de
Alexandro has written in the xx. Chapter of his first book.

And if you will take pleasure in Divination of things to come by Cocks,
Alectoromantia,
(which Divination is named Alectoromantia) as did Iamblicus master of
Proclus, as Libanius his companion, great and learned Philosophers, in the time
of the Emperor Valens, you may make experimente of such predictions, and
therewith do pleasure to your friends.

And to the end that you shall not be ignoraunte in the Theorike, or
Speculation of the said Divination, I will show you a certain practice and
Prognostication thereof. Certain great lords were curious to know, who
should be successor to the Empire, after Valens, favorer of the damnable
sect of the Arrians: praiyng thesaid Philosophers to give answer, according
to their Art and experience, which they had of such things. Who were very
diligent to sa^i^fie their request, as commonly men of letters are not ingrate
to communicate to others, the fruits of their garden.

Therefore Iamblicus, and Libanius, chose a place very plain and equal, of
conueniente largeness: and caused fine powder, or ashes to be sifted therein.
In the which powder, they wrote the xxiiij. letters of the Alphabet equally
distante the one from the other, one little cubite a so^der, which is a foot
and a half.

The xxiiij. Letters so written and ordered, made a Figure pentagon, or of five
angles, having five equal distances: Upon every of the which letters, they
laid ten grains, one of Wheat, and an other of Barley.

The Figure being set in order, they took a Cock, and said to him these
words: Cock envious, Cock ielous, Cock proud: Eat the grain, and leave
the letter. Then making a great whisperyng, in manner of a Charm, they let
the Cock so Charmed, eat certain of the grains liyng upon the letters. The
which letters the^ joined together, and set in order, according to the
grains which lay on them, these letters were found. T, H, E, O, D. Theod.
And were thereby contented to search no further.

And by this Divination by the Cock, the said Philosophers gave answer,
that the successor of the Empire, should be one Theodosius, or Theodorus, or
Theodotus, where of Valens being advertised, was greatly displeased, fearyng
least his children should be deprived of the Empire. And therefore put to
death all the great Lords, which were so named. Iamblicus had evil fortune,
and shortly after was poisoned. Vopiscus, Lampridius, and Zonare, which have
written the lives of the Emperors of the East and West, will make you wise in
this Prognostication.

Not without reason I have rehearsed unto you this little Cubite. For if your
figure Pentagon, were directed by the great Cubite (which is of nine foot,
according to the which, the Ark of Noah was measured, as some Speculatours
have affirmed) you might fail in your Divination, and shall not come to the
knowledge of that your desire.

Nevertheless, for as much as such Diuinations, be deceiptes, and
enchauntmentes of the eyes and senses, having in them no substance of truth,
but rather of lies, you shall give no faith thereto. For falshoode is ever
overcome by truth: as by example allegorike, Josephus in his History of the
Antiquity of the Jews, in the second book and fifte Chapter declares: As
also is written in Exodus, Chapter seven. Where the rod of Moises, was by
the finger of God turned into a very Serpent, and devoured the phantastike
Serpents of the Magicians of Pharaa. And the Aucthours of the said Magique,
finally received their reward as did Iamblicus: and as did Arphaxat the
Magician of Persia, who was stricken with a Thunderbolte: As was also the
Bailife of Mascon, whom the Devil carried away, as our Chronicles witnesses.
And also as were Mathetin and Hollere, Magicians of the Goths, which were
overwhelmed, as writes Olaus Magnus in his History of the North Regions, in
the third book. Likewise Oddo a Magician of Demnarke, who was drouned. And
infinite others came to the like evil end.

But now to return to our He^nes: To entreat the^ and govern them well, you
must have four servants or maids, with large ears, well to conceive, and
understand your commandments: and the feet of Hearts, with diligente
expeditio^ to execute the same: and a trusty right hand to be faithful,
loiall, obedient, and of few words. For (as says the Terentian Parmenio) it
is a great fault in servants to be babbelers, and not to keep their
Masters counsel.

Their office shall be to bring the Hens into their houses every day, at five
of the clock in the Euenyng in Summer: and at three of the clock in Winter.
Also that they be diligent to close the entries, and windows of the Hen
houses, that in the night the Fox (natural enemy to Hens) Weaselles, or
Polecattes, may have no access. And in the morning, to open the entries and
windows, that they may come forth. And then to make clean the Pearches and
lathers. Also to refreashe their Pottes and Troughes with clean water. For
filthy and corrupt water, engenders the pippe, and other sicknesses.

In the day also, the said servants must be myndfull to visit the Panyers,
if they be furnishe with Hay, and to refreshe them if need be. The which
must be done every week, for engenderyng of Lise, Worms, and Vermin, which
make the Hens lean, and cause them to scratche.

In like manner they must he diligente, in gatheryng the Eggs. And by account
to deliver the^ to a woman, which shall lay them in order upon fair wheat
straw, in a place of large and free air, to be kept freashe and cold. The
same servants, after that in the Morning, they have given them their feedyng
of Barley and Otes, and sometimes also Fetches, or Tares, shall cast among them
some dry Horsedounge, to the end that the Hens may labor the more, to
search their meat with scrapyng. For such exercise, is wholesome for them.
Then about Noone, they shall feed them again, calling them with loud voice,
that they may be acquainted with the call of their keepers, whom they will
sone know, as did the Sparrowe of Lesbia Catullma: The Parrat of Corinna
Ouidiana: The Thrustle of Agrippina the wife of the Emperor Claudius: The
Raven of the Shoemaker of Romme, which gave the good morrow to the Emperors
Liberius, Germanicus, and Drusus. And was bought for twenty Sesterns,
amounting to the sum of five hundred crounes of our money, by the supputation
of Budaeus, after the rate of five and twenty Crounes one Sesterne. And in
like manner shall they do a little before they bring them to rouste.

If your yard contain two Acres enclosed, you may thereof Plowe half an
Acre in some corner, where the He^nes may sometimes in the day scrape the
ground, and to^ble them selves in the duste or sand, wherein they take great
pleasure. You shall Plowe or hardell the said land, once in the Month, that
it become not too hard, that the Hens may easily raise it, without hurtyng
their claws.

You may also cast certain seeds upon the Plowed ground, and cover it with
the hardell, that the Hens may take both more pleasure and labor, in
discoueryng it. For the Hens through idelnesse, become gross and heavy, and
will cease from laiyng.

When your Housbandrie shall be thus well ordered, you must practice in the City
of Paris, with ten or twelve Physicians, dwelling in sondrie places of the
said City. Not of the beardlesse and delicate Apollinaries, which care for
nothing but glory, and civil flattery, to get rich wives. But of the
bearded Aesculapians, such as was the famous Florentine, a man of singular
knowledge, and experience in his art, and famous for the wise counsel which
he gave to his daughter, pursued by the unchaste love of Ladislaus king of
Naples and Hungary.

Such ancient Physicians, will easily permit the necessity of Nature, and
confirm the wholesome Edicte of the Emperor Claudius: who (as witnesses
Suetonius) permitted in banquettes and companies, freely and without shame, to
let escape the wind of the beallie, knowing that certain shamefaste persons,
subject to the Collicke, have died for holdyng the said ventositie: As also
Cicero in the xxij. book of his Epistles, says that fartyng ought to be as
free as belchyng, after the opinion of the Stoikes.

You shall give them to understand, that you can daiely furnishe their
Pacientes with new laid Eggs, every morning without fail. You shall also
advertise them, of them that have the sellyng, and distribution of them.

You shall also take heed, that you have not to deal with such Physicians,
which have naught else to do them to walk their Mules, as they were which
were observed by Master Francis Rables Pentagruell, to depart out of their
lodgyng at six of the clock in the morning, and to return at Noone without
strikyng of stroke. For such are the very pacientes of impacie^tes, by the
understanding of Epoptiques and Acromatiques of Aristotle and Alexander his
Disciple, which they thought only worthy to be read, as writes Quintus
Curtius.

In like manner you must be acquainted with xv. or xx. Gainsellers, or
Regraters, such as can chatte and babble best, and walk about all the
streates, and the four corners of the City, and the most famous places of
the same: as the Burse, the Pallaice, the great Haules, the Ports, and other
places of great resort: Assuryng them to furnishe them daiely of a number of
new laid Eggs, which they shall sell and distribute to your profit,
agreeyng with them for reasonable price and wages, as shall be said hereafter.

Having keep this order, you shall be careful and diligent, to cause your
Eggs daiely to be carried to the Gainsesters, or women that shall sell them
again in the morning of the day followyng. You may carry the^ best upon
Asses. For which purpose, that Beast is very proper, because of his slow
going, that he break not the Eggs. But take heed that they eat no Figs,
least you bruste for laughyng, as did the Philosopher Chrysippus, as writes
Diogenes Laertius, in his book of the lives of Philosophers. The like also
chanced to Philomenes, as writes Valerius Maximus, in his Chapter of rare
kinds of Death.

Now it rests to make you understand the profit, that shall come unto you
daiely of your sum: all charges and expenses deducted: the rent of your house
paid, the wages of your servants, the Gainsellers contented, the charges of
the Ass, his keeper compted, and also the grain or corn wherewith your
Hens are fed. For of the sale of Eggs, is taken no custom, or imposition,
as was in the time of Ihon Ducas Emperor of Constantinople, and successor of
Theodosius Lascaris, who was so excessive, that in a few days, the Croune of
Irene the Empress, was thereby marueilously enriched in precious stones and
iewelles, as Nephorius has left in writing, in the third book of the History
Bizantine, in the chapter, of the famine of the Turks.

You shall sell, or cause to be sold, every new laid egg easily for six
French pence the piece. For I assure you, that within the City of Paris, are
a thousand, yea rather two thousand, that will gladly give a Carolus (which
is nine French pence) for every new laid Egg, being thereof assured:
wherein see you fail not.

How many Gentlemen and Gentlewomen are there, which greatly desire in the
Morning, to eat a new laid Egg? How many are there of Citezins, and their
wives, touched with the like desire: How many old folks weary of Flesh,
could for their Dinner be content, with a new laid Egg or two? For you
must know that an Egg, is naturally of good nourishemente, wholesome,
delicate, of easy digestion, and makes good blood, as writes Alexander
Aphrodiseus in his second book, and xxviij. question of his Problemes.
Likewise Albertus Magnus writes, that an Egg engendereth in a man, as much
good blood, as is the bigness of the yolke, which tourneth almost all into
blood.

I have yet made no memory of sick folks, which of necessity have need of
new laid Eggs, by the ordinance of the Physicians, whose freendship you
shall entertain for the same purpose. The number of the which sick folks, I
am sure in the said City, will daiely surmounte a thousand persons without
speaking of them that keep a certain diet, as well to increase the lusts of
their pleasures in Venerie, as also to restore that which sometime by excessive
wantonness, they have diminished of their strength and health. For these also
shall have need of your merchandise.

You may therefore by this deduction, be assured of the vent and sale, and
deliverance of your Eggs day by day as much as your Hens shall do their
endeavor, orderly to furnishe your Customers.

Now let us return to our account. You can gather no less every day of
your xij. hundredth Hens, then eight hundredth Eggs: which are two terces or
third parts of the number: Leauyng the other terce or third part of your
Hens, in the mean time to rest and repose them selves. For the season is
not every day agreeable for all He^nes to lay: Specially in the midst of
Winter, and other times near unto that. But you shall then help them in
giuyng them Fenegreke, commonly called the dredge of Horses. And also Barley
half sodde. For these things keep the^ in natural heat, and cause them to
lay. L. Souses v. s^. vi. d. and ii. third parts of a penny xliiij. s^. v. d.
ij. thirdes.


Eight hundredth Eggs, by supputation Arithemeticall, at six French pence the
piece, will yield. L. Souses for the hundredth. Which in number producte, makes
xx. Frankes or French pounds a day. Which is, for the said eight hundredth,
seven score Frankes the week, and seven thousand three hundredth Frankes the
year, of honest profit.

Let us divise the charges. And that which then remains, we will call the
gains and profit. For the Lawiers say, that we call nothing profit, sauyug
what remains after the charges deducted: as the famous Lawier Papinia^ has
well defined in the xxiiij. book of the Pandectes, under the title of
repetition of dowry after the marriage dissolved.

First for the pension of the work man, ij. s^. ii. d. and ii. thirdes.
and his House for every day twenty Souse: which by the year comes to
three hundredth, three score and five Frankes. I here understand years of the
Sun consisting of three hundredth, three score and five days.

For four Servants or maids, twenty Souses the day, which is for each of
them for wages, meat and drink, five Souses to find them selves: xl. li. xi.
s^. i. d. and i. third
amountyng in the year to the like sum of three hundredth three score and five
Frankes. You know how greatly sobriety is to be commended in servants,
both men and women: which kick when they be fat (as do Monks in the mewe)
and murmr when they be full. Among the which, we mean not such as with
pure conscience, exercise them selves in their vow of contemplation of Divine
things, in whose souls, contemplation takes perfection, as says the
Divines. For in all sorts of men, the best ought to be respected, and the
worst noted. Neither yet do I mean, that you should be sparyng for the meat
of your servants, as was the Abbot of Poson in Hungary, who was wont to say
that of all the works of his servants, the mouyng of their Jaws grieved him
most: he was so filthis coueteous, that he disdained to see his servants
eat, as writes Aeneas Syluius in the xlij. Chapter of his History of Boheme.

For the charges of the two Asses (although Thistles grow every where
abundantly) we will allow five Souses a day: amountyng to four score and
tweltie Frankes, vi. d. and ij. thirdes. x. li. v. s^.
and five Souses in the year. And for the Ass keeper (whom you may also apply
too other service, after that he has brought his Eggs to the place appointed
(who can have no less then one maid to acco^panie him, whose allowance being
after the rate of five Souses the day, comes to four score and twelve
Franks, and five Souses the year. Who^ you shall advertise, that he ouercharge
not his Asses least they murmr as do the Monks unreformed.

The Emperor Augustus Caesar after the victory Actium against Antonius,
injured by the love of Cleopatrae Queen of Egipte, going to see the ships
captive, found suddenly an Asse-keper, and asked him what was his name: Who
answered that his name was Fortunatus: and the names of his Asses, Victorious.
Thereby gratulatyng the victory of the Emperor. You may feel the profit of
your Asses with like congratulation, and hope of good Fortune and victory,
against them that would have thrown you into miserable poverty: if you
follow your business with requisite diligence as did the said Emperor
Augustus his wars: Auoidyng such delices and pleasures, as Antonius used
with Cleopatra.

For meat or feedyng for the Hens, shall suffice for the day two quarters
of Paris measure, as well in Barley as in Otes, Fitches, or Tares: and in
Winter, Septier is y^ Quarter of Paris v. s^. vi. d. and ij. thirdes.
bearde or horned Wheat, (which in Champaigne is called Sarasine Wheat)
after xxv. Souses the Septier or quarter, which by the day amounts to L.
Souses: and in the year seven hundredth, four score and seven Frankes, and
ten Souses, which is four score and vij. li. x. s^.

As touching the Physicians, some of them selves shall have need of your
merchandise: as they that have a Famely, and many little children: whom you
must visit weekly with certain quarterons of new laid Eggs, brought on
Thursdaie for Fridaie and Saterdaie. At Easter also with certain Red Eggs to
present to their neighbors, as the revenue of their practike. But such as
have no family, and seek for wife and house, followyng the precepte of
Xenophon in his Oeconomiques, you may to (gratify them) show the^ the
increase of your Housebandry, and recite unto them the pleasure which you
receive therein, to hasten them to cast them selves into the net of happy
Mishap, and yet in the mean time honor them with some pretty Presents.

And if you have the means to recover Pullettes, or Chickens of the race of
the He^ne, which engendereth them perfectly formed, scrapyng and pepyng, and
followyng the Hen, as soon as they be out of the Egg (as rehearses
Apuleius in his book of the golden Ass) you may thereby give argument of
high Philosophy of noueltees, upon the doubt which they make, if the round
Eggs bring forth Cocks, and the long Eggs Hens. Wherein Albertus Magnus
the Ape of Aristotle, does contrary his Master, in the sixth book of Beasts.

But in the resolution of this question, you shall find the^ no less
troubled, A pretty question.
then in this: which is, why there are more Sheep then Wolves: Seeing that one
Sheep commonly engendereth not but one, or seldom times two, whereas the
Wolf brings forth eight or nine. Again, in consideration that for one
Wolf that is killed, a thousand or two thousand Sheep go to the
slaughter. For the reason which Herodotus brings in his third book of his
Muse of Thalia, (where he says, that Nature has made fierce and cruel
Beasts more fruitful, speaking of the multitude of Serpents and Vipers,
which in Arabia keep the Trees of Frankensence (can not be applied to
Wolves, which are fierce and rauenyng. But to return to our charges.

For the entertainemente of the said Physicians, I give you estate of two
hundred and three score Frankes by the year. xxviij. li. xvii. s^. ix d. one
third.
So shall your Physicians have no occasion to complain, that they have the
pension of Pulters. Of other fidelity nevertheless, that he that is found
culpable of false report, shall abide the Judgment of the Senator Papirius,
at the siege of Aquilon, a Town of the Samnites, of the which Valerius
Maximus makes mention in his seventh book.

To the Gainsellers, vi. d. and ij. thirdes. xv. s^. vi. d. ij. thirdes. xl.
li. xi. s^. i. d. and i. third.
you shall give five Souses for a hundred. Giving the^ charge, that they sell
not in your name, any Eggs but yours. Which in sum, shall be by the week
seven Frankes: and by the year, three hundred, three score and five Frankes. In
the which you shall do nothing contrary to the opinion of Socrates, who
blamed them that bought Marchaundize by gross, to sell them again to others
by retaile, as hurtful to the common wealth.

Then the supputation or compte being made upon xx. Frankes of the sale of
your Eggs by the day, x. li. iiij. s^. v. d. one third. viij. hundred vi.
li. ij. s^. ij. d. ij. thirdes. three hundred li. vij. s^. ij. d. ij. thirdes.
amountyng to seven thousand and three hundred Frankes by the year, we must
rebate the sum of two thousand, seven hundredth and three Frankes, and five
Souses Tournois, (of currante money) for the expenses here before compted. So
remains unto you the profit by the year, the sum of four thousand, five
hundredth, four score and xvj. Frankes, and five Souses, which is five
hundredth and xj. li. xiij. s^. x. d. and ij. thirdes.

And when your laiyng Hens shall be no more then six C. a day, leauyng the
other six C. in rest to abide their season, yet shall remain unto you xv.
Frankes by the day: and by the year, iii. M. iiii. C. xlvii. Frankes, three
Souses, xxxiij. s^. iiii. d.
and ix. pence, all charges deducted, which amounts to three hundredth four
score and three li. v. d.

Which seems to me an honest gain and profit, upon the emploiyng of so
little a sum, and that, without all filthy Usury: By the means also
whereof, your may feast your friends, and lead a joyful life: I say not
prodigal, as of Asope the Tragike, with his platter of small birds, whereof
Pliny makes mention in the tenth book of his Natural History. Neither so
dainty or gluttonous as of Apitius, that was in the time of the Emperor
Tiberius. Neither yet so sumptuous and magnificent, as that of Lucullus noted
of Plutarche (in his book of the lives of famous men) for the banquet which he
made upon the sudden, for Pompeius and Cicero: the expense whereof was no less
then twelve hundred and fifty Crounes, coming to fifty Sesternes Roman. Or
that of Pomponius Atticus. Again on the other part, I mean not that your
living shall be so straight, in frugalitie or sparyng, as was that of Curious
Dentatus, who lived with Radishe roots. Or of Pertinax, who would be served
ten times with one Salet. Neither so vile or sparyng, as was Epaminondas a
great Lord of Thebes, who kept his chamber while his apparel was amendyng,
because he would have no change.

But temperate and modeste, as that of the Kings of Egipte, who before they
fell too their meat, disputed of modesty and sobriety, taking pleasure in
bankettes, more joyful, then sumptuous or exquisite. And so shall you not fall
into the penalty of the Law Numerall of Julius, who prefined a Tax to be
paid of the charges, made in great feasts and bankettes.

And for as much as it may seem a thing vndecente, that a man should make
profession of an Art, or trafique of Merchandise, whereof he has no
knowledge, being ignorant of the natures and temperatures of the things, which
he has in hand: I will not fail to advertise you of the diseases, which
come to Hens and Cocks, and of their remedies, and when it shall be needful
to change them, and put others in their places, to the end that your number
do not diminishe: as you know that by surrogation, the kinds of all things
are preserved in their being, and so remain perpetually, as divine Diotimus
taught Socrates in the second book of the feast of Plato.

Their common disease is the pippe, which is a disease of the tongue, the end
whereof is thereby hardened, in manner of a gristle. And thereby also the Hen
loses her taste, both in eating and drinkyng: and infecteth also the other
Hens, specially within the house, and the place of their feedyng.

This disease proceeds, either of being long without drinckyng of clean and
freashe water, or by drinckyng of foul and stinckyng water. And to heal it,
you must take the Hen, and take away the superfluity, which grows on
the tongue hardened at the end. And then wash the tongue and beak with oil, in
the which shall be tempered a hedde of Garlike. And put among their meat
Staphesacre: and to rub the tongue well with Spettle or Vinegar, first tempered
in the mouth of the servant.

An other disease, is the Catare or Rheum, which is a fluxion of cold humors
in the head of the Heaues, making them to hang their wings, and their Creastes
or combs. The remedy is, to trauerse or overthwart their nosethrells with a
Feather put through them, to open the Fluxion or Rheum that is stopped, and
makes them blind. It shall also be good to warm their drink in Winter:
because such diseases proceed of cold, or drinkyng of Frosen water, or liyng
under the Moon, the mother of all moistuesse.

Against the Lice and Vermin, which makes them lean, feeble, and
unfruitful, I have showed you the remedy. But when the disease is now come,
the remedy is too bathe them with a little wine, or drink, in the which
shall be sodden some Comine, or Staphisacre, commonly called the death of Lice,
appliyng it to the heddes of little children, with ointmentes.

If you doubt, how I know this, not alledgyng any Author for the proof: you
shall understand that I have learned it, by practice of the common people, in
like manner as the wisemen among the Hebrews, named Cabalistae, and the like
among the Gauls named Druydes, learned their Sciences by Tradition, from
mouth to mouth, and from hand to hand without letters. Whereby is come to
pass, yt in our France, the government is more by customs not written, then
by written laws: as Julius Caesar has written in his Commentaries, of the
conquest of the Gauls or Frenchemen, in his sixth Book.

The auncientes have written certain remeadies, to keep the Hens from the
Fox, as Palladius in his book of Housebandrie, teaches how to rub the
walls of the Hen house, with the gaul of a Fox, and to cut in little
pieces the flesh of a Fox, and to mingle it with the Hens meat, to cause
the Fox to abhor to come near it, by feelyng the death of his proper kind,
which nature can not abide, as Pliny writes in his nine and twenty book of
his Natural History. But the most sovereign remeadie, is to keep fast and
close the doors and windows in the night. And that in the day, your
servants often times come, and go in all places and corners of your close.
And that nere unto it, or the Hen house, be no heaps of wood, bushes, or
stones, where such beasts may be hid or harbored. For, the beasts which
live by rapte, have ever a certain fear joined with their craftiness, and
desire of rauenyng.

About the time of Autumn, you shall every year draw a hundred or two hundred
of the eldest of your He^nes, and such as have their claws longest, and
grossest. In place of the which, you shall put younger of such sort or
quality, As I have before described.

If peradventure you be of opinion, to keep your Eggs of one season for an
other, you must lay them in order upon sheaues of straw very freashe, with
the sharp end upward, or to lay them in Panyers in like manner. And that
they be well covered with straw, that they be not turned by too much heat,
or cold. And if you will choose the best for your friends, take Candida,
Longa, Noua (that is) white, long, and new, followyng the opinion of the
school of Salerne.

The other two Acres which remain about your Yard, Court, or place
enclosed, shall be commodious to sow Barlie, which is a grain very proper
for the nouriture of Hens. And if you can recover Barlie of the seed of
Aethiope, whereas dwell the Jews of the ligne of Dan, Nepthalin, Gad, and
Asser, nere to the river of Sabbatique (which Moises affirms to be the river
in the holy scripture called Gosan) it shall be singular good, because one grant
thereof brings forth an hundred, as Eldad Damus the Hebrew has written in
his breef History of the Empire of the Jews, enclosed in Aethiope.

I will write unto you more ample of the other profits, which concern the
nouriture of Hens, as of what properties they are, and what one may draw of
their substances. But my end has been none other then to give advise, how for
a little sum of money and little travail, you may get great profit: to
the end that you may the more easily forgette your losses, and accustom your
self to the noise and cluckyng of your Hens: and not to seem more delicate,
then was the good Philosopher Socrates, who bore it easily because they laid
him Eggs: as he bore patiently the murmuryng and scoldyng of his wife
Xantippe, because she bore him children.

You may every day se your menage or housebandrie. And (as did the
Peripatici) walk about the closes, and other places: and consider the
endeavor of your servants. Whom also by this means you shall make more
careful and diligent: and your Hens better entreated, according to the
Apophthegme which says: That the eye of the Master makes the servant
prompter, and the Horse fatter: as also Aristotle makes mention in his first
book of Oeconomikes. But how so ever it be, direct your Housebandrie in
such order, that bones be not given to Asses, and Thistles to Dogs.

The Maid servant or Chamberlain, of Promotheus (named Experience) who served
him, after that he had brought from Heaven the liberal Sciences, and to whom
when he drue nere to death he gave them by Testament, may in short time assure
you, either to continue this Merchandise and traffic, or to leave it. For she
( Experience I mean) is one of the cheef servants which you must have,
with other diligent company.

You ought not to take it greeuousstie to leave your dwelling place, and
accustomed pleasant Air, or your neighbors, cousins, or friends. For you
know well the incommodities which Civil war brings, the which (as
writes Cicero to Marcus Marcellus, in the fourth book of his familier
Epistles) is no less lamentable, then the victory gotten by sheadyng of
domestical blood. And therefore not without reason says the Proverb: That
war is pleasant to such as has no experience thereof. The which saying
Erasmus, a rare manne in all kind of learning has in his Chiliades, dilated
by many examples: as you may also easily judge at this present. You know also
that the Marchaunte to fly poverty, hazardeth him self by land and sea, and
leaves his native air and country.

And for the doubt that you may have, not to be assured in peaceable
possession of your enclosed ground, against the violence of Thieves and
soldiers: I would wish you for the guard thereof, either the wakyng Serpent
which kept the garde^s of Hespides (famous for the golden apples) slain by
Hercules of Thebes, or the furious Bulls which kept the golden fleese in the
I Will of Colchos, under the king Aoetas the father of Meda, which were overcome
and taken by ^a^o^ of Thessalia, at the voyage of the Argonautae. Have recourse
to the Metamorphoses of Ovid in the fowerth and seventh Book. But better then
all this shall serve for your security, a tablet of three or four flower de
Lice (the kings Seal) authorized by the king: which shall be of greater
efficacy then any other sauegard that you can desire.

For final counsel, I pray you continewe in the love and fear of God,
obeisaunce to your Prince and his Magistrates, reverence to all superiors,
with patience of your losses, to occupy your trade without fraud, and you
shall find multiplication of all your gooddes. And then (as says Iuuenall in
his third Satyr) you may say that you are son of a white Hen.

But when you shall be known to do service to so excellent a Common wealth as
is the City of Paris (which surmounteth all those that have been famous among
the Greeks) and that you have given the first entry, and (as says the
Proverb) broken the Ice to others, I suppose your enemies shall be repulsed, as
were they of Furius Cressinus Citezin of Room enueighed of his neighbors,
because that of a little he raised more gain, then they did of much tillage.
For the which they imputed unto him, that he used Witchcrafte, and
Enchauntment. Who bryngyng for the his instruments of Housebandrie, his
diligente servants: was discharged of all such suspicions, and of all men
greatly commended, as writes Titus Liuius. And furthermore your felicity and
prosperity, shall be a passion to your enemies, as chances to all envious
persons.

I know other experiences very prompte. But of no greater gain then six
frankes the day, all charges deducted Therefore, if my first instructions seem
not agreeable unto your Nature, advertise me thereof, that I may direct unto
you an other way more easy, and no less delectable, though of less profit.

Peradventure some will think this Counsel very strange and ridiculous,
and perhaps of difficult execution. To think it strange, there is no greater
reason, considering the nourishyng of Hens for honest gains, is no new or
strange thing, if we believe that which Celius Rhodoginus, a worthy Author,
has written in his fowertene book of Antiquities: That in the I Will of Delos
(otherwise called Ortygia for the boundance of Quails) being one of the most
famous of the Cyclades in the sea Aegaeum were found many that made estate and
traffike in the nourishement of Hens, for gain and profit. Who were so well
exercised herein, and in the knowledge of their He^nes, that only upon the
sight of an Egg, they could easily judge what Hen it came from. Therefore,
that sellyng of Eggs has ever been a thing commonly used: have recourse to
the Impost, which was in the time of the Emperor Honorius, as is said
heretofore.

As touching mockers, no man can establishe any thing so good or well ordered,
that the mocker shall not bite, when Envy has made impression in his foolish
brain, and has there taken up his lodgyng, to torment his host.

And to resolve you of such difficulties, let us take hold of the saying of
Agathon a young gentle man, in the Oration which he made of Love, in the
feast of Plato, saying: that we ought more to fear the judgment of a few
wisemen, then of many ignorant fools and mockers. For wisemenne slowly give
the loose bridle to their congues, but use their words with judgment: as also
writes Cicero in his Oration for Plancius, saying: That the judgment of ten
wise and grave men in one City, imports more then the judgment of all the
common people, who for the most part judge without counsel or reason.

If any man shall say that the invention of this counsel is old: I confess
unto you that I am not the first teacher hereof, as was Carbilius of the
first letters at Rome, or the first Schoolemaister: yet has it not been
practiced in our time. And as writes the Poet Horatius. Many things are
renewed which time has devoured, and buried as dedde, the which again in
time shall be drouned in the River of Oblivion, and shall again return to
their estate by course, as doo^ in manner all worldly things, as wise Solomon
also witnesses.

Assure your self my dear freede, that Magnifico Megret, or any other
Alchemiste, have not with their Fornaces and Alembikes, drawn more profit by
the Philosophers stone, then you shall draw out of the beally of your Hens,
if you will join pleasure with pain. And so shall you be out of danger,
(...) which such Alchemistes fall, who oftentimes consume their Patrimony,
and blow it away with bellows. But ever beware the Fox. In the mean time
you shall receive of your friend this little gift, such as it is, in hope
hereafter to recover of him some better thing when occasion does serve, which
(occasion) you must take by the he^^e before, that it escape not from you.

Now therefore for the end of this account, you must arm your self with
patience when affliction is sent, and anoide poverty (the enemy of all good
manners) by exercise of honest and profitable frugalitie in ^^yng the things,
which you have gotten by your labor: and therewith also a reputation not
bulgare, which shall be bruted through all France, for the novelty of your
enterprise. Whereof some will take such pleasure, as (...) move the severe
Catoes to laughyng, and raise the Melancholic Mi^^ of weepyng Democrites.

And finally, you shall herewith receive the contentation of your loving
freende with this pleasant present, to mitigate the forrowes of these cloudie
times, and to putt you in good comfort of better hope in time to come.

Hatchyng of Eggs without Hens, as writes Ioannes Porta in his second book
of Magike Natural.
TAke the dounge of Pigeons or Hens beaten into powder, and finely sifted.
Then lay the Eggs in such sort, that one touch not an other for breakyng.
And see they be well covered with the said dounge both under and above, in
close Panyers or Coopes commodious for the purpose, so that the rounder or
bigger end of the Eggs be dounwarde. But first you must lay a bed of
Hens feathers, and thereon the dounge: and likewise an other rank or bed
of Feathers upon the dounge that covers the Eggs. This done, you shall every
four and twenty hours turn the Eggs, that they may equally receive the
heat. They may thus be kept, in a place of temperate heat. And when
twenty days are past, if you shall perceive that the chickens strike the
shell with their bills, harken if they peep. For often it chances, that for
the thickness of the skin or filme, they can not break forth. Then help
them with taking of the Shell. And immediately bring the Hen unto them. The
like may be done in a warm. Quen, tempered to the measure and proportion of
Natural heat. Likewise also in hot Horse dounge, with like diligence of
measuryng and conseruyng of heat, with addyng of new and pure doung every
seventh day.

Cardanus in his twelueth book De Subtilitate, writes mutche in like manner:
But says that you must first make two Cusshions or Pillowes filled with
Hens dounge, beaten into fine powder and Sifted. Then by sowyng or other
means, fastenyng on the Pillowes Hens Feathers both great and small of
good thickenesse, and lay the Eggs between them in a warm place etc. as
before. He writes that in the great City of Alkair or Babilonia Noua in
Egypt, they use thus to hatche Eggs in great multitude.

FINIS.

