A QUENCH-COALE. OR A brief Disquisition and Inquiry, in what place of the
Church or Chancell the Lords-Table ought to be situated, especially when the
Sacrament is administered?

Wherein is evidently proved, that the Lords-Table ought to be placed in the
MIDST of the Church, Chancell, or Quire North and South, not Altar-wise, with
one side against the wall: That it neither is nor ought to be styled an Altar;
That Christians have no other Altar but Christ alone, who has abolished all
other Altars, which are either Heathenish, Jewish, or Popish, and not
tolerable among Christians.

All the Pretenses, Authorities, Arguments of Mr. Richard Shelford, Edmond
Reeve, Dr. John Pocklington, and A late Coal from the Altar, to the contrary
in defense of Altars, calling the Lords-Table an Altar, or placing it
Altar-wise, are here likewise fully answered and proved to be vain or forged.

By a well-wisher to the truth of God, and the Church of England.

Hebr. 7. 12. 13.

For the Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a change also of
the Law: For he of whom these things are spoken, pertains to an other Tribe,
of which no man gave attendance at the Altar.

Augustinus de verbis Domini secundum Joannem, Sermon. 42. Christus quotidie
pascit; Mensa ipsius est illa in MEDIO constituta. Printed in the year 1637.

To the High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
MOST DREAD SOVEREIGN,
THE bleeding and almost desperate Condition of the long established Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of England, of late years, not only secretly
undermined by Popish Priests and Jesuits, but openly oppugned, affronted, by
some English Priests and Prelates in diverse Visitation-Articles, Sermons and
printed Books licenced for the Press, to the intolerable contempt of your
Majesty's late pious Before the 39. Articles, and concerning the causes of the
dissolving of the Parliament. An. 1628.
Declarations; Has made me so presumptuous, as not only to compile, but
likewise to recommend this unpolished Quench-Coale to your Royal Personage:
Wherein like a plain-dealing Englishman, I have according to my poor ability,
not only defended the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, in the particulars now oppugned, against those treacherous rebellious
Sons of hers who have professedly both in their Sermons, practices and
printed Books oppugned them, out of her own Records and Writers (which I have
principally made use of) but likewise discovered and laid open, without
flattery or partiallity, their desperate practices, aims, plots and
intentions, to suppress and root out our sincere Religion, and usher in
Popery by degrees; Together with the method, and progress they have made and
prosecuted in this their pernicious design.

The reasons inducing me to dedicate this rude incompt Discourse (which I had
neither time nor opportunity to polish) to your Sacred Majesty were these.

1. First, to acqu^int your Highness, with the several dangers wherewith the
Religion, Doctrine and Discipline, by Law establishest in the Church of
England, are now surrounded, and those open affronts and oppositions made of
late years against it; Of which I presume, your Majesty (who commonly see with
other men's eyes, and hear with other men's ears, as most Princes are forced to
do) have not been yet so fully acquainted, as your faithful Subjects could
desire, especially by your Prelates.

2. Secondly, to inform your Majesty, how grossly some of your Prelates and
Chaplains have abused your Highness and your Subjects ears and eyes, both in
the Pulpit, the Sea Acoale from the Altar, p. 64. the Order, of the
Counsell-Table concerning S. Gregory's Church: And Ibid. p. 15. 16. 17. 19. 53.
to 58.
Counsell-Chamber, and in printed Books, in the point of Altars, and their
situation of Communion-Tables Altarwise against the East wall of the Quire;
Which Altars and Situs of Lords-Tables, they have peremptorily affirmed, to be
consonant to the practice of approred Antiquity; Yea to the Statutes, Doctrine,
Canons and Discipline of the Church of England; When as it is most apparent:
That the primitive Church laand Christians had no Altars, but Tables only, for
above 260 teyeares after Christ; And that then and ever since, till now of
late, both their Tables and Altars were always placed in the MIDST of their
Quires or Churches; As J have here plentrifully manifested; And that they
neither bowed to nor toward their Altars, as these new Doctors falsely
dogmatize.

3. Thirdly; To present unto your Majesty, the many dangerous Innovations and
backslidings to Popery that have crept into our Church of late, and now are
publicly justified in print, yea enjoined by some of your potent Prelates, and
enforced on your poor Subjects (especially godly Ministers) under pain of
suspension, excommunication, deprivation, yea fining, imprisonment and utter
ruin in your High Commissions, (at See 1. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1.
first erected to suppress all Popery, Innovations, Errors and Episcopal
enchroachments upon your Eeclesiasticall Prerogative, but now used as the
chief Instruments, to countenance and set them up,) in professed opposition
and rebellion against your Majesty's Laws, Proclamations and two late pious
Before the 39 Articles; and of the causes moving his Majesty to dissolve the
last Parliament, p. 20. 21. 22. 42.
Declarations to all your loning Subjects: Wherein your Majesty (to the
unspeakeable joy of all your true-hearted people) calling God to record before
whom you stand, has made this solemn Protestation.

That you will never give way to the authorizing of any thing, whereby ANY
INNOVATION may steal or creep into the Church, but preserve that unity of
Doctrine and Discipline established in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, whereby the
Church of England has stood and flourished ever since. That you do profess to
maintain the true Religion and Doctrine established in the Church of England,
without ADMITTING OR CONNIVING AT ANY BACKSLIDING TO POPERY OR SCHISM.

That you will not INDVRE ANY VARYING OR DEPARTING JN THE LEAST DEGREE, from
the se^^d Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England now established. And
that you will esteem those subordinate Officers and Ministers that shall be but
negligent in seeing this your Declaration executed (much more then those who
apparently oppugn it,) as culpable both to God and your Majesty; And will
expect that hereafter they give you a better account; Yet notwithstanding both
these your royal Declarations; Some of your Prelates (who were both privies
and parties to them) with others of your Clergy, have since their publication,
not only suffered many Jnnovations to creep and steal into our Church,
admitted and connived at many backslidings to Popery and Romish Schism, and
permitted nay See Shelford, Reeve, Chownaeus, Brown, Pocklington, Heylyn,
Bishop White, A Coal frrom the Altar, the Female Glory, with other late
licensed Books, Bishop Wrens, Bishop Mountagues and Bishop Pierce their
Visitation Articles.
licensed in print many varyings and departings in the highest degree from the
settled established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; But
likewise been the chief Authors and fomenters, yea the open Abbettours and
Commanders of them both in the Pulpit, High Commission, their
Visitation-Articles, Synodes, and in printed Books; Especially in setting up,
justifying, writing and preaching for Images, Crucifixes, Altars, Priests,
Sacrifices of the Altar, bowing to Altars, to Communion-Tables, and railing
them in Altarwise, with other particulars elsewhere specified in this
Discourse; In which we have lately backslided, not only toward Popery, but
quite Apostatized to it, (as the Priests, the Papists glory and crack in
every place:) justifying in some late printed Books, Chownaeus Collect: 16.
17. 18. Mr. Robort Shelford Priest Treatise concerning Antichrist.
The Church of Rome to be a true Church, and never to have erred in any
fundamental points, no not in the worst times; And publicly maintaining the
Pope or Papacy not to be A^tichrist, and Antichrist yet not to be come, in open
affront to For (...) against Disobedience and wi^full Rebellion. Sermon. 3. 4. 5.
our Homilies Of Ireland, n. 80.
Articles, Bishop Downham, Bishop Abbot, Dr. Beard, Mr. Squire, Mr. Powel,
Richard Brightwell, Thomas Becon, and others of Antichrist.
Authorized Writers of all sorts, and the professed position of all the
Reformed Churches of the world.

So much do some of your Prelates and Priests now dote upon the Rev. 17. 5.
15. 16.
Whore of Rome and her abominations.

Yea such has been the monstrous unparalled presumption of these undutifull,
persidious Innovatours, since these Declarations published by your Majesty,
that they have dared to purge, corrupt, sophisticate and Innovate the public
Records and Monuments of the Church of England, ratified by sundry 1. Eliz. c.
2. 13. Eliz. c. 12. 3. Iacobi c. 1.
Acts of Parliament, without your Majesty's privity; To such an hight of
insolency are they grown.

I shall instance only in 3. particulars, worthy your Majesty's, yea the whole
Kingdoms consideration, and the severest Censures that your Royal Justice can
inflict.

First, they have purged and corrupted the Book of Common Prayer in two
several places, the first whereof so nearly concerns your Majesty, your
Royal Confort and Princely Issue, that J should be no less then an
Arch-Traytor to you all, should I not discover but conceal it.

In the ancient Common-prayer-Bookes there was this Collect prescribed for the
Queen, Prince and Royal Issue O God, who art the Father of thine Elect and of
their seed, we humbly beseeth thee to bless our most gracious Queen, etc.

These busy Innovatours, to testify their loyalty and duty to your Majesty,
your Queen and Royal Issue, have presumed to expung you all out of the
Catalogue of Gods Elect, and to rank you all in the number of Reprobates and
Castawayes, with one dash; Blotting this clause (who art the Farher of thine
Elect and of their seed) quite out of this Collect, in all the late
Common-prayer-Bookes; Whereby they have done as much as in them lies, not only
to deprive your Majesty and your Princely Jssue, of that temporal Crown of
Sovereignty over these your Realms, to which you are Elected by God, but also
to rob both your Majesty, your Noble Queen, your Royal Issue, your most
Illustrious Sister, and her Princely Progeny, of that eternal Crown of glory
likewise, to which both Col. 3. 12 1. Those. 1. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 1. 2. 2. John. 1.
2. These. 2. 13.
Charity and Loyalty enjoyne us, to believe you are Elected through Gods Ephesians.
1 4, 5. 6. 7. 11, 12. Romans 11. 5, 6.
free grace and everlasting decree; Elect, in the Collect, being taken in both
these senses.

Whether these pragmaticall Refiners of this prayer, deserve not a Bishop
Latimer his 2, and 5. Sermon before King Edward the 6.
Tiburne-Tippet, at the least, for this bold attempt, I humbly submit to your
Royal Majesty.

2. The second alteration they have made in the Book of Common Prayer is, in
the Epistle for Palme-Sunday; small in appearance, but great in consequence.

All the Common Prayer-Bookes before the year of our Lord 1629. (as likewise,
Tyndals, Couerdales, Thomas Mathewes and the Bishops Bibles, used in our
Churches till Anno 1612.) read that text of Phil. 2. 10. according to the
original, the Fathers, all Latin Writers and Translations, but two of late (to
wit the Beza and Castalio, who render it Ad nomen, not IN nomine, as all
others do) in this manner. That IN the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc.

But these Innovatours, to Jdolize the name Jesus, and usher in the Ceremony of
Capping and bowing to it (thereby to make way for bowing to Images, Altars,
Adoration of the Eucharist and other Romish Innovations) in the year of our
Lord 1629. (the very next year after your Majesty's Declarations) turned this
IN into AT the Name (as one Prelate did the like before in the New Translation
of the Bible for the same purpose) contrary to the original, the sense and
scope of the place, the Fathers, all former Common-prayer-Bookes, and the very
rules of our English Dialect; There being no such phrase in the whole Bible,
nor in any English Author, that ever I yet read, as, AT the name, except only
in this mistranslated and corrupted text; But only, IN the name. AT the name
being pure nonsense; As appears by turning IN into AT, in all the texts of
Scripture where this phrase IN the name is used: As Math. 28. 19. Baptizing
them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, John 16.
23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father IN my name, he will give it you: Acts
3. 6. IN the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth stand up and walk. Acts 9. 27.
2. 9. He preached boldly at Damascus IN the name of Jesus: And Acts 16. 8. 1.
Cor. 5. 4. Ephesians. 5. 2. 2. These. 5. 20. 2. These. 3. 6.

In all which if we convert IN into AT, and read them AT the name, it makes
both the English and text Nonsense, and so it does in this very text, Phil. 2.
10. As some Lame Giles his Haultings; and certain Quaeries propounded to the
Bowers at the name of Jesus, Qu. 1. 2. 3, 4.
have manifested at large in particular Treatises of this Subject, and
Ceremonies of bowing at the name of Jesus, when it is pronounced, Ibidem, And
the Appendix concerning bowing at the name of Jesus.
brought in by Popes with indulgences, for idolatrous ends, and not known, not
used in the Primitive Church for above 1200 years after Christ; What ever some
have written or preached to the contrary, to abuse your Majesty and Subjects
with their Fables.

Who they were that originally caused these two alterations and Corruptions of
the Common-prayer-Booke (to omit the changing of Minister into Priest, in some
places) I cannot certainly inform your Majesty; But if common same and
circumstances may be credited^ they were some of your greatest Prelates this
day living.

One of the chief instruments employed in this good service, (who can discover
the parties that set him about this work; Then a Chaplain to a great Bishop,
now to your Majesty) was Dr. John Cosens, as I was long since informed by your
Majesty's Printer Mr. Norton, upon the first discovery and inquiry after this
abuse.

A fit instrument for such a purpose; Who but the year before was accused in
Parliament for dangerous words against your Majesty and the Reformers of our
Religion; To wit. See a brief Historical Narratio^ of some notorious Acts
and Speeches of Mr. John Cosens at the end of Mr. Peter Smarts Sermon: Printed
at Edinburg An. 1628
That your Majesty was no more Supreme Head of the Church of England next and
immediately under Christ, then the Boy that rubbed his horse heels. That the
Reformers of our Church when they took away the Mass, took away all Religion
and the whole service of God: They called it a Reformation, but it was indeed a
Deformation; That the Mass was a good thing and a good word: As also for
setting up Images, an Altar and no less then 220 Tapers and 16 Torches on
Candlemasday, in the Cathedral Church of Durham, coutrary See the Homily
against the peril of Idolatry
to the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England.

All which particulars were substantially proved against him, both in the
Parliament House and at the Assizes at Durham, where he was found guilty upon
an Indictment. Yet in stead of punishments, answerable to these his offenses,
(some whereof would have been capital in other men) he has been so bolstred
up by some great Prelates, near your Majesty; As that he has received two or
three great livings for his encouragement since, and is now lately advanced to
be your Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary, and an head of a College in
Cambridge, (to help to poison that Fountain of learning and religion, with
the drugges and dregs of Rome;) to the great grief and discontent of
thousands; Honest Mr. Smart his prosecutour (for showing himself a faithful
Subject to your Majesty) being in the mean time violently thrust out of his
Preberdary of Durham and his Benefice, deprived, degraded, imprisoned, fined
and utterly ruinated in his Estate, by your High Commissioners at York,
(though a man every way conformable to the established Doctrine and Discipline
of the Church of England) only for opposing these Innovations of his, and
preaching a Sermon against them in the Cathedral at Durham: That of the Poet
being here really verified. Iuveual. Satyr. 2.
Dat veniam Corvis, vexat Censura Colnmbis. These things no doubt have been
concealed from your Majesty; Which now being discovered, I trust you will lay
them to heart, and learn to distinguish good Subjects from bad, in despite of
all calumnies cast upon them by these persidious instruments.

I have the rather given your Majesty this hint of Dr. Cosens his words and
practices, (whom the Papists of Durham now much honor and challeng for their
own,) because he was one of the first men that brought Altars into our Church,
and the first I hear off, that turned his Communion Table Altar-wise, and then
into an Altar.

See qua^ p. before.
Mr. Burgin, one of his Disciples, was the next that imitated him, who taking
away his Communion Table, erected an Altar in the East End of the Chancle of
his Parish Church; within the Bishopric of Durham; Which Altar (made of a
Gravestone) he laid upon a wall of stone, not a frame, adorning it with gilded
hangings; Which done, he read Second Service at it, (though above half his
Parishioners could neither hear nor see him;) and fell devoutly to adore it,
till at last his foot hanging in his gown, he unhappily fell down against the
Altar-steps, brake all his nose and face, so as he sacrificed his own blood
both upon the steps and Altar itself in stead of Christ's, and was not able to
walk abroad in many days after.

From these two presidents and beginnings, have all those other Innovation^ of
this Nature sprung, which now spread themselves far and near over all your
Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland too.

So far more prevalent and powerful is Dr. Cosens and his party, then either
your Majesty, your Laws, Declarations and loyal Subjects, or the established
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; All which with the Book of
Common Prayer, must now be Subject to their correction and control.

2. The second public Monument of our Church, which these Innovatours have
corrupted, is the Eucharisticall prayer, in the Book of Common Prayer
appointed for the 5. of November, in perpetual thankfulness to God for the
deliverance of your Royal Father, your Majesty and the whole Realm from that
infernal, divelish, matchless Powder Plot of the Papists, prescribed and set
forth by the express Statute of 3. Iacobi, ^. 1. which corruption nearely
concerns your Majesty, yea the whole Realm, and in my poor understanding
deserves as heavy a Censure, as any of those Powder-Traytors suffered.

All the Books of this kind from 3. Iacobi till 1635. rendered the chief
passages in this prayer, in these terms.

Root out that Antichristian and Babilonish Sect, which say of Jerusalem,
down with it, down with it, even to the ground, etc.

And to that end strengthen the hands of our Gracious King, the Nobles and
Magistrates of the Land, with Judgment and Justice to cut off these workers of
Iniquity, WHOSE RELIGION IS REBELLION, WHOSE FAITH IS FACTION, WHOSE
PRACTICE IS MURDERING OF SOULS AND BODIES, and to root them out of the
confines of this Kingdom.

This prayer (which some have observed, not to have been read, but purposely
omitted in your Majesty's Chapple the two fifth of Novembers last past, be like
by their direction who have since perverted it,) in the last Edition 1635. is
thus treacherously Metamorphosed: Root out that Babilonish and Antichristian
Sect ( added.
OF THEM) which say of Jerusalem, etc, And to that end strengthen the hands of
our Gracious King, etc. to cut off THOSE (for THESE) workers of Iniquity, WHO
TURN RELIGION INTO REBELLION and FAITH INTO FACTION.

In which strange alteration there are these notorious treacheries, yea
villainies, included not to be stighted over.

1. First, there is a diverting of the maine edge and substance of this Prayer
from the Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and Antichristian Babilonish Sect of Rome,
particularly designed in the first Prayer-Bookes, upon those Loyal Subjects
and Religious Christians, whom the D. Raynolds de Idolatria Romans Eccles. Epist.
ad Angl. Seminaria Sect. 5. p. 21. 22.
Papists at first, and profane licentious Romanizing spirits since, have
slaundered with the name of Puritans. Speeds History of Great Britain. p.
1252. 1233.
On whom as these Hell^sh Traitors and their Confederates would have fathered
this damnable plot at first, had it taken effect, (as blessed be God it never
did) to make them more odious to the World; (Which themselves confessed upon
their examinations and our Historians record:) So they have now turned the
whole scope of this prayer (and by cousequence the very practice and treason
itself) upon these poor Innocents; The only men aimed at in this alteration;
And the chief men declaimed against both at Court, Westminster, Paul's and our
Universities in the Sermons there preached of late years on the fifth of
November, wherein most have paralleld them with, And many affirmed them, to be
far worse then any Priests or Jesuits.

So much we poor Puritans (never yet guilty of the least treason or Rebellion
against their Princes in this Island, nor of any such forgeries, Jnnovations, or
Romish practices, as I have here discovered,) beholding to the Jesuits,
Priests and some English Prelates, who have been guilty of many hundred
treasons, Conspiracies and Rebellions against your Majesty's Royal
Progenitors, as our Mr. Tyndals Practice of Popish Prelates, D. Barnes his
Supplication^ to King Henry the 8. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 321. 409. 410.
479. 533. 168, to 234. Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. and Godwin in the lives of
Anselme, Becket, Edmond, Odo, William, Arundell, Laughton, Stratford, Scroope,
Poole, Wolsey, Adam de Orlton, and other Bishops.
Historians and writers witness.

And here by the way, your Majesty, (in despite of envy and calumny may take
Notice) First, that those who are now slaundered under the name of Puritans,
are your best and loyallest Subjects, because most hated and slaundered by
Jesuits, Priests and Traitors, who would Father all villainies and treasons on
them; And hate them most of any people, because truest to their Sovereigns.

2. Secondly, that no kind of people in the World are See Dr. Raynolds de
Idol. Eccles. Romans Epist. Ad Angl. Seminaria Sect. 5.
So much slaundered and traduced as they, though the Innocentest men of all
othors.

This the practice of the Papists to Speeds History, p. 1252. 1253.
translate this Powderplot with all their treasons and rebellions from
themselves to them, and most Sermons preached before your Majesty can witness;
Wherein such things are broached, such Mr. Boltons Discou^se of true happiness,
p. 193.
slanders raised of Puritans by Poetical brains, and yet vented out in the
Pulpit as sacred Oracles, which the Devil himself would blush to relate, and
the Auditors know to be mere sigments: And all to make Puritans odious to
your Majesty, being the only men that keep both your Crown and Religion safe.

J shall therefore humbly beseech your Majesty, when ever you hear any
Legends or Declamations against Puritans hereafter, to consider from what kind
of Persons they proceed, and to put them that utter them to make proof of what
they say, or else to brand them with an hot-iron in the cheeks or forehead
with an S for slaunderers; And then you will never hear any more fables of
Puritans, with which your Royal ears are now so often abused by the Jesuit
Contzens Disciples; Who gives this as one chief rule how to usher Popery into
any Christian State, Polit. l. 2 c. 17. 18. 19
to slander and disgrace the Puritans and zelots, to make them odious both to
Prince and people, and then Popery will break in without any opposition or
noise at all.

2. Secondly; By this perverting of this Prayer, the chief Odium against
Jesuits, Priests and Papists (the Speeds History. p. 1249. Sect. 33.
chief Authour^ of this horrid treason) is mittigated and taken off, that so
they may take root among us again, to the ruin both of Church, State, and
(without Gods special protection) of your Sacred Majesty, to whom they will
ever be treacherous, as they have Dr. White his Defense of the way, c. 6. 10.
The Homily for Whitsunday. D. Barnes his Supplication to King Henry 8.
always been to all Christian Princes and Republikes, that would not be their
slaves and Vassals to yield universal obedience to them in what ever they
should command.

3. Thirdly; By this Metamorphosis of, whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith
is Faction, etc. into. Those workers of iniquity, who turn Religion into
Rebellion, and Faith into Faction: The Romish Religion is acquitted and purged
from that damnable, treasonable, Rebellious, factious Doctrine, of the
lawfulness of deposing and murdering Christian Kings and Princes,
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope or enemies to the Roman Church and
Faith; Of which the first prayer, the Statute, of 3. Iacobi c. 4. in the form
of the Oath of Supremacy, the On Whitsunday and of wilful Rebellion.
Homilies and Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection and unchristian Rebellion,
Part. 3.
Writers of our Church, and among others Dr. John White in his Defense of the
way to the true Church, The Institution of a Christ^a^ manchap. of Orders. Dens
and Rex.
c. 6. etc. 10. Sect. 5:6. 7. 8. and Dr. Richard Crakanthrop in his Treatise of
the Popes Temporal Monarchy, c. 1. and 11. Which Authors chapters I shall
humbly desire your Majesty and all that love either your safety or Religion
seriously to read over at their best leisure, and then let them love Popery,
Priests and Jesuits if they can or dare,) prove them deeply guilty both in
point^ of Theory and Practice; And if all these fail, yet their obstinate
refusal of the Oath of Supremacy (which only 3. Iacobi c. 4. Deus and Rex.
enjoynes them to renounce this Doctrine of King-killing) proves them deeply
guilty of it; (and can your Majesty trust such near about you, who will by no
means swear, they will not murder nor deprive you?)

Now for any thus far to gratify Traitors and Rebels, as to acquit them from
that very Doctrine which makes them such, even then when they are quilty of it,
must needs be a danegrous, if not a Traiterous Act, perilous to your Majesty
and the whole Realm.

4. Fourthly; This Alteration extenuates the greatness and execrable odiousnes
of that horrid Treason, both in respect of the Actors, and that desperate
Doctrine which moved them to committ it; And to mince or extenuate such an
unparalleld treason as this, so execrable to all the world; Is nothing else but
to turn Traitor, and become guilty of the same treason, or of another as bad
as it.

Yea it is to be feared, that those who will be so perfidious, as after thus many
Years, to go about to extenuate and lessen such a Treason, have a mind to
turn Traitors themselves, atleast wise, to favor Treason and Traitors, and
have treasonable hearts within them.

5. Fifthly; This corruption is a large step to the abolishing of the memory of
this never to be forgotten Treason, and of that solemn Holy Day on the 5. of
November, instituted by 3. Iacobi c. 1.
Act of Parliament, for this very end, that our unfeigned thankfulness for our
happy deliverance from this Hellish design might NEVER BE FORGOTTEN, but be
had in A PERPETUAL REMEMBRANCE, that ALL AGES TO COME may yield praises to the
Divine Majesty, and have in memory THIS JOYFUL DAY OF DELIVERANCE: (they are
the words of the Act.) For when such a treason begins once to be blanched,
slighted, and the solemn gratulatory Prayers instituted for its remembrance
thus miserably to be corrupted. the next step can be no other, but the
abrogating both of the Book itself, and the solemnity kept in remembrance of
the treason; And then when this is effected, the next news we shall hear of
from Rome, will be the denial of the Fact, that there was ever any such
treason plotted, though sundry Histories specify it; As they have long since
Beyerlinke Chro nog^: p. 309.
published in print, that Henry Garnet the Jesuit and Speeds History, p. 1249.
Sect. 33.
Archplotter of it, had no hand therein; And that there was See Cooks Pope
Ione and the Authors quoted by him. Ioannis Valerion de Sac^ dotum Barbis.
Polychronicon. l. 5. c. 30. Caxion^ Chronicle, part. 5. An. 885. Volateranus
Cem. 1. 22 f. 228. Marianus Scotus, l. 3. Ae^as. 6. Anno 854. Col. 152. Martini
Poloni Supputation^s, An. 855 Col. 152. Papa. 109.
never any Pope Ione, though above 20 ancient Popish Writers record there was
such a one, and she a Pope, a strumpet, a most say an English woman.

6. Sixthly, It is apparent, that this alteration was made only to gratify the
Priests, the Jesuits, Pap^sts, and men Traitorously affected; Since all loyal
Subjects and truebred English spirits cannot but abhor it.

Therefore who-ever were the Authors or occasions of it, (be they either Arch
Prelates, Bishops, Priests, or other, for J cannot yet certainly discover the
parties, neither have I any sufficient means or Commission to do it, it being
a thing worthy your Majesty's own Royal Discovery, as the Powder Plot
itself was your Fathers, KING JAMES, his 3. Iacobi c. 1. 2. 3. Speeds History,
p. 125l. 1255. 1256. 1257.
own ever-blessed detection:) if it be not See 1. Eliz. c. 1. 27. Eliz. c. 2.
3. Iacobi, c. 1. 3. 4. 5.
Arch-Traytours and Rebels, yet J dare proclaim them no friends to your
Majesty, nor yet to the Church or State of England, or to the Religion we
profess, but enemies to them all, and friends to none but Rome, whose
iustruments they were in this particular.

3. The third corruption and forgery, is in the very Articles of Religion of
the Church of England, at first compiled in King Edward the 6. his reign Anno
1552. Revised and reestablished Anno 1562. in Queen Elizabeth's days, after
that Anno 1571. confirmed by Act of Parliament, 13. Eliz. c. 12. and printed
both in Latin and English the same year by the Queens Authority.

The 20 Article in all these ancient Yea in the Latin and English Editions,
An. 1553. in King Edwards days.
Editions, and all others in Queen Elizabeth's reign, (as likewise in the
Articles of Ireland, taken verbatim out of the English, printed at Dublin Anno
1615. and twice reprinted at London, An. 1628. and 1629. Artic. 75. of the
Authority of the Church;) runs thus: It is not Lawful for the Church to
ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods Words, etc.

But the Bishops to advance their own usurped Authority and gain some color
to arregate to themselves a power of prescribing new rites and Ceremonies, have
forged a New Article of Religion, and added it unto this, without either your
Majesty's or the Parliaments privity or consent, and cu^ningly obtruded it on
the Church of England; Making this Article now to run thus: The Church has
power to decree Rues and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith.
And yet (so far runs the Bishops forgery and addition) it is not Lawful
for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods Word written, etc.

Which whole first clause to yet: Is no part of the Article, but a mere
forgery and imposture of the Bishops; Whose, gloss is as pernicious as the
text, or woise: For, by Church they understand nothing else but Bishops; Making
the sense of this forgery to be this: The Church, that is, the Bishops in their
Visitations, Consistories and High Commissions (as they now de facto expound
it, witness their late new Visitation Articles, Rites and Ceremonies which they
would hence justify and Authorize) and likewise the Clergy in their
Convocation without the King and Parliaments consent) have both power to decree
Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in matters of Faith.

An exposition and Doctrine quite contrary to the Statutes of 25. H. 8. 6. 19.
1. Eliz. c. 2. 13. Eliz. c. 12. and all Acts concerning Religion, Heresy,
Bishops, and the like, yea directly repugnant to your Majesty's Declaration
before the 39. Articles; And quite opposite to the Scriptures and all ancient
VVriters, who never took the word Church for Bishops or Cleargie-men only, but
for the whole Congregation, and as well as much for the common people as the
Bishops and Ministers, as the 19. Article next preceding it, and our Mr.
William Tyndall in his Treatise what the Church is Dr. Whitaker de Ecclesia,
Dr. Field of the Church, Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection, etc. part 2. p.
168. 169. 170.
Writers plentifully witness.

This forgery, how ill soever glossed, is thrust into both the late Editions of
the Articles, Anno 1628. published by your Majesty's special command, and
made a part of the 20 Article, notwithstanding your Majesty in your Declaration
before both these Editions; Expressly prohibited, The least difference from
the Articles of the Church of England allowed and authorized heretofore in
Queen See the Declaration concerning the dissoluti^ of the Parliament. p. 21.
Elizabeth's days, or any varying and departing from them in the least degree,
in which it is not to be found; Nor yet in the Articles of Ireland: n. 75.
taken verbatim out of this 20. Article, printed in London the very same year,
or in the Addition of those Articles An. 1629. a year after these two last
impressions.

If the Bishops here reply, that they found it added in Rogers his Exposition
on the Articles, printed some years before.

J answer, that Copy was not the Authorized Authenticke Original by which
they should be directed but a bastard Copy, with which your Majesty would not
have your poor Subjects cheated or deluded.

Your Majesty therefore, prohibiting any the least difference from the Articles
allowed and authorized heretofore in Queen Elizabeth's days, by Parliament;
Prohibited them to insert this forged addition.

If they reply, that they were ignorant of the Original true Coppyes, and knew
not this to be a forgery.

I answer, that this is very improbable, that so many great Bishops should be
altogether ignorant, which were the true genuine Articles of our Church, who
had read, subscribed and given them in charge to others so often.

But admit it true, yet ignorance in this case is no plea at all for any man,
much less for Bishops; And if they are so ignorant of the very Articles of our
Church, J hope your Majesty and others will think them very unmeet to be
Bishops in our Church, and trust less to their pretended knowledge, judgment
and learning in future times, giving little credit to any thing they do or
say, without examination of it, since they are so really or affectedly ignorant
of the very Which they might do well to study a while, and give over their
secular Offices and Affairs, which make the^ so blind and ignorant in divine
things.
Articles of our Church, in the which they pretend most skill. But if they knew
the very Original Coppyes and Articles (as no doubt they did,) and that this
clause was not in them, but a mere late forgery, most fraudelently and
corruptly added to them; Then they were accessaries and wilful consenters to
this forgery, to delude both your Majesty and the whole Church of England with
it; Yea protessed rebels against your Majesty's Declaration before these two
impressions, (made by their own advice) prohibiting the least difference from
the said true Articles and Originals: And so are they guilty of forgery,
treachery and contumacy against your Majesty in the highest degree.

See Cromp^os Jurisdiction of Tit. Starchamber and Rastals Abridgme^t forger of
false deeds
If a man forge but a private Will or Deed, to cosen any private man of any
Inheritance, Lease or personal estate, he shall be severely punished in the
Star-cha^ber, fined, pyllored if not loose his ears beside. What punishments
then do they deserve, who have thus corrupted the Commo^-prayer-Booke, the
Prayers for the Gunpowder-treason and the Articles of Religion, (all ratified
by Parliament and so matters of Records and to 8. H. 6. c. 12. 5. Elz. c. 14.
corrupt or raze Records, or forge deeds the second time is felony,) and to
forge a new Article of Religion, to deceive your Majesty and your whole
Kingdom, and that not only for the present, but for all future ages?

Certainly, hanging is to good for them. Should a poor Puritan do but half
as much, the Bishops would have drawn, hanged and quartered him long ere this,
especially if the thing were derogatory to their Hierarchy and Epis. copall
Jurisdiction. But Bishops and their Agents think they may do any thing in
these days without check or censure. Yet I hope your Majesty will not let them
go scotfree for these their forgeries and corruptions; If not all done by
their Command and privity, yet doubtless by their connivance, negligence and
subsequent consents. And is it not now high time for your Majesty to look to
these persidious Innovatours, and to repose no trust in them any longer, since
they are lately grown so powerful, so insolent, as thus to sophisticate, to
pervert these very Original Records of the the Church of England, to which
they have subscribed, and to forge new Articles of Religion, to cheat your
Majesty and the whole Church of England with, for fear they proceed to further
forgeries of an higher nature?

We know, that the Bishops of Rome have See Dr. Crakenthorpe his defense of
Constantine and of the Popes temporal Monarchy; and excellent Treatise to
this purpose.
forged a Donation from Constantine and others, with which they have deluded
and troubled all the world, thrust the Roman Emperors from their Throne and
Territories, and usurped a temporal Monarchy over all the world: We know
that the Bishops of England in King Richard the 2. and Henry the 4. his days
Fox Acts and Monument p. 404. 405. 406. 481. 524. and Mr. Fullers Argument, 25.
H. 8. ^. 15.
forged two bloody Acts of Parliament against the true Professors of the
Gospel, to which the Commons never consented, though they foisted their
assents into them, upon which tyrannous forged Acts most of our Martyrs were
butchered, and thousa^ds of godly Christians and loyal Subjects imprisoned,
martyred, ruinated and stripped of all their goods, or else abjured, by
blood-sucking tyrannous Prelates.

Whether they may not in time proceed to the like attempts if not severely
punished for those fore-past forgeries and corruptions of our Churches,
Parliamentary Records; I humbly submit to your Majesty's and all wise-mens
considerations; Ambition, tyranny, pride, and malice being boundles, when they
have once overswolm'd the banks of due moderation, or grown impudent and
unrulie, especially in Bishops.

Having thus represented to your Majesty's Royal view these 3 grand forgeries
and corruptions, give me leave (I humbly beseech your Highness) to add to
these, two other late Jmpostures obtruded on the Church of England.

1. The first by Dr. (then Mr.) John Cosens and his confederates; Who Anno
1628. (the same year your Majesty's Declarations were published,) set forth a
Book, intiteled: A collection of private Devotions, or, the Hours of Prayer;
Wherein was much Popish Trash and Doctrine comprised, and at least 20 several
points of Popery maintained, to countenance all which, in the Title and Epistle
of this Book, he writes; That these Devotions of his, were after this manner,
published by Queen Elizabeth, and were heretofore published among us by her
High and Sacred Authority, to wit, in the Preces of Horary, set forth by her
Royal Authority Anno 1573.

When as there is no Analogy at all either in matter, form or method,
between these Devotions of his and those devout Prayers of her Majesty, nor any
of his points of Popery in them, as has been proved by Cosens his Cosening
Doctrine. A trial of Private Devotions.
two particular Answers to his Devotions in print: Yet these Devotions of his
were never yet suppressed, but publicly sold among us, approved by a Bishops
license, and now reprinted, to abuse your Majesty's poor Subjects, encourage
Papists, and scandalize that everblessed pious Queen, as the Author and
Patroness of his gross Popery. An abuse not tolerable in a Christian State.

2. The second is as bad or worse. Anno 1631. One John Ailward (not long before
a Popish Priest) published a Book intiteled: An Historical Narration of the
judgment of some most learned Bishops concerning Gods Election; Affirming the
Errors of the Arminians, to be the Judgment and Doctrine of the Church of
England, and of the Martyrs and Reformers of it, both in King Edwards and Queen
Elizabeth's days.

This Book (though written in professed opposition to your Majesty's
Declaration before the 39. Articles, to Suppress Arminianisme (yet now made
the only iustrument to advance it and suppress the truth) was licensed by Mr.
Martyn, then Chaplain to the Bishop of London, now Archbishop of Canterbury.

The whole Book except some 3. or 4. leaves containing nothing else but a
Copy of an Answer to a Letter, wherein the Answerer purged himself and others
from Pelagian Errors, etc.

This Masterpiece, forsooth, is pretended to be set out by the Bishops and
Reformers of our Church in the inception of Queen Elizabeth's reign by public
Authority, and the Doctrine then taught and professed. When this new Book was
printed, no Coppies must come abroad (as the Stationer then affirmed) before
the Now Canterbury.
Bishop of London had presented it to your Majesty, and gained your Royal
approbation thereof.

Not long after this it flies abroad over all the Realm, to the great
amazement and disturbance of many of your Subjects: One of them coming to that
learned Knights hands, Sir Humphry Lynde, (better read in Fathers and Popish
Authors then English Antiquities,) he was so much stumbled and greiued at it,
that he presently repaired with it, to a Gentleman's study of his acquaintance;
Telling him, there was a new Book, freshly published, which proved the Martyrs
and Reformers of our Church to be professed Arminians, and that this was the
Doctrine publicly taught and printed by Authority in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeths-raigne; Saying withal, it would do infinite harm, and desiring
him to take some pains to answer it.

The Gentleman no sooner turned ever two or three leaves of the Book, but he
presently discovered the grand Imposture; Informing the Knight, that this Copy
of a Letter, etc. was written by one Champenies, whom John Venon (Divinity
Lecturer of Paul's in the first year of Queen Elizabeth) An Apology or
Defense of the Doctrine of Pred^stination ^. 37.
expressly affirmed, to be then a rank Papist and a Pelagian, and that in
answer to this Verons Lectu^ es of Predestination, then publicly preached at
Paul's, ( dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, and printed by Authority in the second
year of her Highness reign.)

He likewise acquainted him, that this Copy of his Letter was printed about
the third year of her Dominion, without any Authors or Printers name thereto,
or place where, or year when it was printed, or any intimation at all that it
was ever licensed; All which were plain evidences, that it was printed in a
corner, without any license at all.

And whereas (said he) you desire a speedy Answer to it, if you will give me
but a pair of gloves, I will show you two Answers to it, already in print
above ^0 years since, by public Authority, and one of the first printed
Coppies of this Letter to boot.

To which the Knight replied, J am sure you do but jest with me.

No, said the other, I am in good earnest, will you give me, or wager a pair of
gloves hereupon?

That (answered he) I will do with all my heart. Then, said the Gentleman,
reach me hither those three Books he pointed to.

He did so. The first was a Copy of the Letter, without name of Author,
Printer, date of time or place; Which compared with that in this new Book,
proved the same verbatim.

Now, said the Gentleman, you have seen the Original, I will show you the
Author of it, (which he did in Verons Apology, f. 37.) and likewise two
several Answers in print: The first by John Veron himself forenamed,
entitled: An Apology in Defense of the Doctrine of Predestination Dedicated to
Queen Elizabeth, and imprinted at London by John Tisdale in the fourth year of
her Reign; Wherein this whole Letter is fully answered: The second, by that
famous Learned Man and exile for Religion in Queen Mary's days, Robert Crowly;
In his Apology of those English Preachers and Writers, which Cerberus the
three-headed Dog of Hell charge with false Doctrine, under the name of
Predestination; Seen and allowed according to Her Majesty's Injunctions, and
printed at London by Henry Denham, Anno 1566. Wherein this whole Letter is at
large recited in several Sections, and then answered Verbatim; This Book
being nothing else but a particular professed Answer to it by public
Authority; As directly contrary to the truth and Doctrine of the Church of
England then taught and established.

When the Gentleman had showed him these two printed ancient Answers to this
new Book; He likewise turned to Se^m^s London^, 1584. ^. 311, 312, 325, 326,
327, 124, 125, 126, 134, 164, 165, 178, 208. 215, 224, 226, 268, 270, 288, 295,
299, 308, 323, 14^, 142, 18^, (...)
some passages in Bishop Latymer, which answered and cleared his words cited in
this Book from any such sense as it would fasten on them: And to answer the
Passage in it out of Bishop Hoopers Preface before his Exposition on the ten
Commandments, He showed him first, the Confession, and Protestation of the
Bishops Faith, dedicated to King Edward the 6. and the whole Parliament, and
printed at London Cum Privilegio, Anno 1550.

Secondly, (...)
A brief and clear Confession of the Christian Faith, containing 100
Articles, London 1584.

Thirdly, An Fol. 22 ^^ 24. 29 40. 55, 56 57. 60, 63, 64 65, 78. ^^
Exposition upon certain Psalms, London, 1510.

Jn all which this godly Martyr did professedly in expr^^e terms oppugn all
the Arminian points now controverted, and those this new Book would fasten on
him, by over straining some of his words.

Which done; Now said the Gentleman, I have showed you many full old Answers
to your, New Book, and proved it to be a mere lie and forgery from the
beginning to the end, yea the most gross and greatest Imposture, affront and
impudent abuse that ever was put upon the Church of England; Wherefore, Sir^
since you are acquainted at London-House and Lambeth, I pray inform the Bishop
and Archbishop, what you have seen, and desire them to take some speedy course
to rectify this most foul abuse.

He did so: Yet the Book was not called in, in a weeks space or more; Which
the Gentleman perceiving, went to Lambeth, with his Books, showed the
Archbishop, that then was, what he had showed the Knight; Desiring his Grace,
that the Church of England might not have such an impudent strange Imposture
thrust upon her.

Where upon he thanked the Gentleman; Protesting he had showed him that he It
seeme^ the Bishops are none of the learned ^ men, (...) se well acqua^ted with
^e W^^ters and Doctrine of the Church of England, as some private Gentlemen ar^.
never saw nor heard off before; Desiring him to leave his Books with him for
a week, after which he would safely restore them.

VVhereupon, these Books, after they were half sold and dispersed over the
Kingdom, were only called in, but not burned, nor any public Act made against
them, to discover the practice and Imposture: Only the Gentleman was at the
cost, to send some of these old Books in answer of this new Pamphlet, to the
University Library at Oxford, and to Cambridge, acquainting some of his Friends
there, with this Decoy.

But now of late this Book flies abroad into all parts, is publicly sold in
all Stationers shops, and thousands of your Subjects, ignorant of the fraud,
are merely cheated and seduced by it; the Licenser (if not the Author) being
since advanced; and the discouerer of this egregious Jmposture (detestable both
to God and man) most despitefully rewarded and miserably traduced, for his
pains. O tempora! O mores! that men should suffer for their good service in
this kind.

Now J humbly refer to your Majesty's most serious consideration, whether
all these particular Corruptions, Forgeries and Jmpostures (the undoubted
verity whereor is soon discovered by the Books themselves, which w^^ attest
them do not cry aloud to your Majesty for speedy redress, and proclaim the
authors of them (though never so great or powerful) unworthy of your
Majesty's grace, unmeet to be trusted or credited by your Highness any more,
(for those who are thus treacherous and unfaithful to their Religion and
Mother Church, how can they be loyal or trusty to your Majesty? and worthy of
the highest Censures your Royal Justice can inflict upon them.

Your Majesty has called God to witness in Concerning the Dissolution of the
last Parliament, p. 21.
A Declaration to all your loving Subjects, (who dare credit you without an
Oath,) That it is and alw^yes has been your hearts desire to be found worthy
of that Title, which you account the most glorious in all your Crown, DEFENDER
OF THE FAITH.

And how can you better accomplish this desire of your heart, or make yourselfe
worthy of this most glorious Motto then by rectifying all these most gross
abuses and Jmpost^res? By rooting out all Innovations and back sl^dings unto
Popery, now crept into our Church, by reducing all your Subjects to the
unanimous profession of the long established Doctrine of the Church of England;
And by taking vengeance upon all the grand Authors and Executioners of the
forementioned Forgeries, Impostures and Innovations, which dishonor your
Royal Majesty, greive all your Faithful Subjects, betray and scandalize our
Religion, make us a Who would not laugh at these mad arguments, Pa^adoxes and
Frantique passages of G^les Widows, Shelford, Reeve, many of which are as
ridiculous and absurd as any in Ignoramus.
very derision, prey and scorn to our Romish Adversaries, and draw down the
very plagues and vengeance of our offended God upon us, whose judgments now
call for a speedy redress of these things, at your Majesty's hands, whom they
have most intollerablie and undutifully dishonored? For whereas your Roy all
Majesty out of the piety and syncerity of your upright heart, has in your
fore-specified Before the 39. Articles. And concerning the dissolution of the
Parliament. p. 21. 42.
Declarations, most seriously protested in the very presence of God himself
your perfect detestation of all Innovations in `Doctrine or Discipline and
backsl^dings unto Pope^y, professing and proclaiming that you will by no means
tolerate or endure them, much less then favor or enjoyne them; Yet since
these disloyal Novellers, their Clients and Agents forgetting their duty both
to God and your Majesty, fear not to give out in private speeches, and to
intimite as much in A Coal from the Altar, p. 36.
print, that your Majesty does not only connive at, but likewise underhand,
either countenance or command by Letter or Word of mouth, all these their
Innovations and Apostacies toward Rome, (with their putting down of Lectures
and preaching, of their late silencing, excommunicating and persecuting godly
Ministers in sundry Diocesses for not yielding to these Jnnovations, or not
reading the late Declaration for Sports in proper person in their Churches,
which they humbly conceive not to be your Majesty's, and which requires no
such thing, that it should be read, much less by Ministers themselves in
proper person, and gives no man Authority in case they read it not, to suspend
or silence them for it, to the Jnnocent peoples prejudice only, whose souls
are starved and murdered by this means:) and that they do nothing at all,
but what they are enjoined by your There was a Letter lately read in some
Churches of Ipswitch, as from the Archbishop of Canterbury in the audience of
all the people, affirming that your Majesty had given the Archbishop order and
direction for railing Communion-Tabes Altarwise, and that all Communicants
should come up to the Rail and receive, which much amazed the people, and Dr.
Aylot the Archbishops surragate often times affirmed the same in Court to
diverse, who alleged your Majesty's ^awes and Declarations to the contrary.
Majesty's Royal Instructions; Endeavoring by these false Rumors, to make
your Subjects believe (had they such a miraculous Faith as to credit this
impossibility) that your Majesty is the Original Authority and underhand
enconrager of all these their execrable practices, Ceremonies, Novelties,
proceedings and backsliding; Of purpose to draw all the Odium of them on your
Highness, and thereby as much as in them lies, to alienate your Subjects hearts
and affections from your Majesty; Which intolerable, unpardonable scandal,
were it as true as it is false; Yet it were their duty to forbear such
speeches, or cast ^uch scruples into your Subjects minds: But since they are
most n^torious falsehoods and disloyal Jesuitical practices in the highest
degree, making your Highness no better then a notorious Hypocrite or dissembler
both toward God and Man, as themselves are, though all the world will be your
Compurgatours to acquit your Highness from any the least suspicion of such
dissimulation; Your Majesty is now obliged both in point of honor and Justice
to aveng yourselfe of such undutifull Slaunderers and Detractors from your
Sacred Fame, and by a speedy redress of all their Innovations, Superstitions,
Ceremonies and Abuses, to proclaim to all the world, that they are none of
yours, but their own spurious issues, and that your words and Actions both in
public and private are ever consonant, uniforme, and the same in every
respect, without the least shadow of alteration, much less of doubling, either
with God or Man.

If your Majesty now demand of me, who they are who have been the chief
Authors and instruments of these gross abuses, forgeries Innovations?

I answer, that although it may prove dangeroos to me to nominate them in
particular, before your Majesty shall command me so to do, by reason of their
over-swaying power; Yet for your Majesti^s satisfaction herein; ( A Coal from
the Altars phrase.
who can judge of the Catt by her Claw) I shall give your Highness a Register of
the names of some of the chief under-instruments, by which you may easily
discrie the heads and Grandes of this disloyal crew.

One of the first and chief instruments your Majesty in your Royal Page 20.
21.
Declaration and Proclamation has pointed out and nominated to my hands; To
wit, Richard Mountague; then Bachi^er of Divinity (since that time punished
with the fatt Bishopric of Chichester for his notorious Schisms and
Innovations) whose Book entitled, Apello Caesarem, published in the year
1625. (as the words of your Highness determine) did open the way to those
Schisms and Divisions which have since ensued in our Church. For remedy and
redress whereof, and for Satisfaction of the consciences of your good people,
your Majesty did not only by public Proclamation call in that Book of his
which ministered matter of offense, but to prevent the like danger for
hereafter, reprinted the Articles of Religion, established in the time of Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory (a plain resolution, that your Majesty intended to
establish only the original Copy of the Articles confirmed in Parliament by
Queen Elizabeth, in which there is no such forgery or addition to the 20
Article, as is before discovered, not any other corrupted Copy since;) and by
a Declaration before those Articles did tie and restrain all opinions to the
sense of those Articles, that nothing might be left for private fancies and
Innovations.

Yet notwithstanding this your Rayall care, this Book of his, (because not
burned, and the Author rewarded, advanced to be a governor in our Church,
before any public recantation of his Errors) is bought and sold; And he not
only in a new Apparatus ad Hist. Ecclesiast.
Latin Book, but likewise in a Court-Sermon at White Hall in 1636.
Lent last, in your Majesty's Sacred presense, (forgetful both of his duty and
your Highness Declaration) has presumed to plead, not only for a Limbus Patrum,
bowing to Altars, and railing in Lords-Tables Altarwise, but likewise for
Altars, Priests, and unbloody Sacrifices offered upon Altars toe, in professed
defiance to this your Declaration: For which some of your Majesty's Courtiers
who heard his Sermon, then openly protested, that he deserved to be hanged up
in White Hall gate, (it were a See B. Latymer his 5. Sermon before King Edward,
f. 64.
goodly sign, the sign of such a Bishops skin and Rochet thus exalted) and
that they wondered how the Archbishops could sit by and hear such a Sermon,
and not command him out of the Pulpit.

So insolent is this first grand Agent grown, because not punished, but
preferred for his first offenses.

The next chief F^ctor is Dr. John Cosens, whom I have formerly nominated; a
man likewise much honored, enriched and advanced even to your Majesty's
service, and the next in some men's voice to be recommended to a Bishopric,
(if your Majesty reserve not the disposition of Bishoprics to your self, but
suffer others to have a finger in their disposal:) and all for the good
Service he has done the Church of Rome, the affronts he has offered to the
Church of England, and using such reproachful words against your Majesty's
Supremacy, for which another happily might have had his head and quarters
advanced as high as London bridge ere this, in Leiw of all ^ther preferments.

The happy success of these two leading Instruments, has since encouraged
many others to the like attempts; as His first Sermon, p. 5. 37. where he
terms the Lords-Table an Altar, Gods mercy Seat, and pleades for bowing
toward it.
Dr. Lawrence, Mr. His 5. Treatises Cambridge, 1635. all absurd and Popish.
Robert Shelford Priest, His Communion Book Catechism expounded, London 1635.
the Epistles: And p. 17. ^^22. 35. 38. 39. 48. 60. 61. 62. 63. 74. 75. 76. 77.
90. to 111. (in the first Impression since torn out 127. to 141. 200. 201.
203. 20^ 206. 211. 216.
Mr. Edmond Reeue, Sunday no Sabbath: Vile throughout.
Dr. John Pocklington, The History of S. George, and of the Sabbath.
Dr. Peter^ Heylin, (the Author as most conclude of A Coal from the Altar)
Collectiones, An. 1635. Collect. 16. 17. 18. 34. 35.
Chownaeus, and Thomas Brown his Sermon: Oxon. 1634. The Female glory: Dr.
Cosens Collection of private Devotions reprinted, 1636. Bishop Whites Treatise
of the Sabbath day the latter part and Epistle Dedicatory. Dr. Reads
Visitation Sermon, 1635.
others in late printed Books and Sermons, in hope, of like preferments, to
broach many Arminian and Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies and Innovations, contrary
to the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and in
high contempt of your Majesty's, Declarations; Which Books were licensed by
William Bray and William Harwood, Chaplains to the Arch Bishop of Canterbury
that now is, by Samuel Baker and Mr. Weeks, Chaplains to the now Bishop of
London, and by Dr. Beale, late Vice Chancellor of the University of Cambridge;
Yea one of them, denying your Majesty's Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastia^all
and affirming the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and not have erred in
fundamentals even in the worst times, dedicated to the present Archbishop of
Canterbury, was lice^sed by his Chaplain William Harwood, (yea justified
publicly by the Archbishop in the High Commission, in the Censure of Dr.
Bastwicke.)

Quid facient Domini, audent cum talia Servi? When the Chaplains dare license
such Doctrines, Books, and Novelties by their Lords Authority, it is much to
be feared, that their Lords themselves dare do as much or more then this
amounts to.

If your Majesty will but inquire of these new Authors and Licensers, who are
the men that cherish and countenance them; By whose Privity and Authority they
have presumed to attempt the writing and Licensing of such Books, you may
easily by these Rivulets trace out the Fountains from whence all these
Enormities, Corruptions, Forgeries and Innovations flow; And if you shall
vouchsafe with all, to cast your Royal eye upon the Remonstrance, touching the
increase of Popery, Arminianisme, and the decay of Religion, presented to your
Majesty by the Commons house the last Parliament, it is a thousand to one, but
you will soon, discover the very parties, not only by guess but by name.

Besides, if your Majesty will once more cast your prying eye upon the late
Visitation Articles of Bishop Wren, Bishop Pierce, Bishop Monntague, and other
your Prelates and Archdeacons, visiting in their own names and by their own
Authority; Or cause a diligent inquiry to be made in all places where Altars,
Images, Crucifixes, bowing to Altars, Tapers, railing Communion-Tables
Altar-wise, reading Second-Service at the Altar, Consecrations of Altars,
Churches, Chapels are introduced, urged and many godly conformable Ministers
excommunicated, silenced, suspended and persecuted for not submitting to these
with other such Innovations and New-Doctrines; By whose Authority and command
these things are done and enforced; Or by what Authority some Scholars,
Ministers and Lecturers have been refused to be admitted to holy Orders,
Benefices and Lectures, for not subscribing to certain New-Doctrines and
Ceremonies underhand propounded to them; (And with all take this into your
Royal consideration, that in Edmond Reeve his Communion Book Catechism
expounded Epistle Dedicatory, and p. 20. 205. 206. 211. 216. Robert Shelford
his Treatise of Gods House, p. 20. A Coal from the Altar, p. 1. 26. 27. 64.
three late printed Treatises, Archbishops, Bishops and Cathedral Churches,
are made the Original Patterns, by which all other Persons and Churches must
be regulated, in these very Innovations;) Your Majesty without any further
help or character, may infalliblie discover, both the roots, the fountains
and Seminaries, from whence all the premises issue.

More particular light then this, is neither yet safe for me to give, nor
necessary for your Majesty to require.

If any think I have gone to far in this; Let him know; That it is only the
zeal of doing your Majesty, my Country and Mother Church of England, faithful
service without fear or flattery, (it being now no time to mince things, or
dissemble longer,) which has thus far transported me; In whose just
important cause and quarrel (how faint hearted soever others show themselves,)
I shall be ever ready, through Gods assistance, not only to spend my Li^e, my
Limbs, my Fortunes and Liberty, but my very Life and Soul, Choosing rather to
hazard all or any of these, then to behold my God, my Sovereign, my Country,
my Religion, secretly undermined, abused, betrayed, trampled upon, or ruined,
and yet sit mute, neither discovering the contrivers, the instruments, nor
close cariages of such Antichristian, treacherous, disloyal designs for fear
of any danger, person, or Prelate whatsoever^ And if J did it not when I had
means and opportunity, I should neither deem my self, a faithful Servant to
my God, nor a loyal Subject to your Majesty, my Sovereign.

And now since I have lanched thus far out into this tempestuous Ocean.
(perchance with hazard of drowning, or Pirates, unless your Majesty rescue me
by a Patent of safe conduct, and calm these boisterous Seas when they arise to
overflow me,) give me leave to wade but one step further, to acquaint your
Highness with the evil dangerous fruits of these lewd practices, Books
Innovations, and then I shall cast anchor in the secure Harbor of your Royal
Grace and Protection.

1. First, they have produced abundance of Schisms, Factions, ^arres,
discontents, quarrels, heart-burnings, if not mutual malice, hatred and
reproaches, among your people in all places of your Realms, and quite rent
asunder that ancient unity, peace, love and mutual charity which flourished
among them, before these Innovations crept into the Church.

2. Secondly, they have not only grieved, and vexed the righteous souls, but
even quite dejected the spirits, and broken the hearts of many thousand godly
L^ts and most faithful Subjects to your Majesty, who even pine away and
languish under them, for grief and sorrow of heart.

3. Thirdly, they have bred a general fear in the hearts, and an overgreat
jealousy in the heads of your Loyal Subjects of an approaching alteration of
Religion, and total Apostasy unto the Sea of Rome; They having little left to
secure or arm them against this fear and jealousy, but the syncerity of your
Majesty's own Royal heart to our Religion, your comfortable, pious
Declaracions (now trampled by these Novellers under feet in open scorn) and
the zeal of diverse of your Nobility, to whom Gods truth and our Religion are
dearer then their souls: Which no doubt they will now declare by their actions
in this time of need; To your Majesty's great joy and ease, and the daunting of
these strange audacious Innovatours, though hitherto many of them have been
over-silent.

4. Fourthly, they have caused many to turn Atheists, Skeptickes or Newters in
Religion, seeing our Church so wavering and unconstant; Many to fall off to
Popery, and hundred thousands of Papists from conversion, by encouraging and
hardening them in their Antichristian Errors and Superstitions, to which they
see us running, if not flying so fast of late, that they say they need not come
toward us, since we are posting so fast to them.

5. Fifthly, they have caused thousands of godly Christians (the Genesis 18. 24. to
33. Acts 27. 23. 24 Ier. 5. 1. Ezech. 22. 30. 31. Psalm. 106. 23. Exodus 32. 10,
etc.
best Preservatives against Plagues and Judgments) to fly out to foreign
Countries and Plantations; Hundreds to separate from our Church, as now quite
Romish and Antichristian; And made thousands ready for to separate, it being
now a common received opinion among many; See a Book intiteled, The necessity
of Separation from the Church of England.
That our Churches (especially our Cathedrals) are now so far Popish in all
respects, (Latin Service only excepted, which they say is countervayled by
their merry all-sung never-wept Service, which the people understand no more
then Latin,) that we have now the same, or at least as just cause to separate
from them, as our godly Martyrs and Church had to separate from Rome in the
beginning of Reformation.

And though the same reasons hold not alike of all Churches for the present,
yet that they hold as firm in regard of the future, since now we and all our
Churches are taught and commanded, to Reeve p. 20. 205 206. 211. 216.
Shelford, p. 20 A Coal from the Altar, p. 1 26. 27. 63. 64.
imitate our Prelates and Cathedrals in all their Romish Rites and Ceremonies
as their Mother Churches and true patterns of Imitation.

So that unless a speedy Reformation follow of these late Corruptions and
Innovations, half the Kingdom, for ought I can conjecture, are like, either
to turn professed Seperatists, or else to leave the Realm; To such a pass
have your busy Prelates lately brought things by their new Devises, Books,
Articles, Ceremonies, Superstitions, and their Suppressing of Lectures,
Preaching, and godly comformable Ministers, Sermons of Lords-dayes
after-noones, Repetition of Sermons, and the like.

6. Sixthly, they give a great occasion to Jesuits, Seminarie-Priests and
Friars, (of which there are now swarms in England, (there being above 60.
Benedictine Monks only, besides other Orders in England, Anno 1624. as
appears by the Nam sexaginta amplius Monachos Benedictinos Congregationi
nostri subditos in Anglia memora(...) Apud N. le Maistre Instauratio Antiqui
Episcoporum Principatus. Parisijs, 1633. l. a. p. 280.
Letter of Rudesindus Barlo, President of the English FRIARS of that Order, to
the C^lledge of the Cardinals at Rome, dated the 12. of December, 1624. and
many more, no question, of that order now;) Who at this present use few other
Arguments to seduce your Majesty's Subjects from their alleagiance and Religion
to Popery, then the forenamed Jnnovations and new printed Popish Books, which
they buy up with greedines.

Ibid. p.
Resi^dus Barlo in his forecited Letter to the Cardin^^s of Rome, to institute
either Dr. Kellyson or Dr. Smith two of his order) or both of them Bishops over
the Priests in England, writes very confidently; That if one of these were made
a Romish Bishop here, Latio^es intra unicum biennium fructus in Angl^cana
missione aspecturi sitis, quam hactenus in ^adem nullo existente Episcopo per
sexaginta jam elapses annos, conspexoritis; They should see more joyful
fruits in this English mission within one two years, then before they had
seen in threescore when there was no Bishop.

And I may as truly say, that since these Innovations have grown public and
got head among us, these ( See Franc^scus de Sancta Clara: Edit. 3. printed all
as most think in England to reco^cile us to Rome, who makes good use of our
Novell Authors and University Acts; To hearten his Roman Catholic, and seduce
Protestants.
new Books been licensed, and all Confutation of them stopped at our Presses,
the Priests, Jesuits and Popish Monks (who have now a Bishop or two at
least) have perverted more by means of them alone (for they could never hurt
or wound us but with our own men and weapons) then in sixty years before. As
therefore the increase of Papists was one maine ground and chief cause lately
alleged in the Star Chamber, of resuming the Londonderry plantation into
your Majesty's hands: So the self same reason should now move your Majesty to
recall these several Innovations, and burn up these late Novell Widd^w^,
Shelford, and Reeue especially, (...) to make sport in aki^de.
ridiculous Pamphlets, in affront of our best and solidest Writers, which
withdraw so many from your Alegiance, and give the Priests and Jesuits cause
to triumph over us, yea to deride and flout us for our follies, Apostasies and
miserable public contradictions.

7. Seventhly, they open the mouths of this Babilonish Crew, and of foreign
and domesticke Papists, to slander both our Church and Arch-Prelates, as if
she and they, with many other of our Prelates and Clergy of chief note,
were now 2. Pet. 2. 22.
returning with the dog to his vomit, and the washed Sow to her wallowing in
the mire, yea to the very vomit and mire of that Whore of Rome, which we had
formerly spned and cast out.

That this is the common News in most foreign parts, not only the reports of
Travelers witness, but Sr. John Cook your Majesty's principal Secretary of
State, some few years since (in the very infancy of these Innovations and
backeslidings) affirmed openly in Star Chamber (in the now Archbishop of
Canterburies case) that this news was spread as far as the very Walls of Rome
itself, upon his certain intelligence thence; And therefore it was high time
for your Majesty, your Prelates and the State to look more strictly to our
Religion, and to take away all occasions of such Rumors; Since which there
have been more occasions of them given then in forty years before.

So as this Rumor is generally believed abroad as a most certain truth^ and
crept into some of their late printed Books.

This likewise is the common confident discourse and persuasion of most Priests
and Papists at home, both among themselves and in the Company of Protestants,
over whom they now seem to triumph, and stick not openly to affirm and
justify, that both our Archbishops (to omit others) are theirs.

To make this good, I shall give your Majesty two late instances, of which I
have certain intelligence, (and witnesses too if need be,) worthy your Royal
consideration.

A Barkeshire Gentleman, of some worth, a Popish Recusant, was since Easter
last 1636. at a public meeting, where were diverse prime Gentlemen of the
Shire, and 3 or 4 Justices of Peace, if not more; Where entering into Discourse
concerning some Controversies of Religion between the Papists and us, with some
of the Company, he used these words in the hearing of them all; Well Gentlemen,
you may talk and discourse of your Religion as long as you please, but we have
the Queens Majesty and the Arch Bishop of Canterbury firm on our side; And so
long we shall make our party good enough with you.

Some of the Company questioning him for these words; He answered, He would
justify and make good what he said; But was Had a Puritan, as they style them
spoken but half so much^ he should have been fined, imprisoned, pilloried, and
lost his ears ere this.
never yet (for ought I hear) required to do it, though intimation has been
given of these speeches to some whom they much concern.

When Dr. Cosens the last Summer 1636. removed from the Bishopric of Durham,
to his College at Cambridge; He gave his Friends of New Castle a farewell
Sermon in the Town, at which Sermon (preached in the afternoon) most of the
Papists in that Town were present: Two of them the next morning meeting with
two Merchants of the Town, who were Protestants, they went all into a Tavern
to drink their mornings draughts: The Papists demanded of the Protestants,
whether they heard Dr. Cosens his Sermon? One replied, that he only heard of
it, but heard it not, by reason of some business that hindered him: The other
made Answer, that he heard it: The Papists demand of him how he liked it? He
replied; That it was but a plain ordinary Sermon, and that he heard nothing
extraordinary in it: Yea, but said the Papists, did you mark his garb, his
cringes to the Altar, and how he bowed himself when Jesus was named? He has
the right garb and duckes of our Priests.

The other answered, he did not much observe his gestures.

Well, said the Papists, Dr. Cosens is a learned honest Gentleman, and to tell
you truly, He and the Some reported it of Canterbury.
Archbishop of York are both ours.

The other bade them, take heed what they said. We know well enough (said
they) what we say, we tell you again, they are both ours.

Whereupon one of the Protestants merrily replied: If you will needs have both
of them to be yours, pray take them to yourselves, we can spare them well
enough.

Many words past to this purpose. The Protestants complained of these speeches
as scandalous to the Archbishop, and acquainted him therewith.

Whereupon the Papists were Articled against in the High Commission-Court at
Durham, and cited to appear there; Appearance they made, but they have not yet
made any full answer, the business being hushed up in a manner, and laid asleep.

Dr. Cosens in the mean time takes his journey toward Cambridge; Most of the
Gentlemen Papists in the Bishopric, to prove him theirs, brought him a
dayes-journy on his way, and some of them as far as York.

Like speeches have been used by other Papists, yet more privately and
modestly. The like report they in In a Dr. new Pamphlet stolen out of Studley
his railing Book, for the most part, and of the same Subject.
print of Dr. Theodor Price, Subdeane of West-minster, that however he lived
like an Atheist, yet he died like a professed Papist.

This, J confess, is not only a report, but a truth; He being a reported
Papist long before his death; Which made many wonder at the impudency of that
great Prelate, who knowing him intus and in cute, durst recommend him to your
Majesty as the fittest man he in his conscience could pitch upon to make a
Welsh Bishop; And so earnestly, to stickle for him against your Lord High
Chamberlain and his Chaplain Dr. Griffirth Williams; Especially being a man
that never preached all his life, but one Sermon (as was reported) and that in
Latin, penned (as was bruited in Oxford long ago^) by his Kinsman D. Jews;
And he not long after a notorious Sodomite, ^ Edmond Reeve the Catechism in the
Communion Book expounded, p. 206.
flying the Realm and losing his Provostship in Oxford for this very Sin;
Yet now (without any purgation or satisfaction for so foul a crime) is
preferred not only to the Mastership of S. Crosses, but likewise made your
Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary, (I will not say by whom,) and the chief man
employed for the now Chancellor of Oxford in his canvase for that dignity
against the Earl of Pe^broke your Lord High Chamberlain, who had most voices,
though not the fairest play: It may be these Arch-Prelates countenancing and
preferring of such persons, is one maine ground of these Papists speeches; Who
are worthy to be punished for them, if they cannot justify and make them good;
And they unworthy to stay one hour in their places, in case they shall not or
cannot both by their Actions, Doctrines etc preceedings disprove them to be
true, as J hope their Graces will, being Fathers in God, highest grown up into
Christ in all things, and the Eldest in Grace, for which cause the word Grace
is used unto Archbishops, as Mr. Reeve learnedly informs us.

But how-ever that shall fall out upon trial, yet this certainly is one fruit
of these late Jnnovations and Books to produce such speeches in these, and
more men's mouths then three or four.

8. Eighthly, these Books, Innovations and Apostasies both in Doctrines,
Ceremonies and Religion, defiling our Church, corrupting our divine worship,
depraving our lives and provoking God himself to anger in an high degree, have
(to our present terror, fear and punishment) drawn down the heavy plagues
and Judgments of God among us, in sundry quarters and places of the Realm;
Especially in New Castle (almost wholly unpeopled) and London; Where the
Pestilence has already swept many thousands, and yet still spreads and sweepes
away more and more, and is likely so to do, till we all 2. Chro^. 6. 28, 29.
30. c. 7. 13. 14. 15 c. 2. 12. 13 14. 15. 16 17. 18.
jointly humble our selves with fasting, Zeph. 2. 1. 2. 3.
weeping and mourning both in public and private for our sins and
Innovations, Luke 13. 3. 5.
reform our wicked and profane ungodly lives, and purge out all these
Idolatries, Superstitions, Errors, Ceremonies and Innovations that have
defiled our Church; Which Pest now earnestly calls upon your Majesty, (whose I
say. 49. 23. Romans 13, 1. 2. 3. Psalm. 101. 3. 4^. 6. 7. 8.
chief charge and office this is, (neither will your Bishops or Underofficers
negligence excuse your Majesty before Gods Tribunal, in case it be not done,)
even speedily, really, heartily and thoroughly to effect, for fear he who Psalm.
11^. 5. Psalm. 135. 10. (...). Job. 12. 18. 19.
even strikes through Kings in the day of his wrath, with this pestiferous
Psalm. 91. 5. 6. 7.
arrow of his, which flies far and near among us (from which ^ (...), Air,
Fort, Cordials, nor a Isay 38. 1. 21. which sickness most accord to be the
plague of which the Emperor Theodosius the third died. Gri^^ston Imperial
History, p. 281. and the King of late, with sundry heretofore.
Crown itself can secure any) should likewise smite your Highness or any of
Royal Seed as well as others, either to sickness or death; Either of which, the
Lord forbid, and shield you from, as he has done hitherto to our greatest joy.

What other future events and fruits these Innouations may produce, unless
the increase and ushering in of Popery, J cannot divine: Either of which would
prove dangerous to your Majesty's, should they ever come to pass, as we trust,
we pray they shall not.

For that Christian King who lives under the Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome,
or where Papists get the start (as all Histories and Mr. Tyndals practice of
Popish Prelates. D. Barnes his Supplication to Henry the ^. D. John White,
Defense of the way, c. 6. 10. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 214. to 220. 717, to
728. 321. 409. 410. 479. 533. Dr. Crakanthorpe of the Popes temporal
Monarchy, c. 10. 11. 12.
our Writers witness) are more miserable then the poorest peasant, living in
continual danger both of his Crown and life; unless he will be a mere
vassal to the Pope and his Cardinals, to feed those devouring Harpyes with
their treasures, to fight for them with their arms, when ever they command,
and be universally obsequious to them in all their exorbitant Imperious
requests; yea not only the Pope and his Cardinals, but the poorest Priest and
Friar will be able to command and beard him at his pleasure in despite of all
his wealth and power, of which your Majesty's Royal Progenitors here in
England have had sufficient experience.

What base and despicable account the Pope, his Bishops and Clergy make of
Christian Kings, even of those who are most obsequious to them, and how they
jeare and flout them even in print, I shall only instance out of the authorized
writings of a late Jesuits, which learned Of the Popes temporal Monarchy, c.
1. p. 24. 25. 26.
Dr. Crakanthorpe has thus quoted and Englished to my hand, worthy your
Majesty's most serious contemplation.

The former of them is Be^anut Contro^: Angl. q. 3 n. 14. 15. and 16.
Becanut, who calling the Pope a Shepherd, and Kings and Emperors Dogs Per
Canes intellig^ n^ur partim Reges and Imperatores. Ibid. nu. 15.
or Curres of this Shepherd, and sporting himself with these Titles, says,
Igitur hi Can^^, therefore if these Dogs be watchful and trusty, they must
be ready at the Shepherds hand; But if they be lazy, mad or troublesome, the
Shepherd must presently remove them, and put them from their Office. This does
reason teach, this does the Caunsell of Lateran decree.

Again, Christian Kings are Sheep, are Rams, are Wolves, and are Dogs.
Whence it is that the Pope carries himself in a diverse manner toward them.
As they are Sheep, if they be scabby, he may put them out of the fold: As they
are Rams, if they be troublesome, and push with their horns, he may shut
them up; As they are Wolves, he may drive them away; Quatenus Canes; As they
are Dogs, he may put them from their Office, if they be defective therein:
And some of these he does by Excommunication, some by deposition. So Becanus of
late.

The other is Gasp. Scioppius, whose words are so contumelious, even in the
highest degree, that one may justly wonder that any of their Catholics, but
especially their Catholic Kings, can patiently digest them.

The Church, says he Ecclesia est Mandra, sive Grex, aut (...) jum^^^st^rum
sive Asinorum, clitellariorum aut Sagmari^rum. Gasp. Sciop. in Praesat. ad
Imper. in Summa Cap. 147.
is mandra jumentorum, sive As^^^rum, a great fold of Beasts or Asses; Some are
Pack-Asses, Cum nos Christiani simus Dei jumenta sive pecora subjugalia, equi,
muli, sive Asini Clitellarij, Dossuarij, Sarcinarij. Idem in Eccles, c. 147. p.
534.
some Dosse-Asses, and other Burden-Asses.

And then telling, cujusmodi Ibid. in Marg.
Asini sumus nos Catholici, what manner of Asses himself, and other Catholics
are; We, says he, Ibid.
must be beasts which have understanding and reason to obey Bishops with all
humility and patience; For they Illi enim sunt Homines, sive Agasones, Muliones
Iugarij: Illi nos Fraenant, illi loro alligant, nos agunt, nos stimulant, nobis
jugum imponunt. Ibid. p. 534.
are the Men, they are the Muliters and Assedrivers, they must yoke, bridle
and saddle us, put halters about our necks, load and drive us; For others,
Ibid. p. 535.
they are like to beasts, but tame and obedient beasts, such as must do what
they are commanded: For a good Bonus and intelligens Asimus audit Consilia and
praeceptasal Malionis. Ibid. p. 536.
and understanding Ass is he, that hears and follows the direction and
command of the Muliter.

Further, yet he adds concerning Kings, that Reges Ibid. in Marg.
Catholici sunt Asini cum tintinnabulis; Catholic Kings are Asses with belles
about their necks, as being the fore-Asses, which lead Tum caeteros Asinos,
qui sonitum ti^^ tinnabuli de collo vestro pendentis audiunt, via^ ingredi
faciatis. Ibid.
the way to inferior Asses.

And particularly for Charles the Great, whom he much commends, he says, Ibid.
p. 536. 537.
that Charles was a far greater and wiser Ass, then those Kings, who cast
off the Popes yoke; For Charles being tantus Asini^, so great an Ass, cried
(or rather brayed) out with a loud voice, universa Asinorum mandra, to the
whole fold of Asses, that is, to the whole Church, in this manner; For the
memory of S. Peter. Let us honor the Roman Church, and though they yoke which
the Pope imposes be such, as we can scarcely bear, yet let us with devotion
endure the same.

Ex-quibus verbis, says Scioppius, ^^rum Issachar agnosca^, de quo Genes.
chap. 49. Issachar Asinus fortis.

By these words of Charles you may see, that he was a very Issachar, of whom it
is said, Issachar is a strong Ass.

Is not this (may it please your Majesty) a fine piece of Catholic Divinity,
to account and call the whole Catholic Church a fould of Asses; All Catholic
Kings, Asses with bells, all other Lay persons, Asses without bells; None but
Bishops to be Men and Muliters, and the Pope the chief Muliter and driver of
all the Asses?

So shall the Man be honored, whom the Pope will honor.

The more zealous and devout one is in obeying him and embracing his Doctrine,
the greater Ass they account and call him.

Seeing therefore this is the high account, that the Pope, his Bishops and
Clergy make of Christian Princes; I presume your Majesty will never suffer
the Pope the chief Muliter, nor any of his, nor your own Bishops, the
under-Muliters, to yoke, bridle, sadle, or put halters about your Royal
neck, or the necks of any of your Loyal Subjects, much less then to ride,
jade, load, or drive either yourselfe or them, (all which they now attempt and
aspire to do;) Since if your Highness should honor them in all this, yet shall
you receive from them no other applause or thanks, no other Honor or Title
for your labor, then here Scioppius, and they all by him, gives unto Charles
the Great, to be: Tantus Asinus, and verus Issachar Asinus fortis.

A Title J am certain your Highness will not so highly esteem of, as to deem
it, Declaration concerning the Parliaments Dissolution. p. 21.
the most glorious in all your Crown, as you deservedly do that other,
Defender of the Faith, which you have better right to far then this, which
all Christians cannot but detest, though these Popish Heralds would bestow it
on them.

Wherefore to draw toward a conclusion, J shall now most humbly beseech your
Majesty, upon the bended knees of my soul, to receive the premises and this
poor Quench-Coale into your most Royal and pious consideration; And thereupon
to take the Raines of Ecclesiastical government and affairs, from those who
have thus abused them, (to your Highness, your Subjects and the whole Church of
Englands prejudice.) into your own immediate hands; That so these Abuses,
Novelties and Corruptions here discovered; may be thoroughly reformed, and the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ restored perfectly and incorrupt among us.

It was an excellent Counsel, that the late famous Emperor Ferdinand gave to
Maximilian his Son and Successor when he lay upon his deathbed: Grimstons
Imperial History in the life of Ferdina^d, p. 684.
Banish from thee such as seek new means to oppress and grieve thy Subjects.
O how well it becomes a Prince, to hear the afflictions and grievances of his
People, and to redress them! Imitate not those who unburthen themselves all
they can of matters of Justice or Government, for it is thy chief Office.

Unless your most Sacred Majesty follow this his Royal advice, things are
likelyer to grow worse then better, if you remit all to your Prelates, and
expect a reformation to proceed from them; Who need most reformation, and are
the chief delinquents.

Martin Bucer (one of the wisest and learned men of his age) in his Book
Lib. 2. c. 1. 2. Inter Scripta Anglicana. p. 56. 57.
De Regno Christi, dedicated to King Edward the 6. Discoursing by what way and
means the Kingdom of Christ might and ought to be restored by pious Kings,
and what Counselors they should use in this Reformation, is bold to acquaint
that godly King (who had then at least as many godly Bishops as your Majesty
has now, if not more,) that if he would have any restitution of the Kingdom
of Christ here in England, he must not look that it should proceed from the
Bishops, neither must he much depend on, or trust to their advice therein; But
must be the principal actor himself, and advise most with men of an inferior
rank.

His words (worthy your Majesty's special observation and fit for our present
purpose) are these. Primum, haud dubito Serenissime Rex, M. T. ipsam videre
hanc, quam requirimus, imo quam requirit salus omnium nostrum, Regni Christi
restitutione^, AB EPISCOPIS NVLLO MODO EXPECTANDAM, dum adeo PAVCI inter eos
sunt, qui vim hujus regni, and propria munia plane ipsi cognoscu^t PLERIQVE
AVTEM EORVM ILLVD ET IAM QVIBVS POSSVNT and AVDENT MODIS, VEL OPPVGNENT, VEL
DIFFERANT, VEL REMORENTVR. Meminisse itaque S. M. T. necesse est, regiam sibi
i^ hoc Regno potestate^, a summo Rege Regum, and Domino Dominantium, Jesus
Christo, esse commissam; Omnemque animam suo imperio subjectam, etiam
Episcoporum and Cleri Universi. Quocirca de horu^ munere and Ministerijs rite
instaurandis, hoc decet S. M. T. solititius ad vigilare, and studio ardentiore
in hoc ipsu^ incumbere, quo hujus reparatio functionis, ad salute^ omnium plus
adfert momenti; Et neglectus ejus atque dissipatio majus omnibus salutis creat
periculum and infert damnum. Exempla itaque S. M. tuae proponenda sunt, and
summa religione imitanda, Davidis, Salomonis, Asae Hiskiae, Iosiae, N^h^miae,
and similium, quibus solida^ pietatis laudem, and probe administrati regni
Scriptura attribuit. Hi vero cum religio vera esset gravissime ipsorum
temporibus collapsa, and Sacerdotium pernitiose corruptum, ipsi sibi religionis
OMNEM PROCURATIONEM and RESTAU RATIONFM IURE and DEBITO R^GII MUNERIS
SUMPSERANT: E^s^^; sibi ex Sacerdotibus and Prophetis ALIISQUE PIIS VIRIS ad
hoc tam sanctum and arduum opus adjunxerunt consiliarios and administres,
o(...) depraehenderant Dei scientia and zelo plurimum pollere.

Tum ante omnialegem Dei populo exponi, explicarique MAXIMO STUDIO curaverunt.
Deinde, nt Foedus Domini ru^sus toto cord omnes reciperent, and in veritate
sancirent legis obedientiam professi, persuaserunt. Atque tum demam, ordinem
and Ministeria Sacerdotum atque Levitarum, cunctamque Religionis juxta Legem
Dei administrationem, reconcinnaverunt: Ac nequis eam rursus convelleret,
vigilantissime caverunt. De his piorum Principum studijs and conatibus ad
restituendum suis populis Regnum Dei, legantur and pie expendantur, quae
divinae Historiae narrant de Davide, 2. Sam. 6. 1. Par. 13. 14. 15. 16. 23. Et
tribus sequentibus capitibus. De Salomone, 1. Regum 8. and 2. Paral. 5. 6. 7.
De Asa, 2. Paral. 15. and de Jehiskiah, Regi summam procurationem Regni Christi
competer^. Quibus opus sit Regi ad hoc negotium Consi^^^^ijs. 1. Pa^al. 13.
2. Regum. 18. and 2. Paral 18. and 19. De Iosia, 2. Regum 22. and 23. 2.
Paral. 21. and 25. De Nehemia, per totum ejus librum. In his itaque Historijs.
and Exemplis S. M. T. clare perspiciet, PRIMUM, in officio esse suo, and sicut
aliorum ordinum and numerum in suo Regno, ita MAXIM SACERDOTALIS ORDINIS
ETMVNERIS IPSA SVSCIPIAT INSTAVRATIONEM. Deinde videbit, ad hanc rem in
Consilium ei esse adhibendos, non qui magnificis modo titulis, se Theologos and
Sacerdotes profitentur, horumque sanctissimorum munerum stipendia lauta
invaserunt: Sed quos ex fructibus ipsorum agnoverit, Regni Christi, and
cognitione, and studio esse prae alijs praeditos, atque flagrantes. S cut David
Consilium de instauranda Religione primum coepit cum Principibus millenarijs,
cum Centuriombus, and Ducibus. Nec enim potest quisquam ad reparandam Christi
Regnum Consilium and operam sua^ constanter confer, qui non se jugo Christi
ipse quoque totum submiserit. Tales vero Christus Rex noster sibi regignit and
format, ex quibus vult hominum ordinibus, nec ullis hanc beneficentiam suam
alligat hominum ordinibus, multo minus inanibus titulis and larvis. Quo itaque
pauciores sunt in omnibus ordinis us, qui Christi Regnum and solid habent
cognitum, and in veritate cupiunt restitutum; (...) diligentiore cura
quaerendi, and selegendi sunt, in quacunque illi hominum sort inveniantur, qui
S. M. T. in hae causa and negotio Regni Christi plane suscipiendi, and ad omnes
Subditos ejus revocandi sint PRIMO LOCO A CONSILIIS. Qui corporis restitui
valetudinem expetit, is cerre Medicos non adhibit sibi pro magnificis Titulis
and amplisopibus, quas Artis sibi praetextu cumulaver^nt; Sed quos cognoverit
medendi and solida scientia, fidelique voluntate pollere. Sic nemo se ei
libenter navi committat, quae ab eo regatur, qui nomine tantum and opibus se
Gubernatorem jactet, peritiam autem navigandi nullam teneat; Sed mavult quisque
cum eo navigare, qui tametsi obscuro sit nomine and tenuibus facultatibus, ad
rite tamen gubernandam navem existat Probe doctus and exercitatus. Quanto vero
majore cura ac studio S. M. tuae inquirendi sunt atque approbandi, quibus non
corpora, sed summam credat Religionis Christi reconcinnandae qua aeterna omnium
salus continetur? Adsit ergo S. M. T. Rex nostet Christus, ut summam de
Religione restituenda Concilium eos sibi delegat Consiliarios, qui and vim
Regni Christi probe norint, and toto illud cord expetunt obtinere, cum primis
apud semetipsos, tum etiam apud omnes alios; Nihilque in eo humani commodi vel
gratiae spectent, sed paratissimi sint extrema potius carnis incommoda subire,
quam ullam praeterire occasionem Regnum Christi adferendi and propagandi.

This was Bucers advice to your pious Predecessor King Edward, I hope it will
not be unseasonable for me now to recommend it to your Majesty: At whose Royal
feet, I now in all humility prostrate both my self and these my unworthy
Labors, (void of all Courtship, Flattering Elegancie or Trappings, and having
nothing else but loyalty and plain Rusticke downright dealing, to make them
acceptable to your Highness:) beseeching your Majesty (what ever others may buze
into your cares against them) to make a charitable construction of them, as
proceeding from the real syncerity and fidelity of his heart, who as he daily
prays to God for your Majesty's long life and happiness, as his duty binds
him, and shall continue thus to do; So he is, and ever shall be, ready to
Sacrifice, not only his studies, but life, and what ever else he has, unto
your Majesty's service; And, in despite of envy and calumny, shall ever
manifest himself in all things,

Your Majesty's Loyal, dutiful and obedient Subject; Though yet I conceal my
name, till I may do your Majesty further Service.
EDMOND REEVE His Reasons For bowing to Lords-Tables, and placing them
Altar-vvise, related and refuted.
CHISTIAN READER, before I entertain thee with a serious Epistle, give me
leave to detain thee a little with some late Paradoxes in Edmond Reeve,
printed by License, to prove the necessity and Lawfulnes of bowi^g to and
toward the Altar and Communion. Table at our entering in and going out of the
Church, to refresh thy spirits withal. His first reason is this.

The Communion Book Catechism expounded, p. 132.
As the people of God being entered into Gods house (to wit, the Temple of
Jerusalem) did worship toward the Sanctuary or mercy Seat from which he was
heard speaking (not their Altars or Shew-bread-Tables) so now also ought EVERY
ONE being come into Gods house, to prostrate himself, that is, make low
obeisance toward Gods mercy Sear, being the uppermost part of our Temples,
unto Almighty God there.

This reason is properly reduced into these two Logical Arguments,
point-blanke against his Conclusion.

1. The Jews worshipped toward the Sanctuary and mercy Seat, from which God
was heard speaking (a Type of our Pulpits and Reading Pewes, if of any thing;)
not toward their Altars or Tables:

Ergo, EVERY ONE now also ought to bow to Gods mercy Seat, (the Pulpit and
Reading Pew, from which he is heard speaking in his Word; not unto Altars and
Tables.

2. Every one ought to prostrate himself toward the uppermost part of our
Temples, unto Almighty God there: But the Roofes of our Temples, at least the
East wall of them, in the Authors sense, not the Table or Akar (or our Pulpits
standing higher then they) are the uppermost part of our Temples.

Ergo, we must prostrate ourselves toward them to God there; Not toward the
Table or Altar.

But how then a prostration of the body toward the ground the lower part of
the Temple, can be a prostration toward the Roof or upper part of the Church,
when as it removes the body further from it (unless Mr. Reeve can tell me how
a man may prostrate himself upward) I cannot yet discern.

2. His second Argument is this: Ibidem p: 134.
The Divine wisdom of the Church calling the Communion Table Gods Board, does
give us to understand, that that is to be accounted the peculiar Seat of God
within the Temple. (For after a Church or Chapel is consecrated by a Bishop,
Gods gracious presence is ever at his mercy Seat, says the Margent) and
therefore toward it unto God there, we are to make low obeisance, whenever
we come into Gods house, to pray. Also as the Chair of State is always to be
honored, though the person of the Royal Majesty be not seen there: So is
GODS BOARD EVER TO HAVE DUE REVERENCE (therefore this bowing is done and due to
the Board itself not God,) and God who is there perpetually, is always to be
prostrated unto, yea when as the body and blood of Christ in the blessed
Sacrament is not upon the same, (So the Passage in Bishop Mortons too,) nor
Divine Service in saying therein, or in any other place of the Holy Temple. For
which cause it is prescribed, that ever the holy Communion Table should be kept
Sacred.

This I have elsewhere fully answered out of Shelford and Widows, who
produce neither Scripture nor Reason for all this they say, nor any authority,
but their own.

1. First therefore let them prove: That God has and ought to have a Seat in
every Church.

2. Secondly, that this Seat is the Communion Table only, not the Pulpit,
Reading Pew, Bible, or any other part of the Church.

3. Thirdly, that God always sits there by his grace, when there is no body in
the Church, to bear him Company, no Service, no Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood.

4. Fourthly, that when there is Divine Service read in the Church, a Sermon
preached in the Pulpit, or a Child Christened at the Font, and no Service or
Sacrament at the the Table, that he yet sits still on the Table, and is there
only specially present by his grace, and not at these other places in any of
his Ordinances.

5. Fifthly, that God is alike present at the Table by his grace when there is
no Communion as when there is one.

6. Sixthly, that men ought in point of duty to bow to every place where God is
present: And to one part only off, or instrument in the Church, and not to the
whole Fabric:

Seventhly, that a Bishops consecration confines God close prisoner to his
mercy Seat, the Table, so as never to suffer him to stir one inch from
thence, no not when there is no Sacrament, no Divine Service, no person there
to do him homage, nor use of his special presence.

Till these bedlam Paradoxes be proved, which will be ad G^aecas Calendas, we may
well demurre to this second reason. Of which more fully anon. Only to retort
the reason, let me argue thus.

The place where God is most specially present by his grace ought to be bowed
unto.

But God is most specially present by his grace in Heaven, in the Church-Bible,
and midst of his people, not at the East end of the Church where none must sit
near him, as I bare elsewhere proved; And in every good Christians heart.

Ergo, these, not the Table, are to be bowed unto. As for his Chair of State;
That it ought always to be bowed unto. (I think when it is in the wardrobe,
Cart, Imbroy derers or upholsters shop, etc. should have been excepted,) he
must show us some Law or Statute for it, ere we can believe it.

And though some men bow unto it now and then, because the King sits some times
personally in it: This Gentleman must prove, that God sits personally
sometimes on the Table, which he can hardly do. But he and others tell us,
that God sits always there; Very good; Then I thus retort the similitude.

No Man is so sottish to bow to the Kings Chair of State when the King
himself is sitting in it, but only when he is absent; For when the King his in
it, they never do it, but bow only and immediately to the King, without any
respect to the Coaire.

Therefore since God is always sitting on the Table, they ought not to bow or
do any reverence to it at all.

And so this Simitude cuts the throat of their cause if rightly paralleld and
applied.

This will likewise overthrow his Ibid. p. 136. 137.
Argument for the the placing of the Table Altar-wise, elsewhere at large
refelled.

Here also (writes he) it is to be considered unto the honoring of Gods holy
name (of his Table rather) in what place of the Chauncell Gods Board or Seat
should stand.

Does not nature itself teach us, that in every common house the Seat of the
chiefest should be above every inferior?

And should not Christianity teach us, that no Seat of any person, much less
of any of the Laity, (it seems then the Clergy may sit above God himself if
they please) should be above Gods mercy Seat, the Sacred Communion Table in
the Chauncell? etc.

And when as the Lords-Table is set in the uppermost place within the
Chauncell, is it not decent that the ends thereof (thus this Expositour and
Patron of the Common-Prayer-Booke dares control it) be toward North and South?

The Holy Ghost commands all things to be done decently and according unto
order, (Ergo Lords Tables ends must be turned North and South, against the
express order of the Common-Prayer-Booke:) And if it ought so to be in all
things, much more ought it to be in every thing about Gods house and especially
in the standing of his Sacred Seat; As if this Seat stood very undece^tly and
quite out of order, unless the Ends of it stood North and South contrary to
order.

But of this me^ry profound Divinity hereafter: This only by the way for a
Breakfast: The Author, having in all this forgotten his good Instruction in
his Epistle to his Parishioners.

That we are all bound in conscience for to learn, believe and obey whatsoever
is commanded in the Commuuion-Booke, Homilies Book and Constitutions or
Canons Book.

All which condemn his bowing to, and placing of the Table North and South:
And so by his own censure, not speaking according to the Communion Book
Doctrine. J may with a safe conscience before God affirm that there is no
light of Gods holy spirit within him.

They are his own words and censure, of all those who speak not according to
the Communion Book Doctrine, which himself professedly speaks against, in
all these, and other passages.

But enough of this ridiculous Ignoramus, who has wronged the Pope
exceedingly, in giving the Titles of HOLINESS and HOLY FATHER to our Bishops,
whom he makes absolute Popes in many Passages of his crack-brainde Treatise.

NOTE THIS.
It appears by Number. 1. 50. etc. etc. 2. v. 2. 17. That the Tabernacle of the
Lord stood in the midst of the Camp of Israel, and the Levites were there
commanded to encampe ROVND ABOUT IT: To which that text of Rev. 5. 11. etc. 7.
11. has relation, as Learned Mr. Meade there proves at large.

It is also evident by Numb. 3. 26. c. 4. 26. (And the hanging for the door of
the gate of the Court which is by the Tabernacle ROVND ABOUT, etc.) That the
Passage in the Counsel of Constantinople where the same phrase is used, is to
be taken properly as Bishop Jewel and others interpret it, not as the Collier
has most absurdly perverted it, the words being the same both in Latin,
Greek and English in all places.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHRISTIAN READER, it is Heroda^i Clio. p. 34. and Solinus Hist. p. 175.
storied of Croesus his dumbe-borne Son, that when he saw a Persian Captain
going to stay his Father, his filial affection was so stirred in him at the
sight, that though he never spoke before, yet then he brake forth into these
words: O man, do not kill Croesus; And so saved his Fathers life.

What this dutiful Son thus unexpectedly uttered (being ever before
tongue-tied) out of his endeared love to his natural Father, I am here
constrained, (out of my loyal respects to my spiritual Mother the Church of
England) publicly to speak to some treacherous seeming-Sonnes of hers, who
have almost stabbed her to the heart, under a specious pretense of fighting for
her, in some late printed works: O man, do not murder and betray my Mother
the Church of England. (Even as Luke 22. 41.
Judas once did our Savior with a kiss) whiles you are in outward appearance
contending wholly for her.

Alas, when I behold you writing professedly against her Homilies Articles, and
the Book of Common Prayer, to which you have all Articles of Religion, 25. and
Canon. 36. 37.
subscribed; When I see you raking the very ashes, and mangling the deceased
Carcases of her most eminent Jewel, Raynolds, Whitaker, Fulke, Willet, Perkins,
with other of her most victorious triumphant Champions over Romes greatest
Goliahs, (whom you never durst so much as look upon, by way of Opposition, in
their life times) proclaiming professed hostility to their authorized Writings;
When I behold you siding with the Papists, maintaining their Antichristian
Errors, Doctrines, Ceremonies and abuses before all the world, without blush
or shame; Defending their Erroneous Writers against our famous Orthodox
Authors, whose blessed memories you seek causelessly to steine; When I behold
you avowing even in print; Chowneus, Reeve, Shelford, Pocklington, Heylyn, Bis:
White, Bishop Mountague, Bish: Wren, with sundry others have defended these
Positions between them in printed Books, others have done the like in Sermons,
yea in the High Commission.


That the Church of Rome is a true Church.

That personal Succession of Bishops is requisite and Essential to make a
true Church.

That the Archbishops and Bishops of England derive their lineall Succession
and Episcopal dignity from S. Peter's Chair, and the very Sea of Rome, and
that we should not acknowledge them for Bishops in case they either did not, or
could not do so.

That the Pope of Rome or Papacy is not the Antichrist; Nor Antichrist yet come
or revealed.

That Crucifixes and Images in Churches are Lawful and necessary comely
Ornaments.

That Christ is Really present upon Earth, on the High-Altar and
Communion Table.

That Communion-Tables are Altars; Ministers of the Gospel, Priests serving at
the Altar; The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Sacrament of the Altar, and
may yea ought so to be phrased.

That men ought to bow to Altars and Communion-Tables, and to place and Rail
them in Altar-wise at the East end of the Church, and come up to them, and
receive when there is a Sacrament; And that Ministers must read their Second
Service at them when there is none.

That auricular Confession to a Priest and Absolution are very fitting and
necessary: (points much insisted on, and pressed at this present, when
Cleargie-mens sins are so open and notorious, that they need no Confession,
but correction rather.)

That the Lord's Day is no Sabbath.

That it is Jewish to call or keep it as a Sabbath.

That it is not of divine but humane Institution, nor within the morality of
the fourth Commandment.

That two hours only of it are to be sanctified, nor the whole day.

That Morrises, Dancing, Sports and Pastimes (yea labors of men's calling, not
specially prohibited by some humane Laws even out of cases of necessity) are
Lawful on it.

That men may fall totally and finally from Grace.

That they have free will, and may exactly fulfill the Law of God if they
please themselves.

That men are justified by works, yea by charity, and not by faith alone.

That men are Elected from the foresight of faith and works, and Reprobated
only out of the foresight of their sins.

That there is an universal grace given to all men, whereby they may be saved
if they will.

That Christ died alike for all men wha soaver.

That preaching is an extraordinary thing Among the Bishops it is so.
necessary only for extraordinary times, and belonging to none but
extraordinary men.

That one Sermon in a Month is enough and better then two a day.

That reading is properly preaching.

That Archbishops and Bishops Episcopal Jurisdiction and degree is above
other Ministers, Iure divino.

That the Ministers know more then the Lay People, the Bishops more then the
Ministers, the Archbishops more then the Bishops; And therefore; what ever the
Ministers shall teach or prescribe the people, what ever the Bishops, the
Ministers and people; what ever the Archbishops, the Bishops, Ministers and
people too, are bound to believe and obey, without further question or dispute.

That the Popes Laws, Decrees and Canon Law are still in force, and our Church
ought to be governed by them, and our Ecclesiastical Courts proceed Legally
according to them.

That Bishops have power to make and publish Articles, Canons, Injunctions,
Oaths, Orders, Rites and Ceremonies in their own names and rights, and to
enforce both Ministers and people to obey them.

That they may silence, suspend and excommunicate, (yea deprive and imprison)
Ministers at their pleasure without any Legal cause.

That Bishops are not bound to preach so much or so often as other men, (though
they have greater wages, and so should do more work;)

That they may Lawfully and laudablie neglect their spiritual functions to
manage temporal Offices and affairs, exercise both Swords at once, and rule
both Church and State together.

When I see out own Divines (if we may believe them) by public License in
printed Books defending all these with sundry other erroneous Romish
Positions, maintaining all Popish Ceremonies, conforming themselves to Popish
Mass Priests, in their noddes, cringes, genuflections, habits, preaching,
writing, Ceremonies; And joining thus with them in a most treacherous
confederacy against the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, as many late Writers, and by Name Bishop Mountague, Bishop White,
Edmond Reene, Dr. Pocklington, Dr. Heylyn, Dr. Primerose, Dr. Laurence, Dr.
Read, Mr. Shelford, Mr. Chowne, Mr. Studly, with others in their late printed
Books, Bishop Wren and other our Prelates in their Visitation Articles, and
hundreds in their unprinted Sermons, both in the Court, City, University and
Country have done.

When I behold our Lords Tables every where called, and turned into Altars, or
rayled Altar-wise; Our Ministers transformed into Priests, and so styled: Our
Religion Metamorphosed into external Popish Pomp and Ceremonies; Our Devotion
into Superstition; Our Holiness into professed profaneness; Our godnes into
impiory; Our Preaching into Piping and Dancing; Our Lords days into
Play-dayes; Our Conscience into unconscio^ ablenes; Our fear of God into
Atheism; Our Bishops for the most part into Bite-shrepes; Our Ecclestasticall
High Commisioners into Spanish Inquisitours and mere Tyrants; Our Pastors into
Wolves; Our Religious Fasting (even in this time of Plague and danger) into
Feasting; Our devout Prayers into carnal lollity; Our Profession of Religion
into Derision, and Gods Word, (yea Heaven and Hell) into a Fable; And that
principally by means of some (...) Authorized Books in print, (which no man
can have free liberty to answer, this being one grand Policy of our Popish
Innovatours, to ingrosse the power and command of all our printing Presses
into their own hands, and to stay whatever may either detect or cross their
Antichristian Romish designs.)

When I behold all this, I say, even with a bleeding heart and troubled spirit,
how can I but unloose my hitherto silent tongue and pen, and cry out aloud
that all may hear, to these open Powder. Traitors, who would blow up our
Religion and our Church at once; O men, do not thus murder and destroy the
Church of England.

Now, because I cannot at once encounter all those who are guilty of this
unnatural Treachery, nor crush all these viperous Cockatrices in the shell, I
have here single and out some three or four of them to combat with,
(especially the Author of A Coal from the Altar, intiteled, A Judicious
Learned Divine; Whose Coal set on fire by Mr. Samuel Baker, in the Bishops of
Londons Open, has kindled a new Combustion everywhere in our Church,)
concerning Altars, the Sacrament of the Altar, the ^^^^swing of the Communion
Table an Altar, and the placing of it Altarwise, with one side against the
Wall, as the East end of the Church.

Which they have earnestly pleaded for in late printed Books, in open affront
and defiance to our Statu^es, Articles of Religion, Book of Common Prayer,
Injunctions, Canons, Martyrs, and most Eminent Writers.

Which particulars though they seem small at first view, and are slighted by
many, as matters of no great moment, yet, all Circumstances considered, they
are very important, and the conniving at them without Opposition, like to prove
fatal to our Religion, as the Reading of the Treatise itself, will evidence
more at large.

To make this apparent in few words; There is no man almost so ignorant, as not
to know; So blind, as not to see that there is a strong faction sprung up of
late among us (the heads whereof were particularly voted and descried in
Parliament House the last Parliament) who labor with all diligence, power, and
cunning artifice, to bring the whole body of Popery into our Church again, yet
secretly by degrees, with as little noise as might be, by those several
Stratagemes and means, which that cunning-pated Jesuit Adam Contzin in his
Book of L. 2. c. 17. 18. 19 See the Book called, Look about you.
Politickes printed at Mentz, Anno 1621. has prescribed them for that purpose;
Which they prosecute and follow to an haires-breadth.

To effect this Plot the better (according to the Popes consultation and
direction in his Conclave) they first vented all the Arminian points in printed
Books; Which though at first oppugned by many to their hazard, have now (under
a pretense of silencing all controversies in this kind) quite silenced the
truth itself; Being now publicly printed and preached every where without
control, contrary to his Majesty's Proclamation, concerning the inhibiting and
calling in of P. 20. 21. 42.
Mountagues Book (which led the Dance,) in his Declaration before the 39.
Articles; And concerning the Dissolution of the last Parliament; Which are now
made snares only by these potent Confederates (contrary to his Majesty's pious
intention) to suppress the truth, and bring those into trouble, who defend it
against Arminian Novelties or Popish Tenants, either by printing or preaching.

Next after this, they began to cry up, practice, and enjoyne many
superstitious Popish Ceremonies, especially bowing at the name of Jesus, both
in time of Divine Service and Sermons, to the end it might usher in bowing to
Altars, Images, Crucifixes, with adoration of the Sacramental bread and wine;
Which Ceremony getting head by violence, many suffering for opposing it, and
others either ignorantly or cowardly submitting to it, though not prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer; Then they began at first in some private places to
set up Images, Altars, yea Crusifixes in Churches, directly contrary to our
Against the Peril of Idolatry.
Homilies; To call Lords-Tables, Altars; To turn them Altarwise or into
Altars, and bow down unto them.

And because an Altar without a Priest was to no purpose, they next begin, to
term themselves with other Ministers by no other name but Priests; Yea
Priests to dance attendance on these new Altars, both in their Sermons, Books
and VVritings.

Which being done but secretly in corners (as every Evil is bashful at
first, and creepes up but by degrees) these new devises also got^ ground by
little and little, some potent Bishops setting them on, and countenancing them
under hand, Crushing such who chiefly oppugned these Innovations in the
High Commission and elsewhere.

And having thus by public Censures and these under^and Devises given open
countenance to them, and disheartened people from opposing them, they grew in a
short time so impudent as openly to plead for Jmages, Altars, Priests, turning
of Communion-Tables Altar-wise, bowing to them and at the name of Jesus,
reading of Second Service at them, standing up at Gloria Patri, the Gospel,
etc. and that not only in the Pulpit, but in the High Commission and in print,
setting some shallowpated fellows (as Giles Widows, Reeve and Shelford) in
the forefront to break the Ice, to see how the people would relish them; And
then when these men had borne the brunt and blame for a while, and the
strangenes of the things was almost vanished, seconding them with others of
better note and parts, to give greater Countenance to them, that people might
the more willingly embrace these Innovations.

Which being thus once pleaded for in print, our Bishops (the chief Plotters
and fomenters of them) begin first more covertly underhand by way of
persuasion and entreaty, and now at last openly in their Visitation-Articles
by way of peremptory command, (one pragmaticall impudent Prelate giving the
first onset, and then others seconding him in their fore-plotted order,) to
enjoyne all these Innovations, Popish Practices and Ceremonies to be put in
full execution throughout their Diocese; And now they are grown so impudent,
as to excommunicate, suspend, yea Censure in the High Commission all such
Churchwardens and Ministers, who out of Conscience toward God, Obedience to
his Majesty's Laws and Declarations, or love to Religion, dare oppose or not
sub^^ie unto (...) many The Church-warders of Berkington, Ipswitch, Colchester,
and others.
Churchwardens being excommunicated for not (...) in the Table Altarwise; And
many Ministers suspended excommunicated, put from their Livings, if not field
(...) imprisoned too (especially in Bishop Wrens and Bishop (...) Diocese) for
not bowing to the Altar, and as the names Jesus, not reading Second Service at
the High Altar (...) Lords-Table, for opposing the railing in of the Table
Altarwise, without Lawful Authority, or preaching against, or not yielding to
these Popish Proceedings; Which have lately gotten such head in most places,
that now all thing except Latin Service, are prepared for the Mass in many
Churches, which added to these Novelties, will make us perfect Papists: For we
have Altars (with Altar-clothe^^ Tapers, Bisons and other Romish furniture on
them,) Priests, Crucifixes, bowing to Altars, coming up to the Altar, and
there kneeling down to receive, all Popish Trinekets and Massing Ceremonies,
Copes, Organs, Vestments (especially in our Cathedrals, which now must be.
Coal from the Altar. p. 26. 27. 28. 51. 52.
Pattern^ of Imitation to all other Churches in the Diocese,) all which being
but mere Preparations for the Mass, how soon that also may steal in upon
us, (if his Majesty's pious care, with other our Magistrates vigilancie and
inferior Minister outcries, who are over-silent in such an exigent, prevent
(...) not with speed,) by these active hot-spurs machinations who have made
such a swift progress in all the other particulars which they impudently
press and justice with bra^e^ faces and obdurate hearts; (not fearing already
to style the Lords Supper, an unbloody Sacrifice, the Sacrament and Sacrifice
of the Altar, and to maintain a corporal presence in the Eucharist, I fear
to divine.

And when Mass is once installed and set up, the next thing these Novellers
are to effect,) Popery will be perfectly restored with it, and then face well all
our Religion, which we have enjoyed, with all extern^ peace and felicity
attending it.

Now, (...) it is plain (according to the modern Papists and these
Innovatours Doctrine,) that there can be no Mass without an Altar, or
Super-Altar; No Altar but at the East end of the Church, as remote from the
people as they he, for the better officiating of private Mass; And neither
Mass nor Altar without a Sacrifice, a Sacrament of the Altar, and a Priest to
Consecrate and Offer it; The oppugning of these Innovations (the immediate
Harbengers and forerunners both of Mass and open Popery, without which there
can be no Mass, and Popery can never get head among us, (and by conniving at
which without ^^ong and sudden Opposition, both Mass and Popery, the things
principally a^med at, without which these other are to no purpose, will
presently perke up and get quiet possession among us, to the utter overthrow of
our Religion,) must needs be of great consequence.

(...) know, that when a Ciety is beleaguerd, whiles the (...) and Out works
are safe and defended, the City is in no danger of surprisall: But if the
Enemies once get them, all is in danger to be lost: Our Lords-Tables,
Ministers, Lords Supper, yea the very use and defense of these Titles, (...)
well as the things, are the Bulworkes and Outworkes of our Religion, as long as
we maintained them, there was as fear of Mass or open Popery; But since the
Altars and the name of Altars invaded and thrust out our Lords-Tables and their
names, Priests out Ministers and the Title of Ministers, and those other
Massing Ceremonies prevayled, the Outworkes of our Religion are quite lost and
taken, with many of the In-workes too; by our Popish Adversaries, and all is in
great danger of speedy surpris^^^; Is it not then high time for us to awake and
bestirre ourselves; To beat out these secret Traitors, which demolish these
Out-fortifications, or betray them to our Romish Adversaries and to make good
and regaine these Sconces (if it be possible) without which all will be hazarded,
if not quite l^st, and that in a little space for ought we know?

Let no man then think slightly of these smaller matters, without which the
grandest designs of our Popish Adversaries cannot be effected or proceed: But
let all rather labor to pry into that great Treacherous plot and hidden
mystery of Iniquity, which sets all these under-wheeles on work, and endeavor
all they may, to oppose that imminent inundation of the whole body of Popery,
flowing in a maine upon us, all which wise men both foresee and feare^ Which it
will be in vain to do, if we permit these Banks, these Bulworkes J here
content for, to be broken downe^ Which alone will secure us, if maintained, but
ruin all if once demolished, by foreign Opposites or homebred Traitors.

For the Coal from the Altar (the maine Treatise I he^^ encounter, which fires
all these fortifications at once, that the enemies may enter and surprise us
whiles we either neglect or strive to quench the flame:) The Author thereof,
(...) seems, was ashamed to own it by his name, (though as impudent, as
shameless, as active an instrument of mischief as great an incendiary for his
years as any living in our Church, if he on whom fame has fathered it, be the
man.)

The Title informs us, that he is a Divine, yea a judicio^ Learned Divine,
(perchance in his own and some other conceit;) But certainly what ever his
Learning is, sure I at his Judgment is not very great, and his honesty less,
as will appear in the Quench-Coale.

For the Letter he undertakes to answer (which he would injuriously without any
ground Father upon Mr. Cotton of Boston, the more to abuse had Censure the true
Author of it, with whom he has lately had some personal quarrels and
contests) is certainly known to be Dr. Williams now Bishop of Lincoln and
Deane of Westminster, a man far more Learned and judicious then the Answerer,
and every way able to make good his own Letter, which I have not particularly
undertaken to defend, dealing in this Controversy with the Coal, no further
then concerns the points debated in the Letter, and that in general, without
any relation unto the Epistoler, who no doubt will answer for himself without
a Proctor.

As for this Quench-Coale, having to do with others as well as the Coal, I
have therein followed mine own Method, though confused, not the Coals; And
cleared the points in Controversy by our own English Martyrs, VVriters and
Records, omitting Forraigners, partly for brevity sake, and partly because
impertinent in these particulars, which principally concern the practice and
judgment only of our own Church; In which as I wonder much that the rumored
Author of the Coal could find no Lord's Day Sabbath, though he writ An
History of it, so J wonder how he could find an Altar in it; Our Church having
cashered Altars as Popish, Heathenish and Jewish, yet he deemes the Christian;
And retained and prescribed the Name and Sanctification of the Lord's Day
Sabbath, which he brandes as Jewish, as if Altars were not more Jewish then it.

And here good Reader, I desire thee to observe, (...) they are that thus plead
most stiffly for Altars, calling Comunion-Tables Altars, and turning them
Altar-wise, (...) Bish: White, Dr. Hylyn, Dr. Pocklington, Ree^e, etc
those who write and preach against the name (...) Sanctification of the
Lord's Day Sabbath, as Jewish.

Certainly, these men, I fear, are quite distracted thr^^ malice, or tossed to
and for with a spirit of giddines, (...) they could not so earnestly oppose and
write against Iuda^ (as they term it,) with the one hand, and yet at the
(...) time embrace and write for it with the other.

Now, if Judaisme be so distasteful to them, as that (...) cannot brook the
name, much less the Sanctification of (...) Lord's Day Sabbath, which the
Homilies of the Time and (...) of Prayer, and the third part of the Homily
against Rebellus to which they have subscribed, pleades for, as truly Christian
How then can they write for Altars, ( yea the naming of (...) Lords-Table an
Altar, and his Supper the Sacrament of (...) Altar,) which the first part of
the Homily, against the (...) of Idolatry, p. 18. and the second Part of the
Sermon of (...) Time and Place of Prayer, p. 131. condem^ both as Jewish Popish
and Heathenish, as many of our Writers before and since these Homilies have
done?

Let them therefore either reject Altars, as they doe^ Christian Sabbath,
because they are Jewish; Or else (...) and plead for this Sabbath, and its
strict Sanctification, (^^^mitting it be Jewish, as it is not,) because they
write so (...) lie for Altars, more Jewish far then the names, or strict
Sanctification of the Lord's Day Sabbath.

To draw to a Conclusion; All J have here written, is ^y out of pure zeal to
Gods glory, the Patronage of his (...), and benefit of his Churh, without any
private spleen particular persons.

If any good accrue to Gods people by it, or this my Mo^^ Church of England; I
desire God may have the glory, (...) whom alone it is due; If no public
benefit be reaped by (...), nor satisfaction given to private Christians in
these ^ggering times, to settle both their Judgments, Conscien^ and Practice,
as I hope there will; Yet I have done my (...) endeavor; The Success is Gods
alone, not mine to (...); To his Blessing I commend both thee and it, desiring
(...) the short space I had to compile it in, may excuse the de^^ in the
composition. So I rest.

Thy Friend in the Lord. Iuli^ the tenth 1636.
Courteous Reader, this should have come in at the 3. Question, concerning the
Consecration of Churches; Immediately before the words of Bishop Pilkington
there cited, Page 214. Line 32.
Antiquita^es Ecclesiae Brit: p. 85. 86. 87
Matthew Parker, the Learned Archbishop of Canterbury, relating the form of
Consecrating Churches, Chapples, Altars, Foundation-stones, Vestments,
Chalices, and the like, out of the ancient Missals and Saxon Pontificals, which
our Bishops at this day use; Concludes thus of them all.

Who can doubt, but that Papal Rites and Ceremonies abound with these kind of
Exorcismes, which differ nothing at all from these anciently used in the
Ordalium and vulgar form of Purgation, which they at length condemned, yea
rather abound with more and more stupendous Conjurations then they?

But S. Augustine, who in his time complained of the multitude of Ceremonies,
if he were now alive, what would he think of that immense and prolix number of
Ceremonie^ (...) in use?

For writing to Ianuarius, he thus speaks of Ceremonies: Notwithstanding he
has laden with servile burdens Religion itself, (which the mercy of God
would have to be free, with very few and most manifest Ceremonies of
Celebration,) that the condition of the Jews is now more tolerable then that
of Christians: Who although they acknowledge not the time of liberty, yet they
are Subject to the rudiments of the Law, not to human presumptions or
Insti^^^ons.

Thus Augustine: And verify the condition of this our time is much to be
deplored, that the Fathers of the Church, either will not, or cannot with the
same edge of their mind, cut off these and such like Ceremonies, or rather
TRIFLES from the Church, where with they discerned and corrected these former
vices of Ordalium, or trial by fire. But those being damned and abolished as
Superstitious, they still hold fast and retain these (Consecrations) QUAMVIS
PUERILIA ET DELIRIA SINT, although they are Childish things and Dotages framed
and co^piled out of them. How much more equal then modern Papists, was Pope
Gr^gorie, who writes; That the rules of the Holy Fathers were delivered
according to the circumstances of time, Place, person and instant business. But
these having no regard, neither of time nor place, no^ business, nor person, nor
of any other thing but their own will and vain glory; N^ pusillis in re^us
(...) ce^e^a volu^^; Will not submit to the truth even in these trivial things.

Thus this Archbishop of these Dedications, so much now contested for by his
present Successo^r; Ou^ of what spirit, he has here determined to our hands, I
(...) not recite (...).

A QUENCH-COALE, OR A breife disquisition, or Inquiry in what place of the
Church the Communion Table, ought to be situated especially when the Sacrament
is administered.
IT has been a great Question lately raised and much agitated among us, by
some Innovating Romish spirits; In what place of the Church or Chancell the
Lords Table ought to stand, specially at the time of the Sacraments
administration; whether in the Body or midst of the Church, Chancell or Quire,
or at the East end of the Quire Alterwise, where some now rail it in, and
plead it ought of right to stand? The Rubricke in the Common prayer book before
the Communion, thus resolves this question. The Table at the Communion time
havinge a fair white Lynnen cloth upon it shall stand IN THE BODY OF THE
CHURCH, OR IN THE CHANCELL where morninge prayer and eveninge prayer be
appointed to be said. And the priest standinge AT THE NORTH SIDE OF THE TABLE,
shall say the Lords prayer with this Collect followinge etc.

Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions published in the first year of her Reign, when
the former Rubricke was made thus explain and define this question. The holy
Table in every Church when the Communion of the Sacrament is to be distributed
shall be so placed in good sort with in the Chancell, as whereby the Minister
may be more conveniently heard of the Communicants in his prayer and
administration, and the Communicants also more conveniently, and in more
number communicate with the said Minister: And after the Communion done from
time to time the same holy Table to be placed where it stood before. Therefore
it is not to be moveable, not fixed, or rayled in at the East end of the
Chancell.

The Canons Anno 1603. Can. 82. thus second the Injunction. Whereas we have no
doubt but that in all Churche^ with in the Realm of England, convenient, and
decent Tables are provided, and placed for the celebration of the holy
Communion, we appoint that the same Tables shall from time to time be kept
and repaired inconvenient, and decent manner, and covered in time of divine
service with a Carpett of silk, or other decent stuff, and with a fair
lynnen cloth at the time of the administration as becomes that Table, and
so stand savinge when the said holy Communion is to be administered, At which
time the same shall be placed in so good sort with in THE CHURCH OR CHANCELL, as
thereby the Minister may be the more conveniently heard of the Communicants
in his prayer and administration; and the Communicants also more conveniently,
and in more number may communicate with the said Minister.

Queen Elizabeth's visitors in the first year of her Reign (who best knew
the meaning of the Rubricke and Injunctions, made that very year) did by
special direction, place the Communion Tables throughout all Churches of
England, in the body of the Church, or Chancell some distance from the wall,
with the two ends standinge East and West, and the two sides North and South;
in which sort they have stood noe less then 73. years, or more, And in such
Churches where the Tables could not conveniently stand always in the body of
the Church or Chancell, they then placed them in some other convenient place
where they might best stand, givinge direction, according to the Rubricke, and
Queens Injunctions, for removinge them into the midst of the Church or
Chancell, when the Sacrament should be administered, as the said Rubricke,
Injunctions, and Canons prescribe.

In the year of the Lord 1533. there was a short and pithie treatise touching
the Lords supper, compiled as some gather, by M. William Tyndall, and printed
at the end of his works, wherein p. 476. 477. he wishes, that the holy
Sacrament were restored unto the pure use as the Apostles used it in their
time. After which, he prescribes this form of administringe it, wishing, that
the secular Princes would command and establish it. To wit, That the bread
and wine should be set before the people in the face of the Church upon the
Lords Table (not an Altar) purely and honestly laid etc. Then let the
Preacher, (whom he would have to preach, at least twice every week) exhort
them lovingly to draw near unto this Table of the Lord etc. This done let
him come down, (to wit from the pulpit) and accompanied honestly with other
Ministers, come forth readily unto the Lords Table (not the Altar) the
congregation now SET ROUND ABOUT IT, and also in their other convenient
seats, the Pastor exhortinge them all to pray for grace, faith, and love
which all this Sacrament signifies, and puts them in mind of, Then let
there be read openly, and distinctly the 6. chapter of John in their mother
tongue, etc. Where this Author prescribes a Table, not an Altar, and that to
stand in the face of the Congregation, not at the upper end of the Quire, that
so the Congregation might sit ROUND ABOUT IT and thus receive. This he
determines to be according to the pure use of the Sacrament in the Apostles
time, and that which our Martyrs then desired to be restored.

In the year of the Lord 1549. (as M. John Fox in his Acts and Monuments
London. 1610. p. 1211. 1212. Records) King Edward the 6. with 9. of his Privy
Council (whereof Archbishop Cramner, and Thomas Bishop of Ely where two) writ
a letter to Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London, to give substantial Order
throughout all his Dioces, that with all diligence, all the Altars in every
Church, and Chapel with in his Dioces be taken down, and in steed of them a
Table to be set up in some convenient part of the Chancell with in every such
Church or Chapel to serve for the administration of the blessed Communion,
sendinge with this letter 6. reasons why the Lords board should rather be
after the form of a Table then of an Altar. After with letter and Reasons
received the Bishop appointed the form of a Right Table to be used in his
Dioces, and in the Church of Paul's brake down the wall standinge by the high
Altars side, placinge the Table a good distance from the wall.

M. Martin Bucer, in his Censure of the Common prayer book, of the Church of
England, in his scripto Anglicano p. 457. writes, That it appears by the
forms of the most ancient Temples, and writings of the Fathers, that the
Clergy stood in the midst of the Temples, which were for the most part round,
And out of that place did so administer the Sacraments to the people, that
they might plainly hear the things that were there recited, and be understood
of all that were present, And he there condemns, the placinge of the Quire
so remote from the body of the Church, and administringe distinct service and
Sacraments therein, as contrary to Christ's Institution, and an intolerable
contumely to God; exhortinge King Edward, and the Archbishop severely to
Correct the same. Shortly after which Censure of his, the Altars were taken
down, and Communion Tables placed in the body of the Church or Chancell in
their steed.* Fox Acts and Monuments p. 1404. 1406.
Bishop Farrar causinge a Communion Table for the administration of the Lords
supper (March. 30. 1555.) to be set up IN THE MIDDLE OF THE CHURCH of
Carmarthen, without the Quire, and taking away the Altar thence. The MIDST
of the Church being then thought the fittest place for its situation.

Incomparable Bishop Jewel,* See his life before his works Sect. 25.
one of Queen Elizabeth's visitors, in the first year of her Reign, who had
a hand in turninge the Altars into Communion Tables, and placinge these Tables
in the midst of the Church, or Chancell, if not incomposinge the Rubricks in
the Communion book,) in his answer to Hardings Preface, writes thus. An
Altar we have, such as Christ and his Apostles, and other Holy Fathers had,
which of the Greeks was called the Holy Table, And of the Latins the Table of
the Lord, and was made not of Stone, but of Timber, and stood not at the end of
the Quire, BUT IN THE MIDST OF THE PEOPLE, as many ways it may appear. And
other or better Altar then Christ or these Holy Fathers had, we desire to have
none. And in his Reply to Hardinge, Article 3. Divis. 26. He proceeds thus.
Now whether it may seem likely that the same Altars stood so far of from
the hearing of the people as M. Hardinge so constantly affirms, I referr my
self to these authorities that here follow. Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c. 4.
Eusebius thus describes the form and furniture of the Church in his time.
The Church being ended, and comely furniture with high Thrones for the honor
of the Rulers, and wish stalles beneath set in order, And last of all the
holy of holies, I mean the Altar, BEING PLACED IN THE MIDST. Eusebius says
not, the Altar was set at the end of the Quire, but IN THE MIDST OF THE
CHURCH AMONG THE PEOPLE. De verb. Domini secundum Ieannem Sermon. 42.
S. Augustinus likewise says thus. Christ feeds us daily, and this is his
Table here set IN THE MIDST. O my hearers, what is the matter that ye see
the Table, and yet come not to the meat? In the 5. Actio 1.
Council of Constantinople, it is written thus. When the Lessen or Chapter was
readinge, the people with silence dr^ve together ROUND ABOUT THE ALTAR, and
gave care; (Yet Sunday no Sabbath p. 27.
D. Pocklington writes, that they are much mistaken that produce the Council
of Constantinople to prove that Communion Tables stood in the midst of the
Church, and the p. 54 53.
Coal from the Altar, says the like:) And to leave others. Ration. divin. l.
5.
Durandus examininge the cause, why the Priest turns himself about at the
Altar, yeildeth this reason for the same. In the MIDST OF THE CHURCH. I
opened my mouth, And Platina notes, that Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, was the
first, that in the time of the ministration, divided the Priest from the
people. To leave further Allegations, that the Quire was then in the body of
the Church, divided with railes from the rest, whereof it was called Cancel,
or Chancell, etc. And whereas M. Hardinge imagines, that the people for
distance of place could not hear what the Priest said. A man that has
considered the old Fathers with any diligence may soon see he is far
deceived. For In Ephesians. 2. Hom. 3. in 2. Cor. H^mil. 18.
Chrysostom says: The deacon at the holy Mysteries stood up, and thus spoke
unto the people; Oremus pariter omnes, let us all pray together; And again
he says, the Priest and people at the ministration talk together. The
Priest says, the Lord be with you, the people answeareth, And with thy
spirit. Justinian the Emperor commanded, that the Priest should so speak a
loud at the holy Ministration as the people might hear him: And to leave
rehearsal of others. De Saeramento Encharistica.
Bessarion says, the Priest speakinge these words, the people standinge by at
each part of the Sacrament, or on every side, says Amen. After which he
concludes thus. Seeinge therefore that neither Altars were erected in the
Apostles time, nor the Communion Table that then was used stood so far off
from the body of the Church, nor the people gave ascent to that they understood
not, so many untruthes being found in M. Hardings premises, (all which are
revived afresh in the Coal from the Altar, to affront Bishop Jewel, and
justify M. Hardinge, and that by public license, such is the desperate
shamelessenes and Apostacy of our age:) we may well and safely stand in
doubt of his Conclusion. And in the margin he has this note annexed to M.
Hardings words. The. 82. un truth. The Altars, and Communion Tables STOOD IN
THE MIDST OF THE CHVRCH, as shall appear. And Article 13. division 6. p:
362. he cites the same passages of Eusebius, Augustine, and the Council of
Constantinople, to prove, that there was aunciently but one Altar and Communi^n
Table in every Church, and that standinge in the midst of the Church, Quire,
people; and concludes thus; So likewise Gentianus Hernettus, describinge the
manner of the Greek Church as it is used at this day, says thus; In the
Greek Church there is but one Altar, and the same standinge IN THE MIDST OF
THE QVIRE, and the Quire also was in the midst of all the people, Thus this
Jewel of the Church: From whose words it is apparent, that the Communion Table
in the Apostles times, and in the Primitive Church for above 1300. years after
Christ, stood in the midst of the Church, or Chancel, not at the East end of
the Quire, Altarwise against the wall; And that it ought now thus to stand in
the Churches, being thus placed in his time. Which books of his, being A
defense both of the doctrine, and practice of the Church of England against the
Papists, Commanded to be had in every Church for Ministers and the people to
read. (And therefore it seems a strange prodigious insolency, that A Coal
from the Altar p. 53. to 57. D. Pocklington Sunday no Sabbath. p. 27. Edit. 1.
men of our own Church (as they pretend) should be so impudent, as
publicly to affront and refute his doctrine in print; but far stranger they
should do it by public license to disparage him, and justify the Papists
doctrine) is a clear demonstration to me. That by the very doctrine, and
practice of the Church of England, the Communion Table ought to stand in the
MIDST OF THE CHVRCH OR CHAVNCELL, especially when the Sacrament is
administered; and that the railinge of it in against the wall at the East end of
the Chauncell, like a Dresser, a side Table, or Popish Altar, (to the end it
may not be thence removed, and that the people may come up to it by several
ranks and files to receive the Sacrament,) is a mere Popish Innovation
contrary both to the doctrine and practice of the Church of England.

The namelesse Author of the Page 53. 54. 55. 56.
Coal from the Altar, taking upon him to be far wiser and learneder then
Bishop Jewel, (yea then Bishop Ba^ington, D. Fulke, M. Bucer and all the
learneddest writers) is bold to write without blushinge, That the authorities
of Eusebius, Augustine, Durandus, and the 5. Council of Constantinople, do
not prove, that the Communion Table in their times stood in the midst of the
Church, or Chauncell; that B. Jewel is mistaken in their meaning, and shapes
several answeares for to shift them. To that of Eusebius he says, This
proves not necessarily, that the Altar stood either in the body of the Church,
or in the middle of the same, as the Epistoler does intend, when he says the
middle; The Altar though it stood alonge the Eastern wall, yet it may be
well interpreted to be in the middle of the Chancell in Reference to the North
and South, as since it has stood. And were it otherwise, yet this is but a
particular case of a Church in Syria, wherein the people being more mingled
with the Jews then in other places, might possibly place the Altar in the
middle of the Church as was the Altar of Incense in the midst of the Temple,
the better to conform unto them. To which I answer: 1. That the first part
of this reply is in a sort mere nonsense. The Altar was placed in the midst
of the Church or Chancell, that is (says he) in the East end of it, or in the
midst of the East end; as if the East end of the Church or Chancell were the
Church or Chancell it self, or the midst of it, the midst of the Church or
Chancell, But these being distinct, and different things, the midst of the
Church or Chancell, can be not more interpreted, to be the midst of the
Eastwall or end of them, then the East wall, or midst of the East end of the
Quire, can be the midst of the Church, So that this evasion is but a mere
nonsense Bull; And had Eusebius intended any such thing, he would have thus
expressed himself; that they placed the Altar against the midst of the East
end wall of the Church or Quire, not in the midst of the Church or Quire, and
compassed about it and the Sanctuary with wooden Railes wrought up to the topp
with artificial carving.

2. I answer, that The second part of the Reply is a plain concession of
what he formerly denied; and not only so, but a confirmation of it with an
annexed reason, So that here we have one piece of the Coal against the
other: one denyinge that it was in the midst, the other confessinge, and
provinge the contrary: Now whereas he writes, that this was but a particular
case of one Church in Syria: I answer, that it seems this famous Temple was
one of the Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c. 3. 4
first Christian Churches that was built and consecrated by the Christians
after our Saviors death, and so became a general pattern for all the rest:
The Walafridus Strabus de rebus Eccl. l. 4. c. 19.
great Church at Jerusalem being built round or ovall like to it, and
havinge the Altar in the midst, like this;) In the edifying whereof, Paulinus
Bishop of Tire, who passed all others for rare and singular gifts, was the
chief means and director, And till he can produce an example of some
Churches in the Primitive times, either before, or not long after this, wherein
the Table or Altar stood against the East wall of the Quire Altarwise, as now
they are situated, which he can never do, I shall take it as a general and
sufficient proof for the settinge of the Table in the midst of the Church or
Chancell. That which he adds, that it was done perchance to please the Jews;
is but his own fancy, no Historian or writer so much as insinuatinge any such
thing; And admit it true, yet the Jews situatinge of the Altar of Incense in
the midst of the Temple, though, not out of any Jewish fancy or conceit, but
by Gods own direction, is a fitter pattern for Christians to follow, then
any Popish Altars, fixed station at or against the East end of the Quire, only
by a bold Friars or Popes direction, without Reason, Scripture, president, or
divine direction to warrant it.

To that of the 5. Counciil of Constantinople, he replies, A Coal from the
Altar p. 45. 55.
that although (...), in it self does signify a Circle, yet (...), cannot be
properly interpreted, round about the Altar, so as there was no part thereof,
that was not compassed by the people; noe more then if a man should say, that
he has seen the King sittinge in his Throne, and all his Nobles about him,
it needs or could be thought, that the Throne was placed in the middle of the
presence, as many of the Nobles being behind him as before him; for which he
cites Rev. 4. 6. and c. 7. V. 11. To which I answer, First, That as the
proper signification of (...), is, a Circle, as he confesses; so the proper
signification of (...), is, to compass or stand round about the Altar in a
Circle, and to hemne it in on every side. If this then be the proper meaning
of the words of this Council, as all must acknowledge, good reason have we to
take them in their proper sense, and not improperly.

2. This word and phrase is so taken and interpreted in the Scripture, (as
Psalm. 26. 6. Psalm. 128. 3. 1. Sam. 16. 11. Rev. 4. 6. and c. 7. 11.) For
sittinge, standinge and incircling the throne or Table round about on every
part; Therefore it should by the same Reason be so taken here.

3. When as we say, the Kings Nobles do inviron or stand round about his
Throne; this implies, that his Throne stands not against a wall, but so as men
may stand round about him; round about, e^^rimplyinge a perfect Circle, though
about does not always so.

4. I shall make it most clear, that all Altars aunciently were placed in the
midst of Temples, Churches, or Quires, and that it was the use both among
Jews. Pagans, and Christians, to compass, stand, dance, and goeround about
them; therefore it shall be intended the people did so there, till the
contrary can be proved, which wilbee ad Graecas Calendas.

To that of S. Augustine, he replies; that, mensa ipsius in MEDIO constituta,
is not to be interpreted, the Table set here in the midst, as it is translated;
but the Table which is here before you, according to the usual meaning of
the Latin phrase, afferre in medium, which is not to be construed thus, bring
it precisely into the midst, but bring it to us, or before us: Oh wise
evasion! as if Bishop Jewel, Bishop Babington, Doctor Fulke, and the Epistoler
were such illiterate novices, that they knew not how to conster Latin, and
need be set to school again to learn their Grammar. I wonder why this
pragmaticall Critic cavelled not at our new translaters for rendringe that
of Math. 18. 20. where two or three gathered together there I am in medio
little, in the midst of them; where the same latin word is used: If in medio,
here may be properly Englished, in the midst, not at the East end, or
before them; why not in this text of Augustine? All know, that the proper
signification of Medium, is the midst; and of in medium afferre, to bring into
the midst, not before men; Coram nobis, being the common phrase, signifying to
bring, a thing before men, not in medium afferre; And if this Gentleman
remember his Grammar; Sentit medios illapsus in hosts, cannot be interpreted,
he perceived he was fallen, before his Enemies, but, into the midst of them.
The translation of Bishop Jewel therefore is good and proper, and the Colier a
nonsense Critic, to quarrel with it upon such slender grounds.

To that of Durandns, in medio Ecclesiae apperuios meum, that it proves not
that the Altar stood in the midst of the Church, but that the Priests stood at
the midst of the Altar: For it is generally known that many hundred years
before Durand was borne, the Altars generally stood in Christian Churches, even
as now they do.

I answer, first, that to interpret in medio Ecclesiae, the midst of the
Altar, not of the Church, is nonsense; as if the Altar were the Church, or the
midst of the Altar the midst of the Church, yea though it stood not in the
midst but East end of it.

2. If in medio here, by his own confession signify in the midst, not before
the Altar; then why not in that place of Augustine too, at which he formerly
carped, as mis-translated.

3. It is not well known neither by experience (for noe man is so ancient,)
nor by any authenticke writer extant, that many 100. years before Durand was
borne the Altars generally, stood in Christian Churches as now they do; there
being not one testimony that can be produced to prove it. The Altar in the
Cathedral Church of Rome standing, even in time of Mass, when the Pope
receives the Sacrament, in the midst of the Quire, and the Pope sitting in a
Chair of estate about it, as William Thomas an eywitnesse of it An. 1547.
testifyeth in his History of Italy, yet the contrary is well known, and shall
God willing be proved; and if this were so well known, I wonder why this
judicious learned man proves it no better, begging only the Question disputed,
in stead of proving it; having thus answered, these nonsense idle Cavills
against the authorities, quoted by learned Jewel, I now proceed to other of
our writers.

Doctor Gervase Babington Bishop of Worcester, in his Comfortable notes upon
Exodus chap. 20. and 27. p. 279. 307. in his works in folio, shows at large,
That the Apostles and Primitive Christians had no Altar but Communion^ Tables
only, and those made of boards, and REMOVEABLE, SET IN THE MIDST OF THE
PEOPLE, AND NOT PLACED AGAINST A WALL; they are his own words.

Doctor William Fulke, in his Confutation of the Remish Testament, notes on
Heb. 13. sect. 6. Anno 1589. writes thus: The Lords Table of the ancient
Fathers is called indifferently a Table, as it is indeed; and an Altar, as it
is unproperly; But that it is called of them a Table, and was indeed a Table
made of boards, and removeable set in the midst of the people, not placed
against a wall, I have showed sufficiently by the Testimony of the ancient
Fathers before, (to wit those whom Bishop Jewel quotes:) So on the 1. Cor.
11. sect. 1^. He and M. Cartwright both affirm: That in the Primitive Church,
the Lords Table was situated in THE MIDST OF THE CHURCH AND PEOPLE, not
against a wall.

Doctor Andrew Willet in his Synopsis Papismi the 9. general Controversy.
Quest. 6. Error. 53. p. 496. writes thus against the Papists, concerning the
fashion and form of Churches, and the divisions and partitions with in: We
will not much contend, so these conditions be observed: First, that all
superstition be avoided in making one place of the Church holier then the
rest, wherein the Papists mightily offend. For the Quire and Chancell was for
their Priests and singers, the other part of the Church for laymen, they were
not to enter into that holy place, And thus according to the places they
divided the Congregation as though one part were more holy then the other. A
good Quire for those novellers who plead so much of late for sanctum
sanctorum.
But where learn they, that Churches ought to have a Sanctuary as the Jewish
Churches had. That was an evident tipe, and is now accomplished in our Savior
Christ, who is now entered into the heavens, as the high Priest then entered
into the holy place to make attonoment for the people Heb. 9. 24. this
therefore is very gross to revive and renew again Jewish tipes and figures,
as their own Ordinary gloss says. The external Rites, and Ceremonies of
the Law, because they were a shaddowe of Christ to come, and of his Mysteries,
Therefore the truth of the Gospel being come, are made unlawful and vanished
away. Salomons Temple then with the Sanctuary and Preisthood therefore which
were shadows of things to come, are no presidents or Patterns for Christians
to follow, But if here in not with standinge they will imitate the buildinge
of Solomon's Temple to have a Sanctuary, why do they not also build toward
the West, as the Temple was? why bring they not their ALTARS DOWN TO THE BODY
OF THE CHURCHES. For in their holy place there was noe Altar. And indeed
Altar we acknowledge none, as hereafter shall be proved. But we see noe
Reason why the Communion Table may not be set IN THE BODY OF THE CHURCH, as
well as in the Chancell if the place be more convenient, and fit to receive
the Communicants: But I pray you why the Altar rather sert in the Sanctuary
then the Font or Baptisterie? They are both Sacraments, as well Baptism as the
Lords supper; why should one be preferred as holier then the other? Thus this
Doctor.

By all these authorities it is most apparent, that by the express Resolution
of the Common prayer book confirmed by Act of Parliament; Of Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions, 1. Eliz. c. 2. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 1.
the Bishops, learned writers, and constant practice of the Church of England
from the beginning of Reformation until now, the Communion Table not to stand
at the East end of the Chancell, or Quire Altarwise against the wall,
especially when the Sacrament is administered; but in the midst of the Church,
or Chancell, and that so it stood in the Primitive Church.

Now for the better discovery of the place where the Table ought to stand, it
will not be impertinent to enquire.

First, where the Table of Shewbreade was placed?

2. Where Jewish and heathenish Altars auncienly stood?

3. How the Jews Tables, and the Table at which Christ instituted the
Sacrament were situated?

4. How the Communion Tables were placed in the Primitive Church?

5. What place is most proper and Convenient for the Table?

6. What reasons can be produced for the placinge of the Communion Table
Altarwise, at the East end of the Chancell against the wall? etc.

For the first of these, it is most evident, that the shewbread^ Table (a tipe
of Christ, and the Sacramental breads,) stood not in the Sanctum Sanctorum,
but without the veil of the Tabernacle on the Northside, (not at the East
side) of the Tabernacle. Exodus 26. 35. Heb. 9. 2. 3. 6. 7. which are express;
compared with the 1. Kings 7. 28. 1. Chron. 9. 32. c. 23. 29. c. 28. 16. 2.
Chron. 4. 19. c. 13. 11. c. 29. 18. If the situation then of the Shewbreade
Table may be any president for Communion Tables, they ought to be placed, not
in the East end of the Chancell, but in the Northside of the body of the Church
as the shewbread Tables stood.

For the second; we must know, that Altars were aunciently seituated
heretofore in groves upon hills, and elevated places, especially among the
Idolatrous Gentiles, Jer. 11. 13. Exodus 34. 13. Numb. 23. 1. and 28. 29. Deuteronomy.
7. 5. c. 12. 3. 2. Kings 11. 18. c. 21. 3. to c. 23. 12. whence they are
frequently styled in Scripture, high places, and condemned by that name. 1.
Kings 2. 3. 4. c. 1^. 31. 32. c. 14. 23. c. 15. 14. 2. Kings 12. 3. c. 14. 4.
c. 15. 4. 35. c. 17. 29. 2. Chron. 17. 6. c. 32. 1. c. 33. 17. Jer. 42. 35.
Ezech. 6. 3. c. 16. 16. 39. 25. In detestation of these high places, (in truth
naught else but high-Altars,) God himself gave express charge to the
Israli^es, Exodus 20. 28. not to go up by steps to his Altar, that their
nakedness be not discovered: And to pluck down, and destroy all high places.
Numb. 33. 52. 2. Chron. 17. 6. Ezech. 16. 39. yet the Popish Innovators are so
sottish, as even in dispite of God himself, to erect high places, high Altars,
and to go up by steps unto them, in stead of Communion Tables; and to Christen
the Lords Table, with the name of Shelford his sermon of Gods house p. 2. 4. c.
15. 17. 19. Reeves his exposition of the Cathechisine in the Communion book.
D. Pocklingto^ Sunday no Sabbath, and a Coal from the Altar.
an Altar, and high Altar too. The Golden Altar for incense was set before the
Arc of the testimony in the first Tabernacle: And the Altar of burnt
offeringe, which was most holy, was placed before the door of the Tabernacle
of the tent of the congregation. Exo. 40. 5. 6. 10. to 34. and that by Gods
own appointment, And when a burnt offeringe of fowls was brought to the
Altar, the Priest was to wringe the blood of it out at the side of the Altar;
and to pluck away the Croppe with the Feathers, and to cast it besides the
Altar on the EAST part, by the place of the ashes. Levit. 1. 14. 15. 16,
Therefore the Altar of burnt offeringe did not stand Altarwise against the East
end of the Tabernacle, or Temple. When the Temple was built, Solomon placed the
Altar of incense covered with pure gold, not with in, but by the Altar. The
brazen Altar he placed before the Lord at the Tabernacle of the congregation
in the fore front of the house. Another Altar he erected in the middle of the
Court, before the house of the Lord, on which he offered burnt offerings, and
meat offerings, and the fatt of the peace offerings. And when the Temple was
consecrated, the Levites which were the singers with their soons, and their
brethren being arrayed in white Lynnen, havinge Cymballs, and Psalteries, and
Harpes stood AT THE EAST END of the Altar (to wit of the golden and brazen
Altar,) and with them an 120 Priests, soundinge with trumpetts, All which is
clearly related 1. Kings 6. 22. c. 8. 64. 2. Kings 16. 14. 2. Chron. 1. 5. 6.
c. 5. 12. c. 7. 7. Neither of these Altars therefore stood in the Sanctum
Sanctorum; in the East side, or against the East wall of the Temple. When
Elijah built an Altar to the Lord in Mount Carmel, he made a trench, round
about the Altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed, And the
water ran round about the Altar, and filled the trench. 1. Kings 18. 32. 35.
His Altar therefore was placed in the midst, where men might stand round
about it, not against a wall. We read of David that he build an Altar to the
Lord, in the threshinge flower of Araunah. 2. Sam. 24. 18. 25. And that not
against the East wall thereof, but in the midst of it; as is evident by Psalm.
26. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I COMPASS thine Altar ^
Lord. We read in the 2. Kings 11. 11. that when Jehoash was Crowned, the
Gaurd stood every man with his weapons in his hand round about the King, from
the right corner of the Temple to the left corner, alonge by the Altar and the
Temple; The Altar therefore stood not in the corner, or East end of the Temple,
but in the midst, or near the entringe into it; In the 2. Kings 12. 9. we
read, that Jehoiada the Priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the ^idd
thereof, and set it besides the Altar on the right side, as one comes into
the house of the Lord. So as the Altar stood not at the upper end of the
Temple, but near the entry, almost as our fonts now stand. And c. 16. 14. It
is recorded, that King Ahaz brought the brazen Altar which was before the Lord
from the forefront of the house, from between the Altar, and the house of the
Lord, and put it on the northside of the Altar, (not the East:) Mana^^eh built
Altars for all the host of heaven in the two Courts of the house of the Lord. 2.
Kings 21. 5. 2. Chron. 33. 4. 5. 2. Kings 23. 12. King Asarenewed the Altar of
the Lord, that was before the porch of the Lord. 2. Chron. 15. 8. We read of
a prophecy. Isay. 19. 19. In that day shall there be an Altar to the Lord in
the midst of the Land of Egypt. And of a commination to the Idolatrous
Isralites. Ezech. 6. 4. 5. your Altars shall be desolate, and I will scatter
your bones ROVND ABOUT YOUR ALTARS. We find mention of the gate of the Altar
NORTHWARD in Jerusalem. Ezech. 8. 5. and the brazen Altar stood Northward, as
it seems. Ezech. 9. 2. We read of an Altar, that was before the house.
Ezech. 40. 47. Whereupon the Priests the Ministers of the Lord are enjoined in
the time of a solemn Fast, to weep between the porch, and the Altar. Joell 2
17. So Ezech. 8. 16. the same expression is used, Behold at the door of the
Temple of the Lord, between the porch, and the Altar were about 25. 35. men
etc. And Zacharias, as Christ informs us. Ma^h. 23. 35. was slain between
the Temple, and the Altar; Altars^in those days standinge usually without the
Temples: it being both a troublesome, and unseemely thing to bring Oxen.
Sheep, Calves and other beasts into the Temple there to kill, and sacrifice
them on the Altar. By all these Scripture Testimonies it is apparent, that
Altars both among the Jews, and Gentiles, were never placed in the upper end
or against the East walls of their Temples. but in the Courts, the Entries, or
midst of their Templies, in such manner that men might go freely round about
them, far different from their modern situation; which has noe one
pattern in Scripture to warrant it. Now if Altars were thus situated either
without their Temples, or near their entrance, porch, or doors, or else in
the midst of them in former ages, so as men might freely compass, and walk
round about them, why should they not be thus placed, by our
Altar-introducers, and heathenish Popish Innovators now? There is neither of
these Novellers but would have a Quire, or Sanctu^ Sanctorum in his Church,
and would take it very ill if any man should subvert, or write against Quires
in Churches; yet themselves, by placinge their Altars and Communion Tables
Altarwise against the East wall of their Churches, do utterly overturne and
destroy their much applauded Quires, out of a mere superstitious sottish
ignorance. For the Latin word Chorus (from which our Quires have their
derivation, and denomination) as Originu^ l. 6. c. 19.
Isiodor Hispalensis, De univ. l. 5: c. 9.
Rabanus Maurus, In their several dictionaries: Chorus.
Calepine Eliot, Thomasius Olioke, with Ser^ius in Virgil. (...). 6.
others testify, is nothing else, but; multitudo in sacris collect; and
dictus Chorus, quod initio in modum Coronae CIRCA ARAS STARENT, and ita
psallerent: A multitude assembled, together in sacred places or Temples, and
called a Quire, because that in the beginning they stood ROUND ABOUT THE
ALTARS in manner of a Crown or garland, and so would singe; Our Innovators
therefore by removinge their Altars to the East end of their Quires, and their
railinge them in close-Prisoners against the wall, so as the Choresters,
singinge men, people cannot, may not stand round about them like a ringe or
crown, and so singe praises unto God, when they receive the Eucharist; both
overturne the very name, and essence of their Quires, which aunciently did
Compass, and surround their Altars, as these authors testify. And not they
only, but others long before them witness, that of the aunci^n^ Poet Virgil,
very pregnant to this purpose, which may serve as a Commentary on the former
Etymology, or definition of a Quire. Aen^id. l. 4.
Instauratque CHOROS, Mistique ALTARIA CIRCUM
Cretesque, Dryopesque fremunt pictique Agathyrsi, etc.
Aen^id. l. 8.
Dona ferunt, cumulantque oneratis lancibus ARAS,
Tam Salijad Cantus, Incensa Altaria Circum,
Populeis ad sunt Evincti tempora ramis,
Hicjuvenum CHORUS, ille senum, qui carmine lauds,
Herculeas, and facta ferunt etc.
Which may be thus Englished: Promiscuous Quires about the Altars round,
Creets, Epires, Scythians, squeaking-notes resound, etc.
In Chargers to the Altars, gifts they bring,
The prauncing Priests, bout burning Altars singe,
Their brows with boughs and poplar-garlands dressed,
A Quire of younge-men, Old-men ready pressed,
Hercules fame and sactes to chaunt, etc.


Which Genialium dier^ l 4. c. 17. f. 226. 227.
Alexander ab Alexandro thus seconds. It was (says he) a usual Custom, ut
sacrificantes ARAS CIRCUMCURRERENT, that those who sacrificed should run
round about the Altars, beginning their course from the left hand to the
right, which they thought more Religious, and anon from the right hand to the
left. Those who sacrificed, as they were eatinge, used to singe praises to the
Gods; CIRCUM ARAS psallere as mnnerum, to singe by measure about the Altars, to
singe songs, and verses, and playinge on Cimballs, CHOROS agitare, to make
Quires, or Daunces. Ibidem see Herodian, Zonaras, Lampridius, and Grimston in
his life.
It is recorded of Antoninus Caesar, that when he sacrificed to the God
Heliogabalus, he brought thither Phaenicean-weomen; quae in orbem cursitarent
cymbalaque and organa Musica CIRCUM ARAS psallerent, who might run round in
a Circle, and play upon Cymballs, and Organs ROUND ABOUT THE ALTARS, And that
this singinge and dauncinge about Altars was usual among the ancient
heathens, appears by Plato legum Dialog. 7. Strabo Geogr. lib. 10. Euripides
Bacchae Caelius, Rhodiginus Antiq. lect. l. 5. c. 3. Athenaeus dipnosoph. l.
14. c. 11. 12. Bulengerus de Theatro lib. 1. c. 52. an ll. 2. c. 12. to 17.
with others, there cited Answearable to which Deipnosoph l 13. c. 1.
Athenaeus records out of Clearchus Solensis, that the Lacedaemonians those
who had noe wives, the women at a certain Feast drawinge them ROUND ABOUT THE
ALTARS buffeted them with their fists, that avoydinge this contumely they
might be taken with the love of children, and take them wives at a fit age.
And Genialiu^ dierum l. 4. c. 17.
Alexaunder of Alexandro, relates out of Laconica Instit.
Plutarch and Lacaedemon. Respublica.
Xen^phon, that it was a custom among the Lacedaemonians to whipp their
youths which exceeded 14. years of age ROUND ABOUT THEIR ALTARS. A pregnant
Evidence, that their Altars then stood in the midst of their Quires and
Temples, not at the East end of them against a wall. Our Popish Novellers
therefore who have newly removed their Altars, and Communion Tables to the
East end of their Quires close to the wall, must either bring them down
again into the midst of the Quire, to preserve both the name, use and
essence of their Quires, or else disclayme their Quires, and Christen them with
some other name: By all this as also by the Page 30.
Coal from the Altars confession, it is most apparent, that both the Jews,
and Gentiles Altars, stood not at the East end of their Temples, Quires,
Chauncells, nor yet against a wall, but about the midst of their Temples, or
Courts at least wise in such sort, that men might stand, and freely walk round
about them. O^r superstitious Innovators therefore, who will needs turn, (1.
Cor. 9. 13. 14. c. 10. 18. 19. 20. H^br. 7. 11. 12. 13. 14.) Jews, or
Gentiles, or both, in erectinge Altars, must likewise imitate them in the
situation of their Altars, or else reject their Altars, as well as their
manner of situation in the midst, which they refuse to follow.

For the third, how the Jews Tables, and the Table at which our Savior
instituted the Sacrament were situated? It is apparent, that they were so
placed, as that they usually sat round about them, This is evident by the 1.
Sam. 16. 11. where Samuel said to Jesse, send and fetch David, for we will not
sit ROUND till he come hither ( so the Hebrewe, and Margin read it) and by
Psalm. 128. ^. Thy children shall be like Olive plants ROUND ABOUT THY TABLE.
Our Savior and his Disciples at the Institution of the Lords supper sat round
about the Table, after the Jewish Custom, as is evident by Matthew 9. 10 c.
26. 20. 26. 27. Mar. 14. 18. 19. 20. c. 16. 14. Luke 7. 37. 49. c. 11. 39. c.
22. 14. 27. 30. c. 24. 30. John 13. 12. 18. 23. 1. Cor. 10. 1^. 21. c. 11. 20.
etc. compared with the two former texts. Hence Thomas Godwyn in his Jewish
Antiquities l. 3. c. 2. p. 114. 115. writes thus: In the days of our Savior
it is apparent, that the gesture of the Jews was such as the Romans used. The
Table BEING PLACED IN THE MIDST ROUND ABOUT THE TABLE Were certain bedds,
some times two, some times three, some times more, according to the number of
the guests, upon these they lay down in manner as follows: each bed
contained 3. persons, some times. 4. sildome, or never more. If one lay upon
the bed, then he rested the upper part of his body on the left elbowe, the
lower part lyinge at length upon the bed, but if many lay upon the bed, then
the uppermost did lie at the bedds head, layinge his feet behind the seconds
back, in like manner. The third or fourth did lie, each restinge his head in
the others bosom: Thus John leaned on Jesus bosom. John 13. 23. Their Tables
were perfectly circulare or round, whence their manner of sittinge was termed
Mesibah, a sittinge ROUND, and their phrase of invitinge their guests to sit
down was, sit ROUND. 1. Sam. 10. 11. Psalm. 128. 3. Thus he, with whom all the
Rabines, and Commentators on these texts accord. So among the Romans, the
Tables were placed, and the guests sat down in the self same manner as they
did among the Jews, as Godwyn in his Roman Antiquites l. 2. sect. 3. c. 14.
Records, yea among See Gu^^el. Stuckius: Anti. Convivali^ passim.
most Nations in all their Feasts, their Tables at which they sat down to
eat or drink, were ever placed in such sort, and with such a distance from
the wall, that the guests sat round about them: And so are all the Tables
placed here in England, none ever seeinge a dyninge-Table placed like a
side-Table against a wall, in such sort as our Communion Tables are now
situated in many places. If then all Tables at which men eat, and drink,
have ever both among the Jews, and Romans, our own, all other Nations, been
placed in the midst of the room, or in such sort that men might sit round
about them: Why should not then the Lords Table (especially when we eat, and
drink the Lords supper) be placed in the midst of the Church, or Chauncell in
such sort, that all the people may sit or kneel round, and eat, and drink
about it, since Christ himself, and his Apostles when he instituted this
Sacrament had their Table thus situated, and satt round it, as all acknowledge?
Is not that order best which all Nations, ages, yea Christ himself, and his
Apostles used? And are not those both factious, and obstinately schismatic
who contrary to the usage of all Nations, ages, and our Saviors own
example, will place the Lords Table Altarwise, like a dresser, or side Table,
against the East wall of the Church, as far of as may be from the people,
that so none may sit, and receive near it, much less round about it, and
that without all Reason, sense, or president? undoubtedly they are, yet such is
the sottishnes, pride, and superstitious wilfulnes of many of our domineeringe
Prelates, whose will is their only reason, Religion, Law, that they will be
wiser then Christ, then his Apostles, then all the world besides, and no place
seems so fittinge to them for the Communion Tables situation, as that which
is most unfitt, the East end of the Chauncell wall, against which one side of
it must lean, for fear of fallinge, and is there imprisoned, impounded with
railes and bars, for fear of runninge away. O Madness o folly whether are
these men's wits, and senses fledd, who are thus so strangely Acts 26. 24.
frentike out of their overmuch learning?

For the 4. How Communion Tables (some times termed Altars improperly) were
placed in the Primitive Church? The forementioned passages of Eusebius,
Augustine, the 5. Council of Constantinople, Bishop Jewel, and others assure
us, that they were placed in the midst of the Church, or Quire, not at the East
end against the wall, as they are now: To these I shall add, That Eccl. hist.
l. 5. c. 22.
Socrates Scholasticus, and Eccl. hist. l. 12. c. 34.
Nicephorus record, That in the Church of Antioch in Syria, the Altar stood not
to the East, but toward the West. De Rebu^ Eccl. (...) ^^st. l. 4. c. 19.
Walafridus Strabus records the same in express words, and further informs
us, that many did pray from the East to the West. And that the Jews where
ever they were, usually prayed Se 2. Chr 6 20. 21. 34 38. Ps. 138. 2. d Dan. 6.
10.
toward the Temple at Jerusalem; (as Daniell did in great Babell, which
stood East from Jerusalem, as Esaias 43. 5. Ier. 49. 28. Dan. 11. 44. Zach. 8.
7. Math. 2. 1. 2. and all Mapps witness, So that Daniell prayinge toward,
it, turned his face directly West, not East; as our Novellers dotingly fancy,
who allege his example, for turninge their faces in prayer, the buildinge of
Chancells, Chappells, Churches, Altars, placinge Communion Tables, and bowinge,
toward the East, when as he prayed Westward only, and his example is quite
opposite, and point blanke against them; and their superstitious. Pope Vigilius
was the first who ordained that those who said Mass, should torn their haces
toward the East; D. Barnes and John Bale in the life of Vigil.
easterly adoration, derived from Necromancers, and those heathen Idolaters,
Ezech. 8. 16. who worshipp the risinge sun, toward the East, as D. Willet
Synopsis papismi. contr. 9. qu. 6. Error. 52. proves against the Papists.) And
from thence Walafridus thus concludes: We being instructed by these examples,
know, that those have not erred, neither do they err, who either in Temples
newly built to God, or cleansed from the filthynes of Idols, have set their
Altars toward diverse clymates, according to the opportunity of the places;
because there is no place where God is not present: for we have learned by most
true relation, that in the Church of Jerusalem, which Constant^ne and his
mother built over the Sepulcher of our Lord, of a wonderful greatenes, in a
round form; in the Temple of Rome anciently called Pantheon, consecrated by
Boniface, by Phocas the Emperors permission, to the honor of all Sancts, and
in the Church of S. Peter the Chief of the Apostles, Altars have been placed,
not only toward the East, but likewise distributed into other parts, and
quarters of the Church. These since they were so placed either unpossibly, or
by necessity, we dare not disapprove. Let every man abound in his own sense,
The Lord is high to all those who call upon him in truth, and salvation is
far from sinners. Let us draw near to us: Thus he. Gregory Nazianzen in
his 21. Oration. p. 399. declaming against the unworthie Bishops and Ministers
of his age, says thus: They intrude them selves unto the most holy Ministeries
with unwashen hands and minds, as they say, and before they are worthy to come
unto the Sacraments they affect the Sanctuary it self, and CIRCUM SACROSANCTAM
MENSAM permuntur and protenduntur, and are pressed and thrust forward ROUND
ABOUT THE HOLY TABLE (not Altar) esteeming this order, not an example of virtue
but a maintenance and help of life; A clear evidence that the Communion Table
was then so situated, that the Ministers might go and stand round about it.
Tom. 1. Col. 1281.
S. Chrysostom in his first Homily upon Esaias. 6. 1. I saw the Lord sittinge
etc. has this passage concerning the Lords Table? do thou not think that
the Angels stand ROVND ABOUT THIS DREADFVLL TABLE, AND COMPASS IT ON EVERY
SIDE with reverence? A clear Evidence, that the Table was so placed in
Churches in his age, that men, and Angels might stand round about, and
Compass it on every part. To wit, in the midst of the Church or Quire, as
De verbis Dom. secund. loan. Sermon. 42.
S. Augustine his coaetanean witnesses in plain words. where no doubt it
always stood (as the learned Relics of Rome chap. of Church Goods fol. 322.
vol. 3
Thomas Verow testifyeth) till private Popish Masses (wherein the Priest only
receives) removed it to the East end of the Quire or Chauncell near the wall,
as remote, as might be from the people. If any object, (as the late Coal from
the Altar. p. 56 57. objection.
Coal from the Altar does) that Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 22.
Socrates Scholasticus, and Nicephorus write: That in most Churches in their
times the Altar was usually placed toward the East. I answer:

First, that before their days in Eusebius, Chrysostomes, Augustines, and the
Emperor Zeno his time, it stood in the midst of the Church, or Quire, and so
it did in Durandus his age, 1320. years after Christ, Eccl. hist. l. 12. c. 34.
and in the Greek Churches anciently and at this day, as Bishop Jewel has
formerly proved.

2. Neither of these two Authors affirm, that the Altar, or Communion Table
stood at the East end of the Church or Quire close against the wall, as now
they are placed, the thing to be proved; but only toward the East part of the
Church, ad Orientem versus, says Nicephorus: that is, nearer to the East then
to the West end of the Church; to wit, in the midst of the Chauncell, or
Quire ( which in many Churches was placed at the East Isle then, as our
Chauncells, and Quires are now, though not in all;) as is evident by the
forequoted authorities: So as the argument hence deduced, can be but this non
sequitur, Altars in their days stood usually toward the East end of the
Churches, (to wit in the midst of the Quires, and Chauncells which stood
Easterly, as our Communion Tables stood till now of late,) Therefore they
stood Altarwise against the East wall of the Church or Chancell, as some
Novellers now place them; whereas the argument hold good the contrary way:
They were placed toward the East end of the Church, therefore not in the very
East end Altarwise: since toward the East, is one thing, and in the East
another, as toward London in case of situation, or travel) is one thing, in
London another, That which is toward London, being not in it, as he who is
toward Marriage, is not yet actually married. We read of Daniell, that he
prayed toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6. 10. yet he was then in Babble, many miles
from it. We read likewise of certain Ezech. 16 17.
Idolaters, (and of noe others but them in Scripture, for the Jews usually
prayed Westward, the Tabernacle, and Temple being so situated) who had
their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the East, and
worshipped the sun toward the East; yet they s^ood not in the East end, but
in the inner-Court of the Lords house at the door of the Temple between the
porch, Exo. 26. 27. Ezech. 8. 16. 17. Godwins, Moses, and Aron l. 2. c. 1. D.
Willet Synopsis Papismi. Contr. 9. q. 6. Error 52. 53.
and the Altar, which stood West, not East ward; yea the Scripture makes a
manifest difference between, toward the East, and in the East. Genesis 2. 14. 1.
Kings 7. 25. 1. Chron. 9. 24. c. 12. 15. 2. Chron. 4. 4. c. 31. 14. Joel 2. 20.
Math. 2. 1. 2. This objected authority therefore makes against, not for our
Innovators; who can produce noe one authenticke writer, testimony or example,
for above a thousand years after Christ, to prove, that Altars, or Lords
Tables stood or were situated Altarwise against the East wall of the Quire, in
such manner as now they place them; there being many pregnant testimonies to
the contrary, that they stood in the midst of the Quire, Church, or Chauncell,
where now they ought to stand, as they did in former ages.

I come now to the 5. thing, to examine, what place is most proper, and
Convenient for the situation of the Communion Table, especially when the
Sacrament is administered? Noe doubt the midst of the Church, or Chauncell, (not
the East end of it, where it is newly placed) as the Rubricke of the Communion
book, Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, the 82. Canon, the forecited Fathers,
and writers resolve in express terms; and that for those ensuinge reasons,
which under correction cannot be answered.

First, because the table at which our Savior originally instituted the
Sacrament, was placed in the midst of the room, he and his Disciples sittinge
then round about it, and so administringe, and receivinge it, as the premises
manifest. Now we ought to immitate our Saviors institution, and example as
near as may be, 1. Cor. 11. 1. 23. 24. Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 21. John 2.
6. not only in the substance of the Sacrament, but likewise in all decent, and
convenient Circumstances, whereof the situation of the Table in the midst of
the congregation is one: Among the 6. reasons, why the Lords board should
rather be after the form of a table then of an Altar, published by King
Edward the 6. and his Council, this was the 5. and Chiefest. Fox Acts and
monum. p. 1211.
Christ did institute the Sacrament of his body and blood at a Table, not at an
Altar; wherefore saying the form of a Table is more agreeable with Christ's
institution then the form of an Altar, therefore the form of a Table is
rather to be used then the form of an Altar in the administration of the holy
Communion. The same argument holds as firm in the situation of the Table; The
placinge of it in the midst of the Church or Chauncell is more agreeable with
Christ's institution then the standinge of it Altarwise against the wall at the
East end of the Quire, Therefore this situation of it is rather to be used
then the other.

2. Because this is most agreeable to the practice of the Apostles, Fathers,
and primitive Church in the purest times, as I have already manifested, and of
the reformed Churches beyond the Seas,

3. Because it is most consonant to the book of Common prayer, Queen
Elizabeth's Injunctions, the Bishops own Canons, and the judgment of our best
writers.

4. Because it is the most usual and proper situation of tables among all
Nations in all ages both a broad and at home, who place their Tables at which
they eat, and drink, in the midst of their dyninge rooms, at least wise in
such sort that men may sit, or stand round about them, The Lords Table
therefore being a table to eat, and drink at, 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. 20. 21. c.
11. 20. and the Communion it self usually termed both in Scripture, and all
sortt of writers from the Apostles days till now, the Lords supper; ^. Co^.
11. 20. this situation of it must be fittest, and decentest, which is Common
to all suppinge tables, and does best express, and resemble the nature of a
supper, by standinge in the midst of the Communicants; and their sittinge,
standinge, or kneelinge round about it altogether (not by several files, and
turns,) like so many bidden-guests. Whereas the placinge of it Altarwise,
like a Dresser, or sideCubberd, not a Table; and the causinge of men to come
upp to the rail by several files; and there to receive by turns, kneelinge,
does neither express the one to be the Lords table, nor the other to be the
Lords supper.

5. Because this situation of the table in the midst will Fox Acts and
monuments p. 1211.
more move the simple people from the superstitious opinions of the Popish
Mass, Altars, Priests, sacrifices, and private Masses, where the Priest alone
Communicates, and draw them upp to the right use of the Lords supper. Whereas
the placinge of it Altarwise against the East wall of the Chauncell, now urged
is nothing else, but to usher Altars; Priests, public, and private Masses,
adoration of Altars, and the Hostia, transubstantiation, and the whole body of
Popery into our Church again, as the Papists themselves do every where
crack, and vaunt, and all who are not wilfully blinded may at first view
discern by woeful experience. This form of scituatinge the Lords Table, and
administringe the Sacrament, was used in the primitive Church, till M. Thomas
Vegon Reliq. of Rome: chapter of Church Goods: s. 322.
Popery, and private Masses, thrust it out. When Popery, Masses, Mass
Priests, Transubstantiation, Altars, adoration of the Hostia, and other Popish
trash were abolished, this Fox Acts and monu. p. 1404. 1406. and the foregoing
testimonies.
situation of it was again revived as a Sovereign Antidote against these
popish innovations, and so has continued eversince. The alteringe therefore
of it must needs tend to the introduction of those things again, and so ought
with all diligence, and courage to be with stood.

6. Because this situation is most 1. Cor. 15. 40.
orderly, and decent, and that in 5. regards.

First, Because the Minister thereby may be more conveniently heard of the
Communicants in his prayer, his administration, and Consecration, which many
cannot hear when the table stands at the furthest end of the Quire, or
Chauncell in most great Churches, and parishes.

2. Because there the Co^mmunicants also may more conveniently, and in
greater number communicate with the Minister, then they can do when the Table
stands at the end of the Quire or Chauncell, as remote as may be from the
people: Both these reasons are rendered in the Common prayer book, Queen
Elizabeth's Injunctions, and the 82. Canon, neither can they be gain said.

3. Because the Communicants when the table stands in the midst may B. Hooper
Sermon 4. on Jonas.
more easily see the Minister when, and how he consecrates the Sacrament,
then when he is more remote, and may the better make their Confession to
Almighty God, and say Amen to every prayer, as they are In the Communion and
Homily of the right use of the Church p. 8 Can. 18.
enioy^ed.

4. Becanse it is less troublesome to the Minister to distribute, and to the
people to receive the Sacrament at his hands the nearer both of them are to the
Communion Table.

5. When the Table stands in the midst, all the Communicants may receive
together in the seats next adjoyninge to the table without any disturbance,
disorder, noise, or stir, as they are And in the Homily of the right use of
the Church p. 8. Can. 18 Gratian. de Consec. Did. 1.
expressly Commanded to do. 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. c. 11. 20. to the end, c. 13.
40. 23. to 34. whereas this new d^vise of settinge the Table at the East end
of the Chauncell against the wall, and causinge the Communicants to come upp in
several disorderly ranks and squadrons to the rail, and there to receive,
divides the Communion, Communicants, and Congregation, making so many
Communions, and Congregations as there are Companies; breeds a Confusion,
disorder, disturbance, noise, distraction, and often times a Contention in the
Church, in causinge the people to march upp and down, some one way, and some
another, to contend who shall first receive, or take the uppermost place, to
crowd, thrust, and hinder on the other in passinge to and fro, drives many from
the Sacrament who would else receive it, breeds many quarrels, factions,
schisms, and divisions between the Minister and the people, hinder the
Communicants much in their Meditations, prayers, reverence, devotion,
attention, singinge; enforces the people who are old, blind, lame, sick,
impotent to march upp to the Minister to receive, who should rather come to
them; inverts the practice and Custom of our Church ever since reformation,
lengthens the administration, and puts all into a Combustion, yea into
Confusion, causinge many to turn Papists and Seperatists.

7. The Lords Supper is called of us in our Litargie Homiles and Articles, THE
COMMUNION, and his Table the COMMUNION TABLE: Now that which is thus common
ought to be placed IN THE MIDST of the people, and in a Common, not a
peculiar place as the Latin phrase IN MEDIO CONSTITUTUM, or COLLOCATUM, ever
used to express a thing that is Common; and the Scriptures quoted in the next
ensuing reason evidence. Whereas the placing of the Table so far from the
people, the railing of it in that so none, but the Minister may have access
unto it, destroys both the Communion and Communion Table in appropriating it
to the Minister, and sequestring it from the people.

8. The Communion Table ought to be placed in the midst of the Church, and
Congregation, because that is the place wherein God and Christ have especially
promised their Gracious presence, as the ensuinge Scriptures evidence, not at
the East end of the Church or Chauncell as our Novellers fondly dream, and
Magisterially determine. Hence Psalm. 46. 5. God is said to be in the MIDST
of his holy place, and City. Psalm. 48. 9. We have thought of thy lovinge
kindness oh God in the MIDST of thy Temple. Jer. 14. 9. yet thou o Lord art in
the MIDST of us, and we are called by thy name. Hosea 11. 9. I am God, and not
man, the holy one in the MIDST of thee. Joell 2. 27. ye shall know that I am
in the MIDST of Israel. Zeph. 3. 5. 15. 17. ye have polluted the Sanctuary,
the Lord is in the MIDST thereof. The King of Israel, even the midst of thee.
The Lord thy God in the MIDST of thee is mighty. Zech. 2. 5. For I says the
Lord will be the glory in the MIDST of her. Math. 18. 2^. Where two or three
are gathered together in my name there am I in the MIDST of them. Luke 2. 46.
Christ's Parents found him in the Temple sittinge in the MIDST of the Doctors.
John 20. 19. when our Savior appeared to his Disciples, after his
resurrection, he came and stood in the MIDST of them, and said, Peace be
unto you. Rev. 1. 13 and 2. 1. The son of man is said to be, and to walk
in the MIDST of the 7. golden Candlesticks, which are there interpreted, to be
the 7. Churches. Rev. 5. 6. Christ the Lamb is said to stand in the MIDST of
the Throne, and in the MIDST of the Elders. So Exodus 3. 4. God called to Moses
out of the MIDST of the burninge bush, a type of the Church. So he spoke to
Moses out of the MIDST of the Clowd. Exodus 24. 16. And tells the Isralites,
that he dwells in the MIDST of their Camp. Numb. 5. 3. The Lord spoke unto
you out of the MIDST of the fire. Deue. 4. 12. And they heard his voice out of
the MIDST of darkness, and of fire too. Deuteronomy. 5. 22. 23. The Prophet Esaias. c.
12. v. 6. writes thus, Cry out, and shoute thou Inhabitant of Zion, for great
is the holy one of Israel in the MIDST of thee. By all which texts it is
evident, That God and Christ are said to be principally present in the MIDST
of the Temple, congregation, people; whereas there is not so much as one place
throughout the Scripture that says, they are specially present at the Temple,
Congregation, people, The Communion Table therefore being Christ mercy seat,
the place of our Saviors special presence upon Earth, and his Chair of
Estate (as Giles Widows, Shelford, Reeves, and other Novellers dogmatize)
ought to be placed in the midst of the people, Church, and Congregation,
where these Scriptures jointly affirm, that God, and Christ are more
immediately, and specially present, if they be more in one place of the Church
and Temple, then another, as they say he is.

9. Add to this that the Apostle says, Our bodies are the Temples of Christ,
and the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17. c. 6. 19. 2. Cor. 6. 16. And where do
both of them principally dwell with in these Temples, but in the heart (seated
in the midst of the body.) Gall. 4. 6. Ephesians. 3. 17. So also do they
principally dwell, and manifest themselves in the midst of our Material
Temples and Congregations: Therefore for this and the precedent, reasons, our
Communion Tables ought to be situated in the midst of our Churches or Quires,
as they have been in ancient times, where our Injunct^ons, Canons, writers,
Communion book, and the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. confirminge the same,
prescribe, that they should stand, at least wise when the Sacrament is
administered.

10. The Altar of Incense, and the shewbreade table stood not in the Quire, or
Sanctum Sanctorum, but in the midst of the Sanctuary or body of the Temple,
as the premises Evidence, and Godwyn in his Jewish Antiquities l. 2. c. 1. p.
78. 79. records. Now these being in some sort tipes of the Communion Tible,
intimate, (which the Fathers sometimes have an Altar improperly in relation to
them) that it should be situated in such manner as these were.

Havinge thus produced these unanswearable reasons; for the placinge of the
Communion Table in the midst of the Church or Chancell, specially at the
Sacraments administration. I come now in the 6. place, to examine those
reasons which are, or can be alleged by our Novellers, for placinge Communion
Tables, Altarwise against the East end, wall, of the Quire of Chauncell.

The first reason alleged by them is this; The high Altar or Lords Table
(says dotinge M. Robert Shelford He might have added Mass or Popish Priest.
Priest in his Sermon of Gods house, Cambridge 635. p. 17. 18.) usually
stands at the East end of Gods house, Idque propter Christum etc. and that
because of Christ when is called the light of the world, and ORIENS, to with
the branch. Zeph. 6. 12. and is likewise expected to come from the East. Math.
24. 27. which put into an argument, is this, Christ is called the light of the
world, the BRANCH, and as some men think shall come to Judgment from the
East. Therefore the Communion Table and high Altar ought to stand Altarvvise
against the East end of the Church.

What frentique Bedlam logic, and divinity is this? what Consequence or
Coherence in this argumentation? Is not this far worse then that of Rationale
divin. l. 4. See B. Jewels Reply to Harding Article 3. divi. 26. p. 145. and
fo D. Pockl. arg. Sundno Sabbath p. 43. 44.
Durandus, and other P^pists, Christ is called a Rock, and a Corner stone. 1.
Cor. 10. 4. Ergo Altars and Lords Tables must be made only of stone; To whicht
I might vetor^ from this text of Zech. 6. 12. Christ is cal^ed the branch;
Therefore Altars and Lords Tables ought to be made only of wood, not stone
(Christ being else where called a John 15. 1. 2. 4. 5. Romans 11. 16. 17. 18
Rev. 2. 7. c. 22. 2.
vine, Tree of life etc. and more probable inference then this M. Shelford
deduceth from it. Therefore high Altars, and Communion Tables ought to stand
Altarwise against the East end of the Church, since it is warranted by the
practice of the Primitive Church whose Communion Tables and Altars were made
only of wood, not stone, (as Reply to Hardinge Art. 3. div. 26. p. 145. defense
of the ^ Apol. part 2. chapter 1. div^ 3. p. 315. 316.
Bishop Jewel, and Notes on Exodus 20. and 27. p. 279. 307.
Bishop Babington prove at large out of Augustine, Optatus, Chrysostom,
Athanasius, and others) as our Communion Tables are, and ought to be, by the
direct prescript of the book of Common prayer (which calls it Gods BOARD) the
Homily of the worthy receivinge of the Sacrament, Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions
at the end, King Edward the 6. and his Privy Councills letter, and 6. reasons.
Fox Acts and Monuments p. 1211. 1212. Canons 1571. p. 18. Canons 1603. Can. 20.
21. 82. Arbishop Parkers visitation Articles. Art. 2. Doctor Fulke notes on the
Remish Testament: on Math. 23. sect. 7. on Heb. 13. sect. 6. on Apoc. 6. sect.
2. Answer to Martyn c. 17. sect. 15. 16. 17. Doctor John Reynolds conference
with Heart. p. 462. 477. 478. to 524. Bishop Morton his Protestants appeal l.
2. c. 6. sect. 2. p. 146. Doctor Willet Synopsis Papismi, the 9. general
Controversy qu. 6. part. 2. Error 55. p. 498. Defense of the Apo. part. 2. c.
1 divis. 3. p. 315. reply to Hardin. art. 3. div. 26. p. 145.
Bishop Jewel, and Notes on Exo. c. 20. and 27. p. ^79. 307.
Bishop Babington in the places quoted in the Margin. Bishop Farrar, Fox Acts
and Monuments Artic. 20. p. 1404:1406. Bishop Ridley in his last examination.
Fox ibidem. p. 1601. 1602. And his farewell to his friends in general. Ibidem
p. 1610. compared with p. 1211. 1212. Though some turn them now adays into
Altars made of stone. But to come to a more particular examination of this part
of this argument.

First he says, Christ is the light of the world. Ergo. Communion Tables
ought to stand Altarwise at the East end of the Church. This ce^tainely is but
a madd Consequence.

For first, Christ is noe Corporal, or natural, but a spiritual and
supernatural light, enlightninge men's understandings, only by the light of his
word, his grace, and spirit, John 1. 4. 5. 7. 8. 9. Heb. 6. 8. Ephesians. 1. 18.
Psalm. 19. 8. not their corporal eyes.

2. He is an universal light in this respect. John 1. 8. 9. not situated or
fixed in the East, but diffused over the whole worlds as far as his Church is
spread,

3. The place where this light is ordinarily dispensed in the readinge and
preachinge of his word, is not the Communion Table, o^ Altar, but the Pulpitt,
and readinge deske, standinge for the most part about the midst of our
Churches, not at the East but West end of our Chancells.

4. There is no Analogy between the Communion Table and light, unless in
respect of those Candlesticks, and unburninge tapers which some Popish
Novellers place for a double show upon it, contrary to the Homely against the
peril of Id^lat. par. 3. p. 50. 51 52. 75. Queen Elizabets Injunct. n. 23.
art. of Ireland 52.
Homilies, and Articles which expressly condemn them.

5. Light is of a diffusive nature, spreadinge it self into every
quarter-indifferently, and torches, or Candles that give light are Commonly
placed in the midst, Math. 5. 15. not at the East end of the room or Table,
that they may give light to all that are in the house. Witness the great Lamp
in the midst of Paul's Quire, or great braunched Candlesticks, in the midst of
our Churches, and that of the Apostle. Phil. 2. 15. Among whom ye shine as
lights of the world in the MIDST of a crooked and perverse Nation. The
Candlesticks and Lamps among the Jews were placed not in the East, but
Southside of the Tabernacle. Exodus 40. 24. 25. In the Temple the Candlesticks
that were placed. 5. on the Northside, 5. on the South. 2. Chron. 4. 7. but
none in the East end: So that from these particulars it appears, that there is
no Analogy between light and the Couimunion Table, and that if any argument
may be thence deduced for its situation, it will be but this, That it ought
to stand in the midst, or in the South, or Northside of the Church, because the
Lamps, lights, Candlesticks were and are so placed in the Tabernacle, Temple,
and most of our Churches, and Christ is said to be, and walk in the midst of
the golden Candlesticks. Rev. ^. 13. 20. c. 2. 2.

For the second branch of this argument, Christ is a branch. (for so Oriens
is used, Zeph. 6, 12. the place he quotes) Ergo the Lords Table ought to stand
at the East end of the Church. As it is a ridiculous Inconsequent (fit for a
Cambridge Ignoramus, (where this good Logical argument, with many such like,
was printed) so there is little Analoges between branches and Lords Tables,
unless in regard of matter.

For First, Trees and branches grow not in Churches, or Temples.

2. They spring upp, and are planted as well West, North, and South as East,
and are Commonly planted with us West, and South, to avoid the East, and North
blastinge winds.

3. Christ is a branch, yea a tree of life seituated not in the East but in the
midst of the Paradise of God. Rev. 2. 7. of which the tree of knowledge of
good, and evil in the midst of Paradise. Genesis 2. 9. c. 3. 3. was but a tipe:
This allusion therefore, as it is impertinent, (there being no similitude
between the Lords Table, and a branch,) so ^ proves, that the Communion Table
should be placed in the midst of the Church, because Christ the tree of life,
and the tree of knowledge (typifyinge him) were planted in the midst of
Paradize, a tipe of the Church.

For the third, That Christ shall come out of the East, Ergo, the Communion
Table ought to stand in the East end of the Church; As this argument is taken
out of Bellarmine l. 3. de Sanctis c. 3. (who uses it to justify, and prove
that we onght to pray, and build our Churches toward the East,) and well
answered and refuted by Doctor Synopsis Papism^ the 9. genesis Contr. qu. 6.
Error 52 53.
Willet in the name of the Protestants, who condemn this superstition, which
many now plead for: So it is built upon a false foundation.

For first no Scripture says, That Christ shall come to Judgment from the
East: but that he shall come in the Clouds, Rev. 1. 7. Math. 24. 30. and so
come again as he ascended: Acts 1. 11. But he ascended upright in a cloud,
into heaven, not East ward. Acts 1. 9. 10. 11. Luke 24. 51. Mark 16. 19.
Therefore he shall so descend; Heaven being neither East, West, North or
South in regard of the Earth its Center, but diametrally about it, And so
Christ's descent from it must be such. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.

2. That text of Math. 24. 27. (As the lightninge comes out of the East; and
shines Even unto the West, so shall the coming of the son of man be:) as
all Orthodox divines generally accord, relates only to the celeri^ie,
sodainenes and terriblenes of Christ's coming to judgment (which shall be as
swift, as sudden, and terrible as lightninge. 1. Cor. 15. 52. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
16. c. 5. 2. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. 9. 10. Rev. 6. 12. to the end. Luke 21. 34.
35. Mark 13. 32. to 37. which thus explain it;) not to that part of heaven
from whence he shall descend; which if it be East in respect of one part of
the world, must yet be West, North and South, as to other parts, in relation
to that Clymate or Country to which he shall descend: the world being
plainly Circular, and globall, havinge no angles nor squares, and so no East,
West, North, or South if simply considered in it self.

3. Admit that Christ should come to Judgment out of the East in respect of
England, and these parts of the world; yet this is no Reason to prove, that
our Communion Tables should be placed at the East end, of our Chauncells
Altarwise, (for then no doubt the primitive Christians would have so placed
it, and not in the midst of their Churches.

For First, the Lords Table serves only for the administration of the Sacrament
instituted, to show forth Christ's till he come, 1. Cor. 25. 26. not to
demonstrate the manner of his second coming to Judgment, to which the Table
has no relation. Christ's second coming therefore havinge no reference to the
Communion Table, nor the Table to it, can be noe argument for its Easterlie
scitnation.

2. The Apostle in the 1. Cor. 11. in all matters and Circumstances concerning
the administration of the Sacrament, sends us only to Christ's original
institution, not to his second Coming, But the Table at which he instituted
the Sacrament stood in the midst, as I have proved, Therefore our Communion
Tables, should so stand now, let Christ's come to Judgment which way he
please.

3. Christ's gives us this charge by his Apostles, do all things decently, and
in order, 1. Cor. 11. 33. 34. c. 13. 40. never sendinge us to take a pattern
from the manner of his second Coming, which is left Arbitrarie to himself
and his Fathers pleasure, Acts 1. 7. Math. 24. 36. not prescribed as a pattorne
of imi tation unto us: But the standinge of the Table in the midst in Christ,
the primitive, and all reformed Churches Judgments, is most decent, and
Convenient, therefore it is to be observed, and retained of us.

The second reason alleged by our Novellers for their new dislocation of
Communion Tables, is this: The Communion Tables ought to be placed at the East
end of the Chancell, because it is Christ's mercy seat, his claire of Estate,
and the special place of his presence here on Earth, on which he sitts, and
resides, and the East end of the Chauncell or Quire is the upper, the best
part, the prime place of honor in the Church, and therefore no seats ought to
be there suffered, and the Altar, the Communion Table must be there seated
that so none may take the wall of Christ, (...) sit above him and God
Almighty. This reason has been often alleged by our In M. Chancies and M.
Wards case, and others.
Archbishops, Bishops, and others in the High Commission, and urged by I
Schismatic Puritan p.^
Giles Widows, Sermon of Gods house.
M. Shelford, Exposition of the Catech. in the Common prayer book near the
end. Coal from the Altar. p. 52.
Reeve, and other fantastic Scriblers in their ridiculous frant^cke novel
Pamphlets which no man may have liberty freely to write or preach against,
though never so erroneous, superstitious, Popish, and absurd. To this I
answer.

First, that the mercy-seate was Jewish, tipicall, and abolished by Christ's
death, of whom it was a type. Romans 3. 25. 1. John 2. 2. Col. 2. 16. 17. Heb. 9.
1. to 12. and all Commentators on these textt, and on Exodus c. 25. and 26. and
30. and 31. and 37. and 39. and 40. Godwins Roman Antiquities l. 2. c. 1. p.
78. 79. Therefore is not, it cannot be a mercy seat.

2. The mercy seat was nothing else but the Coveringe of the Arc, so
called, because it Covered, and hidd the Law, it was made of pure gold, two
cubits, and an half broad with two Cherubims of gold of beaten work in the
two ends of the mercy seat, and it was put above upon the Arc. Exodus 25. 17.
18. 19. 20. 21. 22. c. 26. 34. c. 30. 6. c. 31. 7. c. 37. 6. to 10. c. 40. 20.
Lev. 16. 13. 14. 15. Number. 7. 8. 9. Our Communion Tables are not such for
matter, form, workemanshipp, situation, neither is there any Arc upon the
topp whereof they may be satt, and if you will make the Quire resemble the
Arc, you must then place them upon the roof and leds of our Quires, therefore
they are not mercy seats.

3. God did only dispense his word and Oracles, and all things which he gave
Commandment to the Children of Israel from between the two Cherubims, and
the mercy seat. Exodus 25. 22. and the fore-quoted texts. The pulpi^ therefore
in this regard and of it elevation above the pewes, and people should rather
be Christ's mercy seat, then the Communion Table, where Christ only
distributed his body and blood unto us, not his word, and precepts.

4. Godwyn ibid. l. 2. c. 1. p. 78.
The Arc and mercy seat stood in the Sanctum Sanctorum at the West end of the
Temple, not the East. Heb. 9. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. whether none but the high
Priest might enter, and that but once a year not without blood. If therefore
the Communion Table be a mercy seat, it must stand in the West end of our
Churches upon the topp of the Arc in a Sanctrum Sanctorum, as it did, neither
ought any Bishop or Priest to come near it, but the high Priest only, (to with
the Archbishop of Canterbury Private of all Engiand) and that once a year, and
noe more, with blooddy sacrifices.

5. There was but Godwyn ibidein.
one mercy seat standinge only in the Temple, not in the Synagogues over the
Arc, which was but one. If therefore the Lords Table be a mercy seat, there
should be but one in all the world. This first reason therefore is but a
Jewish frenticke dream.

6. The paten which contains the Consecrated bread, and the Chalice, which
hold the hallowed wine, and stand upon the Table, as the mercy seat did upon
the Arc being made of silver in most, and of gold in some places, should
rather be Christ's mercy seat then the Table it self, yet no men bow, or
cring to them, or plead for their honor, and precedently, though more worthy
in respect of matter, use, and immediate contayninge of the material parts of
the Sacrament, then the Table.

2. I answer, That the Communion Table is not Christ's Chair of Estate, as
these Novellers dogmatize. For heaven only is Christ's Throane, Earth but his
foo stool. Genesis 4. 2. Psalm. 103. 11. Psalm. 110. 1. Heb. 1. 13. c. 8. 1. c. 10.
12. 13. Romans 8. 34. Psalm. 11. 4. Isay 66. 1. Matthew. 5. 34. Acts. 7. 49. And it
is the express resolution of the Scripture, and the Article of our Creed,
that Christ in his humane nature has his Throane, and mercy seat only at his
Fathers own right hand in heaven, where he sits in Majesty and glory,
making perpetual intercession for us; and shall there constantly reside
until his second coming to Judgment, Acts 1. 11. c. 3. 21. Hebr. 9. 28. how
then the Communion Table can be his chair of State, and chief place of his
presence, I cannot conjecture.

2. Christ in the Sacrament exhibits himself not in his State and glory to
us, but in the very depth of his passion and humiliation, the Sacrament being
instituted, not to manifest his exaltation and glory, but to express unto us
the breakinge of Gods body and effusion of his blood on the Cross, and to
show forth his death till his coming. 1. Cor. 11. 24. 25. 26. Math. 26. 28.
Luke 22. 19. 20. How therefore this place, Phil. 2. 7. 8. and Emblem of his
greatest debasement, can be colourobly styled, his chair of State and
M^j^sty, I cannot comprehend.

3. Who ever heard a Table to eat and drink at, tearmeds chare of State,
either in respect of the meat, or guests? or how can it be so termed
without gross absurdity, especially when the party there present on it, is
exposed to us only as spiritual meat and drink, to be received by us, not
adored of us. 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4. 16. 17. 21. c. 11. 21. to 30. John 6. 48. to 59.

4. If any thing may be there termed Christ's Chair of Estate, it should
be the Plater and Chalice, wherein the bread and wine are imediately
comprised, not the Table whereon they stand, which is rather a footstool to
support Christ's Chair, then the Chair wherein he sits in State; the bread
and wine not so much as touching the Table.

5. Why should the Lords Table be Christ's mercy seat or Chair of State,
rather then the Font, the Pulpit, or Church Bible? Is not Christ as really and
spiritually present in the one as the other, by his mercy, grace, and spirit?
and is not Baptism, and the word as necessary as the Lords supper? Math. 28.
19. 20. Mar. 16. 15. 16. yea^ more needful, and absolutely necessarie^ since
men may be saved without receivinge the Sacrament of the Lords supper, but
not without Baptism, and the word read, and preached, as many teach.

6. To make the Communion Table Christ's mercy seat, Chair of Estate, and
place of his special presence, if it be meant of his spiritual presence
only, is a falsehood; since he is always equally present in this manner in
all his ordinances to the end of the world. Math. 28. 19. 20. If of his
Corporal presence, which is only now in heaven, Acts 3. 21. Hebr. 9. 28. John
14. 2. 3. 28. c. 16. 7. 16. 17. 19. 21. (the thing they intend) then it smells
of rank Popo^se, intimatinge a transubstantiation of the bread and wine into
Christ's very body and blood, a notorious Popish absurdity, long Artic. 28
since exploded by our Church, and drowned in Fox Acts and monuments the later
part.
our Martyrs blood: who oppugned it to the death.

3. Admit, that the Communion Table were Christ's mercy seat, and Chair of
Estate, (which they take as granted without any Scripture, ground or reason,
which I desire them first to prove, before they lay it down an undoubted
principle) yet the conclusion will not follow, that therefore is must stand at
the East end of the Chauncell or Quire Altarwise.

For first, the Godwyns Jewish Antiquities l. 2. c. 1.
mercy seat stood in the end of the Tabernacle, and Temple upon the topp of
the Arc, not at the East. Therefore the Table should stand so too were it a
mercy seat.

2. Christ's Chair of Estate ought to be seated there where himself has
promised his special presence: But that is not in the East end, but in the
midst of the Church and people, Math. 18. 20. as I have formerly proved by
sundry Scriptures: Therefore it should be placed in the midst.

4. Whereas these men protend, that the East end of the Chancell or Quire where
they now rail in the Table Altarwise, is the highest and most worthy place in
the Church; and that noe seats must there be suffered, for fear any should
take the wall or upper hand of Christ, and sit above him, or checkmate with
him in his own Temple. I answer.

First, that these are ridiculous Childish fantastique conceits of their own
superstitious brains, grounded on no Scripture or solid reason, and so not to
be credited.

2. These reasons make Christ ambitious of place and precedence, and corporally
present here an Earth, when as he was; and still is lowly and humble, Matthew.
11. 29. forbiddinge men to sit down at any Feast in the uppermost place, but
in the lowest, and pronouncinge an woe against the Pharisees for lovinge the
uppermost seats in Synagogues, and Feasts, Math. 23. 6. Luke 11. 43. therefore
were he now on Earth, he would not contend for precedence, and the
upper-most place, as these his ambitious-Champions do for him, because they
love precedence themselves, much less will he do it now, he has taken upp
his seat and throne in heaven, and has left the Earth altogether in his
bodily presence, where these Novellers would feign to be still resident in the
Church on the Communion Table, as the Papists say he is upon their Altars,
close prisoner in a Pix.

3. It is most false, that the East end of the Quire or Chauncell where they
now place their Altars and Tables, is the most honorable and prime place of
the Church and Quire; For in all Cathedralls that I have seen, and in his
Majesty's, Chappells, the Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes Thrones and seats, and
the Kings Closetts are at the West end of the Quire or Chancell, And the most
honorable persons seat, is the West, not the East end of them; the more West
any man sits, the higher, the more East the lower, the seats next the West end
being reputed the highest and honorablest, the seats next the East, the
lowest, for the singinge men and Quiresters, and the meaner sort of people. So
in Parish Churches, where there are any seats in the Chancell or Quire, the
seat at the West end is usually esteemed the worthiest and first seat, and
the nearer the East end the meaner, and lower are they reputed. The West end
therefore of the Quire and Chancell, as these instances, and experience
undeniable manifest, is the chiefest, and the place where the most honorable
persons have their seats, and chaires of State. If therefore the Communion
Table, or their Altars, be Christ's Chair of State, and that he ought to take
precedence and place of all men, then it must be placed in the West end of the
Quire in Cathedralls, where the Bishops Throne and seat is situated, and
removed to the West end of the Chancell, where the best man of the Parish sits,
not thrust down to the East end of the Quire or Chancell against the wall,
which is in truth the lowest place by their own practice, and resolution. And
here we may behold the desperate so^tishnes, and frenzy of these Popish
Innovators, who under a vain pretense of givinge Christ, and the Communion
Table the upper hand, that none may sit above them, will needs thrust them
into the vary lowest place even in their own practice, Judgments, and Common
reputation, where servants or the meaner sort of people only sit, (where there
are seats or forms) in most Churches, which yet against their own Judgments
and knowledge, (out of I know not what factious strange superstitions humor)
must upon a sudden be Cried upp for the most honorable place, by these
learned Rabbis.

4. Admit the Communion Table Christ's Chair of Estate and mercy seat; and
that it ought to be placed in the best and uppermost place of the Church; yet
it is only such, and thus to be situated when the Sacrament is administered:
For how is it his Chair of State, his mercy seat, and chiefest place of
residence, when there is no Sacramental bread and wine upon it to represent
his spiritual presence to us? But when the Sacrament is to be administered, the
book of Common prayer, the Queens Injunctions, Fathers, and forecited Authors
inform us, that it must be placed in the body or midst of the Church, or
Chancell. Therefore our Novellers must either deny the East end of the Quire to
be the most honorable place, or that it was ever so reputed; or else confess
the invalidity of this their proposition, That the Table ought to stand in the
chief and most honorable place of the Church, unless they will Condemn the
Fathers, the primitive, yea our own Church, and all our chief writers of
Error in this particular.

5. Admit, that the East end of the Chancell or Quire be the most honorable
part of the Church, and that the Table for this reason ought there to be
rayled in: Why are not the Font and Pulpit there placed and rayled in as well
as the Table, and the Bible, and readinge pewe too, Are not the Font, the
Pulpit, the Bible as honorable as venerable, as worthy to take place and
precedence as the Table, both in respect of matter, use, relation to God and
Christ, and divine institution? undoubtedly they are; therefore to be all
ranked in an equipage as the lavers, Shewbread Tables, and Altar were in
Solomon's Temple which stood one by the side of the other. 2. Chron. c. 4. and 5.

6. If the East end of the Church or Quire be the most worthy; and fittest for
the Tables situation now, why was it not so for the Arc, the Altar, and
shewbread Table heretofore? why did those never stand in the East end of the
Temple, but in the West; the midst of it, or in the Court, as the premises
Manifest? Certainly if the East end of the Temple or Synagogues had no such
dignity, no preheminen^ie or implements in them heretofo^e by divine
appointment, our Novellers can have little reason to plead, that they ought to
have any such precedence, honor, or use now.

The third reason alleged for the placinge of Communion Tables. Altarwise at
the East end of our Quires and Chancells, is; because they are High Altars: So
Treatise of the Church or God^ house p. 2. 4. 15. 17. 19.
Saelford, Reeves, and the Coal from the Altar, and Bishop Mountague in his
least Lent Sermon style them; contrary to the dialect of our Church, after the
Popish language; Exposition of the Catech. in the Communion book toward the
end.
This is the true reason why they are placed Altarwise, to bring in Altars,
Priests, bowinge to Altars, kneelinge, at, and before them, to adore the Hostia
(to which we are already proceeded) and in fine, to set upp public, and
private Masses, yea the whole body of Popery again: For which these are
immediate preparatives, of which they are real parts and and adjuncts: This,
and this only is the true undoubted cause, Page 6. 14. 15. 18. 32. 38. to 58.
(all others mere idle pretenses to delude the people) why our Communion
Tables are now turned into Altars in many places, and lately rayled in
Altarwise in most parishes against the East wall of the Quire. And that this
alone is the true cause in those Prelates, and Churchmen who originally press
it, not only the qualities, doctrines and actions of the parties themselves
which every m^ns Conscience, and experience visibly discernes unless he be
strangely hoodwinckt, but the things themselves compared with the history of
former times declare.

For if we look into the story of the Church, we shall find, that the
first thing that was done upon the beginning of reformation, was the pullinge
down of Altars, and settinge upp of Communion Tables, and the first thing
again acted upon the restitution of popery was the settinge up of Altars, and
turninge Communion Tables into Altars as now our Prelates do, upon which
Masses presently were said: Thus we read: that Fox Acts and Monu. p 795.
in the year of our Lord 1528. upon the Reformation of Religion at Berne
Constance, Gene^a, Basil, Stransburge, and other Cities the first thing they
did, was this; they proclaimed that Masses, ALTARS, and Images in all places
should be abolished, and there upon, the Images and Altars, with Ceremonies,
and Masses were accordingly removed and abolished in them all. About Fox ibid.
p. 879.
the year of our Lord 1556. The Waldoyes in Piemont being sommoned and
pressed to forsake God and revolt again to Idolatry, which they had begun to
cast of, agreed together to make a solemn protestation, that they would
utterly forsake the false Religion of the Pope, and live, and die in the
maintenance and confession of Gods word and truth. Whereupon they said, let us
all go to morrow into the Temple to hear the word of God, and after let us
cast to the ground all the Idols, and ALTARS; to which they all agreed;
saying, let us so do; yea, and that the very same hour in the which they
have appointed us to be at the Council house: Whereupon the next day after
they assembled themselves in the Church of Body, and as soon as they came into
the Temple without any further delay, they beat down the Images, and cast
down the ALTARS. After Sermon they went to Billers where they beat down
their Images and ALTARS. Our famous King Edward the 6. about the beginning of
Reformation in his Reign, gave order to pull down Altars, and set upp
Communion Tables in most Churches of the Kingdom, And to the end that all of
them might be totallie abolished.

Bishop Ridley to oppease all diversity about the form of the Lords board, and
to procure one Godly uniformity, exhorted all his Diocese, unto that which he
thought did best agree with Scripture, with the usage of the Apostles, with the
primitive Church, and which might Highly further the Kings most Godly
proceedings, in abolishing of diverse vain, and superstitions opinions of the
Popish Mass, out of the hearts of the simple, which would be more holden in
the minds of the people by the form of an Altar, then of a Table, as the King
and Council in their 1. and 3. reasons had resolved, and to bring them to the
right use taught by Holy Scripture, of the Lords Supper; Hereupon (I say) he
appointed the form of a right Table to be used in his Diocese, (according to
the King and Counsels instructions and consideration) and in the Church of
Paul's brake down the wall standing by the High Altars side. And upon this
occasion (as it most probable) he wrote his book DE CONFRINGENDIS ALTARIBUS,
of breaking down Altars, registered by Bishop B^le among other his works,
though not now extant that I can find. Not long before this, John Hoper Bishop
of Gloucester, (afterward a Martyr, as was that worthy Ridley) preaching before
King Edward the 6. in his 3. Sermon upon Jonah, printed Anno 1551. Cum
Privilegio, took occasion thus to Censure Altars, and to move the King utterly
to demolish them. If question now be asked, is there then no Sacrifice left to
be done of Christian people? yea truly, but none other then such, as might be
done without Altars, and they be of 3. sorts. The first is the Sacrifice of
thankgiving, Psalm. 51. 17. 19. Amos 4. 5. Hos. 14. 2. Heb. 13. 15. The second
is beneficence, and liberality to the poor, Mich. 6. 8. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. 2.
Cor. 8. 19. Heb. 13. 16. The 3. kind of Sacrifice is, the mortifying of our
own bodies, and to die from sin. Romans 12. 1. Math. 12. Luke 14. If we study
not daily to offer these Sacrifices to God, we be no Christian men, seeing
Christian men have no other Sacrifices then these which may and ought to be
done without Altars. There should among Christians be no Altars, And therefore
it was not without the great wisdom and knowledge of God, that Christ, his
Apostles, and the Primitive Church lacked Altars, For they knew that the use of
them was taken away, It were well then that it might please the Magistrates to
turn the Altars into Tables according to the first institution of Christ to
take away the false persuation of the people, they have of Sacrifices to be
done, upon Altars, For Note this
as long as the Altars remain, both the ignorant people, and the ignorant, and
evil persuaded Priest will dream always of Sacrifice. Therefore were it best
that the Magistrates remove all the Monuments and Tokens of Idolatry and
superstition, then should the true Religion of God sooner take place, which he
thus seconds, in his 8. Sermon upon Jonah. A great shame it is for a Noble
King, Emperor, or Magistrate contrary to Gods word, to deteyne or keep from
the devil or his Ministers any of their goods o^ Treasure, as the Candles,
Images, Crosses, vestiments Altars: For it they be kept in the Church as things
indifferent, at length they will be maintained as things necessary, as now we
find true by late woeful experience. And in his 4. Sermon upon Jonah, he
proceeds thus: But this prayer of Jonas is so acceptable, it might be thought
of some men, that the place where Jonas prayed in should have be^tered it; as
the foolish opinion of the world is at this time, that judges the Prayer said
at the High Altar, to be better then that which is said in the Quier; that in
the Quier better, then that which is said in the body of the Church, that in
the body of the Church, better then that which is said in the Field or in a
man's Chamber. But our Prophet says the Lord has no respect to the place, but
to the heart and faith of him that prays. And that appears. For penitent
Jonas prays out of the whales belly, and miserable Job upon the dung heap,
Daniell in the Cave of the Lions, Hieremie in the claypit, the theife upon the
Cross, S. Stephen under the Stones, wherefore the grace of God is to be prayed
for in every place, and every where as our necessity shall have need, and
wants solace. Although I commend the prayer made to God in the name of Christ
to belike in every place, because that our necessity requires help in every
place, yet I do not condemn the public place of prayer, whereas Gods word is
preached, his holy Sacrament used, and common prayer made unto God, but allow
the same, and sorry it is no more frequented and haunted, but this I would wish,
that the Magistrates would put both the Priest, Minister and the people into
Note.
one place, and shut up the partition called the C^auncell, that seperateth the
Congregation of Christ one from the other, as though the veil and partition of
the Temple in the old Law, yet should remain in the Church, where indeed all
signs and types are ended in Christ: And in case this were done, it should not
only express the dignity and grace of the New Testament, but also cause the
people the better to understand the things read there by the Minister, and also
provoke the said Minister to a more study of the things he reads least he
should be found by the Judgment of the Congregation not worthy neither to read
nor Minister in the Church: further that such as would receive the Holy
Communion of the body and blood of Christ, might both hear and see plainly
what is done, as it was used in the Primative Church, when as the abomination
done upon Altars was not known, nor the Sacrifice of Christ's precious blood so
conculcated and trodden under feet. Hereupon, as also upon M. Bucers forecited
opinion to this purpose, and William Salisburyes Battery of the Popes
Batereulx, London 1559. (and not upon M. Calvin's Letter, as the late Author of
a Coal from the Altar misreports p. 29. 40.) Fox Acts and monum. p. 1211. 1212.
all the Altars in England by the King and his Counsels direction were utterly
taken away out of all Cathedral Collegiate Parish Churches and Chappells, and
Tables set up in their steed in such manner as they stood till now of late, to
wit in the midst of the Church or Chauncell, as appears by that is Fox Acts
and Monu. p. 1404. 1406.
storied of Bishop Farrar, by M. Fox concerning the Church of Carmarthen in
Wales, where the Archdeacon of Carmarthen in his visitation under this good
Bishop, finding an Altar set up in the body of the Church for Celebration of
the Communion, contrary to the King and Counsels Ordinance, caused the said
Altar to be taken away, and a Table TO BE SET IN THE MIDDLE OF THE CHURCH,
which the Vicar removing, Bishop Farrar himself in the third year of King
Edwards Reign; Commanded the Vicar to set the Table WITHOUT THE CHANCELL
again, near the place where it stood before for the ministration of the
Communion. After this in the 5. and 6. year of King Edwards Reign, as Altars
themselves were quite cashered out of the Church, (according to the Fox ibid.
p. 888.
prophecy of William Mauldon; who in the days of King Henry the 8. when the
Mass most flourished and the Altars with the Sacrament thereof were in most
High veneration so as in man's reason it might seem unpossible that the glory
and opinion of them so depely rooted in the hearts of (...) many could by any
means possible so soon decay and vanish to naught, yet not withstanding he
being under the age of 17. years by the spirit (no doubt) of prophecy
declared to his Parents that they should see it shortly even come to pass,
that both the Sacrament of the Altar and the Altars themselves with all such
plantations as the Heavenly Father did not plant should be plucked up by the
roots, etc.) so the very This the Common prayer Books themselves evidence, and
the Coal from the Altar confesses. p. 37. to 42.
name of them was wholly expunged out of the Book of Common Prayer, by the
whole Convocation and Parliament, and the name of Gods-boord, Lords-Table,
Table, and Holy-Table, inserted and retained both in the Rubricke and Order for
the Celebrating of the Communion therein prescribed, and the Table enjoined
therein at the time of Celebrating the Communion to stand in the body of the
Church or Chauncell. And in the Homilies then published by the King and
Parliaments authority, the name of Altar was wholly omitted in the Homilies
concerning the right use of the Church, and of the worthy receiving the
Sacrament, and the name of the Lords Table only used and mentioned in them, as
he that reads them may discern. A truth so clear; that the nameles Author of
the Coal from the Altar, p. 39. 40. confesses; that the former Liturgy,
(wherein was the name of Altar) was called in by Parliament 5. and 6. C. 6. 11.
and the word Altar left out of the Common Prayer Book then established; ye^
upon this only ground, not from any scanda^ which was taken at the name of
Altar by the Common people, but from the dislike taken against the whole
Liturgy by Calvin, who was all in all with my Lord Protector etc. A very
likely tale, I promise you. As if the whole Parliament and Clergy of England,
would be so rash or inconsiderate, as to alter their whole Liturgy 3. and 4. E
6. c. 1.
formerly confirmed by Parleament, only to humor M. Calvin, (without any
Scripture, reason, or other convincing considerations,) and upon no other
grounds. Certainly either this ground of the Alteration is but forged and
conjecturall, though positively laid down; or else the Church of England and
Prelates then^ more honored See Antiasminianisme p. 58. 59. 64
M. Calvin and his judgment, then many of them and of our Clergy do now; who
make it a chief part of their superstition zeal, to B. White in the Ce^sure
of D. Vastnicke and other of the B^s. all that time; Normington and others in
their late Sermon. M. Shelford in his 5. Treatises: with many others.
revile and traduce him both in their writings and Sermons, all they may,
without any just or lawful cause; adorning Bellarmine, Baronius, and the
Popish Schoolmen with the most magnifying Honorable Tules they can invent, to
vilefy him the more, and humor the Catholic faction. And that this is but
forgery, will appear, not by the forementioned Fox Acts and Monu. p. 121.
Letter of King Edward and his Counsel to Bishop Ridly; That the Altars in
most part of the Churches of the Realm were already taken down, (not to
please M. Calvin) but upon GOOD AND GODLY CONSIDERATIONS, and so no doubt the
name of Altar exploded out of the Common prayer Book and Homilies upon the
self same good and godly Considerations; but likewise by the 1. and 3. Parts
of the excellent Edit. ult. part. 2. p. 18 44.
Homily against the Peril of Idolatry, wherein Altars are expressly condemned
as heathenish, Idolatrous, and Popish; the Homily also showing at large, that
Godly Kings in all ages brake them down, and Idolatrous Princes and people
only set them up; contrary to Gods command, who threatens to punish and
destroy the people that so set up or suffer Altars, Images, and Idols
undestroyed; and to break down and destroy their Altars and Images:
recording. That all Christians in the primitive Church, as Origin against
Celsus, Cypriam also, and Arnobius testify, were fore charged and complained on
by the Gentiles, that they had no Altars nor Images: From whence it is evident
that they took them to be unlawful in the Church or Temple of God, and
therefore had none? whence the second part of the Page 1^1.
Hom. of the Time and place of Prayer, calls the Images and Altars of
Christians in those and our days, HEATHENISH and JEWISH ABUSES, which provoke
the displeasure and indignation of Almighty God, and profane and defile their
Churches, and grossly abuse, yea filthily defile the Lords holy Supper, with
infinite toys and trifles of men's own popish devises, to make a goodly show,
and to deface the plain, simple and sincere Religion of Christ Jesus, yet our
Prelates against these Homilies and the Communion Book, which they Canons
1603. Can. 36. 37. 38.
subscribe to, and force others likewise, to subscribe unto; (yea See the Book
of Ordinat.
contrary to their Oath and solemn profession when they were ordained
Ministers, and consecrated Bishops,) set themselves now tooth and nail to
turn Communion Tables into Altars, and term them by this name, both in their
B. Wrens late visit. Articles.
visitation Articles, Bishop Montague in his Sermon before the King, the last
Lent.
Sermons, and printed Shelford, Reve, B. White, D. Pocklington, the Coal from
the Altar, with others.
Books, as the Papists and Popish Prelates did in Queen Maryes days: who upon
the change of Religion and setting up of Popery, made this their first work,
to remove Communion Tables; to erect Altars every where, without which they
could have no Masses, nor Masse-Preists; and to preach against, (...) scosse at
Communion Tables, and extol Altars, as our Prelates and their Popish
instruments now do, whose Practices (and ends too no doubt) are the same with
these in former times; which I shall take a little Liberty to relate, both to
inform the Reader, and lay open that Mystery of iniquity now intended, by
turning of our Lords Tables into Altars. M. Fox our learned Ecclesiastical
Historian, who not only writes the History of Queen Mary's days, but lived in
those times, records, Acts and Monum. p. 1282.
that in the first year of Queen Marye as soon as she came to the Crown, and
before any Law made for that purpose, many men (just as too many Bishops and
Ministers are now) were to forward in erecting of Altars and Masses (the
inseparable companions of them) in Churches: That Ibidem p. 1333.
D. Weston pre^ching at Paul's Cross the 20. of October the same year to with:
1553. named the Lords Table, an Oister-borde; to which M. Fox adds this
marginall Note; The blasphemous mouth of D. Weston, calling the Lords Table an
Oister-board; That the Archdeacons Official visiting at Hynton the 28. of
November following, gave in charge to present all such as did disturb the
Queens proceedings, in letting the setting up of their Altars and saying of
Mass, or any part thereof: The 24. of October the same year, one 1. Mariae c.
3. Sess. 2.
Act was made to punish such, who should willingly or of purpose, molest let,
disturb or otherwise trouble any Parson, Vicar, Parish, Priest, or Curate,
preparing, saying, singing, ministering or celebrating the Mass, or unlawfully,
contemptuously, and maliciously, of their own power or authority, pull down,
deface, spoil, or otherwise break any Altar or Altars, or any Crucifix or
Cross that then was, or after that should be in any Church, C^apple or
Churchyard; which was seconded by the Queens Proclamation the 15. day of
December following. Fox ibid. p. 1344. 1345.
Upon the 2. of December 155^. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winc^ester, and Lord
Chaunsellour preached at Paul's Cross before King Philip, Cardinal Poole, and
other Peers: where in his Sermon he had this passage. And let us now awake
which so long have slept, and in our sleep have done so much naughtines against
the Sacraments of Christ, denying the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and
pulled down the Altars. Fox ibid. p. 1404. 1406.
March 30. 1555. Bishop Farrar was Articled against among other things, for
causing an Altar set up in the body of Carmarthen Church, to be taken away, and
a Table to be set up in the middle of the Church, for celebration of the
Communion. Fox ibid. p. 1512. 1515.
On the 3. of December John Austen a violent Papist came to the Lords Table in
M. Blinds Church at Adesham being Churchwarden, and laid both his hands upon
it, saying; who set this here again, it being taken down the Sunday before:
He is a knave that set it here, etc. and if he say any service here again, I
will lay the Table on his face, and in that rage he with other took up the
Table and laid it on a chest in the Chancell, and set the Tressels by it; And
the 26. of November following, he said to M. B. and, ye pulled down the Altar,
will ye built it again, No (quoth he) except I be commanded, for I was
commanded to do that I did. The next Sunday, this Churchwarden had provided a
Priest to say Mass, for which he had gott^^a^ Altar. Fox ibid p. 1601. 1604.
October 1. 1555. in the last Exam^nation of Bishop Ridley, D. White, Bishop of
Lincoln, raged this argument to Ridely out of Cyrill; Altars are erected in
Christ's name in Britain and in far Countries; Ergo Christ is come; But we
may use the contrary of that reason; Altars are plucked down in Britain. Ergo
Christ is not come. Bishop Ridley smilng, answered: your Lordship is not
Ignorant that this word Altar, in Scripture, signifies as well the Altar,
whereupon the Jews were wont to make their burnt Sacrifices, as the Table of
the Lords Supper. Cyrillus m^aneth there by this word Altar, not that the
Jewish Altar but the Table of the Lord, and by that saying (Aultars are erected
in Christ's name, Ergo Christ is come) he means that the Communion is
ministered in his remembrance, Ergo he is come etc. As for the taking down of
the Altars, it was done upon Note. See Fox p. 1211.
just consideracions, for that they seemed to come to nigh to the Jews usage.
Neither was the Supper of the Lord at any time more better ministered, more
duly received then in these later days, when all things were brought to the
rites and usage of the Primitive Church. Lincoln. A goodly receiving I promise
you, to set an Oyster Table in steed of an Altar, and to come from puddings at
Westminister to receive, and yet when your Table was constituted, you could
never be content, in placing the same now East, now North, now one way, now
another, until it pleased God of his goodness to place it clean out of the
Church. Ridley; your Lordships unreverent terms do not elevate the thing etc.
To this speech of Bishop White, M. Fox affixeth this marginall Censure. Bishop
White blasphemously calls, the board of the Lords Table, An Oyster Table.
Which just Censure the Page 20. 21.
Coal from the Altar most injuriously turns upon M. Prynne, for calling the
Lords Table, a Drester. A slovenly and scornful term, deserving no other
Answer, then what the marginall Notes in the Acts and Monuments give in the one
place to the Deane of Westminster, or in the other to the Bishop of Lincoln D.
White. And truly had the Gentleman in the Lame Giles his haultings.
place pretended, expressly termed the Lords Table a Dresser, as these two
nickenamed it, An Oister board, or Oyster Table, I should have passed thus
verdict upon him, that he was Nig^o CARBONE notandus; defamedly marked with
this black Coal. But examining his words, and finding them to be misreported,
to lay a causeles blemish on him; I must needs conclude, that the namcelesse
Priest or Colier who has fastened this scandal on him, is as black and
shameless as his Coal. For he never terms the Lords Table, a Dresser; but only
Censures such who against the Rubricke for the Communion, Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions, and the Canons An. 1571. (not 1471. as himself mistakes whiles he
blames him for mistaking) p. 18.(which is no mistake, the English Copy, which
he no question saw and followed, printed the same year with the Latin, which
is p. 15. warranting the quotation true both in regard of Page and words,) what
ever the Coal either ignorantly or maliciously spatters out to the contrary:)
at the administration of the Sacrament, place the Communion Table Altarwise
with one side against the wall, more like a Side-Table, Cupbard or Dresser,
then a Lords Table to eat and drink at, Like, or more Like a Dresser or
Sideboard then a Table, is all he writes; wherein he is as far from
blasphemy, or calling the Lords Table, a Dresser, as the Scripture itself is
from blasphemy, or terming Christ a th^^fe, when it says, Matthew. 24. 4^. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 4. 2. Pet. 3. 10. Rev. 3. 3. c. 16. 15. that Christ and the day of
the Lord shall come as, or like a Thief in the night; the comparisons and
similitudes being both apt, the one in regard of the manner of the Tables
situation, the other in respect, of the sudden fearful unexpectednes of
Christ's second coming to Judgment; though the name of a Dresser, unfit to be
imposed on the Lords Table; and of a theife upon our Savior. By which slovenly
term M. Prynne is so far from calling the Communion Table; that he phraseth
it, Lame Giles. p. 37
A religious implement of Gods own appointment. But to return again to that
from which this false Calumny in the Coal has diverted me. This our famous
learned Martyr Bishop Ridley, not long after this his Conference to show how
eagerly the Popish Prelates, were bent to remove Communion Tables, and set up
Altars in their steeds, and how much he detested this their practice, in his
excellent Farewell to his friends in general, breaks forth into these
patheticke words: Othou now wicked and bloody Sea, Fox ibid. p. 1610.
why do thou now set up again many Altars of Idolatry, which by the word of
God were justly taken away? Why have thou overthrown the Lords Table? Why do
thou daily delude thy people, masking in thy Masses in steed of the Lords
Supper? The Papists in their discourses with our stout and learned Martyr M.
John Philpot were as hot as a Coal, for Altars, and the Sacrament of the
Altar; For Fox Acto and Monu. p. 1652. 1653.
in his 11. examination on S. Andrews day 1555. Christopherson who reasoned
with him, demanded whether S. Augustine did not call the Sacrament, the
Sacrament of the Altar? To which M. Philpot replied: That makes nothing for
the probation of your Sacrament. For so he and other ancient writers do call
the Holy Communion of the Supper of the Lord, in respect that it is the
Sacrament of the Sacrifice which Christ offered upon the Altar of the Cross;
the with Sacrifice all the Alta^s and Sacrifices done upon the Altars in the
old Law did prefigure and shadow; the with pertains nothing in your
Sacrament, hanging upon your Altars of Lime and Stone. Christopherson. No does
I pray you, what signifies Altar? Philpot. Not as you falsely take it,
materially, but for the Sacrifice of the Altar of the Cross. Christopherson.
Where find you it ever so taken? Philpot. O, yes that I do in S. Paul to the
Heb. 13. where he says: We have an Altar of which it is not lawful for them
to eat that serve the Tabernacle. Is not Altar there taken for the Sacrifice
of the Altar, and not for the Altar of Lime and Stone? Christopherson. Well God
bless me out of your company, you are such an o^ stinate heretic, that I
never heard the like. Philpot. I pray God keep me from such blind Doctors,
which when they are not able to prove what they say, then they fall to
blaspheming as you do, for want of better proof. In the Fox ibid. p. 1703.
Conference between Archbishop Crammer and D. Martyn, March 155^. Martyn
speaks thus to Crammer in defense of Mass and Altars which he couples both
together. If you mark the Devils language well, it agrees with your
proceedings most truly; For cast thy self downward, said he, and so taught
you to cast all things down wards; Down with the Sacrament, down with the
Mass, down with the Altars, etc. In Fox ibid. p. 1781.
Cardinal Pooles visitation at Cambridge January 1557. his Deputy Visitors
set forth certain Statutes, whereby they would have the university hereafter
ordered; wherein among other things they prescribed, at how many Masses every
man should be day by day and in what sort every man in his entrance into the
Church should bow himself to the Altar, ( a ceremony, superstition, and
Idolatry now taken up by many contrary to, or without all Scriptures, Law and
Canon, though thus enjoined by, and, borrowed from the Papists, whose
superstitious toys are now much imitated and adored) Fox: ibid p. 1786.
In April, the same year, Cardinal Poole in his ordinary Visitation Articles
with in his Diocese of Canterbury. Article 18. 23. concerning the people,
inquired; whether the Altars in the Churches be consecrated, or no? And whether
there do burn a lamp or candle before the Sacrament? And if there do not,
that then it be provided for with expedition? As Altars were thus erected,
bowed to, pleaded for, and countenaunced in Queen Mary's time, upon the
revivall of Popery, and Communion Tables removed and scoffed at; so immediately
upon her death, and the descent of the Crown to Queen Elizabeth, this
religious Princes by her Near the end.
Injunctions, (published in the first year of her Reign) commanded the
Altars in Churches to be removed (which was done in many Churches in sundry
parts of the Realm before such Injunctions upon the alteration of religion)
and Tables to be placed for ministration of the Holy Sacrament, according to
the FORM OF THE LAW THEREFORE PROVIDED; to wit, the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2.
rat^fying the Common Prayer Book, which prescribes the Sacrament to be
administered at a Table not at an Altar. (By which it is apparent, that the
ministering of it, at an Altar, is against, and not according to the Statute;
and so punishable thereby:) And hereupon Matthew Parker Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his Metropoliticall Visitation Anno 1560. had this Article of
Inquiry among others, Artic. 2.
Whether they had a comely and decent Table for the Holy Communion, set in
place prescribed by the Queens Majestyes Injunctions, And whether your Altars
be taken down, according to the Commandment in that behalf given? After
this, Anno 1561. the Book of Orders published by the Queens Commissioners,
and Book of Advertissements published Anno 1565. enjoined decent Communion
Tables standing on a frame, to be made and set in the place were the steps of
the Altar formerly stood, stiling them always Communion Tables, not once an
Altar, and putting them in opposition to Altars, And the Canons made in the
Synod at London Anno 1571. (which neither the Epistoler and M. Prynne has
misquoted as the Page 20. 21.
Coal does falsely accuse them, it being p. 18. in the English Copy then
printed which they followed, though p. 15. in the Latin, which the Colier
followed, who it seems never saw the English:) prescribe, that Churchwardens
shall see there be a fair joined Table which may serve for the administration
of the Holy Communion, and a clean cloth to cover it, and that they shall see,
that all Roodelo^ts in which wooden Crosses stood and all other Relics of
superstition be clane taken away, which being executed accordingly, thereupon
Se Haddon C^nt. (...) l. 3. s. 271.
Hierom Osorius, the Annot. (...). 1. Cor. 11. se. 18. and (...) Heb. ^0 sect.
6.
Rhemists, M. Novel his Reprouse of Dormans proose ^. 15. 16. 17
Dorman, in his Preface before his Reply to B. lewell.
Harding, Reynolds Cons. with (...) 8. divis 4.
Heart and other Papists, complained against Queen Elizabeth and the Church of
England in their several writings, that they had cast down Images, Churches,
Altars, removed them out of their Churches and set up profane unhallowed
Tables to administer the Sacrament on in their steed; which Act of theirs
Answer to Hardings Preface. Reply to Harding Art. 3. div. 26.
Bishop Jewel, Contr. Osorum l. 3. f. 271.
Gualther Haddon, M. Fox, Reproof of Dormans Proof f. 15. 16. 17. 66.
M. Deane Nowel, His Catech. vol. 1. f. 484.
M. Thomas B^acon, Answer to the Rhemish Test on 1. Cor. 11. sect. 18. on Hebr.
13. sect. 6. Apo^ 6 sect. 2.
D. Fulke and M. Carthwright, Synopsis Papismi Contr. gener. 9. Error 53 54. 55.
D. Willet and Confer with Heart e^h. 8. sect. 4.
D. Reynolds not only justify as lawful, but as necessary and commendable,
affirming that Queen Elizabeth and the Church of England might as lawfully
remove and break, down Popish Altars, Images and Crucifixes, as Ezekiah and
other good Kings of Judah and Israel demolished and brake down Heathenish
groves, Idols, Images, Altars, by Gods own special command and approbation.
From all which particular passages we may clearly discern, That one of the
first things which our own and other reformed Churches did upon the bringing
in of Religion and abolishing of Popery, was the breaking down and abandoning
of Altars, together with their name, and placing of Communion Tables in their
steed; that the first thing again, the Papists did, upon the restitution of
Popery, was the erecting of Altars, and casheering Communion Tables. That the
setting up of Altars, and turning Communion Tables into Altars, or Altarwise,
is to no other end, but to usher Masses and Popery (the inseparable
concommitants and followers of Altars which cannot subsist without them) into
our Church again; That our godly Martyrs, Princes, Prelates, writers yea and
our Church itself, have constantly both in their Judgments, practice, and
disputes, condemned Altars, as Jewish, Heathenish, Popish and unlawful unto
Christians; That they are contrary to the Statute of 1. Eliz. 1. 2. The Book
of Common Prayer, Homilies, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Advertissements and
Articles of the Church of England, and were never yet written or preached for,
patronized, enjoined, or erected but among, and by Papists, and that to receive
the Mass and set up Popery, which fall or stand together with them. And that
the Communion Table is no Altar, nor High Altar, as our Shelford of Gods house:
p. 2. 4. 15. 17. The Coal from the Altar Sunday no Sabb. p 15 27 28 29 43 48.
50
Novellers dream and teach. All this being thus premised, I come now to give a
particular answer to this 3. reason for placing Communion Tables Altarwise.

First, therefore I deny, that the Communion or Lords Table is either an Altar,
or High Altar, that it ought so to be styled or reputed, or that any Altars
ought to be set up in our Churches;

First, because the Scripture never terms the Lords Table an Altar, but a
Table, 1. Cor. 10. 21. only and prescribes a Table only, not an Altar for the
administration of the Sacrament.

2. Because our Common Prayer Book, Homilies, Articles, Canons, Injunctions,
writers do the like, distinguishing the Communion Table and Altars as opposite
contradistinct things, inconsistent one with the other, abandoning not Altars
only themselves, but the very name of Altars, as Jewish and Heathenish, 1. Cor.
9. 13. c. 10. 18. 19. being quite expunged, so as it is not to be found in our
Book of Common Prayer, Articles, Injunctions, Homilies, Canons, which never
term the Lords Table an Altar, either properly or improperly.

3. Because Altars and Lords Tables differ much one from the other.

1. In matter, the one being made of stone, gold, brass, or earth for the most
part, Exodus 20. 24. 25. c. 38. 30. c. 39. 38. 39. c. 40. 5. 16. Jos. 8. 30. 31.
the other only of wood.

2. In form the one almost quite square, Exodus 7. 12. c. 30. 1. 2. 3. 10. c.
37. 26. c. 38. 2. Rev. 9. 13. the other not so broad as long, the one having
horns often times, to which delinquents fled and laid hold, the other not.

3. In name and appellation, and that in all languages.

4. In use, the one being only to offer Sacrifices, incense and burnt offerings
on; Exodus 31. 128. c. 37. 25. c. 38. 1. Lev. l. 7. 9. being therefore called an
Altar, Altar and Ara, from the Sacrifices and fires burning on it; as Orig. l.
15. 4.
Isiodor, ^n their Di^^^^^. (...) and (...).
Cilepine, Holicke and others witness: the other only to eat and drink at, 1.
Cor. 10. 21. c. 11. 20. 21. 2. Sam. 9. 7. Lu. 22. 30.

5. In institution, the one Legal, Jewish, Typical, and Heathe^sh; the other
Evangelical and Christian, of which anon: the one instituted before and under
the Law, the other only under the Gospel.

6. In their appendices, attendants, and circumstances.

For First, Altars were usually, consecrated both among the Jews and Gentiles,
Exodus 40. 10. 11. Numb. 7. 10. as they are this day Summa Angelica: (...).
Altar and Cons^o. Alt. Rhem. Notes on 1. Cor. 11. sect. 18.
among the Papists, with many Jewish and Superstitious Ceremonies, oylings;
sprinklings, exorcismes, Relics of Sancts, orisons, and I know not what other
fond conceits; but Communion Tables were never so consecrated either in the
primitive, or Christian Churches of latter times.

2. Altars we ever accompanied with Preistes, Sacrifices, burnt offerings,
peace offringe; etc. Exodus 40. Levit. 1. 1. Cor. 9. 13. c. 10. 18. Hebr. 7. 1.
to 15. 1. King 18. 20. to 37. among the Jews and Gentiles: with Summa Ang.
Tit. Altar and Cons. Alt. D. Rainold (...) with Heart c. 8. diois. 4. 5. M.
Nowels Reproof of Dormans Proof. f. 66.
Masses, Massepreistes, Pixes, consecrated Hostiaes, Tapers, Basins,
Candelstickes, Crucifixes, Images, Sancts Relics, Altar-cloathes, Massing,
vestiments, to add gestures, and Fooleries: but Communion Tables only with
Ministers and preachers of the Gospel a chalice, plater, bread and wine,
without more or other furniture, but a decent cloth to cover them.

7. In their effects; the one tending to maintain, erect, propagate and usher
in Gentilisme, Judaisme, Popery, Mass, Massepreists, Transul stantiation and
Superstition among Christians, and to corrupt the doctrine, administration and
right use of the Sacrament, the true cause why the Primitive Christians, why
all reformed Churches and our own Church abandoned and cast them out. The
other to abandon them, and to restore, preserve, perpetuate the purity and
integrity of the Doctrine, use, and administration of the Sacrament, according
to its primitive institution; as the so e^^^ed and subsequent authorities
evidence at large; and Fox Acts and monum^ p. 1211.
King Edward the 6. with his Council both in their Letter to Bishop Ridley,
and in their 6. reasons why the Lords board should rather be after the form of
a Table then of an Altar, punctually resolve.

8. Because all Altars, Sacrifices, Priest, and the Temple itself where the
Altar stood (for the Godwin Moses and Aaron l. 3. c. 2. and l. 2. c. 1.
Jews had no Altars in their Ordinary Synagogues, but only in and about their
Temple, to show that we Christians should have no Altars in our Churches which
succeed their Synagogues not the Temple,) were but types and shadows of Christ
the true Altar, Priest, and Temple, Col. 2. 16. 17. Heb. 7. l. to 15. c. 13.
10. as all the Fathers, and generally all Commentators and Christian writers
accord, and therefore vanished at his death, as the whole Epistles to the
Hebrews, and Galathians, and Colossions c. 2. prove at large. Hence the
Apostle calls Christ himself, our Altar, Heb. 13. 10. and Rev. 6. 9. c. 8. 3.
5. c. 9. 13. do the like, as Expositors old and new, together with King James
himself in his Paraphrase upon the Apocalypse, and our own Martyrs, writers
generally accord.

Hence Hom. 17. Sup. Iesum Nave to^. 1 s. 158 f. 6.
Origin most pertinently resolves thus: The truth therefore was in the Heavens,
but the shadow and example of the truth on earth; and whiles this shadow did
continue on earth, there was an heavenly Jerusalem, there was a Temple, there
was an Altar, there were High Priests and Preistes; But when as in the coming
of God our Savior descending from heaven, truth sprang out of the earth, the
shadows and examples full to the ground, For Jerusalem fell, the Temple fell,
ALTAR SUBLATUM EST, the Altar was taken away, etc. SI ALTAR VIDER IS
DESTITUTUM, etc. If thou shall see the Altar destitute, be not thou sad
thereat, If thou find not the High Priest do not thou despair. EST IN CAELIS
ALTAR, there is an Altar in Heaven, and an High Priests of future good things
stands by it chosen of God; according to the order of Melchisedecke.

Hence In L am. Ier. l. 2. zain: Btbl. Patru^ tom. 9. part. 1. p. 167. etc.
Paschatius Rhadbertus most pertinently concludes: REPVLIT Dominus ALTAR SVVM
DE ECCLESIA, in qua CHRISTVS ALTAR CREDITVR ESSE. Hostia and Sacrificium,
Pontifex and Sacerdos. The Lord has thrust his Altar out of the Church, in
which Christ is BELIEVED TO BE THE (only) ALTAR, obligation and Sacrifice, High
Priest.

And Enarrat in Ps. 118. Oct 3. Tom. 2. p. 422, etc.
S. Ambrose, In 7 Psalm. Poenitent. ^. 235, etc
Gregory the great, Exposit. ^n Exodus c. 20. to 4. Col. 112. 113.
Beda, Comment. in Apoc. c. 47. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 526.
Andreas the Archbishop of Caesaria, In Festo Omnium Sanctorum Sermon. 4. Col.
292, etc.
S. Bernard, with diverse other Fathers expressly resolve; ALTAR DOMINI
CHRISTVS, that Christ himself is the Altar of the Lord, the Altar meant both
in the Hebrews and Apocalypse, and that all Altars were but types of him and
ceased with him. And though some of the punier Fathers 260. years after Christ
and since, do sometimes by a figurative and improper speech, call the
Communion Table, (but more commonly only the Sacramental bread and wine
representing the body and blood of our Savior) the Altar, in respect of the
Psalm. 51. 17. 19. Amos 4^ 5. Hos. 14 2. Heb. 13. 15.
Sacrifices of prayer and praise there offered at the receiving of the
Sacrament, thence called the Eucharist; of the Collections and Alms there and
there given by the Communicants for the releife of the poor, which are called
a Sacrifice an oblation, Heb. 13. 16. Math. 6. 8. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 8.
19. and in as much as Christ's body and blood who is the true Altar; are there
mistically distributed, not out of any relation to, or analogy between Jewish
and Heathen Altars and Tables, or because the Sacrament is in truth a real
Sacrifice as the Papists and our ignorant Popish Innovators fondly dream, yet
they most usually and properly term it only the Lords Table, or Board, and the
Sacrament administered there at, the Lords Supper, as appears by sundry
passages in Nazianz. Orat. in laudem Basily and 21 Oration.
Nazianzen, De verbis Domini secundum Joan. Sermon. 46. Tom. 10. p. 225.
Augustine, Theodoret Dial. Atreptus c. 11.
Theodoret, Hom. 18. in 2. Cor. De Pomitentia Hom. 7. Tom. 5. Col. 746. B. Hom.
45. in Joan. Hom. in Psalm. 22 and 216. Hom. 1. deverbus Isaiae vidi Dom.
Chrysostome^ Com. in Natuum c. 1. Tom. 5. p. 137.
Hieron, Theophylac^t Evar. in 1. Cor. 11.
Oecumenius, Oecumenius in 1. Cor. c. 11.
Theophylact, and other Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 8. Eusebius
Caesariensis apud Damascenum Parallel. l. 3. c. 47. Petrus Blesensis Hom. 20. in
Litania Ma^ai. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l. 12. c. 41. Euthymius in Psalm. 22.
Council. Nicenum. can ^lt. apud Servum Tom. 1. p. 347. Gratianus de consecrat.
distinct. 2.
Fathers,

All these are cited by Bishop Jewel, Bishop Babington. D. Rainolds, and our
writers; they stiling the Cross whereon Christ suffered and was Sacrificed, the
Altar of the Cross, yea faith, the heart and mind of godly men, an Altar, as
frequently as the Communion Table, and in the self same figurative and
improper sense.

Hence S. Hierom iu Psalm. 25. and 31. Tom. 6. p. 30. B. and 46. B. writes thus:
Altar fidelium fides est. FAITH IS THE ALTAR OF THE FAITHFVLL. And the same
Father Comment. in Marc. 9. Tom. 6. p. 58. 79. and Gregory the great Homil.
22. Super Ezechiel f. 209. E. F. aver: Altar Deiest Corbonum, Histia and
Sacrificia bona opera fidelium, THE ALTAR OF GOD IS A GOOD HEART, the good
works of the Faithful are the oblation and Sacrifices. And Origin Contra
Celsum l. 8. tom. 4. fol. 101. writes to the same effect: Celsus charge us
(Christians) that we shun ALTARS, Images and Idol Temples, that so they may
not be erected etc. whiles that he sees nothing in the mean time, that we in
the mean while have the mind of just men insted of Altars and temples; from
which without all doubt the sweet odors of Incense are sent forth, vows, I say
and prayers from a pure conscience. Let whoever will therefore if he please make
inquiry of these Altars which I have last mentioned, and compare them with
these Altars which Celsus has brought in, truly he may plainly understand,
that they verily are inanimate and in process of time will become corruptible;
but these our Altars shall so long continue in the immortal soul, as long as
the reasonable soul shall continue. Now these Fathers thus stiling both the
heart itself, and the mind and faith which have their chief residence in the
heart, an ALTAR; in respect of the spiritual Sacrifices of prayer and praise
offered by faith on a pure heart as on a spiritual Altar, and they stil^ ^ the
Communion Table an Altar B. Jewel. Reply to Harding Art. 30 divis 26. p. 145.
D. Reynold con^^rence with Heart p 476. 477 478 M. Nowell his Reprofe of Dormans
proof p. 15. 16. 17. D. Fulke and M. Cartwright Con^ut of the Rhemish
Testament on Heb. 13. sect. 16. and 1. Cor. 11. sect 18. Fox Acts and Monuments
p. 1211.
only in this sense and in a figurative and improper speech, as they call the
heart, mind end faith an Altar, their phrasing of it an Altar only in this
sense can be no A^gument at all to prove, that it is properly and in truth an
Altar, or in that sense as some now press it.

And these other 3. the heart, mind, and faith, which they term an Altar,
being situated not in the East part, but in the midst of the temple of the
body, are a stonger evidence to prove, that the Table ought to be situated in
the midst of the Church, though it were an Altar, as these 3, termed Altars,
are in the midst of the body; then that the Table is properly an Altar, and
therefore ought to stand in the East end of the Quire Altarwise.

5. Because the Scripture expressly condemns Altars as Jewish and abolished by
Christ, putting Altars, Priests, and their waiting on the Altar, as Jewish and
Heathenish, in direct opposition to the Lords Tables, Ministers, preaching of
the Gospel, consecrating of the Lords Supper at his Table; and distinguishing
Christ and his Ministers, from Aaron and the Priests of his order, in this,
that one of them was to give attendance at the Altar the other not, as is
evident by 3. remarkable Texts of Scripture.

The First of them is the 1. Cor. 9. 13. 14. Do ye not know that they which
Minister about Holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they which
wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; Where Preachers
of the Gospel, are directly distinguished from Priests, waiting on the Altar;
and preaching of the Gospel in the one, put in opposition, to waiting on the
Altar, in the other, The one being Evangelical, the other only Legal and
abolished.

The next Text is that of 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. The Cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ; the bread
which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For we being
many are one bread and one body, and are all partakers of that one bread.
Behold Israel after the flesh, are not they which eat of the Sacrifices
partakers of the Altar? what shall I say then, that the Idol is any thing, or
that which is offered in Sacrifice to Idols is any thing? But I say that the
things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils and not to God;
and I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils. ye cannot drink
the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of Devils, ye cannot be partakers of the
Lords Table and of the Table of Devils; wherein the first part, the Ministers
of the Gospel, who bless, eat, drink, and participate of the Communion of
the body and blood of Christ, and partake of that bread at the Lords Table; are
distinguished from Israel after the flesh, and the Priests of Aaron, who ca^e
of the Sacrifices offered upon Altars, and are partakers of Altars; and the
Lords Table put in opposition to the Jewish Altars; and in the second part, the
Sacrifices, Cup and Table of Devils, and partaking of them, put in opposition
and contradistinction to the Cup and Table of the Lord, and the eating and
drinking of them.

The 3. Text is that of Heb. 7. 12. 13. 14. where Christ himself, his
Preisthood and Ministers, are thus purposely distinguished from Aaron and the
Leviticall Priests, and Preisthood, that one of them gave attendance at the
Altar, the other not: For the Preisthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a change also of the Law: For he of whom these things are spoken
partainet^ ^o another Tribe, OF WHICH NO MAN GAVE ATTENDANCE AT THE ALTAR. For
it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda of which Tribe Moses spoke
nothing concerning Preisthood etc.

In which Text (as David Dickson in his short Explanation of the Epistle of
Paul to the Hebrews, with others observe,) the Apostle proves that Aarons
Preisthood is changed and the Ordinance thereof, because Psalm. 110. speaks of
Christ's Preisthood after the order of Melchisedek, that is freed from the
service of the Altar; and Christ was borne not of the Tribe of Aaron but of
Judah, of which no man gave attendant at the Altar, to wit the material Altar
commanded in the Law. To declare, that Altars and giving attendance at Altars
properly belonging to the Leviticall Preisthood, were abolished by Christ the
true Priest and Sacrifice, of which they were but types; And that as Christ
himself was borne of the tribe of Judah, of which no man gave attendance at
the Altar, so the Ministers of Christ under the Gosple who profess themselves
of his Tribe and Stock, should by his example give no attendance at the Altar,
since he never did, nor ought to do it.

From this remarkable Text, the Church of the forraigners in ^nand An. 1550.
when John de Alasco, that Noble Polonian was their chief Minister and
Superintendent, in the Confession of their faith dedicated to King Edward the
6. and printed at London that same year, Cum Privilegio, make this the 5. note
of Christ's Kingdom, Quod nullum Altarenovit, cum sit ex Tribu Judah in quo nemo
assistit Altari etc. Ibidem.
THAT IT KNOWS NO ALTAR, since he is of the tribe of Juda, wherein NO MAN GAVE
ATTENDANCE AT THE ALTAR, neither needs he the furniture of any mystical
vestiments, that he may enter into typical Sanctuaries or Holy places, all
which things are abolished with this their Preisthood, because the truth of
those things which they did shadow out is exhibited.

And David Dickson in his short Explanation of the Hebrews printed at
Aberdence 1635. p. 126. 127. inferres from thence.

First, that Christ's Preisthood is freed from that Altar which God commanded
in the Law, and all the service thereof.

2. That an other Altar he knows not; and Christ's Preisthood being declared
to be freed from the service of this Altar no Law can tie it to any other.

3. That whosoever will erect another material Altar in Christ's Preisthood,
and tie his Church unto it (as the Papists add, and our New Prelates and
Doctors do now) must look by what Law they do it.

4. That negative Conclusions in matters of faith and duties, follow well from
the Scriptutes Silence. It is not warranted from Scripture therefore I am not
bound to believe it? Since the Apostle here reasons thus; That none of the
tribe of Judah attended the Altar, because Moses speak nothing of that Tribe
concerning the Preist-hood ( which overturnes all Priests, Altars and
attendance at Altars under the Gospel, and the calling of the Lords-Table an
Altar, because the Scripture is silent and speaks nothing of them, but against
them.)

To which I shall add a 5. inference. That Christ himself never gave any
attendance at the Altar, nor yet Melchi^edecke; or any of Christ's Tribe,
Therefore none of Christ's Ministers ought to do it; and that those Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests and Ministers, who will needs have and set up Altars, plead,
write, dispute for Altars, and likewise wait on, serve and give attendance at
the Altar, are only Preistes of Aaron or Baal, and of their Tribe; not
Ministers of Jesus Christ, nor any of his sacred Tribe, none of which gave any
attendance at the Altar; This is the Apostles reason, inference, and the very
drife of his argumentation, not mine, let those therefore whom it concerns
look well unto it, and evade, or answer it as they may.

6. Christians have no such sacrifices, incense-offrings, or oblations, which
require any material Altars to consecrate or offer or sacrifice thereupon, no
spiritual service at all that requires an Altar. Therefore they neither have
nor ought to have any Altar. All their Sacrifices now (as prayer, praise,
liberality to the poor, mortifying their lusts, and the offering up of their
souls and bodies ^living Sacrifice unto God,) are spiritual, requiring
neither a Priest, much less an Altar to Sacrifice or offer them upon, Psalm.
51. 17. 19. Amos 4. 5. H^sea 14. 2. Mich. 6. 8. H^or. 1. 15. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2.
2. Cor. 8. 19. Rom 12. 1. as Third Sermon. upon Jonah.
Bishop Hooper, and Fox Acts and (...). p. 1211.
King Edward the 6. with his Counsel argue: Therefore they neither have nor
ought to h^re any material Altar, but only Christ their spiritual Altar in
heaven, (...) sacrifice and offer them up to God upon.

7. If the Communion Table were an Altar, then it should be greater and better
then the Sacramental bread or wine, or the Lords Supper itself, and a means
to consecrate them. This reason is fully See the Rhemish Notes, and M
Cartwright on this Text.
warranted by our Saviors own resolution, Math. 23. 18. 19. Woe be unto you
ye blind guides which say, whosoever shall swear by the Altar it is nothing,
but whosoever swears by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. Ye fools
and blind, for whether is greather, the gift, or the Altar that sanctifies the
gift? and by Exodus 23. 37. c. 40. 10. where the Altar is called most holy
because it sanctified all the Sacrifices offered thereon as more holy then they,
even as Christ our spiritual altar, consecrates and hallowes all our
spiritual Sacrifices, Hebr. 13. 10. Math. 16. 23. But no man dare or can truly
say, that the Lords Table is better then the bread and wine, or the Lords
Supper itself, (though those who bow and ringe unto it both when there is no
Sacrament on it, and when they have the Sacrament itself in their hand, to
which they give no such adoration, imply it to be so) or that it consecrates
the Sacrament laid upon it; (for what need then any prayer or words of
consecration?) therefore it is no Altar.

8. Every Altar was, and ought to be dedicated and solemnly consecrated unto
God, with special ointments, sprinkling of blood and solemnities; (specially
the Altar of incense and atonement, and those Altars placed in the Temple:)
else they were not to be used or reputed Altars. Exodus 24. 4. to 9. c. 29. 36.
to 45. c. 30. 1. to 11. 23. to, ^0. c. 39. 38. 39. c. 40. 5. 9. 10, etc. Number.
7. 1. 2. Chron. 7. 7. 9. Ezech. 43. 6. to 27. Thus the Gratian. de Consec.
Distinct. ^ Summa Angelica Tit. de Consecrat. Altaris.
Papists use to consecrate and dedicate their Altars, and thus was the Altar of
Wolverhamptons Collegiate Church in the Country of Stafford, upon the 11. day
of October. 1635. solemnly dedicated after the Popish manner, by M. Iefferies
Archdeacon of Salop and others: of which more anon: But our Communion Tables
were never thus consecrated, nor solemnly dedicated; sprinkled and enoyled,
neither in truth ought they to be by any Law of God, or of our Church and
State; Therefore they neither are, nor can be Altars.

9. That which will be a means to make ignorant people and superstitious
falsehearted Ministers to dream of Sacrifices Mass, and Popish Priests, and to
usher Popery, Mass and Masse-Preistes by degrees into our Church again to the
polluting and defiling of Gods house, S^crament and the setting up of gross
Idolatry, must needs be sinful, unlawful and to be abandoned of us: But
the erecting of Altars in our Churches, the calling of Communion Tables,
Altars, and turning of them Altarwise, and so reading second service and
administering at them, will make ignorant people and superstitious false hearted
Ministers still to dream of Sacrifices, Mass, and Popish Priests, and will
usher Popery, Mass and Masse-Preists by degrees into our Church again, etc.
as Sermon. 3. on Jenah.
Bishop Hooper, and others forequoted authorities evidence, and King Edward the
6. and his Council in their 3. reason against Altars resolve, Fox Acts and
Monuments p. 1211. Therefore they must needs be sinful, unlawful, and to be
abandoned of us now, as they have been heretofore, both in King Edward the 6.
and in Queen Elizabeth's days.

10. That which neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the Primitive Church, for
above the 250. years after him, either had or used in their Churches and
administration of the Sacrament, that we (who ought to imitate their example,)
1. Cor. 11. 23. 24. 1. Pet. 2. 21. 1. John 2. 6.) ought not to have erected or
suffer in our Churches.

But neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the primitive Church in her purest
times, for above 250. years after Christ, either had or used any Altars in
their Churches or administration of the Sacrament but Communion Tables only.

Therefore we ought not to have erect or suffer them among us now. This is the
5. reason used by King Edward the 6. and his Counsel against Altars, Fox Acts
and Monuments p. 1211. who propounds it thus: Christ did institute the
Sacrament of his body and blood at his last Supper at a Table, and not at an
Altar, as it appears manifestly by the Evangelists.

And S. Paul calls the coming to the holy Communion, the coming unto the
Lords Supper, and also it is not read that any of the Apostles or the Primitive
Church did ever use any Altar in administration of the Holy Communion. Wherefore
seeing the form of a Table is more agreeable with Christ's institution, and with
the usage of the Apostles, and of the Primitive Church, then the form of an
Altar, therefore the form of a Table is rather to be used, then the form of an
Altar in the administration of the Holy Communion. Now because this truth has
been lately noted with a black Coal, and some what blurred and obseured I
shall produce some few authorities, to clear it.

The third part of our own incomperable Homily, against the Peril of
Idolatry, (confirmed both by 1. Elz. c. 12.
Statute, the Art. 35.
Articles of our Church, and every Ministers Can. 36. 37.
subscription as Orthodox truth p. 44. assures us: That all Christians in the
Primitive Church, as Contra Cells. l. 4. and 8.
Origin against Celsus, Contra Demetriadem.
Cypriam also and Advers. Geutes l. 6
A^nobius do testify, were fore charged and complained on, that they had no
Altars nor Images: It is evident therefore, that they took all Images, (yea all
Altars to, by the same reason) to be unlawful in the Church of the Temple of
God, and therefore had none though the Gentiles therefore were Highly displeased
with them, following this rule, Acts 5.
we must obey God rather then men. So the Homily which Defense of the Apology
Artic. 3. 26. Divis. p. 145.
Bishop Jewel thus seconds.

There have been Altars, says M. Harding; even from the Apostles time, and
that even as it is used now, far from the body of the Church, etc.

This man could never utter so many untruthes together without some special
privilege.

For first, where he says: The Apostles in their time erected Altars, It is
well known that there was no Christian Church yet built in the Apostles times
for the faithful for fear of the Tyrants were feign to meet together in
private houses, in vacant places in woods and Forests, and in Caves under the
ground. And may we think that Altars were built before the Church?

Verily Contra Celsum l. 4
Origin thal lived above 200. years after Christ, has these words against
Celsus: Objicit nobis quod non habemus Imagines, aut Aras, aut Templa; Celsus
charge^h our religion with this, that we have neither Images, nor Altars, nor
Temples.

Likewise says Arnobius l. 6.
Arnobius, that lived somewhat after Origin, writing against the heathens:
Accusatis nos, quod nec Templa habeamus ^oc Imagines, nec Aras. Ye accuse us
for that we have neither Churches, nor Images, nor Altars.

And Volateranus and Vernerius testify, that Sixtus Bishop of Rome, was the
First that caused Altars to be erected. Therefore M. Harding was not well
advised so confidently to say; That Altars have ever been, even sithence the
Apostles time.

Learned M. Thomas Beacon in his Supplication, in the third Volumme of his
works printed Cum Privilegio, and dedicated to all the Bishops of England by
name, and to Queen Elizabeth herself, London 1562. f. 16. In his Comparison
between the Lords Supper and the Popes Mass f. 102. 103. and Relics of Rome
Tit. of Church Goods f. 322. writes thus: Christ, his Apostles, and the
Primitive Church used Tables at the administration of the Holy Communion, The
Primitive Church more then 200. years after Christ's ascension used Tables at
the Celebration of the Divine Mysteries. And who so rude or ignorant of
Antiquities which knows not, that Pope Sixtus the second about the year of
our Lord 265^ brought in the altars first into the Church, utterly forbidding
Tables any more to be used from thenceforth at the administration of the
Lord's Supper: when notwithstanding from Christ's ascension unto that time, the
Lords Supper was always ministered at a Table, according to the practice of
Christ, of his Apostles, and of the primitive Church, Pope Sixtus the second
ordained first of all that the Supper of the Lord should be celebrated at an
Altar, which before was not the use for the Holy mysteries of the Lords body
and blood until that time was ministered upon a Table according to the practice
of Christ, of his Apostles and of the primitive Church; and here may all men
see from whence the Popish altars come, for the which the stuborne stout
Papists do so stoutly strive (and some now too, that call themselves
Protestants) about the year of our Lord if stories be true 265. came in the
Altars first into the Church; others affirm, that they came in about the year
of our Lord 594. But I believe that Altars came not into the Church before the
year of our Lord 590. when the Popish peevish Private Mass began first to
creep in, Volateranus, Durand. Flascit. Mass. Pet. Aequillinus, Joan. Sella.
Thus M. Beacon.

The same is affirmed by learned M. Calshill, in his answer to Marshalls
Treatise of the Cross, printed at London 1565. f. 31. 32. (who proves out of
Origin l. 8. Cont. Celsum; that Christians in Origens age had neither Images
nor Altars,) by M. Thomas Cartwright in his Confutation of the Rhemish
Testament, one the 1. Cor. 11. sect. 18. v. 19. p. 415. with other of our
writers.

All these Authorities (to which the Papists could never ye reply) the Coal
from the Altar page 45. 46. 47. will blow away at one breath; informing us,
that all these our Authors were mistaken in Origens and Arnobius meaning; who
must be understood, not that the Christians had no Altars in their Temples, but
that they had no Altars for bloody or external Sacrifices, as the Gentiles had.

For otherwise it is most certain, that the Church had Altars, both the name
and thing, and used both name and thing along time together before the birth of
Origin or Arnobius either; which he proves by the Testimonies of Tertullian,
Irenaeus, Cyprian, Ignatius, the Apostles Canons, and Heb. 13. 10.

To which I answer, first, that this namelesse Author, in modesty and good
manners, should have rather deemed himself mistaken in the meaning of Origin
and Arnobius, then our Homilies, and these our learnedest writers, whose
judgments and authorities certainly will over balance his.

2. These Authors took their words and meaning aright, what ever is pretended;
as appears.

1. By the Gentiles objection itself: The Gentiles charged the Christians,
that they had neither Temples, nor Images, nor Altars: Was their meaning then,
that they had Temples indeed, but not to sacrifice in, and Images to, but not
to adore; or that in truth they simply had neither Temples nor Images.
Certainly the Coal itself would blush at the first exposition; and the
Papists might else thus pritilie evade these authorities against Images; that
the Christians had Images, but not to adore, though the Gentiles objected they
had none, and Lactantius and Minucius Felix too about that age; expressly
resolved that they had no Temples nor Images at all.

Their meaning therefore being (as our Homilies, and those very words themselves
resolve,) that they had no public Temples, no Images at all, for any
assemblies, use, or purpose; their meaning likewise must be, that they had no
Altars at all for any purpose; (not, no Altars for any bloody and external
Sacrifices as the Gentiles had, but yet they had them to administer the
Sacrament on, as he falsely glosseth it:) Since the w^nt of Temples, Images^
Altars are all coupled together, and objected to them in the same sense and
manner.

Now had the Christians in that age had Temples, but not for Idols service,
Images, but not to adore; Altars, but not to offer bloody and external
Sacrifices on, as the Coal Glosseth it; the Gentiles would then never have
objected the want of Temples, Altars, or Images to them, as is probable; since
they had them, but their not sacrificing on them, and adoring them as they did,
and not making a right use of them who^ they had them; as we tax all covetous
men, or Nonpreaching Ministers, that are Scholars, not for having no money or
learning, but for not making such use of them as they should.

The very objection therefore cleares it infallibly, that they had no Temples,
Images or Altar at all.

2. The Fathers answers to these objections will take of this Cavil quite.

Minucius Felix (flourishing in Tertullians time, 200. years after Christ) in
his Octavius Oxoniae 1627, p. 104, First mentions this Objection of the
Gentiles, and gives this pi^hie reply thereto; But think ye that we conceal
what we worship, if we have not Images, Temples and Altars? For what Image
shall I feine to God, when as if thou rightly judge, man himself is Gods
Image? what Temple shall I build to him, when as this whole world fabricated by
his workmanship can not contain him? And why I being aman remaining more at
large, shall I imprison the power of so great a Majesty with in one little
house? Is he not better to be dedicated in our mind? yea is he not to be
consecrated in our breast? shall I offer Sacrifice and burnt offerings to God,
which he has brought forth only for my use, that I should cast back his gift
unto him, is an ungrateful thing; when as a good mind, and a pure heart, and a
sincere conscience is a Sacrifice fit to be offered to him. Therefore he who
embraces innocence, supplicates to the Lord, he who follow ^j^stice,
sacrifices to God; he who absteines from dece^ts, attaineth God^ he who
delivers aman from danger, slays the best oblation: These are our Sacrifices;
these are Gods Holy things, thus among us, he is most religious, who is most
just etc.

Where this acute Father clearly acknowledges, that the Christians had no
material Temples, Images, Altars or Sacrifices, at all among them, but only
spiritual sacrifices, Altars and oblations; and had they then in truth had any
real Temples, Images, Altars; he would no doubt have all aged and confessed,
yea proved, that they had them though they knew not of them, and so have
stopped their mouths by falsifying their objection, and showing the Gentiles
the righ^use of them, to free them from any further Cavil of not using them at
all, or amiss.

The like Answer Contra Ce^s. l. 8. Tom. 4. f. 101 Cells. and Aras and
simulachra and delubro, nos aut diffugere QVO MINVS FVNDENTVR, etc.
Origin gives to Celsus; Celsus (writes he) says that we shun the very
building both of Altars, and of Images, and of Temples, not suffering them to be
erected (an infallible evidence and charge, that they had none at all for any
purpose, because they would not so much as suffer them to be built, but shunde
the very making of them.) When as he sees nothing in the mean time, how that
we have the mind of just men in ^^eed of, (or for) our Altars and hearthes; out
of which without all doubt the sweetest odors, of incense are sent forth, and
prayers out of a more pure conscience. Let any man therefore that will examine
these Altars, which I have newly mentioned, and if he lift compare them with
these Altars which Celsus has brought in.

Verily he shall plainly understand, (...) mate and will be corrupted in
process of (...) or Altars in an immortal soul, shall continue as long, as
the reasonable soul, shall be pleased to dwell therein, etc.

But we truly have Images not made by any impure work men, but framed and
formed in us by the word of God itself, to wit the virtues imitating the
first borne of every creature, etc. in which I should believe it fitting, that
honor should be ascribed to him who is the exemplar of all Images, to wit the
Image of the invisible God, the only begotten God, etc. Which he thus seconds
in another place:

Contra Cells. l. 7. f. 96. 97. l. 4. f. 46. 47.
The Christians (says Celsus) cannot endure either Temples or Altars, or
Images and Statutes to be looked upon, they openly disprayse Images etc.

To which Origin thus replies: The Christians and also the Jews, when they
hear, thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve;
neither shall thou make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above or in the earth beneath, etc. and for many things
not unlike these, do not only dislike the Temples of the Gods, and Altars, and
these Images, but would if there be a necessity rather run more willingly to
death, then out of any sin or impiety altogether defile what they rightly
think of God the maker of all things, etc.

Therefore Celsus affirms, that Images are by noe means to be esteemed for
God, but dedicated to the Gods; when as it is plainly perspicuous, that to
make and affirm such things, is the part of such men as are about the
divinity. But we shall not so much as account them as Images of the divine
Image, as those who may make no form as of the invisible, so also of the
incorporiall God.

By both which charges and replies, it is clear, that Christians in those
days had no material Temples, Altars, Images; but only spiritual Temples,
Altars and Sacrifices in their hearts, and breasts, and that they rejected all
material Altars, Images and Sacrifices as unlawful, and abominable. Origin
himself not denying the charge to be true, but justifying the Christians for
having neither, S. Arnobius in his 6. Book against the Gentiles, brings them
in thus objecting: In this part ye have used to fix the greatest crime of
impiety upon us, that we neither build sacred houses for the Offices of
worship, that we constitute not the Image or form of any of the Gods, that we
built no Altars, etc. (A plain charge against the Christians, that they then
neither had, nor yet would build any Temples, or set up any Images or Altars,
which they could not have objected if they had then any,) that we offer not the
blood of slain beasts, not Frankincense, not salted corn, and that we bring
not in liquid wine powered out in bowls.

Which things verily (says Arnobius) we do not therefore give over and
forbear, either to build or do, as if we carried impious and wicked minds, or
had taken up some contempt against the Gods out of a rash despair, but because
we think and believe the Gods; (if so be they are Gods indeed, and endued with
the eminency of this name?) will either deride these kinds of Honors, if
they can laugh, or will take them ill at our hands, if they may be exasperated
with the motions of anger.

After which he shows at large the reasons, why Christians build no Temples,
made no Images or Altars, and offered no such Sacrifices at all to God, and why
they thought it unlawful so to do; not denying the objection but confessing
the matter of fact to be true, and defending it from the very fundamental
grounds of Religion; which he would never certainly have done had the
Christians then had any material Temples, Images or Altars for any divine or
spiritual use.

Instit. l. 6 De ver^ Cultu c. 24.
S. Lactantius, his Scholar, meets with the same objection, and answers it in
this manner: Whosoever shall obey all these heavenly precepts, he is a
worshipper of the true God, whose Sacrifices are meekn^^s of mind, and an
innocent life and good actions.

All which things he who exhibits, sacrifices so often as he shall do any
good or pions thing. For God desires not a Sacrifice, neither of a male
creature, neither of death and blood, but of a man and of life. To which
Sacrifice there is no need of Laurel or sacred leaves to adore the Altar, or
rushes or green turfes which verily are most vain, but of those things that
are brought forth out of a sincere heart.

Therefore upon the Altar of God, which is truly the greatest, and is placed in
the heart of man which cannot be defiled with blood, is laid righteousness,
Pretense, faith, innocence, chast^ty, abstinence. What mean Temples; what
Altars, what finally Images themselves, which are either the monuments of dead,
or absent persons.

After which he Instit. l. 2 c. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7 11. 17. 18. 19.
disputes excellently against Images showing why Christians had none, and
concludes, that D^^^lls were the Authors of Images, wherefore without doubt
there is no Religion, where ever there is an Image.

From all these Fathers answers, therefore, it is most clear and evident, that
the Christians in their times had neither Images nor Altars; and that they held
them both unlawful, unnecessary, ranking them both together as Paganism,
Iudaisme and Idolatr^^; they then using no Altars (no not to consecrate the
Sacramention,) for fear of inclining to Gentelisme or Iudaisme, or hardening
the Jews or Gentiles in the use of their abolished idolatrous Sacrifices or
Altars.

3. These Histories forecited, which affirm, Se Tho^^ Becons Relics of Rome.
fol. 322. a.
that Pope Sixtus the second about the (...) 65. or 294, or after, first
brought in Altars into the Church, will quite take of this absurd evasion.

For these Altars thus introduced by him, were not for any bloody or external
Sacrifice, such as the Jews or Gentiles used, but only to consecrate and
receive the Sacrament at, as all acknowledge.

If then Altars even to administer the Sacrament at, were then first brought
into the Church, and not before, as Historians generally accord; then
certaynely the Christians before that time, had no Altars, ^o not for the
c^l^brating of the Lords Supper on; and so these authorities of Origin,
Arnobius, Minucius Faelix, and Lactantius, must necessarily be intended, as all
the forecited writers, and our Homilies interpret them, that Christians had no
Altars at all in those times, no not to celebrate the Sacrament on, and then
the shift in the Page 45^ 46. 47.
Coal, that they had Altars for this purpose, but not for any bloody or
external Sacrifices, must need be fabulous and forged, having no Authority,
that I know to back it in any writer.

Now whereas to justify this apparent falsehood, as I have manifested it,
Object.
the authority of some Fathers before Origin or Arnobius, stiling the Lord
Table, an Altar, is pretended, and so the name, and thing itself, used and
known among Christians before that age.

I answer, Answer.
that these authorities in truth, when once examined, will vanish into smoke.
To take them according to their Antiquity, not their Order.

The ancient and maine Authority is that of Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar. But
this I shall afterward prove, to be meant only of Christ himself, not of the
Communion Table, as all the Fathers and ancient expositors, our own writers,
and Martyrs, and all Protestant Divines accord, without dissent, or question.
So that this proves nothing.

That of the Apostles Canons (the (...) in pretended Antiquity) has been long
since disclaimed and branded as Cooks Censura p. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
counterfeit coin by all our learned writers, and many Papists themselves, yea
as a spurious brat of some later age, many hundred years after the Apostles
and the puriest of these Fathers.

Neither are Ignatius his Epistles of any better authority, being all forgid
and spurious, a^ Censura p. 59. 60. 61.
M. Cook has undeniably proved them. But admit them true, yet they made
little to the purpose. For that of his 6. Epistle ad Maguesianos, is but this:
Run all together into the Temple of God as to one Altar, to one Jesus Christ,
the High Priest of the only begotten God.

That in his 9. Epistle to the Philadelphians but this: There is one flesh of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and one blood of his shed for us, and one Cup, which is
distributed to us for all man, one Altar to all the Church.

And that in his 7. Epistle of Tarsenses but this; Esteem Widows continuing
in chastity as the Altar of God.

Neither of these style the Communion Table, the Altar; the two first of them
being meant of Christ, and the Church itself, the last and first used
figuratively and by way of similitude, only; the first applied to the Church,
the other to Widows, neither to the Communion Table, the thing in question.

That of Irenaeus, the next ancient, is to as little purpose his words advers.
Haereses l. 9. c. 20. being but these; David was a Priest to God, although Saul
persecuted him: Omnes justi Sacerdotalem habent ordinem: yea all just men have
a Preistly order, or are Priests So all the Apostles of the Lord are Priests,
who neither inherit Feiles, nor houses, but always serve God and the Altar, of
whom even Moses in Deutr. spoke in the benediction of Levy: who says to his
Father and Mother, I have not known thee, etc.

Which Text speaks not of the Communion Table, nor of any proper Priests, or
Altars, but only of spiritual and metaphorical Priests and Altars.

For it termed all righteous men, Priests that attend on God and his Altar, and
he says, the Apostles were such when they plucked the ears of corn, they
then waiting on God and the Altar, which was long before the Communion Table or
Lords Supper was instituted, so that here the Altar; if properly meant, is not
the Lords Table but the Jewish Altar, and that before the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper instituted; If allegorically and spiritually, it is meant only of
Christ, our spiritual Altar, Heb. 13. 10. Rev. 65. 9. on whom all the
faithful, who are spiritual Priests, 1. Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 1. 6. do waste, not
of the Lords Table, at which none but Ministers serve and consecrate. So that
this makes nothing to the purpose.

What Irenaeus means by the Altar, will appear more evidently by his own
words. Adv. Haer. l. 4. c. 34. where, as he styles the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, not the Sacrifice or Sacrament of the Altar, but So he styles it also
l. 5. p. 540. 541.
the Eucharist, (with which he joins no other oblation used among Christians,
but only that of praise and thankgiving, neither of which requires an Altar;)
so he writes, that God will have us also offer a gift at the Altar, (to wit
the Sacrifice of prayer and praise) frequently without intermission.

And least any one should here dream of a material Altar here on earth, he
explaines himself what he means by the Altar, and where this Altar is
situated in the very next words, EST ERGO ALTAR IN CAELIS, etc. Therefore our
Se Aug. de Sanctis Sermon. 11. B. Jewels Reply to Harding Artic. 20. divis. 3.
p. 440, 441. and Art. 1. divis. 9. p. 18. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c. 4.
accordingly, who use this very expression, that the Altar is in heaven, and
Christ the Altar.
ALTAR IS IN THE HEAVENS: For thither all our prryers are directed.

Irenaeus therefore neither knew, nor spoke of any Altar that Christians then
had, but of Christ himself, who is now in heaven, neither does he so much as
once style the Lords Table, an Altar, nor make mention of an Altar, whereat the
Sacrament was administered throughout his works. His authority therefore might
well have been spared.

The next Father is Tertullian, out of whom two passages are alleged; One,
out of his Book de Poenitentia, where he remembers Geniculationem ad Aras.
Bowing and ducking to Altars, now much in use. But certainly Altars in that
age had not obtained so much dignity, as to be adored and bowed to, since the
consecration of them came in long after, in Pope Felix time, as Reliq. of Rome
of Church Goods vol. 3. f. 322.
M. Thomas Becon writes out of Sabellicus and Pantaleon, neither can it be
proved, that Christians in that age used to bow to Altars.

This authority therefore is suspicious, and to put it out of doubt, Erasmus,
Rhenanus, Junius, and Censurae Pat (...) p. 80.
M. Cook prove it, not to be Tertullians but some conterfeit thrust upon him,
the phrase being certainly none of his, no nor some things mentioned therein
so ancient as his age. This counterfeit authority therefore will not stand the
Coal in any stead.

The second passage is that in his Book de Oratione c. 14. Nonne solemnior
^rit statio tua^si^ad Atam Deisteris? Here is standing only at the Altar
mentioned, not kneeling or bowing to, or at it, So that these two Authorities
seem to thwart one another at the first view.

To this I answer, that though this Book be generally conceived Tertullans,
yet I suspect, that the additions after the end of the Lords prayer explained,
where in this passage is, are none of his. For I find this passage in them: Sic
and die Paschae quo communis and quasi publica jejunij religio est, merito
deponiemus of culum, etc. which intimates, that Christians on Easter day did
Keep, a common and public Fast, and therefore refused to kiss one another^ And
it makes Easter day, not to be Stationum dies; a day of praying standing, as
the next words prove.

Now it is certain, that Tertullian in his Book de Corona Militis, writes,
that the Christians in his age thought it a great wickedness to fast or to pray
kneeling on the Lords day, being the joyful day of Christ's resurrection, much
more then to do it upon Easter day; and that the Christians did not fast but
rejoice in remembrance of Christ's resurrection from Easter to whitsontide.

No Ecclesiastical writer extant then making mention of any solemn fast or
praying kneeling observed by Christians, in that age on Easter day; who thereon
ever used to Feast and rejoice, See Greg. Nys. Orat. 3. de resur and all the
Fathers on that Text.
applying, that of the Psalmist to this day and Feast, Psall. 118. 24. This is
the day which the Lord has made we will rejoice and be glad in it. This
passage makes me suspicious, that the later part of this Book is none of his.

Add to this; That Cyprian (a Hierom de scripto. Eccl. with others in the
lives: of Cyprian and Tertul. pr^fixed to their works.
great admirer of Tertullian, whom he styled his Minister) makes no mention of
this Book or of Tertullian, or of any Altar or Stations at the Altar, or Kiss
of peace, or other such Customs and Ceremonies, in his Exposition or
Commentary on the Lords Prayer, which is probable he would have done, had
Tertullian written any such Book as this, or had these Ceremonies or Altars
been then in use, they being both Countrymen flourishing successively in the
same Church. Moreover, this Book makes mention of Hermas Book, entitled the
Pastor, by way of approbation, and gives an answer to an objection out of it;
when as in his Book de Pudicitia, he thus censures it as counterfeit;
Scriptura Pastoris ab omni Concilio Ecclesiarum etiam vestrarum inter
Apocrypha, falsa and adultera judicatur, as the Cooks Censura p. 13.
Books now passing under his name are accounted.

Moreover, in this very Book of Tertullian, in his Book de Corona Militis,
and so in S. Cyprian on the Lords Prayer, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
by both of them, jointly styled, the Eucharist, and both of them interpret,
Give us this day our daily bread, of Christ, who is our living and true bread
which came down from heaven; whose body the Sacramental bread is esteemed,
and on whom we daily feed in the Sacrament, and Eucharist.

Now both of them stiling the Sacrament, the Eucharist, and speaking not of any
Sacrifice or Sacrament of the Altar, but only of spiritual bread to be eaten
of us, (neither of a Table) we may doubt this passage to be none of his.

Beside this, that famous Eusebius Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 8.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, flourishing but 240. years after Christ, very
near Tertullians time, writes thus to Sixtus Bishop of Rome, that an ancient
Minister, who was a Bishop long before him (a plain evidence, that Ministers
and Bishops were then both one, and so promiscuously styled) being present when
some were baptized and hearing the interrogatories and answers came weeping and
wailing to him, and falling prostrate at his feet confessed and protested that
the baptism where with he was baptized of the heretics was not true,
whereupon he desired to be rebaptized: which he durst not do, but told him,
that the daily Communion many times ministered might suffice him; when he had
been present at the LORDS-TABLE, and had streched forth his hand to receive the
holy food, and had communicated, and of a long time had been partaker of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, I durst not again baptize him, but
bade him be of good cheer, of a sure faith, and boldly to approach unto the
Communion of the Sincts. But he for all this morunneth continually, horror with
draws him from the LORDS-TABLE, and being entreated hardly, is persuaded to
be present at the Ecclesiastical prayers.

In which ancient undoubted Epistle to the Pope himself, we have not mention
at all of any Altar, or Sacrament, or Sacrifice of the Altar, but twice
together the name of the Lords Table, and also of a daily Communion, holy food,
ministering and partaking of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.
Which being the proper genuine and undoubted language of that age, makes me
doubt these passages of Tertullian to be forged or corrupted.

De praes. adv. haer p 182 189. Ad uxore^. l. 2 128 129 130 De Coronr Militis
p. (...). and (...) ^ent.
He, as also Diaelogus cum Tryphone and Apol. 2.
Justine Martyr, and Clemens Alexandrinus, often times making mention of the
Lords Supper, the Eucharist, bread and wine, receiving the Eucharist at the
hands of the Presidents or chief Ministers, and the Tables to, but never of
any Sacrament of the Altar, nor of an Altar, but only here.

Finally, all the forequoted Fathers and Authors expressly determine, that the
Christians and Fathers of the Primitive Church for above 250, years after
Christ had no Temples, Altars, nor Images at all, and that Altars were first
brought in by Pope Sixtus the second, about the year of our Lord 265. after
Tertullians age.

This authority therefore of his, and all others cited in the Coal, and
Ster^at. l. 1. and 4. Cent. Mag. 2. c. 6. De Retibus (...) Coena^ Dominica^.
great part of Page 43. 44. 45. 46
D. Pocklingtons Sunday no Sabbath concerning the Antiquity of Churches,
Temples, Altars and Bishops chaires among Christians with in 200. years after
Christ, must needs be fabulous and Apocryphal. He for the most part taking the
name Church and Churches, in the Authors quoted (or in truth misquoted) by him,
for material Churches, which they mean only of the Christian Congregations,
who had then no public Churches, but only private places in Woods, Chambers,
Vaults, Caves, and the like, to meet in, as Apol. adv ^entes.
Tertullian^, Reply to Harding Artic. 3. divis. 26. p. 144.
Bishop Jewel, and our The 3. part of the Homily against the Paril of
Idolatry p 66. 67.
own Homilies witness.

But admit this Book and Passage to be Tertullians own, yet then it may be a
question; whether Tertullian means by Aram the Lords-Table, or that place
wherein the Christians met. ^e Calep. and Holioke in their Dictionar. Ara.
Ara signifying a Sanctuary, as well as an Altar.

If the place wherein the Christians assembled, as the words preceding, and
drift of the place import, ( Sle militer de statlonum diebus, non putant
plerique Sacrificiorum Orationibus interveniendum, quod Statio solvenda sit
accepta corpore Domini. Ergo denotum Deo obsequium Eucharistia resolvit, an
magis Deo obligat? Nonne solemnor erit statio s^ad Aram Dei steteris? (to wit
after the Sacrament received) Accepto corpore Domini, and reservatio utrumque
salarum est, and participatio Sacrificij, and executio officij: which cannot
properly be intended, that Tertullian would have the Christians stand all at
the Altar, and not depart from it after they had received Christ's body and
blood, standing still in the place that they received in: but, that they should
not depart out of the place wherein they assembled, till all prayers and divine
offices were fully ended.

If I say it be meant only of the place or Sanctuary itself, then, it makes
nothing to the purpose; if of the Altar or Communion Table itself, then it
will inevitably follow hence, that the Christians of that age received the
Sacrament only standing, not kneeling, and so it more disadvantageth the
objector one way then benefits him another

However, it is but a single Testimony, and therefore ought not to
^ver-ballance those many pregnant, weighty, punctual authorities to the
contrary.

The last authority, to prove the name and use of Altars in the Primitive
Church before Arnobius and in O^igens time, is S. Cyprians: Three places out of
him are quoted in the Coal, but the words not cited.

The first is his Epist. l. 1. Epist. 7. in Erasin. and Epist. 74.
Epistle to Epictetus and the people of Assuras. As if it were lawful after
the Altars of the Devil, to approach to the Altar of God etc. whence we behold
and believe this censure to have come from the disquisition of God; ne apud
Altar consistere, that they should not persevere, to stand at the Altar, or
any more to handle it: And that they should contend with all their might, that
such should not return again, ad Altaris impiamenta and contagia fratrum, to
the polluting of the Altar, and contagion of the brethren.

The second is his Epist. l. 1 Epist. 9. Epist. 69. in Pamel.
Epistle to the Presbyters, Deacons and people of Furnis. It was long ago
ordained in a Council of Bishops, that no Clergy man or Minister of God
should be appointed an Executor or overseer, of any man's will, since all who
are honored with divine Preisthood ought not to addict themselves to any thing,
but only to serve the Altar and Sacrifices, and to prayers and orisons.

The Leviticall Tribe which did wait on the Temple, and Altar, and divine
service, had no inheritance or temporal portion allotted them among their
brethren, but others manuring the earth, they should only worship God, etc.
Therefore Victor since, against the form lately prescribed to Priests in the
Council, he has adventured to appoint Geminius Faustinus being a Presbyter, a
Tutor, non est quod prodormitione ejus apud vos fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio
nomine ejus in Ecclesia frequentetur, ut Sacerdotum decretum religiose and
necessary, factum, servetur a nobis, simul and caeteris fratribus detur
exemplum, ne quid Sacerdotes and ministros Dei Altari ejus and Ecclesiae
vocantes, ad saeculares molestias devocet.

The third is his Epist. l. 1 Epist. 12. Apud Pameliu^ 70. p. 101.
Epistle to Januarius. Porro autem Eucharistia and unde baptizati unguntur
oleum, in Altari sanctificatur, sanctificare autem non potuit olei creaturam,
qui nec Altar habuit, nec Ecclesiam, unde nec unctio spiritalis apud
haereticos potest esse; quando constet oleum sanctificari and Eucharistiam
fieri apud illos omnino non posse. And in his Oration de Coena Domini, we find
only once mention of the Lords Table, and twice of an Altar.

To these authorities I answer first in general; that the often mention of an
Altar in these places, rather argues the Epistles, and this Sermon not to be
Cyprians, then that the Christians, in his time had Altars, which all the
forecited Fathers and Authors deny.

2. That many forged works are attributed to S. Cyprian, and many places in
him corrupted, as Bastards of the false Fathers p. 11. to 18
D. James and M. Alexander Cook have proved, and among the vest they manifest
his Sermon de Coena Domini, (which mentions Altars) with other of his works to
be none of his, but Arnoldus Bonavillacensis, Censura p. 75. to 82
living about the year of our Lord 1156. at least 900. years after Cyprian:
and these Epistles, for ought I know, may be his or some others; Se Cooks
Censura, D. L^nes and D. Favar.
most at least many of the Epistles, or attributed to other of the Fathers and
Popes, being spurious.

3. The name Altar is not usual in any Orthodox undoubted writers of that age;
and Dionysius^Alexandrinus (as I have proved in his Epistle, registered by
Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 8.
Eusebius) living about S. Cyprians age, twice terms it only the Lords Table.

4. Pamelius in his Notes on these Epistles, seems to stagger at them, nor
knowing certainly to de fine what time they were written, nor what the parties
were to whom, or concerning whom, they were directed.

5. S. Cyprian in many other Epistles that are undoubtedly his calls the
Sacrament only the Eucharist, the Lords Supper, the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood, and the Table in S. Paul's words, only the Lords Table.

And in his Epist. l. 2 Epist. 3. in Pamelius Epist. 63.
Epistle to Caelicius only concerning the Cup in the Sacrament, which all
coufes to be his, he confines all men most punctually to our Saviors
institution and example in all things concerning the Sacrament, writing, that
Bishops through out the world ought to hold the reason of the Evangelical
truth, and Dominicall tradition, nor to depart from those things which Christ
our Master has both commanded and done by any humane and novell Tradition;
that we ought herein to do only what the Lord has done before; that if S.
Paul or an Angel from heaven should teach us to do any thing, then what
Christ has once taught us and his Apostles preached they are and should be to
us an Anathema: That Christ only is to be heard; therefore we ought not to
attend what any one before us shall think meet to be done, but that Christ who
is before all men, has first done.

Neither ought we to follow the custom of any man, but the truth of God. For
if we are the Ministers of God and Christ, I find none whom we ought more or
rather to follow then God and Christ.

S. Cyprian therefore tying himself and all men thus strictly to Christ's
institution, and example, in all points and circumstances of the Sacrament: And
Christ and his Apostles never administering it at an Altar, nor stiling the
Lords-Table, an Altar, and his Apostles never serving nor giving attendance at
an Altar, I cannot but from hence conclude, that these Passages certainly are
none of Cyprians. But to come to the particular scanning of these authorities.

1. I answer, That the first of them does not precisly call the Lords-Table, an
Altar, nor expressly affirm, that Christians then had Altars, being a mere
allusion to the Priests and Altars under the Law, relating to that of 1. Cor.
9. 13. and Exodus 29. 37. 44. as the Text itself does evidence. Which allusions
were frequent in our Ministers, Prayers, and Sermons, when we had no Altars in
our Church for them to wait at, nor Communion Tables called or known by the
names of Altars.

2. That it mentions a Canon and Constitution made at least 60. years after S.
Cyprians time, to wit in the Council of Anegra An. 314. Canon 1. 2. 3. there
being no such Canon extant in any Council held in his age, which makes it
suspuious if not spurious, written long after his decease.

3. If this Epistle make any thing for Altars, then, it makes far more
against our Bishops tenets and power now, since it expr^sly affirms, that the
people have power, and are boundin conscience to reject always, and not to
receive any man for their Bishop, or to admit him to enjoy his Bishopric, who
shall fall away from the truth to heresy, or Idolatry; that by such a lapse
he ipso facto loses his Bishopric, and, becomes no Bishop, neither ought to
be admitted to his former degree of a Bishop, but the people are to elect a new
in his ste^d; the maine, scope and drist of this Epistle.

To the second I answer, that this Epistle mentions, a Canon LONG BEFORE in a
full Council, not in S. Cyprians age, for ought appears, before whose days
we read of no such Council, but long after; Yea Pamelius notes, that this
Epistle was written in some Council, in what he knows not, belike in the 1.
3. or 4. Council of Carthages, an hundredth years after that under S. Cyprian;
In which Counsels the Council. Carthag. 1 Can. 6. 9. and 3. Can. 15. and 4.
Can. 18. 20.
Constitution mentioned in this Epistle, (written as is evident by the subject
of it, after these 3. Counsels) was made and decreed; and so not S. Cyprians.
And indeed the words, Non est quod pro dormitione ejus fiat oblatio, a^t
deprecatio nomine ejus in Ecclesia frequentetur; discover it rather to be some
late Popish Friars, then his.

But admit it his, yet the word Altar, and expression herein used, is but an
allusion to that of 1. Cor. 9. 13. and does not expressly define the Lords Table
to be an Altar, or so named or reputed in his age, or that the Christians then
had Altars.

And if it makes any thing for Altars in that age, yet that expressly condemns
Clergiemens intermedling with any secular offices, or employments whatsoever,
since they ought wholly, yea solely to addict and devote themselves to Gods
service, prayer, preaching, and other spiritual duties of their ministerial
function.

A shrowde Tui opinionem nominis enormiter gravat, quod causas sanguinis agis,
quod abjecta Ecclesiarum solicitudine negocijs seculari^us te tott^m occupas,
and involuis. Verum tamen tui professio ordini^, nec degeneres saeculi curas,
nec saevitiam gladij materialis admittis Apost. dicit. Secularia negotia si
habueri^is, eos, qui contemptibiliores sunt inter vos, ad judicandu^ eligite.
Non decet ordinem profeffionis tuae in alea tanti diutius ludere and salute
anime spietate ade^ damnabiliter secularibus involuere montemque Seir
Bariginoso spiritu circumine. Petr. Blesens. Epist. 42. ad Epist. Camoracenj.
check to some of our present Prelates and Clergiemen, now most zealous for
Altars, who dare presume to take upon them temporal offices, honors,
employments, and so far to engage themselves in Secular, Temporal, Civil,
or State affairs, that many of the^ almost wholly neglect their spiritual
functions and duties, serving the world and Mammon more then God himself.

To the third, I answer that this savors not of Cyprians age, in being not the
use of Christians then to consecrate chrisme, or the Sacrament, on an Altar,
much less the Doctrine of that time, that Chrisme or the Eucharist could not
be consecrated without an Altar, which doctrine being quite contrary to what
this Father delivers in his forecited Epistle to Coelicius, I may farther
affirm it, to be a l^^e Popish fo^gerie and imposture, then S. Cyprians. And
so (...) all the premises I may now safely conclude, notwithstanding these
objected authorities in the Coal, that the Primitive Church and Christians for
above 250. years after Christ had no Altars, neither did they repute or call
the Lords Table an Altar, and so my ^ 9. Argument still holds good, maugre all
those spurious Fathers and newminted evasions. I now proceed to my 10. Argument:

10. Those things and names which the whole Church, State, and most approved
writers of our Church of England have censured, abandoned, and condemned upon
good, godly, pious grounds, and considerations heretofore, ought not to be
patronized, used, written, preached for, revived, or new erected in our
Churches now.

But the whole Church, State, and most approved writers of the Church of
England have censured, abandoned, and condemned Altars, with their names, and
the calling of the Communion Tables, upon Fox Acts and monum. p. 1211.
good, godly, pious grounds and considerations heretofore. Therefore they ought
not to be patronized used written for or preached, revived, or new erected in
our Churches now; The Major is unquestionable, the Minor evidently proved in,
and by the premises, which yet to make more perspicuous, I shall further clear
by these ensuing authorities, Se H^d. Cant. O^or l 3 s. 271
Osotius, See Novells Reproof of Dormans Proof f. 15. 16. 17.
Dormian, In his Preface before his Reply to B. lewell.
Harding, Notes on 1. Cor. 11. sect. 18. on Hebr. 13. sect. 6.
the Rhemists, See Reynolds Conf with Hare c. 8. div 4.
Heart, and Garner deEuchar. and others forecited.
other Papists, complained of King Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth, and the
Church of England in their time, that they had taken away, broken down,
demolished all the Altars, and cast them out of the Church, setting up profane
Tables or Oister-boards, as they termed them in their steeds, using only such
Tables, not Altars, to consecrate the Lord's Supper on; blaming our Church in
the self same manner, De Eucharistia, or the Sacrament of the Altar.
and for the self same cause, as the Idolatrous heathens did the Christians in
the Primitive Church, for that we have no Altars to consecrate upon.

A clear Confession and apparent evidence, that the Church of England both in
King Edwards, and Queen Elizabeth's days, abolished and condemned Altars.

Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester scoffingly accused the Protestants in
King Edward days, that they had no Altars, but Tables and Boardes to eat and
drink at; to which Peter Martyr. Defensia ad^. Guard. deEuchar.
Peter Martyr Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford in King
Edwards days, returned this answer; What use is there of an Altar, where no
fire burns, nor beasts are slain for Sacrifices. And concerning bowing to
Altars (a Popish Ceremony or rather Idolatry or superstition now much
practiced, both without Scripture and Canon) he there thus determines; If an
Angel from heaven would provoke us to adore either Sacraments or Altars, let
him be accursed. I do not think (says he) that any of the Fathers were
polluted with so gross Idolatry, as to bow their bodies before Altars,
especially when there is no Communion; but if at any time they shall be
discovered to have done thus, let none of us be lead by their Books, or
examples to decline from the strict observation of Gods Law, which peremptorily
forbids, the making of Idols and bowing to them or before them. This was
this great learned man's judgment concerning Altars and bowing to them.

William Wraghton in his hunting of the Romish Fox, 2. William Wraghton
dedicated to King Henry the 8. Basil. 1543. writes thus of the Popish Prelates
of England. f. 12, Ye hold still Vestiments, Popes, incense and ALTARS,
organes and crosses in the Church, all which ordinances, Constitutions, and
Ceremonies the Pope has devised and maed, Ergo ye still have the Pope.
Receiving Altars among Popish ordinances and Ceremonies in receiving whereof
the Pope is still retained.

William Salisbury, 3 William Salisbury.
in his Battery of the Popes Batter, printed at London Cum Privilegio Anno
1550. and dedicated to the Lord Rich. then Lord Chancellor of England, spends
that whole discourse in condemning Altars, as Heathenish, Jewish, Popish, and
unfit to be tolerated in Churches; to the end that the rude and simple people
being better persuaded by manifest texts of Holy Scripture, should not have
occasion to murmer grudge, or be offended, neither with the godly proceedings
of the victorious Metropolitan of England (who as redoubted grand Captine, has
first enterprised, on this most notable feat) nor with any other Bishop or
Lawful Officer, that attempted to pluck down and remove the Popish Altars
out of Christ's, Churches and Temples; in the maintenance whereof he was fully
persuaded, that all the learned Popist^ would stiffly continue, as he there
professes in his Preface to the Reader.

In which Treatise, after he had showed Altars to be Jewish and Heathenish,
serving only for Sacrifices and offerings, which ended in and with Christ's
off^ing up of his body once for all: be concludes thus: So then now if it be a
clear case, and that by the plain text of Holy Scripture, that since Christ
was once offered on the Altar of the Cross, all carnal Sacrifices, and all
manner of offerings, that ever were wont to be offered upon the Altars, be wholly
extinguished, utterly void and of none effect. And in as much as no man (being
in his right wit when he advisedly perceives and plainly understands, that
the cause of the first invention and building of the Altars was for no other
purpose, but to burn or to offer Sacrifices and oblations upon, which manner
of Sacrifices God will no longer accept) but he will strait ways acknowledge,
that their ought not any Altar to remain to any use among us Christians, after
the death and passion of our Master Christ; at which time as he protests
himself, saying, Consum^tum est, it is finished; signifying thereby, that
Moses Law was not only by him prevented, fulfilled, and finished, but that the
same Law or any Commaundment, Rite, Ceremony, or any other part there in
contained, (as concerning any burthening or Jurisdiction over the Christians)
was to all intents ended, taken away, and fully determined, and the Gospel as
it were a new Law, surrogated, confirmed and established in steed of the old.

Therefore Christians thus freed from the Law ought to have no Altars, but
Tables; For what husbandman (be he never so simple) will be about to plough his
land with a whelebarowe, to harrow it with a slede, or to carry with an harrow?
what husbandman, I say is so folish, as to go about to wede his corn with a
since, to moye his hey with a weeding hoke; and to tedde the same with a rake?
Is a leaden Cesterne made for to sail on the Sea, is a ship, made to be drawn
of horses as a wagon upon the Land? do Noble men build sumptuons Palaces for
their horses to stand in, and lie themselves in old ruinons stables? or do men
ordeine fetherbeds for their dogs, and lie themselves in kennells? who makes
a Garnar of an Oven, or an Oven of a Garnar? Or who makes a threshing flore in
his dwelling house, and a herth in his barn? who can make a pleasant and a
brave banketing house, of filthy Schambles, or of a stinking Slaughter house?
Yea or who had not rather have his Supper laid on a fair Table before him,
then on a bloody Butchars Cradle.

And so likewise (to apply some of these strong Anagogies and dark sayings to
our purpose) is not a Garnar more meet to lay up grain in than an Oven? Is it
not more meet to make a threshing flore in a barn then in a man's dwelling
house? And to make an herth to kendle fire on in the mids of a man's house,
then by the moyes side in his barn.

And so who can make the Jews old slaughter Synagoge to serve for the new
Euangelike Banketing Temple? Or who had rather eat the heavenly banquet of the
Lords Supper on a Jewish, a heathenlyk, or a Popish Altar: then on a decent^
and a fair comely Table? The unbeleiving Jew defieth Christ's Table and his
Supper also. The unfaithful heathen thinks scorn of the same. The Pope and
his Papists make of it a God or a popet. The Jew abhors utterly our
religion. The Heathen in no sense can away with it. The Pope is well contented
to be called a Christian, yea to be thought to be Christ himself, so that he
give him leave to live like a Jew or a heathen. And shall we seek upon them?
Shall we be partakers of their damnable Ceremonies, of their execrable Rites,
and cursed usages? Or is Christ's religion so unperfit of itself, so needy and
beggarly, that it must borrow imbring Fastes of the heathen, borrow Altars of
the Pope, and borrow vestimentes of the Jews? besides an unnumerable sort of
other like baggage, which has heen weeded now of late out of Christ's
Religion, and now restored home to the owners thereof.

Therefore let us either render home again unto the heathen, the superstition
of the imbring days, and to the Pope his hallowed Altars, and unto the Jews,
their Aarons vestimentes: or else let us like good companions join together in
a league with them, and be tenauntes in Commune, and put our religion with
theirs in hotch potche.

After which at the end of the Book he proceeds thus: S. Paul through the
secret advertisment of the Holy Ghost did know before hand, then if he had
geven the name of an Altar unto the Lord his Table, that there would be in time
to come certain Jewish teachers that would build and set up Popish Altars in
steed of Tables to serve the Lords Supper upon.

And surely the holy D. S. Augustine, nor any other Godly writer, would never
have used this term Altar, so often; after that sort as they did, if they had
had but the least inckeling in the world of foreknowledge, what absurdity, what
inconveniencie, and what mischief and abomination have been grounded on their
translated terms. And I pray you what though S, Augustine, or other Doctors
used to term the Lords Supper the Sacrament of the Altar, which if it be as I
take it (I take it after the most sound and faithfullist understanding) the
unlearned people should not be greatly beholden unto them for their strange
terms being so far fetched.

For thus I understand them: The Sacrament of the Altar that is to say the
sign of the Altar, which Altar betokens the Cross, which Cross betokens
the Sacrifice that was offered on the Crolle, or the passion and death of Jesus
Christ. Wherefore good Christian brethren, let us that are homely fellows, not
be ashamed of the old Terms, that we have at our home in the text of Holy
Scripture, which calls the reverend and healthful remembrance of the Lords
death by breaking of bread, by the name of the Lords Supper, or the Communion,
and partaking of the body and blood of Christ. And the thing whereat we vel
propter art^ latriam vitandam tutius erit ut sedengenu flectens mensae
Dominicae populus accumbere assuescant. They therefore used (...) sit at the
Sacrament in King Edwards days to avoid the peril of adoration.
sit devoutly to eat the Lords Supper, let us both have it, and call it the
Lords-bord, or the Lords-Table, and not a borrowed towell, nor a Popish stone
Altar, nor yet a wodden Altar, with a Super-altar. And let us present with so
far fetched terms and so dearly bought, the Popes glace, and his fair Ladies
of Rome. Thus he.

John Bale Bishop of Osyris, 4. John Bale Bishop of Osyris.
in his Image of both Churches, or par^phrase upon the Revelation, as he makes
Christ himself the only Altar spoken of and intended. Rev. 6. 9. and c. 11. 1.
upon whom the full Sacrifice of Redemption was offered: So in his Preface to the
first part of his Book, he reckons up beads, Altars, Images, Organs, Lights
etc. among the Ceremonies of the Popish Church, terming them; the very filthy
dreggs of darkness. All which upon the 17. Chapter fol. 162. he says shall be
plucked away by the evident word of God, and then no longer shall this Harlot
of Rome appear. For no longer continues the whore, then whoredom is in
price. Take away the Rites and Ceremonies, the Jewels and Ornaments, the Images
and lights, their Lordships and Fatherhodes, the Altars and Masses, with the
Bishops and Priests, and what is their Holy whorish Church any more.

Bishop Pilkington in his exposition upon the Prophet Aggeas c. 1. v. 9, 5. B.
Pilkington.
reckons up Altars, Copes, Masses, and Trentals among other Popish
abominations, which the Common people thought would bring them through
Purgatory for a little Money, how wickedly soever they had lived.

And c. 2. v. 3. he writes thus: The Popes Church has all things pleasant in
it to delight the people with all: as for the eyes, their God hanges in a rope,
Images gilded, painted, carved most finely, copes challaces crosses of gold and
silver banners, with Relics and Altars: for the ears, singing, ringing and
Organs piping: for the nose frankincense sweet; to wash away sins, as they
say, Holy water of their own holying, and making Priests an infinite sort,
Masses, Trentalls, driges, and pardones etc.

But where the Gospells preached, they knowing that God is not pleased, but
only with a pure heart, they are content with an Honest place appointed, to
resort together in, though it were never hallowed by Bishops at all, but have
only a pulpit, a preacher to the People, a Deacon for the poor, a Table for
the Communion, with bare walls, or else written with Scriptures, having Gods
eternal word, sounding always amongst them in their sight and ears; and last
of all they should have good discipline, correct faults, and keep good order
in all their meetings.

Learned M. Thomas Becon, 6. Thomas Becon.
in his works in Folio, printed at London Cum Privilegio An. 1562. and
dedicated by name to both their Archbishops and all the Bishops of England, and
by them approved; has many excellent passages and invectives against Altars,
some whereof I shall transcribe at large. In his Humble supplication unto God,
for the restoring of his Holy word, written in Queen Mary's days vol. 3. fol.
16. 17. 24. 29. He writes thus: Moreover, Heb. 13. Altars not tolerable among
Christians
heretofore we were taught, to beat down the Idolatrous and Heathenish
Altars, which Antichrist of Rome intending to set up a new Preisthode, and a
strange Sacrifice for sin, commanded to be built up, as though calfes,
goats, sheep, and such other brute beasts should be offered again after the
Preisthode of Aaron, Christ, his Apostles and the primative Church used tables
at the ministration of the holy Communion
for the sins of the people, and to set in their steed in some convenient
place a seemly Table, and after the example of Christ, to receave together at
it the holy mysteries of Christ's body and blood in remembrance that Christ's
body was broken, and his blood shead for our sins.

But now the sacrificing ^orcerers shame not, both in their private talk, and
in their open Sermons spitefully to call the Lords Table an Oysterbord, and
therefore have they taken out of the Temples those seemly Tables, which we
following the examples of the dearly beloved son, and of the Primative Church
used. at the Ministration of the Holy Communion, and they have brought in
again their bloodly and butcherly Altars. and upon those they sacrifice and
offer daily, O cruel butchers.
say they, that is, they kill, slay and murder thy dear son Christ for the
sins of the people. For as thy Holy Apostle says Heb. 9. Where no sheading
of blood is, there is no remission and forgivenes of sins. If through their
Massing, sins be forgiven, then must the Sacrifice that there is offered, be
slain, and the blood thereof shead.

If the Massemonger therefore offer Christ up in their Masses, a Sacrifice unto
God for the sins of the people, O murderers.
so follows it that they murder, kill and slay Christ, yea and shed his blood
at their Masses, and so by this means we must needs confess, that bloody
Altars are more meet for such bloody butchers, then honest and pure Tables.

But we are taught in the holy Scriptures Romans 6. that Christ once raised from
death, dies no more. Death has no more power over him. For as touching that
he died, he died concerning sin once. And as touching that he lives, he
lives unto the God his Father. If Christ therefore died no more, then do the
Papists sacrifice him no more. If they sacrifice him no more, then are they but
jangling juglars, and their Masses serve for none other purpose; Masses why
they serve.
but to keep the people in blindness, to deface the passion and death of
Christ, and to maintain their idle and drafsacked bellies, in all pomp and
honor, with the labor of other men's hands, and with the sweat of poope men's
brows, so far is it of, that they with their abominable Massing and stinking
sacrificing, put away the sins either of the quick or of the dead, as they
make the unlearned and simple people to believe.

Ah Lord God and heavenly Father, if thou were not a God of long suffering and
of great patience, how could thou abide these intolerable injuries, and so
much detestable blasphemies, which the wicked Papists committ against thee and
thy son Christ, in their Idolatrous Masses, at their Heathenish Altars.

As in the days of wicked Queen Jezabel, The Lords Table cast out of the
Temples Dan. 11.
the Altars of the Lord were cast down, and other Altars were reared, and set
up to Baal: even so now the Tables of the Lord, where the Holy Communion was
most Godly ministered, are cast down and broken on pieces, and Idolatrous Altars
built up to the God Moazim, to Erkenwald, to Grimbald, to Catherine, to
Modwyne, 1. Cor. 10.
etc. But o Lord, bannish out of the Congregation that most vile and stinking
Idol the Mass, and restore unto us the Holy and blessed Communion, that we
eating together of one bread, and drinking of one Cup, may remember the Lords
death, and be thankful, to thee.

Purge our Temples of all Popish abominations, of Ceremonies, Ceremonies.
of Images, of Altars, of Copes, of vestmentes, of Pixes, of Crosses, of
Censers, of Holy waterbuckets, of Holy bread basketes, of Chrismatories, and
above all Idolatrous Priests, and ungodly ignorant Curates.

And in his Comparison between the Lords Supper and the Popes Mass fol. 100.
101. 102. 103. He proceeds thus; Christ in the administration of his most holy
Supper, The apparel of the Massemongers.
used his common and daily apparel. The Massemonger like Hickescorner being
dressed with scenicall and gameplayers garments, as with an Humerall, or Ephod;
with an Albe, with a girdle, with a stole, with a maniple, with an amice, with
a chesible, The gesture which the Mass mongers use in their Mass.
and the like etc. comes unto the Altar with great Pomp, and with a solemn
pace. Where (it is wonderful to be spoken) how he sets forth himself, to
all Godly men to be lamented and pitied, and to children, even to be derided
and to be lauged to scorn, while like another Roscius, with his foolish,
playerlike and mad gestures, the poor wretch wrytheth himself on every side,
now bowing his knees, now standing right up, now crossing himself, as though
he were a frayd of spirits, now stoping down, now prostrating himself, now
knocking on his breast, now sensing, now kissing the Altar, the Book and
Patene, now streching out his arms, now folding his hands together, now making
charecters, signs, tokens, and crosses, now lifting up the bread and Chalice,
now holding his peace, now crying out, now saying, now singing, now breathing,
now making no noise, now washing of hands, now eating, now drinking, now
turning him unto the Altar, now unto the people, now blessing the people either
with his fingers, or with an empty cup, etc.

When it evidently appears by the Histories, that the Ministers of Christ's
church in times past when they ministered the Holy Sacraments, either of
Baptism or of the Lords Supper, used none other, then their Common and daily
apparel: yea and that unto the time of Pope Stephen the first, which first of
all (as Sabellicus testifyeth) did forbidd, that from thence, forth Preistes in
doing their divine service should no more use their daily array, but such holy
garments as were appointed unto that use. This Bishop lived in the year of
our Lord 260.

Christ simply and plainly, and without any decking or gorgious furniture,
prepared and ministered that heavenly banquet.

The Massemonger with a marvelous great pomp and wonderful gay show sets
forth his merchandise. The Mass mongers Trinkets.


For he has an Altar sumptuously built, yea and that is covered with most fine
and white linen clothes, so likewise richly garnished, decked and trimmed with
diverse gorgious pictures, and costly Images. He has also crewettes for water
and for wine, towels, coffers, pyxes, Philacteries, banners, candlestickes,
wax candles, organes, singing Bells, sacry belles, chalices of silver and of
gold, patenes, sensers ship, frankensence, Altar cloothes, curtines, paxes,
basyns, ewers, crosses, Chrismatory, Relics, jewels, owches, precious stones,
myters, cross staves, and many other such like ornaments, more meet for the
Preisthode of Aaron, then for the mynistery of the New Testament.

It is nobly said of Lib 2. Offic. c. 18.
S. Ambrose, the Sacraments require no gold, neither do they delight in gold,
which are not bought for gold. The garnishing of the Sacraments is the
redemption or deliverance of the captives and prisoners. And verily those are
precious vessels, which redeem souls from death. That is the true treasure
of the Lord, which works that, that his blood has wrought.

Again he says: The church has gold, not that it should keep it, but that
it should bestow it, and help when need is. For what does it profitt to keep
that, which serves to no use?

Christ did minister the Sacrament of his body and blood to his Disciples,
sitting at the Table. When the time was now come (says Luke) Jesus sat down,
and his 12. Disciples with him. Luc. 22.

The Massemonger, delivered the bread and wine to his geates kneeling before
the Altar. In distributing the mysteries of his body and blood, Christ the Lord
used not an Altar after the manner of Aarons Preistes, whom the Law of Moses
appointed to kill and offer beasts, but he used a Table, as a furniture, much
more meet to get, defend, confirm, increase and continue Friendship.

But the Massemonger as one always desirous to shed blood, stands at an
Altar, and so delivers the Communion to his people: when as the Apostle
speaking of the Holy banquet, makes mention not of an Altar, but of a Table,
saying, 1. Cor. 10. Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the
Table of the Devils.

Neither did the ancient and old Church of Christ allow these Aaronicall and
Jewish Altars. For they used a Table in the administration of the Lords Supper,
after the example of Christ, as it plainly appears both by the Holy
Scriptures, Altares.
and also by the writings of the ancient Fathers and Doctors.

For the Sacrifices taken away, to what use, I pray you should Altars serve
among the Christians? except ye will call again, and bring in use the Jewish
or rather Idolatrous Sacrifices.

Truly Altars serve rather for the killing of beasts, then for the
distribution of the pledges of amity or Freindship; Note.
neither do those Altars more agree with the Christian Religion, Exodus 2^.
then the cawdron, the fyrepanne, the basen, the sholve, the fleshhoke, the
gredyrne, and such like instruments, which the Preistes of Aaron used in
preparing, dressing, and doing their Sacrifices.

For unto the Honest, seemly and worthy celebration of the Holy banquet, of the
body and blood of Christ, we have need not of an Altar, but of a Table, except
ye will say, that the primative Church, When Altars came first into the Church
which more then two hundred years after Christ's ascension used Tables at the
Celebration of the divine mysteries: yea except ye will say that Christ
himself the Author of this most Holy Supper, did dote and was out of his
wits, which not standing at an Altar, like Aarons Priest, but sitting at a
Table, as a Minister of the New Testament did both ordain and minister this
Holy and Heavenly food.

For who is so rude and ignorant of antiquities, which knows not, that Pope
Sixtus the second, about the year of our Lord 265. brought in the Altars first
of all in the Church forbidding Tables any more to be used from thenceforth at
the ministration of the Lords Supper; when notwithstanding from Christ's
ascension unto that time, the Lords Supper was always ministered at a Table,
according to the practice of Christ of his Apostles, and of the Primative
Church? But there is but one only Altar of the Christians even Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, and of the virgin Mary, of whom the Apostle speaks on this
manner, Heb. 13, We have an Altar, whereof it is not Lawful for them to eat,
which serve in the Tabernacle.

Our Altar is not of stone, but of God. Not Worldly, but Heavenly, not visible,
but invisible. Not dead, but living; upon the which Altar whatsoever is offered
unto God the Father, it can none otherwise be, but most thankfully and most
acceptable.

And like as Christ administering the most Holy mysteries of his body and blood
to his Disciples, sat down at the Table. So likewise his Giustes, that is so
say his Apostles, sitting at the same Table received that Heavenly food sitting.

But the Massemonger delivers not the Sacramental bread unto the
Communicants except, they first of all kneel down with great humility and
reverence, that they may, by this their gesture declare and show evidently to
such as are present, that they worship and honor that bread for a God: which
is so great and so notable wickedness as none can exceed, when it is plain
and evident by the ancient writers, that the Geastes of the Lords Supper long
and many years after Christ's resurrection sat at the Table.

So far is it of, that they either after the manner of the Jews stood right
up: or after the custom of the Papists kneeled, when they should receave the
Holy mysteries of the body and blood of Christ.

So in his Cathechisme f. 484. To the same purpose he proceeds thus:

Father. What think, thou, is it more meet to receave the Supper of the Lord
at a Table, A Table more meet for the ministration of the Lords Supper, then an
Altar.
or at an Altar?


Son. At a Table.


Father. Why so?


Son. For our Savior Christ did both institute this Holy Supper at a Table,
and the Apostles of Christ also did receive it at a Table.


And what can be more perfect then that, which Christ and his Apostles have
done.

All the primative Church also received the Supper of the Lord at a Table.

And S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. speaking of the Lords Supper, makes mention not of an
Altar, but of a Table. Ye can not be partakers, says he, of the Lords Tables,
and of the Devils also.

Tables for the ministration of the Lords Supper continued in the Church of
Christ, almost 300. years after Christ universally, and in some places longer,
as Histories make mention: So that the use of Altars is but a new invention,
and brought in, as some write, by Pope Sixtus the second of that name.

Moreover an Altar has relation to a Sacrifice. And Altars were built and set
up at the Commandment of God, to offer Sacrifice upon them. But all those Heb.
10^.
Sacrifices do now cease, (for they were but shadows of things to come)
therefore the Altar ought to cease with them.

Christ alone is our Altar, our Sacrifice and our Priest. Our Altar is in
Heaven, Our Altar is not made of stone, but of flesh and blood: of whom the
Apostle writes thus Heb. 13. We have an Altar, whereof it is not Lawful for
them to eat which serve the Tabernacle.

Furthermore the Papists have greatly abused their Altars, while they had such
confidence in them, that without an Altar, or in the stead thereof, a
Super-altare, they were persuaded that they could, not duly and truly, and in
right form minister the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.

And this their Altar and Superaltar, likewise must be consecrate, have prints
and charactes made therein, washed with oil, wine and water, be covered with a
cloth of hayer, and be garnished with fine white linen clothes and other
costly apparel, or else whatsoever was done thereon, was counted vain and
unprofitable.

The use also of Altars has greatly confirmed and maintained the most wicked
error and damnable heresy, which the Papists hold, concerning the Sacrifice
of the Mass; while they teach, that they offer Christ in their Mass to God
the Father, an oblation and Sacrifice for the sins of the people both of the
living and of the dead, and by this means they greatly obscure and deface that
most sweetsmelling and alone true perfect and sufficient Sacrifice of Christ's
death.

And therefore all the Altars of the Papists ought now no less to be thrown
down, and cast out of the Temples of the Christians, then in times past the
Altars of the Preistes of Baal.

So far is it of that they be meet to be used, at the Celebration of the Lords
Supper. Finally, who knows not that we come unto the Lords Table, not to
offer bloody Sacrifices, to the preformance whereof we had need of Altars, but
to eat and drink, and spiritually to feed upon him that was once crucified
and offered up for us on the Altar of the cross, a sweet smelling sacrifice to
God the Father, yea and that once for all.

Now if we come together to eat and drink these Holy mysteties, and so
spiritually to eat Christ's body and to drink his blood unto salvation both
of our bodies and souls, who sees not, that a Table is more meet for the
celebration of the Lords Supper, then an Altar.

Father. Thy reasons are good and not to be discommended. Of gestures to be
used at the Lords Table.
But what say thou concerning the gestures to be used at the Lords Table?
Shall we receave those Holy mysteries, kneeling, standing or sitting?


Son, Albeit I know and confess, that gestures of themselves be indifferent,
yet I would wish all such gestures to be avoided, as have outwardly any
appearance of evil, according to this saying of S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. Abstain
from all evil apparaunce.


And first of all, Of kneeling.
forasmuch as kneeling has been long used in the Church of Christ, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, through the doctrine of the Papists, although of it
self, it be indifferent, to be, or not to be used, yet would I wish, that it
were taken away by the authority of the hier powers.

Father. Why so?


Son. For it has an outward appearaunce of evil. When the Papist through
their pestilent persuasions had made of the Sacramental bread and wine a God,
then gave they in Commandment straight ways, that all people should with all
reverence kneel unto it, worship and honor it.


And by this means this gesture of kneeling creept in, and is yet used in the
Church of the Papists, to declare that they worship the Sacrament, as their
Lord God and Savior. (Whence M. Roger Cutchud. in his 1. and 2. Sermon of the
Sacrament An. 1552. printed Cum Privilegio, Anno 1560. writes:) Many coming to
the Lords Table, do misbehave themselves, and so do the lookers on, in that
they worship the Sacrament with kneeling and bowing their bodies, and knocking
their breasts, and with Elevation of their hands. If it were to be elevated and
served to the standers by, as it has been used, Christ would have elevated it
above his head. He delivered it into the hands of his Disciples; bidding them
to eat it, and not to hold up their hands to receive it, and not to worship
it: and so delivered it to them SITTING, and not kneeling: Only God is to be so
honered with this kind of reverence, and no Sacrament: for God is not a
Sacrament, neither is the Sacrament God. Let us use it as Christ and his
Apostles did. If thou will be more devout, then they were, be not deceived, but
beware that thy devotion be not Idolatry.)

But I would wish with all my heart, that either this kneeling at the receiving
of the Sacrament, were taken away, or else that the people were taught, that
that outward reverence was not given to the Sacrament and outward sign, but to
Christ, which is represented by that Sacrament or sign.

But the most certain and sure way is utterly to cease from kneeling, that
there may outwardly appear no kind of evil, according to this Commaundment of
S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. Abstain from all evil appearaunce: Lest the enemies by
the continuance of kneeling should be confirmed in their error, and the
weaklings offended, and plucked back from the truth of the Gospel. Kneeling
with the knowledge of godly honor is due to none but to God alone. Therefore
when Satan commanded our Savior Christ to kneel down before him and worship
him: He answered, It is written; thou shall worship the Lord, Math. 4.

Standing, Of standing.
which is used in the most part of the reformed Churches in these our days, I
can right well allow it, if it be appointed by common order, to be used at the
receaving of the Holy Communion.

And this gesture of standing was also used at the Commaundment of God of the
old Jews, Exodus 12. when they did eat the Paschall Lamb, which was also a
Sacrament and figure of Christ to come, as our Sacrament is a sign and figure
of Christ come and gone. Neither did that gesture want his mysteries.

For the standing of the Jews at the eating of the Lords Passover, signified
that they had a further journey to go in matters of Religion, and that there
was a more clear light of the Gospel to shine, then had hethereto appeared
unto them, which were wrapped round about with the dark shadows of
ceremonies: again that other, yea and these more perfect Sacraments, were to,
be given to Gods people, which all things were fulfilled and came to pass
under Christ, the author of the Heavenly doctrine of the Gospel, and the
institutor of the Holy Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Now as concerning sitting at the Lords Table, Of sitting.
which is also used at this day in certain reformed Churches, if it were
received by public authority and common consent, and might conveniently be
used in our Churches; I could allow that gesture best.

For as Note.
it is be doubted, but that Christ and his Disciples sat at the Table, when
Christ delivered unto them the Sacrament of his body and blood: which use was
also observed in the primative Church, and long after.

So likewise it is most Commonly, that we Christians follow the example of our
M. Christ, and of his Disciples. Nothing can be unreverently done, that is done
of the example of Christ and of his Apostles. We come together to eat and
drink the Holy mysteries of the body and blood of Christ; we have a Table set
before us, is it not meet and convenient, that we sit at our Table?

The Table being prepared who stands at his meat? yea rather who sits not
down? when Christ feed the people, he bad them not kneel down, nor stand
upon their feet, but he commanded them to sit down, John 6. which kind of
gesture is most meet when we assemble to eat and drink, which thing we do at
the Lords-Table. Neither does the sitting of the Communicants at the Lords
Table want her mystery.

For as the standing of the Jews at the eating of the Lords Passover
signified, that there was yet to come another doctrine then the Law of Moses,
even the preaching of the glorious Gospel of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesu:
and other Sacraments then Circumcision and the Passover, even the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper. So in like manner the sitting of the Christen
Communicants at the Lords Table does signify, preach and declare unto us, that
we are come to our journeyes end concerning Religion, and that there is none
other doctrine, nor none other Sacraments to be looked for, then those only,
which we have already received of Christ the Lord.

And therefore we sitting down at the Lords Table show by that our gesture,
that we are come to the perfection of our Religion, and look for none other
doctrine to be given unto us: Notwithstanding as I said before, gestures are
free, so that none occasion of evil be either done or offered.

In all things which we call indifferent; this rule of S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. is
diligently to be obeyed: Abstain from all evil apparaunce.

Father. I do not disalow thy Judgment in this behalf. Of vestures at the
ministration of the Lords Supper.
But come of, tell me: what say thou concerning the vestures, which the
Ministers use at the ministration of the Lords Supper?


Son. In some reformed Churches the Ministers use both a surplesse and a
cope, in some only a surplesse: in some neither cope nor surplesse, but their
own decent apparel.


Father. And what think thou in this behalf?


Son. When our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus did minister the Sacrament of
his body and blood to his disciples, he used none other but his own Commone
and daily apparel: and so likewise did the Apostles after him, and the
primative Church likewise used that order, and so was it continued many years
after, till superstition began to creep into the Church. After that time,
fond, foolysh fansye of man's idle brain devysed without the authority of Gods
word, that the Minister in the divine service, and in the ministration of the
Holy Sacraments should use a white linen vesture, which we now commonly call a
Surplesse. Surplesse.



Until this time the Church of God continued in the simplicity of Christ and
of his Apostles, requiring no painted visores to set forth the glory and beauty
of our Religion: which is then most glorious, and most beautiful; when it is
most simple, and none otherwise setforth, then it was used and left unto us of
Christ, and of his Apostles.

And contrariwise it is then most obscured and defaced, when it is dawbed over
with the vile and vain colors of man's wisdom, although outwardly never so
gorgious and glorious.

Afterward as superstition grew and increased, so likewise the people began
more and more to be liberal in giving to the Church, and in adourning, decking
and trimming the Temples of the Christians, yea and that so much the more,
because they were now persuaded, that such Temples, and will works pleased
God, deserved remission of sins and everlasting life.

By this means came it to pass, that the simple and plain Tables, which were
used in the Apostolic and Primative Church, were taken away, and standing
Altars set up, and gorgeously decked with sumptuous apparel, and garnished
with gold, pearl, and precious stone. And because that he, which should
minister at that gorgeous and sumptuous Altar, should answer in some points to
the glory thereof, therefore it was devised, that the minister also should have
on his back See D. Rainolds conference with Heart c. 8. divis. 4. 5. Haddon
contra Osorium lib. 3. fol. 285. M. Nowels Reproof of Dormans Proof fol. 66.
And Thomas Becons Comparison between the Lords Supper, and the Popes Mass.
Bishop Jewel Defense of the Apology part. 3. c. 5. divis. 1.
galant and gorgious apparel, as an Amyce, an albe, a tunicke, a girdle, a
fannell, a stole, a vestment etc. whereof some were made of silk, some of
velvet, some of cloth of gold, yea and those garnished with Angels, with
Images, with birds, with beasts, with fishes, with flowers, with herbs, with
trees, and with all things that might satisfy and please the vain eye of the
carnal man.

And all these things being before but voluntary, gre^ afterward unto matters
of so great weight and importance, yea unto such necessity, that it was made a
matter of conscience, yea it was become deadly sin to minister the Holy
Communion without these scenicall, Histrionicall, and Hickescorner like
garments; so that now to sing Mass or to consecrate, as they use to say,
without these Popish robes, is counted in the Church of the Papists more then
twice deadly sin, so far is it of, that these Missall vestures are now
things of indifferency.

Wherefore in my judgment, it were meet and convenient, that See Fox Acts and
Monum. p. 1873. 1356. 1366. 1384. 1405. 1604. 1781. 1834. 1837. accordingly. 7.
Deane Nowell.
all such disguised apparel were utterly taken away, forasmuch as it is but
the vain invention of man, and has been greatly abused of the Massing
Papists? For what has the Temple of God to do with Idols? what concord is
there between Christ and Beliall: what have the vestiments of a Popish Altar,
to do with the Table of the Lord Christ.

Many such passages are in this Author, which for brevity case I pretermitt.

Reverend M. Alexander Nowell, in his Reprofe of Dormans proof, printed at
London Cum privilegio Anno 1565. fol. 15. 16. 17. and 66. writes thus: Touching
the name of Altars, which M. Dorman so gladly catches hold of here is S.
Basil (as he did before in S. Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 9.) where we call it the
Lords Table, we have for us good authority.

First, that Christ instituted the Sacrament at a Table, and not at an Altar,
is most manifest: except M. Dorman would have us think, that men had Altars in
steed of Tables, in their private houses in those days, but our Savior
expressly saying, that the hands of him, who should betray him, were upon the
Table, takes away all doubting. Luc. 22. c. 21.

And S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. v. 21. also calls it Mensam Dominicam, the Lord his
Table.

Sure I am that M. Dorman, and all the Papists with him, can not say so much
out of the Scriptures of the new Testament, for their Altars, as I have
alleged for the Lords Table, they may go therefore and join themselves to the
Jews, as in multitude of Jewish ceremonies, so in Altars also; as it seems
indeed, they would both become themselves, and make us too Jews, rather then
Christians.

If S. Basil, and some old writers call it an Altar, that is no proper, but a
figurative name, for that as in the old Law their burnt offerings and Sacrifices
were offered upon the Altar, so are our Sacrifices of prayer, and thankgiving
etc. offered up to God at the Lords Table, at it were an Altar.

But such kind of figurative speech, can be no just cause, to set up Altars,
rather then Tables, unless they think that their crosses also should be turned
into Altars, for that like phrase is used of them, where it is said, Christ
offered up himself upon the Altar of the Cross.

Now the old Chrysostom. Hom. ^18. in 2. Cor. August. Tract. 26. in Joan. and
multi multis locis
Doctors do call it the Lords Table, usually, truly, without figure, and
agreably to the Scriptures. Concerning the spiritual worship or service of
God, or Sacrifice, if you will (seeing it is also mentioned in S. Basil) due
to be done at the Lords Table, which, as a fore is noted, he calls an Altar,
it is not lacking in our Churches at the Lords Table: that is to say, true
repentance of heart, which is as the Prophet calls it, Psalm. 51. v. 19. a
service and a Sacrifice pleasant unto God, the offering up of our prayers and
praises unto God; which service and Sacrifice of praise, as the Psalm.
withnesseth, Psa. 50. c. 14. v. 23. does honor God; and specially that
Sacrifice of thanks giving, most peculiar to this Altar or Lords Table, and to
that Holy Sacrament, having thereof a peculiar name, being called with the
Greeks Eucharistia, to say, thanks giving, for the grateful remembrance of
that one Sacrifice offered by our Savior once for all: which Sacrifice of
thanks giving we jointly with other present, do offer up to Christ our
Savior, in the memorial by him self, and by faith in our heates do
communicate his precious body and blood, a Sacrifice by him self offered for us.

Neither are our oblations, or offerings to the poor lacking, when we come to
this Altar, which S. Paul Phil. 4. v. 18. also calls a Sacrifice acceptable,
and pleasant to God, where as you Papists have no such thing, but only the bare
word Offertorium, without any offering for the poor; saving that you did not
forget to receive the offerings for your selves at the usual offering days, and
when any Dirige, or Months mind did fall.

Thus you se, M. Dorman, that we have even that same spiritual worship,
service, and Sacrifice too (if you so will) due to be done at this Altar, that
is to wit, the Lords Table, which S. Paul speaks of here, and any other
Altar or service he means not, nor knew none.

And were you not altogether to gross, S. Basil so often speaking of spiritual
worshipping, and spiritual service, might somewhat reform your carnal and
sensual understanding? you se we do not stick to grant you not only a
spiritual worship and service, but a Sacrifice too, which yet has no need of
your Altars, framed to your selves, upon this false fantasy, that the body
and blood of Christ are there offered by the Preistes, for the quick and dead,
with the abuse of that distinction of the bloody and unbloudy offering of
Christ's body, applied to the same: which altogether is a false fable, and a
vain dream most meet for M. Dorman.

The Scriptures, Heb. 10. v. 10. 12. 14. and 13. 11. 12. do thus teach us,
that Christ our Savior once for all offered up his body and blood upon the
Altar of the Cross, the one and only Sacrifice of sweet Savior to his Father:
by the which one oblation of the body of Christ^ a Sacrifice for our sins,
once for ever offered, and no more to be offered by any man, we be sanctified
and made perfect.

Wherefore the Popish Preistes, which do repeat often the Sacrifice of Christ's
death, as they do teach, thereby, as much as in them lies, do take away the
efficacy and virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ's death, making it like to the
Sacrifices of the old Law: the imperfection of which Sacrifices, S. Paul does
prove by the often repetition of the same. For the continuance whereof their
Preistes needed also succession: but Christ is a Priest for ever without
succession, as the Apostle Heb. 10. plainly teaches.

Our service and Sacrifice now, is the often and thankful remembrance of that
only Sacrifice, in the receiving of the Holy Sacrament at the Lords Table,
according to his own institution: Hoc facite in memoriam mei. Do this in
remembrance of me: with spiritual feeding by faith also, upon that his most
precious body and blood, so by him for us offered. Touching the pulling down
of your Altars, I answer: they are justly destroyed, as were those wicked
Altars by Asa, Josaphat, Ezechias, Josias, godly Kings of Juda destroyed, 4.
Reg. 18. c. 22. 4, Reg. 23. 2. Para. 14. a. 3. 2. Para. 17. b. 6. 2. Para. 31.
a. 1. 2. Para. 34. a. 4.

For as abominable Idolatry was committed on, and before your Altars, as ever
was upon, and before those.

If you require prouses hereof, you shall have them in their due places of the
Mass, and of Idolatry to Images, after which he complains thus of the
Papists: also of Christians we have made us Jews, and your selves of Ministers
of the Gosple have you made Jewish and Aaronicall Levites, you have on Aarons
robes, you use his gestures, you have brought in his incense, his censers, his
Altars, his candles, his candlestickes, his belles, and his banner, his gold
and his silver into the service and Temple of God.

Of the which beginning of things, S. Hierome Hierom ad Demetriadem, and ad
Nepotian.
in his time much complained. And would to God you had done no worse, then thus
to make us and your selves altogether Juish, by your shadows imitating and
counterfeyting the old Law.

Elegant Walter Haddon 8. Walter Haddon.
and M. Fox in his answer to Hierom Osorious lib. 3. fol. 271. write thus
concerning Altars: Now whereas thou say, that Images, signs, Crosses and
Altars are cast down, I suppose that this part of the Complaint does not much
appertain to Luther, or the Ministers of the Eua^gelicall doctrine, when as
they never put any hands to the pulling down of them.

Neither is it equal, that those who are but private men, should by force and
Tumults take liberty to themselves, to do^ any thing in the Common wealth or
Church.

But if the Magistrates by their lawful authority, because they see it
agreeable to the word of God, do piously and quietly do their office therein,
what has Osorius a private man and a stranger here, either to scould at, or to
intermedle with it.

If King Sebastian shall think meet to cherish and follow these parts of the
Roman Superstition in Altars, in Images, in Pictures, and adoring Images, he
has the voices of the Scripture on the one side, of Monks on the other, to
which he may choose whither he will harken, he may do in his Reipublike, at his
peril and pleasure, But on the other side if Elizabeth Queen of the English,
the Scripture leading her, shall think meet, that these filthinesses of impure
superstition, which no Christian may endure without the danger of himself, and
of his, rightly to be driven from the Empire, and cast out of the Realm,
verily she does nothing therein, which may not plainly be defended by the
perspicuous authority of the sacred Scripture, and by the great examples of the
most approved Kings.

Unless perchance Osorious shall think the memory of Ezekiah, Josiah,
Jehosaphat, not much to be appladed, who both destroyed Altars, and Images and
Groves, and break in pieces the brazen Serpent, or then Gedion also who when
he was no King cut down the Grove, and overturned the Altar, what therefore?
that which in the Carnal Law was lawful to the Kings of the Jews, shall it
be less lawful to our governers, Magistrates in the spiritual Kingdom or
Christ? Or shall that then which in them was thought worthy of praise, and
reward by the verdict of the Scriptures, be condemned of impiety in Christian
Princes now? After which he proceeds, to justifye this action in breaking down
and abolishing Images and Altars, by Histories, Fathers, and Counsels in the
Primative times.

D. Fulke, 9. D. Fulke
in his Confutation of the Rhemist Testament on the 1. Cor. c. 11. sect. 18.
fol. 287. determines thus of Altars: But you proceed and say, for this profane
Tables are removed, and Altars consecrated. Christ and his Apostles were to
blame (if it be as you say) to minister upon profane Tables, without
consecrating of Altars, But who shall bear witness for consecration of Altars?
who but S. Augustine Sermon. 255. de tempore. And who shall warrant us that this
Sermon is not falsely entitled to S. Augustine (as a great number of those
Sermons are?) But admit it be Augustines own auctority, yet he speaks only
of consecrating of Altars, not for this end to discern the Lords body and
blood. For that their Tables and Altars were dedicated to the Holy use of
ministration, it is not the matter we stand upon, but whither they were
consecrated for this end.

They were called Altars unproperly, as the Sacrament was called a Sacrifice,
the Ministers sacrificing Priests and Levites, yet were they neither in matter,
for me nor use, like unto your Popish Altars of stone, that were set against a
wall. For they were Tables of wood, and so commonly were called, as it is
manifest by S. Augustine Ep. 50. Bonifacio. And Optatus l. 6. both speaking of
the rage of the Donatists, which brake, or shaved, or scraped the boardes of
the Altar or Table. Note,
IT STOOD IN THE MIDST, THAT THE PEOPLE MIGHT STAND ROUND ABOUT IT. Eusebius. l.
10. c. 4. ad Paulin. tyr. ex Aug. de verb. Dom. secund. Joan. Sermon. 46. It was
removeable and carried by the clerks August. Quaest. vet. and nov. Test. q.
101. Or otherwise as appears by Optatus l. 6. Therefore it is nothing like
Popish Altars. So on Matthew 23. fol. 46. sect. 7. he determines thus:

Popish Altars that are set up to overthrow the Altar of the Cross, are not
Holy but cursed. And so is all that pertains to them. Neither have they
perfection of the Lords Altar that was in the Temple, which was a figure of
Christ's only true Sacrifice once offered, and that never can be sacrificed
again, (as S. Augustine Says) Neither did the Altars of the temple sanctify
by touching, for then the murderer which took hold of the horns of the
Altar, should be sanctified, whom God commanded to be drawn from thence and
executed, Exodus 21. 14. 1. Reg. 2. 28. Neither if any man had offered any other
gift, then that God which commanded, had the gift been made Holy by touching
the Altar, for it was the ordinance of God, by which the Altar sanctified the
gift, and not any quality in the Altar. It is like you are sick of the disease
of the Pharisees, which was covetousnes, (as Chrysostom and Theophylact note)
by magnifying the gifts of the Altar.

M. James Calfhill, 10. M. Calfehill.
in his Answer to Marshalls Treatise of the Cross, London. 1565. the Preface
to the Reader, writes thus: Thus Idols brought in Oratories, Chapels and
Altars, Sacrifices, vestimentes and such like, which all be utterly condemned
of the Lord. fol. 31. 32. he proves out of Origin, that the primative
Christians had neither Images nor altars in their Churches.

And fol. 95. writing against the Popish manner of consecrating Churches, he
concludes thus: then they put on their Massing coats, and come like blind
fools, with candles in their hands, at noone day, and so proceed to the Holy
Mass: with renting of throtes, and tearing of notes, chanting of Priests,
howling of Clerks, flinging of coals, and piping of Organs. thus they
continue a long while in mirth and jolity, many mad parts be played. But when
the vice is come from the Altar, and the people shall have no more sport: they
conclude their service with a true sentence, Terribilis est locus iste: this
place is terrible.

And have they not fisht fair, think you? to make such a do, to bring in the
Devil: O blind beasts, O senseless Hipocrites, whom God has geven over unto
themselves. that they should not see their own folly, and yet bewray their
shame, to all the world beside.

Bishop Babington 11. Bishop Babington
in his Comfortable Notes upon Exodus chap. 27. fol. 307. 308. writes thus upon
Altars: Concerning the Altar how it was made for matter, height, length, and
breadth, the text is plain in the 8. first verses.

For the use of us we may note two things; First, that it was a figure of
Christ, as the Apostle to the Hebrews expounds it, And secondly, that the
Altars used in Popery, are not warranted by this example.

But that the Primative Churches used Communion. Tables (as we now do) of
boards and wood, not Altars (as they do) of stone.

Origin was above two hundred years after Christ, and he says, that Celsus
objected it as a fault to the Christians, Quod nec imagines, nec Templa, nec
Aras haberent, that they had neither Images, nor Churches, nor Altars.

Arnobius (after him) says the same to the Heathens, Accusatis nos quod nec
Templa habeamus, nec Aras, nec Imagines, you accuse us for that we have neither
Churches, nor Altars, nor Images. Gerson says, that Silvester the first caused
stone Altars to be made, and willed that no man should consecrate at a wooden
Altar, but himself and his successors there. Belike then the former ages knew
not profound reason, that Altars must be of stone, quia Pe^ra erat Christus,
because the Rock was Christ, as Durandus after devised. Upon this occasion in
some places stone Altars were used for steadiness and continuance, wooden
Tables having been before used, but I say in some places, not in all.

For S. Augustine says, that in his time in Africa they were made of wood. For
the Donatists, says he, break in sunder the Altar-boords, Again, the Deacons
duty was to remove the Altar. Chrysostom calls it, The Holy board, S.
Augustine, mensam Domini, the Table of the Lord. Athanasius, mensam ligneam,
the Table of wood.

Yet was this Communion Table called an Altar, not that it was so, but only by
allusion metaphorically, as Christ is called an Altar, or our hearts be called
Altars, etc. Mark with your self therefore the newness of this point, for
stone Altars in comparison of our ancient use of Communion Tables, and let
Popery and his parts fall, and truth and sound antiquity be regarded.

Touching the horns of the Altar spoken of, they literally served to keep up
the Sacrifice from falling of, and figuratively noted strength, so that, to
bind the Sacrifice to the horns of the Altar, was to give themselves wholly
with a strong Faith, and only to rest, and trust and stay upon him, and to tie
all carnal affections fast also to the Altars Horns, by subduing and making
them captive to God. This Altar was in one place, and the Sacrifice in one
place, nothing how Christ should only once, and in one place offer up himself
for all man kind. Concerning the Lamps, as little do they warrant Popish
Altars, And Christians used no such follies and apish imitations of things
abrogated and serving only for the time.

M. Thomas Cartwright 12. M. Cartwrigt
in his Confutation of the Rhemists translation, Glosses, and Annotations on
the New Testament, upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians chap. 11. sect.
18. fol. 415. writes thus of Altars: The next note to discern the Lords body,
is the removing of profane Tables to consecrate Holy Altars. So the Rhemists:
to which he replies.

Altars under the Law were Holy, because they were builded upon the foundation
of Gods institution. Now they are profane, not only because they have no
institution of God, whereupon a stone may be laid, but because they are
contrary to the institution which propounds a Table, Luke 22. 21. 1. Cor. 10.
21. 1. Cor. 11. 20. Math. 26. 20. 26. 27. and (in the matter of the Eucharist)
never mentions Altar: which is confirmed further, in that this Sacrament is
called in the Scripture the Supper of the Lord, (whereunto a Table does well
agree) and is never termed a Sacrifice, for which an Altar is fit. That it is
said, they sat down, a thing used at a table, and strange at an Altar, whereat
they sat not but stood: that they did eat and drink which was never used at an
Altar, and is usual at a table.

For although they did eat of that which came from the Altar, yet they never
did eat at it. And if your Masonrie of Altars came from the Lords ordination
under the Law, why should our table be profane, or your Altar Holy,
considering that even under the Law, there was as well a Holy table, as an Holy
Altar.

And (setting apart the example of Christ) by so much the table is fitter now
then the Altar: as the shewbread standing upon the table, has a nearer
Analogy with the bread of the Sacrament then had the flesh of slain beasts
which was laid upon the Altar.

Now your Hill Altars (being failed of the Holy Scriptures) go to beg grace of
the Optatus l 6. Aug. Ep. 50. ad Bonif. vid. Euse. l. 10. ex orat. panegyr. in
Eucari^s vid. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 10. c. 5. Item de consecr. distinct. 2.
ancient Fathers: where notwithstanding that they find some better
entertainment then in the word of God, yet is your building of Altars by their
hands like unto Peter's Chapel at Rome, which is always building and never
built.

If they present you with some rough stones to the setting of it up, yet bring
they no mortar to hold them from falling upon heaps. For often times they
help you with the name of an Altar, when the thing they signify thereby is a
Communion Table, assigning it the Deacons Duty to remove the Altar, that the
ALTAR STOOD IN THE MIDST OF THE CHVRCH, AND NOT AT THE END OF THE QVIRE: even
as they term the Lords Supper a Sacrifice unproperly (because it is a sign of
the true Sacrifice) when in truth they will only recommend unto us a Sacrament.

Other sometimes, even the naked and bare name of Altar they take away from
you, calling that whereupon the Holy things are set (as it is) a Table, as also
the Holy things themselves, they call by their proper names, of signs and
Sacraments, and not by the improper and borrowed speech of Sacrifice or host,
yea and if Altars were Lawful, yet could they argue no real presence of the
body of Christ upon them, unless (as they do the bread) so they will
transubstantiate the dead bodies of beasts into the body of Christ, not then
borne, when those things were laid upon the Altar.

Neither has Augustines Sermon. de tempo. 115. any thing thereof: it has of the
keeping of the Feast of Hallowing of Altars, which we suppose your selves do
not observe, whereby it may well be doubted (as of diverse others of those
Sermons) whether it be Augustines or no; especially seeing it gives so High a
commendation to Nebuchadnezzars testimony of Christ the Son of God.

Last of all, let the good Reader understand, that here in the Papists join
with the Origin cont. Cells. l. 4. Volat. vid. volat. and venerer contr.
Floretum l. 4. Beat Rhen Ep. praefix Leiturg. Chrysostom. Heb. 13. 4. Tit. 2. 5.
1. The. 4. 4
Heathen, which quarrelled with the Primative Churches, that they had no
Images, Altars nor Temples, whereunto agrees that Sixtus Bishop of Rome, was
the first that erected Altars.

Also that Gerson affirms, that Silvester Bishop of Rome, was the first that
caused Altars to be erected of stone: whereupon it is also by another called a
novelty to have Altars builded.

D. Willet, 13. D. Willet.
in his Synopsis Papismi, the 9. general controversy Quaest. 6. part. 2.
Error 54. determines thus: Altars we acknowledge none. Altars we have none in
our Churches; S. Paul calls it the Lords Table,1. Cor. 10. 21. where we
receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And he calls it bread,
which is broken, 1. Cor. 11. 26. But bread is set upon Tables, not sacrificed
upon Altars.

Augustine also calls it, Mensam Domini, the Lords table. Epist. 59. and
Epist. 50.

He showing how cruelly the Donatists handled Maximi^ian a Catholic Bishop,
beating him with Clubs, even in the Church, lignis Altaris effractis immaniter
ceciderunt, and wounded him with the wood of the Altar, which they had broken
down, where though he improperly call it an Altar, yet was it a Communion
Table framed of wood, and made to be removed, not fastened to the wall, as
their Popish Altars were. Damascus Epistol. 4. Let the Local Bishops be
content to minister as Priests, and to be partakers only of the Lords Table, he
says the Lords Table, not the Lords Altar.

To these I might add M. Robert Crowlie his Confutation of Miles Hoggard
London 1548. where he writes thus: Mal. 1. 7. God complains of the Isralites,
that they had polluted him, in that they said, the Table of the Lord is but a
vile thing. What other thing, I pray you, do your sacrificing Priests? they
cannot abide the Lords Table, they must have an Altar and Sacrifice. They
cannot be contented which the Communion at the Lords Table according to the
first institution in honest apparel, but they must have a private Mass in
Masking Cotes, dashed full of turns and half turns, beckings, duckinges,
crossinges, kissinges, tossings, tumblings, besides the unreverent breathing
out of words upon bread and wine, and the holding them up to be worshipped as
Gods.

Also Bishop Jewel, Bishop Hooper, B. Ridley and others, in their forecited
passages against Altars, together with D. Rainold in his Conference with Heart
p. 8. Divis. 4. Bishop Morton in his Protest. appeal l. 2. c. 6. sect. 2. p.
164. Francis de Croy, his first Conformity c. 24. M. Peter Smart in his Sermon
at Durham July 27. 1628. David Dickson his explination upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews 2. 7. v. 13. 14. p. 126. 127. and c. 13. v. 10. p. 317. 318. yea and
the Statute of 3. Jacobi c, 5. (which authorizeth Justices of Peace, Majors,
Bailifs and other chief Officers of Cities and Towns Corporate, in their
Liberties from time to time to search the houses and Lodgings of every Popish
recusant convict for Popish Books and Relics of Popery, and that if any
Altar, Pix, Beads, Pictures, or such like Popish Relics, or any Popish Book
or Books shall be found in their, or any of their custody they shall be
presently defaced and burnt, which Act expressly defines, Altars as well as
Beads and Pictures, to be mere Relics of Popery fit to be demolished) all
which have with one unanimous voice, condemned Altars, as Heathenish, Jewish,
Popish, abolished by Christ's death, contrary to his institution the practice of
the Apostles and Primative Church, and unmeet to be used or tolerated among
Christians, resolving likewise in express Terms, that Communion Tables are no
Altars, nor yet to be so styled.

And so by consequence not to be placed Altarwise, as the objectors pretend
they ought to be, because they falsely style, and deem them Altars.

If any here object, First, Object. 1.
that Communion Tables are Altars, because D. John Pocklington, in his Sunday
no Sabbath, printed and reprinted with License under M. Brayes the Archbishop
of Canterburies, Chaplings own hand London 1636. Edir. 1. p. 43. averrs, that
the Table of the Lord is called an Altar. 1. Cor. 8. 13. They that wait of the
Altar, are partakers of the Altar: which is not to be understood of Israel
after the flesh, for habemus Altar, we also under the Gosple have an Altar.
Heb. 15. 10. And because the late Coal from the Altar, Concludes from Heb. 13.
10. that the Lords Table is an Altar, and may be so termed.

To this I answer first, Answer 1.
that this great over confident Doctor, shows himself a very Ignoramus in the
quotations, If not a Papist in his expositions of both these Texts, which it
seems he never looked on in the Bible, for he quotes the 1. Cor. 8. 13. for c.
9. 13. and Heb. 15. 10. for 13. 10. there being not 15. but only 13. Chapters
in that Epistle, and he who is so ignorant in the Scriptures, as thus to
misquote, misprinte these texts, no wonder if he mistake their proper sense and
meaning.

2. I answer, that it is most clear, that the first Text of the two, namly, 1.
Cor. 9. 13. Do ye not know, that they which Minister about holy things live of
the things of the Temple, and they which wait AT (not of the Altar, as he
reads it) are partakers with the Altar; is meant only of the Aaronicall
Preistes, Levites and Jewish Altars, not of Christ's, Ministers and Lords Tables.

First, Because the things of the Temples and Altars, (which were placed in the
body or Court of the Jewish temple, there being no Altar in any of the
Synagoges) are here coupl^d together, and the Text of Deuteronomy. 18. 1. quoted to it
in the margent of our last translated English Bibles, of purpose to confute
this blind Doctor, and instruct all men, that this Text is meant of the
Aaronicall Priest and Levites under the Law, not of the Ministers under the
Gosple, as all Expositors whatsoever, both old and new interpret it.

2. Because, the Apostle expressly resolves it so past all dispute, in the next
ensuing words v. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gosple, See William Salisbury his Batery of the Popes Batter.
where he puts the Preachers and Preaching of the Gosple, and the living by it,
in direct opposition and contradistinction to the Preistes and Levites
ministering about Holy things in the Temple, and living of the Temple; serving
at the Altar, and partaking with the Altar, to preaching of the Gosple, and
living by it; drawing an argument by way of equity from one to the other, in
this manner; The Priest and Levites under the Law, which minister about Holy
things live of the things of the Temple, and those that wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar, and that by Gods ordination.

Therefore by the selfsame reason has the Lord ordained, that the Ministers of
the Gosple, who preach the Gosple, (not those who seldom or never preach, as
our great Prelates do) should live of the Gosple. So that if we interpret this
Text, as this novell Doctor has done, we shall quite overturne the Apostles
argument and similitude, and make it a mere nonsense Tantalogie, such as his
Sunday no Sabbath is, as full almost of Errors and falsehoods, as lines.

3. To that of Heb, 13. 10. We have an Altar, it is true that the Bishop of
Chichester, heretofore in his Conference with Fox Acts and monum, p. 1806.
Richard Woodman Martyr, alleged this very Text, to prove the Popish Sacrament
of the Altar, and that it is meant of their Popish Altars, whereon their
Sacrifice of the Mass is offered, and the Rhemists in their Notes on Heb. 13.
sect. 6. conclude thus: This Altar (says Isychius) is the Altar of Christ's
body, which the Jews for their incredulity must not behold: 1. 6. c. 21. in
Levit.

And the Greek word (as also the Hebrew answering thereunto in the Old
Testament) signifies properly an Altar to sacrifice on, and not a
metaphorical and spiritual Altar. Whereby we prove against the Heretics,
that we have not a Common table or profane Communion board to eat mere bread
upon, but a very Altar in the proper sense, to sacrifice Christ's body upon: and
so called of the Fathers in respect of the said body sacrificed.

Greg. Nazianz. in orat. de Gorgonia. Chrysoft. demonst. quod Christus sit Deus
Socrat. l. 1. c. 20. 25. August. Epist. 86. de Civitate Dei l. 8. c. 27. and l.
22. c. 10. Confess. 1. 9. c. 11. 13. Contr. fauct Manich. 1. 20. c. 21.
Theophylact in 23. Math.

And when it is called a table, it is in respect of the heavenly food of
Christ's body and blood received.

And other Papists generally infer from hence (as Harding against Jewel, and
Hare in his Conference with D. Rainolds, cap. 8. divis. 4. that by Altars is
not meant Christ himself, but the very material Altar on which they Sacrifice
Mass; inferring from hence, that the Church of Christ has yet altars and
Priests, and that the Communion table is here termed an Altar.

But for any Protestant writer of our own Church or other who interprets the
Altar in this Text to be the Communion Table, or a material Altar. I profess,
I know not any till this new Doctor, M. Shelford, M. Reeve, and the nameles
author of the Coal from the altar page 47. ( who yes writes thus dubiously of
this Text, as applied to the Lords Table;) and above all indeed S. Paul in his
Habemus Altar, Heb. 13. 10. In which place whether he meant the Lords table,
or the Lords Supper, or rather the Sacrifice itself certain it is, that he
conceived the name altar, neither to be impertinent nor improper in the
Christian Church.)

All the Fathers and ancients on this Text that I have seen; yea Isychius,
whom the Rhemists quote, interpret it of Christ himself, whom the Rhemists
themselves in their Notes on Apoc. 6. 9. interpret to be the altar under which
the souls of all Martyrs live in heaven expecting their bodies, Confutation of
the Rhem. Testament Notes on Apoc. 6. sect 1.
that in these Positive words: Christ as man ( NO DOUBT;) the altar under which
the souls of the Martyrs live in heaven, etc. which M. Cartwright and Doctor
Fulke thus resort upon them:

But if Christ be the Altar here, and that without doubt, not withstanding that
he is not here expressly said to be, why should not he so be also in Heb. 13.
10. where the name of Altar is more directly applied to him? why was it there
an Altar of stone; which is here of flesh? there in proper speech an Altar,
which is here but a borrowed speech? Verily there can be no other reason why
that Altar was of stone, but that the Jesuits, which out of that place framed
it, either for heavines of understanding to conceive the truth, or for hardness
of heart to yield unto it, were heavier and harder then the very stones
themselves, whereof they would have the Altar. And where in disagreeing
themselves, they agree with the truth: so in that which follows: Christ is
the Altar as he is man, they are as far from the truth, as they are near and
like unto themselves; especially if they mean he is the Altar according to his
Manhood alone: for when his Manhood, being the Sacrifice, was sanctified by
Christ, which is the Altar: and the thing which sanctifies, is of a Higher
nature then that which is sanctified by it, Math. 23. 19. Heb, 7. 7. it must
needs follow, that our Savior Christ must be considered in somewhat else then
in his manhood. when he is said to sanctify to same.

How our own writers have expounded this Text heretofore, will appear.

First, William Salisbury.
by William Salisbury his Battery of the Popes Bater, printed at London Cum
Privilegio Anno 1550. But now (writes he) are we set upon to batter, and beat
down the head corner stone of their Popish Batereulx: we will first declare
yet one grammar term more, for the unlearned sake, which though it be no high
point of Divinity, nevertheless who so has not the knowledge thereof, his
Divinity is but humanity or rather carnality then true knowledge in divine
matters. And so the grammarians call it a speech spoken by a figure called
Metonymia, when the thing contained is meant by the name of the thing that
conteyneth it. As when he say, reach hither the Cupp, meaning to have the
drink contained in the Cup.

This figurative speech used Christ himself, when he said Luke 22. This Cupp
is the New Testament in my blood: where he meant of the wine, and not of the Cup.

And likewise Matthew 23. where he speaks by the name of the City unto them,
that dwelled in the City, saying, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that stayest the
Prophets, etc.

Such manner of speech is also much used in the old Testament; as Esaias 1. Hear
^ Heaven and harken ^ earth.

And in an other place, Howl ye ships of Tharsis. And so the Papists must
either grant that, that kind of speech is used in the text, that we shall anon
rehearse hereafter, ior else must they grant, that the Jews, (whose Altars or
rather Sacrifices and forbidden meat, the writer of the Epistle alludeth unto)
were wont to eat up their Altars being made of stones. And that were hard meat
indeed; yea that were meat alone for Ostrich is a beast that swalloweth gaddes
of stele and digesteth them.
Ostriches? yea or rather stone meat were more meet for such as have stony
hearts, as have all Papisticall Doct. who against their conscience, knowledge
and learning, and being all destitute of the spirit of God, cry and shout for
the defense of their welbeloved Altars, Habemus Altars, Habemus Altar, Habemus
Altar; yea and I may tell you this Habemus Altar, is their judgeling trick,
whereby they do juggle unto the unlearned, it is all their Tabernacle, and only
refuge against all tempests, and this is as well their shote anchor, as their
halow at their hosing up of their ankor. But to hale in my sail and to land at
the proposed haven.

The English text of Habemus Altar written, Hebrew 13. is this: Be not carried
about with diverse and strange learnings: for it is a good thing, that the heart
be established with grace, and not with meats, which have not prosited them
that have had their pastime in them. We have an Altar, of the which they have
no power to eat, which serve in the Tabernacle, etc.

Here he does in a manner make a breife rehearsal of all the chiefest matters
that he entreated of before, adding thereto diverse Godly sentences to persuade
the Hebrews to abide in this learning: Inducing them also, by alluding unto
their Law being but a shadow to cleave unto the Gosple, and to let go the
shadow.

And therefore he says thus unto them: And as you had certain Sacrifices
offered on the Altars, whereof it was not Lawful even for the very offerers to
eat: so likewise have we a sacrifice once offered upon the altar of the Cross,
whereof it is not Lawful for as many of you as be yet duskened with the shadow
of the Law to eat, nor to be partakers of it at all.

Now therefore must the Papists be thought not only to be of too childish a
wit, and of no understanding, but rather furious and mad, if they continue to
prove their stony altars by this text.

And therefore would I think it an exceeding good deed for such as enjoy their
right wit to pick out from amongst themselves as many as are vexed with the
spirit of the said kind of phrenesy, and send them to Bedlem, or to their own
City of Rome. For else they shall still infect other, and do more hurt then
every man is ware of.

At the last to draw to an end in this matter; where this word Altar is read in
the 6. 8. and 11. Chapters of the revelation of S. John: if altar in those
places, admitting the like trope and figurative speech, do not signify Christ
also (God knows, it signifies nothing less then the confirmation of such
altars as the Pope has filled every corner of Christ's Church with all.

And if the Papists (after that all the Testimonies, as well of the Old and
the New Testament have failed them) go about to wrest the saying of the old
Doctors, for the stabilishing of their altars, they shall get nothing thereby,
but still utter their own gross ignorance, or their perverse blindness, For
whereso ever the old Catholic Doctors, used this word altar for the Lords
Table, then alluded they unto the Jews Altar, and meant thereby the Cross
which served as an altar to offer upon the Sacrifice of Christ's natural body.

And forsorh, ye Papisticall Preistes, as many of you as understand the Latin,
and marked what you read, (and if ye had been The Be gathers honey on the
same flour, that the Spider gathers poison.
Bees and not Spiders) you might have gathered the nature of this manner of
allusion or resemblance of Christ's Cross unto the altars of the Jews, even
out of your own poisoned Mass.

For do you not remember how ye mumbled (how ye redd I would say) in a
certain rhyme of your said hotch potch, which began: Lauds crucis extollamus,
nos qui crucis exultamus, etc, Oquam Falix quam praeclara, fuit haec salut is
ara, rubens agni sanguine. O how excellent and how happy, was this altar of
ir^e, besprynckeled with Lambs blood! and again in another prose: Ara crucis,
lampas lucis, verasalus hominum; whose sense in English word for word is this:
The Altar of the Cross, the lamp of light and the very health of men.

Richard Woodman.
By Richard Woodman Martyr, who interprets this Text only of Christ, in his Fox
Acts and monum. p. 1806.
second Examination before the Bishop of Chicester, which I shall here verbatim
rela^e,

Chichester. Follow your vocation: you have a little learning: we have an
Altar, Heb. 13. whereof you may not eat. What means S. Paul thereby?


Woodman. There is no man so foolish, to eat stones, I trow.


Chich. What mockers and scorners be you, to say no man will be so foolish to
eat stones? it is a plain ^ocke.


Wood. Why my Lord, you said I had no learning, nor knowledge. Wherefore it
becomes you to make things more plain to me, and not to ask me such dark
questions, and yet blame me to, me think it is too much.


Chich. I dare say, you know what it means well enough. The most fool in my
house will understand my meaning better then you do.


Wood. There stood some of his men not far of, talking together beside a
window. He called one of them by his name.


Chich. Come hither, I say to thee, thou shall not eat of this Table; what do
I mean thereby?


The man. Forsooth my Lord, The B. of Chichester rightly answered of his man
according to his question.
you would not have me eat of this table, laying his hand thereupon. With this
answer he made all them in the house to fall on laughing, and I could not hold
it in, but burst out with laughter, and said.


Wood. He has expounded the matter almost as well as I.


Chich. He means well enough, if you would understand him, answer me again,
to make it more plain, I say to ye, Thou shall not eat of this Table, what
mean I thereby?


The man. Forsooth you would not have me eat this Table.


Wood. These words made them all langh; wherewith the Bishop was almost angry,
because the answer proved no better and said.


Chich. He means that I would not have him eat any of the meat that is set
upon this Table. How say thou, do thou not mean so?


The man. Yes forsooth my Lord, that was my meaning indeed.


Wood. Yea my Lord, now you have told him what you mean, he can say so too: and
so could I have done (as little wit as I have) if you had said, Paul meant
that no man might eat of that which was offered upon the Altar, but the Priests.


Chich. Yea I perceive you understand the meaning of Paul well enough, but
that you list to cavil with me.


Wood. Why my Lord, do you think I understand such dark places of the
Scripture, without learning? you said even now, I had no knowledge, nor
learning, wherefore I answered you, as you judged of me.


Chich. Well, let this matter pass, and let us turn to the principal
again. Sacram, of the Altar.
How say you by the Sacrament of the Altar.


Wood. You mean the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ Jesus?


Chich. I mean the Sacrament of the Altar, and so I say.


Wood. You mean Christ to be the Altar, do you not?


Chich. I mean the Sacrament of the Altar in the Church, what is it so strange
to you.


Wood. It is strange to me indeed, The Altar how it is to be taken and where it
is.
if you mean the Altar of stone.


Chich. It is that Altar that I mean.


Wood. I understand not the Altar so.


Chich. No I think so indeed: and that is the cause that you be deceived. I
pray you, how do you understand the Altar then?


Wood. If you will give me leave till I have done, I will show you how I
understand the Altar, and where it is.


Chich. Yes, you shall have leave to say your mind as much as you will.


Wood. It is written, Math. 18. That wheresoever two or three be gathered
together in Christ's name, there is he in the midst among them: and whatsoever
they ask the Father upon earth it shall be granted them in heaven, agreeing to
the 5. of Math. saying: When thou come to offer thy gift at the Altar, and
there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
offering, and go first and be reconconciled to thy brother, and then offer thy
gift. The Preistes would have interrupted me, but the Bishop bad them let me
alone.


Chich. You shall hear a pretty conclusion anon.


Wood. I pray you let me make an end, and then find fault with me if you can.

Now to the matter: Christ the true and only Altar.
In these two places of Scripture, I prove that Christ is the true Altar,
whereon every Christian man and woman ought to come and offer their gifts.

First wheresoever the people are gathered together in Christ's name, there is
he in the midst; and where he is there is the Altar, so that we may be bold
to come and offer our gift, if we be in love and charity: if we be not, we must
leave there our offering, and go first and be reconciled to our brother, and
agree with him quickly, and so forth, and then come and offer the gift.

Some will say, how shall I agree with my adversary, when he is not nigh by a
hundred miles? may I not pray till I have spoken with him? To all such I
answer: if you presume to pray among the faithful, wishing any evil to any
man, woeman or child, thou as kest vengeance upon thy self: For no such as
keth any thing else of the Lord in h^s prayer, wherefore agree with thy
adversary; that is make thy life agreeable to Gods word. Say in thy heart
without dissimulation, that thou as kest God and all the world forgiveness
from the bottom of thy heart, intending never to offend them any more.

Then all such may be bold to come and offer their gift, their prayer on the
Altar, where the people of God be gathered together: Thus have I showed you my
mind, both of the Altar, and of the offering, as I understand it.


Chich. Do you understand the offering and the Altar so? I never heard any man
understand it so, no not Luther the great heretic, that was condemned by a
general Council, and his picture burned.


Wood. If he were an heretic, I think he understood it not so indeed; but I
am sure all Christians ought to understand it so.


Chich. O what vain glory is in you, as though you understood all things, and
other men nothing. Hear me: I will show you the true understanding, both of
the Altar, and the offering on the Altar. We have an Altar (said Paul) that ye
may not eat of. Meaning thereby, that no man might eat of that which was
offered on the Altar, but the Priest.

For in Paul's time all the living that the Priest had, the people came and
offered it on the Altar, money or other things: and when the people came to
offer it, and then remembered, that they had any thing against their brother,
then they left their offering upon the Altar, and went and were reconciled to
their brother: and they came again and offered their gift, and the Priest had
it. This is the true understanding of the place that you have rehearsed:
wherefore you be deceived.


Wood. My Lord, that was the use in the old Law. Christ was the end of that.
But indeed I perceive by Paul's words, the Sacrifice was offered in Paul's
time: yet that makes not that it was well done, but he rebuked it. Wherefore it
seems to me that you be deceived.


To pass by that learned Martyr M. John Philpot, with our famous Thomas
Beacon, who in their forecited passages, interpret the Altar in this Text, to
be Christ himself: not any material Altar either of wood or stone.

D. Fulke
The judicious solid D. William Fulke, in his confutation and answer of the
Rhemist Testament Heb. 13. 10. sect. 6. does thus expound this Text: The
Apostle speaks expressly of partipation of the Sacrifice of Christ's death, as
it is manifest in the two verses next following, which is by Christian faith,
and not in the Sacrament only, whereof none can be partakers that remain in
the Ceremonial observation of the Leviticall Sacrifice.

Therefore this place is brutishly abused, to prove that the Christians have a
material Altar, as the Papists have many. The Apostle means, Christ to be
the Altar, and not the Table whereon the Lords Supper is ministered, which is
called an Altar, but unproperly, as the Sacrament is called a Sacrifice. For he
says, We have an Altar, which is but one, where as the Popish Altars and
Communion Tables are many.

But Isychius says, This Altar is the Altar of Christ's body; ye abuse
Isychius, for he says that the Altar is the body of Christ it self. Such an
one says he, may not come, neither to the veil nor to the Altar; that is, to
the body of Christ, to do the ministry thereof.

For that has Paul, writing to the Hebrews, taught to be the veil and the
Altar.

The same he says l. ^. c. 4. Know thou that S. Paul understands, that the
intelligible Altar is the Lords Body, for he says, we have an Altar, whereof
they have no power to eat, which serve the Tabernacle, namely, the body of
Christ. For it is not Lawful for the Jews to eat of it. This Altar of
necessity is in the entrance of the Tabernacle of witness; that is in the
entrance of the heavens, because we have entrance into the Heavens with him.

It is manifest therefore, that Hesychius means not the Ppish Altars, but the
body of Christ in Heaven, the mystery whereof is celebrated on the Lords Table;
which of the ancient Fathers is called indifferently a Table, as it is indeed,
and an Altar, as it is unproperly.

But that it is called of them a Table, and was indeed a Table made of boardes,
and removeable, set in the midst of the people, not placed against a wall, I
have showed sufficiently, by the Testimonies of the ancient Fathers before.

By M. Cartwright in his Confutation of the Rhemists Heb. 13. 10. sect. 6. (we
have an Altar.) The writ^r to the Hebrews exhorting them to seek establishment
of their hearts in the grace which was brought unto them in the Gospel, and
not in the discretion of meats, alleges this for proof, that even as those
which seryed the Tabernacle, were not partakers by eating of those beasts,
whose blood being brought into the holy place, their bodies were burnt without
the camp.

Even so, those which holding fast the Ceremonies of the Law, are even yet as
it were in the Tabernacle, cannot be partaker of our Savior Christ, who
suffered out of the gates of Jerusalem, and is the truth of the shadows and
figures, which were burnt without the camp.

This being the very natural meaning of the Text, let the Reader observe, how
not childishly only, but absurdly also, the Jesui^es apply this place to prove
a Real Altar, and consequently a Sacrifice of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

For first, what is that which the Jews are threatened to be deprived of the
eating of.

If the Jesuits will answer according to their drift here of, proving an
Altar of stone, and not a Communion Table, they must say that for reward of
their obstinate cleaving to the Ceremonies of the Law, they shall not eat
stones, a small punishment for so great a finne, which if the Jesuits were put
unto, they would (I think) cry for a Communion Table, as of some better
digestion then the Popish Altar: whereby it is evident how sottish it is which
they strain so much at, touching the proper signification of the Greek word,
and the Hebrew answering there unto: which as if those words which properly
signify one thing, cannot by borrowed speech signify another thing
unproperly. And as though they were ignorant, that the word as properly
signifies a real Sacrifice, as this word signifies an Altar, were not in
this very Chapter translated from the property of it to signify a spiritual
Sacrifice.

Wherefore by the Altar is meant our Savior Christ, so called, for that as he
is the Priest and Sacrifice, so also he is the Altar, which sanctified himself
to be offered unto his Holy Father, as the Altar did sanctify the gift which
was upon it, And it is Christ, not sacrificed upon an Altar of stone, by a
Priest, but which offered himself upon Mount Calvary, without the gates of
Jerusalem, as is expressly mentioned here in this place.

Neither does the writer to the Hebrews mean Christ, suffering in a Mystery,
but that oblation of himself which he once offered, wherein the fire of Gods
anger fed upon his body and soul to have (as were the Sacrifices of beasts)
consumed them, if that his humanity had not been supported and borne up by the
eternal spirit of his God head, wherein he offered himself unto his Holy
Father.

And Isychius l. 6. c. 21. in Lev. saying, that Christ's body is the Altar,
confuteth you plainly, that hereof would ground an Altar of stone: and saying,
that the Jews for their incredulity must not behold him, he gives you another
blow, thereby declaring that the eating of Christ is the beholding of him, and
not the ^arn all eating of him, or swallowing him down the throat, and the
beholding of Christ he places in the eye of faith, which the incredulous Jews
wanting must not behold him.

What cursed spirits therefore are these, which upon the confidence of this
place, making as much for their Altars as for Baals, scoff at the Holy Table
of the Lord, in calling it a common and profane board, which must needs
(unless they have heardned their faces to all impudency, grant that the first
and last time that ever our Savior Christ ministered the Eucharist in his own
person, did it at a Table, and not at an Altar, and at the same Table also at
which he eat his common repast, which notwithstanding we do not, nor (in the
peace and quiet of the Church) think meet to be done.

But of this matter let the Reader see more before upon 1. Cor. 11. 29. where
also he shall see how unworthily the ancient Fathers are abused for maintenance
of Massing Altars. And let it be here observed how the evidence of the truth
presses them, which are feign to confess that the Fathers call it as well a
Table as an Altar, but say they that is unproperly in respect of the heavenly
food of Christ's body and blood received.

And I pray you, what should let us to say, that when they call it an Altar;
they do it unproperly, because of the spiritual Sacrifice of thanks giving,
that is offered at it. Set aside the truth of the cause triable by other
reasons, what warrant have you for your answer which we have not for ours.

Nay we may much trulyer say it then you can; which having showed it before
will here content our selves with one place, and the same taken from your own
allegations.

And from him who may well be in stead of all the rest, for August. Epist. 86.
speaking of that which under the Gospel succeeded that under the Law says
thus: One Altar ought to give place to another, sword to sword, fire to fire,
bread to bread, beast to beast, blood to blood: whereby the same reason that
the beast which is offered must needs be an unproper speech, and the fire that
consumes it a metaphorical fire: it follows that the Altar, whereupon the
beast is laid and consumed must needs be an unproper speech.

And indeed this unproperty of speech in the Altar is yet further confirmed.
When in the same place. Augustine objecteth to one as an Ignorance, that he
understood not the name of Altar to be more used in the vvriting of the Law and
of the Prophets, then under the Gospel, but most evidently of all, in that the
proving, that there is mention of an Altar in the New Testament, alleges the
place in the Apocalipse, which the Jesuits themselves interpret of our Savior
Christ. You were here also greatly over-seen to bring this place; seeing he
against whom this ignorance is objected, affirmed that in stead of a beast, we
have now bread in the Sacrament: and in stead of blood we have the cup: where
you would bear the world in hand, that Beringarius was the first that denied
Transubstantiation.

And S. Augustine answering it, and affirming that blood succeeded to blood,
yet does evidently declare, that he meant a figurative and Sacramental blood,
in that where the other said, we have in stead of a beast, bread, Augustine
answers, that as the Jews had the presence bread, so we in the Supper of the
Lord, and when he says, that every one takes a piece of the Immaculate Lamb:
it is evident that he means by the Lamb, the figure and Sacrament of the
Lamb, unless you will dare to say, that our Savior Christ in the Supper is
cu^ or broken in pieces: but as for your shift it is not so honest: for
presupposing (as you do) that it is very blood and raw flesh, which is there
received, the word of Table fitteth it not so well, but rather the word of
Altar ought to have been retained, considering that men use not to bring any of
these dishes to their Tables, and yet were usually brought under the Law to the
Altar: which Altar if you be ashamed to build up again to have place meet for
your Popish dishes, you shall repair to the Butchers shamble or slaughter
house, where this Merchandise of yours is most saleable.

D. Rainold.
By D. Rainolds in his Conference with Heart Chap. 8. Divis. 4. p. 473. 474.
475. 476. 477. 478.

Heart. The name of Altar is used properly for a material Altar, by the Apostle
to the Hebrews, saying Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no
power to eat which serve the Tabernacle, etc.


Rainolds. And are you out of doubt that by the words, We have an Altar, the
Apostle means a material Altar, such as your Altars made of stone.


Heart. What else? A very Altar?


Rainolds. And they who have no power to eat of this Altar are the stubborn
Jews, who keep the Ceremonies of the Law.


Heart. The Jews, and such profane men?


Rainolds. Then your Mass Priests may, and do use to eat of this Altar.


Heart. They do; and what then?


Rainolds. Their teeth be good and strong, if they eat of an Altar that is made
of stone. Are ye sure that they eat of it.


Heart. Eat of an Altar? As though ye knew not, that, by the Altar the Sacrifice
which is offered upon the Altar, is signified. They eat of Christ's body, which
thereby is meant.


Rainolds. Is it so? Then the word (Altar) is not taken for a very Altar in the
proper sense, but figuratively for the body of Christ the which was sacrificed
and offered.

Neither is it taken for the body of Christ, in that respect that Christ is
offered in the Sacrament, in the which sort he is mystically offered as often
as the faithfall do eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup. Wherein the
breaking of his body and shedding of his blood is represented to them.

But in that respect that Christ was offered on the Cross in the which sort he
was truly offered, not often, but once, to take away the sins of many, and to
sanctify them, for ever, who believe in him.


Heart. Nay, the ancient Father Isichius expounds it of the body of Christ in
the Sacrament (as I showed) which the Jews must not behold. They might behold
his body upon the Cross, and did so.


Rainolds. But the Holy Apostle himself did understand it of the body of
Christ, as it was offered on the Cross.


And that is manifest by the words he adds to show his meaning touching the
Jews and the Altar, Heb. 13. 11. For (says he) the bodies of those beasts
whose blood is brought unto the Holy place by the High Priest for sin, are
burnt without the camp^. Therefore even Jesus that he might sanctify the people
wish his own blood, suffered without the gare.

Which words are some what dark, but they will be plain, if we consider both
the thing that the Apostle would prove, and the reason by which he proves it.

The thing that he would prove, is, that the Jews cannot be partakers of the
fruit of Christ's death, and the redemption which he purchased with his precious
blood, if they still retain the Ceremonial worship of the Law of Moses.

The reason by which he proves it, is an ordinance of God in a kind of
Sacrifices appointed by the Law to be offered for sin, which Sacrifices
shadowed Christ, and taught this doctrine, Lev. 6. 16. and 7. 6.

For whereas the Preistes who served the Tabernacle in the Ceremonies of the
Law, Levit. 4. 3. and 16. 17. had a part of other Sacrifices and offerings and
did eat of them, Lev. 6. 30. there were certain beasts commanded to be
offered for sin in special sort, and their blood to be brought into the Holy
place, whose bodies might not be eaten, but must be burnt without the Camp.

Now, by these Sacrifices offered so for sin our only Sovereign Sacrifice
Jesus Christ was figured, Heb. 9. 12. who entered by his blood into the Holy
place, to cleanse us from all sin, 1. John 1. 7. and 2. 2. and his body was
crucified without the gate, John 19. 20. that is, the Gate of the City of
Jerusalem: and they who keep the Preistly rites of Moses Law, cannot eat of
him, that by his death they may live, John 6. 51. for none shall live by him
who seek to be saved by the Law, as it is written, Gal. 5. 2. if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

The Apostle therefore exhorting the Hebrews, to stablish their hearts with
grace, that teaches them to serve the Lord in spirit and truth after the
Doctrine of the Gospel, not with meats, that is to say, with the Ceremonies
of the Law, a part whereof was the difference between unclean and clean in
meats does move them to it with this reason, verse 10. that they serve the
Tabernacle and stick unto the Rites of the Jewish Priest hood, their souls
shall have no part of the food of our Sacrifice, no fruit of Christ's death,
verse 11. For as the bodies of those beasts which are offered for sin, and
their blood brought into the Holy place by the High Priest, might not be eaten
by the Preistes, but were burnt without the camp: so neither may the keepers
of the Preistly Ceremonies have life by feeding upon Christ, who (to show this
mystery) did suffer death without the Gate, when he shed his blood to cleanse
the people from their sin. verse 12.

And thus it appears by the Text itself, that the name of Altar betokneth
the Sacrifice, that is to say, Christ crucified; not as his death is showed
forth in the Sacrament, but as he did suffer death without the gate.

Whereby you may perceive first, the folly of your Rhemists, about the Greek
word, (is also the Hebrew) that it signifies properly an Altar to Sacrifice
on; as though it might not therefore be used figuratively; where yet themselves
must needs acknowledge it to be so too.

Next the weakness of your reason; who thereof do gather, that, by the
Sacrifice, which that word imports in the Apostle, is meant the clean
offering, of which the Prophet speaks.

For the clean offering, of which the Prophet speaks, Mal. 1. 11. is offered
in every place, the Sacrifice meant by the Apostle, Heb. 13. 11. in one place
only, without the Gate.

Wherefore the name of Altar in the Epistle to the Hebrews does neither
signify a Massing Altar, nor prove the Sacrifice of Massing Preistes.

Heart. That which you touch, as folishly noted by our Rhemists in their Annot.
on Heb. 13. 10. about the Greek and Hebrew word, is noted very truly.

For you cannot deny your self, but that it signifies properly an Altar, a
material Altar to sacrifice upon, and not a metaphorical and spiritual
Altar. Whereby as they conclude, that we have not a Common Table or profane
Communion board to eat mere bread upon, but a very Altar in the proper sense
to sacrifice Christ body upon: so for proof hereof they add, that in respect
of the said body sacrificed, it is also called an Altar of the Fathers, even of
In Orat. de Sorore Gorgonia.
Gregory Nazianzene, Demonst. quod Christus sit Deus.
Chrysostom, Histor. Eccles. l. 1. c. 20 and 25.
Socrates, Epist. 86. de Civitat. Dei 18. c. 27. and l. 22 c. 10. Confess l.
11. and 13. Contra Faustum Manich. l. 20. c. 21.
Augustine, and Theph. in Matthew. 23.
Theophylact.

And when it is called a Table, it is in respect of the Heavenly food of
Christ's body and blood received.


Rainolds. The note of your Rhemists, about the Greek and Hebrew word is true,
(I grant) yet foolish too, though true in the thing yet foolish in the drift.
For to the intent that where the Apostle says, we have an Altar, it may be
thought he meant not that word spiritually, or in a figurative sense, as we
expound it of Christ, but materially of a very Altar, such as is used in their
Masses: they say that the Greek word thusiasterion, (as also the Hebrew
answering mizbbeach thereunto in the old Testam. signifies properly an Altar
to sacrifice on, and not a metaphorical and spiritual Altar. Which speech how
dull it is in respect of the point to which they apply it, I will make you see
by an example of their own.


Our Savior in the Gospel teaches of himself, that he is the true bread,
which gives life unto the world, the bread which came down from Heaven, that
whosoever eats of it should not die; if any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever. John 6. v. 61. 33. 50. 51.

Your Rhemists in their Annotat. on John 6. 32. do note thereon, that the
person of Christ incarnate, is meant under the metaphore of bread, and our
belief in him is signified by eating. Wherein they say well. But if a man
should tell them, that the Greek word artos, (as also the Hebrew lechem
answering thereunto in the Old Testament,) does properly signify bread which
we eat bodily, and not a metaphorical or spiritual bread: were not this as
true a speech as their own? yet how wise to the purpose, who is so blind that
sees not? yea, to go no farther then the very word whereof by their Hebrew
and Greek they seek advantage themselves, upon that place of John Rev. 6. 9.
that he saw under the Altar the souls of them who were killed for the word of
God. do affirm expressly, that Christ is this Altar. Christ (say they) as man,
no doubt is this Altar. They mean it (I hope) in a Metaphorical, or other
figurative speech.

For they will not make him by transubstantiation to be an Altar properly, yet
here is it as true that the Greek word thusiasterion, (as also the Hebrew
mizebbah answering thereunto in the Old Testament) signifies properly an Altar
to sacrifice on, and not a Metaphorical or spiritual Altar.

And if it were as much for the advantage of their cause to prove, that Mass
is said in Heaven, as that in earth: and that Christ is properly bread without
a figure, as that bread is properly Christ in the Sacrament: the text of the
Scripture where Christ is called bread, yea the true bread, would prove the one
clearly, as they could fit it with this note: and the word Altar, would put
the other out of controversy, chiefly if that were noted with all, that an
Angel stood before the Altar, having a Golden Censer, Rev. 8. 3. though
Aretheas in collect. exposit. in Apoc. c. 8. Rupert. Com. 8. in Apocalyp. 1. 5.
Allen in his Treatise of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
others there also affirm the Altar to be Christ.

But it fares with your Rhemists, as it is wont with false Prophets, Ezekiel.
13. 10. one builds up a muddie wal, and others daube it over with a rotten
plaster, and when a storm comes the wall falls and plaster with it: For
though, as they lay it on, it seems hansome, that The Rhemists in their
Annotat. on the New Testament.
words signify properly the natural things which they are used to signify,
and not metaphorical or spiritual things: yet if it be opened that heerby is
meant that words may not be used (by metaphors, or other figures) to signify
those things which properly they do not signify, the boys in grammar
Schools who know not what a Metaphore is, will laugh at it.

Wherefore this plaster will not help the weakness of your muddie wall, I
mean of the Conclusion which you would prove it by, and do infer upon it,
that we have an Altar in the proper sense to Sacrifice Christ's body upon.

In the daubing up whereof yet your plaisterers do show a piece of greater
Art, partly by drawing us into hatred, who have not Popish Altars, but
Communion Tables, partly by vvinding the names of Fathers in, as if they made
for you against us, Both with skill and cunning, but more of Sophistry, then
divinity, 1. Cor. 10. 21.

For that which the Scripture does call the Lords Table, because it is
ordained for the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 11. 20. in the administration of the
blessed Sacrament of the body and blood: The Greg. Nazianz. Orat. in laud.
Basilii. Chryso^t. demonstr. quod Christus sit Deus. Homil. in Matthew. 16. and
8. 3. in pri^r Epist. ad Corinth. 24. and 27^ ad populum Antioch. 60. and 61.
Sermon de Euchar. and de B. Philogenio. S^crat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 20. and
25. August. Epist. 59. ad Paulin. Tract in Johan 26. de verbis Domini. Sermon.
46. Theophylact in prior Epist. ad Corint. c. 11.
Fathers also call it a Table in respect of the Heavenly banquet that is served
upon it.

And this improper sense. Marry, by a figure of speech, by which the names of
things that are like one another in some quality, are given one unto another:
as Christ is called David, Ezekiel. 34. 23. John Baptist, Elias, Mal. 4. 5. the
City of Rome Babylon, Rev. 17. 5. the Church of God Jerusalem, Isay 62. 9. the
Prudent. Him. de S. Laur. Co^c. Carth. 2. c. 2. Isidor. etymol. ar. l. 7. ^.
12. Ambr. de Offic. l. 2. c. 50. Lev. Epi. 79. a^ Dioscer.
Fathers for resemblance of his Ministers and Sacraments in the New Testament
to them in the Old, are wont to give the name, as of Preistes and Levites, to
Pastors and Deacons. so of a Sacrifice to the Lords Supper: and of an Altar to
the Lords Table.

For these things are linked by nature in relation and mutual dependence (as
I may say one of another the Altar the Sacrifice, and the Sacrificers, who
serve the Altar, that is Preistes and Levites. Wherefore if the Fathers meant a
very Altar in the proper sense to Sacrifice Christ's body upon, then must they
mean also the Leviticall Preist-hood to serve in sacrificing of it.

But the Leviticall Preist-hood is gone, Heb. 7. 11. and they knew it, neither
did they call the ministry of the Gospel so, but by a figure.

Your Rhemists therefore do abuse them, in proving as by them, that the
Communion Table is called an Altar properly, But us of the other side they do
abuse more, by setting an Altar against a Common Table in such sort of speech,
as if we, whose Churches, have not a very Altar to kill our Savior Christ, and
sacrifice him upon it, ^ad but a Common Table and profane Communion board to
eat mere bread upon.

A feate to make us odious in the eyes of men, whom you would persuade that we
discern not the body of the Lord. Which your privy slander does us open injury.

For we have not a Common, but a The Book of Com. pray^ in the Commun.
Holy Table, as both we call it, and esteem it: not a profane Communion board,
but the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 23. wherein we receive the bread
of thankesgiving, and the Cup of blessing, as the Apostles Doctrine, and
practice of the Justin. Martyr in Apolog. 2. Irenae l. 4. c. 34. and l. 5. c.
4. Cyprian Epist. 63. ad Coecilium. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. and 5. Lev. Sermon.
4. de quadrag.
Fathers teach us: your selves are guilty rather of feeding men with mere
bread, who do take Council. Constant. Sess. 13. and Trident. Sess. 21. c. 1.
can. 2.
away the Cup of the New Testament in the blood of Christ from the Christian
people: and in stead of the blessed bread of the Sacrament, do give in your
Masses, Durandus in rational. divinor. officiis l. 4. c. 53.
mere bread indeed by your own Confession, the Common bread, that goes under
the name of* Panis benedictus sanctae com munionis vicarius.
Holy bread. I would to God M. Heart, you would think with your self even in
your bed (as the Prophet speaks Psalm. 4. 4.) and consider more deeply, both
the wicked abuses, wherewith the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
profaned in your unholy Sacrifice of the Mass, and the treacherous means,
whereby your Masters and Fellows of the College of Rhemes do seek to
maintain it.

Who being not able to prove it by the Scriptures either of the Altar, or of
the clean offering the principal places whereon their show stands: they go
about to breed a good opinion of it in the hearts of the simple, partly by
discrediting us with fal^e reproaches, partly by abusing the credit of the
Fathers. Which two kinds of proof do bear the greatest sway through all your
Rhemist Annotations.

D. Wille^
By D. Willet in his Synopsis Papismi, the 9. general controversy part. 2.
Quest. 6. Error 54. where he brings in the Papists arguing thus for Altars;
Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar, of which they have no power to eat that serve
at the Tabernecle. That is, the Altar whereon Christ's body is offered:
Bellarm. Rhemist in hunc locum. Answer. The Apostle speaks expressly of
participation of the Sacrifice of Christ's death (as it is manifest in the two
verses next following,) which is by a Christian faith, and not in the Sacrament
only, whereof none can be partakers that remain in the Ceremonial
observations of the Leviticall Sacrifices.

For the Apostle speaks manifestly, verse. 12. of the suffering of Christ
without the Gate. Christ therefore is the Altar, yea our Priest and Sacrifice
too.

Further, you abuse this place to prove your material Popish Altars, which are
many: but the Apostle says, we have an Altar, speaking of one.

This exposition Richard Woodman a holy Martyr has sealed, that Christ is the
true Altar, whereon every true Christian ought to come and offer, he proves by
the Conference of those two places of the Gospel. Math. 5. 23. If thou bring
thy gift to the Altar, and remember that thy brother has ought against thee,
etc.

Likewise, Math. 18. where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in
the midst.

Wheresoever then people are gathered together in Christ's name, there is he in
the midst, and where he is, there is the Altar, so that we may be bold to
come and offer our gift, Fox p. 1991. Col. 2.

David Dickson.
By David Dickson, who in his Short Explanation of the Epistle to the Hebr. c.
13. v. 10. p. 317. 318. writes thus: We have an Altar, etc. Such as will eat
of Jesus and be partakers of him, must beware to serve the Jewish Tabernacle,
by keeping on foot, and continuing the Ceremonies, and appertaynances annexed
there unto; such Feasts, such Jubil es, such Altars, such sprinklings, and
Holy water, such Priests and vestimentes, etc. as Levi had.

He calls Christ, by the name of the Altar; because He is the thing
signified by the Altar, and by the Sacrifice, and by she rest of the Leviticall
Ceremonies.

Then 1. those Ordinances of Leviticall Service were figures of Christ, some in
one part, some in another, and He is the Accomplishment of them, even the
Truth of them ALL, The true Tabernacle, the true Priest, the true Sacrifice,
the true Altar, etc.

2. Christ's self, is all the Altar that the Christian Church has. Our Altar
is He only; and nothing but he, the Apostle knows no other.

The same exposition upon this Text is given by M. Peter Smart, in his Sermon
at Durham July 27. 1628. And finally by King James 8. King James.
himself, who in his Paraphrase on the 6. of the Revel. 9. v. determines thus:
I saw under the Altar the souls of the Martyrs, which cried with a loud voice:
How long will thou delay, o Lord, since thou art Holy and true, to revenge our
blood.

For persecution it makes so great a number of Martyrs, that the souls lying
under the Altar, to wi^t in the safeguard of Jesus Christ, (who is the only
Altar, whereupon and by whom it is only Lawful for us to offer the Sacrifice
of hearts and lips, to wit our humble prayers to God the Father) did pray, and
their blood did cry to Heaven, and crave at the hands of their Father a just
revenge of their torments upon the wicked.

Thus all these with sundry other writers of our Church, together with all
Protestant writers, whatsoever unanimously interpret this Text of Christ
himself, not of Communion Tables and Altars; Therefore it proves not that the
Communion Table is, or may be called an Altar, though the Fathers some times
improperly style it so, contrary to the Scripture language, yet not in that
sense, or for any such end as the Papists and our Popish Innovators do, to
bring in the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Altar, and set upp Mass again.

If any object in the second place, Object. 2.
as the Coal from the Altar page 13. 14. 15. 16. 27. 28. 29. strangly does,
and before him Treatise of Gods house p. 2.
M. Shelford, that the Lords Table may be called an Altar, yea the Lords
Supper, the Sacrament of the Altar (though the Scripture never style either of
them thus.)

First, Because the Fathers some times phrase them so.

2. Because the Statetude of 1. Ed. 6. c. 1. r^vived by El. c. 2. terms the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper the Sacrament of the Altar.

3. Because the Common Prayer Book in 2. Ed. 6. Anno 1549. calls the Lords
Table promiscuously both by the name of a Table an Altar.

4. Because our Godly Martyrs, as John Fryth, Archbishop Crammer, John Lambert,
John Philpot, Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Ridley, call both the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. The Sacrament of the Altar, and the Communion Table an Altar, as
their words cited in the Coal from the Altar p. 16. 17. testify: from whence
that Pampl^t concludes thus: So that we have a Sacrifice and an Altar, and a
Sacrament of the Altar on all sides acknowledged; neither the Prince or
Prelates, the Priest or people dissenting from it, some of those terms being
further justified by the Statute Law.

To the first of these Reasons I answer: Answer 1.
First, that Christ and his Apostles never phrase the Lords Table, an Altar,
but the Lords Table, the Lords Supper, the Communion of Christ's body and blood,
we ought therefore to style them so as the Scripture does, 1. Cor. 10. and 11.
to call them by those names the Scripture gives them, which are proper and
genuine, since we ought to speak as Christ and God has taught us of these
ordinances.

2. The Fathers and primative Christians for at least 230. years after Christ
had no Altars of which more before; therefore See B. Jewels Reply to Harding
Art. 1. div. 5. p. 5.
not the name of Altars, or of the Sacrament of the Altar.

3. The Fathers usually and properly style the Communion Table, the Lords
table, the Holy table, the Table etc. and the Sacrament i^selfe, the Lords
Supper, the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, the Eucharist and the like,
and that properly, and those who phrase the Table an Altar, or the Sacrament,
the Sacrament of the Altar, do it only improperly and figuratively, (as they
style faith, and our hearts the Altar of a Christian,) either in relation to
Christ himself, who is our only true Altar, whose body, blood and death are my
stically represented to us in this Sacrament, or in respect the Sacrifice of
his body for us on the Altar of the Cross, is here spiritually exhibited, or
by reason of the spiritual Sacrifices of prayer and praise, and oblations of
Charity for the poores releife that are there offered up when the Sacrament is
received, or because it puts us in mind of Christ our Altar in Heaven, who must
consecrate all our Services, Sacrifices, and spiritual oblations, and make
them acceptable to his Father.

In these regards only, as In their forecited places.
some of our Martyrs, Bishop Jewel, D. Fulke, D. Reynolds, M. Deane Nowell, D.
Willet, and M. Cartwright observe, the Fathers sometime style the Lords Table,
an Altar, or out of an allusion to the Jewish Altars and oblations, which were
but types of Christ and his sacrifice on the Cross, here represented to us,
but never truly or properly. Therefore their Antiquities prove it not to be an
Altar; nor yet the Sacrament, to be the Sacrament of the Altar, or that it may
properly be so termed.

4. Though the Fathers phrase the Communion Table an Altar, or the Lords Supper
the Sacrament of the Altar; yet this is no argument that we may now lawfully
do it, or that they did well in it. For when they used this manner of speech,
the Sacrifice of the Mass and Masse-Preists, with other idolat^ous popish
trash, was not known nor heard in the world, neither were there any to be
scandalized with those phrases, or to wrest them to such ill ends and purposes,
as since they have been: There were then no Papists to be hardened and
encouraged in their popish Superstition, no Protestants to be scandalized or
drawn to dream of Mass and Mass Priests again, as now there are.

Therefore they (prochance) might lawfully use these terms, though we may not:
And yet See this Rhemists Notes on Hebr. 13. Sect. 6. and others of the Mass.
these terms and speeches of the Fathers, the Papists have formerly derived
and still defend and justify all the abominations of their Mass, their altars,
Mass Preistes massing vestments, Cringes, Ceremonies; which shows, that the
Fathers might have better spared then used them, since all this hurt, but no
good at all has proceeded from them; and if we should now after so long a
discontinuance and disuse of these Titles, and our exploding of them, as Fox
Acts and monnm. p. 1211.
savouring to much of Popery and Iudaisme, and tending to foment them, should
reassume them, it would not only harden the Papists in all their idolatries,
errors and superstitions concerning the Mass and altars wherein they differ
for Protestants, but likewise cause many to revolt from our religion unto
Popery, and others scandalized with these terms either wholly to separate from
our Church as false, superstitious, Popish, or else to continue in it with
wounded, troubled, scrupulous consciences and dejected discontented spirits,
and drive them almost clean away from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as
late experience to apparently manifests.

So that this fi^^t reason is of no great moment to prove what is objected.

To the second and maine reason; I answer 1. That the Statute of 2. Ed. 6. was
made in the very infancy of reformation; whence M. Rastall in his Abridgment
of Statutes, Service, and Sacraments.
annexeth this observation to it.

But note the time of the first making of this Statute, which was before that
the Mass taken away, when the opinion of the real presence was dot removed
from us.

The language therefore of this Act, made thus before the Mass was taken away,
or the gross opinion of Transubstantiation removed from us, is not much to be
regarded, much less insisted on, though the Coal from the Altar; does
principally rely upon it.

2. I answer, that this Act does not call the Lords Supper, the Sacrament of
the Altar, nor the Lords table, an Altar, but rather the contrary; For the
Tittle of it is this: An Act against such persons as shall unreverently speak
against the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, commonly called the
Sacrament of the Altar,etc.

And the body of the Act runs thus: As in the most comfortable Sacrament of the
body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ commonly called the Sacrament of the
Altar; and in Scripture (mark it,) THE SVPPER AND TABLE OF THE LORD, THE
COMMUNION AND PARTAKING OF THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST, etc.

So that the name which the Statute gives it, is only the Sacrament used, 8.
times together in this Act; and the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
thus so styled, and this clause, commonly called the Sacrament of the Altar, is
not a Title given it by the Statute, but by the Preistes and vulgar people, who
then usually called it so, and added only by way of explanation as their usual
term, not the Parleaments, and being omitted in the ensuing parts and clauses
of this Act, which terms, the Sacrament, the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, with out this term of explination; which this Act expressly declares, to
be no Title given it in, or by the Scripture, which ever calls it, the Supper
and Table of the Lord, the Communion and partaking of the body and blood of
Christ; but only by the vulgar, who were then either for the most part Papists
or Popishly affected, neither Mass nor Transubstantiation, nor Altars being
then abolished, as they were shortly after.

3. This Act calls not the Communion Table an Altar, (the sole thing now in
question,) but, the Table of the Lord: therefore it makes nothing for Altars, or
the stiling of the Communion Table an Altar.

4. No Act either in King Edwards Reign or Queen Elizabeth's, or since her
days, this alone excepted, calls the Lords Supper, the Sacrament of the Altar,
but only the Sacrament, the Holy Sacrament, etc. this Title therefore being
omitted in all other Acts, and mentioned here as the phrase of the vulgar, not
the Parleaments, and used only in the Statute of 1. Mar. Parl. 1. c. 3. when
Mass and Altars were again set up and revived, but in no other Act of any of
our Protestant Princes but this, can be no plea at all, for us now to call the
Lords Table, an Altar, or his Supper, the Sacrament of the Altar; but rather
argues the contrary; that we should for bear to style them thus, because the
Parleament in all Acts since concerning this Sacrament or divine Service
(except only in Queen Mary's days) has done it; though the Coal from the
Altar falsely affirms the contrary, that some of their Terms are further
justified by the Statute Law, but never proves it, neither in truth can do it.

5. Whereas the Coal from the Altar page 16. 17. objectes, that this Statute
of ^. E. 6. c. 1. repealed by Queen Mary in the first Parliament of her Reign,
was afterward revived by Queen Elizabeth both the head and body, and every
branch and member of it 1. Eliz. c. 1. So that we have a Sacrifice and an
Altar, and a Sacrament of the Altar an all sorts acknowledged, etc.

I answer, that there is in this a double mistake. 1. in the Statute itself,
in citing, 1. Eliz. c. 1. which speaks nothing of the Sacrament or Common
Prayer, nor of this Act of 1. Ed. 6. c. 1. for 1. Eliz. c. 2. so that it seems
the Author of this Coal, (who styles S. Edward Cook, S. Robert Cook, and
makes M. Plowden a Judge, and styled him Page 61. 62.
Judge Plowden, though he were never any Judge; and a Professed Papist) was
some By like D. Heylyn w^o plays the ignorant Lawyer to, in his hist. of the
Sabbath part. 2. c. 7 8.
busy pragmaticall Divine who took upon him to cite and interpret Statutes in
which he had no skill, or else borrowed his Law, from others, as ignorant as
himself, perchance from Treatise of Gods house p. 2.
M. Shelford, who quotes, or rather misquotes these two Acts.

2. In the thing for which he cites it, for the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. does
neither mention nor revive this Act of 2. Ed. 6. c. 1. (though Service and
Sacraments 1.
M. Rastall and some others have thought the contrary,) as is clear by the
words themselves whereon they ground their opinion.

Where as at the death of King Ed. 6. there remained one uniforme order of
Common service and administration of the Sacraments, set forth in a Book
entitled; The Book of Common Prayer, etc. the which was repealed in the first
year of Queen Mary to the great decay of the due honor of God, and discomfort
to the professors of the truth of Christ's Religion. Be it further enacted by
the authority of this present Parleament, that the said estatute of Repeal and
every thing therein contained ONLY CONCERNING THE SAID BOOK, and the service,
administration of Sacraments rites and Ceremonies, contained or appointed in or
by the said Book, shall be void and of none effect from and after the Feast of
the Nativity of S. John Baptist next coming, and that the said Book with the
order of service, and of the administration of the Sacraments rites and
Ceremonies, with the alteracions and additions therein added and appointed by
this estatute^, shall stand and be from and after the said Feast in full force
and effect, according to the tenor and effect of this estatute, any thing in
their foresaid estatute of repeal to the contrary not with standing.

And in the end of this Act^ this clause is inserted: and be it further enacted
by authority aforesaid, that all Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, whereby an
other service, administration of Sacraments, or Common prayer is limited,
established or set forth to be used with in this Realm or any other the
Queens Dominions or Countries shall from henceforth be utterly void and of
none effect.

By which it is most apparent. First, that this Act repeales the statute of
repeal 1. Mariae: only as to the Book of Common Prayer and administration of
the Sacraments confirmed by Parliament 5. and 6. Ed. 6. and no further;
therefore not as to the Statute of 1. Ed. 6. c. 1. which has no relation to
that Book, and so remains unrevived, and still repealed by this Act as before.

2. That it revives not any Statute for Common: Prayer or Sacraments formerly
repealed, but the Common Prayer Book itself, and that not as it was at first
published, when it had the name of Altar, and Sacrament of the Altar in it, but
as it was purged from these terms, and testified in 5. and 6. Ed. 6. with such
alterations and additions as were annexed to it by this Act.

So as it neither revives the head, body, and every branch of 1. Ed. 6. c. 1.
nor yet the Altar, the Sacrifice or Sacrament of the Altar, nor any of these
phrases, as the Author of the Coal from the Altar, ignorantly and falsely
affirms, nor any other Statute concerning Common Prayer, no not; 2. Ed. 6. c.
1. or 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 1. which are expressly repealed by the last clause of
this Act, (the whole Statute concerning Divine service and Sacraments now on
foot) because they prescribed another Book of Common Prayer, service and
administration of the Sacrament, then this which this Statute confirms; which
enacts, that the said Book etc. with the Alterations and additions therein
added and appointed by this estatute, shall stand and be in full force and
effect, not by virtue of any former Law, but according to the tenor and effect
of this Statute.

From all which I may safely conlude against the Coal, that neither the head,
nor body, nor any branch, or member of 1. Eliz. 6. c. 1. is revived by 1. Eliz.
c. 2. and so that we have neither a Sacrifice, nor an Altar, nor a Sacrament of
the Altar on any side, much less on all sides acknowledged, as he falsely
vaunts; that both the Princes, Prelates, Priests, and people have dis^ented
from it, and that none of the said terms have been further justified by the
Statute Laws.

And so this maine authority on which he and M. Shelford built, is point blanke
against them, makes nothing at all for them; and over throws their cause.

To the 3. reason I answer; that true it is in the first Book of Common
Prayer, set forth in King Edwards days An. 1549. the Communion Table was
called an Altar, as is evident by the Book itself, and the 2. reason why the
Lords board should rather be after the form of a Table then an Altar: Fox Acts
and Monuments p. 1211. the Altars themselves being not then removed by public
authority: but when the Altars the next year following (for no reformation can
be perfited at first, but by degrees) were removed by the King and Counsels
special command, and Communion Tables placed in their Rooms, not to humor M.
Calvin, but upon good and Godly considerations, and the 6. reasons compiled by
the King and Counsel, (which the Bishops were to publish to the people for
their better satisfaction and instruction, registered by M. Fox; the very names
of Altar and Sacrament of the Altar were by authority of Parleament 5. and 6.
E. 6. c. 1. expunged out of the Common Prayer Book, and the names of Lords
Table, Gods board, Communion Table, Holy Table, Communion Sacrament, and
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and Lords Table, only retained and
inserted in its steed; which Book being afterward altered, amended and
revided by Act of Parliament, 1. Eliz. c. 2. the names, Altar, and Sacrament of
the again purpose omitted, and those other Phrases and expressions only
retained.

The names therefore of Altar and Sacrament of the Altar, being thus
particularly, purposely and professedly damned and expunged out of the Book of
Common Prayer, by the whole Church of England in two several Acts of
Parleament under two most religious Princes, and never thought meet to be used
or reinserted since, is a most convincing retirated parleamentary resolution,
that the Communion Table is not an Altar (much less an Shelford p. 2. 7. ^
High Altar, as some now phrase it;) that the Lords Table, ought not to be
styled an Altar, nor the Lords Supper the Sacrament of the Altar, (else why
should these Titles be thus exploded?) and that no Orthodox member of the
Church of England ought to style them thus, much less to write and plead in
defense of these their Titles, as these new Champions do, but to call them by
those proper names which the Scripture, the Common Prayer Book, and these two
statutes give them.

To the 4. reason; I answer:

First, that neither of all the Martyrs quoted in the Coal p. 14. 15. 16. does
call either the Lords Table, an Altar, or the Sament, the Sacrament of the
Altar.

True it is, Bishop Latimer says, that the Doctors call the Lords Table an
Altar in many places, in a figurative and improper sense; and Bishop Ridley, in
answer to that place, that Bishop White objected out of Cyrill, says, that S.
Cyrill means by this word Altar, not the Jewish Altar, but the Table of the
Lord; but themselves never call it an Altar, but a Table only; they being so
far from it, that Bishop Ridley writ a special Book, de Confringendis
Altaribus, and Fox Acts and monum. p. 1211. 1212.
he and Bishop Latimer had a chief hand both in casting Altars out of our
Churches and Chapples, and in expunging the very name of them out of the Common
Prayer Book.

Neither of the other Martyrs so much as mention the Altar in the words there
^ited, and M. Philpot expre^^ly resolves, that the Altar meant by Heb. 13. 10.
is not the Communion Table or material Altar, but Christ himself.

And as they style not the Communion Table an Altar, so not the Lords supper,
the Sacrament of the Altar.

For John Fryth only says, they examined me touching the Sacrament of the
Altar; the term his persecuting Examiners gave it, not he; who mentions it as
their Interrogatorie, not his answer.

So John Lamberts words: I make you the same Answer, that I have done unto the
Sacrament of the Altar, relates to his adversaries Articles which so styled it,
not to his own voluntary answer, which must be made of, and according to the
question demanded.

M. Philpot only says, that the old writers do sometimes call the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ among other names which they ascribe thereunto,
the Sacrament of the Altar; but he calls it not so himself.

Archbishop Crammer in Henry the 8: days, before he was thorougly resolved
against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of which he was at first an over
earnest defender as himself Fox Acts and monum. p. 1703.
confessed at last.

Take no offense at the term of Sacrament of the Altar, but afterward he did;
not using it in his writings; and so far was he s^em calling the Communion
Table an Altar, that he was the chief agent in casting ou^ Altars: and
expunging the very name of Altar out of the Common Prayer Book, his, Ibidem p.
1211.
name being subscribed to the Letter to Bishop Ridley, for the removing of
Altars, and setting up Tables in their places; and the 6. reasons why the Lords
Board should rather be after the form of a Table then of an Altar, (condemning
both Altars, and their very name in some sort) sent to Bishop Ridley which that
Letter, being approved, if not compiled by him.

So that all these Reasons and authorities wherewith the Coal from the Altar
is principally kindled and en^lamed, are now quite extinguished upon ^^^full
examination, and neither prove that the Communion Table is an Altar, or may be
so styled, or that the Lords Supper is or may be phrased the Sacrament of the
Altar, but the contrary.

Since therefore it is evident by all these authorities and reasons,
notwithstanding these Objections, that the Communion Table is no Altar, and
that the Church, State and writers of England have abandoned all Altars, and
their very name together with them, by which Altars ( as Philippus Eilbrachius:
writes in his Epanorthosis viae Compendariae Neomagi 1633. c. 18. p. 143. sect.
7.) the Cross of Christ is overturned, and therefore they are to be taken away;
the Orthodox Churches doing well, in removing them, and restoring Tables, at
which the Papists themselves dare not deny, but that Christ and his Apostles
after him used to Celebrate his Supper.

The objection falls quite to ground, and I may thus invertit: Communion Tables
are no Altars, neither ought they to be styled or reputed Altars; Therefore they
ought not to be placed Altarwise, against the East end of the Quire, in such
manner as the late Popish Altars, as is pretended stood.

But admit Communion Tables to be Altars, then it will hence necessarily,
follow^ that they ought to stand in the midst of the Church or Quire, because
Altars anciently ever stood so, b^th among the Jews, Gentiles, Pagon Greeks
and Romans, and Christians to, as I have largely manifested.

Thus they stood in Durands time Anno 1320. even in Popish Churches; thus were
they situated in ancient times in all the Greek Churches, and so are they yet
placed at this very day as Bishop Jewel has proved out of Durandus, Gentianus
Herveticus, and other Authors.

Yea thus have some Altars stood heretofore in England: Fox Act^ and monum. p.
1404. 1406.
For the Altar of Carmarthen was placed in the body of the Church: Erkenwalde
the 4. Bishop of London was laid in a sumptuous shrine in the East part of
Paul's above the High Altar, and some other of our Bishops have been buried
above the High Altar; Therefore it stood not at the very East end of the Church,
and these Prelates were very presumptuous in taking the wall of the High Altar,
and setting their very Tombs; and rotten Carcases, above Christ's mercy seat,
and Chair of Estate, (...) of their present successors may be credited, who as
they will have no ^ea^es at the upper end of the Chancle for fear any man
should sit above Christ or chekmate with God almighty, some thinks they should
suffer no shrines or Tombs especially of Bishops (who should give good example
of humility to others,) to be there erected for fear any man's rotten carcass
should lie inshrined above them; If then our Tables must be situated. as all or
most Altars anciently have been till with in these few years; they must then
be placed in the midst of the Quire or Chancell, because Altars have there
been usually placed, as the premises abundantly evidence.

And these ensuing Testimonies will prove^ lexond^ control. Rerum Germanic.
Script. m. 1. p. 5^0. 591.
Sigismund the Monk, in his Chronicon Augustinum scholasticum, Anno 1483. pars
1. c. 1. records; That in the ancient Cathedral Church of Augusta dedicated to
S. Afra, there were two Quiers, in which were two Altars standing under two
arches; and at the lower end of the Quire under the rayles, which divided it
from the body of the Church two Crucifixes. and under them two Altars contening
the Eucharist for the people. Moreover in the body of the Church there were 4.
Altars; the first and chief of them was the Altar of S. Dionys, Versus
Occidentem in part, septentrionali, non juxta murum, SED QUASI IN MEDIO: and
that stood toward the West, (not East) in the North part, not close by the
wall, but as it were in MIDST.

Thus was the Altar of S. Mary placed in Rome, so that in the great inundation
of Tiber in the days of Pope Nicholas the 3. the water Platina N^col. 3.
ROTUNDE quatuor pedibus etc. went round about it from foot high and more.

De Vitis pont. Rom p. 68. 69.
Anastasius writes of Pop^ Theodorus, that Pyrrhus Patriarck of Constantinople
coming to Rome in his time about the year of our Lord 646. Fecit ei Cathedram
poni juxta Altar; he caused a chair to be placed for him hard by the Altar,
honoring him as the Priest of the royal City.

Either therefore the Altar in those days stood near the West end of the Quire
where the Bishops chaires, and Seats now generally are placed, or in the midst
of the Quire; or else Bishops then usually sat at the East end of the Quire
cheek by will with the Altar, where our Prelates will suffer no seats at all
to stand, for fear any should sit above, or in equipage with God Almighty.

The same Author relates, that Pope Sergius about the year of our Lord 694.
made a fowersquare veil about the Altar in S. Peter's Church, having 4. white
Curtains and 4. scarlet ones IN CIRCUITU ALTARIS round about the Altar, two of
each side: the Altar therefore stood not against the wall, but some distance
from it, else this travarse or veil of Curtains could not inviron it round
about.

In the great Cathedral Church of Rome itself, (whence these Romanizers would
seem to take their pattern) the Altar Anno Dom. 1547. even on Christmas day
(as William Thomas an eye-witnes in his History of Italy, and Thomas Becon vol.
3. f. 282. out of him report) when the Pope himself and all the Cardinals
received the Sacrament, STOOD IN THE MIDST of the Chaple or Quire, upon every
way, and the Pope being brought behind (or above it as our Prelates term it)
was there in a Throne of wonderful Majesty set up as a God, sitting above
Christ and God almighty himself by our Novellers and Prelates language: in
which manner the Altar stood there long before, and yet continues situated, as
I am informed.

And in S. Peter's Church at Rome, (as D. Andrew Board an eye-witnes to, in
Cardinal Wolsies days, in his Book of the Abuses of Rome, and M. Thomas
Becon out of him vol. 3. f. 281. relate,) the Sacrament and Altar are both in a
Chapple, not in the East, but Northside of the Church; and S. Peter and S. Paul
lie interred in a Chapple, under an old Altar, at the very lower part or end of
the Church, (not the upper.)

If Altars therefore even in the very Cathedralls of Rome itself, are thus
seated in the midst of the Chapple or Quire, in the North, not East end, yea
at the very lower part and end, not East or upper end of the Churches^; Our
Roman Novellers have no ground or Color at all left them, for their East^rly
situation of Altars or Tables with one side against the wall, or to place them
at the upper end of the Church or Quire, as they call it, since the old Altar
under which S. Peter and Paul lie buried (and at, which the Sea Thomas Beacons
reliq. of Rome.
Romanists affirm, they consecrated the Sacrament and said Mass,) stand thus
at the lower part or end of the Church, the Priests, Prelates and people taking
the upper hand thereof, and sitting above it, as the Pope himself does above
the High Altar.

The 3. objection Object. 3.
is this: Coal from the Altar p. 30. 53. 54.
The Jews and Pagans Altars, stood in the midst of their Quiers and Temples;
Therefore Christians Altars and Communion Tables ought to stand at the East End
Altar-wise against the wall, as now they are placed.

I answer 1. Answer 1.
That this is a mad consequence: For if we will imitate the Jews and Gentiles
in setting up Altars, then we have cause to imitate them in the form and
situation of our Altars; and if we will reject the latter as Iew^sh and
heathenish much more Altars themselves, as more Jewish and heathenish then
their sit us.

2. I answer, That the argument, is a mere Nonsequitur; For admit we ought not
to imitate neither Jews or Getiles in situating our Altars or Communion Tables
in the midst as they did, yet will it follow. Ergo we must place them against
the Eastwall or end of the Church or Chauncell.

Certainly Ergo we should place them at the West, North or South Side of the
Church or Quire, is as good a consequent.

3. Our Novellers will needs imitate the Se Orme ^ods Pagano-Papis^ l Francis
de Croy his 3. Conform.
Gentiles and Jews in their Sanctum Sanctorums, Mercie-Seates, Copes, Miters,
Aaronicall attires vestments, Organs, Singing-men, and a world of Jewish and
Heathenish Ceremonies, Orders, Pastimes Festivals and Consecrations; why not
then in the standing of their Altars; having no Divine Prohibition to hinder
them in this particular, as they have in all, or most of the others.

4. The Altars of the Jews were placed in the midst of the Tabernacle Temple
and Court, of the Temples by divine institution and direction, and so situated
in pagan Temples by the very dictate of Common reason, as the most useful
^itting and de^ent situation; therefore Christians should rather imitate, then
directly thwart them in this particular, having both Gods institution and right
rectified reason to induce them thus to do.

The 4. objection is this. Object 4. Se the Coal p. 26. 27 28. 51. 52.
The Communion Tables in all Cathedral Churces and in all his Majesteyes
Chapples are so situated, (where Ecclesiastical discipline is best observed,)
therefore they ought there to be placed in all other Chapples.

I answer: 1. but I know not, neither do I believe the Axtecedent to be true,
for certain I am, that in many Cathedrals with in these few years (and by
name in the Cathedral of Salisbury, Winchester, Exeter, Bristol, Worcester,
Carlisle and others) the Communion Table stood East and West a good distance
from the wall, not Altarwise against it, and with in the memory of some men yet
alive, it stood so in all Cathedrals of England, and in all or most of the
Kings Chapples. If they have been otherwise situate of late years, (as the
Tables in many Churches have been) contrary to Law; it is but an innovation,
introduced by some violent Innouators, without any Lawful authority, for what
end all England sees, and knows to well. So as I may truly thus retort the
argument: that the Tables in Cathedral Churches, and the Kings Chapples stood
not Altarwise but Tabllewise till now of late days, when their situation has
been changed without, yea against both Law and Canon, Therefore the Lords Tables
in all other Churches and Chapples, ought thus to be situated.

As for the practice in his Mayesteyes Chapples since he came to the Crown, I
am utterly ignorant of it: But when he was Prince of Wales, I once received the
Sacrament in his Chapple at Sant James; and then the Communion Table at the
Time of the Sacrament administration was placed in the midst of the Chapple,
and white linen Clothes, like Table Clothes, were spread upon the deskes of
the Seats (where in the Communiant^ sat round about) in a decent manner, the
Ministers delivering them the Sacrament in those seats, and this (they then
certified me, had been, and was the custom of administering the Sacrament
there, both in Prince Henry's and his Majestyts time.

Whether the Custom be different at Whitehall, or other his Majestyes
Chapples, I know not; since I never was at any Sacrament there; but of the
other, I was an eye-witnes, and many who have been ancient servants both to
Prince Henry, and his Majesty, can testify this to have been the Custom. I
cannot therefore think, that the King and Princes Chapples do jarre or vary in
this particular.

But admit they should, yet vivendum est legibus non Exemplis; his Majestyes
subjects must live according to his Laws in this particular, not according to
the pattern of his Chapples; exempt, as from all Episcopal Jurisdiction, (as
all other Churches and Chapples should be as well as they if this argument hold
good,) so from ordinary Rules and Laws, which bind the Subject.

But to give a more particular answer. I say, that admit the Antecedent true,
yet the consequence is infirm: We know, that Cathedral Churches have Deanes,
Prebends, Canons, Singing-men, Choristers, Organists, Virgerers, Copes,
Sackbuts, (yea Kits and Cornets often times) in them, and that they sing, not
read their whole divine Service and prayers to; (I doubt me much whether with
any serious contrition and compunction, since, S. James writes thus c. 5. v.
13. If any man be merry, let him sing Psalms, if any man be sorry or
afflicted, let him pray, not sing: and Solomon says Prove. 25. 20. As he that
takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon niter, so is he that
sings songs too, much more then with an heavy heart.)

Will it therefore follow; Therefore all Papish Churches and Chapples ought to
have such Officers, Instruments, and chaunting? We know, that many Cathedralls
now, I know not by what Law, have no Communion Tables in them, but High Altars,
( so they term them,) elevated on High with many steps, and ascents, their
very exalted situation and name, being clearly derived from the Idolatrous High
places of the Gentiles, so often condemned in Scriptures, Number. 33. 52. Deutr. 33.
29. 1. Kings 12. 31. 32. c. 14. 23. 2. Chron. 17. 6. c. 31. 1. c. 34. 3. Jer.
17. 3, Ezech. 6. 3. c. 16. 16. 39. which were nothing but High Altars, situated
in High places.

Shall therefore all our parish Churches and Chapples have no Communion Tables
in them, (though prescribed by our Statutes, Common Prayer-Booke, Articles of
Religion, Homilies, Injunctions, Canons, writers,) but High-Altars only, which
all these decree? We know that these new erected Cathedral High Altars have
much furniture, as Tapers, Basins, Cushions (yea and Crucifixes, The hom.
against the Peril of Idol. Se p. 41. 42. 61
expressly condemned by our Homilies, as unlawful either to be made or used in
Churches,) standing on them; Which M. Andrew Melvin, that famous Scottish Poet
and Divine, thus wittily describes in Latin Verse: An. Mel. Musoe print. An.
1620. p. 24.
In Aram Anglicanam ejusque apparatum:
Cur stant clausi Anglis libri duo regia in Ara?
Lumina coeca duo, pollubra sicca duo?
Number sensum cultumque Dei tenet Anglia clausum?
Lumine coeca suo; Sorde sepulta sua.
flumine sicca suo?
Romano an Ritu dum regalem instruit Aram;
Purpuream Pingit religio^a lupam. So the first Copy but the corrected, as in
the Text.
gemino mact at honor lupam?
Si Christi haec Mensa est, cur Missae est structa paratu?
Cur versa in tenebras, Lux? in inane Latex?
Si sensus, cultusque Papae sit clausa Britannis,
Cur sacra cum casta Biblia clausa prece?
Cur, quae pulsa prius, presto est caliginis umbra?
Quo calamistra trucis, philtraque blanda Lupae?


Which may be thus Englished, upon the Altar and Furniture thereof in England.
Why, on Court-Altars, two Books clasped lie,
Two lightless Lights, two empty Basins dry?
Does England in Gods worship lock-up Sense?
Dark in her Beams, dry in Streams influence?
Whilst with Romes Rites, she Royall-Altars Decks,
Offers she not Romes Whore in all respects?
If `tis Christ's Board, why is it Mass-like trimmed?
Why has it empty Fonts? Lights wholely dimmed?
If Romes Dumbe-Showes be from the Britans banished,
Why are our Bibles Shut, our pure Prayers vanished?
Why are Romes Foggs brought back, expelled before?
What mean the Tyres, sweet Drafts of that bace Whore?
Shall it therefore follow, because these Cathedral Altars have such trinkets
standing on them, ergo every parish Church and Chapple ought to have such
furniture standing on their Altars and Communion Tables to?

I trow not, unless there were some Law or Statute for it; since the Rubricke
of the Common Prayer Book, and the 82. Canon Prescribes, that at the Communion
time the Table should have no other furniture but a white linen cloth upon it,
and that at other times, during diviue service only, it should be covered with
a Carpet of filke, or other decent stuff; so that all these other Popish
Trinkets now standing on it, in Cathedral Churches, are both against the
Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. the Book of Common Prayer, the Canons, yea and the
Queens Injunctions, as the High Altar is.

This argument, therefore (now much insisted on) is invalid, untesse our
Cathedrals were more conformable to our Laws and Canons in those particulars,
then now they are.

The 5. Object. 5. A Coal from the Alt. p. 18. 19. 20. 21. 48. to 53. Answer.
Objection is this: That the Queens Injunctions command the Communion Tables
to stand in the place where the Altar stood: Ergo they ought to be placed
Altarwise.

To this I answer, that the words of the Queens Injunctions, published Anno
1559. by the advice of her most honorable Counsel, are these:

For the Tables in the Church. Whereas her Majesty under stands that in many
and sundry parts of the Realm, the Altars of the Churches be removed and
Tables placed for the administration of the Holy Sacrament, ACCORDING TO THE
FORM OF THE LAW THEREFORE PROVIDED; and in some other places the Altars be not
yet removed, upon opinion conceived of some other Order to be taken by her
Majestyes Visitours.

In the order where of, having for uniformity, there seems no matter of great
moment; so that the Sacrament be duly and reverently Ministered: yet for
observation of one uniformity THROUGH THE WHOLE REALM, and for the better
imitation of THE LAW IN THAT BE HALF, it is ordered, that no Altar be taken
down but by oversight of the curate of the Church and the Churchwardens, or
one of them at the least^, wherein no riotous or disordered manner to be used;
and that the HOLY TABLE IN EVERY CHURCH be decently made and set in the place
where the Altar stood, and there commonly covered as thereto belongs, and
shall be appointed BY THE VISITORS; and so to stand saving when the Communion of
the Sacrament is to be distributed: at which time the same shall be so placed in
good sort with in the Chauncell (the Rubricke before the Communion and 82.
Canon, say, with in the body of the Church or chancell, which makes me
suspect, that Church was omitted in the printing of these Injunctions,) as
whereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of the Communicants, in his
prayer and ministration, and the Communicants also, more conveniently and in
more number communicate with the said Minister; and after the Communion done,
from time to time, the same HOLY TABLE to be placed where it stood before.

In which Injunction, (much wrested and insisted on by the Cole) these
particulars are remarkable, to stop the mouths of our modern Innovators.

First, that Communion Tables are no Altars, nor ought to be so styled, they
being here put in opposition and contradistinction one to the other, though
some now confound and bind them together as one.

2. That all Altars were removed, and ordered to be removed, by virtue and
form of a Law, therefore provided, to wit the Statute of: Eliz. c. 2.
confirming the Book of Common prayer which abandoned them. Therefore the
bringing in and setting up of Altars now, and the calling of Communion Tables,
Altars, is against that Law, and the Book of Common Prayer.

3. That the setting up and continuance of Communion Tables, and the calling of
them by this name, was, and yet is according to the form of the Law in that
behalf; and the removing of them and altering of their name to Altars, or
High-Altars: against the Law.

4. That all Altars were generally removed and enjoined to be removed in all
Churches and Chapples through the whole Realm, and an Holy Communion Table
decently made and set up in every Church; therefore no doubt in all Cathedralls,
and in the Queens own Chapples, for better example unto others: So that the
erecting of Altars in them, or any of them, must needs be a late Novelty,
contrary to Law, to this Injunction, and a gross Nonconformity.

5. That the care of Taking down Altars, and setting up Communion Tables, was
committed to the Curate and Churchwardens of each parish, not the Bishop: yet
now these must be enforced to be the instruments to set up Altars, and displace
the Tables Altarwise.

6. That the power of keeping Visitations belongs only to the Queen and her
Successors, and that none ought to visit in their own names and rights but in
hers, as their Visitours, having first obtained a Commission under their great
Seals so to do, as the Statutes of 1. Eliz. c. 1. compared with 26. H. 8. c.
1. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 32. H. 8. c. 15. 31. H. 8. c. 10. 25. H. 8.
c. 8. c. 21. c. H. 5. c. 1. 14. Eliz. c. 5. and the Pattents of all the Bishops
in Edward the 6. his Reign abundantly evidence.

7. That the ordering of the Situation and covering of the Communion Tables, is
referred not to the Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese, but to the Queens
Visitors, who were then 37. H. 8. c. 17. Fox Acts and Monum. p. 1181. 1192. B.
Jewels life before his works sect. 25.
specially appointed by her Commission, as they were in King Henry the 8. and
King Edwards days, many of them being Lay-persons.

Which Visitours placed them Tablewise, not Altarwise, in such sort as they
stood in all our Churches ever since, till with in these two or 3. years last
past.

8. That the Communion Table ourght not to be fixed and railed in Altarwise
against the East end of the Chancell, and there to stand unmovable, even when
the Sacrament is administered: the Injunctions expressly prescribing, that where
ever it stand before; yet when the Communion of the Sacrament is to be
distributed, it shall be removed into such part of the Chancell, (or into the
body of the Church as the Rubricke of the Common prayer Book runs) as whereby
the Minister may be more conveniently heard etc. and after the Communion done
from time to time the same Holy Table to be placed as it stood before.

Which word shall be, is not a baer arbitrary permission only, as the Colier p.
50. 51. 52. glosseth it, but a direct pr^^^pt, as is the later-clause, by his
own confession, else the Churchw^rdens might choose; whither they would remove
the Table after the Sareament ended to the place where it stood before.

These Propositions plainly expressed in the Injunction thus premised, I come
now to answer the objection, being in truth the only thing our Innonators
colorably allege for them.

First then I answer, Answer 1.
that this clause, and set in the place where the Altar stood, implies not, but
all Communion Tables should be placed against the Eastwall of the Chauncle, for
all Altars were not so situated, Fox Acts and Monuments p. 1404. 1406.
before this Injunction: The Altar in Carmarthen Church, was placed in the
midst of the Church, without the Quire.

The Altar in the Sauoy Church and other Churches and Chapples ( built North or
North and South) stood at the South end of the Quire, not the East: and in many
Churches some Altats stood one way, some an other, some West, some North and
South, as Dc Re^us Ecclesiasticis. l. 4. c. 19.
walafridus Strabus witnisseth^ but generally they ever stood in the midst of
the Quire, as the Promises evidence. The Author of the Coal therefore must
prove that all the Altars in all our Churches and Chapples stood against the
Eastwall of the Quieres, or Chauncles, in the place where now he would have
them situated (which he can never do) else this clause of the Injunction will
little help, but mar his cause, and make poinct-blanke against him; since it
prescribes not the Table to be placed in the East end of the Quire Altarwise
against the wall, but, in the place where the Altar stood, so that where the
Alter was placed in the midst, west North or South end of the Church or
Chancle, the Table was to be there situated likewise.

2. By The place where the Altar stood, is not to be interpreted so precisely,
that it must stand in that particular individual place, or in that form and
manner as the Altar stood; for this certainly was not the meaning, but, in the
place, that is, in that end of the Church where the Altar stood; to wit, in
the midst of the Church, if the Altar stood there; or in the East, West, North
or South end of the Church, where the Altars were so severally situated; or in
the Chauncel, where the Altar formerly stood in the Chann^le: that this only is
the true meaning of the Jnjunction, and not, that the Table should be placed
just where the Altar stood, or in that manner with one side against the East
wall of the Quiere, as our, Innouators expound it, is most apparent by these
Reasons.

1. First Because the Communion Tables were Fox Acts and Monuments p. 1211.
1212.
of a different form from the Altars then in Churches being both longer and
brother then Altars, which were all most perfectly square, but Tables all most as
long again as broad.

They could not therefore be situated in the same individual precise place as
the Altars stood, being thus different in proportion and form from them.

This is the Page 19.
Coals own argument, even against it self.

2. Because the Coal itself confesses, Page 51.
that Altars were incorporated, and fixed unto this wall; and that Tables were
not to be so; therefore they were not to be placed punctually in that place, and
in such sort ar the Altars stood and were placed, by his own confession.

3. Because the Rubricke of the Common prayer Book prescribes; that the
Minister at the time of administering and consecrating the Sacrament shall stand
at the North side of the Table, not at the North end: which clearly determines,
that the Table ought to be situated Table-wise with the sides or Longest
squares of it North and South, not Altar wise, with the ends of it North and
South and the sides of it East and West, against the Wall, as some popish
Altars stood: And therefore the Jnjunction never intended, that it should be set
in the very precise place where the Altar was, and in the self same manner as
it was situated; for the Table being but a long square, not a perfect
Quadratum, has but two sides, and two ends; the narrowest square of it, being
ever in our Engish Tongue, termed an end not a Side, and the longest square
only a SIDE.

And though Geometricians usually term every square* Alatit^dine.
Latus, in Latin, which we translate a side, (which yet more properly
signifies the breadth, then the length of a thing, and so rather the end then
the side, yet we in our English phrase ever call the long square only, the
side, and the Narrew the end: The Rubrike therefore being first compiled in
English, for English men, according to the usual meaning of the English
phrase, not to show any terms of Art or skill, but to direct and instruct both
Ministers and people in the most plain and familiar way; the word North-side,
must needs' be interpreted of the long-side; of the Table standing Northward,
which we ever phrase the side, not of the narrowersquare set Northward, which
we ever heretofore and still, phrase the North-end.

Wherefore the shife used by the Coalier, Page. 23. 24.
That the North-end and the North-side come both to one, there being no
difference in this case between them, he that stands and ministers at the
North-end of the Altar, standing no question at the North-side there of, as
inpropertie of speech we ought to call it, (cujus contrarium verum est, since
we neither use nor ought so to call it in our English dialect,) is but a mere
ridiculous evasion, and a miserable shift.

Neither will his Objection, Page. 23.
that the Communion prayer Book done into Latin by command and authorized by
the great Seal of Queen Elizabeth in the 2. year of her reign, translates
it.

Ad cujus mensae Septentrionalem pa tem etc. avayle him: Since SEPTENTRIONALIS
PARS, though it may signify, the Northern end of the Table, as well as the
North-side, in case the end of it were so situated, yet here signifies only,
the North-side, not end of the Table, the North-side being the Norh-part of the
Table, as well as the end the original English which it Translates, the
North-side not end, and the Tables at the time of this Translation standing
with the Long-side. not the end of it towar^ the North.

4. Because the Queens visitors and the whole Kingdomne thus interpreted it,
even in point of practice, by placing all the Communion Tables in all Churches
at that very time, by virtue of this J^junction and the Rubrike, not Altarwise,
with the two ends North and South, and the sides East and West along by the
wall; but Table-wise, with the two long sides North and South, and the ends
East and West, a good distance from the wall. as they have stood from 1.
Elizabeth, till now of late, without any Alteration, as experience, and all
aged men, who well remember how the visitors placed them. with our fore cited
writers prove, past all contradiction.

Fox Acts, and monuments. p. 1211. 1212.
Neither were they thus placed by casualty, but of set purpose, to difference
them from Popish Massing Altars, even in point of situation, and to Coal. p.
20. 71.
teach the people that thy were Tables to eat and drink at, not Side-Tables
or dressers, as the Epistoler observes,

If then the Queens own visitors, and all those throughout the Kingdom,
whether Ministers or Church wardens, who had a hand inplacing the Communion
Tables upon the removing of Altars, did thus interpret the Injunction, not of
the precise place where the Altar stood, or manner of its standing; with the
one side against the East-wall of the Quiere, under the East-window, but only
of that part of the Church where the Altar stood, and there upon situated the
Tables throughout all England and Wales, not Altarwise, but Table-wise only, as
is before expressed,; an experimental truth past all contradistion,) then
certainly there can be nothing in this Injuncttion prescribing them to be now
new placed Altarwise against the East-wall of the Chancel, in that precise
form, place and, manner as the Altars stood, as our Novellers now froms hence
most fondly contend,

3 Finally admit these words might (^simplie consider ed) be taken in that
strict senc as some now would have them, yet the following words; and shall be
appointed by the Commissioners, not the Bishops or Ordinaries, who are
expressly, excluded (though the Coal would make the prime men) which relate as
well to the placing, as to the covering of the Table; leaves the manner and
precise place of Situs, to the Commissioners appointement, since the very
places wherein the Altars formerly stood, were not so sitting to set the Table
in, in many Churches, as some other place in the same part of the Church or
Chauncel.

All which considered, this, Injunction gives no warrant at all for the late
removing of our Tables and railing them in Altarwise, for which the Coal is so
hot and fiery.

Now where as the Page, 13
Coal would willingly make the world believe, that this Injunction says,
that the removing of Altars was a thing of no great moment; so that for ought
it appears unto the Contrary, neither the Article nor Homily, nor the Queens
Injunctions nor the Canons. 1571. have determined any thing, but that as the
Lord's Supper may be called Sacrifice, so may the Holy Table becalled our Altar,
and set up in the place where the Altar stood.

2. I answer, That these words in the Injunction; There seems noe matter of
great moment, referrs not to Altars, as if the removing or standing of them
were a matter of no great moment (for then 5. and 6. E 6.. 1. Ely. ^ 2. Fox
Acts and Mounments. p 1211. 1212.
the Parleament, King, and Council in King Edwards days, would not have so
carefully removed them out of Churches and expuoged their very name out of the
Common Prayer Book, not the Queen and the Parliament by especial Law provided
for that purpose done the like, neither would she have taken such care for
their general removing, or our Martyrs and Writers been so earnest against
them in their authorized works,) but it relates only, to some futher or other
order to be taken by the Quenees visitors for the removing of them, with order
and direction to be given by them, was noe matter of great moment, but that in
those places where the Altars were not yet removed upon opinion conceived of
some other order to be taken by her Majesteyes visitors, they might have been
well removed without any such order from them as they were in many and sundry
parts of the Realm besides, according to the form of the Law therefore
provided: For they having a Law authorizing them to remove their Altars, and to
set up, Tables in their stead, they might without only order from the
visitours, even according to the form of the Law therefore provided, removed
their Altars and set up Tables for the administration of the Holy Sacrament:
So that these words referred only to the Comissioners order and direction, for
the removing of Altars and setting up Tables and Altars themsilves, or the
removing of them simply considered, as the Coliar dreams (and so his
inference grounded on this is misinterpretation, is as false as vain the
rather since neither of all these authorities all, adged term the Lords Table
an Altar, but the Holy Table, Communion Table, or Lords Board and Table only.

The 6. objection Object. 6.
is this; The orders published by the Queens Commisioners Anno: 1561. say,
Coal p. 22.
that in the place where the steps were, the Communion Table shall stand; and
that there be fixed on the wall over the Comunion Board, the Tables of Gods
precepts imprinted for that purpose.

And the Book of Advertissements Anno 1565. orders thus.

The parrish shall provide a decent Table, standing on a frame for the
Communion Table, etc.

And shall set the ten Commandments upon the Eastwall over the side Table.

Which put together make up this Construction, that the Communion Table was to
stand above the Steps and under the Commandments and therefore all along the
wall, on which the the Commandments were appointed to be placed, which was
directly where the Altar had stood before,

I answer Answer 1.
first, that those two Authorities ever use the word Table, and never style the
Lords Table and Altar, as his Objector does, and would have it termed;
therefore its most likely they would have it placed like a Table not an Altar.

2. If both the Queens Injunctions, those Orders 1561: and Advertissements
1565. do also unanimously prescribe the Communion Tables to stand Altar-wise,
why were they not all then placed so, but stood Table-wise, then, and ever
since? why did our learned In their, fore cited and places, (words.
Bishop Jewel in that very age and Bishop Babington Doctor Fulcke, Doctor
Willet and Mr. Cartwright after him even in the Queens own time, (the first
of them not above two years after the Advertissements, in their Authorized,
works, maintain, that the Table ought to stand in the midst of the Church
or Chauncell; as it did in the primitive Church, and publish this as the
Doctrine of the Church of England, proving and defending it against the Papists
whom they contended with, if this were both the Doctrine of our Church, the
precept meaning of the Queens Jujunctions, Orders, Advertissement, that they
should be placed^ Altar-wise against the East end of the Quire? yea if this
were so, why was Bishop Jewels works prescribed to be had in all Churches, to
aff ont this situation of the Table in them all? Certainly the Coliar must
satisfy and solve these questions fully, or else he must give me leave to
think: that he is as much out in his infer ence from these Authorities, (If
the thing be well observed) as he was inhis Conclusions from the Injunctions.

3. I answer that that the Orders 1561. prescribing the Communion Table to
stand where the steps of the Altar formerly stood coupled with the ensuing
words, prove; that the Table was to stand Altar-wise, with one side against the
wall, but a good distance from it, as far as the steps of the Altar stood
before; and that the setting of the Tables of Gods precepts over the Communion
Board, or upon the East wall over the side Table, is not so to be interpreted
as if the Commandments were to hang perpendicularly over^t (for that they
could not do, the Tables standing where the steps of the Altar stood, but over
it, that is, some good height above it, not direstly over it, is clear.)
First, by the words them selves intimating as much, (for they say they shall be
set or fixed on the East wall over the Communion Table; over in both these
places, relating to the Wall, next antecedent, not to the Table; at leastwise
to the Wall as well as the Table: now the wall by which the Table stands,
cannot be said to be perpendiculary over the Table, but only, over, that is,
above it, therefore neither the Table of the Commandments affixed to it, or
written on it, as it is in many Churches.

Thus Joseph was said, to be set over all the Land of Egypt: Genesis 41. 33, 43.
not in situation, for so he could not be, but, in Authority and Jurisdiction,
that is, he took place and had precedence and command of all in Egypt, or was
above them or in higher authority then they.

Thus David uses the phrase Ps: 66.12. Thou have caused men to ride over our
heads, that is to be above us and triumph over us.

So we say, that such a picture hangs over such a door or chimnie or window,
when it hangs above it, though not direstly over it, such a thing is over your
head, that is, above it, not directly over it.

4. Admit over it, be meant perpendicularly over it, yet this makes not at all
for its situation, Altar-wyse but only Table-wyse and over it, must be
interpreted, over the East end of it next to the East wall, not the East side
of it placed against the wall, that which hangs over the East end, being as
truly said to be over the Table, as that with hangs over the side or middle of
it.

5. Neither of these affirm, that these Commandments must hang over it when
the Sacrament is administered, neither prescribe they any thing how or where it
shall then be seated; but at other times,

Therefore it proves nothing at all, that the Table ought to stand Altarwise at
the East End of the Quire, at the time of the administration of the Lords
Supper as he would thence infer.

The 7. Objecteon Object 7
for the placing of the Communion Table Altar-wise is this.

Coal p 58 59 60 61. etc.
The Statute of 10. Elizabeth c. 2. enacts, that if there shall happen any
irrever^ece or contempt to be used in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by
the misusing of the Orders appointed in this Book, the Queens Majesteye may
by the advice of her Commissioners in causes Eclesiasticall or of the
Metropolitan of this Realm, ordain or publish such further Ceremonies or
Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edyfying of his
Church, and the due reverence of Christ's Holy mysteries and Sacraments.

A power not personal (says the Coal) to the Queen only when she was alone
but such as was to be continued also unto her Successors.

So that in case the Common Prayer Book had determined positively, that the
Table shoule be placed at all times in the vale of the Church or Chauncel,
which is not determined of; or that the Ordinary by his own oppointment could
not have otherwise appointe, which yet is not so: the Kings most excellent
Majesteye on information of the irreverent usage of the holy Table by all sorts
of people (as it has been accustomed in these later days) in sitting on it,
in time of Sermon, and otherwise profanely abusing it in taking Accounts, and
making Rates, and such like businesses, may by the last clause of the side, for
the due reverence of Christ's holy mysteries and Sacraments, with the advice and
Counsel of the Metropolitan comaund it to be placed where the Altar stood and
to be railed about for the greater decency.

To this I answer first, Answer 1.
That a possead Esse non valet consequentia.

The Kingh by virtue of this Act, by the advice of the Metropolitanne may
command the Table to be placed where the Altar stood, and there rayled in:

Ergo it ought there to be placed and railed in, before, or without the Kings
Command, is no good Argument: yea the contrary holds good.

The Table ought not so to beplaced or railed in but by his Magesteyes express
Command, and that by some public Act and writing under his great Seal, as is
evident by Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, the Book of Orders Anno 1561. and the
Book of Advertissements Anno 1565: with the Statute of 25. H 8. ^. 19. the
King being, to Cammand nothing of this nature to all his Subjects but by matter
of Record under his great Seal as all his Proclamations and writs do testify.

But his Majesteye has yet given noe such express command by any public Act
or writing, under his great Seal, Therefore it ought not to be done.

2. This branch of the Statute, takes away all power from the Metropolitan
Prelates and Ordinaries to ordain or publish any new Rites or Ceremonies what
soever, o^ to alter any formerly prescribed or established, vesting this power
only in the Queens Majesteyes, her Commissioners, and Metrapolitane being only
to advise her, in cause she require their advise, but not to do any thing them
selves in their own names, either with, or with our the Queens advise, they
being ( as some say in a Praemunire if they do it) by the State of 25. H. 8. c.
19. compared with 27. H. 8. c. 15. 35. H. 8. c, 16. 3. and 4. Ed^ 6, c. 11. and
his Majesteyes and the Bishops own resolution in the Declaration before the 39
Articles of Religion reprinted by his Majesteyes special Command. London:
1628.

By what right or power then I pray, and with what great affront to his
Majesteyes Prerogrative Royal, can or do our Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Ordinaries and officials in their several visitations take upon
them, to prescribe new rites and Ceremonies of their own devising, to print
and pubblish them in their own names, without any Commission from his
Majesteyes in their visitation Articles, and to injoyne Ministers,
Churchwardens, Sidemen to submit unto them, suspending, questioning, and
excommunicating them in case they refuse to do it, when as them selves for
making and they for submitting to any such Rites, Ceremonies, or Constitutions,
are ipso facto excommunicated by the 12. Canon made in Convocation Anno 1603?
By what right or authority do they now set up Altars instead of Tables; order
and give in charge in Bishop Wrens visitation Articlos which other.
printed Articles, that Communion Tables shall be changed removed, and set
Altarwise against the East end of the the Chauncel, and there rayled in, that
the Ministers shall bow and cring unto them, administer the Sacrament, yea read
the 2. service ( as they call it,) at the Table, even when there is no
Sacrament, and that all the Communicants shall come up to receive? that all men
shall stand up at Gloria Patri, the Gosple, Athanasius and the Nicene Creed,
bow at every naming of Jesus, Women to be Churched with vayles. and not
without things no ways prescribed by the Book of Common prayer or Commanded
by his Mayestey under the great Seal, suspending, silencing, depriving,
excommunicating Ministers, and vexing his Mayesteyes subjects several ways
for not submitting to these their Novell Articles and Injunctions, being all
Derogatorie to his Majesteyes Ecclesiastical Prerogative, contrary to this
objected clause of the Statute, and to the first clause thereof, which enacts;

That no manner of Parson, vicar, or other Minister what soever, shall wilfully
or obstinately standing in the same use, or by open fact, deed or thenreatning,
compel, cause, procure or maintain any person vicar or other Minister in any
Cathedral or parrish Church or Chapple, to use ANY OTHER RITE, CEREMONY,
ORDER, FORM OR MANNER of celebrating the Lords. Supper, Mattens Evening song,
Administration of the Sacraments then is mentioned and set forth in the Book
of Common Prayer and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, under
the penalties therein expressed, which Book neither prescribes nor mentions
all or any of these Novel Rites and Ceremonies, The Coalier therefore might
well have f^^o ne this objection which falls so heavy upon him, and these
Prelates which set him no work to blow a broad his Coal from the Altar, to
kindle a combustion in our Church,

3. I answer, that this clause is merely personal to the Queen because she and
her Commissioners only is named in it, not her Heirs and Successors and their
Commissioners, and that for two reasons; First, for the Parleament then knew
her syncerity and love to Religion, and her desire to advance it, of which she
had given good Testimony all King Edward the 6. time, but especially in Queen
Mary's days; therefore they would trust her with such a power; But they then
knew not, neither could they divine who might chance to be her Heir or
Successor to the Crown, nor what they might prove, in point of Religion.

Therefore they would not adventure to entrust them with such an authority ( who
might peradventure overturne the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, with the
due use and reverence of Christ holy mysteries and Sacraments formerly settled
by this Act, and the Book of Common prayer by virtue or coulor of this clause
without a Parliament) but limited it only to the Queen.

2. Because the Book of Common Prayer administration of the Sacrament and
other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, being then but newly
corrected and published, there might there upon (as commonly it falls out upon
all Alterations) grow some questions, doubts and inconveniences about it, or
some defects or cause of alteration appear in the Ceremonies and Rites therein
prescribed which needed to be resolved, rectified, and supplied before a new
Parliament might be called to dee it, or perchanse not worthy the sommoning of
a Parliament.

All which questions, in conveniences and defests, would in likly hood appear
and be fully rectified, without any need of future alierations, Rites, or
Ceremonies, or continuing this power to her Heirs and Successors, which are
purposely omitted in this clause.

This appears most clearly, by comparing it with the two first clause of the
Act; where the forfaitures for offending against the first clause is, several
times by express words limited and given to the Queens Highness, HER HEIRS and
Successors; and though the 2. clause says, that he who shallbe convicted the
3. time shall for his 2. offense forfait to our Sovereign Lady the Queen all
his goods and chatles, omitting her Heirs (...) (...) abolissing, all
foreign power repugnent to the same; and it gives the Queen Her Heiers and
Successors, and their Commissioners, power only to punish all Heresies, Errors,
Scismes, contempts. offenses, Abuses, and enormities Ecclesiastical what
soever contrary to former Laws, Statutes, not power to make new
Ecclesiastical Laws, and so new He resies Errors, and Ecclesiastical
offenses, not punishable by any Ecclesiastical power or In^isdiction before.

These two Statutes therefore are unfittly paralleld.

And here I wonder much that the Cole page 62.
Colier should allege, and argue according to truth that the Statute of 10.
Eliz. c. 1. (which enacts, that all Ecclesiastical power, together, with all
such Jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities and preheminences Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical power, or authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully be
exercised or used for the visitation of the Eccesiasticall State and persons,
and for reformation, order, and correction of the same and of all manner,
Errors, heresies, scismes abuses, offenses contempt, and enormites, shall for
ever, by authority of this persent Parliament be united and annexed to the
Jmperiall Crown of this Realm etc.) was not an Jntroductions of a New Law,
but confirmative of an old, annexing no new^ but only the old Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of right belonging to the Imperial Crown of this Realm for if
this power of visiting the Ecclesiastical State and persons, be (as he truly
confesses) for ever united to the Crown, and to be delegated from it to
others whom they shall think meet to name and appoint from time to time, only
by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, as the following words of that Act 5.
times together prescribe, I wonder with what faces our Archbishops, Bishops
Arch Deacons and other Ecclesiastical persons (who have and ought to have no
manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction but in, from, by, and under his Majestey
to whom by wholly Scripture all authority is wholly given to hear and determine
all manner of causes Ecclesiastical, and correct vice and sin what soever,
and to all such persons as his Majestey (to wit by special Patent and
Commission) shall appoint thereunto. As the Statute of 37. H. 8. c. 17.
resolves interminis) can or dare affirm, their Episcopal Jurisdiction to be
Iure divino, or be so presumtuons as to take upon them without any Letters,
Patents, or Commission from his Majestey under his great Seal, to keep
visitations and Consistories, to make and imprint visitation Oaths and
Articles in their own names, and impose them as binding Laws upon his
Majesteyes subjects, or to exercise all kind of Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions
in their own names and rights, or to send out their process under their own
Seals and in they own names alone, not his Majesteyes, contrary to the
express Statutes of 26. H. 8. c. 1. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 21. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1
Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. and 8 Eliz. c. 1. as if every of them
were both on absolute Monarch, King and Pope in his own Dioces, and had no
Sovereign over them to acknowledge.

Let them therefore hence forth either give over these their distoyall
enchroachments upon his Majesteyes royal prerogative Crown, dignity, and his
Loyal subjects Liberties, or else let the Colier for ever disclaim this
Statute and this grand objection, to maintain his Altars and new Altered
Communion Tables standing Altar-wise, which overthrowes all Ep scopall inherent
Jurisdiction,

The S. Objection 8 Object.
is this. That it is said in the Preface of the Book of Common Prayer, Coal
from the Altar. page 11. 65. 66. where it is insiuuated.
that if any doubt do arise in the use and practicing of the same Book to
appease all such diversity, the matter shall be referred to the Bishop of the
Diocese, who by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and appeasing
of the same, so that the same order be not contrary unto any thing contained in
that Book.

Fox acts. Monuments. p. 1212.
Therefore it is in the Bishops power to cause the Table to beplaced and railed
in Altar-wise against the East end of the Church, and there it ought to stand.

I answer first, Answer 1.
the Argument follows not.

For first the Bishop has no power given him by this clause to altar any
thing, but only when and where there is a doubt and diversity risen in any
parrish concerning, the use and practice of the said Book; not, when^ and
where there is no doubt concerning the situation of the Lords Table Altar-wise
against the East Wall of the Quire, all taking it for granted, that it ought
not so to be placed, but to stand in that place and manner as it has done from
the beginning of reformation (and^ time all most out of mind) till now,
Therefore the Ordinary has no power to order any thing in this case in most
places, and in case that any Popish Innouators have raised a doubt in any
place, where there is or can be none, touching the placing of the Lords Table;
the Ordinary in this case can not, must not make any innovation, but order that
it must stand in that place and form as was at first ordained by the Quee^es
Commissioners and where it stood ever since, it being his Declaration before
the 32 Articles, and concerning the dissolution of the Parleament. p. 21.42.
Majesteyes express command that there should be no Innovation in the least
degree in any Church Ceremonies, or Matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

2. The very words inhibits the Bishop of the Diocese to make any order
contrary to any thing contained in this Book; now the placing of the Communion
Table Altar-wise against the East wall, especially when the Sacrament is
administered, is contrary to these Books, the Queens Jnjunctions, Canons,
writers and practice of our Church from the beginning of reformation till now.

Therefore the Bishop neither can nor ought to turn the Communion Tables
Altarwise by virtue of this clause, but is expressly prohibited by it, so to do

The last argument to prove that Communion Tables ought to stand Altar-wise is
this. Object 9.


Coal from the Altar. p: 63: 64: etc
His sacred Majestey has already declared his pleasure, in the case of Sant
Gregory's Church near Paul's in London, that the Communion Table Shall be
placed Altar-wise against the East wall of the Quier^, and thereby has given
encouragement to the Metropolitan, Bishop and other Ordinaries, to require the
like in all other Churches committed to them; which resolution faithfully
copied out of the Regestets of the Counsell-Table, ^earing date the 3. of
November. 1633. the Author of the Coal from the Altar, who ends with it. bath
at large relaved.

To this I answer first, Answer 1.
that this concerns only one particular Church and no more and the reason of
this order drawn from the example of the Cathedral of Paul's and Sant
Gregory's proximit^e there to, is not communicable to other Churches and
pe^nliar to this alone.

Therefore it can be no president for others. Secondly, It was not here
resolved, that our Communion Tables ought to stand Altarwise as the Colier
argues, neuber is there mention of any example, save ^ at of Paul's (...) (and
that of late times sinde King James) nor any Canon, Rubric, Statute authority
or writer produced by the opposities to justify this situation of the Table,
for all heir pretense of the practice of approved antiquity, foisted in to the
order; where as the other side produced good antiquity and authorityes for
them, as I am informed, and among others.

The Rubrike before the Communion, the Queens Injunctions the 82. Canon,
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Babington, Doctor Fulke, with the Fathers quoted by them,
and an un interrupted presciption in all Parish Churches and most Cathedrals
from the beginning of reformation:

3. Though his May stey ordered the Table should stand where it was placed by
the Deane and Chapter of Paul's direction, upon this ground chiefly that it was
the most convenient Place in that Church, as not, only the persons then present
can depose, but the order inselfe insinuates in these words.

Now his Majestey having heard a particular relation made by the Council of
both parties, of all the carriage and proceedings in this cause, was pleased to
declare HIS DISLIKE OF ALL INNOUATIONS and receeding FROM ANCIENT
CONSTITVTIONS, grounded upon just and warrantable reasons, especially in
matters concerning Ecclesiastical orders and government knowing how easily men
are drawn to affect Novelties, and how soon in such cases weak judgments may
be overtaken and abused: and the ensuing words which seem to give particular
reasons, why this being but a Nouelty was tolerated and passed over, when as
otherwise his Mayestey would not have connived at it.

His Mayesteye therefore deeming it an Innovation, and declaring thus his
dislike of all Innouations; this order is so far from giving authority or
encouragement to the Metropolitan Bishops or other Ordinaries to require the
like in all other Churces committed to them, as the Author of the Coal infers,
that unless he will apply that ancient verse.

Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque negata. To the Metropolitan Bishops and
other ordinaries that they, love and are encouraged to affect and set up these
Innouations, which his Mayestey dislikes, they must rather be discouraged then
animated by this order to require the like in any, much less in all the
Churches committed to them.

And truly if al things be well considered they have little cause to be thus
encouraged to require and make this Innovation as they generally do, not being
ashamed or afraid to give it in charge to Churchwardens and Ministers in
their Visitation Bishop Wren in his Articles for Norwich Diocese, and Bishop
Percie for Bath and Wels.
printed Articles, and to excommunicate Church-wardings for not removing and
railing in the Lords-Table Altar-wise as appears by the Churchwardens of
Ipswich, Beckington, Colchester and others.

For first, the Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. Enasts upon the Prelates and
Clergies joint Petition in Parliament, That they, the said Clergy (in their
Convocations and Synods) any of them (in their several Diocese, visitations,
Consistories or Jurisdictions) from henceforth shall presume to attempt,
allege, claim, or put in ure any Constitutions or ordinances, Provincial
Synodals, or any other Canons, nor shall enact, promulge or execate any such
Canons, Constitutions or ordicances provincial, by what soever name or names
they may be called in their Conuocations in time coming, which always shall be
assembled by authority of the Kings writ, unless the same clergy may have the
Kings most royal assent to make, promulge and execute such Canons,
Constitutions, and ordinances provincial, or Synodall and the kings most
royal assent under his great Seal, he had to the same: (all which King James
his Letters Patents before the Canons 1603. morefully express and manifest.)

Upon peine of every one of the said Clergy doing contrary to this, and being
thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment and make fine at the Kings will.

The penalty of which Law every Metropolitan Bishop and ordinary has incurred
(and some say a Praemineere to) by printing and making visitation Articles and
Injunctions in their own names, for altering and railing in Communion Tables
Altar-wise, and many such Innouations, without his Mayesteyes royal assent and
approbation under his great Seal of England had to the same.

2. The 12. Canon 1603. ordaines this: whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that
it is Lawful for any sort of Ministers and lay persons or either of them, ( and
Bishops with other ordinaries are certainly with in this number) to join to
gether, and make Rules, Orders or Constitutions in causes Ecclesiastical,
without the Kings authority, and shall submit themselves to beruled and
governed by them, let them be excommunicate ipso facto, and not be restored,
until they shall repent and publicly revoke those their wicked and
Anabapsticall Errors; But our In their several visitation Articles.
Bishops, Archdeacons and other Ordinaries, with the Doctor Heylyn as most
give out, and some Circumstances discover.
nameles Judicious Learned Divine who writ the Coal from the Altar) affirm
(and that in print to all the world) that it is lawful for them and either of
them to make and printe visitation Oaths, Articles, Injunctions and
Constitutions in causes Ecclesiastical, for the railing in of Communion Tables
and turning them Altarwise, and other Novel Ceremonies, as standing up at
Gloria Patri, the Gospel, Athanasius; and the Nicene Creed, bowing at the name
of Jesus, and to Communion Tables and Altars etc. Yea to keep Consistories and
visitations without the Kings Authority under his great Seal licensing them to
make or exccute any such Articles, Constitutions, Ordinances, or to keep any
Court or Consistory, and they enforce by visitations excommunications, fines
imprisonments, and the power of the High Commission diverse of his Majesteyes
Subjects to submit them selves to be ruled and governed by them.

Therefore they are all ipso facto excommunicate by this then own Canon, ( and
so irregular and all their proceedings nullities,) neither are they to be
restored until they shall repent and publicly revoke these their wicked and
their Anabaptisticall Errors, Articles, Oaths, and Constitutions, which they
have thus audasiosly imposed upon his Mayesteyes loyal Subjects.

3. His Mayestey in his Papc. 21. 42. 43
Declaration to his loving Subjects of the causes which moved him to dissolve
the last Parliament, published by his Majesteyes special command Anno 1628.
p. 21. 42. 43. Makes this most solemn protestation.

We call God to record before whom we stand, that it is and always has been,
our hearts desire to befound worthy of that title which we account the most
glorious in all our Crown: Defender of the faith: NEITHER SHALL WE EVER GIVE
WAY TO THE AUTHORIZINGE OF ANY THING WHERE BY ANY INNOVATION MAY STEAL OR
CREEP INTO THE CHURCH, but preserve the unity of Doctrine and discipline
established in the time of Queen Elizabeth where by the Church of England had
stood and flourished ever since.

We do here profess to maintain the true Religion and Doctrine esta blished
in the Church of England without admitting or conniving at ANY BACKSLIDING
EITHER TO POPERY OR SCHISM: We do also declare that we maintain the
ancient and just Rights and Liberties of our Subjects with so much constancy
and justice that they shall have cause to acknowledge that under our government
and gracious protection, they live in a more happy and free estate, then any
Subjects in the Christian world.

But the turning of Communion Tables into Altars and so terming them; the
railing of them in Altarwise and so standing, the forceing of the Communicants
by several ranks and files to come up to them, and there to receive kneeling
at the rail, the enjoining of Ministers to read the second service (as they
now Term it) at the Table, when there is no Communion, and to ducke, to bow
unto it going to it, returning from it, and at their ingresse to and egresse
from the Church, (all which Bishop Wren and others in their late visitation
Articles and instructions have most strictly enjoined, suspending and
excommunicating such Ministers and Churchwardens who have refused to submitt to
these and otherlike Romish Novelties) are all of them direct Innouations, not
used nor heard of from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth reign till of late,
they are contrary to the Purity of that Doctrine and Discipline established in
the time of Queen Elizabeth, where by the Church of England has stood and
flourished ever since: they are an apparent backsliding to Popery, borrowed from
the Papishs, and brought in only to simbolize with them, and set up Mass and
that all Popish Doctrines, Rites, and Ceremonies again, by degres, as the
premises and experience witness.

They are contrary to the ancient and just Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, who ought not to have any such Novelties thrust upon them, much less
to be excommunicated fined, suspended, imprisoned, and thrust from their
freeholds, Lectures and Cures but by the Law of the Land, and some special Act
of parleament as the Statute of Magna, Charta. c. 29. The late Petition of
Right 3. Garoli with other Acts therein recited expressly resolve.

Therefore they are all directly contrary to his Majesteyes Declarations, and
this his most solemn and Christian Protistation, both to God and All his
Loyal Subjects, Neither has his Majestey given the least way to the
Authorizing of them or any of them, or given any admittance or conniuance to
them or given any authority or encouragement to the Metropolitan Bishops or
other Ordinaries to require the like in all other Churches committed to them,
as the nameles Author of the Coal most impudently and falsely (to his
Mayesteyes great dishonor and reproach) has a vowed in print, and the Bishops
and their officers given out in speeches, to color over these and all other
their late Popish Innouations, brought in and fomented by themselves alone, in
affront of this his Majestoyes declaration and royal pleasure signified this
is print by Special Command to all his Loyal Subjects, whose hears were not
so much overjoyed at the sight of it at first, as now they are overgreiued to
see the Metropolitanes, Bishops, Ordinaries, and this black Collier in his
blushlesse Coal from the Altar, so insolently and apparently to thwart,
affront, and bid defiance to it by all these with other their dangerous Popish
Innouations, and by suspending, silencing, excommunicating all such faithful
Ministers, Lecturers, Churchwardens, People, who out of Conscience towars God,
Loyalty to his Mayesteyes Laws, and obedience to this his royal Declaration
refuse to submit unto them, which they hope his Mayestey upon information of
this their most desperate insolency, and exorbitant disloyalty and rebellion
against his Laws, and Declaration, will not only consider, but most severely
punish, to his poor Subjects comfort and releife.

4. His Mayesteye to show his further detestation against these Innouations, in
his Declaration before the 39. Articles of Religion, reprinted by his
Majesteyes commaundment. London 1628. (which Declaration was made upon mature
Deliberation and with the advice of so many of our Bishops as might
conveniently becalled together) thus signifies his royal pleasure therein:
That we are supreme Governor of the Church of England: and that if ANY
DIFFERENCE ARISE about the external Policy concerning Injunctions, Canons, or
other Constitutions what soever thereto belonging. THE CLERGY IN THEIR
CONVOCATION ( not every Bishop or ordinary in his Dioces, as the Coal and
order of the Council Table oited in it, which doubt less in this was not
rightly entered or Copied and determines) IS TO ORDER AND SETTLE THEM: (But how
of their own heads without any special Commission from his Minyestey? Noe I
warrant you:) having FIRST obtained LEAVE UNDER OUR BROAD SEAL SO TO DO, AND
WE APPROVING THEIR SAID ORDINANCES AND CONSTITUTIONS; providing that none
bemade CONTRARY TO THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE LAND.

That of our Prinely care, that the Churchmen may do the work which is proper
unto them; the Bishops and Clergy from time to time in Convocation upon their
humble desire SHALL HAVE LICENSE UNDER OUR BROAD SEAL to deliberate of and, to
do all such things, as being made plain by them, and ASSENTED TO BY US, shall
concern THE SETTLED CONTINUANCE OF THE DOCTRINE AND DISCIPLINE of the Church of
England now established FROM WHICH WE NOT ENDURE ANY VARYING, OR DEPARTING IN
THE LEAST DEGREE.

Where his Mayestey and the Bishops themselves expressly determine against the
Coals Doctrine and Bishops Practice:

1. That if any difference arise about the external Policy concerning
Injunctions, Canons or other Constitutions what soever thereto belonging, or
the true sense and meaning of them, not the Metropolitan or Ordinaries in
their several Jurisdictions, nor yet the High Commissioners; but the whole
Clergy in Convocation is to order them.

Therefore this difference concerning Alters, the situation and ray, ling in of
Communion Tables, the reading of the 2. service at them, receiving at them and
the like; which every Bishop, Archdeacon, Chancellor, and Surregare now takes
upon him perempterily to order and Alter at his pleasurs.

2. That the whole Clergy in Convocation can neither deliberate on, nor Order,
or settle any thing, in these or such other particulars, or differences,
unless they first obtain leave from his Mayestey under his broad seal so to
do, and He also approve their said ordinances and Constitutions by his or^ and
seal and Letters Parents; Therefore the Metropolitan himself, the Bishops,
Arch deacons, and other Ordinaries with their Under-officers, can order or
settle nothing in these particulars, or others, nor prescribe any new Rites,
Ceremonies or visitation (...) and Articles in their own names, by their own
power; (as they most presumptuously do in all places every day, without any
leave first obtained from his Mayestey under his bread Seal so to do) or to
publish, give them in charge, and impose them on his Subjects without his
Majesteyes approvation and asleht, thereto his broad Seal likewise.

3. That the Clergy in Convocation, much less then any Bishop in his
Diocese, can order or determine nothing, no not by his Mayesteyes license and
approbation under his broad Seal, that can bind the Subjects, or inferior
Clergy in case it be contrary, to the Laws and Customs of the Realm:

But Articles and Bishops Constitutions for the Turning of Communion Tables
into Altars and railing them in Altarwise, with other for enamed particulars,
are contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and to the Customs of it from the 10.
of Queen Elizabeth till now ( sufficient to make two successive where 25. or
30. years makes a good Prescription.
prescriptions at the Citull and Canon Law) neither were this made by the
Clergy in Convocation by his Mayesteyes license, and assent under his Seal,
but by the Bishops, Arch-deucons, and their officers themselves, without any
such royal license or assent.

Therefore they are merely void, and neither do nor ought to bind his
Mayesteyes Subjects, or the inferior Clergy.

4. That his Majestey will never authorize, or assent unto any thing propounded
to him by his Bishops or Clergy, no not in Convocation, but what shall
concern the settled continuance of the established Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England, but the Turning of Communion Tables in to Altars, the
railing of them in Altarwise, etc. Do not concern the settled continuance of
the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, but tend to
the se^ret undermining and discontinuance of them; Therefore his Mayestey has
not authorized, nor assented to these Innouations.

5. That his Majestey will not endure any varying or departing in the least
Degree from the settled established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England: Therefore he will not endure that his Bishops ( who were privy to this
his Royal Declaration made by their own advice,) should vary and depart from
both, in setting up Altars in steed of Lords Tables, in Terming the Lords
Table, an Altar and high Altar, and his Supper the Sacrament of the Altar, in
railing in Communion Tables Altar-wise, and their forcing the Ministers to
consecrate and the people to receive, or in prescibing any other new Popish
Rites and Ceremonies.

Much less will he endure, that they should affirm both by word mouth and
printed Books authorized by their Chaplains, that all these things are done
with his approbation, and by his private direction and Command, but will one
day call them, and these erroneous superstitious Popish writers to an account,
for these their andacious contumelies, and affronts in contempt of his Laws
and Declarations, of purpose to alienate the hearts and affections of his
faithful loyal subjects from him, and to countenance and further their own
Romish designs, to undermine religion and usher in Poper, by degrees which
has now well nigh wound in not only its head and rail, but almost its entire
body into our Church, by these their treacherous, disloyal practices,
proceedings, and Innouations.

All which considered, the Council Table order for St. Gregorius Tables
seituation, will stand the Bishops and the Colier in no steed at all: and the
nameles Author of the Coal from the Altar (with other popish Scriblers) may
justly fear, that his Majestey for those vntriuthes and false Rumors raised
up, and publicly printed of him, (as if he were the chief Patron Author and
Direct^r of all those late Romish Nouclties, Rites, and Ceremonies, which have
either secretly crept or vyolently in truded themselves into our Church
contrary to his Laws and Declarations) will give them no great thanks or
reward, but inflict an heavy censure on them, and make them and their abesters
sing a public Palinodie, suitable to these his Royal Declarations, published
by his special Command, from whence his justice, honor, piety and constancy
will never doubtless suffer him to receed in the least degree.

I have now through Gods assistance run over, blown out and quite
extinguished (as I suppose,) the Coal from the Altar (or rather from Who
licensed it.
Mr. Samuel Bakers, Oven) which was like to sets our Churchon fire, what ever
the nameles Author of this Treatise (who upon examination proves neither
learned nor indicious if a Divine, as the Title styles him) or Mr. Shelford,
Doctor Pocklington, or Edmond Reeue, have lately written or objected in defense
of Altars, or placing and railing in Communion Tables Altar-wise, talking of
those idle glosses, and false Cauils they have made to elude the Authorities
and Antiquities which Bishop Jewel and Dr. Williams Bishop of Lincoln in his
Letter to the vicar of Grantham (for he is certainly known to be the Author of
it and has auowed it,) have produced against the Antiquity of Altars, and for
the scituating of Tables in the midst of the Church and Quire: all which I
shall here prostrate to thy Christian Censure, having done nothing in this
argument out of vain glory, faction, opposition, or desire of victory over
impotent Antigonists, but out of a sincere affection to the truth, and that
loyalty, that duty and endeared respect I bear, both to my gracious Prince,
(whose honor, Constancy and fidelity are interessed in this Controversy) and
to the established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, which
these, like so many secret Powder-traytors would suddenly, blow up, and
subvert, by their Romish Treatises and desperate Innouations If I have failed
or erred in any particular (as what man is free from these common infirmities
of Mortality,) impute it not is the wilfulnes but weakness of him, who will be
more glad, more ready, to see and correct his own Ouersights, then to lay open
or Censure others. if thou receive satisfaction from it (as I hope thou will in
some good measure,) in the things therein discussed, give God the glory, pray
for me; who as I am not afraid to defend the truth in this Apostatizing faint
hearted age, when as it has few Friends, but fever Patrons: so I shall neither
be ashamed to set my name to this Defense, when the Author of the Coal from
the Altar, dares be so bold as subscribe his name to his Assayling firebrand,
which I here principally have encountered, with our own domesticke writters and
Records.

And now, good Reader, I should here dismiss thee but that as the Coal
concludes with the Councel-Table Order, and the Copy of that Letter which it
thought to burn to ashes, so I shall close up the first part of my
Quench-Coale with a true Relation of the Manner and form, not only of turning
a Communion Table Altar-wise, but likewise Dedicating a Communion Table to be
an Altar in such a solemn manner, as our age has scarce heard the like.

The History whereof, as it was acted, I have under the hands of an eyewitnes
or two, who with-hundreds more can make it good, if need be upon their Oaths.

THE MANNER OF ALTERING THE Communion Table of the Collegiate Church of
WOLVERHAMPTON in the County of STAFFORD: and consecrating it for an Altar, the
11. day of October. Anno Domini 1635.
UPON Satarday being the 10. of October 1635. Master Edward Latham, one of the
Proctors of Leichfeild, and Surrogate of Woluerhampton accompanied with some
20. or 30. Persons, men, weomen and Chorasters, came to the Town, many of the
Inhabitants, but chiefly the Clergy going to meet him.

The intent of his and their coming, was to perform the solemnity of
Dedicating the Communion Table to be an Altar, and of consecrating certain
Altar Clothes (as they said) to the glory of God.

The Table was made new for this purpose, being about a yard and an half in
lenght, exquisitely wrought and inlaid, a fair wall of waynscot being at the
back of it, and the rail before it, was made to open in the middle, and not
at one side; the middle, where the Ministers tread, being matted with a very
fair Matt.

Upon the Table was placed a fair Communion Book, covered with cloth of gold,
and bossed with great silver Bosses, together with a fair Cushion of Damask,
with a Carpet of the same; both party coulored of sky coulor and purple, the
fringe of the Carpet being blew and white.

On each side of the Table hangs two pieces of white Callico, and betwixt them
the 10 Commandments, written in a fair Table with gilded Letters, the
foresaid Cushion standing just below it.

But on the North end where the Minister stands to consecrate, and in that
piece of white Callico, is represented at the top, the picture of Angels with
faces, clouds; and birds fleying; about the middle, the picture of Peter on
the Cross, at the bottom, George on horseback treading on the Dragon,
leaves, and grass, with some trees, being beneath all, almost at the end of it.

In the other piece of white Callico on the West end, is the same as on the
North end, only the picture in the middle differs, being the picture of Paul
with his Like a Persecutor not an Apostle.
sword in his hand, all this being the curious work of some needle woman.

Now the mystery why, the Pictures of Peter, and Paul and George on
horseback, and more other are in this work, is imagined, because the Church
is dedicated to the memory of Peter and Paul and it is under the Jurisdiction
of Sant Georges Chapel at Windsor.

The next day being the Lords day, as soon as the Priests (for so they would be
called, to suite the better with their Altar) came to the Church, each of them
made a Low Congie a piece at their very first entering in at the great Church
door, and an other Congie a piece at the I Will door, and after that 3. Congies
apeece toward the Altar (before its dedication,) and so they went into the
Chancell where a basin of water and a towel was provided for the Preistes to It
seems they come to Church with poluted hands, and s^inking souls, that they
thus needed water and incense.
wash in, where was incense burnind which perfumed the whole Church; and then
they returned back making 3. Congies a piece, and went to service; which was
solemnly performed, the Organs blowing, great singing, not heard of in this
Church before, which kind of service lasted two hours at least.

Service being finished there was a Sermon Preached by one Master Ieffery
Archdeacon of Salop in the County of Salop, whom the Surragate brought with
him.

His text was, John. 10. 22. 23. And it was at Jerusalem the Feast of the
Dedication, and it was winter, and Jesus walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.

All his whole Sermon was to prove the truth of the Altar. He had not one place
of Canonical Scripture as we remember, and but one place in all, which was out
of the Maccabees: His Sermon lasted an hour.

After Sermon they went to the Dedication, or rather as the Preacher styled it,
Renouation of the Altar: and in the Bellhouse One Priest can consecrate the
Sacrament, what need then 4. (and neither of them a Bishop, contrary to the
Canons) to Consecrate the Altar? It sermes the Altar is more holy then the
Sacrament which has but one to hallow it.
4. of them putt on the rich broydered Copes, and every one of them had a Paper
in his hand, which they termed: Censer, and so they went up to the Altar,
reading as it went, for they looked often on it.

As they went they made 3. Congies apeece, and when they came to the Altar,
they kneeled down and prayed over the cloth, and the other Consecrated things,
the Organs blowing all the while; this solemnity lasted almost half an hour.

After all this was performed there was a Communion, and one was appointed to
stand with a Basin to receyve the offertory; diverse gave money, and it was
thought it had been given to the poor; but the man that held the Basin gave it
to the Surragate, (the sum gathered being reputed about 40. s,) he calling
the Churchwardens gave them as he said 10. s, the remainder he told them he
would bestow on other pious uses, but the 10: d. being counted, proved to want.
6. of the just sum he said he had delivered them.

None gave the Communion, but the 4. that had Copes.

This finished, they Defiled belike with the very Consecration of the Altar and
have Altar-clothes.
washed their hands and returned, making 3. Congies apeece as before.

These Copes and the silver Basins were brought from Leich- field. Its well
they would allaw an afternoon sermon to grace this Dedication since they admit
none their since.


The Communion and Dedication ended, Quod Nota.
they went to dinner, and in the Quod Nota.
Afternoon they come to Church again, where was a Sermon preached by one
Master Usual a Minister, and his text was in the 2. Sam: 7. 2. And David said
to Nathan the Prophet, se now I dwell in an house of Cedar, And the Ark of God
abides under Curtains.

This Sermon did justify and magnify the Altar, and lasted more then an hour:
which being finished, they went to prayer; which was very solemnly performed,
the Organs blowing, and diverse Anthems and Responds being sung at that time:
which done, they departed from the Church to their lodging, where they were
very merry; and to grace this solemnity and Consecration of the Altar the
Higher, the next day being monday, they of Leich-feld went out of Town This
was an holy Dedication of an Altar indeed, belike it was to Bacchus not to God.
many of them very drunk, defiling themselves with this swinish sin like so
many filthy brute beasts, to make the Altar the more holy and venerable, and
themselves more apt to nod and Congie to it, and this manner of keeping this
feast of Dedication, a pattern for all the Country to Imitate. Thus ended this
late Dedication, with which I here conclude my rude Discourse, and Quench-Coale.

THE SECOND PART OF THE QVENNCH-COALE.
IN this part of my discoursel purpose by way of Corrullarie to p^opound some
few Quaeres ip these our New Doctors and Innouat^rs, together with the reasons
why I (...) propose these doubts and Questions to them.

The first Quaere is this: What is the true and final end they aim at, in
erecting Altars, styling Communion Tables Altars, and placing them Altar-wise,
and in christening themselves again by the name of Priests, (not as it is used
for a contract of the word Presbyter, which signifies properly an Elder or
Minister of the Gosple, but of the word Sacerdos, denoting a sacrificing or
massing Priest.

It is a Rule both in Philosophy and Divinity, Aquinas 1^ 2^. quaestio^ 1.
Artic 1. 2. 1^ Quaest: 6. Ar 1. 2.
Omnia agunt propter finem; All things (especially all Rational agent) aim at
some vltimate, uttermost, or final end in all their Actions; Much more then in
their serious writings and Polemicall discourses; We know again that it is an
undoubted Maxim in the Schools; that Aquinas 1^ 2^. Quaest 1. Ar. I^. Ar 32 ^
2. 2^ qu. 189. Ar, (...)
finis and causa finalis est primus in intention, vltimus in executione
agentis. The first thing in Intention of the agent, though the l^st in
execution; And that Aquinas 1^ 2^. qu. I. Art. 3 qu 96 Art. 1. 1. 2^. qu. 8.
Art. 2. So Occhum, Scotus, Bonave^ture. Aegydius. Dura^dus. Lambard. Medis Vil
la, Bacon. and all the Schoolmen. Keckerman. Zabarell. Magyrus. Ruuio. and all
Logiciaha.
Omnia med in sum et agunt propter finem, all middle causes are and work only
to produce the end: Et non sunt volita nisi propter finem.

These things being undoubted truths past all dispute; And it being as true
likewise, that Altars themselves and Priests being but instrument and
subordinate relatine things, (...) for some other use, and the ^^nation of
Tables Altarwise being but ^ ceremony the utmost end or final cause thereof
being of themselves, (since none is so simple to ses up an Altar only because
he would have an Altar, or to turn the Lords Table Altar-wise, only because he
desires, it should be so plated: or to style himself affoctedly a Priest, only
for the Titles sake, and no more, but for some further end, all these serving
to no use or purpose at all simply considered, but only with relation to some
further end:) The sole Question then will be, what this end should be? To which
if our Innouators and late Colliar would give a direct Answer in down right
English terms; it can be no other but this; That the end they strive for, in
contending for Altars, Priests, and turning Tables Altarwise, is only to usher
in a Sacrifice, into our Church, since Cardinal Bellarmine and B. Morton in
his Institution of the Sacrament twice printed of late l. 6. c. 5. sect: 15. p.
46. expressly resolve. That Priests, Altar and Sacrifice are relatives, and have
mutual and inseparable dependence one on the other; and since there can be no
other use of these but only for sacrifice, as both the Ge^. 8. 20. Levit. 1. 6.
to 9. c. 2. and 9. c. 7. 31. Exodus 20. 24.
scriptures, and the Bellarm. de Missa. I. 1. c. 2. Sum. Angelica Tit. Altar:
Papists acknowledge, and the Coal ingenuously confesses: p. 8. 14. 15. 16.
But what sacrifice is this? Certainly that sacrifice which may now be brought
into our Church, can be no other, but that which formerly, upon the beginning
of reformation, was cast out: but that sacrifice was only the Idolola^rous
Popish sacrifice of the Masle: Therefore this certainly is the Sacrifice they
would bring in again, by these Altars, Priests, and Communion Tables seated
Altarwise.

If they reply that they do it only for the more decent celebration of the
Lords Supper.

I answer, that a Fox Acts and Montiments. p. 121. 1212. B. Morton Institution
of the Sacrament: p. 463.
Table is far more decent for such ^ purpose, then an Altar; a Table posture,
then an Altar situation; and a Minister, then a Priest: since we never read in
scripture of any supper, or eating at an Altar, since Christ himself instituted
the Supper at a Table; (which Table, if we believe the Magnu^ Chron: Belgio^^m.
Cronickle^ of Flaunders, Gharles the Emperor Anno 1350. removed from
Noremberge to Prague, as most precious relic, which the Thomas
Beconlikeliques of Rome.
Church of Rome flath yet to show, if you dare believe them, though she never
consecrates the Sacrament (...) it, (which me thinks she should then dve, I
but in an Altar, (...) at an Altar, and since we find no mention in scripture,
of any Priests, but only of Apostles and Ministers (...) at this Table, If they
reply; as the Page ^
Coal does, that they (...) only to him) (...) Commemoratue Sacrifice, which
our Church allows, not ^ Prepitiatory, as the Papists make their Mass.

I answer first, that our Church allows not so much as of a Commemoratiue
Sacrifice, neither does she in her Homilies, or Articles style the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper so, much less in her Common prayer Book, Injunctions,
Canons or statntes: neither, does the Colier allege one passage in any of all
these, to prove this bold assoueration, either p. 8. or p. 15. 16. where like a
beggarly Pedlar, he lays open all his shrids and stolen wares.

2. The Church of England (even in that very homily he cites p. 8.) expressly
condemns this Commemroratory Sacrifice in these words; Homily of the worcester thy
receiving of the Sacrament. part. 1. p. 198. Edi^. 1632.
We must take heed then (says the Homily,) least of a Memory, it BE MADE A
SACRIFICE. If not A SACRIFICE, then not a commemoratiue Sacrifice, unless they
will grant a commemoratiue Sacrifice, to be no Sacrifice, which is a
contradiction; and to say, we must take heed, least of the MEMORY, we make it A
SACRIFICE: Is all one as to say: we must take heed that we make it not a
commemoratiue Sacrifice; a Memory, and a Sacrifice, being here put in direct
opposition and contradistinction one to an other in this clause, and in the
following parts of the Homily; which 4. several times, calls the Sacrament, A
MEMORY, A COMMEMORATION, AND OUTWARD TESTIMONY of Christ's death, but never a
Sacrifice commemoratiue or Propitiatory: Both which it expressly clubs down in
these words: P. 200.
Now it follows, to have with this knowledge a sure and constant says, not
only that the death of Christ, is avay lable for a redemption of all the world,
etc: but also that he made upon the Cross, A TRVE AND SVFFICIENT SACRIFICE for
thee, a perfect cleansing of thy sins, so that then acknowledge no other
savior, redeemer. Mediator, Advocat, Intercessour, but CHRIST ONLY.

Herein thou need no other man's help. NO OTHER SACRIFICE ( therefore neither
commemoratiue, (...) propitiatory: for this vniuerfull Negative includes both)
or (...) NO SACRIFICING PRIEST (...) New Preist^ observe this well to which
they have subscribed) NO MASS, (let those who labor might and maine to usher
it into the Church by degrees, consider this.) No means established by man's
injunction; Therefore no A t^r, Priest, Sacrifice, or Table seated Altar-wise;
All which this homily strikes dead at once; and our Common-Prayer-Booke and 39.
Article too, almost in the selflame words.

3. A commemoratiue Sacrifice is a mere Bull, and contradiction: For as the
picture of a man is no man, or of fire no fire; or of a Chalice, or Sacrament,
no C^alice, or Sacrament; So the commemoration of Christ Sacrifice, is in truth
no Sacrifice, nor kind, nor species of a Sacrifice, but only a shadow or
memorial of a Sacrifice. So that this is but a Mountebancks cheer, and
distinction to delude children and fools with all, not warranted by any
Scripture or judicious Orthodox divine.

4. The Sacrament neither is; nor can be a sacrifice, for every sacrifice
whether legal, or Evangelical, is a religious service, holocast, worship, or
(...) offered up by men to God himself. Numb 28. 2. 3. 4. Psalm. 4. 5. Psalm.
5^. 14. Psalm. 66. 15. Mat. 3. 3. Romans 12. 1. H^b. 9. 14. and 5. 1. 7. Heb. 13.
15. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Whence the Book of Common Prayer, after the receiving of the
Sacrament, prescribes this Eucharisticall prayer: And thus we offer and present
unto thee O Lord our selves, our sules and bodies to be a reasonable, holy, and
livelie SACRIFICE unto thee, and. But in the receiving of the bread and wine in
the Sacrament, we offer up nothing unto God, but only God tenders his Son,
with all the benefits of his death and passion unto us; As the words take and
rate this, the prayers before and after the Sacrament, the Scriptures, and
every man's experience withesseth. Therefore it can by noe means be termed a
Sacrifice; Whence the Homille of the Sacrament terms our thanksgiving to God
after the Sacrament received, and at other times a Sacrifice, p. 103. as the
Apostle expressly does Heb,. 13. 15. and the Psalmist before him. Ps. 107. 22.
Ps. 116. 17. Ps. 54. 6. Ier. 33. 11. Almos 4. 5. Ion. 2. 9. But never terms
the Sacrament it self thus, because it neither is, nor can be a sacrifice
commemorative, or propitiat^rie, unless with reference to this thanksgiving,
and to the whole act and service, not to the consecrating and distributing of
the bread and wine, as B sh: (...) proves at large Instit. of the Sacram. l. 6.
throughout.

5. This Homily ^ times together her case the Sacrament a Table and Lords
Table, never a Sacrifice, an Altar, or Sac^^ment of the Altar; Admit the
Homily granted it to be a Sacrifice, which it does not, yet it is such a
Sacrifice as needs neither Priest, Altar, or Tables situated Altar-wise, even
by the Homily and Book of Common Prayers resolution; Therefore no such Romish
Massing Sacrifice, as these Innovators would obtrude by crast and power upon
us, which stands in need both of a Priest, an Altar, or Table placed
Altar-wise^ or of the name of a Sacrifice, to make people reasly to esteem in
so.

6. Nemorepente for turpissimus: (...) Romish Novellers dare not discover
themselves, or proceed so far at the first dash, for fear of prevention and
strong opp (...); but they will usher in things by certain insemble degrees,
step by step, till they have brought in the whole body of Popery at last. First
then we most have Communion-Tables only turned Altar-wise; Then we must have
them termed Altars; Next we must set up Altars indeed; Then we must cringe
to, and adore them; after that have a Priest, to write on them; then a
commemorative sacrificrenly to be off red on them. And thus far we have
already proceeded in many places AND GENERAL IN ALL COLLEGIATE AND CATHEDR ALL
CHVRCHES (as the Colier in forms his friend and ^eader both: p. 1. and 27: The
Ringleaders and most (...) (...) corrupt examples to reduce us back to Rome,
that ^^unded them: And now must we and Rome be brought ^^gether (...), as
muthally to embrace and (...) each other: the next step must be, to make the
Sacrament a propiriatory sacrifice, as the Papists do, who first proceeded ^
this method, and held it but commemorative, as appears by all their ancient
Schoolmen. And then when the thing itself is once got in^ the name of it
^yet too gross and odio^^ will quickly follow, it shall then be rebaptized
with the name of Mass, by these its Godfathers; who as they have already
pleaded for its Popish title: The Sacrament of the Altar, because the statute
of 1. E. 6. c. 1. styles it the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
commonly called (to wit by the Papists in those days, not the Parliament or
Protestants) Col. p. ^ 16. 17.
The Sacrament of the Altar: So they will by the selfsame reason call it by
the name of the Mass, and justify this Title of it, by the Mass itself, to
be lawfully warranted both by Prince, P^^late, Priest, and the whole
Parliament, because the statute of a and 3. E. 6. c. 1. (and the Book of
Common Prayer established by it) there styles it: The holy Comm^nion commonly
called THE MASS (to wit by the Papists and ignorant people of those times,
the Mass being not quite abolished till this law was made.) Though the very
intent of this Law was to abolish the Mass, and the name of Mass, (...) is
clear by the body of the Act, the Book of the Commo^-prayer then set out,
and since corrected; the Homily of the worthy recei^ing of the Sacrament fore
cited the 31. Article^ with all the surnamed writers, Injunctions, and Cannons
of our Church (and neither old Doting Shelford, nor his so^^e the Colier, dare
deny;) even as the end and true scope of the she statute of 1. E. 6. c. 1. was
to abolish both the name (...) Sacrament of the Altar; Though th^se ignorant
Scrib^^^ would justify both the lawfullnes of Altars, and of term^^ the Lo^ds
supper the Sacrament of the Altar from th^^^ against the meaning of the Law, as
I have already ^^^fested.

Since therefore it is clear by the Colier, that the (...) and their
Confederates (...) some notable designs in (...) upon the established doctrine
and discipline of the Church^ which he terms Colefron^ the Altar. p. 4. line
19. 20.
A GOOD WORK (J would it were so) NOW IN HAND (which we find too true, and
since this good work, is just like Coliers work and Character by the printed
(yea his own) happy premunition truly Epistle to the reader I am to advertise
thee, etc. Thou would take notice (and so many do) that the Roma^^ is the
words of the Author
ROMAN, to wit, by Altars, and Priests, and Tables turned Altarwise to usher
in Mass with its Name and Sacrifice into our Church, for which all things are
now ready prepared in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches; It is high time
for us to propound this first question to these domestic ^^^ialists what their
intentions are, to stop their further progress, both by a linely discovery
and strenuous opposition of these their Antichristian Romish designs, and to
admonish them, and all others, in the words of our own established Of the
Sacram. part. 1. p. 198.
Homily: BEFORE ALL THINGS this we must be sure of, especially, that this
supper be in such wise done, and ministered as our Lord and Savior did, and
commanded it to be done, as his holy Apostles used it, and the godly Fathers in
the primitive Church frequented it. For (as the worthy man S. Ambrose says) he
is unworthy of the Lords Table that otherwise does celebrate the Mystery, then
it was delivered by him: Neither can he be devout that otherwise does presume
then it was given by the Author, but when the Author gave it, he gave it not a
Sacrificing Shave^ Masse-Preist, he gave it not at an Altar, but at a table,
and that situated in the MIDST table-wise, as J have manifested, to his
Disciples sitting; not kneeling round about it Which some sca^dalously term:
An unrevere^s and unseemly gesture, as if Christ and his Apostles were
unreverent, and instituted and received the Sacrament in an unreverent and
unseemly manner.
. Therefore we must be sure so to minister if we will be either worthy of the
Lord or devout, we must then take heed (as it is now ^^gh time so to do it)
lest of the memory is be (...) a (...); lect of a Communion it be made a
private ea^^^^^ (therefore of having our tables at the time of its celebration
placed Altar-wise, at the remotest East end of the Chan^^^^, brought in with
private Masses, and for that purpose only (...) le^^^ of two parts we have but
one, least applying it to the dead, we loose the fruit that be alive:
hol^some counsel and necessary doctrine for these present times, as the 34.
Article termed the Homilies, with which I shall close up this first quaere.

QVESTION II. The second Question I would propound to these Novelle^s is this.
That since they will now style themselves and be called of others only Priests,
(so Shelford termed himself (...) the Title page of his unlearned Treatises,
and many others have done in late prin^ed Sermons and Pamphlets In imita^ion of
Popish Priests who^^ so title themselves in the fronts of their books.
what kind of Priests they are, and wherein their Preisthood consists. If they
say, they are only spiritual Priests, and have only a See Bishop Mortons
Institution of the Sacrament Edit. 2. lib. 6. c. 3. Sect. 1. 2. 3.
spiritual Preisthood, ^o^^ffer up the spiritual sac^ifices of prayer, (...),
thanksg^uing alms, righteousness, broken and contr^^^ hearts, and their own
bodies and souls to God; that every Christian is as much a Priest, even by
Christ's own institution a themselves, and has the s^lfesame Preisthood that
they (...) Rev. 1. 6. 1. Pet. 2^ 5 ^ Exo^ 19. ^^ And so they do all they can
^o ingrosse this Title as peculiar to themselves, which is common to every
Christian. If they mean by Priests nothing (...) Pres^yters B. Morton. Ibid p.
415. 461
, and intend no more by their name and Preisthood but only the Eldershippe and
Ministry, let them enjoy that Title and office in Peace, I quarrel not with
them; Only this I must inform them That such Priests need neither Altar nor
Sacrifice, but (...) expressly debar^ed from both by G^d himself, 1. Cor. 9.
13. 14. c. 10. 16. 17. 18. 21. Hebr. 7. 12. 13. 14. But if they mean by the
word Priest, D. Reynolds confer. with Heart. p. 446. to 473 D. Fulke Rhem.
Testament. Notes on Heb 7. c. 9. 10.
(...), or S^cerd^^, a sacrificing Priest, or a Priest waiting at, or upon the
Altar; as it is clear they do, both by their writings; their prayers before
their Sermont, (where they pray for the Preist^^) (...) serve and wai^ a^ the
Altar^ their erecting and pleading for Altars and Commemorative Sacrifices at
least, (...) evident (...) and shall then inquire of them, what (...)
Sacrificing Priests they are, and of what order their Preisthood is? In
Scripture I read only of 4 kinds of Priests and Preisthoods; Priests (Heb. c.
5. and 7. and 8. and 9. and 10. Levit. c. 1. verse. 12. Exodus c. 28. and 29. and
30.) after the order of Aaron^ Priests after the order of Melchizedech, (2
Kings 17. 32. 1 Kin: c. 12. 31. 32. c. 13. 33. 2. Kin: 10. 18, etc.) Priests of
Baal, and Priests of the high places, or Idol Priests. The two first of divine,
the two latter of Diabolical institution: Since which there has sprung up of
late in the Church another d^stinct generation of Priests, commonly called by
the name of Masse-Preists; and those are both of Papal Diabolical
institution. Other sorts of Sacrificing Priests then these I neither know nor
read of. The sole question then will be, of which of those of 5 sorts of
Priests our Novellers and Altar-panons are? If of the first sort; that is
directly abolished, changed and abrogated by our Savior. Heb. 7. 11. 12. c. 8.
6. to 13. and cap. 9. 10. throughout. Col. 2. 14. 15. 16. And those who cry
down the name and sanctification of the Lords day Sabbath as Heylyn.
Pocklinton and others.
^^wish; will not I hope tear^ne themselves in the order of Aarons Priests, B.
Morton Instit. of the Sacrament. ^6. c 3.
which is far more Jewish; Of which sort of Priests they cannot be, unless
they are lawfully descended from the tribe of Leui, Number. 3. 6, etc. c. 16. 1,
and Josh, c. 13. v. 14. and 33. Psalm. 135. 10. Mal. 2. 4. 8. Hebr. 7. 5. If of
the order of M^chizedech, that is peculiar only to our Savior, subsisting
personally in him alone; and incommunicable to any other, as the Apostle
directly resolves, Hebr. 5. 9. 10. c. 6. ^^. c. 7. throughout ^. ^. 9. 10. As
all authors interpret, old and new writers acknowledge, and among them Mr.
David Dickson in his Page 134 135 142. 144. 145. See B. Morton his Institution
of the Sacrament. l. c. 3. throughout, and in the proceeding and ense^ving
^hapters. D Fulke and Mr. Cart^rig^ in the con^utation of the R^em. Testament
on Hebr. 7. and 8. and 9 and 10. to the same^^^pose.
commentary a short explanation on the Hebrews 7. An: 1634^ where he lays
down the conclusion fully warranted by the Apostles text.

1. That to make any Priests in the new Testament by special office beside
Christ, is to rent the Preisthood of Christ, and to make it imperfect like
Aarons, which for the same reason that it had many Priests, was weak,
imperfect and inferior to Christ's.

2. That to make Priests by office in the New Testament, to offer up any
corporal sacrifice is to make Christ's Preisthood seperable from his own
person, which is against the nature of Christ's Preisthood, which can not pas^e
from one to another. Hebr. 7. 24.

3. That to make plurality of the Priests in Christ's Preisthood, Vicars, or
Substitutes, or in any respect, partaker of the office with him, is to
praesuppose that Christ is not able to do that office alone, but is either
dead or weak that he cannot fulfill that office; contrary to the text which
says: Because he continues for ever, he has an unchangable Preisthood, or a
Preisthood that cannot pass from one to another. Hebr. 7. 24.

4. That whosoever communicates Christ's Preisthood with another, besides his
own person, makes Christ not able alone to save to the uttermost, those that
come unto God by him.

5. That the Scripture knows no Priest, but the Leviticall Priests of Aarons
post^rity, for the time of the Law^ Or else that one Priest that was made by
oath in the time of the Gospel, besides these the Apostle knows none,
neither were there any other in his time in the Church.

6. That to have Priests now, after the similitude of Priests under the Law,
were to renounce the difference which God has made betwixt the Law and the
Gospel.

7. That to make a Priest in the Gospel, who is not consecrated by an Oath, to
abide for evermore in the office, but may be changed, and another come iu his
place, is contrary to Evangelicall Preisthood.

8. That to make Plurality of Priests in the Gospel, is to alter the order of
Melchizedech sworn with an Oath, and to renounce the work set betwixt the
Law and the Gospel.

9. That to make a man Priest now, is to mar the Son of Gods privilege; To
whom the privilege only belongs.

10. That to make a sin^ull and weak man Priest now, is to weaken the
Preisthood of the Gospel, and make it like the Law.

11. That as long as Christ's consecration lasts (which endures for ever)
none must meddle with his Preistly office.

12. That to add unto it, and to bring in as many Priests now, as did serve in
the Temple of old, is to provoke God, to add as many plagues, as are written
in Gods book, upon themselves, and their Priests also.

All which considered; I hope these Novellers dare not say, they are Priests
after the order of Aaron, much less of See Bis-Morto^ his Institution of the
Sacrament. l. 6. c. 3. 4. 5. 6. throughout.
M^lchiz^dech, which is peculiar to Christ alone.

P^reists of Baal, or Idol-Preists, J presume they neither will, nor dare style
themselves.

If therefore they be Priests of any order, they are, and can be no other but
S^minary or Masse-Preists: and if they are such Priests in truth, as their
writing and practices declare them; Then let them be gone packing to Rome their
mother, or to some English Seminaries or Cloisters, where they may say and
sacrifice Ma^^e.

Sure our Of the worthy receiving and esteeming of the Sacrament, p. 200.
Homilies inform both them and us that we have no need of Mass or Sacrificing
Priests, neither yet (thanks be to God) have we any Masses to be chaunted,
(unless our Cathedral divine service may be so termed, which comes nearest
Mass of any) in our Parish Churches, standing in need only of 2 Timothy 4 1^ 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2
Preaching Ministers, not Sacrificing Masse-Preists, condemned by our statutes,
as direct Trayt^rs^ to our King and State 27. Eliz. c. 2 See Rastall
Recusantes, Ie^uites, Seminary-Preistes, Romans service and Sacrame^nts, etc.
: And if those Jnnovators will-needes enroll themselves in this order of
Priests, I should not envy them the horn of a Tyburne ^ippert, to grace their
order and necks with all, nor yet the shaving of their Crowns to the very
shoulders (^o use Father Latymers speeches)^ which they well demerit, in stead
of that Egreg^am vero laudem and spolia ampla, which prick them on to as^ume
this new title and office of Priests and Preistshood.

QVESTION III. The third Question J shall propose to them (and all our
Prelates) is this, what Law, Canon or ground they have for the Consecrating of
Altars: (a Ceremony already begun at Wolverhampton, as you have heard, which
will shortly creep up by degrees in other places:) Or for Consecrating
Churches, Chapels, or Churchyeards? Statute I am certain there is none for
it, yea sure I am that all the statutes against See Ra^^all Title Mort:
Mort. concerning divine service and Sacraments, and the Book of
Common Prayers, with diverse of our learned Writers are against it.

To make this clear in few words.

1. First it is apparent that every Consecration of a Church, Chapel, or
Churchyard makes a Mort:

This is the express resolution of the whole Parliament and Realm in the
Statute of 15. R. 2. c. 5. Rastal. Mort. ^. and 13. E. 1. c. 32. against
Crosses.

But Mort: are directly against the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, as
appears by Brook, Fiz: and Rastall in their Titles Mort: Therefore these
Consecrations are so too.

2. Secondly, they are expressly opposite to the Statutes of 2. and 3. E. 6. c.
1. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 1.

If these statutes with that of Jac^ c. 5. were duly executed, we should not
have so many of those books in the Realm as now they are, which are freely
printed, and sold openly in every Stationers shop. 1. Eliz: c. 2. 8. Eliz:
c. 1. and 3. and 4. E. 6. c. 10. 12.

All which for the abandoning of all superstitious service, and to take away
all occasions of dive sity, of opinions, rites and Ceremonies in our Church,
clearly and utterly abolish, and extinguish and forbid for ever to be used, or
kept in this Realm all books, called Missals, Breviaries, Officials, Manuals,
Processionals, Legends, Primers, or other Books whatsoever, heretofore used
for service of the church, written or printed in the English or Lattin tongue;
With all other manner of Rites, Ceremonies, divine service, Consecrations, or
public forms of prayer, then such only as are mentioned and prescribed in the
Book of Common prayer and other rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England,
and in the Book of Ordination, ratified by these Acts; In neither of which is
there one syllable or Title extant, concerning the Consecration of Churches,
Chapels, or Church^ yardes, or Altars, nor any form of prayer prescribed for
the purpose, as there is both for the Administration of the Lords supper,
Baptism, whether public or private, Marriage, Burial of the Dead, Churching
of Women, visitation of the sick, confirmation of Children, Ordination of
Deacons and Ministers, Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ^ll other
things our Church deemes lawful or necessary.

Since therefore these statutes have professedly in direct terms abolisl^e
(...) those Popish Books and P^^mers See summa Angelica and Rosella Tit.
consecrat. etc. Et ratr. de Consecrationis distinct. 1. and 16. Anton^ Corseti
R^portoriu^ Tit. Consecratio.
wherein the manner prayers, and service, for consecrating of Churches,
Chapels, Churchyards, or Altars, are prescribed and established in their
places, the Book of Common Prayer, and Ordination of Ministers, wherein there
is not one syllable concer^ing any such consecrations, nor any form of prayer
or service, instit^ted for all or either of them, as there is for all other
rites and Ceremonies which our Church holds necessary: And since they expressly
prohibit all other Rites, Ceremonies, Forms of Prayer, and Consecrations,
then such as are comprised and prescribed in th^se two Books; It is infallable
that they have utterly abolished, and abrogated this Ceremony of Consecrating
of Churches, Churchyards, Chapels, and Altars, as Jewish, Popish,
Superstitious, or at least superfluous, and quite excluded it out of our Church.

As for our Canons, Homilies, I^junctions, and Articles of Religion, there is
not in all, nor any one of them inferred ^re title concerning these
Consecrations; Which condemn and exclude them by their silence; The Of the
Idolat. The right use of the Church, the time and place of prayer.
Homilies likewise have some glances against them: For our writers, Mr. Tyndall
in ^is obedience ( page 136. 152.) of a Christian man, William Wra^ghton in his
hunting and Rescuing of the Romish Fox, John Bale B: of Osyrus in Ireland in
his Image of both Churches in sundry places; Thomas Becon in his Relics of
Rome, Foli^ 91. 92. 93.
Mr. Cal^r hill in his book against Marshall, Page 210 414
Mr. Fox in his book of Martyrs.

And many other of our writers have expressly censured and de^^ed those
Consecrations, as Superstitious, Jewish, Popish, and Antichristian, styling
them conjuring rather then hallewing of Churches, Chapels, and Altars,
inv^nted only for profi^^, and reserved only to Bishops for gain sake.

And to name no more, reverent Pilkirg^on sevea^ely censures these
Consecrations in these ensewing words: Exposition of Ageus, c. 2. v. 2. 3, and
c. 1. v. 7. 8.


The Popes Church has all things pleasant in it to delig^^ the people, but
where the Gospel is preached, they knowing that God is not pleased but only
with a pure heart, they are con^ent with an honest place, appointed to resort
together in, though it were never hallowed by Bishop at all. It is written Acts
7
that God dwells not in Temples made with hands, nor is worshipped with any
work of man's hands, but he is a ^spirit, an invisible substance, and will be
worshipped in spirit and truth, not in outward words only of the ^ippe, but
with the deep lighes and groans of the heart, and the who^e power of the
mind, and earnest hearty calling on him in prayer by faith? And therefore he
does not so much require of us to build him an house of stone, and timber, but
has willed as to 1 Timothy 2.
pray in all places, and has taken away that Jewish and Popish holiness,
which is thought to be more in one place then in another. All the Earth, is the
Lords, and he is present in all places, hearing the petitions of them that call
upon him in faith. Note this.
Therefore those Bishops which think with their conjured water, to make one
place more holy then the rest, are no better then the Jews, deceaving the
people, and teaching that only to be holy, which they have censed, crossed,
oyled, and breathed upon. For as Christ said to the woman thinking one place to
be more holy to pray in then another. John 4
Woman, believe me, the time is come when ye shall worshipp neither at
Jerusalem, nor in this hill, but the true worshippers shall worshipp God in
spirit and truth: So is it now said, the place makes not the man holy, but the
man makes the place h^ly, and ye shall not worship your Jdols, Stocks, and
Stones, neither at Wilsingham, Ipswich, Canterbury, nor Sheve, for God chooses
not the people for the places sake, but the places for the peoples sake^ But i^
ye be in the midst of the field. God is as ready to hear your faithful
prayers, as in any Abbey or Burrey, yea a thousand times more, for the one
place he hates, as defiled with Idolatry, and the other he loves, as undefiled
and clean. If the good man lie in prison, tied in chames, or at the stake
burned for Gods cause: That place is holy: For the holiness of the man, and
the presence of the Holy Ghost in him; As Tertullian says, yet there should be
common places appointed for the people to assemble and come together in, to
praise our God, etc.

Those who in the Apostles times were buried in no Church or Churchyard, nor
Christen moldes (as they be called, when it it is no better then other Earth,
but rather worse, for the conjuring that Bishops use about it.) It appears in
the Gospel by the Legion living in graves, the Widows Son going to burial,
Christ buried without the city, etc. That they buried not in hallowed Churches
by Bishops, but in a several place appointed for the same purpose without the
city, which custom remains to this day in many godly places.

As it then was lawful and no hurt to the dead, so it is now, and one place is
as holy as another to be buried in, saving that comely order requires the
bodies not to be castaway, because they are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and
shall be glorified at the last day again, but seemly to be buried, and an
honest place to be kept several from Beasts, and unreverent using of the same,
for the same purpose.

IT IS POPISH TO BELIEVE that which the Bishops do teach: That place to be
more holy then the rest which they have hallowed, as they say, with their
conjured water, crossings, censings, processions, etc.

But blessed be that God our Lord, which by the light of his word does confound
all such wicked and fond fantasies, which they devise to fill their bellies,
and maintain their authority by: Although these Ceremonies in the old Law were
give by Moses for the hardness of the people to keep them exercised, that
they fall not to the Idolatry of the Gentiles; yet is there no mention of these
in the new Testament, nor yet commanded now, either to us o^^ them, but
forbidden to be used of all, both of us and them.

We be no longer under shadows, but under the truth.

Christ has fulfilled all, and taken away all such dark kind of Ceremonies,
and has placed the clear light of his Gospel in the Church^ to continue to
the end.

Thus and much more this Bishop, who liberally censures all Lordly
Non-preaching Dominering Bishops, tearming these creatures ravening Wolves,
Ly^ns, Bears, and such other ravening Beasts, for mercilesnes, rap^ne and
cruelty.

If then these Consecrations be thus contrary to our S^^tutes, Common^prayer^
bo^ke, H^milies, Canons, Article^, Injunctions, Writers, and thus derived by
this reverent Bishop himself, in a Book printed at Lord n^ (...) An: 1562.
(the same year, he 39. Articles of Religion were promulged and ratified,) I
would gladly know by what Law or Authority our Bishops or their Delegates now
take upon them, to consecrate Churches, Chapels, Church yards, and Altars,
accounting them altogether profane; unless they have defiled, conjured, (I
should have said consecrated) them with their new devised Ceremonies, Orisons,
Consecration, Rites, and Ceremonies, takenout of Popist Masse-bookes,
Ceremonials, Rituals, at large related in Summa Rosella, Summa, Angelica,
Bochellous, Gratian, Ivo, Lyderwood, Hostrensis, with other Canonists in their
Tales of Consecration of Churches and Altars, and treatises of this subject,
deserving rather derision then imitation.

If they have no Law at all for it, but only the Popes Canon Law, (as they have
not) aboli shed by sundry 2. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 20. 21. 27^ H. 8^ cap. 15. 37. H^
8. c. 17^ 32. H. 8. c. 3
acts of Parliament, is derogatory to the Kings prerogative, the subjects
liberties, and the Laws and Statu^es of the Realm; Then why are they now of
late so mad upon these consecrations, as things of infinite moment. How hot
they have been upon consecration of Altars, appears not only by the new
consecrated Altar at Wolverhampton, of which before, but like wise by the new
erected and much adored high Altars in most Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
in M^ga^len College (...) Oxford, in Clare-hall, Petorhouse, Queens Coll^dg^,
with di^en other Colleges in the University of Cambridge, solemntly dedicated
with some kind of consecration, adorned with Tapors, Candlestickes, Basins,
Crucifixes, Crosses, rich Altar-clothes, clasped brave Books, with Crosses in
steed of Bosses, Crimson and Scarlet Cuinions, rich hangings, and daily adred
with superstitious idolatrous geniculations, to the great grief of all good
Christians, who mourn to see these Fountains of learning thus desperately
poysened and disguised with the Relics, Sorceries and Ornaments of the Romish
whose; Whom the divinity Professor of Cambridge D. C^llins in (...) public
Sermons has of late years much ext^lled, like an Apostazing Pander, preaching
openly in S. Mary's Church^ That it is sit w^e should meet the Papists
halfeway, both in preaching and practice; Which he and others there have not
o^^^ done, but almost if not quite r^n^hon^^ unto them, as as Deus Natura and
Gratia, in sund^^e pages.
Franciscu de Sancta Clara (that modern Reconciler) vaunts it sundry places of
his printed Book; To the great encouragement and triumph of all the Roman
Faction; Who vau^^ that^ they need no step one foot to us, who are running
withal speed to come home to them, unless Gods present plagues (...) judgments
for our desperate Apostasy stay our progress, and some stout private
Champions and royal Edicts encounter us in the way to Rome, to drive us home
again, for never a Prelate will or dares to do it, many of them spurring us
(...) in this holy pilgrimage to S. Peter's Chair, (whence Sunday no ^abbath p.
2^ 48. Edit 1.
D. (...) lington tells us they derive their Pedigree,) with all their mig^^
and man: How earnest and zealous our Prelates have b^^^ in their consecration
of Churches, Chapels, and Churchyards, placing great holiness in this
Ceremony, yea and necessity too; And evident, not only by their late See Bis:
^^audes Wrens, Pearce, Whites, and other of their Articles to this purpose
visitation Articles, wherein they take great care of the holy consecrated
graund they have hallowed with their Rochets, that it be by no means
profaned, but likewise by sundry late consecrations, and contests about this
Ceremony, I shall instance only in ^ particulars, omitting Cre^ Church, the
Chapel at Hamors^^th, and others.
all the rest, together with the solemn consecration of the foundation stones
of the repair of Paul's, (which were very solemnly blessed by the Bishop,
who has far more charity toward senseless stones, then men, whom he can
find spare hours to curse, excommunicate, imprison, dismember, and what not,
but not to bless or preach to.)

The first instance I shall pitch on, is that of S. Giles Church in the Feildes.

This Church about 9. years since, was new repaired in some of the walls, leds,
and seats, and all divine offices, Sacraments, preaching of divine service was
celebrated in it, after its repair for two years space or more, (time enough
one would think to consecrate it, if prayer, preaching of Gods Word, holy
exercises, and Sacraments can make places holy:) All this time it was thought
holy enough without any such consecration, by D. Mountain then Bishop of
London: But his Successor, after a years space (I know not upon what grounds,
or humor, much less by what law or authority) would needs have the Church
consecrated, though not new built, but repaired, ^n which case by the Summa
Angelica Tit. cons^cratio Ecclesiae.
Canon Law there needs no fresh conse^ration.

The Parish at first oppose it, but the present Bishop will not be foiled in
this Laudable work, whereupon he seque^ters the Church for a month or 3 weeks
space, locks up the ^oores, suffers neither divine service, nor Sermons, nor
Sacraments (except Baptism) all that while, to the great disturbance of the
Parishioners; At last after much ado, and the expense of 50. or 60^^ in fees
and entertainment, the Bishopp solemnly consecrates it, See Pontificale
Episcoporum de consecratione Ecclesiae. Mr. Calfe hill his answer to Marshall.
F. 93. 94. 95. 96.
after the old Romish manner (there being no Protestant form prescribed by our
Church) a crucifix, condemned Of the Peril of Idolatry.
expressly by our Homiles, being first set up in the glass window, to h^ll^w
it in a legal form though the fees for consecration were See Summa Angelica
and Rosella Tit: Symonia.
Symony by the Canon Law, and Se^ Brook Fitz. habent and Ristal Tit. extortion.
extortion by the Common Law, and so illegal by both.

The 2. instance, is that of the new Chapel in the Kings Bench prison, buil^
by St. John Lentall.

After it had been built and used as a Chapel above a years space, I know not
by what Law, it must needs be consecrated, or else threatn^d to be sequestered
and interdicted.

The present Archbishoppes surrogate, and Bishop Wren, by late delegation under
the Archbishop forsooth, would do the feat, but not under 30^. fees at least,
that was the lowest they would stoop to; So pure and innocent are these holy
Consecrations and Consecratours from Symony and extortion; This price being in
a manner agreed upon (hough somewhat an overhigh rate for so short a work^) D.
Cu^le Bishop of Winchester hearing of it, alleged it was within his (...), and
the of^ reit belonged not to them, but to him to consecrate; And because he
would be sure to prevayle, he proffered to hallow it gratis, and take nothing
but a dinner for his pains, which the other would have besides their 30^.

Hereupon S^. John Lentall yields, that he should have the h^nour to consecrate
it.

A week or two before this consecration, some Popishly affected person or
other, had caused the picture of Christ and his 12 Apostles to be hung up in
the Chapel, contrary to the Homilies and Doctrine of our Church, the which
some more honest minded persons rased and defaced.

The Bishop coming to consecrate the Chapel, since Easter last 1636.
, esples the defacing of these Images, and was very angry at it; Telling Sr.
John, that had he known of the defacing of these holy Images, which ought to
be respected before he came thither, h^ would not have consecrated the Chapel
till they had been repaired and beautefied again; Ye^ since he was come, he
would consecrate it as it was, but gave Sr. John a special charge to see these
holy Relics of Rome repaired with all speed, which thereupon being done, has
driven many from the Chapel.

By which true relation of this Consecration, we may see what an holy c^re our
devout Prel^t^ have of preserving and setting up these Images and Pictures,
which the very Of the Peril of Idolatry. The Right use of the Church. The
Time and Place of Prayer.
Homilies and subscribed Doctrine of our Church injoyne, them in all especial
manner to deface, pull down, and cast out of all our Churches, as things that
do not adorn or consecrate, but most fil^hely defile, idulterate, and
profane them. Ex^ungue Leonem, you may know what and whose creatures they are,
and what they aim at, by their claws.

The third instance J shall nominate, is now very fresh in memory.

D. Lawde Archbishop of Canterbu^y, contested lately with the University of
Cambridg^, pretending that he by his Metropoliticall authority ought to visit
them.

The University on the other side alleged; That their University it self, and
many of their Colleges, were of the Kings foundation, and so of right 2 H. 5.
c. 21. H. 8. c. 21. Cooks Iustitutes: f. 344. a. and other Law books there cited
exempt from all Episcopal ju^isdiction; That they were not under the Bishop
of the Diocese his visitation, therefore not under the Archbishops; That
every College had its proper visitours, appointed by the Charters of their
foundation, with his Majesty's and his Royal ancestors special appointment,
and therefore ought to be visited by no other.

That the power and right of visiting the Ecclesiastical State and persons^
especially of the Universities, was a chief flower of the Crown united to it,
by express words, in two several Act^ of Parliament, to wit, 26. H. 8. c. 1.
1. Eliz. c. 1. And also by 37. H. 8. c. 17. 8. Eliz. c. 1.

That the Kings Majesty alone by the Canon Law and those statutes was the sole
visitour of the whole Realm; That no Bishop could keep any visitation, no not
in his own Diocese, but by special Pate^t and Commission under the Kings
broad Seal authorizing him, and that in the Kings name and right alone, not
his own, as these Statutes of Ed. 6. c. 2. and all the Bishops Patents in
Edward the 6. time made according to this Act, expressly define.

That they were bound by their oath of Supremacy and allegiance to his Majesty
1. Eliz. c. 1.
to defend this right of his, to the uttermost of their powers, and by their
oath to maintain his Privileges. Antiqu. Ecces. Brit: in late Fox Acts and
Momuments p. 1774. to 1782.


That no Archbishop since 25. H. 8. c. 1. ( except Cardinal Poole by a
Commission from the Pope, as his Legate and Delegate in Queen Mary's time) had
ever attempted and presumed to visit the University in his own Metropoliticall
right, and that it was never visited before that time by any B. as
Metropolitan, but only as Antiqu: Eccles. Brit: passim.
the Popes Legate, and by virtue of his Bulls: That King Henry the 8 King Edward
the 6. Queen Elizabeth, and King James, did visit it by their Commissioners,
and no Archbishop in their time durst presume to visit it by his
Archiepiscopall power only: That 36. H. 8. p. 13.
Robert Holgate Archbishop of York, in King Henry the 8. his days, with other
Bishops, and all the Bishops what soever in King Edward the 6. time, were
forced to tal^e special Patents and Licenses from the King, enabling and
authorizing them in precise words, to visit their Diocese and execute
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and that only Nomine, vice, and autoritate Regis,
which they could not do without such Patents. See 5. H. 6. parts. ^^. in this
Ro^s.


That no Bishop or Ordinary, without a special Patent or Commission, can or
dares to visit any one of the Kings free Chapels, much less then, any of his
Universities, which are more peculiar to his Majesty, and more to be
respect^d, and of they did, they incurred a Praemunire. Cooks Institut. F. 334.
a: Brook Praemunire. 21. 21. E. 3 60. a:


Therefore if the Archbishop would come to visit them in his own name and
right as Archbishop only, they must and would withstand him, according to their
oaths, and duties, both to his Majesty and the University; But if he wo^ld
come as the Kings visit u^ and substitute only, and in his name and right
alone, with a special Commission or Patent under his great^^eale, they would
willingly submit to his visitation, otherwise not.

This contestation grew so great, that at the length it came to be heard and
descided before his Majesty, and his honorable privy Counsel at Hampton
(...) ^ Whereupon the ope^ing and^ hearing of the case (pretended by the
Vniversit^es and Archbishops) was whether his Majesty, or the Archbishops,
or which of them should be supreme in causes Ecclesiastical, and sole visitour
of the Universities in Law and righ^ The Arch-bisop declared, that he desired
not to visit the University out of any ambition or desire of Innovation, etc.
But only to rectify some enormities of l^ng Continuance; And what were they?
There were some Chapels belonging to certain Colleges in that University,
the which had never yet been consecrated, and yet divine service and Sacraments
were ministered in then, and had been so for many years, and for insta^ce he
named E^^^nuel College for one Se Speeds History of great (...) p. 106^^ 1068.
(which has been used as a Chapel ever since the year of our Lord 1524) and
Sidney Sussex College Chapel, used from An: 1598. till this present.

So that the consecration of these two Chapels were the principal cause (at
least pretense) of this great contestation before the Archbishop and
University.

A weighty matter, God woot^ to trouble his Majesty and whole Counsel with,
when as there is neither Popes (and so Bishops) have no scriptures for their
hallowing of things. B. Pilkington on Aggeus. c. 2. 2. 10.
Scripture, Law, nor Canon of our Church in force, to justify such a
consecration, but Laws and authoriti^^ store against it.

Exposit: on Aggeus 1. v. 78. De vita and Obitu M. Buceri.
Bishop Pilkington, Acts and Momuments p 1777. to 1788.
Walter Haddon. Mr. Fox, and others much jeare and deride the madness, folly,
and superstition of Cardinal Poole, and his Deputy visitors of this very
University of Cambridge, for digging up Mr. Bucers and Paulus F^gius bores out
of S. Mary's Church i^ Cambridge, ^. years after they were interred; And
interdicting, and n^w con^ecrating the Church again as profaned by them, for
fear their Masses and divine service, there used, should be nothing worth, the
place being made profane and unholy by these Heretics funerals, as they
judged them: When as the Church was holy enough to say Mass in for three year
space before, and all that would not hear it^ must be imprisoned, although the
parties lay there buried.

And is it not then a far greater madness superstition, and ridiculous frenzy
for our dominering Arch-Prelats, to deem these two Chapels profane places,
unfitt to administer the Sacraments, and celebrate divine service in, because
never yet consecrated by a Bishop, not only after three, but almost threescore
years use and practice of divine service, Sermons and Sacraments in them; When
as neither his predecest^^rs Whi^gift, Bancroft, and Abbot, (men very
ceremonious, and much addicted to superstition) ever so much as moved any such
question concerning the necessity of their consecration. And there is no such
Canons, Law, and Doctrine to enforce the consecration of them now, as were to
justify the Se Summa Angelica and Rosella Tit. Consecratio Ecclesiae.
rehallowing of S. Mary's, in Queen Mary's time, which the Popish Canon Law
then approv^d.

O that these great Prelates were as zealous to preach the word of God, and
patronize the authorized Doctrines of our Church, as they are for these
superstitious, ridiculous Romish trifles, fitter for Schoole-boyes to sport
themselves with all, then for great and grave Bishops (ever employed in the
highest State and Church affairs) to trouble both the University, King,
Counsel, and themselves with all.

If any here reply, that the Ioannis de Aton C^nstit: Dom: Othonis de
consecrati^nis Eccles: f. 5. 6 7.
Counsel of London An: 1236. under Cardinal Otho the Popes Legate, first of
all ordained and decreed here in England, that Churches should be consecrated,
whereas before that time, (as the words of the Constitution witness) diverse
Cathedrals and Parochial Churches in England had been built many years before,
and used as Churches, and yet were never consecrated: J answer, that it seems
till this Constitution, even in those times of superstitious gross blindness,
Consecration was not held a thing of any moment or necessity, much less then
should it be so reputed now.

Yet as those ancient Churches must then, for this Legates gain be all
consecrated within a certain space, that he might have a round fee from every
of them, or else be wholly suspended and interdicted, so must these ancient
Chapples now, by this Popish Canon.

After this Constitution, the Bishops by 15. R. 2. c. 5. Rastall Mort. 8.
Bulls from the Pope took upon them to consecrate Churches, Chapples, and
Church-yeards, in their own names and rights, till the abolishing of the Popes
usurped power, and restoring the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the Crown.
An. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 20. 21. and 26. H. 8. c. 1.

After which Acts the Bishops durst not consecrate any Chapple, Church, or
Church-yeard, till they had obtained a special License from the King, under
his broad Seal, for them and their successors, enabling and authorizing them
to do it; Which License they (after much suite to the King, Henry the 8.)
obta^ned in the 31. year of his reign, the Copy whereof I shall set here
down.

31 H 8. In the Patent Rols: pars 4^.
The King to all men, unto whom these presents shall come greeting. Know ye
that we, out of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have
granted and given License, and by these presents for us and our heirs do
grant and give License, as much as in us is, to the most reverend Fathers in
Christ, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and Edward Archbishop of York, and
to the reverend Father in Christ, John Bishop of Bath and Wells, and also to
all other Bishops and Suffraganes within our Realm of England, that they, and
every (...) them may consecrate any Churches, Chapels, or Church-yeards, in
our Kingdom of England already built and finished, as well for the
administration and receiving of all Sacraments and Sacramentals to be ministered
in them, o^ any of them; As for the use of the burial of dead pers^ns within
the same Churches, or Church-yeards, and every of them, etc.

And we further will and grant by these presents, tha^ our Chancellor of
England shall make or cause to be made, and deliver or cause to be delivered to
any of the foresaid Archbishops and Suffraganes from time to time, as often as
there shall be need, so many, and such a number of our Letters Patents, with
special and sufficient words and clauses to be made in due form of Law, for
the execution of the Premises, and to be sealed under the great Seal, as
shall be necessary and fit for the premises or any of them, by his discretion,
etc. Notwithstanding the Statutes of Mort: etc. In witness whereof, etc.
Witness the King at Westminster, the 1^. day of November in the 31. year of
the reign of King Henry the 8, etc. Teripsum Regem.

From which Patent (truly transcribed out of the Rolls, where it it is in
Lattine,) I observe:

First, that the Archbishops had then no Lawful right (...) power at all to
consecrate Churches, Chapels, or Church-yeards, without a special License
from the King himself, under his Great Seal: Therefore by like reason not to
keep Consistories, Visitations, inflict Ecclesiastical Censures, suspend or
silence Ministers and the like, without such a special grant or License: And
so their Episcopal jurisdiction, not ^ure divino, but merely humane by the
Kings grant and institution.

Secondly, that after such a License given them by the King, under his great
Seal, they cannot, yea ought not by Law to consecrate any Church, Chapel, or
Church-yeard, without suing forth a spec^all Patent out of the Chauncery, under
the Great Seal, particularly and by name authorizing them with sufficient
words and clauses, to consecrate such and such a Church, Chapel, or Church
yeard in special, (much more then must they have the like special Patent, and
Commission, to keep Courts, Visitations, suspend or silence Ministers, and the
like,) which Licenses and Commissions now they sue not out, but go on of their
own heads, in and by their own Episcopal authorities for the most part, for
which a Paemunire lies against them.

Thirdly, that every consecration is, and makes a 15. R. 2. c. 5. Rastall
Mortmanie. 8 3.
Mortmani^; Therefore it is against the Law, and must have a special License
and warrant from the King, under his Great Seal, as this Patent prescribes.

Fourthly, this Patent allows neither the Bishops, nor their Officers, to take
any fees at all, for any such consecrations; Therefore the fees they 30^. 40^.
a Church or Chapple
exact for them, are mere extortions, for which an Indictment or Bill lies in
the Sta-chamber.

Fifthly, they cannot enforce any man, or Parish, to have their Chapels,
Churches, or Church-yeards consecrated, unless themselves require and desire
it may be done, as some words in the Patent (which for brevity sake I have
omitted) manifest, and the words may, nor shall consecrate, implies as much.

Sixthly, that this gives them no power at all to consecrate Altars or
Altar-clothes, (which have a Sum^^ Angelica Tit: Consecrat: Altaris and
Pontificale Romanum.
distinct peculiar form of Consecration) but only Churches, Chapels, and
Church-yeards.

After this King 37. H. 8. in the R^^s pars prima
Henry the ^. in the 37 year of his reign, by his Letters Patents to the
Bishop of Oxford, among other things, granted him power to proceed to the
Consecration of Churches and Church-yeards within his Di^cesse. Moreover
without special grant from the King they had no such power; For which cause it
was then specially inser^e^ into this and other Bishops Patents.

And thus long the Consecration of Churches with all other Popish Superstitions
and Ceremonies almost continued in use.

But upon the change and reformation of religion, (which is worthy of
observation) i^ quite vanished away, as did many other Popish Superstitions, by
the abolishing of the Masse^Bookes, Primers, and Ceremonials, which prescribed
the manner and form of Consecrating Churches, Chapples, and Church-yeardes, by
the Statutes of 2. and. 3. E. 6. c. 1. and 3. and 4. E. 6. c. 10. Whence I
find not in all the Patents made to Bishops in King Edward^ days by the
provision of the statutes of 1. E. 6. c. 2: One syllable authorizing them to
consecrate Churches, Chapples, or Church-yeards, though all other parts of
Ecclesiastical and Episcopal jurisdiction (as keeping of Courts, Visitations,
Probale of Wills, granting of Letters of Administration, suspending of
Ministers upon Note this: Bishops then could not suspe^d or deprive Ministers,
without a special Patent or Commission, and that upon just and Lawful causes,
warranted by some statute there in force: Ergo now they cannot do it. And not
one of the^ having such a Pa^ent or Commission at this day from the King, all
their suspensions and proceedings against Ministers and others are mere
Nullities.
Legal and just grounds etc. be particularly granted them in those Patents:
Yet how? To be executed only NOMINE VICE ET AVTHORITATE NOSTRIS REGIIS, in o^^
own Royal Name, Stead, and Authority, not their own, as the Patents of
Scory, Couerdale, 5. Ed. 6. parsf: in the Rolls, with many others testify:
Neither have any Bishops since Henry the 8. this clause of Consecrating
Churches, Chapples, (...) Churchyards, inserted into heir Patents in these
latter days, from the King, under his Great S^ale, authorizing them to keep
Consistories, Visitations, prove Wills, grant L^^ters of Administration,
Suspend, Silence or deprive Ministers or inflict any Ecclesiastical Censures
upon any Subject.

Therefore they have not authority at all in point of Law, to execute any of
those particulars, and what ever they do in any of them is Coram non judice,
and but a mere Nullity, especially their Consecration of Churches, Chapples,
Church-yeards, Altars, for which they have neither Patent^ Statute, Article,
Injunction, Canon, or Orthodox Writer of our Church: Or for those long Fox Act^
and Monuments. p. 1147 999 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 3.
since antiquated Bacchanalian feasts of Dedication, which they would now
Dedicacion for sport at the end.
receive.

But of this enough for this present, in which I have been the more prolix,
because it is a poiet of Law, not hitherto discussed fully, by any that I have
met with.

QVESTION IIII. The 4. Question I shall propound, is this: What Law or Canon
there is to enjoyne Ministers, to read the Epistle and Gosple, or second
service at the High-Altar or Lords Table (or to suspend them if they refuse to
do it) when there is no Communion.

The reason of this demand is five-fold: 1. Because in truth there is no
Statute, Law, Injunction, or Canon extant, prescribing any such thing.

2. Because the Rubricke before the Communion ordaines, that the TABLE AT THE
TIME OF THE COMMUNION shall stand in the body of the Church or Chancle WHERE
MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER BE APPOINTED TO BE SAID, and the Priest standing at
the NORTH SIDE of the Table, shall say the Lords prayer with thy collect
following. etc. And the Rubricke at the end of the Communion ordaines thus:
Upon the Holy Days if there be no Communion, shall be said all that is
appointed at the Communion, until the end of the Homily, concluding with the
general prayer, etc. But it says not, that it shall then be said at the
Communion Table: Whence I observe:

1. That the^ Rubricke ties not the Minister to say second service at the Lords
Table, but at such times only as there is a Communion.

2. That when he reads service at it, the Table ought not to stand Altar-wise
against the East-wall of the Church, but (...) be removed and placed in the
body, or MIDDLE of the Church, or Chapel, where Morning and Evening Prayer be
appointed to be said: So as the Pr^^st ought not to go up to the Table or high
Altar, but they ought to be removed and brought down to him, as is clear by
th^s Rubricke, and more perspicuous by Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, and the 82
Canon forecited, if you read: Whence I argue thus:

The Minister ought not to read Second service at the Altar, but then only,
when it is removed and brought down into the body and middle of the Church or
Chancel to celebrate the Communion at, as the Rubricke, Injunction and Canon
resolve: But the Table is not thus to be removed or placed but at the time of
the Communion (unless they will grant, that it ought always to stand in the
midst of the Church, or Chancel, which they profestedly deny) witness the
Rubricke Institution and Canon: Therefore they ought not to read Second Service
at it, but only when there is a Commi^^ion.

Thirdly, The third reason of the (...).
because the Rubricke before Te Deum says, that the Epistle and the Gospel
shall be read where the two Lessons are with a loudvoayce, that the people may
hear the Minister that read^th them, and the Minister Atanding and turning
himself, as ^he may best be heard of ALL such as be present: Therefore this is
direct, that the Second Servic^ (whereof the Epistle and Gospel are a part)
must be read in the Reading P^w, where the Lessons are, when there is no
Communion; Because there, he may best be heard of ALL present, and that he must
not turn his fuce East, but West to the people.

Fourthly, because the Table is instituted and placed in Churches, 4. Reasons
not to read divine Service at, but to Consecrate and minister the Lords Supper
at; This is the sole use for which it serves: As the Font, is ordained only for
Baptism^, the (...) for reading, and the Chest or p^oremans lo^ in every Church
for Alms: So it for the L: S^ as is clear by 1 Co^^ 10. 16. 21 C. 11. 20. 2^.
etc. The Common-prayer-booke; The Homilies of the worthy receiving of the
Sacramnt^, of the right use of the Church, of the R^pairing and keeping clear
of Churches.

Queen Elizabeth's In^unctions and Canons set ou^ 1511. p: 18. and Can: 1603.
Can: 8^. 82. 83. 84. with all writers old and new I ever met with all, have
the Licenses and Injunctions run thus:

Whereas her Majesty understands, etc. And Tables placed for ministration of
the holy Sacrament, according to the form of Law therefore provided: Hence
Matthew Parkers visitation-Articles An: 1560. Art. 2. thus: Whether have you in
your Churches, etc. A comely and decent Table FOR the HOLY COMMUNION, etc. The
Canons in Convocation Anno 1571. p. 18. thus: Churchwardens shall see, there
be a fair repaired Table, which may serve for the Administration of Holy
Communion, and a c^eane Cloth to cover it; A convenient Pulpit, whence the
Heavenly doctrine may be taught, etc. The 28. Can: 1603. thus: Whereas we have
no doubt, but that in all Churches within the Realm of England ( therefore in
Cathedrals too, which had then no Altars) convenient and decent Tables are
provided and placed ( to what end? to read Service at? No; But) for the
celebration of the holy Communion, etc. And likew^se that a convenient seat be
made for the Minister to READ SERVICE IN: With a comely and decent Pulpit for
the preaching of Gods word Can. 83.

Since then the use of the Table by these and infinite other testimonies, yea
by the resolution of all ( our Have you a decent Communion Table to administer
the Sacrament or Communion at? This is the ordinary Article in all visitations.
Pre^utes ^isitation Articles) is only instituted for the celebration of the
Lords Supper at it; And the 28 Canon, with the Rubricke before T^ Deum expressly
confines the reading of divine service to the Ministers State appointed for
that purpose: It is clear, that the Minister ought not to read Second Service
at the Table, but only when there is a Communion: That the reading of Service
at it on other times, is a mere abuse and perversion of that end, for which it
was instituted: And Bishops may with as much reason and Law enjoyne them to
read Second Service, at the Font, in the Pulpit, or at the Poor man's box, as
at it.

Fifthly, The 5. reason.
Because the Queens Injunctions, the 82 Canon, and Arch bishop Lauds very
first Article for his Metropoliticall visitation expressly prescribe:

That when ever the Minister shall read Service at the Table, it shall be
placed in so good sort within the Church or Chancle, as thereby the Minister
shall be the more coveniently heard of the Communicants in his prayer and
administration, and the Communicants also more conveniently, and in more number
may communicate with the said Minister: Which words, compared with the Rubricke
before Te Deum, are a direct resolution, that the Minister ought not to read
any prayers at the Table, but when there is a Communion; Which being most
clear;

No Bishops may or ought to enjoyne Ministers to read Second Service at the
Table or Altar, when there is no Communion, neither can they suspend any for
not doing it.

And if any Bishop persuade or enforce Ministers to read Service thus, both
the Bishop and they (as D. Wre^. Bishop of Norwich, with many of his Clergy
have done) incur the penalties of the Act of 1 Eliz. c. 2. and may be
indicted, fined and imprisoned for it by this Law; It being a saying of divine
s^rvice in another manner and form, and an using of other rights and
Ceremonies then are prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; Which together
with the Queens Injuctions and Canons) condemns this Innovation, which was
never used or urged in Parish Churches till now; Neither is there any president
for it in Antiquity, but only in Popish Churches of late years.

All that can be alleged for it is that which Sermon of Gods House: p. 20.
Shelford and the A Coal from the Altar. p. 11. 27.
Colier produce for Altars, and bowing to them; The practice of our Cathedral
and Collegiate Churches, being most Popish, corrupt, and most opposite to our
Laws and Canons of all other in their i Crucifixes, Images, Tapors, Altars,
Altar-adorations, Vestments, Chaunting, lascivious Music, Gesticulations,
with a World of other Romish Antichristian Relics and Ceremonies: (All which
are condemned by the Homilies against the Peril of Idolatry of the time and
place of Prayer: The Common Prayer-Booke: 3. and 4. E. 6. c. 10. and 1. Eliz.
c. 2. 3. Iac. c. 5. and all our writers till of late) being fitter our
detestation then Imitation.

To which I answer: 1. That we must live by precepts, not Examples; Our
Cathedrals in this, and sundry other particulars, are contrary to our Laws
and Canons in point of practice, therefore to be detested. corrected, and
reformed by our Laws, and made like to other Churches; Not our Laws, Canons,
and Churches to be squared by them, the worst of any.

2. The Rubricke of the Common Prayer-Booke, in the end of the Communion,
prescribes in direct terms; That in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, where
be many P^eists and Deacons, they shall ALL receive the Communion with the
Minister EVERY SVN-DAY AT THE LEAST, except they have a reasonable cause to the
contrary; By which it is clear, that there ought to be a Communion celebrated
every Sunday in every Cathedral and Collegiate Church, and that every Priest
and Deacon of the Church ought then to receive it with the Minister, unless he
has a reasonable cause to the contrary: And who can this Minister be but the
Bishop? Ergo Bishops are but Ministers, and ought to receive the Sacrament
every Sunday in their Cathedrals: Ergo to be always Resident at their Seas,
and no dancing attendance on the Court.

The last clause of this Rubricke relates only to all the Priests and Deacons
receiving with the Minister, not to the Sacraments administration by the
Minister, for that ought to be every Sunday without intermission.

Thus was the Sacrament daily administered in every Cathedral and Collegiate
Church Ivo Denetalium: pars 2a. c. 25. 26 28. 29. 34 25 August. Epist. 118 ad
Ianuarium. Cyprianus de coena Domini. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacramentis c. 6
anciently, and in Queen Elizabeth's days; And so it ought by Law to be now;
And this was the reason why Second Service for the Communion was read every
Sunday and Holy Day at the Lords Table in those Churches, because they had a
Communion on those days.

But now the Substance of the Communion is quite omitted and discontinued, and
not so much as looked after by our Bishops and Cathedral men; and the
Ceremony, to wit^, the use of reading second service at the Table (now for
^oo^h at the High Altar, as they call it,) only retained and urged; Which ought
not to be read there by Law, as I have manifested, unless there be a Commnion,
and then only at (...) Lords Table, as the Rubricke in the Communion, the
Queens Injunctions, and 28. Canon prescribe, not at an Alta.

Our Bishops therefore must now either pull down their High Altars in their
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and administer the Sacrament in them every
Sunday and Holyday at the Table, (and the standing in the midst, not (...)
Quire where all may hear, not at the upper end, where (...) can ^eare what is
read, as in Paul's and other Cathedrals, (...) the Vergers by holding up their
Verges are appointed to give notice to the Cheristers and others, when to say
AMEN, (...) that they hear not what is read) as the Common Prayer-Booke
injoynes them; Or else give over their reading of the Second Service at their
High Altars or Lords Tables, situated Altarwise, reading it only in their
Pewes, appointed for that purpose, as they do in Parish Churches, else they may
be lawfully indicted, fined and imprisoned for it, as egregious viol^ters of
the statute of 1^ Eliz. c. 2. and of the Common Prayer, that they seem so much
to stand upon.

QVESTION V. The 5 Question I shall propose is this; What Law or Canon is there
for the building of Churches and Chapples East and West, or placing the Chancle
or Quire at the East end of them, See Hospinian de Origin Altarium and
Templorum. And the Authorities in the beginning forecited.
Statute or Canon of our Church and State J know not any; and for pract se it
has been otherwise.

The Temple of Jerusalem and its Sanctuary flood otherwise: And the Jewish
Synagogues anciently and now were built round, or in an Oual manner, as was the
Great Temple built by Helena and Constantine the great over the Sepulcher at
Jerusalem: The famous Walafridus Strabus de Rebus Eccles. c. 1. Eusebius Eccl.
Hist. l. 10. c. 4.
Church of Tire, built by Paulinus Bishop of that city, was otherwise situated:
For the Sermon made in the praise thereof, which fully discribes it, informs
us; That the great Porch of the Church was at the East part of it, reaching
very high EAST-WARDS unto the Sunne-beames, and that there was a separation
with great distance, between the Sanctuary or Temple it self and this Porch:
The Sanctuary therefore being a great distance from the Porch, and the Porch
standing thus Eastw^rds; It is certain, that the Chancle or Quire of this
Church stood either in the midst, or West end of it, not at the East in the
midst whereof (the same Sermon informs us) the Altar stood.

The Coliars strange gloss to evade this direct a^thority, p. 53. ( That this
Altar stood along the Eastern Wall of this Chancle, which may well be
interpreted to be in the middle of the Chancle in reference to the North and
South.) is a direct forgery contrary to the words of this Sermon, which says,
th^^ the Porch stood Eastward, and the Sanctuary a great distance from it, in
the midst of which the Altar stood. So as it could not possibly stand along
the East wall or end of the Church, being so far remote from and beyond the
Porch, which stood Eastward.

Since this time the Churches (as I have elsewhere manifested) have been
diversely situated according to the convenience of the place; Some being round
or Ouall; Others square; Others standing North and South, as (...) the Savoy
Church, with diverse of the Kings own Chapples; And the Chapples of Sundry
Colleges, Hospitals, Noblemen and Gentlemen; And if this be not sufficient,
the very late Popish Chapple at Somersett-house; with the new Church in Court
Garden, which as it stands not now perfectly East and West, so at first the
Chancle of it stood toward the West part; Which some Prelates (without Law,
Canon, and reason, I know not upon what superstitious overweaning conceit)
commanded to be altered and transformed to the other end, to the great expense
of the builder, the hindrance, and deformity of that good work, which yet must
not be used for a Church, because not consecrated by a Bishops co^^ring white
Rochet; Which consecration I have manifested to be against Law, and utterly
exploded as a Romish Relic.

If then there be no Law or Canon for the building of Churches or Chapples,
East and West, or placing the Chancle in the East end of Churches, as is
apparent, there is not; There cannot then be either Law or Canon for the
placing or railing (...) of our Communion-Tables against the East wall of
Church or Chancles Altarwise; Being the end for which J moved the Question.

And as there is no Law for this situation of the Table or Chancle, so as little
Antiquity.

For in Durantus his time (one of the latest authorities Bish^p Jewel quotes)
who lived not above 400 years since, the Altar stood in the midst of the
Quire, and not close against the wall, as is evident not only by the words
Bishop Jewel ^ites, but by other passages: By the: Altar ( Rationale Divin l.
1. c. 2 nu. 15.
says he) our heart is understood, which is in the MIDST of the body, ficut
Altar in MEDIO ECCLESIAE, as the Altar is in the MIDST of the Church.

Moreover he informs us, (...). l 1. c. 7. nu 15.
that in consecrating the Altar, the Bishop septies Altar CIRCVIT, goes ROUND
ABOUT the Altar 7 times (which he could not do stood it Altarwise as now,
close to the Easterno wall,) to signify that ^e ought to take care for all, and
be vigilant for all, which is signified by CIRCUITUM, by his compassing or
going round the Altar.

And if this be not sufficient, (out of Isiodor De officijs, l. 1. c. 3
, Amalarius De Ecclesiasticis officijs, lib. 3. c. 3.
, Fortunatus De Instit. Clericorum: l. 1. c 33.
, Rabanus Rationale Divin. l 1. c. 1. nu 18.
, Maurus Page 56.
, and others forecited) he thus defines a Quire Page 56.
, Chorus est multitudo exsacris coll^cta, and dictus Chorus, quod initio in
modum CORONAE CIRCUMARAS starent, and ita psallerent: Enough to Answer the
Coliars De Ritibus Eccles. l. 1. c. 17. nu. 1.
idle euation of his authority.

This ancient definition of a Quire is since repeated and approved by Durantus
De Ritibus Eccles. l. 1. c. 17. nu. 1.
Bartholomeus Gavantus Comme^t. in Rutr. Missale: par: 1 Tit. 15. Sect. 2
and other late Popish writers.

Enough to prove that how ever Romish or English Altars have been lately
situated against the East wall of the Quire, yet ab initio non fuit sic: it
has been but of late times so, even as the Papists themselves confess.

Hence our Learned Dr. ^ulke Cap. 17. Sect. 15.
, as in the places forecited, so in his Defense against G^egory Martin writes
thus:

The Table anciently stood as men might stand ROUND ABOUT IT, AND NOT AGAINST A
WALL, AS YOUR POPISH ALTARS stand, which is easy to prove, and has often times
been proved, and it seems (says he to Martin of the Papists Lib. 6. c. 5.
Sect. 15. p. 462. Edit. 2.
) you confess as much; Which words of his are both cited and approved of by
Bishop Morton (who concurs both in words and judgment with him) in his two
late Editions of his Institution of the Sacrament.

This Hospinian De Origin Altarium.
proves by sundry authorities, and by that of the Counsel of Constantinople
(...). which Survis, Crab, Binius, and others render CIRCVMCIRCA ALTAR, round
about the Altar, as the word does properly signify even in Acts 14. 28. Job. 10
24 Exodus 39 25. 26
Sacred Scripture, and other authors, as Bishop Jewel, and Bishop Morton both
resolve.

I shall therefore close up this Quaere with the words of the Jesuit 19. 12.
Number. 1. 50. Josh. 6. 3. 4. 2 Sa^. 5. 9. Exodus 16. 13. 2 Cron. 4. 3. 2 Kings 6
14 15. Job. 16. 13. Psalm 7. 7. Ps. 17 9. Ps. 18. 4 5 Ps. 22. 12 16. Ps 88. 17.
Ps. 103 3. Ps. 118. 10. 12. Jonab. 2 3. 5 Luke 21 20. Heb. 11. 30. c. 12. 1.
Ro^. 20 9. ^ Jeue. 3. Qu. 83. Disp 233. co. 2. n. 20
Vasquez, more moderate, then many of our Novellers, Nihilominus certum est,
etc. Although there be many Authors (to wit of late time, which he there
cites) for the placing of Altars toward the East; Yet it is certain, that it
is NO SIN or offense to situate not only lesser Altars, but likewise the High
Altar (and Quires and Chancles too, which he there speaks of) toward other
climates or parts of the world; For this tradition (how-ever some urge it as
necessary, and a binding Law) non est de earum numero quae sub praecepto nobis
volita fuerunt; It is not of the number of those traditions, which have been
left unto us under any precept; Which he proves out of the forecited words of
De rebus Eccles. c. 4.
Walafridus, Strab^, adding out of Eccles. Hist. l. 12. c. 24.
Nicephorus, that men have dive^sly ordered those things in former times.

Which the example of the Church of Antioch does manifest out of Eccles. Hist.
l. 5. c. 21.
Socrates, wherein the Altar stood westward, it being free for Christians in
these things, vel hanc vel illam consi^^tudinem amplecti to embrace either this
or that custom in the si^uation of their Altars, (Lords Tables) and Quires:
Much more the^ to rail in, or not rail in their Altars or Lords Tables
Altarwise at the East end of the Quire, or to come up to the rail (as
Visitatio^ Articles for Norwich Diocese.
Bishop Wre^ will now enforce all his Diocese by his new iuvented Articles, to
receive, contrary to the custom of all our churches from Queen Elizabeth's time
till now, yea contrary to the practice in the days of Popery, and in the
primitive time when the Laity came not into the Quire or Chancle to receive,
but only to offer, as is evident by Concilium To^ et ^^um 4. Can. 16. in choro
clerus communice^; Extra Chorum populus. Council: Eluber: Can. 76. Sardicense
Can. 10. Agathense: Can. 2. 5. 50. Cypr. Epist: 52. Innocentius. 1. Epist. 22.
Niciph: Eccles: Hist: ^. 12. c. 41. Chamir. l. 9. de Coena Domini. c. 1. Dr.
Featly his grand sacraledge, p. 391. with others forequoted.

And the Rubricke of the Book of Common Prayer, set forth in 2. and 3. Ed. 6.
which appoints the people to be placed in the Quire, the men on the one side,
the women on the other side, and there to receive.

And likewise King James his Proclamation, new printed before the Books of
Common Prayer, admonishes all men that hereafter they shall not expect nor
attempt any further alteration in the common and public for me of Gods
service from this which is now established, etc. it being necess^ry to use
constancy in the holding of the public determinations of States, for that
such is the unquietn^sse and unstedfastnesse of some dispositions ( as Wren and
other Novellors, and the Colier now) affecting every year new forms of
things, as if they should be followed in their unconstancy, would make all
actions of States ridiculous and contemtible; Whereas the steadfast maintaining
of things by good advice established, is the Weals of all Common Wealths,
which J would wish our Novellers to ruminate upon.

QVESTION VI. The 6. Quaere I shall put to these Innovatours, is this: What
Statute, Canon, Scripture, An^iquity or reasons they have for bowing to or
toward Communion-Tables or Altars; Whether their cringing and bowing be a
divine ado^ation, or only a civil worship? And how it differs from the Pagans
and Papist, bowing, and practice of adoring Altars, Crucifixes, Crosses, and
Images, which our Homilies with all our Orthodox writers define to be Idolatry.

This Question is T^^partie, and the chief of all the rest not hitherto
debated fully in print by any; J shall therefore crave leave to be the more
copions in it, beginning with the first branch thereof:

Law, Canon, Injunction, Constitution of our Church, enjoining and prescribing
any such bowing or Ceremony, I never yet, met with any, no not in times of
Popery, except that of Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1781.
Cardinal Pooles Popish Visitours in Queen Mary's days, in the University of
Cambridge, fore mentioned.

Scripture there is not any direct in point, only some texts are strained and
miserably perverted to this purpose. As See Shelfords Sermon of Gods house: p.
18 19 20. Bishops Mortons Institution of the Sacrament. Edit 2. p. 463.
1: Psalm. 5. 7. and Psalm. 138. 2. In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
Temple; The nearest texts they can ci^e for their purpose, and yet far enough
from it.

For what Logician will not deride this argument:

David would and did worship toward the Temple at Jerusalem.

Ergo we must bow down and worship to or toward our Altars or Communion
Tables:

David and the godly Israelites being in their houses or elsewhere out of the
Temple, worshipped, that is, ^ King. 8 29 30. 33 35 Dan. 9. 10
prayed toward it;

Ergo Christians when they come in or go out of our Churches, must bow down
to the Table or Altar.

What coherence of vigor is there in this argument? What beast had he reason
would thus dispute? Had they hence inferred, Ergo, we must always adore, bow
down to, or worship God toward (not in) our Churches and Chaples: This had
been a more probable inference, though unsound; Because the Jews worshipped
and prayed toward their Temple only, which is vanished; Not toward their
Synagogues, of which our Churches is rather patterns and successors, then of
the Temple, which was but one, not many, and that a type of our Savior,
abolished shortly after his death, nor of our Churches built long since after
another form, and to an 2 Ch^o^, 7. 12. See the Homily of the right use of ^he
Church.
other purpose then it.

But to answer the texts fully: 1. First, the worship toward the Temple, here
mentioned, was not bare bowing down of the body only (as these Novellers
dream) to, or toward it, or the Altar or Temple, but a praying toward it, as
is evident, by Psalm. 28. 2. 1 King. 8. 20. 30. 33. 35. 38. 42. 44. 48. 2 Chronicles.
6. 20. 21. 24. 26. 29. 34. 38. Dan: 6. 10. Therefore it warrants no bowing to
or toward the Altar or Lords Table without prayer.

2. Secondly, it was a worship toward the Temple only, not toward the Altar
in the Temple; And so makes nothing for bowing toward the Altar or Table; For
the Church or Chapple it self is neither.

3. Thirdly, it was only a turning with the face toward the Temple; Not any
genufl^ction or chringing to the Temple: But this bowing of our Novellers, is
not simply toward, but likewise to the Altar, as Exposition of the Catechism
in the Communion-Booke toward the end.
Reeue, and Sunday no Sabbath: p. 50.
D. Pocklington acknowledge; Now bowing to, and toward the Altar, are in some
respects two distinct things; Therefore this worshipping toward the Temple, no
warrant for any bowing to a Table or Altar,

4. Fourthly, this worshipping toward the Temple is taken two manner of ways
in scripture; Improperly and Properly: Improperly for a praying in some private
place, not only out of the Temple, but even out of the sight and veiwe of it.

Thus Daniel even in Babylon prayed 3 times a day toward Jerusalem: Dan. 6.
10. And so did all the Jews where ever they were, whether in captivity exile
or their own Country, 1. King. 8. 30. 35. 38. 44. 48. and other forecited
texts.

Properly: For worshipping or praying in the Temple: as, 1. King: ^. 29. 30.
33. 42. 2. Chron: 6. 20 21. 27. 26. 29.

Take it in either sense, and it will not avayle our Novellers, David in his
private devotions, even out of the sight and veiwe of the Temple, did worship
or pray toward it; Ergo we at our coming in and going out of the Church, when
we see the Table or High Altar must bow down to or toward it; or David did
worship God toward, that is, in his Temple.

Ergo, they must bow and worship to or toward the Altar or Table, ( for in
them or either of them they cannot locally worship God, unless they will make
new forms of Altars and Tables, and be mewed up within them by ^ike Popish
authority) are but frenticke ridiculous consequents; Yet the best that can be
drawn ^^om these texts, to justify these Ceremonies.

5. Fifthly, the Jews had good warrant and ground to worship and pray toward
the Temple For:

1. First, they had a divine premission and authority, if not a precept so to
do.

2. Secondly, a promise from God himself to hear and gra^^^ their prayers
made toward the Temple;

Both which appears by the forequoted texts of the Kings, Chronicles, Daniel,
and the Psalms. Viz: 1 King. 8. 39. 30. 33. 35. 38. 42. 44. 48. 2 Chronicles. 6.
20. 21. 24. 26. 29. 34. 38. Dan. l. 10. Psalm. 5. 7. Psalm. 28. 2. Psalm 138. 2.

But we have no such permission or precept to bow to or ^^wards Altars or
Tables, but a direct precept against it, which many read at the Altar and
Table, (to wit, the second Commandment, Exodus 20. 5. Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them; extending as well to Tables as to Images,
Idols or any other creatures) though they presently break it by bowing unto
the Table or Altar.

Neither have we any promise of reward, or of answering our prayers made to us,
for this cringing to Altars and Tables.

Their practice thereof warrants not ours.

3. Thirdly. the Temple was a special and lively type of our Savior Christ
himself, (as Divines generally accord,) and that in many respects, too tedious
here to mention.

Wherefore the Jews were thus to worship See the Commentatours on 1 King. 8. 2
Chor. 6. Ps. 5. 7. and 138. 2. and Dan. 6. 10
toward the Temple, to teach them always to look forwards toward Christ,
which was to come in the flesh, as to their only Sanctuary, help and refuge in
all conditions, the only Mediator and intercessour, to whom they must pray,
the only High Priest, Sacrifice, Oblation and Altar they must depend on
typified by the Temple, but never toward Synagogues.

Now these reasons of their worshipping toward the Temple make nothing for the
cringing and congewing to Communion Tables and High Altars.

4. Fourthly, the Temple was the place of Gods special presence, which God had
chosen for himself to dwell in, and to put his name there, where all the
Isralites were every year by special command from God, to meet and to
worship him, and this among others was one cause of their praying toward it.
Deuteronomy. 12. 11. 12. 1 King. 7. 29. 30, etc. Psalm. 122. 3. 4.

But our Innovatours cannot produce one Syllable in Scripture to prove, that
the High Altar or Communion. Table is the special place of Gods presence, the
place which he has chosen to place his name there and to dwell in; Sure the
Scriptures informs us, that WHERESOEVER two or three (Mat. 18. 20.) are
gathered together in Christ's name, there is he in the MIDST of them; And
thereupon commands us: To pray EVERY where, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 8. because God is
now every where alike present by his Grace: Therefore no ground have they to
worship or bow either to or toward it, as they do.

5. Finally, the Jews whether they were East, West, North, or South from the
Temple, or it from them, worshipped and prayed toward it.

But our Innovatours, as they will have all Altars stand Eastward, so they will
terminate and direct their worship only toward the East, and Altars standing
toward the East.

These texts therefore, with David's worshipping toward the Temple (on which
they principally rely) make nothing at all for the bowing to Altars and
Tables, which no Father or Orthodox exp^siter that I have seen, ever deduced
from the Scriptures.

Yea, but if these do not avayle them, Mr. Shelford (in his Sermon of Gods
house, p. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.) acquaints us with some others that will: as,
Psalm. 99. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool:

E^go, the first reverence that we must make when we come into the Church, is
to bow to the Lords Table, which Saint Paul calls the Lords Altar, and to
worship God toward it.

Oh senseless Divinity, and childish Logic! Who ever read of such dist^acted
inferences? Had the Psalmist said we will worship at the Altar; Or had this
footestoble, here mentioned, been the Altar, or this worship, a mere bowing of
the b^dy toward the Arc, or to it, and not a praying or sacrificing only
before or at it, there had been some shadow of worshipping, that is, of
praying and sacrificing to God at the Altar, but not of bowing to, or toward
it, much less to or toward the Lords Table, which is neither an Altar, no^
h^th any Analogy with the Altar, nei her is it so termed by Saint Paul, as
this D^eamer doteth, as I have else where proved at large. But since, we read
not in Scripture, that David ever worsh^pped or bowed to or toward the Altar;
And this s^o es^^^le here, by his own confe^^on was See Bis^^p. M^rt.
u^itution of the Sacrament. p. 463.
the Arcke, but by David's own exp^sition Gods holy mountain o^. H^ll Z^on,
Psalm 99. 9. And this worshipping, not a bow^ng, but prayer: Therefore here is
not the least countenance for this Ceremony.

Yea, but if these texts fall sh^rt, yet others come fully home: as Exodus 12.
27. Then the peopl. bowed themselves and worshipped. Ergo Potlid: Therefore we
must bow down, and worship the Al^ar or Communion Table.

Had th^se either b^wed themselves to or toward the Altar, the inference had
been somewhat tolerable, though nothing to the purpose, for bowing to Lords
Tables; But seeing they bowed only to worship God by praising him, or praying
to him (their bowing it self being not their worshipping, as these Dreamers
fancy, the texts themselves distinguishing the bowing from the worship, and
worship from the bowing) and since the first of these bowed themselves when and
where there was no Altar near them; And the second not to or toward the
Altar, but unto God; Therefore can they with no more probability hence infer
the lawfulness of mere bowing to or toward the Altar or L. T. then they ca^
hence make good that these bovved themselves to, and worshipped toward the
Altar, which is certain they never did.

The other (...) of Is^y. 45. 23. and Romans 24. 11. (meant only of the bowing
and subjection of men to our S^viour Christ himself, not to Altars or the name
Jesus, as S P^ul here expressly resolves) are so impertinently cited by Mr.
Shelso^^ Sermon of Gods house, p. 18.
to this purpose, that they need no answer.

All men shall bow to Christ himself at the day of judgment: (...), they must
bow to or toward Lords Ta^les and C^mmunion Tables now; Being a consequence,
nor tolerable in a B^dlam, much less in an ancient In the ^ncomia^^^^^ verses
before his book.
highly applauded Divine, by Ignoramusses of his own strain.

Yea but if these texts miscary (yet say some) that of D Walburton D^^me of
Wels, in a Sermon, and others in their Sermons.
Isay. 36. 7. and 2 Chronicles. 32. 12. Has not the same Hezechiah ( says railing
Rabshaketh) taken away his High places, and his Al^ars, and commanded Judah and
lerusalem, saying, ye shall worship before one Altar, and burn incence on it?

1. I answer, first, that this is only the railing speech of Rabshaketh, not
the dictate of Gods infallible Spirit, therefore no authenticke proof.

2. Secondly, the first part of it is a direct untruth, why not the latter too,
there being no such command of Hezechiahs in Scripture, for the Isralites to
worship before one Altar?

But admit there were: 3. Yet thirdly, I say, that this Command to worship
before the Altar, makes nothing for worshipping or bowing to the Altar, much
less the Table; No more then David lifting up his hands toward Gods holy
Oracle: Ps. 28. 2. proves that we ought to lift up our hands toward the Table
or Altar, when we come in, or depart out of the Church, or when ever we make
prayers unto God.

For first, this worshipping before the Altar was not any Genuflection, or
bowing to or toward it, but a bringing of an Oolation or Sacrifice to it, and
burning incense on it, as the next words expound it, and Genesis 8. 20. 1 King. 3
4. 2 Kin. 16. ^2. 13. c. 18. 22. Ps. 43. 4. Ps. 51. 19. Ps. 118. 27. Isay. 56.
7. Mat. 5. 23. compared together, testify:

Or else, it was only a standing upright, and praying to God before it, o^
near it, without any incuruation of the body to or toward i^: 2 Kin: 8. 21.
22. 2 Chronicles. 6. 12. Luke 18. 11. 13. Neither of which warrant or enforce any
bowing to or toward it: No more then the Rubricke in the Common-prayer-booke,
prescribing the man and the woman to kn^^le down in some convenient place nigh
unto the place where the Table stands, when they are Churched, there to
p^ay-implyes; That they ought to use to bow to or toward the Table.

Secondly, because they might worship before the Altar, without any bowing or
particular inclination of the body to it, as we use to kneel and pray before
the Font at every Christning, before the Minister and Pulpit at every Sermon,
before the Grave at every funeral, before the Reading Deske at every
Common Prayer, Mourning or Evening, and yet bow or cringe our bodies to or
toward neither of them, out of any respect at all unto them; Neither do we
the like to the Sacrament or Lords Table when we receive his Supper though most
kneel before it then.

So that J may now safely conclude, that there is no Scripture at all for this
new Ceremony, the rather, because Exodus 20. 23. 24. 25. 26. Dan. 27. 5. Josh.
8. 31. God commands his Altars to be made only of Earth or unhewne stones,
without any Image or Picture on them, to withdraw the Jews from bowing to
them, being made of so base materials, enjoining them also not to go up by
steps to his Altar (as our Novellers do to their High Altars,) that their
nakedness be not discovered thereon, which would have been more discovered by
bowing and stoping down thereto, then by assending to it by steps.

As for Psalm. 95. 6. it is as extravaga^t to this purpose as the rest; The
Table being not our Lord and maker, before noted, toward whom this text
enjoynes us to kneel and fall down prostrate: Which I have sufficiently
answered in refelling them, and therefore pass it by.

But are there no Fathers or Antiquities for bowing to Altars and Lords Tables?

To Tables certainly, not one, unless that of Nazianzen concerning his Mother
Oration 28 de Funere Patris p. 472.
Quod venera^dae Mensae nunquam terga verteret, be wrested to this purpose
contrary to the sense; To wit, that she never turned her See Ps. 21 12. Ier.
2 27. c. 32 33. 2 C^ron. 29. 6. where the like phrase is used.
back upon the Lords Table, by neglecting to communicate, when ever the
Sacrament was administered at it; Which is far enough from bowing to it: The
Table there being put for the Sacrament it self, adminis^red thereon, as it is
in Sundry such passages in the Fathers, Nicephorus Greg. f. 10. Cent. Magd. 8.
Col. 677. Cent. 9. Col. 243. and others.

For bowing to and toward Altars there are some seeming Passages in Antiquity,
the chief whereof J shall recite and answer, omitting the residue as
impertinent.

The Antiquity of this bowing.
The first Antiquity J find that may probably be objected for bowing to
Altars, is the De Bibliotheca Patrum Colon^ Agrip. 1618 p. 14 15.
Mass of S. James the Apostle, the brother of the Lord, if we dare believe it:
Wherein among other things, I find a Prayer prescribed to the Priest, to be
said, A fo^bus usque ad Alta^e, from the Church-dore to the Altar, which has
these words in it: We shake and ^remble coming to thy holy Altar. After the
Priest is gone in to the Altar, the Deacon cries; Let us bow our heads to the
Lo^d; And then the Priest kneeling down, says this prayer: Tho^ who only art
the Lord, and a m^rcifull God; Inclinantibus cernices suas CORAM SANCTO ALTARI,
etc. To all that bow then necks before thy holy Altar, and ask special
gu^fisfio^ there, sen^ fo^th thy good grace, and (...) dictions, which cannot
be taken away from u, etc.

ANSWER. To which I answer; First, that this Liturgy is but a me^re late
Popish forgery (brought in many hundred years after Christ.

Descriptor: Eccl. A^^ 34.
Bellarmine and Annal: To^. 1. An. 63 nu 17.
Baronius, being so ingenious to confess, that there are so many additions to
it of late times, as it is not easy to judge what part it had S. James for the
Au^hour.

But if he were Author of any part, yet doubtless not of this, as Censura
scriptorum veterum: p. 9 10.
Mr. Cook proves sufficiently; To whom I shall refer you.

Secondly, here is not a word of the Priests bowing to or toward the Altar,
nor yet of the peoples; But only a bowing their neck to the Lord.

Thirdly, this bowing their necks before the Altar, was not with any relation
to the Altar, but to God, and only a bowing of the body in prayer to the Lord.

Therefore this spacious forged Antiquity, hatched but of late years, makes
nothing for this Ceremony.

The Second Antiquity.
The second, is that of Eccles. H^era^^h. l. c. 5.
Dionysius Arcopagita, who writes: That a Bishop when he is to be consecrated,
utroque genu flexo ante Altar^a, kneeling on both his knees before the Al^tar,
has the Gosple delivered by God, laid upon his head and hand: That a Priest
kneeling before the Altar on his knees, has the Bishops right hand laid upon
him; That the Deacon kneeling only on one knee before the Altar, has the
Bishops right hand imposed.

After which he observes, that access to the Altar, inflexio genuum, the
bowing of the knees, and laying on of hands, etc. is common to all three, and
that their access to the Altar, and bowing of their knees, and all the
spiritual Graces in them to God, etc.

To which I answer: First, that this Antiquity is but some late Counterfeite
Noveltie, as Mr. Cook Censura: p. 50. 52. 54.
has showed at large, and the very Ceremonies of Ordination here mentioned
prove, which came not in, till at least 600 years after Dionysius days, as D^
Divin^s Ossicijs.
Alcumirus witnesses.

Secondly, admit the Author genuine, not forged, yet here is nothing but a
kneeling down before the Altar on both knees, to receive Imposition of hands,
not any bowing of the knee or body to or toward the Altar, the thing which
should be proved.

The third Antiquity.
The third, is that of De Paenitentia, lib. Edit. Rhenani. To^. 2 p. 46.
Tertu^^^n, where his Panitence, among other things, is prescribed. Aris Dei
adgenicular^: To bow the knee to Gods Altars.

This some think an unanswerable Antiquity. I answer, first: That See Cook
Censura p. 70. Rhenanus in argumento (...) libri
Erasmus and diverse others think this to be none of Tertullians, in regard of
its phrase, and because Altars (as I have proved) were not then in use.

Secondly, I answer: That the true Copy reads it, CHARIS, not ARIS DEI; as La
Cerda the I^su^e in his Edition of Tertullian, and Annotations, proves at
large; And the anteced^nt and subsequent words do manifest.

Plerumque v^ro je^uni^s p^eces alere, ingemiscere, lacrymari and mugire d^es
^octesque ad Dominum Deum ^uum, P^aesbyteris advol^, and A^is (for Charis) Dei
adgeniculars, and omnibus fratribus legationes depricationis suae injurgere.

After which, some few ^nes, it ^o^owes by way of recital: Ergo cum te ad
fratrum g^nua protenais, Christum contrecta, Christum exo as: Which last words
prov^s that, and A^^s, ^mistaken, and put in for Charis; ET be^^g here a pla^^^
bodge, absurdly thrust in for Ch^ Which added to arts, makes Charis.

This, the placing of it between Presbyteris advolui, and omnibus fratribus,
etc. warrants to be the true sense and reading; And that for three reasons.

First, because the parties that were thus to prostrate themselves to the
Elders and Saints of God were Rhenanus and La Cerda l^idem: Tripart. Hist. l.
9. c. 35.
Paen^tents, or men excluded and excommunicated from the Churth and Sacraments
for some heinous sim^^s, which they were thus to lament: This bowing and
prostration therefore of themselves, could not be Aris Dei, to the Altars, from
which they were excluded; But Charis Dei, to the beloved Saints of God, to whom
they might have private access for comfort and counsel.

Secondly, because the end of this bowing to the Elders and Brethren was only
to ask them pardon for their scandals and offenses against the whole Church
and them; And to deprecate their crimes, as the last words, omnibus fratribus
legationes depraecationis suae injungere, manifest: Or else See Tripart. Hist.
l. 9. c. 35
to desire them to pray, greive and lament to God both with and for them; As
the following clauses.

Quid consortes casuum tuorum ut plauso^es fugis? Non potest corpus de unius
membri vexatione laetum agere: Condole at universum, and ad remedium
conlaboret, necesse est, etc.

Now, it were absurd for them thus to bow and kneel down to the Altar of
God, for either of these two causes; Therefore it was questionless to the
Saints of God, and must so be rendered.

Thirdly, because the Tripartite History, Ierom, Cyprian, with others, quoted
by Rhenanus and La Cerda, touching the manner of the Ex^^^logesis (Con^ession)
in the primative times, make no mention at all of any bowing to Altars, used in
this kind of discipline, by Pae^^tence; But only a bowing to the Saints of
God, who bedewed these Paenitents with their tears.

This bowing therefore only to Gods Saints is no proof of the Antiquity of
bowing to Altars.

Thirdly, admit it were Aris Dei, yet it makes nothing to the purpose: For this
was not any precise bowing to or toward the Altar such as is now used, but
only a kneeling or prostration in prayer before it, as the text does manifest.

Besides it is Aris Dei adgeniculari, in the Passive, not adgeniculare in the
Active verb; Therefore no voluntary genuflexion to the Altar, but an enjoined
and enforced prostration of a pae^itent by the Altar; So that this grand
authority well examined vanishes into smoke, extending only to paenitents, not
any other.

The fourth Antiquity.
The fourth is that of Adversus eos qui hummae in Christ^ etc. p. 565
Athanatius. Quid? quod and hodie qui ad Sanctum Altar accedunt, idque
amplectuntur, ac cum metu ac laetitia salutant, non in lapidibus and lignis,
sed in gratia per lapides and ligna nobis raepresentata adhaerent.

I answer, first, that this is not Cooks Censura 93. etc.
Athanasius his genuine work.

Secondly, that this was only a coming up unto, and embracing and kissing of
the Altar, which our Novellers now use not when they bow to it, or before it;
And that out of Superstition, rather then any true Christian devotion, as is
manifest.

Thirdly, it is spoken only of such who came to receive the Sacrament, and at
the time of their receiving, not of others.

The fifth Antiquity.
The fifth, is that of Gorgonia, who being dangerously sick (as Oration 25 p.
443.
Nazianzen in his Oration in her praise records) and dispairing of Man's help,
went secretly in the dark night unto the Church; Ad Altar cum fide procumbit;
Casts herself down with faith by the Altar, calling him to witness who is
worshipped upon it, with a loud voice, etc. And moving her head to the Altar
with the like cry, and abundance of tea^es, threatened she would not remove
from thence, till she had recovered her health, and so continued praying and
weeping at the Altar, till by Gods goodness she was miraculously recovered.

To which I answer: First, that here is no mention of any bowing to or toward
the Altar, but only of a kneeling down, and a prostration at it, to pray and
weep to him that is worshipped on it; Which proves no more the use or practice
of bowing to Altars, then our Ministers kneeling down and praying at the Lords
Table, when they consecrats the Sacrament, or marry any man, warrants or proves
a custom to bow to or toward the Lords Table, never in use till now of late.
See the Common Prayer-Booke, the Rubricke before Communion and Marriage.

Secondly, this is alleged as an extraordinary example only of one, and she
a woman (who in ancient times might not come near the Altars, nor touch the
Altar-clothes by the Canons; ( Gratian. de Consedratione Distinct. 1. Rodulphus
Tungrensis de Canonum observantia: Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 254. B.) in an
extraordinary case, at an extraordinary time of the night when none were
present in the Church: This swallow therefore makes no Summer, proves no
general practice or custom then, but the contrary.

The sixth Antiquity.
The sixth, is that of Eutropius the Eunuch (Socrates Scholast, Eccl es. Hist.
l. 6. c. 5.) who incurring the Emperor Arcaaius displeasure, took the Church
for his Sanctuary, and lay along at the foot of the Altar.

I answer: That there is no prostration to or toward the Altar to adore it,
but to be secured by it, a flying to it only as a Sanctuary by a guilty person
fearing death, not a voluntary adoration of it, or bowing to it, by an innocent
person ^n no danger of his life.

Therefore impertinent, our bowers not lying down along at the feet of our
Altars, as they did.

The seventh Antiquity.
The seventh, is the example of Paulus the Novatian Bishop of Constantinople,
who perceiving his Church to be in great and immine^t danger of burning, by
reason of a fearce fire, fell prostrate before the Altar, referring unto God in
his prayer the preservation of his Church, and so by his uncessant earnest
prayers miraculously preserved the Church from burning. Socrates l. 7. c. 39.
in the Book 38. in the English Nicephorus, Eccles. Hist. l. 14. c. 41.

I answer: That here was no prostration or bowing to or toward the Altar, but
only a prostration in prayer before it; Which proves nothing.

Besides, Nicephorus makes no mention of the Altar, but only relates, that
Paulus went into the Sanctuary, and there prostrated himself in prayer.

Finally, this case is extraordinary, upon an extraordinary occasion: Neither
do the Historians mention it to prove any reverence then given to the Altar,
but only to show the force and fruit of prayer, which can quench even the most
raging flames of fire.

In a word; We read here of a bowing and prostration in prayer before the
Altar, but not of any bowing or prostration to the Altar without any prayer;
The thing only in dispute; For which there is not one example in any Author
till above 500 years after Christ.

The eighth Antiquity.
The eight, is that of Rusticus, a Cardinal Deacon of Rome, about the year of
our Lord 550. Contra A^ephalis Disputatio. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 6. Pars 2. p.
225. G. 229. E. where he writes thus: We all adore the Cross, and by it, him
whose Cross it is, yet we are not said to coadore the Cross w^^h Christ,
neither by this is there one nature of the Cross and of Christ. Similiter
adorare Altar, ^oadorare Altari Trinitat^ non dicimur, sed potius per Altar.
Nec enim Tabernaculum in Erem^, nec Arca, nec Templum, nec Altaria ab antiquis
coadorabantur and concolebantur and neque una est Dei and horum facta Natura.
Hae vero creaturae non coadorentur Trinitati, sed per eas Trinitas adoretur.
Nec non and clavos quibus fixus est, and lignum venerabilis Crucis, omnis per
totum m^rdum Ecclesia absque ^lla contradictione adorant, etc.

To which I answer: First, that this is one of the Papists new forged Fathers,
not heard of in the Church till now of late; Besides, they branded him for a
Schismaticke, and a man then deprived by the Pope, and cannot certainly define
whether this be his work. See Biblioth. Patrum before his works.

Secondly, this work must not be so ancient, or else the Author is a great
liar, it being that the universal Church did not adore the Cross and Nay es
universally in that age, nor adore God and Christ in, by, and through Altars,
Crucif^x^s, and Images, nor yet in 50 years after, as is apparent by Pope
Gregory the first; (Registr. lib. 7. Epist. 109 and l. 9 Epist. 9.) No, nor yet
in 300 years after witness the Council of Constantinople Anno 754. Matthew
Westminster H^^: 793. Houeden Annal. pars l. p. 405. The Council of Paus An.
824. Agobardus his book de Picturis and Imaginibus: Our own Homilies aganst
the Peril of Idolatry, together with Zonarus in his Annals, N^celus in his
Annals, Eutropius in his Roman History, and the other Centurie writers
witnessing as much.

This Author therefore being either a bastard or a liar, will not stand them
much in stead.

Thirdly, I answer, if our Novellers will take advantage of this authority,
which I have quoted for them, let them take him all, or none.

That I presume they will not do, for then they must adore the Cross, the
Crucifix, and Nails wherewith our Savior was pierced, and that they will not
do (I suppose) as yet: If therefore they disclaim him in this, why not in
that of adoring the Altar.

Fourthly, he writes expressly, that they did adore the Altar, and not coadore
the Trinity with it, but rather adore the Trinity by or through it.

Now thus to adore the Altar, or God with, or by, or through it, is no less
Idolatry, by our own Homilies ^ and all our writers resolution; Whereupon Dr.
Duncombe in his determination at Cambridge, disclaimed utterly any worshipping
or adoring God by or through the Altar, even in his defense of bowing to or
toward it.

This Idolatrous adoration of the Altar and President will not stead them, but
quite spoil their cause.

The ninth Antiquity.
The ninth that may be objected, is that of Bibl: Patrum Tom. 10. p. 415. 416.
E. c.
Stephanus Edvensis, a Bishop An: 950. Cap. 12. de Sacramento Altaris, Where he
writes: That the Priest coming to the Altar in his Massing-v^st^ents, osculatnr
Evangelium and Altar, kisseth the Bible and the Altar, signifying him thereby,
who with the kille of his meare nation has made both one in the incaruation of
the Jews and Gentiles.

He holds or stands at ( Tenet dexteram partem Altaris) the right hand-side of
the Alta^, because Christ was promised in the Law to the Jews, before he
preache^ to the Gentiles. After that the Gosple is removed from the right hand
or corner of the Altar to the left by the Deacon or Priest, the right hand is
attributed to the Jews, for the veneration of the Law, the left to the
Gentiles for their execrable Idolatry.

The Gosples Doctrine committed to them, was first repulsed by the Jews;
Whence the Gosple ought to be read on the left side of the Altar toward the
North, etc. (O profound reason and divinity!)

After the Priest, inclinans seante Medium Altaris, bowing himself or kneeling
down before the midst of the Altar, prays to God the Father to give him the
spirit of humility, etc. Which I have cited more at large, to show the
ridiculous grounds of Popish Ceremonies.

I answer: First, that in all this there is not one word of bowing to or
toward the Altar, which certainly would here have been mentioned among other
Ceremonies, had it been then in use.

Secondly, the last words mention only a kneeling down at the Altar (and that
by the Priest, at the time of Consecration) to pray, but no kneeling or bowing
to the Altar, either before, after, or without any prayer, the Ceremony now
contended fore. This therefore is not home.

The tenth Antiquity.
The tenth, is that of Bibliot^. Patrum Tom. 12. pars 1. p. 1054.
Honorius Augustodunensis de antiquo ritu M^ssarum, l. 3. c. 30. De
Inclinationibus.

Dam Ecclesiam ingredientes ad Altar inclinamus, quasi regem milites adoramus.
Aeterni quippe Regis Milites sumus, cui semper in precinctu specialis militiae
assumus. Cum autem ad Orientem and Occidentem inclinamus, Deum ubique
praesentem nos adorare monstramus. Quem it a rationali motu ab ortu nostrae
nativitatis usque ad occasum mortis sequi debemus, sicut coelum ab Orient in
Occidentem naturali revolutione ferri videmus. Quod Monachi expressius
designavit, qui se toto corpore ab Orient in Occidentem girant. To which I
answer: That this Author lived 1120 years after Christ, and is the first
undoubted writer that makes mention of bowing to the Altar at the en^ring into
the Church, which I have met with all; Which Ceremony, as is likely, began in
his days. But yet observe.

First, he says, they bowed To, not toward the Altar only; Which many of our
Novellers deny they do.

Secondly, that the ground and reason of bowing to the Altar then, is far
different from those reasons alleged for it now.

They bowed thus: Only to restify that they were Gods Soldiers, ready at all
times to do him service; Not, from any reasons drawn from the Altar; But we
forsooth must bow to it, because it is Gods mercy seat, the place of Christ's
special presence on Earth, his Chair of state, to testify ou^ Communion with
the faithful, because it is the principal part of the Church; And if all
these fail, because it is used in Cathedral Churches; Which reason they never
dreamed on then.

Thirdly, that as they then bowed to the Altar, so likewise they bowed
themselves both East and West, to testify, that God whom they worshipped was
every where alike present.

But our men will only bow Eastward, and have all Altars so situated, not
Westward; And confine Gods special presence to their Altar, and the East end
of the Church, as if he were not every where present alike; Which is directly
opposite both to their practice and reason here alleged to the contrary.

Fourthly, they bowed only to the Altar at their first entrance into the
Church, ours now, not only at their coming in, but every time they pass by it,
toward it, repair to it, retire from it, and at their going out of the Church
besides.

Fifthly, this, in that age, was the practice only of Monks when they went to
their hours of prayer (for of them he speaks, as is evident by the precedent
and subsequent chapters) with reference to these hours. Therefore it is no
proof for Ministers or Laymens practice of it then, or now.

The eleaventh Antiquity.
The eleaventh, is that of Biblioth. patr. Tom. 14. p. 252 A 254. B. C. 256. B.
Rudolphus Tungrensis, flourishing about the year of our Lord 1380. De Canonum
observantia propositio 23. Who as he informs us in direct terms, that Sixtus
the second Anno 261 ordained;

That the Mass should be celebrated upon an Altar, QUOD ANTEA NON FIEBAT,
which before that time was not done, (a clear proof that Christians for 261
years after Christ had no Altar in use) so he writes: That the Priest in that
age read the Gosple at the left corner of the Altar, according to the Roman
Order, that on the Right side he might be the readier to receive oblation, and
perform sacrifice. That the Roman Order prescribes, that incense with a Tapor
should be carried before the Gosple, when it was carried to the Altar or Readers
seat. And then relating diverse Ceremonies about the Mass, he says: Sacerdos
autem humiliationem Christi usque ad mortem Ctucis nobis indicat, quando se
usque ad Altar inclinat, dicendo habe igitur ohlationem. Et statim in
sequentibus narrationem de Dominica passione orditur; Quam usque ad supplices
te rogamus, observat; Quosque juxta Altar se inclinans, Christum in Cruce
inclinato capite spiritum tradidisse signat.

To which I answer: That this is no bowing to or toward the Altar; But a
bowing of the Priest, as low as the Altar, and by ^r besides the Altar, not out
of any respect or reverence to it, but to show forth Christ's humiliation unto
the death of the Cross (as i^ the Sacrament (1 Cor. 11. 24. 25. 26) instituted
for that purpose, and then celebrated, were not sufficient for that, without
this idle Ceremony, to show that Christ bowed his head, when he gave up the
Ghost, (as if Christ himself at his last supper, or his Apostles after him,
could not have prescribed such Ceremonies for these ends, had they thought them
necessary:) T^erefore its no warrant or proof of any bowing or inclination to
or toward the Altar (especially for other ends) which is not so much as
mentioned in this writer, there being non Canon extant for it in his age.

The twelveth Antiquity.
The twelveth, is that of Eugenius Roblesius (Bibl. Patrum Tom. 15. p. 761. G.
H.) de authoritate and ordine Officij M^rzabarici, among the Goths. Where J
find no mention of the Priests genuflection to the Altar before the ordinary
Mas^e, or in it; But these passages after it: Absoluta Missa, Sacerdos genubus
flexis juxta Altar recitat, salve regina. D^nde deosculato Altar, convertit
se ad populum: But in the Lenton Masses, immediately after the Psalms,
Sacerd^s genust xo supragradus Altaris recitat quasdam preces, etc. Hinc ante
sacrificium and oblationom, Sacerdos genu flexo ad Altar, recitat. alias
preces, etc.

But all this proves only a kneeling and genuflection in prayer at the Altar,
not any bowing or incuruation to or tow^rds it, and that all the time of the
Consecration by the Priest alone, not by other at other seasous.

These are all the chief Authorities I have hitherto observed, which seem to
give any color to this bowing to or toward Altars, which Ceremony I cannot
find prescribed in any Books of Divine Offices, Canonists, Missals,
Caeremonials, Primers, Psalters, Liturgies, Masse-Bookes, or Masses (no not in
the Popish Churches, much le^^e at home) that have hitherto come unto my hands:
A strong argument and evidence in my judgment, that it was never used in
former times as now it is of late: The forecited Authorities (two only
excepted, and those late Popish writers) making nothing at all either for the
lawfulness of this Ceremony, though many ignorant superstitious persons are
deluded by them.

Most of these Authorities, I confess, are not cited or objected by the
opposites, but least they might object or pervert them hereafter, J have here
propounded and answered them by way of anticipation, and all others of this
nature, in answering these.

These are the only Authorities yet behind.
The first is that of the fifth General Counsel (Surius Tom. 2. p. 440. See
Bish. Mortons Institution of the Sacram: l. 7. c. 3. Sect. 3. p. 5. 15.) of
Constantinople, Actio. 1. where John the Patriarch speaks thus: Haec patienter
sustinete fratres, and prius A DOREMUS SANCTUM ALTAR, and post hoc do vobis
responsionem: Et cum intrassent ad Sanctum Altar, permansernnt clamantes;
Multi enim Imperarores, etc.

To which I answer: First, that this Patriarch speaks plainly of adoring the
Altar it self, not to or toward it, or of the Hostia upon it; Which our
bowers themselves confess to be Idolatrous.

Secondly, the ensewing words prove, that this adoring the Altar, was only a
going to the Altar there to pray, not a bowing to the Altar it self, of which
there is not a word, unless we will make this Patriarch a gross Idolater in
adoring the very Altar; From which the Lollards both in France and England were
so far averse, that they were called Pileati or Oeputials by the Papists,
(Antiqu: Eccles. Brit. 295.) ^o quod Altar praetergressi ex Pontificis
instituto pixide incluso pi^ei honorem non deferant: Because they would not
putt of their Caps to the Pix or Altar, when they passed by them. And if they
would not so much as move their Caps to them, much less did they bow their
knees or bodies to or toward them.

This president therefore, take it in one sense or other, will not advantage our
Nouellers, unless they will confess, that they adore the Altar it self, and
not God toward it, which makes them gross Idolaters.

The second Authority.
The second, is that of Cardinal Pooles Deputy visitours in Queen Mary's
bloody days, who among other Noble Acts in that visitation, decreed and
prescribed ( Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1781.) how many Pater Nosters and Ave
Mary's every man should say, when he should enter into the Church, and in his
entrance AFTER WHAT SORT HE SHOULD BOW HIMSELF TO THE ALTAR; And how to the
Master of the house.

This Authority, I confess Is full, for bowing not to the Hostia only, as the
passage in Bishop Morton would fable, but to the Altar it self.

But yet observe, first, when and by whom this Ceremony was prescribed: In
Queen Mary's days, by professed Papists, and Champions for the Church of Rome.

Secondly, to whom it was prescribed, only to Scholars in the Universitie, and
no others.

Thirdly, with what this Ceremony was attended; With Pater Nosters and Ave
Mary's.

Fourthly, to whom it is likewise extended; To the Master of each College, as
well as to the Altar, and that in the Church it self.

Therefore certainly they then reputed it no religious worship or divine
adoration, as most now esteem it.

Jf our Bishops and Novellers will take this for their pattern and president,
(some of them being not ashamed to magnify Queen Mary's, and depresse Queen
Eliz abeths day^^. See Dr. Dupra his preface to the University Statutes at
Oxford) I shall then conclude with Dr. Pocklington; (Sunday no Sabbath, p. 2.
48.) That they are lineally descended from S. Peter's Chair a^ Rome, and with a
late Jesuit, which I have not yet seen, but heard of; That the Jesuits need
write no more for the Sac^ifice of the Mass, for that we are writing for and
setting up Altars so fast in England, that they hope to see Mass there very
shortly (if these may have their will at least, and God and his Majesty prevent
it not with speed.) But if they are ashamed of such a president, let them with
like shame henceforth abandon such an Antichristinn Romish practice.

The third Authority.
The third, is that of Odo Bishop of Paris in a Synod about the year of our
Lord 1206. (Bochellus Decreta Ecclesiae Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 81, p. 558.)
Summa reverentia and honor maximus sacris Altaribus exhibeatur, and maxim ubi
sacro sanctum corpus Domini reservatur, and Missa celebratur.

A very probable Authority for this Ceremony: To which I answer: First, that
there is not one word in this Injunction concerning bowing to or toward the
Altar: And reverence, and great honor might be given to it, in such manner as
it is given to Churches, Fonts, Pulpits, Bibles, and the like, not by bowing to
or toward them, but by a reverend use and estimation of them free from
superstition on the one hand; And prophonesse on the other. So as this
Authority in truth proves nothing.

Secondly, admit it meant of bowing to Altars, yet it is to be given only to
sacred cons^crated Alta^s, not to others; But few or none of our Altars, not
one of our Lords (...) ables have yet been so solemnly consecrated, (the
reason why Papists refuse to bow to them.) (...) it makes (...) for any
genu^lectio^, (...), or Tables.

Thirdly, this honor and reverence is (...) to be given to those Altars only
whe^c the body of Christ is a ways (...) pix, and Mass celebrated: And th^^
(say (...) Papists in their private discourses: (...) of the (...) 46^.) is
that (...) reason why they bow (...) cause Christ's bo^y, is they imagine, ^s
the (...) as they bow not at all to or toward the body of Christ reserved on
it.

But our Altars, for ought I yet know (...), have no body of (...) on them.
Therefore they are not yet to be bowed unto or reveren^ed, by virtue of (...)
likewise ordaines, that (...) which l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 8^. p. 558. Which our
Bishops urge with much vigor.

As for the Synod of (...) An. 1583. though it decree many things concerning
Altars, (as that Therefore all of them stood not Easterly at the upper end of
the Chancle.
none shall stand under the Organs, Pulpit, or against the Piltars of the
Church, or over against the High Altar, or near the Church-dores, or any
unfitting place: That there shall not be above 7 Altars in any Church: That all
of them shall be of stone 7 handfuls and an half broad, and 8 handfuls long:
That i^ might have a fair Altar-cloth to cover it; That a Cisterne of water (
See Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 3. Tit. c. 33. 34. p. 362.) with two or
three towels near it for the Priest to wash h^s hands: ( defiled with their
unholy holy Sacrifice of the Mess:) That every Altar, where the Bishop shall
judge, it may conveniently be done, shall be rayled in with an Iron or stone
rail, or at least with a wooden on^, standing at least 7 hand-breathes
distance from the Altar, within which rail no Layman may enter whiles that
Mas^e is celebrating: That every Altar have its proper Ornaments and decent
furnature, as Altar-clothes, towels, a Crucifix in the mid lest, two
Candlest^ckes at the least, one placed at the right hand, another at the left,
which shall stand alvvayes on it, but especially on all Holy Days, unless the
Bishop at some times shall otherwise order.

Which Popish Constitution Bishop Wren with other of our Prelates and
Novellers now follow to an hairs breadth: though I say this Counsel decreed
all this and more, yet there is not a syllable in it concerning bowing to the
Altar; Therefore it seems to be a thing of no great request, even among the
Papists, who bow only to the Hostia on it, (B^sh^ M^tons I^stitution of the
Sacram: p. 463.) not to the Altar it self or toward it.

These I suppose are the prime Authorities that can be produced by any for
bowing to Altars; And all these if duly weighed are nothing, at least to sway
with any Protestant or sincere Christian.

As for bowing to or toward the Lords Table, (which I have proved not to be an
Altar, nor yet to be of right so styled, but only the Lords Table, as even in
times of superstation it has been st^^ed; Cent. Magd. Cent. 8. Col. 677. Cent.
9: Col. 243. Nic^ph: G^eg. f. 10. Bishop Mortons Institution of the Sacram^nt,
p. 303.) there is not one syllable in all my reading, nor I think in any man
else to be found.

If any demand now of me, how I prove, that the primitive Church and Coristia
is bowed not to Altars and Lords Tables, and therefore we ought not now to do
it?

I answer, that I can manifest it sundry ways: 1. Because I find no such
thing either in the Fat^e^s or Ecclesiastical Historians, where all the
Rights, and Ceremonies used in the Primitive Church, are accurately set down
and a^scribed, (See Cent Magd. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. cap. 6.
de Ceremoni^s and Ritibus Eccles.) so as this of all other had it been a thing
of that moment, and so much practiced as some now fable) would not have been
passed over in s^^^nce by them.

2. Because the Primitive Church and Chr^stians for 260 years after Christ or
more, had no Altars at all among them, as I have else where proved; Therefore
no bowing to Altars; And to Tables we never read that any bowed, no not in
times of Popery, when they so far disdained Lords-Tables that they
contemptuously styled them Profane Tables and Oysterboards. Acts and Monum.
Edit. ult. pars 3. p. 85. 95. 497.

3. Because the Christians in the Primitive Church for many hundred years
after Christ prohibited all Christian^ to bow their knees or kneel on any
Lordsday, and from Easter till Whitson-tide on any weekeday, in honor of
Christ's resurection, holding it an offense and sin so to do even in the act
of prayer and adoration it self; As, Tertullians words in his Book De Corona
Militis, witnesses; Die Dominica jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis
adorare.

And these subsequent Authorities do likewise manifest it; Justin Martyr.
Quaest. 115. Tertullian ad uxorem. Hierom Advers: Luceforianos de
Ecclesiasticis observationibus: c. 29. Radulphus Tungrenfis de Canonum
observantia. Proposit. 23. p. 458. A. Council: Nicaenum Can. 20. Carthag. 6.
Can. 20. Constantinop. 6. Can. 90. Turonense sub Carolo Magno Can. 37. Gratian
de Consecratione Did. 3. Origin Homil. 4. in Number. Cyprian Centur in Orat:
Domini. Centur. Magd. 3. c. 6. col. 135.

If then the Primitive Christians prayed and worshipped standing and deem^d it
a sin to kneel either in prayer or any other act of adoration or worship on
those days, the chief time of the^ Christian and public assembles,
especially for receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Ivo Carnot^^ses
Decretal. Pars 1. c. 25. 34.

It is certain therefore, that they used not in their Assemblies to bow their
bodies or knees to or toward High Altars or Lords Tables^ and as certain that
they kneeled not at the Sacrament, much less bovved their he^ds or knees at
the naming of Jesus, as some ignorant shallovv-pated Novellers now pretend and
give out, without proof or shaddovv of truth^

4. Because the Fathers condemned, as Idolatry, all b^wing to or toward
Images, or Idols, all worshipping (...) God, in, by, through, or toward them;
Holding div^^ (...) and adoration, a thing peculiar to God alone, (...)
immediately to God himself, without any such (...) ^elpes of Images or Altars,
condemning all relative w^rship, as derogatory to his Majesty: See the Homily
of the (...) of Idolatry: Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuits Challenge of
Images and praying to Saints.

Therefore this vvorsh^pping and adoring of God, in, by, through and toward
the Altar and Communion Table, is a thing utterly condemned by them, and to be
detested of all, which would have hardened the Gentiles in their Idolatry, for
which cause they suffered no Images in their Churches, and carefully (
Tertulliani Apologia) wiped of these Cauils of (...) Pagans, who s^^ndered them
with the worshipping of the Rising Sun, the Cross, an Asses head, and the
like; Concluding and prot^sting, that adoration and worship was due to God
alone, and that immediately.

5. Because, they reputed Christ only the true Altar, the only Altar in ^eaven
which they adored, all other Altars were Jewish or Pagan relics, abolished by
Christ's death, which had no Authority to warrant them in the Scripture;
Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c. 4. See Bishop Mortons Institution of the
Sacrament, Edit. 2. p. 415. 418. 461. 462. Therefore unfitt to be bowed to or
toward, or to be the objects of any relative worship, as most now make this
their bowing. Upon all which grounds, I conceive, I may safely assirm^, (at
least till our Novellers shall be able to prove the contrary) that the
Primitive Church and Christians, never used to bow to Altars or Lords Tables,
and that there are no Fathers nor Antiquities to just^fy this usage.

In the Description of the election of Maximilian to be King of the Romans in
the month of January, An. 1486. Rerum Germanicarum Scriptores Tom. 3. p. 22.
23. 24. 28. 29. 30. 32.

I (...), that (...) E^^perour in the Cathedral Church at F^ankf^^d (...) for
him to sit in; Ad Altaris (...); A the South Side of the Altar, where the
Gosple is usually read, higher then the other seats, just over against the
Altar; That the Archbishop of Mentz, the Duke of Bavar^^, the Count Palatine
of Rhene, Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and the Duke of Burgundy sat on
his left hand; The Arch bishop of Colen, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marqu^sse
of Brandenburge on the left hand; And the Archbishop of Treuier neither on the
right hand (...) the left, but just before the Kings face, before the Altar. On
the same side of the Quire sat diverse other Bishops. On the North-side of
the Altar sat many Bishops, Earls, Dukes, and Nobles.

All which in order went and offered at the Altar. After which the King came
and received his Crown at the High Altar. Mass being ended, the Princes
Elect^urs went to the Altar to swear, according to the tenor of the golden
Bull.

At last Maximilian, led by the Archbishops of Mentz and Colen, was lifted up
upon the Altar, and TE DEUM sung and played on the Organes. CIRCA ALTAR about
the Altar, at the sides, by the exalted King, stood the Archbishop of Colen
and Mentz, and before his face stood the Archbishop of Treuier, the other
Princes accompaning and standing about them.

By which it is evident the High Altar at Frankford at the time of this
Coronation stood not Altarwise, against the East-wall of the Quire, for the
King sitting on the South Side of it, just over against the Altar, and these 5
great Princes sitting in distinct seats at his right hand in state, the Altar
was at least 5 seats distance from the East-wall, and stood so, that the
Archbishops, Princes and Nobles when the Emperor was elevated on it, stood
round about it, and him, at the time of this royal solemnity.

The Heathen Altars likewise stood not against the East-wall of the Quire, as
appears by Paulus in Curculione: Nur^ Ara veneris haec est ANTE horum fores.
Ovid. Motamorph. l. 10. Ante fores horum stabat Iovis hospitis Ara. Julius
Caesar Bullingerus de Theatro l. 1. c. 22. p. 256. Latini Comae^i Aram in
PROSCENIO CONSTITUUNT in Apolonis honorem, etc. Vide ibid.

So that the placing of Altars against the East-wall, is but a late Novelty,
even among the Papists themselves, and so likewise this bowing to or toward
the Altar; For J find no mention of it in the exact Description of this
Solemnity.

Only I read, that when Maximilian was crowned at Aken the 31. day of March
following, they went into the Quire to the High Altar, and there heard Mass.
Then the 3. day of April he offered at the Altar of the Virgin Mary. That after
some Hymns sung, and collects read in the Quire: Rex prostravit se super
tapetum ad gradus Altaris totus in longum: The King prosttated himself at the
steps of the Altar upon a Carpet, lying all along upon it. And the Archbishop
of Colen, super ^um sic proctratum legit, reads over him thus prostrate, Lord
save the King, with other two Collects. ( Erge, we must thus prostrate our
selves when we come in (...) of the Church, is no good argument it being a
Ceremony (...) for the King at his Coronation, not to others, and a (...) not
to or toward the Altars, but at the steps of it, to have an Archbishop read a
prayer over him, and some special (...).) After which he sat down in a
Royal Seat before, the Altar, the Archbishop of Mentz sitting on his right
hand, and Treuier on the left; Then these Bishops took of the Kings upper
garment, and leading him between them, ante Altar prostratu^in modum Crucis,
he prostrated himself in form of a Cross before the Altar, the Archbishop
of Colen saying diverse prayers ( there specified) over him, and the Letanie.
The Letanie ended, the Archbishop of Colen, standing before the Altar, with
his Pastoral staff in his hand, asked of the King six Questions, the last
whereof was this; Will thou reverently exhibit due subjection and faith to the
most holy Father and Lord in Christ the Pope of Rome, and to the holy Church of
Rome? ( The Popes were anciently sworn to the Emperor, and elected by him,
now they must swear to the Pope, and be chosen by him and his three.
Archbishop Electours, who are still at his devotion. See Gratian Distinctio.
69. and Dr. Crakenthorpe of the Popes temporal Monarchy, cap. 1. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7. 8.) After which Questions he was led by the Archbishops of Mentz and
Trevler to the Altar, and putting two of the fingers of his right hand on the
Altar; Said, I will, and J shall faithfully perform all the premises as far
as God by his divine assistance shall enable me, and the prayers of faithful
Christians shall assist me: So help me God and all his Saints.

Which done, these Bishops brought him back before the Altar. After that
they lead him again to the Altar, qui prostravit se ad terram in longum, and
then the Archbishop of Colen read a blessing and prayer or two over him;
Which done, they anointed him in several places; And (...) returning before
the Altar, casting himself down in manner of a Cross, the Arch-B^shop of
Colen read other prayers over him. Then they girt him with a sword; After
that, they set the Crown on his head with several Collects; then leading them
again to the Altar, he laid both his hands on the Altar, and made this
profession among other things in the vulgar tongue; ( Which in truth made him a
s^ave both to the Pope and Prelates, rather then a King:) I will yield due and
Canonical honor to the holy Bishop and Church of Rome, and to the other
Bish^ps and Churches: These things likewise which have been given and conferred
by Kings and Emperors to churches or Ecclesiastical persons, I will
inviolably preserve and cause to be preserved by them, the Lord Jesus Christ
assisting me.

By which oath and practice the Emperors and Kings of the Romans are made
Vass^les to the Pope and Prelates, their hands being thereby tied from the
invading any of their exorbitant usurped Privileges or pos^^ssions; A he^^sh
policy worthy observation. Anno Dum. 1518. Jacobi Manti^ Cardi^alat us. Alberti
Epise: Mogunt: Rerum Germ: Scriptores. Tom. 2. p. 399.

When Albertus Arch. Bishop of M^ntz was made a Cardinal; he tame up to the
High Altar, and there kneeling down before it on both his knees, the Popes
Legate graced him with a red hats, the badge of this h^s dignity which he put
upon his head: He kneeling down before the Altar till the song of S. Augustins
and S. Ambrose was sung.

So An^o 1066. Ho^eden Annql: pars prior p. 447. J read, that King Herro^d, at
the celebration of the Mass at Westminster; Ante Altar in Oratione prostratus
jaceret, lay prostrate before the Altar in prayer.

When our King Richard the first was to be crowned (Houeden Annal: pars
poster^or: p. 656. 657. 739.) he came tothe Altar before the Archbishops,
Bishops, Clergy, and People, and kneeling down on his knees before the Altar,
took the usual Coronation Oath, upon the Euangeli^ts and (...) After which,
(...) in the Archbishop an (...) And taking the Crown from the Altar, put it
(...) his ^and. So at his second Coronation, he was led into the Cathedral
Church of S. Swithim at Winchester (...), even unto the Altar, and ibi flexis
genubus, and (...) with bended knees, devoutly received a benediction from
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and from thence was ladde to his Throne.

I read also, that Hugh Abbot of Cluney, and Hilde^^^^^ whiles he was an
Archdeacon riding together, en^^^^^ into a Country-Church, Ante Aram
injunctis, lateribus (...) in multam horam protracta Oratione; Cast themselves
down before the Altar one by the others side, and there prayed along time.
Ma^me^^^rie de Gestis Regum Angl: lib. ^. p. 10^.

Thus the Monks of Glastenbury (when their Abbot ^^^^^^ine fel^ at variance
with them, and chased them with (...) men into ^he Church) sancto Altari
miserius fuas appl^^^^^^^, Bewailed th^is mise^ies, to wit, at the holy Altar,
where the Abbot slew two, and wounded foureteen of them; Yea the Abbot himself
with a spear (says Houeden, Annal: pars prior, p. 456. 460.) thrust one of
the Monks, through the body, and slew him, Sacrum Amplexar^^^ Alt^^^^,
embracing the holy Altar in his arms; Alium ad Altaris crepidinem sagit^is
Confossum necauit.

But that any of these Kings, Prelates, or Monks bowed their bodies to or
toward the Altar at their entering in, passing by or repairing to the Altar, or
coming in, or going out of the Church, as we do now, I find not one syllable
in these Histories which certainly would not have pretermi^ted it, had it been
then in common use.

Indeed, I read in Aeneas Picalomineus, Cardinal of Sens, (Europes status sub
Frederico tertio Imp. c. 19. 63.) that Vla. (...) King of Poland after his
conversion from Paganism to ^^ristianity; In^er equitandum quotiescunque
turres Ecclesiarum inspe^^t, detracto pileo, caput in^linavit; Deum (qui
coleretur in Ecclesia) veneratus: When he did ride abroad, as often as he beheld
the Towers, ^he pulled of his hat, and bowed his head, worshipping God, who is
adored in the Church: But that he did thus, when he saw the Altar or
^^rds-Table, I find not, had he used any such Ceremony, this Cardinal
doubtless would have recorded the one as well as the other.

If our Altar-worshippers will press or imitate his example, then they must
bow and worship toward our Churches-steeples, when they see them, (for which
they may have some color from David's worshipping, Psalm. 5. 7. Psalm. 138. 2.
and Daniels praying toward the Temple, Dan. 6. 10.) not toward the Altar or
Table.

Now, most of our Churches towers and steeples stind, either at the west end or
in the midst of the Churches, few or none of them at the Eist-end, quite
opposi^e to their Altars and Tables situation; This president therefore will
manifestly overthrow their bowing to, and worshipping toward the Altar, and
the East, which they now so much contest for.

As for these mentioned prostrations, and kneelings down at or before the
Altar only to pray, or to receive a Crown or Cardinals hat, without any
relation to the Altars, as they were for these special ends and purposes, not
out of any respect to the Altar; So they warrant not our genuflexion or
inclination of our bodies toward, or to the Altar or Table, upon reasons
drawn from the Altar or Table, or for other purposes, and upon other occasions
then these.

Besides, this kneeling and prostration of theirs was only at and before
consecrated Altars, not at or before Lords Tables or unhallowed Altars.

But few of our High Altars are yet solemnly dedicated by our Prelates,
neither can they, unless they be removed further from the wall, the Bishop
being to go 7 times about the Altar, when he consecrates it; As I have proved
out of Durandus, Rat: Divinarum, l. 1.

And admit they are thus hallowed, yet being consecrated not by a power
derived immediately from the Pope of Rome, but by such as are yet counted
Schismati^kes by him, (though Bishop White in his Epistle Dedicatorie to his
late Treatise of the Sabbath, be very angry with those^, who repute, or st^^y^
us Schismatics from the Roman Church at this day, because most, but those whom
he there styles Puritanes, `Presb^te^ians, etc. are perfectly reconciled to
it,) they are so ^arre from being adored and bowed to, that the Papists and
Popi^^ly affected (the only men who are likely to how to or toward them) will
think them fitter to be demolished:

For Anno 1177, in the Council of Venice, under Pope Alexander, where the
three Anti-Popes, Victor, Paschall, and (...) were degraded; ( See Houeden
Annal: pars posterior page 568^) It was decreed among other things: That all
the Altars dedicated by those Anti-Popes, or their Ordinaries, should be
demolisheds; Which was done accordingly: Yea Christian Archbishop of Mentz,
burnt his Bull, with his own hands received from Pope Paschall, in the
presence of Pope Alexander, receiving a new Bull from him.

So Geeffry Plantaginet Archbishop of York ( See Houeden Annal: pars
posterior p. 713.) overturned all the Altars, brake all the Chalices, that Hugh
Bishop of Durham had celebrated at or used, or any other Priest in his
presence, after his excommunication by him.

Our High Altars therefore, by the same reason, being not consecrated at all,
or at least by Schismatickes or Excommunicate persons (if not by the sentence
of the Church of Rome, yet by the express determination of the 12 Canon 1603.
(which together with the stature of 1. Eliz. c. 2. condemns the consecrating
of, and bowing to Altars by necessary consequence, with all other our late
Innovation, excommunicating all those ips^ facto, that neither prescribe or
submitt unto them,) are rather to be broken down, removed, abolished, as they
were both in King Edw. the 6. and Queen Elizabeth's days, then they bowed to,
or adored; Since as Gulielmus Sturkius observes ( Antiquit Co^vinalium, l. 2.
6. 16. P. 209.) Christ, Apostplorum, and primitivae Ecclesiae exemplo magis
videntur quadrare mensae, quam Altaria: Verissimis illis impletis (ait)
legalibusi, and peracto in cruce sacrificio per Christum, earn hic rationem
Eccl^siae, quamolim Synagogae instituit. Mensam dedit in qua epuletur, non
autem in qua offeretur victima: Nec Sac^rdos consecravit, qui offerent
sacrific^rentque, sed Ministrosdedit, quiepul^m sacrum distribuer^^^. Arae,
fixae, and statuae, pecudibus mactandis, and ignibus fo^end is magis sont
Idoneae. Christum in Mensa sacrosanctum suum conviu^um primo instituis^e, accum
charis^^^nis suis discipulis celebras^e, Evangelica historia testatur. Hanc
Mensa^ auro purissimo coopertam, atque infinitis propemodum ge^mis ornatam, ex
Taletio occupatam, Musem Ara^um D^cem se^um reportasse ^estatur Leo Affcicanus,
l. 5. c. 79. Jn pri^itiva quoque Ecclesia mensarum in celebratione Coenae
Dominicaeusum, cum alium literarum monumenta, tum il^a Nicenae Synodi verba
testantur. Jn divina MENSA ne ^umiliter intenti simus, ad propositum panem, etc.

Thus Sturkius who at large pieades for the use and convenience of religious
and pious Dis^ourses, conferences, the reading and talking of Scripture and
divine things at Feasts and Christian Assemblies, both from the Example of
Christ, the Fathers, and Heathen Philosophers, Antiqu: Convivalium, l. 3. c.
1^. fol. 382. 383.

In direct opposition to Bishops Wrens new Visitation-Articles to the contrary.
Whom I desire his worship, and all those profane ones of his opinion, to read
at their best leisure, together with his other notable passages against the
pr^phanation of the Lords day; by Feasting, Dancing. Ales, Revels, (...) and
other pastimes, ( Epist. Dedicat: Antiqu: Connival: l. 1. c. 16. fol. 36. c.
23. fol. 67. c. 25. fol. 74. 75. c. 33. f. 133. to 138. and l. 3. c. 2l. 22.)
so much contested for now of late; All which the primitive Christians
abandoned, as well as Altars.

But though these Novellers have neither Statute. Canon, Scripture, nor
Antiquity for this new invented Ceremony, yet doub^l^sse being reasonable
creatures, they must have some reasons for it. True, they think they have so;
But if their reasons be but examined, they are in truth mere lying (...)
crackbrainde fantasies of their own invention, not warranted by any Scripture,
or registered in any Father, or Author, no^ known to Durandus, (See Rationale
Divinorum (...).) or Mirologus, (See De Divinis Offici^s l^b.) or any other
Romanists, who have taken upon them to give a reason for every one of their
Ceremonies, though never so superstitious or ridiculous.

If any desire to know their Reasons, they are these: 1. First, they say, they
do and must bow to or toward the High-Altar and Lords-Table, because it is
the place of Christ's special presence upon Earth, and his Chair of estate
wherein he (...). See Giles Widows his Lawless kneelesse Schismatic
Puri^^^^^, p. ^9. Shelfords Sermon of Gods house, p. 2. 4. 18. 19. 20. Reeve
his Exposition of the Catechism in the Common-Prayer-Booke, near the end.

Which reason I have already proved falce. Only I shall demand these few
Questions of them:

I. QVESTION. By what Scriptures or Fathers they can make good this
proposition; That the High-Altar or Lords-Table is the special place of Gods
presence upon Earth, and his Chair of state, wherein (...)?

II. QVESTION. What they mean by this special presence, whether his
corporal, or his divine presence?

If his corporal, that implies, first, a Transubstantiation of the
Sacramental bread and wine into the very body and blood of Christ.

Secondly, a perpetual reservation of the consecrated bread thus
transubstantiated into Christ's body on the Altar and Lords-Table, (else the
reason holds not, but only at the time when the Sacrament is administered, and
the consecrated bread and wine is standing on the Table; And so they ought them
only to bow to or toward the Altar; Not at other times when there is no
Sacrament, ( Bishop Mortons I^stitution of the Sacrament p: 463.) as now they
do.)

Thirdly, it implies, a denial of the Scriptures and Articles of the Creed,
which assure us, That Christ in his humane nature and corporal presence is
wholly ass^nded into Heaven; That he has quite lest the world, and is gone to
his Father^; That he is set down at his Fathers own right hand; That he is
no more corporally present upon Earth; That he cannot be corporally in many
places at once, and never was so that we find in the Scripture; That the
Heavens must contain him until his second coming to judgment: And the like,
Acts 3. 21. cap. 1. 10. 11. John 14. 2. 3. 19. c. 16. 28. c. 17. 11. 12. c. 13.
1. 1. Pet. 3. 22. Heb. 10. 12. cap. 12. 2.

And it is point-blancke against the Homilies, Articles, Writers and
established doctrine of the Church of England, to which these Rebellious sons
of Belial have subscribed.

If they mean only Christ's Spiritual presence, that certainly is as much at
the Font, the Pulpit, the Bible, the Common-Prayer-Booke, as on the Table, as
much in the whole Church and Quire, as in all, or any of these standing in
them; Yea much more in every pore Christians heart and soul the true Temples
of God, wherein Christ and his spirit dwell by faith; Ephes^ 3. 17. c. 2. 21.
1. Cor. 6. 19. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 2. 20.

Therefore if this reason hold firm they must bow alike to or toward all and
every of these, as well, and as often as to the Table or Altar.

III. QVESTION. Admit the Preposition true, I would demand of them, how they
can prove this their assertion to be truly Orthodox; That men ought to bow and
worship to and toward the place of Christ's special presence? What Scripture,
Council, or Father has taught them any such Doctrine? Certainly if this be
good Divinity, then when ever they see the Pulpit, Bible, Font, Church, or any
pious Saint of God though never so pore, they must for sooth bow (...) the^,
because Christ is specially present in them, then they must no sooner look up
to Heaven, but they must bow their knees and bodies to it, for that is Gods
Throne, Christ's Chair of Estate. indeed, and the place of their special
residence, by the Scriptures express resolution: Yea then when ever they see
the Paten or Chalice, which immediately contain the Bread and Wine, they must
bow to them, because they are the place of Christ's special presence, rather
then the Table or Altar, on which those vessels which contain the Sacrament
only stand.

IV. QVESTION. Jf this reason be folid, I would then demand but this Question,
whether Christ be not more immediately, really, and spiritually present (yea
and corporally too, if they hold any such presence in the S^crament, as they
seem to do,) in the Consecrated B^ead and Wine, then in the Chalice or Cup,
or on the Table or Altar it self? If so, (as all must necessarily grant) then
it will inevitably follow from this reason, that they must much more adore and
bow to the consecrated bread and wine, then either to the Altar or Table.

If so, then I would demand of them:

First, what is the reason they bow only to the Altar or Table, not to the
consecrated bread and wine? Or in case they answer that they bow to both; How
their bowing to the bread and wine differs from the Papists adoration of them,
which our Church condemns as most gross Idolatry?

Secondly, What is the cause why they bow to the Altar or Table, before the
bread and wine are consecrated, when Christ certainly is not there present, in
that manner as they fancy, and yet bow not to the bread and wine after
consecration, when Christ is specially present in them?

Thirdly, why many of them at the administration of the Sacrament, when as they
have the bread and wine in their hands, bow down to the ground almost, as they
come from, pass by, or go to the Table or Altar, out of their reverence and
respect to the Table and Altar, and yet bow not at all to the consecrated bread
and wine, which they hold then in their hands?

Fourthly, whether bowing to and toward the Altar or Table so frequently and
devoutly (as they deem it) when there is no Sacramental bread and wine upon
it, and at the time of the Sacrament, even when they hold the Sacrament in
their h^nds, and their not bowing to or toward, and adoring of the Sacrament
it self (which is far more ho^ourable then either the Table or Altar, which
serve only for its consecration and distribution, and may put them more
immediately in mind of Christ) be not an advancing and a preferring of the
Table and Altar, not only before the Pulpit, the Fo^t, the Bible, the
Common Prayer Book, the Paten and the Chalice themselves, but likewise before
the consecrated bread and wine, the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, and the Lord
Christ himself, to whom they give no such congies, such solemn adoration,
reverence, genuflexion, honor and respect?

If so, then it is almost execrable and ab^minable; Jf not, then let them
inform me; How that which is least bowed to, worshipped or adored, is most
reverenced and respected, then that which is not bowed to or honored with any
such genuflection; Or how themselves can preach and (...), that the name Jesus
is more honorable, venerable, great and glorious then any other of our
Saviors ^ames, because it is and ought to be most cringed, capped and bowed to
of all others? Till all these Quest^ons are resolved, J shall desire them to
suspend this their capital reason.

The 2 Reason.
The second reason for this Ceremony is; Because the Altar and Table are
Christ's mercy-seate, and the memory of the everlasting Sacrifice, there made
and presented to the Trintry. So Mr. Sermon of Gods (...), p. 2 4 19.
Shelford Priest, here turned Masse-Preist to present the memory of the
everlasting Sacrifice to the holy Trinity (opened so to Christ himself that
made it, as if he himself had forgotten it, or were not able of himself to
present its memory to his Father, without a Masse-Preists help) which Law
Giles Widows thus seconds. The La^lesse kneelesse Schismatic Puritan. p.
34. 89.
The Church is the place of Gods presence; The Communion Table the Chair of
State of the Lord Jesus, and his theifest place of presence in our Church:
Where his PRIESTS SACRIFICE THE LORDS SUPPER to reconcile us to God, offended
with our daily sins.

Where we sind a resolution of my first Question; What is the end of our
Novellers writing, preaching and contesting for altars and Priests, to wit,
that we may have a Sacrifice again. And what Sacrifice is that?

The Sacrifice of the Lords Supper faith, Page 34.
Widows; The Sacrament or Sacrifice of the Altar, says She ford, page 2. 19.
And what kind of Sacrifice is this? A commemorative w^^^e Sh^^ford and the
Colier. And no other but so? Yea quoth Widows a propitiatory sacrifice
likewise, to reconcile us to God, offended with our daily sins.

And so we have now not only Altars and Priests, but the Sacrifice of the Mass
it self in its full latitude, both as Commemorative and Propitiatory in point
of doctrine, in Books la^ely printed by Authority, and not yet called in; How
soon we may have all of them (as we have Altars Priests and a commemorative
Sacrifice too in many places) in point of practice, I leave to others to
determine; This being made the reason why we bow to Tables and Altars, because
they are Christ's mercy seat, and the memory of the everlasting sacrifice, etc.
is there made and presented to the Trinity.

This reason I have sufficiently disproved already in proving the Table and
Altar, to be no mercy Seat, and the Lords Supper no Sacrifice Commemorative or
Propitiatory.

I shall therefore first of all desire them to prove what they thus affir^e,
both by Scripture and reason.

Secondly, when they have done this, then to make this appear in like manner by
Scripture or solid arguments drawn from it, or at least by Fathers and
Councels, that Christians are bound to bow to Christ's mercy seat, or to the
place where the memory of his Sacrifice is offered; The Jews never doing it to
the one, nor the Primitive Churches to the other. Till this be done I shall
demurre upon this Reason.

The third Reason.
The 3. Reason is this; The lawless knee less Puritan, p. 89.
The Tible and Altar are a sign of the place where our Savior was most
dishonored and c^ucified; Therefore we must bow unto them. So Giles Widows
reasons in a Book licensed at Oxford by some learned D^ctours.

I answer: First, that this is a plain untruth, for they are neither a sign
of Jerusalem, Golgatha, the High-Preist hall or the Cross.

Secondly, if a truth, yet unable to VVarrant this Ce^^monie; For what
Scripture, reason or Author is there to just fie, that men ought to bow at the
sign of the place where our Savior was despised dishonored and crucified.

Thirdly, if this reason be good, then these Novellers must bow at and to the
signs of Jerusalem which hang up in every City, or to, or toward these
Tavern Posts (which these bowers haunt much night and day, to make them nod,
bow and reele the better to their Altars) where the sign of Jerusalem hangs;
For they are properly the sign of the place where our Savior was most
despised and crucified then the Table or Altar: Then likewise they must bow to
every Map of Jerusalem, of the holy Land, for they are signs of that place
too; Much more to Jerusalem and Golgatha themselves, to which I wish these
Cringers would all travel in pilgrimage, that so they might have the sight of
the place it self to encourage them in this their bowing, which is better and
more moving then the bare sign of it.

Fourthly, this perchance may make something for the adoring of Crucifixes and
the Cross, because though they are no signs of the place where Christ was
despised and crucified, yet they are signs of that on which he was despised
and crucified, whereas the Table or Altar is a sign of neither. So that the
Papists, if any, shall give him thanks for this reason.

The fourth Reason.
A fourth reason they produce in print is this: Let us learn of our Mother
C^urches, for there our reverend Fathers the Prelates and others make there
reverence to God on this wise both at their entry and return. Wherefore to
follow their good and holy pattern, we also are to do the like, both at our
first coming in to Gods house, and at our going out, so Shelford in his Sermon
of Gods house, p. 20. and the Coal too, p. 1. 2. 27. 64.

And if I may judge, this is the chief, if not the sole reason, why most men
use this Ceremony. The Archbishops both do and practice it for reasons best
known to themselves; and the Prebends, Deanes and Cathedral men with other
Ministers and C^rates in City, Court and Country, to imitate and please the
Bishops, whose precepts and examples all are to obey and follow without any
examination or demurre (as these writers, to wit, the Colier in his C^ale,
page 2. and Reeves in his Exposition of the Catechism in the
Common-prayer-B^oke Dogmatize) else we shall soon find a speedy dissolution
both of church and State.

To this Reason then I answer: First, that Gods written Law, not our Prelates
examples, no further th^^ warranted by Gods word, Cor. 11. 1. is the only rule
both of Minsters and peoples obedience in matters of faith; Gal. 6. 16. Psalm.
119. 9. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

And it together with the the Laws of the Realm, and Canons confirmed by Acts
of Parliament, (of which fort there are none now extant) the only rule for them
to follow in matters of Ceremony.

Since therefore this bowing is neither commanded by Gods Law, nor any Stat^te
or Canon confirmed by Parliament, and the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. expressly
prohibits all Rites and Ceremonies but such as are prescribed by Parliament, in
the Book of Common Prayer, (as this is not) the Bishops practice therefore
or Cathedral usage, are no good arguments to persuade the practice of it.

Secondly, God forbid, that the Bishops practice should be the rules of men's
obedience, many of them living and doing things quite contrary to Christ's
precepts in all things. Christ prohibites them both to be or called Gracious
Lords, Mat. 20. 25. 26. L^ke 22. 25. 26. 1 Pet. 5. 1. 23. And they desire both
to be Lords, and to be so styled of all men, and style themselves so too; He
prohibits them all civil temporal Offices, Jurisdiction and Dominion, Bishop
White his Title to his Treatise of the Sabbath, and Bishop Morton in his
Institution of the Sacrament Edit. 2.
they ingrosse all into their hands. He would have them be content only with
one sword, Ephesians. 6. 17. to wit, of the spirit, the word of God, and they in
despite of him will not only challenge and possess, but use and abuse both. He
commands them to be lowly and humble, Matthew. 11. 29. Col. 3. 12. And they
studdy nothing else but to be pround and lofty; He enjoynes them to be
pitiful and merciful, even as he is merciful, Col. 2. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 31.
32. Luke 6. 36. And they show themselves altogether pitiless and cruel. He
wills them to be 1 Timothy 3. 2. to 9. Tit. 1. 5. to 11. Ephesians. 4 31. 32. 1 Pet. 1.
15 16. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 3.
patient, and yet who more choleric and angry? to be meek and gentle, yet
who more insolent and inhumaine? To be ready to pardon and forgive; And yet who
so dispitefull, malicious or revengfull? To be holy in all manner of
conversation even as he is holy; And yet who so profane or in heart, in life?
So malignant against purity, holiness, and holy men as they? To be apt to
teach, and yet who more unfitt or unwilling to preach then they? To preach the
word in season and out of season, and that every day; Vnde necesse est in
singules, ut ita dicam dies sementum facere, ut ipsa saltem assiduitate
doctrinae, sermonem auditorum animi retinere possint. S. Chrysestom: l. 6. de
sacer: Tom. 5. Col. 471. Yet they will neither do it themselves, and silence
all others who desire to do it; Having made almost a famine of Gods Word,
throughout out the Land, Amos 8. 11. He presoribes them; to ^sed his flock, (
Acts 20. 28. Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17. Ezech. 36. 6. to 17. Ioh. 10. 1. etc. Ia. 40.
1. 2.) and they starve them; To seek his wandering sheep, and they run from
and look not after them; To be Pastors to them, yet who such thieves and
mu^therers, who not only fleece, but kill, sley, devour, and suck the very
blood of their sheep? To comfort his people, and speak comfortably to his
inheritance, yet who such causes of grief, vexation, oppression, tears, and
anguish of heart unto them, as they? He commands them to be blameless, yet
who more ^candalous and blameworthy? Not selfewilled; Yet who so violont,
wilful and head strong in all their undertakings? Not soon angry, yet who
more touchie or outrageous? No strikers; Yet who strike more then they, and
that with both Swords, with which they lay on like mad men almost in every
place? Not given to filthy lucre, yet who more griping and covetous? Not given
to wine, yet who love or follow it more then they? Sober; Yet who so Incivill?
Just; Yet who unjust, oppressive, or treacherous both in word and deed.
Temperaie; Yet who more immoderate in all kind of pomp and luxury? Ruling
well their own houses; Yet what Bucer Enarrat. in Psalm. 92
houses or servants so unruly, disorderly, irreligious or profane as theirs?
Men having a good report of all men; Quod si Pontifices nolunt de se turpia
narrari, aut nefaria, nihil ejusmodi faciant: aut cum fecerint, no^ putent
caipsa ita latere, ut and sciri and posteris narrari nequeant. Papir. Massa:
Yet who so ill reported of as they? Men holaing fast the faithful word, as
they have been taught; Yet who such Apostates from the truth, and revolters
from the established doctrine of the Church, as they? Men able and williug by
sound doctrine both to exhort and convince the gainesayers; Yet who so
unwilling (if not unable) to do it, as many of them?

God forbid. then that their example should be our precedents. J read in our
learned Bale (Scriptorum Brit. Cent. 9. c. 97. p. 756. See Bishop Whites
Orthodox paragr. 12. p. 63.) in the life of John White Bishop of Winchester,
whom he styles Antichristi Romani terrificus Minister, Principum illusor,
animorum carnifex, duplex and periurus, hypocrita, qui rostris and unguibus in
regno Angliae restituere conatur, omnes Antichristi Rom^ni tyranides,
idololatrias, faetida, and impia dognita universa; That as he changed his
religion like a Weather-cocke with the times, so he had this disticke bestowed
upon him for his pains, by John Parkhurst.

Candidus es recte, nec candidus es, Rogitas cur?
Nomine candidus es, Moribus niger es.
And may we not now say the like of some of our Candid Prelates, who like the
Polypus change their color with the Climate, and can shift themselves out of
one color into another at their pleasure, especially Black and White; Being
sometimes all white in there surplesles, anon all black in their gowns, at
other times speckled black and white in their Rotchets, wearing their
Shirt-sleeves (as a Mr. Badgers young daughters speech to Bis^ Laud who asked
him: Why he wore his shirtsleeves upon the top of his cloths
Child once ignorantly to^d a Bishop) over their gowne-sleeves.

Those who can thus easily change their garments from white to black, etc. can
as easily alter their religion; As some of their Predic^ssours have done.
Bishop Pilkington in his Exposition upon Aggeus, chap. 1. verse 9. tells us of
some, Bishops here in England in Queen Mary's days, (which some begin to
magnify) who in one years space confirmed the p^eaching of the Gospel of
Christ, and pure Ministering of Gods Sacraments, and the same men within the
same year, with the same impudent mouths and blasphemous tongues brought in
the Pope, set up Jdols, banished Christ and his holy Supper, appointed for all
men that will to receive it together, took way his holy Gospel, Table and
Sacraments, and placed by their Authority the Mass for one shaveling to eat
up all, and bless the people with empty Chalice, and burned his Preachers to
fill their bellies.

I cannot say that some of our Bishops, have in as short a time done the like,
or as much as this comes to; Only this I dare say of some of them: See the
Orthodox faith, etc. in answer to a Popish Treatise, entitled WHITE DIED BLACK
Dr. of Divinity, Deane of Carlisle then, now Bishop of Ely, to compare his and
his brothers Doctrines and P^sitions there defended, with these since mentioned
in his last Treatise, and in the High Commission Court.
Qui color Albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo. That they have in a short time
altered their color for the worse, and (like the Albanes of whom Not. Hist. l.
7. c. 2. Herodotus: l. 2.
Plinic writes) grown black in their old age, when as they were white in their
youth, contrary to the custom of all other people.

I shall therefore deny this reason to be of force, and conclude with John
Balaeus, Cent. 9. c. 97.
Parkhurst verses to England: Anglia furcatis nimium ne fidito mitris,
Dic rogo, number serus sum tibi praemonitur?


The fifth Reason.
The fifth reason, is that I find in the learned and reverend Prelate, Dr.
Thomas Morton Bishop of Durham, in his Institution of the Sacrament. Edit. 2.
London 1635. l. 6. c. 5. Sect. 15. p. 463. where I read thus. The like
difference may be discerned between your manner of reverence in bowing toward
the Altar for Adoration of the Eucharist only, and ours in bowing, as well when
there is no Eucharist on the Table, as when there is, which is not to the Table
of the Lord, but to the Lord of the Table, to testify the Communion of all the
faithful Communicants there at, even as the people of God did, in adoring
before the Arc, his footstool. Ps. 99. 5. and 1. Chor. 28. 2.

As Daniels bowing at prayer in C^ald^a, looking toward, the temple at
Jerusalem, where the Temple of Gods worship was, Dan. 6. 10. And as David would
be known to have done, Ps. 5. 7. I will worship toward the holy Temple. Which
words again are repeated for failing. Lib. 7. cap. 9. Sect: 2. Page 551.

I ANSWER. That I can hardly believe, that this addition to the second is
Bishop Mortons own, but a trick of Legerdemaine, thrust in by some other,
without his privity, with purpose to blemish this incomparable piece of his,
and draw a scandal upon him.

My Reasons are three. First, because his judgment and practice formerly to my
knowledge, have been otherwise in this particular, and likewise in the point of
bowing at the naming of Jesus; And not above three months before this second
Edition published, ^e writ a letter to Dr. Daniel Featly, wherein he declared
his judgment both against Altars, and placing of Lords Tables Altar-wise, and
this Ceremony of bowing to or toward them.

Therefore I cannot belive his judgment and practice so soon altered, unless
there be such infection in Bishops Rotchets, as to make them all turne-coates,
as it has made most of them.

Secondly, because the phrase and style are different from his savouring rather
of some Disciple of Sheldfords, or of Bishop Just like his bowing not to the
name of Jesus, but to the Sense; Sermon. on Phil. 2. 9. 10. 11.
Andrews streine, then his, as the invention, not to the Table, but to the
Lord of the Table, etc. evidenceth.

Thirdly, because it is a contradiction to what himself professedly maintains
in other places against the Papists, and in the words immediately foregoing, as
appears by these two particulars:

First, the Bishop in the words immediately preceding this addition, writes thus:

Page 462
That the Table of the Lord anciently stood IN THE MIDST OF THE CHANCLE, so
that they might COMPASS IT ROUND: This he proves in the marge^t by Eusebius
Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c. 4. Forecited: By Coccius. Tom. 2. Tract. de Altar; Out
of Athanasius in the life of Antonie, who writes thus: Altar, Domini multorum
multitudine CIRCUMDATUM. By Chrysostom: l. 6. de Sacerdotio. (...): where the
Priests are said to stand in a circle about the Altar: By Dionysius Areopogita:
Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 3. Pontifex quidem in MEDIO ALTARI col^ocatur: CIR
CUNSTANT autem eum Soli cum Sacerdotibus Ministri Selecti: By Augustine de
verbis Domini Sermo. 46. Mensa ipsius est illa in MEDIO constituta: Concluding
thus.

These ^estimonies verify the same assertion of Dr., Fulke against Gregory
Morton, c. 17. The Table stood so, that men might stand ROUND. ABOUT IT. Then
comes in this addition, which begins thus: All this notwithstanding, you are
not to think that we do hereby to oppose the Appellation of Priest and
Altar, or yet the new situa^ion thereof in our Church as convenient, and for
order more decent, etc. Where the Bishop is made to thwart both himself and
the Primtive Church, in maintaining the placing of Lords-Tables Altar-wise
against the East End of the Church to be for use as convenient, and for order
more decent, then the situation of them in the midst. A thing which the Bishop
(who throughout his Book pleades only for Antiquity against Popish Noveltie)
would never do. Since in the very Table of his Booke^, ^he has this
Reference: It was so anciently placed as to stand round about it.

And here by the way. I cannot but observe the desperate impudency and
sottish^es of the times wherein we live.

Bishop Jewel and Dr. Fulke from the forecited Authorities in Queen Elizabeth
days, pr^ved and affirmed that Communion-Tables in the primitive Church stood
in the Midst of the Quire or Chancle, so as-men might stand round about them.

Bishop Morton here, in his learned Book, from the same authorities positive
affirms the like, and that in both the authorized Editions of his Book. The
first An. 1631. and the second Edition. Anno 1635.

Yet notwithstanding these learned Prelates judgments in their most judicious
eleberate writings, so often and so newly printed, with public approbation, Dr.
Pocklington in his Sunday no Sabbath, and a nameless Colier in his Page 53. 54.
55. 56. 57.
Cole from the Altar (two ridiculous idle Pamphlets) within one year after,
even by public license too. must be set up to affront these learned Bishops,
together with the Bishop of Lincolnes Letter to the Vicar of Grantham, and all
the writers of our Church in this (and other particulars too) that Altars and
Lords-Tables stood not in the Midst of the Quire in the primitive Church; And
that these authorities these grave Bishops cite to prove it, are impertinent,
and no ways evidence that they contest for.

Good God, what age ever heard of such contradictions and confusions in print
at the same time, in the same Church, by men of the same religion, and both by
Authority! Certainly, the Licensers of these Books, and Prelates that give way
to them, deserve to be made examples for it to posterity, for shaming both our
Church and our Religion, and making us laughing stocks to all the world, by
authorizing such contradictions. and idle Romish Pamphlets. But to return to
the point.

2ly. The Bishop in the immediate foregoing words writes: (p. 462.) That the
Greeks and Latins more rarely called the Table of the Lord an Altar then a
Table: Which they would not have done, had Altar, carried in in it, the true and
absolute property of an Altar using therein the same liberty as they used to
do in applying the name Altar to Gods people and to a Christian man's faith and
heart. And both before and after he shows: (l. 6. c. 3. p. 417. 418. 419. c.
5. p. 461. 462. 463. 464.) That the Fathers generally call Christ our Altar,
placing him as our true Altar only in Heaven, which he proves by Irenaeus: l.
4. c. 34. Nazianzen Orat. 28. Ambrose Com: in Hebr. 10. with other Fathers.

But here in the beginning of this addition he is made to approve both the
name, the having use and situation of Altars in our Church, and of Priests too;
From which he is so far: Page 361. 462.
That in the beginning of this very Section before the addition he writes in
this manner: Your Bellarm. l. 1. de Missac. 2. did. 5.
Cardinal his objection is this: That Priest, Altar and Sacrifice are
Relatives, and have mutual unseperable dependence one of each other. So he,
and that truly, etc.

But what if we shall say of this point of Appellations, that it was not so
from the beginning, here unto we claim but your own common confessions. Viz.
g That the Apostles did willingly abstain, from the words Sacrifice Sacerdos,
and Altar: So your Cardinal and Durantus your great Advocate for the Roman
Mass. Whereby they have condemned not only other your Romish disputers, who
have sought a proof of your proper Sacrifice in the word Altar, used by the
Apostle Paul, Hebr. 13. But also, themselves, who from S. Luke, Acts. 13.
((...)) concluded a proper Sacrifice. As if the Apostles had both absteined,
and not absteined from the words of Priest and Sacrifice.

And again, your Jesuit Lorinus; ( In Acts. 14. 22. de Sa^erdote. Ab hoc
abstinet Novum Testamentum, ut magis proprio antiqui legis Sacrificij and
Idolorum, concedo.) The New Testament (says he) absteined from the word
Sacerdos, as from that which is more proper to the Old Testament. So he,
wherefore this and the English word Priest, having a different relation, one
to a sacrificing Minister, (which is proper to the Old Testament,) the other as
it is derived from the word Presbyter, in the New Testrment, which is Senior,
and has no relation to a sacrificing function.

It must follow, that your Disputers seeking to urge the signification of a
sacrificing office proper to the Old Testament, for proof of a sacrificing act
proper to the New, perform as fond and fruitless a labor, as the patching of
old vestments with new pieces, whereby the rent is made worse.

But the Apostles did indeed forbear such terms in their speeches concerning
Christian worship, whereof these your forenamed Disputers can give you a
reason; Least that (say Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa, c. 17.
they) the Jewish Priesthood being as yet in force, might seem by using Jewish
Terms to innovate Jewish rit^s. Which is enough to show, that you are
persuaded they absteined from the use of these words for some Reasons.

Thus he and much more against Priests: And against Altars likewise he has
sundry passages: p. 415. 416. 417. 419. both which this addition allowing,
seems not to be his.

Here again I cannot but admire, that these terms of Priests and Altars thus
shunned by the Apostles and denied by our writers, together with Altars and
Sacrifices themselves so notably refelled by this Bishop both An. 1631. 1^35.
should the selfsame years by doting Shelford, Widows and Reeve, and this
year by Dr. Pocklington, and the namelesse Colier be publicly maintained
point-blanke against the Bishop; And that they by public authority should
which the Rhemists and Bryelly expound that of Hebr. 13. 10. of a material
Altar, which this Bishop out of Aqui^as, the Divines of Colen, Bella^mine
himself and Est^us, proves, (...) be meant of it, but only of Christ himself,
or of the Altar of the Gross; p. 416. 417.

I fear therefore that this Clause was added by some of those Bishops
Chaplains, who licensed these New Pamphlets which point-blanke oppugn the
Bishops book; Or else by some of these New Writers or their Friends.

These Reasons (I say) enduce me to believe, that this is not the Bishops
passage. But that which does must prevail with me is this, Fox Acts and
Monuments. p. 1781.
the sottishnes of the difference, reason and proofs therein alleged, which
savours neither of his judgment, learning, nor acurenes; All which I shall now
examine.

1. First, the party here puts a difference between Protestants bowing to the
Altar and Table, and Papists, which (says he) is three fold:

First, in the cause or reason of this bowing: Papists bow toward the Altar
only to adore the Eucharist which is on it: Therefore by his own confession
they bow not to or toward the Altar, out of any relation to, or occasion
drawn from the Altar; Though Cardinal Pooles Visito^s in Cambridge enjoined
the Scholars to bow to the ALTAR, as well as to the Hostia in Queen Mary's
days.

But Protestants bow toward the Table, to testify the Communion of all the
fait^ full communicants. there^^t.

Secondly, in the Object, ^apists bow to the Eucharist, Protestants to the Lord
of the Table, not to the Table of the Lord.

Thirdly, in the time, Papists bow only when the Eucharist is upon it;
Protestants when no Eucharist is thereon.

The second difference, makes Papists and Protestants bowing both one. For they
bow not to the Eucharist, or consecrated bread and wine; ( See Bishop Mortons
Institution of the Sacrament, l. 7. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.) But as they
apprehend and, believe it to be the very body and blood of Christ, ye^ Christ
himself both God and man: And so to him which these Protestants terms, the
Lord of the Tabl^; Therefore the object of their bowing (at leastwise according
to the Papists Doctrine) is both one; And so in this respect no diversity in
their genuflexions.

The first and l^st liversity makes Protestants worse then Papists, and that in
these respects.

(...) Prot (...) make the Table or Altar the partial, if not total cause of
their bowing to or toward it. Wi^nes the 3. first reasons alleged for this
Ceremony, all drawn from the Table, and M. Shelfords distinction, ( See his
Sermon of the Church p. 79.) that it is not terminativum cultus, sed MOTIVUM.

But, the Papists have so much piety and religion in them, as neither to make
it one or other, bowing toward it, ONLY to adore the Eucharist.

Secondly, the Papists never bow to the Altar or Table but when the Eucharist
and Christ himself (as they believe) is really present on it; At which time
both by their Canons and Doctrine they are enjoined to bow toward it only to
adore the Sacrament. A clear evidence that no part of their bowing is either
occasioned by, ^ or done unto the Altar.

But our Novellers (out stripping the Papists) how to or toward the Table even
then when there is no Eucharist on it; When they both know and believe that
Christ is not there really present neither in his person nor in his ordinances;
And when ^s neither the Doctrine nor Canons of our Church enjoyne them so to
do. (A plain evidence that they bow not only or principally to the Lord of
the Table, but to the Table and Altar it self;) Therefore their bowing is
far worse, more unreasonable and absurd then the Papists in these two
respects.

3ly. The Papists bow thus ( Bishop Morton Ibid.) only to adore their breaden
God, terminating their worship intentionally only in Christ: But our Novellers
make Christ only a stalking horse in this their adoration, bowing not to the
Table but to the Lord of the Table: And why so? What to worship or honor him
thereby^ No such matter; But to testify the Communion of all the faithful
Communicants at the Table; Such a piece of new divinity, as J never read the
like, except in some Popish Mass books, to wit, Officium beatae Mariae
secundum usum sacrum, their Ladies Psalter, Primer, etc. which teach their
Proselites, to pray to God to move the Saints to pray to him for them. For who
ever read of any immediate bowing and adoration to God, to testify only a
communion among men? A bowing to the Lord of the Table, not to terminate it
self in him, but by and the through him, to signify the Communion of all
faithful Communicants at the Table? What is this but to make Christ and his
worship a stalking horse to our brainsick fantasies? to adore them by and
through Christ? And to erect a kind of new worshipping of him, not terminated
in him, but given to him for some end, that is, out of him and beyond him.

In this regard therefore this bowing is far more Bishop Morton l. throughout.
intolerable then the Papists: Theirs being at the most, a relative worship of
God by or through the Hostia and our Novellers adoration toward the Table, and
their own fantasies in and through God himself, as this reason manifests,
which I shall next examine.

And here, first I shall demand, in what Scripture or author this reason of
bowing to or toward the Lords Table, is to be found, except in this: And what
idle head was the first inventour thereof? Certainly, if there be any new thing
under the Sun, ( Eccles. 1. 9. 10.) or any thing written of late that were
never heard or thought off before, this reason is it.

Secondly, I shall demand, where God requires this C^remony in Scripture for
any such end as this? And whether he will not be angry with us, for giving him
such a worship as is neither required by him, nor terminated in him.

Thirdly, what authority any man has to institute any such adoration or
Ceremony upon his own conceit, without asking either God or the King leave to
do it? Fourthly, what thing there is in this our bowing to the Lord of the
Table, toward the Table, that can lively and significanly represent (...) to
God or men the Communion of the faithful Communicants thereat? The rather,
because this is no joint act of all the whole congregation together, but of
some particul^rs only, and that severally by themselves.

F^f^ly, how our bowing when there is no communion celebrated, can testify
that, which is only really and truly signified by the Communion it self?

Sixthly, whether it be not an high presumption in man, to dare of his own head
to institue a Ceremony or external gesture, to signify that, which he has
long before particularly ordered to be signified by a Sacrament of his own
institution? ( l. Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.) Seeing it imports a weakness and
insufficiency in the Sacrament instituted by God himself, (and that in bread
where many comes, and wine where many grapes are united together) to signify
our Communion: l. Cor. 10. 16. 17.

Seventhly, whether this bowing only toward the Table be not one great step
toward the adoring of the Eucharist on the Table; And whether these who yield
to the one, will not easily be drawn to proceed on to the other? And so safest
to avoid the first: for fear of being once taken with the second? which can
hardly creep in among us if we withstand the first.

Eighthly, whether God being omniscient, and knowing what was fir^^st to advance
his glory, reverence, worship and fear, knew not of these reasons produced by
them for bowing to Altars and Lords-Tables, when the Scriptures were penned? If
not, then he is not omniscient, and so not God. Jf he knew of them then, why
did he not record them in Scripture, or prescribe this bowing, as necessary
upon these new-coyned reasons? If he knew them, and yet thought them not
sufficient upon which to require or prescribe any such worship or Ceremony,
and therefore passed them both over in silence, why should we dust and ashes
presume to give God a worship, upon such weak principles as were not prevalent
enough to move him to require it at our hands, or to cause Christ himself or
his Apostles to practice it for our imitation?

Wherefore let us ^ot make our selves wiser then God, or more careful of his
adoration then himself has been, for fear the reward of all our pragma^icall
diligence in this nature, be but that of these who presume to add to the
written word of God, ( D^utr. 4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18.) or at least that
of the prophet, ( Isay, 1. 11. 12.) Who has required these things at your
hands?

I come now in the last place to examine the proofs of Scripture cited for
this Ceremony, which being the same J have formerly answered, and all quoted to
this purpose by doting Shelford ( Se hi^ Sermon. of Gods house, p. 18. 19. 20.) J
shall pass them by; Only affirming thus much, that neither of these Scriptures
warrant the reason here alleged for this bowing, or end for which they are
cited; For what sense are there in these arguments: The people of God
worshipped before the Arc, Daniel prayed toward the Temple, and David to;
Therefore Christians ought to bow, not to the Table of the Lord, but the Lord
of the Table, to testify the Communion of all the Communicants there at?

This Logic and Divinity better beseemes a Colier then a Scholar, a brute
beast then a reverend Prelate; ^^erefore certainly none of his, but some man's
who desired to Father this spurious frenticke passage upon him, to gain it
cred^ and applause by his deserved fame, and to cast a scandal and blemish on
this his worthy work.

If therefore it be none of his conception, I hope he will now no longer Father
it; If his in truth, (which few Scholars dare or can believe) I hope he will
now correct it, both for his own honor and the good of others, the very
gros^est oversight of profound Scholars, being apt to pas^e current with
Novices, and some times with men of gravity and judgment, for want of
examination or overweaning of the parties worth; As appears by Bishop Andrews
Sermon on Phil. 2. 9. 10. 11. Whose extrauagant reasons and false quotations,
to prove the bowing at the name of Jesus a duty of that text, against the
unanimous reasons of all Fathers, and expositours before him, but the Rhemists,
Sorbenists, and 2 or 3 Jesuits (who never made this bowing a duty of the text,
or a thing necessarily thence enforced;) are so approved, that now all ou^
Pulpits, Schools, and late printed Shelford, Reeve Rives, Pocklington, Dr.
R^ad, Brown, Widows, Adams, Wren, Page, and I know not how many more, who
bring it in by head and shoulders into their Sermons and writings.
Pamphlets ^ing of nothing else but this his new-invented duty, and r^diculous
childish reasons for to prove it, which well examined prove so irrational and
unworthy such a deepe-learned Scholar, that his greatest admirours in other
things would blush at them, and disclaim him for ever in them; As the Answer to
that Sermon by way of Quaeres, will in part discover to such as shall peruse it.

Having thus examined the Authorities and Reasons produced for this new bowing
to Altars and Lords-Tables. I now proceed to the next point of the Question
propounded; Whether it be a divine adoration, or only a civil worship? A divine
adoration certainly it is; Being not done to the Table of the Lord but to the
Lord of the Table, paralleled with worshipping toward Gods Temple, worshipping
at his foote-stoole, Daniels prayer, etc. And so expressly determined by Mr.
Shelford; (See the Sermon: of Gods house, p. 18. 19. 20.) The forecited passage
fathered on Bishop Morton, In his devotions, the Prayer, when we are prostrate
before the Altar.
Mr. Cozens, Mr. Widows, Edward Reeve, and Dr. Duncombe in his Determination,
and Dr. Pocklington Suuday no Sabhath, p. 50.

C^ill worship it cannot be, because terminated they say in God, done in Gods
own house and presence, not in any civil but religious respect; Done toward
the Altar or Table, not as civil, but as sacred and religions things, to which
no civil worship at all is d^e^^ in any civil respect.

If then it be a divine worship, as they hold i^, it must be either a sincere
and genuine worship, or Superstitious: Not the former.

First, because not instituted or prescribed by God in his word, no text so
much as intimating, much less enjoining it, nor any one example in the New
Testament (...) it.

Secondly, because never practiced by the Patriarchs or Prophets in the Old
Testament, who never thus bowed to or toward Altars: nor by Christ or his
Ap^stes in the new, who never thus inclined their knees or bodies to or toward
Lords-Tables, nor yet, for ought we find, to God himself, unless it were in
prayer only, Mat. 26. 39. Acts 20. 36. c. 21. 5. Ephesians. 3. 14. Romans 4. 10. 11.
A thing worthy noting^, taking off all hare-adoration only fo the body, not
accompanied with prayer or some so other religious duty.

Thirdly, Altars themselves under the Gospel, abolished by Christ's death, are
not of divine institution, but contrary to it; Therefore the bowing toward,
them, to honor God or worship Christ thereby, is superstitious and unlawful.

Fourthly, had it been a worship of divine institution, its probable, that the
Saints of God in the Apostles days, the primitive Church, and all succeeding
ages would both have conscionablie and constantly used it; And either
fore-commaunded or enforced the observation thereof. But this they have not
done. Therefore it is not of divine institution.

Fi^tly, no divine worship due to God or required by him, is arbitrary to be
done or not done at man's election; Neither can it be omitted without mortal
sin; But this is arbitrary at man's election, and may be omitted without
mortal sin, as the stoutest Champions thereof will and must onselfe; Since
no Romans 4. 15. 1.
Law of God or man prescribes it as necessary; Therefore it is no divine
worship.

Sxitly, no relative worship of God, John 3. 4.
in, through, or by reason of any other Creature is of divine institution,
there being no part ^ne of any such worship in Scripture.

This the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry plentifully proves. (See
Bishop Mortons Institution of the Sacrament, l. 7. throughout; especially c. 8.
Sect. 1. p. 547. 548.) But this (and so the bowing at the naming of Jesus) is a
relative, not an immediate worship. Therefore not truly divine.

Seventhly, that which the most pious Christians, the most judicious and
zealous Protestants in their writings and practice have censured and declined
as evil and superstitious; And being only by the most igorant, blind,
superstitious and Popish Persons most practiced and contested for, that
certainly is not any divine institution, nor any sincere adoration approved by
God: But this bowing is such, as the premises, and experience witness;
Therefore not of divine institution, or any sincere adoration approved by God.

Eighthly, that whose chief, Patrons are enforced to fly to mere forged
authorities, and absurd ridiculous reasons of their own late invention, to
justify and maintain it, that certainly is not truly divine.

Such is this bowing to and toward Altars and Lords-Tables; As the premises
testify. Therefore not divine. And so by consequence a mere See Bish; Mort:
Institution of the Sacrament, l. 8. c. 1. p. 557. Col. 2. 18.
superstitious will worship of man's invention, which God neither, approves of
nor allows, Isay. 1. 11. 12. And being not of faith it must be sin, Romans 14.
23.

All which I desire our new Masters of Ceremonies to consider now at last, who
perchance have not yet so much as ruminated on this point, but taken up this
practice (as most men do new fashions) without any examination either of its
lawfulnes, decency, or convenience; Contrary to the Apostles rule who advises
us, (1. These. 5. 21. 22.) to prove all things, and to hold fast only that which
is good; Abstaining from all appearance of evil; Whith this bowing certainly
has:

First, because it is a new upstart innovation, prescribed by by no Law of God
or man.

Secondly, because it tends to erect, countenance and usher in a relative
worship of God, in, by and through the Creature.

Thirdly, because it seems to implie an actual transubstantiation of the
bread and wine into Christ's very body, and tends to usher in this doctrine,
together with an adoration of the Hostia; and reservation of it on the Altar or
Table in a Pix, the maine ends for which it seems and is now taken up. For as
kneeling at the Sacrament, first ushered in adoration of the Sacrament, so this
bowing to the Table or Altar, must revive it, the true end for which it is now
^rged.

Fourthly, because it hardens Papists in their Idolatr^us superstition of
adoring the Eucharist, and bowing to Crucifixes, Images, Crosses, condemned by
us as most gross Idolatry. See the Homily of the Peril of Idolatry, Bishop
Morton his 7. Book of the Institution of the Sacrament.

Fifthly, because it gives general offense and scandal to most, especially
those who are pious and judicious.

Sixthly, because it tends to the erection of Altars, Priests and Sacrifices
formerly abandoned, and gives Papists occasion not only in words but in writing
also to vaunt and hope, that we are now apostatizing and revolting unto Rome
again.

Seventhly, because it advenceth the Table and Altar above the Font, Pulpit,
Bible, Chalice, Paten, yea and the consecrated bread and wine, to neither of
which any such genuflexion is given.

Eighthly, because there is appearance of superstition and Idolatry in it,
which is or may be committed by it, as probably as of the Papists adoring of
the Eucharist; Upon these grounds therefore, all Christians should renounce it.
Bishop Morton, l. 7. through out, and p. 541. 542. 445.


I come now to the last clause of the Question to inquire how this bowing to,
Of the Peril of Idolatry. Bishop Mortons Institution of the Sacrament. l. 7.
toward or before the Altar or Table differs either from the Pagans or Papists
practice of bowing to or toward Images, Altars, Crucifixes, Crosses and the
like, which our Homilies with all our Orthodox writers expressly define to be
Idolatry?

For the Pagan Gentiles, it is evident, that they bowed to or toward their
Altars, over or under which the Images or Statues of their Idol-Gods, which
they worshipped toward the Altars stood, as the Papists and we have now our
Crucifixes standing on or over our Altars either in Arras, Glass or Mettle, or
in some Curious common Prayer-Booke standing on our Altars, only for a dumb
show, adorned with two or three silver Crucifixes (in stead of Bosses) on the
cover, in Imitation of these Pagans. That this of the Pagans is no fable, is
evident first by Virgil.

Aeneid. l. 4. p. 171. 172.
Aut ante or a Deum pingues spaciatur ad Aras, etc.
Dicitur ante Aras media inter uumina divum,
Multa Iovem manibus supplex or ass supinis.
Aeneid. l. 5. p. 213.
Iamque dies epulata novem gens omnis and Aris FACTUS HONOS, etc.
Aeneid. l. 8. p. 279.
Hanc Aram luco statuit quae maxima semper
Dicetur nobis, and erit quae maxima semper, etc.
Secondly, by, De Arctitectura, l. 4. c. 5 8. Dr. Raynolds d^ldololat. Romanae
Ecclesiae. l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 46. p. 432.
Vitruvius, who writing of the structure of Pagan Temples says: That the Cells
wherein the Images, of the Idol-Gods were placed, were built at the East end of
the Temple, and that their faces looked westward; But the Altars ad Orientem
versus toward the East (where (...) Novellers situate them:) ut qui (...) ad
A^am (...) la^es, out sacrificia facientes, spectent ad simulacrum sublimius A
a s^um: That so those who came to the Altar to Offer or Sacrifice, might look
toward the Jmage placed over the Altar ipsaque simulachra videantur exorien^^a
contueri supplicantes and saecrificantes. And might seem to be^^^d the Images
there set up both when they prayed and sacrificed.

Thirdly, by Clemens, Alex^nd^inus, who writes: That the most ancient. Temples
looked toward the West; Vt qui vultu Imaginis tuents stabant ad Orientem
verterentur; That so those who stood with their faces toward their Images,
might be turned toward the East, when they worshipped: Which that of Ezech. 8.
16.
Ezechi^l concerning the Idolaters of his age, well explaines.

And he brought me into the inner-Court of the Lords-house, and behold at the
door of the Temple of the Lord between the porch and the ALTAR were about 25
men with their books toward the Temple of the Lord, and THEIR FACES TOWARD THE
EAST, and they worshipped the Sun TOWARD THE EAST.

Hence we may clearly discern; Whence this custom of placing Altars,
worshipping, praying and bowing toward the East (now much contended f^r) had
its original, even from the Heathen Jdolaters worshipping the using Sun, and
placing their Images and Altars at the East end of their Temples, toward which
they bowed and looked when they prayed or sacrificed.

De Origin Al^^rium.
Whence Hospinian writes expressly: At this day most Altars among the P^pists
(mark it) are placed in prima Templorum part, ET VERSUS ORIENTEM SPECTANT, in
the forefront of their Churches, and look toward THE EAST; Quod etiam AB
ETHNICIS SUMPSERUNT, which they likewise took from the Et^^uickes. For many of
the Heathen adored the Sun for a God, whence in their public sacrifices
they turned their faces toward th^rising Sun, etc. Wherefore the Lordin his
Law commanded, that the Sanctum Sanctorum, in which the mercy-seat was placed,
should stand not toward the East, but toward the West, least the Israelites
should seem to worship him after the manner of the Ethnickes. Which I wish See
his visitation-Articles.
Bishop Wren and other who will have the Readers Pew and all other seats so
placed, that the Minister and people when they pray, may all look Eastward
toward the Altar or Lords-Table (whereas the Rubricke in the Common Prayer
forecited enjoynes the Minister to turn his face toward the people) would
now at last consider: To avoid which practice the primitive Christians, (as he
there proves at large out of the Authorities quoted by Bishop Jewel, (yea and
by Bishop Jewel himself, whom he recites with honor and approbation) placed
their Altars and Lords-Tables in the Midst of their Churches or Quires; Out of
which our Nouellers and Colier would now remove them to imitate the Papists,
and these Idolatrous Ethnickes.

Fourthly, this is apparent by Prudentius:

Iam si sub Aris ad sigillorum ped^^
Iaceatis, infra sectilem quercum siti,
Quid esse vobis aestimem proiectitius?
Fif^ly, Epist. 49 Quaest. 3. Tom. 2. p. 223.
by S. Augustine, who writes, that the Pagan Idols were placed over their
Altars honorabili sublimitate, in an honorable sublimity, ut a praecantibus
atque immolantibus attendantur, that they may be minded, or looked upon by
those that prayed or Sacrificed.

Sixthly, by Horace (in an Image)

Epist. l. 2. Epist. 1. p. 276. See Iuvenal. Satyr. 12. 13. p. 115. 119. 121.
Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores
I^r andasque tuum per nomen ponimus Aras.
Seventhly, by Ovid Fostorum l. 5. p. 88.


Nos quoque tangit honos festis gaudemus and Aris.
Turbaque caelestis ambitiosa sumus.
Eighthly, by the express testimony of the Scriptures, 2. Chron. 34. 3. 4. In
the twelfth years Iosiab began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high
places, and the groves and the carved Images, and the molten Images; And they
brake down^ THE ALTARS of Baalim, and the IMAGES THAT WERE ON HIGH ABOVE THEM,
or over them.

Hence we find Altars and Jmages of the Heathenish and Jewish Idolaters ever
coupled together for the most part in Scripture both in point of erection and
demolition, as Exodus 34. 13. Ye shall destroy their Altars and break down
their Images, standing over or about them: So Deutr. 7. 5. c. 12. 3. there are
the same words: 2 Kings 11. 18. And all the people of the land went into the
house of Baal: And brake it down, his Altars and Images brake they in pieces,
2 Chronicles. 14. 2. And he took away the Altars of the strange Gods and the high
places, and brake down the Jmages, c. 33. 15. And he took away the strange
Gods, and the Idol out of the house of the Lord, and all the Altars that he had
built in the mount of the house of the Lord, and cast them out of the City,
Isay. 17. 7. 1. In that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes shall
have respect to the holy one of Israel: And he shall not look to the Altars,
the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made,
either the groves or the Images. Hose^ 10. 1. 2. According to the multitude of
the fruit he has increased the Altars, according to the goodness of the land
they have made goodly Images. He shall break down their Altars, he shall
spoil their Images.

So we read that Ahab reared up an Altar for Baal in the house of Baal, 1
Kings, 16. 32. And an Image of Baal which ^^horam put away: 2. Kings 3. 2. From
all which texts, compared with 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. 4. it is apparent, that Pagan
and Jewish Idolaters had the Images and Statues of their Jdols standing above
or over their Altars, toward which they looked and bowed their bodies and
kne^s both when they sacrificed and prayed: As is evident by Isay. 17. 7. 8.
Exodus 20. 4. 5. c. 23. 24. Levit. 26. 1. Numb. 25. 2. Josh. 23. 7. 16. Judge. 2.
17. 19. 1 Kings 19. 18. 2 Kings 5. 18. c. 17. 35. 2 Chronicles. 25. 14. Isay. 2. 9.
Romans 11. 4. This our famous Dr. Reynolds testifies and proves at large^ De
Romanae Ecclesiae Idelolatriae, l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 46. proving likewise that the
Altars at Athens dedicated to the unknowen God had an Image over it, Acts. 17.
which he manifests from. v. 16. 23. 24. 25. 29.

1. Which being a clear undeniable truth; I would first know what difference
at all there is, between those Idolatrous Pagans, Papists, and our late
Innovatours? ( See Francis de Croy his threefold Conformity, part. 1. and
Ormered his Pagano-Papismus.) These Ethnickes had Altars: So have the Papists
and we: They had the Images of the Idols, they worshipped in their Temples,
and these standing in the East end of their Temples above and over their
Altars; And we have the Image of our Savior on the Cross (which our Homilies
hold unlawful to be made, much more unlawful to be set up in Churches)
standing either upon our Altars, or above them, in Tapestrie, or
Glasse-windowes, or both, just as have the Papists.

They when they worshipped, prayed or Sacrificed to their Idol-Gods, bowed and
turned their faces toward their Altars and Images; So do the Papists toward
their Altars and Crucifixes, and so do we: Where then lies the difference? If
they reply, that the Paga^s terminated their worship only in their Altars and
Images, adored the Altars and Images themselves, not God in, by, or through
them.

Our own Homilies will take away this evasion both of the Papists and our
Novellers, ( See the Peril of Idolatry, part. 3. p. 50.) where we read thus.
Furthermore in that they say, they do not worship their Images (or Altars) as
the Gentiles did their Idols (or Altars) but God and the Saints whom the
Images (and Altars) do represent, and therefore that their bowings before
Images (and Altars) be not like the Idolatry of the Gentiles before their
Idols (and Altars:) S. Augustine, Lactantius and Clemens do prove evidently,
that by this there answer they be all ONE with the Gentiles Idolaters: The
Gentiles (says S: Augustine. in Psalm. 135.) which seem to be of the purer
religion, say: We worship not the Images, but by the corporal Image, we do
be hold the Signs of the things we ought to worship. And Lactantius says: (
Instit. l. 2. c. 2, 3.) We fear not the Images, but them after whose likeness
the Images be made, and to whose name they be consecrated.

And Clement says, that Serpent the devil utters these words by the mouth
of certain men; We to the honor of the invisible God worship visible Images:
Which surely is most false. See how in using the same excuses which the
Gentiles Idolaters pretended, they show themselves to join with them in
Idolatry. For notwithstanding this excuse S. Augustine, Clemens and Lactantius
prove them Ido-Iaters.

Thus the Ovid. Fastorum. l. 4. Macrobius Saturn. l. 1. c. 7. Iuvenal: Satyr.
12. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 8. p. 230. l. 11. p: 353. Copa. p. 563. Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 16. c. 37. Su^tonij, Caligula. Sect. 13. Tatianus Orat. adv. Graecos.
Baruch. 6. 10.
Homilies; And Dr. Reynolds, De Idolat. Romans Eccles. l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 86. etc.
Dr. John White his way to the Church: Sect. 51. n. 7. 8. p. 207. 208. Bishop
Jewel, Bishop Alley, Bishop Abbot, Bishop Usher, Dr. Fulke, Dr. Will, Dr.
Field, and all other of learned writers, in their Tracts concernng Images and
their Adoration. out of these and other Fathers.

Where then is the difference between Pagans, Papists, and our late Novellers
in these particulars? (To which I may add the Tapors on our Altars, used by
the Pagans, and condemned by our Part. ^. p 50. 51. 75. Part. 1. p. 38. Francis
(...) Croy his first Conformity, c. 25 Orm^rod. Pag^. no-papismus semb. 37.
123. 124. 125.
Homilies and Writers, as Heathenish and Superstitious;) Certainly I can yet
find none. If they reply; That they can only worship before the Altar, Table
and Crucifix, but do not worship the Altar, Table or Crucifix it self, as the
Pagans and Papists did and do.

I answer: That as bowing, kneeling, and worshipping before God; Is the same in
Scripture phrase, with bowing, kneeling, praying to, and worshipping God
himself: witness, Deuteronomy. 26. 10. 1 Samuel 1. 12. 15. 19. 2 Chronicles. 20. 18. Psalm.
2. 27. Ps. 72. 9. Ps. 86. 9. Ps 95. 6. Ps. 96. 9. 15. Ps. 98. 6. 9. Isay. 6.
23. Da^. 6. 10. 11. 26. Mich. 6. 6. Rev. 3. 9 c. 4. 10. 5. 8. c. 7. 10. c. 15.
4. compared with Isay. 45. 23. c. 49. 23. c 60. 1^. Romans 14. 1^. Hebr. 11. 21.
Gen: 24. 26. 4. c. 47. 31. Exodus 4. 31. c. 12. 27. c. 34. 8. 1 Chronicles. 29. 10.
2. Chron. 7. 3. c. 29, 29, 30. Neh: 8, 6. Ps. 72. 9. with other texts. And as
bowing, kneeling and falling down before men, is all one with bowing, kneeling
and falling down to men; Gen: 49, 8. 1 Samuel: 25, 23. 2 Samuel: 14, 33 c. 24, 20. 1
Kings 1. 16. 23. 2 Kings 2. 15. Prove: 14. 9. paralleld with Gen: 27. 29. Exodus:
11. 8. 1 Kings 2. 9. 1 Chronicles: 21. 21. So bowing, kneeling, worshipping, or
falling down before or toward Images or Altar, the very same in Scripture
language and account, wit^ bowing, kneeling, worshipping, or falling down to
Images, or Altars, 2 Caron. 25. 14. Isay. 44. 15. 17. 19. (which Iunius
renders, Procumbit CORAM EO:) Dan: 3. 3. 5, 6. Luke 4, 71. If thou therefore
wilt fall down or worship BEFORE me, all those shall be thine; Compared with
Exodus: 20, 5. Levit. 26. 1. Matthew. 4. 9.

This is the resolution of our Homilies, p. 20. and 44. to 75. of William
VVraghton in his Rescuer of the Romish Fox (where this is excellently cleared)
and generally of all our Writers against Images, and, See Bishop Morton
Institution of the Sacrament, l. 7. and Dr. Reinolds de Idolot. Eccles. Romans
Adoration of the Eucharist, the thing now clearly a^ med at in this Ceremony,
as Dr. Heylyn in his late History of the Sabbath intimates, if not in the
Coal too.

This Cloak therefore is to short to cover their nakedness, neither will it
serve the turn.

If they say, they have no eye at all at the Altar in this their bowing, nor
yet at the Crucifix over it; And that neither of these are the termina^io^s, or
total or particular object of their bowing toward them; All which they must
affirm and make good to acquit themselves from relative worship and Idolatry.

I answer; That this is but a mere forgery and pretext.

For first, Shelford in his Authorized Book ( Page 19.) faith; That the Altar
or Table is motivum cultus; The moving cause of this their worship and
^doration toward it; Therefore certainly it has some Influence into it, and
some share in it.

Secondly, as it is the object that stirs up this worship (for were See the
Homily against the Per^ll of ^d latrie, part. 3. which argues thus on case of
Images.
there no Altar or Table, ^here would not be any such bowing to to or toward
the place where it stands, a plain evidence that it is both the o^igin^ll
cause, if not the object of this worship,) so it is the only visible object to
which it is directed, in which it is terminated, their eye, mind, and bodily
incuruation being all leuelled at it alone; Else why should they not as well
bow toward the Font, Pulpit, or any other part of the Church indifferently, but
to and toward it alone; God being everywhere alike present, (as Honorius
Augustodunensis formerly shows,) and no more confined to the Altar or Table,
then to any other part of the Church.

Thirdly, it is not terminated objectively in God or Christ, because done to
them, only to (...) the Communion of all the faithful Communicants at the
Table or Altar to which we bow, as the Passages fatl^^red on Bishop Morton (
Page 403.) witnesses: Therefore terminated only in the Table or Altar.

Fourthly, all the reasons produced to appropriate this bowing to or toward
the Altar and Table, and to justify the lavvfulnes thereof, are only drawn
from the Altar it self. The reasons therefore of its use and lawfulnes being
drawn only from the Altar and Table; This bowing without question must have
relation to them, as its Object and Termination.

Fifthly, the situation of the Tables Altar-wise, and eleuating and raising the
ground in some places higher then before, the gracing of it with Crucifixes,
Altarclothes, Arras hangings, Candlestickes, Basins, Cushions and other Massing
furniture, the better to induce men to adore and bow unto it, is a strong
argument in my judgment, that they bow directly to it, making it the immediate
object of their bowing, and worship not God, whose presence they now confine to
the Altar, and never adore in this manner but in, by, through, on or toward the
Altar or Table.

Sixthly, the bowing to it when there is no Sacrament at all on it, nor cause to
deem God specially present at or on it, ( See Bishop Mort on, p. 463.) is an
invincible argument, that they do i^ to the Table or Altar, and not simply
toward it.

And to put this out of further doubt. 1. First, I have heard many of them
confess, that they do bow unto the Altar.

2. Secondly, J have heard them exhort and persuade others to bow to it.

3. Thirdly, I have heard them preach for bowing not toward but To the Altar
and Table; And fevv Sermons have there been of late times either at Court,
Paul's Cross, or our Universitie Churches, wherein there have not been some
Passage either to justify, press, excuse, or persuade the bowing To Altars
and Lords-Tables. If any man think this a slander, which thousands can
witness, then hear in the last place Books printed by Authority, confessing
it in direct terms.

Giles Widows in his Lawless kneelesse Schismatic Puritan, p. 89. printed
at Oxford by License An: 1632. And that Popeling Thomas Brown in his Sermon at
S. Mary's, Oxford 1634. plead not only for Altars and bowing toward them, but
for bowing AT and TO them: So that by the judgment of Oxford-Scriblers and
Licensers; This bowing is to the Table and Altar.

Mr. Robert Shelford in his 5. Treatises printed by License (...) Cambridge (to
his eternal infamy) p. 17. 18. 19. 20. though in words he minseth the matter;
That he would not have them give divine worship to gods Table, but to worship
God toward it; Yet he confesses, that the Altar is motivum cultus, and bids
us direct our aspect TO it, and bow our bodies toward it; And makes it at
least a partial object of this genuflection. Edward Reeve in his Exposition on
the Catechism in the Common-prayer-Booke is downright, for removing Tables
Altarwise, and bowing TO them.

If these crack-braind writers have not weight enough; Then hear one since
them all, in stead of all. Dr. John Pocklington, a greet learned Dr. of
Divinity, late President of a College in Cambridge, Chaplain to a great
Bishop, and that in a Visitation-Sermon (the most profane and scurrilous ever
yet printed, if not preached) entitled Sunday no Sabbath; Licensed by that
Apostate William Bray, Chaplain to the now Archbishop of Canterbury (a great
zelot and Precisian, heretofore an earnest preacher against Altars and profane
Sabbath Breakers whiles a Lecturer) March. 15. 1635 and twice printed in the
year of our Lord 1636. who as in his first Edition, p. 48. seems to infer;
That the Sacrament can not be consecrated without an Altar; So p. 50. he
concludes his Sermon thus: And if we do not only bend or bow our body TO his
blessed Boorde, or HOLY ALTAR (so he often times calls it) but fall flat on our
faces so soon as ever we approach in sight thereof, what Patriarch, Apostle;
blessed Martyr, holy or learned Father would condemn us for it? or rather
would not be delighted to see their (...) so honored, and their devotion so
reverently imitated, and so good care taken to have it continued in the Lords
house, on the Lord's Day, by the Lords Saints, unto the Lords coming again.

This bowing therefore being not only toward, but TO the Table, (which is made
at least the partial Termination and Object of it, if not the total or
principal) how it differs from the Pagans or Papists relative worship of
Idols, Images, Pictures, Altars, or how it can be excused from impiety and most
gross Jdolatrie (as bad as that of the ^aplanders who worship a red cloute
upon a stick, to use the comparison of the I^suite Coster) I cannot possibl^e
discern. Enchiridion: De Sacraem. Eucharistiae, c 8: ^. Decimo^Bis: Morton
Institution of the Sacrament, l 7. c. 8. Sect. 2 p. 549.


And that it is the same in all respects with the Papists der^ved from them,
set up to reduce us back to Rome, and harden Papists in their Jdolatrie, give
me leave to relate a late story to you. On An. 1636
Monday, Thursday last, some Citizens of London of good quality went with other
of their friends to White Hall, to see the Ceremonies of the Monday and washing
of the poor men's feet: Which when they had beheld some of the company desired
to see his Majesty's Chapple at White Hall: They did so; And in the Chapple
found one of the Queens women of their acquaintance at her prayers before the
Crucifix: Who seeing them dravving ^eer her, left off her devotions, and came
and saluted them. W^^^s they were vewing the Chapple and talking together, in
comes a Gentleman, a Papist, and makes a low Congie to the ground almost, and
after that a second, the one to the M^ar^ the other to the Crucifix, and so
departs. Whereupon one of the Company spoke thus to the Popish Gentlewoman
(...) Lord will you never see and give over your most gross Idolatry of
worshipping Images, stocks and stones; With other words to like purpose,

The Popish Gentlewoman defended this practice the be^^ she could and whiles
they were discoursing about it in one side of the Chapple in came Dr. Brown of
S. Faithes, then newly made Dea^e of Hereford; and as soon as ever he entered
in at the Chapple door, he bowed 3. several times together down to the
ground to the High Altar, on which he fi^^d his eyes; After which coming up
into the midst of the Chapple he fixes his eyes upon the Crucifix, and boweth
down to the ground to it: Which they all beholding and wondering at; Law you
now (quoth the Popish Gentlewoman, to the Citizen who discoursed with her)
this is done of your own men, a great Dr. and one of his Majesty's own
Chaplains; See you how he bowed to the Altar and Crucifix, far lower and
oftener then the Popish Gentleman did; And ca^ you blame that in us which your
own Doctors do? I tell you, you must and will all come to this ere long. In
truth replied the Citizen, you have No^plussed me, J can not tell what to say,
I never thought to have seen Dr. Brown do such an Act as this.

By this time the Dr. was come hard by them, and most of them being his
familiar acquaintance, one of them steps to him, and says O, Mr. Dr. we
little thought to have met, you here. The Dr. not seeing them before, and
knowing that they observed this his bowing, like one deprehended in the very
act of spiritual adultery, wa^ed as pale as ashes, and was in such a
perplexity for the present, as if he would have fallen down dead in the place,
having not a word to reply; Which they per^^ lying, (...) into some other
discourse, that he might recollect his spirit.

This I shortly after received by accident from the parties thee (...)
eyewitnesses of the fact, being people of no mean (...) it to diverse.

What then may we conclude from this, (...) that we are now in this particular
more Idolatrous and Popish then the Papists themselves, that we have many a
Papist mas^ed under^ Protestants hood, who are not ashamed to be Papists, but
only that they are so soon and suddenly discovered to be such at unawares, and
that it is high time for his most Excellent, Majesty our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles, Defender of our faith and Religion, with all his
faithful Officers and Subjects to look about them; To prevent these Romish
Innovations, Rel^pses and gross, Back slidings to P^perie in time, (expressly
prohibited by his Majesty, both in his royal Declaration before the 39.
Article, and concerning the Dissolution of the last Parliament, p. 21. 22. 42.)
When as his own advanced Chaplains (and I would he had no more such of them
but this one) are grown such Popelings, as to commit such notorious Idolatry
in his own royal Court and Chapple, to the encouraging and confirming of
Papists in their most gross superstition and Idolatry, and greiving of the
Souls of all his true-hearted loyal Subjects, whose love will prove his
strongest guard against all those treacherous Romish Ianizaries Ies^ites and
Assinates, whose faith is faction, whose very religion is rebellion; whose
practice the murdering of men's souls and bodies, especially of Christian
Princ^s, as many of our Writers, and the Book for the 5. of November,
(miserably guelded and corrupted in this very particular in the last
impression, 1635. it were worth the inquiring by whom and whose authority, to
discover a new n^st of Traitors, at leastwise to our religion, if not our King
and State:) at large relate. See Mr. William Tyndall his Practice of Popish
Prelates, Obedience of a Christia^man. Dr. Barnes his Supplication to King
Henry the 8. Henry Stalbridge his exhortatiory Epistle, Dr. John White his
Defense of the. Way, c. 6. 9. 10. 11.

Since then there is now no ma^eriall sollid justifiable difference at all
between the Pagans, Papists, and our Romanizing Novellers bowing to Altars,
Images, Crucifixes and Lords-Tables, as the premises witness, needs must we
now not only pass lentence against it, but abandon and abhor it, as most
gro^^e Jdolatrie; Yea as that which no doubt (among other several particulars
of our late backsliding to the Church of Rome) has been one cause See the
Homily of the Time and place of Prayer, The second part of the Peril of
Idolatry: The exhortation for the fast: The last great plague.
of drawing down that Plague and Pestilence, which now spreades it self every
where among us, with these other spiritual and temporal judgments which now
we languish under, and are likely to increase upon us to our utter ruin.

And have we not all cause to fear the very extremity of Gods wrath to be
powered on us, of which he has given us visible prognostickes from heaven? I
shall name but one of many, upon the 23. day of February last past in Sussex
and sundry places of the Kingdom, from 8, till 9^ of the Clock in the
morning there was seen by many persons of good quality (who have testified it
under their hands) three Suns n^are together (a thing very rare) and at the
same time a Rainbow (such as was never seen the like but once) differing from
ordinary Raine-bowes in these 7. remarkable particulars:

1. First, where as all other Raine-bowes are in Iris est inflectio solis in
nube. Magyrus Keckerman and others.
some watery thick cloud, this was in no cloud at all ou^ in the clear open
air.

2. Secondly, where as other Raine-bowes are ever in direct opposition to the
Sun, so as he that turns his face to the bow, turns his back on the Sun,
this stood directly South-east in the same quarter that the Sun the^^ was.

3. Thirdly, other Raine-bowes are commonly lower then the Sun, and one end
of them seems almost to touch the earth; This was far higher then the Sun
goes in the Sommer-solstice none being ever seen so high by many degrees.

4. Other Raine-bovves are seen only at a certain distance, 5. or 6. miles
about, and that but one way vvhethervvards it is reflicted; This seemed above
30. miles distance every way.

5. Fifthly, other Raine-bowes continue but a short space, and then vanish: This
a full hour from 8. till 9. of the clock, as long as the 3 Suns continued.

Sixthly, other Raine-bovves are flit^ing and move with (...) cloud wherein
they are: This was fixed, continuing in the same place a full hour.

Seventhly (which is the strangest of all, principally to be considered)
whereas all other Raine-bowes stand with the (...) downward in this manner ^
this appeared all the while with the horns upward thus^ which makes it the
more terrible; The bow as all know (and we of this Nation especially who have
won so many battles by it) is a Military or warlike instrument; Now as long
as the back of their bow is toward the Archer and the horns from him toward
his enemy, it is a Sign of peace and safety, that he has no intent at all to
shoot, hurt, or slay him; But when once the Archer tur^es his bow the contrary
way with the ^tring and horns toward himself, and the back of the bow
toward his enemy, then its a sign he is angry and intends to shoot and
slay him: The application is obvious, God has a bow, (a warlike Instrument) as
well as man, which Scriptures often mention: ( See Ps. 7, 12. Lam. 2. 4. c. 3,
12.) This bow immediately after the flood, when he out of his infinite goodness
entered into a covenant of mercy and peace, with Noah and his posterity, placed
in the cloud for a token of this Coveuant between him and the Earth: ( See Genesis
9. 13. 14. 15. 16.) And becanse it was a token only of love, grace and peace,
he placed it with the horns downward, and the back toward Heaven, to
testify and proclaim peace and mercy to the world; Now when God shall thus in
a^unusuall miraculous manner invert this bow of his, turning the horns of it
toward Heaven and the back upon us in such a visible and notorious fashion,
that many Counties of the Kingdom at once might and did take notice of it
(though few such serious notice as they should,) what can we thence in all
probability conclude; But that we having so long waged war against Heaven
with our prodigious sh^meles manifold open sins, ( See Ier. 3. 8. 9. Ier. 3.
3.) and so far broken our covenant and long continued league with God m the
(...) and (...) of his ordinances, he has now a resolution to break off his
covenant of peace and of grace with us, and to denounce open war against us
from Heaven; And therefore has bent his bow, turned the string of it toward
Heaven; and the back of it upon us, and made ready his arrows upon the string
to discharge them against the faces of us his on gracio^s rebels and enem^ies,
who proceed to provoke him daily more and more. Psalm. 7. 12. Psalm. 11. 2.

And has not God himself (if I may so speak) made this very Comentary on
this text and Prodigy? Has he not shot abroad his ( Psalm. 95. 5. 6.) Arrows of
the Plague and Pestilence among us, and made them in Newcastle, London and
other places (where they have wounded thousands to death) even ( Ier, 46. 10.)
almost drunk^ with our blood? Yet ( Isay. 5. 25. c. 9. 12. 17. 31. c. 10. 4.)
for all that his anger, (this bow and arrow of his) is not turned away, but
still str^t^hed aut and full bent against us: Neither can we either Imagine or
divine when the arrows of this his pestiferous qui^er will be spent, since they
fall thicker among us every day, and we have not yet put on the arms of
public fasting, prayer, humiliation and repentance, (bu^ rather of feasting,
dancing, masking, playing, chambring, da^lying, and what not,) the only armor
of proof that can ward off their deadly stroke. But when God has short out
this ^heefe of Plague Arrows at us with this bow of his; Shall we then think
he haith no other arrows to let fly against us? O! I Cannot but with fear
and troubling suspect the contrary.

Never was there any such Rainbow as this seen before in any age, (for ought
I can find in story) but one, and that was here in England too, pertending
the heaviest woeful days and tidings to it, that ever it heard or saw before;
For th^^ Month, time of the day, form and continuance, it was the same with
this, only differing in the day of the month and ^pparition of two Suns then,
whereas now there were three. Which Mr. Fox thus relates ( See Acts and
Monuments Edit. 1610. p 1333.) and Dr. Hackewell out of him, ( See (...) for
the government of the worldy l. 2.) who accounts it one of the strongest
prodigies that ever he read off: Upon the^^ 5. day of February An. 1555. that
was seen (says Fox) within the City of London (where some saw this last sight
too) about 9. of the clock in the fore-noone strong sights. There was seen two
Suns both shining at once, the one a good pretty way distant from the other
(as these 3. now seen were.) it the same time was also seen a Raine-bovv
turned contrary, and a great deal higher then has been a^customed. The common
standing of the Raine-bovv is thus^. But this stood this^, with the head
dovvneward and the feet as it were upvvard. Both these sights were seen as
well at West-minster, in Cheap Side, on the south side of Paul's as in very
many other places, and that by a great number of honest men. Also certain
Aldermen went out of the Guld hall to behold the sight: What these prodigies
did then protend, the subsequent story of Queen Mary's blo^dy unhappy days (at
large recorded in the Acts and Monument^, and other histories of our own) can
witness; And Mr. Fox his marginall Note annexed to this passage ( strong sights
seen before the coming in of King Philip and Subversion of Religion) can
testify.

God forbid J should he so presumptuous as peremptorily to determine that these
late Apparitions should bode us any such black ominous events; The piety of
our most gracious Sovereign, his zeal and care for religion, manifested both
in his own private practice and in his forementioned Declarations; Together
with his most admirable clemency, prohibit me from the very thoughts of any
such unluckey Divination. But were it not for this confidence and full
persuasion of his Majesty's incomparable goodness, clemency, zeal and love to
our Religion, for which all succeeding ages will adore his memory; And were it
not for those many godly Christians of all sorts and ranks of men, which are
every where scattered up and down among us (though many by our Bishops tyranny
have been forced to fly the Realm, and more like to follow) through the open
desperate designs and practices of some swaging domine^ing Prelates, who do
what they list on the one hand; And the secret ^reacheries of the Jesuits,
Priests and Papists on the other hand to undermine our Religion, and ruin both
it, Church, State and all else at once are such, and our backslidings toward
Rome within these 4 years past, so great and manifold, that I should not only
fear, but expect the selfsame consequents now, which then ensued. But blessed
be our good God, our gracious King is safe (and for ever may he be so) and so
our Religion and we seem in despite of all the hellish powderplots now
prepared to blow up us and it at once; Which Plots being here in part
discovered, and laid more fully open in some other new printed Troatises, I
doubt not but his most royal Majesty and honorable Lords, (who hitherto (out
of State policy and abundant clemency) have convinced all these late dangerous
Innovations, the better to discover, and more justly to proceed against the
plotters and fomenters of them, sufficiently detected by name in the last
Parliaments remonstrance to this purpose) will now at last when the Romish
Priests and Projectors are grown so open insolent and notorious, provide a
speedy remedy to the eye of all good subjects, to wit, the extirpation of that
generation of Vipers, which has long been gnawing out their own mothers
bowels; The prosperity and flourishing of our Religion, Church, State, the
diversion of all gods inflicted and menaced judgments, and their own eternal
honor. To which blessed work, as I have here contributed my poor (...) on
deavours, so I hope all true English hearts that have (...) sparlie of loyalty
in them to their Sovereign, love to (...) Country, or zeal to the established
Religion of our (...) Which in their breast, will now without more delay (...)
most assistance, (it being now high time or (...)) thus to do.

(...) no man say these things stood now upon are but triuiall, (...) they
either are or make way for that which is the maine (...). That which
Chrysostom writes in a like raze, ( See (...) Cor. 3.) I may truly apply to
this: Hoc parum non (...) Imo vero est fere ^^tum; Ci^o eum neglectum sit (...)
Parva itaque nunquam despiciamus, ne in magna in^^^^^.

It is a true saying of Pope Gregory the first, ( See Maral. (...) 13.) and we
have found it experimentally true in these (...) here debated. Qui modica
spernit paulatim (...) (...) curare parva negligimus, inseusibiliter seducti,
au^^^^ (...) majora perpetiamus. Esus quippe potusque ad Lu^^^^ (...) L^sus (as
our playing with Popish novelties, Ceremonies and royes has done) ad
idololatriam traxit: Quia s^in vanitatis culpa nequaquam cause compescitur, ab
iniquitate pro^^^^ men^ incauta deuoratur.

I. shall therefore desire all those who deem these things ^rifles, to
ruminate on these two Fathers words; And diligently to consider whether they
tend; Then J presume they will change their judgments.

Much more might be said concerning these Questions and matters here debated;
Bnt this J hope will suffice for the present, I shall therefore close up all
with the words of Dr. Edward Chulouer in his Sermon entitled Paul's
Peregrinations, delivered at Paul's Cross Anno 1617. London 1623. p. 316. to
329. Let us now travel from Athens into England, from the world under the Law,
to the world under the Gospel, and consider what it is, wherein we are to
imitate these Gentiles; Concerning their Altars, and what it is wherein we
must leave and forsake them. Altars, as they are properly so taken for those on
which the typical or supposed real Sacrifices were offered, are now ceased
and taken away. Our Savior when he was lifted up upon the Cross, bad Altars
to be beaten down; When he rent the veil of the Temple, the Earthquake
shook their foundation; When he died, their parts were acted and went out.
The Papists that they may scrue the Pope farther into the mystery of iniquity,
will have him maintain one Lesson, which themselves confess to be a note of
Antichrist, and that is, that Jewish Ceremonies are not yet ceased, at the
least in matters of Sacrifices and Altars. But perhaps they had rather be
beholden to the Gentiles for them. For if we would believe Cardinal
Baronius, we may see their lustrall water, Baron. Auval. ann. Dom. 44.
and sprinkling of Scpulchres, in Iuvenall sixth Satyr, Lights in Scpulchres,
in Suetonius and Octavius, Lamps lighted on Saturday, in Geuecas. 96. Epist.
Distribution of Tapers amongst the people, in Macrobius his Saturnals. But more
lively may we see it in their Altars:

1. First, Brush^ de Monast. Germano, fol. 129. Virgil.
in multiplying the number of them in every Church; God allows but two Altars
to the Temple, and Bruschius reckons 51. in one Church in Vlmes, taking their
pattern belike from Venus Temple, of which the Poet; Ubi Templum illi
centumque Sabeo thure calent arae: But God teaches no such Arithmeticke, as to
multiply Altars, because Ephraim (says he) has made many Altars to sin,
Hos. 8.

2. Secondly, they imitate the Gentiles in dedicating their Altars to such as
it is unknown, or at the least uncertain if ever any such were in the world,
as to S. George, S. Catharine, and S. Christopher, doing no otherwise then did
the Romans, who consecrated Altars, Dijs incertis, to their uncertaiue Gods, or
these Athenians, who built them Deo ignoto, to their unknown God. But we need
not much seek to know whom they follow in these devotions, when as it is a
maine Argument urged by Bellarmine, that Altars and Sacrifices were used by the
Gentiles, therefore they must still be retained by Christians: I know not what
antiquity they pretend, nor what they can find in the Primitive Church, to
prove the lawfulnes of them, we deny not, but that the Fathers might term
the Table of the Lords supper an Altar:

And that first, in respect of the similitude it has to the Altar of the Old
Testament, for that on it are placed the Sacraments of Christ's body, which
before was figuratively offered up by the Priest upon the Altar.

Secondly, because on it were laid the Oblations and Offerings, which well
disposed people were wont to bestovv upon the poor, and this we will grant
them; But that there were any such Altars in use in the Primitive Church as
they pretend we absolutely deny. We have an High Priest (says the Author to
the Hebrews) who needs not daily as those Priests to offer Sacrifice, nor
that he should offer himself as often as the High Priest enters into the Holy
place, every year with the blood of others, for then must he often have
suffered since the foundation of the world, but now once in the end of the
world, has he appeared to put away sin by that Sacrifice himself Chap. 9.
v. 25. 28.

Well then, Altars of Stone and Metals are nov Note.
banished the Christian world, by the decree of our Lord Christ Jesus, and
herein we must observe that Precept of our Savior to his Disciples; Go not
into the way of the Gentiles in these things imitate them not; But what do
we, therefore altogether shun Altars, and Jmages, and Temples? It was an
old imputation indeed of Celsus and others, against Christians in the Primitive
Church, as it is now of the Romans against us, that we abandon these
Ceremonies, and relinquish them, to which my answer at this time shall be no
other then what Origin gave Celsus; Celsus affirms (says he) that we shune
Altars and Images, because he takes it to be the belief of that invisible and
inexplicable Communion we maintain; When in the mean time he perceives not,
that to us the minds of the just are for Altars and Temples; From which
doubtless are sent forth these most sweet odours of Incense, vows I mean, and
Prayers from a pure Conscience: We are not therefore ambitious in moving
Altars, or framing Images, which heretofore have been the Tabernacles of
Devils, and C^ges of uncleme Spirits; But rather embrace such living Altars, as
one whom we see to burn the true fire of zeal, kindled not by vestall
Virgins, but by the Spirit of God.

Let any man (adds that Father) make an inquiry into those Altars which we
expound, and compare them with those which Celsus (I will say which the Pope
would bring in,) or the Images which are fixed in the mind of them which worship
God with Phydias's or Policletus's, or whom he ever men list to select of
cunning Artisicers, and he shall plainly see, that these inanimate and
senseless Colosses shall decay and corrupt with time, whereas these living
Sanctuaries shall be immortal, and continue for ever.

Shall we fear (Beloved) least Altars and Images be taken away, or Churches
loose somewhat of their Grace and Government.

I must tell you with S. Ambrose, that neither our Prayers nor Sacrifices stand
in need of such trimming, the best adorning of Sacraments, is not Tissues and
Silk, or embroidered Canopies, or spangled Crucifixes, or painted Poppets, or
any the like faceings, (...) our (...) their High Altars note this.
Popery sets forth her Altars, more like Pageants then places which favor of
Christ's simplicity, but the redeeming of Captions, etc.

But now what should we admire those Altars whose covering our Savior Christ
pronounced to be but untighteous Ma^mon, or those Ce^sers whose metal S. Peter
was not ashamed to confess that he had none (...) Cry not therefore, Templum
Domini, etc. The Temple of the Lord, etc. as did sometimes the Jews, Ier. 7.
He is the Temple of the Lord, in whom true faith dwells, who is clothed with
Justice as with the veil of the Tabernacle, in whom not Temperance alone, or
Abstinence sing their parts, but in whom the whole set of virtues make a
complete Quire; Would thou therefore like the Gentiles build an Altar, and
yet not as did these Athenians to the unknown God? Why, see matter and stuff
prepared to thine hand, the Prophets and Apostles for the foundation, Christ
himself for the chief Cornerstone:

Would thou lay it over with pure and refined metal? Why, see the word of
God, it is like Gold 7. times purified in the fire.

Would have a Beast to slay? Mortify and kill thy beastly affections, which
otherwise would kill thee.

VVantest thou a knife to kill them; Take the Sword of Preaching not into thine
hand, but into thy heart, that is, it which is sharp^r then a two-edged sword,
and cutteth to the dividing and separating of soul and Spirit.

Are all these things prepared, and lackest thou yet fire to consume them? Why
zeal must be that fire, without which all these will profit thee nothing.

O beloved! if these were the Sacrifices of the Romanists, or these the Altars
of Papisme, I would change my speech, and most heartily request you to join
hands with them, and let the seamelesse coat of Christ to suffer rupture and
division no more between us.

No longer should thy blessed name (sweet Jesus) bear reproach among the
uncircumcised infidels for our separation, but if their Altars be but the Popes
Exchequers, and the Priests but like the Publicanes, which sit there at the
receipt of custom; Go out of Babylon, let us treat no longer with her upon
Articles of agreement.

What Erasmus says of the Altars of our time, the same verdict Ad Gulcel.
Absasem Apol^
S. Bernard gives of the Altars of his time, by the hight of such sumptuous and
wonderful vanities (says he) men are more incited to offer then to adore.
Thus riches are swallowed up by riches, thus money draws in money, because I
know not by what means (but so it is) where men see most, there are they most
willing to give.

On Altars therefore is presented the beautiful portracture of some Saint, and
it is thought so much the more holy, by how much the more beautiful. Men run
to kiss it, they are invited to enrich it, and more are astonished at things
curious, then inclined to adore things religious; O vanity of vanities, and yet
not greater vanity then madness, the Church abounds in the Walls, and wants in
her poor; She clothes her stones with gold, and leaves her Son naked, to
the cold, the maintenance of the poor serve to satisfy the eyes of the rich,
the curious find matter to delight them, the distressed find no bread to
sustain them.

But are these the devotions which Rome so vaunteth of? Well might S. Austin (
in Psalm. 43. 49.) then wish those of his time to forbear Sacrificing and
Altars, if this be all the fruit of them.

Alas! he shows himself far from alowing such impostures, (says he) If
thou have a fat Bull, reserve him not for the Altar, as if Jewish or Gentilish
Sacrifices were in use, but kill him for the poor, though they cannot drink
the blood of Goats, yet they ca^ eat the flesh of Bulls, and he which said
unto thee. If I hunger, I will not tell it thee, will then tell thee I was
hungry, and thou gave me to eat.

But what Altar then would he have us to erect to God? What Sacrifices, thinks
he, ascend best pleasing in his sight? Why, he turns us to the Psalmist. Offer
unto the Lord, the Sacrifice of praise, an humble and a contrite heart shall
thou not despise.

So then would thou build an Altar? Why, the loftiest Altar thou can
build, is a lowly heart: Would thou have something to offer, see an
oblation passing the blood of Goats and Calves, and Sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving.

Well might we hear, least God should have required something without us,
something in the house that the M^thes had corrupted, something in the Garner,
which the Mice or vermin had consumed; Something in the Field, which the Fox
or Wolf had devoured; But he sends us to our selves, and to our immodest
Closet, which none but God can unlocke, (says Austin) thine Altar is thy
conscience, offer thereon the Sacrifice of praise.

We are secure, we go not into Arabia for Frank incense, neither do we rip up
the bowels of the earth for Stories to beautify our Altars, If Paul could find
an Altar abroad; Know. Christians have it at home, within their own breasts.

If all these Authorities be not sufficient, take but one more for all, past
all exception fresh in memory; To wit, the testimony of the reverend learned
Prelate D. Thomas Morton Bishop of Durham in his Iustitution of the Sacrament
set forth by public Authority and approbation Anne 1631. and since (...) Anne
1635. with enlargements. Where L. 6. c. 3. S^ct. 8. p. 416. 417. and c. 5.
Sect. 15. p. 463. (if the latter be his Addition) where thus he writes: If
furthermore we speak of the Altar you will have it to be rather on earth
below, and to that end you object that Scripture Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar
(says the Apostle) whereof they have no right to eat, that serve at the
Tabernacle; This some of you greedily catch at, for proof of a proper
Sacrifice in the Mass, (See the Rhemists in their Annot. upon the place, and
Mr. Breerly in his Book of the Liturgy, Tract. 3. Sect. 3. Sub. 4.) and are
presently repulsed by your Aquinas, expounding the place to signify either his
Altar upon the Cross, or else his body, as his Altar in Heaven; Mentioned
Apocal, 8. and called the golden Altar. Aquinas, istud Altar vel est Crux
Christi (...)

If we our selves should tell you, how some one affirms, that this Altar,
spoken of by (...) the Apostle^ is the body of Christ himself in Heaven^ upon
which and by which all Christians are to^ often up their Spiritual Sacrifice
of Faith Devotion, Thankfulness Hope and Charity; You would presently answer,
that this one cea^ainely is some Lutheran or Calvinist^ the words are so
contradictory to your R^mish Gatbe not with standing you may find all this in
the Antididagma of the Divines of (...). Antididagm: (...) de Miss^, Sacrificie
Post (...) (Habemus Altar) Heb. 13. Et Apoe. 8. (Aure^m Altar) in que and per
quod omnes Christiani universa Sacrifitia fid^i devotionis, gratiarum actionis,
Spei, and Charitatis De^ Patri debent offerre. Atque it a sit ut Christus sit
Altar, Sacerdos, and Sacrificium. August. (...) de (...)

Besides your Argument drawn from the word Altar, in this Scripture is so
feeble and lame a Soldier, that your Cardinal was content to leave it behind
him, because many Catholics (says he) interpret it otherwise. Bella^ Quia non
desunt (...), qui interpretantur (...) vel de Cruce, vel de Christo ipso, (...)
L. 1^ de Missa. c. 14.

And indeed, who is of so shallow a brain, as not to discern notorious
conconscionablenesse of your disputers, who confessing that the Apostles in
their times did Abstain from the words Sacrifice, Priest and Altar, do
notwithstanding allege the word, Altar, in the text to the Hebrews, for proof
of a proper Altar in the Mass. Will you be contented to permit the decision of
this point to the judgment of your Jesuit ^stius. Estius Comment. in 13. ad
Hebr. (Habemus Altar) Thomas Altar his interpretatur C^u^m Christ's, ^l i^sum
Christum, de quo edere, inquit, est fructum passionis percipere, and ipsi
tanquam Capiti incorporari. Crucem Christi pr^prie vocari Altar nulla
dubitatio est. Vnde Ecelesia ^^cat A^am, Cru^is Arbitror Expositionem Thoma
magis esse Germanam, quam innuit Apostolus cum paulo post dicit (Iesum extra
p^rtam passum esse) ire in ara Crucis obiatum; Vt taceam, quod toties in hae
Epistola, atqu^ ex institute per Antithes^m comparat Sacerdotem ministrantem
Tabernacul^, cum Christ ^^ipsum offerente Cruoem Sane cum nullam facere
voluerit mentie^^m Sacrific^^ incruenti nonae legis, non multum verisimile est,
eum (...) aliud agentem, velut ex abrupto noluisse de Sacrifici^ incru (...)
Sermonem jungere; Sed potius cruenti in Cruce oblate memoriam ex antedictis
remeare hu^ pertines quod Corpus Christ in Cruce oblatum, Panis vocatur, fide
manducandus. Vt Ioh. 6 P^nis quem ^g^ dabe.

He adhereth to the Jnterpretation of Aquinas, which is that here by Altar is
meant the Cross of Christ's sufferings Which he collecteth out of the text of
the Apostle, where he says of the Oblation of Christ's Passion, that it was
with out the gate, and observes, for confirmation-sake, that the Apostle
often, of purpose, opposes the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross to the
bloody Sacrifice of the Old Testa^ment, so far as never to make mention of
the Sacrific^ of the New Testrment, So he, what is, if this be not ou^
Protestantiall profession, concerning this word Altar, t^ prove it to be taken
improperly for the Altar of Christ^ Cross; And not for your pretended proper
Altar of the Mass.

But we are cited to consult with the ancient Fathers be it so, if then we
shall demand where our High Priest Christ Jesus is, to whom a man in fasting
must repair; Orig^n resolves us, saying: He is not to be sought here on Earth
at all, but in Heaven. Origin Iejunans debes adire Pontificem tnum Christum qui
vtiqu^ non in terris quaerendus est, sed in Coelis. Et per ipsum debes offerre
Hestiam Deo. In Levit. c. 16. Hom. 10.

If a Bishop be so utterly hindered by persecution, that he cannot partake of
any Sacramental Altar on Earth, Gregory Nazianzen will fortify him, as he did
himself, saying: I have another Altar in Heaven, whereof these Altars are but
Signs; A better Altar to be beholden with the eyes of my mind, there will J
offer up my Oblations; Gregor Nazianzen. Si ab his Altaribus me arcebunt, ut
aliud habeo, cujus figurae sunt ea, quae nec oculis ^ernimus, super quod nec
ascia, neo manus aseenda^, nec ullum Artificum instrumentum auditum est, sed
mentis totum hec opus est buic quae per contemplationem estabo, in hec gratum
immolabe Sacrificium, Oblationes and Holocausta, tanto praestantiora, quanio
veri^as ambra^ Orat. 28. p. 484.

As great a difference (doubtless) as between Signs and things, etc. For your
better apprehension of this truth, if you will be pleased to observe that
Christ in the time of the first Institution and Celebration of this Sacrament,
propounded it, in the place where he with his Disciples, gave it unto them, to
be Eaten and Drunken; Then tell us where it was ever known, that any Altar was
ordained for Eating and Drinking? In Gods Book we find Levit. 9. that the
Priests themselves were not permitted to eat their Oblation on, but besides
the Altar. Neither may you think it any Derogation to this Sacrament, that the
place whereon it is Celebrated, is not called an Altar of the Lord, seeing the
Spirit of God, by his Apostle has dignified it with as equivalent Attributes;
For the Apostle, as he called this Sacred Banquet purposely, The Supper of the
Lord, and the vessel prepared for the Liquid: The Cup of the Lord; So did he
name the place whereon it was set: The Table of the Lord, and the contemners
thereof, Guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; And thereupon did denounce
the vengeance and Plague, which fell upon profane Communicants, the judgment
of the Lord and all these in one Chapter. 1. Cor. 11.

Thus this learned Bishop point-blanke against Pocklington, Shelford, Reeve and
the Colier, who in the point of Altars, and wresting of Hebr. 13. 10. to
material Altars or Lords-Tables, are more Popish then the very Jesuits and
Papists themselves, who as the Bishop here proves, disclaim this most gross
sottish interpretation of the text: I wonder therefore of the strong impudency
of those two Apostates, Bray and Baker, (very zealous Puritans, and eager men
heretofore against Altars, Images, bowing to Altars or the name of Jesus,
Images, Sacrifices, Sabbathbreaking, etc. but now are hot against them) since
Bishops Chaplains, as eager against them, when they were Lecturers, who dare
license such Popish trash, in direct opposition to Bishop Jewel, yea Bishop
Morton printed but one year before, by public license; And more I marvel at
the carelesnes of their two great Lord Prelates, who permit them thus to do
without control.

But perchance their Bishops may here be pardoned, because they are so wholly
taken up with the world and wordly affairs, belonging not to their functions,
that they have no time at all to think of God, Religion, or any part of their
Episcopal function, and so suffer their Chaplains to do what they please;
Who deserve a Tiburne-Tippet in stead of a Deanery or Bishopric (which they
gape after) for their pains, in licensing such Romish Pamphlets, at these in
public affront, not only to the Articles, Homilies, most eminent writers, and
establish^d Doctrine of our Church, but even of his Majesty's most religious
Declarations both before the 39. Articles, and after the last Parliaments
dissolution, and the eternal infamy and scandal of our Church, which they
cannot expiare with their lives.

Well, how ever they brave it out for the present, a time of reckoning I hope
will come ere long, to ease our Church of such viperous Apostates, the mildest
term, that charity itself (if regulated by truth) can give them for their
treachery in setting not only their licenses but names also to such Books as
these; which act plainly manifests, that having so long maintained the Arminian
Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints, that themselves are both turned
Apostates, to make good their Doctrine by practice and example.

But of this enough. Only let me conclude of them and the new English Priests
and Altar-Patrons in the words of old Gildas, who thus Caracterizeth them: De
Excidio and Conquest. Brit. Rerum Brit: Script. p. 134. 135.
Sacerdotes habet Britania, sed insipientes; quam plurimos Ministros, sed
impudentes; Clericos, sed raptores subditos: Pastores, ut dicuntur, sed
occisioni animarum lupos paratos; (quippe non commoda plebi providentes sed
proprij plenitudinem vontris quaetentes:) Ecclesiae domus habentes, sed turpis
lucri gratia eas adeuntes; rar^ sacrificantes, and nunquam puro cord inter
ALTARIA stantes: Praecepta Christi spernentes, and suas libidines rebus omnibus
implere curantes: Sedem Petri Apostoli immundis pedibus usurpantes, sed merito
cupiditatis in Iudae traditoris pestilentem Cathedram decidentes: Veritatem pro
inimico odientes, ac mendatijs ac si charissimis fratribus faventes: Iustos
innopes immanes quasi angues torvis vultibus consicantes, and sceleratos
divites absque velo verecundiae respectu sicut coelestos Angelos venerantes,
etc.

Cuius (...) CARBONE IGNITO DE ALTARI forcipe Cher^^^^ advc^o ^abia, and Isai^,
inundata su^^?

Which will serve for an answer to Dr. Alexander Read Parson of Fifield in
Essex, his late idle Visitation Sermon, (newly printed 1636.) upon this very
Text. Throughout which be makes his own private fantasy, the sole rule of
Decency, without one word of Scripture to back them.
A Note upon 1. Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently and in Order.
Tending to search out the truth in this Question:
Whether it be Lavvfull for Church-Covernours to Command indifferent decent
things in the administration of Gods Worship? Written by a judicious divine
and pertinent to the matters debated in the Quench-Coale.
ALL (I conceive) that this place houldeth forth touching the point of Decency
and Order, may be summed up in these particulars.

1. First, that the whole Church and every member thereof are to perform all
the duties of Gods worship in a decent and orderly manner.

2. Secondly, what the Church and Members thereof are to do in this kind; That
the Church Governors may and ough to see it done.

Thirdly, that it being the duty of Church Governors to see that all things in
the Cougregation be done decently and orderly; It is therefore their part in
eminent measure to be able to discern and judge what is decent and undecent,
what is orderly and disorderly.

Now, when I say, it is their part, I mean, it is their duty; Their place and
authority requires it, not that they always have a power and Spirit of
discerning to judge a right in this case; For, it seems, the High Priest with
the rest of his Brethren and Prophets, yea and David himself, all of them
thought it decent to bring back the Ark of the Lord upon a New-Cart, which
afterward David himself saw and confessed it, was not done after due order, 1.
Chron. 15. 13. From whence it appears (since they also are subject to errors
in this kind) that it will not be safe for them to judge and declare the
decency of things by no better a rule then their own wisdom, judgment and
pleasure; But even they also as well as the people must be guided by such rules
as the Holy Ghost directs us unto in this case, which are the holy and
infallible Scriptures, and with Scripture, Nature and Civill-Customes; Yea and
I willingly also admit the lawful Custom of the Church or Congregation in
which a man lives: For to judge of Decency by all these Rules we have warrant
in Scripture, as 1. Cor. 14. 34. 1. Cor. 11. 14. and 16.

And indeed, they who are to approve themselves in all their proceedings, (as
2. Cor 4. 2. When Peter and Paul commanded us to obey our Superiors they
commanded to obey the Bishops in the Doctrine of Christ, not in their own.
Tyndals Answer to Mr. Mores first Book, p. 286.
Paul dia) and as all Church-Masters ought to do, to every Man's conscience in
the sight of God, ought to be seriously guided by these patterns.

It is not fit for them (I say) to give for the ground of their proceedings,
their own wisdom and pleasure, but it be hooves them to justify their doings
therein from such rules, as every good Conscience may see approveable, 2. Cor.
1. 12. 13.

Fourthly and lastly, this place in hand houldeth-foarth also farther this
truth, that whatsoever thing the Church sees by those former rules to be
indifferent and decent, or which Church Governors shall by these rules declare
so to be, those things may and ought lawfully to be done.

For farther clearing whereof, and the better describing of the power of
Church Governors in these matters; It may be observed that of decent things
lawful to be done in Gods Church, some are; Indifferent and decent; As to
preach in a Gown or Cloak, whereof the one is no more necessary or expedient
then the other. But now they are become Laudable Ceremonies, whereas before
they were but Ceremonies alone. Now are they become necessary rites godly
Institutions, seemly ordinances, when as before they had no such names. John
Bales Image of both Churches on Apoc. 13. f. 108.

1. 2. Decent and Expedient; As to abide in single life, or to enter into
marriage; Of which though marriage in time of persecution be indifferent, yet
single life is more expedient, to prevent the troubles of the Flesh, 1. Cor. 7.

3. Necessary and decent, either always; As a Woman to keep silence in the
Church: Or at least Hic and Nunc, in some places and at some times, so as the
neglect thereof would be uncomely and unexpedient, by light of 1. Nature. 2.
Scripture. 3. Custom.


As, a 1. Cor. 11. 5. to 11.
Woman to be unvailed in the Congregation in Eastern Countries, so, to
abstain from blood, whilst the eating of it was offensive to the Jews.

Now, for such things as are necessary and (...), Church Governors have power
to give order and commandment concerning them. As did the Sinod at Jerusalem
touching those things, which they called Necessary, to wit, Necessary during
the time of the offense of the Jews. Which was necessary to be avoided: Acts.
15. 28. Of such things as are decent and expedient, Church Governors also have
power (...) declare the Decency and Expediency of them, yea and to advise and
persuade the practice of them; But not to give an Order or Law to bind the
people thereunto farther then themselves shall find it expedient and decent for
themselves.

Thus in point of abiding in Single-life, in time of the Churches Distress,
the Apostle gives his advise and judgment: 1. Cor. 7. 25. 40. Yea and
persuaded to it, for avoiding trouble in the flesh, Verse. 26. and 28. but would
not bind them to it, neither in point of Conscience nor of outward practise^,
as having no command for it from the Lord, V. 25. In which respect he calls
such a commandment (if he had given it) a Snare, V. 35.

And herein the power of the Church Governors falls short of the authority
of Civil Magistrates, who may in civill-matters make binding Laws for any
thing expedient, for publike-weale, which subjects are readily to submit (...),
1. Pet. 2. 13.

But See Dr. Barnes his Discourse, that Men's constitutions bin^ not the
conscience: p. 297. to 301.
Church Governors have not the like power in matters Ecclesiastical, to make
binding Laws for any thing expedient in the Churches behoof, unless
Necessity be joined with expediency.

Objection. Against this it may be objected, Paul had power to command
Philemon that which was convenient; Therefore he might make a Law commanding
the Church some expedient decent things.

Answer. It follows not; For first, its one thing to give a Commandment for
once, another thing to make a Law to bind One always to do the like.

Secondly, it is one thing to command a particular person, who may owe
himself to a Church-Governour, as Philemon did to Paul: Another thing to
command, yea to give a standing command and binding Law to a whole Church, to
whom he professes himself a Servant or Minister, as 2. Cor. 4. 5. over whom
he has no authority, but 1. Cor. 4. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 1. 14. Simile.
Stewardly or Economically, to wit, when he speaks in his Lords or Masters
name, not in his own. As the Steward in a family has not power over his
Masters Spouse, but when he speaks or shows his Masters command or
directions, not his own.

But, Note this
of such things as are only Indifferent and Decent, I do not find in Scripture
that ever Church Governors did lawfully advise and persuade them; Much less
charge and command them. And that this place in hand, 1. Cor. 14. 40. does not
give them any such power (though it be much urged to this end) may appear from
these reasons.

First, the place speaks not of Indifferent Decent things, but of
Necessary-Decent things, the neglect whereof was undecent, and disorderly, by
the light of Nature, Scripture and Custom. As 1 Cor. 11. to 17. c. 14. 2. to
38.
for Men to wear long-haire, women to,, be bare-headed, and for women to
speak in the Congregation, as also for men to speak many of them at once.

Secondly, the words of this place run not thus, Let all decent things be done;
Or let all things judged or declared by the Church Governors to be decent be
done, but thus, Let all things, to wit, all Ecclesiastical matters; As all
the Ordinances of God that are done in the Church, all the duties of Gods
worship; Whether Praying, Prophesying, Psalms or Sacraments, or the like, be
done decently and orderly, in orderly and decent manner:

But whether in that decent manner, which Church Governors do appoint, or in
some other, that the Apostle limitteth not, but only requires that all be done
d^cently, which if it be done, his rule here prescribed is observed and
followed.

3. Thirdly, the same may appear out of this place by this argument.

If this place of the Apostle did give power and authority to Church Governors
to command indifferent decent things, then he that should transgress the
commandment of the Church therein, should also transgress the commandment
of the Apostle: As, look what Order or Acts of Justice any civil Governor
does by virtue of the Commission of the King, He that violateth such Acts, or
trangresseth such Orders, transgresses also against the Commandment and
Commission of the King.

But, it appears to be otherwise in this case, (See D. Barnes, That men's
Constitutions bind not the Conscience, p. 297. to 300.) as for instance.

If the Church-Governour command a Minister to preach always in a Gown (it
being indifferent and decent so to do) he that shall now and then preach in a
cloak, transgresses the command of the Church; But not of the Apostle: For
he that preaches in a cloak, preaches also decently, or else whereto serves
Tertullians whole Book, de Pallio.

Now, if so be it be done decently, then it is all that the rule of the Apostle
requires in this point.

But, because this point is of great consequence both for Church Governors and
others to be truly informed in, give me leave to clear the same from some
other arguments; To wit, that it is not in the power of Church Governors to
command indifferent decent things in the worship of God by Order of Law.
(Prelates and Cleargy-men may be right well assured, that God never gave unto
them authority to make and establish so many Ceremonies and Traditions which be
contrary to the liberty of the Gosple, and are blocks in Christen men's ways,
that they can neither know nor observe the same his Gosple in liberty of
conscience, nor so attain a ready way to Heaven. John Paru^y his Articles. Fox
Acts and Monuments, p. 50^.)

First then, that which exceedes the bounds of Apostolical authority and
straightneth the bounds of Christian Liberty, that is not in the power of any
Church-Governour to command.

But to command indifferent decent things, by order of Law, exceeds the
bounds of Apostolical authority, and straightneth the bounds of Christian
Liberty. Ergo, etc. The former of these, to wit, that to command indifferent
decent things exceeds the bounds of Apostolical authority, appears from
the Commission granted to the Apostles, which was the largest Commission that
ever Christ gave to any Church Governors, This was the Argument of Ioannes de
Wesalia, Abb: Usperge^sis, Paraleip^mena, p. 419, to prove. Quod Prae lati non
habent autoritatem instituendi leges.
Math. 28. 20. Where our Savior gives them Commission, to teach all Nations
to observe all things whatsoever Christ had commanded them.

Now, all things whatsoever he has commanded them are Necessary, not
indifferent for the people to observe: If therefore the Apostles over and above
the Commandments of Christ, which are necessary, should teach the people to
observe indifferent things also, which Christ has not commanded, they shall
exceed the bounds of their Commission, 1. Cor. 14. 37. 1. Cor. 7. 6. 10.

OBJECTION. It will be in vain to object, that our Savior here speaks only
of matters of Doctrine and Faith, not of Government and Order: Answer.
unless it could be proved, that our Savior elsewhere did enlarge this
Commission, and gave them more illimited power in matters of Government and
Order or Indifferency: Which for ought I can s^e no man goes about to do,
unless it be from this place of the Cori, which has been already cleared (as
I hope) from any such meaning.

As for the second or latter part of the Assumption, that to command
Indifferent Decent things straightneth the bound of Christian Liberty, is of
itself evident. For, whereas (for Example,) a single man or woman are at
Liberty to marry where they will, 1. Cor. 7. 39. If the Apostle had bound them
from marriage by any command of his, though they had received that Gift of
Continency, yet he had then straightned and deprived them of their Liberty in
that particular, 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4. Col. 2. 20. 21.

OBJECTION. It is wont to be excepted against them, that Christian Liberty
stands not in the freedom of outward Actions, but in the freedom of
Conscience.

As long therefore as there is no Doctrinall necessity put upon the Conscience
to limit the lawfulnes of the use of outward things, Christian Liberty is
preserved, though the use and practice of outward things be limited.

ANSWER. Whereto I answer; The Apostle in this case leaves the people of God
at Liberty, not only in point of Conscience for lawfulnes to marry; But even in
outward See 1. Cor. 9. 4. 5. 6. 1. Tim. 4. 3. ^.
Actions and practice. Let him do (says he) what he will, he sins not, let
him be married, Verse. 36. As who should say, the Conscience being free from
sin in it, J will put no tie on the outward practice to restrain it.

2. Argument.
The second Reason may be this; They who are not to judge or censure another in
differences about circumstantiall things or matters of Indifferency, they
(surely) make a binding Law, that all men shall be of one mind or of one practice
in such things. But the former is true, from the rule of the Holy Ghost,
binding all Christians, even the Apostles as well as others, Romans 14. 3. Let
not him that eats despise him that eats not, and let not him that eats
not judge him that eats, for God has received him. Ergo, etc.

OBJECTION. But if it be said here, that this place speaks only of private
Christians, not of Church Governors.

Answer. I answer; The place speaks of Christians private and public, See
Niceph. Call. Eccles. Hist. l. 12. c 33 34. 35. Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c
21. 22. l 7. c. 28. 35.
seeing it reserveth and refers the judgment of our Brethren in such like
things, not to public persons, but only to Christ, Ver. 4. 10.

Third Argument.
The third Argument or reason is this: They who did accommodate themselves in
the use of Indifferent things according to the judgment and practice of all
Christians wheresoever they came, they (surely) did not make Laws and bind
Christians to accommodate themselves to their judgments and practice in the
use of things Indifferent: But the Apostles of Christ (and the Christians too
in the primitive Churches) did accommodate themselves in the use of Indifferent
things according to the judgment and practice of all Christians wheresoever
they came; As appears from the Sea Acts 21 23 24 26 27. Eusebius Eccles.
Hist. l. 5. c. 21. to 25 in the English translation.
Apostles Example 1. Cor. 9. 10. 21. 22. 23. To the Jews (says he) J became a
Jew, etc. Ergo, etc.

OBJECTION. But, here it may be objected, though the Apostles rather chose to
use their Liberty and their lenity then their authority in these indifferent
things, wheresoever they came; Yet if they had pleased, they might have used
their Apostolical authority in binding all Churches to their judgments and
practice in such things.

Answer. 1. Hereunto I answer, first, that doubtless if they had received any
such authority, they would in some place^ or other, and at one time or other
have claimed it and practiced it; For, a sword never used rusteth in the
scabbard; And, Frustra est potentia quae nunquam venit in actum. It is a true
Axiom, and pertinent to that we speak off.

2. Secondly, I say, that the Apostle himself does clear the point, when he
confesses he did thus accommodate himself even to the weaknesses of
Christians, Note this.
least he should abuse his authority in the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 18. 19. 20. O
that such Governors as plead so their Succession to the Apostles, and do
challenge in sundry passages of government Apostolical authority, would also
be pleased to study and emulate an Apostolical Spirit!

Fourth Argument.
Let a 4. Argument be this, That if the Synod of the Apostles and Presbiters
and Brethren of Jerusalem did reach their authority no farther the^ to lay upon
the Disciples necks the yoke and burden of Necessary things, and that only
during the time while they continued Necessary; Then See 1. Cor 7. 5. to 40.
Col. 2. 19. 20. 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4. Mar. 7. 7. 8. 9. Matthew. 15. 9. Gal. 1. 10. 11.
12.
may not any Succeding Synod reach their authority to lay upon the Church
Commandments and Canons of Indifferent things; For, this Synod at Jerusalem
was and ought to be the pattern and president of all Succeeding Synods; For,
Primum in vnoquoque genere est mensura reliqu^rum.

And our Savior teaches us to refute abetrations from Primitive patterns with
this, (Matthew. 19. 8.) Non sic fuit ab initio. From the beginning it was not so:
But the Synod at Jerusalem reached their authority no farther then to lay
Commandments upon the Disciples only touching Necessary things, Acts 15. 28.
Necessary (I say) either in themselves (as abstaining from Fornication;) or at
least in respect of present offense, as abstaining from blood, etc.

And let me conclude this Argument taken from the Apostle Paul his intercourse
with the Apostle Peter, about a matter of this kind: If the Apostle Peter was
to be blamed for compelling the Gentiles by his example to observe Indifferent
things or Ceremonies of the Jews; Then other Church Governors will be as much
blameworthy for compelling Christians by Law and by grevious ce^sures, to
observe the Ceremonies now in question, though they were Indifferent. But, the
Apostle Paul tells us, that Peter was to be blamed in this case, Gala. 2. 11.
14. Ergo, etc.

OBJECTION. Now, if any except thereat (as some are wont to do in this case)
and say, that Peter was therefore blamed, because the Ceremonies to which he
compelled the Gentiles were not urged as things Indifferent, but as Necessary
to Justification and Salvation.

ANSWER. I answer; This is but a mere evasion, and will stand them in no
stead; For, it is certain, Peter did not account them as necessary, he knew
the contrary, nor did he so use them himself, nor so compel others to them;
But, knowing his Liberty for him (a Jew) to use them among the Jews, he used
them when the Jews came down from Jerusalem, out of a tender care to prevent
their offense.

OBJECT. But, you will urge again, and say: The false Teachers did urge them
as necessary.

ANSWER. I answer; What then? So did the Christian Jews at Jerusalem, yet Paul
himself used them there, Acts. 21. 23. 24. 26. 27. notwithstanding the corrupt
opinion of worship and Necessity which they put upon them, as much as ever did
the false Teachers in Galatia.

OBJECTION. Why then (will you say) did Paul blame that in Peter, which he
practiced himself?

Answer. He had indeed blamed Peter for that which he practiced himself, if he
had therefore blamed him for practicing such Ceremonies, because they were
urged by others with a corrupt opinion of Necessity and worship.

QVERE. What was then the difference that made the practice of Paul lawful in
using the Ceremonies at Jerusalem, and the practice of Peter unlawful in using
the same Ceremonies at Antioch?

ANSWER. J answer. The difference was this: Though that corrupt opinion of the
necessity of the Ceremonies prevailed alike in both places; Yet the Ceremonies
themselves had not the like warrant in both places. In Jerusalem they were
known to have been the Commandments of God, and were not yet known to the
Christian Jews to have been abrogated, and therefore at Jerusalem they had
warrant from God to use them, to avoid the offense of the weak Jew there; But
at Antioch and in all other Churches of the Gentiles they were, (at best) but
things Indifferent, as having never been commanded of God there; Whence it
was, that Peter saw his Liberty to forbear them there at his first coming.

QVERE. What was then the Sin of Peter in resuming the practices of the
Ceremonies there?

ANSWER. His Sin was double. First, the abuse of his authority in the Church,
for that unawares by his Example he compelled the Gentiles to the use of such
Ceremonies, as himself saw Liberty to forbear amongst them; And which having
never been commanded by God to them, he had no power to impose on them. His
other sin was, the dissembling or concealing of his Christian Liberty which
he should then (then) have stood upon, when he saw the false teachers urge
these Ceremonies upon the Gentiles as well as upon the Jews, to the prejudice
of their Christian Liberty.

When things that are indifferent are commanded to be done of necessity (as
now all our Prelates Ceremonies are) then are not the same to be obeyed,
because the same destroys our freedom in Christ. Dr. Barnes says: Men's
Constitutions bind not the Conscience. p. 300.

The Sum of all this will lead us by the hand one step farther, namely; If it
be a sin in Church Governors to command (especially upon strict penalty)
Indifferent decent things; It will be a sin also in Ministers, and in private
Christians to subscribe Ex animo, and to yield obedience by Co^formity to such
commands, although the Ceremonies were as good (indeed) as they were pretended
(which I believe they are not) Indifferent-Decent-Things. For, does not such
voluntarily Subscription and Conforming to them build up our Church Governors,
yea and with them (that which is most to be taken to heart of us, our
Sovereign civil Governors also in the confidence, that such commandments
are as well lawfully given by them, as received and obeyed, yea confirmed and
allowed by us?

Now, to build up or edify a Brother to sin is properly to offend a Brother;
For the proper Definition of an offense is, that which edifieth a Brother unto
Sin, as the original word expresses it, 1. Cor. 8. 10. and so to sin
against a Brother, is to wound his Conscience; Yea, and as much as in us lies,
to cause him to perish for whom Christ died; Which is no better then Spiritual
Murder of his Soul.

Now, if thus to edify any Brother to Sin be so heinous an offense, how much
more heinous an offense is it, to edify our Governors to the giving and
urging of such commandments, yea and to the sharp Censuring of all others,
as refractory and factious persons, who choose rather to undergo the loss of
the greatest Comforts they enjoy i^ this World, then to wound the Consciences
either of them selves or of their Governors.

It is true, by forbearing obedience to those commandments we offend the
Spirits of our Governors, and make them to be (though causelessly) offended
with us; But by yielding obedience to these things we should offend their
Consciences in edifying them to sin, and provoke the Lord to be offended with
them. Better they be offended with us, without fault, then through our fault
God to be offended with them and us.

It is not for Christians; Much less for Ministers, to redeem outward peac^
and Liberty at so de^re a price as the hazard of the blood of so many precious
Souls, especially of our Governors in highest place and Authority.

What then shall we think of those Our Prelates ought to be our Servants as
the Apostles were to teach us Christ's Doctrine, and not Lords over us to
oppress us with their own. Peter called it tempting of the Holy Ghost, Acts
15. to lade the Heathen with ought above that w^^ch necessity and Brotherly
Love requires, and Paul rebukes the Corinthians and Galath^a^s for their
overmuch obedience, warns all men to stand fast and not to suffer themselves
to be brought into bondage. Tyndal Answer to Mores, 1. Book, ^. 285. 286.
Lordly Dominering Prelates, who not only take upon them to enforce both
Ministers and people to the observation and practice of the Ceremonies
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, further then the Sta^u^e of 1. Eliz.
c. 2. and the Law authorizeth them; But likewise by their New-printed Vsi^ation
Oaths and Artic^es, presume (like so many P^pes and Parliaments) contrary to
the Law of God, the 25 H. 8. c. 19 21. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 13. Eliz. c. 12.
Statutes of the Realm, and their own 13. Canon (even of their own heads
alone, (without the Kings Authority or License under his great Seal) to impose
new Popish Rites and Ceremonies of their own devising, See Bishop Wrens
Visitation-Articles.
(is standing up at Gloria Patri, the Gospel and Nicene Creto; Bowing at the
name of Jesus, Praying toward the East, Bowing to Altars and Commu^on-Tables,
and the lik^, of which there is not one syllable in Scripture, or B^^ke of
Common Prayer itself, and so are directly prohibited by the Statute of 1.
Eliz. c. 2. which prohibites the use of any other Rites or Ceremonies then
those expressed in the Book of Common Prayer, under severe penalties, I do
believe stedfustly and faithfully, that you Bishops are ten times worse then
the Great Turk. For he regards no more but rule and Dominion in this world,
and you are not therewith content, but you will also rule men's consciences, yea
and oppress Christ and his holy Word. Dr. Barnes, p. 284.
to enforce them on Ministers and people against their consciences, by
Excommunications, Suspentions, deprivations, imprisonments, threats and such
like open violence?

Certainly, we must needs conclude them to be mere Acts 4. 1. ta 13. c. 5. 17.
to 42. Fox Acts and Monuments 1610. page 415. 416. 417. 418. 428. 434. 435.
438. 552. 562. 567. 598.
Antichristian tyrants, not the meek Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
never took such authority and State upon them, thus to tyrannize it over men's
consciences, bodies and estates in things indifferent, much less in things
unlawful, as many of the Ceremonies and Jnjunctions are; Against which all
godly Ministers and people ought solemly to protest, and to go on 126. H. 8.
c. 1. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. E^. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz.
c. 1.
boldly in their Ministry and Christian duty, in despite of all their threats,
imprisonments, their suspentions and Excommunications to the contrary, which in
truth are mere nullities, not only by Gods Law, but by the Gal. 5. 1.
Laws and Statutes of the Realm, since our Bishops have no Lords Patents or
Commission under the broad Seal Authorizing them to exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or Censures, or to keep any Visitations and
Consistori^s; And since all their proceedings, suspentions, excommunications,
are made in their own names, under their own Seals, not his Majesty's, as
they ought by Law to be. Wherefore Exposition on the Prophet Abdias, the last
page of all.
Let us all now stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ (yea and the Laws
of our Realm too) have made us free, and not be again entangled in the
Prelates yeokes of bondage, formerly grievous, but now intolerable.

I shall close up all with Bishop Pillingtons words. It is not meet that God
should be King, and the Pope and Prelates to make Laws for him to rule by: But
God rules by his own Laws.

Gregorius Magnus Pastoralium, l. 3. c. 5. Aliter admonendi sunt subditi, and
aliter Praelati. Illos, ne s^bjectio conterat; Jllos, ne locus superior
extollat: Illi ne minus quae rubentur jmpleant; Illi, ne plus justo jubeant,
quae compleantur. Illi ut humiliter subjaceant; Illi quoque ut temperanter
praesint.

Marsilius Pat: D^fensoris Paris: Pars 2. c. 28. Talium Decretalium ordinatores
praeter licentiam fidelis Legislatoris aut Principis, ad ipsorum quoque
observationem quenquam inducentes verbis su^reptilijs, quasi cogentes,
comminando simplicibus eorum transgressoribus damnationem aeternam, aut
blasphemias, five anathemata, vel alias maledictiones inferentes in quenquam
verbo vel scripto, corporaliter sunt extremo puniendi supplicio, tanquam
Conspiratores, and Civilis Schismatis concitatores. Est enim gravissima species
CRIMINIS LAE SAE MAJESTATIS, quoniam IN PRINCIPATUM DIRECT COMMITTITUR; Ad
ejus etiam supremi pluralitatem, and conseque^ter per necessitatem ad
solutionem cuiuslibet Politiae perducens.

I should be glad to see this adjudged for Orthodox Law, as it is, and executed
on our audacious Innovators, convicted of High treason by it.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
CHristian Reader, since the finishing of this Treatise a memorable Story has
fallen out in the Town of Colchester, in the County of Essex, worthy public
knowledge, which I shall here relate.

One Thomas Nuceman Parson of the Parish Church of S. Runwald in Colchester
caused the Communion Table in his Church to be removed and rayled in Altarwise;
Which done he enjoynes all the Communicants to come up to the new rail, and
there to kneel down and receive the Sacrament, refusing to administer the
Communion to any but such who came up to the rail, though present in the
Chauncell and ready to receive it in the accustomed place and manner, and
commanding the Churchwarden to present them to D. Aylot (the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Surrogate, for that Town during his Metropoliticall Visitation)
for not receiving, when as they should have presented him for not giving them
the Communion, when as they there proffered to receive it, after their ancient
manner. One Mr. Burroes of that Parish being thrice put by the Sacrament, for
not coming up to this new rail, and yet presented for not receiving,
thereupon prefers a Bill of Indictment upon the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2.
against Nu^oman for this Innovation at Colchesters Sessions: Which Indictment
being ill drawn, and most of the grand Jury Nucomans friends, an Ignoramus was
retained thereon, and Dulman the Clerk that drew it, might have well been
added thereto.

This Indictment only exhibited so troubled Nucoman and Dr. Aylot, that the
next Court-day Mr. Burroes is excommunicated for not appearing in Court, though
he made his personal appearance, and there continued till the Court was risen,
as he could prove by 20 witnesses, and the Dr and Register both confessed as
much, (such strange justice and vexatious oppression now reigns in these
spiteful, I should say spiritual Courts.)

The next Lords day, Nucoman publishes the Excommunication in the Church, and
then sends the Churchwardens to Mr. Burroes there present to command him to
depart the Church: Who coming to him accordingly; He told them, that the
Excommunication certainly was forged by Nucoman his enemy, that there was none
granted against him in the Court, for he was present all the while; And how
ever, it came not out in the Kings name, under the Kings Seal, and by an
authority derived immediately from the King by special Letters Patents, as it
ought by Law to do, and the express provision of the Statutes of 1. Ed. 6. c.
2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. and therefore it was void in Law, neither
would nor could he in point of loyally to his Majesty obey it, being not made
by his authority. Whereupon the Churchwardens left him.

Nucoman hereupon bids them carry him out of the Church; The Churchwardens
refuse to do it. Then he charge the Constables to do it: Who c^^ming to Mr.
Burro^s; he told them, that he was not excommunicated, that they had nothing to
do in the Church, neither was it any part of their office but the
Churchwardens to remove him, and therefore bid them to do no more then they
could justify by Law, else they should smart for it. Upon this they left him.

Nucoman hereupon puts off his Surplesse, closes his Book and g^eth out of
the Church, the people follow him by degrees.

Mr. Burroes sits still till about 11. of the clock when the Clerk came to
shut the doors.

The next day there was a great stir about this business, Nucoman would have
this a disturbance against the Statute of 1. Mari^e. c. 3. Mr. Burroes said,
that he was the disturber and the Dr, for publishing and granting such an
illegate excommunication and giving over divine service without cause, and that
he was not to go out by Law if the excommunication had been legal, but ought
to have been carried out by the Churchwardens, and so was no disturber. Much
ado there was about it.

Mr. Burroes to clear the business goes to the Register and Dr. to know whether
he was excommunicated or no, and for what cause.

At first they denied he was excommunicated, neither would they believe that
Nucoman had published any excommunication against him: Which when he made
appear, they then told him he was excommunicated indeed by the Court: He
demanded for what cause? They answered for not appearing: He replied he was
present all the while in Court, and that they both knew to be true; And is
this, said he, your justice to excommunicate men for not appeapearing, when
they are all the while in Court?

To which Dr. Aylot answered, ^ Sir, you are an audatious fellow indeed, you
will indite your Minister for Innovations, we will take you down in time, and
teach you how to indite Ministers, I will excommunicate you ^ all the Parishes
round about and throughout England, and see who dares absolve you, for
Inhibition I am sure you can have none.

Will you so Mr. Dr. said he, I thought your power had not been so large as to
reach over all England, nor your presumption and insolency so great as to
excommunicate his Majesty's subjects thus against Law, for inditing these that
break both his Majesty's Laws and Declarations; If you abuse me thus as you
say, you will, I will not only go to Church notwithstanding your
excommunication, but likewise bring you into the Star Chamber for abusing me in
this manner.

Well the This Dr. is an high Commissioner, and when any man opposes his
extortions or Innovations presently he has a dormant warrant and Pursevant to
arrest and vex the parties^ With which course he has so vexed and abused the
Country and his Majesty's authority, that hanging is to good for him; The like
have other Commissioners done.
Dr. proceeds, excommunicates him upon no grounds in other Parish-Churches,
threatens him with the High Commission, only for inditing Nucoman for abusing
him as before, and bringing in Innovations. And does not such a rejected
wilful oppressing unjust Ecclesiastical Judge deserve to be trussed up for
such proceedings? Were His 5. Sermon before King Edward, fol. 64.
Bishop Latymer now alive, and should hear such a story of an Ecclesiastical
Judge, (and most of them are of the same Litter,) he would not stick to say
before the King himself; J would wish that of such a Judge in England now we
might have the skin hanged up. It were a goodly sign, the sign of the Judges
skin. And certainly till the skins of some of these Spiritual Devill-Iudges
be fleyde off, and their necks graced with a Tiburne-tippet for their
extortions and strange oppressions of his Majesty's people, in a way of
justice, the people shall never live in quiet, but the Wolves will bite and
devour them.

Mr. Burroes, notwithstanding all this malice, proceeds in his resolution as
well as the Dr. on the 2. of October last, being the Lord's Day, he goes to his
own Parish Church, without any absolution, whereupon Nucoman gives over
service and departs, and all the people after him; Then he goes to another
Church where he was excommunicated; And after that to a third, they all do the
like and leave the Church.

On Monday the 3. of October, being the Sessions-day for the Town, he prefers
a new Indictment against Nucoman for his Innovations, the Mayor and Recorder
persuade him to desist, he refuses to do it; Then they wish him to put it off
till next Sessions, because it was a new case. He answered, the case was
plain, and that he must by the Statute indite him this Sessions or not at all.
Then they fall to persuade the Jury, not to find the Indictment; The Jury
being stout honest men, notwithstanding find it, Billa vera, this Innovation
of Nucoman being a notorious affront both against the Statute and his Majesty's
late Declarations; They desire them to change their verdict; The honest men
refuse to do it: Thereupon the Sessions is presently adiourned for 10. days.

Nuoman posts to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to acuaint him with these
proceedings, and to crave his direction what shall be done.

Upon his return he brings down a Pursevant and Process with him to arrest Mr.
Burroes only for prosecuting him in the Kings behalf, enters his house, and
first by policy, after that by power seeks to apprehend him, sets the whole
Town in an uproare, gets the Sessions adiourned 9. weeks longer to the end
that he may escape the punishment of the Statute, and remove the Inditemeut
thence into the Kings Bench for delay. Thus are the Kings good Subjects abused
by a pack of Iewde companions, and the High Commission made the Instrument,
not only of oppressing his Majesty's best subjects, but of patronizing knaves
and offenders in their open contempts against his Majesty's Laws and
Declarations, the chief use it now serves for. Master Burroes threatens them
all with the Star Chamber, for a conspiracy, and denying him and the Kings
Justice; And so the matter yet hangs in suspense.

This case is like to be a president for all England to follow; And if all
people where Communion-Tables are turned into Altars, or rayled in Altarwise,
or they enforced in a new manner to come up to the rail to receive; will
prefer the like Inditements against their Ministers (yea and Bishops too, the
chief Agents in these Novelties, upon the second clause of the Statute of 1.
Eliz. c. 2.) whereupon they are to be imprisoned 6. whole months, without
bail or mainprise, upon the first Conviction and Indictment, and to forfaite
one whole years profits of all their Ecclesiastical livings and promotio^s;
And for the second, to be imprisoned and deprived of all their livings ipso
facto; for the third to forfait all their goods, and be for ever made incapable
of any Ecclesiastical living or preferments; Our busy Romish Innovatours will
shrink in their bornes, and we shall be no more troubled with Altars, railing in
Lords-Tables, or ascending up to them to receive. For their ease and
encouragement, in which good work, I shall here sent down the Copy of his
Indictment, which the Jury has formed, against Nucoman, the Minister, as a
president worthy general imitation in all places where is need.

Iuratores pro Domino Rege praesentant, quod cum in Statuto Parliamenti Dominae
Elizabethae nuper Angliae Reginae tenti apud Westminster in Com: Midd: Anno regni
sui primo inactitatum and ordinatum inter alla existit, quod si aliquis
Persons, Vicarius sive alius Minister culuscunque generis qui cantare vel
pronunciare debet commune^ praecatlonem mentional: in libro c^i titulus, Liber
communis praecationis, ac administrationis^ Sacrame^torum, ac aliorum vituum
and Ceremoniarum Ecclesiae Anglicanae, in praedicto Statuto specificatus, de
vel post festum nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae, Sessionem dicti Parliamenti
tunc proxime sequentis, uti recusaret dictis communibus praecationibus, sive
administrare Sacramenta in tali Cathedrali vel Parochiali Ecclesia suis alijs
locis in quibus eadem administrare assuesere deberet, talibus ord ne and forma
quemadmodum in dicto libro specificantur editaque existunt, vel praefracte aut
obstinate persistens in eodem uteretur ullo; alio ritu, Ceremonia Ordine,
Forma, sive modo celebrationis, Cenae Dominicae aperte vel privatim, sive
Matutinis, vel, Vespertinis, administratione Sacramentorum, vel alijs apertis
precibus, qua^ in dicto libro co^memoratur and prescribitur vel predicaret,
declarent aut loqueretur quicquam in dero, gationem sive depravatione^ dicti
libri vel alicuius rei inde co^te^tae, vel alicuius inde partis, ac legitime
co^victus erit inde secundum huius Regnileges per veredictionem duodecim
hominum, aut per propriam confessionem, vel per insignem criminis evidentiam
perdet ac foristaciet dictae Dominae Reginae haeredibus and Successoribus suis
pro prim^ offensu profic^um omnium suorum spiritualium beneficiorum sive
promotionum provenientium vel emergentium per bonum annum integrum proxime,
post huiusmodi convictionem; Ac etiam quod persona sic convicta carceri
manciparetur per spacium sex mensium sine vadimenio vel manucaptione. Qu^dam
tamen Thomas Nucomanus Parsona Parochialis Ecclesiae Sancti Runwaldi infra
Colcecestriam in Comitatu Essex Clericus qui debet administrare Srcramenta in
dicta Ecclesia modo Ritu and forma prout specificatur and statuitur in dicto
libro 14. die Aprilis, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, F^anciae and Hiberniae Regis, fidei defensoris, etc. duodecimo, vi and
armis, de sua Schismatica and factiosa dispositione, and Innovationis ambitu
recusabat administrare Sacramentum Cenae Dominicae in dicta Ecclesia, modo Ritu
and forma sicut in dicto libro commemoratur and prescribitur, ac etiam ad tunc
and (...) praeftacte and obstinate in eodem persistens aperte (...) alijs
Ritibus, Ceremonijs, ordine, forma, ac modo C^lebrandae Cenae Dominicae, quam
in dicto libro specificatur and prescribitur, videlicet, in non collecando vel
collocari faciendo mensam Dominicam tempore administratiouis praedicti
Sacramenti in corpore dictae Ecclesiae sive Cancellae vel Chori eiusdem quo a
communicatibus dictae Parochialis Ecclesiae magis convenienter audiretur i^ sua
precatione ac administratione, ac etiam ijdem Communicantes majori numero secum
communicarent; Nec non in cogendo Communicantes and Parochianos dictae Ecclesia
novo ac inusitato modo and forma ad novam repagulam circa mensam Dominicam and
dictae Ecclesiae nuperime collocatam ascendere, ibidenque Cenam Dominicam
flexis genibus procumbe^^es alternatim recipere, recusandeque administrare
dictum Sacramentum Communicantibus and Parochialibus dictae Ecclesiae, ad
dictam repagulam non ascendentibus, idque loco uitato eiusdem Ecclesiae idem
accipere paratis and efflagitantibus contra ordinem, ritum ac formam in dicto
libro edit: and specificat: and consuetudinem Ecclesiae Anglicanae hactenus
usitatam and approbatam, ac etiam contra formam dicti Statuti, and pacem Domini
Regis nunc, necnon in gravem contumatiam and Contemptum Declarationum dicti
Domini Regis nuper editatorum, and in magnam perturbationem, inquietationem and
distractionem Subditorum dicti Domini Regis, and perniciocissimum exemplum
allorum Scbismaticorum ac Innovatorum, and suscitationem plurimarum Schismatum,
lituum, contentionum and seditionum inter Ligies dicti Domini Regis.

FINIS.

