To the right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, chief Secretary to
her Majesty, Chaunceller of the Order, and one of her highness privy Counsel,
all grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
THe endelesse making of books was a vanitye in the days of Solomon, when
Printing was not. The end of all, is the seat of God. Certainly men may not
make it a light matter in conscience, to trouble the world with unprofitable
writings. Yet, as in the shewebread that was showed to the people as a figure
of Christ the old loaves having served to their use were removed, and other
supplied in their room, yet still bread in nature, and twelve loaves in
number: so those writings that figure out Christ, and set forth Christian
duetye, may be oftentimes treated of, and eftsoons repeated and added to other
men's doings, not withstanding no great variety in the matter or manner of
handling. It has been thought expedient I write and publishe this little
treatise. Whereupon (right Honorable) therewithal I have thought it my bounde^
duty humbly to present it to your honors view: the rather, in part to
excuse mine over great boldness else when, but principally, to crave such
furtheraunce in the setting out thereof, as your honors piety and place
accustometh to show, to such as in their calling with their talentes, either
five, two, or but one, labor to set forth the truth, to instruct the simple,
and to save souls. This has been mine endeavor: the success whereof is to be
prayed for of the almighty and merciful God, who always preserve your honor
to the glory of his name, the benefit of his Church and this our country, in
all faithful service to her Majesty, and great comfort of her loving
subjects in the Lord. February. 14. Anno. 1582.

Your Honors most humble and bounden John Prime.

The Preface.
AS the use of all things is most precious, so is their abuse most pernicious.
Many excellent things are spoken of the Sacraments of Christian faith: They
are the Lords own ordinances, memorials of divine promises, monuments of our
duty, signs to the word which we profess, assured seals of his good will,
strong bands whereby we stand bound first to God in obedience, and then in
mutual love amongst our selves. Notwithstanding, these sacred mysteries, the
very instruments of the holy Ghost, have they not been of old, or are they
not now either unthankfully refused, or unworthily received, or less
duetifully regarded, then was, and is behoofeful? Full hands can not apprehend
any other thing, they are full already: foul hands and soyled in the clay and
brickeworke of sinful thoughts and deeds, they are profane, and should not
presume to touch his Jewels. Want of true knowledge in the word of God, has
bred sundry distemperatures and diseases, errors and heresies in the body of
Christ's Church in this behalf. When the writing is not known, the seals are
less or more then duly, and never aright esteemed of the ignorant man. When
the light of the Scriptures was hid under the busshel of a strange tongue,
the Sacraments also in the dark were most irreligiously contemned,
superstitiously abused, carnally and grossly mistaken. As good have a seal to a
blancke, as to a writing drawn in strange characters and letters that cannot
be read, or if read, yet understood but of a few, and of them no further then
it pleased the masters of corrupt time at their leisure, or begging Friars for
their gain, to expound in miserable manner, to hungry, poor, and sterued
souls. And then as good no bread at all, as so vile a prouender made of
mixtures, either hard, or dowbaked and clammie: either they could not chewe
it, or it could not nourishe them.

Thus was the Lords inheritance abused, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 19.
famished for want of true food, or fed as Irenee speaks, with lyme and
water, in stead of milk. The Devil knew he could not beguile in the light,
and therefore no sleight of Satan ever like to this to deceive men, Mar. 12.24.
and slay souls. Whiles that Christians were wise, they never sought in
pilgrimage from shrine to shrine, S. P. Q. R. Beda.
neither to Rome, nor to Jerusalem, nor to any singular place under heaven,
with observation of the place, Luke 17.20.
as if God were more tied to this region, then to that, one or other. The true
worshippers worshipped in spirit and truth. In truth, without hypocrisy,
Ioh. 4.23.
and in spirit, without external respects. For as the Conye is acquainted
with his own burrowe and safe rock: Prou. 30.26.
so Christians then knew where to seek, whither to run, and how to find
rest in heaven for their souls. They asked help always of an able hand,
trod the kings high way, knocked at the right gate, builded their house on the
only foundation: that is, they believed in Christ, called upon God, were
guyded by his spirit, trusted in his promises, hoped in his mercies manifestly
laid abroad, and sufficiently revealed in his written word, John 20.31.
and as certainly confirmed by the pledges of his will the holy Sacraments:
whereof this treatise is intended for all such as can be content to learn in
few words of a simple teacher.

Of the Sacraments in general.
The nature of a Sacrament.
A Sacrament is a sensible sign to the eye, instituted of God to be continued
in his Church, for the further assurance and increase of spiritual graces in
the faithful. Of which sort is Baptism and the Supper, August. epist. 118.
and only these two, even as they are jointly specified by the Apostle to the
Corinthians. 1. Cor. 10.


In the general may be observed these four notes chiefly. The institution
to be of God.

The institution.
1 Concerning the institution, as God only is to be hearkened unto in his
sayings, so must he alone he followed in his ways wheresoever he goes before
us, and leads us after him with the least thread. Reason not directed by
faith, is a disputing and a busy mistress in the forge of man's brain, and
she will be leader in all things. Zeal likewise without knowledge, is a rash
fire that licketh up every fond devise, feeds and glutteth her self on
superstitious fancies, whereupon ambition in the man of pride, The Papacy.
taking her advantage of the former two, has stolen away the peoples hearts
from their God under pretense of devotion, but in deed superstition,
enthronised her self in the consciences of men, and exercises a proud
dominion over the Lords inheritance in his holy Temple. Notwithstanding of the
Apostle we have learned a contrary lesson, Iam. 4.12.
that the only Lawgiuer in Israel is the Lord, because he alone sees the
heart, whereunto the Law is principally proposed, searches the reins, and
beholds the inward parts, may command, and will reward the good
conscience, will and is able to discern right, and judge uprightly, and has
denounced to take vengeance of the very souls of sinners, wherein they
closely, but chiefly offend. Neither may mortal men add to, take from, or
alter at pleasure his words: and what are his Sacraments, but his words made
visible, and invested with signs of his own ordayning? August. 80. tract. in
Ioh.
The examination of John's Baptism was on this manner: Whence is it? Matt. 11.15.
from above, or from beneath? of God, or of man? If from heaven, it was to be
received: if from the earth, they might reject it. For what is earth to heaven?
man to God? our dreams to his word? our dregs to his wine? Is there any
taste in ye white of an egg? What is chafe to wheat, or glass to a
diamonde? 1. Sam. 15.22.
Verily obedience is better then the sacrifice of good ententes, as they be
termed. For will we honor him with the fattest cattle out of the stall, or
worship him in the calfe of purest gold? the one is but a beast that eats
hay, the other the workmanshippe of the engrauers hands. By obeying, we offer
up our bodies and souls a reasonable sacrifice, wherein he is well pleased.
Thereby we reverence his majesty, adore his wisdom, subject our wills to his
will, rest in his word, making no reckoning at all of any institutions that
merely touch the conscience, but of his. Whereupon with the blessed virgin we
say, John 2.5.
What ever he commands, do, and also what he has not commanded, we fear
not to transgress and break asunder, as Samson did those green withes and
new cords. Judge. 16 9.
We know all such witchecraftes the Lord does utterly abhor. As for his
Sacraments, they are his own institutions, he marketh his sheep with his
own marks, writes all with his own singer, seals his writing with his own
signet. Neither should any presume so much as to set to these his seals, but
one ly such as are called to so hye a calling, to be as it were the keepers of
them to that end appointed: much less may men make new seals of their own
devising.

When it pleased GOD to seal his promise made to Abraham with the sacrament of
circumcision, Gene. 17.
he calls it his own covenant, and said, It is I the Lord, the author
thereof. A particular rule generally to be observed in every Sacrament of
either Testament: It is I the Lord.

The signs.
2 In the second place we are to take view of these seals, for they are
visible to the eye, as his voice is audible to the ear.

The drane water fly gazeth on every fair flower, but gathers no honye as
does the Be. The wandering sight co^sidereth little of the excellency of the
seals. Before it was true to say, No institution, no Sacrament: here we may as
truly avouch, No sign, no Sacrament. For ye whole is made of all his parts,
and every Sacrament has ever these two members, the outward sign, and the
inward grace, and without the sign is no grace sacramentally signified at any
time, neither is the show of a sign sufficient, it must be material and able
in a convenient proportion, to demo^strate and declare to man's frail
capacity, the grace implied and signified, as shall better appear in the
specials afterward.

The signs barely looked upon in themselves, they are base matters, earthly
elements, common and ordinary: but put once ye princes stamp to ye metal,
the seal to the wax, the wax and seal to the Lords promise, the case is
altered. For earthly, common and usual elements, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
that a little before were, do put now upon them, and are endued with divine
considerations: yet still in substance remaining ye same, but in efficacy,
virtue, service, ends, signification and representation of graces, base things
become beautiful and marvelous, being thus sequestered by God himself to so
high and holy purposes, and therefore are vsualy termed by the very names that
the graces themselves are called by. And this is also a common rule amongst ye
Fathers. See it so in examples out of the Scriptures. Circumcision is the
covenant, the Lamb the Passover, the Arc the Lord, Baptism our burial,
Christ the rock, the Bread his body, the Cup his blood, because the analogy
of these things is lively, the proportion plain, the signs significantly
ordained of God: and being thus uttered, they more affect our faith, and touch
our affections.

The invisible grace.
3 Thirdly, the graces, (that is, (the inward part of the Sacraments) are,
though singular in consolation, yet secret in the mysterye of their operation.
God works how he lists, and on whom he pleases. The Iay feeds below,
the carnal eye sees nothing but the bark and ryne of these things, bare
water and bakers bread. Faith flies higher, as the Eagle soareth upward, and
mounteth to heaven it self, where Christ sits at the right hand of the
father, the only ground work, life and soul of all the Sacraments that ever
were, or are in use. The song of Solomon is called the song of songs for his
excellency, Nazianz. de Sacro. Bapt.
and God the God of gods for his puissa^ce. In like manner, the graces we reap
and receive by Christ in ye sacraments, (so great and gracious are they) they
may be termed graces of graces: as namely, remission of sins, imputation of
righteousness, sanctification of life, and a special application of our
savior Jesus. Neither yet for all this (which is diligently to be noted) do
we tie or bind his goodness so hereby that he must needs work with, or can
not work without these means by his spirit, the salvation of them whom he had
chosen and destinated to eternal life before all worlds. Many Israelites that
died in the desert when they could not travail if they had been sore and cut,
were saved without circumcision. The thief that from the cross went straight
to heaven, was never otherwise baptized then in his own confession, faith, and
petition to Christ. Salvation is neither kneaded into ye dough, nor mingled we
water, no more then with the word, which is as Hierom says more truly
Christ, Hierom. in Psalm. 147.3. cap. eccle.
but proceeds from God, and is conveyed by ordinary means of either word or
outward signs, where they are not contemned, but may conveniently he had, and
are reuere^tly used as they ought.

The use and continuance.
4 And this is the fourth and last point, the right use and continuance of the
Sacraments. Physic is not prepared, but to be received. As in the Revelation,
no man receives the white stone, Revel. 2.17.
but to whom it is given: so no man reads the writing, but who receives it.
The author of the Sacraments, is God, the signs holy, the grace most holy.
This Manna would be kept in a golden pot, and these jewels set in ye purest
gold. The gift that is bestowed, is most sincere, the stone white that is
delivered. And ought not then the hand to be a clean hand, or rather the
heart a pure heart, that receives such pearls? GOD couenanteth to be our
God, should we not accept the offer, and rejoice in his covenant? Achaz in
hypocrisy pretended he would believe God without a sign. Esai. 7.12.
Certainly so must we do in deed many times. Balaam, Nom. 23.19.
that saw less the^ his ass, saw so much, ye Gods word is enough. Shall he
speak, and not do? Yet when he offers signs withal, to help forth our
infirmities in faith according to his word, either natural as the rainebow,
or artificial as the brazen serpent, or miraculous, or Sacramental, or
whateuer, if we then refuse them, in stead of shunning the fault of tempting
him, we run upon the contempt of his heavenly wisdom. Go preach, baptize
all nations. Mat. 28.19.
This is a general commandment, and must be observed. 1. Cor. 10.24
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords
death until his coming again. As often, therefore often and usually: until
his coming again, therefore perperually must this Sacrament be continued in a
godly remembrance of ye Lords death. Genesis 29.17. Deuteronomy. 34.7.
The old ceremonies were weak sighted like Leah, and therefore could not last
ever. Moses eyes were not dim, until his dying day: so the force of
Christian Sacraments remain in their full use until the end of the world.

Their sacraments, some were special for place and person. In Paradise the
tree of life was for the place, Genesis 2.9. Judge. 6.37. Esa. 28.8.
the wette and dried fleece, the going back of the dial, were personally to
Gedeon and Ezechias. And their chiefest Sacraments, either extraordinary, as
Manna and the rock, ceased in the wilderness: or ordinary, as circumcision
and the Passover, these also have had their end in the fullness of time, when
their womb (as Cirill speaks) was delivered of Christ, as a woman of her
child into the world. For Christ is come, and their ceremonies were of Christ
to come, and when he came, they as shadows yielded place at the presence of
the body. The difference of their Sacraments and ours consists in cleerenes
of knowledge, and continuance of tynte. They carried the former part of the
staff, and we the hinder end. Christ is borne betwixt us both, but we that
come after, have the fuller view, and see directly before our face, they
respectively and looking back to that which they carried and came after: and
therefore more obscurely then we. And now because Christ is borne no more,
lives no more, dies no more, and because all these things are plainly to
the eye painted, and poynted to with ye finger in our Sacraments, ours are not
henceforth to be changed any more, but are constant and perpetual, and
continually in all duty to be used and enjoyed till his coming again to judge
the quick and the dead in the last day.

Of Baptism.
The nature of Baptism.
Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration in water, whereby our sins are
cleansed, we clad with Christ, endued with his spirit, our names entered among
the number of Christian professors, in the name of the blessed Trinity.

The institution.
Touching the institution, whether it grow out of ye earth, or descend from
above, be of men, or of God, being of all confessed to be a Sacrament, and a
Sacrament being already proved to be always a divine institution, it is
needless to repeat or say further therein. Yet moreover and above that, our
Saviors own example and general commandment, Go preach, Mat. 3 15.
baptize, etc. are evident warrants, autentike, and special for proof herein,
that it is of God.

The form of the administration.
The form of the action declares what we receive of God, and there withal
enformeth us what we owe and ought to render him again. Through singular
mercy in the name of the Father, by like merit and mame of the Son, by the
virtue of the Holy Spirit, name and power thereof, we are made partakers of
all the privileges, that may be incident to such as shall be saved in the
house and Church of God. In whose lap, we are as it were new borne, new
washed, new apparelled, made new creatures in Jesus Christ. Such is the form,
so great the force of this sacrament.

Wherein if any man upon a farther desire to be instructed in the mysteries of
his profession, The marvelous operation of Baptism.
muse in mind, break forth, and say as Mary did to the Angel, Luke 1.34.
How may this be, that a material element should thus work in spiritual
things, that water touching the body should cleanse the soul, that water in ye
fountain where it is cleanest, having no such operation, should thus change
and be changed in the Church and font whither it is brought from his spring?
are these effects natural? Exodus 11.25.
Of old ye waters of Marah were made sweet, water in Cana, John. 2.8.
turned into wine, Exodus 7.17.
the rivers of Nilus into blood: and though every of these mutations were
marvelous in the sight of the wisest eye, yet in this case there is more done.
Mere and bitter water in comparison, is made exceeding sweet, sweeter then
the fruit of the ripest and purest grape: yea, yet more then this is done.
Cold and usual water, is really changed, truly, and indeed turned after the
manner of Sacraments, from a common moisture, into ye dew of gods spirit, and
into the blood of the Lamb, Revel. 7.14.
wherein the souls of ye Saints are washed. For although it leave not off to
be water, but remains as before, a visible sign, yet by the access of Gods
word, and the omnipotent power of his spirit, the Angel as it were
descending upon the poole in the Gospel, John 5.4.
the change is greater, then man's words can express.

By similitudes framed and uttered to our capacities, faith conceiueth
convenient instruction and sufficient comfort. Where the sun warmeth not,
water is a sterile and bare moisture, neither can it engender any thing without
the heat and help of the spirit, that moved upon the waters at their first
creation. Genesis 1.2.
For as it was then, so is it still, and as it was and is so in ye generation
of things: so much more is it so in the regeneration of man. Water of it self
cannot make a man, much less a Christian man. The proportion of the sign with
the graces signified.
The spirit of God is sometimes said to inflame and purify like fire, and in
this case to regenerate in water, to cleanse and wash like water. And as verily
as clear water cleanses and cools the body: so, and as truly, the like
graces by the blood of Christ and his spirit, are wrought upon the soul, by
entrance into this bathe. Wherein we may observe a further similitude, that as
in washing pooles, when men go into the^, they do off their aparell, and then
enter the bath, and bathe their bodies: so in this the old man is put off,
Adams fig leaves thrown aside, and then with niter and fullers soap, nay
rather with the blood of the son of God, all our former filthe is scoured
away. This dissimilitude is in this similitude, our former rags are never
resumed, as sinners resume their garments when they have washed. Those plaguey
clothes that took stayne and infection from sinful Adam, we bury or we
burn. The regenerate man has done away his former generation, dies to sin,
the gylte and dominion whereof lies as a dead body in the grave, and has no
more power over the creature which is endued with the new man, freed from
Satan, accepted into service and favor in the family of GOD, wears the
cloth of righteousness, and is apparelled as the woman in the Revelation with
the son of God. Reave. 12.1.


Wherein notwithstanding it is expedient, still and ever to remember from what
rock we were he wen, on what stock we grew, what we have lost, and what we
have found, how foul we were, how clean we are, that tasting how sweet
the Lord is, we may as it were, feel the difference between soote and sugar,
see and view the odds between our crimosin and blood red sins, and the
snow white innocence we have obtained in him.

To compare the state wherein we were by creation, and then in nature corrupted,
and now by grace and regeneration, were to compare an innocent life, a
deserved death, and life everlasting together, that is, Paradise, hell, and
heavenly bliss, betwixt themselves. For our case at ye first was no worse,
afterward no better, and in Christ betterthen ever before. Romans ^.
For as by one man came sin, and by sin death, which presupposes a former
innocence, and life: so by the man Christ, much more excellent is the
righteousness that is imputed to faith, imported by this Sacrament, and shall be
enjoyed without end. As the first Adam, eating of the forbidden tree, he
(susteining the person of al mankind) by his disobedience did set on edge his
posterities teeth: so the second Adam trod the wine press alone, and yet we
his posterity also drinck never the less of his wine. And here let no man
say, Prou. 9.2.
I have mixed mine own wine, I have compassed these things my self.
Strength, if it lean to presumption, is weaker then water, and the broken
reed: and yet the strongest things of man, are but mere weakness, the
purity of nature, pollution, liberty of will, thraldom, and the merit of
works, a stained cloute. And then if the clothe be so course, how course is
the list: or if the wool be course, can the clothe be fine? Adam begat Seth,
Genesis 5.3.
and all his children in his own likeness. For as the man that is not, cannot
beget himself that he may have a being: so man being naught, can never of him
self beget any thing else, or him self to be good again. Why the^ do we
presume? A puff of pride blows out the candle that was lightened of another
at the first, and cannot kindle it self the second time. The debtor in the
Gospel was not able to make payment for the ten thousand talentes, Matt. 18.24.
and the more in debte in process of time, the more unlike to come out of
debt, albeit he said as the adversaries of the truth say, if his Lord would
have patience, he would pay and satisfy all. The three parables in Saint Luke,
tend all to this purpose, Luke 15.
to show man's inhabilitie in every respect, and the Lords exceeding mercy
altogether. The lost groat lacks sense, the strayed sheep wit, the
prodigal son wisdom. The woman lights ye candle, sweepeth the house,
seeks diligently. The shepherd goes out into the wilderness, and brings
home on his shoulders. And as for the wastfull son, God in his providence
disposed so, that by afliction and famine, he should be taught and constrained
to return back, making a most true confession, that he had sinned against
heaven and his father, and was no more worthy to be called his son. Had
sinned, and therefore now only was to stand upon grace and pardon: had
sinned against heaven, and therefore in earth unfit and unable to make
satisfaction: had sinned against so loving a father, and therefore unworthy the
name of a son. Notwithstanding, while he stood yet a great way off, his
father saw him, and had compassion, ran, (prevented him with mercy) fell on
his neck and kissed him, killed the fat calfe, put shoes on his feeete, and
a ring on his finger, hired musicians, and called for the best robe, and clad
him therewith that was utterly destitute of al attire, except such as Job
speaks of: Job. 9.31.
Mine own clothes defile me.

Many excellent and rich ornaments are laid together in one heap in the
Prophet Ezechiel: embroydred works, Ezech. 16.
bracelets, silk, silver, gold etc. and all these God bestowed on them ye lay
dead in their blood, whom he raised to life, circumcised with his own hand,
dried their corruption with salt, washed their uncleanness with water, swadled
and clad them with new and precious apparel, even with Joseph's party colored
coat, or rather with the Queens garment of needle work, which yet was not of
her own making.

The old purifyings did prefigure out, and as it were made the first draught
thereof: but the water of Baptism most lively expresses his mercy and
compassion, whose only eye, and no man's else, took pity on us then, when we
lay, not wounded, but dead and long dead in our sins. In this water ye little
fish and humble Christian resumeth life again, ye lay gasping and dead on the
shore before. In this water ye Scorpion loses his venim, Cypr. 4. lib. epist.
7.
and can not sting. In this water, Sin, Satan, the flesh and the world lie
floting and drowned, as in the deluge in Genesis, 1. Cor. 10.1. 1. pet. 3.21.
and red Sea in Exodus, where Noah ye preacher of righteousness and a few with
him were saved in ye Arc, which after a sort was a figure of Baptism. The
Israelites went through on dry foot, Pharao and all his host drowned in the
red sea. But for all this, this is true in the letter of these stories, and
certain in the truth of a farther meaning, ye though Noah escaped drowning,
yet he was overcome afterward with wine: though the Egyptians were overwhelmed
al, yet there remained other enemies in ye desert: neither did Israel
straightwayes enter the promised land, without further labor and fightes first
had with sundry and diverse nations.

Hierom. ad Ocean. Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap. 7. Ephe. 5.25. Romans 7.
In this Sacrament, though generally iniquity be pardoned, and sin drowned,
and we saned, yet for all this, al infirmity is not quite abolished, we are
washed al, Ioh. 13.10.
but our feet (such are ye ways wherein we tread) need daily and continual
washing. The effect of Baptsme works not in a moment, but by little and little,
as the leaven seasoneth the whole five peckes at length. After a great
sickness, strength is not recovered but in continuance of time: the wound is
healed, but it must be skinned over also. When this mortality shall change for
immortality, corruption put on incorruption, ye old Phoenix be made a new,
then, and never till then perfectly, every wrinckle shall be made plain, every
spot washed, and every tear wiped away from our face, our nakedness covered
over, or quite done away, and we presented blameless to the judgment seat of
God. Col. 1.22.
In the mean time, while our dwelling is in this vale of misery and houses of
clay, it is our continual duty daily more and more to contend and proceed
from faith to faith, from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue,
crucifying the old man, having still recourse to that general grant of pardon
we obtained in Baptism at the first, remission of sins in the death of
Christ.

Not that this Sacrament be eftsoons repeated and reiterated again in fact,
Anabaptists.
but afresh recorded in faith, godly meditation, August. 11. tract. in Ioh.
vterus non repetitur.
and humble prayer. The father does not often begette his son, but the son
remembering that he was begotten of a loving father, bethinketh himself,
considers his duty, increases in piety, reverent awe and obedience.
Neither the seed one and the same grain is often sown, but being once sown
in due season, it brings forth his fruit. The harvest of man's perfection is
not in this world. The sowing which is once, and the growing time which is
still, is here: full ripeness is found else where. August. de Ieiunio.
Imus nondum peruenimus: we are but in the way to heaven, going on and
travailing till we come thither, even growing toward it, and groaning after it.
In ye midway, no man spinneth so even a thread that never breaks, treads so
right that never trippeth. For besides diverse actual sins, ye inevitable
sin of concupisce^ce which lusts against the spirit, is left still as a
sting in the Be, notwithstanding his honey and diverse graces by grace received.
The adversaries to the truth, in their Covent at Trent, 1. Decr. 5. Sess. Cat.
Tri. de. bap. sacr.
and in their Treatise of Baptism, would extenuate and make light of it,
saying, it is not in any wise sin, except it be conse^ted unto. Saint James
teaching what will be the end of sin, Jacob. 1.14.
says, that concupiscence te^pteth, draws and entiseth to (actual and
external) sin: and is this no sin? It is the mother of sin, and are not
ye mother and daughter both of one nature? Again the very name Lust carries
with it a kind of consent, desire, and will to sin. But suppose, that by
dissenting the external act of sinning be restrained, what then? God
considers the heart, and he with all our strength, power and faculties, is
to be served: the least defaulte in any part of our inward parts, is an
offense and sin against his Majesty. But does consent or dissent, make our
lusts either sins or no sins? Is not an enemy an enemy if he be
conquered? Is not rebellion treason, if it be prevented? Is not sedition
sedition, if it be repressed? Is lust no sin if it be kept in? Is fire no
fire, except it flame? What need many words? Does not the Apostle in express
words, sundry times call concupiscence sin, because it hinders the good he
would, and helps forward ye evil he would not? They say the Apostle speaks
improperly: a wonder. He that framed the ear, made the eye, fashioned the
tongue, shall he not hear, does he not see, can he not speak as properly as
the children of men? were there nothing but this, yt we are taught to pray with
sighs as S. Paul does against this temptation, it were sufficient and proof
plain enough, yt it is sin. For in praying yt it be not, we confess yt where
it is, it should not be, and so because it is, it is sin, especially being
forbidden in ye Law. A little feeling of a good conscience, might take away all
controversy in the question, as has been well declared not long since. Reply
to the censure 5. articulo.
And thou, O man, which have a sense what sin is, submit thy self under
the power of Gods hand, power forth thy soul in praise to so merciful a
Lord, who has forgiven the gylte of this and al other thine offenses, who
binds them daily in a bundell, and will one day drown or dye them all to an
other color in ye blood of his son, whereof thy Baptism is a sure seal.

This knowledge and confession belongs to al people, from the cleauer of the
wood, to the Prince and counselor, from the Cedars of Libanus, to the
Hyssoppe of the wall back again: high and low, rich and poor, old and young,
one with another, without respect of persons, they are the Lords equally.
Ancient men must not forget who was he that took them from their cradle, and
carried them along in his arms to their gray hears. Esa. 46.4.
Children must learn that they also are contained in his covenant. John was
sanctified in his mothers womb, The baptizing of children.
Samuel in his childhoode consecrated unto the Lord, Mar. 10.14.
Children brought to Christ that he might lay hands on them. Bring we then
also our children, that Christ may bless them in his own institution, Genesis
17.12.
as of old God did ye circumcised infantes of eight days age. Delays may be
dangerous and are needless, August. de verb. a post. hom. 9.
the usage is an ancient rule of faith. It is true, yt not the lack, Bern. ad
Hugon. Epi. 77.
but the neglecte of the Sacrament does hurt: beware then of contempt. Christ
baptizeth with ye spirit and with fire: with the spirit, that is, with spiritual
graces he endueth the^ who in faith and thankfulness observe his word, receive
his sacraments, are ingraffed into him, and grow up in him as lively branches
in ye true vine. John 15.1.
Again he baptizeth with his spirit, Luke 3.16.
able to discern hypocrites, and with fire red hot, ready to consume al
chafe and corruption, as both the superstition of the Popish, and also the
security of ye Anabaptist, that either presume, or pervert, or any way pollute
ye right use of this his holy ordinance, which to the reverent receiver, is the
bath of his regeneration in Christ, ye badge of his profession, and the bond
of brotherly love in the house of our God. Ephesians. 4.3.


Of the Supper.
THe Leuits duty was to prepare the people to the worthy receiving of the
Passover. 2. Chro. 35.6
In place whereof, has succeeded the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, with semblable, necessary, and convenient preparation
thereunto. Chrisost. in 1. Cor. hom. 24.
For if it were a princes sacred body, or but purple garment only (the matter
whereof is worms thread, and color no better then the dead fish blood) yet
were it not rashly to be abused with unwashed or unclean hands. How much the
more reverent then ought ye receiving of these holy mysteries of Christ's body
and blood to be of all them that know what it is to stand in awe that they
offend not? Wherefore let a man examine himself, says ye Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.28
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. Even so, and
therefore if not so, not at all. Better to abstain, then to come together for
the worse.

As the print in wax is more fitly received and fully expressed, when the wax
is wrought and warmed first: so like wise the effect of this Sacrament is more
lively felt and seen, when we repair thereunto with prepared minds, well
instructed, and thoroughly examined.

In which examination, two points chiefly are observed, whereof the one
concerns faith, the other love. Faith, to be settled in our hearts toward
God: Love, to be she wed to our neighbor. The latter proceeds out of the
former, and both from the spirit of God. Faith receives increase by hearing
and prayer: Romans 10.17. Luke 17.5. Mark. 9.24.
O Lord increase our faith. Love and faith jointly are stirred up and
strengthened by repentance, in ye worthy repayring to, and receiving at the
Lords table. Whereupon arises these three, as agents in this examination,
assured faith, brotherly love, earnest repentance.

Faith directs in knowledge. Love is occupied in tha^kfulnes to God, and good
doing toward men. Repentance ever in either amendeth what is omitted or done
amiss, and craves pardon with humble mind and full purpose, not to offend in
the like again. All which duties (as I take) may be rightly considered
according to the times, wherein either we are to receive, or presently receive,
or have received the Sacrament. The first is called a Preparation unto the
Supper, ye second, a meditation therein, the third, a christian conversation
that must ensue thereupon.

In preparing our selves is required, Preparation.
yt we know of whom, what, and in what order we must receive.

It seems to be recorded as a comme^dation, Of whom we receive 1. Sam. 1.23.
that Anna nursed her own son: in which respect among infinite others, the
love of God exceeds all love. Wherein as he spares no cost, so he
undertakes any care, Plutar de institu. lib.
which nice and unnatural mothers refuse to do, putting forth their infantes to
be nursed abroad, without need or cause. Our God does not so, neither
needs he so to do, Isai. 49.15.
his breasts are neither sore, nor dry at any time. Of his own good will he
begat us again in baptism, and so will he still feed and bring us up to a
full age, and perfect grouth in Christ. Sufficient or abundant provision for ye
house, himself in his wisdom has provided, ye holy spirit being steward of
all, and as it were distributer and caruer at the board.

What we receive.
And to come to the second point, what we receive. The meat of this table, is
the very death of Christ, the Lamb of God, that takes away ye sins of the
world. The story and institution whereof, is recorded by three Evangelists,
Matt. 26.26. Mark. 14.22 Luke 22.19.
and again commented upon by the holy ghost at large in the former Epistle of
S. Paul to the Corinthians: where the Apostle begins the matter with a
faithful saying, 1. Cor. 11.23
That which I have received of the Lord, I have delivered you. For otherwise,
if he came with offers of his own devising, himself raught the Galathians what
his entertainment ought to be: Gal. 1.8.
Let him be accused, though he were an Angel of God from heaven.

The Lord Jesus, that night yt he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had
given thanks, he brake, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken
for you: this do in remembrance of me, In like manner the cup, etc. For as
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords
death till he come again. Wherein we see evidently what Christ did, and also
in duty what we must do. In the visible signs which he took, of bread that
he brake, wine that he powered forth, and in delivering the^ both to be taken,
eaten and drunk, he manifestly declared two things: the one, that he would
immediately make an oblation for the redemption of mankind upon the altar of
ye cross: the other that for ever he would be the everlasting food of their
souls, his body to be the bread of life, his precious blood to be their
comfortable drink, ye Physic of immortality, Ignat. epist. ad Ephesians.
and preservative against all evil. The sacrifice and oblation he intended, is
plain by these words, Which is broken, Mat. 26.28.
which is shed for many for remission of sins. Even is broken and shed,
because ye hour wherein he should be betrayed and suffer, drew nigh and was at
hand, That he would be their food, is proved clearly, in that he commanded
to take, and eat, this is my body. Now by the way, out of these two notes,
may be noted two forcible reasons, against the sacrifice pretended in the mass.

They are lately delighted with motives and demandes, may I ask them this
question? Do they think a sinful priest can do more at his mass, then the
son of God did at his supper? I hope they will not prefer a mere man before
Christ God and man, the Savior of the world. And if so, then may they see
their priest can make no sacrifice: for Christ himself when he sat at boorde
with his disciples, made none, but declared what he meante to make. For and if
he had so done ye Thursday at night, what needed he the^ to have suffered ye
Friday at noone? again, he wills us to take and eat, and feed on him. He
offreth himself to be received of us, not to be offered by us to his Father.
That was his own proper and personal duty. But to leave to speak hereof,
our dewtie is with thankfulness to feed on the food he offreth us, even to eat
and drink him, to partake his blessed body and precious blood. Wherein,
notwithstanding to mistake and mingle the signs, and the things signified
co^fusedly without difference, were as Aug. says, De doct. Chr.
a miserable thraldom to the very soul of a Christian man. Christ's words be
plain. He took bread, after thanks given he break and gave bread: for what
he took, he brake, and what he brake, he gave, and therefore he gave bread. For
the Apostle says he brake bread, and that he calls his body, and so
concerning the cup: for after a sort, to speak of one, is to speak of both.
Marie took Christ to have been a Gardener, John 20.15.
but ye adversaries take a portion of bread to be Christ. The true professors
say and believe, that this saying of the Lord, This bread is my body, has a
spiritual and Sacramental meaning, and otherwise to avouch, yt a piece of
bread (for yt it is bread, is proved) or else which is all one, ye the show of
bread is literally very Christ, is a mo^struous kind of speaking, utterly
impossible, and altogether blasphemous. For if bread, or the show of bread, or
that which was bread, be called Christ properly, and with out figure of speech:
without all controversy, as properly and as truly (but there is no show of
truth in so gross errors) bread was borne of the virgin Marie, bread was
crucified on the cross, bread shall judge the quick and ye dead, and a piece
or a fancye of bread is the Savior of the world, the son of God, the
second person in Trinity, God himself, and the Lord of life. In effect so
strangely, have our unnatural country men written and one more fondly then the
rest, Sand. in his Manhu.
directing an Epistle dedicatorie to his Lord and God, under the forms of
bread and wine in the Sacrament. Thus it fares with these men by the just
judgment of the Almighty God, who have given him over, and he them, that
because they would not believe the truth, they should still believe lies
without end, changing the glory of the immortal God, into the similitude of
corrupt creatures, besides all sense, reason, and congruence of faith.
Chrysostom, writing upon Labans complaint, where he says to Jacob, Gene.
31.30.
Why have thou stolen my gods? what, says that father, what perfect folly is
this? Are thy gods such, as they may be stolen? or art thou not ashamed in so
saying? Semblably, what a Christ have ye adversaries made and imagined? is
Christ made of bread? ground with teeth, consumed with the bitte of mouth, and
stolen away sometime of the sely mouse? or are they not ashamed of these carnal
and fleshly more the Capernaitical gross dreams, ye profit nothing? nay
rather dread they not in heart and soul, to say as they have said to the
cake in the Priests hands, D. Har. confuta. of the Ap. page 94. Pointz in his
Testi. cap. 3. Brist. Mot. 26.
Thou art my maker, and to the wine in the chalice, Thou art my Lord and my
God, by thee alone and nothing else, I hope to be saved

Bish. Cran. to Winch. and Bish. Jewel to Hard. etc.
The just confutatio^ of which strange speeches, has bin under taken and
discharged of most excellent learned me^, in our English tongue. My purpose is
only in a word, to give warning to ye simple of this mire, wherein they see
those dru^ken men, servants to their own devises, thus to wallowe, plunge, and
tumble themselves up and down.

There are others, who albeit they are not so far gone out of the way, yet
they tread not the true hie way, in every respect. As they confess Christ to
be in heaven, and yet they worship no heaven, but Christ, sitting there at
the right hand of his father: so over much resting upon the bare letter of the
words, they suppose only a conjoined presence in the bread, and no more. They
go no further, neither do they adore the bread, though they think Christ
consubstantially to be therein. When they are urged with the undoubted article
of the Creed, whereby we believe ye ascension of our Savior, some of the^
reply, yt Christ being God, may be every where. Others altogether absurdly
say, he auen it self is every where. Were it not but that somewhat might be
learned, belonging necessarily to this treatise by ye way, it were a folly to
refute follies. Verily as Christ is perfect God, so is he perfect man, and the
properties of both natures entire in one person. We may not build his deity,
and destroy his humanity. Who according to his manhood, is gone from ye earth,
taken up to his father, ascended on hie, sits and makes intercession there:
the heavens must contain him, till the last times, and then and thence we look
for his coming again. Neither can all this be a mere supposed vanishing out
of sight, but a local departure: because the place is set down whence he
went, and whither he ascended, and that he shall come again. I leave the
world and go to the father. Ioh. 16.28.
and he shall so come again from heaven. Act. 1.11.
And here to dream yt heaven is every where, were a madness. For then Christ
had been in heaven before already, and so what needed he to depart and ascend
and go hence? and if earth were heaven, the wicked and earthely minded men
were most in heaven. And not only they but ye very damned spriits in hell were
in heaven also: for hell is some where, and they say heaven is every where. And
the^ where were that great Chaos, that is spoken of in the Gospel, Luke
16.23.26.
betwixt Abraham's joys in heaven above, and the rich man's torments in hell
beneath? There is a kind of spirit which is not driven away but with prayer
and fasting, to the end to pray more earnestly, the Lord if it be his will,
end all quarrels, especially about this sacrament of unity, open the eyes of
all those who ever they be, yt seek vain shifts and fond detrises, to the
end only to exclude one convenient and usual figure, which necessarily goes
with the nature of a sacrament, and agrees with the canons of christian belief,
and without the which our belief concerning the person of Christ, can never
stand. For if he be perfect man (as we believe) like to his brethren in all
things, Heb. 1.17.
sin excepted, being but one man, he can be but in one place at one time.
The want of sin both not extend a body to pluralities of places: for then
every man, as he has less or more sin, should be straightwaye in fewer
and more places accordingly. But these things in sight are but vanities.
Wherefore Christ according to his humanity, is and must be in one place at
once, and no more, and that is in heaven.

Now then in earth, what do we receive, while we receive ye Sacrament?
certainly Christ Jesus, the land and the fruit, Christ and the virtues of his
life and death, and of what ever he did. But he is in heaven, and we in earth,
and ye distance is great. Faith has an eye, an hand and a wing, whereby it
pearceth, reaches and flies up to heaven it self. To faith, things absent
are present, things distant are conjoined, things secret are open, unseen
are visible, impossible are easy. As verily as bread both serve for the
strength of the body, and wine for the comfort thereof: so and as certainly to
ye in ward man in faith, Christ is bread to the soul, and wine to ye mind,
and we mistically made one in him, and he with us, dwell in him, and he in
us, feed on him, and he our spiritual food. And this is that which we
receive at his boarde. I confess, our knowledge is in part, and therefore our
speech is imperfect. Those harder parts of the Lamb that could not be eaten,
were consumed with fire: even so, if there be any thing (as I grant to me
there is) which words cannot express, a godly man's faith may better
comprehend, and in heart conceive, the^ I utter. It is not bare bread and a sip
of wine (as scorners speak) that we receive, but truly, and in deed very
Christ. And whereas it is so, let us go on and see how such a ghest ought to be
entertained.

^^we ^^rist ^^ght to recei^^
Prepare the chamber of thy soul, sweep the house of thy conscience, yield up
the keys of thy heart, prostrate thy self in humility, open wide the gates
of faith, that the king of glory may enter therein.

Berengaria^ his recantation.
The adversary whetteth his teeth, opens his mouth, makes ready his belly ye
he might chewe and swallow up his maker. Meat for the belly, and the belly for
meat, and the Lord shall destroy them both. O my brethren, who ever you are,
this heavenly food is not Let us eat and drink, 1. Cor. 6.1^.
and to morrow we shall dye. Here is neither venison for Isahac, nor a Kid for
Tobi, nor Quails in the desert, nor wine in boules, nor wine in flagons. Who
ever eats of this celestial Manna, and drinks of this spiritual rock which
is Christ, shall not only walk in ye strength of it forty days and forty
nights as the Prophet did, but shall live for ever with God.

Wherefore the wicked and ungodly, Faith.
have no part nor portion therein. They eat the bread of ye Lord, but not the
Lord the bread of life, because they want the hand of faith to receive him. He
that eats Christ, shall live by the means of Christ: but the life of the
wicked is no life, and in their death is eternal damnation.

The adversaries care little what Jewels they cast to swine, what unclean
beasts they drive into the Lords pastures, how fine manchet they throw to
very dogs. There is no communicating of Christ, but in the true communion of
Christ. One head is head but of one body: and though it gives some heat by
means of ye heart to a rotten member that is not yet cut off, yet it gives
life only to the sound parts. The chafe and husk of corn receives a kind
of humor, but the fat and heart of the seed only nourishes the wheat, and
not the chafe. The bare name of Christianity, the bark and letter of the
word, the outward elements of the Sacrament, are after a sort in common to all:
but true Christianity, a good understanding, and the inward grace of these
things, are proper to the godly, and to none other. The humor yt the wicked
receive from the root, serves to increase a great deal more chafe, and the
chafe to nourish a bigger fire, ye is due for a greater quantity thereof. If
it were otherwise, how easily might the Apostle be answered, and how soon
put to silence, when he asks what part and communion, 2. Cor* 6.19.
meaning a good society, is there between the faithful and the infidels?
Forsooth they have a fellowship in the participation of Christ in the
Sacrament. No, the spirit of God suffers no replye.

The Communion in this supper is two fold. In respect of the giver, and the
duty of the receivers, toward him alone and amongst themselves only. The
gift of communicating him, is offered by grace: for who ever gave him first,
that it may be given him again? Cyril. lib. 4. cap. 17. in John.
And he is received by faith: send forth thy faith, and thou have taken hold
on him. The community which is betwixt ye receivers themselves, is by charity
and love. Love seeks not his own, Love.
and that is love in deed, which is betwixt brethren then when a man loves
another, August. de temp. ser. 256.
either because Christ is in him, or to the end Christ may be in him. And this
is a necessary point, which must also be brought to the worthy receiving of
Christ. Some are pale with fasting, and blewe with envy, tame their body as it
were a wild horse, and ride out of the way when they have done. When you come
together, there are dissentions among you, says S. Paul to the Corinthians,
every man makes his supper, before he come to the Lords Supper, no man tarieth
one for another. Ye have made a private matter of the public liturgy and
church duty. What shall I say? shall I praise you? in this I praise you not.
And his not praising the^, was a marvelous disprayse. The rich disdained the
poor, the poor envied the rich, the head would not direct the foot, one
member was at variance with an other, and yet every member has an interest in
the next, and so the last and every one each in another, and altogether among
them selves. The candle must not hide it self under a bushel, nor flash in
another man's eyes, being proud that one has lighted it, and little considering
that it self might be burnt or put out, and another lighted in his room.
Vessels contain water not for them selves, but for others, and if they refuse
their duty, though they are full, they may be emptied. There is a more
excellent way, if men did walk therein, and if every man would carry his
brothers burden. The elm vnderproppeth the vine, and the vine is without
pricks, and hurts not, but is an ornament to the elm. The foot bears the
head and body, and the head guides them both. Shall an Hebrewe wound an
Hebrewe, Exodus 1.13.
the fathers son his brother and the son of his mother, the servant his
fellow? The world that is without, hates us enough, though we yt are within,
hate not our selves. The God of love inflame our coldenesse in charity,
mollify our hard and cruel hearts, qualify and soften all rough and uneven
ways and dealing. Why? are we not brethren of the same parent, of God in his
Church? subjects of one King the Lord? and under one Queen a gracious Lady?
are we not cou^trymen and fellows in one family? have we not the same hope
and spirit? have we not the same enemies, friends, faith and the food of
faith, the word and Sacraments? Cor. Tacit. in vita Iul. Agric.
Cornelius Tacitus reports that the old Britons were easily conquered,
because they used no co^sultation nor common consent in matters. The Madianites
kills one an other. Josias fought an unnecessary battle, and dyed in the
field. It is good to be wise and patient, wise and constant, patient and silent
in trifles, when a man shall but dig in the fire, and the sparkles fly in
his face and no good done. Otherwise if a venomous spider come in the way, who
will not set foot upon it? If the cause be the Lords, and the quarrel good,
and thy calling according, it is good fighting these battles. Strive for the
truth for life, defend justice unto death. Eccle. 4.2.
In this case the white liuered soldier that fears a frost shall be covered
with snow. If every hear were a life, and every life a thousand lives, ve^ter
them all for him that gave them all. But again in ye days of peace, where
peace may be redeemed with less a do, what wise man would be hanged in hear
of his own fancy, or fall as Saul did upon his own sword. He that loves
danger, shall perish in trouble and no man pity him, and the meek shall
possess the earth.

A gentlewoman of Lacedemonia, Plutar. contra Colo.
and Diotorus his wife did always fall out at the table and vary, because the
one loved oil, and the other butter, and yet the qualities of butter and oil
were not much diverse.

Charity does cover malice, envy and hatred does uncover as the boisterous
Northwinde all imperfections, and naturally men are given to pry in at other
men's windows, to beat dust of their coats, and find motes in their eyes. But
Saint Paul says, Let every man prove him self and not other men, and so let
him come to this Sacrament. When Christ foretold that one of his disciples
should betray him, every one of them began to ask him, Mar. 14.19.
Is it I? not is it he or he, but every one was desirous to prove him self and
know, whither it were he, Is it I? they were not like him that said, Mat. 7.4.
Brother suffer me to take forth the mote out of thine eye. And do we call
them brethren, whose good name we seek to take from them in obiecting motes
and faults? A mote is a little fault, and a beam is a great fault, and
neither great nor little should be suffered, especially in the eye. Yet every
man is not a fit Physician, the eye is a tender part, and may as soon take
hurt as good, if there be not great discretion taken. Let the public minister
prove all, and the private man prove him self, and so in faith and love let us
all in one repair to the Sacrament of unity which as goats milk should
break and mollify the stony hearts of men, Plin lib. 20. prooe. and lib.
3.7. cap. 4.
as rain alaieth great winds, and as David's music assuaged Saul's
mela^cholie and evil spirit. And yet when all this is done, the best men are
men still, and the best earth is earth ever, and will bear nettles and
brambles and pricks. Flesh is frail in faith, blood imperfect in love,
seetheth and boyleth with a little fire and upon a small occasion, Repentance.
and therefore repentance always in either is most requisite, which
accompanying with faith her mother, and love her sister, warmeth and cherishes
them both, who otherwise wax wanne and cold and loose their force.

If any man deem Christ's death vnsufficie^t, suppose his sacrifice needs
renewing, imagines any other intercessours requisite, doubts of his kingdom,
believes not his word, these are great wants of faith, and he never proved
himself, that comes with this mind to the Lords boorde, where these
things are or should be felt and fed upon. Here Repentance is requisite to
help faith. Again, if any man have any thing against his brother, or his
brother against him, let him go first and be reconciled before he eat and
drink the Sacrament, which is of unity in Christ Jesus. Thus examining his
conscience as before, and acknowledging his sins in his sight, ask pardon
with sighs and tears, because he either distrusted, or disobeyed, and so
displeased so gracious a God, so merciful a father, so perfect a Savior,
that had commanded himself to be believed upon, and our selves of our selves
to be beloved in him one of another.

There is never a threede in Papistrie but is stained. They have neither
perfect faith which they divide between God and his creatures, nor true love
(which wants the bond of love, true faith) nor due repentance have they. For all their repentance stands in whispering in a Priests ear, or absteyning
from the moderate use of certain meats, in which they put a satisfaction: as
if God were pleased and sin done away with the eating of fish and not of
flesh, or the not usage of other his creatures reverently with thanks giving.
1. Tim, 4.3.


But in deed the sour herbs wherewith we must eat his passover, are a
penitent heart, a broken and contrite spirit, because foolish flesh labors
and werieth it self in sinful ways, and does eftsoons offend in thought,
word, and deed, against his divine majesty. And this if we do, craving
pardon for all our sins and misdoings, no doubt he will consider our sighs,
receive our prayers, forgive our sins, accept us for just, account us for his
own, and make us meet partakers of his heavenly table.

Being thus prepared, instructed in faith, Meditation
enflamed in love, and after a sort repaired by repe^ta^ce, you may present
thy self before the Lord. Wherein (as ye wisema^ wills in an other case)
meditate again and again what is set before thee, Pro. 23.1.
least thy table be thy snare, thy meat thy bane, thine own knife cut thine
own throat. Bread which is ye staff of strength to man, will choke ye Hawke.
The faithful, charitable and repentant soul partaketh salvation, the
unworthy receiver eats and drinks his own damnation: even as the
Babylonian dragon brake asu^der as soon as he received ye balls yt Daniel put
into his mouth, as yt story reports.

Wherefore you godly man and child of God, ponder with thy self, enter into thy
conscience, let convenient thoughts and meditations occupy and possess thy
inward parts. And that thou may so do, remember what you art a doing, what
work thou have in hand. Do this in remembrance of Christ, Plutar. in vlta
Numae, Hoe Age.
feed on him in thy soul with thanks, and set forth (lively) his death with
praise. Pharaohs butler forgate Joseph, Genesis 40.23
ye unclean hog never looks up to him that beats down the maste from ye
tree. Lift up your hearts, we lift them up unto the Lord. They are the words
of the church service, godly words. It is meet and right so to do, and our
bounden duty that we should at al times record his goodness, but especially
at the time of this action, to show forth his death till his coming again,
and agnize our sins, which being the cause of his dying plucked ye son of
God out from ye bosom of the father to be crucified on earth, of, among, and
for sinful men.

The maymes we received in Adam and remain yet in us, are three. Sin,
Ignorance, Weakness. The remedies whereof we find in Christ, the Physician of
our souls. Medicus est minister naturae: that which is wanting by nature, is
supplied by grace.

Christ is a Priest to cleanse our sins, a Prophet to instruct our rudeness,
and a King to conquer our enemies. But his Priesthood and his sacrifice we
chiefly celebrate in this Sacrament, which also may be and is termed therefore a
Sacrifice, not of Christ, but to Christ in remembrance of his, ye sacrifice of
praise, the calves of our lips, the incense of thanks giving: and this
Levites fire should never go out, and in the present, flame all abroad. Wherein
we believe in heart, and confess with mouth, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, being perfect God, was made perfect man. Man, yt he
might die: God, ye in dying, he might satisfy for mankind: for because yt the
flesh alone profits nothing, his manhood was not sufficient, except also he
had been very God. Wherefore God, even our God so exceedingly loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten son (and therefore he also naturaly God, the
son like the father) to be the ransom for the sins of the world. Isai.
53.5^
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, the peace ours, the chastisement
his, all sufficient for all the sins both of body and soul of all sinners.

The grieuousnes and bitterness of which cup may be considered, in that our
Savior after a sort tasted thereof, and it tasted bitter: put forth his hand
to take it, pulled it in again, and began to tremble: his very soul was
sorrowful, prayed earnestly, went out and prayed again, that if it were
possible, it might pass over, needed an Angel for comfort, swet water and
drops of blood.

If there were nothing herein but an usual death, would Christ thus have been
afflicted? The heathen have suffered more, and with more patience apparent:
therefore there must be, and was more in it, and yet he is not come to the
bitterness in the bottom of the cup. Those former agonies were but honey in
comparison of the conflict with Satan which followed, and the wrath of his
father which ensued, when all sins, as heavy as hell, and more then the
stars of heaven, or the sand of the sea were laid in one upon him, and he
for them made a curse and execration, Isa. 53.8.
the just executed for the unjust, one for all.

A child is borne to us, and given unto us, and lived for us. This might
comfort Jerusalem at the heart: but the end and perfection of our joy, and his
sorrow, was his death on cross, wherein consists the thankful meditation I
speak of, helped by breaking of the bread, and the pouring forth of the wine
before our sight: wherein the default of our adversaries appears greatly,
that debarreth the people of so great an help. For be it that perfect Christ
be communicated in the bread, yet in the wine significa^tly is resembled his
bloodsheding most. And how dare they alter the Lords institution? As he took
bread, even so he took the cup: (...)
then if bread be requisite, so is ye cup also. For as he took the one, so he
took the other. Eckius in ench.
Eckius would prove his half communion out of his Paternoster: give us this
day our daily bread. A beggar is never out of his way. What scripture will not
serve for any purpose, if yt do for his? Saint Paul teaches what the Lord
did, and what ye Corinthians should do till Christ his coming in the clouds,
he means what al posterity was to do. For those Corinthians are gone the
way of all flesh, and their church rased. He tells them, and in them us:
Other things at his coming he would dispose of (as of indifferent
circumstances.) But for the lawful and inviolable usage of the Sacrament in
both kinds, he delivered as he had received.

David slew the Giant with one stone, but he took more then one out of the
brook. Christ is received in his word, by his spirit, in baptism, sacramentaly
in either, or rather in both the signs of the Supper jointly taken as he
ordained. So sufficiently and abundantly has ye Lord provided for his
household, bread made of many graynes, and also wine of many grapes, ye
answerably we being many, may be one in him and he in us, expecting the
accomplishment of our joy to the full, no more in signs and figures in earth,
but apparently to eat and drink at Christ's table with him in the kingdom of
heaven, where we shall sit on seats and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
Luke. 22.30
Amen.

There are certain kinds both of birds and beasts, Conversation.
whose meat will not tarry with them, but passes quickly away recto intestino
Such beasts never chew the cud. And some men not unlike or worse then beasts,
meditate little of whom they were begotten and fed, what they feed on or in
what sort, much less does the meat digest with them to make the^ strong men
in Christ, as if Sara were their mother, and Agar their nurse, or as if they
were nursed with milk and weaned with poison, and the meat naught and would
not prove with them, so do they live. In coming to the Service and
Sacraments, either for company or custom sake, they look one way with the
godly, but in their conversation, they row another way, and show in their
deeds, of what fellowship they are. They pass through the red sea, but
murmr in the wilderness, nay even at the red sea offend they God. In
pretense somewhat they are, but inwardly nothing, and in fact naught. Their
windows be not scued as Salomo^s were, to give a full light into ye house to
their own hearts, in hypocrisy somewhat is showed, the window wide enough
outwardly. Faith, Love, Repentance, to sight are set forth, in performance
every one is for him self, neither thankful to God, neither charitable to
his neighbor, and both without remorse. These things ought not to be so, this
Passover would not be so eaten, our loins so soon vngirded, and our staves
thrown away, the water of Baptism trampled on, the bread and wine, or the
body and blood of Christ thus received all in vain. Were it that the naughtye
liver could be a good believer for the time, or were it, yt as water he might
be whote immediately before and at ye action of receiving, yet if when the fire
is removed, the cold qualities return again, what avails ye former heat? A
cole is red while it is in the fire: when the fire is out, his black and
natural color returns by and by again, and then light it again, and it
seems red again, but yet in ye end it consumes to ashes. The bone that is
often set in ioynte, August de tem. Ser. 58.
will hardly be well joined often. Let no man presume of sinning, nor yet
despair of mercy. The Sacraments, as they are seals of mercy, so are they
also bonds of obedience: and as God will perform on his part al, so must we
endeavor to show our selus duetiful in all good works. Whereunto to persuade, if
there were nothing else but this, this may suffice: that because Christ our
Passover is offered up, 1. Cor. 5.
we keep an holy feast unto the Lord, not in the leaven of wickedness, but in
the sweet bread of a sincere conscience, and upright conversation in Christ
Jesus.

A prayer upon consideration generally of the Sacraments.
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, who of thy tender kindness, have
chosen thine elect to everlasting salvation before al times, and in due time
have called them to the knowledge of thy good will, reueiled in thy word, and
sealed with the Sacraments of thine own ordaining, we thy humble servants, and
by mercy in Christ thine adopted sons, pray thy fatherly goodness to make us
meet partakers of these and al other thy benefits so largely ever more
bestowed and powered upon us.

Let us not (O Lord) neither detain ye truth of thy word in ye
unrighteousness of a sinful life: neither suffer us (dear Father) to receive
ye pledges of thy endless love in vain, but to the ends that thou have
appointed them.

Wherefore grant us thy heavenly grace, that we thy chosen people may use thy
holy ordinances to most holy purposes: namely, to the further increase of our
weak faith, to the comfort of our wan hope, to the enflaming of our cold and
frozen charity in these hard and evil days, to the dutiful and thankful
setting forth of the glory of thy holy name, Amen.

A prayer to be said with meditation of our Baptism.
MErciful Father, we miserable and sinful men feel with in our selves, and
therefore are forced to break forth and confess, yt in our flesh dwells no
good thing.

O Lord, thou look down from heaven, and beholdest the sons of men and
their sins, they are infinitely great, and in number mo then the hears of
our head or the stars of heaven: they can not be hidden.

Our children gather sticks, our fathers kindle the fire, our mothers kneade
dough to make cakes to serve other gods. There is not one that does good, no
not one. We are all borne in sin, conceived in iniquity, and the whole race
of our life is naturally naught. We are not able to dream of a good thought,
and when we have done all yt we can do, or if we could do al yt we are
commanded, yet were we unprofitable servants, and therefore we appeal from
thy justice, (O most just God) to thy mercy seat, and throne of grace: for we
fear nothing more then the examination of our drossy works.

O Lord, wash thou us that we may be white, for in our selves we are altogether
black, purge us that we may be clean, sanctify us that we may be holy,
circumcise our ears and hearts and other parts, sear our polluted lips
with the cole of thy spirit, and create a new heart win us, this old heart of
ours will not serve, wash us more and more, and we shall be clean.

This thou have promised in thy word (O gracious God) and in the Sacrament of
our new birth is this now fully set forth and sealed: wherefore with
confidence we appear before thee in prayer, not trusting in our own merits,
which are not, but in thy manifold and endless mercies, which as a great and
pure stream of water shall make us whiter then the snow, and clearer then the
Crystal glass.

O Lord have mercy upon us according to thy great mercy, put away our
iniquities, pardon our offenses, cancel the bill of debt, quench ye flames of
lust, pluck out the sting of sin, mortify our flesh more and more, kill and
bury the old man, bruise the serpents head, drown the spiritual Pharao, and
all Egypt, that we in a good time may be presented perfectly blameless in thy
sight, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer to be said immediately before the receiving the holy Communion.
O Almighty GOD, who in thy eternal wisdom have built thee an house, and he
wen out the pillars thereof: chosen a Church which shall not fail, killed thy
vittayles, mixed thy wine, prepared a Table, and have sent forth thy ministers
to cry in the open streets, and to inuit unto this feast in thy word and
Gospel: and yet have denounced that the scornful, the wicked and the wilful
sinner shall have no part nor portion with thee, grant us grace (O Lord) that
we may effectually hear, and willingly follow the voice of thy calling, and
that the seed of thy word, being shed in to our ears, may take deep root
in our hearts, and bring forth fruit accordingly in a godly conversation.

And whereas not only by thy word, but by thy Sacraments also we are fed at
thy hand, and specially in the Supper of thy Son our Lord his institution,
we crave the assistance of thy holy spirit, worthily to prepare us for the
receiving of so heavenly a banquet.

Otherwise, who or what are we to entertain, or to be entertained in this
manner? we are unworthy the least of thy mercies, much less are we worthy
that the heir of all should enter under the roof of our soul, or that our
unclean feet should once step within thy courts, and yet thou have
commanded we should repair to thy Temple, and receive at thy table.

Wherefore (good Lord) prepare thou us aright that we may be prepared, dwell
in us yt we may dwell in thee, knock at the gates of our hearts that we may
open unto thee, sup with us, that we may sup with thee, increase our faith and
love toward thee, and in thee toward our neighbors. And albeit we offend
often, and fall many times, yet stay thou us by thy merciful hand that we
never fall away. Finally, strengthen our weakness with thy everlasting food,
neither look upon our imperfections, but on the perfectness of thy sons
oblation, in whose name we pray, that thou endue us ever with an humble and a
contrite spirit for all our sins past, and with a constant purpose always
hereafter unfeignedly to serve and please thee in newnes of life to our lives
end, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A thanks giving upon the receiving of the holy Communion.
MY soul praise thou the Lord, and all the powers within me praise his holy
name.

My heavy soul awake, praise the Lord, forget not his benefits, show not
thy self an unthankful thistle being watered with so many graces.

He fashioned the round world, and all ye is therein, yea with a more special
care he guides the feet of his Saints.

He clotheth the lilies of the field, and feeds the birds of the air, but
he apparelleth his chosen with the cloth of righteousness in the family of
his Son, and feeds them with the bread of life.

In him we are, and are regenerate, by him we live and are fed at his own
table, in him, and by his spirit we move with al godly motions, and this comfort
no man can take from us.

Al good gifts descend from above, and the praise of all is due to thee (O
Lord) even as the waters ishue from the sea, and to ye sea return again.

O then what shall we render unto our loving God, for all his kindness? he has
not spared his only begotten son to ye death the death of the Cross, for
our sakes.

Thou O Lord art not pleased with man's inventions: only thou have willed that
we be a thankful people, and that we continue a fresh and grateful
remembrance of thy goodness for ever.

The calves of our lips, the incense of prayer and ye sacrifice of praise
thou will accept.

Wherefore (O my soul) praise the Lord, set forth thy Saviors death, remember
his passion, show not thy self unkind, feed on him in thy heart, and be
thankful, in a full assurance of all his mercies in Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


