Imprynted at Cant^rbury, in saint Paul's parysh by Johan Michel.



^

The history of wyates rebellion, with the order and manner of resisting the
same, whereunto in the end is added an earnest conference with the degenerate
and sedicious rebels for the search of the cause of their daily disorder.

Made and compyled by John Proctor.

Mense Decembris. Anno 1554.

In the end ye shall find a table, directing to the principal points
contained in this book.

To the most excellent and most virtuous lady our most gracious Sovereign,
Marie by the grace of God Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem and
Irelande, Defe^dour of the faith, princess of Spaygne and Sicilie,
Archeduchesse of Austria, Duchess of Millaine, Burgundy and Braband,
Countess of Haspurge, Flaunders and ^y^ole, your Ma^esties most faithful,
loving, and obedient subject John Proctor, wissheth all grace, long peace,
quiet raygne, from God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
IT HAS been allowed, most gracious sovereign, for a necessary policy in all
ages, as stories do wytnes, that the flagicious enterprises of the wic^ed,
which have at any time attempted with traiterous force to subvert or alter the
public state of their countries, as also the wise and virtuous policies of the
good, practiced to preserve the common weal, and to repel the enemies of the
same, should by writing be committed to eternal memory: partly that they of
that age in whose time such things happened, might by the often reading
conceive a certain gladness in considering with them selves, and beholding as
it were in a glass, from what calamity and extreme ruin, by what policy and
wisdom their native countries were delivered, besides the great misery and
peril they them selves have escaped: partly for a doctrine and a monition
serving both for the present and future time: but chiefly and principally that
the traitors themselves, who through hatred to their prince or country shall
either of their own malicious disposition be stirred, or else by other perverse
counsel thereunto induced, may always have before their eyes the miserable end
that happens as just reward to al such caytiues as either of ambition not
satisfied with their own state will seek prepostorously to aspire to honor,
or of malice to their prince will enter into that horrible crime of preuie
conspiracy or open rebellion. The industry of writers does sufficiently
declare in a number of stories that conspiracy and treason has always turned
to the authors a wretched and miserable end, and if their persons happen at
any time to escape temporal punishm^nt, as rarely they have done, yet their
names, spicially of ye notorious and principal offenders, have been always had
in such vile and odible detestation in all ages and among all nations, as for
the same they have been ever after abhorred of all good men. These general
considerations moving other to indict and pen stories, moved me also to
gather together and to regester for memory the merueilous practice of Wyat his
detestable rebellion, little inferior to the most dangerous reported in any
history, either for desperate courage in the author, or for the mo^struous
end purposed by his rebellion. Yet I thought nothing less at the beginning,
then to publishe the same at this time or at this age, minding only to gather
notes thereof where the truth might be best known, (for the which I made
earnest and diligent inuestigation) and to leave them to be published by others
hereafter to the behof of our posterity. But hearing the sundry tales thereof
far dissonau^t in the vtteraunce, and many of them as far wide from truth,
facioned from the speakers to advance or deprave as they fantased the parties:
and understanding besides what notable infamy spronge of this rebellion to the
whole country of Kent, and to every member of ye same, where sundry and many
of them to mine own knowledge showed them selves most faithful and worthy
subjects, as by ye story self shall evidently appear, which either of have or
of purpose were omitted in a printed book late set forth at Canterbury: I
thought these to be special co^sideratio^s, whereby I ought of duty to my
country to compyle and digest such notes as I had gathered concerning that
rebellion, in some form and fashion of history, and to publishe the same in
this age and at this present, contrary to my first intent, as well that the
very truth of that rebellious enterprise might be thoroughly known, as that
also the sheire where that vile rebellion was practiced, might by opening the
full truth in some part be delivered from the infamy which as by report I
hear is made so general in other shyres, as though very few of Kent were free
from Wyates conspiracy: most humbly beseching your highness to take this my
traueil in so good and gracious part, as of your graces benign and gentle
nature it has pleased you to accept my former books dedicated unto your
highness. Whereby I mind nothinglesse then to excuse or accuse any
affectionately, but to set forth each man's doings truly according to their
demerites, that by the co^templation hereof both the good may be encouraged in
the execution of perfect obedience and unspotted loyalty, and the wicked
restrained from the hateful practice of such detestable purposes.

To the loving reader.
THe safe and sure recordation of pains and peryls past, has present
delecta^ion (says Tullye.) For things, were they never so bitter and
unpleasant in the execution, being after in peace and security, renewed by
report or chronicle, are both plausible and profitable, whether they touched
our selves or other.

Being thus in this point persuaded (loving reader) I tho^ghte it a travail
neither unpleasant for thee, nor unthankful for me, to co^triue the late
rebellion practiced by Wyat, in ^o^me of a chronicle as thou see. Whereby as
I mean not to please the evil, nor displease the good, so I much desire to
amend the one by settinge before his eye the lamentable Image of hateful
rebellion, for the increase of obedience: and to help the other by setting
forth the unspotted loyalty of such as aduenturouslye and faithfullye served
in this dangerous time, for the increase of knowledge and policy the better
to repress the like dangers, if any hereafter happen.

And further although hereby I couete not to renew a fear of a danger past,
yet would I gladly increase a care and study in every good man's heart to
avoid a like danger that may happen, and most times ha^^peneth, when a
danger with much difficulty avoided is not sufficient warninge to beware of
the next. I have forborne to touch any man by name, Wyat only except, and a
few other which the story would not permit to be leaft out. Yet take me not
that I mean to excuse any man's fault thereby. For what should I show my
self ^o ungrate or unnatural unto my natural countreimen, as namelye to
blase them to the world, whom either their own good hap, or the queens
surpastinge mercy would to be covered at this time.

And although I touch some by name, terming them in certain places traitors
and rebels, ^ust ti^les of their deserts, yet (God is my witness) I do it not
of malice or envy to any of their persons. I never hated any of them, no not
Wyat him self: whom, although he was utterly unknown unto me, yet for the
sundry and singular gifts, wherewith he was largelye endued, I had him in
great admiration. And now I rather pity his unhappy case, then malice his
person. And do much lament that so many good and commendable quality and
were abused in the service of cursed heresy, whose reward was never other
then shameful confusion, by one way or other to all that followed her ways.
Finallye, if thou suppose I have not fully set forth the whole case al as it was
I shall not again sai it. neither thought I it necessary so to do, but rather
so much as for this time might be both plausible and profitable, and should
satisfy such points as in ye dedicatorie epistle to ye queen's majesty are
expressed. Herafter it may be yt further be said touching this matter. In mean
time you have no just cause I trust to be offended with this my present
enterprise, either for the manner of handlinge, or for the matter herin handled,
the one having sufficient perspicuitie, and plains, the other full truth: for
which I have made such diligent inuestigation, as I have found it, and have
herin expressed the same, especially so much as concerns Kent.

VALE.



wyates rebellion, with the order and manner of resisting the same.
WHAT a restless evil heresy is, The dangerous nature of heresy^
ever travailing to bring forth mischief, never ceasing to protrude all those,
in whose hertes ^he is received to confusion: by what plausible allurementes at
her entry she catches favorable intertainement, with what ways of craft and
subteltie she dilateth her dominion, and finally how of course she toyleth to
be supported by faction, sedition, and rebellion, to the great perell of
subversion of that state where as a plague she happens to find habitation,
as well the lamentable history of the Bohemians and Germans, with all other
treating of like enterprises by heretics, as also Wyates late conspiracy
practiced with open force, does plentuously declare. Heresy the s^eciall
ground of Wyates rebellion.
Who as it should evidently seem by the trade of his life and the late
disclosing of him self, was so fervently affected to heresy (although he
labored by false persuasion otherwise to have coulored it) that burning
inwardly with a prepensed treason in his breast, for the co^tinua^ce of the same
within the realm, he persuaded to him self such an impossibility therein
(the Queen's highness prospering and bearing ye scepter of high governance) as
could by no means be brought about without rebellion, Rebellion the only
refuge of heretikes^
the only refuge as I said that indurate heretics have always sought for
maintenance of their heresy, living under a Catholic prince. Wyat ^ersuaded
that the queen and heresy could not reign together.
He therefore being thus inflamed could no longer contain, but immediately upon
the beginning of the Queen's most happy reign forsaking his habitation in the
country, went to London, Wyates repair to Lo^^do^ to stir other to (...)
rebellion.
of purpose to stir the duke of Suffolk and his brethren, with others of
power in further countries, whom he knew to be like affected to heresies, and
consequently to burn in semblable desire for continuance of the same: Leaving
nevertheless such behind him in Kent to solicit his and theirs unhappy
case, whom he knew so much addicted thereunto as in his abse^ce for their
diligence in such a ministry neded no ouerseer. He remained in London, till
he thought him self throughlye furnyshed every way, and every where with in
the realm to attempt his determined enterprise, when apt time should serve.
Which done, he returned into Kent, Wyates return into Kent.
not of purpose then to proceed: But understanding his strength practiced there
by his age^tes to set things in order, and so to return to London, abidynge
the time appointed therefore by him and his accomplices. But so it befell in the
mean time, that at his being in the country, the counsel committed a
gentleman of that shyre to ward, one to Wyat above all other most dear,
whereby the common brute grew, that he suspectynge his secrets to be reveled
(and upon that occasion to be sent for by the counsel) felt him self, as it
were for his own surety, compelled to anticipate his time. Wya^ prevented the
time.
But whether that were the cause or no, doubtful it is. But certain it was,
that Wyat the^ proceeding in his detestable purpose, armed him self, and as
many as he could: And geuinge intelligence of his determination to his
accomplices, as well at London as else where, the Thursday after at Maydstone in
the market time, The first day of Wyates styrte at Maydstone.
beiynge the.xxv. day of Ianuarye, in the first year of the Queens raygne by
proclamation in writing, published his deuillishe pretense.

The cause why Wyat made not religion the outward pretense of his rebellion
And considering with him self, that to make the pretense of his rebellion, to
be the restoring or continuau^ce of the new and newelye forged religion was
neither agreeable to the nature of heresy (which always defends it self by
the name and countenance of other matter more plausible) neither so apt to
further his wicked purpose, being not a case so general to allure al sorts to
take part with him: he determined to speak no word of religion, but to make
the color of his commotion, The color of Wyates rebellion.
only to withstand strangers, and to auaunce liberty. For as he made his
full recknynge that such as accorded with him in religion, would whollye join
with him in that rebellion: So he trusted that the Catholics for the most
part, would gladl^e embrace that quarrel against the strangers, whose name he
took to become odible to all sorts, by the sedicious and malicious report,
which he and his had maliciously imagined and blown abroad against that
nation, as a preparatiue to their abominable treason. His proclamation
therefore published at Maydstone, Wyates preparatiue to his rebellion
and so in other places, persuaded that quarrel to be taken in hand only in
the defense of the realm from over runnynge by strangers, and for
thaduauncement of liberty. Where in very deed, his only and very matter was
the continuance of heresye, as by his own words at sundry times shall
hereafter appear.

And to the end the people should not think that he alone with a few other
mean gentlemen, had taken that traytorous enterprise in hand without comfort
and aid of higher powers, he untruly and maliciouslye added further to his
proclamation, Wiates untrue persuacions to further his rebellion^
by persuasion to the people, that all the nobility of the realm, and the
wholle counsel (one or two only except) were agreeable to his pretenced
treason, and would with all their power and strength further ye same which he
found most untrue to his subversion. And yt the lord Aburgaueny, the lord
Warden, sir Robert Southwell, high shyreffe with all other gentlemen would join
with him in this enterprise, and set their foot by his to repel the strangers.

This proclamation, and such annexed persuasions made at Maydstone on the
market day, and in other parts of the shire, had so wrought in the hearts of
the people, How Wyates untrue persuasio^s abused the people.
that diverse which before hated him, and he them, were now as it seemed upon
this occasion, mutually reconciled, and said unto him. Sir, is your quarrel
only to defend us from ouerrunning by strau^^gers, and to advance liberty,
and not against the Queen? No, quod Wyat, we mind no thing less, than any
wise to touch her grace: The nature of an heretic is to sai one thing and
think another.
but to serve her, and honor her according to our duties. Well quod they,
give us then your hand, we will stick to you to death in this quarrel. That
done, there came to him one other of good wealth, saying: Sir quod he, they
say I love potage well, I will sell all my spones, and all the plate in my
house, rather than your purpose shall quayle, and suppe my potage with my
mouth. I trust, quod he, you will restore the right religion again. Whiste
quod Wyat, you may not so much as name religion, for that will withdraw from us
the hearts of many: Wyates own words to prove heresy to be the ground of
his rebellion.
you must only make your quarrel for ouerrunnyng by strangers. And yet to
thee be it said in counsel, as unto my friend, we mind only the restitution
of Gods word. But no words. By these his words it appeared, that his
principal intent was not to keep out strangers, which commonly do not
invade to our hinderaunce, but by rebellion amongst our selves: nor to
advance liberty, which ever decays through treason: but to advance
heresye, the Lady regent of his life and doings. This same thursday as Wyat,
Thomas Isleye, and others were occupied at Maydstone with proclamations to
stir the people, and such like: so were others his confederates occupied in
like manner by proclamacions at Mylton, Ashforde, and other towns in the East
parts of the shyre. Through whose allurementes the multitude were grown so
earnestlye affected to Wyates purpose, that they suffered master Christopher
Roper (a man of good wurshyppe, and so esteemed of the^) to be taken of Wyates
ministers, Thapprehe^^sion of master Christopher Roper by ye rebels.
and carried out of the market place, without any manner of rescue, for that he
having his heart and eye full fixed upon the Queen, not only withstode the
readinge of Wyates traitorous proclamation at Milton, but also in ye same place
proclaimed him, and all his traitors. And being roughlye charged therewith by
Wyat and other his galauntes, when he was brought to Rochester, he answered:
master Christopher Ropers words to Wyat.
this tongue spoke it, and does now auowe it. They suffered master Tucke also,
and master Dorrel of Calehyll being gentle men of good wurshyppe,
Thapprehe^^sion of master Tucke and master Dorell.
and Justices of peace, to be taken out of their houses by the rebels and
conveyed without any manner of rescue, in the day time to Rochester, being
twentye miles distant, where they with master Roper were kept as prisoners,
in great danger of life. In like manner sir Henrye Isleye, Antonye Kneuet,
William Kneuet with others, were at Tunbrige, Seuenocke, and other towns in
the West parts of the shyre, styrrynge the people by alarummes, drums and
praclamations.

Now ye shall understand that the evening before the publishing his pretense at
Maydestone, How Wyat wrote to the sheriff of his intent to stir.
Wyat sent a letter by one Thomas Monde (a man of much honesty) to sir Robert
Southwell being Shreif of the shyre, unto whom long before, as I can
understand, he had neither spoken nor written other the^ in defiau^ce, they
being in contencion for matters of religion, as it was said. Nevertheless to
serve his purpose, dissembling his great malice and haut courage, he wrote a
letter to him of such effect as follows.

The effect of Wyates letter to sir Robert Southwell Shreif of Kent.
After hearty commendations, there has been between you and me many quarelles
and grudges, and I ever the sufferer, and yet have you sought the end which
is now frendlye offered unto you, if you be willing to receive it. But
whatsoever private quarrel you have to me, I doubt not but your wisdom is to
much, seeing so many perilles at hand to us both (this pretensed marriage
taking effect) to dissent from us in so necessary a purpose, as wherein we now
determine to enter for the common wealth of the whole realm. And that you may
the better understand our pretense, I send you the copy of our proclamation
comprehending the sum and effect of our meaning^ whereunto if the commen
wealth shall find you an enemy, say not hereafter but that you were fre^dly
warned^ we forbear to write to the lord Aburgaueny, for what you may do with
him, if you list, we know.

The style of wyates proclamation. A proclamation agreed unto by Thomas Wyat,
George Harper, Henrye Isleye, Wyates fals^ presumption of the best of the shyre.
knights, and by diverse of the best of the shyre, sent unto the commons of the
same.
Forasmuch as it is now spread abroad, and certainly pronounced by the lord
Chauncelour and other of the counsel, of the Qnenes determinate pleasure to
marry with a stranger: etce. we therefore write unto you, because you be our
neighbors, because you be our friends, Because.
and because you be Englishemen, that you will join with us, as we will with
you unto death in this behalf, protestyng unto you before God, that no other
yearthly cause could move us unto this enterprise, but this alone, wherein we
seek no harm to the queen, but better counsel and cou^selours, Such
cou^selours he means a^ would favor heresy and.ce.
which also we would have forborne in all other things save only in this. For
herein lies the health and wealth of us al. For trial hereof and manifest proof
of this intended purpose: Lo now even at hand, Lo loud lie
Spaniardes be now already arrived at Dover, at one passage to the nombre of an
hundredth passing upward to London, in companies of ten, four and vi. with
harnes, harquebusses and morrians with match light, the formest company whereof
be already at Rochester. We shall require you therefore to repair to such
places as the bearers hereof shall pronounce unto you, there to assemble and
determine what may be best for ye advancement of liberty and commen wealth in
this behalf, and to bring with you such aid as you may.

The end of Wyates proclamation.
The messenger that brought the letter with the proclamation from Wyat to the
Shreif being not preuie to ye contents thereof and having charge upon his life
to return an answer with all speed, importuned the Shreife so much therefore
(although he saw hi^ greatly busied in giving advertisement throughout the
shyre of Wyates traiterous determination) as he nevertheless to satisfy the
messenger, whom he know to be a right honest man (notwithstanding his
diligence was abused in so leude a message) made him answer out of hand as
follows.

The Shreifes answer to the messenger that brought Wyates letter.
Neighbor Monde, rather to satisfy your importunity, the^ to answer Wyates
letter, whom in this case I disdain to answer, or to speak with you apart
coming from a traitor, you may say unto him that as in deed I have been
desierous of his friendship for neighbourhoodes sake, so have I much more
desired his reformation in diverse points of great disordre, whereby he
certainly knew as well by my spech to him self, as other means coming to his
knowledge, that I have since the beginning of the Queen's reign holden him
and some of his coleges in this co^spiracie vehemently suspected for like
matters as now they have attempted. Wherein seeing he has not deceived me, but
by opening him self has manifestly verified mine opinion conceived of him, I
purpose not to purchase his friendship so dear, as for the gain of him to lose
my self and my posterity in perpetual infamye. And if such things which his
fond headde has wayed for perilles, to the condempnation of the whole
wisdom of the realm (they allowing the same for good) had been in deed as
perilous, as he with others, for want of due consideration, demeth them, his
duty had been to have opened his opinion therein as an humble and reverent
peticioner to the Queen's highness, or to some of her graces counsel. But to
press his sovereign in any suite or upon any occasion with weapon and armor
by sturring her subjects to rebellion, that is and always has been accounted
the part of most arrogant and presumptuous traitors, and so do I note him and
his mates as you may tell them, and shall God willing provide for the^
accordingly. Now goodman Monde it shall be in your choice whether you will carry
this message or no. But as your friend I shall advise you to seek out better
company. The messenger excusing himself by ignorance, departed to Wyat with
answer. And sone after returned to the ^hire^^ under whom he served the queen
very faithfully.

The Shreif being made preuie (as ye have heard) by Wyat to his traiterous
pretense the night before he stirred, and wanting no good wy^^ as it should
seem, with the help of the lord Aburgaueny, who was as forw^rd as he to have
resisted the reading of Wyat^s proclamation at Maydestone the day following, and
to disparse his force, sent for gentlemen and yeomen in all have to ye end.
But before he could gather power mete to attempt the repressing of ^uche a force
(sundry of his neighbors of greatest possessions, and towns most populus,
which should have been his chief aid, being contrary bent) Wyat acco^^panied
with a force well armed and weponed marched to Rochester

The same Thursdaye Harper and other metynge him in the way, where fortifiyng
the East parts of the town, and breaking up the bridge toward the West, he
abode the coming of his appointed strength, sufferynge all Passengers to pass
quietly through the town to London, or to the sea, taking nothing from them
but onl^e their weapon. And being the Fridaye all day at Rocheste^, and not
hearing from Isleye, the tow^e of Tunbridge, and other his co^^urates of the
West part of the shyre, he adressed an earnest letter the Saterdaye morning
to Isleye, the Kneuetes, and other, with the town of Tunbridge, requiringe
them to accellerate their coming unto him. According whereunto Isleye, the
Kneuetes, with other, being newlye returned from Penshurste, The riffli^g of
sir Henry Sidneye
where they riffled Sir Henry Sydneye his armourie (he being attendaunt upon
the Queens highness as a faithful subject) perceyuyng Wyat to long for their
coming, resolved to observe their promise, and march forwards that night
toward Wyat. But understanding that the Lord Aburga^eny, the Shriffe, and
George Clerk had now gathered a force, and were pressed to encountre them,
first or they departed out of ye town, thought it good by some kind of
proclamation to alienate the peoples hearts from them, as they did in manner
following.

The copy of the praclamation made at Tunbridge by sir Henry Isleye^ Antony
Kneuet, and his brother with others.
YOu shall understand that Henry Lord Aburgauenye, Robert Southwell knight,
George Clerk gentleman, have most traitrouslye to the disturbance of the
common wealth, styrred and raised up the Queens most loving subjects of this
realm, to defend the most wicked and deuilishe enterprise, of certain of ye
wicked and perverse cou^selours, to the utter confusion of this her graces
realm, and the perpetual servitude of all the Queens most loving subjects.
In consideration whereof, we sir Thomas Wyat knight, sir George Harper knight,
sir Henry Isleye knight, Anthony Kneuet Esqu^er, with all the faithful
Gentlemen of Kent, and trusty commons of the same, do pronounce the said Henry
Lord Aburgaueny, Robert Southwell, and George Clerk gentleman, to be
traitors to God, the crown, and the common ^ealthe.

This done, with all speed calling their company together by the noyes of
drums, and lea^inge their direct way to Rochester, for that they would not
come under the wing of the Lord Aburgauenye and the shireffe, they marched
that night to Seuenocke. Taking order with such as were left behind in the
town, that they should be in a readiness to come when so ever they should be
sent for by Wyat, and that by no ways they should believe any tales. For quod
they, the counsel will now send abroad fliynge lies and tales, to discredit
us, and discomforte you, for it is their policy. Antony Kneuet after he was
leapt to his horse, took one by the hand, and said: fare you well. And if you
hap to hear that I am taken, never believe it, for undoubtedly I will either
die in the field, or achiue my purpose. But within.xxiiij. hours he brake his
promise, and ran away no faster then his legs could carye him.

Well, I shall now leave them marchyng to Seuenocke, and return to Wyat at
Rochester. The Herauldes coming to Rochester.
This present saturday came unto him from the queen's highness an Herald and a
trumpetour. Wyat at the ^ounde of the trumpette came to the bridge, where the
Herald was with his cote armor cariyng the arms of England on his back. But
Wyat without using any reverence to him, either for his cote or office, would
not suffer him to come in to the town to declare his mes^age, and pressyng to
come in he offered to stricke him: whereupon the Herald stayed and did his
message there, so that only Wyat with a few with him heard it. Which as men
could gather by ^eport of them that herd it, was promise of pardone to as many
as would retire to their houses within.xxiiij. hours after the proclamation,
and become good subjects. But Wyat would not suffer his soldiers in any
wise to hear it, nor any other proclamation coming from the queen. In the
mean time also sir Thomas Cheynie lord Warden, The lord wardens greetyng to
Wya^.
being a most faithful and noble subject, had sent him such salutacions as
of honor ought to be used to a traitor. And being very desirous to be
doing with him, and to pr^ue on his body what in words of greetinge he had
affirmed, felt yet by his discretion and long experience great causes of stay.
For Wyat desired nothing more then his coming forth, persuadinge that he
wanted no friends about^ him, nor any other that would take in hand to
repress him with force gathered in that shire. And undoubtedly doubtful were
the hearts of the people, and merueylouslye bent to favor Wyat and his
purpose, as by daily euentes appeared. The lord Aburgaueny and the shireff,
who the Saterdaye next after Wyates stir were at Malling in the way toward
Rochester (where Wyat lay) having with them a company of well appointed
subjects, in whom not withstanding for the more part they had good opinion of
trustines and honesty, yet having the general case of the peoples dispotion
in their eye, and not without cause, suspectinge in their band amongst so
many faithful and good some such to be, upon trust of whose trustles and
britell aid, it were no good policy to adventure far, ponderynge therewith
that this illusion of the people whereby they were so far drawn from their
right course and duetie^ grew chieflye by such craftye and false persuasions
as Wyat and his mates had set^e forth in sundry parts of the shyre, by way
of proclamation in writing, wherein among other gross lies they had set
forth also matters of untruth to discredit the lord Aburgaueny and the
shyreffe, as Wyat in his persuasions, that they would join with him. And
Isleye in his proclamation, that they had traitorously assembled the Queens
loving subjects against her grace and the realm. It seemed unto the^ very good
and necessary to spend some time at Malling in aduisinge and lesso^^^g the
multitude, and by way of exhortation to impugn those traitorous
proclamatio^s, and refell such gross and false lies therein conteigned, and
finally to disuade ye people (which that day being the market day were
assembled to a great nu^bre of al sorts) from the traitors and their wicked
attemptes. And accordingly the shireffe had penned an exhor^ation to yt
purpose, which was pro^u^ced out of writi^g in Malling, and sent after by him
into other parts. The heari^g whereof, did vndoubt^dly much move the people, as
after shall appear. I shall report the same in substance truly: how be it
not fully i^ the same form and manner, as I found it, and as it was penned and
pr^^^nced by the shireffe. Who in thutte^au^ce and settinge forth thereof,
spared not to speak plainly and touch sha^ply as the^ the present time and
case ^^ployed vehement occasion.

An exhortation made by sir Robert Southwel knigh^ shireffe of Kent, at Malling
the Sat^rday, being the xxvii. day of January, and market day there to a great
ass^mble of people, refelling and co^fu^ing wyat and his accomplices traitorous
proclamations, wyat being at Rochester iiij. miles distaunt.

LOuinge neighbors and friends, where of late there has been most pestilent
and traiterous proclamations, as ye have heard set forth by Thomas Wyat,
George Harper, Henry Isley, and others, as most arrant traitors to the queen
and the realm, some of the^ the queen's au^cie^t enemies before time, and double
traitors, yet notwithstanding, acco^pting the^ selves to be the best of the
shire in their proclamatio^s, and in the samere putting and pronu^cing other as
traitors, who^ ye all can witness to have been from time to time, true and
faithful subjects to the queen and this our common weal: as the L. ^burgaueny
here present, my self and other gentlemen now pressed and ready with you,
according to our duty, to serve our noble queen: I shall need to spend the
less time to declare unto you, how evil they be, or how evil their
enterprise is, that they have taken in hand: for as much as this their arroga^t
presu^ption and presu^ptuous pride in aduau^cing the^ selfs so far from al
truth, and in depraui^g of other so maliciously for executing their bounden
duty, ought abu^da^tly to persuade what they be to al of consideration
without further circumstance. But for as much as in their proclamations, they
fill ye ears of y^ queen's liege people with gross and manifest lies to stir
the^ against her grace, in thutterau^ce whereof they use this demonstration, lo,
signifiyng some notable thing near at hand for credit worthy impression in
their memory, as lo, a great nu^bre of strangers be now arrived at Dover in
harnes, with harquebusses, moria^s and matchlight I say unto you neighbors and
fre^des upon pain to be torn in pieces with your hands, that it is untrue and
a manifest lie, invented by the^ to provoke and irritate the queen's simple
people to join with the^ in their traitorous enterprise. And therefore I have
perfect hope, that you being before time abused with their crafty and deceitful
treason, will not now ones again having experience of their former evil be
trapped for any persuasio^ i^ so haiinous a snare as this most vile and
horrible crime of treason. Do you not see and note y^ as in the beginning of
the queen's most gracious reign, some of the^ sought to deprive her grace of
her princely estate and rightful dignity, minding to aduau^ce thereunto y^
lady Jane daughter to the duke of Suff. so are they and others newly
con^^edered with the duke and his brethren, being i^ arms at this present for ye
same purpose, and daili loki^g for aid of these traitors and other of their
co^spiracie as by the queen's most gracious letters signed with her own hand and
ready to be read here, may plainly apeare unto you? And will you now nevertheless
aid the^ any ways, or sit still whiles they go about thus wrongfully and
traitorously to depose their and our most gracious sovereign lady and queen,
the comfort of us al, the stay of us al, thonly sauegard of us al, to who^ can
no displeasure or danger chance, but the same must double redou^de to all and
every of us? No friends and neighbors, I trust never to live to se you so far
abused. They go about to bleare you with matters of strangers, as though they
should come to oueru^n you and us also. He seems very blind and willynglye
blinded that will have his sight di^med with such a fond mist. For if they meant
to resist strangers, as they mind nothing less: they would the^ prepare to go
to the sea coasts, and not to the queen's most roial person with such a company
in arms and weapon. Ye can consider I trust, this noble ge^tlema^ the lord
Aburgaueny here present being of an au^cie^t and great pare^tage, born among
you, and such other gentlemen as you se here, which be no strangers unto you my
self also (although a pore ge^tlema^, who I trust at no time has abused you)
has so^what to lose as well as they, and would be as loath to be over run with
sta^gers as they, if any such thing were meant. But for that we know most
certe^ly that there is meant no manner of evil to us by those stra^^gers, but
rather aid, profit and comfort against other strangers our ancient enemies,
with who^ they as most arra^t and degenerate traitors do in deed unkindly and
unnaturally join: we in her graces defe^se will spe^de both life and what we
have beside to the utter most penny against the^. Well, I can no more now sai
unto you, but understanding ye queen's highness as a most merciful pri^cesse to
be ones again determined to pardon as many as by their traitorous and
deceitful proclamatio^s, and other illusio^s were allured to this last treason,
so they repair to their habitations within xxiiii. hours after her graces
proclamation read, and become true subjects to her gra^e, to advise such as
has taken part with those traitors, or have withdrawe^ them selves contrary
to their allegiau^ce, from the aiding and serving of their sovereign,
according to their duties against her enemies, tha^kefullye to accept and
embrace her most gracious pardon, and use means of the^ selves to apprehend
those arrant and principal traitors, and and make a present of them to the
queen's highness, or leave the^ to the^ selfs as most detestable traitors: who
being once so graciously and mercifully forgiven could not but carry the
clem^^cie of the same in their hearts to the furtherance of all obedience
whiles they lived, if there had been any spark of grace in the^. And further I
have to say unto you, yt as these traitors by their proclamatio^s without
authority have moved you to styr against the queen your sovereign, and
appointed you places, where to mete and co^sult for ye furthera^ce of their
traitorous purpose, and to bring with you such aid as you ca^, so shall I
require you, and in her graces name charge you that be here present, not to
come there, but that you and such as be absent taking knowledge herby, repair
to such places as I the queen's shireffe and officer shall appoint you, with such
aid as you can bring for the better service of the queen and the shyre, where
you shall be assured to receive comfort, thanks, and honesty to the end of your
lives and your posterity. And the other way but endless shame and utter undoing
to you and yours, which shall be worste to your selves, and yet a great
grief to us your neighbors, whose advise in all other your private causes you
have been content to follow, and now in this waightiest that has or may
happen to you, will refuse us and follow them that has ever abused you to your
and they utter confusion.

At Mallynge the seven and twenteth day of Ianuarye. Anno Mariae primo.
God save Queen Marye and all her well wyllers.

The shiriffe reading this exhortation caused one Barrham a gentilman and
servant to the lord Aburgau^ny to pronounce it as he reed it, so loud and so
distinctlie as the people assembled round about him to a very great number
in manner of a ring might easlie here and understand every word proceeding from
Barrham, who of his own head cried out unto, them: You may not so much as
lift up your finger against your king or queen. And after the people had
heard the Shiriffes exhortation and cried God save queen Marie, which they did
most hertely, spending therein a convenient time, the shiriffe used these
words unto them. Masters quod he, although I alone did speak unto you, yet
what words were spoken too you by me were also spoken to you by the lord
Aburgauenye and all the gentilmen here present, The sh^riffes spech to the
multitude.
in whose persons I then spoke and now require at your hands a plain and
resolute answer. Will you now therefore join with such as you s^e
evidently to be arra^t traitors, orels with the lord Aburgauenie and such
gentilmen as you see here present, that will live and dye with you in defense of
our rightful queen against these traitors? The people with one voice defied
Wyat and his accomplices, The peoples a^swee^ to the sheriff.
as arrant traitors, and said that they now well espied they had but
abused them. Wherefore in defense of queen Marie they would dye upon them,
expressinge their minds with such earnest shoutes and cries as showed to
proceed unfeignedly from their hearts, which after was confirmed by a better
experience the day following as ye shall anon here. But by the way ye shall
understand that Wyat heringe of this proclamation, said: I know that Barram
well, Wyates promise of barrams reward.
but yet I never took him to have so wide a throat, if I live I may happen to
make him crow a higher note in a another place. What trow ye should then have
become of the author? In the Sundaye followinge the lord Aburgaueny the
shiriffe and the rest of the gentilmen were determined to have merched in the
morninge earelye toward Rochester to have aided the duke of Norfolk and sir
Henrye Gerningham captain of the guard then being at Grauesend toward Wyat
with a certain band of whitecotes to the number of.vi.C. sent unto them from
London, The duke of Norf, and sir Henrye Gerni^gha^s coming to Grauesende.
whereof Breet and others were their captains. Roger Ap^ulton and Thom^s Swa^
^rustie ge^tilme^.
Roger Appulton gentilman was also at Grauesende with the duke attendant to
serve where in likewise was Thomas Swan gentilman.

This satterdaye at night the lord Aburgaueny suspectinge that Wyat and his
accomplices liynge within four miles of them, and being so much provoked in
that they were in the day so rightly set forth in their colors at Malling
would for revenge work some anoyau^ce to the^ or his band yt night, either
by a ca^masado or by some other mean, did therefore to prevent the same set a
strong watch in in the market place at Malling and other parts of entry into
the town: The lord Aburgaueny set the watch i^ person.
and gave the watch word him self before he would take any rest. But between
one and two of the clock in the night when every body was taken to rest
saving the watch, there happened a larom, A larom at Malling.
sundry cryeng: treason, treason, we are all betrayed, in such a sort that such
as were in their beds or newlye rissen thought verily that either Wyat with
his band had been in the town, or very nere: The thing was so soden and
happened in such a time as men not acquainted with like matters were so amassed,
that some of them knew not well what to do, and yet in thend it proved to
nothing: for it grew by a messenger that came very late in the night
desiringe too speak with the lord Aburgaueny or master shiriffe to give them
certain aduertisme^t that sir Henry Isleie, the two Kneuetes and certain
other with.v.C. weldishe men were at Seuenocke, and would merche in the
morning from thence earlye toward Rochester, for the aid of Wyat against
the duke of Norff. and in their way burn and destroy the house of George
Clarke aforesaied. A meaning of ye rebels to burn master George Clerks house.
Whereupon the lord Aburgaueny and the sheriff by thaduice of the gentilme^
before named, for that the said Clarke had been a painful and seruisable
gentilman, changed their purposed journey from Rochester, to encounter with
Isley and his band, to cut them from Wyat and save Clarke from spoil. And
so in the morninge early being sundaye The lord Aburgaueny the shiriffe, The
merching of the lord Aburgaueny and the shiriffe too encounter Isleye.
Warram, Sentleger, Richard Covert, Thomas Roydon, Anthony Weldon, Henrye
Barnei, George Clarke, Johan Dodge, Tho. Watton, Heughe Catlyn, Thomas Henley,
Christopher Dorrell, Heughe Cartwright, Johan Sybyll Esquiers, Thomas Chapman,
James Barram, Jasper Iden, Johan Lamb, Walter Heronden, Walter Tailor, Johan
Raynoldes, Thomas Tuttesham, Johan Allen, and Thomas Holdiche gentilmen with
yomen to the number of.vi.C. or there about merched out of Malling in order
till they came to Wrotham heath where they might easily here the sound of the
traitors drommes, Wrotham heathen
and so making have pursued them till they came to a place called Barrow
grene, Barrowe grene.
thorough which lay the right and redye way that the traitors should take
merching from Seuenocke toward master Clarke. The lord Aburgaueny being
very glad that he had prevented them in winning the grene, sent out spialles
to understand their nerenesse, and to discriue their number, reposinge them
selves there till the return of his spialles, who at their coming, said
that he neded not to take further pains to pursue them. For they were at hand
coming toward him as fast as they could march, which was glad tidinges to
the Lord Aburgauenye and his band. And taking order furthwith to set his
men in a raye, he determined to abide their commminge, and there to take or
give the overthrow. Which the traitors understanding, whether it was for yt
they misliked the match, or the place to fight, whiles the lord Aburgaueny and
his band were busye in placing them selves, The s^rinkyn^ of the rebels.
they shrancke as secretlye as they could by a bye way. And were so far gone
before the Lord Aburgaueny understood thereof by his spialles, as for doubt of
ouertaking them before their coming to Rochester, he was driwen to make such
haste for the ouertakinge of them, as diverse of his foot m^n were far behind
at the onset giving. The first sight that the Lord Aburgaueny could have of
the^ after they forsook their purposed way, was as they ascended Wrotham hill
directlye over Yaldam, Master Peckams house, where they thinkinge to have
great advantage by the winning of ye hill, displaied their ensigns brauelye,
The displa^^yng of the rebel is ensigns.
semynge to be in great ruff. But it was not long after or their courage was
abated. For the lord Aburgaueny, the shyreffe, and the rest of the gentlemen,
with such other of the queens true and faithful subjects, as with great
pains taking to clyme the hill, and to hold way with the horsemen, The
rebels overtaken.
ouertoke the rebels at a field called Blackesoll field in the parish of
Wrotham a mile distant from the very top of the hill, Blackesol^ field.
where the lord Aburgaueny, the shyreffe, the gentlemen aforenamed, and other
the queen's true and faithful subjects handled them so hot and so fiersly,
yt after a small shot with long bows by the traitors, The skyrmishe.
and a fierce brag showed by some of the horsemen, they took their flighte
away as fast as they could. Yet of them were taken prisoners above three skore.
In this conflict Warram Sentleger (who brought with him a good company of
soldiers, and always a seruisable gentleman) also George Clarke, Anthony
Weldon, and Richard Clarke with others did very honestly behave the^ selves.
William Sentleger hearing of a fraie toward, between the Queens true
Subjects and the traitors, came to the lord Aburgauenie into the field with
all haste, not an hour before the skirmishe, who with the rest of the
gentlemen, with certain of the Lord Aburgauenyes and Shireffes ^eruauntes,
being all well horsed served faithfully, and from ^hence chased the horsemen
till they came to a wood called Hartlei wood four miles distant from the
place where the onset began. The chase (...) the horse ^^n.
The Queens true subjects did so much abhor their treason, and had the
traitors in such detestation, as with great difficulty any escaped with
life that were taken prisoners, and yet were they al very well armed and
weaponed and had also great advantage by the place of fight. Sir Henry I^sleye
lay all that night in the wood and fleed after into Ha^pshire. The two
Kneuettes being well horsed were so hastily pnrsued, as they were driven to
leave their horse, and crepe into the wood, and for haste to rippe their
boots from their legs, and run away in the vampage of their hose. The
chase continued so long as night came on before it was full finished. Thus
was I^^ey, the Kneuetes and their band overthrown by the faithful service of
diverse gentlemen and yomen seruinge under the lord Aburgaueny and the shyreffe,
whose forwardness, courage, and wisdom, in this traiterous broyle, no doubt
was very much praise worthy, as well for their spedie acceleration of their
strength, which (considering how they were every way compassed with the
traitors) was no small matter in so little space, and for their wise and
politic handlinge also in kepinge them together from Wyat, who merueylouslye
and by sundry ways sought to allure them away. For had not they in their
own person to the incouraginge of their company adventured far, and by
their wisdom, discretion, and great charge, politikelye handled the matter,
some think that Wyat had been at London before he was looked for by any good
man, with no small train: whose iouruey was greatly hyndered and his company
very much discomfited by this repulse given to Isleye and his band. Where
amongst other things Gods secret hand was greatly felt to ye great comfort
and present aid of true subjects against the traitors, who having such
advantage of the place (as in deed they had) were like rather to give then
receive so foul an overthrow. But this it is (you see) to serve in a true
cause, and her whom God so favors, that he will ^ot suffer the malice and
rage of her enemies at any time to preu^ile against her: to whom he has
given so many ^otable victories and so miraculous^ that her enemies might
seem rather to have been ouerthrow^ Spiritu Dei^ then vanqueshed huma^o robore.
The lord Aburga^eny the shiriffe and the gentilmen with them, Thanke^ given
too GOD for victory.
after they had given humble thanks to God for the victory (which they did
very reverently in the field) and taken order for the prisoners, were driven
to divide the^ sel^es for want of harboroughe, and vitta^le for the soldiers
that had well deserved both. The lord Aburgaueny and certain with him went to
Wrotham. The shiriffe and certain with him to Otforde, where they had much to
do to get vittaile for ^^^ir soldiers. The lord Aburgaueny and the shiriffe
su^pec^^ng that some of those gen^^lmen lately disco^^^ted in this ^^irmishe
would not long tarry in the realm but make shift to pass the seas, yea, and
by sp^^all understanding. Wyat him self with some of his company thereunto
bent, devised to lay^ the country about that they might not escape. And
considering that they would not do it at Dover nor in that cost, they knowing
the lord Warden to have such watch unto them, but rather for sundry
respects at Rye or more southward, and having great proof of Thomas Dorrell
the younger his fidelity, Thomas Dorrell of Scotney y^e younger.
he returned the same Dorrel being newly come unto him with.ixxx. men well
appointed into Sussex, giving him straight charge that con^ulting with sir
Johan Guyldforde, they should both day and night: s^t sure watch for the
passinge of a^y that way to the sea co^t, and further to take such order as
no m^^it^d, fish, wine or other vitaile coming out of those parts should
pass to the rele^f of the traitors. Anthony Kneuet, notwithstanding great and
straight watch laid round about the country by the shiriffe for
thapprehension of him and other that fled, arrived that sundaye at night late
at Rochester, where his news were so joyful, Harpers running a^aye from Wyat.
that Harper furthwith found the mean to rid him self out of their co^^pany
without any leave taking. and ran to the duke of Norff. to whom he seemed so
greatly^ to lament his treason, that the duke peteinge his case (the rather for
the long acquaintau^c^ betwe^e them in times paste) received him too grace.
But within a day after he ran from the duke and returned to his old mate, as
hereafter shall appear. Wyat hearing of Isleye his overthrow, and vndertandinge
by the proceeding at Mallinge the day before that those things set furthe in
his proclamations, whereby he thought his strength at home to be most surely
knit unto him, were now become rather a weakenninge then otherwise: the people
there being ready to fall from him for his so abusinge of them, he fell into so
great extreme anguishe and sorrow, as writing a letter of expostulation to some
of his familiars abroad, in reprehension of their infidelity, in that they
sticked not to him so fast as they promised, Wyats bewai^ing his case with
tears.
he bedewed the paper whereupon he wrotte with tears issuing so abunda^tlye
from his eyes, as it would bear no ink, and so leaving to write, calling for
a preuie cote that he had quilted with angels not long before, Wyatscote of
fe^ce quilted with aungelles.
which might serve both for his defense and refuge for his necessity being
in a another country, he practiced with such as were nere unto him where they
might have ready passage and most for their surety to take the sea. Wyates
practice to fly by sea.
For England said he is no place for us to rest in: His company also shranke
from him as fast as they could devise means to escape: whereunto Thomas Isleye
and others had a greater respect the^ him self, he seming to take care for
nothing, but how he might safely^ convey him self being well frended, as
it was thought with some of the shipmaisters.

Wyat mated.
Thus was Wyat so mated by the lord Aburgaueny, the shiriffe and their band,
as he was at his wits end, as ye have heard, and cheifely by keeping him
from that, which by spiall about him they afterward understood him specially
to desire, which was offer of battle: he and his being fully persuaded that
there could be no great force raised against him in the shire, whereof the
most part should not be his when it should come to the show. Wherein although
he might be deceived, as in deed he was, yet his quarrel with the disposition
of the people thereunto well considered, with the end of his traueil, which
could be but spoil and raven redye means and lures to draw the careless
multitude unto him: It seemed to the lord Aburgaueny and such as served with
him better policy to werie Wyat and weaken him by the cutting away of his
strength from him, then to offer him battle til the duke of Norffolkes
coming: whom the lord Aburgaueny and the shiriffe knew to be at hand
toward Wyat: unto whom they and all the gentilmen of their band after their
skirmishe with Isley, made the haste possible they might. But before their
coming the case was wonderfully changed to the great descomforte of all the
queen's true subjects: and that came to pass that of al me^ was lest feared.
For who was it that suspected such cruel and malicious disposition to remain
in any English heart toward his country, in any sub^ectes thought toward
his Soueraygne, that receyuyng her graces armoure, weapon, and money, would
have played so traitorous a part as these captains did with their band^ It is
so strange a case as the world never saw. It is so malicious a part, as the
Jew would not have done the like, having received his hyre to serve.

So it was that the noble Duke being an ancient and worthy captain, and yet
by long imprysonment so diswonted from the knowledge of our malicious world,
and the iniquity of our time, as he suspectinge nothing less than that
which followed, but judging every man to accord with him in defier to serve
truly, marched furthe the Mondaye about ten of the clock in the morning
from Grauesende to strowde toward Rochester, and about four of the clock
in the after noone of the same day, he arrived at strowde nere unto Rochester,
The dukes marchinge from strowde to Rochest.
having with him the captain of the guard, Griffith Morgan now bishop of
Rochester, The names of the gentlemen serving under the duke.
Sir Edward Braye, sir John Fogge knights, John Couerte, Roger Appulton
esquiers, and Thomas Swan gentleman, with certain of the guard, and other to
the number of CC. or there about, besides Bret and other five captains, Bret
chief captain of ye whitcotes.
who with their band being six hundred all in whight cotes tarried behind at
a hill called Spittell hill, (...) unto strowde, whiles the Duke went to
strowde to see the planting of the ordinance. Which being ready charged and
bent upon the town of Rochester, and perceiving Wyat and the other traitors
by hanging out of their flagges upon the bridge wall, to be in great brauerie^
which considering the miserable state they were in the night before could not
be (had they not received some new comfort by some traiterous mean,) the
Duke commanded one of the pieces to be fired for shot into Rochester. And as
the gunner was fyeringe the piece, sir Edward Braies eldest son came in all
the have to the duke saying. Sir did not I tell your grace this morninge that
yonde^ false wretches would de^^iue you^ How know you that quod the Duke. why
sir (que Braye) you may see them as false trayrours bent against you. And
immediately Bret and other captains of the whitcoates with their band being
upon the hill and at the back of the Duke, made great and loud shoutes
sundry times criynge: The revolt of the captains to ye whight cotes and their
band.
we are all English men, we are al English men, fashionynge them selves in
array ready bent with their weapons to set upon the Duke if he had made any
resistaunce. Whereupon the Duke and the Captain of the Guard commanded the
pieces that were bent upon the town, to be turned upon Bret and his ^ande.
But upon further consi^^^ation the shot was spa^^d^ And the Dukes grace with
the c^ptayne of ^he guard sir Hen^^e Ge^^ingham consideri^g not without bleding
hear^^s their ^hiefe strength thus ^^^ened upon them, so that they were now
environed both behind^ an^ before with t^ayterous enemies, sh^fted t^em selves
away, as did als^ their ^^mpa^ie. After whose departure Wyat accompanied with
(...) or th^^ and not many more, came o^t of Rochester half a mile from the
town a^ the left, to m^te the six captains of the whyt coat^s. Amongst
whom was Harper, Harper returned to his old mate.
notwithstanding his crouchynge and knelinge before the Duke, and fair
pr^mises that he would^ undertake that Wyat should have yielded. Who f^tinge
before the other captains, with his sword drawn, said to Wyat. I promised
you a good turn, and say not now^ but I have pa^^ed it. Who had s^en the
imbra^ynge, ^ ^^ippynge and congratula^i^n v^ed at thi^ metynge, from traitor
to traitor, might^ iustlye wonder thereat. Shortly after they had well clawe^
one another, they went together like them selves into Rochester: When this of
all other mos^e unfortunate channce came to the knowledge of the Lord
Aburgauenye^ the sh^reffe and their friends, they we^e not a little troubled
with the straungenes of the case, much^ doubtinge that the people whi^^^ before
seemed to be brought to good frame, would be impa^^ed by this alteration, and
such as were before evil disposed ^oulde not be greatly am^^ded thereby.

The shireffe being the same night at Maydstone, The shireffes being at
Maydston.
that had come the ^ame day from O^^orde fourtene miles distaunt ^o mete with
Thomas Guils^^de, Steven Dorrell, Ed^^^d Horden, John Robartes and John Finche
Esquiers, to match toward the Duke, and in the morning so far from any
mistrust of that which followed the same day^ at Rochester, as having no sure
place to conueye the prisoners taken the dai before in the skirmishe with
Isleye. He left the chiefest and trustiest of his servants and friends, both
gentlemen and yomen of al his band at Malling for the sauegarde of the
prisoners, where also lay the Lord Aburgauenye and his band, doubtinge that
Isleye and the rest that escaped would have made some mean that night to have
recovered the prisoners, sundry of them being men of good wealth and well
frended, and liynge within four miles of Wyat. The sheriffs secret return
to Mallinge.
Upon these news whether it were for the absence of the lord Aburgaueny and
his strength, or mistrusting false measure in the town, or moved with example
of the reuolte of the whitcotes, he thought (it should seem, Maydston no me^e
place for him to make any abode, nor yet good policy, al parts considered, to
disclose the time of his remouynge, but iudginge plainly him self thonly mark
of these parts, whereat the traitors shot, or falling any ways into their
hands, so newly after the case of the duke, one part of ye tragedy to be the^
ended: he returned to his strength, giving knowledge to the gentlemen
remayninge in Maydstone to repair to his house for consultation, what was to
be done for the redubbinge of that unhappy chance. In which consultation
there did rise so many different opinions, some saying they would to the
Queen, and some to the Earl of Penbroke being her graces Leuetenau^t, that ye
shiriffe without further debatinge, entreating the lord Aburgaueny and certain
gentilmen to remain and entertain such of their bands as they could hold
till his return, which he promised should be without delay, went to the
counsel for knowledge of their pleasure: where he tarried uneath two hours but
returned in post ye same night. And at his coming the lord Aburgaueny and he
assembled as many of their force as they could call together.

The traitors and their friends were grown as men revived from death to
life, flattering them selves that a thing so far above men's expectation
could not have happened to them so fortunatlye, but by Gods miraculous
provision, as favoring greatly their case: and so blewe it abroad as well by
wind as by writing, the more part of the people being ready to believe it, as
the case in the heads of the multitudes was wonderfully changed both for
strength and opinion.

Wyat advertised by his letter the duke of Suffolk of his victory by Gods
provision (as he termed it). Wya^ (...) ^o the (...) of Suff.
Whose letter was intercepted in Essex, as the messenger passed the ferie, by a
servant of sir Robert Southwels, and brought to the counsel. He wrote also
to the duke of Norffo. but in another style, his letters being open and
importing such matter as follows. Be it known to al men, and specially to
the duke of Norffolke that I have taken nothing in hand, Wyats letter to the
Duke of Norffolke.
but that I will maintain with the exspense of my life: which before it
depart out of my body, shall be fold full dear. et ce.

An inuictiue against ye neuters.
Such of those parts as honge in the wind, as neuters, whereof were no small
number that had lurked in caves all the tempest, watching but where should become
the victory: that for example of the evil were nothing inferior to the
arrantest traitors, but rather for a number of respects much worse, began to
appear very cherefull, giving them selves great thanks for handling the
matter so finely, that conueing the^ selves out of the way by their policy,
could avoid charge and perell so wittely. And as they met with such as had
served faiethfully (with who^ they durst be fra^ke) they spared not to open
their mouths largely, pouring out such language as could be but lamentable,
or rather odible to every true ear, tunderstande any subject so far
perverted from his allegiau^ce and duty, that for gain or security of their
own persons, would rejoice in sittinge still as indifferent, where the crown
is a ^^rtie: or to persuade security to them selves be they never in so
strong a hold, where their sovereign is in peril. Which (all things
rightly weyed) seemed a strange, persuasion taccompte either gain or sauinge
in sparing some part of the accidents by sitting still, to adventure the
loss of the principal, whereupon life and the wholle depends: or by affecting
a little corruption inordinatly, to lose both honest fame and good opinion of
his country, which every honest man ought to seek to preserve as tenderly
as the well doing of him self and his wholle posterity. Thus may we
euidentlye se the diverse effects of diverse inclinations according to truth
and untruth of perfect obedience prevailing in men's hearts. These neuters
or cou^terfetes that would be neither open foes, nor adue^turous friends, but
as wyly vultures houeringe in the wind to catch and gripe some part of the
pray, although they would no part of the fray, persuaded them selves to save
that which in their opinion the true hearty subject should lose by giving
such adventure: that was security of body and goods (which grant they
saved) yet in the just judgment of the honest they deserved thereby the same
blotte of infamy that is due to the open enemies. On the other side the true and
faiethful, whose hearts and hands such dim color of unthankful policy
could not witholde from the vtteraunce of needful service in such general
case of danger, thought it rather a gain to adventure body and goods,
whereby either to preserve the head and the wholle, which was cruelly pursued,
or at least by defense of the same to purchase unto them and their names the
honest opinion of unspotted members, and the imortalitie of good fame, wherewith
truth always rewards unfeigned service. For such an in comparable virtue is
faiethfull loyalty, so much abhorring all corruptible allurementes, that
whose hearts she has in governance, with such neither savor of gain, nor
hope of security, neither persuasion of frendeshippe, ne other intisement can
so much prevail, as for any respect they will digress from the right course
of true service. Where the contrary wanting that perfection, to taste the gain
of fortunes corruptible members, wherafter they gape to obtain quiet to the
restyue carcass and lucre to the^ selves, the thing they only seek, are easly
drawn to Run a clean contrary race.

This naughty brood therefore of counterfetes, of al other not tolerable in
a common weal, are specially to be looked to in their beginning, least their
evil example by long sufferaunce grow to such a president at the last, that
the common saiynge, Good to sleep in a whole skin, being espied to escape
without danger or reprehension, be taken up for a pollicye, A consultation of
the rebels after the reuolte by the whit cotes.
and thereby outeweye the just p^ize of bounden duetye.

After this most unhappy chance, the traitors with their new adiunctes,
fell to a great and solemn counsel that same night at Rochester, for their
procedinge in their pretensed treason. In discourse whereof proceeded such
vnsittinge talk as well toward the Queens highness, as her honorable
counsel, tendyng to the alteration of the whole state, as abhorred the ears of
some of the self traitors, that understanding by that talk the end of
their purpose, whereof before they were ignoraunte, wished them selves under
the earth, for being so unhappy as to be so much as acquainted with so
damnable an enterprise. Such an opinion had they, as they demed very few
counselors or officers of authority or of nobilty within the realm worthy
the place whereunto they were called. And persuadinge great choice to be
amongst them selves for the suppliynge of that want, such ouerweninge had
they o^ them selves, and made so sure a rekeninge of the victory, as they
disposed the honorable offices of the realm among the^ selves. Wyat thought
him self now so sure of the victory, as seeing him that offered to sell his
spones and all the plate he had, rather then his purpose should quail, and
suppe his potage with his mouth, warranted him that he should eat his potage
with silver as he did. England when good couns^ll should stand it in most
auaylable stead, neded no better counselours then such as they were, if they
had half the wit they thought them selves to have, coupled with grace and
honesty. But what they had in deed, their acts declare plainly to their own
confusion, as it has always, and ever herafter shall to as many as be of like
disposition. One of them that had some wit in deed, although he wanted
grace, perceiving by their talk in what fond frenzy they were entered, to
interrupte them therein, he said, that such matters were good to be treated
of at further opportunity. But for the present, it were mete to divise upon
their next iourneye, and whether it should be good policy in them mindyng to
march toward London, to leave the Lord Aburgauenye and the shireffe at
liberty, that annoyed their friends, and by all likelyhode would not so
cease, as they may or dare at their black being left at large. One of them
taking upon him first to answer, thought nothing more necessary then their
sequestration. And if his advise might have been heard in ye beginning, the
shireffe should have been in hold (as I have heard) before any thing should have
been attempted. A devise to apprehende the shyreffe.
But the captains to the whitcotes mete cou^selours for such an enterprise,
having the spoil of London in their eyes^ would not dispute that was paste:
but for the present they persuaded clean contrary to the former opinion:
saying that their going about thapprehension of the shireffe should be but a
loss of time. For London said they, longed soore for their coming, The
misrekening of ye rebels upon London.
which they could by no mean protracte without bredynge great peril and
w^ikenes to them selves. And having London at their commandment, whereof they
were in no manner of doubt, if it were not lost by their sloth, their revenge
to the lord Aburgaueny, the shireffe, with other their enemies would easly
follow. Wyat savoring full well their disposition, and understanding their meaing
by their arg^^mentes, and knowing also that without his assenting thereunto,
he could not long have (...) company, yielded to their co^nsell. And so being
out of m^asure exalted into hault courage and pride by the revolt of the white
cotes, he marched the day after being Twesday in great pomp and glory,
cariyng with him vi. pieces of ordinance (which they had gotten of the
queen's) besides their own, to Cowling castle, a hold of the Lord Cobhams,
four miles distant from Rochester, and not much out of their way toward
London, where the lord Cobha^ was. Wyat at his coming to Cowling castle, bent
his ordinance against the gate, and with great and sundry shottes and fire
^rake and burned up a way through the gate. The Lord Cobham defended his
castle as stoutly as any man might do, having so few against so great a number
and so little munition, him self discharging his gunne at such as approached
the g^te right hardely. And in that assault two of his own men were slain.
After this assault and talk with the lord Cobham, Wyat marched to Grauesende
where he reposed that night.

wyates marchi^g to Dartforde.
From Grauesende he and his band marched the wednesday next after to Dartford,
where he reposed that night: whether came sir Edward Hastinges master of the
Queen's horse, and sir Thomas Cornewalles knights, The coming of the master
of the horse and sir Thomas Cornewalles to Wyat.
both of her graces honorable preuie counsel, sent from the qnene to Wyat,
tunderstand the cause of his commotion, and ^lso (as it was said) finding any
repentant submissio^ in him to promise pardon, or at the lest great hope
thereof. Wyat understanding their coming, and taking with him certain of his
ba^d, went to the weast end of the town where he had planted his ordinance,
and at the lighting of master Hastinges and sir Thomas Cornewalles from their
horse, Wyat having a part sin in his hand advanced him self so^what before
such gentlemen as were with him, Prid^^
and using but little reverence due from a subject to cou^selours traced nere
them, to who^ the master of the horse spoke in substance as follows. The
queen's majesty requires to understand the very cause, wherefore you have thus
gathered together in arms her liege people, which is the part of a traitor,
and yet in your proclamations and persuasions you call your self a true
subject, which can not stand together. I am no traitor quod Wyat, and the
cause wherefore I have gathered the people, is to defend the realm from
oueru^ning by strangers, which must follow, this marriage taking place. why
quod the queens agentes, there be no strangers yet come whom either for power
or nu^bre ye need to suspect. But if this be your only quarrel, because ye
mislike the marriage: will ye come to communication touching that case, and the
queen of her gracious goodness is content ye shall be heard. Wyates arrogant
aun^^^^^^
To whom Wyat shaped (...) declare his malicious intent and traitorous heart to
the queen's own person and royal estate. I yield thereto quod Wyat, but for my
suertie I will rather be trusted then trust. And therefore I demand the
custody of the tower, and her grace in the tower the displacing of certain
cou^sellers, and placing other in their rowmes as to me shall seem best. Upon
this leude answer, long and stout conference was between them. In so much
that the master of the horse said unto him with a s^out courage. wyat before
thou shall have that thy traitorous demand granted thou shall die and xx. M.
with thee. Shortly after the master of ye horsie, with master Cornewalles
finding him an arrant traitor, and desperately set to al mischief, retour^ed
to the queen's majesty. The common people being with him and calling to their
remembrance how Wyat in all appearance made his whole matter of styr, for
strangers, and no ways against the queen, and perceiving how irreverently he
used him self as well to y^ queen's harrold at Rochester, as to y^ privy counsel
at Dartford, and considering with the^ selves also that he would suffer none of
the queen's proclamatio^s to be read among them: their hearts began to rise
against him. And among the^ selves su^drie of the^ much murmured, wisshinge
with the loss of al they had, they had never been acquainted with Wyat nor his
doings: and in deed sought as ^any ways as they could to be rid of him.
Which perceived by ^^at and his mates, they deuis^d a brute to be sounded in
his hand, that the lord Abur^aueny, A crafty policy.
and the shireffe did cause to be hanged as many as they c^^lde take coming
from Wyates ^^nde. Wherewith the people s^^^^ing in a great mase what t^ do,
were wonderfullye per^^^^ed. The queen vnderstan^^^^ by the master of the
horse, and sir Thomas Cornewalles, the arr^gancie of Wyat, and ^otwithstanding
that she perceived her merciful inclination rather to provoke him then
otherwise, yet seemed she nothing willinge even then by violence and force (as
she easly might) t^ suppress him. But yet a longer time to suffer and abide,
and by delay and mercy, her enemy might be won to reconciliation. The
nobility which were at that time with her grace, The suit of the nobles to
the queen
pe^^ceiuinge such surmounting mercy, rather to increase then any^ ways to
abate courage and malice in the insolent and proud^ heart of the traitors, and
further understanding that the traitors demed the con^ation or forbearing to
proceed rathe^ of debilitie and fear, then o^ mercy, and clemencye,
counseled with her grace, that wi^^ her gracious leave and license, they
might se^ upon him, and his ba^de, before he should pass^ Black heath:
declaring that to suffer such an arrogant traitor, being but a mean ^^m^er
to approach thus contemp^^^uslye so nere her royal person (as it were in
defiaunce of ^er grace, and her true subjects) ^houlde greatly redounde to
their dishonours in the opinion of all faithful men, thoroughout the world.
The Queen's answer to the nobles.
The queen gave them all most hearty and loving thanks, saying that she
nothing doubted of their true hearts toward her. Yet was she loathe to make
any proof or trial thereof, in such quarrel as should be with loss of
blood. For to repress them with violence, and subdue them by the sword,
could not have so happy success, but many of my pore subjects (quod she)
should derelye bye it, with the loss of their lives. Wherefore she determined
to suffer as long as she might, and to forbear that practice, till there were
no other hope, ne remedy. For albeit, in the capital traitors, ther^ could
be but great default, yet in the multitude, she was persuaded to be no malice,
but only misled by their captains, and rather seduced by ignorance, then
upon any evil purpose meant to her grace. Wherefore she desired them to be
contented: for she was fully determined to continue her merciful sufferaunce,
and other her gentle means so long as she might, and vanquish her enemies
without the sword, if any spar^le of obedience, or natural zeal remain in
their hearts. Notwithstanding she required (...) to prepare and retain (...)
force in a readiness, if their ^^^^e hearts should drive her (...) use
extremity.

But her highness doubting (...) London being her chamber, and a city holden
of dear price in her princelye heart, ^ight by Wyat and such Ruf^ens as were
with him, be in danger of spoil to the utter ruin of the same: her highness
therefore, as a most tender and louinge gouernesse, went the same day in her
royal person to the guilde halle, to forsee those perils: where among other
matters procedinge from her incomparable wisdom, The Queen's spe^he in the
guild halle in London.
her grace declared how she had sent that day, two of her privy counsel to
the traitor Wyat, desireous rather to quiet thy^ tumulte by mercy, then by
justice of the sword to vanquishe, whose most godly heart freight with all
mercy and clemency, abhorred from al effusion of blood. Her highness also,
there showed the insolent and proud answer returned from Wyat. Whereat the
faithful citezens were much offended, and in plain terms defied him as a most
rank traitor, with all his coniurates. And touching the marriage her highness
affirmed, that nothing was done therein, by her self alone, but with consent
and aduisement of the whole counsel, upon deliberate consultation, that this
conjunction and second marriage should greatly advance this realm (where^nto
she was first married) to much honor, quiet, and gain. For (quod her grace) I
am already married to this commonw^ale, and ye faithful members of the same,
the spousall ring whereof I have on my finger, which never hitherto was nor
shall hereafter be leaft of. Protes^inge unto you nothing to be more acceptable
to my heart, nor more aunswereable to my will, then your advancement in w^alth
and welfare, with the ^^^theraunce of Gods glory. and to declare her tender
and princely heart toward them, ^he promised constantlye not to d^part from
them, although by her counsel she had been much ^^ued to the contrary, but
would r^maine nere and pressed, to adventure the spense of her royal blood in
defense of them. Such matter passed from her besides, as did so wonderfullye
^^amour the hearts of the hea^ers, as it was a world to hear with what
shoutes they exalted the honor and magnanimity of Queen Mary.

This done her grace returned toward white hall, and passinge through the
streates, being full of people, pressynge to behold her grace, wherein they
had singular delight, and pleasure: One amongst all most im^udent of all
others, stepped fourth saying: A male part artificer.
your grace may do well to make your forewarde in battayll of your
Bishops and Priests, for they be trusty and, will not ^^^eyue you. For
which words he was commanded to ^ewgate, who deserved to be ^^nged at the
next boughe for ^xample of all other, so impudentlye and arrogantlye to
assault his Soueraygne and Queen, with such seditious and traiterous
language.

The voice went yt he was an hosier, out of al doubt he was a traitor and an
heretic, whose ^eart was whollye in Wyates bosom, although his body was
abse^t^ For it was not possible any faithful subject or true christian to utter
such shameless speech to his liege Lady and Princess as he did then. But
such is the fruit of heresy, contempt of God and man, as by daily experience
is seen.

The Thursdaye next after Wyat having xliij. ensigns in his band, Wyates
marchinge to Detford strande.
and not paste four thousand men, although they were accounted of a far
greater number, marched to Detforde strande, eight miles from Dartforde, and
within four miles of London. Where upon such aduer^isement as he received by
spiall of the queens being in the Guilde hall, and the order of the people to
her, he remained that night and the next whole day: diverse of his own
company doubtinge by his longer tar^ynge there then he did in other places,
with other presu^ptions, that he would have passed the water in to Essex. His
prisoners as ma^^^er Christopher Roper, George Dorrel of Calehil, John Tucke
Esquiers, The departing of master Christopher Rop. and master Dorrel from
Wyat.
who were kept very straitlye being sickelye, and having within the town
no convenient harborowe or attendaunce, were licensed by Wyat upon promise of
their wurshyppe to be true prisoners, to provide for them selves out from the
town where they best might. But they thinking no part of their worship
stained in breaki^g promise with a traitor, sought ways to escape, and came
no more at him.

On the Saterdaye folowinge very earlye, Wyates marchinge to So^thwarke.
Wyat marched to Southwarke, where approchinge the gate at London bridge foot,
called for the openinge of the same: which he found not so ready as he looked
for. After he had been a little while in Southwarke, diverse of the soldiers
went to Winchester place, where one of them being a gentleman, began to
show his game before all the cards were full dealed: I mean to riff^e and
spoil, which in deed was the determinate end of their purpose, but the time
was not yet come, not they come to the place where they should begin it.
Whereunto Wyat having further respect then the young gentleman had, showed
him self with stern and fiery visage so much to be offended with his
doings, that he made diverse believe that he would have hanged him upon the
wharffe.

Which whereof it grew, either of hatred to the evil, or of policy to
purchase credit to a further mischief, as well the nature and course of
rebellion, as also Wyates own words may easly let us tunderstand. Who the
mondaye next before his stir devising with two of his fre^des for the
execution of his pretended purpose, one of the^ at length, said unto him: I
have no doubt but you shall be able to assemble a great force, but how you shall
be able to continue the same with you, having not sufficient treasure and
monye, the only bait wherewith the multitude is holde^, I stand much in doubt.
what then quod Wyat^ Marye said the other, me thinks a good way for your
provision thereof, after your force is once gathered, that ye apprehend the
lord Warden, the lord Aburgaueny, sir Robert Southwel, sir Thomas Moyle, with
other of whose hearts and affection toward you and your case you stand in
doubt: whereby ye shall not only have them in saftie, which are most like
within the shire to withstand your enterprise, but also provide you both
treasure and money (which they want not) for the relief of your band. Ah quod
Wyat, is this the best counsel ye can give? If we pretend to keep out
strangers, and begin our quarrel with the spoil of our own countreyme^, what
will the whole realm trow ye then deem of us? Nay your advice is naught, and
your way the next way to accelerate our confusion. For if we will go
forward in our matter, and make the best of it to our purpose: spoil, and
tirannye may not be our guides. We must by all means devise, and al little
inoughe, to continue good opinion in the heads of the multitude of some
plausible end to succeed by our stir: otherwise we undo our selves. For
perceiuinge at our entry yt our minds run of spoil, who will not rather
resist us, and abide the adventure of that, whereof we bear them in hand, then
to be in certain to be spoiled by us? And I see no cause why you should
doubt of want of money, saying ye know that such gentlemen as are confedered
with us keeping appointment, their soldiers shall come ready furnished to
bear their own charges for.ix. days, and our hap shall be very hard if
we be not at London shortly after we stir, and that with so great a company
as shall be out of danger to be stopped by any of the shire upon such a soden,
or let of entry into London finding half the frindes there as we think to
have. Wyates rekening of ye spoil of the tower and London.
And being ones in London, and having the tower in our hands, I trust you
think we shall not lack money long after, if any be to be had there, or in
the Aldermens coffers: To that said the other, that had spoken as yet never
a word: I know commoners in London that have more ready money then some of the
Aldermenne. Soft quod Wyat, I pray you in any wise forbear all such talk
till we come to ye place where we would be. In mean time let us work secretly,
and by all tokens and signs, show our selves to favor and maintain our
pretense of strangers only. Such and the like communication was between Wyat
and two other, the mondaye before his rising. Whereby is evident, that their
final intent was to advance them selves by spoil of other men^es goods,
although they pretended otherwise. And to color the same, Wyat so fell out
with this ge^telman for riffling the lord Chauncelours house, that he made a
number believe he would have hanged him out of hand, had not Bret and other
entreated for him.

When they had lien in Southwarke a day or two, and found them selves deceived
in London, which by the great diligence and politic handlinge of that
worthy and faiethfull knighte the lord William Haward Admiral of England, The
Lord William Haward admiral of England.
that had the special charge thereof with the aid of sir John Whight knight
maiour of London, his brethern and citezens was so well preserved, as the
traitors thereby were disappointed of that they looked most certainly for. Wyat
as a man desperate, and setting all the six and seven, aduenturing the
breaking down of a wall out of an house joining to the gate at the bridge
foot, Wyates co^^minge into the porters lodge at ye bridge foot.
whereby he moughte enter into the leads over the gate, came down into the
lodge about a leaven of the clock in the night: where he found the porter in
a slomber, Care away
and his wife with other wakinge watchinge a cole. But seeing Wyat, they began
suddenly to start as greatly amassed. Whist, quod Wyat, as you love your lives,
sit you still, you shall have no hurt. Glad were they of that warrant, pardye.
What should they do, people better accustomed with ye tankerd of beer, to
pass forth the night then acquainted with target, and spear to endure to
fight? Wyat and a few with him went furthe as far as the draw bridge: on
the further side whereof he saw the lord Admiral, the lord Maiour, sir
Andrewe Iudde, and one or two other, in consultation for ordering of the
bridge, whereunto he gave diligent ear a good time and not seen. At length
conceived by their talk moore then he could digest, and perceauinge the great
ordinance there bent, returned saiynge to his mates: this place is to hot
for us. And when he was come to his colleges and declaringe upon this exployte
what he had heard and seen, they then altogether fell to a new counsel what
was to be done. The rebels at their wits end.
Some would then return to Grenewiche, and so pass by water into Eliex,
whereby their company as ^hey thought, should increase, and inter into London
by Algate. And some would to Kingston upon Teames, and so further West. And
some, of the which Wyat him self was chief, would return into Kent, to
me^te with the Lord Aburgauen^e, the Lord Warden, the shyreffe, sir Thomas
Moyle, sir Thomas Ke^pe, sir Thomas Finch, that were at Rochester coming on
Wyates back with a great co^^pany well appointed: falsely persuading him self yt
he should find among them mo friends then enemies. But whether his desire to
return into Kent grew upon hope he had to find aid there, or whether it was
to shifte him self away, it was much doubted of his own company. And some
of them that knew him well, except they were much deceived, reported not
long before their execution, that his desire to retire into Kent was only to
shyfte him self over the sea.

The Lord Warden being now come to Rochester as ye heard, The Lord Wardens
being at Rochester toward Wyat.
and very honorably furnished with horse and men well appointed to no small
nu^bre, enteringe in consultation with such gentlemen as were there, for the
better procedynge in their service, showed a great desire to accelerate the
onset upon the traitors: least malice should impute both his former and present
stay, rather to want of forwardness then to good policy. Wherefore he
desired to pursue after them with all expeditio^. Whereunto ye gentlemen then
being in arms with him, said. As for your Lordshyps contation hitherto, it
shall be weyed, not as fools by fansye and malice deem, but as wise me^ shall
measure it by their discretion of wisdom. We see not but unadvised hardiness
and preproperous haste in most matters have these two companions: Error in
the beginning, and Repe^tau^ce in ye end. And for this our case, who so
understands the same, can not but confess your lordships deliberate
forbearing to have proceeded of great wisdom, as wherein have could litel
prevail. And whereas your lordshippe is so d^sirous to pursue after Wyat and
his band, you see how they have lain in Southworke and within four miles of
London these four dayes^ and yet not meddled with by the queens army being so
nere. Which is neither for want of men, nor of forwardness in that noble
gentleman the earl of Penbroke the queens leiuetenant, The earl of Penbroke
the queen's leuetenaunt.
but upon great policy and further respect, no doubt then we seem to
conceive. Wherefore your lordshippe may do better to pause, and first to
advertise the queens majesty and the lord leiuetenaunt both what your
lordeshyppe upon grave and deep consideration has conceived in this doubtful
time, and also in what readiness your lordshippe is and other gentlemen with
you, whose pleasures known, we may then happelye proceed in service both
with good conte^^tacion to them above, and best suertie for our selves.
Otherwise if fortune should not favor our iourneye, there may be thought in us
more impotent will to haste, then provident policy to speed. And danger
hereby can none follow, our enemies liynge between her graces army and us,
considering withal, that London is so well furnished and so willing to resist
their entry. Whereupon the Lord Warden went in post to the Queen, leaving
the Lord Aburgauenye and the rest of the gentlemen with his and their band
until his return, which was very shortly after. Who according ^o his
first purpose with the r^st of the gentlemen marched furthe toward Wyat.
Which who had seen so well appointed, and with what willing hearts they
went, and had known withal the faithful dealinge of sundry gentlemen
besides in other parts of the shire, ought to say, that not wythstandinge
there were many evil, yet were there many worthy gentlemen and honest
faythsull yeomen in Kent free from Wyates conspiracy: and that the same
received some injury at his hand, that taking upon him to set furthe any
Cronicle, should name only four gentlemen of this shire to be workers
against Wyat. For although every man pursued him not in the beginning, many
(...) them dwelling far from him: yet were they as well occupied where they
were, and as much t^wardes Wiates confusion, by ^^ayinge and witholding great
force through their ernest persuasions and labor, that else would have been
with Wyat.

Now to return to Wyat, whom in this mean time Bret and the other captains
espiyng to have a desire to be gone, dissembling the knowledge thereof,
wrought all the secret means they could devise, to stay his going, as having
the weight of their lives depending upon this enterprise as well as he. One of
them by agreement in their consultation said to him. You see (quod he) with what
difficulty ^ou keep your soldiers here not wtstandinge they be in a town
where they are in a manner as pent in, and thereby the more uneasy to get away,
being so narowly looked to. And now if you shall leave the town and retire into
Kent, as some of your company suspect you will, whereby both they and al other
shall judge you to be in despair of the aid of London (the hope whereof has
been hitherto ye greatest occasion of stay of such as be already here, and the
comfort for the coming of other to the increase of your power) you may assure
your self, that such as be here will not tarry long after with you findinge
time to escape, as they shall easly enough being at large, nor such as be absent
will have haste to repair unto yo^, when they shall perceive you to be in
despair of London: and so shall you weaken your self to the comfort of your
enemies, and discomfort of your friends. Bret under color of singular
affection to Wyat deuisynge an apt occasion to avoid suspicion, which wanted
not among them, required to speak with him aparte, and having him alone,
Bretes words to Wyat.
said: It shall not be amiss that for your own surety you have in
remembrance the effect of the several proclamations made at Dartford, the
one by master William Roper wherein you were betraytered^ the other by master
Appulton which as I here, was also made at London and in other parts of the
realm, wherein is promised the inheritance of an hundred pound land to
such as can apprehende and present you to the queen. Now what fa^tasies may
grow in the heads of your own fellows for the sauegarde of the^ selves, of
whom you have had already some experience, it is to be douted. Or what may
grow in the heads of your soldiers, when faylinge of the aid of London
they shall be in despair of your enterprise, it is also to be doubted. On the
other part, when such of Kent on who^ it seems you repose some trust, shall
here of your retire, their disposition perhaps will be much changed. And
therefore it stands you in hand to ^^^ke to the matter substaun^^^llye.

Wyat having the same confi^ence in Bret, Trustles traitors.
that Bret would Wyat to have had in other, remembering his most deceytfull
^reason to the Queen, contrary to the trust reposed in him for the conduct of
the whitecotes, And fealing his grief doubled, and his desire to convey
himself ^waye, so much the more increased by Brettes secret talk with him
(as the stricken dear) wandreth aside, all alone complaining with him self his
most unhappy fate. And soon after ^^lling Thomas Isley unto him, said: Ah
cosyn Isley in what extreme miserye are we? The reuolte of these captains with
y^ whitcotes seemed a benefit in ye beginning, and as a thin^ sent by God for
our good, and to comfort us forward in our enterprise, which I now feel to
our confusion. Ah cosyn, this it is to enter such a quarrel, which ^^t
withstanding we now se mu^^ have a ruthful end, yet of necessitee we must
prosecute ye sam^^

Wyat as desperate finding other to accord with Brette^ opinion upon his
conference with them, by whom for direction of his traiterous journey he was
cheifely advised (although for his shyfting away there were other whom he
better trusted) marched the tewesdaye being Shrouetewsday out of South^wer^e to
Kyngston upon Thames, Wyates marchinge to Kingston.
ten miles distaunt, where (...) arrived about iiij. of ye clock (...) the
afternoon. And findyng ^xx^ foot or there about of the ^^dge taken away
saving the ^^stes yt were left standing, practiced with two mariners to swim ^^er
to conueye a barge unto (...). Which the mariners (tempted with great promises
of pre^^^ment) did. Wherein Wyat and ^^^taine with him were conuai^^ over:
Wyates passage at Kingston.
who in the time that the number of the soldiers ^ay^ed in the town, caused
the ^^^dge to be trimmed with lad^^rs, planckes and beams, the some tied
together with ropes and bourdes, as by ten of the ^^ocke in the night was in
such ^lighte, that both his ordinance and band of men might pass over
without peril. And so about xi^ of the clock in the same nyght^ Wyat with his
band without either resiste^ce or peril marched over the bridge toward
London, having such a loving heart in his body to ye quen^, as before day he
meant to have been at ye court gate. Which he could never have ate^pted having
any spa^c^e of that good zeal in his breast to the queen's suer^y as to further
his treason (...) outwardly pretended to the world^ considering the danger yt
might have grown by y^ fear thereof to her grace. But as god would partly by
werines of his soldiers, and partly by breach of the wheles that carried his
ordinance, i^ was nine of the clo^ke of the day following, being Ash
wednesday before he came so far as ^^de park. Where his courage (being to fore
as ye have heard ^ot very lusty) began now vtterl^ to die, beholdynge as it
were before his face the present bane and ^^nfusion, whereunto his mali^^^us
intent was shaped. Yet desperatio^ being his leude guide, ^e marches forward
and comes within the power of sir William ^erberd earl of Penbroke being
that day the queens leiuet^uant general in y^ fie^de. Who yet with diverse
other noble me^ and faithful subjects (being t^en in arms with him, pressed
and ready to receive so impudent a race of traytourous rebels to their
deserved breakef^st) understanding partlye by ^ure spiall, partly by their
own vewe, that the rebels exceded not the number of four thousand, and most
of them naked, void of al policy and skyl, considering with all, that they
could not set upon Wyat and his whole band but great effusio^ of blood should
follow, the queens army being so gredie to be reue^ged, and the other so
impotent to ^esist, determined rather by policy to atcheue the victory, then
by blood shed to confound the rebels. Wherein they should please God,
answer the queen's merciful expectation, and pur^hase unto the^ selves most
renown and honor of that days service. Upon these resolutions they permitted
Wyat with the fore part of his band to pass quietlye alonge, and through
between the queens majesty's horsemen, the lord Clynton being marshall of the
^^e^de and captain of the bar^ed horses and dimilaunces on the South side,
Jack of Musgraue being captain of the ^ighte horsemen on the North side:
The great ordinance be^^ge charged to shute full upon the breast of the rebels
coming ^^stwarde: The earl of Penbro^e with the maine battle of fotemen
as well for handgunnes morishe pikes, bows and byls, standing in goodly array on
the ^ortheast side, behind the said ^^eat ordinances, ready to set upon the
rebels in the face com^^ing toward Holborne: Wy^^ coming in the forefront
of his band perceiuinge that he was thus beset with horsemen on both sides,
the great ordinances and the fotemen before his face Northeastward, so that he
could no ways escape, but necessarilye must fall into their hands, although
for policy he was suffered, and a great part of his men to pass so far
quietlye and with out resistau^ce through the horsemen, he suddenly forsook his
way intended through Holborne, and with might and maine as fast as they
could, he and his mates ran down underneath the park wall of brick,
adioyninge to the Queens manor house called saint James. The lord Clinton
obseruinge his time, first with his dimylaunces brake their array, and divided
Wyates band in.ii. parts. Then came ^he light horsemen who so hardly persued
the tail of his ba^de, that they slew many, hurt more, and took most of
them. Whiles the said horsemen were ^^us in fight with the ^aile of his band,
Wyat him self and v.C. men or there about peked on still all alonge under
saint I^mes park wall, until he ^^me to Charinge cross, where d^^ers of the
queens household s^ruauntes and others fought with them, and in the end
killed.xvi, of the rebels. Neuert^elesse Wyat having escaped with a part of
his company merc^inge a long in battle raye ^^tred into Fletstrete, and came
(...) Flete brigge toward Ludg^te. And although noman res^^^ed his passage
through the ^^r^etes thus far, yet when at length he per^eiued that he had
no help of friends in London, and the suburbs as he looked for, left his men
standinge still in battle array, and rode back as ^arre as the temple bar
gate, with a naked sword in his hand the hiltes upward (as some report) at
which gate he would have gone through toward Charinge cross to the
residue of his me^, but he was then stopped by force of the queens true
subjects, who would not suffer him to pass with out temple bar. At the length
came one sir Morryce barkley knight unto him, and requ^^ed him to consider that
he could not prevail in this wicked purpose, and that his men wear all
taken and slain in the filde, and therefore willed him to cease of from any
further oc^asion of blood shed, exhor^ing him to yield him self prisoner, and
to stand to the queens m^rcie. Which to do Wyat refused, and said that he
would rather be slain then yield to any ^an. And yet nevertheless (as it
chanced) there came a Harrold of arms immediatlye ryding in the queen's coote
Armor to this place: to whose cote shortly after Wyat submitted him self
prisoner, and so went to the court at West minster, and there was brought before
the priuye Counsel, and shortly after with in one hour sent from thense to
the Tower of London prisoner.

Amongst other things this is to be remembered, that whiles the said Wyat,
and certain of his men (as before said) were cominge thus toward Flerestrete,
a certain Captain of the said rebels with diverse of his soldiers returned
from Charinge cross, down to the court gate at white halle, and gave a larme
before the gate, and short diverse arrows into the said court the gate being
open, in so much that one master Nicolas Rockewood being a gentilman of
Lyncolnes inn, and in armor at the said court gate, was short through his
nose with an arrowe by the rebels. For the coming of the said rebels was
not looked for that way: but thought that the Queens Army should have joined
battle with them in the (...) acc^rding to promise mad^ (...) the^ said Wyat
on this hehalf, (...) promised that he would (...) to the queen's fotebattel,
and (...) with the^ pyke against pyke (...) man to man. Which when it (...) to
the very point, he refu^^d ^ shranke a bye way by saint ^^mes park wall for
his re^^ge as you have heard before, where many of them were slain (...)
horsemen, so that they came ^ot ^^e the queen's power of the (...) battle. Which
increased some ^^sperate boldness in the despai^ing rebels, not without great
dis^o^^e^ure to all the court, and the ^^tie of London, perceiving that he was
himself and so many rebeles with him come through the (...) army thus far:
wheru^o^ ^rewe great admiration amongst (...) who will not deceive me. And
(...) deed shortly after news (...) all of victory, how that ^yat was taken.

Th^s day the Judges in the ^^men Place at Westminster (...) in armoure. The
Maiour, ^ldermen, and the householders (...) the City by.iiij. of the clock
(...) the morning, were in armor: The lord Wyllyam Hawarde, ^^ghe Admiral
being amongst (...) Who (as I have tofore said) ^^s by the Queen's majesty
^^pointed Captain general and ^iuetenaunt for the time, to co^^^^re in
counsel, and join in ^^ecution with the lord Maiour, and his brethren for
the sure and spedie gardinge, and warding of the City, to the pre^er^^tion
whereof the Queens (...) (...) and ensign of God: wh^^ (...) ^ede alone gave
this victo^^ and alone with out pollycie (...) might of man ouerthrewe her
^^nemies. Yet so, that he therwt ^^^^ared his special favor and plea^^^^e
toward his servant that ^^ble knight the Earl of Pen^^^ke, in appointing him
chief ^^^mpion this day to defend (...) chosen and elect virgin, those
faieth has not been. wa^^ring in this catholic religion, nor his truth and
service dought^^ll at any time toward his prince. Wyat, as is said, was
co^^mitted to the Tower. So were diverse other gentlemen, as sone after was
Henrye Graye duke of Suffolk and his.ii. brethren: the duke being so hardly
pursued by the lord Hastinges earl ^^^tingdon was by him appr^^hended in
Leycetershire: The duke of Suffolkes apprehension by the Earl of Hu^ti^gdon.
whereby he declared him self as well in honor and unspotted loyalty, as in
parentage, and patrimony to suc^ede his great grandfather ye lord Hastinges:
whose fidelite and steadfast truth toward king Edward the fourth, and his
children, the Cronicles report, to his immortal hon^ure. Of the common people
there were such a number taken in the chase by the Earl of Penbroke, that
besides the usual gailes sundry chur^hes in Lon^don were made places for
their sau^garde, till order was taken for their enlargement.

The duke was arrayned by his Perres, and by verdit found ^^^tie of tre^son
before the du^^ (...) Norff. being lord Cunsta^^^, and that day his Judge.
(...) he and his brother Tho^^s, at several days made (...) end at Tower
hill by (...) of their heads. Sundry (...) of Wyates accomplices be^^ge
arrained and condemne^ (...) their confession of trea^^^ suffered in diuer^
parts of (...) ^hyre: a^ Hen^ye (...) ^^^ghte, Thomas I^leye his (...) and
Water Mantel at (...), where Wyat first (...) his s^anderde, (...) ^^eue^,
William his bro^^^r with another of the (...) ^t Seuenockes Bret, at (...)
ha^^inge in ^haynes^ (...) of the common sort, very (...) were executed, save
only (...) (...) he ^^slyked the sa^e, and (...) how ^enitent and s^row^^^^
he was therefore.

Certain words proceeding from Wyat at his arraynem^^t.
My Lords, I must confess my self guilty, as in the end truth must
^^forse me to say, and that I (...) justly plagued for my si^nes, (...) m^st
greuouslye I have (...) agayn^t God, who (...) suffe^ed me to fall into this
beastlye bruti^h^nesse and horri^^e offense of treason. And lo in me the like
end, as all sorthe that have attempted like enterprises from the beginning
have (...). For peruse the Cronicles throughout, and you shall find (...)
rebellion never from the beginning (...) (...) ^nder^^andyng the gre^^ (...),
^^nour, and suerty, (...) this realm^ shall receive (...) ma^^^ge, if it shall
please (...) Que^n^ to be merciful to (...), ^h^re is no man living th^^ (...)
more trusty, and sayth^^^^^ (...) ^^rue her grace, no no^ (...) r^^die to die
at her high^^^^ ^ote^ what so ever the qu^^^^ (...).

^hus ^^rre touching Wy^^s words at his arrayne^^^t, I thought not
super^^u^^^ hereto report, to the end that all other blindly fallen into ^he
^^^^e error, would by the example of Wyat, (...) also ^^th ^im to
repentance, as well ^^^^ss^nge to the world with ^^en voice their detestable
misc^^^fe, as also from the ver^e (...) (...) (...) ^^rge such as were in
prison in (...) country for that offense, ^^inge of no small number, but and
to compou^de by their dis^^^tion with the offenders according to the quality
of their offenses. Which manner of order ^^ing not hard of in y^ like case, or
at the lea^t very rarelye, declared a singular clemency and ^enignitie in the
queen, that ^eing followed so cruelly, would yet be so moved with pity as t^
vouchsafe to answer them with such lenity, in the executinge of so few in
comparison to so great a nu^bre and so large a ^ause, being all in her graces
mercy to dispose at her pleasure, ^ beside suffer the rest to escape with so
small abashement of their countenance after so heinous ^ffense. (...) that
shall peruse this storye diligently, and consider al parts thereof exactlye
with remembrance of things past, sithence the beginning of the queens most
happy raygne, must of force recogni^e of what condition so ever he be, the
magnificence, mercy, and fortitude of this most noble princess, as from time
to time with such patience to endure so great malice of her own subjects,
with such lenity to forbear the revenge of so intolerable outrage, with
such mercy in the end to pardon and remit ^o heinous and great offenders.
Happy was it with those heinous offenders, that her graces most worthy and
honorable counsel were so agreeable to her virtuous inclination, as inclined
rather to pursue merciful pardon for continuance of life, then to prosecute
revenge by ^xecution of death. It is to be w^^hed by all good men with one
assent, that provoked with so great clemency these degenerates reform the^
selves, and forbear thus to attempt so gracious a princess, unto whom by gods
authority the sword is not vaynly committed, lest thereby they procure to
the^ selves damnation in sekinge by such outrage their own death and
confusion. From the desire whereof we see by a number of evident arguments, the
queens highness and her honorable counsel to be so far as (by all means
they can imagine) they seek t^ e^^hewe that they by most wylfull and
malicious means follow to their subversion.

An earnest conference with the degenerates and sedicious, for the search of
the cause of their great disorder.
HEre I purpose to shut up this tragical treatise touching the displayinge of
Wyat and his adventure, and yet not to end my travel concerning the same, but
shall gladlye debate and confer with thee louinge countreeman, such special
and necessary matter, as further rises thereof, tending as well to our mutual
comfort presently, as also to a general doctrine to endure to our posterity,
not without present terror to the wicked race: whose hertes broile in desire
to rebel. Al which points this present story does ple^teouslye perform to
him that lists to learn. Whereby first y^ good and godly may be comforted, as
by this experimente, to consider how God always defendethe his chosen and
elect vessel, our most gracious and merciful princess, against the
malicious and cruel assaults of her ennemies, be they never so crafty, never
so strong. And secondlye a general doctrine therewith taught, or rather by
new experience renewed, so many times taught before, that the inevitable end
of rebellion is certain confusion to the rebel. Of these two ye third
necessarely springs, as a terrible prohibition in the hearts of the ^^cked
never after to attempt ^^e like villainy against Gods ^^noynted, whereof they
can at ^o time skamble other part the^ small confusion, linked to perpetual
infamy. And to make perfect impression hereof in your ^eartes you degenerates,
that cannot satisfy your selfs with so virtuous a pri^cesse, but thus from
time to time, moleste her highness with seditious rumors, vprores, and rebellion,
I here ^ppeale to you chiefly, and require you to enter into the secret clo^et
of your own heart, and to ^onder with me in egall ballaunce of due
consideration the incomparable virtue, mercy, and benignity of this most
worthy princess our queen, with your own mischief, cruelty, and
intolerable malice. And then let truth give sentence, whether this disorder
grows of ^ lack in ye head, or of a malicious corruption i^ the me^bres. Can
^e imagine any thing to be required of God, to be in a princelye Magistrate,
either for the aduau^ceme^t of his public weal, whereof he is accounted the
living soul, or for the contentation or commodity of the politic body his
people, whereof he is reputed the principal head, which is not plenteously
found in this our most gracious maistres^ Can you wish her to have any thing
touching virtue, or virtuous ornament worthy her royal person, which she
already ha^he not? Whose honorable n^me for the singular virtues, ^^d rare
qualities, naturallye ^^afte in her most royal person ^^en from the cradell,
as well (...) ample theater of the whole w^rlde has in admiration, as also
malice, and envy it self in such veneration, as never durst ^^se any
sinister, or contrary report of her virtuous life to these ^ai. Is there any
thing on the other side, yt ye can wish to have (...) your own commodity that
by ^er you enjoy not? Has there ben (...) any time, any prince in the ^^der of
his public regimente more careful for the advancement of his subjects to
wealth, or for the preservation of them in tra^quillitie and surety, then her
grace is? Can you doubt of this, that have had experience and tr^al thereof, so
many ways? Have you not seen even in the very beginning of her most happy
reign, all such bloody and laqueous laws, by her royal assent repealed,
and the rigor of those taken away, as hau^ or hereaft^r might decay, and
weaken the noble and faiethfull members of her realm? Could you require
greater prouffe of incomparable clemency, favor, and love toward her people
ingeneral, the^ this? Have you not seen he^ fre repair of many noble houses by
her graces liberal restitution, or rather gifts o^ statly Castelles, Honors,
Manou^s, and Lor^shippes, which by her laws without offens^ of justice her
highness moughte have retained, ye same being inues^ed in her graces noble
pro^^^^tours, by the due order of (...) laws? Can you require any ^^eater
token of princelye pity ^hen this? Have you not seen her ^^ghnes not only
forborne all demaundes of Subsidies or ^^xes, but also freely dispense ^^th
great paimentes of money ^ue to her by former grant to her predecessors,
notwithstanding the large and diverse occa^^ons her highness had to re^^ire
aid, as well for the great debt she found this realm in, (...) for large
expenses she has ^^^^eined in resisting the rebell^^n of her own people?
Could^ (...) have a greater euiden^e of love toward her ^ubiectes the^ this^
Have you not seen and daily may see diverse eskape by pardon ^^^cif^llye
remitted, and suffered to live in their accustomed wealth and pleasures that
deserved once^ twice to dye, as open ennemies and traitors? Could ye desire
g^eater mercy and le^itie in her grace, then this? Have ye forgot how her
grace at the beginning of her happy ^^igne did, and still daily does call
upon all and singular her magistrates having any judicial a^cthoritie, to se
the laws so egally distributed thoroughe out her realm and dominions, without
respect to the persons, that none might have just cause to complain of
wrongful vexa^ion, or oppression? Could ye desire play^er demonstration of her
highness equite and justice the^ this^ What have you then to allege for your
excuse yt practice s^che malice and spite against so gracious, so merciful,
so liberal, so just, and so louinge a princess? What should move you thus
vnkindlye and unnaturally to raise rebellion against her grace, to the
molestation of her royal person, and perturbation of the whole realm, and
finallye to your own confusion? What fault find you in her, whom the wholle
world judges to be most perfect and ^ounde? Can you not love her, whom the
whole world has in admiration for her virtues? Can you not forbear forcyblie
and trayterouslye to molest her whom every good and godly man finds him
self bound in conscience with expense of bodi^ and goods to defend?

What esteem you her grace to be? Is she not your lawefull queen, whom Gods
express commandment binds you to honor and obey for conscience sake? Has
she no^ in her hands full authority to command, and power to compel? What
esteem you your selves to be^ Are ye not subjects by the like commandment
of God bound to serve, love, and obey?

Finally, is not her grace such a one in whom God by sundry tokens and daily
experimentes declares him self to delight and to be well pleased, thus
continuallye protectinge and def^ndinge her with the overthrow and shame of
her enemies^ Alas countr^y men, what wicked spirit possesses your entrayles,
that can not be satisfied with such a gouernesse, worthy all duty and
reverence? What evil ghost has plunged your hearts in such strange malice,
that notwithstanding so many and great benefits employed by her, and
received by you, you can find in your hearts to assault her with re^ellion,
or in any wise suffer any one evil motion to enter into your thoughts against
her? If you can not deny but she daily and hourly cares for you and yours,
as a most careful princ^sse why then should you not ^nswere her princely
zeal with f^yth^ and duty, as it becomes true subjects? God say^th, you
shall not resist your prince, if you do, you resist me (says he) with
present peril to your souls. Man says, you can not rebel against your
souerayg^e, but my laws must condemn you for traitors. Experience proves
utter confusion and perpetual infamy to be the fatal and inevitable end of
rebellion. What advantage the^ are you in hope any way to find by rebellion,
when thereby you have heaped the coals of vengeance upon your heads at Gods
hand, you have received man's judgment to your perpetual shame and reproach,
and in the end you are assured by infallible experience, confusion to be
your guerdon? May not you of all other think your selves most unfortunate
to envy this noble Queen for her virtue, whose fame reaches so farre^ Or are
you so fond to think that you can obscure the same by rebellion, which is
illustrated and set forth by your malicious attemptes, no otherwise then gold
is tried by fire? No, the whole world must of necessity wonder at you for
your intolerable evil and restles malice, and extol her grace, for her
incomparable patience and endless mercy. What, can you not like her noble
marriage? Is the mislyking thereof, the cause of this your degenerate misorder?
Mighty God, do you challenge such singular knowledge in Gods word, such
special influence of the holy spirit, demynge all other in respect of you
and your colleges, to be blinded, void of al truth: and thus directly
against knowledge, against gods express truth, against ye suggestion of the
good sprite rebelliously stir against your natural princess, faining yt your
quarrel which you your selves know to be against God and nature, as to bridell
your sovereign in the fra^cke choice of marriage, ye fredom whereof was never
denied to ye meanest subject in the world? Alas country me^, has blind
malice so bleared the eyes of your common senses, that you see not how
manifestlye you bewraye as well the bru^ishnes of your hearts, as also the hoped
fruit of your religion? In hope of your reconciliation, I could find in my
heart to debate further with you of this weyghtie matter. But as you ^e justly
condemned of arrogancy in faininge a quarrel in the person of the realm, for
that which the wisdom of the same by common consent, for the manifold
commodities grown thereby has allowed for a benefit, so should not I avoid
the note of much folly, if I would take in hand to defend by arguments (as
a doubtful matter) that so many wise men have allowed. If then your
soueraygne ought without your interruption to enjoy that you can not endure to
be denied to your selves (I mean the free choice of marriage,) if also the
same be confirmed by them, unto whom for their authority you are bound to
give place: It follows that as this ought not to be the cause of your
unnatural outrage, even so it can not be otherwise, but that (according to
the universal sentence and opinion of other christian realms conceived of
you) the inordinate desire to retain false religion, so far abuses you,
that you forget duty to God, your prince, and your country. O blind and
malicious ignorance, do you not see how by your unlawful practice it
plainlye appears both what you be, and from whom this goodly Jewel (for
the which you do so strive) comes? Can you be thought any other then
ingrate, arrogant, degenerat, and deuilish, having a disposition to rebel?
Wherein you follow the Devil author of malice, strife, and division, and
forsake God who is delited in peace, sufferaunce, and obedience? Can your
i^religion be thought other then a mere illusion proceeding from the Devil,
which the authors and followers have ever sithe^ce sought to support with
falsehode, sedicious rumors, rebellion, and tira^nye? Merueill it is that any
man wylbe so wylfully blind, or so sottishe as to believe that to be of God,
which never by integrite of life entre^: neither by patience, and tolleration
was persuaded: ne yet by miracle confirmed. Did Christ him self at any time
rebel to stablishe his religion? Yea did he not patiently suffer most
pite^ull death rather then he would resist? And yet you must grant me, that
being God and man, he lacked not power to have overthrown whom he liked. But
it was contrary to the nature and virtue of his true religion, which by much
patience, and not with violence, by tolleratio^, and not rebellion was first
persuaded and established. Did any of the apostels the folowers of Christ and
his true religion, notwithstanding many times, and in many places they were
refused with their doctrine, persecuted, and cruelly pursued, did they at any
time rebel? What then shall I esteem you that be open rebels, or what gear
shall I mesure your religion to be, which always is not otherwise supported
then by rebellion, treason, and tyranny? Will you here of me what your ^elues
are ashamed to discover? Came not this your religion by a fleshly and carnal
mean into this realm? Were not the fruits that come in: therewith manifest
contempt of magistrates, licentious and dissolute living, oppression or rather
open robery of the poor, dissolution and breath of godly order, laws, and
ceremonies, w^e^by the people were kept in due f^a^e, and love toward God
and man? Further was it^ not here settelled and maintein^d by manifest tiran^y
in the innocent ^loude of many wise learned Martyrs, and now in the end; by
yo^ defended with open rebellion against your natural and lawefull queen?
Merciful God how comes it to pass, that any man having the use of his
commen senses should not perceive what this illusion is, and whence it came?
Now as you have had your ears open to here me in this discourse, open also
your mouths and say to me, whether this religion thus grounded upon such
foundation as you know, expressed in fleshely living, continued with such
bloudye practice, defended with such malicious and ungodly rebellion is to be
endured in any Christian region, or in any wise to be thought to proceed from
god. Give sentence your self of what degree so ever you be, I seek no other
judge.

O England England, if thou hadest words to speak, as thou have grief to
compain. If thou could as well strike our ears with thy lamentable voice,
as thou do perce our hearts with thy great and incomparable sorrows,
would thou not, if sobbinge tears let not thie vtteraunce, speak in
this sort and these words?

A Prosopey of England unto the dege^erat English.
O You seditious and degenerat, know you what you do, when you thus moleste
and vex her to whom I wholly am own and due: and you of duty bounden to
obey and serve? Can ye either purge your selfs before God, who plagueth such
disobedience with eternal damnation, or excuse you before man whose laws
adiudge rebellion to shamful death? Are ye so disperate that you fear not to
o^fend the^ for their power, whose sharp punishments ye can not avoid? Be
you so far from al humanity, that you can not honor, love and obey her, for
her known virtues the brandishing beams whereof, might melte the rage of the
foreign ennemies? Be you so unwise to think that your malice toward her
touches only her person, and not me, only molesteth her and not me? O you
wicked children, if I may now call you children: Is this the fruit of the new
professio^^ Does the suggestion and influence of this your newly embraced
learning work such ungodly motions in your breasts thus sedi^iously, and
rebelliouslye to disturb her, whom duty binds each godly subject to obey:
thus unnaturally to vex, and hassarde me, whom nature stirs each natural
borne child to preserve? Be you content to have the fruition ^f my ^ommodites,
to repe the fruits of my pleasures, and thus to vex me, thus to molest me,
thus to indaunger my condition in her, whose careful study is only to reform
both you and me, to bring us both to that ancient and blisfull state which
thoroughe you, and the like was lost and brought to extremity? Suppose you to
have your commodities by me, when I by you am made bond, and servile? Think
you to escape miserable servitude, when I by your disorder and sedition am made
thral to forre^ enemies? Be you so mad to judge your selfs to be in suertie
when your seditious riot has wrought my confusion? Am I not the common
parente out of whose bowelles you were born: In whose lap you were received:
with whose sustenau^ce you were norished: In whose arms you were fostred? Have
you any continuance of wealth quiet, honor, or dignity, that by me was not
received, through me is not maintained, and in me finallye continued? Was not I
careful for you or you were borne, to provide clothes to cover your naked
members: to produce sustenau^ce and food to draw forth life begone ^n you: To
preserve friends unto you: and reserve ability to them that might attend,
company, and comfort you? What have you but by me? And what are you in hope
to have without me? And will you thus requite my tender love and kindness,
with such hateful rebellion? What so ever I have done for you, I have done
the same for your progenitours^ friends and kinsmen. And can neither their
cause stir you, nor your own case move you to be good to me, by whom you
all stand? You have been the occasion, at the least, the mischief, which you
with mischief strive now to defend, that these many years I have lost many
and diverse of my liuelye and ^ounde members, being cruelly cut from my
politic body, and have also sustained the great contempt and breach of
godly and wise orders devised for preservation of mine estate, and
conservation of my members in their dew and ordinary course. Whereby how
odible I have sithence been to my self, and hateful to all christian realms,
as well the general voice of all foreign countries daily strikinge your deaf
ears does witness, as also the plain speech vttred not long ago by a
most faithful and true membre of my sister Scotland the earl of Huntley
confirmed. The earl of Huntley
Who being here, and hearing some here either for brag or ^rayse, tellinge
how many Scotts in Scotland English soldiers had slain: What great
maistrie have you done, quod then that good Scottishe earl, when with army
royalye come into Scotland^ and there kyl a few Scotts, and one abject Scotte
without arms or policy comes home to your own houses and distroyeth ten
thousand English people in a day both body and soul with heresy? The same
being afterward moved to become E^glish, and to be sworn to me and my laws:
No, quod he, I am a true christian Scotte bor^e, and so I will remain. For as
I am I know no enemy but the English man, but being once sworn English,
where should I assure me of one sure friend, that have now but one known
enemy? For be you out of doubt, although ye English men have not war with
all foreign princes christian, yet assure your selves to be in perfect peace
with none: but when time shall serve, to have the whole world in arms against
you, if ye proceed as yet ye do, rather like to be come Turks then to
continue Christians, whose religion ye daily refuse, and set forth heresye.
In the mean time, the whole world wondereth at your blindness, that you see
not your own madness and impiety. I speak thus in this sort not as a Scotte
to an English man, but forgetting al private quarrels as one christian to
another, lamenting in my heart to behold the wret^hed condition and present
face of this your realm, whereof I heard much or I came here, and here I
find true much more then I heard.

O frendlye, wise and most true saying, full of counsel and wit, yet spoken
to such in whose stony hearts it could make no impression, whereby has
followed not only subversion and shameful confusion to diverse of them to
whom it was spoken, but also my danger ever sithe^ce more and more increased.

And now that it has pleased the high God of his unspeakable mercy
tappointe so virtuous a gouernesse over me, at the sound of whose heavenly
and manifold virtues, as he has hitherto compounded my quarrels abroad, and
as it were holden foreign hands back, being willinge to pursue me, and to
make example of me by shameful e^de, as I was example to the whole world of
all disorder, impiety, and heresy: so now by her ministry and authority, he
means mercyfully to cure and heal my mangled body, to repair mine abased
state, to restore my good and wholesome laws, to reform my disordered members.
Which her noble grace accordinglye pursuinge with all her might and
authority, findinge also like disposition in my principal members her
highness ^onourable and noble subiec^^s, now you, only you, I ^^ye, sporne
against Gods ^ercifull work, and as most enemies to my prosperous estate,
cease not to hinder, what God has meant to me, and what his chosen instrument,
this most ver^uous lady does attempt to compass for me: deuisinge day by
day sedicious, false and traiterours brutes, rumors, and tales to molest and
trouble her, to confound and destroy me. And rather then ye will be reduced
from error to truth, and reformed from disorder to better governance, by
the calling and persuasion of gods true instrument and chosen ministresse, ye
will believe what that most vile and deuelishe rabble of Antichrists ministers
by their pestilent books teach you in corners, as that by gods law ye may
rebel against your head. O cursed and hellishe generation^ I beseech you
consider both me and your selves. You have been the cause of my great
griefs, and yet you en^ie me the remedy. You know if I perish you can not
flourish, yet disdain you to be reformed, that I may be confirmed in mine
ancient and blisfull state. You resist to be subject to good governance,
that my benefits might be performed in you, to your great furtheraunce: and
contrary to your allegeaunce, contrary to nature, will thus vex and trouble
me. Yea, by your deed, although not by your will perhaps deliver me into the
hands of the^ that be my fooes, but in deed most ennemies to your selves. I
say no more but refer you to consider what I have said, and to way with
your selfs in what case I stand, and whereunto I was brought by this ^^lusion,
which has so deformed me, and bewitched you. And further by my sister
Boheme, consider what I may come to, and am like to be if you cease not this
your wilful and desperate outrage. Finallye do not forget the straung
diseases, sundry plagues, great dearthe, which I have long suffered, as
clear tokens of Gods vengeance to be bente over you and me, and the blessing
of his mer^ifull hands to be taken from us. So now ponder with your ears my
words, that I have spoken, that my sorrow may reach your heart. And if you
think me worthy whom you should utterly destroy and bring to hateful
confusion, then may you lawefully maintain that you have taken. Ponder I
beseech you louinge countreemen, what our commen parent and native country
England has said. Call therewith to your remembrance what she might say
in way of just complainte: and then see if by any means you can either
excuse your selves as not acquainted with the cause of her greiffes, or accuse
her, as causeles complaining before she has need. ^ suppose you not to be so
(...) and so blind, that you see ^ot your disorder: nor so impudent and
shameless, that you ac^nowledge not your known malice, nor yet so desperate and
^o utterly destitute of grace, that you will not hereafter refourme your
selves, partly dis^^forted by the manifold evils ^olowinge such unnatural
prac^ises, partly allured by the high merits and incomparable mercy of so
gracious a princess as God has appointed now to ^ouerne over us. I here
will end, as one pitiyng your former case, and yet not despairinge your better
governance here after.

FINIS.
(...) set forth within the book.
THe (...) nature of heresy. ^^olio.i. Here^^e the specia^ grou^^e of wyat is
(...). Eodem. Rebellion the ref^ge of he^^^ikes. 10. W^atts repair to London.
fol.il. Wyates return into Kent. eodem Wyates first stir at Maydstone. fo.^.
Why wyat made not religion the pretense of his rebellion. ^odem The color of
wyates rebellion. ^ode^ Wyates preparatiue to rebellion, fo.4. Wyat uses
untrue persuasions to further his rebellion. eodem The people abused by wyates
untrue persuasions. fol.v. The nature of an heretic is to say one thing and
think another. eodem. ^yates own words prove heresy to be the ground of
his rebellion. eode^ Heresy the rule and guide of wyates life. folio.vi.
Master Christopher Koper apprehended by the rebels. ^odem. (...). eod. (...)
Kopers words to (...). eodem. (...) Tucke and mai^^er Dorrel of (...)
apprehended by ye rebels. fo.v^^ ^^^tes letter to sir Robert South^^ll sh^re^f
of Kent. eodem ^yat^ falsely presumes of the best of ^he shire. fol.vi^^. ^^at
wishyng to the Queen bet^^^ ^^^^^ellours, means such as wou^^ (...) heresy.
fol.ix. (...) loudlye touching the arriual (...). ^odem. The (...) answer to
the bringer of (...) ^^tter. fol.x. (...) and his accomplices noted by the (...)
traitors. x^. The ^hir^if gathers power for the ^^ (...) traitorous
pretense. (...) (...) and other mete wyate. fol.xii. (...) t^^eth from al
passengers passing (...) their weapon. eod. (...) writes to Isley, the
Kneue^te^ (...) o^^er to h^^t their coming unto (...) eodem. (...) (...)
^^hort^cion made by the sherif ^^ (...), refelling wyates traitorous (...).
fol.xvii Wyat defied by the people as a trayt^^^. fol.xxvi. (...) D^^e of
Northfolke sent against wyat. fol.xxvii. (...)^h^ndreth whiterotes sent from
(...) against wyat. eodem The lor^^ Aburgaueny sets a watc^^ in Malling.
eodem A (...) larum in the night at Mal^^^^. eodem The ^^b^lles int^nde to
burn master (...) Clerks hou^e. fol.xxviii. (...) rebels dare not
encounter with (...) Aburgauenie upon Bar^ow (...). ^odem (...) rebels
overtaken by the lord (...) at Blacksoll feilde i^ the (...). fol.^xx. The
^ebels put to flight at (...). eodem (...) ^^^elles horsemen chase^ from
Blacksolfe ^d to Harley wo^ fo(...) (...) Isley his flight into (...). eodem.
(...) (...) revived. fol.^^^. ^yates letter to ye duke of suff. fo.x^^^ Wyat^s
letter to ^^e duke of norf. fo^^^ (...) against the neuters. eode^. Good to
sleep in a whole skin. fol.xiv. The consultation of the rebels after the revolt
of the whitecotes. eodem. The rebels opinion of their own wisdom. fol.xlvi^
A (...) to appreh^d the sh^rel. fo.xiv^^ The misrekeninge of the rebels for
London. eodem. The ^ssault of Coulyng castle. fol.4^ The ^^^^ing of sir Edward
Ha^^inges and sir Thomas Corn^walles (...). eodem (...) proud answer to sir
Ed^^^^^ Hastinge^. etc. fol.xli^ ^ motion of the nobles to the Queen. fol.li.
The ^^^nes ans^ere to her noble^. fol.^^^ The Q^eenes sp^che in the Guyld^
halle. fol.lii^. A ma^e part artificer. fol.liii^. (...) marchynge to Detfo^^e
(...). fol.^^. (...) ^eparting of mai^ter (...) (...) (...) courage dies.
fol.lxv^^^. (...) suffered with ye fore part of his (...) through the horsme^^
(...) The Lord Clinton marshal of the (...). fol.lxix. wya^ forsa^eth his
intended way^ through Holborne. eode^^ The Lord Clinton deuideth Wya^^ (...) in
two parts. fol.lxx. (...) Barkel^y ^nyght. eod. (...) yeldeth him self to an
Harr(...). ^o.l^^. Rebels at the court gate. eodem (...) shot throug^^ ^he
nose. fo.lxx^^^ The Queens words to them that crie^ (...) eodem The Iud^^^
sit in armor. fo^^lxxiii. The gar^inge and wa^^inge of the city. eodem The
pra^se of the (...) of Penbroke, fol.lxxiiii. wyat committed to the Tower.
eode^. Henry Gray duke of Suff. and his. ii. brethren committed to the Tower.
eod. The praise of the Lord Ha^^ynges. eodem. ^yat arrained. lxxv^. ^^ates
words at his arrai^^ent. ^od^m. Of (...) as did p^naunce by wearyng (...)
before the Queen. ^o.^xxvii. The Queens commission to diuer^ of the shire to
b^yle and sett^ at large the ^risoners fol.lxxviii. The Quee^es wonderful
mercy. fol.lxxix. England (...). fo.lxxxxi. The earl of H^ntleys words to
the duke of Sommerset. fol.lxxxxiii.
Imprynted at London by Robert Caly within the precinct of the late dissolved
house of the graye (...), now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital

The.xxii. day of December. 1554.

Cum priuilegio ad impr^^^^^ (...).


