THE FALL OF THE LATE ARRIAN.

He that believes in the son of god has everlasting life. But he that beueth
not is condemned already: because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten son of God. John. ill.

angel and a woman

TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS LADY THE Lady Mary's grace, daughter to the right
puissaunt king Henry the.viii. and sister to our most redoubted king Edward
the.vi. John Proctour, her most humble orator wissheth from God, grace, peace,
and helthfull felicity.
AFTER that I had given our late Arrian the fall (most Gracious Marye) I
bethought me, under whose shylde I might happily calenge the game. And diligently
considering with my self, how that all my labors, and the fall which I have
given, tend only to the mayntinaunce of the honor and glory of the Glorious
Virgin Marye, in defending and vpholdynge the sweet fruit of her blessed
womb Jesus Christ in his true divinity and perfect equality with God the
father (which my adversary would have gladly leyde on the ground): under whose
banner thought I with better luck might I enter the triumph, and sing the
victory, then our Noble Marys. whose native gentylnesse is such, that as her
grace can not but vouchsafe her good will in all honest quarelles: so in this
especially she will not, but will and do thuttermost: moved as well for the
name sake, as also through the heavenly conformity of most godly qualities in
her, to the high resemblaunce and perfect imitacion of the other.

As who that dwells evermore in Galile, Mary dwells in Galile, i^habiteth
Nazareth, espoused to Joseph visited by Gabriel, Mat. i.
the most glorius transmigracion from the inordinate love of the creatures into
the Creator of al

Inhabiteth most willingly Nazareth, the sloure of virginity, the branch of
divine influence.

Accompanyeth continualye with Joseph, the increase and augmentacion of faith
and love.

Admits dailye into the priuey closet of her heart Gabriell, the fortitude
and might of God. Through whose joyful Annuntiation, her soul springs up
with hope. Affects the fullness of Grace, the presence of the Lord: And
obteyneth a sertayne singularity of blessedness, amongst all Ladies. Mary
rises and goes into the Mountain, comes into the City of, Jude, enters ye
house of zacharye, and salutith Elyzabeth. Lu. i


As who again daily rises, from sin, from worldly vanities and delyces.

Goes, into the mountains, toward the heavenly Jerusalem.

Comes, into the City of Jude, the City of worthy praise, and divine honor:
into the house of God, to confess her unto his holy name.

Enters, the house of Zacharye, the faithful and worthy remembrance of the
Lord his preseptes.

Swetely saluteth Elizabeth, the saturitie and fullness of her God: Only
satisfieng her greedy desire in him, Qui solus replet in bonis desiderium
nostrum.

And as the true handmayde of the Lord, Merry co^ceyueth, bears and brings
forth Jesus Christ. Math. i.
conceiueth most worthily in her heart.

Bears in perpetual memory.

And brings forth Jesus Christ, true God and man, in most goodly practice of
godly life.

Thus, most Gracious Marye, and blessed handmayden of the Lord, debatyng with
my self your Noble nature and heavenly disposicions: wherein, your Grace so
nygh approaches to the perfection of that your Graces celestial pattern, the
holy Virgin Marye: that in some man's head, wit might well gather, and reason
conclude not a miss, one, and the same soul to be of both, the bodies only
changed, according to Pythagoras law. I say, occupyeng my imaginacion after
this sort, within the circuit of your Graces excellencye, I find matier
enough, encouragyng me, to will that I would, to like as I lysted: to do in
deed no less then in mind, me thought I was ever a doing.

Wherefore, as well for contentacion of mine own private affection, as that also
I suppose it most meet and congruent: I have not let to commit these my
labors, into the hands of the people, under the supporte and recognisaunce of
your Graces title and name. Whereby, I doubt not, but the honest and godly sort
will like it the better: the cankred and enuyous shall have less force to
endomage or hinder. Although I know their bytyng and carpyng styng will not a
little be sharpened thereby, against the same my doyngs: which I gladly do
acknowledge, shall atchiue no small ornament and grace, through these four
letters MARY: Thus in every thing Envy does comitat virtue, no otherwise then
shadow the body.

Howbeit, for my part, I do neither covet the praise of the one, ne regard the
dispraise of the other. Only my desire is, to exhibet a labor in tho^s eye
commendable, without respect of their commendation: And in the others fansye
vituperable, without care or regard of their nyppe and check. The fruit,
no doubt of both, thonlye flower of your Graces name shinyng in their eye at
the first entrance, shall bring forth and yield unto me, in such plenty,
that it shall greatly ensence and provoke me herafter in the like opportunity
to will most with the best, all if my power can do least with the worst. In
mean time, I most hertely desire your grace, to aspyre and favor that, that
present is: the matier for the worthynesse, the Author, for his forward good
will. Both of the matier, and the author his intent, your highness shall have
further instruction, if the same vouchsafe to read my preface to my
Cou^treimen of England: wherein, I do both touch and teach, according to my
skyll and connyng: and toward the end thereof, do disclose a word or two,
concerning the late Arrian, and his fall. Thus the Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, Jesus Christ preserve and continue your Grace in all honor, glory, and
wealth, now and ever. Amen.

THE PREFACE unto my country men of England.
IT IS not unknown to the christian reader that the devil, as he is the
continual adversary of mankind, so continually at al times and seasons, he
laboreth by wonder full and sundry crafts, to overthrow and extinct the
Evangelical doctrine, the only comfort and stay of man: and to weary the
faythefull folowers of the same.

In the first buddynge time of Christ his church, lord, with how many
afflyctions was the same invaded: with how many waves of sundry persecutions,
knocte and bet at? with how many tourmentes and deaths tried? Against which,
the cruelty of Princes: The perverse maliciousness of the Iues: The impious
rage of heretics, and finally the whole world with all kind of deuelysh
engines and malicious policies, had as ye would say, made insurrection. And
although Annas and Cayphas reign not still, Nero and Diacletian are not ever,
yet ever shall Jesus Christ, and such as faithfully believe in him, suffer
persecution to the end of the world: as Paul does wytnes. And in this present
time, what dangerous tragedyes has Satan styrred up: what strange and
perilous heresies has he raised among the people of God? Who seeing the great
follye, the habundau^ce of iniquity in these days among the people, does not,
or laugh hertely with Democritus, or bitterly lament with Heraclitus, of which
men I have read in Ancient writers, that thones facion and custom was,
evermore to laughe: thothers to lament and weep at al things commonly
practiced amongst the people of their time. If they both were now living,
they would, I suppose, even dye, the one with laughyng at the folly, the other
lame^tyng the great iniquity of the people: of both there was, never more
plenty, as is in our time. For my part, I can rather lament and sorrow with
Heraclitus, the present state of this world, then otherwise laugh with
Democritus, For what heart in which remains any sperkle of honesty and
godliness, would not rue the great impiety of these days, would not bewail
the wickedness of this time: Wherein it is to be seen (to speak nothing of
Anabaptists, Libertines, Marcyonistes with other a no^bre, which are
presentlye riefe amongeste the people) that call into doubt and question,
whether Christ be comen or not: Yea, and some without doubt, question, or
controversy moved at all, fear not impiously to auouche, teach and affirm,
that our only Justice and peace, our only pathway to everlasting life, our only
Mediator and Savior, our only propiciacion for sins, Jesus Christ, is not
true god, but a mere creature, a passible man only.

What more worthy Democrites laughters, or Heraclites tears, then such
outrageous follye, such unbridled iniquity? And is this an easy persecution,
a small grief trow ye, to the faithful Congregation, to the right beleuers of
Jesus Christ, and favorers of his holy word, that contrary to so many and
mighty testimones of the scriptures, after the most glorious bloodshed. and
slaughter of so many godly Martyrs, for corroboracion of the same: After so
great unity universally received in Christ his Church, touching this high
truth of his divinity, it should be now denied, that he is true GOD, equal
in his divinity to the father: Howbeit there was no other lykelyhood, but that
such monstrous metamorphosye should happen. I remember the Cineke Diogenes,
who passing by the house of a certain lauysh and ryotous person, where upon
the door it was written: This house is to be sold. Yea of my faith quod
Dyogenes. I espied very well and prophecyde in my mind, that by reason of thine
unmeasurable surfetyng, thou would at last, spue up some whole house. Even so,
of such dissolute ryotyng, such unmeasurable gourmaundyng and dangerous
surfeitynge of the people, in all abhominacion, vice, and uncleanness, as have been in these later times practiced amongst them: to the miserable deuastacion
of Christ his vyneyarde, prophanacion of the pure and unspotted religion,
antiquacion of al honest, godly and decent Ordres: what else was there to be
looked for, but that some of them would at last euomet and spue forth some
such monstrous portent, and prodigious matter, of long time not heard of
before: so abominable, filthy, and stynkynge, that no true Christian might
abide the hearing, savor, or sight thereof. Were we not sufficte^tly instructed
by the scriptures, that toward the end of the world, heresies should opteyn a
great stroke amongst the people: We might justly wondre to see so many
strange scismiks and opinions in these our days sprung up, and so many
infected with the same. But being resolved by Gods word, that they shall be,
let us not wondre either that they are, or for that so many be infected with
them: Which are therefore sent and permitted, that the faith of man in having
temptacion, should have also probacion.

The greatest wondre is, to se such nombre of heresies so nygh home, so many
infected with them within this I Will of England: Within England I say, where
every man, every woman pretends to be a gospeller, every boy, each gyrle
trained and exercised in reading the holy Scripture of Jesus Christ.

A high name, a noble train, and most godly exercise, If we matched them
(gentle friends and Countrymen) with godly mind and good affection to
practyse and follow that which we read and hear of Gods true word, in our
life and behavior. But our tongue sounds much in tune: our phrase is Lord
Lord, and the lord knows, our manners gear all together out of tune, our
life naught naught: We bear it in our hands, we se it with our eye, we here it
with our ears, we roll it up with our tongue: but our co^uersacion and living
savor nothing thereof at all, but daily worse, and worse experience proves. If
it be no matter of wonder, that we thus wander yet in such darkness, which have
ye light amongst us: that we be thus spotted, and defiled with so many sores of
perilous heresies, which carry about with us the glass of knowledge: that we be
thus far out of square, which have the straight rule, and right square at
hand: What wonder is it, if other (...) talk: or that the wholesome word of
god, which is so fra^ke in your mouths, never came so far as your hertes.
Gals. iii.
Quis vos fascinauit non obedire veritati? Who has bewytched you (gentle
friends and Countreimen) what ayleth you that you will not obey to the truth,
but thus headlong run into all untruths, thus irreuerentlye wander in to all
ungodliness, and pitefully stray in to all unrighteousness.

Ones merueilously ye were bewytched, by that Romysh man, the peuysh Pope: what
time he held your heads under his girdle of iniquity. Then as the Poet
Diphilus, in a tragedy which he pleyed at Rome in the Theater, said of great
Pompei: Valetius Mar. ^ i, vi. cap, ii.
Miseria nostra magnus est. Our miserye is the great: meaning it by Pompei, who
was called great Pompei: So tha^ ye might have said? Miseria nostra Papa est:
Our misery is the Pope, the great pomp of the world. Now he being disclosed
what he is with all his tricks: his false forged power abrogated and
discharged: who has now bewytched you, who now, Miseria nostra (gentle
brethren) that in the bright day ye can not see. In the plain pathe ye can
not walk without falling, that having the true square and straight rule, your
lives square not, your works all crooked out of frame and rule.

That Noble Henrye, King of Kings, now dissolved and dwelling with Christ:
That heavenly Josias I say, did much for you, what time not without great
traueyle and study, not without tirannicall hatred of foreign powers thereby
procured unto him, he brought home that comfortable light, that pleasant food
of soulles, and gave it each of you in your hands. What time ye were yoked to
the Popes bulls, he vnyoked you, and pulled your necks out of that miserable
bondage. Where you were lynked to his prolyng pardons, he purchased a free
pardone unto you of them all: Further, where ye were nouseled in Idolatrye, and
trained in worshippyng stocks and stones, he cared to discharge such blocks
out of your way: where you were grossly fed upon the marry she of man's
tradicions: he studied to acquaynt you with the fine diet of christ's true word
etc. Thus good and gracious Lord was he unto you in procuring and grauntyng:
How faithful and honest subjects prove ye in receiuyng and exercisyng so
precious and rich treasures: What perfection have they wrought in you. I can
not say the truth without your great shame: But seeing ye be not ashamed of
shameful doing, blame me not, if I be not a shamed to do you to wit thereof.

Then ye were half blind, and now ye see nothing.

Then stocks and stones were in your eye, and now God is out of your hertes.

Then ye sought pardones in paper for your sins, and now ye sin without
repentance in your hertes.

Then ye kept a gross diet, and now you surfeit inordinatlye in all
abhominacion and iniquity.

Then ye were not in the right way, and now ye are to to far of.

Then did ye stomble among cloddes and brakes, and now ye fall down right
even in the plain path.

Finally then ye had much zeal without all knowledge: and now ye have much
knowledge without all zeal. Then knew ye least, and followed most: and now ye
know most, and follow least.

What a monstrous metamorphosie: what a strange alteracion of manners is this?
Who has bewytched you now my friends? what evil ghost: What wicked spirit
has benu^med you of your wits now. Nemo leditur nisi a serpso: No man is
hurt but through him self: it was a wise and true sentence of Tullye. The
evil ghost of your own self, love, pride and ambicion: The wicked spirit of
temeritie, contempt, and rashness, all together possessyng your hertes, has
thus bewytched you, not to obey and follow the truth: whereby in stead of
christians, ye are become Antichristi^as: for true Gospellers, ye prove
Anababtistes, Libertines, Ebbionitts, Arrians, Seleutians, Saduces, Pellagians,
foul and blasphemous Heretykes. This is true that I say, and I am loathe to say
it, would God it were false, and I proved a liar: but report of some is
certain, proof by experience can not lie? I se it daily more and more true,
and I am sorye for it in my heart, because I love you. Other hear it and
laugh at the same in their minds, because they hate you. It is a good matter
for your enemies to rejoice, and for your friends to weep at: It is glad
tidings to the one, and heavy news to the other.

And as we exceed in all heretical and blasphemous opinions: so retain we
also all uncleanness, all fylthynesse of life emongste us.

Righteousness is fled: Virtue is banyshed the countreye: they can have no
dwelling place here to abide: The fynes and incomes so great, the re^tes so
high at the lords hand. The entreteinment of other so churlysh: The
neyghboured each where so vnplesauut.

When has there ben heard of such intolerable pride, The ear which w^^
heart his own life rebuked shall dwell in the middle of them that he wise.
Salome^,
of such vnsasiable greedynes for the gru^mel seed, and durtye mucke of this
vayn world, then have latelye reigned amongste them which were in aucthoritee,
our rulers, and in godly conversation of life, should have been heads and
Capitaynes also.

When has there ben heard of the like headynesse, Letter of over much
license comes great p^stilence. ^ There.
flattery, ambicion, and rashness as now a days is yet practiced even in the
pulpettes, where hence, the sincere and pure word of God should be taught and
preached with all meekness, with all humbleness, with all simplicity. When
has there ben hard of the like dissoluteness, disorder, disobedience, and
dangerous liberty, as is presentely in ure amongst the Commons.

But the one sort is well purged: whereof certain have reaped as they have sown:
Whose false gouernemente is to manyfeste, how so ever certain busy persons
have lately talken in defending their falte, most worthy condemnation: and
condemnynge the doings of the kings most prudent councelours therein, best
worthy commendation. But the lord grante them his grace that they may
acknowledge their transgression, and earnestly repent them for the same: and
that, where they have lived a life worthy death everlasting, yet through
herty repentance, they may dye the death in Jesus Christ, that may turn
them to life everlasting, and that this their fall may be to al other that
are, or hereafter shall be appointed rulers over the people, sufficient example
and feyre warnyng, how they should behave them self in that vocation: To
whom, for further instruction be this said: Intelligite and erudimini qui
iudicatis terram, seruite Dominio in timore, and exultate ei cum tremore. Ye
that are called to be Rulers over the people, as well Kings, as other Civil
heads and magistrates, understand, says the Prophet, and be instructed
which do judge the earth, serve ye the lord in fear, and rejoice unto him
with dread. This ought to be your study and traueile: to search after the
knowledge and understanding of God his laws, that such matters as shall come
in co^trauersy before you? ye may decide and determine according to equity and
justice.

And to the end ye may lead your people in the right path of the lord, The
root of wisdom is, to fere god, and the brau^che thereof shall long time
endure. Salomo^
and provoke them by your example to live in righteousness: serve ye the Lord
in fear, without which nothing but sin: for look what example of living:
what presidents of doings: what pattern of manners, what lessons of honestye
and godliness, what discipline of mercy and gentleness they receive at your
hands, such will your people follow. Therefore, if your liui^g be not godly and
pure, ye stand in danger, not only of your own parts, but of your peoples
also. For as the crased ship by lekyng in water into it, does not only drown
her self, but as many as be in her: Even so, if you that be heads and Rulers
live in wickedness: If the ship of your own soul be over whelmed with the
wave of iniquity: what merueyle is it if the people that stand a board with
you, be drowned in the same shipwreck with you also. If ye lead your lives
out of all honest and godly order, what marvel is it if they live
inordinatlye. If ye live as lawless persons, what merueile if they stray out
of all laws. If ye be so proud that ye have forgotten, your birth was but
syn, your lifetyme but as y^ bubble in yt water, in death, yeshal be but worms
meat, what merueyle if there remember it not. If ye be so blinded in vain
glory, that ye can not discern the true goods from the false: the right
treasures form the counterfeiet: To use y^ Pu^l^ke Weal for a particular geyne
or aduau^tage, is not o^nly a thing toule and dishonest but also mischeuous
and very adhominable. Seneca.
If your hertes be so rapte to cumulate and heap to gyther the commodities of
this corrupt world, with the incu^moditie of, ye care not whom, making that
your Lady and Sovereign, which ought to be your servant and drudge, that ye
have forgotten the terrible, Voe, so often thretned over you: that ye have
forgotten the Eua^gelical fool, to whom it is said: This night they requere
thy soul from the, and those goods which thou have gathered together, whose
shall they be? If ye have forgotten this, I say, what meruell is it if your
people remebre it not. If these you to walk before them in the path of
iniquity, what merueile is it if they follow the same way after you. Out of
doubt, Whosoever lives ill in y^ sight of them whom he has in rule, as much
as in him be sleyeth y^ beholders quod Augustine.
as Helitr^pium the flower does ever open at the son risynge: and at the
son set, closes: so if the Rulers rise from sin and wyckednes, the
people will rise also: If they be set in the chair of pestilence, the people
will not sytte far of, whose nature is to ensue and follow that chiefly,
whereunto they perceive their heads and Rulers inclined and prone.

And ye that are preachers and teachers over the people, consider your charge
and office, it is h^gh time ye do so. Many of you have done your parts well:
but many again of you have, and do very leudely behave your selfs, rather
like to rauenynge wolfes, then faithful pastors: Rather like to sow sedicion,
to make vprores amongst Gods people, then sincerely to show forth the true
word of God, not regardyng, as it appears by your doings, whether the
souls committed unto your charge, synke or swymme, go with you to the devil,
or without you to GGD. I have heard often your vain and vndiscreate talk,
with mine ear. I see daily your corrupt conversation of life, with mine eye,
my tongue can not dissemble it. But better to late, my friends, then never.
Turn your books a new: learn your office in them more earnestly: and express
the same to us in your living more effectually. Remember that if ye be called
spiritual for naught, yet were you made Pastors and Ministers for somewhat. Ye
have a charge committed unto you from God, by the mouth of Paul: Learn,
mark, and bear it well away. If ye faithfully do it, your reward is,
Immarcescibilis gloriae corona. But if ye be found necligent and slothful
laborers, that through your necligencye and deceytfulnesse, Goddis
Agricolacion go not forward: his building rise notte: his sheep straye into
perdicion, death shall be your salarye, dampnacion your reward, and their blood
shall be required at your hands. The reward is great, let ir provoke you: the
pain is horrible, let it fear you: do, and have the one assuredly: do not, and
mysse not the other undoubtedly.

As Psylly therefore be not only hurt of venomous serpetes them selfs, but
also do suck out the poison from other that at stynged with them: so your
part and office is, not only to regard that your selfs be not hurt and
poisoned with the venomous styng of Satan: but also to cure and heal other
that are under your charge, with wholesome instruction, godly example of life,
continually practysed amongst them: and to kill the stynge of Satan in them:
to suck out his poison from their souls, with the mighty word of God, by
dailye and sincere preaching, and inculcatyng it into them. And do it I say
sincerely, soberly, discretely without all counterfeytyng, all dissimulation:
for clokyng will not help, dissimulacion can not serve: The high Judge
seethe clearly, even the secrets of your hearts, though ye color and
iuggle never so craftily. The fyshe called Mugyll, hydeth his head, wenyng that
then all his body is also well hydden. The Woodcocke likewise clappeth his
byll to the ground, thynki^g that then he is safe enough and not seen. But I
would none of you to prove so folish as ye fish Mugill, so wise as the
Woodcocke, as to believe, that by hidyng your head oy byl, by dissembling and
colorable practyses ye can not be seen, and discerned who ye are. Though the
world be sometime deceived by such pollycies: yet the eyes I say of God, be
ever clear. Ye may avoid a tyrant, by chaungyng the place or country, but
him ye can not avoid; which is every where, and sees every both thought and
dead.

ANd ye that are by Goddis appointment hearers, be not slack of your part in
your vocacion and duty: be obedient unto your heads and teachers, and that
for conscience sake. Pay to every of them their dew with good will, be it
tribute, honor, fear, love or reverence: S. Paul requires no les at your
hands: and his warrant to Tymothe, touching your duty, conteyneth no contrary
lesson. Ye have the holy and comfortable Testament of Jesus Christ in your
hands: If you be ignorant in your duty, the greater is your fault: if ye
know it and follow it not, who shall excuse you.

It greeueth me to see such dangerous division, so great disobedience as is
presently in force emongst you: it is a vehement presumption, and sure token,
that ye have wonderously abused that comfortable treasure of Gods sweet word.
The nature whereof is, to make such as do acquaynt them worthily with it, les
proud, less vicious, less dishobedient, less contencious, less malicious,
less covetous. But in that ye are more in all, and less in none: it
appears, ye did more proffytte therein, when ye had less knowledge thereof. Ye
have heard, read, and searched it, I deny not: but your life proves that
he have read it as if ye read it not, your eye not single: Ye hear it, as if
ye heard it not, your intent not pure: Ye search it as though ye searched it
not, your mind ungodly. And this is the occasyon that ye receive so small
profit and fruit thereof: for he that sees your conversation, hears of your
behauors, sercheth your doings, shall find you in all, far wide from yor
professyon. And no meruell, ye sought not for it. Many of you are mighty
talkers: iolye braggers, great questmo^gers, all that ye sought for. For as in
one and the same field the Be does ensue the flower: the got, the steme or
stalk: the swyne, the root: the four feeted beasts, the fruit: Even so in
the scriptures diverse is your intent: some of you seek matter of talk: some,
strange oppinions: and some proufes and arguments to maintain your conceptes
and mad imaginacions be they good or badde: some, the knowledge only: some,
the way to live well: and few seek after that way. It is the best part,
and the least part of you have ensued it. And after this sort, readyng and
serchyng the scriptures, what meruell is it if ye he given into wrong and
corrupt sense: which sought not after the pure and right vndecitandyng
thereof: If so many scismyckes and heresies be sprung among you, which so
irreuerently, so unworthily presume to abuse the reverent and worthy word of
God. For as to them that are over charged with wine, their eyes often times
dasell when they persuade them selves to see many things, where in deed they
see but one.

Likewise such as do so rashlye and unadvisedly with vnpure mind and ungodly
intent read and search the scriptures of God, do forge and imagen many
strange sentences there upon, perswadynge them selves to see many things
therein, where in deed they see not one thereof: so heuye headed be they with
pride, ambicion, covetousness: so daselyng ar their eyes with self love,
pertinacy and disdainfulnesse. But good countreimen remember the great care and
travel of the most redoured prince, or he could: the love that he would bring
it unto your hands: forget not that it is a higher matter then the book of
Rodynhoode: Consider what commodytie ensues by the right use thereof. Deceive
not the loving exdecracion of so high and fatherly a Prince conceived of you,
do not frustrate his traueil and labors? Provoke not Goddis vengeance upon
you, do not abuse his holy word: Spoil not your louies from such heavenly
and inestimable treasures and comfort, do not turn it into our own
confucion. And frame your selves yet at length worthelye to use this
incomparable Margatete: put on a single and a doves eye, which sees only
heavenly things. Let your hearts be inflamed with hot desire toward it. It
does not vouchesafe vulgarelye to be loved, after a commen sort to be
affected: it requires a thirsty mind, a hungrye and greedye stomach, but
after it, a lone: And at the first entrance in to it, ye must lay a part all
pride, vainglory, and disdainfulnesse out of your hearts. For although the
Court of Goddis word be very large and ample, loftye and high: yet the
door wherein ye must enter, is very low: and none can enter into it, but
such as are low, humble and meek of spyrite. And it is a serten token that ye
have good success in that Court: and that ye are well in favor with the high
Lord thereof, if you daily prove more and more mylde, meek, sobre, humble, and
lowlye of heart.

Such only does he reteygne in favor: to such only he vouchsafe to talk in
that his holy word, and disclose his high and secret mysteries: which are
shut up unto the arrogaunt and proud. It reioyseth the ploughmans heart to
behold the ears of his grain or corn rather to hang downewarde then to
stand bolte up right: because he knows perfectly them to be lode^, these
void of good fruit

The high plowghman Christ, coueyteth to see the same in you: to whom ye shall
be an acceptable and fruytfull heruest, if your heads be not cocked up with
vayn glory, selfloue, and pride, but bowed down with all humility and
meekness.

If it prove not so with you, think not that ye have any whyt proffeted in his
word. For as Menedemus was accustomed to say that many sailed to the scole
of Athens, which at beginning seemed to them selfs sapient: soon after became
Philosophers, that is, studious of sapie^ce: Anon Rethoricioners: And finally
Idyotes and unlearned: Even so, if ye worthelye enter the scoole of this
Heavenly Philosophye, and accordingly proffyt therein: where before ye seemed in
your own conceyte to your selffes ioyly men, gay fellows, and as well seen as
the best doctor of them all: ye shall quyckly be out of this conceyte with
your selfs: Every day ye shall be less arrogau^t, less proud: every hour
challenge less knowledge unto you: and say with Socrates finallye: Hoc scio
quod nihil scio: This know I, that I know nothing: and this is to know all.
Read it therefore with all humbleness, w ith all meekness of heart, with pure
intent, a nd godly purpose, to the end ye may proffytte therein: proffytte
therein, that ye may know your duty dew to God and the world: And knowing
it, have ye prompt will, ready hand, sweet foot, to mind, practyse, and
follow the same to thuttermost.

FINALLY if any remain amongst us quycke as yet and lively me^bres of Jesus
Christ, so remain we still: Be we not discomforted for any thing we see.
There are many heresies, no wondre: there have been more. Many are infected with
them, why not: therefore they are permitted, to tempte and prove the wit of
man. Let not all this remove us from our standing: but for asmoche the
weakness of man gives might to heresies (they of them selfs being of no
force and might) and the devil there comes only and preueyleth, where faith
is feeble to withstand and resyst: see we stand sure: see our house be
evermore well warded with the strong and impenitrable bolte of faith. It is
no wondre (as I have said) that heresies are: it is a greater occasyon of
wonder if we be found so slenderly provided and so ill appointed, as not to be
able to repel and keep of so weak an enemy. For if we arm our selfs with
vnwaueryng faith in Jesus Christ, no dout we shall be strong and of power
sufficient to frustrate our aduersarye the devil his intent: who daily
labors by sundry policies to discharge that comfortable weapon from us, to
the end he might enter our holds. He is very craftye and politycke, and
therefore tempts us with many fair and flatteryng means, and all to deceive
and intrappe our simplicity, that we would forsake the wholesome grayn of the
high Lord, and lay hand upon his dampnable Zizan. And as Hyena the beast
does immitate the voice of man, Yea, and learneth to call some one by name, to
the end that the same called furthe, he may devour: The like pollicye Satan
uses to ketche us in his snare: He inuiteth us unto him by many fair names,
and entieth our hearts with many goodly promyses, and to none other end, but
to devour us, both body and soul.

But we are well warned of this crafty tyrant: it were much shame to be
unarmed at any time against him. He has sent emongst us many a stout and
craftye whelpe now a days, to make away for him, that he may enter into our
holds I say: some of them appearing unto us like them selfs, that is
deuellyshe, without cloak or semblau^ce of godliness, and these can not begile
us. But some again transfigurate, and fascyoned into Angels of light, and
such may much prevail in their masters quarrel, with such as are
wauerynge, doubtful, and weak in the faith of Jesus Christ, our high
Captain. But resyst we them manfully: fear we not to answer unto them, as
the people Cinniensis answered unto the Embassetours of Brute: which treated
with them to yield up their City in to the hands of their Captain Brute:
Valor, Mar. ii. 6. La. 4.
to whom their answer was in this wile: Ferrum sibi a maioribus quo vrbem
tuerentur, non aurum, quo libertatem ab imperatore auaro emerent relictum: Our
Auncetoures said they left unto us weapon to defend the City, not gold, to
redeem it of a covetous Emperor.

The devil by his faithful Embassetours and ministers, persuades with us
dailye to give over our interest of the spiritual Jerusalem: But we have
weapon from the begennyng prescri^ed, appointed and let unto us from the
Lord of holies, wherewith we ought courageously with stand all such
assaults and craftye persuasions, and not cowardly give over unto our
adversary, and stand to his courchy and reward, which is no better then
miserab^e servitude for the time present: and finally everlasting death. He is
a covetous Lord, yield we as much as we will: be we as obedient unto him as
we can: that is our reward, and no better. Who so mad as to bye repentance
so dear. Lysymacus, by reason of a vehement drythe and thristynesse, was
compelled to yield him self unto the Scythes: And after that he had drounken
the cold water: Good God, sayt he: Quem breuis voluptatis causa quanta^
deposui felicitate^: That is to say: For how short pleasure, how great
felicity have I forgone. But think and debate we with our selves well, how
great felicity we loose, when for a little vayn glory of this folysh world,
for contentyng our own self love, for the cold water of this mortal life,
we for go the Croune of glory that never decays: we loose the love of God:
we give over the fountain of life, the lively water springyng into
everlasting joy and felicite. Therefore I say, have we ever the people
Cynnyensis answer frank in our memory: let Lysymacus example be always
obuersaunte before our eyes: and bye we not repentance so dear. Rather let us
fight it out hardely: use we our weapon of constant faith: let us not shrink
from our Captain, and hell gates shall not prevail against us, It is a weapon
strong and sure: ii. Cor. ^.
and of force Ad destructionem munitionum, concilia destruentia, and omnem
altitudinem extollentemse aduersus scientiam Dei. etc. That is, to cast down
strong holds, to over throw Councelles, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God. etc. It is therefore a strong and sure
weapon: and reason it be so: the hold is dear and precious to be defended
therwithal: our souls I mean: which the devil with so many pollicyes and
crafty sleyghtes by his faithful ministers does daily assaute: but in vain
if we leave not of, this sure weapon of vnwaueryng faith: if we shrink not
from our Captain. For know we to our further comfor e, that no equality is
between our Capitayns The devil I say of their side: and God of ours: he is of
no power, but where no power is: Never ouercometh, but through our own
prodicion: Our weakhertinesse, cowardnesse, and impotensye, is his only might,
courage, and forse. A weak Captain is he, if we remain strong: strong,
if we beg^nne to be weakherted, or necligent, to resyst: where we resyst not,
there preuayleth he: where we withstand not, there can he captive: Sabell.
^^ ii. En^ead. v.
Vincerescis, victoria vt^^escis, said Bercha Pennus to Hannibal.

But the devil, contrary, Victoria scit vti, vincere nescit. He knows
triumphantly to use the victory: but he has no skyll to win the same,
unless we cowardly yield unto him: and shrink I say from our Captain, who
is the Lord of hosts, the Lord of powers. Dominus fortis and potens prelio.
And who being with us and on our sides: who against us that can prevail?

To be short, at the beginning men thought it enough if they were not invaded
and hurt of wild beasts, and sought no other benefyte by them: But afterward
they began a little and a little to convert them into their further commodity
and pleasure, as to be clothed with their skynnes, to feed on their flesh, and
with diverse of their parts to recure and heal such maladyes and diseases as
grew in their bodies.

Even so must we use our adversaries, the devil and the wild beasts his
ministers, not only that we be not hurt of them: but also that we be
aduaunteged by them: as the more vehemently to be sturred up to the study of
Gods comfortable word, the more strongly to be confirm med in the faith of
Jesus Christ: the more earnestlye to walk in his way: the more faithfully to
proceed and go forward in the veretie of him with joyful fear, and
trembling joy, with all alacrity and cherefulnesse: with careful respect,
and wary cautelnesse, lest we slip into the love of that, which we now detest,
and hate. For as the enemies which lie skout watchyng on the walls of the
cities do compel and enforce the citizens, then chiefly to watch, and keep
best order and rule: Semblably in this hurlye burlye of Christis religion: the
walls of his chosen temple our souls, leyde at on every side with all kind
of ordinance, that the devil can imagyn, it behooves us now especially to
pley the men, to go stronglye armed.

God no dout permits us to be thus persecuted with such sismicks and
blasphemous opinions, partly for our wickedness and dissolute living past, for
our necligency in wat chyng our walls before time: And chiefly to try and
prove or faith and constancye to ward him by the same: no otherwise then we
try our pot or vessel by putting lyquor in to it, whether it be sound, or
not: According to Paul his saiynge: Opottet hereses esse, vt probati quique
manifesti fiant inter vos.

For as much therefore it pleases God to use this trial of us: it stands us
upon principally to utter what we are: to declare our selves sownde of faith,
and in deed, not only in name true Christians: as well for declaracion of
true and perfect repentance in our hertes for our folly past: as also in
this trial of God, to show us stout and constaunt in the faith of him,
whom we profess in name: And nothing to shrynke, but with cherefull courage
and bold stomach (what so ever hap) to run that race: to join that
battle: to fight that field: that shall be for contentacion of his high
pleasure: vtterdefamynge his and our adversaries.

If in this state so busye we shall seem to be dismayed and as it were werye
of our parts, what else may we appear to do, then to forsake the honye,
because the Bea has a little stonge us.

Say we as M. Brute said to certain diswadynge him from the battle: Valor.
Mar. li. v^. ca. v.
Fidendenter in aciem descendo, hodie enim aut recte erit, aut nihil curabo:
That is to wit, With good confidence (said Brute) I go in to the battle, for
this day all shall be well, or my care shall have an end. Brute thought it
neither meet for him to live without the victory and ouerhande of our
enemies: or at the least be out of carke and care. Life is sweet: but without
this victory, more bitter then gall. Death is sower, but in this quarrel most
delectable and precious. Dye we the death in the Lordis Camp: and we shall
live the life everlasting in heaven with eterne felicity and pleasure. Live
we the life in Satan his tabernacle, and we shall dye the death everlasting
in hell with most terrible torments, and unspeakable pains. Choose the best
whiles choice lies in lot.

HERE to break up this matter gentle Reader, and at length to come to the
declaracion and disclosyng of my purpose and intent in this my little book,
which I have entitled: THE FALL OF THE LATE ARRIAN: Thou shall understand that
I have in the same confuted the opinion of a serten man who lately denied
Christ deuinitie and equality, with God the father, affirmynge that he was but
a mere Creature, and a passible man only, not God. And this was Arrius opinion:
of whom in my book I do treat more at large: and as many as do hold that
opinion, are called of Ancient writers, Arrians: and therefore I entitle my
treactise: The fall of the late Arrian: not disclosynge his name through out
my work, but under the name of Arrian: whom I would be loche to displease, if
he has Recanted that blasphemous oppinion, as some say that he has. This
our late Arrian therefore not long since was before serten of the Counsel and
diverse other Learned men, for his opinion, by whose procurement I know not. And
delivered the same his opinion with his prouffes in writing to the lord
Archbishop of Canterbury being thereunto at length required, as in the
beginning of his writing he confesses. Whereof diverse copies came into diverse
men's hands: And one was sent to me, from a friend of mine: who required me to
peruse the same, and to let him dnderstand what I thought of it. To whom I did
eftsoon restore it incontine^t, writing underneath the same for my answer to
my frendis demand, nothing else but Vae hoi per que^ venit sca^dalu^ tantu^.
Then being of mind never to have said one word more unto it, Yet I thought it
very necessary and expedient, that so blasphemous and perilous opinion should
be confuted by some man, and that with speedye expedicion: In consideracion the
people now a days for the most part, be so good of taking, that nothing is
to hard for them to learn: especially if they hear of any new lesson not
taught, or herd of a long time before: Then nothing comes a mysse unto them,
nothing to hard for them to learn and bear away, although, it be in dead
never so much against God the Father, and his natural Son Jesus Christ. But
in this behalf I was in manner careless: for reme^brynge what a ioylye
multitude of fresh writerse there are in these days, I thought this gear
could not escape unlooked on, But, seeing in other trifelyng matters of no
effect and importauunce to speak of in comparison of this: they are so ready
with their confutyng, books, ballettes, and pleyes. In so weyghtye a cause as
this is, I reckened they would not be seen slack or neclige^t, but out of
hand, with all celeritie and speed withstand it. How be it reckeners without
their host must reckon twyse, I have heard say. Hytherunto, not one of them
have said one word unto it, or by mirth, pley or ernest game, that I ca^
hear of: what they will, I know not.

For my part at beginning I thought nothing less then to attempt any
such enterprise, as I have now taken in hand: partly because I have not
exercysed me self in the like before time, and chieflye for that I suspected
much my wit and connyng: therefore I supposed best for me, having neither
exercise ne conning to dwell in mine old silence and not to mell especially
in this matter, being of such importance and high difficultye, far above my
compass and reach.

Beside this, I pondered the present sent condition of this world with me
self, I thought in such hurlye burlye, in so great tumultes, the voice of
such one should not be herd: For if the words of Ecclesiasticus are true, that
the voice of the wise is heard in quietness, it booted not to speak in so
unquiet a time as this is, (I thought) and of such matter. And to help
forward, the saiynge of the Prophet came eue^ in the nick to my remembrance:
Intelligens, in tempore illo tacebit:.i. The wise will keep silene in that
time.

All this notwithstanding, when I could not perceive or here tell, that any
had taken in hand to improve and confute this most dangerous and blasphemous
opinion: Charity which seeks not any private contentacion or pleasure at
any time, but evermore couetyng to vanquish the difficulty of all times and
seasons vehementlye provoked me to utter some part of my mind in this
behalf: Whereunto the children eke which were in Babylon, did not a little (as
me thought) encourage and hexten me forward, whose example enstructeth us,
that we ought with free courage and good heart, cherefully to witness the
truth, although the whole world were against it: which even out of the myo
burning fire sange merely Psalm to God: not regardig the multitude of them
which despised the truth: but satisfied them selfs being. iii. in no^bre.

Wherefore neither my small exercise, nor my slender knowledge, ne yet the
abundance of Iniquytie (which keeps revel now a days) have defased me: But
my hope fixed in the help of the Holy Spirit, I have not kycked against the
spur of Charity, nor have spurned against the zeal and oue which I bear
toward my Country, both a like together prickynge me forward herto: But
have most wyllyngly, I wotte not how happily, showed forth the truth
touching this matter of Christis Deuinitie.

Besechyng the Christen Reader, if I have not satisfied thy expectacion in all
points, yet will good to my good will, and bear with my weakness:
sufficient it is and enough to will well in high matters, writers sayen: the
matter is high, my will is good, accept the one for the others sake, Valete.

Reason both wonder, how says tell can
That a maid is a mother, and god a man:
Let reason go, and believe the wonder:
Faith is above, and reason is under.
quod. Antiquitte.


THE FALL OF THE LATE ARRIAN,
Arrian ALBEIT IN this vehemente and unthought on perturbacion of mind
(reverend father) all labor is odious, writing dyffyculte and hard,
co^mentacion vnplesaunt and gruous, unto me: yet in the defense of my cause,
being required to write, for the reverence which I owe unto your Lordship above
other, I have purposed briefly and compendiously to commit in writing what I
think touching tharticles.


Proctor. THO I was resolved in my mind that ye were well worthy
emprisonment, fetter and chain, that feared not to conceive, maynteyne and
teach such blasphemye against God the Father and his natural Son Jesus
Christ, true God: Yet I doubted whether your body was after that sort or by
any other means puny shed or not, where of I could not by your own relacion,
neither by hearsay, learn one word so much: but rather that ye were taken up
emongst states, much made of, and frendlye enterteyned, (for ye will not lie I
trow.) Notwithstanding, I believed assuredly, and was clean out of doubt,
(although ye had not mentioned of it at all,) that your mind was not free
from perturbacio^ and trouble, being so sore wounded and greuoslye infected
with that stinkyng leprye, and foul skabbe of most dangerous blasphemy.
Therefore I can not blame you good man, if all labor seem odious, writing
difficult, commentacion vnplesau^t and grievous unto you, your mine being in
such pitious maiadie and careful plyght. Yet nevertheless, such was your
goodness and gentleness, that neither the odiousness of labor, the
dificulife of writi^g, nor the greuousnesse of commentyng could stay or let,
but your hand must haste with all speedye diligence to deliver and bring
forth that plesaunt Babe which ye had conceived, and went great with all so
long time before. In the birth whereof, your joy comfort, and pleasure would be
so great, you knew, that the pains and grief of your travel should be clean
forgotten within a little space.


Arrian WHICH mine opinion by the co^municatio^ tofore had with your Lordship,
might have been euidenty noughe and sufficiently known, without writing. For
first at the beginning when your lordship admitted me to disputacion before
many witnesses, and then after to private and familier talk, I did plainly
say all that then came into mind: verily I have not dissimbled my opynion,
which I got not or borrowed out of Sarcerius. Conradus Pelican, and such
garbages, or rather synkes or gutters: but out of the sacred fou^teyn


Proct. IN somer seasn as often as it thu^dreth more vehemently then lyghten,
then surely says Pliny, it betokens wyndes. Even so, when any man
thundreth with tauntes and flaunderous nipps, at another, yet he him self no
goodly man to speak of, nor in any good knowledge, neither in any other
honest qualitle lyghtnyng or shinynge before him, with whom he fyndeth so much
falt, as ye do now by Sarcerius, Co^radus Pelicanus with their like, is it not
(trow ye) a sure token, and vehement presumption of a mind rather puffed up
with wind and ambicion then in very deed godly and charitable? How so ever it
like you to pronounce of them, if just trial and proof be made, you come not
nygh to any of them by much, in the knowledge both of the scriptures and other
kind of learning also: vnies ye have better store yet left behind in your
belie, then hytherunto ye have uttered. For amongst may good things which each
of them have left unto us in writing, if they have said in any point a
mysse, it is in such matters wherein a man may errwithout great danger, as you
seem to grant in your process following: but I am well assured, none of them
ever blasphemed Jesus Christ, as to auouche and teach that he was not God,
that he had not divine nature in him: and that he was only a creat man, as you
be not ashamed to do. Which opinion of youres, I dare sai, stinketh a thousand
parts worse before God and all godly me^, then the most filthy garbage, synke
or gutter that is: therefore tho it please you to compare them to such unclean
refuse or garbage, to fylthy gutters and synkes (which is no slander in your
mouth,) yet be not you of mind to believe that your self is sweet and
sauery. For as ye have not dissimbled your sentence and opinion ye say, no
more will Ioissimble or color with you herein. I tell you therefore truth like
a friend, that your breath is so abominable stinkyng, by reason of that
pestilent vapor fumyng up from the synke of your blasphemous stomach, that no
Christian can abide it. And where as ye thus deprave the writers tofore
remembered and their like, the cause not alleged, which moved you to report
them so: it is clear that it was, because hythervnto ye have not learned to
say well of any body, and not for their deserts. Howbeit the circumstaunce of
your words may let us tundersand the cause: verly for that they teach, defend
and iustifye Christ is deuinitie, and you will none of that.

It were much more commendable, with your pen to confute by good learning, if
they be such as ye adiudge them, rather then thus slanderously upon no
manifest occasion that ye allege to diffame and bacbite them. But ye play as
the beast called Bonasus, which because he is not of power to resist with his
horns by reason they are so ill fauouredly bowed and turned inward, as he
runs away, lets fall his dounge, wherewith, as with fire, he burns
such as pursue after him and happen to touch it. In like manner you sir,
forasmuch ye know, ye ar to weke in any of their hands, and to make your
party good, if the matter should come to open trial by learning, it like you
well at least to shyte in their ways, as the common phrase is, and cowardly
by hynde their backs in corners, with your reprochefull and slanderous
reports extenuate their estimacion and name, in all that ye can. I can not
tell what else I should think herein, but that, as a certain kind of Mares,
writes Columell, beholdynge their own form and figure in the water any
time, run afterward mad: Semblably you are so far in love, and dotage with
the Impe ye have now delivered Pe rind ac si ex ouo prodiisset, yt ye ar next
door to madness, in which your rage, ye favor nor friend ne foe: but bark and
byte as venemously as ye ca^, at al especially such as favor not the birth of
the same your fair babe: As I am sure Sar. Cont. Pellic, with their like do
not, but utterly detest and abhor, as al godly writers do that ever wrote.
Therefore where as ye say ye have not Taken or borrowed your opinion of them or
their like, which ye esteem no better then synkes and gutters. I do believe it
well: for none of them are Authors of favorers of such blasphemy, how so ever
they can clear them selfs in other points. Wherhe^ce the^ was it engendered,
say on? Ex sacro font: Of the sacred fountain ye say: What? of Christ's
holy Testament, yea, so ye mean: but the devil it was as sone: For none such
wicked generation I know, can sprink forth from thence, out of what sacred
fountain then a Gods name? Of the sacred fountain Styx, that infernal lake I
trow, called Fons sacer, in the sense that Virgill the Poet says: Auri sacra
fames:.i. The sacred hunger of gold: that is to say, the cursed and damnable
hunger or desire of Gold. So that of the sacred fountain, which is to wit, of
the damnable and cursed fountain called Styx, runnyng beneth in hell (as
Poets feign,) I grant you, first engendered this your deuelyshe chett: whereof
it was your chance to take a drafte that Belsebub or some other of the rabble
had brethed on before, and infected with their poison: which made your bellye
to swell up with this foul hell hounde: As it happened likewise to your
predecessoure Arrius, priest in the Church of Alexandry, the year of our
Lord. CCC. and.xx. who was the first Dadd and parent of this impe, now
eftsoon buddynge and springyng up through your engendryng and travel: and as
he then, so you would gladlye now father it upon the holy word of God, to the
end it might prosper and come forward the better, and the people by such
pretense allured, should cull and coll, embrase, and make much of it: as
thought it were the true fruit of that holy word. But ye are foul deceived,
sir: your card of.x. can not out ^ace us so: for we know what ye have in your
hand as well as your self. Ye may not look therefore to speed better then he
that went before you, of whom I shall more largelye speak afterward. If he at
that days was found what he was, and by the whole Council of Nicene
(whereunto the Emperor Constance the great with. CCC. and.xviii. Bishops was
assembled) condemned as an heretic, his opinion judged to be of the devil and
not of God: Look not you hardely for any better success or fortune,
especially now in these days, under great EDWARD, whose years not so matjure
as Co^stancynes: Yet in Grace and Virtue as great: in all judgment as ripe to
descerne such wicked and bastard wares from the sincere and pure Merchaundes
of Christ is holy testament: Who incesstantly labors daily to wede out,
banysh and extincte all such wickedness from his people, and the same to
enstruct with the vnfallyble rule, how and by what mark and token they may
certainly know, avoid, and detest all such as ye are with your fruits of
iniquity, tho they be faced and colored with never so great holiness.

This Maiden King, Noble EDWARD Securis rationum vestrarum (as Demosthenes was
wont to say of Phosion toward him selfeward) the ax of al your wicked purposes,
cutteth down fast by he root, what so ever is not planted under the
commission and warrant of Jesus Christ: but let us see what follows of yours.


Arri. TO which sacred founten, just and right faith ought to cleave and
lean, in all contrauersyes touching Religion, chiefly in this point which
seems to be the pyller and stay of our religion: where it is called into
question concerning the invocation of saints, or expiacion of souls: A man
may err without great danger, in this point being the ground and foundation of
our faith, We may not err without damage to religion: I call that true religion
which instructs ma^s mind with right faith, and worthy opinion of God. And I
call that right faith, which does credit and believe that of God, which the
scriptures do testify not in a few places, and the same depraved and detort in
to wrongsense, but as ye will say, throughlye, with one and the same
perpetual tenor and concent.


Proct. GREAT Alexandre, king of Macedonie, what time diverse persons had
hyghly commended the frugalitie and spare manner of living that Antipater used,
who lead a life homely, void of delices: Yea (quod Alexander.) Foris albo
vtitur pallio Antipater, intus vero totus purpuratus est. That is to say:
Antipater wears a white robe outwardlye, but within he goes in purple every
inche of him. Notyng the conserable sparyng of the said Antipater: where as in
very deed he was, that notwitstandyng, as ambicious and stately as the best.
The like hipocrisy and coulerable handlyng (gentle reader,) but in a higher
matter, this fellow presently uses to deceue, seduce, and intrapp thy
simplicity. But fear not to say, or believe it with out saying, that he wears
a white robe, outwardly, but within, he is dashst up in purple every ynche of
him: that is, he bears the in hand with his outward words that he is an
honest plain man and a good Christian, and yet notwithstanding in very deed
he is a great heretical blasphemor against Christ, every ynche of him. If
naked words ought only to be weyed, and expended as sufficient testimony and
trial of a man, who better christian then this man, whose words in this
place, sound as godly as any can be spoken: But good Christian reder, I
exhort and council the again and again, for the love of God take heed of
such false prophets: Tho they speak and gloss never so fair, tho the
scripture drop out of their mouths never so thycke, yet I cry, take heed:
weygh and consider with thy self well, to what end and purpose their plesau^t
and fair talk, their mouths full of scripture do tend: and then, by grace
ye may anon find them: say unto your self as Phosion said unto the people
of Athens, being very brag upon the heresay or brute of Alexander his death: If
he be dead to day quod Phosion, he wylbe dead to morrow also, and so forth, etc.
If it be true that they tell you, it will be still true: follow the proverb:
Festina lent: This have spedeth best when al other have makes wast.

Behold how iolylye this man preaches to us now in this place. Right faith
must lean (says he) and cleave to the Word of God: That is well. The
scriptures must try and decide all contrauersyes touching true Religion: That
is well. True Religion is that which instructs with right faith and worthy
opinion of God: And that is well. Right faith is that which does believe and
credit that of God, which the scriptures with one concent throughout, do
testify of him: Wondrous well. Finally, he improueth such as do deprave,
detort, and wrest the scriptures into wrong sense: all this is meruelously
well spoken: yea, nor Paul neither Peter taught better doctrine: Sed fugite
hinc pueri, later anguis in herba.

Mark, gentle Reader, to what end and purpose all this gear goes, and then
thou shalt well perceive both, Actu. 8.
quod illi no^ est sors i sermon isto, that he has no part in the tale told
by him (as Paul said to Simon Magus) and how that all this while also, he
lays but whiles to deceive the: he sets thy teeth an edge with a pleasunt
bayte, the rather to take thee with the hook which yet thou see not: For is
it not his purpose and intent to persuade thee, that Christ was but a creature,
a passible man, and not God, equal to his Father in his divine nature? Yes for
soth: and is not this clean contrary to al scripture, true Religion, and right
faith? Nothing more contrary, as it shall apeare afterward, Yet now he would
make thee believe that he will decide this matter by the sciptures, according to
right faith and true religion. O plene omni dolo and omni falacia sili diaboli,
and inimice omnis iusticiae non desinis vias domini peruertere rectas? Acto.
xiii. O full of all subteltie and al deceatfulnesse, Ictu. 13,
the child of the devil, and ennemy of all righteousness, ceasest thou not
to pervert the straight ways of the Lord? Could Paul trow ye speak this
sentence then to Elimas ye sorcerer, so well and truli, as I may now sai it to
you, which promised to follow the right menyng of ye scriptures ^o cleue to
perfect faith, and true religion. And by and by contend and labor with all
your might to deprave the scriptures, to overthrow the Christian faith, and
suppress religion, with your most detestable and cursed blsasphemye against
thauctor of all three?

Such is the trust and policy of heretics: first to premit a fair painted
tale or they approach to their wicked purpose, faced and set forth with all
holiness: therewith to tickle the ears of such as hear them, to the end they
should not mistrust their prosses ensuynge, which in the beginnynge premyse so
godly. But Christen Reader, thou have learned by datlye experience, that all
is not gold, which glystereth: And every tree which does flower and blossom
fair to the eye, yeldeth not the best fruit in the end. Therefore be not
deceived with their false and counterfayte trash, tho it shine and glyster
never so bright to your eye: Be not in love with their fruit, tho they flower
and blossom never so freshlye, They are very liberal good fellows, they will not
stycke to give you the byeng of the one, and a large taste of the other, if you
grant to be a chepman of theirs: But good Christians forsake all, and then ye
shall be ^ure to be the greatest gayners: refuse all, and then shall ye carry
with you the best part, which these kind of merchauntes would spoil from you:
the kyngedome of heaven I mean, which is yours by inheritage, through the
precious purches ^f Jesus Christ, and ye can not be ^efeated thereof, as long as
you con^^new constaunt in the faith of him. Therefore follow you the ploughe
^arnestly, upon which ye have set ^our hands: and look not back: that ye be
not found unmeet for that kingdom, Luke. i^.
Nullus enim qui ^anu superiniecta aratro retrorsum ^ertit oculos, idoneus est
ad regnum ^ei. i. For none that puts his hand ^p the plow, and looks back,
is fit for ^^e kingdom of God, says Christ. ^ut tell forth your tale good
sir.


Arri. WHAT the scriptures do witness of God, it is clear and manifest enough:
for first Paul to the Romans declares that he is everlasting, and to
Tymothie invisible and immortal, to the Thessaloniens living and true. James
also teaches that he is inco^mutable, which things in the old law and
Prophets likewise are taught infixed, inculcate so often, that they can not
escape the reader: And if we think these Epithetous not vaynelye put, but
truly and profitably adiecte, and that they agree to god, And that we must not
believe him to be God, to whom the same agree not? We therefore call God (which
only is worthy this name and appellacion) everlasting, invisible,
incommutable, incomprehensible, immortal, etc.


Proct. HEtherunto ye have talked at pleasure, and roued a broad at Randon as
they say: Now at length ye approach to the matter, and prick toward the mark
of your purposed intent, but so nyghe that a man may sit at the white with
Diogenes without danger of hytting. Therefore I wyshe the, good Christian reder
or I go further to sit hard at the white of Christ's deuinitie iwth me, whereat
this fellow does now level as well as he can, to perce the same through:
And then I warrant the. But if thou mislyke this standing, and being in fear
of hurting, shrynkest away, and so chaungeste thy place, then thou runnest
wylfully into thine own destruction: for such is his cunning that tho he
shuts to hit the mark, yet he mysseth the wole but every time: and his
shafte lyghtethe amongst them that stand a loofe: Therefore I say stand eue^
as nyghe the mark ye can: and believe assuredly that it stands in such
place, as it is not for him or any other (though he had the cunning and
strength of the whole world) to deface, perce, or disfigure it by any manner of
means. This if thou do, my life for thine: thou shall be not only in sauegard
out of all danger, but also merelye behold, the far wide, to short, or
over shotyng of him, and laughe at the same, to thy great comfort and solace,
to his and others no small rebuke, shame and confusyon, that fear not to
attempt such high enterprise, which to atchyeue, al wit lack skyl, al
strength want might. And much les this young nouis is of force and power
suffyciente and able enough to the same: whose Attyliery I assure the Chrystian
Reader, to put the in more comfort, excide not the number of.iii. or.iiii.
crooked shaftes, and they so weke fethered, so blunte and dull headed, that they
can another flee any thing shifte, nor perce wheresoever they lyghten: besides
that his bow is dull, his string woren, his arm to to weak, not able to
draw any length at all: Only he has a pretye cast to make his arrowe by
rufflinge the feathers, to give a yolye sound in the Air, to the end the simple
and rude men that stand bye and hear it, may thereby beliue him to be a
cunning man and a great doer, and so to persuade the^ to bette on his side, and
become his skolers: but out of dought his cunning is no greater, his stuff no
better then I have told the. But now, to come out of this metaphor, and to
leave the gentle Reader a while with this watch word, I will convert my
oracyon and talk o the master of the game, who of that little store, beginnethe
now to loose forth one of his Arowes, against the white of Christ's deuinitie,
and thus he says.


Arri. WHAT the scriptures do witness of God, it is clear and manifest enough
and so forth as is above rehearsed.


Proct. WHat so ever the scriptures in any place do testify of God, that same
am I wyllyng with all my might evermore to defend and teach And what soever your
self shall gather, maynteine, and teach out of the same holy scriptures
ryghtlye understood, touching God, or any other Godly matter I will never
withstand or again say you therein: I will not contend against you for
vpholdyng and justifying the scriptures and such truths as ar therein
expressed: And therefore I do gladly and every good Christian, doothe with me
acknowledge and grant no les then ye have in your former words brought in:
for the scriptures bear wytnes that it is veraye true. Conserninge the
Eternitye of God sundry places as well in the old as in the new testament make p
layne relacion. Deus eternus dominus qui creauit terminos terriae and non
dificiet: God says Esaye the Lord everlasting, Esaye. xi.
which created the lymittes of the yerthe, and shall not decay: Paul to the
Romans. x. Chapter. Romans xvi
Iuxta delegacione^ eterni dei in obedientiam fidei. etc. At the commandment
of the eurelasting God, for setting up the obedience of faith. etc. with many
other places. Semblably diverse texes every where in the Scriptures to be
readen, showing and declaring his glory, power, and divinity to be
everlasting, do necessarylye infer and prove God to be everlasting also. As
in the first of Peter and. v. Chapter. Per. v.
Qui vocauit nos in eternal gloria^ suam. i. Which have called us in to his
everlasting glory. Romans i.
And Paul in the first to the Romans (as ye touched the place to fore) syath,
eterna eius potentia and diuinitas: Everlasting is his power and dyuinitie.

God also is invisible ye say, and I say the same with you, for as says John^.
iiii. Iho. iiii.
Deus spiritus est: God is spirit: then no corporal thing, no materyall
substance is God. And having no body, he can not be seen, but is inuysyble to
all bodily eye. Where it is read therefore that god spoke to Moses face to
face. Exodus. xxxiii.
And other the like sentences in the Bible the absuroytie of the sense does
show, that we may not understand it simplelye and as it lies, for God has no
face: But we must take it by comparyson, as thereby tunderstande and gather,
that Moses knew God more euidentlye then other. Likewise where John^ says
Videbimus eum sicu^i est. We shall se him as he is, it is to be taken and
understood thus, that we shall see and perceue him herafter more better and
more lyuelye then we now do: that is to wit not by faith, nor through the
vele of obscure and dark similitudes: nether in ye glass of things creat.
But then we shall behold and see the creatures rather in God him self, as the
Angels do.

Again God is living and true: I confess, he is living and ever living by
reason he is eterne and immortal, he is true and ever true, and truth it
self, whose will is not chaungeable, nor mutable, Omnis homo mendax: Man only
is untrue: whose mind every hour for the most part does ebb and flow: never
constant.

Finally God is incommutable, I do not deny: For I have said that God is no
chaungelynge, he is ever as he is, as he was and as he will be: Tho some now a
days give him a new dysgised lyuerye every day, and frame his holy word and
testame^ as a ship man's house to serve their wicked purposes, and to mayneteine
their folly how so ever they like or mislyke Yet God I say and his word oath
incommutable. Iat. 1.
Apud que^ non est transmutacio, nec vicisitudinis obu^bratio: With who^e says
S. James is no variablenes nether is he changed unto darkness. Saint Austen in
his book De creatura tern^eth him bonum incommutabili. And David witnesses of
him saye^g. Psa. ci.
Mutabis ea and mutabu^tur, tu autem idem ipse es. i. Thou shall change that
things and they shall be changed, but thou art ever the self same.

And therefore S. Austen writing upon the Geneses, Aug. sup Genes.
says thus: Deus nec per loca nec per te^pora mouetur creatuta vero per loca
and tempora. That is: God, nor by places nor by times is moved, but the
Creature both by places and times is moved. To be moved by times is meaned, to
be altered and changed by affection: but God, nor by place nor by tym can be
immuted, altered, or changed, Mala. 3.
him self saiynge by the Prophet: Ego DEVS and non mutor qui est
incommutabilis solus.

of these properties agreeable to the God head, S. Austen in many places
reverently makes mention: but of many, one or.ii. places to reherce shall be
enough in this place. Deus solus inuisibilis, solus imensus, solus
incircumscriptus, L^ de essen^^n di crin^^acts
solus immutabilis, solus incorporeus etc: God is (says he) alone inuisyble,
alone vnmeasurably great, alone incircumscript, alone immutable, alone
bodyles, again.

Deus spiritus natura simplex, Quest. do ui et v ^ter^e V^sta. (...)
lux inaccescibilis, inuisibilis, infinitus, perfectus, millius egens, eternus,
immortalis, etc: That is to say, God as a spirit, of nature simple, a light
ammarcessible, i^uisible, infinite, perfect, wanting nothing, everlasting,
immortal. etc.

This far I have labored to confirm your words and assertion towchynge the
proprytes belongen to God: and have not dysagreed from you herein gladly
confessing with you that god is invisible, everlasting, lastyng, living and
true, immortal, and incommutable. And all these epithe^ous, to agree as the
divine nature, and that none is true God, unless the same be i^uisible,
everlasting etc. Now let us see what ye infer.


Arri. AND if Jesus Christ, even he wbiche was borne of Marye, was God, so
shall he be a visible God, comprehensible, and mortal, which is no counted God
with me, quod great Athanasius of Alexandrye. etc.


Proct. THE tree named Tilia writes Pliny, has a plesaunt ryne or bark, and
a leaf, in taste delicate enough: but his fruit is such, that no beast
vouchsafe ones to touch it, so vnplesaunt and naught it is. I prophesied,
before good soth, that after so fair flower and blossom (good sir) wherewith ye
mustered so freshly and so tymely, ye would at length yield the like fruit, as
ye now perform, altogether vnplesaunte and naught, good for no end, but to
put us out of dout, that the tree is worthy to be cut down, and to be cast
into the fire, as Christ bid. Is this the fruit of the right faith, of true
religion, which ye promised to follow? Has the holy scripturs taught you to
conclude thus, to which ye promised to lean and cleave, without wrestyng and
detortyng the same to wrong sense? Have ye tried out of the sacred founten,
the streme whereof ye promised so faithfully to ensue, without troublyng and
pudling the same, or that there were more Jesus Christ's then one, that ye come
in with your: Eue^ he which was. etc. Or that Jesus Christ borne of Mary, was
not God? Ye have done your will, but ye have not performed your promise.

To answer you shortly. I deny the argument: And say that Christ is God:
notwithwandynge he was here amongst us, visible, and mortal. etc. Yet is he
no visible God. Nevertheless, true God is he, was, and shall be everlastingly,
invisible, incomprehensyble, and immortal. To him that is fleshly and carnal
in his understanding, very hard it is to conceive how this may stand. Our
senses can not comprehend the truth in this matter. We must therefore cleave
to faith only for trial herein, which easily amounts us up into this tower
of understanding. We must suspende reason, for it works treason to all Godds
Mysteries: it reasons not worth a fygg in all such points. We ought therefore
I say, in faith and spirit, to learn the knowledge of Jesus Christ, not by
reason and wit, Otherwise we shall be deceived, and prove our selfs at length
to be very archdoltes, when we think us to be most sure, and believe us to be
most wise. Wherefore natural judgment and carnal reason serte a part: let us
become scolers to faith, until we have well learned this lesson. And faith will
teach plainly what every true Christian is bound to think and believe herein:
She will teach us to believe steadfastly, that Jesus Christ is true God, not
made, but which was from the beginning equal to God the Father: again, that
Jesus Christ was true man, borne of Mary, still Virgin: and that he dyed on the
Cross to redeem mankind, being lost through the fall of Adam: and that he
rysed a gain the third day, according to his promise, Conqueror of death
and sin: and that he now sits at the right hand of God the Father, a
continual solicitor for all that believe in him.

Faith will teach us also that there be.iii. distinct and several persons: the
Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost: yet no.iii. Godddes, but one God all.iii.
and all.iii. one God, This is one part of Faythes doetrine, to hyge for our
carnal senses to reach unto. And the it sounds much against our reason to
think it true: yet it makes all with our salvation, to believe it most true,

And albeit right now good sir, ye promised to follow right faith, and the true
understanding of the scriptures: yet can ye not brook this gear: but
earnestlye contend that there is no such thing because your eye, and other
your corrupt senses tell you that he was here in a visible form, and that he
dyed. etc. which is not to be found in the divine nature ye say: and I
grant forsothe that God is invisible, and immortal, and that in no wise the
Godhead can be seen, or dye. I grant likewise that Christ was here seen
in the world, like a man, and that he dyed: yet faith byddeth me to say and a
bide by, that Jesus Christ is God, notwithstanding that visibilitie and that
mortality. If ye ask me by what rule I prove this: very by the rule that
never squareth, not of man's inuencions, but of the word, whereof, the truth it
self is author Jesus Christ, the true natural and only son of god the
father, and in him self true God and man: he and his word be all one: he can
not lie, and his word can not be false: his word bears wytnes that it is
so: and faith therefore requires me to believe it without further question.
Harken therefore and I shall tell, how the scriptures in many places do
testifye of this truth: and to begin at the old law, I read in the.xxv.
Psalm. Psa. xiv.
Et concupiset Rex decorem suum, quoniam ipse est Deus tuus, and adorabis eum:
The King shall require his beautye, for he is thy God: and thou shall worship
him.

And in the.ix. of Esaye. Esaias. ix.
Paruulus natus est nobis, and filius datus est uobis, and vocabitus nomen eius
DEVS fortis, Pater, eternae vitae: A little one is borne to us, and a son is
given to us, and his name shall be called mighty God, father of everlasting
life. In the first of John, Ioh. i.
In principio erat verbum, and verbum erat apud deum: In the beginning was the
word, and God, Tues Christus filius dei viui. Mat. x.
was the word. In the.xx. of John, Thomas says: Dominus meus and Deus
meus.i. My Lord, my God^ And S. Collo. ii.
Paul in the second to the Collosians writes of him thus: I^ quo hahitat
omnis plenitudo deithtis corporalis: that is: In whom abides all fullness of
the Godhead corporally. The.ix. Romans ix.
to the Romans: Christus qui est Deus sup omnia, laudanus in secula: Christ
which is God over all things, blessed forever. These places of the scripture
do playniye declare and show that Christ is God. Again, who is everlasting
but God: Christ is everlasting, and therefore true God. Ante luciferum genui ^^
^ That is: Psalm. c.ix
I says God the Father have begotten thee before all begynny^g and without
begi^nyng. Saint John records the same: John. i.
In principio erat ver bum: In the beginning the word was: It follows to
make the matter plain: Et ver bum erat apud Deum, et deus erat verbum omnia
per ipsum facta sunt:.i. And the word was with God, and God was the word, and
all things was made by him. If al thing was made by him then it follows, that
he was not made: if he be not made, then according to saint Austen he is no
creature: if he be no creature, he is of the same substance and essence with
the father: if he be of the same essence with the father, the^ is he God even
as the father is. What can be more plainly spoken? And as I have recyted a
few places for the proof hereof, so could I allege a number mo tendynge to
the same end: But enough they say is as good as a feast. One proof more I
will add hereto touching Christ deuinitie. And then I shall come to the parts
of your argument. In all the Scriptures through out every where, we be
commanded to adore and worship, to invoke, to put our trust and confidence
in Jesus Christ With the same fact the Scripture does artrybute unto Christ
power infinite, that he is every where, that he searches the hertes, hears
in all places, at all times the supplycacions and prayers of the people, and
that he rewards justice and life everlasting. If this be so as it is not to
be doughted the Scriptures bearing witness to the same, as after ye shall here:
Then of force it follows that Jesus Christ is true god: and has in him the
divine nature. For no creature ought to be iniuocated but God alone, no
creature is every where, but God alone: in no creature we ought to put our
trust and confyde^s but in God alone? No creature sercheth the hertes but God
alone: no creature can reward life everlasting but God alone. And that Jesus
Christ ought to be inuocated, as he that can do al, this the scripture is
clear.

Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis and onorati estis, et ego reficiam vos. i.
Mat. xi.
Come ye to me all which do labor and are laden, and I will refresshe you:
This one sentence were enough to persuade us that Jesus Christ ought to be
called on and inuocated as he that does here us eueri where, aid and socoure
us every where. Which is for God only to do.

Concupiscet rex decorem tuu^ quoniam ipse est de tuus and adorabis eum: Psa.
xiv.
The king shall require his beauty: for he is thy God and thou shall honor him,
Psa. 72.
Et timebunt eum do nec erunt sol and luna..i. And they shall fear him as
long as Soon and Moon shall be.

Qui non honorat filium, non honorat patrem:.i. John. iii.
He that honorethe not the Son honoreth not the father. None worthy to be
honored but onyle God: Christ therefore is true God, ^^^s^p ii.
because he is to be honored and worshipped. In nomine Jesus flectatur omne genu.

Qui credit in filium habet vitam eternam: Act. vii.
He that believes in the son has life everlasting. ^, these. iii.
Domine Jesus suscipe spiritum meum: Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Ipse deus
and pater noster and dn^s noster Jesus Christus dirigat via^ nostram ad vos:.i.
God him self our father and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our journey unto
you. ii. these. ii.


Ipse Dominus noster Jesus Christus and deus pater noster qui dilexit nos et
dedit consolacionem eternam etspem bonam in graciam confirme^t vos:.i. The
lord Jesus Christ him self, and God our father which has louyd us and given
us everlasting consolacyon, and a good hope through grace, comfort your
hertes and stablyshe you. etc.

And in these and the like Testamonies of the scripture it is spoken of the
perpetual and everlasting inuocacion of Christ, yea when he is not visiblelye
present and conversant amongst men: Wherefore this adoracyon and inuocacion
dew to Christ may not be understood of an ex^erne significacion of honor as
the Iues cauell, such as is exhibeted to one present in our eye, as to a king
holdinge the Civil imperie: But these sayenges do preach of Messyas
perfectlye and louinglye heryng the supplicacion of his people, in every place
at all times and seasons defending and comeforting the faithful. And these are
the proprietes of the omnipotent nature. It is therefore good and profitable for
us diligently to weyghe and consider this doctrine concerning the inuocacion
and adoracio^ of Messiah Jesus Christ. Which doctrine not only instructs us
of Christ's deuinite, but does also greatly coumfort and solace us, and
vehemently exuscicate and stir up our hertes, to call upon hi^.

For as much therefore we are required by the scriptures to invoke and call
unto Christ: let this consyderacio^ be ever fra^ke in our minds that we must
grant and acknowledge divine Nature to be in him: Because the inuocacion of
him which is absent, which is not bodily present does argue his
omnipotensie. For it lets us tunderstande that he can and does see the
secret motions and co^ceptes of the hertes of men in all places: Which is for
God to do alone. Remember we also the example of the Church so often repeting
this prayer. (...). i. Christ have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon
us. This prayer is a manifest profession of Christ's deuinitie. Again volue we
often in our minds the form of our baptyme which is the sum of the hole
Gospel. Mat. vi^.
In the last of Mathewe it is written. Baptisans illos in nomine patris and
filij and spiritus sancti: Baytysing them in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghost. Here are three persons named, and to all three like
power and honor ascribed. The sense and menynge of which words, I baptyse the
in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost, is this. I
wytnes and testyfye the to be accepted of the everlasting father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghost, and through the mercy and power of them, to be
delivered from sin and death everlasting, and to be rewarded with ryghtuesnes
and life everlasting. Examine we the words well and they let us to
understand, that god the father is omnipotente, is to be inuocated. And for as
much they do so much attribute to the father: And seeing the son, and the holy
ghost are matched and joined with him in that honor, as like doers, Necessity
infers their power to be equal and like, And their power being equal and
like, out of question they be (...) as the grecians term them, that is to say
of one essence and nature. Of which words also of Baptism Basil that grave
and Auncyente writer does myghtelye contend the father, the son, the holy
ghost to be (...).

Hereunto accords all the old and grave fathers, whose autorytes and
censures I will not allege, to avoid tediousnes. Only one or.ii. places of
S. Austen it shall not be from the purpose to recyte, nor vnplesaunt to the
godly reader: whose judgment upon the scryptures is to be regarded much more
then youres is, for sondrye causes. This holy S. Austen made whole books in
confutacyon of Arrius and other good bloodes of the same hear being heuye
masters to Christ's deuinitie. And in all other his works al most he takes
occacion somewhat more or les to speak of this truth he says. Lib. de
he^esibus. Cap. c.
Ambo scilicet pater et filius eterni nec caeperunt esse nec desierunt: That
is, both, as well the father and the son be everlasting nor began they to be,
nether end they: Again. Proprium est filij quod a patre genitus est, solus a
solo, coetertus, and consubstancialis patri: Lib de in quisicone ^tiuitaus
That is, it is only proper to the son, that he was begotten of the father, a
lone of a lone, coeterne, and consubstaunciall to the father. Li ^^. de
trinitate. Cap. xxi,
Sed plane sidenter dixerim vnius erusdomque substantie patrem silium and
spiritum sanctum: But I dare boldly say the father, the son and the holy
ghost, to be of one and the same substance.

In these few places S. Austen utters his opinion playnelye. And declares
him self to be resolved and out of dought co^cerni^g this verite. In comparison
what he has written touching this matter, that which I have brought of his, is
nothing: yet enough for the purpose presentlye.

Thus have I, performed the first part of my promysse in declaring by the
scriptures yt Jesus Christ is true God. It remianeth now ye I show how it
stands that Jesus Christ being very God (whose nature is, not to be seen
not to dye, nor to suffer any affecte or passion, whereunto the nature of man is
subject as ye have taught) was hear seen, suffered the Calamities of man and
fynallye dyed. Which thing done I shall I hope confirm and stablishe thy
conscience (gentle Reader) in this high mysterye of our faith, whereof thou art
all ready persuaded: persuade other that hethervnto doughted: sufficiently
answer to your objection: and wholye accomplish my promise.

Ye shall understand therefore that in Christ are.ii. natures, the one divine,
by which he is very God: the other human by which he is true man. That, he
received of God he father without mother. This, he received of Marye his mother
without father: What time he dyscharged the veale of the law, leaded us from
fleshelye matters to spirytuall things: And wroughte the high misterye of our
redemption. Saint John^ witnesses of both natures when he says. John. i.
Deus erat verbum, et verbum caro factum est: That is, God was the word. And
the word was made flesh. By the flesh is meaned man: He calls him God,
because he was in the beginning coeterne and consubstancyall with his father,
as he in his Gospel proves by many strong reasons, as after I shall more
largelye declare. He calls hi^ flesh for that he came down from his
heavenly throne, and took the nature of man upon him for the salvation of
mankind, in the appeasing his fathers wrath conceued through the fall of
Adam, against all his posterytye. Jesus Christ therefore has.ii. Natures in
him one of Godheade, an other of manhead: yet Christ not.ii. but one. Libra de
vera innocentia. Ca. 347.
Christus verbum est, illud caro est, illud deus est, illud homo est, sed vnus
est Christus deus et homo: Christ is the word says saint Austen: that,
flesh is, that, God is, that, man is: But one is Christ, God, and man. In a
another place writing to Peter he says the like, as he is much in this matter
every where. Lib. defide ad Petrum. Cap^. x.
Firmissime tene et nullatenus dubites dei verbum quod caro factum est, duas
naturas inconfusibiliter permanere, vnam vero diuinam, quam habet cum parre
communem secundum quam dicit ego et pater vnum sumus, alteram vero humanam,
secundum quam ipse Deus incarnatus dicit pater mayor me est: As much to say.
Believe steadfastly and in no case doughte the word of God which is made
flesh, to remain and contynewe.ii. Natures inconfuselye: the one divine which
he has with the father common, according to which divine nature he says I and
my father be one: the other verelye humayne, inconsyderacyon whereof he God
incarnate says. The father is greater then I. Hetherunto Sa^nt Austen.

Such was the love, mercy and kyndenes of Jesus Christ our savior toward
mankind, tha the being very God omnipotent would be made man, that man might
be reconsyled to God: he veraye God would descend from heaven, that man to
heaven might ascend: He very God, wholde be made the son of man, than man
might be made the son of God: He very God immortal would be made mortal, that
man condemned to death, might be made immortal to everlasting life: He very
God and rich, would be made poor, that man might be made rich. According
to the saying of Paul. Cum esset dives factus est egenus vt illius inopia
diuites essem^s:.i. Where he was rich, he was made needye, that through his
nedines we might be made rich.

Now to the purpose: as in Christ there was two natures, whereby he was God
and he was man: Likewise he had in him the proprietes of i^, natures. The
propryetie of his deuyne nature was, not to be seen, not to suffer, not to
dye. etc. For God is invisible, impassible, immortal as we have to fore
granted. But being man also and having the nature of man in him, he had in
him he qualyties and effects proper and incident to the same nature, w hiche
are, to hunger, to thyrst, to be seen, his members to be re^te and torn, to
suffer, to dye. etc. Where therefore you frame your Argument thus. God is
invisible, and immortal, Christ was here visible and mortal. Therefore Christ
is not God.

This argument is not good, the reason not true: notwithstanding, the mayor is
vndoutely true, and can not be false: For tho Christ was seen, and was
crucified to death, yet it follows not therefore, that Christ was not God: for
he was both God and man. To your minor therefore I answer thus: Jesus Christ
was God, and man: and in consideracio^ he was God, he could not be seen, he
could not dye: In consideration he was man, he might be seen, he might be
mortal, as he was. This answer is sufficient, true, and catholyke. S. Peter
is plain enough herein, which says that Christ suffered in the flesh: And
Ireneus writes that Christ was crucified and ded: Requiessente verbo vr
crucifigi and mo ri posset. 1. The word resting, to the end he might be
crucified and de^d: which is as much to say, as the divine nature in Christ,
was not c^^t and torn, was not crucified and dead, but was obedient to the
father, rested, gave place to the wrath of the eterne father, conceived
against man, and would not use his power and might. And this agrees with S.
Phs^. (...).
Paul, saying: Qui cum esset in forma Dei, no^ rapuir equalitate^ Dei. etc. In
our Englysh tongue it sounds thus: Christ which was in the shape of God, and
thought it no robery to be equal with God the father, Nevertheless, he made
him self of no reputacion: And being sent to obey the father in his passion,
he would not practyse his might and power contrary to his sendyng: bu^ took on
him the shape of servant, ^^cam like unto man: and receauyng with the nature
of man, mortality: he humbled himself, and was obedient unto death. This have
I sufficiently, and for the good readers contentacion I hope, answer this your
first reason or argument, how so ever it shall content and satisfy your mind.
And have veraye plainlye set before your eye, that Christ was true God, and
true man: having in him the nature both of God, and man. And that as he was
God, he was not visible, not mortal: As he was man, he was seen, suffered the
passion and affectes incident to the nature of man, and finally dyed. This
assertion, great Athanasius of Alexandrye did never impugn, but all his life
time with al his might furthered the same, and to the last day of his life
suffered grievous and sharp persecution, and often in danger of murtherynge
through the malicious and wicked suggestions and deuelysh pollycies of Arrius
and his companions, for vpholdyng and mainteinynge this verity touching
Christis deuinitie. Therefore, in my judgment ye are much to be blamed to
allege him as a favorer of that detestable heresye. And for as much
thoccasio^ in this place ministered by you serves so well, I will note out of
Eusebius, one or two pretty feats practiced by Arrius and your predecessors,
surnamed Arrians of Arrius, who was, as I have tofore said, the first author of
this blasphemy, the year of our Lord. ccc, xxx.

This Arrius therefore after the Council of Nycene, Eusebius. li. iii. triper.
hist. ca. xi
the Emperor Constantius commanded to apeare before him at home in his
palace, and examined him whether he yet believed according as it was agreed
upon in the Counsel, or no: who with out delay subscribed the Decrees of the
Council, as though he believed on the same. The Emperor required him to take
an oath upon a book if he believed the said articles or not, Arrius, a man of a
good large conscience, stycked not at all thereat, but boldlye took an oath in
this sort that he believed as he had written: having underneath his harmpyt
priuelye a scroue of paper, wherein he had written his peculier sect and
opinion: By this craft deludyng the Emperor, bearyng him in hand that he
meaned the Decrees of the Counsel, where he thought nothing les. This was a
pretty devise: but Gods punishment immediately followed. After he departed from
the Court, as he was to the way going, Eusebius. l^. iii. Trip. hist. cap. ^ii.
being provoked to the stole, in exhonoratynge nature, he powered out all his
bolwels, and so dyed and horrible death.

Now touching Athanasius (who^ you, our late Arrian brings in, as one that
favored your sect) your predecessors the Arrians, practysed all the vilany,
craft, and subteltye they could devise and ymagen, not only to put him to
worldly shame, but also to bring him to confusion: Of many their deuelysh
touches. I will rehearse one only, by that one, yt wise reader may conjecture
the rest. These stout clerks and holy men therefore, perceauyng that they were
not able to make their par^ye good by the scripture, and probable argument,
but were ever confounded by Athanasius, the inuinsible, and inexpugnable
bulwark of the Catholyke verity, did so irritate and kyndle the Emperor
Constantius Ceaser against him, with their malicious and wrong suggestio^s,
that he streigth awarded out his co^missio^ to certain that were at Tire,
requiring them to make diligent enquyri^, and strayte examinacio^ of the said
Athanasius his manners, and behauyours. Two principal crimes were laid to his
charge by the Arrians: one was, that he had by force rauyshed a woman: the other,
That he had killed a man, whose arm he should cut of to work enchauntmentes
with all. To make the first accusacion good, they had hyered a meet woman for
their purpose, that should come in, to face out the same matter. To prove
the other, they had callen unto them one Arsenius whylom Athanasius lectour: who
fearyng the correction of his Master whom at a time he had offended, ran his
way from him. This Arsenius, the Arrians had shut up close in a chaumbre, to
the end they might with faith belie him to be dead: Arsenius notwithstanding as soon as he perceived wherabout they went, what mischief they wrought toward
Athanasius, or for that he abborred the fact, or else supposing thereby to come
in favor again with his master Athanasius, priuelye by night conveyed him
self away out of the chaumbre where he was hydden, and came to Tire by sea,
where his master Athanasius was, to whom he opened all the matter. Then
Athanasius requires Arsenius to hyde him self in some priuey place, until he
should be called forth for the trial of the matter. The time is present, the
company assembled, the judges are set, the Commission read, the woman
apeareth, the bear of a deadde corse is brought in before ye judges, the arm
cut of from a dead man, being leide upon the biere is uncovered. All do se
and behold it: and al at the fearful sight thereof, do detest and condemn
the cruelty of the deed. The woman now says her lesson without book,
which she had learned before, of the Arrians: that she on a time received
Athanasius in gestwise, and that in the night she was oppressed by him, and
ravished against her will. Athanasius is brought forth to his answer, who as
he was very holy, so was he a very wyity man also, as he which had according
to the lords precept, conjoined admatched together the simplicite of the dove,
with the prudence of the serpente: warned secretly Timothy his priest which
was with him present, that he should answer the woman, as though he were
Athanasius: for he knew perfeictly that nor he had seen the woman, neither
the woman him at any time before, When she had ended her tale, says Tymothe
unto her: Say thou woman, thou were rauyshed of me against thy will
perforce? Yea, quod she again by and by with stomach enough like a woman:
Thou, even thou I say, in such a place, at such time dydest contaminate my
woman head and mine honestye by forcible means. Thus was her false accusacion
pretely disclosed, thauctours thereof shamfully disgraced, and dashed out of
countinance. Yet was not good Athanasius acquyted, nor the woman punyshed for
the slander, because the same were Judges which were his accusers. They
proceed to the second crime: Behold, say they, the thing it self
speakethe, this is the arm of Arsenius, to what purpose and end thou have
cut of the same, declare thou unto us. Then Athanasius asks them wittely,
if they knew well Arsenius, whose arm this was. Diverse of them answered that
they knew him by sight very well. Then Athanasius required, that it might be
lawful for him to send for a certain man, whom he needed to have present at
the matter: it was granted him. For brieffe, Arsenius is brought before them:
whose face uncovered, behold says Athanasius, Arsenius is a live, behold,
here is his right arm, and here his left arm: Now whose arm this is, and to
what end it is cut of, declare ye: for you know, and so do not I.

What here dooest thou look for gentle reader that Athanasius should be
discharged? Yea, he had been rent and torn in pieces by his adversaries, had not
Archelaus, one of the^ which were chiefly appointed to here this examinacion,
plucked him out of their hands, and conveyed him away privily from them, More
of this Historye ye may read in Eusebius: as there remains behind much
more, worthy the reading: this is enough for my purpose, as thereby to let the
understand, gentle reader, both what Athanasius was, and also what well
disposed men Arrius and his companions were: such ar the tabernacles of
heretics. We have none such now a days I hope. No, in this time present,
there are none that persecute Athanasius and his like: All is well now: the
godly men are quiet: Christ and his are in safegarde: no body does persecute
them now, no body dare openly, and maliciously slander, backbyte, disquiet and
oppress them now: every great man now is become Archelaus, ready and willing
to defend the godly and innocent men: to deliver them from the wicked
assautes of their adversaries? But for the more plain and manifest declaracion
of Athanasius opinion herein. I shall adiect to the end of this book the
notable psalm that he made, called, Quicumque vult.


Arri. FOr if we be not able to comprehend nor the a^gels, nor our own souls
which are things creat, to wrongfully then and absurdly we make the Creator
of them comprehensible, especially contrary to so manifest testimonies of the
scriptures. etc.


Proct. SAINT Ciprian records no less then ye have said touching Gods
incomprehensibilitie: And I subscribe to both your sayings, because ye say the
truth therein: HIs words be these: Quod si animae meae quae corporis mei
obtinet pricipatu^ nec originem scio, Cipriani ad Corn lium de carnalibus
opec^ b^ christi in perlogo.
nec metior quantirate^ nec qualis sit intueri sufficio. etc. Patienter me
far oportet, si operatorem vniuersitatis non intelligo, qui in minimis
operationum suorum particulis meam profiteor caecitatem: That is: If, syath S.
Ciprian, I do neither know the beginning, nor measure the quantity of my
soul, which obteineth the souereigntie of my body, nor am able to understand
what thing it is. etc. I must patiently suffer and hold me content, if I
comprehend not, ne understand the worker and only doer of all thing, that is:
which do gladlye profess and acknowledge my blyndnesse in the least particle
of his works. This is a plain truth and confyrmed by diverse manifest
testimonies of the Sriptures. And I suppose the whole world thinks no
otherwise of God, especially amongst Christians I dare sai there are none that
affirm the contrary. I meruel therefore what moves you to pronounce of us so,
as tho we that believe Christ to be very God and man, should by the same means
make God comprehensible. If ye can make this to be a good argument: I believe
that Jesus Christ is both God and man: Ergo, I make God co^prehensible. Ye see
further in a millstone then I can or any man else I believe: If I had bynne with
you what time ye wrote that, I would have knocked at your elbowe to have known
that knacke for my lerynge. For it is incomprehensible to my reason, how your
wit can iustlye comprehend God therefore to be made comprehensible, by cause
Christ is god and man. This sounds I dare avouch to every Christian ear
very folysh and absurd. And as these reasons which hetherunto ye use to
overthrow Christ's deuini^ie be meruelouslye weak and slender, of no
importance at all, even so are all that afterward follow, barran without
substance, pythe or any good matter: so that I may well say of you, as a
certain Lacon said of a Nightingall being carren lean without flesh. Vo^ tu
es praeterea nihil: A voice (quod he) thou art, beside nothing Yet verelye I
can a low the pretye conueyaunce, brag, and art in which ye use to make
that your nothing seem some thing: even as we delight in the dieserdes
gesture and setting out his part, yet his matter all together unpleasant to
each honest and virtues man: Howbeit that will not help, for your nothing will
come to naught, tho ye strain your wits never so much to make it some what.
The Lord was not retained of your council ini plantynge it: Therefore ye know
what must follow. But to the purpose. We that be true Christians do not make
God comprehensyble: Yet by the Scriptures we comprehend that Christ has in
him two natures one of Godhead the other of manhead. Whereby we comprehend in
faith that he is both true God, and true man: And being both God and man,
that he comprehended in him the propryetes of both natures. By the qualites
proper to the one our senses might comprehend that he was man visible, and
mortal: By the proprietes of the other our faith appprehendethe that he was
God, Creator of all things, essence invisible of any creature
incomprehensible, possessinge together with his father essencially al life, al
sapience al eternite, him self being also life it self, sapience it self,
eternite it self, comprehending in him self al creatures in the world: And
he comprehended of none. For he is says Saint Austen. Liber. iii. Cap. i. de
trinitate.
Sine qualitate bonus, sine qua^titate magnus:.i. Without qualytie good,
without quantytie great. This is the faith and assertion of the whole
Christianity. How comes it to pass then, that ye should fasten this error
upon us, as to make God a comprehensible thing, saying we affirm playnelye in
manifest words the contrary. But thus goes your argument, Christ was here
emongst men comprehensible, Christ was God, ergo God was comprehesible. And
hereunto ye add to undo Christ's Godhead, and to save hole Gods
inco^prehe^sibilitie, that God by the scriptures is inco^prehensible, therefore
ye would conclude that Christ was not God, because he was comprehe^sible.

To answer you briefelye, I say, Christ both god and man, in his humanity was
comprehensible, in his deuinitie incomprehensible. Again by reason of that
union of ii. natures knit and joined together in the person of his godhead, as
we may say, God dyed for us, so may we truly say also, God is
comprehensyble, both true touching the flesh which he true God, received: his
deuinitie remayninge still, immortal and incomprehensyble. And that Christ had
in him.ii. natures whereby he was God and man: I have al ready declared, but not
so fuselye or as the matter permitted: or as I might. In the one I should have
found no end, in the other I should have been to tedyous. Yet I doughte not but
I have said sufficient therein for the Chrystyan Readers contentacyon. And as
occacion shall be mynistred, so will I more largely treat of the same in the
process ensuing. Now sir where ye contend that Jesus Christ was a creature
comprehensible, and therefore not the incomprehensible creator, your reason is
false because he was both, having in him ii. natures, one creat whereby he was
man and a peered a comprehensible creature, the other increat, through which
he was God, of all creatures creator incomprehensible, invisible and immortal.


Arri. FOR how may it be thought true religion which vnitethe in one subject
contraryes, as visibilitie, and inuisibilitie, mortality and immortality.
etc.


Proct THe ru^nyng stream says Plutarke, has not any serten color but is
evermore of that color whereof the ground is, which is subject unto it. All
heretykes most commonly are at the same point, evermore unlike them selves, at
all times redye to change their hew and color, to say and vnsaye as
present occacion does serve. Or ye have forgoten that which ye said in the
beginning of this your last sentence, or else ye use to say one thing and
think an other, other else because ye will not be condem^ned in any thing, ye
will abide by nothing that ye say: and this is a wise touch quod Will Somer.
Did ye not right now affirm that god was incomprehensible, that his works,
councelles, and will could not by any reason of creature, be comprehended
searched, and known: did ye not in effect grant all this even in the line
going before? And in your process ensuing, are not these your words? (God is
not comprehensyble of any create understanding, explycable with no speech)?
And now that ye come in with your how may it be thought a true religion
which unites in one subject contraryes. etc. Is it not a plain declaracion
that ye have or forgote^ that your former assertion, or that ye speak otherwise
then ye thought, or else that ye will abide by nothing no longer then it may
serve for your purpose? For by this your how. etc. do ye not grant that God
and his council, is comprehensible and subject to our understanding, and
therefore ye ask how may it be true religion. etc. To the end ye would learn
how and by what means Christ could be both god and man, visible and
invisible, mortal and immortal. Truly he that were persuaded that gods
counsel, workynge, and will are incomprehensible in explycable, would never
ask how this or that might stand with true religion, touching Gods misteris.
For as much therefore ye now ask how, (and being in dought of the matter in
deed, otherwise your how might be allowed) and tofore by grauntinge him to be
incomprehensible in all his doings, did condemn such doughtfull and curyous
questyons, how may it be thought the contrary, but your tongue can and will
sound mere contrarieties touching one matter? But concerning this questyon of
youres: because ye be in doughte thereof in deed, you have not wit enough
to learn the truth thereof, and I lack cunning to teach it you unless ye
first believed, and then ye would ask how, For I tell you, such howes
touching gods instrutable mysteries, are nether laudable nor profitable, unless
it be in faith. If ye be not in faith, if ye stedfastlye believe not before ye
ask how, your how can not be resolved. Ask not how with Sacarye lest ye
receive punyshement for your incredulytie. Ask how with Marye the most
blessed virgin, and mother of Jesus Christ: then ye shall receive fruit of
your question. She asked how, but believed first, and therefore she received an
Answer that contented her. He also required how, but believed not, seekynge
rather to understand, then to believe, rather by argument to learn, then by
faith. And therefore instead of an answer he receauid condingne punysheme^t
for his unbelief. Therefore my advise and counsel to you is, that ye ley a side
such curyous and vain inquisicions concerning Gods dyspensacion, suspect
your reason, for it wants right judgment: mistruste your wit, for it
lackethe wisdom; condemn your senses, for they have not experyence, to
decide, judge, and determine any one jot of gods mysteries. Cuius sapie^cie
non est inuestigacio: Esaias. 40
.i. whose wisdom is inuestigable says Esaias. And as Hieremy does write.
Hier. 32.
Magnus est concilio et inco^prehensibilis cogitatu:.i. God is great in
council, and incomprehensible, in thought. And measure God and Gods council
according to the rule prescribed in the holy scriptures: search after the
understanding of his will and doings by such means, as he would be searched
for: then shall ye attain such knowledge of his Godhead, yt understanding of
his will and coucelles, as shall be suffycient for your salvation everlasting. In
the old law God did open and reuele him self unto his people by word and
syngne, that is to wit, by the voice of the law and promyce of reconciliacion
given unto them: And also by wonderful miracles amongst them at that time
wrought, to thend they should not toose and tugge their brains in vain
cogitacions and endless inquisicions what he was, how and by what means he
does this and that: but refer their minds wholly to this word and
testimonye. And by this word and testimony, tundersta^de how they should
acknowledge, honor, and invoke that God, which opened him self to them by
that word and testimony. As in the first precepte he byndeth them to the
word, which sounded to their ears in the mount Sina: and to the testimony
exhibited in co^ductyng and leadyng them out of Egypt: Ego sum Dominus Deus
tuus qui eduxi te de terra Egipti: That is: I am thy lord thy god which brought
the furthe of the land of Egypt. He made with them also a promise of a
medyatoure that should come, through whom the world should be saved: Byndyng
them to call upon that God which did lead them out of Egypt, and couenau^ted
with them of a medyatour. Now that mediator being come, crucyfyed, and
resurged, the light of the Gospel known, he wylleth us to fire our eyes, and
set our minds wholly upon him: that by him as most surest testymony we may
know what God is, and his will. He leads us directlye into the knowledge of
the father: if he lead us not, we can not but straye al together out of the
right path, we cannot avoid darkness, but wander therein to our utter
confufyon. Nether have we now received a prerogatyue by Christ, to be
inquisitiue in Gods matters: to be curyous in searchynge out the causes of
Gods operacions, and councelles as to try out what the deuyne nature is in it
self, how God the father begatte the son Jesus Christ, how the holy ghost
proceeded from them both: How one Christ could be both God and man: and how
this and that comes to pass. Yea he condemns such speculacion in man
vehemently, allows no questyon to be moved in his hye mysteries, especially
out of faith, that is to say unless we believe assuredlye first the words of
him: as Marye did, for when Gabryell saluted her she replied, with these
words. Quo^odo fiet esse istud: Luc.i.
how may this be? Yet did she not mystruste or dought, whether it could come
to pass or not: but believed sertenlye, that it both might and would be:
considering and faithfully credetynge all impossybilities to be most possible
and veraye easy to him; whose words sounded to her ears, contrary to
Zacharye, Nicodeme, and the Capharnites: Luc.i. Job iii. Ioh.vi.
Who in their incredulity serched after Gods mysteries and thereby procured
Gods displeasure unto them, Philip was very besy with Christ, and required him
to show his father: But Christ was with him quickly, rebuked him, disalowed
his question and reuocated his mind from such inquisicion, saienge. Qui vide^
(...) videt patrem meum: Ioh. xiii.
.i. He that feeth me sees my father: He wylleth us not to comber our brains
with such fon and uncertain speculacions. But earnestlye to leye hand on him
the true and natural son of God the father: Before promised, and now
exhybited unto us to our inestimable comfort, joy, and solas, And by him to
know God, and the way to come unto him: for none knows God the father but by
him: none comes to the father but by him. Who so ever is a searcher of Gods
mysteries, with other instrument the^ faith and love, by other mean then the
son Jesus Christ he is oppressed of his glory and (no otherwise, the if he had
directely and intentiuely somewhyle looked in the son,) departs as blind as
a haddorke: for as the scripture says. Tenebre eum non apprehendunt. Ioh.i.
Now sir if ye be at this point, if ye will thus captyue your senses, and
submytte your self to faythes doctrine: then ask of me how.etc. And I dare
teach you this lesson with many m^ so perfectlye that ye shall not need to
dought again thereof. But if ye will not lean hereunto, but wylfully and
stouburnly persist in your folly, trusting to your unreasonable judgment,
indescreete reason, and blind senses for the determinacion of such
supernatural matiers. I can no more prevail in teaching you, then does the
cork in vpholdig the net that it may swyme above water, when so much led is
annexed that it vyolently pull the same to the bottom: Where ye say therefore,
How may it be thought true religion that unites in one subject contraries.
etc. To make you an answer that ye may understand. I replye unto you with
the like phrase, How may it be thought a true relygyon which techeth that a
virgin brought forth a child without the seed of man: If ye can make good
this; ye can not but admytte the other also^ both being true for one
consyderacion. The word of God tells you that Marye conceived and delivered
a child without the carnal knowleage of man: and ye do belyue it: why?
Because your reason can comprehend how it may come to pass? No: why then?
because the word, ye will say, does wytnes that it was so: likewise the same
word is a plain testymonye that in Jesus Christ were united.ii. contrary
natures the one invisible and immortal, the other visible and mortal, why do ye
not believe it? Why dought ye more of the religion that teaches us the union of
such contraries in Christ, then of that relygion which reaches us that a
virgin brought forth a child: seeing both have one and the self same ground.
Here your (how) gives me occasyon to speak of the wonderful miracles which
Christ wrought amongst us. above al humayne reason, to the end this might not
seem impossible to your faith, tho your wit can not compass it, that Jesus
Christ was both God and man: To whom being omnipotent all thing is easy and
possible, be it never so difficult and impossible to man's understanding and
judgment. But to avoid tediousnes I will not use the occasion. As it is true
and Godly relygion which teaches us that Christ did such miracles, so is it a
true and Godly religyo^ to believe that Christ is true God and perfect man: for
both were like possible to him. And of both we have like proof. By his word
we are assured, he did them: and by his word also we are put out of dought he
did this. Thus have I taught you, how it may be thought true relygion which
unites contraries in one subject. And touching your principle of natural
Philosophy, co^traries can not concur in one subject, I meruel much that ye
would use it to try and decide the hie mysteries of god therewith al. How be it
I should not much meruell thereat. For as the serpent called Amphisbena has a
head at both ends, and uses both parts in stead of a tail, as it ly kethe
him. In like manner such inconstant and wauerynge persons as ye are, now by
this now that ways do defend your selves, applying every thing to your in
tent: framyng the same to prove and improve as your fansy like. And as Hyena is
sometime a male sometime a female: so ye one while ye be deuynes, an otherwyle
Natural philosophers as ye perceue how your purpose may best succeade and go
forward. But truly, as the people in Asya named Androgini do so, imitate both
kinds, that they be nor men nor women: even so ye counterfeicte to pley both
deuynes and Natural Philosophers after such sort, that ye prove your selfs
to be none of both. Where ye talk of relygio^ of faith, and gods mysteries ye
counterfect a deuyne. But where ye cum in with your contraryes in one subject,
ye speak folly shely, Phylosophycally I would have said. Again in that ye
council Natural Phylosophie for the declaracyon of deuinitie, ye bewraye your
self, to be no divine: And in that ye include the high and supernatural
mysteries of God within the circuit and compass of Natural Philosophy, ye
declare your self to be no Philosopher, not knowing that the dicyon and
Limities thereof extend no further then natural matters. Thus whiles ye would
be seen both a deuyne and a Philosopher, ye show your self to be none of
both. And as ye are neither good deuyne nor cunning Philosopher, according
to your skyll in the one and cunning in the other, ye have so vndescreately
coupled deuinitie and Philosophy together in this your sentence, that the
fruit spronge of that compulacion is nor deuinitie ne Philosophy: but as the
Mule engendered betwyx an Ass and a mare is nether Ass nor mare, so by this
your unnatural conjunction of supernaturality and Naturallytye together, ye
have brought forth (but to your self alone I hope) a foul and prodigious
monster, all unlike to deuynytye, all unknow to Philosophy. As, That Christ is
not GOD and man, according to true Religion, because natural Philosophyes
Rule is, that Contraryes can not be in one subject. Perchance ye are merry of
this talk well I will make an end straight way. As ye can not reason Natural
Philosophy, by deuinitie so can ye not teach divinity, by Natural
Philosophy. In the one, faith admits no impossibility to be: In the other,
reason contendeth nothing possible to be, if by reason it be not
comprehensible. In the one, faith makes all thing reasonable that is above
reason. In the other, reason makes all thing incredible, which is not within
reason. Therefore as in can not stand by natural Philosophy, one thing to be
both visible and invisible, mortal and immortal in one respect, because
contraryes can not be found at once in one subjects by reason: So is it
perfect and true Religion by deuinitie to believe that one thing is visible,
and invisible, mortal and immortal, because contraryes are united in one
subject, contrary to reason.


Arri. IT IS laufull by many ways to see the infirmity of Jesus Christ whom
Paul in the last Chapter to the Corinthians, of the second epist. denies
not to be crucified through infirmity. And the whole course and consent of the
evangelical historye, does make him subject to the passions of man: as
hungre, thyrst, werynesse, and fear: to the same end likewise, at swear
anxietie, continual prayer, the consolacion of the angel: again, spittyng,
whypping, rebukes or checkes, his corpse wrapte in the lynnen clothe, unburied.
And to believe for sothe that this nature subject to these infirmities and
passions is God or any part of the divine essens: What is it wother but to
make God mighty and of power of the one part, weak and impotent of the other
part, which thing to think, it were madness; and folly, to persuade other
impieties.


Proct ANACHARSIS saying was that the Athenians occupied their money to no
other end; but to number: by the numbrynge up and gatheryng together these
places of the scripture so nycely against Christ's deuinitie, may we not justly
think, good sir, that ye have read the holy scriptures to pyke out matter and
stuff therhence, rather to mainteyne disputacion and talk, then for any other
godly end and purpose. If ye can deny this, how happened then, that ye have
heaped these sentences to gither, only declaryng the manhed of Christ, and have
not as well alleged one of so many, and manifest places every where in the
scripture to be seen, that necessarilye prove Christis deuinitie. It appears
yt ye have ouerseene the whole body of the new Testament: therefore ye can not
pretend for your excuse that ye read them not. But ye prefixed before hand
with your self what ye would do. And so ye read the scriptures notte thereby
to instruct you what ye should do: but therthence to embesell matter by
violent wresting to supporte and uphold you in that which ye would do: And
after a preposterous order, forcyng the rule of Gods word to agree to your
folish fansyes and wicked purposes: And not framing and conforming your self
to it. Ye have mo fellows I grant in this behalf: yea so many, that if ye were
blyndfold, ye might easily find out as good as your self thereat every where
almost: yet your falt is not the less for that the feloship is so great. Your
wise reason that ye make now is thus:

That nature which is subject to humane passions and infirmities, is neither
god, ne any part of the divine essence. But, by the Scriptures it is manifest
that Christ was subject to such infirmities: as hungre, thyrst, fear, and ce.
Ergo, Chtist was not GOD: Well concluded and clearkely.

In deed that the nature subject to any infirmities and passions, is or God
or any part of God it were extreme folly to think, mere impiety to persuade
other. But to believe and persuade other that Jesus Christ is not therefore true
God, because he suffered such affectes and passions even the same which ye
have inducretely rifeled together on a heape^ it were intolerable folyshnesse,
and more tha^ Iudaical impiety. I have said, and now I say again, that by
the Scriptures Christ was true God and man: having in him both natures, as well
the divine as the humane nature, united and knytte together to the person of
his godhed miraculouslye. I have also tofore said, that as he took on him the
nature of man, so did he receive the affectes and infirmities incident and
natural to the same: As with the flesh (the one part of his humanity) hungry,
thyrst, werynesse, mortality. etc. with the soul (the other part of his
humanity) anxietie, trouble, and fear with other the like. I deuye not
therefore that Christ suffered such passions as ye tomble together: but in
consideracion only of the humane nature which he received, and as man: being
notwithstanding true God, and having in him the true Godhead: which was not at
any time passible, was nether rent ne torue, was not subject to hungre, thirst,
cold, heat, mirth or sadness. etc. And although he was omnipotent, equal to God
the father in all power by his deuinitie, yet he would use such obedience toward
his father, such mercy toward us, that being very god, he refused not, for
contentacio^ of the one, and reconsiliacto^ of the other, to put on our vile
nature, and in the same to suffer all persecution, troble, and affliction, and
finally most cruel death. For it was decent and meet, says. ^. Austen, That
a mediator between god and man, should have in him somthyng like unto God, and
somthyng like unto man, ne in vtroque hominibus similis long esset a Deo, aut
in vtroque Deo similis long esset ab hominibus: ita mediator non esset: Lest,
says he, being like in both to men, he should be far from God: or in both
like unto god, he should be far from men, and so he could be no mediator. And
therefore being true God with God, he would be made man amongst men, Ad pasc^
tium epistola. 174
No^ muta^do quod etat, sed assume^do quod no^ erat, says S. Austen: Not by
dischargyng or chau^gyng that which he had, but by taking unto him that which
he had not: And so became a merciful mediator berwyxte his Father and us.

Therefore, as where we read in the scriptures that Christ did any thing that
was for God to do only, it follows not that he was not man therefore: So again,
where we find that he did hungre, and thirst, labor, pray, wept, and slepte.
etc, we may neither conclude that he was not God by that: for he was God and
man both: yet was he not.ii. but, i. And he, one, was perfect God, and perfect
man: perfectly and absolutely, having in him self both Natures with their
propertyes, united to the person of his godhead, by reason of which personal
vnio^, many things confusely and without respect had to the proprieties of
the natures are spoken in the Scriptures of him: which can not agree unto him
but in consideracion of his Godheade: L^kewyse many things in many places are
spoken of him which can not be applied unto him, but in co^sideracion of his
manhed only: Exaumple of the first we have every where at hand, as that in
Johan, where he says: No man ascends iinto heaven but the Son of man which
is in heaven. Christ was not in heaven at that time according to his humanity:
it is therefore to be understood that he was in heaven then according to his
deuinitie: by which he is every where, And of the other part is that which s.
Paul writes: So God loved the world y^ he delivered his only begotten sun to
death, but according to y^ flesh which he had received: neither is he called the
only begotten sun of God, but in co^sideracio^ of y^ divine nature which was in
hi^: yea, this name Christ is a term of humane nature: for he was not anointed
with grace touchi^g his deuinitie, no, nor touching the flesh which he did
bear, but only according to the soul the one and the better part of his
humanity.

Where as ye say therefore that we make God of one part mighty and omnipote^t,
of the other part weak and impotent: yea truly, in diverse consideracions and
respects: if ye mean of God the second person: the scriptures teching us so
to do, as ye have hard: therefore it is neither madness to think it, nor
impiety to teach in other, as you affirm that it is: but much is your
madness, and great is your impiety, if ye do not think and believe the same
with us. By reason of that personal union of the.ii. natures in him, these
proposicions be true in fundrye respects: God is every where: God dyed: God
descended into hell. All three true if they be meant by God the second person of
y^ deity Jesus Christ, who very god and man is every where according to his
godhead: who very God and man dyed in consieracio^ of his flesh: who very God
and man descended into hell but according to the soul: only the body lyenge
dead in the sepulcher, Thus in diverse and sundry consideracions ye see, we may
truly and catholikely say: that God dyed, with other the like phrases: As God
is impotent and weak was ye bring it. Think and believe therefore, and teach
not the contrary: Otherwise your impiety is much, and great is your follye.

That the Christen Reader may see even as it were in a bright glass your
crafty and wicked iuggelyng in picki^g together so curiously these places to
improve Christ deuinitie, and not one of the great heap of most comfortable
sentences, which are plenty and frequent in the scriptures, necessarily
prouyng his Godheade: spoken of. To the end I say, the gracious Reader may well
understand your iniquity, in this behalf it shall not be much from our
purpose to declare and open, how that Christ as he was in the same person god
and man, so in all the dispensacion wherein he traveled the time of his
conversation here, we may deprehende certain and manifest tokens, both of his
divine nature, and also of our frail nature which he received. And to
begin at his Conception.

He was conceived in a womans womb: Mat. 1.
But by the holy ghost, an Angel being paranimphe, Luc. 1.
and mediator between god and her: that was for man: this was for god and ye
son of god

He was borne certain months, he waxed within the privy places of humane body:
Mar. 1.
But Not yet borne he is acknowledged Lord of Elizabeth: aganised of John, Luc.
iii.
preached of Zachary to be the Redeamer of the world, Mat. iii.
spronge from above.

He is brought forth after the manner as man is into the world: But before
all worlds, the same was begotten of god the father god.

He is borne of a woman: Heb. i. Mat. i.
But Of a virgin without ye co^mixtio^ of man.

He is laid homly in a stal or ship cot: Luc. 1.
But to him the Angel from heaven came singing melody meet for a god: Luc. 1.
Mat. ii,
him the bright shynynge sterre does signifye: the wise men do adhore, Luc. ii.
and with their Mystical presents, honor, in contempt of Herod

He is circumcised in his infansy: But of An and Simeon he is acknowledged even
then the light of all nacyons, Luc. ii.
the glory of the people of Israel.

He flees into Egypt: Mat. ii.
But the same does put to flyghte the Idols and false Gods of the Egiptians.

He dysputeth with the lawers in the temple being xii. years old: Luc. ii.
But in that young boy the elders do wonder at things above man.

He required water being werye of iorneing: John. iiii. John. ^.
But at the marriage feast the same could turn unsavory water into wine of
the best: the same as a God cries, Mat. xi.
all ye that labor and are laden: come ye to me and I will refreshe you: the
same promyseth to all that believe him, John, 4.
the lyuelye water leapinge or sprynkynge in to everlasting life.

He is deept in water as a man: Mat. iii.
But the same as God does sanctyfie the waters, ^e^^. 1.3
and makes them effectual to wash away al sins of al men. He resortethe
with sinners to baptyme: Mat. iii
But the same is hououred with the testymonie of John^, John^. i.
behold the Lame of God which takes away the sins of the world.

He was tempted: Mat. 4.
But wyllynglye, but he overcame it, and for our sakes, He was hungry: Mat. 4.
But after fortye days, and the same did feed to the full many thousand of
people with a few small lofes. John 6.


He is carried in a boat: Mat. 8.9
But the same does walk upon the waters when he list.

He is heavy a sleep: Mar. vi. John 6. Mat. 8. Mat. 8.
But the same awaked mastereth the wyndes and sea: with the turn of an hand,
fo cruel tempest causes great tranquillity and calmes.

He pays.ii. coins of money: Mat. 17.
But the same he took out of the fysshe which was showed unto him.

He is reported to be of ye devil: John. x.^ Mat. xii. 8.9.
But the same does expulse and propell all kind of deuylles.

He enquireth what the inscription of the coin is, Mat. 17.
as ignorant man: But the same as God that knows all things diverse times
answers to the still and preuey cogytacions of the Phariseis. Mat. ix. Io,
7.2.


He asks where Lazar is leyde, John. xi.
as though he knew not: But the same with his only vice does auocate Lazar
out of his grave. John. xi.


He is invaded and hurled at with stones: But never touched. Io. 8.11.


He feleth the inco^modities of man's nature: But the same does cure and
dyscharge all infyrmytyes and deseases raynynge in man's body. He is all be
spytted, Mat. 27. John. 19
and scourged: he has no form ne beautye in the eyes of men: Esa, 5 3. Eruct
^.
But the same appears to David beautyful above the sons of men: the same is
transsygurate in the mounten: Mat. ix. Luc ix. Mat. 17.
his face shyneth above the brightness of the son his garments passes the
whytnes of the snow.

He appears as man in the form of a servant: Phi ii. Mat. xx.
But the same as God brandeshith in miracles. Mat. 26. Io. xviii.
He is judged of Cayphas, he is accused, he is still as a Lamme: But the same
being adjured by the lyuinge God, sayte, Mat. 26.
hereafter ye shall see me syttinge at the right hand of the virtue of God.
Behold a manifest voice of deuinitie to sit at the right hand of God* is to
be equal with God, none equal with god but God. He is lift up upon the
Cross: But the same there vanquished Satan: and over came sin.

He hangs betwyx.ii. thieves: Luc. xxiii.
But the same to the one says with a kinglye voice: this day thou shalt be
with me in Paradyse.

He a bydeth much crueltye and vengeance as man: But the same the da^knes
miraculously spronge upon the yerth do declare God.

He puts away his soul: John. x.
But wyllynglye and the same had power to resume it again: The veale of the
temple is broken, Mat. 27.
the stones are clefte a sonder, the dead be relyued, all betokenynge God.

He dyed: But with the same death he restored life to the world.

He is buried in a close sepulcher: But the same resurgeth the third day
immortal, the sepulcher not opened.

He descended into hell: But the same returned tryumphantly bringinge with him
a pray of much price.

He is conveyed up to heaven in a visible body: And the same sendethe down a
Comforter by whom he dispenses heavenly gifts amongst men.

Thus in all the life of Jesus Christ if any list to do as in his person were
diverse natures, so shall he find every where diverse inuinsible arguments
expressed by Christ him self, declarynge and proving both natures to be in
him. You then that could and would not note both as well as the one sort
only, is it not trow ye more then a presumption, that tho ye could yet ye
would not have Christ God? is in not a great lykelyhode that ye purposed rather
to persecute Christ, then to prosecute the truth? As they do myghtelye prove
his humanity: so do these necessaryly and strongly declare his deuinitie. And
will ye be persuaded in the one and not in the the other? If one force, efficacye,
and virtue be of both, why will ye not admyt both: If one Scripture bear
wytnes of both why will ye not teach both: If one Christ be author of both,
why will ye not believe both: Admytte, teach, and believe both: or one Christ
will condemn you in both: for beleuinge the one in not believing: and for not
believing the other, in beleui^g.


Arri. THE nature divine is single, comunicable to no creature: co^prehensible
of no creat understanding: explicable with no speech. But as Paul says in the
first to the Romans, by the visible structure of the world we deprehende the
invisible power, sapience and goodness of God. etc.


Proct ALl this is true and Godly: but applied to an untrue and ungodly end.
Therefore I can find nothing amysse here in, but your intent which is
wicked. Ye would hereby emproue Christ his deuinitye but it will not frame with
you. To contend that Christ has not the divine nature in hi^: because the
same nature is single, communicable to no creature and so forth. Non sani esse
hominis non sanus iuret orestes:.i. A mad man might swear that it were no wise
man's part. The reason is because he was God and man: and had in him both that
single nature which is co^munycable to no creature, which is incomprehensible
explycable with no speech. etc. And also the nature of man unlike to the other
in all the propryeties ye have rehearsed: having therefore both natures in him,
if by the one your senses might comprehend him to be a co^prehensible
creature, as man, it follows not by that, that he had not the other in him by
which he is God incomprehensible: for the scriptures ar manifest that he had
both in him. As we have tofore sufficiently declared. And where you say that
the divine nature is communicable to no creature, it can not be denied. Neither
can ye fasten the contrary upon us, because we believe Christ to be both God
and man: and to have in him the natures of both. For albeit he true God took on
him true man, to thend he one might be both. And being both is but one
person, and in the same but one Christ: yet are not the two natures made one,
or in any point confounded or mixed, altered or chan^ged from their first
condition and state: them not co^municatynge or participatynge with the other in
any consideracio^. The word was made flesh, says s. Ihon: He meaned not that
the word was turned into flesh, or that the word and the flesh were made one
in substance: but that the word was made flesh, that is to say, the word took
unto it the very nature of man, wholly and perfectly: that where before he was
but the word, and the son of God only, now he might be man and the son of
man also. That phrase of S. John may be understood y the like used of S.
Paul, where he says: Christus pro nobis factus est maledictus: Christ was
notte in deed the same thing Miledictum: but because he took upon him
Maledictu^ for our sakes, therefore it is said: Factus est maledictum: Even so
and in the like form it is said in John: Verbum caro factum est, because
Christ being that word, vouchsafed for our sakes to put on him our nature, and
so became man: he received the shape of servant upon him which he had not, but
he left not ye shape of God therefore which he had: he was the word, and the
word was made man. Thus the word and man concurryng and meetyng together, one
person is made, and in the same, one Christ, having in him.ii. distinct and
diverse natures, yet but one person: which natures tho they be united together
in him and meet in person of his Godhed, yet are they not so united, they do
not so meet that they be mingled and confounded together, as water and wine,
leven and dough, the one being altered and confounded into and with thothers
substance, But these Natures in Christ remain together inconfusibiliter,
says S. Austen: That is inconfusely and unmixed, nor altered, changed, or
immuted in any one jot of their first and proper state, force or virtue. How
may this be ye will say that the divine nature and the nature of man could be
united together in one Christ and to one person, and the one not communicate or
perticipate with thothers substance. I can not teach you tunderstande how:
but ye may learn by your self how to believe it. And therefore S. AusTen
byddeth you to ask your self, how your self but one man can have in your
self.ii. diverse and sundry natures inconfusely existynge: as the soul and the
body. Therefore the nature of God, and the nature of man at united and
conglutinate, together in one Christ and to one person of the same Christ's
Godhead, after a mistical, ineffable, and inexplicable wise, each nature
notwithstanding that union that conglutinacio^, still remainyng in the
integrity and perfection as before that union or conglutinacion it was. Of
which union although Origin confesses that no similitude proper and fear enough
ca^ be brought, yet he compares the same too iron which is fyred and inflamed,
saying: As the fire does penetrate the iron, and of every side is mixed unto
it, so the word says, he receauynge humane nature, shyneth in the same
throughout and in every part: And the humane nature enkendled as ye may say,
with the light of the same, is united unto the word: And as the iron is not
altered into the nature of the fire, or the fire into the nature of iron: so
neither is the divine nature turned into the humane nature, nor the humane
nature converted into the divine nature.

Thus the divine nature, notwithstanding this personal union, remains still
inco^municable, single, incomprehensible, and inexplicable: touching the
incomprehensibilitie whereof and inexplicabilitie, I have said enough to fore.
The same divine nature is called simplex, in our tongue, single, because in it,
is no diversity, variacio^, or multitude either of parts or Accidents, or of
any kind of forms or fascions: but the same is pure, sincere, uniform, ever
like and the same, of one sort, unmixed, not diverse, not mutable in any
condition. This is the understanding of the word simplex, which ye use.

Now after ye come in with a new five eggs to aggruate the matter how that it
follows not, that he is God, because he is called by ye name of God, sometime
in the scripture: but neither barell better hrryng.


Arri. WHERE IT IS BY the scriptures evident that there is one god, as in
the.vi. of Deuteronomy. Your God is one God: yet the vocable is transferred to other,
and therefore it is written in the.lxxxi. Psalm: God stood in the sinagoge of
gods: which place, Christ in the.x. of John, declares to agree to the
Prophets, Whiles he studieth to avoid the crime of blasphemye, for that he
calling God father, had signified hi^ self to be the son of God. And Paul
in.i. to the Cori^. viii. And though there be which are called gods, Whether
in heaven other in earth (as there be gods many, and lords many) yet unto me is
there but one God, which is the father, of whom ar all things, and we in him.
And says Paul: There be to whom their belly is god: but to many, Idols:
according to that saying: all the gods of Gentyles, Idols. And Paul in the ii.
to the Corin. iiii. does call Satan, the god of this World. To men it is
applied but syldome: yet sometime it is, and then we understand it as a name
of a mean power, and not of the everlasting power: Exodus xxii. Thou shall not
detract the gods: and Moses be he a god to Pharao. Again, Paul to the Romans
ix. calls Christ, God, blessed for ever. and in the Gospel of John. Ca. xx.
Thomas Didimus does acknowledge him God through the feelyng of the wound:
Many times that I remember, I do not find that he is called by this name.


Proct NOW the matter, think ye, is without peradventure: for what warantise
have we so good and strong for the proof of Christ Godhead, ye think, as that
he now and then is called in the scriptures by the name of God, which confuted
as a weak reason to no effect and purpose, as thereby to auouche him God,
equal to the Father, what have they then to say but Conuictus. a. um. Well
bragged spr for sooth: Yet have ye mist the cushyn for all your have: as ye
shall have thereof by and by proof to your reproufe. In deed if one and the same
fine or end were both of runnynge and of dysputacyon ye might well clappe
hands for the game were yours, by reason ye have prevented me i^ telling your
tale first: But Sophocles puts me out of dought that it is not so: for best
said, best have, says he, be it first or last. Therefore tho ye have ended
your tale, and mine not yet begone, yet stakes may be so parted hereafter
that ye may leese the whole.

I say as ye say that there is one true God and one alone. And I say as ye
say not, that this one and true god is.iii. in person, and one in substance:
the first part ye grant and the place recited out of the Deuteronomy, by you,
prouethe the same: But the last part ye labor to improve with all the wit
ye have. God is one I say, and so is he.iii. too, one in nature.iii. in person:
The scriptures teachethe us the same. As in Mathewe Christ him self says to
his disciples, Mat. 28.
god and teach all nations baptisinge them in the name of the father the son,
and the holy ghost here.iii. are named, and like power and honor attrybute to
all.iii. Again in John, John. 1. Cap. v.
there be. iii. which give testimony in heaven, the father the son, and the
holy ghost: here.iii. are named, and like power and honor attribute to
all.iii. Again in John^, there be, iii. which give testimony in heaven: The
father, the son the holy ghost: here are three dystincte persons expressed
also, and that these.iii. are but one nature or essens, S. John^ is plain,
saying: Hij tres vnum sunt: That is, these three are but one essence or nature.
He says vnu^: not vnus.
Wherefore the father, the son Christ, and the holy Ghost, three distinct, and
not the same in person: but one and the same in nature. One nature or
substance of all.iii. and all.iii. of one nature or substance: The father
God: the son God: the holy ghost God: Yet one only God: and not. iii. Gods:
but.iii. persons of one Godheade. The father not one part, but one person: the
son not one part, but one person, the holy ghost not one part, but one person
of divine nature. One only godheade is the same the father has holy and
presentlye: the same the son has holy and presentlye: the same the holy
ghost has holy and presently, So three be god: yet one and the self same
godhead: three are omnipotent, yet one and the self same omnipotensye: three are
wise, yet one and the self same sapyence. Three are mercyful, yet one and the
self same mercy. etc. This is the catholyke faith tho it be not youres.

Now spr, this God being one in nature, and three in person, is the true God.
And according to his omnipotensye, he is God of all, be they good or badde:
but according to the proprieties of the scriptures, he is called God only of
such as worship him, love and dread him, prefer him before al other
things In which sense he is called God of Abraham, God of Isaac: God of
Jacob: and so David cries, Deus meus, my God.

Shamfullye do they cry Deus meus, whose God is their bellye, whose God is
mammon, whose god is sensualytie, or riotousnes, shamefully do they call him
father, which are of the father the devil, who fathereth thereth all such as
despise theyr^ neiboure: shamefully do they call him lord, which obey not his
precepts: But most shamfullye dare they call him their God which do
sequestrate them selves from Christ, his natural son, his equal in all
omnypotensye, all eternity, all might, all virtue: For he is not the God of
heretykes. And who more heretykes then you, which affirm such blasphemy
against Jesus Christ. This is a serteine rule, in John^. John^. v.
Qui non honorat filiu^, non honorat patre^:.i. He which honoreth not the son,
honoreth not the father: But rather flees from God the father, runs
headling into al contempt and blasphemye: Ye must therefore seek an other God,
for this is none of yours ne will be as long as ye continews in this foul
heresye. How be it he can not be Godles, that has so many Gods in store: Ye
may have your choice of a fair company, which ye have repeted by name: As the
belly, ydolles, spreetes, Satan, proper gods all: as ye have clerkely declared?
Ye may appoynte unto your self one of them several which ye list: if ye be
not already received wtal.

This hyeghe and most excelente nature of God, tho it be not agreeable or
communicable to any thing without this holy Triade: yet is the term or name
God often times applied and trasferred to other: As ye have inferred: and I
deny it not. But what? other as well men, as domme and dead materse are called
under metaphor or tralacion gods, therefore is not Jesus Christ God, but after
the like manner as they are Gods? yea sir to this end you have taken pains to
gather these places togoether. To answer you and your argument, I say with
the Prophet David. Non est similis tui domine. etc. That is: none like to the
Lord amongst them al. And therefore the scryptures as often they apply the
vocable God to any other, do evermore add some manifest token whereby we may
dyscerne and perceive the dyfference: betwyx the true God, and them to whom
the name attrybute fyguratiuelye. As in the place by you alleged where it is
said, Stetit deus in singagoga deorum:.i. Ps. lxxxi.
God stood in the synagoge of gods: here the name is applied to other: But it
folowethe in the text, tho it do not in your allegacion. Et in medio eorum
deos diuidicat: That is, and in the mids of the^ he judges the gods, a
plain reason that they were not true gods: but gods only in name, and not in
power and virtue, because they are judged: for none can judge the true God.
Even so Idolles are called gods in Paul. But it follows gentium: of gentyles:
Likewise Satan is termed god: But it follows huius seculi. Again it is said
to Moses Ecce feci te deum pharani: behold I have made the a god to Pharao:
by whom, Gods purpose was to declare and open his divine power, and therefore
the wise men called magi confessed that the finger of Godde was in the miracles
of Moses. But the one word made, makes plain declaracyon that he was not a
true God, for it agrees not to God to say that he is made: Neither does the
scripture say absolutelye I have made the a God: but it follows, to Pharao.
Further to the end we might easily understand the difference between the true
God and other counterfeyte Gods, the scriptures call him God of virtues the
Lord of hosts, Lord omnipotent, maker of heaven and yerthe, God of Hebrews,
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: the God of our fore fathers: again God of
peace, God of comfort, God of revenge.

Now good sir, vewe and examine with your self well this that I have said
touching the discrepau^ce betwyxte the true God and your other foren and
strange gods: and then tell me who is a fool. Then tell me whether ye can yet
dygest it in your stomach that Jesus Christ is true God or no: which is so
often called in the Scriptures everlasting, omnipotent, creator of al things.
founten of all goodness, author of peace, Lord of everlasting life. etc.
Which are the propryetyes of the divine nature only: What and if he were not
named by this term, God, at all through out the seryntures, should we
therefore dought of hi^ Godhead, of whom the serynture does so absolutelye
pronounce, that he was in the beginning everlasting with the father, that al
things was made by him: that he rest^red the dead to life, he sanctifyeth, he
searches the thoughts of man's heart, he give the life everlasting and so
forth which are only fyt and proper for that God which is the true God and
Lord of all? Does not he him self say. Pater meus v^ que modo oratur, and
ego operor, que ille facit, et filius similiter facit: that is to wit, my
father works hitherto, and I work: whatsouer he does that does the son also:
Again, John^. v.
Sicut pater exuscitat mortuos et vnieat, sic et filius quos vult vnicat: that
is. As the father does raise up the dead and quickens them: even so the
quickens and relyueth whom he list. What startinge hole have ye in so
manifest sentences, wherein it is so plainly declared that Christ together with
his father does creat, does sustain the creatures: defend and save the
church: restore life to the dead. Which out of all dought are only fytte,
proper, and convenient for the divine and omnypotente nature.

Add hereunto: John. i.
Ego vitam eternam do eis. etc. I give life everlasting to them. Ioh. xiiii.
Quicquid petieritis in nomine meo hoc faciam: What so ever ye shall require in
my name, that same will I do. John. xv.
Sine me nihil potestis facere: Without me ye can do nothing. Mat. 18.
Vbicunque sunt duo aut tres co^gregati in nomine meo ibi sum in medio eorum:
Where so ever two or iii. are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
mids of them. John. xx.
Dat spiritum sanctum: He gi^ueth the holy Ghost: John^. xx. Priusquam
Abraham natus est, Ioh. viii.
ego sum: Before Abraham was borne, I am. To give life euerlastynge^ to do what
so ever we require in his name: to be every where. To give the holy ghost: to
be everlasting is it not for God alone impossible, and beyond the power of
all creatures. Were it not to clear, ye would petchaunce deny it. For as much
therefore the scryptures every where do this witness of Christ, ascribinge^^ him
such doings as are not for any creature to do, but only for God thonlye
creatoure and ruler of ^^ things: were it not proof suffycient that he is
true God, al if he were not termed by this name God at al^ Yes doughtles for
the name is to no purpose, the deuyne power and virtue shining and appering in
his doings, declare him God: and not the name. Your argument therefore ye sir,
is to young, and a great deal to weak as therewith to prove that Christ is not
a true God, because the Prophets and other more vile creatures are called
gods, in the scriptures: the name is to no effect where the power is not:
they I grant were in name gods, but not in power, Jesus Christ, was not only
in name, but in all power true God, equal to his father: as is declared. And
as the name makethe not that God whereunto it is applied. So is it very madness
to contend and affirm, therefore Jesus Christ not to be God, because the
Prophets with other creatures be termed god in the scriptures, and yet not
gods thereby: As ye seem to do. Ye should have compared their doings and
qualities together with Christ's, and so declare your rabble of gods to be as
much gods, as Christ is, as well in power as in name. But ye were well assured
that in so doing ye should have marde all the matter you go about: and therefore
ye pleied a wise pagent, not one word so much to speak thereof to dye for. The
prophets I grant were termed gods and they did many miracles: But none so
many, none with the like virtue, none with the like authorite, as Christ did.
For Christ never prayed, never called upon the help of the father, at any time
when he would do any miracles. Who had so al his power of his father, that he
had the same equal with the father. Demona dii gentium: says Saint Paul. But
mark what odds is be twyxte them and Christ: Christ beray God, became man,
dyed for man with his death reconsyled man to God his father. What have your
gods done sir, or what do they that you make your comparison between them and
Christ, for soth they delude the sely pore souls: that they might be
companyons of darkness with them. But Christ brought light into the world,
made open the verity whereby he healed all. They entysed and allured them to
all abhominacio^ and wickedness: But Christ took away the sins of the world.
They tumble down into the pyt of hell their worshyppers: But Christ auaunceth
his into heaven. Satan also is called god: but Christ and he, gods far unlike.
The One author of all goodness, the other author of al wickedness: the one peace
maker, the other sows dyssension and strife, wheresoever he is received. The One
treated al things good, in the right use: the other labors to make all
things ill by abuse. The One sau^th the other leeseth. The One calls to
everlasting life, the other to everlasting fire.

The belly is called God likewise, yea, and so is Covetousness or auacies a great
god now a days, to whom much blasphemy and idolatry is committed euerywhere.
If Paul douted not to call avarice idolatrye: If Christ in the Gospel does
set manimon against God as an other god, I may boldlye auouche them to be
blasphemers and idolaters which serve the same, which do more est^me their
money, then the true God. As this avarice of money is the cause of much
mischief, so it engenders one wonderful ill thing betwent the Princes of therth
and their people, I mean flatery and adulacion, when by the subject persuades
the (...) oftenymes that he is Gods fellow, attributes divine honor unto him:
drives in to his head that all thing is well and godly what so ever he shall
attempt, all if it be directly against God, and all to creep in to favor, to
aspiere to promocion and wealth. And the King or Prince of the other part is not
offended therwithall: but takes upon him what such kind of men ascribe unto
him. So that it chances somtymes that the people instead of a good Christian
King, have a very tyrant, a spoyler and oppressor of the Comen weal,
mainteyners of all iniquity and vice, reynyng over them. And the King again,
instead of honest subjects, and grave councelours has flatterers,
pyckthankes, and holders up yea and nay. Finally what so ever ye prefer
before God and his holy precepts, that same ye make a god. But if it had lyked
you to have compared their deeds as well as the name, and the cause who they
are called gods, with Christis doings and the cause why he is god: ye might
have benne sooner a shamed of your leude comparison: And said with David: Non
est similis tui Domine, and non est secundum opera tua: That is: None like unto
the O Lord: and none according to thy works. Seek thou honor and renoume,
he gives the everlasting glory. Desyrest thou souereigntie, he admits the
into his kingdom, whereof shall be no end. Requirest thou richesse, in him
thou may possess all things, who only is Lord of all. Seek thou oracles
or the certeintie of things: Thou have the scripture of most certain truth, in
which he true God speaks unto the out of his privy closet as often as thou
list. Wylt thou have pleasure, he only gives perfect joy which no man can
take away. Delyrest thou ease, he cries mercifully: Omnes qui laborati and
onorati estis, venite ad me, and ego reficiam vos: That is to say: All ye that
labor and are laden, come ye to me, and I will refresh you. If to your gods,
this may be worthily applied then, out of doubt your comparison was right: and
ye may justly affirm them true gods: as Jesus Christ is, to whom the
Scripture does ascribe this, with much more, mightily prouyng him to be God,
not in name only, but in power, and virtue divine, To conclude, I say therefore
with s. Paul, that though there be which are called gods, whether in heaven
or in earth (as there be many gods, and lords many) yet unto me there is but
one God which is the Father, of whom ar all things, and we in him, and one
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

This sentence of s. Paul, your self brought in, but curtailed, as ye use all
the rest: for ye left out the last part thereof: and good cause why, for it
made all against your wicked purpose: Therefore in any case see ye allege not
one word as nyghe as ye can, that may make against your but wring and wrest,
toss and tugge, mangle and heaw every part thereof until ye frame it to your
mind: if ye ca^ not, leave it clean out a gods name, and take that which will
serve. And to theude the Christian Reader may understand that ye are your
crafts master in this point: ye have craftily practysed the same in all the
places almost, which ye have hither unto, and hereafter will allege for the
maintenau^ce of your blasphemous error. And where as the former sentence out of
Paul, ye curtayled: now ye allege another place of S. Paul, but the mids
and the body of the same clean left out, only ye bring in the head and the
tail, the rest discharged which is the effect and chiefest part of all: it
is out, the.ix. to the Rom.: and this is your alligacion: S. Paul calls
Christ God blessed for ever. But between God, and blessed for ever, S. Paul
has these words: over al things: and this is his saying: Christ which is God
over all things, blessed for ever Amen. Blessed s. Paul would put us out of
doubt, that Jesus Christ was God, not in name only, as other are, but in
deed: not in opinion, but in nature, and power true God: and therefore he
added: over all things: for to be God over all things, is only agreeable to
the omnipotent nature. But S. Paul his mind and yours is not like: And
therefore no meruell if ye agree not in words. He minded to declare him to be
true God: and therefore he says: Christ God over al things: but you would
persuade that he is God, only in name, as other many are: and therefore ye say:
Christ, god blessed for ever: leauyng out: over all things: which words
strongly and only prove in that place, the true Godhead in Christ: For to be
called God: or to be blessed for ever, is no proof that he is true GOD: The
Prophets, with other, were called gods: Diverse were blessed forever: yet
none of both true gods thereby. But to be called God, and God over all
things, yea, by the mouth of S. Paul, what double can there remain in any
Christian man's herat, but that Jesus Christ is true God.

And the place of S. John, John xx.
which ye also reci^e, does confirm Paul's menayng, and confound your wicked
opinion, very plainly: Yet can ye, like pourselfe, bring it in craftily for
contirmacio^ and probacion of your iniquity: it is not to be denied that
Christ studied to avoid the crime of blasphemy: But what. did he therefore
grant that he had committed blasphemye, in calling God: Fathe? Or did he
deny that he was the natural Son of God the father? No forsothe, all if you
would with your blind and deceatfull allegacion of the place, make the simple
to believe it. The Iues abiected blasphemye unto him, because he being a mere
man to their sight made him self God, namynge God father so often: and were
redye to invade him with stones as a blasphemour. He avoided the blasphemye,
not in denyenge that which he to fore had affyrmed. But for tha^pesinge and
taminge the Iues rage and fury, in giving them a soft and gentle answer. And
in the same his answer more myghtely declaring his Godhead natwithsta^dinge,
then he did in the words before. Therefore when they leyde blasphemye to his
ch^rge, for calling God father, he answered unto them that it was no
blasphemy: for if (said Christ) in the old law such were called gods with
out blasphemye, to whom the word of God was spoken. How iustlye then may I
call my self ^^ Son of God, which am the wo^ itself, which am sanctrfied of
God the father, and am sent from God the father inito the world. But ^^^tent
your self, weyghe and con^^^ with your self well, my works and doings, that
and if ye percaue ^^^ that I do things above the might of man, and which are
only for god to do, then believe not that I am the Son of God: but it I do,
then at leastwise credit my works, if ye will not credit me, and believe
assuredly that the father is in me, and I in him. Thus Christ tempered his
answer, auoidyng the blasphemye, and appeasyng his adversaries furious
madness, and yet not denieng that he was the true Son of god, and true god:
but rather with much modesty, vindicatyng and challengyng the same unto him,
which to dissemble he thought not convenient, because in deed he would not be
unknown unto us, what he was.

Now if ye ask me wherefore he answered not simplely and directly without all
other circu^staunce, that he was god in deed: it was because the Iues were in
great fury and rage, and sought occasion to sley him: And the time not yet
come, when he purposed to suffer the extremity, for the safegarde of mankind.
Therefore he did not only stay and let them, by his divine power, from hurlyng
any one stone at him (although they had taken up some in their hands for the
same purpose) but also to the end, their hot fearsenesse and cruelty aswaged
and mittigated, they should in their quietness understand that which they
could not abide in their rage: it seemed best to his high prudence rather by
such gentle and moderate drift of words to insynuate the same unto them, then
shortly to answer them: yea, it is true, I am God: Which should have
increased their furye, and less persw^ded them.

Now, good sir, forasmuch it is thus manifest and plain in that place of. S.
John, necessarelye proving Christ deuinitie: and in the self same Chapt. also
diverse other sentences invincible, and inevitable tendynge to the same effect,
are to be seen and read: as that, John. x.
Sicut nouit me pater, ita ego noui patrem: As the Father knows me, even so
know I the Father. Potestatem habeo pouendi animam. etc. I have power to put
my soul from me: and I have power to take it again. Vitam aeternam do eis: I
give life everlasting to them. Pater and ego vnu^ sumus: The father and I be
one. Which places can not be avoided, forasmuch I say, as well that self place
which ye infer for your purpose is so vehement against you: and so many
other of the like importance, within the same Chapter so nyghe couched
together, and so plainly set forth in your way, that ye could not, but
stomble on some of them, or ye came to your standing where ye wrought your
pleasure: Merciful Lord, how great and odious is your iniquity, that have
not chosen to cleue and lean to so maifest a truth, in so many places
expressed, rather tha^ thus blasphemously and wylfullye not only refuse and
sporne against it, but also wretchedly and most shamfully wrest and wring the
pure scriptures for maynteynyng and upholding your lewd and abhomynable
heresye. But ye will say perchance ye saw them not, and I believe it: For (as
the Prophet says,) many have eyes and see not: many have ears and hear not.
Sapi. ii.
etc. Excaecauit enim maliclaeos: For iniquity has blinded them, vt non
videat oculis, nec cord intelligant: That they see not with eyes (says
Esaias), nor understand with heart.

I have readen of Polemon the Sophist: that what time his fyngers and toes waxt
corny or hard, he warned the Phisicions to dig, incide or cut Polemons
quaryes of stones, saying: Commedendum est, manus non habeo: ambulandum est
pedes non habeo: dolendum est, manus habeo and pedes: That is to wit: I need
to eat, and I have no hands: I need to walk, and I have no feet: I must
suffer ache and pain, and I have both hands and feet thereto. Wherein are ye
like to this Polemo^? Verily in that, that ye have nor hand nor foot in some
kind of busynes: and in some thing again, ye have both hand and foot, with all other your joints nimble and ready enough: but the condition far unlike
between you: because he feign would and could not, and you well can, but
will not. It was all against his will, and to his great grief that he had not
his hands and feet, as well to feed and walk withal, as he had them ready
to his restless pain. But contrary wise it stands all with your will, and
it is to your full contentacion and pleasure that when you should see the
truth, your eyes be blemysshed: when ye should hear the truth, your ears
be stopte: when ye should speak the truth, your toungue be blystered: when ye
should write the truth, each of your fingers against other iustle, as hansomly
as a bear picketh muscles: and when ye should walk in the truth, your feet
be then quarry and stonye, that ye can not: But contrary, to blemysh the
truth, ye have your ears open to hear: to blaspheme the truth ye have your
tongue sou^de, and quick to speak: to contend against the truth, ye have
your fingers nimble, speedy letter, and shyft pen to write, To walk in
wickedness in spite of the truth, ye have your feet swyfte to trudge a
pace, whyther the pathe of iniquity can lead you: it follows in your epist.


Arri. WHERE as he is notable by other diverse names, Which for the most part
al if they have great co^mendacio^ in man: they are not admitted to the divine
nature: as humility, obedience, gentleness, paciency, much less these:
Sheep, Lion, Worm, Host. Sin, cursyng, and other like,


Proct ARISTOTILES Stagerites oftentimes vpbrayded the Athenians for because,
whereas they had invented Corn, and Laws as it. things very necessary to be
had in a Comen weal, they only did use the one and not the other: did enjoy the
corn, and rejected the laws.

How much more iustlye may I accuse you, good sir, which promised so largelye
in the first entry of your matter, that you would follow, in decidynge and
determinynge the same, not the words of the scriptures only but the right
understanding of the same also: And yet hytherunto have used the one and not
the other: have recited the words, and left the sincere and true meaning of the
same. The Athenyens devised not corn alone, but also laws as both fytte for
them: but of both the one they retained in ure only, as thereby to feed and
pamper up their carcases The Other whereby they knew their dyssolute life, and
beastely manners should be noted and corrected, they let slipe and would not
exercise. You likewise all if ye were appointed upon both and promised to use
not the words of the scripture only, but also the catholyke sense of the same:
Yet still contrary to your first appointment and promise, ye only use the one,
yea and forcyng the same to put on more strange forms and fygures then ever
Proteous had, and al to maynteine and defend your follye so diverse and
varyable. But the sincere meaning of the words in scripture ye have not
hetherunto used but obstynatlye refused. In this point I can not allow you:
and Aristoteles does condemn you. If it be incident unto your nature that
when your promise consists of.ii. parts, the one should be false, the other true,
then belike it is natural unto you. And forasmuch that which is natural,
can not easily be routed out of man: it is to be feared least ye will dye an
heretycke. Ye have brought i^ scryptures and ever more do bring by clusters
and heaps to make good your concept: but the true understanding of the
scriptures ye seldom mell with all. The One ye like well: and therefore ye tie it
at your gyrdel before you, to the end ye will always follow it: but the other ye
have thruste in the wallette with your own deeds, hanging behind at your back
to thend you would not be co^bred with the sight of any of both: at any time. God
would have both co^ioyned together: but ye and your fellows have made a plain
deuorse: to thend ye might without check of the one, commit aduoutery with the
other. And as I do now tell you of it, so have I done before: and after will,
as often as I perceive you so to abuse the scriptures. And if ye be ashamed to
here of it after this sort, be also ashamed hereafter eftsoon to do it. And
for my part when ye shall be a fearde to mynister the occasion, then shall I
fear to leye it to your charge. To approach to our purpose. Ye say that in
the Scriptures Christ is termed by these names, as humble, meek, obedient. etc
And again, worm, lion, syn with other the like. Which names ye say, may not
be admytted to the deuyne nature: therefore ye conclude that Christ being
called by these names can not have in him the deuyne nature, And how well it
follows, who so blind that seethe not I have by the scriptures declared at
large, ye Christ was not God alone nor man alone: but both, God and man. And
had in him self not only the nature of man as ye would have it, but the very
nature of god also as ye would not he had with your good will, And as he was
true man so was he humble, obedyent, meek, and pacient: Which names have great
commendacion in man ye say, and so let them have in him. To the deuyne nature
ye will not have them applied, well, I will not much contend against you
therein. I grant again that he is called by these names in the scripture as
sheep, ly on sin: etc. But to affirm that he is not true god therefore,
because he is termyd by such names, it were to groselye and more then folly.
As well ye may conclude, that he was not man. For a sheep, is not man: nor the
lion, man: nor the worm, man: But Christ in called sheep, lion, and worm:
ergo he is not man: As just as germans lyps. By the same reason I might prove
that the father is not God: because in Deute. iiii. he is called ignis: and
Eccle. xxxix. Fluuius: and Hiere. ii. Fons with diverse other names applied
unto him in the Scritpures. The application of which names, as well prouethe
the father not to be God, as the son. So by your allegacion, we shall have no
God anon But acknowledge rather both the father and the son to be God, and
understand with me that such names are attrybuted to Christ, to do us
knowledge, how that Christ, all if he was true God, and thought it no roberye
to be equal with God the father in all omnipotensye: (As Paul wytnesethe of
him) Yet for our sakes becam eman: and in his humanity, did humble him self
as man in this world, was obedient to his sendynge, gentlely and pacyentlye
suffered thextreme crueltye, and outrageous vilany of the Iues excerctsed upon
him. And for this innocensie in him and patience, he is called ouis and agnus
in the Scryptures. And to say some thing the rest: He is called Lion in
consyderacion of his fortytude and power: Whereby he vanquysshed the rorynge
Lion our aduersarye the devil. According to that in the Appocalyppes. Vicit
leo de tribu Judah: Apoca. v.
That is, the lion from the trybe of Judah, has overcome: Which is spoken of
Christ, who suffered, meek as a lamme, conquered strong as a Lion, the
rorynge Lion (I say) which as the scripture says, roometh about, seeking
whom he may devour. Both are called Lions, the one Lion in power, the other Lion
in cruelty: the one mighty to defend, the other strong to destroy.

He is called Vermis a worm, in consideracion of the humility which was in
him above other: who did humble him self to all things for our sakes.
Pouertye is an heuye burden: and he would be most poorest for our sakes. Pain
is an hard thing: and he would suffer most bitter pains for our sakes. Death
of all thingse most bitter: And he submytted him self unto the same for our
sakes. More spytefull then death is ignomy: And he refused not to be spytted
at, to be checked, slaundered, dysdayned, and blasphemed for our sakes. Yea in
that he received our common nature, he was equal with other men. But in that he
was so pore, and lived in such peine and dysdayne, he was inferioure to many.
Again in that he was mortal and died: he was as al other are. But in that he
suffered wyllynglye such kyne of death, and for our deserts, he was under
the condycion of many men. In consyderacyon whereof he says by the mouth of the
Prophet. Ego vermis and non homo: That is, I a worm and not man. Howbeit
besides this saint Austen supposes him to be called Vermis for an hyegher
consideracion. Why is Christ called worm says he. Because, (he answers)
he was mortal, he was borne of the flesh: and begoten without the companynge
together of man and womanne in the Act of generacyon. And therefore he
says thus. Sicut vermis calefaciente sole de puro limo formatur, Aug de
erpos^ciove simboli. ser. i.
sic spiritu sancto illustrante et sanctificante cor virginis nulla sementiua
carnis origin operante concepta est: vnde se vtrini Christus comparans, per
psalmistam ait, ego s^m vermis and non homo. i. Non co^ceptus more humano.
Which is as much to say. As the worm is engendered of the pure and only
slyme or mudde, being made hot with the warmesume: even so the holy ghost
illustratynge and halowynge the heart of the vyrgyn: she was conceived with
child, without any humane act of engendrynge wrought therein: In
conlideration whereof Christ comparynge him self to a worm, says by David,
I am a worm, and not man, that is, I am not conceaned after the manner and
fashyon of man. Thus far Saint Austen.

Further he is called I grant peccatum.i. sin, but according to his
humanite in which he became the sacryfyce for sin to our inestimable
comfort. He was not in deed sin, as the letter sounds, neither had he any
syn in him at any time. The pain for sin only was in him: which he
admitted to him self, to the end he would put away and dyscharge from us his
people both, as well the sin, as the pain dew for the same. In the law,
says S. Austen sin is taken for the sacryfyce for syn, such a syn was
Christ, and none other. In which sense S. Paul says. 2. Cor. v.
Eum qui non nouit peccatum, pro nobis peccatu^ secit: That is, he has made
him to be sin for us, which knew no syn: And therefore in the eight to the
Romans it is said of him. Roma. 8.
Misit Deus filium suum in similitudinem car nis paccati: That is, God sent his
son in the symylitude of sinful flesh, and not in fynfull flesh. Where as
ye say therefore that Christ is called sin, ye must understand that word
syn, to sygnyfye the sacrifyce for sin, which he being very true God and man
vouchesaued to be, to the end he that was our creator in his Godhead might be
also our redemer in his manhead. And we thereby should be made that
ryghtwysnes, which before the father is allowed. And this was nothing
preiudycyall to his deuinitie.

Fynallye of these names and the like as well which ye have pycked together, as
all the rest applied to Jesus Christ in the Scripture: ye ought reuerentelye to
think, that they are attributed unto hi^, in some consideracion touching his
humanity: or else (as Dionise Areopagita does council) according to some divine
anagoge: that is an high, and subtyl understanding. Now forth.


Arri. HE is called now and then the Image of God: for that I suppose, his
life is as ye would say, the glass of the deuyne will to ward us.


Proct, YEA, and for that he is of the same essence, and substance that the
father is of. And therefore he is also called splendour gloriae: And Character
substancie patris. And in thapostolyke Creed. Lumen de lumine. Deum, de deo.
That is, light of light, God of God. And Christ only is the image of God,
Other are secundum imaginem dei: That is according to the Image of God, The
father says unto the son, make we man, and adds, secudnnm imagine^ nostram.
That is accordynm to our Image: By which words it is evident says saint
Austen that the father and the son, are but one Image


Arri. HE is called the word also: verelye because he was nerest unto the
father. And as ye would say the orgen or instrument of the divine voice: For
the word is made flesh. what else does it signifye, then that the felshe
received the word. And that God the father did greeffe into Christ as ye would
say by inplantacio^ that heavenly doctrine which should concile us unto him: and
in manner converted the same into his nature. That he should not say ne think
any thing but the word of the Lord: not that the flesh was converted into
the divine nature: or admitted into society and feloship with the same. As it
seems very absurd at the first blushe. And that it is not true, the style
following declares plainly. And he dwells amongst us. etc, full of grace:
Grace, power, is of God: The fullness whereof does make men desposed to the
love of God, and the obseruacion of the law not Gods.


Proct. SYnguler as ye are, so is your judgment upon the scryptures singular:
But I appeal to the wise reader whether such singularity proceed not of a
single wit and thine brain. As many as ever wrote upon John (as diverse holy
and well learned fathers have done) Do expound that plae of him (the word is
made flesh) after this sort: That the word the second person of the Godhead
Jesus Christ came down and was made flesh: that is to wit, received the
nature of man wholye and perfectly, both body and soul, vnitynge the same to
the person of his Godhead. And now sir contrary to all their judgments and
most of all contrary to saint John his mind (who of purpose wrote his Gospel
only to dysclose and declare Christ his deut^itie) ye have shaped a strange
exposicion upon that text. Bull how fyt and meet what d^^^e perceaueth not?
The word is made ^^she, that is to weete ye say: the fles^h^e received the
word, and not, the word received flesh: which any reasonable man would
certainly gather of that place: And not that the flesh received the word. For
S. John says not. Caro verbum facta est: The flesh is made the word. But
his phrase is. Verbum caro factum est: The word is made flesh: whereof no
man can iustlye gather that the flesh received the word, but rather and as
the truth is the word received flesh, for the word was made flesh says
saint John: meaning by the word (made) that the word Jesus Christ received
and took unto him flesh. and by the word (flesh) he understands, the
hole and perfect nature of man both body and soul: to the end as I have
said often, that where as he was but the son of god, and true God: Now by the
recepte of this nature, he might be known unto us the son of man, and true
man also. He is therefore called the word, not for that he was the origin or
instrumente only of the deuyne voice as ye say he was: But for thta he was
in verytye the deuyne voice it self, and the true word it self. And this
divine voice and true word Christ, was made verelye flesh, That is to say:
received of Marye the very flesh of man: and became true man as before true
God So that now in one person he was perfect God, and perfect man. Yet his
divine nature not converted into the nature of man, or in any co^sideracion
admytted into the society or feloweshyppe with the same: only the two natures
in hi^ are united to the person of his Godhead inconfusely by a miraculous
union, as at large I have tofore declared, And the text following, tho ye force
and draw it never so much: Yet will it not follow that way, as ye would have
it.

He dwelt amongst us, as man: Igraunt he was full of grace and truth I deny
notte. The style in deed following in John declares no less: but what
follows of yours thereupon? verily that ye would have him not God, but man only,
well disposed to the love of God, and the obseruacion of the law: But the style
following taught ye not to conclude so, which if ye would frame your blind
fansye to follow, and nor force the same to follow your mad brain: ye should
then follow the better and sure guide, and in the right way: For many styles
following in saint John, will lead you into the perfect understanding of Christ
deuinitie, if it would please you ordinatly to follow after them, and mark the^
with an indifferent eye. And in the same place where ye were last, you find,
that Christ is the true light, John. i.
which does illuminate every man coming into this world.

Ye find also that grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John i.


Ye find again: John. i.
Rabby, thou art even the very son of God: thou art the king of Israel.

Even there also, behold the la^be of God which takes away the sins of the
world.

Now sir to be the true light: John. i,
To illuminate all that come in to the world: To be grace and truth it self,
as in another place he does witness the same of him self, saying: I am the
way, Ioh. iiii.
the verity, and life: To take away the sins of the worldle: To be even the
very son of God: Is it for man, or for God, say ye? For God only, ye can
not deny. And the styles following even in the same chapter do ascribe all this
to him, wherefore he is true God. Thus your style every where lacks edge to
cut the butter that may stycke to your bread.


Arri. AND IF opportunity served to search the Scriptures accordingly, it
should easily appear that Christ is not of the same substance or nature,
neither equal with God the father. And such places and testimonies as now
come ot my remembrance, I will hereunto add. etc.


Proct BUT before ye add any more, let me add my subtraction to your first
addicion, and then add and multiply what you list.

Ye say, it may easily appear by the scriptures Christ nto to be equal with God
the Father, neither to be of y^ same substance or nature with him. And I say,
it were very hard for you to make that easelye appear to any, all if ye had
never so much opportunity to search the scriptures. The best ye can do, ye
have already done therein: But it easily appears (I dout not) to every right
Christian by that your best doing, that ye can do least with the worst, to
bring that your purpose about.

I have sufficientlye before declared, by the sincere and incorrupt
scriptures, to the full contentacyon of any Christian mind (I hope) the
equality of the son Jesus Christ, both in power, and also nature with God
the father. Notwithstanding sythen now eftsoon in this place ye deny the
same, I shall not let presently also to sai something that may make with Christ,
and against you.

I would were therefore of you, what in all the scriptures is attributed to God
the Father, that is not also attributed and ascribed unto the so^n Jesus
Christ? If in the scriptures nothing is referred to God ye father, but that
which is likewise applied to the son Jesus Christ: tha^ of force it
follows, that by the scriptures, the Father and the Son ar of one and the
same substance or nature, and equal in all points touching Deninitie. And
that the scriptures do match him with the Father, in all points of the
Godhead, be ii proved by the scriptures in this discourse: The Father is called
God in the scriptures, so is the Son: of whom it is said: i. Ioh. v.
This same son Jesus Christ is very God, and eternal life.

The Father is called Lord: so is the Son: of whom it is said: And one
Lord Jesus Christ which is God above all thing, Mat. xxii Psa. c. ix.
blessed for ever. And again: The Lord said unto my Lord. etc.

The Father is called holy: so is the Son, of whom it is written: I know the
what thou art, Mark. i.
even the holy one of god. etc.

The Father is called Judge: so is the Son: of whow it is said: There is one
lawmaker and Judge, Iam. iiii
which is able to save and distroye,

The Father is called just: so is the Son: of whom it is said: The just and
righteous judgment of God shall be opened, which will reward every man
according to his deeds.

Here ye see, that his judgment is called just, and the judgment of God:
wherefore he is just, and God.

The father is called true: So is the Son, and truth it self, him self
sayiyng: I am the way, verity and life. Ioh. xiiii


The father is called high: so is the Son: of whom it is written^ High above
all nations the Lord, Psa. cxii
above the heavens his glory. Psa, c, ii.


The Father is called the light: so is the Son, himself saying: I am the
light of the world: Ioh. viii.
he that follows me, does not walk in d^rkenesse, but shall have the light of
life. The Father gives life everlasting: so doothe the Son, himself, saying:
John. x.
My sheep do here my voice, and they follow me, and I do give life everlasting
unto them.

The Father does save: so does the Son: of whom it is said: Mat. i.
he shall make his people safe from their sins.

The Father doothe raise and quicken: so does the Son, of whom it is
written: John. v.
As the Father doothe raise up the dead and quicken, even so the son does
quycken, whom he will. The Father is called everlasting: so is the son,
John. i. Ioh. viii.
of whom it is said: In the beginning was the word. Ioh. viii.
etc. himself saiynge: Before Abraham was, I am.

The Father made all things: so did the son: of whom it is said. All thing
was made by him, John. i.
and with out him, nothing is made.

The Father does know the secret thoughts and cogitacions of the mind: so
does the Son, of who^ it is said: But he knew their though tes, Cor. xi.
Apo, x.
and said unto them. etc. Again: al Congregacions shall know that I am the
sercher of the hertes and minds.

The Father is every where: so is he Son: of whom it is said: In omni loco
dominaciones eius. Psalm. c ii.
And he him self says: Where soever.ii. or.iii. are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the myds of the^

The Father gives understanding: so does the Son: of whom it is said: ii.
Tim. ii
Understand what I say^ for ye lord will give the understanding.

Thus much have I done upon the opportunity received at your hands, that ye
may both understand the equalytie of the Father and the Son, and also
hereby to occasion you, to seek opportunity for serchyng the scriptures, as well
that ye may perfectly know that which I have now said, as likewise to see
the much more left unspoken, that may be said for the proof of the same,
which you deny. Now will I rehearse your places, one after another: and
answerethe same.


Arri. TO sit on my right hand, and on my list hand is not in me to give.
Mat. xxii.


Proct, ONE named Chius, a vintner, (as Plutarche writes if I remember well)
used to bye the best wynes for other to drink: and he him self would drink
none other but such as were mustye and had lost their verdure: whose servant
on a time being demanded what his Master did at home: mary quod he: Cum
adfint bona, querit mala: That is to say: Where much good is at hand, he
seeks for that which is naught. Let this Chius (good sir) be as it were a
Crystal for you to see your own condition and disease in: that being in the
vyneyarde on every side beset in cluster with the grape of that heavenly
nectar, being in the treasury replenyshed with so many incomparable good
things passing gold, pearl, or precious stone, yet leauinge so pleasant and
good iuce. Vappa sitis vappam: neclectyng so diverse and incomparable good
things: Malus queris mala: Ye hunt after that which is evil. And forasmuch
in the Testament of Jesus Christ, which is that heuenlye vyneyarde and rich
treasury I speak of, nothing can be found but right good: Ye practice to
corrupt the good, that it may serve your naughty appetite wherewith it can not
agree yt Jesus Christ should be God: but only a pure man as ye are. And therefore
ye have gathered certain places whereby ye would diswade Christ deuinitie, and
persuade him to be a Creature and man only: And the first place ye have taken
out of saint Mathewe: Mat. xx.
where it is said: to sit on my right hand, and on my left hand is not mine
to give. Which words in deed were spoken by Christ to the mother of Zebedees
children, what time she fell down before him, and desired that her two sons
might sit in his kingdom, the one upon his right hand, the other upon his
left hand, to whom Jesus final answer was: to sit upon my right hand, and on
my left is not mine to give, but unto them for whom it is prepared of my
father: which is as much to say, that according to this present state, wherein
ye see me, I am not come to dystribute the places and seats of my kingdom:
for know ye, that from the beginning, my father and I have distributed and
appointed them: Therefore be not you careful, as though they were void.
This is the right and true understanding of that place. Now let us see what
would you conclude hereof, that Christ is not God? and how so? Perdye thus:
God is of power to give the seat on the right hand, and on the left hand in
the kingdom of heaven.

But to sit on the right hand, and on the left hand is not mine to glue says
Christ,

Wherefore Christ is not God. This argument is stark naught, and not worth a
rush: For Christ being both perfect God and perfect man somtymes (as I have
often times said) speaks as God, somtymes as man: as here in this place in
co^sideracion of his manhead, and according to the present dispensacion of the
flesh which he received, he says to the mother of Zebedees children, that
it is not in him to give for any to sit on his right hand, and on his left
hand. Wherefore it follows not hereby that he is not God, no more then it
follows that he is not man, when he speaks as God. And as in this place, in
consideracio^ (I say) of his present state then, and his humanity, he said
that it was not in his power to dispose the seats of his kingdom: so might
you have easily found without great seeking in other places, how that he does
challenge unto him the same thing, which here he seems to refuse: as where
he says: App. iii.
Qui vicerit, dabo illi sedere. etc. To him that shall overcome, I shall grant
to sit with me in my seat. etc. And in another place: Verily Verily I say unto
you, Luc. xxii.
that ye which have followed me in regeneracion, what time the Son of man
shall sit in the seat of his magestie, ye shall also sit with him. etc. In
which place, Christ manifestly declares that he has power and authority in
him self, to appoint and dispose the places of the heavenly king dome: therefore
if by your own reason Christ is not God, because he says, to sit on his right
hand and on his left hand it is not his to give, why will not your reason
serve you to believe him to be very God, which now says: I will grant him to
sytte with me: and ye shall sytte with me in the seat of my magestie. If ye
deny him to be god, because he has not the power to distribute and grant the
seats of the heavenly kyngdo^e: will ye not confess and believe him to be God,
if he has that power in him? I can not think how ye can avoid it. And do
not these places prove certenlye, that he has that power in him? If not, then
what say ye to that in Math, Mat. 28.
Omnis poiestas concessa est mihi in coelo and in terra: Unto me is given all
power in heaven and in earth, says Christ. If all power in heaven and earth be
given to him, then is it in his power to dispose the seats of his kingdom in
heaven: if not, then is he a liar that says all power in heaven and in earth
is given to me. But Christ is true, and truth it self, and his word can not
be false, Now sy^ I make this reason.

It is for God and not man to apoynte the places of the heuenlye kingdom: but
Christ has power to appoint the places of the heuenlye kingdom, wherefore
Christ is very God.

Answer hereunto at your leisure, if ye can. And this answer is suffycyente
to your next text, which is thus.


Arri. OF THAT day or hour no man knows, neither the angels which are in
heaven, nor the son, but the father only, etc.


Proct THE son knows not of that day and hour according to his humanity,
by any natural reason: but yet the son knows perfectlye does the day and
hour, otherwise wise how may it be said of him, John. x.
Ego et Pater vnum sumus: I and the father be al one, Mat. 28.
if in this point they be diverse? how can it stand that al power both in
heaven and yerth is given unto him, John. iii,
if this be not in his power and knoweledge? how is it that the father has
given him all things into his hands, if this be out of his hands and power
to tell? Shall he be the high judge when that day and hour comes, John. v.
and yet knows not when it shall be? John. i.
Did he make all things and nothing was made without him, and yet knows
not of that day and hour? Abides in him all plenytude and fulness of the
deite, Collo. ii.
corporallye, that is substanciallye, naturallye, from the beginning with the
father, not spiritually and through faith only, as in sons by adopcyon: and
yet labors he with this defecte and want? Does he know the father even as
perfectlye and as deeplye as the father knows him, John. v.
and yet knows he not this point of his council? Does he give life
everlasting, John. v.
and yet knows not the day and hour when he shall perform it? Yes no
dought as perfectlye and assuredlye as the father does: All if in this place in
consyderacyon of his humanytie: and to declare that the secrets and councels
of God are beyond man's understanding and knowledge, he says of that day and
hour no man knows, neither the Angels which at in heaven, ne the son, but
the father only. For he one being both God and man, knows and knows not:
knows as God, knows not as man. Both parts are apparaunit by the
scriptures that are alleged: in so apparent matter therefore dought not any
longer: through ignorance to be deceived, it is excusable: but upon knowledge
to be obstynate what shall excuse you? Your third text is this.


Arri. WHY call thou me good? noone good but God.


Proct. MAgister bone good master said the young man what shall I do to obtain
life everlasting? which questian proceeded from him which stood some what in
his own conceyte, and moved this questyan to the end he would rather be
commended in that which he had done, the^ in deed to learn what he should
do. Mar. x.
And therefore Christ being as it were offended with that Arrogaunt name,
laid unto him, what call thou me good, none good but God? As if he said,
why call ye me good which surname is above the dignitye of man, and yet ye
believe not that I am very God, and the natural son of God the father sent
amongst you in the shape of a servant for the redempcyon of mankind. He would
be called Good, and acknowledged God, or else he would none of both. And all
though in this place for causes rehearsed, he seems to rebuke the young man
for calling him good master, yet shall ye find that in an another place he
vouchesauethe that name, yea and calls him self good shepeherde: John. x.
Admytte the one and refuse not the other. But and if ye think it proper for
God to be called good, let him be man in that he refused to be called good
master in the one: let him be God which calls him self good shepeherde in
the other. And believe assuredlye that it is not unsitting for him to be called
good with the father, which truly says. Ego and pater vnum sumus: I and the
father be all one: if both, but one: Why both not good as well as one?


Arri. Gloryfye thy son. etc. Ioh. xvii.


Proct. IF this does prove that Christ is not God, then by the same it
follows that the father is not god also, for the sentens wholly recited (which
you seldom do) importethe no les. Clarifica filium vt et filius clarificet te.
Ioh. xvii
Father (says Christ) gloryfie thy son, that thy son also may gloryfye
the. And in another place he says. Ioh. xix.
Ego te clarificaui super terram. I have gloryfied the upon the earth, ye see
then that this is but borrowed ware, it cummeth and goes betwixt the father and
the son with just return: if therefore Christ may not be god, because he is
gloryfyed of the father: neither the father must be god because he is gloryfied
of the son, for each of them gloryfieth an other as ye have herd. How be it
if a man would axe ye, what is meaned by these words (gloryfye thy son) and
what gloryficacion Christ spoke of, I dought not but yt your answer should
utter your folly, and confirm my saying: unless ye would ever of purpose and
malycyouslye answer contrary to your knoweledge and conscience. For in the
same Cha. wherhens ye had this, ye read plainly these words. Ioh. xvii.
Clarifica me pater apud temetipsum claritate qua^ habui priusquam mundus
fieret apud te: That is, glorify me thou father with thine own self, with
the glory which I had or ever the world was made. If Christ had glory with
the father or ever the world was, the was Christ with the father, ab eterno
eternallye from the beginning (as John does wytnes also in the beginning of
his Gospel that he was) if Christ was eternally from the beginning with the
father, then was not Christ any creature: if he was no creature, then was he
God. Thus is Christ true god evermore glorious and the Lord of glore. Paul's
words prouinge. 1. Cor. 1.
Si cognouissent nnncquam dominnm gloriae crucifixissent:.i. If they had
known, they had never crucified the lord of glory. Notwithstanding being also
man, in his manhead as he could be crucisied, so might he be gloryfied
likewise. Acknowledge at length that, in whom one and semblable claryficacyon
is, in them is no dyfference of power.


Arri. ALL are yours, you ar Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Cor. iii.

This place of saint Paul Athanasyus that ancient writer does expound in
this wise. All things are yours, only for that God has subierte all things
unto you, and have ordained all things to serve your commodity and pleasure.
You are Christ's through your creacion and servitude. Christ's is Gods because
he was before the wordle with the father, and was of the same essence and
substance that God the father is of. And hereunto all the old fathers agree:
and of our late doctors I know none that dissent in this point: so that it is
euydente that ye have soked this out of your own brain only, as to contend
that Christ is not god, or of the saine nature with the father, because Paul
says Christ is Gods, or of God^ Upon which words Bullinger writes thus:
Christ is gods, that is to say (says he) Christ is coequall with the Father,
and unto him, the Church is subject, not as to man, but as to the living God.
If ye mark well S. Paul's words, or rather the right meaning of them, ye
shall not find Christ's deuinitie denied, but rather manifestlye avouched: as
who in the same place, and by the same words which ye aleage, instructs the
Corinthians, that albeit al things (whether it be Paul, either Appollo, or
Cephas, whether it be life or death. etc.) ar ordained to their weal and
comfort: yet ought they not to glory in them, but in Christ only, through
whom they have atchyued all: and who is their head and their god, and therefore
not to glory in man only, but in him which is both God and man, even as he
himself does glory in God his Father.


Arri. YEA more aptly is this declared of Paul, whiles he explaneth that of
David: he has subject all things under his feet. etc. Cor. xv.


Proct. THE whole and perfect sentens of Paul is thus: Then comes the end,
when he has delivered up the kingdom to God the Father, when he has put
down all rule, authority and power: for he must reign till he has put all
his enemies under his feet: but where he says all thing is put under him, it
is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him: when
all things are subdued unto him, then shall the Son also him self be
subject unto him, that put all things under him, that god may be all in all.
These are s. Paul's words. Now sir, what find ye herin, that improueth
Christis deuinitie? Assuredly nothing, all if ye find in this sentence of S.
Paul, that the Son shall be subjected un to the Father: for her upon pyrcheth
your hope to compass your purpose, which will never turn to good hap. And if ye
please to comefurth of this wylfull ignorance and conform you to ensue and
trace the knowledge of Gods word, according to the Catholyke and Christian
faith, then shall ye understand, that in this place s. Paul does the
Corinthia^s to wit, that then shall the end come, when all things shall be
subdued unto Jesus Christ: and Christ the son shall deliver unto his father
his kingdom, that is the Church, the whole number of the Elect, which he has
by his death redeemed: then also Christ the Son him self shall be subject unto
the father, touching the dispensacion of the flesh, and in his members the
saints, by which it is meaned, that then the misterye of Christ shall cease,
the preaching of the Gospel shall be leaft: and no longer any such in the
everlasting kingdom of God, and the saints shall be as was in the Militaunte
Church when the world was subject unto the preaching of the Gospel: For
where no sin and disease is, there needs no remission, or medecyne. And
this subjection of the saints shall be the most free kingdom unto them: For
then Jesus Christ very God and man shall be all in all: God in God, and
reignynge over all things: creature in creatures, and to God subject as a
creature. And how shall he not be all in all which is thonly goodness of al,
the righteousness of all, i, Ioh. ii. Ioh. xiiii Psa. xrvi Ephesians. ii.
the life of all comfort of all, health of all, the felicity of all, the peace
of all, and glory of al: in who^ al have life everlasting abou^ding in all good
things? And how shall he be subjected unto the father, whose magestie hono^r
and glory is the same with the fathers: and who says: Ego and Pater vnu^
sumus: i. I and the Father be all one. John. x.
And how shall he notte reign euerlalstingly with God the father as god, Iud.
viii.
which proceeded from the Father before all begynnynges, which unmade and
uncreate, John. i.
made and created all things with his father: and of whom it is written: Mich.
iiii
Et regnabit Dominus super eos in monte Syon ex hoc nu^c, and vsque in
seculum:.i. And the Lord shall reign over them in the mount of Syon for now
and ever more, Again: John. xii.
Nos audiuimus ex lege quod Christus manet inaeternum: i. We have heard out of
the law that Christ co^tinuth for ever. And of whom it is written by Luke:
Luke. i.
Regnabit in domo Jacob inaeternum:.i. He shall reygne in the house of Jacob
for ever. Verily touching the dispensacio^ of the flesh, and the misterye now
in force and ure, Christ shall be subjected unto the father: but being true God
and consubstanciall son of God the father, has and shall euerlasti^gly have,
one and indivisible reign and kingdom with the father, Thus are ye answered
and taught, as the pure and chatholyke faith teaches in Jesus Christ: who
grant that ye may likewise believe.


Arri. CHRIST lives through the vnitue of God: and there is one only Lord.
etc. what more manifest then this?


Proct. VERILY nothing more manifest against you, nothing more plain to
confound your folly. 1. Cor. 13.


Christ lives through the virtue of God: that is true: and thereby s. Paul
means, that although Christ was crucified through infirmity of the flesh
which he carried about, yet relyued he again by the divine power and virtue of
god, which was in him self being very God: and in whom, says saint Paul,
all fulness of the deity dwelled corporally and naturally. Colos. ii.
What does this make against Christ's deuinitie: yea, does it not mightelye
make with it? And the place that follows does so plainly confirm the same,
that ye may be ashamed to recite it to the contrary. There is but one Lord
which is Jesus Christ. etc. says S. Paul.

What of this? is not Christ therefore God, because he is thonly lord? Oh what
blyndenes is this? Quis vos facinauit? Galla. 3.
Who has bewitched you? no dought the blind may see, that will see herein,
whtche you upon wilfulnes will not se, does Paul say ye, teach that there is
but one only Lord Jesus Christ, and do not you see that by the same Saint
Paul byndethe you to believe that Jesus Christ is god and the self same thing,
and essens that God the father is? For if no other Lord is but Christ, how
shall the father be lord then, if he be not the same thing and essence that
the son is, and if they both be not one in Godhead? The father is called
Lord, for it is written, the Lord said unto my Lord here the father is
called Lord, and the sonalso Lord. Yet Paul says that there is but one Lord
the son Jesus Christ through whom all thingse, and we by him. how man this
stand if we make the father and the son diverse in nature and not on? No
doubt the father and the son al one: the father God and lord the son God and
lord: both one God, both one lord: and one, both. And this appellacion
lord, when it is applied to Christ, is of the same force and importau^ce in
the scriptures, that God is of. He is called Lord more often then God, as well
for that the Prophets most commonly called him Lord, and also because, that
name does more allude to the mystery of his incarnacion: Through which he
delivered us from the servitude of Satan: dyslorded him of us: and took the
lordshyp and domynion over us upon him self.


Arri. BUT not to trouble your lordship any longer with my rude and barberous
talk, shortly thus I think of Jesus Christ. Verily that he was the most
elect vessel, the orgen or instrument of the divine mercy, a Prophet and more
then a Prophet, the son of God, but according to the spreete of
Sanctificacion, the syrst begotten but amongst many brothers. etc.


Proct. HEre is Christ defined as vnchristeanly as ever I herd, and who so is
werye of the christianity, let him believe as ye teach: for in deed it is
contrary to Christ and al Christianity: but who soever ^eio^ seth in the name
Jesus Christ, and looks to enjoy life everlasting through him, he must
needs confess and believe Christ to be otherwise then ye do presently
acknowledge.

Feign would you that Christ should not be god, but your faint proof there of
declares what spirit ye ar of.^. Notwithstanding ye do what ye ca^ which is
nothing in effect: and wh^ can any do more against so heyg^^ and manifest
truth? Ye leave ^^ one stone unmoved to further y^^ purpose, save only the
chiefest stone which will not roll that, way with all that you can: And ye
are well content to let it alone, and prove ma\steries with the rest. Much like
ye are unto Patroclus, who when he went into the wars, took with him all the
armor and weapons of Achilles, his spear only excepted, which he thought to
be to weghty and great for his arm: No otherwise you descendynge into the
field against Christ is deuienitie, brought with you to overthrow the same,
all kind of armor and weapon save only the verity and truth (which was not
for your weari^g) the spear and shyelde of all Catholyke and Christian men, of
force in all such causes, to uphold and support the ^^ght, in spyght of all
might. And ^^ith this weapon, as I have hither unto made you to stoop: so a
none I dought not I shall give you the down fall. And here join we in this
quarrel. In this your description of Christ, I find, that all y^ your inte^tis
altogether wicked, ye^ some part of your words in the same sound well, and
may be well taken: as where ye say that Christ was the most elect vessel,
was the orgeyn or instrument of the divine mercy, was a Prophet and more then
a Prophet. These phrases are good and Catholyke in a good and Catholic man's
mouth, where the intent is pure and godly. Therefore your words that sound
Jesus Christ to be a most elect vessel, be they good; but your intent that
would have him an elect vessel only, must needs ^^ wicked. Your words that
sou^^^ Jesus, to be the orgen of the deu^^ mercy, he they good: but your in^^
which would have him an orge^^^ instrument only of the divine mercy, and not
the author of mercy, and mercy it self, must needs be wicked. Your words that
sound Jesus Christ to be a Prophet and more then a Prophet, be they good: but
your intent which wole not have him the giver of all prophercye as God
almighty, must needs be wicked because it concordeth not with the verity of
Christis condition, and consent of all the Catholyke Church: which believes
stefastly both, as well that which your words affirm, and that also which
your intent denies, It follows in our descripcion: He is the son of God,
but according to the spirit of sanctif^yng: Your But ma^^festly discloseth
where at ye shute. Which term is yours, the rest is in S. Paul to the
Romans, but not ^^nakedly, as ye have alleged it: as here afterward it shall
appear. First let us examine what ye mean when ye say, that Christ is the
son of God? but according to the spirit of sanctuiyng. If ye mean as S.
Paul means, then your meaning is good: if not, then is your meaning deuelysh
and wicked. But your But, I say, utters your intent, verily that Christ is
the son of God only, as other good men are, whose hearts the holy ghost
has anctified, ye mean the son of God by adopcion: and therefore ye knyt up
your definicion with First gotten but amongst many brothers.

S. Paul's words wholye and sincerely without wrestyng and ma^gling of them
are these: Romans 1.
of his son which is made of the seed of David, to ^^ chyng the flesh, and
declared the so^^^ of God in power, according to (...) holy spirit and by his
resurrec^^^ from the dead: This is S. Paul sentence, conteinynge much more
then ye brought in, and eke somewhat less by your But, which if it were in
Paul as it is in yours, then your next But might follow the better. In these
words S. Paul teaches, Christ to be, not only the Son of man touching the
flesh, but also the Son of God, and true God, by three ways: that is to
say: By power, by the spirit, and by resurrection. By power, as by miracles
and works, which were above the condition of man: of which he spoke in John:
Ioh. v. x.
Si ve^ bis meis non creditis, operibus saltem credit:.i, If ye believe not my
words, yet have credit to my works: By the holy ghost, as in sundry places,
so in that, that the holy ghost came down in visible form upon him, what
time the ^oyce of the father sounded: Mat. iii. xvii.
Hic est silius meus in quo mihi been cu^placui:.i. This is my son in whom I
am well pleased.

And hither unto appertains that of Ioh. in his caconicall epysiel, Et
spiritus est qui testificatur. He promised also to send, and according to his
promise did seen the holy ghost to be a comforter and gyde in his bodily
absence, unto all such, as faithfully trace his ways: Which was for god to do,
and not man. The third argument whice S. Paul uses in that place to prove
Christ's deuinitie, is his resurrection. For who could raise him self from
death by his own power and virtue, but the natural son of God, which said
Tollite templum hoc, et in triduc excitabo illud:.i. Destroy ye this temple,
and in three days I will build it vy again. John. x.
ego ponam animam mea^ and iterum sumam eam, nemo tolle^ eam a me sed ego ponam
eam ameips^ potestate^ habeo ponendi eam, and iteru^ potestatem h abeo sume^di
came: That is to say: I will put my soul from me, and I will take the same
again unto me; None shall take it from me. but I will put in from meselfe: I
have power in my self to put it away, and I have power in me to take it
again. Ye see then what s. Paul meaned in that place, and ye hear how that
other parts of the scriptures do confirm also his menyng and intent in that
behalf. Wherefore your meaning and intent which is repugnaunte hereto, must
needs be wicked and naught. And somethyng to say of your next But which is:
Christ is the first begytten son of God, but a mongest many broothers. I pray
you which of all his brothers can say: Ego ex Deo processi and veni:.i. Ioh.
viii
I proceeded further and came from God: Which of so many can say: Ioh. xiiii
Creditis in Deum, and in me crdite:.i. Believe ye in God and believe in me?
Which of so many brothers can sya: John. x.
Ego and pater vnum sumus:.i. I and my Father be one? which of them all can say
as he said to Philip: Qui videt me, videt patrem: He that sees me, sees the
Father? which of so many can say and perform: Qui credit in me, habet vitam
aeternam: He that believes in me has life everlasting? Which of you then can
say: Mat. xvi
Qui non honorat filium, non honorat patrem: He that honors not the son,
honors not the father? Again, to whom of so many brothers was it ever
said: Thou art Christ the son of the living God? To which of so many
brothers may it be said: John. iii.
Qui non credit, iam iudicatus est: quia non credit in nomine vnigeniti filii
Dei: That is: He that believes not, is alredye condemned: because he believes
not in the name of the only begotten son of God? If ye can declare any to be
equal with him in these points, then will I grant with you that he has mo
brothers: and every of them true God. For none but God can say as he has
said: and to none but to God can it be said which ye have heard. In mean
time I believe him to be brotherles, and confess him to be thonly begotten
son of God, consubstanciall and coequall to ye father in all power, honor, and
glory. And for your further instruction read at your leisure, s. Paul in the
first to the Hebrews, where ye shall find that S. Paul proves him to be
brotherles, and the natural son of God, and true god. for.iii, causes
chiefly: the one is, because he is the creator and maker of Angels (as there he
proves): the other, for yt he is honored of angels: yt third, because he has
his seat for ever and ever. Now sit, all if every just man is the son of God
by adopcio^, who so just that made the Angels, that is honored of Angels, that
sytteth at the right hand of God the fathers magesiie i^ seat for ever and
ever, But Jesus Christ alone, whom S. Peter calls Veru^ filium. ii. Pet. i.
The true son of God, and not the son by adopcio^? And of whom s. John
says: Hic est verus Deus and vita aeterna: This is true God, and life
everlasting. And if none made a^gels, none to be honored of angels, none has
seat euerlasti^gly, but Jesus Christ: then of likelihod he is brotherles.
Again to creat Angels, to be honored of Angels, to have seat for ever and
ever if it be for God only, then is Christ God: and I believe that he is.


Arri. FVRTHER he was notable by miracles, but which god wroght by hi^, as also
the Prophets of the old law, did many wonderful miracles: yet may we not call
the^ gods therefore.


Proct. FOrsothe I grant, that both Christ, and the Prophets of the old
law, did very great miracles: yet their miracles not like great, nether the
manner of doing one, as anon ye shall hear. And where ye say that God did
such miracles by him: I grant that he did: So did he make and create all
things by him also: What? Had he not in himself therefore y^ power to make and
create all things? Yes no doubt: as who is the same self thing, essens and
nature, that the father is: so that, to say that the father made all things by
the son, is as much to say, that the father and the son one god, one power
made al things, not one doing more then the other: for there is not between the^
one, and then another, but both one touching the deity, and.ii. persons of the
same. Therefore to grant un to you, that God wrought miracles by Christ, yet
doothe it not follow that, Christ had not in himself power to do miracles:
for he had power in him to do all thing as absolutely as the father had: who
says: I and the father be one. John. x.
Again: The father is in me, and I in him: John. iii.
And All power is given me in heaven and in earth. What greater miracle can
there be, then to put away the soul, and take it again? And Christ did so,
and said that he had power in him self so to do: John. x.
and did so in deed. Now (sir) although the Prophets and other did veraye
great miracles, yet the manner of doing so diverse between Christ and them,
well proves him to be God, and these not to be gods. For as they did nothing
of themself, so did Christ absolutely all of himself. They ever used
inuocations and prayer er they were able to do any miraculous matter. But Jesus
Christ did all of him self, never prayed, never inuocated the father what
time he would show any miracle, but of his own divine power, and with his
only word he wrought miraculons wonders: what said he too Lazarus, John. xi.
Lazare veni for as? What did or said he to the wydow her son, Lukc. vii.
but Adolessens tibi dico surge:.i. Young man, I say unto the, rise. What did
or said he to the daughter of the ruler, but Puella surge:.i. Damesell arise.
Math. ix
Helyas I grant did rere up the dead, but first prayed. 4, Re. 4,
Helyzeus when he relyued the son of Sunamite, prayed a lone in a chau^bre,
the door cloose shut unto him. Peter also relyued Tabita, but first prayed
earnestly on his knees and then said: Tabita arise. Act. ix.
Likewise to Eneas, which kept his bed.viii. years, he said: Eneas, the lord
Jesus Christ make the whole, arise and make thy bead. If S. Peter could work
so high miracles in Christ's name, was not Christ himself able to do the like,
and more greater in his own name? Wherefore look how much difference is
between co^maundyng, and desyring: geuyng and deseruyng: of him self, and by
another power: so much discrepau^ce is between Christ and other in workyng
miracles. And forasmuch to command, to give of himself, and by no other
power, life to the dead, health to the sick. etc. is for god only to do:
Believe Christ to be god, that has and can do yt same. And the other that did
nothing but upon desire, and desert through faith and prayer, and by an other
power, call them not godds, neither compare them with Jesus Christ for shame.


Arri. THIS have I uttered my opinion in Writing, according to your good
Lordships co^maundment, besechyng your lordship to take the same in good part,
as the thing done by hi^ which is pressed and ready to do your lordships Will
and co^maundment in all points that may be performed by this weak vain of
wit in me.


Proct, ANd thus have I confuted the same your opinion by writing according to
the truth of the pure scriptures of God, affirmyng (contrary to your assercio^)
Jesus Christ to be the natural son of God the Father, and true God in all
points equal and consubstanciall to his father: and this doctrine to mainteyn
and defend I am pressed and ready a gaynst you and al other that will deny it, to
thuttermost of all my power.

And forasmuch the vain of your wit be but weak (as ye say), I would wysh
that ye should not ouercharge it so much, neither strain it so far as to
compass such matters which the strongest wit can never bring to pass. If
therefore your wit be but little, spend it all well, and all little enough. And
so doing, ye shall not need to beseech or require any man to take in good
part your doings, they themselves co^mendynge themself, and deseruyng favor
at every honest man's hand. But if ye persevere in this wicked fascio^, as to
persuade black to be white, chalk chese: then each wise man may well think,
will and wit to have wrestled in you so long, that will has driven wit out of
possession, and wholly optayneth the souereigntie in you, and so you to do all
thing upon will without wit. Of all men I am lothest to see it in you, for I
protest before god, that I bear as good heart, and wysh as much good unto you
as I do to my self. The contrary I would not have you think in me, although I
have taken upon me to condemn your opinion: and whiles I do the same shall
seem sumwhat roughly to talk unto you perchance: but rather that I greatly
detest and abhor the opinion and sect, which can not to sharply be touched:
for to your person I owe no displeasure or malice at al. And thou christian
reder instead of long conclusion in the matter that I treat of, read the
Psalm of Athanasius which herafter follows: Besechyng the to take in good
part these my doings, wherein good will has wrought all that it could, how
soever power and faculty have been answerable thereto.


Mutuo oremus vt saluemur.
THE SENTENCE AND BELEFE OF Athanasius, touchig the deuinite of Jesus Christ.
Whosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic faith.

Which faith except every one do keep holy and undefiled: without dout he shall
perysh everlastingly.

And the Catholyke faith is this: that we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in unity.

Neither confoundyng the persons: nor deuydynge the substance.

For there is one person of the father another of the son: and an other of
the holy ghost.

But the godheade of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost, is al
one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternall,

Such as the father is, such is the son: and such is the holy ghost.

The father uncreate, the son uncreate: and the holy ghost uncreate.

The father incomprehensyble, the son incomprehe^syble: and the holy ghost
incomprehensyble.

The father eternal, the son eternal: and the holy ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternales but one eternal.

As also there be not three incomprehensybes, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, one incomprehe^sible.

So likewise, the father is almightye the son almighty, and the holy ghost
almyghtye.

And yet they are not three almightyes, but one almyghtie.

So the father is god, the son is god, and the holy ghost is god.

So likewise the father is Lord, the son Lord, and the holy ghost Lord. And
yet not three lords but one lord For like as we be compelled by y^ christian
verity: to acknoweledge every person by himself to be god and lord.

So are we forbidden by the Catholyke religion: to say there be three gods, or
three lords.

The father is made of none: neither created nor begotten.

The son is of the father alone: not made nor created, but begotten

The holy ghost is of the father and of the son: neither made nor created nor
begotten but procedyng.

So there is one father, not three fathers, one son not three sons: one holy
ghost, not three holy goostes.

And in this trynytie none is before nor after other: none is greater nor less
then other.

But the whole three persons be coeternall together and coequall.

So that in all things, as it is before said: the unity in trinity, and the
trinity in unity, is to be worshippyd.

He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the trinity.

Furthermore, it is necessary to ever lassing salvation: that he also believe
ryghtlye in the incarnacion of our lord Jesus Christ.

For the right faith is that we believe and confess: that our lord Jesus Christ
the son of God, is god and man.

God of the substance of the father, begotten before the worlds: and man of
the substance of his mother, borne in the world.

Perfect god and perfect man: of a reasonable soul, and humayne flesh
subsystynge.

Equal to the father as touching his Godheade: and inferyor to the father
touching his manhood.

Who although he be god and man yet he is not two, but one Christ.

One, not by conuersyon of the god head into flesh: but by taking of the
manhood into God.

One altogether, not by confusi^^ of substance: but by unity of per^^.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh (...) one man: so god and man is one
Christ.

Who suffers for our saluacyo^^ descended into hell, rose again the third
day from the dead.

He asse^ded into heaven, he sits on the right hand of the father, god
almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

At whose cu^myng al men shall rise again with their bodies, and shall give
accomte of their own works. And they that have done good, shall go into life
everlasting: and they tha^ have done evil, into everlasting fyet.

This is the Catholic faith which except a man believe faithfully he can not
be saved.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George, by William
Powell. An. Dn^i. D. CCCCC. XLIX. Men's. December. ix, Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solom.


