A gorgious Gallery, of gallant Inventions.

Garnished and decked with diverse dayntie devises, right delicate and
delightful, to recreate each modest mind withal.

First framed and fashioned in sundry forms, by diverse worthy workmen of
late days: and now, joined together and builded up: By T. P.

Imprinted at London, for Richard Jones. 1578.

A. M. Unto all young Gentilmen, in commendacion of this Gallery and workmen
thereof.
SEE Gallaunts, see, this Gallery of delights,
With buyldings brave, imbost of variant hue:
With daynties decked, deuisde by worthy wights,
(Which) as time serude, unto perfection grew.
By studies toil with phrases fine they fraught:
This peereles piece, filde full, of pretty pith:
And trimde it, (with) what skill, and learning taught,
In hope to please your longing minds therewith.
Which workmanship, by worthy workmen wrought,
(Perusde) least in oblivion it should ly:
A willing mind, each part together fought,
And termde (the whole) A gorgious Gallerye:
Wherein you may, to recreate the mind,
Such fine Inventions find, for your delight:
That, for desert, their doings will you bind,
To yield them praise, so well a work to wright.
FINIS.
A. M.
Owen Roydon to the curious company of Sycophantes.
THe busy Bees whose pains do never miss,
But toil their time the winters want to wielde:
And heap in hiues, the thing that needful is,
To feed their flock till winter be exilde:
Sometimes the Drones the Honey combs do eat,
And so the Bees must starve for want of meat.
The drowsy Drones do never take such toil,
But lie at lurch, like men of Momus mind:
Who rudely read and rashly put to foil,
What worthy works, so ever they do find:
Which works would please the learned sort full well,
But Sicophantes will never cease to swell.
Though (learnedly) themselves be void to write,
And have not known the height of Hellicon:
Yet, carpingly, they needs must spit their spite,
Or else their former force, (they judge) is gone:
Who only live, the seelly Bees t'annoy,
And eat the meat, whereon the Bees should joy.
(Depart from hence) that cursed kind of crew,
And let this Book, embrace his earned meede:
Which was set forth (for others) not for you,
What likes them best, that only for to read:
And let the rest, without rebuke to pass,
And help t'amend the thing that blameless was.
(APPELLES) might suffice, to warn you well,
(who) while he was a paynting in his Shop:
Came in (a Sowter) who began to swell,
And viewd his Image all from toe to top:
And scofte at this, and did mislike at that,
Of many a fault the Champion began to chat.
At length ( Appelles) angry with his man,
Dislyked much and gave him answer so:
(Talk thou of that, wherein some skill thou can)
Unto the slipper (Sowter) only go:
The saucye (Sowter) was abashed much,
And afterward, his talk was nothing such.
So? ( Momus thou) no further then thy mark,
And talk no more, then skill does give thee leave:
But in thy heart, there is a burning spark,
And (whiles thou lives) that sickness will thee greaue*
But do thy worst, and do no more but right,
The learned route, will laughe at thy despite.
FINIS.
O. R.
THE GALLERY of gallant Inventions.
To a Gentilwoman that said: All men be false, they think not what they say.
SOme women feign that Paris was,
The falsest lover that could be:
Who for his (life) did nothing pass,
As all the world might plainly see:
But ventred life and limbs and all,
To keep his friend from Greekish thrall:
With many a broyle he dearly bought,
His (Hellen) whom he long had sought.
For first (Dame Venus) granted him,
A gallant gift of Beauties fleece:
Which boldly for to seek to win,
By surging Seas he sayld to Greece:
And when he was arrived theare,
By earnest suit to win his Dear:
No greater pains might man endure,
Then Paris did, for Hellen sure.
Besides all this when they were well,
Both he, and she, arry^'d at Troy:
King Menelaus wrath did swell,
And swore, by sword, to rid their joys:
And so he did for ten years space,
He lay before the Troyans face:
With all the host that he could make,
To be revenged for Hellens sake.
Lo? thus much did poor Paris bide,
Who is accounted most vatrue:
All men be false it has bin said,
They think not what they speak (say you)
Yes Paris spoke, and sped with speed,
As all the heavenly Gods decreed:
And proou'd himself a Lover just,
Till stately Troy was turned to dust:
I do not read of any man,
That so much was unfaithful found:
You did us wrong, t'accuse us than,
And say our freendship is not sound:
If any fault be found at all,
To women's lot it needs must fall:
If (Hellen) had not bin so light,
Sir Paris had not died in fight.
The falsest men I can excuse,
That ever you in stories read:
Therefore all men for to accuse,
Me thinks it was not well decreede:
It is a sign you have not tried,
What steadfastness in men does bide:
But when your time shall try them true,
This judgment then, you must renew.
I know not every man's devise,
But commonly they steadfast are:
Though you do make them of no price,
They break their vows but very rare:
They will perform their promis well,
And specially where love does dwell:
Where freendship does not justly frame,
Then men (forsooth) must bear the blame.
FINIS.
O. R.
The lamentable lover abiding in the bitter bale of direful doubts toward his
Ladies loyalty, writes unto her as follows.
HEalth I thee send, if he may give, yt which himself does miss:
For thy sweet breast, does harbor whole, my bloody bale or bliss,
I need no scribe, to scry my care, in restless rigor spread:
They that behold, my changed cheer, already judge me dead.
My baned limbs, have yielded up, their woonted joy to dye:
My healthles hand, does naught but wring, and dry my dropping eye,
The deadly day, in dole I pass, a thousand times I crave
The noisome night: again I wish, the doleful day to have.
Each hour to me, most hateful is, each place does urge my woe:
No food me feeds, close up mine eyes, to ghastly grave I go.
No Phisickes art, can give the salve, to heal my paynfull part:
Save only thou, the salve and sore, of this my captive heart,
Thou art the branch yt sweetly springs, whose heart is sound and true
Can only cheer me woeful wight, or force my want to rue.
Then give to me, the sap I thirste, which gift may give me joy,
I mean thy firm, and faithful love, whose want breeds mine annoy,
Remember yet sure freendship had, ypast between us twain
Forget him not, for love of thee, who sighs in secret pain.
I often do seem in company, a gladsome face to bear,
But God thou know my inward woes, and cares yt rent me there:
And that I may, gush out my grief, in secret place alone,
I bid my friends farewell in haste, I say I must be gone.
Then haste I fast, with heavy heart, in this my doleful case:
Where walks no wight, but I alone, in drewsie desert place,
And there I empt, my laden heart, that sweld in fretting moan:
My sighs and playnts, and panges I tell, unto my self alone.
What shall I say? do ask me once, why all these sorrows be*
I answer true, O foe or friend, they all are made for thee.
Once knit the lynck, that love may last, then shall my dollors ceas^
It lies in thee, and will thou not, the yielding wight release?
O would to God, it lay in me, to cure such grief of thine:
Thou should not long, be void of help, if twere in power of mine,
But I would run, and range in storms, a thousand miles in pain:
Not fearing foil, of friends to have, my countenance whole again
And will thou then, all mercylesse, more longer torment me?
In drawing back, since my good help, is only whole in thee?
Then send me close, y^ hewing knife, my wider wound to stratch:
And thou shall see, by woeful grief, of life a clean dispatch.
When thou shall say, and prove it true, my heart entirely loved,
Which lost the life, for countnance sweet from who^ he never moved
Write then upon my woeful Tomb, these verses graven above,
Here lies the heart, his truth to try, that lost his life in love.
Lo, save or spill, thou may me now, thou sitst in judgment hie,
Where I poor man, at Bar do stand, and loud, for life do cry.
Thou will not be, so mercylesse, to slay a loving heart*
Small praise it is to conquer him, that durst no where to start,
Thou have the sword, that cut the wound, of my vnhol^en pain:
Thou can and art, the only help, to heal the same again.
Then heal the heart, that loves thee well, until the day he dye:
And firmly fast thy love on him, that's true continually,
In thee my wealth, in thee my woe, in thee too save or spill:
In thee me life, in thee my death, does rest to work thy will.
Let virtue myxt, with pity great, and loving mercy save
Him, who without thy salve, so sick, that he must yield to grave,
O salve thou then, my secret sore, since health in thee does stay:
And grant with speed, my just request, whose want works my decay
Then shall I bless, the pleasant place, where once I took thy glove,
And thank ye God, who gives thee grace, to grant me love for love.
FINIS.
A loving Epistle, written by Ruphilus a young Gentilman, to his best beloved
Lady Elriza, as follows.
TWice has my quaking hand withdrawn this pen away
And twice again it gladly would, before I dare beewray
The secret shrined thoughts, that in my heart do dwell,
That never wight as yet has wist, nor I desire to tell.
But as the smoothered cole, does wast and still consume,
And outwardly does give no heat, of burning blaze or fume:
So has my hidden harms, been harbred in my corpce,
Till faintyng limbs and life and all, had welnigh lost his force:
Yet stand I half in doubt, which of these two to choose,
To hide my harms still to my hurt, or else this thraldom loose.
I will lay fear aside, and so my tale begin:
Who never durst assail his foe: did never conquest win.
Lo here my cause of care to thee unfold I will:
Help thou Minerua, grant I pray, some of thy learned skill.
Help all you Muses nine, my woeful Pen to write:
So stuff my verse with pleasant words, as she may have delight,
With heedyng ears to read my greeif and great unrest:
Some words of plaint may move perhaps, to pity my request.
Often have I hard complaint, how Cupid bears a sway
In brittle youth, and would command: and how they did obey.
When I with skorning ears did all their talk despise:
But well I see the blinded boy: in lurking den he lies,
To catch the careless sort: awayting with his Darte:
He threw at me when I unawares, was wounded to the heart.
To speak and pray for help, now love has me constrainde:
And makes me yield to serve the sort, that lately I disdainde.
Since beggars have no choice: nor need had ever law
The subject Ox does like his yoke: when he is driven to draw.
That Ruphilus this wrote: thou wonder wilt I know,
Cause never erst in louinge vearse: my labor I bestow,
Well, woeful love is mine, and weeping lines I wright,
And doubtful words with driery cheer: beseemes a careful wight
O thou Elrisa fair, the beuty of thine eyes
Has bred such bale within my dressed, and cau'sde such strife to rise.
As I can not forget: until devouring death
Shall leave to me a senceles goast: and rid my longer breath,
Or at the least that thou: do grant me some relief
To ease the greedy gripes I feel, and end my great mischief.
As due to me by right, I can no mercy crave,
Thou have the power to grant me life: refuse not for to save.
Put to thy helping hand, to salve the wounded sore,
Though thou refuse it for my sake: yet make thine honor more,
Too cruel were the fact: if thou should seek to kill
Thy faithful friend that loves thee so: and does demand no ill.
Thy heavenly shape I saw: thy passing bewty bright,
Enforst me to assay the bayt: where now my bane I bight
I naught repent my love: nor yet forthinke my fact,
The Gods I know were all agreed: and secretly compacte.
To frame a work of praise: to show their power divine
By good advice this on the earth: above the rest to shine.
Whose perfect shape is such: as Cupid fears his fall,
And every wight that has her seen, I say (not one) but all
With one consent they cry: lo here dame Venus air,
Not Danae nor she dame Led: was ever half so fair.
Though Princes sue for grace: and each one do thee woo,
Mislyke not this my mean estate: wherewith I can naught do,
As highest seats we see: be subject to most wind,
So base and poor estates we know, be hateful to the mind.
The happy mean is mine: which I do happily hold,
Thy honor is to yield for love: and not for heap of gold.
If ever thou have felt: the bitter panges that stinges
A lovers br^st: or know the ^ares, that Cupid on us flinges.
Then pity my request: and wayle my woeful case,
Whose life to death with hasty wheels: do toumble on apace.
Uouchsafe to ^ase the pain: that love on me does whelme,
Let not thy friend to shipwreck go: since thou do hold his helm.
Who yeel^eth all he has: as subject to thy will,
If thou command he does obey, and all thy heastes fulfill.
But if thou call to mind: when I did part thee fro,
What was the cause of my exile: and why I did forgo
The happy life I held, and lost there with thy sight,
Well may thou wayle thy want of troth: and rue thy great unright
If thou be found to fail thy vow that thou have sworn
Or that one jot of my good will, out of thy mind be worn.
Or if my absence long: to thy disgrace has wrought me
Or hindering tales of my back friends: unto such state has brought me.
I can and will accurse the cause of my ill speed:
But well, I hope, my fear is more: then is the thing indeed.
Yet blame me not though I do stand somewhat in fear
The cause is great of my exile, which hardly I do bear.
Who has a sternles ship amidst the trustles Seaes,
Full greedely desires the port: where he may ride at ease.
Thy bewty bids me trust, unto thy promise past,
My absence long and not to speak: does make me doubt as fast.
For as the summers son, does make each thing to spring:
Even so the frosen winters blast, as deadly does them wring.
Unsuer thus I live in dread I wot not why
Yet was there never day so bright, but there be clouds in sky.
Who has of puer Gold, a running stream or flud
And is restraind for coming nigh, this treasure great and good.
He must abide a time: till Fortune grant him grace,
That he have power by force to win: his rich desired place.
I need not thus to do: nor yet so much mistrust,
I know no time can change thy mind: or make thee be unjust.
No more then water soft, can stir a steadfast rock:
Or seely flies upon their backs can bear away a block.
Each beast on earth we see: that living breath does draw,
Be faithful found unto their mates: and keeps of love the law.
My wretched life to ease: when I do seek to turn,
Thy bewty bright does kindle me, in greater flame to burn.
No day, no night, nor time, that geues me mirth or rest,
Awake, asleape, and at my meals, thou do torment my breast.
Though weary loathsome life: in care and woe have clad me,
Remembrance of thy heavenly face, gives cause again to glad me.
Thus Joyful thoughts a while, does lessen much my pain
But after calm and ^ayer tides, the storms do come again.
And I in cares do flame, to think of my exile,
That I am barred from thy sight: I curse and ban the while.
Would God I had the craft a Laborinth to frame,
And also had a Mynotaure: enclosed in the same:
And that our enemies all, might therein take some pain,
Till Dedales line I did them bring, to help them out again.
Then should my sorrows seace, and drown my deep despair,
Then should my life be blessed with Joys: and raisde above the air*
But as the mazed bird, for fear dare skantly fly,
When he has scapte the Falcons foot: even so I know should I
Scarce able be to speak, or any word to say,
Least Argus waiting ielous eyes, might happily me bewray
But oh Elrisa mine, why do I stir such war
Within my self to think of this: and yet thy love so far?
Why rather should not I: give up the life I have
And yield my weary wretched corpse: unto the gaping grau
If I hopte not that thou with faith did bind thy life,
This hand of mine with bloody sword, should stint my cruel strife*
No length of lingering time: no distance can remove,
The faith that I have have vowed to thee: nor alter once my love.
Believe this to be true, that streams shall sooner turn,
Or frosen Ice to fire coals, on blasing flame to burn.
Then I will seek to change: or alter once my mind,
All plagues I pray may fall on me, if I be found unkind.
Or if I mean to swerve while I have living breath
God grant my end then may be such as Agamemnons death.
I wish thy life no harm: but yet I would thou knew
The woeful end that Cressed made, because she was untrue.
These angry gods or men, asonder that do set us,
Shall never pearce our minds in twain nor eke to love can let us
As well they may divide the fire from the flame,
And every beast that now is wild, as soon shall be made tame.
Let not this pistle long, my suit with thee deface,
Who pleads for his life thou know: at large must tell his case.
And all these words I write, to one effect do tend,
I am all thine, and not mine own: and herewithal to end.
I pray thee to regard: thy health and my request,
And that my love do never fleet out of thy secret breast.
FINIS.
NARSETVS a woeful youth, in his exile writes to Rosana his beloved mistress,
to assure her of his faithful constancy, requiring the like of her.
TO stay thy musinge mind: he did this pistle frame,
That holds the dear, and loves thee most: Narsetus is his name
Would God thy friend had brought: ye health yt here he sendes
I should have seen my lacking joy, and heal that heart that rendes.
And ready is each hour: to sunder still in twain,
Save now this pistle that I write: does lessen well my pain,
And helps me to uphold a lingering loathsome life,
Awaiting still the blisfull hour, when death shall stinte the strife.
What does it me prevail: to have king Cresus wealth,
Or who does joy in golden Gives, imprisoned with his health,
I swear by Jove to thee, whose godhead is aye just,
These words I write are not untrue: then do me not mist rust.
Thy self shall be the judge: and if thou list to vewe,
The bared bones, the hollow looks, the pale and ledy hew,
The stealing strides I draw: the woe and dreadful fears
The boiling breast with bitter brine, the eyes be sprent with tears
The skant and hungry meals: the seldom sleep I take,
The dainty dames that others joy, ^o jest to me do make
These hated hateful harms: when I them feel to grieve me
Remembrance of thy beuty bright, does straight again relieve me
And then I call to mind, thy shape and cumly grace,
Thy heavenly hew thy sugared words, thy sweet entising face
The pleasant passed sportes: that spent the day to end,
The lothsom looks that liked not to leave so soon thy friend.
Since froward fortune has, my Mystresse thus bere^t me,
Perforce I yield and am content, to like the lot is left me.
If Pyramus were sad, when he found Thisby slain,
If Cresseds craft and falsing faith: did Troylus turn to pain,
Eneas traitor false: oh treason that he did,
With bloody wounds and murdering sword, Queen Didos life has ri^
If these have won by death and end of pyning pain,
And I alive with torments great in dying deaths remain.
The sound of instruments: or musickes pleasant noyce,
Or riches rule, or proud estate, does cause me to rejoice
Or Venus damsels dear, do please me even as well,
As dying bodies joy to here, for them a passing bell.
The greefes that gripe my heart, and daily do me slay
It lessen would much of the smart, if thou vouchsafe to say:
God grant his weary life: and sorrows to assuage,
God yield him health and happy days with honor in his age.
These words would win my life, dispaired now to death,
Thou should but save that is thine own, while I have living breath
What heaps of haples hopes, on me shall chance to fall,
So thou do live in blisfull state: no force for me at all.
Amid my greatest grief, the greatest care I have,
Is how to wish and will thee good: and most thy honor save.
Be faithful found therefore, be constant true and just
If thou betray thy loving friend, whom hensforth shall I trust?
When shall I speak with thee? when shall I thee embrace?
When will the gods appease their wrath? when shall I have such grace?
Has Jove forgotten dame Led for love: and how he prayed her,
Transformed like a swan at length: the seely soul he trayde her.
When fair fresh Danae was closed up in tower:
Did he not rain himself a drop, amidst the golden shower
And fell into her lap: from top of chimney hi^?
The great delight of his long love: he did attain thereby,
What cruel gods be these? what trespass have I done?
That I am banished thus from thee, what conquest have they won?
I know their power divine: can for a while remove me,
But whils^e I live, and after death, my soul shall likewise love thee
Not Alcumena she, for whom the treble night
Was shaped first, can well compare with thee for bewty bright
Not Troylus sister too, whom cruel Pirrhus slew,
Nor she, the price of ten years wars, whom yet the Greeks do rue
Nor she Penelope, whose chastnes wan her fame,
Can match with thee Rosina chaste: I see her blush for shame.
The child of mighty Jove, that bred within his brain
Shall yield the palm of filed speech, to thee that does her stain.
And every wight on earth: that living breath do draw,
Lo here your queen sent from above, to keep you all in awe
But now I fine my talk, I find my wits to dull,
There lives none that can set forth thy virtues at the full.
Yet this I dare well say, and dare it to auowe,
The Gods do fear Rosinas shape: and bewty does allow.
In Tantalus toil I live: and want that most I would,
With wishing vows I speak, I pray: yet lack the thing I should
I see that I do want: I reach, it runs me fro:
I have and lack, that I love most, and lothest to forgo.
But oh Rosanna dear: since time of my exile
How have thou done? and do thou live: how have thou spent the while
How stands health with thee? and art thou glad of chere?
God grant those happy restful days, increase may still each year.
If any grief or care, do vex thy woeful heart,
Then God I pray to give thee ease, and swagement of thy smart.
Yet this I do desire, that thou be found to abide
A friend: even such as shall mislike, with sudden change to slide.
If pleasure now thou have, to spend the dreiry day,
Read then this pistle of my hand, to drive the time away.
If all thy friends alive: would from thy friendship swerve,
A thousand deaths I do desire, in wretched state to starve.
If I amongst the rest, should alter so my mind,
Or thou should charge I promise brake, or else am found unkind
Though Argus ielus eyes: that daily on us tend,
Forbid us meat and speech also, or message for to send.
A time will come to pass, and think it not to long
That thou and I shall join in joy, and wreake us of our wrong.
Which time I would abide: though time too long does try me
In hope again when time shall serve, thou will not then deny me
Thus hope does me uphold: for hope of after bliss,
And lose thereby my present joy, in hoping still for this.
I do commend to thee: my life and all I have,
Command them both as thee best likes: to lose or else to save.
I am no more mine own, but thine to use at will
The Same is thine without desert, if thou me seek to kill.
Be glad thou little quere, my mystresse shall thee see
Fall flat to ground before her face: and at her feet do lie:
Waste not to rise again, nor do her not withstand
If of her bounty she vouchsafe, to raise thee with her hand.
Say thy master sent thee, and humbly for me greet her,
Thou know my self does wish full often: to be in place to meet her.
If any word in this, has scapte and do her grieve,
A pardon crave upon thy knee, and pray her to forgive
A giltles hand it wrote, thou may be bold to tell:
No mind of malice did me move, her self does know it well.
Thou can and I deserve: make glad my woeful sprite,
I crave no answer to thy pain: nor force thee for to write.
It should suffice if thou: voutchsafe to read the same,
This pistle then if thou mislyke, condemn it to the flame.
But now there needs no more, I will this pistle end,
Esteem Narsetus always well: that is thy faithful friend,
FINIS.
The Lover forsaken, writes to his Lady a desperate Farewell.
Even he that whilome was: thy faithful friend most just,
That thrice three years has spent and past, reposing all his trust
In thy bewayling words, that seemed sugar sweet
The selfsame man unwillingly: does with these lines thee greet.
I can not speak with thee: and speaking is but pain,
To speak and pray and not to speed: too fruitles were the gain.
Inforste therefore I write, and now unfold my mind,
I love, and like as erst I did, I am not yet declinde.
Though time that tries all, has turnde the love you ought,
No changing time could alter me: or wrest awry my thought.
And sure I do mislyke, that women choose to change,
Ungrateful folks I do detest, as monsters foul and strange.
Since first I did you know: I never spoke the thing
That did intend you to beguile, or might repentance bring.
Thrice has my pen fallen down: upon this paper pale,
And scantly can my heart consent: to write to thee this tale.
Least hasty Judgments might, misdeeme my giltles mind,
To charge that malice moves my speech, or some new friend to find
The gods I vouch to aid: who knows the troth I meant,
To swerve or fleet from that I vowed, was never my intent.
But as the Courser fearce, by pearcing spur does run,
So thy deserts enforce me now: to see this work begun.
Would God I had no cause to leave that I did love,
Or loathe the thing that likt me so: nor this mishap to prove.
But since no thing in earth: in one estate can bide,
Why strive I then against the stream, or toil against the tide?
And have you now forgot, how many years I sought,
To get your grace with whot good will: how dearly I it bought.
There is no one alive, that nature ever made
That has such gifts of virtues race, and such untroth does shade.
If faith might have bin found, within a woman's breast,
I did believe within thy heart, she chose her place to rest.
Unskilful though I be, and cannot best deserne,
Where craft for troth does preace in place, yet am I not to learn.
And I did think you such: that little knew of guile,
But seemings now be plaste for deeds, and please fulwel the while
Why do I w^nder thus? to think this same so strange,
Who has assayed and knows not? that women choose to change.
Have you thus sone forgot, the doutes and dreades you made,
Of yongmens love how little hold, how sone away they fade.
How hardly you believed* how often would you say,
My words were spoken of the spleen: and I as often denay.
How often did you protest with hands vpstretcht to skies?
How often with oaths unto the Gods? how often with weeping eyes?
Did you beseech them all, to rid your spending days?
When that you thought to leave your friend: to die without delays
Me thought in heaven I saw: how Jove did laughe to skorn^.
To see you swear so solemly, and meant to be forsworn.
But as the Sirens singe, when treason they procure,
So smyling baytes the harmles souls: unto their bane alure.
Thy fawning flattering words, which now full falce I find,
Persuades me to content my self, and turn from Cressids kind.
And all the sort of those: that use such craft I wish
A speedy end, or loathsome life, to live with Lasars dish.
Yet pardon I do pray: and if my words offend,
A crased ship amid the stream, the Mariner must mende.
And I thus to it and turned: whose life to shipwreck goes
Complaynes of wrongs thou have me don, and all my grief forth shows.
And could your heart consent? and could you gree thereto?
Thus to betray your faithful friend, and promis to undo?
If naught your words could bind, to hold your suer behest,
Nor ought my love ne oaths you swear, could bide within your breast
Yet for the worldly shame, that by this fact might rise,
Or for the loss of your good name, for dealing in this wise.
Or thus to see me grieved: tormented still in pain,
Thy gentil heart should have bin pleased such murder to refrain.
But through thy cruel deed: if that untamed death,
With speedy dart shall rid my life, or leave my living breath.
The gods then can and will: requite thy bloddy act,
And them I pray with lowly suit, for to revenge thy fact.
God grant the earth may bring: naught forth to thy avail*
Nor any thing thou take in hand, to purpose may prevail.
Thy most desired friend, I wish may be most coy,
Wherein thou do thee most delight: and take the greatest joy.
That same I would might turn: unto thy most mischief,
That in thy life thy heart may feel, the smart of others grief.
But since no good can come: of thy mishap to me,
I grant some blame I do deserve, that thus desire to see
Thy blisfull life so changde, from wea^e to wretched state,
When friends do break the bond of love, then is their greatest hate.
Thy deeds do sure deserve, much more revenging spite,
Then heart can think or tongue can tell, or this my pen can wright.
Thy bewty bright is such, that well it would invade,
A heart more hard then Tigar wild: and more it can persuade.
Then Tullyes cunning tongue: or Ouids loving tale,
Well may I curse and ban them both, that so have brewed my bale.
I fear to praise to far: least happily I begin,
To kindle fire that well is quenched, and burn me all within.
For well I may compare: and boldly dare it say,
Thou art the Queen of women kind, and all they ought obey.
And all for shame do blush, when thou do come in place,
They curse each thing that gave thee life, and more disdain thy face.
Then any living wight: does hate the Serpent foul,
Or birds that singe and flies by day, abhors the shrikyng Owl.
Oh that a constant mind: had guided forth thy days,
I had not then assayd myshap: nor pen spoke thy disprayse.
Decreed since that thou art, for ever to forsake me,
In sorrows sweet I will me shrine: till death shall list to take me.
Bewail O woeful eyes, with fluds of flowing tears,
This great mischaunce thy loathsome life, that all ill hap up bears,
Since parted is your joy, resign likewise your sight,
I never will agree to like, or look on other wight.
Nor never shall my mouth consent to pleasant sound,
But pale and lean with hollow looks: till death I will be found.
And you unhappy hands: with lyking food that fed me,
Leave of to labor more for me: since sorrow thus has sped me.
Lament unlusty legs: be lame for ever more,
Since she is gone for whom you kept: your willing pace in store.
O hateful heavy heart: bewail thy great unrest,
Consume thy self or part in twain: within my blouddy breast.
And ye my senses all: whose help was aye at hand,
To length the life that lingreth now, and lothsomely does stand.
Ye son, ye moon and stars: that gyues the gladsome light
Forbear to show your force a while: let all be irksome night.
Let never soil bring forth, again the lusty green
Nor trees that new dispoyled are, with leaf be ever seen.
Let neither bird nor beast: posses their wonted mind
Let all the things that lives on earth, be turned from their kind.
Let all the furies forth, that pine in Hell with pain,
Let all their torments come abroad: with living wightes to rain.
Let peace be turned to war, let all consume with fire,
Since I must d^e that once did joy, and lose that I desire.
I hate my life and breath, I hate delighting food,
I hate my grief I hate my death: I hate that does me good.
I hate the gentill heart: that rueth on my pain,
I hate the cruel stubborn sort, that does my life disdain.
I hate al sorts of men, that have their life in price,
And those I hate that follow death, esteeming them unwise
I hate th^se careful thoughts that think on my sweet ^o,
I hate my self then twice as much: if I forget her so.
I hate, what would you more, I wot not what I hate,
I wish her dead and laid in grave: I wish her better state.
Come wild and sauadge beasts, stretch forth your cruel paws,
Dismember me, consume my flesh: imbrew your greedy jaws.
Within your entrayles: see a coffin ye prepare,
To tomb this careful corpse that now, unwillingly I bare.
Come lingringe slothful death: that do the wretch deny
To show thy force and ridst the rich, that list not for to dye.
Is this the recompense? is this the due reward?
Does love thus pay his servants hier? and does he thus regard?
And does he use to set, the harmles souls on fire,
With fair sweet intisinge looks: to kindle their desire?
Fie false love that have so decte, with bewty bright,
A Lady fair with such untroth, to work such cruel spite.
And ye that did pursue blind love with speedy pace,
^es^rame your steps example take, of this my woeful case.
Let this alone suffice, that in few words I say,
Who can beware by others harms, thrice blessed and happy they.
Believe this to be true: that now too true I prove,
But little troth in women's breast: and fleeting in their love.
God grant each wight on earth, that serves with faithful mind,
A better hap and that he may, a truer Mystrisse find.
FINIS.
The Lover in distress exclaymeth against Fortune.
HOw can the criple get, in running race the game?
Or he in fight defend himself, whose arms are broken lame?
How can th'imprisoned man whofe legs be wrapped in chains,
Think this his life a pleasant time, who knows nothing but pains?
So how can I rejoice, that have no pleasant thing,
That may revive my doulfull sprits, or cause me for to singe.
My legs be lame to go, mine arms cannot embrace,
My heart is sore, mine eyes be blind, for lack of Fortunes grace.
All this is Fortunes fault, that keeps these senses so,
She may advance them if she list, and rid them of this woe.
It is her cruel will, always on me to lower,
To keep from me her pleasant gifts, to make me know her power
Alas, alas, fi^ Fortune, f^e: why art thou so unkind,
To me that feign would be thy son, and ever in thy mind?
Now do I thee beseech, with pleasures me to frayght,
To temper this my woeful life, or else to kill me straight.
FINIS.
An other complaint on Fortune.
IN doubtful dreading thoughts, as I began call to mind,
This world, and eke the pleasures al, that Adams children find,
A place of pleasant hew appeared to my thought
Where I might see the wondrous works which nature for us wrought.
All things of any price, approached to my sight,
And still me thought that each man had, that was his most delight.
The rich man has his joy: his riches to embrace,
So has the huntesman his desire, to have the Heart in chase.
And other have their sport to see the Falcon flee,
And some also in Princes court: in favor for to be.
The warring Knight at will, an horse does run his race,
And eke the lover, in his arms, his Lady does embrace.
When that I see each man enjoy his whole delight,
Save I alas poor cursed man whom Fortune does so spite.
I fall straight to the ground, amazed with much grief,
With blouddy strokes upon my breast, I strive to rid my lief.
And thus I think, how can fair pictures those delight:
Whom nature from their tender age, defrauded of their sight.
FINIS.
The lover being newly cought in Cupids snares, complayneth on the Gods of
love, and compares his grief as follows.
THe hugie heap of cares, that in this world I find,
The sudden sighs that sore molest my heart
The foolish fancies that still run in my mind:
Makes me to lay all joy and mirth apart,
Lamenting still the causes of my smart.
But oh, alas, the more I weep and wayle,
The more my grief to me seems to prevail.
The more I seek my pinchinge panges to swage,
By diverse ways, such as I think be best
The more it frets, the more it gins to rage,
So that my senceles head can take no rest:
Ah seely wretch, what does thee thus mollest
Or what does thus perturbe thy restless brains,
And from thy heart all worldly joy detaynes.
Alas what this should be I can not tell,
My youthful years can skill of no such change
But if some ugly shape of fury fell:
Or wicked wight that in this world does range
Has witched me with this disease so strange.
Or Cupid with his force of cruel dart,
Has stricken me and wounded thus my heart.
Has Cupid then such power on mortal wightes?
And strikes the blinded boy his dart so sure?
That no man can avoid his subtle s^ightes,
Nor ought against his fury may endure?
Has Venus force men thus for to allure?
And why then? does she not her son command
To shoot alike and strike with equal hand?
Is this the guise of powers that reign above,
Us seely souls in snares thus for to trap
And care they not to yield us death for love?
Joy they in woes our corses for to trap?
And pass they not what unto us does hap?
Can Gods above to man bear any hate,
Or do they mock and jest at our estate?
Ah foolish fool? what fancy rules thy head.
Or what does cause thee now this talk to move?
What fury fell does thee poor wretch now lead?
To rail on all the Gods does it behooue?
Since it is only Cupid God of love.
That guiltless she with stroke of goulden shafte,
Has wounded thus and thee of joys berafte.
Even as the slender Bark that long is tossed
By surging waves cast up from deepest seas:
And Saylars still in danger to be lost,
Do hale and pull in hope to take their ease:
When stormy fluds begin once to appease.
Even so fare I being in Cupids power
In hope at last to see that happy hour.
Wherein I shall my wished joys obtain,
And placed be within her gentill heart,
Then shall I take my sorrows all for gain.
When I have her that causes now my smart,
Then farewell Cupid with thy cruel darte
And welcome she that pearst me with her sight,
She is my Joy, she is my hearts delight.
FINIS.
The Lover extolleth, as well the rare virtues of his Lady beloved, as also her
incomparable beauty.
DEsire has driven from me my will,
Or Cupids blase has bleard mine eyes:
Knowledge me fayles, my sight is ill:
If kind or cunning could devise
Nature to paynt in better plight
To set her forth with red and white:
Or if men had Apelles art,
Who could her mend in any part?
Her face declares where favor grows,
And tells us here is Beauties grace:
Her eyes has power to bind and lose,
Her countenance may friends embrace.
Her cheeks be decte with blood full fair,
Her color clear as is the air:
Her hair, her hand, her foot also,
Has won the praise where ever she go.
Her looks do seem to speak alone,
When that her lips remove no whit
Her inward virtues may be known:
By vsinge of her sober wit.
Her iestures also cumly are,
My tongue lackes skill them to declare:
The rest of her that are unnamed,
In perfect shapes are lively framed.
Now though that kind has set her forth,
And natures works she has possessed,
These goodly gifts are little worth:
If pity dwelt not in her breast.
Oh, God forbid such flowring youth
Should be mislyked for lack of ruth,
For I with other might say then:
Lo, this is she that kills men.
FINIS.
The Lovers farewell, at his departure, persuades his beloved to constancy in
his absence.
THough Fortune cannot favor
According to my will:
The proof of my behauor:
Shall be to love you still.
Entending not to change,
Whiles that my life does last:
But still in love to raunge:
Till youth and age be past.
Though I be far you fro,
Yet in my fantacie:
I love you and no mo:
Think this assuredly.
Your own both true and just,
Always you shall me find:
Wherefore of right you must,
Have me likewise in mind.
And do not me forsake,
Though I do tarry long:
But take me for your make,
I will not change my song.
Though absence now a while,
Do part us thus in twain:
Think neither craft nor gyle,
For I will come again
The same man that I went.
Both in my word and deed:
Though some men do relent,
And grudge that I should speed.
But if you do remain,
And do not fro me starte:
My heart you do attain,
Till death us two depart.
And thus farewell adieu,
And play an honest part:
And change me for no new,
Seeing that you have my heart.
FINIS.
A propper Dittie.
To the tune of lusty Gallant.
THe glyttering shows of Floras dames
Delights not so my careful mind,
Ne gathering of the fragrant flames:
That often in Floras Nymphs I find.
Ne all the noates of Birds so shryl
Mellodiously in woods that singe,
Whose solemn Qu^res the skies does fill:
With noate on noate that heavenly ringe.
The ^ri^king Fish in streams that spring
And sport them on the rivers side,
The Hound the Hawk and every thing:
Wherein my joys did once abide,
Does nothing else but breed my woe
Since that I want which I desire,
And death is eke become my fo:
Denying that I most requier,
But if that Fortunes freendly grace
Would grant mine eyes to take the view,
Of her whose port and amorous face
My senses all does so subdew.
That raunging too and fro to gain
The pray that most delights me,
At last I find that breeds me pain:
She flies so fast it will not be.
Then in my self with lingering thoughts
A sudden strife begins to gro,
I then do wish such Birds at noughts:
That from their lovers flies so.
At last I see the Fowlars gin,
Prepared for this Bird and me
Then wished I lo his head therein:
So that my bird and I were free.
FINIS.
The Lover persuades his beloved, to beware the deceites and allurements of
strange suitors.
BE steadfast to thine own
As he is unto thee,
Regard not men un known
But love thine own truly
For often deceyts are sown
By them that unknown be
Wherefore cast of the rest:
And thine own love thou best.
For though that their false suite
Seem pleasant in thine ear,
Thou know often times ill fruit
A pleasant tree does bear.
If thou chance to repute
A rotten Apple clear,
Better to love thine own
And forsake men unknown.
Thou do well understand
These words not spoken seilde
More suer a bird in hand,
Then twenty in the field.
Thou know thine own sure band
And how that it has held
Then change it for no new:
But love him that is true.
If suitors do thee move
Or daily to thee write,
Yet grant to them no love
Their pains for too requite.
But think it does behooue
Thee always to do right
The^ must thou love thine own
And forsake men unknown.
This counsel I thee give
As farforth as I can,
As I that whiles I live
Wilbee thine only man.
For sure it would me green,
To see thee out of frame
Or change at any time:
Thine own not to be thine.
Thus written by thine own
To thee with all his heart,
Disiringe the unknown
Of thee may have no part.
For if such change be sown
No doubt thou killest my heart
Wherefore I say beware:
Always the unknown snare.
FINIS.
The Lady beloved exclaymeth of the great untruth of her lover.
WOuld god I had never seen,
the tears of thy false eyne
Or else my ears full deaf had bin
That herd those words of thine
Then should I not have known
Nor chosen to my part:
So many evils in one
To kill my poor true heart.
As now in thee I find,
Who bidst me from thee go:
As false and full unkind,
Alas why do thou so?
Was never man so false of oath,
To none as thou to me
Was never woman of more troth
Then I have been to thee.
And thou to leave me so,
And can no just cause tell:
But will thou spill with woe,
The heart that loves thee well.
Me thinks that for my part,
I may speak in the same,
I say me thinks thou art,
Even very m^tch to blame.
Pardy, it is but little praise,
To thee that art a man:
To find so many crafty ways,
To fraud a poor woman.
At whom all women smile,
To see so fond on thee:
And men although they wayle,
To see how thou use me.
To lure me to thy fist,
To ease thy feigned pain:
And ever when thou list,
To cast me of again.
The wretched hound yt spendes his days,
And serves after kind:
The Horse that tredeth y^ beaten ways
As nature does him bind
In age yet finds relief,
Of them that did him woe:
Who in their great mischief,
Disdain not them to know.
Thus they for woe and smart,
Had ease unto their pain:
But I for my true ^art,
Get naught but grief again.
The weary and long night
does make me dream of thee,
And still me thinks with sight,
I see thee here with me.
And then with open arms,
I strain my pillow soft:
And as I close mine arms,
me thinks I kiss thee often.
But when at last I wake
And find me mockte with dremes
Alas, with moon I make
My tears run down like streams.
All they that here this same,
Will spit at thy false deed:
And bid, fie on thy cursed name,
And on thy false seed.
That show so to the eye,
And bear so false an hew:
And make all women cry,
Lo, how ye men be untrue?
But yet to excuse thee now,
To them that would thee spot:
I Will say, it was not thou,
It was mine own poor lot.
FINIS.
The Lover declares his paynfull plight for his beloved sake.
SInce needs ye will me singe, give ear unto the voice,
Of me poor man your bond servant, yt knows not to rejoice.
Consider well my care, my pain and my unrest:
Which thou with force of Cupids Dart have grafted in my breast.
Heal, and withdraw from me, the venim of that Darte
Have pity, and release this woe, that does consume my heart:
The greatness of my grief, does bid me seek release
I seek to find to ease my pain, yet does my care increase.
I cease not to behold, that does augment my pain:
I see my self I seek my woe, yet can I not refrain.
That should my woe release, does most increase the same,
The cold that should acquench the heat, does most enrage the flame
My pleasure is my pain, my game is most my grief
My chief delight does work my woe, my heart is my relief
Such haps does hap to them, that happeth so to love,
And hap most hard: so fast to bind, that nothing can remove.
For when the harm is fixed, and rooted in the heart,
No tongue can tell, nor pen may write, how grievous is the smart
I have thought love but play, until I felt the sore,
But now I felt a thousand greefes I never felt before.
To tell what pains I bide, if that I could devise,
I tell the truth, believe me well, the day will not suffice
Grant now therefore some rest, since thus thou have me bound,
To be thine own, til body mine, lie buried under ground.
FINIS.
The Lover having his beloved in suspicion declares his doutfull mind.
Deem as ye list upon good cause
Ye may, and think of this or that,
But what, or why, my self best knows,
Whereby I think and fear not.
Whereunto I may well like
The doubtful sentence of this clause
I would ye were not as I think
I would I thought it were not so.
If that I thought it were not so,
Though it were so, it grieved me not,
Unto my heart it were as the
I harkened and I hear not.
At that I see I cannot wink,
Nor for my heart to let it go
I would it were not as I think
I would I thought it were not so.
Lo how my thought might make me free,
Of that perchance it needs not
For though no doubt in deed I see,
I shrink at that I bear not,
Yet in my heart this word shall sink,
Until the proof may better be
I would it were not as I think,
I would I thought it were not.
FINIS.
An exellent Sonet, Wherein the Lover exclaymeth against Detraction, being the
principal cause of all his care. To the tune, when Cupid scaled first the Fort.
Pass forth in doulfull dumpes my verse,
Thy Masters heavy haps unfold:
His grisled grief ^ache heart well perce,
Display his woes, fear not, be bold
Hid hole in heaps of heaviness
His dismale days are almost spent,
For fate, which forgde this fickleness
My youthly years with tears has sprent.
I loathe the lingering life I ^ed*
O wished death why stayest thy hand,
Since gladsome Joys away be fled:
And linkte I am in Dollors band.
In weltring waves my ship is tossed
My shattering sails away be shorn,
My Anchor from the Stearne is lost
And Tacklings from the Maynyard storne.
Thus driven with every gale of wind
My weather beaten Bark does sail,
Still hoping harbor once to find
Which may these passinge perrils quayle.
But out alas, in vain I hope
Since Billows proud, assault me still
And skill does want with Seas to cope
And licour salt my Keele does fill.
Yet storm does cease: but lo at hand
A ship with warlike wightes addressed,
Which seems to be some Pirates band:
With Powder and with Pellets pressed.
To sink or spoil my bruised Bark
Which dangers dread could not a daunt,
And now the shot the air does dark:
And Captain on the Deke him vaunt.
Then Ignorance the ouerseear proud
Cries to Suspicion, spare no shot:
And Envy yelleth out aloude,
Yield to Detraction this thy Boat:
And as it is now Sea men's trade
When might to cool the foe does lack,
By vayling foretop sign I made
That to their lee I me did take.
Then gathering wind to me they make,
And Treason first on board does come
Then follows Fraud like wily Snake:
And swift amongst them takes his rome.
These bind^ me Captive, taken with band
Of carkinge care and fell annoy,
While under Hatches yet I stand
Thereby quight to abandon joy.
Then hoysting sails they homeward hye
And me present unto Disdain,
Who me beheld with scorning eye
The more for to increase my pain.
As Lady she commanded straight
That to Despair they me convey,
And bid with skillful heed he wayght,
That Truth be bard from me away.
Madam (quoth I) let due desert
Yet find remorse for these my woes,
Of pity grant some ease to smart
Let Troth draw near to quayle my foes.
But all for naught I do complain
For why the deaf can moan no noise,
No more can they which do disdain:
But will in heart thereat rejoice.
Wherefore twixt life and death I stay
Til time with daughter his draw nigh
Which may these furious foes dismay:
Or else in ruthful plight I dye.
FINIS
The Lover in bondage looks for releasement and longs for the relief of
his wedding day.
WHen shall relief release my woe?
When shall desert, disdain digest?
When shall my hap, hap to me so?
That my poor heart may come too rest.
When shall it so? when shall it so?
When shall long love be looked upon?
When shall tried truth be homeliest?
When shall hope have that hope hangs on?
That my poor heart may come to rest.
When shall it so? etc.
When shall I see she seethe right?
When shall I hear she hears me best?
When shall I feel, she feels delight?
That my poor heart may come to rest.
When shall it so. etc.
When stinte all storms that thus agreeue?
When stinte all stays that wrong has wrest?
When stinte all strifes right to relieve?
That my poor heart may come to rest.
When shall it so? etc.
When right shall see right time to boste?
When right shall aright unright oppress?
When right shall reign and rule the roste?
Then my poor heart shall come to rest.
Then shall it so. etc.
When shall I watch the time to see?
Now shall I wish the time possessed,
Now shall I think each day years three
That my poor heart may come to rest.
When shall it so? etc.
Now farewell heart, most smooth most smart,
Now farewell heart with heart hartiest,
And farewell heart, ti^^ heart in heart:
By hearty heart may come to rest.
God grant it so. etc.
FINIS.
A fine and freendly Letter, of the Lover to his beloved.
LIke as the Hawk is led by lure, to draw from tree to tree,
So is my heart through force of love, where ever my body be
The Hawk to pray does double wing, her flight is fled in vain
I make my flight in waste of wind, my hope receives no gain.
Hawks that be high it hurtes to light, two flightes without reward
My flight is two, and three again, alas Mistress regard:
The Hawk brought low, is soon made high, by feeding on warm food
Your mouths breath settes me aloft, there is nothing so good.
Good Lady then strain forth ye strings, whose tune may me revive
And with strau^g tongue do not prolong, my joys thus to deprive.
Within your breast my heart is hid, your will and it is one,
Regard my smart, the cure is yours, and loss, when I am gone.
Thus all your own, I recommend me wholly to your grace,
As seems you best for to reward, my plight and woeful case.
Which plight if you do counterpaise, with joys, as does belong,
My heart for joy would tune accord, to singe some pleasant song.
FINIS.
The Lovers fata farewell at his death.
AL wealth I must forsake, and pleasures eke forgo,
My life to end in woe and grief, my desteny is so
For where I had perfixt, with suit to win my joy,
I found I had right speedy death, al wealth for to distroy.
Whose Image lo I am, though living I appear,
Both body and soul be separate, my heaven it is not here.
My heart I have bestowed, whereas it is not found
Thou body the^ depart thou hence, why pleasurest thou the ground?
And Death draw thou me near, O Death my dearest friend,
Then with thy dart, shoot through my heart, my sorrows so to end*
And when that death did hears the thing that I did crave,
He weighed me, even as I was, a man fit for the grave.
Come follow me says he, thou man be not aghast,
He that delights in earthly things, shall feel these panges at last
All ye then that list to love, this lesson learn by me,
Or ye begin, noate well, the end, is pain and misery.
FINIS.
The Lover complayneth of his Ladies inconstancy
to the Tune of I loathe that I did love.
YYou graves of grisly ghosts
Your charge from coffins send
From roaring rout in Plutoes costs
You Furies up ascend.
You trampling steades of Hell
Come tear a woeful wight,
Whose haples hap no tongue can tell
Ne pen can well endight.
I hate this loathsome life
O Atropos draw nie,
Untwist ye thread of mortal strife
Send death and let me die.
For Beauties taynted trope
Has made my cares assay,
And ficklenes with her did cope:
To fordge my whole decay.
My faith alas I gave
To wight of Cressids kind,
For steadfast love I love did crave
As curtesy does bind.
She likewise troth does plight
To be a constant love,
And prove her self even maugre spite
A faithful turtle Dove.
But lo a woman's mind
Cloakt hole with deep deceyt
And driven with every gale of wind.
To bite at f^esher bayt
For when bewitch she had
My mind that erst was free,
And that her cumly beauty bad
My wounded heart agree.
And fixed on Fancyes lore
As world can witness bear,
No other saynct I did adore:
Or Idol any whear
Ne will, no woe, or smart
Could mind from purpose fet,
But that I had a Iasons heart
The golden fleese to get.
Ne for my part I swear
By all the Gods above,
I never thought on other fere
Or sought for other love.
In her the like consent
I saw full often appear,
If eyes be judge of that it mente
Or ears have power to hear.
Yet words be turned to wind
A new found gest has got
The Fort, which once, to undermine
And win I planted shot
Her friend that meant her well
Out of conceyt is quite,
While other bears away ye bell
By hitting of the white.
In this our wavering age
So light are women's minds.
As Aspen leaf yt still does rage
Though aeole calm his winds.
No place has due desert
No place has constancy
In eueri mood their minds back start
As daily we may see.
What paps did give them food
That weue such webs of woe
What beast is of so cruel mood
That countes his friend for fo:
Yet women do reward
With cares the loving wight
They constancy no whit regard,
In change is their delight.
You gallant youths therefore
In time beware by me
Take heed of wome^s subtle lore,
Let me example be.
FINIS.
The Lover, having sustained overmuch wrong at his Ladies hand wishes speedy
death.
TO feeble is the thread
That holds me in life,
That if it be not succored
Short end shall stint the strife.
For though the spindle run
To draw the thread on length
Alas thereby what hold is won
If it be weak of strength
Or how can it have aid
Since rigor is so rife,
In her whose hands to cut the thread
Gave cruelly the knife.
Whose edge of Envy hard
In Venus forge has wrought,
Whereby his death is thus preferred
Whose life offended naught.
But sith thy chief delight,
My chief delightful fo,
Is with such wrong to work the spite
With speed come end this woe.
And when my death has done
My duty at her will,
A greater grief be not begone
To last thereafter still.
For after death, if strife
Should still my life pursue,
What the^ does death but breed a life
Of moan and mischief new?
Wherefore if needs thou will
Thy spindle spin no more,
But yt this thread with spoil be spilt
Which led my life before.
Provide then for the non^e
Provide for me the best,
That I may dye at once
From all thy minds unrest.
And let not present death
Prefer an after pain,
But let the pains pas with my breath
And not revive again.
For thus by this you shall
Two things at once fulfill,
I shall be free that have bin thrall:
And you shall have your will.
FINIS.
The Lover exhorts his Lady to be constant.
To the Tune of Attend thee go play thee.
NOt light of love lady,
Though fancy do prick thee,
Let constancy possess thy heart:
Well worthy of blamyng:
They be, and defaming,
From plighted troth which back do start:
Dear dame:
Then fickleness bannish,
And folly extinguish,
Be skillful in guiding,
And stay thee from slidinge
And stay thee. etc.
The constant are praised
Their fame high is raised
Their worthynesse does pearce the sky,
The fickle are blamed:
Their light love shamed,
Their foolishness does make them dye:
As well,
Can Cressid bear witness,
Fordge of her own distress,
Whom Leprosy painted
And penury taynted:
And penury. etc.
Still Muses are busy
To tell us of Thisbe
Whom steadfastness does much commend
And Camma is placed,
To blame the defaced
That light of love do send.
Phedra,
Is checked most duly
Because that untruly
Forced thereto by love light
She slays Hippolite.
She slays. etc.
A spring of annoyance,
And well of disturbance,
New fanglenesse in love has bin:
It kills the Master,
It poisons the taster,
No worldly wight by it does win.
Therefore,
Good lady be constant,
So shall you not be shent,
But woorthely praised,
As you have deserved,
As you have, etc.
FINIS.
The Lover wounded with his Ladies beauty craves mercy.
To the Tune of where is the li^e that late I led.
IF pity once may move thy heart,
To rue a woeful wight?
If curtesy can force thy mind,
To view my doulfull plight?
Since I cannot devise
To quench this raging fire,
With trickling tears I crave of thee
Attend to my d^sier:
Whom Venus fethered boy
Has crasde with deadly dart,
Sent from the rays of those thy eyes
Which bread my woe and smart.
In vewing thee I took such joy
As woeful wight in rest
Until the blinded boy I felt
Assault my captive breast.
And since that time alas
Such pinching pain I taste
That I am now remediless
If mercy make not haste.
For hid in deep despair
My tears are all my joy,
I burn, I freese, I sink, I swim
My wealth is mine annoy.
Like as the tender turtle Dove
Does wayle the loss of mate,
In mourning weed, so spend I time
Lamentinge mine estate.
The night renewes my cares
When weary limbs would rest,
And dreadful dreams abandon sleep
Which had my greefes represt.
I drench my couch with tears
Which flow from gushing eyes,
A thousand heaps of hidden thoughts
In mind I do devise.
Full often times it does me good
To haunt and view the place,
Where I received my wound, alas
By vewing of thy face.
Full often it joys my heart
To kiss* that clot of clay,
From whence thou shot those loving looks
Which bred my whole decay.
O blessed place I cry
Though woorker of my pain,
Render I crave most heartily
To me my love again.
Not woeful Monsier dom Dieg
Or Priams noble son,
Constrained by love did ever moan
As I for thee have done.
Sir Romeus annoy
But trifle seems to mine,
Whose hap in winning of his love
Did clue of cares untwine.
My sorrows have no end
My hap no joy can spy,
The flowing Fountain of my tears
Begins to wax dry.
Let pity then requyte my pain
O woorker of my woe,
Let mercy mild possess thy heart
Which art my freendly foe.
Receive the heart which hear
I yield into her hand,
Which made by force a breach in Fort
Which I could not withstand.
Thou have in Balance paysd
My life and eke my death,
Thy loyalty contaynes my joy
Disdain will stop my breath.
If constant love may reap his hire
And faith may have his due,
Good hope I have your gentill heart
My grisly grief will rue.
And that at length I shall
My hearts delight embrace:
When due desert by courtesy,
Shall purchase me thy grace.
Until which time, my dear
Shall still increase my pain,
In pensive thoughts and heaviness
Because I shall remain.
FINIS.
A Caveat to yongmen to shun the snares of Cupids crafty sleightes.
IF ever wight had cause to moan
or wayle with bitter tears,
His wretched life and woeful plight
that still in languish wears.
Then have I cause that late have lodgde*
such love within my heart,
With grief, with pain, with pyning panges*
my body boyles in smart.
O earth why do not thou
my woeful plight sustain?
O surging Seas with swallowing gulf
release me of this pain.
For languishing love with doleful doomes*
has laid my heart in brine,
O woeful wretch, O wicked wight
That so for love does pine.
The Son that shines with golden beams
and dries the dewie flowers,
Does cause me wretch with blubbering eyes
to gush forth extreme showers.
The hermony of chirping birds
that joys with silver songs,
Each living wight, does cause my cares
to fill my heart with thronges.
Each gladsome joy of mundaine glee
That glads the worldly mind,
Does heap up cares on careful corpse
against all course of kind.
And so each thing that ought delight
and rid the mind from pause,
Contrariwise against all right
a thousand cares does cause.
For when that I in sugared sleep,
most sweetly should take rest,
Then do I wring my woeful hands
and beat my doleful breast.
And if I chance on sleep to fall,
a thousand dreams I have:
And do suppose I her embrace,
whose want will cause my grave.
And then with gladsome heart I joy
thus clean deprived of woe:
But (oh alas) when that I wake,
I find it nothing so.
And then my sighs from sobbing heart
does reaue my breast in twain,
And tears that run from blubbered eyes
does more increase my pain.
And when I should sustain my life
and feeble corpse with food,
Unsauory seems it unto me:
each thing should do me good
Amidst the nipping frostes I broyle,
in pearching heat I freese
And thus against all course of kind:
for love my l^fe I leese.
Woe worth the time that first I lodgde
thy s^oyling love in heart,
You young men al be warnd by me
And shun blind Cupids Darte
FINIS.
The aged Lovers noate, at length to learn to dye.
WHy ask thou the cause
Wherefore I am so sad
Thou know when age on draws
No creature can be glad.
And since she has me rested
And threatened me to die:
Therefore I am sequestered
All mirth for to deny.
And now with feeble age
The rest of all my days,
My countenance must be full sage:
Since that my life decays.
Like as the heart of Oak
By time does rot at last,
Like time does age provoke
With time my heart does brast.
Lo thus by course of time
My youth is gone and past,
And now the turn is mine
Of bitter death to taste.
And noate that I have said
The cause whereof and why,
My youthful parts be playde
And I must learn to die.
FINIS.
The desperate Lover exclaymeth his Ladies cruelty and threatens to kill
himself.
MY joyful days be past,
My plasant years be gone,
My life it may not last
My grave and I am one.
My mirth, and all is fled
And I a man in woo,
Desires to be dead
My misch^^fe to forgo.
I burn and am a cold
I freese in midst of fire,
I see she does with hold
That most I do desire.
I see that she does see
And yet she will be blind,
I see in healpinge me
She seeks and will not find.
I see how she does wrye
When I begin to moan,
I see when I come nigh
How fayn she would be gone.
I see she knows my heart
And how I do complain,
I see sh^^ knows my smarte
She sees I do not feign.
I see my help at hand
I see my death also.
I see where she does stand
I see my cruel fo.
I see, what would you more?
She would me gladly kill,
And she shall see therefore
That she shall have her will.
I cannot live by stones
It is to hard a food,
I would be dead at once
to do my Lady good.
She shall have her request
And I will have mine end,
Lo hee^e my blouddy breast
To please her most unkind.
FINIS.
The Lover being blinded with the faythlesse love of his Lady is contented to
remit her fault upon promis of amendment.
SInce that thou did me love
When lust did thee provoke,
And that thou do well prove:
That I cannot revoke.
My freendship fast, my love nor my good will,
Show some relief, least in despair I spill.
How well I was content
^lwayes to follow thee?
How well I did assent,
Thy thrall aye for to be
Thy self can judge to whom I do appeal,
By sentence lo, to yield me woe or weal.
But if thou me forsake,
As Cressid that forgot,
True Troylus her make,
And that thy heart is whot
On him whom shame did force thee once his faith to fly,
I see no hope but yt he must yield forth himself to die.
And though thou think that I,
Am loath the^ too forgo,
Yet shall I rather die
Then live and please my foe:
But hindre him in love, all others does refrain,
Whose treason once did me purchase thy due disdain
FINIS.
A worthy comparison of Virtue against all worldly pomp.
WHen that I way with wit, and eke consider now,
The tickle stay of her, that Fortunes wheel does bow
And turn even at her will, such luck, lo, as she list,
No thread so surely sp^nne, but that she may untwist.
I can but aye lament, and wayle the lack of them,
That in her hold do trust, weighing they are but men.
For if I were a Lord, and come of high degree,
And had all thing at will, as best contented me:
My Prince therewith well pleased, that nothing might offend,
And all my deeds so done, that each man might commend.
My parent of great state, and eke of worthy fame,
That worldly men did wish, the honor of his name:
My friends and mine allies so worthy in each press,
That I need bear no wrong, that I could not redress.
Of courage and of strength, so doughty of my hand,
That Ladies might me love, that dwell in forrayn land.
And enemies might me dread, for fear of overthrow,
And that all this were true, each worldly wight did know.
Yet were I but a man, and mortal in this earth,
For death does not accept, the worship of my birth:
Since so I hold it best, that each man should contend,
So to direct himself, that after this lives end,
Yet virtue might remain, that soundes a Trompet, lo,
A comfort to a friend, a wound unto a foe.
As some to simple turn from sage,
And overthrow with every wind,
Some eke correct with rigorous rage
Whom wealth could never foord good mind,
Has won in prison such a feelde,
As liberty could never yield.
FINIS.
Virtute nulla possessio mayor.
Of a happy wished time.
Each thing must have a time, and time does try men's troth,
And troth deserves a special trust, on trust great frenship groth:
And freendship is full fast, where faythfulnesse is found
And faithful things be full of fruicte, and fruitful things be sound
The sound is good in proof, and proof is Prince of praise,
And worthy praise is such a pearl, as lightly not decays.
All this does time bring forth, which time I must abide,
How should I boldly credit crave? till time my truth have tried.
And as a time I found, to fall in Fancies frame,
So do I wish an happy time, at large to show the same.
If Fortune answer hope, and hope may have her hire,
Then shall my heart possess in peace, the time that I desire.
FINIS.
The Lover persuades him self to patience against Envy and slanderous
tongues.
IF only sight suffice, my heart to loose or bind,
What cause have I to move debate, whereby no peace I find?
If that my restless will, by pain does still renew,
What force have I? but she consent, my fo for to subdue?
To yield and suffer then, I think it for the best,
And by desert as time shall serve, to purchase quiet rest.
Let ielous envy lowre with brows, and visage bent,
I know the worst, no shameless tongue, shall alter mine intent.
The Dice of Love are thrown, god speed the doubtful chance
Misdeeme who list, so she at last, my service will advance.
To ask and to o^tayne, that Fortune were so swifte,
Since trauaill is the ready way, unto each noble gift.
And feeble is the joy, that lightly is begone,
As tender Flare can bear no stresse, before that it be sponne.
Wherefore with sad advice, in hope my heart shall dwell,
And all the tale that I confess, in silence will I tell
Unto her self alone, whose favor I require,
None else shall know her name for me, to constre my desire.
FINIS.
The Lover grievously complayneth against the unjust dealing of his Lady
beloved.
SInce thou unjust, have caught a lust,
To plough in barrayne ground:
Who long thee love, he shall thee prove,
Mutch better lost then found.
As brickle clay, in Winters day,
That in the frost is wrought,
So do I find, thy double mind,
Mutch better sold then bought.
It is as eefe, a broken Syue,
Should hold the dropping rain:
As for to bind, thy changed mind,
That naught can do but feign.
So may I say, both night and day,
Cursing the time and place:
Where I professed, to love thee best,
Whose troth I find so scace.
Whose lyinge words, and feigned bourdes,
Did me so far enchayne:
When thou did flyt, by changed wit,
That I could not refrain.
But of my heart, to ease the smart,
The best redress I know:
Is to vntwinde, my constant mind,
And let such fancies go.
For though I serve, until I sterue,
I see none other boot
Such doubleness, thy heart does press,
And croppes it by the root.
Yet will I pray, even as I may,
That Cupid will requite,
Thy froward heart, with such a smart,
As I have by thy spite.
For to be fed, with wake a bed,
And fast at boorde among:
Till thou confess, ah pitiless,
That thou have done me wrong.
On bush and brier, may it appear,
Whereby most men do pas,
Thy faygned faith, how nere my death,
It has me brought alas.
That they vncaught, may once be taught,
By reason to refrain:
Their crafty wiles, and subtle smiles:
That so in love can feign.
A due unjust, since that I must,
Of force declare thee so,
The fault is thine, the pain is mine:
And thus I let thee go.
FINIS.
The Lover in great distress comfort himself with hope.
O Heavy heart whose harms be hid,
Thy healpe is hurt, thy hap is hard,
If thou should brast, as God forbid:
Then should I dye without reward.
Hope well to have, hate not sweet thought,
Often cruel storms fair calmes have brought:
After sharp showers, the sun shyneth fair,
Hope comes likewise after despair.
In hope a King does go to war,
In hope the Lover lives full long,
In hope the Merchant sails full far,
In hope most men do suffer wrong:
In hope the Ploughman sows much seed,
Thus hope helps thousands in their need.
Then faint not heart among the rest,
What ever chance hope thou the best.
Though wit biddes will to blow retrayte,
Will cannot work as wit would wish
When that the Roche does taste the bayte:
To late to warn the hungry fish.
When Cities bren of fiery flame,
Great Ryuers scarce will quench the same.
If Will and Fantasy be agreed
To late for Wit to bid take heed.
FINIS.
In the commendacion of faithful love.
THe faithful cannot fly, nor wander to nor fro,
Faith only they hold them bye, though that the fickle go.
A Pillar of more force, then Marble laid with hand,
With Pickaxe may deuorce, and lay it flat on land.
The Other so divine, that no art can remove,
Once laid cannot decline, the only Pillar love,
FINIS.
The Lover wishes himself an Heart in the Foreste, (as Acteon was) for his
Ladies sake.
I Would I were Acteon, whom Diana did disguise,
To walk the woods unknown, whereas my lady lies:
A heart of pleasant hew, I wish that I were so,
So that my Lady knew, alone me, and no mo.
To follow thick and plain, by hill and dale allow,
To drink the water feign, and feed me with the sloe:
I would not fear the frost, to lie upon the ground,
Delight should quite the cost, what pain so that I found.
The shaling nuts and mast, that falls from the tree,
Should serve for my repast, might I my Lady see:
Sometime that I might say, when I saw her alone,
Behold thy slave alone, that walks these woods unknown.
FINIS.
An Epytaph upon the death of Arthur Fletchar of Bangor Gent.
YE grisly ghostes which walk below in black Cocistus Lakes,
Mi^s D^tis dens, Erebus Dames, with hear of ugly Snakes
Medusa with thy monstrous mates, assist me now a while,
In dyre wamenting verse to show, and drierie doleful style.
The fair untimely fatal end of Fletcher, now by death,
Unto the Air his soul with Jove, resignde his latest breath:
Whose life fu^l d^e we must commend, as it deserves the same,
And conversation to each one, did seldom meryt blame.
A faithful friend to each he was, to none an oppen foe,
Unto his Prince a subject true, till fates had lodgd him lo.
His acts did tend to no man's harms, no Parasite to praise,
For greedy gain but still the troth, mayntaynd at all assayes.
His time he spent in Uertues lore, as seemd his state full well,
By serious study what he could, he sought for to excel.
But what of all this same? the fates no wight in time will spare,
When ghastly death has pearst in earth, the^ must our bodies wear
In age as well in youths, in youths as well in age,
No certain time we have to bide, when death with us will wage.
No thing can still abide, but comes to naught in end,
The craggy Rocks the sturdiest oaks: stark rotten once is rend.
And so has Fletcher, now to death paid his due,
What he is now we must be all, his Funeral then view.
FINIS.
A Lady writes unto her Lover wherein she most earnestly charge him with
Ingratitude.
O Wretched wight whom hensfoorth may I trust
All men both falce and fell I will them painte,
If thou (unkind) be cruel and unjust
Whom I always so faithful held and quainte:
What cruelty? what trustles treasons just?
Was ever hard by tragical complaint?
But less then this, my merit if I may,
And thy desert in equal balance lay.
Wherefore (unkind) since that on live?
A worthier wight of prowes ne beauty,
Ne that by much to thee that does ariue,
In cumly port ne genorositie.
Why do thou not tweene these thy virtues strive,
It may be said thou have serbillitie:
Then say that who of faith is holden stable:
There may to him none else be comparable.
For write ye not that virtues have no grace
Whereas this trust and stablenesse does want,
As other things, though much of cumly face:
Cannot be seen, where gladsome light is skant.
A maid to false for thee, an easy case,
Whose Idol, Lord and God thou werst most puisant
Whom with thy words it easly had bin done,
To make believe both cold and dark the son.
Cruel, what offense have thou for to bewail,
The killing of thy love if thou not repent?
If ye account so light of faith to fail:
What other sin can make thy heart lament?
How treat you foes, if me ye do assail?
That loves thee so, with such cruel torment:
The heavens iustles, I will say to be:
In case they show the just revenge of me.
If of offenses all, that monstrous vice
Ingratitude, do most a man offend,
And if for that, an Angel of great price,
Was forced to Hell, from heaven to dissend:
If great offense, great chastisment entice
When to reform, the heart does not him bend,
Take heed sharp skourge that God on thee not send
Thou art to me unkind, and do not mend.
If these also, besides some other spot
I have (unkind) whereof thee to accuse,
That thou my heart with holdst, I mean it not,
I speak of thee that made thee mine by lot,
And robbest me since, against reason which I must
Restore (unkind) for well thou wottest it plain,
They shall be damned that others goods retain.
Unkind, thou have forsaken me, but I will
Not will thee willingly for none assayes
Yet this hard hap, and trouble for to fly,
I can and will, end these my woeful days:
In only way, in thy disgrace to dye,
For if the Gods had granted by their pays
My death, given then, when I stood in thy grace,
No wight had dyed in half so happy a case.
FINIS.
The Lover unto his Lady beloved, of her disdaynfulnesse toward him.
FOr beauties sake though love does dread thy might,
And Venus thinks, by suit to prove thy dame:
Though Pallas strives, by hope of equal right,
For Wisdoms watch, as daughter thee to claim.
Though Mercury would entitled be thy Sire,
For thy sweet talk, so sweetly blazed forth:
Though all the Gods, do burn in like desire,
Thy graces rare, in heaven so much worth:
Yet lo, thy proof I know, the trusly weight,
Of Tygars milk, thou fostred were from molde,
And Cipres Well with dainful chaung of freight.
Gave thee to drink infected poison cold.
But yet beware, least love renew in thee,
The dreadful flame Narcissus whylom felt,
With eger mood, and sight to feed thine eye.
Of thine own, from others flame to swell:
For love does love with hot revenge to wreake,
The ruthles Iron heart, that will not break.
FINIS.
The Lover in the praise of his beloved and comparison of her beauty.
NOt she for whom proud Troy did fall and burn,
The Greeks eke slain, that bluddy race did run:
Nor she for spite that did Acteon turn,
Into an Heart her beauty coye did shun:
Nor she whose blud upon Achilles Tomb,
Whose face would tame a Tygars heart:
Nor she that wan by wise of Paris dome.
The Apple of Gold for Beauty to her part:
Nor she whose eyes did pearce true Troylus breast,
And made him yield, that knew in love no law,
Might be compared to the fairest and the best,
Whom Nature made to keep the rest in awe:
For Beauties sake, sent down from Jove above,
Thrice happy is he, that can attain her love.
FINIS.
In the praise of a beautiful and virtuous Virgin, whose name begins with M.
BEhold you Dames ye reign in fames, whose looks men's hearts do lead
And triumph in the spoil of those, upon whose breasts you trede.
A myrt or make of M, whose molde, Dame Nature in disdain,
To please her self, and spite her foes, in beauty raysd to reign:
Whose sunny beams and starry eyes, presents a heauenlyke face,
And shows the world a wondrous work, such are her gifts of grace
In forhed, feature bears, brunt in face does favor guide,
In looks is life, in shape is shame, in cheeks does coulor hyde:
In boddy seemelynesse does show, in words does wisdom shade,
All parts of her does praise deserve, in temprance is her trade.
In humble port is honor plaste, in face is maidens smyles
Her life is grafte with Golden gifts, her deeds deuoyd of gyles.
And as the Star to Mariners, is guide unto the Port,
So is this M, a heavenly joy, to Lovers that resort:
Who run and rome with inward wounds, and folded arms acrosse,
And hide their harms with clokes of care, and feed their hope with loss.
Her looks does lift above the skies, her frowns to Hell does throw
All sues to her, she seeks on none, that daily proof does show:
Wherefore her saying late set forth, she burnt and could not flee,
Though meant in praise, yet far amiss, I take it written be.
She is none such as if she would, that any would disdain:
But for the smartes of others greefes, of pity she did plain,
As one most loathe of any life, for love of her be lost,
Or that with blud or cruel deeds, men write her beauties boste:
For mercy is in M, her breast, and modest is her life,
A courtuous maid, and like to prove, a constant worthy wife.
FINIS.
The Lover deceived by his Ladies inconstancy, writes unto her as follows.
THe heat is past that did me fret,
The fire is out that nature wrought
The plants of youth that I did set,
Are dry and dead within my thought
The Frost has slain the kindly sap,
That kept the heart in lively state:
The sudden storm and thunder clap:
Has turned love, to mortal hate.
The mist is gone that bleard mine eyes,
The lowering clouds I see appear,
Though that the blind eat many flies,
I would you knew, my sight is clear:
Your sweet deceyuing flattryng face
Did make me think that you were white:
I muse how you had such a grace:
To seem a Hawk, and be a kyte.
Where precious ware is to be sold,
They shall it have, that gives most:
All things we see, are won with Gold,
Few things is had, where is no cost.
And so it fares now by me,
Because I preace to give no gifts:
She takes my suit unthankfully,
And drives me of with many dryftes.
Is this the end of all my suit,
For my good will, to have a skorne?
Is this of all my pains the fruit,
To have the chafte in stead of corn?
Let them that list, posses such dross,
For I deserve a better gain:
Yet had I rather leave with loss,
Then serve and sue, and all in vain.
FINIS.
A true description of Love.
Ask what love is? it is a passion,
Begun with rest, and pampred up in play:
Planted on sight, and nourished day by day,
With talk at large, for hope to graze upon,
It is a short joy, long sought, and soon gone:
An endless maze, wherein our wills do stray:
A gylefull gain, repentance is the pay.
A great fire bred of small occasion,
A plague to make, our fraylty to us known,
Where we thereby, are subject to their lay:
Whose fraylty ought, to leave until our stay,
In case our selves, this custom had not known.
Of hope and health, such creatures for to pray,
Whose glory rests chiefly on denaye.
FINIS.
The Lover to his beloved, by the name of fair, and false.
O Cruel heart with falsehood infecte, of force I must complain,
Whose poison hid, I may detect, as cause does me constrayn:
Thy name I shryne within my breast, thy deeds though I do tell,
No mind of malice I protest, thy self does know it well.
If thy deserts then bids me write, I cannot well revoke it,
I shall not spare to show thy spite, I will no longer cloak it:
As Troylus truth shall be my sheeld, to keep my pen from blame,
So Cressids craft shall keep the feeld, for to resound thy shame.
Ulysses wife shall mate the sore, whose wishly troth does shine,
Well Fair and False, I can no more, thou art of Helens line:
And daughter to Diana eke, with pale and deadly cheer,
Whose often change I may well like, two moonthes within the year.
FINIS.
The Lover describes his paynfull plight, and requires speedy redress, or
present death.
THe slave of servile sort, that borne is bond by kind,
Does not remain in hope, with such unquiet mind:
Ne tossed crasid Ship, with yrksome surging seas,
So greedely the quiet Port, does thirst to ride at ease.
As I thy short return, with wishing vows require,
In hope that of my hateful harms, the date will then expire:
But time with stealing steps, and driery days does drive,
And thou remaynst then bound to come, if that thou be alive.
O cruel Tygars whelpe, who had thy hand in hold?
When y^ with flattering pen thou wrotst, thy help at hand behold?
Believe it to be true, I come without delay,
A fool and silly simple soul, yet do thou still betray:
Whose mooueles love and trust, does reason far surmount,
Whom Cupids trumpe, to fatal death has sommond to account
My faith and former life: fed with such friendly fire,
Have not of thee by just reward, deserved such falts hyer:
I promise thee not mine, but thy case I bewail,
What infamy may greater be, then of thy faith to fail?
How often with humble suit? have I besought the son,
That he would spur his Coursers fearce, their race more swifte to run?
To the end with quicker speed, might come the promised day,
The day which I with loving looks, and weary will did pray.
But thou art sure disposde to glory in my death,
Wherefore to feed thy fancy fond, lo, here I end my breath.
I can not sighe nor sob, away by playnt I pine:
I see my fatal fainting file, ye Sisters do untwine,
The Feriman I find, pressed at the River side:
To take me in his restles Boat, therein with him to ride.
And yet although I sterue, through thy dispitous fault:
Yet crave I not in my revenge, that harm should thee assault,
But rather that thy fame, eternally may shine:
And that each to thine avail, abundantly incline.
That each thine enterprise, has luckye lot and chance,
And stable fortune, thine estate, from day to day advance,
That Sun, that Moon, that stars, and eke the plannets all,
The fire, the water, and the earth, may freendly to thee fall.
That many quiet years, thou number may with rest:
Uoyd of all annoyes and greeues, as may content thee best,
And if that foraine love, torment and vex thy heart:
God yield thy weary wanting wish, and swagement of thy smart.
With froward flearing face, at me if Fortune frown,
Thou do rejoice and I not so, but joy thy good renown:
And if I thee offend, for that I do thee love,
Forgive it me: for force it is, I can it not remove.
For I in secret sort, these lines to thee did I write,
My weakened wearied hand hensforth, shall sease for to endyte:
That letters to receive from me, thou need not muse:
The messenger that next of all, of me shall bring the news.
Dissolved from the corpse, shall be my doleful spright:
That first (vnshea^hd) shall pass to thee, when he has vewd thy sight,
Contented he shall go unto the heavens above,
In case that ioyed rested place, may gain it any love.
And now for that my death, thy name may spot and stayne:
If that the flying fame thereof, to others ears attain,
I will not it were red, or known by other ways:
That thou art only cause, I thus in ruthe do end my days.
Wherefore this Letter red, condemn it to the flame:
And if thou do thy honor forse, I know thou will the same,
And if in lingering time, unawares they chance to come:
Wherein the entrayles of the earth, shall hap to be my tomb.
At least yet grant me this, it is a small request:
O happy wythered pyned corpse, God send thy soul good rest.
FINIS.
The Lady beloved, assures her Lover to be his own, and not to change, while
life does last.
Dear heart as erst I was, so will I still remain,
Till I am dead, and more if more may be:
Howsoever love do yield me joy or pain,
Or Fortune list to smyle or frown on me
No changing chance my fast faith may constrayne,
No more then Waves, or beating of the Sea
May stir the steadfast rock, that will not ply,
For fair nor foul one inche, no more will I.
A file or knife of lead, shall sooner carue
The Diamant unto what form you will:
Ere Fortunes dynte, compel me for to swerve,
Or the ire of Love, to break my constant will,
Ye sooner shall, the law of nature starve,
When Ryuers take their course against the hill,
Ere sudden hap, for better or for worse,
Distur^e my thoughts, to take a better course.
With hearts consent, my love you do possess,
A surer hold may chance, then many ween:
The faith by oath, that subjects do confess,
To their new prince, is seldom stronger seen:
No fyrmer state than that, which love does sure express,
Of King, ne Keyser hitherto has been:
So that you need not fortify your hold,
With Tower or Ditch, least others win it should.
For though you set, no Soldiers for defense,
For all assaults, this one may yet suffice:
It is not goods can alter my pretense,
No gentle heart, yeeldes to so vile a prise.
Though crown and septier, few would despise,
Not beauty meet, to move a wavering mind,
Yet more then yours, I wot not where to find.
And fear you not, what form my heart once took,
Least any new print, shall the same deface:
So deep therein, ingraued is your look,
As never may be wyped from that place:
My heart like Wax, so lightly did not brook,
More then one stroke, ere Cupid brought to pass
One splint of skale, thereof to take away,
The best reserved, your Image to pourtray.
That like as what stone, it self best desendeth,
And hardiest is with tool to be grave:
Does sooner break in pieces, then it bends,
To looze the stamp, before my hand it gave:
Even so the nature, of my heart contendeth,
As hard is this, as any stone you have:
Though forse do break it, unto pieces small,
Those pieces somewhat, you resemble shall.
FINIS.
In the praise of the rare beauty, and manifold virtues of Mistres D. as
follows.
IF Chawcer yet did live, whose English tongue did pass,
Who sucked dry Pernassus spring, and raste the Juice there was:
If Surrey had not scalde, the height of Jove his Throne,
Unto whose head a pillow soft, became Mount Helycon:
They with their Muses could, not have pronounst the fame,
Of D. fair Dame, lo, a staming stock, the chief of natures frame.
They would but have eclipsed, her beauties golden blast,
Nor Ovid yet of Poets Prince, whose wits all others past.
Old Nestor with his tongue, and flowing dew so sweet,
Would rather have berefte her right, then pend her praises meet
In Helens heavenly face, whose grace the Greeks bought dear,
For whose defense proud Troy did fall, such form did not appear.
In Hectors sister lo: who Pirhus Father rapte,
Did not abound such beauty bright, as now to D, has hapt:
For D, does pass as far, Dame Venus with her prise,
As Venus did the other two, by doom of Paris wise.
If she had present been, within the walls of I Would,
They would not had such discord then, nor Paris iudgd that side.
In mind all void of doubt, they straight agreed would,
That D, should of good right, the Aple have of Gold.
Whom as I must believe, that nature did create,
To rob the hearts of noble Kings, and courage stout to mate:
Her forhead seemly spaste, wherein do shine her eyes,
No whit unlike to stars by night, or beam when Phoebus rise.
Her hair that shines like gold, her shoulders cover whight.
To which no snow on Mountain high, may be compared right:
Her mouth well compast small, in smylings vtters forth
A treasure rich of Orient Pearl, thereto no Gold more worth,
I fear much Promethius fall, dare no further wade,
Whom love embraced with the shape, that he so finely made:
Yet this I dare presume, one thought of her may draw,
A heart of Iron, and it subdue, unto blind Cupids law.
I sorrow to recite, the bitter tears that flow:
Within the eyes of other Dames, that beauty know.
I weep to wayle in mind, the burning slights that flame:
In troubled hearts of Natures case in spreading of her fame,
They all do curse themselves, of Nature makes complaynt,
That she on them had small regard, that did her thus depaynt.
Of her does nobles spring, and suitors sue for grace,
And Fountains eke of sugared speech, where voice can take no place,
Here Pallas should have lost her praise, for wisdom great,
Who gendred was of Jove his brains, where wisdom took his seat.
Here wise Ulysses wife, whose chastnesse brued her fame:
Should matched be, ye mated eke, in ventring of the same.
Proud Tarquin with his force, which Lucresse did defile:
Could not have spoiled fair D. so, with neither sound nor gyle.
This Dame I think be such, that heaven can undermine,
And lift the earth unto the skies, each stone a star to shine.
If passed time (alas) might now return again,
And all the wits that ever was, would herein take the pain:
They could not at the full, no due gifts express,
A wight unfit to be in earth, in heaven no such goddess.
Whose name shall floorish still, though Atropos with spite:
In running from her deuelish Den, bereave us of this light,
Though Thesiphon do cut, her time of life a way:
Her cankred Sword cannot assail, her fame for to decay.
For we in these our days, our selves may better quight:
To give to her the cheifest praise, then Paris which did right.
Less hatred cannot want, though power for to revenge:
Our stately house as they did Troy, their force does fail to senge.
Their might if it were like, these verses we should rue,
With no less pain then Ovid did, whose grief by Muses grew.
FINIS.
Pretty parables, and Proverbs of Love.
I Spoke when I meant not, in speeding to gain,
I sought, when I sped not, but trauaild in vain:
I found where I feared not, would writh with the wind,
I lost where I loved not, nor for^^d to find.
Nothing in which, truth is not trusty,
But double is such, and beauty but rustie:
I cool with the cold, I leave that I like not,
I know not the old, that rotteth and ripes not.
I savor no such, that fondly does favor,
I care not to much, for such sorry savor:
I taste or I try, in part or in all,
I care not a fly, the loss is but small.
I labor at leisure, I prick without pain,
In using for pleasure, beats in my brain:
I spare not in byrding, to beat well the bush,
Nor leave not in stryking, as long as they rush.
I try ere I trust, naught wasting but wind,
Before I find just, they know not my mind:
I iet not with Geminie, nor tarry not with Tawre
In bluttring who bleares me? I leave them with Law^^.
For fire who fyndeth, in burning to bight,
The wise man he warns, to leap from the light:
For seeing the weed, and losing from bands,
The plowing in Sea, and sowing in Sands.
FINIS.
Of patience.
A Soueraygne salve there is for each disease:
The chief revenge for cruel ire
Is patience, the chief and present ease,
For to delay each ill desire.
Of lawless lust.
AN everlasting bondage does he choose,
That can not tell a little how to use:
He scant enough for shame puruayes,
That all alone to lust obayes.
Of will, and reason.
I Count this conquest great,
That can by reasons skill:
Subdue affectious heat,
And vanquish wanton will.
Of three things to be shunned.
THree things, who seeks for praise, must fly*
To please the taste with wine*
Is one: another, for to lie
Full soft on feathers fine.
The third and hardest for to shun,
And cheifest to eschew,
Is lickerous lust, which once begun,
Repentance does ensue.
Of beauty, and chastity.
CHastity a virtue rare,
Is seldom known to run her race:
Where cumly shape and beauty fair,
Are seen to have a byding place.
Of wisdom.
WHo seeks the renown to have,
And eke the praise of Uertues name:
Of Wisdom rare he ought to crave,
With gladsome will to work the same.
Of a pure conscience.
A Conscience pure withouten spot,
That knows it self for to be free:
Of slanders loathsome reketh not,
A brazen wall full well may be.
Of friendship found by chance.
THe friendship found by chance is such,
As often chance is seen to change:
And therefore trust it not to much,
Ne make thereof a gain to strange:
For proof has taught by hap is had,
Sometime as well the good as bad.
Of good will got by due desert.
BUt I suppose the same good will,
That once by good desert is got:
That fancy finds by reasons skill,
And time shall try withouten spot,
Is such as hard is to be gained,
And worthy got to be retained.
Of flatterers and faithful friends.
THe finest tongue can tell the smoothest tale,
The hottest fires have often the highest smoke:
The hardiest knights the soon^st will as^a^le,
The strongest arms can give the sturdest stroke
The wysest men be thought of greatest skill,
And poorest friends be found of most goodwill.
Of a virtuous, life, age, and death.
GOd wot my friend our life ^ull soon decays,
And virtue voydes no wrinkels from the face:
Approaching age by no entreatie stays*
And death untamed, will grant no man grace.
FINIS.
A proper Posie for a Handkercher.
Fancy is fearce, Desire is bold,
Will is wilful, but Reason is cold.
The Lover being overmuch weryed with servile life, compares it to a
Laborinth.
WIth speedy wings, my fethered woes pursues,
My wretched life, made old by weary days:
But as the fire of Ethna still renues,
And breeds as much, by flame as it decays:
My heavy cares, that once I thought would end me,
Prolongs my life, the more mishap to lend me.
Oh haples will, with such unwary eyes,
About mishap that have thy self bewrethed:
Thy trust of weal, my wailfull proof denies,
To woeful state whereby I am bequethed*
And into such a Laborinth betake,
As Dedalus for Minotaure did make.
With helples search, whereas it were assinde,
Without revoke, I tread these endless Mayes:
Where more I walk, the more my self I wind.
Without a guide, in Torments tyring ways:
In hope I dread, where to and fro I rome,
By death ne life, and finds no better home.
But sith I see, that sorrow cannot end,
These haples hours, the lives of my mischance:
And that my hope, can naught a whit amend,
My bitter days, nor better hap advance:
I shall shake of, both doubtful hope and dreede,
And so be pleased, as God is best agreede.
FINIS.
How to choose a faithful freende.
THough that my years, full far do stand aloof^,
From counsel sage, or Wisdoms good advice:
What I do know by soon repenting proof,
I shall you tell, and learn if you be wise.
From fined wits, that tells the smoothest tale,
Beware, their tongues do flatter often a wry:
A modest look shall well set forth your sale,
Trust not to much, before somewhat you try:
So guide your self in word, and eke in deed,
As bad and good may praise your sober name:
Assay your friend, before your greatest need,
And to conclude, when I may do that same,
That may you please, and best content your mind,
Assure your self, a faithful friend to find.
FINIS.
The Lover being accused of suspicion of flattery, pleads not gyltie, and
yet is wrongfully condemned.
TO seem for to revenge, each wrong in hasty wise,
By proof we see of gyltlesse men, it has not bin the guise:
In slanders loathsome brute, when they condemned be,
With rageles moodes they suffer wrong, when truth shall try them free:
These are the pacient panges, yt pas within the breast
Of those that feel their case by mine, where wrong has right oppressed:
I know how by suspect, I have been judged away,
And granted gyltie in the thing, that clearly I deny.
My faith may me defend, if I might leuid be,
God judge me so, as from that gylte I know me to be free:
I wrought but for my friend, the grief was all mine own,
As if the troth were truly tryde, by prooft it might be known.
Yet are there such that say, they ^an my meaning deem,
Without respect to this old troth^ things prove not as they seem:
Whereby it may befall, in judgment to be quick,
To make them be suspecte therewith, that needs not to kick:
Yet in resisting wrong, I would not have it thought,
I do accuse as though I knew, by whom it may be wrought:
If any such there be, that here withal be vexed,
It were their virtue to beware, and deem me better next.
FINIS.
The Lover describes the dangerous state of Ambition.
Behold these high and mighty men,
Their changing state and tell me then:
Where they or we, best days do see,
Though we seem not and they to be
In wealth.
Their pleasant course straung traces has,
On tops of trees that groundles path:
Full waueringly.
For be it calm they tread not fast,
Blow roughe, blow soft, all help is past:
Appearingly.
With us, ye see, it is not so,
That clime not up, but keep below:
In calmes our course is fair and plain,
Huge hills defendes from stormy rain:
For why?
The raging wind and stormy shower,
On mountains high it has most power
Naturally.
But we that in low valleis lie,
Behold may such as wander hye:
So slydingly:
Then what is he that will aspire,
To heap such woe to please desire:
That may in wealth by staying still,
Spend well his days and fly from ill:
To good.
By having his recourse to God
To love his laws to fear his rod:
Unfaynedly.
To do that in his word we find,
To help the poor, the sick, the blind:
Accordingly.
But though gaynsayd this can not be,
Deem men by deeds, and ye shall see:
That these low valleies they can not bide,
But up will clyme, though down they slide:
Again.
The poor the rich man's place does crave,
The rich would feign hyer places have:
Ambiciously.
The Squyre, the Knight, a Lord would be,
The Lord, the Earl would hyer then he:
Full dangerously.
When these attain to their desire,
Then meaner men are set on fire:
To have the rooms which they in were,
So that ye see all times some there:
In heart.
When one is gone, another is come,
The third catching the secondes room:
Full speedely.
Thus clyming one to others tail,
The bows either break, or footing fail:
Full totteringly.
For when the top they have attaynd,
And got is all they would have gaynd:
Then down they come wit sudden fall,
In doubtful case of life and all.
And thus.
Ambition reapeth worthy hyre,
Because he would such sport aspyre
Unequally.
And there his brag is laid full low,
That thought on hie, himself to show.
Deservedly.
FINIS.
The paynfull plight of a Lover remaining in doubtful hope of his Ladies
favor.
THe bitter sweet, that straynes my yielded heart,
The careless count, which does the same embrace:
The doubtful hope, to reap my due dezart,
The pensive pathe, that guides my restles race:
Are at such war, within my wounded breast,
As does bereave, my joy and eke my rest.
My greedy will, which seeks the golden gain,
My luckles lot, does always take in worth:
My matched mind, that dreades my suits in vain,
My pittious playnt, does help for to set forth:
So that betwixt, two waves of raging Seas,
I drive my days, in troubles and disease^
My woeful eyes, do take their chief delight,
To feed their fill, upon their pleasant maze:
My hidden harms, that grow in me by sight,
With pyning panges, do drive me from the ga^e:
And to my hap, I reap none other hire,
But burn my self, and I to blow the fire.
FINIS.
The Lover recounteth his faithful diligence toward his beloved, with the
rewards that he reapeth thereof.
MY fancy feeds, upon the sugared gaul,
My witless will, unwillingly works my woe:
My careful choice, does choose to keep me thraule,
My frantic folly, fawns upon my foe:
My lust alluers, my lickering lyppes to taste,
The bayte wherein, the subtle hook is plaste.
My hungry hope, does heap my heavy hap,
My sundry suits, procure my more disdain:
My steadfast steps, yet slide into the trap,
My tried truth, entangleth me in train:
I spy the snare, and will not backward go,
My reason yeeldes, and yet says ever, no.
In pleasant plat, I tread upon the snake.
My flaming thirst, I quench with venomd Wine:
In dayntie dish, I do the poison take,
My hunger biddes me, rather eat then pine:
I sow, I set, yet fruit, ne flower I find,
I prick my hand, yet leave the Rose behind.
FINIS.
A Letter written by a young gentilwoman and sent to her husband unawares (by a
friend of hers) into Italy.
IMagine when these blurred lines, thus scribled out of frame,
Shall come before thy careless eyes, for thee to read the same:
To be through no default of pen, or else through proud disdain,
But only through surpassing grief, which did the Author pain
Whose quiuring hand could have no stay, this carful bil to write
Through flushing tears distilling fast, whilst she did it indite:
Which tears perhaps may have some force (if thou no tigre be,
And mollify thy stony heart, to have remorse on me.
Ah periurde wight reclaim thy self, and save thy loving mate,
Whom thou have left beclogged now, in most unhappy state:
(Ay me poor wench) what luckles star? what frowning god above
What hellish hag? what furious fate has changd our former love?
Are we debard our wonted joys? shall we no more embrace?
Will thou my dear in country strange, ensue Eneas race:
Italians send my lover home, he is no Germayne borne,
Unles ye welcome him because he leaves me thus forlorn.
As erst ye did Anchises son, the founder of your soil,
Who falsely fled from Carthage Queen, releeuer of his toil:
Oh send him to Bryttannia Coasts, unto his trusty feere,
That she may v^w his cumly corpse, whom she estemes so dear:
Where we may once again renew, our late surpassed days,
Which then were spent with kisses sweet, and other wanton plays:
But all in vain (forgive thy thrall, if she do judge awrong)
Thou can not want of dainty Trulles Italian Dames among.
This only now I speak by guess, but if it happen true,
Suppose that thou have seen the sword, that me thy Lover slew:
Perchance through time so merrily with dallying damsels spent,
Thou standst in doubt and will enquire from whom these lines were sent:
If so, remember first of all, if thou have any spowse,
Remember when, to whom and why, thou erst have plited vows,
Remember who esteems thee best, and who bewayles thy flight,
Mind her to whom for loyalty thou falsehood do requight.
Remember Heaven, forget not Hell, and way thine own estate,
Revoke to mind whom thou have left, in shameful blame and hate:
Yea mind her well who did submit, into thine only power,
Both heart and life, and therwithall, a rich and wealthy dowre:
And last of all which greeues me most, that I was so begylde,
Remember most forgetful man, thy pretty tatling child:
The least of these surnamed things, I hope may well suffice,
To show to thee the wretched Dame, that did this bill devise.
I speak in vain, thou have thy will, and now says Aesons son,
Medea may pack up her pypes, the golden Fleese is won:
If so, be sure Medea I will, show forth my self in deed,
Yet gods defend though death I taste, I should distroy thy seed:
Again, if that I should enquire, wherefore thou do soiurne,
No answer fitly may thou make, I know to serve thy turn:
Thou can not say but that I have, observed my love to thee,
Thou can not say, but that I have, of life unchaste bin free.
Thou can not cloak (through want) thy flight, since riches did abound
Thou needs not shame of me thy spouse, whose birth not low is found,
As for my beauty, thou thy self, earwhile did it commend
And to conclude I kn^w no thing, wherein I did offend:
Retier with speed, I long to see, thy bark in wished bay,
The Seas are calmer to return, then erst to fly away.
Behold the gentill winds do serve, so that a friendly gayle,
Would soon convey to happy Port, thy most desired sail:
Return would make amends for all, and bannish former wrong,
Oh that I had for to entice, a Scyrens flattering song.
But out alas, I have no shift, or cunning to entreat,
It may suffice (...) absence thine, that I my gri^^fes repeat
Demand not how I did digest, at first thy sudden flight,
For ten days space I took no rest, by day nor yet by night:
But like to Baccus beldame Nonne, I sent and rangde apace,
To see if that I might thee find, in some frequented place:
Now here, now there, now up, now down, my fancy so was fed,
Until at length I knew of troth, that thou from me were fled.
Then was I fully bent with blade, to stab my vexed heart,
Yet hope that thou would come again, my purpose did conuart:
And so ere since I lived in hope bemixt with dreadful fear,
My smeared face through endless tears, unpleasant does appear:
My slepes unsound with ugly dreams, my meats are vayn of taste
My gorgious raiment is dispisde, my tresses rudly plaste.
And to be brief: I bouldly speak, there does remain no care:
But that thereof in amplest wise, I do possess a share:
Like as the tender sprig does bend, with every blast of wind,
Or as the guidelesse Ship on Seas, no certain Port may find.
So I now subject unto hope, now thrall to careful dread,
Amids the Rocks, tween hope and fear, as fancy mooues, am led:
Alas return, my dear return, return and take thy rest,
God grant my words may have the force, to penytrat thy breast.
What do thou think in Italy, some great exployt to win?
No, no, it is not Italy, as sometimes it has bin:
Or do thou love to gad abroad, the foreign costs to view,
If so, thou had not done amiss, to bid me first a dew:
But what has bin the cause, I need not descant long,
For sure I am, mean while poor wench, I only suffer wrong.
Well thus I leave, yet more could say: but least thou should refuse,
Through tediousness to reed my lines, the rest I will excuse:
Until such time as mighty Jove does send such luckye grace,
As we thereof in freendly wise, may reason face to face.
Till then farewell, and he thee keep, who only knows my smart
And with this bill I send to thee, a trusty Lovers heart.
By me, to thee, not mine, but thine,
Since Love does move the same,
Thy mate, though late, does wright, her ^light,
Thou well, can tell, her name.
A Letter sent from beyond the Seaes to his Lover, persuading her to continue
her love toward him.
TO thee I write whose life and death, thy faith may save or spil:
Which faith observe, I live in joy, if not, your friend you kill:
Suspecte not that I do misdoubt, your loyalty at all:
But pender how that lovers are, unto suspicion thrall.
Which thraldom breeds forth thrall, if woonted faith do fail:
Against the Lover thus forlorn, do thousand Cares prevail:
It little helps to have begun, and there to set a stay,
They win more fame, that fight it out: then those that run away.
Like as the willing hound that does, pursue the Dear in Chase:
Will not omit unto the end, his paynfull weary race:
So Love (if love it be indeed) will steadfast still remain:
What so betide, good hap or ill, and not reuoult again.
Such faith of you, sweet heart I ask, such faith: why said I so?
What need I to demand the thing. I have had long ago:
Your faith you gave, the case is plain, you may not seem to start:
And I in earnest of the match did leave with you my heart.
But now perhaps you may allege, long distance may procure,
A cause whereby our former love, no longer may endure:
If so you Judge to far amiss, although that sail and wind,
Convey my corpse to cuntry strange, my heart remaynes behind.
Examples many could I show, but needles is that pain,
Mine own example shall suffice, when I return again:
Mean while although to swim I want, Leanders cunning art,
In all things else (except the same) I Will play Leanders part.
In hope that thou will show thy self, to me an Hero true,
And so although loath to depart, I say sweet heart adue.
A Ringe I send, wherein is pende, a Posie (if you reed)
Whereby you may, perceive always, of what I most have need.
By me your friend, unto the end, if you thereto agree,
Although not so, your loving foe, I still perforce must be.
FINIS.
An other loving Letter.
BEcause my heart is not mine own, but rests now with thee,
I greet thee well of hartinesse, thy self may Caruer be:
Muse not hereat but like hereof, first read and then excuse,
I wish to you a plyant heart, when you these lines peruse.
Hope bids me speak, fear stays my tongue, but Cupid makes me boulde,
And Fancy harps of good success, when that my playnt is told:
Thus Hope does prick, and fear does kick, and fancy feeds my brayn,
In you alone does now consist, the salve to ease my pain.
You are my Paradise of joy, the heaven of my delight,
And therwithall (which thing is strange) the worker of my spite:
Which spite I seek not to revenge, but meekely to subdue,
Not as a foe, but as a friend, I do your love pursue.
I yield my self unto your power, and will not you relente?
In humble wise I mercy crave, and is your mercy spente?
No sure, as nature outwardly, has shewde in you her skill,
I doubt not but that inwardly, the like she does fulfill.
So good a face, so trim a grace, as does in you remain:
A Cressids cruel stony heart, I know may not retain:
Wherefore to ratefie my words, let deeds apparent be:
Then may you vaunt and prove it true, you freedom gave to me.
Consider of my restles care, and way blind Cupids ire:
Then shall you find my paynful love, does claym but earned hire.
Requite not this my curtesy, and freendship with disdain,
But as I love unfeignedly, so yield like love again.
Allow hereof as for the rest, that does belong to love:
My self thereof will take the care, as time, in time shall prove.
Mean while, I wish a Thisbies heart, in you there may endure:
Then doubt not, but a Pyramus, of me you shall procure.
Yours at your will,
To save or spill.
FINIS.
Proctors Precepts.
Leave vading plumes, no more vaunt, gallant youth,
Thy masking weeds forsake, take colors sage:
Shun vicious steps, consider what ensues,
Time lewdly spent, when on coms crooked age.
When beauty brave shall vade, as does the flower,
When manly might, shall yield to ancient time:
When young delights shall dye, and ages bower,
Shall lodge thy corpse, bemoning idle prime.
Learn of the Ant, for stormy blastes to get
Provision, least untimely want do cum,
And mooues thee moan such time, so lewd neglect
From virtues lore, where worthy honors wun.
Think how uncertain here, thou liust a guest,
Amid such vice, that's irksome to behold:
Think whence thou camst, and where thy corpse shall rest,
When breathing breath, shall leave thy carcass cold.
When dreadful death, shall daunt thy hauty mind,
When fearful flesh, shall shroud in clammy clay:
When pamperd plumes shall vade, and dreads shall find,
Deseruings due, for erring lewd astray.
Run not to rash, least trial make the moon,
In ancient years thy green unbridled time:
Old Age is lothd, with folly over grown,
Young years dispisde, cut of in sprowting prime.
Experience learn, let elder lives thee lead,
In lively years, thy fickle steps to guide:
Least unawares, such uncouth paths thou tread,
Which filthy be thought, pleasant to be eyde.
In calmest Seas, the deepest Whorepooles be,
In greenest Grass, the lurking Adder lies:
With eger sting, the sugerest sap we see,
Smooth words deceive, learn therefore to be wise.
FINIS.
Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.
THe greedy man, whose heart with hate does swell,
Because he sees his neyghbors good estate:
Lives vncontent, with what might serve him well,
And eftsoons seems to blame sufficient fate:
This grudging gluton glut, with goulden gain,
To serve his use, although he has enough:
Repines at that, which others get with pain,
So that himself thereby, he does abuse:
He thinks that much, which passes by his claw,
And finds a fault for it through luckles hap:
Although the matter valueth scarce a straw,
He deemes it small of gain, that gives no sap.
He thinks his store, shall serve his sen^lesse corse,
Or that no death at all, he deemes there be:
Else would he to his conscience have remorse,
And seek to live content with his degree:
For what auayles, to horde up heaps of dross,
Or seek to please vnsaciate fond desire:
Considering that, it is subject unto loss,
And we (thereby ill got) deserves Hell fire:
From which O Lord conduct us with thy hand,
And give us grace to live unto thy praise:
Preserve our Queen his subjects and her land,
And grant in peace, she reign here Nestors days.
FINIS.
The reward of Whoredom by the fall of Helen.
FRom Limbo Lake, where dismal feendes do lie,
Where Pluto reigns, perpend Helenas cry:
Where fiery flames, where pittious howlings be,
Where bodies burn: from thence give ear to me.
I am Helena she, for whose vilde filthy fact,
The stately Towers of Troy, the hauty Grecians sacte:
High Troy, whose pomp, throughout the world did sound,
In Cinders low, through me was laid on ground.
King Priamus through me, did end his life:
And Trojans all almost, I was the cause of strife.
I am that Dame, whose beauty passing brave,
Dame Venus praysde, the golden Pome to have:
Whose feature forste, Sir Paris boiling breast,
To leave his land, and seek to be my guest.
That trull which tossed, the surging Seas a maine,
From Grecian shore, to Troy unto my pain.
That flurt, whose gallant sproutinge prime,
Through vilde abuse* was scorcht ere ancient time:
I virtue shund, I lothd a modest mind,
I wayd not fame, my beauty made me blind.
Each brave delight, my masking mind allurde,
My fancy deemed, my beauties gloze assurde:
Such worthy fame, did sound of Helens hue,
Although my deeds, reapt shame, and guerdon due.
In gorgious plumes, I maskt, puffed up with pride,
In brave delights I lived, my fancy was my guide:
But fie of filth, your world is all but vain,
Your pomp consumes, your deeds shall guerdon gain:
See here by me, whose beauty might have boast,
For splendant hue, throughout each foreign coast.
But what preuayles, to vaunt of beauties gloss,
Or brag of pride, whereon dishonor grows:
If I had used my gifts in virtues lore,
And modest liud, my praise had bin the more.
Where now too late, I loathe my life lewd spent,
And wish I had, with virtue bin content.
FINIS.
T. P.
A Lovers life.
THe tedious toil, the cares which Lovers taste,
The troubled thoughts, which moves their minds to fear:
The pinching pangs, the dole which seems to waste,
Their loathsome life, deep plungd in gulfes of care:
Would move each shun, such snares of vain delight,
Which irksome be, though pleasant to the sight.
The mind full fraught, with care enioyes no ease,
A boiling breast, desires unlawful lust:
The heart would have, what best the mind does please,
And fancy craves, the thing which is unjust.
Beside each frown, which eftsoons moves them deem,
They abject are, if sad their Lovers seem.
Or if occasion shun, their usual sight,
Not seen, they think themselves vnminded be:
And then in dumps, as mazd they leave delight,
And yield to grief, till one, each others see:
So that with fear, their minds are always fraught.
That live in love, experience some has taught.
Each lowering frown, from mirth does move the mind,
One jesting word, procures a thousand woes:
So that like grief or more, through sight they find,
Then absence sure, such cares fro fancy flows:
Such goring gripes, such heaps of hideous harms,
Such sorowing sobs, from daunted lovers swarms.
Rosamond a spowsed Dame, her husbands death procurde,
For speaking but a word in jest:
Itrascus too, full thyrty years indurde,
The panges of love, within his boiling breast:
So that in grief they harbor, still their minds are cloyd with care,
They diue in dole, they plunge in pain, and live in cruel fear.
And diverse more, as Axeres whose beauty passing fair,
So Iphis heart, and boiling breast allurde:
That for her sake, he liude in extreme care,
And cruel grief, while breathing breath indurde:
But at the length, disdain upon a tree,
He honge himself, where sh^e his corpse might see.
FINIS.
A Lover approving his Lady unkind. Is forsed unwilling to utter his mind.
Willow willow willow, singe all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow, shall be my Garland.
MY love, what mislyking in me do you find,
Sing all of green willow:
That on such a soddayn, you alter your mind,
Sing willow willow willow:
What cause does compel you, so fickle to be?
Willow willow willow willow:
In heart which you plighted, most loyal to me,
Willow willow willow willow.
I faithfully fixed, my faith to remain,
Sing all of green willow:
In hope I as constant, should find you again,
Sing willow willow willow:
But periurde as Jason, you faythlesse I find,
Which makes me unwilling, to utter my mind:
Willow willow willow, singe all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow shall be my Garland.
Your beauty brave decked, with shows gallant gay,
Sing all of green willow:
Allured my fancy, I could not say nay,
Sing willow willow willow.
Your phrases fine philed, did force me agree,
Willow willow willow willow:
In hope as you promised, you loyal would be,
Willow willow willow willow.
But now you be frisking, you list not abide,
Sing all of green willow:
Your vow most unconstant, and faythlesse is tried,
Sing willow, willow willow:
Your words are uncertain, not trusty you stand,
Which makes me to wear, the willow Garland:
Willow willow willow, sing all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow, shall be my Garland.
Has Light of love luld you, so soft in her lap?
Sing all of green willow:
Has fancy provoked you? did love you entrap?
Sing willow willow willow:
That now you be flurting, and will not abide.
Willow willow willow willow:
To me which most trusty, in time should have tried,
Willow willow willow willow.
Is modest demeanure, thus turned to untrust?
Sing all of green willow:
Are faith and troth fixed, approved unjust?
Sing willow, willow will:
Are you she which constant, for ever would stand?
And yet will you give me, the willow Garland?
Willow willow willow, singe all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow, shall be my Garland.
What motion has moude you, to mask in delight,
Sing all of green willow,
What toy have you taken, why seem you to spite
Sing willow willow willow,
Your love which was ready for aye to endure,
Willow willow willow willow:
According to promise most constant and sure,
Willow willow willow willow.
What gallant you conquered, what youth mooude your minds,
Sing all of green willow:
To leave your old Lover, and be so unkind,
Singe willow willow willow:
To him which you plighted both faith, troth and hand,
For ever: yet gives me the willow Garland?
Willow willow willow, singe all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow, shall be my Garland.
Has wealth you allured, the which I do want,
Sing all of green willow:
Has pleasant devises, compeld you recant,
Sing willow willow willow:
Has feature forste you, your words to deny?
Willow willow willow willow:
Or is it your fashion to cog, and to lie,
Willow willow willow willow?
What are your sweet smiles, quite turned into lowres,
Sing all of green willow:
Or is it your order, to change them by hours,
Sing willow willow willow:
What have you sufficient, think you in your hand,
To pay for the making, of my willow Garland:
Willow willow willow, singe all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow, shall be my Garland.
Farewell then most fickle, untrue and unjust,
Sing all of green willow:
Thy deeds are ill dealings, in thee is no trust,
Willow willow willow willow.
Thy vows are uncertain, thy words are but wind
Willow willow willow willow.
God grant thy new lover, more trusty thee find,
Willow willow willow willow?
Be warned then gallants, by proof I unfold,
Sing willow willow willow,
Mayds love is uncertain, soon hot, and soon cold,
Sing willow willow willow:
They turn as the reed, not trusty they stand,
Which makes me to wear the willow Garland:
Willow willow willow, singe all of green willow,
Sing all of green willow, shall be my Garland.
FINIS.
A gloze of fawning freendship.
NOw cease to sing your Siren songs, I leave each brave delight
Attempt no more the wounded corpse, which late felt fortunes spite:
But rather help to rue, with sorowing sobs come moan,
My lucklesse loss from wealth to woe, by fickle fortune thrown.
I once had friends good store, for love, (no dross I tryde)
For having lost my goods on Seas, my friends would not abide,
Yet having need I went to one, of all I trusted most:
To get relief, he answered thus, go pack thou peuish post.
His words did pearce my tender breast, and I as mazde did stand
Requesting him with pitteous plaints, to give his helping hand:
Content thy self (quoth he) to serve my own estate,
I have not I, yet am I grieved to see thy lucklesse fate.
Ah fie of fawning friends, whose eyes attentive be,
To watch and ward for lukers sake, with cap and bended knee:
Would God I had not known, their sweet and sugered speech,
Then had my grief the lesser bin, experience me does teach.
FINIS.
A Maze of Maidens.
WHo goes to gaze of every gallant girl,
And castes his eyes at every glauncing gloze:
Whose masking mind, with every motion moved,
In fine shall find, his fancy fraught with woes.
For pleasure spent, is but a wishing vain,
By crooked chance, depriude of brave delight:
Cut of by care, a heap of hurtful harms,
Our gaze vngaynd, which whilome pleased our sight.
Our baunts do vade, our pleasures pass away,
Our sugerest sweetes, reapes sorowing sobs in fine:
Our braggest boast, of beauties brauest blaze,
To forowed brows, does at the length resign.
Our foolish fancy filde, with filthy vice,
Pursues his hurt, unto another harms:
A houering heart, with every gloze enticed,
gaynes lothsome-loue, whence naught but sorrow swarms.
Leave then to gaze, of every glauncing gloze,
Contemn the sleights, of beauties sugerest bate:
Whose outward sheath, with colors brave imbost,
Shuns cruel craft, and envious hurtful hate.
FINIS.
A short Epistle written in the behalf of N.B. to M.H.
Dear Lady decked with cumlynesse,
To counteruayle my clemency:
Be pressed, I pray, in readynesse,
To yield your courteous courtesy.
Let me you find Penelope,
In mind, and loyal heart:
So shall I, your Ulysses be,
Till breathing life depart.
Yield love for love, to him who lykes,
To live in lynckes of loyalty:
And grant him grace, who nothing seeks,
For his good will, but curtesy.
Let me your bondmen, favor ^nde,
To gratefie: my willing heart:
Whom no attempt, to please your mind,
Shall hinder me, to play my part.
Permit me not, in lingering sort,
To labor in a barrayn soil:
Ne give occasion to report,
How loytryng love, reapes troubled toil.
But let me say, my heart obtaynd,
The gloze, which pleased my glauncing eyes:
And that I have for guerdon gaynd,
The best that in my Lady lies.
So shall I boast of that, which best
Does please the prime of my desire:
And glory in a gained rest,
Which through your favor I aspire.
FINIS.
A view of vayn glory.
WHat motion more, may move a man to mind
His own estate, then proof, whose days unsure,
Accounted are unto a puff of wind,
A breathing blast, whose force can not endure:
Whose lively shows consumes, whose pomp decays,
Whose glory dies, whose pleasures soon be spent:
Whose stoutest strength, to weakness subject stays,
Whose thoughts be vain, and vade as though vnment.
What have we then to vaunt, or glory in?
Since all is vain, wherein we take delight:
Why should we boast or brag, since naught we win
In fine, but death? to whom yeeldes every wight.
To equal state, he brings each degree,
He fears none, all subjects yeeldes to death:
To d^nkish dust, he drives all we see,
Which in the world, enjoys any breath:
Why vaunt we then, in that we see is vain,
Or take delight, in that we prove but dross?
Why glory we, or seek for golden gain?
Since at the length, we reap thereof but loss.
We loathe to leave, our hutches filde with gold:
Our annual rents, it greeues us to forgo,
Our buildings brave, which glads us to behold:
Our pleasant sport, it greeues us to forgo.
We nothing brought, ne ought shall carry hence,
Life lost, behind goods, money, land, we leave:
And naked shall return, assured whence
Before we came, when death does life bereave:
Line then, to leave thy life in every how^r,
Learn how to lead thy mind, from vain desire,
Of filthy dross, whose sugerest sweet is sower,
When dreadful death, shall yield our earthly hire.
What is our world but vain, fraught full of vice,
Wherein we live, allured by disceat:
Which us in youth, to error does entice,
And sturs us up, in flamed by follyes heat.
Our minds are moved, with every fond desire,
We gloze in that, the which we see unsure:
We usual seek great honor to aspire,
Whose greatest pomp, does but a while endure:
For proof the flower, bedect with gorgious hew,
As soon with heat, of scorching sun does fade:
As does the weed, the which unseemly grew,
And shows it self, vncouerd with the shade.
The stately ship, which floates on f^ming fluds,
With wave is tossed, as soon to surging Seas:
Does yield his pomp, though fraught with store of goods,
As vessel weak, whose force the stream assayes:
Our selves may show, the state of each degree,
As Sampson stout, whose force Philistians felt:
For wealth, let Dives, glut with gold our Mirror be,
Mark Nemrods fall, whose heart with pride was swelt.
And diverse mo, whose preter paths may learn,
Our future steps, our vayn unsteady stay:
Whose elder lives, already past may warn,
Us shun such snares, which leads us to decay.
FINIS.
T. P.
The fall of folly, exampled by needy Age.
BEhold me here whose youth, to withered years,
Does bow and bend, compeld by crooked age:
See here my lyms, whose strength benumbde weres,
Whose pleasure spent, gray hears, bids to be sage.
But lo to late I loathe my life lewd spent,
And wish in vain, I had foreseen in youth:
These drowsy days, which mooues me to lament
My idle youth proved, what thereof ensues.
Unstorde old years, must serve for lusty prime,
These feebled joints, must seek to serve their want:
With tedious toil, because I used not time,
Lo thus I live, suffisde perforce to scant.
In flaunting years, I flaunting florisht forth,
Amid delight, puffed up, with puffing pride:
Mean garments then, I deemed nothing worth,
Nay, scace the best, might serve, my flesh to hide.
I thought them foes, which told me of my fault,
And iudgd them speak, of rigor, not good will:
Who toulde of gain, me thought for hire did hault,
Then lo, I lothde what now I wish by skill.
Experience mooues me moan, the more my grief,
In lively years, because I did not shun
Such idle steps, least void of such relief,
As might have helped my age, now youth is dun.
But what preuayles to wish I would I had,
Since time delayed, may not be calde again:
A guerdon just, (for such as youth too bad
Consumes, (it is) in time therefore take pain.
Seek how in youth to serve contented age,
Learn, how to lead, your life in virtues lore:
Behold you me, attacht with death his page,
Constraynd through want, my lewdnes to deplore.
What grief more great, unto a hauty heart,
Then is distress, by folly forste to fall:
What care more cruel or lothsom, (to depart
From wealth to want) it greeues us to the gall.
But what auayles to boast, or vaunt of vain?
What profit is it, to praise a passed pride?
Since it consumed, is but a pinching pain,
A heap of harms, whose hurt I wretch have tryde.
A direful dreed, a surge of sorowing sobs,
A carking care, a mount of mestiue moan:
A sack of sin, coucht full of cankered knobs,
A wavering weed, whose force is soon orethrone.
For proof behold, the boast of breathing breath,
See see how soon, his valiaunst vaunt does vade:
Our pleasant prime, is subject unto death,
By vices vrgde, in waves of woe to wade.
I know the state, and trust of every time,
I see the shame, whereto each vice does cum:
Therefore (by me) learn how to leave such crime,
Foe^ix quem faciunt, aliena pericula cautum.
Let me your Mirror, learn you leave what is lewd,
My fall forepassed, let teach you to beware:
My ancient years with trial tript, have vewd,
The vaunt of vice, to be but carking care.
FINIS.
T.P.
A proper Sonet, how time consumes all earthly things.
AY me, ay me, I sighe to see, the Sithe a field,
Down goes the Grass, soon wrought to withered Hay:
Ay me alas, ay me alas, that beauty needs must yield,
And Princes pass, as Grass does fade away.
Ay me, ay me, that life cannot have lasting leave,
Nor Gold, take hold, of everlasting joy:
Ay me alas, ay me alas, that time has talents to receive,
And yet no time, can make a suer stay.
Ay me, ay me, that wit can not have wished choice,
Nor wish can win, that will desires to see:
Ay me alas, ay me alas, that mirth can promis no rejoice,
Nor study tell, what afterward shall be.
Ay me, ay me, that no sure staff, is given to age,
Nor age can give, sure wit, that youth will take:
Ay me alas, ay me alas, that no counsel wise and sage,
Will shun the show, that all does mar and make.
Ay me, ay me, come time, sheare on, and shake thy Hay,
It is no boot, to baulke thy bitter blows:
Ay me alas, ay me alas, come time, take every thing away,
For all is thine, be it good or bad that grows.
FINIS.
A Mirror of Mortallity.
SSall clammy clay, shroud such a gallant gloze,
^ust beauty brave, be shrinde in dankish earth:
Shall crawling worms, devour such lively shows, of young delights.
When valyant corpse, shall yield the latter breath,
Shall pleasure vade, must puffing pride decay:
Shall flesh consume, must thought resign to clay.
Shall haughty heart, have hire to his desert,
Must deep desire die, drenchd in direful dread:
Shall deeds lewd dun, in fine reap bitter smart,
Must each vade, when life shall leave us dead:
Shall Lands remain? must wealth be left behind?
Is sense deprived? when flesh in earth is shrinde.
Seek then to shun, the snares of vain delight,
Which moves the mind, in youth from virtues lore:
Leave of the vaunt of pride, and manly might,
Since all must yield, when death the flesh shall gore:
And way these words, as soon for to be sold,
To Market cums, the young sheep as the old.
No trust in time, our days uncertain be,
Like as the flower, bedect with splendant hue:
Whose gallant show, soon dride with heat we see,
Of scorching beams, though late it bravely grew:
We all must yield, the best shall not deny,
Unsure is death, yet certain we shall dye.
Although a while, we vaunt in youthful years,
In young delights, we see me to live at rest:
We subject be, to grief each horror fears,
The valiaunst hearts, when death does daunt the breast:
Then use thy talent here unto thee lent,
That thou may well account how it is spent.
FINIS.
T.P.
A brief dialogue between sickness and worldly desire.
Sickness. TO darkesome cave, where crawling worms remayn.
Thou worldly wretch, resign thy boasting breath:
Yield up thy pomp, thy corpse must pass again,
From whence it came, compeld by dreadful death.

Worldly desire. Oh sickness sore, thy pains do pearce my heart,
Thou messenger of death, whose goryng gripes me grieve:
Permit a while, me loath yet to depart
From friends and goods, which I behind must leave.

Sickness. Ah silly soul, entis'de with worldly vain,
As well as thou, thy friends must yield to death:
Though after thee, a while they do remain,
They shall not still, continue on the earth.

Worldly desire. What must I then need, shrine in ghastly grave?
And leave what long, I got with tedious toil:
Prolong me yet, and let me license have,
Till elder years, to put your Brutes to foil.

Sickness. O foolish man, allurde by lewd delight,
Thy labors lost, these goods they are not thine:
But as (thou had) so others have like right,
(Of them) when thou, shall up thy breath resign.

Worldly desire. Then farewell world, the Nurse of wicked vice,
Adue vile dross which mooues men's minds to ill*
Farewell delights, which did my youth entice,
To serve as slave, unto unsatiate will.

FINIS.
T.P.
Aeger Dives habet Nummos, sed non habet ipsum.
THe wealthy chuffe, for all his wealth,
Cannot redeem thereby his health:
But must to Grave, for all his store,
Death spares neither rich nor poor:
Not Cressus wealth, nor Mydas Gold,
The stroke of careless death may hold:
He fears no foe, he spares no friend,
Of every thing he is the end:
Though Dives had great store of pealfe,
Yet still the wretch, did want him self.
No Phisickes art, or cunning cure,
May any man of life assure:
No high estate or beauty brave,
May keep us from our careful grave:
No hauty mind or valyant heart,
Against pale Death, may take our part:
No curious speech, or witty tale,
Our dyinge corpse may counteruayle:
No force, no gyle, no power or stength,
But death does overcome at length.
The rich man trusts in his Gould,
And thinks that life, is bought and sold:
The sight thereof so bleares, his eye,
That he remembers not to dye:
He has enough and lives in joy,
Who dares (thinks he) work me annoy:
Thus is he made, to pleasure thrall,
And thinks that death will never call:
Who unawares with stealing pace,
Does end in pain his pleasant race.
The greedy Merchant will not spar^,
For lukers sake, to lie and swear:
The simple sort he can by slight,
Make to believe the Crow is white:
No science now, or art is free,
But that some gyle therein we see:
Thus every man for greedy gain,
Unto himself increases pain:
And thinks the crime to be but small,
When that they loose both soul and all.
Who lives here, that is content,
With such estate as God has sent:
The hungry Churl, and wealthy Chusse,
Does never think, he has enough:
Fortune to many, gives to much,
But few or none, thee makes rich:
Thus every man, does scrape and catch,
And never more, for death do watch:
Who still is present at their side,
And cuts them of, amids their pride.
Such is the world, such is the time,
That each man strives alofte to clyme:
But when they are in top of all,
In torments great they hedlong fall:
Where they do give account at large,
How they their tallent did discharge:
There no man takes their golden fee,
To plead their case, and set them free:
Then too too late they do begin,
For to repent their former sin:
Wherefore I wish that each degree,
With lotted chance contented be:
Let not thy treasure make thee proud,
Nor poverty be disalowde:
Remember who does give and take,
One God both rich and poor does make:
We nothing had or ought shall have.
To bear with us unto our grave:
But virtuous life which here we lead,
On our behalf for grace to plead.
Therefore I say thy lust refrain,
And seek not after brickle gain:
But seek that wealth, the which will last,
When that this mortal life is past:
In heaven is joy and pleasure still,
This world is vain and full of ill:
Use not so lewd thy worldly pelf,
So that thou do forget thy self:
Live in this world as dead in sin,
And dye in Christ, true life to win.
FINIS.
Win fame, and keep it.
WHo sees the ill, and seeks to shun the same,
Shall doutlesse win at length immortal fame:
For wisdom, vice and virtue does perceive,
She virtue takes, but vice she seeks to leave.
A wise man knows the state of each degree,
The good be praysde, the evil dishonord be:
He sees the good, the evil he does espy,
He takes the good, the evil he does deny^:
He folowes good, the evil he does eschew,
He leapes the lake, when others stay to view*
His honor stands, his same does ever last,
Upon the earth when breathing breath is past:
As Solomon whose wisdom recht unto the lofty sky,
And David King, their praises live (though bodies t^mbed lie)
They saw the good, the evil they did eschew,
Their honor lives, the proof affirms it true:
Then sith examples plainly, shows the same,
Their praises live who seeks to merit fame.
finis
T.P.
Respice finem.
LO here the state of every mortal wight,
See here, the fine, of all their gallant joys:
Behold their pomp, their beauty and delight,
Whereof they vaunt, as safe from all annoyes:
To earth the stout, the proud, the rich shall yield,
The weak, the meek, the poor, shall shrouded lie
In dampish mould, the stout with Spear and Sheeld
Cannot defend, himself when he shall dye.
The prowdest wight, for all his lively shows,
Shall leave his pomp, cut of by dreadful death:
The rich, whose Hutch, with golden Ruddocks flows,
At lenght shall rest, vncoynd in dampish earth:
By Natures law, we all are borne to dye,
But where or when, the best uncertain be:
No time prefixed, no goods our life shall buy,
Of dreadful death, no friends shall set us free.
We subject be, a thousand ways to death,
Small sickness moves the valiaunts heart to fear:
A little push bereaues your breathing breath,
Of brave delights, whereto you subject are:
Your world is vain, no trust in earth you find,
Your valyaunst prime, is but a brytle glass:
Your pleasures vade, your thoughts a puff of wind,
Your ancient years, are but a withered grass.
Mors omnibus communis.
finis
T.P.
A brief Caveat, to shun fawning friends.
TRy, ere thou trust, unto a fawning friend,
Give no regard, unto his sugered words,
Make your account to leese, what you him lend,
For collourd craft, the smoothest speech affordes.
My self have tried, the trust of tatling tungs
Who paynt their prates, as though they would perform:
(The more my grief) for they (which) whilome clungs,
Like Bees (goods lost) sole left me in the storm,
Where I was feign, in worldly woes to wave,
And seek relief, of former friends, no ^ie:
Perforce constraynd, to seek my self to save,
Or else vnhelp'd, sance succor still to lie.
I made my moan, the greater was my grief,
To him which was, as servant to my state:
But what preuayld, by proof I found him chief,
Who not of me, but on my wealth did wate.
Donec eris foelix, multos numerabis amicos,
Temporasi fuerint nubila, solus eris.
FINIS.
T. P.
Beauty is a pleasant pathe to destruction.
THrough beauties sugered baits,
Our minds seduced are:
To filthy lusts to wicked vice,
Whence issues naught but care.
For having tried the troth
And seen the end of it:
What wayle we more with greater grief,
Then want of better wit,
Because so lewd we luld,
In that we see is vain:
And follow that, the which to late,
Compels us to complain.
The boast of Beauties brags,
And gloze of loving looks:
Seduce men's minds as fishes are,
Enticed with bayted hooks.
Who simply thinking too,
Obtain the pleasant pray:
Does snatch at it, and witless so,
Deuoures her own decay.
Even like the minds of men,
Allurde with beauties bayt:
To heaps of harms, to carking care,
Are brought, by such decaite.
Lothus by proof it proou'd,
Perforce I needs must say:
That beauty unto ruinous end,
Is as a pleasant way.
FINIS.
T.P.
T. P. his Farewell unto his faithful and approved friend. F. S.
FArewell my friend, whom fortune forste to fly,
I greeu^ to here, the lucklesse hap thou have:
But what preuayles, if so it help might I,
I would be pressed, thereof be bold thou maste.
Yet since time past, may not be calde again,
Content thy self, let reason thee persuade:
And hope for ease, to counteruayle thy pain,
Thou art not first, that has a trespass made.
Mourn not to much, but rather joy, because
God has cut of thy will, ere greater crime:
Whereby thou might, the more incur the laws,
And bear worse Brutes, seduced by wicked prime.
Take heed, my words let teach thee to be wise,
And learn thee shun, that leads thy mind to ill:
Least being warnd, when as experience tries,
Thou waylst to late, the woes, of wicked will.
FINIS.
T. P.
The History of Pyramus and Thisbie truly translated.
IN Babylon a stately seat, of high and mighty Kings,
Whose famous voice of ancient rule, through all the world yet ringes:
Two great estates did whilom dwell: and places joined so,
As but one wall each princely place, divided other fro:
These Nobles two, two children had, for whom Dame Nature sought,
The deepest of her secret skill, or she their birth had wrought:
For as their years in one agreed, and beauty equal shone,
In bounty and like virtues all, so were they there all one.
And as it pleased Nature then, the one a son to frame,
So did the glad old Father like him Pyramus to name:
The Other a maid, the mother would that she then Thisbie hight,
With no small bliss of parents al, who came to joy the sight:
I ouerslip what sudden frights, how often fear there was,
And what the care each creature had, ere they did ouerpas:
What pains ensue, and what the storms in pierced hearts yt dwell,
And therefore know, what babe and mother whose chaste, and subtle bra^d
No earthly heart, ne when they lust, no God has yet withstand,
Ere seven years these infants hearts, they have with love oppressed:
Though little know their tender age, what causes their unrest,
Yet they poor fools untaught to love, or how to less their pain:
With well contented minds receive, and prime of love sustain.
No pastime can they elsewhere find, but twayn themselves alone
For other playfeares sport, God wot, with them is reckend none:
Joy were to here their pretty words, and sweet mamtam to see,
And how all day they pass the time, till darkness dimmes the sky:
But then the heavy cheer they make, when forced is their farewell
Declares such grief as none would think, in so young breasts could dwell:
Ye look how long, yt any let, does keep them two a sunder,
Their mourning hearts no joy may glad, yt heuens ye passes under
And when again, they efte repair, and joyful meeting make,
Yet know they not the cause thereof, ne why their sorrows slake.
With sight they feed their fancies then, and more it still de^^re,
Ye more they have, nor want they find of sight they so require:
And thus in tender impe spronge up, this love vpstarteth still,
For more their years, much more ye flame, yt does their fancies fill.
And where before their infants age, gave no suspect at all.
Now needful is, with weary eye, to watchful mind they call:
Their whole estate, and it to guide, in such wise orderly,
As of their secret sweet desires, ill tongues no light espy.
And so they did, but hard God wot, are flames of fire to hide
Much more to cause a lovers heart, within it bounds to find:
For neither cold, their minds consent so quench of love the rage
Nor they at years, the least twice seven, their passions so aswage
But yt to Thisbes Mothers ears, some spark thereof were blown,
Let Mothers judge her patience now, til she ye whole have known.
And so by wily ways she wrought, to her no little care,
That forth she found, their whole devise, and how they were in snare:
Great is her grief, though small the cause, if other cause ne were,
For why a meeter match then they, might hap no other where:
But now tween Fathers, though the cause, mine Auctor nothing else,
Such inward rancor risen is, and so it daily swells.
As hope of freendship to be had, is none (alas) the while,
Ne any loueday to be made, their malice to begyle:
Wherefore straight charge, straight given is with fathers frowning chere,
That message word, ne token else, what ever that it were:
Should from their foe to Thisbee pass, and Pyramus friends likewise,
No less express commandment, do for their son devise.
And yet not thus content alas, each Father does ordain.
A secret watch and bound a point, wherein they shall remain:
Sight is forbid, restrained are words, for scalde is all devise,
That should their poor afflicted minds, rejoice in any wise:
Though pyning love, gave cause before of many careful ill,
Yet daily sith amended all, at least well pleased them still:
But now what depth of deep distress, may they indrowned be,
That now in days twice twenty told, each other once shall see.
Cursed is their face, so cry they often, and happy death they call,
Come death come wished death at once, and rid us life and all.
And where before (Dame Kind) her self, did wonder to behold
Her high bequests within their shape, Dame Beauty did unfold:
Now does she marvel much and say, how faded is that red?
And how is spent that white so pure, it wont to ouerspred.
For now late lusty Piramus, more fresh then flower in May,
As one forlorn with constant mind, does seek his ending day:
Since Thisbe mine is lost says he, I have no more to lose,
Wherefore make speed, thou happy hand, these eyes of mine shall close.
Abasid is his princely port, cast of his regal weed,
Forsaken are assemblies all, and lothed the foming steed:
No joy may pearce his pensive mind, unless a woeful breast
May ioyed be, with swarms of care, in haples heart that rest:
And thus poor Piramus distressed, of human succor all,
Deuoyd to Venus Temple goes, and prostrate down does fall:
And there of her, with heart I korue, and sore tormented minds,
Thus asks he aid, and of his woes, the Fardell thus vnbindes.
O Great Goddess, of whose immortal fire,
Virtue in Erbe, might never quench the flame:
Ne mortal sense, yet to such skill aspire,
As for loves hurt a medecin once to name:
With what dear price, my careful pyned ghost,
Has tried this true, and over true alas:
My greefeful eyes, that sight has almost lost,
And breast through darted, with thy golden Mace.
Full well declare, though all that me behold,
Are judges, and wonders of my deadly woe:
But thou alone, may help therefore unfold,
Else helples (Lady) straight will knap in two
The feeble thread, yet stays my lingering life.
Wherefore, if love, thy sacred Gods breast?
Did ever press, or if most dreadly grief,
And causeles not thy inward soul oppressed:
When crooked Vulcane, to your common shame,
Bewrayed of stolen joys, thy sweet delight:
If then I say the fear of further blame,
Caused you refrain your Lovers wished sight:
And forced restraynt did equal then impart,
And cause you taste, what pain in love may be:
When absence drives, assured hearts to part.
Thy pity then (O Queen) now not deny
To me poor wretch, who feels no less a pain:
If humayne breasts, so much as heavenly may:
Have ruthe on him, who does to thee complain,
And only help of thee, does lowly pray:
Grant Goddess mine, thou may it undertake,
At least wise (Lady) ere this life decay:
Grant I beseech so happy me to make,
That yet by word, I may to her bewray
My wondrous woes: and then if ye so please,
Look when you lust, let death my body ease.
THus praying fast, full fraught with cares, I leave this woeful man,
And turn I will to greater grief, then mind immagin can:
But who now shall them writ since wit, denayeth the some to think,
Confusedly in Thisbies breast, that flow above the brinke?
Not, I for though of mine own store, I want no woes to write,
Yet lack I terms and cunning both, them aptly to recite.
For Cu^nings clyffe I never clombe, nor drank of Science spring
Ne slept upon the happy hill, from whence Dame Rhetorique rings.
And therefore all, I do omit, and wholly them resign,
To judgment of such woeful Dames, as in like case has bin.
This will I tell how Thisbie thus, oppressed with dollors all,
Does find none ease but day and night, her Pyramus to call:
For lost is sleep and banished is, all gladsome lights delight,
In short of case and every help, each mean she has in spite:
In langor long, this life she led, till hap as fortune pleased,
To further fates that fast ensue, with her own thought her eased:
For this she thinks, what distance may, or mansions be between
Or where now stands so cruel wall, to part them as is seen
O feeble wit forduld with woe, awake thy wandering thought,
Seek out, thou shall assured find, shall bring thy cares to naught.
With this some hope, nay, as it were a new revived mind,
Did promis straight her pensive heart, immediate help to find:
And forth she steres, with swifted pace, each place she seeks throughout
No stay may let her hasty foot, till all be vewed about.
Whereby at length from all the rest, a wall aloof that lies,
And corner wise did buyldings part, with joyful eye she spies:
And scarcely then her pearcing look, one blinke thereof had got,
But that firm hope of good success, within her fancy shot:
Then fast her eye she roules about, and fast she seeks to see,
If any mean may there be found, her comfort for to be:
And as her careful look she cast, and every part aright
Had vewed well, a little rifte appeared to her sight,
Which (as it seemed) through the wall, the course the issue had:
Wherewith she said (O happy wall) may thou so blist be made,
That yet sometimes within thy bands, my dear heart Pyramus:
Thou do possess if hap so work, I will assay thee thus.
And from about the heavenly shape, her middle did present
She did unloose here girdle rich, and pendent thereof hent.
And with her fingers long and small, on tipto so she wrought,
That through the wall to open sight, she has the pendant brought
That done she stays, and to the wall she closely lays her ear,
To understand if any wight, on the other side yet were:
And whiles to harken thus she stands, a wondrous thing behold
Poor Pyramus in Venus Church, that all his mind had told.
Performed his vows and prayers eke, now ended all and dun,
Does to his Chamber fast return, with heart right woe begun:
Even to the same where Thisbie stayed, to see if fortune please,
To smooth her brows and her distress, with any help to ease:
He as his woonted usage was, the Chamber once within,
Locks fast the door with fresh complaynts, new sorrow to begin.
But even lo as his back he turned unto the closed door,
Aglimpse of light the pendant gave, his visage just before:
Let in his face, with speedy pace, and as he nearer drew,
With well contented mind forthwith, his Thisbies sign he knew
And when his trembling hand for joy, the same received had,
And he ten hundredth times it kissed, then thus to it he said.
THough many tokens joyful news have set,
And bliss redust, to careful pyned ghost:
Yet may thou swear, that never lived he yet,
Who half such ease, received in pleasure most:
As thou sweet pendant, now in woeful breast
Impersid have, O happy Pyramus,
Nay being a Lady, in whom such r^the can rest:
Most blisfull Lady, most mighty Venus,
And mighty Thisbie (yea) Venus not displeased,
My Goddess chief, my love, my life and all:
For who but Thisbie would, nay could have eased,
A heart remedyles, abandon thrall:
Wherefore since thus ye please, to show your might,
Make me whole happy, with gladness of your sight.
WHiles Pyramus all clad in joy, thus talks within the wall,
No less content, does Thisbie stand without and hears al:
And with those gladsom lights, where love does sightly joy to play,
And vanquish hearts her love she vewes in mind somewhat to say
But mayde^ly fear plucks back ye word, dread stops her trimbling tongue,
A rossy hew inflames her face, with stain of red among.
Yet lo at length her mind thee stays, her senses do awake,
And with a sweet soft sounding voice, this answer does she make.
Love Pyramus, more dear to me then life,
Even as I first this way, for speech have found:
Of present death, so let the dreadful knyfe,
At this instant for ever me consound:
If joyful thought my passing pensive heart,
Did ever pearse, since parents cruel dome.
Pronounst the sentence, of our common smart,
No dear heart mine, for how alas may blome:
The fading tree, whose sap divided is,
Ye, further sweet, I dare with you presume:
Your passed woes, but pastimes ware I wis,
In their respect, that did me whole consume.
But now sharp sighs, so stop my willing speech,
Such streams of tears, do dim my troubled sight:
And inward fear, of parents wrath is such,
Least longer talk, should give them any light
Of our repair, that further to recyte,
My heaped yls I never dare ne may,
Yet oftenly, we wisely hear may meet:
At chosen times which shall us not bewray,
And this for short, thy Thisbie shall thou see:
With morning light, here present eft to be,
To this full feign would Pyramus, replied have again,
But part as need, inforst they must, and as they did ordain:
Ere mornings dawne they do arise and straight repair they then
Unto the fore appointed place, Pyrame thus began.
Mine entyer soul, what prison dollours?
What hard distress, and rare devised woes?
Of me thine own, thy captive Pyramus,
Have so sought, this life from boddy to unloose:
Hard were to tell the tenth, that have it strained,
With thought hereof, great wonders me amaze:
How my poor life, the half may have sustained,
O Thisbie mine own, whom it only stays.
And at whose will the fates do lend me breath,
Yet may I not the fatal stroke eschew:
Ne escape the dinte of fast pursuing death,
Onles your bounty, present mercy show:
And this I trust, there may no ielous thought,
Have any place within my Thisbies breast:
To cause her deem, I am or may be caught.
With love but hers whereon my life does rest,
No be assured, for yours I only taste:
Yours was the first, and shall be first and last,
Why my most sweet (quoth Thisbie) then again:
I doubt not I, but know ye are all true,
Or how may cause of your undoubted pain:
With her be hyd, who hourly as it grew,
None other felt, but even what ye have had:
Yet think not sweet, I taste your greefes alone,
Or make esteem, as ye of me have made,
But ten times more, if that more woe begone,
Might ever be a wretched maidens breast,
Where never yet, one jot of joy might rest.
Well then my joy, (quoth Pyrame) since ye please,
With so greater love, to guerdon my good will:
Safe am I now, but great were mine ease,
If more at full, I might my fancy fill:
With nearer sight, of your most pleasant face,
Or if I might, your dayntie fingers strain:
Or as I wont, your body once embrace,
What say I ease? nay heaven then were my gain.
Howbeit in vain, in vain (ay me) I waste,
Both word and wind, woes me (alas) therefore:
For never shall my heart, O Thisbie taste,
So great an hap, nor never shall we more:
In folded arms, as wont were to bewray,
Each others state, ne never get the grace:
Of any joy, unless we do assay,
To find some mean for other meeting place.
Behold (alas) this wicked cruel wall,
Whose cursed scyte, denayeth us perfect sight:
Much more the hap, of other ease at all.
What if I should by force, as well one might:
And yet deserves, it batter flat to ground,
And open so, an issue large to make:
Yet fear I sore, this sooner will redownde,
To our reproach, if it I undertake:
As glad I would, then us to help or aid,
Sweet heart (quoth she) wherewith she stopped his tale:
This stands full ill: to purpose to be made,
And time it asks, too long for to prevail:
Without suspect, to flat or batter even,
Naythlesse, ye this, or what ye can devise:
For our repair, by thought that may be driven,
Say but the mean, I will none otherwise.
Ye Thisbie mine, in sooth, and say you so*
(Quoth Pyramus) well then I do you know:
Where King Minus, lies buried long ago,
Whose ancient Tomb above, does ouergrow
A Mulbery, with branches making shade,
Of pleasant show, the place right large about:
There if ye please, when sleep has ouerlade,
And with his might, the City seas'de throughout:
At the same Well, whose silver streams then run.
And soft as silk, conserve the tender green:
With hue so fresh, as springtied spent and dunne,
No winters weed, has power to be seen:
Without suspect, or fear of foul report,
There goddess mine, we salfely may resort.
TO this she said, what she best thought, and often and often again,
Was talk renewed, but yet at last, for ease of every pain:
And death to eschew by other mean, who will them not forsake,
At Minus Tomb, even ye same night, they do their meeting make
And so depart, but fore God wot, that day does them offend,
And though but short his long abode, the fear will never end.
And sooner does not cloak of night, alofte his shadow cast,
But Thisbie mindful of her love, and promis lately past
Of fresh new love, far fiercer flames, that erst her heart oppressed,
She feelth the force, and this (alas) deuorced still from rest:
She passes forth in careful watch, till time have shapen so,
That s^epe with sweet, soft stealing steps his customd usage do
And when she sees both house and all drowned therein fast and deep,
With fearful pace and trimbling hand, she forwards gins to creep:
She gains the door, out goes she then, and neither far ne near,
Appears wight save Phebe fair, with gladsom seeming cheer
Sole Thisbie joyful of this guide, does ay I trust it be,
Good luck thy presence does import, and bring at last to me:
More hardyer then before she did, provoke her foot to have,
No object gives her cause of let, till she the town have past:
And when she sees the pleasant fields in safety to have gained,
Then joy thereof all dread deuoures, which erst her only payned.
What will ye more, the appointed place at length she does attain,
Till Fortune please her love to send, there minding to remain:
And whiles she does the fou^tayn clear, with thoughtful hope behold
And every let, her love may stay, unto her self unfold.
A dreadful Lion down desendes, from Mountain huge thereby,
With thundering pace, whose sudden sight, when Thisbie can espy:
No marvel was though terror then, and straungenes of the sight,
Within a simple maidens breast, all counsel put to flight.
Howbeit, though counsel fayld, yet fear so did yt place possess,
That as the tender breast, whose age no fear did yet oppress:
Now sees his foe, with ravening Iaw, him ready to receive,
Sets wings unto his littell legs, himself poor fool to save.
Even so this Maid, her enemy flees, unto a hollow tree:
For succor flies, whose ruthful moan, did succor not deny:
But close her keeps. The Liones fearce, that in the Mountain wild,
Devoured had, new slaughtred beasts, and empty belly filde:
With moossell all embrude with blood, draws to the cristal Well,
He drank, and in his back return, this fatal hap befell.
Amid this way a kercheife white, which frighted Thisbie had
Let fall by chance, as fear and haste, unto the tree her lad:
This Lion finds, and with his mouth, yet smoking all in gore*
And armid paws it staynes with blood, and all in sunder tore.
That done away he winds, as fire of Hell, or Vulcans thunder
Blew in his tail, or as his corpse it seas*d to tear a sunder:
Now Pyramus who could not erst, the wrathful house forgo,
Has past the town, and as he drew the Fountayn near unto:
The cloth he spies, which when (alas) all stained so he saw,
In sunder tore, the ground about, full traste with Lions paw:
The Silver streams with strekes of blood, besprent and troubled new,
And there again yt cursed trace, the woeful print to show:
A sure belief did straight invade, his ouerlyuing mind,
That there the fatal end (alas) of Thisbie was assinde:
And that her dainty flesh, of beasts a pray unmeet was made,
Wherewith distressed with woodlike rage, the words he out abrade.
The lamentacion of Piramus, for el^e loffe of his Love Thisbie.
THis is the day wherein my irksome life,
And I of lively breath, the last shall spend:
Nor death I dread, for fled is fear, care, strife,
Danger and all, whereon they did depend:
Thisbie is dead, and Pirame at his end,
For never shall report hereafter say:
That Pyrame lyu'de, his Lady taken away.
O sovereign God, what straung outrageous woe,
Presents (alas) this corsiue to my heart:
Ah savage beast, how durst thy spite undo,
Or seek (woes me) so perfect love to part:
O Thisbie mine, that was, and only art,
My lives defense, and I the cause alone:
Of thy decay, and mine eternal moan.
Come Lion thou, whose rage here only show,
Advance with speed, and do me eke devour:
For ruthlesse fact, so shall thou pity show,
And me (too) here, within thy breast restore:
Where we shall rest, together evermore.
Ah, since thy corpse, thou graves within thy womb,
Deny me not sweet beast, the selfsame tomb.
(Alas my joy) thou parted art from me,
By far more cruel mean, then woonted fine:
Or common law, of nature does decree,
And that increases, for woe, this grief of mine:
Of that beauty only, which was divine,
And sovereign most, of all that lived here:
No little sign, may found be any where,
If the dead corpse (alas, did yet remain:
O great cruelty, O rage of fortune spite,
More grievous far, then any tongue may feign:
To reave her life, and in my more despite,
Me to defraude of that my last delight:
Her once t'mbrace, or yet her visage pale,
To kiss full oft^, and as I should bewail.
But since from me thou have the mean outchast,
Of this poor joy, thy might I here defy:
For maugre thee, and all the power thou have,
In Plutoes reign together will we be:
And you my love, since you are dead for me,
Good reason is, that I for you again:
Receive no less but even the selfsame pain.
Ah Mulberie, thou witness of our woe,
Right under thee assigned was, the place
Of all our joy, but thou our common foo,
Consented have, unto her death alas:
Of beauty all, that had alone the grace,
And therefore as the chief of others all,
Let men the Tree of deadly woe thee call.
Grant our great God, for honor of thy name,
A guerdo^ ^f the woe, we shall here have:
For I nill (...), she dead that ruled the same,
Pronounce (O Pluto) from thy hollow Cave:
Where stays thy reign, and let this tree receive,
Such sentence just, as may a witness be,
Of dollour most, to all that shall it see.
ANd with those words, his naked blade he fiersly from his side
Out drew, and through his breast, it forced with mortal wou^d to glide,
The streams of gory blood out glush, but he with manly heart,
Careless, of death and every pain, that death could them imparte.
His Thisbies kercheefe hard he strains, and kissed with steadfast chere
And harder strainde, and ofter kissed, as death him drew more nere
The Mulberies whose hue before, had ever white lo been,
To blackish color straight transformed, and black ay since are seen.
And Thisbie then who all that while, had kept the hollow tree,
Least hap her Lovers long abode, may seem him mocked to be.
Shakes of all fear, and passes forth in hope her love to tell,
What terror great she late was in, and wondrous case her fell:
But when she does approach yt tre^, whos^ (...) were
Abasht she stands, and musing much, how (...) should appear.
Her Pyramus with sights prosound, and (...) yt plained,
She hard: and him a kerchefe saw, how he bit (...) and strained:
She never drew, but when the sword, and gaping wound she saw,
The anguish great, she had thereof, her caused to overthrow
In deadly swoone, and to her self she being come again,
With pittious playnts, and deadly dole, her love she did compain
That done, she did her body lean, and on him softly lay,
She kissed his face, whose color fresh, is spent and fallen away:
Then to ye sword these words she says: thou sword of bitter gall*
Thou have bereaved me my Love, my comfort joy and all.
With that dear blood (woes me) of his thy cursed blade does shine
Wherefore think not thou can be free, to shed the same of mine,
In life no mean, though we it sought, us to assemble could,
Death shall, who has already his, and mine shall straight unfold.
And you O Gods, this last request, for ruthe yet grant it me,
That as one death we should receive, one Tomb our grave may be,
With yt again she often him kissed, and then she speaks thus:
O Lover mine, behold thy love (alas) my Pyramus.
Yet ere I dye behold me once, that comfort not deny,
To her with thee that lived and loved, and eke with thee will dye.
The Gentilman with this, and as the lastest throws of death,
Did pearce full fast at that same stroke, to end both life and breath
The voice he knows, and even there with, castes up his heavy eyes,
And sees his love, he strives to speak, but death at hand denies.
Yet love whose might, not the^ was que^cht in spite of death gave strength
And causde from botto^ of his heart, these words to pas at length
(Alas my love) and live ye yet, did not your life define,
By Lyones rage the foe thereof, and caused that this of mine
Is spent and past, or as I think, it is your soul so dear,
That seeks to joy and honor both, my last adventure hear.
Even with that word, a profound sighe, from bottom of his heart,
Out cast his corpse and spirit of life, in sunder did depart:
Then Thisbie efte, with shrike so shrill as dynned in the sky,
Swaps down in swoone, she eft reuiues, and hents ye sword hereby.
Wherewith beneath her pap (alas) into her breast she struck,
Saying thus will I die for him, that thus dyed for my sake:
The purple Ska^let streams down ran, and she her close does lay
Unto her love him kissing still, as life did pyne away.
Lo thus they loved and died, and dead, one tomb the^ graued there,
And Mulberies in sign of woe, from white to black turnde were.
FINIS.
The lamentacion of a Gentilwoman upon the death of her late deceased friend
William Gruffith Gent.
A doutfull, dying, doleful, Dame,
Not fearing death, nor forcing life:
Nor caring ought for flitting fame,
Emongst such sturdy storms of strife:
Here does she mourn and write her will,
Upon her liked Lovers end:
Grant (Muses nine) your sacred skill,
Help to assist your mournful friend:
Embouldned with your Nimphish aid,
She will not cease, but seek to singe:
And eke employ her willing head,
Her Gruffithes praise, with ruthe to ringe.
WIth Poets pen, I do not preace to write,
Mineruaes mate, I do not boast to be:
Parnassus Mount (I speak it for no spite)
Can cure my cursed cares, I plainly see:
For why? my heart contaynes as many woes
As ever Hector did amongst his foes.
Each man does moan, when faithful (...),
And paynt them out, as well as wits do serve*
But I, a Maid, am forced to use my head,
To wayle my friend (whose faith) did praise deserve:
Wit wants to will: alas? no skill I have,
Yet must I needs deplore my Gruffithes grave:
For William, white: for Gruffith, green: I wore,
And red, long since did serve to please my mind:
Now, black, I wear, of me, not used before,
In liew of love, alas? this loss I find:
Now must I leave, both, White, and Green, and Red,
And wayle my friend, who is but lately dead.
Yet hurtful eyes, do bid me cast away,
In open show, this careful black attire:
Because it would, my secret love bewray,
And pay my pate, with hatred for my hyre:
Though outwardly, I dare not wear the same,
Yet in my heart, a web of black I frame.
You Ladies all, that pass not for no pain,
But have your lovers lodged in your laps:
I crave your aids, to help me mourn amayne,
Perhaps your selves, shall feel such careful claps:
Which (God forbid) that any Lady taste,
Who shall by me but only learn to waste.
My wits be weak an Epitaphe to write,
Because it does require a grauer style:
My phrase does serve but rudely to recite,
How Lovers loss does pinch me all this while:
Who was as pressed to dye for Gruffithes sake,
As Damon, did for Pithias undertake.
But William had a worldly friend in store,
Who writ his end to small effect (God knows)
But I. and H. his name did show no more,
Rhyme Ruff it is, the common sentence goes,
It hangs at Pawles as every man goes by,
One ryme too low, an other rampes too hye.
He praised him out (...) do use,
And uttered all the (...) that God had sent:
But I? am she that neue^ will refuse,
But as I am, so will I still be bent:
No blastes shall blow, my lincked love awry,
Oh? would the Gods, with Gruffith I might dye.
Then had it been that I poor silly Dame,
Had, had no need to blot this scratched scroule:
Then Virgins fist, had not set forth the fame,
How God has gripte, my Gruffithes sacred soul:
But we is me, I live in pinching pain,
No wight does know, what sorrows I sustain.
Unhappy may that drowsy day be named,
Wherein I first, possessed my vital breath:
And eke I wish, that day that I was framed,
In stead of life I had received death:
Then with these woes, I needed not to waste,
Which now (alas) in every vain I taste.
Some Zoylus sot, will think it lightly done,
Because I moan, my mate, and lover, so
Some Momus match, this scroule will ouerronne,
But love is lawless, every wight does know:
Since love does lend me such a freendly scope,
Disdaynfull dogs I may despise (I hope)
Wherefore I do, attempt so much the more,
By this good hope, to show my slender art:
And mourn I must (who) never marckt before,
What fretting force do hold each heavy heart:
But now I see that Gruffithes greedy grave,
Does make me feel, the fits which lovers have.
My mournful Muse, (good Ladies) take in worth,
And spare to speak the worst, but judge the best:
For this is all, that I dare publish forth,
The rest recorded is, within my breast:
And there is lodged, for ever to remain,
Till God does grant (by death) to ease my pain.
And when that death is (...)
With all the pains, that (...)
Yet to my Gruffith, will I (...)
Hap death, hold life, my (...)
Before I will our secret love (...)
To Tantals pains, my body I (...)
So live I shall, when death has spit he^ sp^ght,
And Lady (Fame) will spread my praise I know:
And Cupids Knights, will never cease to write,
And cause my name, through (Europe) for to flow:
And they that know what (Cupid) can prevail,
Will bless the ship, that floates with such a sail.
If I had part of Pallas learned skill,
Or if (Caliope) would lend her aid:
By tracte of time, great volumes I would fill,
My Gruffithes praise in wayling verse to spread:
But (I poor I) as I have said before,
Do wayle, to want, Mineruaes learned lore.
By help (I hope) these ragged rymes shall go,
Entitled as lovers lives should be:
And escape the chyding chaps of every foe,
To praise that man, who was best likte of me:
Though death has shapte, his most untimely end,
Yet for his praise, my tristiue tunes I send.
In hope, the Gods who guide the heavens above,
His buried corpse, alive again will make:
And have remorce of Ladies lincked love,
As once they did for good Admetus sake:
Or change him else, into some flower to wear,
As erst they did, transform Narscissus fair.
So should I then, possess my former friend,
Restored to life, as Alcest was from Hell,
Or else the Gods, some flagrant flower would send,
Which for his sake, I might both wear and smell:
Which flower, out of my hand shall never pass,
But in my heart, shall have a sticking place.
But woe is me, (...) in (...)
Adue delight? come (...)
To bluntish blocks (I see) I do (...) plain,
And reap but only sorrow for ^y share:
For well I know that Gods no^ sprites can cure,
The pains that I for Gruffith do endure.
Since wayling, no way can remedy me,
To make an end, I therefore judge it best:
And drink up all, my sorrow secretly,
And as I can, I will abide the rest:
And since I dare not mourn, to open show,
With secret sighs and tears, my heart shall flow.
Some busy brain, perhaps will ask my name,
Disposed much, some tidings for to mark:
That dare I not? for fear of flying fame,
And eke I fear least biting bugs will bark:
Therefore farewell, and ask no more of me,
For (as I am) a Lover will I dye.
FINIS.

