A DISCOVRSE OF HOVSEBANDRIE, No less profitable then delectable: declaryng
how by the Housebandrie, or rather Housewiferie of Hens, for five hundredth
Franks or French pounds (making in English money iv. li. xj. s^. j.d.) once
employed, one may gain in the year, four thousand and five hundredth Frankes
(which in English money, makes five hundredth pou^des) of honest profits: All
costs and charges deducted.

Written in the French tongue, by Master Prudent Choselas. And lately
translated into English by R. E.

Jmprinted at London by Jhon Kyngston, for Miles Jenynges, dvvellyng in Paul's
Churche-yarde, at the sign of the Bible. 1577.

A Souse, is xij. French pence.

Xij. Souse, maked a French Teston, which is four grotes English.

Three Souses, make a grote.

A Frank or French pound, is twenty Souses, xviij. Souses, makes it. s^.
after ix. Sousesto a shillyng. So remains of the Frank two Souls, to make
up the Frank of twenty Souses.

ix. French pence, make one English penie. ix. Souses, one shillyng: ix.
Frankes one English pound: nine hundredth, one hundrethinyne thousand, one
thousand.

To the right honorable the Countee of Rochefort, Knight of the order of the
King, and Captain of five hundredth men of Arms of his ordinances.
MY Lord, having from my youth in memore the precepte of Apelles, most
excellent Painter of his time, who commanded his Prentices not to pass one
day, without drawyng of a line, to the end to keep them in breath and
continuance (as does the Hunter his Greyhounde) he seems by that precepte to
show how greatly idleness is to be avoided, and how great is the loss
of time, to leave the exercise of travail. And therefore, not to transgress
this precepte in these tumuliuous and turbulente times, coposed of more then
civil wars in the bowels of France, I have addressed my self for the
auoidyng of Idleness, to draw my line upon an humble and low subject, to
make a discourse of domestical Housbandry. and to show how a diligent man
may of one little sum, draw great games by honest me^nes. Which doing, I
greatly recreate my Spirits among my books, and forget a great part of my
soron full thoughts of these troublous times. And forasmuch as I know, that
after long practice of arms, and the great travail which you have had
therein, the travail of letters shall be greatly delectable unto to you, when
with equal pase, you join wisdom with magnanimity, I have taken upon me
the boldness, to present unto you this my little labor, by the readyng
whereof you may take one hour of recreation. I have addressed this little
Housbandrie in such order, that the practice being therein well instructed in
buiyng, and conseruatio^ of things bought, with discreet distribution of the
same, may assure him self to lack no marchantes. This little discourse, is of
the time of the troubles of the year M.D.LXVII. before that the Wind Caecias
drew the cloud of troubles into the countries of Poictu and Lodunoys, where I
appoincted the Marchaunte to make his emploit, as shall be seen in the readyng.

Yours most obeisant, Prudent Choyselat.

The Aucthor to his friend afflicted with the troubles of the civil VVarres
in France, in the year of our Lord, M.D.LXVII.
THe calamities and encombraunces, the miseries and sorrows, which proceed
of he insolency into the which the people of this time is plonged in this age
of Iron (Of Iron I may say, hardened to misfortune) has well witnessed to
us, how true is the aunciente Proverb, which says: That Jupiter is slow to
visit the skin of the Got: Yet that in fine, he permits not an evil
fact unpunished. We have seen with our eyes, and felt by effect in our
France, at the risyng of these last troubles, falling upon us like tempest of
a Hail unlooked for. The which, as coming out of the Box of Pandora, or out
of a broken infected Prison, was so spredde among men, and has made such
ouerture of vice and mischief, that all sorts of evil are set at liberty:
Mars the Executour of the wrath of the Gods, has so vomited his Choler
without measure, that the burning thereof has chafed them, not only to
sociall Wars, but to all Deuelishe attemptes, more then Megarique to
Robberies and Murders, and (as says Cicero) to Phalarismes and most cruel
inhumanites, Vulcan leauyng his proper Region, has followed these miseries, and
searched new habitations, to exercise these operations: In such sort that it
is easy to judge, that these mishappes are fallen among men, to put them
in memory of their sins, found in the said Gotes skin, of the which you
have paid your lotte: as I have known by the complaints, which you have
made for your great losses of money and menage speiled and destroyed by
sackcage, and pillage also of your Nobles. In the which I lamente your
fortune, as a common Shipwreck: But patience m^^te surmount. And to help you,
I have none other mean then by advise and counsel: you know that all my
life, I have spente little time in hourdyng of richesse, and things caduke.
And that rather I took pleasure to content my Spirits, in readyng and
searchyng of such things, as few men have found. Yet not to refuse the
help a freende in necessity: and understanding that there yet remains unto
you, five or six hundredth Frankes, which you have hidden, foreseyng so great
a mischaunce, it seems unto me, to the end that you in nothing diminishe
your state of living, so to redress the same, that you may easily in short
time, reenter into as great and ample revenues, as you had before the said
troubles.

Your reuenewe doubtless consists in Housebandrie of all sorts of cattaile,
as Beeues, Kyne, Mares, Sheep, Foul, and such other things as reioyseth
them, which are given to the Country life. I can be a witness how your
Table was ever ready for your familiar friends: And your wife and daughter
were of worshipful estimation, and of careful provision for you famelie,
entertained by honest sparyng and frugalitie, requisite in due time and season.
At which time also you were well esteemed, for your liberality toward your
neighbors and friends. But seeing that Fortune has turned her visage (as
she is accustomed to do, when the time agrees with her) you must needs
retire, and not suffer her to remain with you in like regard as before. And
therefore you must forgette those losses, and think of a Baine to come: To
the which you shall attain easily, with this little sum remainyng, if you
will emploie it, as I will advertise you. And this without spotte of villainy,
or filthy and excessive gains. Furthermore, your Housebandrie shall florishe,
and your name shall be more known in France, then was among the Greeks, the
name of him that burnte the Temple of Diana in Ephesus.

And to make no longer discourse: advise your self to be stowe your sum of
money in buiyng of Hens: not Meleagrides, the which Bellomus in his
Peregrination affirms to be our Hens of the Indies (being the true
granieres of Dtes) but common Hens of our Country: and Housebande or employe
them in such sort, as I will show hereafter. And be not impacient to attend
the conclusion.

First of all, it is necessary to have them, near unto the City of Paris,
famous and of great renoume throughout all the world, to be the mart and
seat of all good Arts, and Sciences, and populous of all sorts of men, if
there be any other under the Sun. There consider the situation of some
commodious place well builded, having good rooms and Stables, with a Court or
yard enclosed of two Acres of ground, more or less, and walled of
sufficient height. With also two other Acres enclosed, for an other purpose,
whereof we will speak hereafter. Of these are enowe to be found, in the
old rural buildings about the City of Paris. So then can you not say, that
you are staightly lodged. For Quintus Cincinnatus Citezine of Room (so named
for wearyng his hair combed and breaded) possessed no more when he was called
to the dignity of Dictator, as writes Valerius Maximus in his fowerth book.

The aforesaied Manor place or Ferme, with Yard or Court enclosed, you
shall take by Lease for certain years, paiyng yearly rent for the dwelling of
you and your famelie. You shall dispose your stables commodiouslie for your
Hens and Chickins, with the view or prospecte toward the Winter Drient,
that the Sun may give the good morrow to your Hens, which greatly
delight at the Morning Sun, as notes Columella in his ix. book of
Housebandrie: also ^arre in his third book.

The Hen houses, shall be commodious and profitable if they be alone or
solitary, and the Plankes well covered with claye, because the Hens delight
to pruine and toumble them selves in duste, and to be kept warm. And
therefore boordes or plaster, are not convenient to this purpose.

The Lathers or Perches must be from the ground two foot high. Also
flat, and not round, because the Hens do not bend, or crook their
claws or Talantes as do other graspelyng fowls.

The said Hen houses also, in the day time must be open, that they may
be euented with Wind and Air. And that the Night air may more easily
transpire and breath out, that it may cause no disease by close air, which
in short time causes putrefaction, and diseases thereof proceadyng.

Under the Hen houses, and all about the Stables, shall be hanged many
Panyers of conueniente bigness, stufte with Hay, to receive the Hens when
they lay. For Hay in this case, is much better then Straw, because it is
softer and warmer, and is not so apt to enge^der Lice or Woormes. I do not
mean that it should be so dear as was that, which was sold for four
Attiques the handful, for men to eat, at the time of the great Famine in
Jerusalem, as writes Josephus in his seventh book of the war of the Jews,
the four Attiques amountyng to fowertene French Souls, xviij. d. and ij.
thirdes.
after three Souses and six French Pence for a Souse, as much as the Roman
peuie, as writes learned Budaeus in his book De Ass.

When you have thus disposed your Hen houses, and made them sure and saufe
against all hurtful beasts and Vermin, that may enter by Day or Night, and
have well placed the Paniers, to receive and harbor them, you shall bestow
the sum of three hundredth Frankes, in buiyng of good Hens, which may cost
you after the rate of five Souses (which is vj. d. and twoo-thirdes) the
piece, by reason of the dearthe which is now, by occasion of Wars. Which
shall be twelve hundredth Hens, after xxv. Frankes the hundred. xxv. Fra^kes
iv. s^. vj. d. and ij. thirdes of j. d.


The Countries of Angeou, Touraine, and Lodunois, have been the Countries with
Britaigne, less troubled with the said Civil wars: And therefore Hens
are there better cheap: Also very good, strong, well membered, and of the
best race to make your emploite.

You shall choose the youngeste, which are apter to lay then the old: and
the common, more then they of kind: or the Black, Read, and Taunie, which
are more fruitful then the Graie or White, as Aristotle affirms in his
History of Beasts in the first book, the first Chapter. And also they
which have their creste or comb double and upright, as witnesses Pliny in
his natural History. Also Palladius and Petrus Crescensis in his Book of
Housebandrie. Likewise Carolus Stephanus a man of our time, and a diligent
gatherer of things Economike, parteinyng to Household and Housebandrie.

They of mean bigness, are the best, having their breast large, their body
well fleshed, not with long Spurs like unto Cocks, for they commonly break
their Eggs. Take heed also that they be not to fat. Witness the good wife
which being in love with her Hen, fed her so well, and made her so fat,
that she left laiyng, as rehearses Esope in his Fables.

You ought to think that the good Woman loved her Hen no less, then the
Emperor Honorius, son of Theo dosius loved his, named Rome. Who
understanding that Alaricus King of the Goths had taken Rome, (which was the
aunciente City of Rome) was very sad, supposyng that Alaricus had taken his
Hen, which he so much loved, as Zonar the Greek Historiographer has
written, in the life of Honorius. I say the aunciente Rome, because the
Emperors of the East parts, called Constantinople, new Rome.

In like manner you shall buy Cocks, to sort or match them. Six score
Cocks shall suffice for the twelve hundredth Hens. v. pi. vi. s^. viij. d.
For one Cock, may suffice for ten Hens. They may cost you ten Souses
the piece, over and above the price of the Hens: which amounts to forty
and eight Frankes. They of the age from a year and a half, unto two years,
are the best.

To know them well, you shall consider the Plumage or Feathers. The Black,
Read, and Taunie, are the best. Also they that have their Comb or Crest
upright, and double or divided. Their eyes Read and glisteryng: Their beck,
short and hooked: well suprred: their going, hautie and proud: Their voice
strong and soundyng: And such as crow much, representyng such a majesty,
as did the Cock of the Persians, which among them was reuerenred, and
honored for a King, as recites Aristophanes. At the least, that they show a
certain hardiness, as they which the Carians, people of the less Asia, bore
upon their Morion or Helmet, going to battle: As Alexander de Alexandro has
written in the xx. Chapter of his first book.

And if you will take pleasure in Divination of things to come, Alectoromantia.
by Cocks, (which Dinination is named Alectoromantia) as did Iamblicus
master of Proclus, as Libanius his compaignion, great and learned
Philosophers, in the time of the Emperor Valens, you may make experiment of
such predictions, and therewith do pleasure to your friends.

And to the end that you shall not be ignoraunte in the Theorike, or
speculation of the said Divination, I will show you a certain practice and
Prognostication thereof. Certain great lords were curious to know, who
should be successor to the Empire, after Valens, favorer of the damnable
sect of the Arrians: Praiyng the said Philosophers to give answer,
according to their Art and experience, which they had of such things. Who
were very diligente to satisfy their request, as commonly men of letters
are not ingrate to communicate to others, the fruits of their garden.

Therefore Iamblicus, and Libanius, chose a place very plain and equal, of
convenient largeness: and caused fine powder, or ashes to be sifted therein.
In the which powder, they wrote the xxiiij. letters of the Alphabet equally
distaunt the one from the other, one little cubite asunder, which is a foot
and a half.

These xxiiij. letters so written and ordered, made a figure pentagon, or of
five angles, having five equal distaunces. Upon every of the which letters,
they laid ten grains, one of Wheat, and an other of Barleye.

The figure being set in order, they took a Cork, and ^aied to him these
words: Cock envious, Cockeielous, Cock proud: Eat the grain, and leave the
letter. Then making a great whisperyng, in manner of a Charm, they let the
cock so charmed, eat certain of the grains liyng upon the letters. The
which letters then joined together, and set in order, according to the grains
which la^e on the^ these letters were found. T,H,E,O,D. Theod.
And were thereby contented to search no further.

And by this Divination by the Cock, the said Philosophers gave answer,
that the successor of the Empire, should be one Theodosius, or Theodorus, or
Theodoius, whereof Valens being advertised, was greatly displeased, fearing
least his children should be deprived of the Empire. And therefore put to
death all the great Lords, which were so named Iambliucs, had evil fortune,
and shortly after was poisoned Vopiscus, Lampridius and Zonare, which have
written the lives of the Emperors of the East and Weste, will make you wise
in this Prognostication.

Not without reason I have rehearsed unto you this little Cubite. For if you
figure Pentagon were directed by the great Cubite (which is of nine foot,
according to the which, the Ark of Noah was measured, as some Speculatours
have affirmed,) you might fail in you Divination, and shall not come to the
knowledge of that you desire.

Nevertheless, for as much as such Diuinations, be deceptes, and
inchauntmentes of the eyes and senses, having in them no substance of truth,
but rather of lies, you shall give no faith thereto. For falshoode is ever
overcome by by truth: as by example allegorike, Josephus in his History of
the Antiquity of the Jews, in the second Book and fifth Chapter declares:
As also is written in Exodus. Capit. vij. Where the Rod of Moises, was by the
finger of God turned into a very Serpent, and devoured the fantastike
Serpents of the Magicians of Pharao. And the Authors of the said Magique,
finally received their reward as did Iamblicus: and as did Arphaxat the
Magician of Persia, who was stricken with a Thumderbolte: As was also the
Bailise of Mascon, whom the Devil carried away, as our Chronicles witnesses.
And also as were Mathotin and Hollere, Magicians of the Goths, which were
overwhelmed, as writes Olaus Magnus in his History of the North Regions, in
the third book. Likewise Oddo a Magician of Denmark, who was drouned. And
infinite others came to the like evil end.

But now to return to our Hens: To entreat them and govern them well,
you must have four servants or maids, with large ears, well to conceive,
and understand your commandments: And the feet of Hearts, with diligente
expedition to execute the same: And trusty right hand, to be faithful,
loyal, obedience, and of few words. For (as says the Terentian Parmeno) it
is great fault in servants to be babbelers, and not to keep their masters
counsel.

Their office shall be to bring the Hens into their bouses every day, at five
of the Clock in the Eueuyng in So^mer: And at three of the Clock in Winter.
Also that they be diligente to close the entries, and Windows of the Hen
houses, that in the night, the Fox (natural enemy to Hens) Weasells, or
Polecattes, may have no access. And in the Morning, to open the entrees and
windows, that they may come forth. And then to make clean the Pearches and
Lathers. Also to refreashe their Pottes and Troughes with clean water. For
filthy and corrupt water, engendereth the pippe, and other sicknesses.

In the day also, the said servants must be myndfull, to visit the
Paniers if they be furnished with Hay, and to refreshe them if need be. The
which must be done every week, for engenderyng of Life, Worms, and Vermin,
which make the Hens lean, and cause them to scrache.

In like manner they must be diligente, in gatheryng the Eggs. And by account
to deliver the^ to a woman, which shall lay them in older upon fair wheat
straw, in a place of large and free air, to be kept fresh and cold. The
same servants, after that in the Morning, they have given the^ their feadyng
of Barley and Otes, and sometyntes also Fetches, or Tares, shall cast among
them some dry Horsedounge, to the end that the Hens may labor the more,
to search their meat with serapyng. For suck exercise, is wholesome for
them. Then about Noone, they shall feed them again, calling them with loud
voice, that they may be acquainted wi^h the call of their kepers, whom they
will sone know, as did the Sparrowe of Lesbia Ca^^lli^^a: The Parratte of
Corinna Ouidinna: The Thrustle of Agrippina the wife of the Emperor Claudius:
The Raven of the Shomaker of Room, which gave the good Morrow to the
Emperors Tiberius, Germanicus, and Drusur. And was bought for xx. Sesterns,
amountyng to the sum of v. hundredth crounes of our money, by the supputatio^
of Budaus, after the rate of xxv. crounes one Sesterne. And in like manner shall
they do a little before they bring them to rouste.

If your yard contain two Acres enclosed, you may thereof Plowe half an
Acre in some corner, where the He^nes may sometimes in the day scrape the
ground, and tomble them selves in the duste or sand, wherein they take great
pleasure. You shall Plowe or hardle the said land, once in the month, that
it become not to hard, that the He^nes may easily raise it, without hurtyng
their claws.

You may also cast certain seeds upon the Plowed ground, and cover it with
the hardle, that the Hens may take both more pleasure and labor, in
discoueryng it. For the He^nes through idleness, become gross and heavy, and
will cease from laiyng.

When your Housebandrie shall be thus well ordered, you must practice in the
City of Paris, with ten or twelve Physicians, dwelling in sundry places of
the said City. Not of the beardlesse and delicate Apollinaries, which care
for nothing but glory, and civil flattery, to get rich Wives. But of the
bearded AEsculapians, such as was the Famous Florentine, a man of singular
knowledge and experience in his daughter, pursued by the unchaste love of
Ladislaus king of Naples and Hungary.

Such ancient Phisicions will easily permit the necessities of Nature, and
confirm the wholesome Edicte of the Emperor Claildius: who (as witnesses
Suetonius) permitted in banquettes and compargnies, freely and without shame,
to let escape the wind of the bealie, knowing that certain shamefatte
persons, subject to the Collicke, have died for holdyng the said ventositie:
As also Cicero in the xxij. book of his Epistles, says that fartyng ought to
be as free as belchyng, after the opinion of the Stoikes.

You shall give them to understand, that you can daiely furnishe their
Pacie^tes with new laid Eggs, every morning without fail. You shall also
advertise them, of them that have the sellyng, and distribution of them.

You shall also take heed, that you have not to deal with such Phisitio^s,
which have naught else to do the^ to walk their Mules, as they were which
were observed by Master Francis Rables Pentagruell, to depart out of their
lodgyng at six of the clock in the morning, and to return at Noone without
strikyng of stroke. For such are the very paciences of impacie^ce, by the
understanding of Epoptiques and Acromatiques of Aristotle and Alexander his
Disciple, which they thought only worthy to be read, as writes Quintus
Curtius.

In like manner you must be acquainted with xv. or xx. Gainsellers, or
Regraters, such as can chatte and babble best, and walk about all the
streates, and the four corners of the city, and the most famous places of
the same: as the Burse, the Pallaice, the great Haules, the Ports, and other
places of great resort: Assuryng them to furnishe them daiely of a number of
new laid Eggs, which they shall sell and distribute to your profit,
agreyng with them for reasonable price and wages, as shall be said hereafter.

Having kept this order, you shall be careful and diligent, to cause your
Eggs daiely to be carried to the Gainfellers, or women that shall sell them
again in the morning of the day followyng. You may carry the^ best upon
Asses. For which purpose, that Beast is very proper, because of his slow
going, that he break not the Eggs. But take heed that they eat no Figs,
least you bruste for laughyng, as did the Philosopher Chrysippus, as writes
Diogenes Laertius, in his book of the lives of Philosophers. The like also
thaunced to Philomenes, as writes Valerius Maximus, in his Chapter of rare
kinds of Death.

Now it rests to make you understand the profit, that shall come unto you
daiely of your sum: all charges and expenses deducted: the rent of your
house paid, the wages of your servants, the Gainsellers contented, the
charges of the Ass, his keeper compted, and also the grain or corn wherewith
your Hens are sedde. For of the sale of Eggs is taken no custom, or
imposition, as was in the time of Ihon Ducas Emperor of Comstantinople, and
successor of Theodosius Lascaris, who was so excessive, that in a few days,
the Croune of Irene the Empress, was thereby marueilousty enriched in precious
stones and iewelles, as Nephorius has left in writing, in the third book of
the History Bizantine, in the chapter, of the famine of the Turks.

You shall fell, or cause to be sold, every new laid egg easily for six
French pence the piece. ob. and one third.
For I assure you, that within the City of Paris, are a thonsande, yea rather
two thousand, that will gladly give a Carolus (which is nine French penuce)
for every new laid Egg, being thereof assured; wherein fee you fail not.

How many Gentlemenne and Gentlewomen are there, which greatly desire in the
Morning, to eat a new laid Egg: How many are there of Citezins, and their
wives, touched with the like desire: How many old folks weary of Flesh,
could for their Dinner be content, with a new laid Egg or two: For you
must know that an Egg, is naturally of good nourishemente, wholesome, delicate
of easy digestion, and makes good blood, as writes Alexander Aphrodiseus in
his second book, and xxviij. question of his Problemes. Likewise Albertus
Magnus writes, that an Egg engendereth in manne, as much good blood, as is
the bigness of the yolke, which tourneth almost all into blood.

I have yet made no memory of sick folks, which of necessity have need of
new laid Eggs, by the ordinance of the Physicians, whose freendship you
shall entertain for the same purpose. The number of the which sick folks, I
am sure in the said City, will daiely surmounte a thousand persons: without
speaking of them that keep a certain diet, as well to increase the lusts of
their pleasures in Venerie, as also to restore that which sometime by excessive
wantonness, they have diminished of their strength and health. For these also
shall have need of your merchandise.

You may therefore by this deduction, be assured of the vent and sale, and
deliverance of your Eggs day by day as much as your Hens shall do their
endeavor, orderly to furnishe your Customers.

Now let us return to our account. You can gather no less every day of
your xij. hundredth Hens, then eight hundredth Eggs: which are two terces or
third parts of the number: Leauyng the other terce or third part of your
Hens, in the mean time to rest and repose them selves. For the season is
not every day agreeable for all He^nes to lay: Specially in the midst of
Winter, and other times near unto that. But you shall then help them in
giuyng them Fenegreke, commonly called the dredge of Horses. And also Barley
half sodde. For these things keep the^ in natural heat, and cause them to
lay.

Eight hundredth Eggs, by supputation Arithmeticall, L. Souses is v. s. vi. d.
and ii. third parts of a penny.
at six French pence the piece, will yield. L. Souses for the hundredth. Which
in number producte, makes xx. Frankes, or French pounds a day. xliiii. s.
v.d. ii. thirdes.
Which is, for the said eight hundredth, seven score Frankes the week, and
seven chousande three hundredth Fra^kes the year, of honest profit.

Let us divise the charges. And that which then remains, we will call the
gains and profit. For the Lawiers say, that we call nothing profit, saving
what remains after the charges deducted: as the famous Lawier Papinia^ has
well defined in the xxiij. book of the Pandectes, under the title of repetitio^
of dowry after the marriage dissolved.

First for the pension of the work man, ii. s. ii. d. and ii. thirdes.
and his House for every day xx. Souses: which by the year comes to three
hundredth, three score and five Frankes. I here understand years of the Sun
consisting of three hundredth, three score, and five days.

For four Servants or maids, xx. Souses the day, which is for each of them
for wages, meat and drink, five Souses to find them selves: amountyng in
the year to the like sum of three hundredth three score and five Frankes. xl.
lib. xi. s. i. d. and i. third.
You know how greatly sobriety is to be commended in servants, both
men and women: which kick when they be fat (as do Monks in the mewe)
and murmr when they be full. Among the which, we mean not such as with
pure conscience, exercise them selves in their vow of contemplation of Divine
things, in whose souls, contemplation takes perfection, as says the
Divines. For in all sorts of men, the best ought to be respected, and the
worst noted. Neither yet do I mean, that you should be so sparyng for the
meat of your servants, as was the Abbot of Poson in Hungary, who was wont
to say that of all the works of his Servants, the mouyng of their Jaws
grieved him most: he was so filthely coueteous, that he disdained to see his
servants eat, as writes AEneas Syluius in the xlij. Chapter of his
History of Boheme.

For the charges of the two Asses (although Thistles grow every where
abundantly) we will allow v. Souses day: amountyng to four score and
twelve Frankes, vi. d. and ij. thirdes.
and five Souses in the year. And for the Ass keeper (whom you may also
apply to other service, x. lib. v. s.
after that he has brought his Eggs to the place appointed) who can have no
less then one maid to acco^panie him, whose allowance being after the rate of
five Souses the day, comes to four score and twelve Franks, and five Souses
the year. Who^ you shall advertise, that he ouercharge not his Asses least they
murmr as do the Monks unreformed.

The Emperor Augustus Caesar after the victory Actiu^ against Antonius,
injured by the love of Cleopatra Queen of Egipte, going to see the Ships
captive, found suddenly an Ass keeper, and asked him what was his name: Who
answered that his name was Fortunatus: and the names of his Asses, Victorious.
Thereby gratulating the victory of the Emperor. You may feel the profit of
your Asses with like congratulatio^, and hope of good Fortune and victory,
against the^ that would have throwe^ you into miserable poverty: if you follow
your business with requisite diligence as did the said Emperor Augustus his
wars: Auoidyng such delices and pleasures, as Antonius used with Cleopatra.

For meat or feedyng for the Hens, shall suffice for the day two quarters
of Paris measure, as well in Barley as in Otes, Fitches, or Tares: and in
Winter, Septier is the Quarter of Partis v. s. vi. d. and ij. thirdes.
bearde or horned Wheat, (which in Champaigne is called Sarasine Wheat)
after xxv Souses the Septier or quarter, which by the day amounts to L.
Souses: and in the year seven hundredth, four score and seven Frankes, and
ten Souses, which is four score and vij. li. x. s^.

As touching the Physicians, some of them selves shall have need of your
marchandice: as they that have a Famely, and many little children: whom you
must visit weekly with certain quarterons of new laid Eggs, brought on
Thursdaie for Fridaie and Saterdaie. At Easter also with certain Red Eggs to
present to their neighhours, as the revenue of their practike. But such as
have no family, and seek for wife and house, followyng the precepte of
Xenophon in his Oeconomiques, you may to (gratify then) show them the
increase of your Housebandry, and recite unto them the pleasure which you
receive therein, to hasten them to cast them selves into the net of happy
Mishap, and yet in the mean time honor them with some pretty Presents.

And if you have the means to recover Pullettes, or Chikens of the race of he
He^ne, which engendered them perfectly formed, scrapyng and pepyng, and
followyng the Hen, as soon as they be out of the Egg (as rehearses
Apuleius in his book of the golden Ass) you may thereby give argument of
high Philosophy of noueltees, upon the doubt which they make, if the round
Eggs bring forth Cocks, and the long Eggs Hens. Wherein Albertus Magnus
the Ape of Aristotle, does contrary his Master, in the sixth book of Beasts.

But in the resolution of this question, you shall find the^ no less trouble,
then in this: which is, why there are more Sheep then Wolves: Seeing that one
Sheep commonly engendereth not but one, or seldom times two, whereas the
Wolf brings forth eight or nine. Again, in consideration that for one
Wolf that is killed, a thousand or two thousand Sheep go to the
slaughter. For the reason which Herodotus brings in his third book of his
Muse of Thalia, (where he says, that Nature has made fierce and cruel
Beasts more fruitful, speaking of the multitude of Serpents and Vipers,
which in Arabia keep the Trees of Frankensence) can not be applied to
Wolves, which are fierce and rauenyng. But to return to our charges.

For the entertainemente of the said Physicians, xxviii. Iib. xvij. s. ix d.
one third.
I give you estate of two hundred and three score Frankes by the year. So shall
your Physicians have no occasion to complain, that they have the pension of
Pulters. Of other fidelity nevertheless, that he that is found culpable of
false report, shall abide the Judgment of the Senator Papirius, at the siege
of Aquilon, a Town of the Samnites, of the which Valerius Maximus makes
mention in his vij. book.

To the Gainsellers, vi. d. and. ij. thirdes.
you shall give five Souses for a hundred. Giving the^ charge, that they sell
not in your name, any Eggs but yours. xv. s. vi. d. ij. thirdes.
Which insumme, shall be by the week seven Frankes: and by the year, three
hundred, three score and five Frankes. xl. li. xi. s. i. d. and i. third.
In the which you shall do nothing contrary to the opinion of Socrates, who
blamed them that bought Marchaundize by gross, to sell them again to others
by retaile, as hurtful to the common wealth.

Then the supputation or compte being made upon xx. x. li. iiii. s. v. d one
third. viii. hundred xi. li. ii. s. ij. d. two thirdes.
Frankes of the sale of your Eggs by the day, amounting to seven thousand
and three hundred Frankes by the year, we must rebate the sum of two
thousand, seven hundredth and three Frankes, and five Souses Tournois, (of
currante money) for the expenses here before compted. So remains unto you the
profit by the year, the sum of four thousand, five hundredth, four score
and xvj. Frankes, and five Souses, which is five hundredth and xj. li. xxij.
s^. x. d. and ij. thirdes.

And when your laiyng Hens shall be no more then six hundredth a day, leauyng
the other six hundredth in rest to abide their season, yet shall remain unto
you xv. Frankes by the day: and by the year, three thousand, xxxiii. s. iii. d
four hundredth forty and seven Frankes, three Souses, and nine pence, all
charges deducted, which amounts to three hundredth four score and three li.
v. d.

Which seems to me an honest gain and profit, upon the emploiyng of so
little a sum, and that, without all filthy Usury: By the means also
whereof, you may feast your friends, and lead a joyful life: I say not
prodigal, as of AEsope the Tragike, with his platter of small Birds, whereof
Pliny makes mention in the tenth book of his Natural History. Neither so
dainty or gluttonous as of Apitius, that was in the time of the Emperor
Tiberius. Neither yet so sumptuous and magnificent, as that of Lucullus noted
of Plutarche (in his book of the lives of famous men) for the Bankett which
he made upon the sudden, for Pompeius and Cicero: the expense whereof was no
less then xij. hundredth and fifty Crounes, coming to L. Sesternes Roman.
Or that of Pomponius Atticus. Again on the other part. I mean not that your
living shall be so straight, in frugalitie or sparyng. as was that of Curious
Dentatus, who lived with Radishe roots. Or of Pertinax who would be served
ten times with one salet. Neither so vile or sparyng, as was Epaminondas a
great Lord of Thebes, who kept his chamber while his apparel was amendyng,
because he would have no change.

But temperate and modeste, as that of the kings of Egipte, who before they
fell to their meat, disputed of modesty and sobriety, taking pleasure in
bankettes, more ioyefull, then sumptuous or exquisite. And so shall you not
faule into the penalty of the Law Numerall of Julius, who prefined a Tax to
be paid of the charges, made in great feasts and bankettes.

And for as much as it may seem a thing indecent, that a man should make
profession of an Art, or trafique of marchaundize, whereof he has no
knowledge, being ignorant of the natures and temperatures of the things which
he has in hand: I will not fail to advertise you of the diseases, which
come to He^nes and Cocks, and of their remedies, and when it shall be needful
to change them, and put others in their places, to the end that your number
do not diminishe: as you know that by surrogation, the kinds of all things
are preserved in their being, and so remain perpetually: as Divine Diotimus
taught Socrates in the second book of the feast of Plato.

Their common disease is the Pippe, which is a disease of the tongue, the end
whereof is thereby hardened, in manner of a gristle. And thereby also the Hen
loses her taste both in eating and drinkyng: and infecteth the other Hens,
specially within the house, and place of their feding.

This disease proceeds, either of being long without drinkyng of clean and
freashe water, or by drinkyng of foul and stinkyng water. And to heal it, you
must take the Hen, and take away the superfluity, which grows on the
tongue hardened at the end. And then wash the tongue and beak with Oil, in
the which shall be tempered a hedde of Garlike. And put among their meat
Staphisacre: and to rub the tongue well with spettle or Vinegar, first
tempered in the mouth of the servant.

An other disease, is the Catarre or Rheum, which is a fluxion of cold
Humors in the hedde of the Hens, making them to hang their wings, and their
crestes or combs. The remedy is, to trauerse or overthwart there nosethrilles
with a Feather put through them, to open the Fluxio^ or Rheum that is stopped,
and makes them blind. It shall also be good to warm their drink in Winter:
Because such diseases proceed of cold, or drinkyng of Frosen water, or liyng
under yt Moon, the mother of al moistness.

Against the Lice and vermin, which make them lean, feeble, and unfruitful,
I have showed you the remedy. But when the disease is now come, the remedy is
to bathe them with a little Wine, or drink, in the which shall be sodden
some Comin or Staphisacre, commonly called the death of Lice, appliyng it to
the heddes of little children, with oyntmentes.

If you doubt, how I know this, not alledgyng any Author for the proof: you
shall understand that I have learned it, by practice of the common people, in
like manner as the wise men among the Hebrews, named Cabalistae, and the like
among the Gauls named Druydes, learned their Seiences by tradition, from
mouth to mouth, and from hand to hand without Letters. Whereby is come to
pass, that in our Feaunce, the gouernmente is more by customs not written,
then by written laws: As Julius Caesar has written in his Commeutaries, of
the conquest of the Gauls or Frenchemen, in his sixte Book.

The auncientes have written certain remedies, to keep the Hens from the
Fox, as Palladius in his Book of Housebandrie, teaches how to rub the
walls of the Hen house, with the gaul of a Fox and to cut in little pieces
the flesh of a Fox, and to mingle it with the Hens meat to cause the Fox
to abhor to come near it, by feelyng the death of his proper kind, which
nature can not abide, as writes Pliny in the xxix. book of his Natural
History. But the most sovereign remedy, is to keep fast and close the
doors and windows in the Night. And that in the Day. you servants often
times come, and go in all places and corners of your close. And that near
unto it, or the Hen house, be no heaps of woodde, bushes, or stones, where
such beasts may be hid or harbored. For, the beasts which live by
rapte, have ever a certain fear joined with their craftiness, and desire of
rauenyng.

About the time of Autumn, you shall every year draw a hundred or two
hundred of the eldest of your He^nes, and such as have their claws longest,
and grossest. In place of the which, you shall put younger of such sort or
quality, as I have before described.

If peradventure you be of opinion, to keep your Eggs of one season for an
other, you must lay them in order upon sheaues or straw very fresh, with
the sharp end upward or to lay them in Paniers in like manner. And that they
be well covered with straw, that they be not turned by too much heat, or
cold. And if you will chose the best for your friends, take Candida. Longa,
Noua (that is) White, Long, and New, following the opinion of the School of
Salerne.

The other two Acres which remain about your yard, court, or place
enclosed, shall be commodious to sow Barley, which is a grain very proper for
the noriture of He^nes. And if you can recover Barley of the sede of AEthiope
whereas dwell the Jews of the ligue of Dan, Nephthalin, Gad, and Asser, near
to the river of Sabbatique (which Moises affirms to be the River in the
holy scripture called Gozan) it shall be singular good, because one grain
thereof brings forth an hundred, as Eldad Damus the Hebrewe has written in
his brief History of the Empire of the Jews enclosed in AEthiope.

I will write unto you more amply of the other profits, which concern the
noriture of Hens, and of what properties they are, and what one may draw of
their substances. But my end has been none other, then to give advise, how
for a little sum of money, and little travail, you may get great
profit: to the end that you may the more easily forgette your losses, and
accustom your self to the noise and cluckyng of your Hens: and not to seem
more delicate, then was the good Philosopher Socrates, who bore it easily,
because they laid him Eggs: as he bore patiently the murmuryng and scoldyng
of his wife Xantippe, because she bore him children.

You may every day see your menage, or Housebandrie. And (as did the
Peripatetici) walk about the closes, and other places: and consider the
endeavor of your servants. Whom also by this means, you shall make more
careful and diligente: and your He^nes better entreated, according to the
Apophthegme which says: That the eye of the master, makes the servant
prompter, and the horse fatter: as also Aristotle makes mention in his first
book of Oeconomikes. But how so ever it be, direct your Housebandrie in
such order, that bones be not given to Asses, and Thistles to Dogs.

The Maid servant, or Chamberlain of Prometheus (named Experience) who
served him, after that he had brought from Heaven the liberal Sciences, and
to whom when he drew near to death, he gave them by Testament, may in short
time assure you, either to continue this merchandise and trafique, or to leave
it. For she (Experience I mean) is one of the chief Servants, which you
must have, with other diligence compaignie.

You ought not to take it grievously, to leave your dwelling place, and
accustomed pleasant air, or your neighbors, cousins, or friends. For you
know well the incommodities which civil war brings, the which (as
writes Cicero to Marcus Marcellus, in the fowerth book of his familer
Epistles) is no less lamentable, then the victory gotten by sheadyng of
domestical blood. And therefore not without reason says the Proverb, That
war is pleasant to such, as has no experience thereof. The which saying,
Erasmus, a rare man in all kind of learning has in his Chiliades, dilated by
many examples: As you may also easily jude at this present. You know also
that the Merchant to fly poverty, hazardeth him self by land and sea, and
leaves his native Air and Country.

And for the doubt that you may have, not to be assured in peaceable
possession of your enclosed ground, against the violence of Thieves or
Soldiers: I would wish you for the guard thereof, either the wakyng Serpente,
which kept the Gardens of Hesperides (famous for the golden aples) slain by
Hercules of Thebes, or the furious Bulls, whche kept the Golden Fleese in the
I Will of Colchos, under king AE^^tas the Father of Medea, which were overcome
and tamed by Jason of Thessalia, at the voyage of the Argonau tae. Have
recourse to the Metamorphoses of Ovid, in the fowerth and seventh book. But
better then all this, shall serve for your security, a Tablet of three flower
de Liees (the Kings Seal) autorised by the king: which shall be of greater
efficacy, then any other saucgarde that you can desire.

For final counsel, I pray you continue in the love and fear of GOD,
obeisaunce to your Prince, and his Magistrates, reverence to all superious,
with patience of your losses, to occupy your trade without fraud, and you
shall find multiplication of all your goods. And then (as says Iuuenal in
his third Satyr) you may say, that your are the son of a white Hen.

But when you shall be known to do service, to so excellent a common
wealth, as is the City of Paris (which surmounteth all those that have been
Famous among the Greeks) and that you have given the first entry, and (as
says the Proverb) broken the Ise to others, I suppose your enemies shall be
repulsed, as were they of Furius Cressinus Citezin of Room, envied of his
neighbors, because that of a little he raised more Gain, then they d. d of
much Tillage. For the which they imputed unto him, that he used Witcherafre,
and Inchauntmente. Who bringyng forth his Instruments of Housebandrie, his
diligent servants, and also his own Daughter most skillful in menage, was
discharged of all such suspicious, and of all men greatly commended, as
writes Titus Liuius. And furthermore, your felicity and prosperity, shall be a
passion to your enemies, as chances to all envious persons.

I know other experiences very prompte. But of no greater gain then six
Frankes the day, xiii. s. iiii. d.
all charges deducted. Therefore, if my first instructions seem not agreeable
unto your nature, advertise me thereof, that I may direct unto you an other
way more easy, and no less delectable, though of less profit.

Peradventure some will think this Counsel very strange and ridiculous,
and perhaps of difficult execution. To think it strange, there is no great
reason, considering that nourishyng of Hens for honest gains, is no new or
strange thing, if we believe that which Celius Rhodoginus, a worthy Author,
has written in his 14. book of Antiquities: That in the I Will of Delos
(otherwise called Ortygia for the abundance of Qualies) being one of the most
famous of the Cyclades in the sea Aegaeum, were found many that made estate
and trafique of the nourishement of Hens, for gain and profit. Who were so
well exercised herein, and in the knowledge of their He^nes, that only upon
the sight of an Egg, they could easily judge what Hen it came from. Therefore,
that sellyng of Eggs has ever been a thing commonly used: have recoursed to
the Impost, which was in the time of the Emperor Honorius, as is said
heretofore.

As touching mockers, no man can establishe any thing so good, or well ordered,
that the Mocker shall not bite, when Envy has made impression in his foolish
Brain, and has there taken up his sod^yng, to torment his Host.

And to resolve you of such difficulties, let us take hold of the saying of
Agathon a young gentleman, in the Oration which he made of Love in the feast
of Plato, saying: That we ought more to fear the judgment of a few wise men,
then of many ignorant fools and mockers. For Wisemen slowly give the loose
bridle to their congues, but use their words with judgment: as also writes
Cicero in his Oration for Plancius, saying: That the judgment of ten wise
and grave men in one City, imports more then the judgment of all the
common people, who for the most part, judge without counsel or reason.

If any maune shall say, that the invention of this counsel is old: I
confess unto you, that I am not the first reacher hereof, as was Carbilius of
the first letters at Rome, or the first Schoolemaister: yet has it not been
practiced in our time. And as writes the Poet Horatius, Many things are
renewed, which time has devoured, and buried as dead, the which again in
time, shall be drouned in the river of Oblivion, and shall again return to
their estate by course, as do in manner all worldly things, as wise Solomon
also witnesses.

Assure your self my dear freede, that Magnifico Megret, or any other
Alchimiste, have not with their Fornaces and Alembikes, drawn more profit by
the Philosophers Stone, then you shall draw out of the bealie of your Hens,
if you will join pleasure with pain. And so shall you be out of the danger,
into which such Alchimistes fall, who oftentimes consume their Patrimony,
and blow it away with Bellows. But ever beware the Fox. In the mean time,
you shall receive of your freende this little gift such as it is, in hope
hereafter to recover of him some better thing, when occasion does serve:
which (occasion) you must take by the hair before, that it escape not from you.

Now therefore, for the end of this account, you must arm your self with
patience, when affliction is sent, and avoid poverty (the enemy of all good
manners) by exercise of honest and profitable frugalitie in vsyng the things,
which you have gotten by your labor: and therewith also a reputation not
bulgare, which shall be bruted through all France, for the novelty of your
enterprise. Whereof some will take such pleasure, as may move the severe
Catoes to laughyng, and raise the Melancholic Milte of weepyng Democrites.

And finally, you shall herewith receive the contentation of your loving
freende, with this pleasant present, to mitigate the sorrows of these
Cloudie times, and to put you in good comfort of better hope in time to come.

Hatchyng of Eggs without Hens, as writes Ioannes Porta in his second
Book of Magike Natural.
TAke the dounge of Pigeons or Hens, beaten into powder, and finely Sifted.
Then lay the Eggs in such sort, that one touch not an other for breaking.
And see they be well covered with the said dounge, both under and above, in
close Panniers or Coopes, commodious for the purpose, so that the rou^der or
bigger end of the Eggs be dounwarde. But first, you must lay a bed of
Hens feathers, and thereon the dounge: and likewise an other rank or bed
of feathers upon the dounge that covers the Eggs. This done, you shall
every xxiiij. hours turn the Eggs, that they may equally receive the
heat. They must thus be kept, in a place of temperate heat. And when twenty
days are paste, if you shall perceive that the chickins strike the shell with
their bills, harken if they peep. For often it chances, that for the
thickness of the skin or filme, they can not break forth. Then help the^
with taking of the shell. And immediately bring the Hen unto the^. The like
may be done in a warm Oven, tempered to the measure and proportion of Natural
heat. Likewise also in hot horse dounge, with like diligence of measuryng,
and conseruyng the heat, with adding of new and pure dounge every seventh
day.

Cardanns in his xij. book De Subtilitate, writes much in like manner: But
says that you must first make two Cusshions or Pillowes, filled with
Hens dounge, beaten into fine powder and sifted. Then by sowyng, or other
means fastenyng on the Pillowes, He^nes feathers, both great and small of good
thickenesse, and lay the Eggs between them in a warm place etc. as before.
He writes that in the great City of Alkair or Babilonia Noua in Egipte, they
use thus to hatche Eggs in great multitude.

Finis.

