THE FIRST PART OF PROTESTANTS PROOFS, FOR CATHOLICS RELIGION AND RECVSANCY.

Taken only from the vvritings, of such Protestant Doctors and Divines of
England, as have been published in the reign of his Majesty over this
Kingdom.

PSALM. 1. verse. 1. Blessed is the man that has not gone in the counsel of
the ungodly.

ANNO DOMINI. 1607.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE LORDS. AND OTHERS, OF HIS MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCIL.
MOST HONORABLE.
As nothing can be less concealed, then the long, manifold, and known
miseries of English Catholics, for their ancient faith: So if we consider, by
what plots and practizes, the advancement of Presbiterall discipline, has
been and daily is more and more affected, and only or chiefly (as the
defendors thereof profess Jacob p. 73. of his reasons. Protestant letters in
the end of the conference 1603. Purit. offer of confer. etc.
) receiving obstacle in course of learning, by the grounds of Catholic
religion: The pens and pulpits of Puritans, and their Printers will
sufficiently write, preach and publish to the world, by whom and to what
purpose, no small part of these afflictions have been urged and incited against
us; not only by those few, which refuse your external conformity, but such as
(for a fashion) follow it, to retain themselves in authority.

For proof whereof, the greatest number of the present Protestant writers, D.
Sutcliffe Sutcliffe against D. Kellison, page 42.
, D. Dove Dove persuasion, p. 31.
, D. Field Field p. 170.
, M. Willet Willet Antilog. pa. 275.
, Wotton Wotton defense of Perkins, page 28.
, Middleton Middleton papistomastix, p. 201.
, etc. do teach, there is no matter of faith, no substantial, essential, or
material point or difference in religion, between Protestants, and Puritans:
But they are of one Church, Faith, and Religion. Then either they be Puritans,
or of no religion: and it is not material with them, whether men be of a true,
or false religion, of any, or none at all. For his Majesty K. speech in Parl.
1603* conference at Hampton, p. 36. 80. 81. 82.
, the Bishop of Winchester B. of Winchest. Survey, page 466. 467. 474. 486. etc.
, D. Couell Couell defense of Hooker, p. 68. against Burges in Prefat. and page
33.
(two of your best writers) M. Parkes Parkes against lymbomastix, page 92. 93.
and Prefat. and Apolog. Epistol. dedicat.
, M. Ormerod Ormerod Epist. dedicat. pict. Purit. etc.
, and others; conclude from their doctrine, and their own books extant tell
us: Their religion is to believe; that every Prince, King, or Emperor
disanulling the Presbitery is enemy to God, unworthy to reign, to be resisted
by force of arms, not to be prayed for: No King, no Monarchy, no Bishop, no
true Church in England, or wheresoever their Presbitery wants. The article of
Christ's descent to hell, is an jdle and vain fancy, a mere dream an
intruded fable, a pernicious heresy. Christ was a sinner, suffered the
torments of the damned, his divinity, humanity, and salvation, heaven and hell,
are questioned: the foundation it self is shaken. And such Professors have
professed, and profited so far, that by outward signs, communion,
profession, protestation, subscription, no man can tell, who is of what
religion among them. For men by this doctrine (as his Highness Conference, supr.
page 82.
has noted) will deny their religion, to make their party good against the
Bishops. A chief Professor, may profess Willet Antilog. in prefat. Latin.
to our Sovereign, Puritanus non sum: I am no Puritan, to have better means
to write Willet lymbomastix.
Lymbomastix, and Parkes against lymbomastix p. 106
become the greatest promoter of pretended discipline. Though a Minister
subscribe-foure times, Burges Apol and apud Couell against Burges.
He may defend both that and refusal; lawful, etc.

Wherefore, seeing such teachers by such means (as Protestants acknowledge)
Parkes Apol. epist. dedicat. Couel against Barg. in pref.
Make way for Atheism and Infidelity; and Parkes supr. epist. dedicat.
men say, they know whom to fly, but whom to follow they cannot tell: I
hope it unto heinous sin in Catholics, not to follow such conductors. And
for further excuse, because they write they University of Oxfor. against the
Millinar. petition, p. 32
are more famous for learning, then all the Ministers of Europe; and yet, do
not only refuse all equal trial offered by us, but either call Willet Eccles.
triumph. page 40. and apud Parkes against lymbomast. p. 28.
the rules and principles of religion, which his Majesty approves (and we
humbly accept) a foolish conceit and imagination, or Wotton defense of Perkins,
p. 15. 16
utterly reject them, and will only be tried by themselves: A poor Catholic
Student, in most dutiful manner presents unto your Honors, these Protestant
proofs, for all chief points of Catholic religion, only taken from their
own writings, since the beginning of his Majesty's reign in England. First
(to give them all advantage) because in this time, they have written so much
and so uncharitably against us, that one of their own number, Omer. pict. pap.
in postscript. epist.
adjudgeth many of their books to the fire, and their authors worthy death.
Secondly, because I cannot tell, whether they will allow what they wrote, or
taught in the days of Queen Elizabeth; seeing they defend, they may often
change, and do ( Dove persuasion, p. 31.
at the least) at the change of every Prince. And so with all submissiue
respect, I leave this cause to your wisest consideration, and your most
Honorable persons to Gods protection.

THE FIRST PART OF PROTESTANTS PROOFS, FOR CATHOLICS RELIGION AND RECVSANCY.
Chapter the first. Of the supreme and most preeminent authority of the true
Church: how necessary it is to find it, follow the directions, and rest in
the judgment of it.
DOCTOR FIELD a late Protestant writer, begins his dedicatory Epistle to the
L. Archbishop of Canterbury (before his books of the Church) in this manner.
D. Field of the Church epist. dedicat.
There is no part of heavenly doctrine more necessary, in these days of so
many intricate controversies of religion, then diligently to search out, which
among all the societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of
holy-ones, that household of faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the
living God, which is the pillar and ground of truth: that so they may embrace
her communion, follow her directions, and rest in her judgment.

D. Couel writes of the Church in these words: Couell defense of Hooker, page
30. art. 4.
That which by her Ecclesiastical authority, she shall probably think, and
define to be true, or good; must in congruity of reason, overrule all other
inferior judgments whatsoever. And to them that (out of a singularity of their
own) ask us why we thus bang our judgments on the Churcbes sleeue? we
answer with Solomon, two are better then one. For even in matters of less
moment, it Eccles. 4. v. 9
was never thought safe, to neglect the judgment of many, and rashly to follow
the fancy and opinion of some few. And in another place thus he cites D.
Whitakers to the same purpose: Couell cont. Burges p. 60.
The Church of Christ according to her authority received from him, has
warrant to approve the Scriptures, to acknowledge, to receive, to publish and
command unto her children.

M. Wotton witnesses: Wotton defense of Perkins, pa. 442.
The judgment of the Church we are so far from discrediting, that we hold it
for a very special ground in this matter of Scriptures.

M. Ormerods words be these: Ormerod pict pap. page 93.
The Church is called a pillar, because it is like unto a pillar. For as a
pillar does supporte and vnder-proppe a building, and makes it more stable,
firm and strong: so the Church does sustain, and support the truth; for the
truth is no where preserved but in the Church.

D. Sutcliffe approves this sentence: Sutcliffe against the three co^uers.
page 7^.
Christ's true Church is a diligent and wary keeper of doctrines committed to
her, and changes nothing at any time, diminishes nothing, adds nothing
superfluous, loses not her own, nor usurps things belonging to others.

Neither is this different from their public doctrine, thus decreed in the
twenty Article of their religion: Articul. 20. 1562.
The Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith. And the joining with this true Church of Christ is so
needful a thing, that D. Field concludes: Field, p. 69.
There is no salvation, remission of sins, or hope of eternal life out of
the Church. Like is the judgment of D. Couell Couell def. of Hooker. page 76.
and others. Wherefore, seeing Catholics profess themselves members of the
Roman Church; before they think of forsaking it, let us examine, whether
these Protestants will not allow it for this true Church of Christ, so
dignified by their doctrine.

Chapter 2. The Roman Church ever was, and still is by these Protestants, the
tru^ Church of Christ: it continues all things belonging to salvation: they
which live and die therein, may be saved.
THE Protestant Relator of religion vvriteth thus, of the Roman Church:
Relation of the state of religion, ca. 48.
There are amongst them (undoubtedly) in great multitude, men virtuous,
learned, fraught with the love of God, and the truth above all things, men of
memorable integrity, of bart and affections. Cap. 6.
In their sermons much matter both of faith and piety, is eloquently delivered,
by men of wonderful zeal, and spirit. Cap. 6. supr.
The outward state and glory of their service, does engender, quicken,
increase, and nourish the inward reverence, respect, and devotion, which is due
unto sovereign Majesty, and power. Cap. 9.
Their deeds of charity are exceeding. Cap. 22. 26.
No severity of life comparable to some of their Religious. If Protestants
were, or would be at union with them; Cap. 48.
they shall find excellent order of government, singular helps for increase
of godliness and devotion, for the conquering of sin, for the profiting of
virtue. And persuading an union, he only requires Catholics to give over five
things, al dispensable, and not any of them essential, as he teaches: And
advises Protestants to change their religion unto us, with that condition.
Secondly, we are assured, that the highest authority of Christ's Church is in
the Roman Church, or in none at all: for D. Field writes: Field p. 228
That the supreme binding and commanding authority, is only in Bishops in a
general Council: so D. Morton Morto^ part. 2. Apol. p. 340
, D. Sutcliffe Sutc. against D. Kellison, p. 41. 42. 102
, the Bishop of Winchester B. Bilsons Survey, p. 85.
, and others. But all men know and D. Sutcliffe, with others acknowledge, the
Protestants have had no such Council; so the Protestant Relator of religion
teaches, Relation of relig. cap. 47.
that this preeminence, means, and remedy is only in the Roman Church.

Secondly, to make trial by their public definition of the Church: The
Protestant Articles teach; Articul. 19.
The visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same. D. Couell Couell defense of Hooker, page 67.
, D. Field Field, p. 25.
, and D. Dove D. Dove perswas. page 23.
, be of the same mind. But because the Puritans add a third note, I will cite
D. Couell in this question: his words be these. Couell against the plea of the
Innoc. page 21. 56.
There be but two essential notes of the Church, the true preaching of the
word, and the right administration of the Sacraments; to which later
Protestants add discipline the third note, and of as much necessity. And
concerning doctrine and Sacraments they generally teach, that they are truly
taught and practiced in the Church, only in essential, necessary, requisite,
and fundamental things; so the Articul. 19.
ninetenth Article before; so M. Willet in these words. Willet Antilog. page
43.
To errors of doctrine which are not fundamental, even the true Church of
Christ is subject: so D. Field D. Field of the Church
ordinarily in his books of the Church: so D. Sutcliffe Sutc. against D.
Kellis. p. 42
, D. Dove Dove persw. page 31. 32.
, M. Wotton Wotto^, p. 28
, M. Middleton Middleton. page 201.
, Powell Powel consideration, etc.
, and all the rest making Protestants and Puritans but one Church, do and must
acknowledge.

Then concerning doctrine, D. Dove writes in these terms: Dove persw. page
11.
In fundamental points of doctrine the greatest Papists in the world agree
with us. And in his whole Treatise never charge the Church of Rome, either
of Schism or Heresy, but labors to excuse themselves, offering that we
shall communicate with them, without any change of opinion: and yet he sets
down this for an infallible proposition. page 5.
This proposition is undoubtedly true; no Heretics nor Schismatikes are to be
communicated withal. And he gives us security, that by no possibility
(according to the former reason of general Councels) the Roman Church can be
judged Heretical; his words be these: page 14.
No Church can be condemned and adjudged Heretical by any private censure, but
it must be public; A general Council, as he there expounds himself, and
is granted before. Touching Sacraments, he allows, page 27. 28*
that according to our definition of a Sacrament, There be as many as we teach,
and this shall not breed any such jarre between us, that therefore we should
refuse to communicate together. And transubstantiation it self shall be no
bar, page 29.
But if we will receive at their hands, they will not examine how we do
expound the words, hoc est corpus meum. And of discipline the third note, he
notes: In that Council of Trent, they set forth such wholesome Canons
concerning discipline, as were fit for a reformed Church.

The Protestant Relator of religion affirms: Relation of relig. cap. 48
That the Roman Church still keeps inviolable, the foundation of religion.
And I think no man will deny the Church of Rome, to be the same it was at
the coming of Luther, and long before; and yet D. Field vvriteth: Field, p. 72.
The Roman and Latin Church continued the true Church of God, even till our
time. And again: page 182.
We doubt not but the Church in which the Bishop of Rome exalted himself (he
adds, with more then Lucifer-like pride) was notwithstanding the true Church
of God: that it held a saving profession of the truth in Christ, and by force
thereof, converted many countries from error to the way of truth. And he
further acknowledges page 72.
with D. Couell and others: Couel defen. of Hook. p. 73
That Luther and the rest of his religion, were baptized, received their
Christianity, ordination, and power of Ministry, in that Church, as the true,
visible, and apparent Church of Christ. He tells us further, Field p. 182.
That diverse of the Roman Church not only of the ignorant, but of the best
learned be saved, and Saints in heaven. M. Willets words be these: Willet
Antilog. pa. 144.
It is not denied by any Protestant, but many renowned Kings and Queens (which
might not plead ignorance, of the Roman faith) are Saints in heaven. And
speaking of his Majesty's Mother, he attributes such holiness and truth to
her religion, and her; that it prevailed with God, not only for her self, but
her Son our Sovereign also, his words be: Willet Antilog. Engl. pref to
the K.
The child of such prayers and tears, cannot possibly fall away.

Who are accounted the greatest Scholars, but the schoolmen chief in
schools? And yet, both D. Sutcliffe terms these ( Sutcl. answ. to the lay
petition, pa. 34.
namely, Innocent the third, Thomas Aquihas, Scotus, Albert, Durand) particular
agents of the Roman Church, and joyneth them in that sense, with Harding,
Allen, Bellarmine, Baronius. And D. Couell speaking of the high praises of such
men, writes of Alexander Hales, S. Bonauenture, and S. Thomas before recited
for the Popes agent in these words. Couell def. of Hooker, page 241.
Alexander Hales, who made his sum that excellent work, by commandment of
Pope Innocentius the fourth, was called the fountain of life, because of that
lively knowledge, that flowed from him: he was Master to Bonauenture, a
Scholar not inferior to himself, of whom he was wont to say, that in
Bonauenture he thought Adam sinned not; meaning of that illumination which was
in him (and doubtless there was much in him) as though he had not been
darkened by the fall of Adam: and therefore the Church called him the
Seraphicall Doctor. To these Aquinas was not inferior, who came so near unto
S. Augustine, (whom in his book against Burges he esteems Co. against
Burges.
the chiefest Doctor that ever was, or shall be, excepting the Apostles, etc.)
that some thought he had all his works by heart, and by a common proverb it
was spoken, that the soul of S. Augustine dwelt in Aquinas: in whom above all
the rest, four contrarieties were said to excel; abundance, breuity,
facility, security: in respect whereof, he gained the title to be called
Angelical. Then if these men were the Popes agents; and yet so renowned and
glorious, and their doctrine so secure and excellent, we may securely follow
them, in the same steps of agency of such business.

And to pass Princes, Doctors, and Popes agents, and come to the Popes
themselves. The Protestant Relator of religion Relation of religion, cap. 43.
42.
has found much virtue, devotion, and piety, of those which have been in
these times; and of the last Pope Clement the eight, he writes thus: He did
often weep upon piety and Godly compassion, at his Masses, Processions, etc.
His eyes were still watering, sometimes streaming with tears, in so much that
for weeping be seemed an other Heraclitus: he was a good Pope, a good Man, a
good Prince, a good Prelate. And to exclude ignorance, the same Relator
witnesses thus: Ca. 29. supr.
The Papists cry mainely in all places for trial by disputation. D. Couell
again witnesses thus of Catholics: Couel def. of Hook. pa. 68.
Touching the maine points of Christian truth, they constantly persist in them.
Protestants do gladly acknowledge them to be the family of Jesus Christ. And
again; pa. 68. supr.
They of Rome were, and are still in the Church, a part of the house of God, a
limme of the visible Church: which he adds also to have been M. Hookers
Hooker l. 5. page 188.
sentence, telling us, that what he vvriteth of the Church of Rome, is but to
give her, her due; and we acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ.
And concludes thus: Couell supr. page 73.
It is strange for any man to deny them of Rome to be of the Church. And
again: page 76.
We affirm them of the Roman Church, to be parts of the Church of Christ, and
that those that live and die in that Church, may be saved. And all kinds of
Protestants when they combat among themselves, rather prefer the Roman
Church to be chosen and followed, then their opposite Protestants.

The Protestant Relator witnesses: Relation of relig. cap. 45.
The Lutherans in Germany, both the Clergy and Laytie openly protest, they
will rather return to the Church of Rome, then join with the Sacramentary
Protestants; such as be in England. The Puritans of this nation Offer of
conference.
in their late offer of Conference, prefer the Roman Church far before
their country Protestants. Of the Protestants there will be as little
question, by this Treatise: And in particular M. Jacob writes thus: Jacob, p.
73.
The Bishops of England when they deal with Puritans, must join plainly with
the Catholics in their answers, if they will maintain themselves. So much and
more is testified in two several Protestant letters, The first copy Iannar. 15
1603. the 2. copy in the end of the conference.
printed in the end of D. Barlowes book, of the conference at Hampton: which
for respect, I pass over without particular citation.

Wherefore, by all agreement both of Catholics affirming this and more, and
Protestants acknowledging this; The Roman Church is still the true Church of
Christ, it contains and continues all things necessary to salvation, they
which live and die therein may be saved; and being the true Church, by the
Articul. 19. 1562. Couell defen. of Hooker, page 67.
ninetenth Article of Protestant religion, it must needs be (as before is
cited) a congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's
ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.
Then seeing according to his Majesty's sentence: King-speach in Parliam.
I acknowledge the Roman Church to be our mother Church. And in the public
conference, his regal resolution being this: Conference at Hampton, page 75.
That no Church ought further to separate it self from the Church of Rome,
either in doctrine or ceremony, then she has departed from her self, when
she was in her flourishing and best estate, and from Christ her Lord and head;
which by the testimonies before is nothing at al in any necessary question;
but still it joyneth us to Christ, both by doctrine and Sacraments in this life,
and with glory in heaven: therefore, we may not forsake it in earth.

Chapter 3. Wherein these Protestants teach, the necessity of one supreme
spiritual head, and commander in the Church of Christ: how S. Peter was this
chief among the Apostles: and after him, his successors the Popes of Rome.
IF we examine a little further, the testimonies of these men: whereas some
unchristian sermons and books, have heretofore termed the Bishop of Rome to
be the great Antichrist, and seducer of the world; we shall now receive a
better doctrine, and more religious answer: That there ever was and must be,
one chief and supreme spiritual head, and commander of the Church of Christ
in earth: That in the time of the Apostles and among them, it was S. Peter the
first Bishop of Rome: And after him, the Bishops and Popes of that same
Apostolic See, therein succeeding in that supreme binding and commanding
authority. D. Field cites and approves this, Field. page 138.
as a general and infallible rule: Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis
dignitate pendet, etc. The health of the Church depends on the dignity of the
high Priest, whose eminent authority if it be denied, then will be so many
Schisms in the Church as there be Priests: then of necessity one chief,
supreme, and high Priest, must be assigned in his judgment. And D. Couell
entreating of this spiritual, and highest Monarchical regiment, and necessity
thereof, writes thus: Couell against the plea of the Innocent. page 106.
We easily see that equality does breed factions, and therefore wisemen to
suppress the seeds of dissentions, have made one above the rest. And that no
man should esteem this as an humane ordinance, either provided by Councels, as
some Protestants would persuade; or given or granted by Phocas the Emperor,
about the year of our Lord 607. for Boniface then Pope and his successors (to
use D. Downames words Downame lib. 1. page 4.
) to be head of the Catholic or universal Church: This Protestant author
both testifies, and proves it to be the institution of Christ himself; and
first among his Apostles, of whom he speaks thus: Couell supr. page 106.
Because in the execution of holy things, where the persons put in trust are
but men, discord and disorder usually do break in; the wisdom of God thought
it necessary, that amongst them, who for their ministry were equal, an
inequality for order, and superiority to command, should be granted: that by
this means, order and union should both be preserved in Christ's Church.
Which, if it concern all persons and ages in the Church of Christ, (as surely
it does) the government must not cease with the Apostles. And again, he
proves this spiritual supreamacy to be perpetual, because now there is
more need in these times of sin and dissentions; And yet (says he): Couell
supr. page 107.
It was the principal means to prevent Schisms and dissentions in the
primative Church, when the graces of God were far more abundant and eminent,
then now they are: nay, if the twelve were not like to agree, except there had
been one chief amongst them: for says Saint Hierome, amongst the twelve one
was therefore chosen, that a chief being appointed, occasion of dissension
might be prevented, etc. And he disputes thus against the Puritans: Supr. page
107.
How can they think that equality would keep all the Pastors of the world in
unity? And adjudgeth this supreme spiritual power so necessary in the Church
of God, that he adds: Seeing that all men may easily err, and that no errors
are so dangerous as those, which concern religion; the Church should be in a
far worse case, then the meanest commonwealth (nay, almost then a den of
Thieves) if it were destitute of means, either to convince heresies, or to
suppress them.

Now it is no great labor to define, who was this chief and commander
among the Apostles, and who after that time was, now is, and must continue.
Among the twelve Apostles I do not remember, that any Protestant prefers
any other before Saint Peter; then Saint Hierome, and D. Couell assuring us,
that among them one was chief, we may conclude it of Saint Peter. And this
the rather, because D. Sutcliffe vvriteth thus: Sutcl. subuers. page 40.
Tertullian gives the keys only to Peter, saying: that the Church is built
upon him. And thus D. Sutcliffe testifies for himself: Supr. page 3.
Peter preached in no place, but he there ordained Bishops and teachers, and
founded Churches: which in his book against D. Kellison, he Sutcliffe against
Kellison, page 105.
makes an argument of supreamacy. D. Field tells us, from Scripture; Field
p. 196
That Christ promised to build his Church upon Saint Peter. Then no Christian
will doubt, (except he will doubt of Christ's truth, and promises) but it
was so performed.

Concerning the supreamacie of the Church of Rome; his Majesty before
acknowledges it to be our mother Church: and it was a rule Kings speech
confer. sup.
to all, both in doctrine and ceremonies, when it was in her flourishing and
best estate. D. Couell writes thus: Couell def. of Hooker
The Church of Rome was the chief and only Church. M. Ormerod Ormer. pict.
pap. page 184.
calls it the eye of the West (in which division England is) and the anchor
of piety. M. Downame grants Downame l. 2. Antich. page 105.
it was a note of a good Christian, to clean unto the Roman Apostolical
Church. And thus both they, D. Sutcliffe Sutcl. epist. dedicat. of subuers. and
page 89.
, D. Field Field of the Church, etc.
, and the rest, do ordinarily yield that it continued until the year of
Christ six hundred and seven, when Bonifacius Pope there, claimed (as they
say) supreamacy first in the Church. D. Downames words be: Downame lib. 1.
page 4.
About the year of our Lord six hundred and seven, Boniface the Pope and his
Successors, claymed and obtained to be head of the Catholic or Universal
Church. Then I thus demonstrate from these Protestants, that this Church of
Rome both claymed and exercised this supreme authority, when it was in this
flourishing and best estate, a rule to Churches of faith, anchor of piety, etc.
First, D. Sutcliffe is witness; Sutcl. subuers. page 57.
Ireneus says, that every Church ought to have respect to the Church of Rome,
for her eminent principallity; which was long before any general Council,
or Christian Emperor to give or allow this privilege. Secondly, D. Field
plainly acknowledges; Field, lib. 3. cap. 1.
that the supreamacy belonged to the Popes of Rome, before the first Nicen
Council. Then by the rules which he gives to know true Traditions pa. 242.
sup.
(custom of the Church, consent of Fathers, or an Apostolic Churches
testimony) this must needs be of that kind: And then equal in authority
with Scripture, as he acknowledges page 134.
of such Traditions. M. Ormerod ascends to Pope Anacletus, living within an
hundred years of Christ; his words be these: Ormer. pict. pap. page 78.
To prove that the Church of Rome has the preeminence over all Churches,
Anacletus alleges Math. 16. verse. 18. Upon this Rock will I build my
Church: and he expounds it thus: super hanc Petram (id est) super Ecclesiam
Romanam, Upon this Rock: that is, upon the Church of Rome, will I build my
Church. This is as great a claim of supreamacy, and by as great vvarrant, as
any Pope now claymeth it. Yet Anacletus was a Saint and holy Pope, even in
the best estate of that Church.

Again, there were at those days accounted but three great parts of the
world, Asia, Afric, and Europe: yet we are told by these Protestants, that
the Pope in that flourishing and unspotted time of the Church of Rome, claymed
and exercised this supreamacy in all these parts. For Asia (though in the
Greek Church) D. Couell tells us Couell against the plea of the Innoc. pa.
65.
, that Pope Victor in that time did authoritatiuely claim supreamacy over all
Asia, excommunicating the Churches of it (to use his words) in seperating all
Asia from the unity of the faithful, for being disobedient in the point and
question of Easter. What greater supreamacy can be claymed in the Church, then
to excommunicate and put forth of the Church, so great a part of the world?

D. Downame yields to Bellarmine, Downame lib. 2. Antich. page 105.
that S. Augustine and Victor Vticensis in Afric were of opinion, that to
adhere to the Church of Rome, was a mark of a true Catholic in those times:
And M. Perkins says: Per. problem pa. 237. 238.
Appeals were often made out of Afric to the Popes of Rome in those days.
Neither does this Doctor deny, Down. supr. pa. 106. 107.
but the Bishops then did swear obedience to the Pope. And entreating of a
Bishop recanting his heresies, he writes of him in these words: Down. supr.
page 107.
He swears to renounce his former heresies, and to profess, and maintain
that faith and religion, which the Bishop and Church of Rome did profess. M.
Ormerod witnesses, Ormerod supr. page 44.
that S. Leo taught, that God did assist and direct that See in decrees.

Of Europe there can be no question: for generally Protestants agree with D.
Field Field of the Church.
, D. Dove Dove persw. page 29. 30.
, D. Couell Couel defen. of Hook. page 74. 75. 76.
, and M. Ormerod Ormer. pict. pap. page 184
, that the regiment of the West Churches (among which this nation is) belonged
to the Pope of Rome. And D. Sutcliffe gives particular examples, Sutcl. subu.
page 19.
how S. Gregory commanded (to use his words) the Bishops of France: and
commanded also in England the constituting of our Archbishop S. Augustine, and
the very See of that preeminence at Canterbury. D. Couell vvriteth the same
Cou. against Burges p. 49.
of Pope Gregory's commanding authority in all Spain: who provoked by the
heresy of the Arrians, commanded that through all Spain, there should be but
once dipping in Baptism. M. Middleton witnesses: Middleton papistomast. page
39.
that (at the least) the first general Council of Nice taught, the dignity of
Rome over the West Provinces, (in which we of this nation are) and that by old
custom, which was, when that Church was in her best and flourishing estate,
and a rule to all. And to prove this custom both larger, then over the West
(that is) universal over al Churches, and from the Apostles, he adds thus:
page 200.
Papias (living in the Apostles time) taught Peter's primacy, and Romish
Episcopality. And D. Downame writes thus: Downame l. 1. Anticl rist cap. 3.
pa. 35.
Diverse Bishops of Rome, before the time of Socrates the Historian (in that
unspotted and reguler time of that Church) contended to have the primacy, over
all other Churches: and that is the chief scope of many of their Epistles
decretall. Neither does D. Downame page 36.
deny, but both Justinian the Emperor, and the great general Council of
Chalcedon, in the primative Church, attributed to the Pope of Rome, to be head
of the Church; which he says is the greatest style. And he adds thus, of
that Church, in that best estate: Titles of honor and preeminence were given
to the Church of Rome, as the chief or head of the Churches. And again:
Before the grant of Phocas, the Church of Rome had the preeminence, and
superiority over all other Churches, excepting that of Constantinople. And both
D. Field Field lib. 1. of the Church*
tells him absolutely, that the Title of Constantinople was but intruded, and
usurped: And when the first Nicen Council gave such honor to the Roman
Church, there was not so much as the name of Constantinople. And that this
preeminence and superiority, was a commanding and binding authority, is proved
before, from all parts of the world, wherein it was exercised, in that best and
flourishing estate of that Church. That no Council could be kept, none
confirmed, nothing concluded in the primative Church, without the Bishop of
Rome, his approbation will approve in the chapter of Councels hereafter.
Wherefore, seeing we have been taught before, by Protestants, that one primacy
and chief commanding authority, was ever necessary in the true Church of
Christ: That S. Peter (as chief of the Apostles) had, and exercised it in that
time: And after him, the primative and most ancient holy Popes of Rome (as
successors unto him) ever claimed, exercised, and executed the same sovereign
spiritual Pastoral office, and dignity over all Churches, in all parts of the
world; and neither by Council, Emperor, or such Donation, but by old custom
and the institution of Christ: And the same Church (as before) still continues
the true Church of Christ: I hope it is no offense to agree with it, in this,
as in other questions.

Chapter 4. All books received for Scripture, by the Roman Church are
Canonical.
THus having (by the directions and sentence of Protestant writers, of so late
memory as this present is) found out, that the Roman Church is the spouse of
Christ, his true Church, and pillar of truth: whose communion we must embrace,
follow her directions, rest in her judgment, living and dying therein to have
eternal life, the only and chiefest happynes which we can seek or find: And
that the authority of the chief Bishops of that holy and Apostolic See, has
ever bin so sovereign, chief, commanding, and supreme, as these men have
taught us, in the former Chapters, we might here by D. Fields censure and
advise, confine our selves, and vvade no further in so many intricate
controversies of religion. But to give a final contentment to all curiosities,
let us briefly enter into a particuler-like examination, of all principal
Articles in question: And first of Scriptures, whose authority is either only,
or chiefest with Protestants.

D. Couell writes in these words: Couell def. of Hook. p. 31
The Church of Rome teaches no bad opinion, to affirm that the Scriptures are
holy, and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us for the authority of the
Church. And again: That the Scriptures are true, we have it from the Church.
And further thus: page 32. 33. supr.
The Church has four singular offices toward the Scripture. First, to be of
them (as it were) a faithful register. Secondly, to discerue and judge
between false and adulterate, and that which is true and perfect. The third,
to publish and diuulge, to proclayme as a crier, the true edict of our Lord him
self. The last is, to be an Interpreter; and in that, following the safest
rule (to make an undivided unity of the truth incapable of contradiction) to be
a most faithful expositor of his own meaning. And concludes thus: page 34.
supr.
We say, that we are taught to receive the word of God, from the authority of
the Church: we see her judgment, we hear her voice; and in humility subscribe
unto all this: Hitherto be D. Couels words, for the major proposition of my
Syllogism. But the minor or second position, that the Roman Church is the true
Church of Christ, is allowed, and proved by Protestants before: Therefore this
Protestant argument, must be thus concluded. All books which the Church of
Rome proposes for Scriptures, the expositions which she delivers, etc. In
humility we must subscribe unto them, receive them as the word of God, from her
authority.

D. Dove refers the question, what books be Canonical Scripture, to the
two Doctors S. Augustine, and S. Hierome. His words be these: Dove perswas.
page 15.
Catholics prove them to be Canonical out of S. Augustine: We, that they be
Apocrypha out of S. Hierome, both which Doctors, are of no small authority with
the Church of Rome; and therefore in this we differ no more from them, then S.
Hierome did from S. Augustine: Therefore (I hope) for many causes, Protestants
will give place unto us, in this question. It is known, S. Augustine in
calling was above S. Hierome: In learning D. Couell tells you, Cou. against
Burg. page 3.
he was far the most learned Doctor that ever was, or shall be in all
likelihood. Thirdly, your public Conference Conference, infr.
(to be after cited) has answered S. Hieromes authority, for Catholics.
Fourthly, S. Augustine speaks in the name of the whole Church, for these
books; his words be these: August. tom. 10. ser. 191.
We receive the old and new Testament in that number of books, which the
authority of the holy Catholic Church has delivered. And in the place where
he delivers the Canon of Scriptures, as Catholics now do, he gives these
rules, to him that would know which be true Scriptures; his words be
these: Tom. 3. lib. 2. doct. Christ cap. 8.
In Canonical Scriptures let him follow the authority of the most Catholic
Churches, among which those be which have deserved to have Apostolic Sees, and
to receive their Epistles: And so proceeding (too long to be cited) concludes
by all his rules, that all those books which the Roman Church now receives
(there remembered by S. Augustine) are Canonical.

But to be brief; The Protestant Surueyor of the communion book affirms
plainly: Survey of the book of common prayer, page 27. 28. 29. 30. 31.
that the Protestants of England must approve for Canonical, these books with
the Roman Church. So likewise do the 22. Preachers of London in their Petition
Petit. of 22. preachers except. against homilies, and except. 4. against the
com. book.
. And D. Field is of the same opinion, or must be; for thus he vvriteth: Field
lib. 4. c. 23. pa. 245.
The ancient and true believing Jews before the coming of Christ (especially
such as lived in Greece, and nations out of Jury, commonly called Hellenists)
received those books for Canonical Scripture. And (to use his words) Hence
it came to pass, that the Jews delivered a double Canon of Scripture, to the
Christian Churches. And speaking again of that volume of the Hellenists, he
adds: page 246.
These books joined in one volume, were translated out of Greek into Latin,
and read by them of the Latin Church in that translation. And entreating of S.
Augustine and the Latin Fathers (especially in Afric) and the third
Carthaginian Council, where this Canon is received, he vvriteth thus: They
reckon the books of Scripture, according as they found them in use in the
Latin Church. Then D. Field has absolutely granted that in the Latin Church
(under which England is) these Scriptures were ever esteemed for Canonical.
And being translated (as he acknowledges) out of Greek into Latin, this
Gretian will not easily persuade, but the Greek Church also first embraced
them; for he says thus: page 245. supr.
The Greek Jews, or Hellenists, delivered this Canon to the Christian
Churches; then first to the Greek Church, being in Greece among them, and best
understanding those Greek Scriptures, before they were translated into Latin.

The Protestant Conference at Hampton Court, entreating of the Protestant
exceptions against these Scriptures, uses these words: Conference, page 60.
Most of the objections made against those books, were the old cauils of the
Jews, renewed by S. Hierome in his time, who was the first that gave them the
name of Apocrypha: which opinion upon Ruffinus his challendge, he after a sort
disclaimed; the rather, because a general offense was taken at his speeches in
that kind. Hitherto the censure of that public conference, whereby the
ground of Protestants denying these books by S. Hieromes opinion (as D. Dove
has witnessed) is utterly overthrown. D. Couell answers Couell against
Burges page 85. 86. 87. 88. 89. 90. 91.
the objections against Burges the Puritan, in particular as Catholics do:
and shows, that these books have without cause, been accused of faults by
Protestants, only to deny them to be Canonical, as Catholics hold. He adds
further thus: They are most true, and might have there concilement of other
Scriptures. And again in these words: Couell supr. page 87.
If Ruffinus be not deceived, they were approved as parts of the old Testament,
by the Apostles. For when S. Hierome write so scornefully of the history of
Susanna, and the song of the three children, he charge him therein, to have
robbed the treasure of the holy Ghost, and divine instrument, which the
Apostles delivered to the Churches. And S. Hierome (who is not usually slow to
defend himself) leaves that point unanswered, pretending that what he had
spoken, was not as his own opinion, but what the Jews objected. And for his
pains in translating the book of Judith, (which the Protestants deny) he
gives this reason; because we read, that the Council of Nice did reckon it
in the number of holy Scriptures: Hitherto D. Couels words. And much like
unto this of Ruffinus, he cites page 76. 77.
from S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, and others, temporibus Apostolorum proximis, in
the next age to the Apostles. Art. 6. Syn. Land. 1562.
the sixth Article of the English Protestant religion, excepteth against these
books, and leaves them forth of the Canon of Scriptures: Answer.
I answer; this proves nothing, but to prove their religion to be
contradictory, and impossible to be true. For the books of Communion, and
Homilies (as before) authorized as well by those Articles, as the statute of
Queen Elizabeth, and the late Protestant Canons, receive, cite, and practice
them for Canonical. Again, that sixth Article is contradictory to it self, in
this point (and so of no authority by Protestants themselves:) for it only
approves for Canonical Scriptures (to use the words of the Article) Articul.
6. supr.
Those Canonical books of the old and new Testament (of whose authority was
never any doubt in the Church) in the name of holy Scriptures, these we
understand. And yet these Protestants do tell us Willet Synops. q. 1. of
Script. page 2. 3. edit. anno. 1594.
that all Scriptures have been doubted off, by one Church or other. But, to
contaynemy self within my time of limitation, I will only cite the Bishop of
Winchester; he writes thus: B. Bilson survey of Christ's sufferings, page 664.
The Scriptures themselves were not fully received in all places, no not in
Eusebius time. He says the Epistle of James, of Jude, the second of Peter, the
second and third of John, are contradicted. The Epistle to the Hebrews was
contradicted: the Churches of Syria did not receive the second Epistle of
Peter, nor the second and third of John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the
Apocalipse; the like might be said for the Churches of Arabia. Will you hence
conclude, that these parts of Scripture were not Apostolic, or that we need
not receive them now, because they were formerly doubted off? Hitherto B.
Bilsons words: By which, it both appears by Protestants, how their Article
does contradict it self. And I may conclude (with the Protestants before)
that all books which the Roman Church receives for Scripture, be Canonical
and most holy. Whereby it is too manifest, what a grounded religion, that
Protestancy is, which has excluded, so long time, so many books of Scripture,
and so many Articles of faith, prayer for the dead, patronage of Saints and
Angels, prayers unto them and the like: And yet would pretend, that their
religion is only founded upon the word of God in Scripture.

Chapter 5. The vulgar Latin translation of Scriptures used by the Roman Church
is best: the English Protestant translations are erroneous.
NEXT to the Canon and Text of Scriptures, let us entreat of their
translations, both as they are used in the Roman Church, and the English
Protestants. And first, concerning the vulgar Latin allowed among Catholics,
D. Dove writes thus: Dove persuasion. p. 16
We (Protestants) grant it fit, that for uniformity in quotations of places,
in schools and pulpits, one Latin text should be used, and we can be contented
for the antiquity thereof, to prefer the old vulgar translation, before all
other Latin books; so much we do yield to the Council of Trent.

And D. Couell entreating of translations of Scripture, against Burges the
Puritan, answers in these words: Couell against Burges, page 94.
We are ready to confess, whether you understand the Italian, or that which
goes under the name of S. Hierome, that they were used anciently in the
Church, a thousand and three hundred years ago, one of them by S. Augustine
preferred before all the rest, the other highly commended by Beza, and that of
the vulgar (though with Pagnin and Driedo) we think it was not S. Hieromes,
but mixed; yet we can be content, to say as Isodore does of it, interpretatio
eius, this translation is to be preferred before others: Hitherto his own
words. And if M. Couell, Dove, and other Protestants well consider the
judgment of the Council of Trent, in this question, and the preface to the
Bible of Xistus quintus, they shall perceive the intent of the holy Council,
being only to approve that Latin translation, used a thousand and three hundred
years since in the Church (as D. Couell tells us) when it was in the
flourishing and best estate; and so to be reverenced by Protestants judgment
before; and not to reject either the Greek in the new, or Hebrewe Text of the
old Testament.

Touching other translations, D. Couell writes: Couel supr. page 94.
No translation whatsoever, is authentical Scripture. And D. Dove adds: Dove
persw page 16.
All translations have many faults. M. Burges in his Apology writes thus, of
the approved English Protestant translation: Burges Apolog. pa. 93. in D.
Couels answer.
It is a translation which has many omissions, many additions, which
sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the sense; being some-time
senseless, sometimes contrary. And D. Couell in his answer acknowledges, so
far faults in their translation, that he requires a better to be
established. The 22. Preachers of London write of the translation only in the
communion book, in this manner: Petit. of 22. preachers except. 11. against
the com. book.
It contains in it diverse corrupt translations of Scriptures, by leaving out
of words, putting too of words, perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost. The
Survey of the book of common prayer, adds: Survey of the book of com.
prayer, page 160.
There be many gross corruptions, as may partly appear by the Abridgement of
the Ministers of Lincoln Dyocesse. The Protestant Author of the Advertisement
testifies: Aduertiseme^t, an. 1604
The Bible is perverted in 848. places in the old Testament. The English
Protestant Bible, is inferior to the Turks Alcaron. And so, Christianity is
denied in England by public authority. Therefore most justly might his Majesty
say in the public conference: Conference, page 46.
That he could never yet see a Bible well translated into English; but the
worst of all he thought the Geneua to be.

Chapter 6. The true, lawful, and juridicall exposition of Scriptures, is in
the Roman Church; and not with Protestants.
THE true and warranted exposition of Scriptures, is absolutely proved before,
to belong to the true Church of Christ, and the Roman Church. For this place,
D. Field vvriteth thus: Field lib. 4. c. 19. pa. 134.
We confess, that neither conference of places, nor consideration of the
Antecedentia, and Consequentia, nor looking into the originals, are of any
force, unless we find the things, which we conceive to be understood and
meant, in the places interpreted, to be consonant to the rule of faith. And
this rule of faith as he further teaches, page 242.
must be tried either by the general practice of the Church, the renowned of
all ages, or the Pastors of an Apostolic Church: which (as the world can
witness) no Protestant can make claim unto. Therefore as D. Couell vvriteth:
Couell def. of Hooker. page 85.
Doctrines derived, exhortations deducted, interpretations agreeable are not
the word of God. And yet these be the grounds of Protestant religion, and
those vvhereupon their pretended faith and justification it self, with them
depends; Although D. Field thus again condemns it: Field p. 226
Private interpretation is not so proposed and urged, as if they would bind
all others to receive it. Therefore he assigns page 228.
three kinds of interpretation and judgment: One of discretion common to all;
the other of direction in the Pastors of the Church; and a third, of
jurisdiction proper to them that have supreme power in the Church. And this
third he only acknowledges in the Bishops assembled in a general Council,
which (as he teaches) may interpret the Scripture, and by their authority
suppress all them, that gainsay such interpretation, and subject every man
(that shall disobey such determinations as they consent upon) to
excommunication and censures of like nature: Hitherto his words. Now that
there neither has been, nor possibly can be, any general Council among
Protestants, (none clayming further jurisdiction, then their own temporal
Terrytories) it is both apparent to all, and acknowledged Relation of relig.
cap. 47.
in express words by the Protestant Relator of religion. And yet besides D.
Field recited before, D. Sutcliffe Sutcl. subuers. pa. 119.
, D. Morton Morton epist. dedicat. 2. part. Apol. lib. 4. 2. part. Apol. pa.
340 cap. 18.
, M. Willet Willet Antilog.
and the rest acknowledge ordinarily, that a general Council has the highest
and binding judgment. And although M. Willet does say, Willet prefat. Engl.
and Antilog. page 71. 120.
That in England the temporal Prince is Governor, ruler, chief ouerseer and
steward of the Church, to whose judgment and redress the reformation of
religion belongs; Yet he adds: Page 150. and 43. supr.
Neither he nor their Church has any privilege from error: But plainly
protests, Willet prefa. to the reader in Antilo.
They must take out a new lesson; and learn to reform their erroneous
conceits. And more then this is generally taught, and confessed among them; of
which hereafter. For this time and place I will only make exemplification, of
D. Dove his grant, and confession; which follows in these words: D. Dove
perswas. page 31.
When the Mass was first put down, King Henry had his English Lyturgie, and
that was judged absolute without exception: but when King Edward came to the
Crown, that was condemned, and an other in the place which Peter Martyr, and
Bucer did approve, as very consonant to Gods word. When Queen Elizabeth
began her reign, the former was judged to be full of imperfections, and a
new was devised, and allowed by the consent of the Clergy: but about the
middle of her reign, we grew weary of that book, and great means have been
wrought to abandon that, and establish an other, which although it was not
obtained; yet we do (at the least, at every change of Prince) change our book
of common prayers, we be so wanton, that we know not what we would have:
Hitherto his words; and he freely confesses errors in all these states and
changes. Yet this flitting from error to error, finding no center, has been
so grievous even to some Protestants, that the Survey of the book of common
prayer, uses these words: Survey of the commun. book, page 159. 160.
The late Archbishop of Canterbury (as is credibly reported) took such a
grief (when the communion book should have been altered) discovered by these
or like words; good Lord! when shall we know what to trust unto? that he
presently fell into his palsy, was carried from the Court, and dyed shortly
after. But let any man enter into a serious consideration of Protestant
doctrine in this point; that under pain of damnation we are bound, to find
and follow the truth; That general Councels (as before) may subject every man
disobeying their determinations, to excommunication and censures of like
nature, the most terrible and fearful punishment of this world; And
Protestants in England so severely punish all Catholics, for not consenting to
their religion, which themselves thus load with errors; and all judgments
Ecclesiastical, even general Councels Articul. 21. anno 1562.
may err and have erred, even in things pertaining unto God, as is defined in
their Articles, and is commonly taught and believed with them, to excuse their
errors. This consideration is able, to putmen (not regardlesse of salvation)
into more then a quaking palsy.

Chapter 7. Traditions are of equal authority with Scripture: yet prove
Catholic religion.
THE dignity and authority of unwritten and Apostolical Traditions (being
lawfully proved) was ever esteemed such, that M. Wotton affirms: Wotton def.
of Perkins. page 405.
Out of all question we are bound to keep them. And tells, page 436.
That M. Perkins was of the same opinion. Field p. 134
D. Field speaks of such Traditions in these words: There is no reason but
these should be equal with the Scriptures. For it is not the writing, that
gives these things their authority, but the worth and credit of him that
delivers them, though by word and lively voice only. He adds also, Field p.
240
that the perpetual Virginity of our Lady was a Tradition, and only received
by such authority, and so do other Protestants. And both they and D. Field
Field supr.
acknowledge Heluidius was condemned of heresy (and justly) for denial
thereof: which could not be, except to deny the doctrine of true Traditions,
were to deny the word of God, in their judgments.

Now let us see, what Traditions we shall have approved by Protestants: The
same Author makes this discourse and division following: Field lib. ^* cap.
19.
First, we receive the number and names of the Authors of books, divine and
Canonical, as delivered by Tradition. This Tradition we admit: the number,
authors, and integrity of the parts of these books, we receive as delivered
by Tradition.

The second kind of Tradition which we admit, is that summary comprehension of
the chief heads of Christian doctrine, contained in the Creed of the
Apostles, which was delivered to the Church, as a rule of faith.

The third, is that form of Christian doctrine and explication of the several
parts thereof, which the first Christians receiving of the same Apostles, that
delivered to them the Scriptures, commended to posterities. This may rightly be
termed a Tradition: for that we need a plain and distinct explication of
many things, which are somewhat obscurely contained in the Scriptures.

Field p. 239
The fourth kind of Tradition, is the continued practice of such things, as
neither are contained in the Scripture expressly, nor the example of such
practice expressly there delivered, though the grounds, reasons, and causes
of the necessity of such practice he there contained.

p. 239 supr.
The fifth kind of Traditions, comprehends such observations, as in
particular are not commanded in Scripture, nor the necessity of them from
thence concluded, etc.

Lastly, coming to Traditions, touching conversation and manners, he
preuenteth and confuteth the usual objections of Protestants about this
doctrine, in these words: Field page 241. 242.
That the Apostles delivered many things of this nature to the Churches; some
by way of precept, some by way of counsel and advise only; some to particular
Churches, and some to all; some to continue but for a time, and some to
continue for ever, we make no doubt. And exemplifying, that the Lords day or
Sunday is of this kind, he adds: Field supr. page 242.
And sundry other things there are, which doubtless the Apostles delivered by
Tradition; but they are confounded with Ecclesiastical Traditions (as
Waldensis aptly notes) that we might the more reverence the constitutions of
the Church, and are dispensable by the guides of the Church: Hitherto be the
words of D. Field.

Then to make ashort reflection upon this his doctrine: By his first rule of
Traditions, he must needs grant unto us (which I have proved before at large)
that althose books which the Roman church approves for Scripture, together
with the special doctrines, of prayer for the dead, to Angels, etc. are
Traditions. For not only D. Field and his rules, do so assure us; but D.
Couell Couell against Burges, page 87.
from the primative Church has told us, that all which we receive, were the
treasure of the holy Ghost, and divine instrument, which the Apostles delivered
to the Churches. Secondly, we must of necessity resort to the Roman Church, to
know and learn the form of Christian doctrine, and explication of the
several parts thereof, and the obscurities of Scriptures. For he says, that
the Apostles delivered this as a Tradition to posterities: And no posterity of
Protestants can be of this posterity; because both their priorities and
posterities, deny Traditions. Thirdly, D. Field must needs seek for, or
allow of many Traditions, which he remembers not; and in all equal
judgment, as many Articles of Catholic religion, as we claim by Tradition:
for in his fourth, fifth, and sixth member of Traditions, he ever speaks Field
page 241. 242.
of them in the plural number; as, things, observations, of this sort, sundry
other, and the like. And yet, he only recounteth baptism of Infants in the
fourth page 239.
: The observation of Lent in the fifth page 239.
: and Sunday, or the Lords day, in the last. If he will say, they are
confounded with Ecclesiastical Traditions (as he did) that men might more
reverence the constitutions of the Church: Let them at the last, recant their
contempt and dislike against them. And this the rather, because the rules
which he assigns to know true Traditions, (being Field p. 242
the authority and custom of the Church, consent of Fathers, or testimony of
an Apostlike Church) neither do, nor possibly can tell, of any Traditions to
advantage Protestants, which deny all Traditions: So that of necessity both
the Traditions, and rules to know them, do, and must belong to the Church
Apostolic of Rome, being in this question a rule of it self, as he has
declared.

Then by the doctrine of D. Field, and the Protestants before (and now to be
cited) Catholics may lawfully say, with the ancient Fathers, with D. Couell
Cou. against Burges, page 139. 124. 125
, and other Protestants: That the sign of the Cross, is an Apostolical
constitution and Tradition.

With D. Couel pa. 122. sup.
again, and the ancient Fathers, and from them: that the mixture of water with
wine in the Eucharist, is an Apostolical Tradition.

With the Pastors of the Apostolic Churches, three hundred Fathers, and
consent and custom of the Church (D. Fields rules for true Traditions) in the
second Nicen Council Conc. Nic. 2.
: That reverence of Images is an Apostolical Tradition.

With S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and S. Epiphanius, by D. Fields rules, and
M. Middletons Middleton Papistomast. page 137. 138 47. 45.
grant: That sacrifice and prayer for the dead, was an Apostolical Tradition.

With the ancient Fathers, so receiving from those which went before them, by
grant also of M. Middleton: pa. 134. sup.
That vows of chastity, and single life in Priests, is to be observed by
Tradition.

With the ancient Fathers: that Relics to be reverenced, is a Tradition, when
M. Willet Willet Antilog. page 13.
tells us, that Vigilantius was condemned of heresy, for denying it.

With his Majesty Conference. page 13.
and the conference (with the consent of Fathers, Apostolic Churches, etc.)
That the particular and personal absolution from sin after confession, is
Apostolical and a very Godly ordinance.

With the Protestant Conference, supr. page 18.
Bishop of Winchester (antiquity so consenting:) That baptism to be ministered
by private persons in time of necessity, is an holy Tradition.

With his Majesty and the said conference: Conference, page 35. 36.
that Bishops he diuinae ordinationis. With the same Protestant conference,
Conference, page 10. 11.
and antiquity: not only that Confirmation is an Apostolical Tradition; But
(because it is so joined by them with Baptism, and has both a visible sign,
and grace, by the Communion book Co^m. book tit. Confirmation.
revived) that it is a Sacrament by Tradition.

With the ancient Father S. Basil, M. Wotton Wotton def. of Perkins, p. 465.
466.
so assuring us of his opinion: that the very profession of our faith, by which
we believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, is a Tradition.

With D. Ceuell: Cou. against the plea of the Innoc. p. 104.
That it was an Apostolical Tradition or Ordination, to ordain Archbishops in
their Provinces; as Bishops also in their Diocese, to rule the Church.

With the Bishop of Winchester B. Bilsons Survey of Christ's sufferings, p. 664.
against the Puritans: that the Article of Christ's descent to hell, and the
Creed wherein it is contained, is an Apostolical Tradition, delivered to the
Church, by the direction and agreement of the Apostles.

And to conclude briefly: why may not we say with the Council of Florence,
cited by M. Willet Willet Synop. controuers. 1. q. 7.
for general, and the Patriarchs of the Apostolic Sees there present, with
the Council of Constance, not of unequal authority, and the Council of Trent
(to pass others) with six Cardinals, four Legates, three Patriarchs, two and
thirty Archbishops, two hundred twenty eight Bishops, and five Abbots there
assembled (as D. Dove tells us) that Protestancy in all points is false, and
Catholic religion true: when no Protestant Church can show any one such like
authority for their cause? And this of necessity D. Field with his Protestants
must acknowledge, or freely by their recited doctrine confess; that there
neither is, nor can be hereafter by his rules, true and certain Scripture,
Tradition, or Religion in the world. For if we neither have Scripture,
exposition of the difficulties in it, or Tradition, but by Tradition (as he
has granted) and those only three rules to know them: if those rules may
propose unto us false Scriptures, false expositions of their obscurities, and
false Traditions in matters of faith; faith cannot be certain, and religion
grounded upon it, is overthrown.

Chapter 8. Of the authority, and commanding highest power of general
Councels: proving the doctrine of the Roman Church.
IT may sufficiently be gathered, by that which has been entreated before,
both that general Councels are of highest authority in the Church of Christ,
and their testimony for Catholic religion. Therefore to be brief in this
question; concerning their chiefest judgment and preeminence: first, the
Bishop of Winchester writes thus: B. Bills. Survey of Christ's suffer. pa. 83.
The authority of general Councels, is most wholesome in the Church; and cites
S. Augustine to that purpose. D. Morton writes, Morto^ part. 2. Apol. page
340. l. 4. c. 18
That concilium publicum est summus judex: a general Council is highest
judge. The Protestant Relator of religion is of the same opinion, Relation of
the state of relig. cap. 47.
and calls it the only remedy in such times of controversies about religion.
D. Sutcliffe has these words: Sutcl. subu. page 119.
General Councels have souer aigne authority in external government. And
again: Sutc. against D. Kellison, p. 41. 42. 102.
False it is, that we will admit no judge but Scriptures, for we appeal still
to a lawful general Council. Sutcl. subu. epist. dedicat.
We hold all the Christian faith explaned in the six general Councels. D.
Field is so clear in this question, that he tells us: first, Field page 226.
cap. 16.
Private interpretations do not bind us, nor are proposed to that purpose:
secondly he teaches, Field p. 228
that only Bishops assembled in a general Council have authority, to
interpret Scriptures, and by their authority, to suppress all them that
gainsay such interpretation, and subject every man that shall disobey such
determinations, as they consent upon, to excommunication and censures of like
nature: Hitherto of the highest dignity of general Councels. Now let us
examine by these Protestants, whether they be for them, or Catholics.

That they be not, nor can be for Protestants, thus I demonstrate from
themselves. The words of the Protestant Relator of religion are these:
Relation of religion, c. 47
The Protestants are severed bands, or rather scattered troops, each drawing
a diverse way, without any means to pacify their quarrels, to take up their
controversies. No Prince with any preeminence of jurisdiction, above the rest:
no Patriarch, one or more, to have a common superintendance or care of their
Churches, for correspondency and unity: no ordinary way to assemble a general
Council of their part, the only hope remaining ever to assuage their
contentions: Hitherto the Relator. Where we see, that first the Protestants
are divided; secondly, they are without any means of union in controversies;
there is no jurisdiction among them; no way for that, which is the only hope to
end contentions in religion: therefore, this only and highest remedy by
general Councels, cannot possibly be for them; except they will have an Union,
Church, Faith, Truth, and Religion impossible. The same is sufficiently also
proved before, from D. Couell in my Chapter Cap. 3. supr. and Couell against
the plea of the Innoc. page 103. 104 105. 106 107 108. 109.
of the Popes authority; where he allows of necessity, one highest, chief,
spiritual commander in the Church, to such purposes. And showing how before
the time of Constantine, there could be no pretense of any Council to be
assembled, but by the spiritual authority; he adds thus: Couell supr. page
110.
The Synod of Rome (in the year 225) called by Cornelius (Pope of Rome)
against Nouatus, consisted of threescore Bishops. and many others of the
Clergy. And further in these words: page 109.
And after, when Princes came to embrace the faith, the best means they could
devise, to procure peace and advance religion, was by their laws to refer
Ecclesiastical causes, to Ecclesiastical judges.

Now concerning the Roman Church: first, the Protestant Relator of religion,
which has excluded Protestants from al hope of any general Council, writes
of the Roman Church in the same place, and in these words: Relation of relig.
supr. cap. 47.
The other (Catholics) have the Pope as a common father, aduiser, and
conductor to them al, to reconcile their jarres, to appease their displeasures,
to decide their difference, above all things to draw their religion by
consent of Councels, to unity. And this is so clear, in the judgment of al
these Protestants, that when they deny the authority of general Councels,
they have no pretense of excuse, but because they were called by the Popes
authority; so D. Field Field book of the church
, D. Sutcliffe Sutcl. subu. against Kellison, etc.
, M. Willet Will. Antil.
, and the rest. And yet D. Fields argument or rule of the Pastor of an
Apostolic Church, the primative Church, and holy Fathers consenting, does
warrant us, that privilege ever belonged to the Sea of Rome, that without the
consent thereof, no Council could be called, none confirmed; as Pope Damasus
Damas. epist. ad Illiric. hist. tripart. lib. 5. c. 28. vel 29. Theodor. hist.
Socrat. hist. l. 2. c. 17. Sozo^.
, the ancient Fathers, and Hystorians witness. And the Bishop of Winchester
grants these propositions: True difference p. 66. 67 edit. an. 1586
The Canon of the primative Church made every thing void, that was done
without the Bishop of Rome. And again: The Canon of the primative Church
forbad any Council to be called without his consent. Middleton papistom. page
39.
M. Middleton tells us that the first Nicen Council did approve the dignity
of Rome (at the least) over the West provinces by old custom. And if we
should enter into particulers: First, B. Bilson will tell us, that the Council
of Constance p. 119 120.
, where the Protestant doctrine was condemned in Husse and Wicliffe; was a
general Council. So he witnesses of the Council of Basil p. 124. 125.
, condemning the same for heresy. M. Willet Willet Synops. controuers. 1. q.
7. Limbomastix apud Parkes, p. 137. 180.
both in his Synopsis and Lymbomastix) as M. Parkes is witness against him:
and himself also so accounts it) grants the same of the Council of
Florence, where the seven Sacraments, Purgatory, the Popes Supremacy, etc.
were confirmed. Of the Council of Trent no man will question: And yet D. Dove
has assured us before, Dove persw. page 14.
that there were present in that Council, six Cardinals, four Legates, three
Patriarchs, two and thirty Archbishops, two hundred twenty eight Bishops. The
third part of such an assembly, would have been a great countenance to
Protestant religion, far greater then ever it had, or is like to procure. D.
Couell Couell def. of Hook. p. 21
and M. Parkes Parkes against limbomastix p. 176
cite and approve as a rule of faith, the great Council of Lateran, where
transubstantiation was defined: and joyneth it with the primative Councels of
Ephesus and Chalcedon, and in the high matter of faith, the Deity of the holy
Ghost. And to ascend to the first of Nice, the Protestants have confessed
before, cap. 4. supr.
that Scriptures which we receive, and they deny, were there approved. M.
Willet Will. Antil. page 88. 89.
calls the primative Councels of Neocaesarea, Toletane, the first and the
fixed general Council, allowed before by D. Sutcliffe (wherein both general
and provincial precedent Councels, were approved) The Papal Church, Popery,
doctrine in Popery. And of the seventh general Council, he writes thus:
Will. Antil* page 178.
The Greeks in a general Council held at Nice, confirmed and allowed the
adoration of Images. But this may suffice of this question, for both the Popes
supreamacy from the beginning, and the authority of all ancient Councels,
Fathers, and Hystories, are so manifest for the present doctrine of the Roman
Church; That M. Middleton tells us: Middleton papistomast. page 200.
Papias (living in the Apostles time) taught Peter's primacy or Romish
Episcopality. Concerning the second he vvriteth in these words: page 193.
supr.
Perusing Councels, Fathers, and Stories from the Apostles forward, we find
the print of the Popes feet. Whereby is manifest, that even from the Apostles
to this present, the doctrine of the Church of Rome, was always (as occasion
was given) approved, decreed, and taught by the holy Councels, Fathers, and
Hystories of all ages.

Chapter 9. The testimony of ancient Fathers of great authority, and for the
doctrine of the Roman Church.
LASTLY, in these general questions, or directions in religion, let us come to
the testimony of the holy and learned Fathers, of the primative Church
(although of these it appears by the former Chapter;) And consider first, the
value and dignity of their authority: secondly, to whose cause, whether of
Catholics or Protestants it bears witness.

The Bishop of Winchester in his Survey of Christ's sufferings, writes thus:
B. Bilsons Survey p. 85.
The ancient consent of Godly Fathers, is with great care to be searched, and
followed of us, chiefly in the rule of faith. And again: pa. 82. sup.
We rest upon the Scriptures of God, upon the authority of the ancient Doctors,
and Councels. And to the objection of those Protestants which say: page 83.
The Canon of the Scriptures is perfect, and sufficient in it self for all
things; therefore, what need is there that the authority of Ecclesiastical
interpretation, should be joined with it? He answers with Vincentius
Lirinensis, in these words: Least every man should wrest the Scriptures to his
fancy, and suck thence not the truth, but the patronage of his error; And he
adds, that S. Augustine gave this respect, not only to general Councels, but
to the testimonies of particular Fathers, Ireneus, Cyprian, Hilarious, Ambrose,
Gregory, Chrysostom, Basil, and others.

D. Sutcliffe writes thus: Sutcl. subuers. page 87.
We acknowledge the faith of the Fathers, of the fourth, fifth, and sixth ages,
and adjoyne our selves to that Church. And against D. Kellison he uses these
words: Sutcliffe against D. Kellison, page 17.
The Fathers in all points of faith are for us (Protestants) and not for the
Pope. M. Willet in the end of his Antilogie, swears the matter in this
manner: Willet Antilog. p. 263.
I take God to witness, before whom I must render account, etc. That the same
faith and religion, which I defend, is taught, and confirmed in the more
substantial points, by these Hystorians, Councels, Fathers, that lived within
five, or six hundred years after Christ. And in the page following, his words
be these: p. 264. supr
It is most notoriously evident, that for the grossest points of Popery, as
transubstantiation, sacrifice of Mass, worshipping of Images, justification by
works, the supreamacy of the Pope, prohibition of Marriage, and such other,
they (Catholics) have no show at al of any evidence from the Fathers, within
five hundred years of Christ. And thus again: Willet Antilog. pa. 271.
The ancient Fathers that lived within six hundred years after Christ, are
against them. And thus I might allege from others, especially triumphing in
this manner, either when they write against Puritans, (whom the Fathers
condemn) as the Bishop of Winchester is cited: or when they speak in
general, and the authorities of Fathers are neither to be answered, as
produced by Catholics, or alleged for Protestants; as it appears in those
places of D. Sutcliffe, and M. Willets great and glorious speeches of the
Fathers. But when these men are either to answer those primative Fathers,
cited for our cause; or stand upon their testimony in particular for
themselves, the case is altered, as is objected Apud B. Bills. Survey, p. 84*
to the Bishop of Winchester, by his Puritan opposite. But how truly they
keep their words and oaths, in these protestations, shall be hereafter
declared: for the present; it is expected by all Protestants that deal
sincerely, that their religion should be agreeable, to the doctrine of the
ancient, and primative Fathers: Therefore, his Majesty esteeming them with due
regard, has pleased to sentence these in Parliament: K. speech Parlia. 1603
I will ever yield all reverence to Antiquity. And in the public conference,
in these words: Conference, page 73.
For my part, I know not how to answer the objection of Papists, when they
charge us with novelties, but to tell them, that their abuses are new. And
approves, the days and time of Constantine in the primative Church, a rule of
religion; saying: Conference supr. page 69.
Constantine is not to be appeached of superstition, but things then used may
still be continued. Also in his first speech in Parliament, he would have all
novelties renounced. And of the same mind (no doubt) be all sincerely meaning
Protestants, which trust unto, and are directed by the sermons, citations, and
books of these Doctors, and teachers among them. But it will now appear,
that they are so far from justifying their former oaths, protestations, and
assertions, that they acknowledge those primative Fathers, to be for
Catholics; and both write, and censure those most holy and learned men for
that cause, with uncivil, contemptuous, barbarous, and irreligious speeches.
First, M. Wotton expressly controleth the recited sentence of his Majesty,
concerning the time of Constantine, and antiquity: for a Catholic Author
citing The Catholic Author against Perkins in prefat
, and humbly accepting it for a rule of trial; M. Wotton writes thus: Wot.
def. of Per. p. 15. 16.
The trial of doctrine, is not to be featched from the opinions and examples
of men. And again: page 16.
It may not seem strange, if superstition were crept into the Church, before
Constantines time. Let us proceed. D. Couell (a man not of the rashest
judgment) has honored S. Augustine before, with the greatest commendation
of learning; yet, M. Wotton writes: W. sup. p. 8.
We need not fear S. Augustine though against us. page 17.
Eusebius is to be reprehended. page 9.
There was want of modesty and truth also in the treatise of Hierome against
Vigilantius. page 88.
The ancient Fathers spoke more like Philosophers, then Divines. page 118.
It is more then I know, that Gregory is a Saint. page 224.
The Author of the Epistle to the Philippians, attributed to S. Ignatius, is
an unfit judge in controversies of divinity. page 422.
Tertullians witness is of small authority. page 440.
Damascene is not greatly to be respected. page 462.
Origin is generally condemned. page 340.
Ignatius Epistle to the Romans (approved by S. Hierome, and Protestants) is a
counterfeit Ignatius, for teaching merit of good works. page 387.
Cyprian is too far carried away, since he ascribes to almesdeedes, the
purging of sin. page 467.
Ireneus judgment is little to be respected. page 494.
Tertullians testimony is not worth answering. Tertullian and Origin may be
joined together. page 495.
Chrysostomes Rhethoricke is better then his Logic. page 495.
Hieromes authority in the case of single life, is not much worth. page 500.
Those Christian Fathers which condemned Iouinian (as S. Augustine, Ambrose,
Hierome, etc.) dealt unchristianly with him. p. 519. 520.
The authority of the ancient writers (Athanasius, Augustine, Hierome)
concluding a work of perfection from those words of Christ, go and sell all,
etc. is not to be admitted. page 543.
The authority of Clement of Alexandria, and Augustine, with the school
Doctors, is inferior to the Jews. p. 545* 546.
Origin and Theodoret (whom before he prefers page 484.
above S. Augustine) overthrow their own distinction. page 594.
Lactantius though he were an ancient Christian, yet in his verses (of
worshipping the Cross) he shows himself liker a light Poet, then a grave
writer. And no marvel, though this Protestant be so angry with the ancient
Fathers, for teaching and maintayning that doctrine, which the Roman Church
now holds, as appears before. For he exclaymeth most barbarously and
without respect, even against all the Kings of this, and other nations, for
the same cause; his words be these: page 53.
The Kings of England and Scotland, etc. were Satan's soldiers, when they were
of the Popes religion: Hitherto M. Wotten; next let us come to M. Perkins,
whom he defends. M. Perkins writes thus: Perkin. problem. page 4.
The Fathers have spoken many things incommodiously of holy things. page 93.
94.
The ancient Fathers did sin in the invocation of Saints: yea, were guilty of
sacrilege, such were Paulinus, Fortunatus, S. Leo, S. Ephrem, S. Flugentius,
Petrus Domianus, Prosper. page 105.
The ancient Fathers sometimes speak inconueniently, of the article of
justification: page 184.
Some of the ancient Fathers (as Tertullian and Cyprian) are Montanists; or (at
the least) do err filthily, for making Confirmation a Sacrament.

D. Sutcliffe, who so much before reverenced the Fathers in words, now
writes in this manner. Sutcl. subuers. page 5.
Metaphrastes is a lying pedant, writing more lies, then leaves. page 8. 9.
Bid reports too many things by hearsay. Ado is a fabulous writer. page 9.
The history of King Lucius his conversion (testified by so many hystories) may
well be paragoned, with the tales of King Arthure, Sir Tristram, and Lancelot
Dulacke. page 19.
The Britains have cause to detest the memory of Augustine.

Let us next come to M. Willet, the great professor of Divinity, who has taken
so solemn an oath before, that the Fathers be for his cause. To show his just
dealings, I will only use the testimony of a Protestant against him. M. Parkes
vvriteth of him in these words: Parkes against Limbomastix, p. 170
He condemns all the ancient Fathers for dreamers. page 151.
Condemns all the Fathers. Defen. of the third testimony. sect. kkk.
He condemns all learned and Godly Divines for enemies of Christ's Cross,
and blasphemers of his passion. He justifies most wicked Heretics, and
condemns most holy Fathers. Defen. of the first and second testimony. p. 2 5.
sect. 18. 21. page 181. 166 101. 100. defenc. of the 2. place. sect. 10. 11.
20. defenc. of the 3. testimony, sect. 7. 12. 15. 16. etc.
He falsely translateth, corrupts, indignely handles, clippeth, shamefully
corrupts, injuriously handles, greatly abuses, untruly alleges,
misquoteth, maymeth, mistranslateth, much abuses, notably corrupts, etc. S.
Augustine, Origin, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Leo, S. Hierome. Tertullian,
S. Bernard, etc. fathereth false-boodes upon them, peruerteth their true
arguments, corrupts their words. And further in particular, for those books
which he has written against Catholics, as his Synopsis and Antilogie, he
reproves Parkes sup. page 7. 10. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. and def. of the
3. test. sect. 16. etc.
and disalloweth, telling us that in them he deceives the world, belyeth
Bellarmine, and Catholic writers. And he is as bold with his Majesty, calling
his sentence ( Parkes sup. page 28.
that the Roman Church is our mother Church) a foolish conceit and
imagination. And no marvel when he is as familiar with the holy Scriptures
themselves, as this Protestant writes thus: Parkes sup. defense of the 1. 2.
3. test.
He strangely peruerteth, belyeth, depraueth, abuses, much abuses, falsifyeth
holy Scriptures.

M. Ormerod has written a book expressly against the Puritans, intituling the
same the picture of a Puritan, condemning them of Idolatry, Heresies, Schism:
And yet to show what credit there is in these men, and what trust to their
doctrine, himself is so far a Puritan in judgment, and in the maine
article, which cost the Bishop of Winchester such pains, that he is not
only at defiance with all Fathers: Ormero. paganopapist. page 44.
but compares the Article and belief of Christ's descending into hell, to the
fable of Hercules, feigned to go thither, and featch from thence Theseus,
Pyrithous, and Cerberus the great Dog of hell, with three heads.

Next let us come to M. Middleton; in this manner he vvriteth: Middleton
Papistomast. page 40.
The credit of men is but a sandy foundation to build upon. And having told S.
Epiphanius page 27.
that he lost the book of the Apostles constitutions out of his bosom, which
he cited haeres. 45. He adds: page 45.
I must crave leave to say of Epiphanius; many assertions he counted for
heresies, which were not heresies: many assertions he counted not heresies,
which are heresies. And all this, because he condemns diverse Protestant points
of heresy, and justifies the contrary for Catholic doctrine. Again thus of
Dionisius the Areopagite: page 49.
Denis his answer is short-heeld, ready to fall back; because he teaches
prayer for the dead. And where S. Ambrose teaches the doctrine of
transubstantiation, M. Middleton tells us, page 61.
He is guilty of presumptuous and desporate blasphemy. He scoffeth page 64.
at S. Chrysostom, and teaches him how to speak, for teaching the doctrine
of prayer for the dead. And again, he uses this mock against him, for
calling it an Apostolical Tradition: page 66.
Well might Chrysostom say, the Apostles knew what profit redounded to the
dead, by prayer for them; for himself knew not. And thus in general: page
133.
The Fathers sometime went beyond the bonds of sobriety, in the doctrine of
chastity. page 134.
The Fathers are not fit judges to determine either of Priests marriage, or
vows of chastity. And for this doctrine thus he writes of S. Ambrose: page
135.
That man has the Apostaticall Dragon, the Devil dwelling in him. And so, he
will send Ambrose away with his Quietus est. page 137
Chrysostom is so hot in his amplifications, that he forgets himself. page
138.
Chrysostom in his vehemence, goes beyond measure in reprehending; and the
Christians of his time in their lightness, went beyond measure in vowing. page
141.
The Canons which Epiphanius cites against Priests marriage, are Apocryphal.
page 143.
He was to partial affected in this matter. page 144.
The ancient Fathers did err, and we dissent from them in some points of
doctrine. page 156.
Augustine was a most subtle disputer: yet, a quick wit soonest falls into
contradiction. page 161.
Neither is Hilary (howesoeuer the Romish Church has made him a Saint) over
hastily to be received. p. 179. 180.
Ireneus, Hilary, and Epiphanius (for defending free will) are Pelagian
Heretics.

It is written against the Bishop of Winchester (who in the beginning of this
Chapter gave such reverence to the Fathers) in these words by his Puritan
opposite: B. Bilsons Survey p. 84.
All this great show of cleaving to the Fathers judgment, is but colored in
you. For in other points again we see, when they speak not to your liking,
the case is altered. You forsake the ancient and learned Fathers, you contemn
and despise them. page 85.
You affirm against all the Fathers. ( 98.
You little regard the second doctrine of the Fathers? Hitherto the Puritant
against the Protestants; now let us hear the Protestants against the
Puritans. This Protestant Bishop intituleth one Treatise thus: pa. 98. supr.
The defendors disdain of the Fathers. Others p. 274. 275.
wrested, and leudly falsified. And again: Prefa. to the King supr.
They condemns all the Fathers Greek and Latin; (...) conspiring against the
truth and perverting the Scriptures. This is too much of this distasting
matter: they which would see more particulers, may find them applied in my
particular questions hereafter.

The 10. Chapter, or Conclusion of the general questions or rules in religion.
WHEREFORE, seeing we Catholics of England, are only, or principally, urged,
moved, and solicited, by the present Protestant Doctors, Divines, and Teachers
of this Kingdom, to forsake that religion, and Church wherein we live, a thing
not to be desired by them, or effected by us without instruction of the truth,
if we were in error: (as the Bishop of Durham sufficiently preached Sermon. of
the B. of Durbam 19. Mart. 1603. cit. K. speech in parl.
before his Majesty, the first day of his first Parliament) we earnestly and
humbly desire, that those miseries, which we have so long hitherto suffered,
as they be forgiven by us; so they may be sufficient unto them: which now do
teach, direct, and instruct us, rather to continue our faith and religion, as
the most certain, secure, and ready way of salvation.

For they have instructed us in their latest vvritings, that the Church of
Rome, is the true Church of Christ, where salvation is to be had; wherein so
many Princes, Prelates, Doctors, and of all degrees, have been glorious
Saints. The greatest agents for the Pope, The crowns and fore-tops of all
Popery, (as M. Middleton Middleton Papistomass. page 127.
pleases to name S. Thomas Aquinas) were most renowned, their doctrine
excellent, and secure.

That the Catholics opinion generally received, of the Popes spiritual
preeminence, was ever claymed (even from Scripture) and practiced by the
Apostolic Roman See, over the whole Christian world, from the time of S.
Peter, to these our days.

That all books, which that Church receives for Canonical Scriptures, are
most true, delivered for such by the Apostles, reverenced for such in the
Church; and Protestants objections against them be friuoulous and confuted.
That the true, and best translation of these holy Scriptures, with the lawful,
supreme, and binding exposition of them, together with Apostolical
Traditions (equal in authority to those holy writings) the general Councels,
and Ancient, Holy, Learned primative Fathers, give absolute testimony, that the
present Roman Church, is that company of holy ones, that household of faith,
that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the pillar and
ground of truth: which is so diligently take searched for, whose communion we
must embrace, follow her directions, and rest in her judgment. And thus much
of the first part of Protestants proofs, for Catholic religion.

A PARIS.

Chez Francois Gueffier, demeurant deuan^ la College de Cambray.

M. D. C. VII.

THE TABLE OF THE FIRST PART OF PROTESTANT PROOFS, FOR Catholic religion.
The first part entreating of the general grounds, and authorities for true
religion.
CHAP. 1. The first Chapter teaches by Protestants, the necessity of seeking,
finding, and following the true Church. Page 7. Chap. 2. The Roman Church ever
was, and now is this true Church. page 8. Chap. 3. The Bishop of Rome by
Protestants, ever was, and is supreme head of the true Church. page 13. Chap.
4. All those books which the Roman Church receives for Scripture, and
Protestants heretofore denied for such, are proved by them to be Canonical
Scriptures. page 17. Chap. 5. The vulgar Latin translation of Scriptures, used
of the Roman Church, is the best: the English Protestant translations are
erroneous. page 21. Chap. 6. The truest, highest, and authorized interpretation
of Scriptures, is in the Roman Church; and not with Protestants. page 23. Chap.
7. Traditions are of equal authority with the Scriptures, and prove Catholic
religion. page 25. Chap. 8. The authority of general Councels above all
Protestant rules, make for the Catholic Church. page 28. Chap. 9. Likewise of
the authority of Fathers. page 31. Chap. 10. The conclusion of the first part.
page 37.
THE TABLE OR ARGUMENT OF THE second part, of Protestant proofs, for
Catholics religion, and recusancy.
THE particular articles of Predestination, Justification, Inherent grace,
Merit and reward of good deeds, of keeping the Commandments, Free will,
distinction of Precepts and Counsels, of Venial and Mortal sins, of
Indulgences, reverence to holy Images, reverence to holy Relics, prayer to
Saints and Angels, public Service not in the vulgar tongues, Church
Ceremonies, Christ's real presence in the blessed Sacrament,
Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass, single life of Priests, vows of
Chastity, Purgatory, and prayer for the Dead, The number of seven Sacraments,
their grace ex opere operato, and an ind^lible Character in some Sacraments.

All which Catholic articles are proved, by the testimonies of such English
Protestant Doctors, and Divines, as have written since the beginning of his
Majesty's reign in England.


