JACOBS VOVV, OPPOSED TO THE VOWS OF MONKS AND FRIARS.

The first Volume in two Books; Of the Holy Sripture, And Evangelical
Counsels.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY Mr. GILBERT PRIMEROSE, MINISTER of the Word of God in the
Reformed Church of Bordeaux. And TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH by JOHN BVLTEEL
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

August. de Trinit. lib. 4. c. 6. Contra Rationem, Scripturas, Ecclesiam,
Nemo Sobrius, Christianus, Pacificus,
Senserit.

2. COR. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold at
his shop under Saint Peter's Church in Corne-hill, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1617.

TO HIS DEAR AND LOVING BRETHREN, Mr. JAMES BVLTEEL AND Mr. PETER BVLTEEL,
Merchants; I. B. wishes increase of external prosperity, and internal
peace, and comfort in this life, and eternal felicity in the life to come,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.
ALL Scripture is given by inspiration of God (dear and loving Brethren) and
is profitable for doctrine, 2. Tim. 3.16.17
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And therefore
the same Scripture is called, Heb 6.5.
the good Word of God, Psalm. 119.103.
the sweet Word, Heb. 4.12.
the quick and powerful Word, Colos. 1.5.
the Word of truth, Heb. 5.13.
the Word of righteousness, Act. 14.3.
the Word of grace, Act. 13.26.
the Word of salvation, Psalm. 19.7.
making wise the simple, yea, 2. Tim. 3.15.
wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus; Psalm. 19 ^.
converting the soul, rejoicing the heart, enlightening the eyes, Romans 15.4.
instructing us, and Deuteronomy. 31.13.
making us to fear God, ^^endring in us Job. 20.31.
faith, Romans 15.4.
consolation, hope, patience, Joh. 5.39.
having (...) eternal life, Joh. 20.31. Gregor. 1. Origin. Isider. Fulgent.
Athanas. Greenam. Tilen. Molin.
for by it we believe in Christ Jesus, and believing we have life through his
name. Hence it comes to pass, that the holy Scripture is for diverse
considerations diversely termed of the Fathers, both ancient and modern; A long
Epistle which the Creator sends to the creature. The Testament of God the
Son. The Library of God the holy Ghost. The book of true love, wherein God
unfolds his love unto man. The mirror of Divine grace and man's misery. The
rich Treasury of the King of glory, wherein is the spiritual Manna, the Bread
of life common to the perfect ones, and to the young ones; where is Jacobs
Well, out of the which the learned and the simple may drink; where are meats
for all ages, the sincere and wholesome milk of the Word (the two Testaments
being the two breasts of the Church of God) for the newborn babes, and strong
meats for them that are of full age; where are remedies for all evils,
preservatives to keep us from diseases, plasters to heal our wounds, weapons
against tentations, and heresies, a sword to kill heretics, a touchstone of
truth to display error, an exact rule of all things, the Mistress of faith and
of virtue, a lantern to direct our steps, an anchor in time of tempest. Yea,
the Scripture is called Paradise, God sometimes Ambros. ep. 41, Deambulabat
Deus in Paradiso, and nunc deambulat in Paradise Deus quando scripturas lego.
Paradisus Genesis, in quo virtut^s pullulant Patriarcharum: Paradisus
Deuteronomium, in qu^ germinant legis praecepta; Paradisus Euangelium, in qu^
arbor vitae b^nos fructus facit.
walked in Paradise (says Saint Ambrose) and now God walks in Paradise when
I read the Scripture. Genesis is a Paradise, wherein the virtues of the
Patriarchs do branch forth: Deuteronomie is a Paradise, wherein the Law does
spront forth. The Gospel is a Paradise, wherein the tree of life does bring
forth good fruits. And truly well may it be called a Paradise: for the godly
person can in no place find a sweeter and pleasanter refreshing then in the
Paradise of the holy Scriptures; where the tree of knowledge is, not of that
that was forbidden, but of that which is appointed of God for the elect; where
stands in the mids the tree of life which is Chris;t. The door whereunto is
not kept close by Cherubins, and the fiery sword, but it is opened by the
instinct of the holy Spirit, and the light of the Gospel to all that be
hungry; where the rivers be of lively waters, whereof the Church of the
faithful is overflowed and cherished, and where the minds of the godly are
enriched with most fine gold and precious stones, that is with the riches of
heavenly graces; Muscul. loc. Com. cap. 20. de S Script.
where be trees of all sorts fair to the eye and sweet to the taste, trees
planted by God, handsome and fruitful, that is the Patriarchs Prophets and
Apostles; where the air passes very smooth and calm, I mean the breathing
of the holy Spirit, most sweetly, cherishing the hearts of the dwellers in this
Garden: where the voice of God is walking and seeking the salvation of the
seduced man, not crying this only, Adam, where art thou? but calling all men
also unto him, instructing and teaching the ignorant, correcting and provoking
to amendment them that do sin, showing unto them that be deceived the tree
of true knowledge, leading them that be subject unto death and destruction
unto the tree of life, raising up them that are fallen, comforting the
careful, and refreshing them that be weary. The Garden of Eden, out of the
which Adam was thrust for his disobedience, had scarsely the shadow of the true
pleasure, which the Elect do enjoy in this garden of holy Scripture; wherein
they hear the voice of God, they see the appearings of Angels, they be
conversant with the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, with Christ himself, and the
Apostles, and do feed on the tree of life, not only taking no hurt, but
exceeding profit, being made partakers of it for ever. But as the old Serpent
endeavored to banish our first parents out of the corporal and terrestrial
Paradise, so has he labored to banish his posterity out of the spiritual and
heavenly Paradise of the holy Scripture, depriving them of the use, profit, and
consolation thereof. Witness the August. contra Petil. lib. 1. c. 27.
Circumcellians, who seduced by this old Serpent, and brought into a distaste
and dislike thereof, contemptuously refused, and contumeliously rejected, yea,
defaced and burnt the Scripture. If Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 4.
a wicked Soldier and an Heathen was beheaded by the Commandment of Cumanus,
an Heathen governor of Iudaea, for tearing a copy of the book of the Law of
Moses, at the sack of a Town? What were these wicked heretics (not heathen
but Christians, though under that name worse then Heathens in their
Antichristian proceedings) worthy of, for not only refusing to enter into
this spiritual Paradise of holy Scripture, but also for defacing and burning
it? Surely they deserved to be shut out of the heavenly Paradise, their names
to be defaced out of the book of Life, and they to be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, and there to burn for ever and ever. For if any Revel.
22.19.
man take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy (which is not so
much as to deface or burn the whole book) God shall take away his part out of
the book of life, and out of the holy City. Neither were these alone, for
others rejected the book of God either in whole, or in part, though not with
such contempt and contumely. Epiph. lib. 1. tom. 2. haeres. 21. Omnem vero qui
veteri Testamento credit mortem subire.
Simon Magus with the Simonians his disciples; Cerdon, Carpocrates, Basilides,
August. de bono Perse. lib. 2. c. 11.
Maniches and Marcion with their Sectatores, rejected all the Canonical books
of the old Testament. Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 2. haeres. 33.
The Prolemaits refused the five books of Moses. The Sadduc^s received only
the five books of Calvin. in harm. Euang. Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 18. c. 2.
Paulus Eber. de Relig and Repub. Iudaeor.
Moses; so did the Epiph lib. 1. tom. 1. haeres. 9.
Samarits, though Cyril. catech. 18
some hold they received the Prophets also; whereas the Cyril. catech. 18
Apelleans rejected both the Law and the Prophets. The Nicolaitaus rejected the
book of Psalms, some of the Rabbis denied the book of Job. Porphiry
despised Daniel; the Anabaptists refuse Ecclesiastes, and the book of
Canticles. Tertul. aduers. Iudaes.
Again, the Jews condemned the whole new Testament. The Irenae. lib 1. c. 26.
Solo eo quod est secundum Mathaeum Euangeli^ vtuntur.
Ebionites, of the Evangelists embraced only the Gospel of Saint Matthew.
C^rinth^^ received none but Mark. Tertul lib. de praescrip. haeres. c. 51.
Irenae. lib. 3. c. 11
Cerdon and Marcion only Luke. The Ibidem.
Valentini^^s the Gospel of Saint John only. Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres.
51.
The Allogians of all other hated Saint John's Gospel. The Tatians accepted
only the Acts of the Apostles; which book of all others, the Eusebius.
Se^eri^^ heretics rejected, and the August. lib. de vtilit. credendi.
Manichees refused; so did Tertul. de praescript. hares.
Cerdon. The Ebionits Irenae. lib. 1. c. 26. Apostolum P^ulum recusant,
Apostatam eum legi^ dicentes.
could not away with any of S. Paul's works. Epiph. lib. 2. tom. 3. h^^res. 42.
The Marcionits received but ten of Saint Paul's Epistles, rejecting those unto
Timothy, Titus, and the Hebrews, Irenae. lib. 1. c. 29.
defacing also those places both in Saint Luke and the Epistles which they
embraced, that concerned either the Divinity or Humanity of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which Tertul. aduers. haeret. c. 51. Solum Euangelium Lucae, nec tamen
^^tum recipit, Aposto^^ Parli^^que ^^^^es, neque totas Epistolas sumit.
Cerdon his Master practiced before, neither embracing al Saint Paul's Epistles,
nor wholly those he embraced. Others rejected S. James Epistle and S. Jude;
others the two last Epistles of S. John; yea, some all Saint John's Epistles,
with his book of Revelations, as Epiphan. ^^m. 1. lib. ^. haeres. ^1.
the A^^ogians, which book Tertul. (...).
Cerdon also rejected. On the otherside, others have added unto the book of
God other books, as necessary unto salvation. The Gospels of James, Peter,
Andrew, Barnabas, Nicodiums, the Canons of the Apostles, the Acts of Paul,
Peter, Philip, Andreas, Thomas, Epiphan. haeres. 61.
which two last books the heretics called Apostolici, did use very much, and
did take from thence their heresies. The Revelations of Peter, Paul, Philip,
Thomas, Steven; the Revelations, Doctrines, Manifestations, Mysteries,
Traditions of Montanus, Marcion, Maniches, Valentinian, Ebion, Ap^lles, and
such like heretics; and so diverse have added diuersely unto the Word of God
their own words and traditions; whereas the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Ye shall not add unto the Word which I command you; Revel. 22.1^.
for if any man adds unto these things, God shall add vnhim the plagues that
are written in this book. Notwithstanding as the ancient heretics have dealt
impiously with the Scripture by their additions and traditions, as also by
their substration and detraction; so do the modern heretics, namely, the
Papists, deal with the Scripture, detracting from it, and adding to it; for as
Saint Hyeron. apolog. contra Ruff. c. 11. Istae machinae haereticorum. i.
magistrorem tuorum sunt vt conuicti de prefidia ad maledictase conferunt.
Jerome says, this is the practice of heretics, that when they are convinced
of trachery, they betake themselves to railing; so these wranglers perceiving
themselves convinced by the Scripture, do as they of whom Jrenae. lib. 3. c. 2.
Irenaeus speaks. set upon the Scripture it self, taxing it of ambiguitie,
and as having no authority, intending, as Saint August. lib. 2. de nuptijs and
concupisc. c. 33. Turrianus lib. 1. cont. sadeel page 99. Ekcius in Enchir.
loco. commun. Pighius lib. 1. Eccles. histor. c. 2. Mortuum atramentum,
Euangelium nigrum, theologia atrameniraria. Res nauimis and muta, nasus cereus,
regula lesbia, Delphicus gladius. O Quantum n^bis profuit fabula ista de
Christo?
Austin says no other thing, then to bring the authority of the Scripture to
naught; therefore they called the Scripture dead ink, a certain bare letter,
a dead letter that kills, the black Gospel, and inkie Diuintie, a dead and
dumb thing, an uncertain mutable mute and dumb Judge, a nose of wax, a
leaden ruler, Sphinxes riddle, a sword in a mad-mans hand, the apple of
discord, yea, a Fable by Pope Leo the 10, O what advantage has this Fable of
Christ brought us? being of no more credit and authority then the Fables of
Aesop, without the approbation of the Pope and of the Church. And these
reproaches and blasphemies are not maintained by the vulgar ^ort only, but also
yea especially by their Divines, Popes, Bishops, Cardinals; for Cardinal
Bellarmine, and Cardinal du Perron have written against the sufficiency and
perfection of the Scripture, the one spending a whole Chapter, the other a
small Treatise to prove the insufficiency and imperfection thereof; whereas it
is the All sufficient word of God, the true and perfect rule of our
understanding, the pillar of our faith, the firm and sure anchor of our hope
and salvation, sufficient both for our salvation (which some Papists do
confess) and for our instruction, which they deny; witness B^^^^, who
examining that glorious Martyr Master Hawks, F^x page 1440. page 1441.
said, that he was a right Scripture man, and would have nothing but Scripture,
and his Chaplain said, he would have nothing but his little pretty Gods Book;
and is it not sufficient, says Master Hawks for my salvation? Yes, says he,
it is sufficient for our salvation, but not for our instruction. Master Hawks
answered, God send me the salvation, and you the instruction. And surely it is
sufficient not only for our salvation, but also for our instruction, for if it
suffices for salvation, how can it be insufficient for our instruction?
therefore the Apostle Saint Paul teaches us both the one and the other,
salvation and instruction by the Scriptures; for first he says, 2. Tim. 3.15.
the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Behold here, the Scriptures are sufficient for our
salvation; and not only for our salvation, but also for our instruction, for
he says, able to make us wise unto salvation, that is, to instruct us to
salvation, yea, in the next verse he says, that the verse. 16.17.
Scripture is profitable for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect. Behold, the Scriptures sufficient and profitable for our
instruction; and not only profitable to the man of God, to the Doctor, the
Minister, and the learned; but also profitable to the ignorant, simple, and
vulgar sort; for Psalm. ^9.7.
it makes wise the simple; and therefore the reading thereof appertains as
well unto the ignorant and unlearned, as unto the learned: for if it appertain
but unto the learned to read the Scriptures, it appertains then unto none to
read them; for no body is learned before he have read them; we read not the
word of God because we are learned, but to become so. And therefore the Papists
do wrong the people of God, depriving them of the reading of the Scripture,
lest, say Hosius in loc. Com.
they, the Porters, Cobblers, Bakers should be Prophets, far unlike to Moses,
Numb. 11.29.
who wished, that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would
put his Spirit upon them: but very like the B^silidians, whose steps they
follow, who (as Jrenae. lib. 1. cap. 23. Ephiph. haeres. 24
Irenaeus and Epiphanius write) did hide their doctrines; We are men, said
Basilides, all the rest are hoggs and dogs; Matthew. 7.6.
Cast not therefore (said he) your pearls before swine, nor give that which is
holy unto dogs: which was to confess openly, Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 65. At
istud aperte fa^eri est se non esse de ecclesia, qui onmes qui de ecclesia sunt
canes censet and porcos.
that he himself was not of the Church, calling all those that are of the
Church swine and dogs. Yea, in hindering the people of God to enter into this
sweet Paradise of holy Scripture; they are like the Scribes and Pharisees
their forefathers, against who^ our Savior Christ pronounces this woe, Matthew.
23.13
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdom of
heaven against men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in. Besides, as they have detracted from the Scripture
by their blasphemous reproaches, accusing it of insufficiency and imperfection,
so have they also added unto it. Cicero orat. 44. in Anton. Philip. secunda. Is
Caesaris leges easque praeclares euertie.
For as Marcus Antonius did abolish the excellent Laws of Caesar, Testamentum
irritu^ fecit. Ibid.
and made void his Testament, Ibid. Acta Caesaris pacis causa confirmata (...)
a senatu, qu^^ quidem Caesar egisset, non e^ quae Caesarem egisse dixisset
Antonius, etc.
yea, when the Senate had ratified the Acts of Casar, he added to Caesar's
Acts what he listed, and would have it to stand as sure, as if Caesar
himself had enacted it. So these have endeavored to abolish the Law of God, to
make void the Testament of our only Caesar and Savior Christ, and have added
to his Testament what they listed, and will have them to stand as sure, as if
Christ had enacted them (yet they would make us believe, that they do Ibid. Et
tu in Caesaris memoria diligens, tu illum amas mortuum.
much in remembrance and honor of Christ, and that they love him): for first,
they add unto the Canonical books of the Scripture, other books that are not
Canonical, but Apocrypha, because they find in those books many things to
serve their turns, for the maintaining of their heresies, which they cannot
shide at all in the Canon of the Scripture. Secondly, because this is not
sufficient, they add their traditions and determinations; yea, their gospels,
whereas all addition of Gospels to the only true Gospel is execrable. Some, as
the begging Friars, disciples of Saint Dominick and Saint Francis, invented and
published forth a book full of horrible blasphemies, which they named, the
Gosp^ll of the holy Ghost, or, the everlasting Gospel, full of their own
^ables and abominable errors, teaching that Christ's Gospel was not to be
compared unto it, and that the Gospel of Christ should be preached but ^^^^ie
years; so they opposed the Gospel of their holy Ghost, to the true Gospel of
the holy Ghost; their eternal Gospel (...) that Gospel, which is called
(...). 14.6.
the everlasting Gospel, to be pr^^ched unto them that dwell^^ the earth and
to every N^^ion, and kindred, and tongu^, and ^^ple, and that even unto the
end of the world; wh^^^^ their gospel was of the Devil that impure spirit,
and was not an everlasting Gospel, but was soon refuted by Guili^^^^^ de ^^^ct^
Am^re, condemned by the Pope, and secretly burnt. Others call the Determination
of the Church the Gospel, some ^^^^taining, that the Popes Decr^^all Episties
are to be counted among the Canonical books, and made equal with the
Scripture. Some making their humane ordinances equal with the Scripture in
authority. Others p^^^e^^ing them before it, and maintaining, that the
authority of Eccles^^sticall tradition has more force and ^ffic^cie to assure
^ur faith in all c^^^trouersies then the Scripture. Thus the hereti^^es in
Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 2. Non p^ssi^ ex hijs i^^euiri verit^^ qui ^esci^^^
traditiane^. N^^ ^^im per literas tra. (...) sed per (...) vocem.
Ire^^^^s time maintained, that the truth could not be found in the Scripture,
by such as were ignorant of tradition, and the great mysteries of faith were
no^ by the Apostles committed to his Disciples, but by word of mouth, and not
by writing. Epiph. here is. 48 August haeres. 26
Moutan^^ confessed, that he admitted all the Scripture, yet he seined over
and besides, that the Comforter was come, to perfect, that which was but
begun; and so did add unto the doctrine of the old and new Testament
cer^aine other observations of his pretended Paracler, which might be such an
holy Ghost as Ep^ph. here is 2^
that of Simon Mag^^ was, or such a one as was, carried in post in a
cloke-bagge from Rome to Trent. The Heretics Ter^^^. de ^^ret^. 50. N^^^^
heres^^^^ Alphab^^^ Gr^^^rum comp^s^^runt. etc.
Marcus and C^l^barsu^, did (...) new heresy out of the Greek Alphabet,
maintaining that the truth could not be found out without these characters;
and that the fullness and perfection of (...) w^^ contained in these letters;
for which cause Christ said, I am (...), and (...). The Heretics, (...),
Apelles, Mare^^^, ^^thsuch like, did boast, that they had received many
doctrines and (...) without scripture. Eusebius. bist. lib. 5. c. 28.
Eusebius ^els us, that the Heretic A^^^m^^ did beast, that his doctrine was
(...) from the Apostolic (...). Clem. Alex. (...). lib. 7.
(...) did glory in that he had a certain Glaucus for his teacher, who had
served as an interpretor to S. Peter; that Valentine did vaunt to have been
Saint Paul's auditor; that the Marcionites did brag that they were the disciples
of them that had seen and heard the Apostle Matthias, of whom they held,
observed, and teached their doctrine. In a word, as the Scribes and Pharisees
esteemed the traditions of the Elders, the R^bbines their Cabala, the
Moutanists the new Comforter; these Heretics their revelations and traditions
to be necessary to salvation, without the which the truth could not be learned
out of the Scripture. So the Papists do maintain, that the sacred and
Canonical Scripture is not sufficient to prove matters of faith and charity,
and therefore have recourse unto traditions and the unwritten word, which are
necessary to salvation. But as the holy Fathers did accuse, and that justly,
Samosate^us, Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 30.
because that departing from the Canonical books, he had been author of an
heretical doctrine, and had not followed the Apostolic doctrine. Even so may
we accuse the Papists, who have corrupted the word of God by their traditions
and fables, and straying from the Scripture, have strayed from the truth. And
surely it is no marvel if they err, so long as they forsake the sea-man^
compass, without the which all things are to us uncertain: yea rather it were
a wonder, yea more then a wonder, if without that compass they could hold
their course, and not suffer ship wrack against the rocks, the sands, and the
unknown shores of humane traditions. For as Plutar. in vita Thesei, in princip.
Plutarke says, The Histriographers which do set ^oo^th the description of
the earth in figure, are wont to place in the lowermost part of their mappes
the far distant region^ unknown unto them, and to mark in the margent such
like notes and reasons as these; beyond these countries are nothing but deep
dry sands without water, full of soul ill favored venomous beasts, or much
mud vnnauigable; or Scythia forsaken for cold. Even so say we; The Scripture
is a map, containing a description of the place of our soiourning here in this
vale of misery, of our journey to our heavenly Jerusalem, containing all thing
necessary for us in this our pilgrimage, both for our instruction and
salvation. Beyond the Scripture, and without the map there of, as in the
lowermost parts and borders of mappes, there is nothing but ^^rra incognita,
unknown land, and dry de^^res, full of bars sands of humane traditions;
nothing but stinking pooles, full of venomous and cruel beasts: that is to
say, of false opinions, and detestable heresies; nothing but unknown and
doubtful ways, the mother of all kind of errors. Beyond this Scripture, there
is nothing but scriptura incognita, the unknown and unwritten word and
traditions, dangerous gulphes and whirle-pooles, where the anchor of our faith
can have no hold, where all our sounding plummets are found too short, and
where we must of necessity make shipwreck of our faith; and therefore we
keep our selves within the m^ppe and comp^sse of the Scripture, the sea-mans
compass the rule of our sobriety, the bridle of our discourse, the limit of
our faith for our safety, lest we should be tossed and cast upon some
unknown coasts, and so perish, August. Hypognost. articul. 6. Sede in portu
fidei catholicae, vbi te nu^^a possit fluctuosae curi^sitatis tempestas turbare
vel mergere.
we rest our selves in the haven of the Catholic faith, where no tempest of
troublesome ^^^^sity, (...) either trouble or drown us. If then they ask us,
why we retain not their doctrine, their determinations, decrees, Councels, and
traditions; we answer, that we receive them not, because they are not
described nor contained in the map of the holy Scripture: if they accuse us
Matthew. 15.2.3 Mark 7.5.7.
as the Pharisees and Scribes did the Disciples of Christ, because we walk
not according to the traditions, of the Elders, but transgress them; we will
answer them with Christ; Why do you also transgress the commandment of God
by your tradition? In vain do ye worship God, teaching for doctrine the
commandments of men. If they reprove us because we Fox. page 1441 Boner.
will have no more then Scripture teaches; but even as Christ has left it
bare we will answer: Thomas Hawks.
He that teaches us otherwise, we will not believe him. If they call us
Hertickes, we will confess with Saint Paul, that Act. 24.14.
after the way which they call here^ie, so worship we the God of our fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, Nay, they
themsel^es are Heretics, because they do not believe all the things that are
written in the Law and the Prophets, Fulke against the Rhemists. Tit. 3.10.
but do obstinately defend grievous errors, against the manifest authority of
the holy Scriptures, and detract from them, and add unto them, teaching
another doctrine, another Gospel, and therefore are accursed: for it Gal. 1.8.
any man preach another Gospel unto you then that which you have received, let
him be accursed. And, Revel. 22.18.19.
if any man add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book. If any man shall take away from the words of this
book, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the
holy City, and from the things which are written in this book.

But the Romanists do not only detract from Scripture and add unto it, but
they pervert it also by their false gloss, and irregular expositions, which
they 2. Pet. 3.16.
wrest unto their own destruction, as S. Peter says; witness the point of
Euangelical Counsels, which they display, to set forth their works of
supererogation, the supererogation of their works, placing them above the
perfection of the Law, the Law of perfection; though some of them deny any
perfection in them, and maintain that they do avail but instrumentally,
accidentally and secondarily to perfection, whereas Thom. Aquin. 22. ae.
Articul. 5.
perfection does consist esentially in precepts, and that precepts do avail
primarily and essentially to perfection. And although the beginning, the
author, the counselor, the name, and the definition of Evangelical Counsels
are not to be found in the Scripture, yet they would make us believe, that
these things are there to be found, though they vary in regard of the Author
thereof. For Antoninus Archbishop of Florence makes Saint Dominick a Spaniard
the first inuentor of Evangelical Counsels, and describes not only Saint
Dominicks conformity with Christ, in his birth, in his miracles, in his
authority and power (therefore was he called Dominicus) and his visions which
he saw stuffed full with fond lies, and impious fables of horrible blasphemies:
but he tells us also over and besides, strange things of him before he was
borne; for Antoninus histor. part. 3^. titul. 23. c. 1. 1. Sed apertius
pronunciatus fuit and declaratus particularius in pictura quadam, quae reperta
est in ecclesia Sancti Marci Venetiae; vbi antequam Dominicus nasceretur in
mundo, imagines duorum dopictae cernebantur a cunctis, quarum vna erat admodum
religiosi in habitu ordinis praedicatorum cum lilio in manu, alter a similitud
nem habebat Apostoli Pauli, pro^^ pingi consneuit, super quam scriptum erat
agios Paulus, id est sanctus, sub figura vero ad pedes sic, per istum itur ad
Christum. Super figuram alteram scriptum erat, Agios Dominicus, sub istovero
Facilius itur per istum nec mireris de scriptura huiusmodi; quia doctrina
Pauli, ficut and caelerorum Apostolorum erat doctrina inducens ad fi^^em and
obseruantiam praeceptorum. Doctrina Dominici ad obseruantiam consiliorum, and
ideo facilius per ipsam itur ad Christum.
he was more manifestly declared, and particularly described by a certain
picture which was ^ound in ye Church of S. Mark as Voni^^, where before Saint
Dominicke was borue the images of two men were seen of all men, whereof the
one did represent a man very religious in the habit of the order of the
Preaching bretheen, with a Lilly in his hand; the other had the resemblance of
the Apostle Paul, as he is usually pou^^raied, on the which was written, Sai^^
Paul, and this underneath, By this man may ye come to Christ; upon the other
image was written S. Dominick, and underneath, But by this you may come ^^sier;
neither must you marvel at this, says Antonius; for Saint Paul's doctrine, as
of all the other Apostles, led but to faith, and the keeping of the
Commandments: but Saint Dominicks doctrine should lead men to the observing
of Evangelical Counsels, and therefore the easier way to come to Christ by
him. O intolerable blasphemy! But some go higher, and make the Apostles
inuentors, professors, obseruers, yea, and Counselors of Evangelical
Counsels, and so reject the former opinion, which makes the Apostles to be
leaders but to faith, and the keeping of the Commandments, and not of
Counsels. Surely the Apostles were no obseruan^ins of Evangelical Counsels,
they never begd, but labored with their hands, and the greatest part of them
were married. Indeed there was an error of those, that called themselves
Epiphanius haeres. 61. August. haeres. 40
Apostolici, as imitators of the Apostles, and termed themselves Aporactici,
because they renounced their wives and goods, dwelling only in Cilicia and
Phrygia, being the offspring of the Tatian and Eucratian heretics, who made
the observation of these things necessary, affirming that none could be saved,
that lived not single and in pouerue as the Apostles did, and rejecting those
that did it not. Such Apostolici there were, but no such Apostles. But some go
a strain higher, and make our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, not only a
Commander, or rather Counselor, but also a chief obseruer of Evangelical
Counsels. But Isa. 40.13.
who has been his Counselor? who has taught and instructed him? Isa. 9.6.
who is the Wouderfull, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father? To
what end should he have practiced Counsels? what, either to show any
imperfection of the Law by any new edition, or addition to that Law which is
most perfect, or else to ^^^it an higher degree of glory in heaven? surely
neither; and therefore Christ's example is unfitly alle^ged for the practice of
Evangelical Counsels, which he never practiced. Secondly, they err in the
baptizing of heir Counsels, naming the^ Evangelical: for they say, these
Counsels are of the Law, which they divide into precepts and Counsels, and so
parts thereof, and secondly, they say the Eunuchs, Isa. 56. were obseruers of
Evangelical Counsels under the Law. Thirdly, they recommend nothing but works;
now all works are of the Law, and if of the Law, they then are precepts, not
Counsels. If then they are of the Law, they should be called Law-Counsels; and
if Legal, then not Evangelical, because of the maine difference of the Law
and the Gospel. But as they are not Evangelical, nor of the Gospel, so are
they not Legal, nor of the Law, according to their own position and rule,
because they say, they are Evangelical; and therefore cannot be of the Law, by
reason of the difference above mentioned. Secondly, the Law, first, comm^unds
always, and never counsels. Secondly, it binds men to the observation
thereof. And thirdly all men. Fourthly, it threatens punishment. Now Counsels,
say they, first, command not, but counsel only. Secondly, they are
arbitrarie. Thirdly, they are not for all men, but only for some men.
Fourthly, they threaten no punishment; and therefore Counsels cann^^ be of the
Law by their own rule. Thirdly, they err in the difference which they put
between Precepts and Counsels, first, that a Counsel is kept with greater
difficulty then a precept, which is false; for it is harder to love his
enemy, which is a Precept of perfection, then to give all his goods to the
poor, which is a Counsel of perfection. Secondly, Counsels are arbitrary,
which is also false, for Iunius in Bellarm. 1172. Consilium diuinum infert
necessitatem, humanum minime.
Humane Counsels are arbitrarie, Di^ine necessary, as those Counsels are; nay,
humane Counsels are not arbitrary, but necessary; if they be the Counsels of
a superior to an in^^^iour, as of a father to his son, of a Master to his
servant, of a King to his subject, they are as much as a comm^ond; how much
more are the Counsels of the ^re^^or to his creature, the King of Kings to his
servants, of God to man? whose Counsels are his will his will is his Law and
Commandments, and therefore necessary. Thirdly, a Counsel not observed, has
no punishment; yes it has. Pr^u. 1.26.27 28.30.
Because ye have set at naught all my Counsel, I will laugh at your calamity,
etc. wh^^^ your destruction comes, then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer. They would none of my Counsel; therefore shall they eat of the
fruit of their own way. Psalm. 107.11.
Because they contemned the Counsel of the most High, therefore he brought
down their hears with labor, they fell down, Bernard. super Cant. sermon. 65.
Euangelium appellasti? ad Euangelium ibis.
and there was none to help. Counsels therefore not observed have punishment.
Lastly, they appeal unto the Scripture for their pretended Evangelical
Counsels: unto the Scripture they shall go, which is not for them, but against
them: for that of Saint Paul, 1. Cor 7. is not Counsel, but his advice and
judgment, and his judgment is a Commandment; yea, admit it were a Counsel,
it is a Counsel of the holy Ghost, and therefore a Commandment; and it is
marvel that they allege Saint Paul as a Counselor of Evangelical Counsels,
seeing that Antonius makes him but a Teacher of Faith, and of the Law, as we
have seen. And Christ's Counsels to the young man, Matthew. 19. and to the Church
of Laodicea, Revel. 3. were no Evangelical Counsels: for be^ides that, that of
Saint Matthew is called a Precept by August. in epist. 89. quaest. 4.
Saint Austin and many more, yea, a general precept by Guiliel^^s de S. Amore,
and that a man may observe that Counsel of giving all to the poor, and yet
have no reward, and so no Counsel: for 1. Cor. 13.3.
if a ^^^gine all to the poor, and (...) no lour, i^ pro^ireth him nothing:
both of them are the Counsels of Christ, God and Man, and therefore
Commandments, both of them necessary, and not arbitiary, both of them not
observed threaten punishment; for the one was excluded out of the King dome of
heaven, the others were spued out of Christ's mouth, for not observing his
Counsel, even by the Papists confession. We say therefore, that these places
will not serve their tu^^e for their pretended Counsels, and the distinction
between the Precept of God, and the Counsel of God is frivolous and improper
according to their sense and meaning. Indeed there may be a verbal and
nominall distinction of the Counsels and precepts of God, but there can be no
real distinction of them: Precepts are Counsels, and Counsels are Precepts, at
least particular precepts, given to some in particular for some time, and some
circumstance, for so Saint Austin, with some of the Fathers, yea, and Schoolmen
and Papists too, call Counsels particular Precepts; and therefore Pope Nicolas
the sixth confesses, Decret. lib. 5. tit. 12. cap. 3. Nonnulla Consilia
Euangelica sub verbo and prohibitione praecepti.
that there are some Evangelical Counsels expressed under the term and
prohibition of Precepts.

But this point of Evangelical Counsels with that of the Scripture, is more
largely handled in this first Volume of Jacobs Vow, the basis and ground of the
ensuing volumes (the second beginning with the Treatise of Vows, which shall
come forth God willing, as soon as time and leisure will permit) which first
Volume I have translated, because I found the matter and subject thereof
learnedly handled, and very necessary, not only for those that are without,
but also for those that are among us, who may see in this Treatise as in a
glass, the errors of the Church of Rome in the points of the Scripture and
Evangelical Counsels, with the refutation thereof. I always liked that
sentence of an ancient Father; It is, says he, an act of modesty, not to
advance your own inventions, but to declare that which you have received of
those that have gone before you; therefore I never made vow, that I would not
put my hand to any Translation or Paraphrase, as Du Bartas did, which he did
not long observe, for he translated that royal and divine The Lepanto.
Po^m of our dread Sovereign, as he himself confesses in the Preface thereof:
but have had a desire to translate this book, following therein the president
and example of great men, Divines, Knights, Lords, Ladies, yea, and Princes too
that have done the like.

The reason which has moved me (dear Brethren) to shroud this translation of
mine under your names, is, because ye are both unto me, brethren of race, of
place, and of grace, which contains more then can be expressed, and is
enough, yea, more then enough, to move me to dedicate this book unto you; and
therefore as God has joined you both together in one of the nearest societies
that can be, so have I joined you both together in this Dedication. For, as
Hieron. ad Chromat. Non debet charta diuidere, quos amor mutuns copulauit.
Hierome says, this paper must not separate you, whom mutual love, yea,
brotherhood has combined together, whose life, love, and affection, as Saint
Ambrose speaks, Ambros. in obit. Fratris sui satyri indiuiduus spiritus
indiuiduus affectus.
are vnseparated, and inseperable; so that as you enjoy a certain communion
among your selves, so here you shall not have a division. Accept then this
small present (which though it be but small, proceeds from no small
affection) as a pledge of my unfeigned and brotherly love, and give to this
stranger thus homely apparrelled in this English habit, and speaking his
English tongue, yet somewhat fearful to set foot in foreign ground, give him
your hand at his first entrance in token of welcome; intertaine him
courteously, and converse with him familiarly, so shall you find in him both
profit and pleasure. Thus commending and recommending him to your kind
acceptance, and you in my prayers to God, I beseech him to perform and finish
that good work which he has begun in you, that so you may proceed on in faith
and godliness, making not your gain godliness, but godliness your gain,
and laying up for your selves treasures in heaven, and that as you are here
combined together in brotherhood by consanguinitie, and in grace, in faith, and
in love, unfeigned one to another by one spirit, and so heirs together of one
promise here on earth; so ye may at last as heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ, possess that spiritual and everlasting inheritance in the
Kingdom of heaven, whose King is the Trinity, whose Law is charity, whose
Measure is eternity.

Amen.
London. April. 30. 1617. Your brother in all Christian

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
WHen I first intended this work, I had no other purpose then to refute a
certain small Treatise of Cardinal Sourdis, Archbishop of Bourdeaux, which he
entitled, THE PASTORAL LETTER, and directed it to all those of his Diocese
of Bourdeaux; pretending to show, that parents have no authority to hinder
their children from following Evangelical Counsels; and children are not bound
to ask their parents leave therein: that is to say, that children may steal
themselves away from their parents, and may become Monks, not only without
their parents consent and will, but also against it. Whereof there was a
notable example in this City of Bourdeaux: Two Virgins, daughters of an
honorable Citizen of the Romish religion, withdrew themselves from the
obedience of their father and mother, to follow a Religion of a new stamp and
edition, called, Of the Vrselines. This fact being found strange of many
learned men, and others of the said Religion; Cardinal Sourdis took upon him
to defend it by writing; and I was requested to undertake the refutation
thereof; which I not being able to refuse, to those that requested of me this
piece of service, I took in hand this work some fourteen months ago. But
I perceived by the prosecution and sequel of this work, that I should labor
in vain, if I refuted not in order all the principal arguments which the
Church of Rome does allege in favor and defense of the Monkish life; which I
have done according to the method, I have here summarily and briefly set down,
beginning first with the holy Scriptures, because the author of the Pastoral
letter begins with that point. My discourse shall be truth, the fountain
thereof shall be charity, the end thereof shall be the glory of God, the
edificatio^ of his Church, the conversion of those that walk in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, to the true light; and the discharge of my conscience,
before God and my Church, to the which I would give an account of my studies;
if she receive any edification thereby, I shall remain fully satisfied.

THE SVMME OF THIS FIRST VOLUME.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of the holy Scripture.
Chap. 1. Of the necessity and sufficiency of the Scriptures. Chap. 2. All men
ought to read the Scriptures. Chap. 3. The Scriptures are perspicuous and
plain to be read of all men. Chap. 4. They are to be read with the same
spirit, wherewith they were written. Chap. 5. 6. 7. What is the authority of
the Fathers in the interpreting of the Scriptures. Chap. 8. Of the Judge of the
sense and meaning of the Scriptures.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of Evangelical Counsels.
Chap. 1. The holy Scripture makes no mention of Counsels, which they term
Evangelical. Chap. 2. They are neither of the Law, nor of the Gospel.

The difference between the Law and the Gospel.

Chap. 3. They are falsely termed Counsels of Perfection.

There is no other perfection then charity, which is commanded to all men.

Chap. 4. The Monks and Friars do speak in vain of keeping Counsels, seeing
there is no man living can keep the Commandments: Not the unregenerate man,
that wants all the conditions required to the doing of a good work. Chap. 5.
Nor the regenerate man, who is imperfect and defective in his most holy
actions. Chap. 6. Which is proved by the examples of the holy men of the old
Testament. Chap. 7. And by them of the new Testament. Chap. 8. Whence all their
sins are mortal in their nature, though venial by grace. Chap. 9. An
answer to the two first objections, concerning that God does promise to
circumcise our hearts, that we should love him with all our heart, and the
testimony given to many, that they have kept the Law, and loved God with all
their heart. Chap. 10. An answer to the third objection, touching those that
are called perfect. Chap. 11. An answer to the fourth objection, accusing God
of cruelty, if he have given an impossible Law. How, and to whom the Law is
possible, and impossible. Chap. 12. Answer to the fifth objection, that Gods
commandments are not grievous. Answer to the sixth objection, whosoever is
borne of God, sins not. Chap. 13. An answer to the 7. objection, that all
Gods works are perfect. An answer to the 8. objection, that we must not do
good works if they be sins: we must do good works, and for what cause. Chap.
14. Four reasons why God does not perfect our regeneration in this life. Chap.
15. An answer to the 56. chapter of Isaias, and to the 3. chapter of the book
of Wisdom, where mention is made of Eunuchs. Chap. 16. An answer to an
objection drawn from the parable of the sower, and the seed, bringing forth
an hundredth, threescore, thirty fold; and to that which the Lord says of
those which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake.
Chap. 17. An exposition of Christ's words, Go, and sell all that thou have.
Chap. 18. An answer to the objection, taken out of 1. Cor. 7. Chap. 19. An
answer to that which the Apostle says, He has preached freely, 1. Cor. 9.
Also to that which is in the Revelation, chap. 14. concerning the 144000
Virgins. Chap. 20. Answer to the example of those that have lived in the state
of Virginity.
The end of the Contents.
AD MONACHOS Admonitio.
HIc discipatis nubibus Sol enitet,
Non iste, lucem corpori qui sufficit,
Sed qui tenebras mentis, illico fugat:
Hic scena fraudum tota, hic mysteria
Reclusa fictae sanctimoniae patent.
Deuota turba belluae teterrimae
Quae vaticani montis incubat iugo,
Exosa coelo, orbigranis, grata inferis,
Procul hinc facesse: Nam tibi certissima
Mors hic paratur: Ista si perlegeris,
D^l^re victa non potes non emori.
JACOBS VOW, OPPOSED TO THE VOWS OF MONKS AND FRIARS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the holy Scriptures.
I. We cannot learn what service is acceptable unto God, but of God himself.
II. God teaches it us within by his holy Spirit, and without by his holy Word.
III. The whole Word of God necessary and sufficient unto salvation, is
comprehended in the holy Scriptures.
WHat Job 36.22.
teacher is like God (said Elihu in his conference with Job)? the same say we
here, where the question is between us of Gods service, of that service which
he approues, and to the which he has annexed a gracious promise of ample
remuneration; who then can better tell us what he is, then he himself? Both we
and they seek for eternal life, and desire to find the way that leads us
unto it; it is God that has given it us, who then shall show us the way of
life, but God? Our Col. 3.3.4.
life is hid with Christ in God; yea, Christ is our life, and John 14.6. and 10
7.
as he is our life, so is he the way of life, the door by the which the
sheep do enter; and there is none other then he, Heb. 10.20.
that has consecrated for us a new and living way through the veil, that is
to say, his flesh. As he has consecrated it, so has he showed it unto us by
his truth: John 17.17.
His word is his truth, and he himself is that truth; John 14.6.
I am (says he) the way, the truth, and the life; no man comes unto the
Father but by me. August. in Joan. tract. 22. Ambulare vis? ego sum via: falli
non vis? ego sum veritas: mori non vis? ego sum vita; hoc dicit saluator tuus,
non est quo cas nisi ad me, non est qu^ eas nisi per me.
Saint Austin to this purpose brings in Christ speaking after this manner, Will thou walk, I am the Way? Will thou not be deceived, I am the Truth? Will thou
not die, I am the Life? thy Savior tells thee this, thou have no other where
to go, then unto me; nor by no other, then by me.

II. Now that we may the better go unto him, who is the Life, and by him who
is the way, and that going by him unto him, we stray not from him; he himself
takes us by the hand, and leads us with his two hands, by the hand of his
Spirit within, and the hand of his holy Word without. For even as we must have
light without, for the chasing away and dispelling of darkness, and also
light in our eyes, and a clear sight, if we mean to travel and soiourne in
this valley of misery, and manage the things of this life, (it being
impossible that the most quick eyed, yea though he had the eyes of an Eagle,
can see in the dark, unless he be outwardly enlightened; or that he that is
blind, and bereaved of his sight, can see the fairest Sunshine day): even so,
if we undergo the way of life, and manage holy and celestial things holily,
and to our salvation, we must be enlightened without, with the Lamp of Gods
words, as David says, Psalm. 119.105.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path; and enlightened
within by the illumination of the holy Spirit, of the which Saint Paul says;
Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, that is to say,
he is not a Christian. For to be a Christian, is to be anointed of the holy
Ghost in some measure; as to be Christ, is to be anointed of the holy Ghost
without measure, as it is written, Psalm. 45.7.
O, God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
And so the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, and in their persons for us all,
that Ephesians. 1.17.18.
The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give us the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, to wit, The eyes of
our understanding being enlightened, that we may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what are the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in his Saints.

III. Now as touching the word, which teaches us how God will be served of
us, and how he will reward, save, and glorify us, we hold, that that word of
God is comprehended in the holy writings of the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists. For eue^ as God in the beginning created the light, which gave
light to the world some certain days without Sun, Moon, or Stars Genesis
1.3.14.
; and afterward created the lights in the Firmament of heaven, into the which
he did infuse and shut up that light, which has not since been imparted unto
the world but by those two great Lights: Even so God in the beginning governed
the celestial world (which is his Church), and did enlighten it by his holy
word, one and simple, without any Scripture: but since he has clothed and
adorned her with the Scriptures, and has lodgd and harbored her, as it were
in a fair Pauillion and Tabernacle, in the divine and holy books, which he
himself has composed by the hands of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles,
August. de consens. Evangelist. li. 2. cap. vlt.
who when they have written the things that God has showed them and related,
we must not say that he himself has not written them, for he has commanded
them to write as it were with his own hands, all that he would have us to
read, both in his words and works, which they have so faithfully and
perfectly performed, that we may confidently affirm, Idem de doctrina Christi
li. 2. ca. 9. In ijs quae aperte in scripturis posita sunt, inueniuntur illa
omnia quae continent fidem moresque viuendi.
that all things appertaining to faith, and the rule of life, are plainly
expressed in the Scriptures. Art thou an idiot and simple? let not the depth
and height of them affright thee, Psalm. 19.7.
The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple? Art thou wise? do
not despise them: for Prou. 1.5.
A wise man will hear, and will increase learning, and a man of understanding
shall attain unto wise counsels. Art thou pensive and grieved with the feeling
of thy sins, and by the apprehension of Gods anger? Psalm. 19.8.9.
The Law of God is perfect, converting the soul; the Statutes of the Lord are
right, rejoicing the heart: Romans 15.4.
For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Art
thou blind in Gods matters? Psalm. 19.8.
The Commandment of the Lord is pure inlightning the eyes. Art thou young, and
desire thou to know the direct and ready way to virtue and godliness? Do
thou ask the Lord with David, Psalm. 119 9.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? David will answer thee in the
name of thy God, Psalm. 119 9.
by taking heed thereto according to thy word; and will prove unto thee his
answer by his own example, saying, Psalm. 119.99.100.
I have more understanding then all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my
meditation, I understand more then the Ancients, because I keep thy precepts.
Art thou desirous of the true wisdom, which is to salvation, and of the true
profession, which makes the Man of God, the Evangelist, the Preacher of Gods
word, and so with good reason every Christian to abound in all spiritual
gifts, necessary for thee in thy vocation, in thy conversation, to lead and
bring thee unto faith in Christ, and to instruct thee to live according to
Christ? 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works 2. Cor. 5.2.
. Do thou sigh and groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with thy
house which is from heaven, according to the example of the Saints? John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures (says he that is the Prince of life), for in them ye
think ye have eternal life. It is not an estimation of an humane opinion, but
a firm persuasion of divine certainty and true knowledge, if the Spirit of
truth that cannot lie do not deceive us, when he says, that John 20.31.
These things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the
son of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his name. In a word,
art thou desirous and willing to to know all the Counsel of God touching thy
salvation; Acts 20.27.
I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God (says Saint
Paul to the Pastors of Ephesus, and of Miletus): but we have not heard Saint
Paul (will thou say) as they have heard him? but a little patience, and hear
him making this solemn protestation, Acts 26.22.
witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things, then those which
the Prophets and Moses did say should come, and confessing himself to have
been Romans 1.1.2.
put apart to preach the Gospel of God, which he had promised before by his
Prophets in the holy Scriptures. Think now with thy self, and upon these two
true reasons and arguments of Saint Paul infer and make this true conclusion:
All that which Saint Paul has preached touching salvation, has been written
by Moses and the Prophets; Now that which Saint Paul has preached is the
Gospel, yea, all the Counsel of God; therefore all the Gospel, all the
Counsel of God has been written by Moses, and by the Prophets: and if by
them, how much more by the Evangelists, and by the Apostles, who have written
down the accomplishment, and fulfilling of all those things that the Prophets
had foretold and prophesied of, and that with more perspicuitie and plainenes.
Let us therefore conclude, that the holy Scripture is all true, all necessary,
all perfect in all her parts both essential and integrall, all sufficient for
him that lives in this world, concerning those things that he must believe,
that he must hope for, and that he must do; and in a word, in, and for all
things that are requisite to attain to salvation. And therefore in all matters
of faith and of manners, we must always ask counsel at the mouth of the
Lord, speaking to us at this time in the holy Scriptures by his Son; which
Scripture (says Athan. de interpr. Psalm. Diuina scriptura est magistra vitae
and verae fidei.
Athanasius) is the Schoole-mistres of virtue, and of true faith, Idem cont.
Idol. Sufficient per se sacrae and diuinitus inspiratae scripturae ad veritatis
indicationem.
and so sufficient of it self for the demonstration of the truth, it being
holy and divinely inspired, Idem ad Seraph. solum ex sacris literis condiscas.
that we need study no other thing then that. The Author of the Pastoral
letter has seen it, and being convicted in his soul and conscience, is
constrained to underprop and sustain his pretended counsels on certain places
of the holy Scripture; in the producing and alleging whereof, is happened unto
him that, which wrongfully he charge those withal, who grounded on the Law
of God and of Nature, do cancel and annull the vows made by their children
without their knowledge and approbation; and that which Saint Peter condemns
in those that deprave the Epistles of Saint Paul, saying, 2. Pet. 3.16.
that the unlearned and unstable wrest them, as they do also the other
Scriptures unto their own destruction.

CHAP. II.
I. The Preface of the Pastoral letter forbids the Vulgar the reading of the
Scriptures. II. By the words of the Preface, it is proved, that all ought to
read the Scriptures. III. The same is verified and justified by the
Scriptures. IIII. A refutation of the blasphemy of those, that maintain the
reading of the Scriptures to be dammageable and dangerous.
But before he comes to the point, he makes a preface, in the which he handles
three points; first, to whom it appertains to read the Scriptures. Secondly,
with what spirit they must be read. Thirdly, unto whom the expounding and
interpreting of the Scriptures appertain. And all to this end, that (having
given them to understand and believe, that it is not for all men to read the
Scriptures, and that they must receive the interpretation and sense of the
Scriptures of those, whom he calls Our spiritual Fathers, Pastors and
Doctors); we beware to imitate the courageous men of Berea, who having heard
the preaching of Saint Paul, Acts 17.11.
received the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so: and that so we may live on the faith of
our Curats (as the proverb is), and ground all our belief on the speculations
of men, whereas Saint Paul writes, that Hab. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.12. Heb.
10.38.
the just shall live by his faith; and the same is said to be grounded, and 1.
Cor. 2.5.
to stand not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Notwithstanding,
let us examine his words, and if they are accompanied with reason, let us
follow them, if not, let us shun them, and follow reason.

II. Concerning the first point, Page 4.
he writes, that the Scriptures may be compared to a wedding banquet, they that
will come unto it and enter in, must be called, and those that have not the
wedding garment, who throng and thrust in themselves too impudently, are to be
thrust out and rejected. That which he says touching the wedding garment,
shows that he makes allusion to the banquet of the marriage of the Lamb,
whereof S. Matthew. 22.2. Luke 14.16.
Matthew and Saint Luke make mention: but all were invited and bidden to this
feast, the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind, good and bad.
Now if we apply this similitude and comparison, it will follow, that even as
all were invited to that feast, Jews and Gentiles, poor and rich, the learned
and the ignorant, men and women, great and small; in a word, all are invited
and bidden to the reading of the Scripture, without any exception of quality,
condition, name, calling, sex or age. And again, even as the great King
published, that they that would not come unto his supper were not worthy,
pronounced, that none of those men should taste of his supper, and destroyed
those murderers of his Servants; even so they that refuse to read the
Scriptures, and use spitefully those that do inuit them to the reading of
them, shall never taste of the conlations contained in them, but shall
miserably perish: he that was cast into utter darkness, was not rejected and
thrust out for his entering and coming in, for he was invited and called with
the rest; but he was rejected, because he brought not with him a wedding
garment, according to the Kings words, Mat. 22.12.13
Friend how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? bind him hand
and foot, take him away, and cast him into utter darkness. Lo, how that
which Eliphas said to Job, is happened and befallen unto Cardinal Sourdis,
Archbishop of Bourdeaux; Job 15.6.
Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I, yea, thine own lips testify
against thee. He did not think so, his intention was to maintain their common
opinion, that it is not expedient that all read the Scriptures; Innocentius 3.
did forbid the reading of the Scriptures unto Lay, or Secular men, saying;
Extra, de Haereticis, cap. Cum ex coniuncto ex Antonij Contij restitutione,
Recte fuit in lege diuina statutum vt bestia quae montem tetigerit lapidetur,
vt videlicet simplex aliquis and indoctus praesumat ad subtilitatem sacrae
Scripturae pertingere.
It has been well enacted and decreed in the Divine Law, that the beast which
touched the Mount Sinai should be stoned to death, to the end the simple and
unlearned presume not to attain unto the subtlety of the holy Scripture. So
he compares ignorant Christians to beasts, and although he was not ignorant,
Thomas in Beet. de Trinit.
that arguments may not be drawn from allegories he transformes beasts into
men, and the Exodus 19.24.
mountain of Sinai into the holy Scriptures, which were not then, and
considers not that there the Priests also were forbidden to approach or touch
the mount; which were notwithstanding the guarders and keepers of the
Scriptures: and that Joshua himself durst not approach the mount, Joshua 1.8.
unto whom notwithstanding, the reading and meditation of the holy Scriptures
was expressly commanded. But why is it not expedient to read the Scriptures?

III. Bellar. de verbo dei, lib. 2. cap. 15.. 5.
They were never read (say they) indifferently of all persons: but we find
faithful witness and evidence, yea, of as qualified and great men, who
conformably to the holy Scriptures say the contrary, and do show evidently,
that the Jews did apply and put their children Claud. Espensaeus in 2. ad Tim.
cap. 3. in illa verba and quia ab infantia sacras literas nosti.
to the Bible at the age of five years, and in the teaching of their children,
they gave the first place to the sacred letters, beginning with that, the which
the Jews did observe (ex prisca consuetudine) according to their ancient
custom (says Eusebius) until his time. If we do read the history of the
Jews, we shall find there that God commanding them to write his Law, commanded
the^ also to read the same unto all, without exception of sex, of age, of
condition, saying by Moses to the Priests, Deuteronomy. 31.11.12.13.
Thou shall read this Law before all Israel in their hearing; gather the
people together, men and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within
thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord
your God, and observe to do all the words of this Law; and that their children
which have not known any thing, may hear and learn to fear the Lord your
God. And lest they should reply, that this commandment is given to the Priests
and Leuits to read, and to the people to hear only and to learn it, we
find there over and besides, that the same commandment is given to all: for
thus says the Lord by his servant Moses; Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.8.9.
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when
thou fittest in thine house, and when thou walk abroad by the way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up; and thou shall bind them for a sign
upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, and thou
shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. Deuteronomy. 4.6.
Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding in
the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these Statutes. The like may
we see in Deuteronomy. 15.18.19.20. He that said, Numb. 11.29.
Would God, that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would
put his spirit upon them, did not envy nor grudge at the peoples reading and
understanding of the Scripture, which is the rule of prophecy, and the
powerful instrument by the which God gives his Spirit to his people. In
Christ's time they read the Scriptures indifferently, for Christ says to them,
John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures. In Saint Paul's time they read the Scriptures, for the
Jews of Berea Act. 17.11.
searched the Scriptures daily; and are commended, for that they did examine
the Apostles doctrine by the Scriptures. And Timothy even from 2. Tim. 3.15.
a child knew the holy Scriptures: Aquila and his wife Priscilla (though by
their occupation poor tent-makers) were so skillful in the Scriptures, that
Act. 18.24.26.
Apollos, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, did not disdain to
go to their school, and to learn of them, who expounded unto him the way of
God more perfectly. What, is the condition of Christians impared, and made
worse by Christ? that he has forbidden that, which was not only permitted
but also commanded to the Jews; God forbid! for the promises of the new
Covenant appertains to us; Jer. 31.34.
They shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says
the Lord. All of us then must read the Scriptures, without which Scripture
were cannot attain unto any knowledge of God, neither can we believe in
Christ: John 20.31.
For these things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of God; nor resist the devil, for to resist him, we must take Ephesians.
6.17.
the sword of the Spirit, which is the word God: neither can we be comforted
in our afflictions; Romans 15.4.
for whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: nor
saved, John 5.39.
for in them and by them we have eternal life. In as much as the end of the
Scriptures is to bring and lead us to faith in Christ, that John 20.31.
by believing, we may have life through his name: for this cause Saint Paul
directs and sends his Epistles to the Churches, composed of persons of all
sexes, ages, and conditions, that they might be read of all of them; even as
all read those letters that are directed and addressed unto them, as having
interest to know the co^tents of the^. This is that, that Saint Gregory did
advise the Physician Theoderus, who did neglect and contemn the daily reading
of ye words of his Redeemer; Greg. 1. Theodorice medico indict. 13. lib. 4.
cap. 84. Quid est autem scriptura sacra nisi quadam (...) omnipotentis Dei ad
creaturam suam, etc.
What is the holy Scripture, but a certain letter and epistle of the Almight
is God to his creature? surely (says he) if you were any where, and received
the writings of an earthly Prince, you would not cease, you would not rest, you
would not steep, before that you knew, what this earthly Emperor writes unto
you. The Emperor of heaven, the Lord of Men and of Angels has sent his Patent
to save thy life, and notwithstanding (honored son) thou make no account
to read it with diligence; study therefore, I pray thee, and meditate daily
the words of thy Creator; learn to know Gods heart by Gods words, that you may
the more earnestly sigh after heavenly and eternal things, and that your
understanding may be inflamed with a greater desire of the heavenly Kingdom,
etc. This is according to that, that the Apostle exhorts the Colossians unto;
Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; and that said he
Espencaeus comment. in Tit. ca. 2.
to all the faithful, unto whom he wrote, exhorting them to' have Hieron. in
Col. 3.16.
not only sufficiently, but also plentifully the knowledge of the Scriptures;
and to this end Chrysostom. in Col. 3.16. Occum. ibidem.
to read them, not slightly and negligently, but with great diligence. Hence
we conclude, that the Scriptures were indifferently read of all before Christ's
time, in Christ's time, and in the days of the Apostles; we could prove the
same in the time of the ancient and Primitive Church (many ages after the
Apostles) by the proofs and evidences of the sentences of the Fathers, who did
exhort the Secular, the Laypeople (as they call them), al men and women to buy
the Bible, to read the holy Scriptures; and complain of them, and blame them,
for that they did not read them. And surely with good reason, for it is not of
holy writers, as of a Plato, or an Aristotle, these have written but to a few
persons, those have Espencaeus commint in 2. Tim. cap. 3. Non scripser unt pane
is sed vniners^ popul^.
written to the whole multitude, to all ages, 1. John 2.1, 12, 13, 14.
to young babes, to little children, to young men, to fathers, unto all whom
Saint John writes. What, are we not men, like them? Christians, like them?
Gods children, like them? guided and governed by the holy Ghost, that is to
say, true Christians as well as they? why therefore may not we read the
Scriptures, as well as they?

IIII. For fear (say they) Bellar. deverbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 15. 28. Quid.
lest in stead of profiting, we receive hurt and damage; for we should easily
take occasion of erring, both in regard of the doctrine of faith, as also in
regard of the rule of life and manners; all heresies being sprung up from the
Scripture not well understood: for if the rude and ignorant people should read,
or hear read in the vulgar tongue of David's adultery, Thamars incest, Iudiths
lie, either he would contemn and despise the holy Patriarchs, or else he would
imitate their vices O blasphemy! God has said, that John 20.31.
faith is conceived and engendered by the Scriptures; and men say, that heresies
are engendered by them: God has said, that John 5.39.
in them and by them, we have life eternal; and men say, that by them we have
eternal death: God says, that Romans 15.4.
they have been given us to teach us and to comfort us; and men say, that they
serve to pervert and destroy us: God says, that Deuteronomy. 31.13.
by them we may learn to fear him; and men say, that by them we learn to
offend him: God says, Psalm. 119.9.
a young man shall cleanse his way, by taking heed thereto, according to Gods
word; and men say, that if he take heed to the Scriptures, they will misleade
and pervert him, and make him to become incestuous, an adulterer, a drunkard,
yea, that he is danger to believe nothing, and to become an Atheist: God says,
that 1. Cor. 15.33.
evil communications and speeches corrupt good manners; and men say, that good
words, (the words of God, the words of the everlasting God, Psalm. 12.6.
that are pure words as silver, tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven
times) withdrawes men from godliness, and draws them to vice. And that is the
reason, why they instruct their children in the knowledge of evil discourses
of men; read unto them a Martial, a Catullus, the incests, fornications,
contentions, and all the fables of the false Gods, of whom God has said, Exodus
23.13.
You shall make no mention of the names of other Gods, neither let it be heard
out of thy mouth. And David accordingly to that, Psalm. 16.4.
I will not take up their names into my lips. On the other side, they forbid
them to read the words of God, unto the which God himself has given this
testimony and witness, declaring, that Psalm. 1.2.
Blessed is that man, whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and meditates in
his Law day and night. And concerning that part of the Scripture, which is the
most obscurest, he says, Revel. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy
and keep those things that are written therein. It is not the Scripture, but
the ignorance of ye Scripture that breeds heresies, Hieron in Mat. 22.29.
as Christ says to the Sadd^ces (great heretics) ye do err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the power of God. And Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. in
praesat. ad epist. ad Romans
conformably to this truth of God, says; Innumerable mischiefs are sprung up
from the ignorance of Scriptures: thence comes the great plague of heresies;
thence the dissolute life; thence unprofitable toil and labor: for even as
those that are deprived of this light, cannot go aright; so they that have no
regard unto the reasons of divine Scriptures, are compelled to fall immed^atly
many ways, like them that walk in palpable darkness. There the ignorant
shall find what to learn; the man of little faith, wherewith to stir up
himself to virtue; the sinner, wherewith to call him to repentance; the
thieves shall find there the examples of Gods judgments executed against
Achan; the fornicators affrighted by the example of the Israelites; they which
cover bad things will learn there to mortify their flesh; they see there the
sins of holy men, that they may know that all have sinned, and that they have
been saved by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus; and therefore do not trust
in, and to their own merits by pride, but humbly seek their whole salvation,
through the all perfect merit of Christ Jesus. In a word, the greatest sinners
shall see there David a murderer, and an adulterer, repenting of his sin, and
entreating pardon of the same; the sinful woman weeping, and obtaining mercy;
the thief on the cross, crying to Christ for grace, and Christ answering him,
^^ke 23.43.
Verily I say unto thee, today shall thou be with me in Paradise: that so they
being instructed and taught by these examples, that the Eze^h. 33.1^.
Lord takes no pleasure in the death of a sinner; but that the wicked turn
from his way and live: they turn from their evil ways, and return to God by
a true amendment of life, and so be saved. I should want time, if I would make
a catalogue of all the benefits that Christians obtain by the reading of the
holy Scriptures. If some have thence taken occasion to sow and disperse their
heresies? If others have made a rampire, or fortress, a retraite and place of
refuge for their sins? it has been their fault, the ficklenes and
inconstancy of their brain, their ambition and the malice of their hearts, and
not the fault of the Scripture. And yet they for the most part, yea, almost al
have been of the learned sort, and not ignorant and simple, Alphons. de Castro.
lib. 1. ^eraetic. cap. 13. Pauci fuerunt idiotae heraesiu^ authors.
of whom few have been authors of heresies: but how many thousand millions have
been instructed in the true faith, reformed and saved by the reading of the
Scripture? By them Matthew. 4.4.
Christ refuted the devil and made him fire: thence the Church has always
tooken stones, with the which she has stoned the heretics, that endeavored
to defend themselves by the same Scriptures; the abuse of the wicked not having
the power, to hinder the universality of the Church from using them aright:
for if that we ought to abstain from good things, for the scandal of the
wicked; Christ ought not to have preached, because the people said, John 8.48.
he had the devil, and were often scandalized and offended at his words; and
the Gospel should not be preached, because 2. Cor. 2.16.
it is the savor of death unto death, to them that perish; and to speak of
humane things, we should forbid men the use of wine, because it is the drink
of many drunkards.

CHAP. III.
I. The Scripture is perspicuous and plain to be read of all. II. How we ought
to understand, that there are obscure and difficult things in the Scripture.
III. The perspicuitie and plainness of the Scripture, proo^ed by the Fathers.
IIII. An answer to the first allegorical objection, taken from the Scriptures,
V. Answer to the second allegorical objection taken out of the same
Scriptures. VI. Answer to the words of Saint Hierom, alleged against the
reading of the Scriptures. VII. All ought to read the Scriptures, according to
Saint Hierome. VIII. Which is proved by reason.
But the Bell, de verbo Dei lib. 2 cap. 15. and 16. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Scriptures are so obscure, that the unlearned laymen cannot ^^^erstand them; O
impiety! that Christ, who is the Malacb. 4.2.
Sun of Justice, and John 8.12.
the light of the world, should be accused either of ignorance, for that he
could not speak plainly; or of malice, in that he would not speak so; and
that the witness, which he has given to his word, calling that of the old
Testament Psalm. 119.105.
a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths, 2. Pet. 1.19.
and a light that shiueth in a dark place: and that of the new Testament, the
light of the Church, 2 Cor. 4.3.4.
which is not hid, but to them that are lost, in whom the god of this world
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them, that so the Son of God
should be made so weak and unable, and be so belied by the calumnies of men.
O intolerable blasphemy!

II. Notwithstanding it is true, that there are some very difficult things, and
deep points in the Scripture to understand, as the mystery of the Trinity,
Christ's Incarnation, the Resurrection of the flesh, the last Judgment to come:
but the words by which these points are described in the holy Scripture, are as
plain and perspicuous as the Sun; all the obscurity and darkness is in
men, of whom they that are Ephesians. 5.8.
without Christ, are nothing but darkness; 1. Cor. 2.14.
receive not, and perceive not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can
they know them, because they are spiritually discerned. They that are in
Christ, Ephesians. 5.8.
are light in the Lord, and therefore do comprehend and apprehend them
according to the measure of the enlightening, some more, some less, all but in
part; witness the Apostle writing of himself, and of all like him, 1. Cor.
13.9.
We know in part, and we prophecy in part, and notwithstanding all
sufficiently to salvation.

III. In Mat. cap. 4. and contra Celsum.
The Scriptures (says Origin) are the fountain of Jacob: The learned drink,
as Jacob and his children; and the simple and ignorant also as the cattle of
Jacob. Gegor. 1.
They are (says another) a river, wherein an Elephant may swim, and a Lamb
may wade over. A third says, Isidorus lib. 1. de summo bono. cap. (...).
That the Scripture is like Manna, common to the perfect ones, and to the young
ones, and does accommodat her self to every one, according to the capacity of
every ones understanding and judgment. F^^^gent. Sermon. de confess.
A fourth compares it unto a rich banquet, wherein are meats for all ages:
milk for the sustenance of babes, and strong meat for them that are of full
age; and so speak all the Fathers. Seeing therefore that all are called to the
reading of the Scriptures, as to a great feast, where the rich man has
prepared meats for all ages; surely they that would exclude them, and deprive
them thereof, are mortal enemies of Gods glory, and of man's salvation: unto
whom will sort well the sentence of execration pronounced by David and Paul,
but badly applied by the Author of the Pastoral letter, Psalm. 69.23.24 Romans
11.9.10.
Let their Table become a snare before them and that which should have been for
their welfare, let it become a trap, let their eyes be darkened that they see
not, and make their loins continually to shake, Or rather we may apply that
vow unto them (that is to say the curse) denounced by our Savior Jesus Christ
against their Grandfathers for the like matter: Mat. 23.13.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of
heaven against men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering, to go in.

IIII. The Pastoral letter produces, Page 4.
and brings forth allegories against all this, not having learnt of Thomas in
sum. part. 1. quaest. 1. artic. 10 Omnes sensus fundantur super vnum scilicet,
literale^, ex quo solo potest tra^i argumentum non autem ex his quae secundum
allegoriam dicuntur.
Thomas, who learned of S. Austin, that arguments are only drawn from the
literal sense, and not from that which is said by allegory. It presupposes
that which is true, That we must read the Scriptures with the same spirit they
have been written with all, which is the spirit of charity, a pure spirit, a
clean spirit: but it supposes that which is false, that this spirit is in
none but in those that preach the Gospel, that is, Pastors and Ministers. But
let us see his proofs, It is written in the Scripture, Ascend in montem in
qui Euangelizas, that is to say, Get thee up into the mountain of virtue, thou
that preachest Scripture. The Text Esai. 40.9.
in Isaiah is thus word for word; O Zion that bring good tidings, get thee
up into the holy mountain; O Jerusalem that bring good tidings, lift up thy
voice with strength, lift it up, be not afraid, say unto the Cities of Judah,
behold your God. The Apostles were to receive power from above in the City of
Jerusalem; and from thence were to publish and spread the Gospel in all Judea
and Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. And this is that, which
the Prophet has prophesied of and foretold by this Apostrophe, not to the
preachers of the Gospel, but to Sion and Jerusalem; who was to be honored
with this privilege, according as the same Prophet had more plainly and
perspicuously described, saying; Esaias. 2.2.3.
It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it: for out of Zion shall go
forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. The question is not
here then of any mountain of virtue, but of the City of Jerusalem builded on
mountains, and of the mountain of Sion, which God should lift up on high, and
exalt it above the hills, on that day. The Author of the Pastoral Letter saw
this, and therefore left at the tip of his pen the word Sion, and left it out,
the Text bearing Ascend in montem in qui Euangelizas Sion. But suppose the
Allegory were good, and that the mountain of Sion were the mountain of
virtue. What? shall it not be permitted to any, to get up into the mountain
of virtue, but to those that preach the Gospel? shall all the rest remain in
the valleys of vices? But the Prophet says of all Christians, Esaias 2.3.
Many people shall go and say, come ye and let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord; and David demands, Psalm. 15.1.2
Lord who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? he is answered, He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, etc. And there is no exception, all are
called to it. It was said unto all the Jews by the Prophet Haggai, Haggai. 1.8.
Go up to the mountain, and bring wood and build the house. This mountain
(if we receive the allegory of Saint Hierome) is that of the Scripture; all
of us therefore must go up to it, according to the exhortation, saying, Hier.
in Agg. cap. 1.
Let us go up to this reasonable mountain, and to every problem, seeking fit
wood in the testimonies of the Scriptures; let us cut it, and build therewith
the house of God within us.

V. The second Allegory is taken from the Mount Sinai, Page 5.
unto the which (says he) no beast may approach, that is to say, no carnal
sense and meaning, the people also was not permitted to approach the mountain,
only Moses. Behold their fair and well pregnant speculations: the mountain
that Isaiah speaks of, is that of Sion; that on the which Moses mounted, is
that of Sinai: this in Arabia, that in Canaan; distant the one from the other
in situation, and different in spiritual signification; Heb. 12.18.22
Ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with
fire, nor unto blackness and darkness, etc. but ye are come unto mount
Sion. And our Author of the Pastoral Letter makes one of these two, and
speaks of these two, as if they were but one; that is his first slip and
error, he makes the one and the other the mountain of virtues, and both
together the mountain of Scriptures, as if virtues and Scriptures were one and
the self same thing. The Scriptures do give precepts of virtue, and one must
bring the virtues of a pure spirit and of charity in the reading of the
Scriptures. The Scriptures are in the divine books, the virtues are in our
hearts; therefore the mountain of virtues is not the mountain of Scriptures,
that is his second slip. His third error is, in that he considers not, that the
Scripture was given in the mountain, and brought by Moses to all the people,
who did command him to read it; and therefore the mountain was not the
Scripture: for the people was forbid to come near the mountain, and was
commanded to approach the Scripture, and to read it. He did not consider, that
the mountain of Sinai, was at that present time the throne of the Justice of
God, terrifying the consciences of men by his Law; and therefore forbidding the
people to approach it, under pain of death. And that the Christians freed and
delivered from the terrors of the mountain of Sinai, are come unto the
mountain of Sion, which is the throne of Gods mercy, comforting the
consciences of men by his Gospel. Then speaks he but little to the purpose,
yea, nothing at all of the mountain Sinai, seeing now we Christians know no
other then that of Sion; that is his fourth error, followed with a fifth gross
fault, that he did not mark, that Moses alone went up to the mountain, when
God did dictate his Law, because God had ordained him Gal. 3.19.
a Mediator between him and the people; and would give authority unto his
Ministry, in admitting him by a special privilege to come to the mountain,
which the people might not look at afar off, without great ^eare and
trembling. The words of God are manifest to this purpose; L^^, (says he)
Exodus 19.9.
I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak
to thee, and believe thee for ever. Finally, all his slipps and errors are full
of absurdities and inconveniences: for if they only and alone, ought to read
the Scriptures which do approach the mountain, Moses alone should read them,
because he went up alone. The Exodus 19.24.
Priests ought not then to have read them, for they went not up to the
mountain: and none might read them now adays, because Moses had not an
ordinary Priesthood, to the which any can succeed, Bella. de verb^ Dei. lib.
3. cap. 4.. 2.
as Cardinal Bellarmine confesses; but an extraordinary, ordained specially
by God for the constitution of a new Commonweal and Church of Israel. Why
does Moses therefore Deuteronomy. 31.9, 10, 11.
command the Priests to keep the Scripture, and to read it? And why do the
Popes, the Cardinals and Bishops with the rest of the Roman Clergy, meddle
with the reading of the Scriptures? What, have they gone up to the mountain
with Moses? Have they succeeded Moses? Are they yet ^cere Sinai? Do they not
think, that they are as yet come unto the mountain of Sion, to the heavenly
Jerusalem?

VI. Men's Allegories are uncertain, so are their opinions, when they are not
conformable to the truth and certainty of the Scriptures. For man's reason
cannot be a principle of that faith that I must have in God: and
notwithstanding this man destitute of places of Scripture, has imagined and
presumed to dis^wade us, and withdraw us from the reading of that Epistle, that
God has sent and directed to us, by (I know not what) most impertinent
allegories out of the fabric^e of Pope Innocent; and being uncertain of the
good success of them, he strengthens them with a sentence of Saint Hiero^^, a
man, I hope, and not an Angel, not an Apostle, not such a one, in whose
writings there may, or cannot be nothing omitted or desired; and therefore not
such a one, as whose writings ought to give law to the Church, concerning what
she ought to do and eschew. This we say, to testify, that the holy Scripture
does only bind the consciences of the faithful, who are the servants,
members, brethren of Christ; and redeemed of him, and not of men, not by men.
Besides, we fear not S. Hieroms words, that are contrary to the intention of
the Author that cites the place: Hieron. in epist. ad Paulinum.
No men (says he) presume in any occupation to teach that, which they never
learned; the Artificer meddleth with his own Trade; the Physician with his
own Science: only the art of Scripture is that which every man challenges;
this, the chatting old wife, this the doting old man, this the brabbling
Sophister, this on every hand men presume to teach, before they learn it. A
complaint surely that serves for us; for by it we learn, that in Saint Hieroms
time, all did handle and read the Scriptures, the which he condemns not; but
reproues only the saucines and boldness of those, which presumed to teach,
before they had learned them, Docent (says he) antequam discant: for we have
heretofore seen, Hieron. in Coloss. 3.
that he approues Laymen should have the knowledge and understanding of the
Scriptures not only sufficiently, but also plenteously. And we may see by one
sentence amongst an hundred, which we will here set down in counterchange of
his sentence, that he recommend^ the study of holy Scriptures to women also.

VII. For thus he exhorts Laeta, a holy woman, to bring up and instruct her
daughter in the reading of the holy Scripture, Idem ad Laetam.
That first of all she anow and approve of the Psalter, and withdraw her self
by those Canticles; that she be instructed to live in the Proverbs of Solomon;
that in the Ecclesiastes she enures her self to defy the world, and trample
it under her feet; That she follow the examples of virtue and patience in
Job, that from thence she pass and go to the Evangelists, and never let them
part from her hands; that with all her heart and desire she drink of the Acts
of the Apostles, and the Epistles; and when she has enriched the collar of her
soul with these ^rname^ts, and decked it with these riches, let her coune the
Prophets, and learn without book the five books of Moses, the books of the
Kings and the Chronicles, the volumes of Esaras and of Ester; and at last she
may learn without danger the Canticle of Canticles; and let her abstain from
all Apocriphall books. He that gave this counsel to a maid, did not
contradict himself, in making a complaint against those that follow it; he
blames only the ignorant, that made a trade to teach that which they did not
know. The like complaint would he make if he lived in these days, in the which
the ignorance of Cardinals, Bishops, and Curats, that make profession to teach
the holy Scriptures, the which they never learnt; their ignorance, I say, is so
great, that the Jesuits have been absolutely necessary to supply this want
and defection, even by the proper confession of the Author of the Pastoral
Letter.

VIII. Unjustly therefore does he complain, Page 39. Page 6.
that there is none, but that speaks freely of the points of Religion, of
Precepts and Evangelical Counsels, etc. For if every Artificer speaks without
blame of his Trade (as Saint Hierome has said heretofore) who can blame the
Christian speaking of his? The Trade of a Christian, is a Religion pure and
sporlesse; his vocation is to obey the precepts of his God, to follow the
counsels of his Savior: What ill does the religious, to speak of his
Religion? to make inquiry of it? to learn it, to the end he may the better
practice it? does the servant offend, that ponders diligently his Masters
commandments, to put them in execution? and the Christian, can he exercise
himself better, then in a diligent search, and serious inquisition of the
Counsels of Christ Jesus, his Head and Lord, to conform himself to them? And
is it not said in the Pastoral letter, Page 6.
that all the Scripture is given of God for our instruction? and what is that
to say, I pray you, but that we must read it, meditate it, turn over and
over the leaves of that book, speak of it day and night, at all times, in all
places, amongst all sort of persons? All, what is given of God for our
instruction, ought to be read of us, and we ought to speak of it incessantly;
all the Scripture has been given us by God for our instruction (says the
Author of the Pastoral letter after Saint Paul); all the Scripture therefore
ought to be read of every one of us. This is a very peremptory reason, and
therefore we may well change the complaint, and grieve and moan with anguish
of mind, that they have taken the use and reading of the Scripture from the
people; that amongst them, of whom they complain, there are few or none that
read the Scripture, that know, why the Son of God became Man, what is the
virtue of his death, and the efficacy of his resurrection: contrariwise, there
are an infinite number of those that believe ^ables, forged and devised
artificially, to be Gospel; and that go out of this world, ere they have
learnt why God did place them in it.

IX. Good Chrysostom exhorted in his days all Christians to read the
Scriptures, and did blame those that did not read them, and did exclame
against them; Chrysostom. hom. 16. in Joan. Turpe est si quilibet artifex
artissuae rationem reddere posset; Christianus autem suae professionis non
posset.
O what a shame is it! that every Artificer can render a reason of his Trade;
and that the Christian can give no reason of his profession? and now the Romish
Bishops exhorts them to leave the Scriptures, and complains of those that
read and speak of them. Let them defend them, and forbid them with
threatenings, I will not fear what man can do to me; but knowing that the word
of God is of such virtue, Psalm. 119.130
that the entrance of his words gives light, and gives understanding unto the
simple, I will love it, I will put it close to my heart, I will take in it all
my delight and pastime; his words shall be folks of my counsel, I will
always adhere and stick fast unto them, that I may say in good conscience
unto my God with David, Psalm. 119.97.
O how love I thy Law, it is my meditation all the day!

CHAP. IIII.
I. The Scripture is to be read with the same Spirit, wherewith it was written.
II. The proofs, which the Pastoral Letter alleges, are nothing to the
purpose. III. The Philosophers justly blamed by Saint Hierome, for that they
did frame and apply the places of Scripture unto their sense and opinions.
IIII. This blame pertaines and belongs unto the Author of the Pastoral Letter.
V. Two true reasons, why the Scriptures cannot be understood, but by the same
Spirit they have been indicted with. VI. The Spirit of God is in the Church in
general, and in every member of the same, according to the measure of the gift
and grace of Christ.
SAint Peter speaking of the writings of the Prophets, says, that the 2. Pet.
1.21.
prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy (...) of God
spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Out of these words of Saint Peter,
the Author of the Pastoral Letter inferres, that we must read the Scriptures
with the same spirit, that they were written by, which is the Spirit of
charity, a pure Spirit, a clean Spirit; we add to this, that John 15.16.
he is the Spirit of truth, and so we say Amen to this doctrine.

II. But not to the proofs thereof that are allegorical, or false, or
corrupted and perverted. That which is said of the commandment given unto him
that preaches the Gospel, that he should g^^ up to the mountain of virtue,
is allegorical and repugning to the sense of the Scriptures. In like manner
that which is added, that no beast way approach unto this mountain, that is to
say, no carnal sense or meaning, and that have we seen in the Chapter going
before. The second proof taken from Genes. 6.3.
that of Genesis is false; God says there, My Spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he is also flesh: and the meaning is, that God will no
longer bear with the malice of men, because they are nothing but flesh, that
is to say, finne and corruption, but he will destroy them from the face of the
earth, if they repent not in the space of an hundred and twenty years. Here
is therefore no question of the abode of Gods Spirit in men, but of the strife
that God has with men, obstinatly hardened, and not harkning unto his
admonitions, but taking occasion by his blessings to live according to the
flesh. The third proof is mained and defective, Saint Paul says, that Romans
15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. In the
Pastoral Letter, these words are thus changed, Page 6.
cut off, and falsified; The whole Scripture is given of God for our
instruction, that so by the example that we embrace, in seeing the recompense
of the ver^^ous, and the punishment of the wicked, we comfort our selves in
hope to attain unto the inestimable goods that are promised there. So that
whole comfort of the Scriptures is falsely referred and applied to the example,
that we take of the recompense of the good, and the punishment of the wicked;
whereas it does altogether consist in the death and passion of Christ Jesus, in
whose blood al those good men Revel. 7.14.
have washed their long robes, having all of them been justified, and
graciously saved by the blood of him on the cross, and not by the merit of any
virtue that was in them. Whence the Lord is called, Luke 25.
the Consolation of Israel, namely, of all the Saints; the peace, comfort, and
joy of whom is wholly limited and stinted in him, and to the witness that Gods
Spirit bears to their spirit and consciences by the holy Scriptures, that God
has reconciled them to himself in him, not imputing to them their sins, where
with joy they cry out with the Prophet David, a man according to Gods heart;
Psalm. 32.1.2.
Blessed is he, whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered;
Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. But not being of
a subject and matter to examine this place any more, I do approve the
conclusion that is drawn from hence: for seeing the Scripture has been given
us for our instruction and consolation, we ought not alter it, or divert it to
our destruction.

III. Neither ought we to imitate those, of whom Saint Jerome complains,
Hieron.
that coming to the holy Scriptures after the study of the Sciences of this
world, do imagine that all that they say, is the Word and Law of God; and take
not the pains to search and examine diligently, what the Prophets and Apostles
have said, but do frame unto their sense the places of Scriptures, which have
no resemblance, agreement, or relation unto it: being like the Israelites in
this, who made a golden Calfe of the treasures they brought out of Egypt;
whereas they that use holily humane Sciences, making them serve and attend on
Divinity, are like those that did employ the jewels and riches of the
Egyptians toward the building of the Tabernacle, and entertainment of Gods
service.

IIII. But when they say, Page 7.
that parents which bind their children to the obedience of the commandment
they give them, to stay with them, to serve them, and not to enter into such,
or such a cloister, are like those first, that they do subvert all order,
imagine they ought to prefer their commandment before Gods commandment,
their wills before the Evangelical Counsels, against the express Texts of the
Gospel, the example of Saints, the interpretations of all the Fathers, and the
decisions of the holy Canons. They charge them with a false blasphemy,
wherewith the Author of the Pastoral Letter shall find himself touched and
tainted; who takes violently by the hairs (as we say) the places of Scripture,
and the interpretations of the Fathers, and frames them after his own
imagination, wherewith they have no resemblance or relation, as we shall see in
the Chapters following.

V. Notwithstanding, this remains as true, that the same Spirit which has
indicted the Scriptures, and given it to be written, ought and does unfold,
and give us the sense and meaning thereof. The reason is in them, or in us: In
them their majesty; 1. Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
They contain the wisdom not of this world, nor of the Princes of this world
that come to naught, but the wisdom of God, which none of the Princes of this
world knew: but, as it is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him. They being of God, Matthew. 11.27.
none can know them but God; and unto whom God will reveal them. For as
amongst men, none knows the things of man, save the spirit of man which is in
him: 1. Cor. 2.11.
Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. For this first
reason, God must reveal them unto us by his Spirit; 1. Cor. 2.10.
For the Spirit teaches all things, yea, the deep things of God. The second
reason is, our incapacitie and insufficiency: for not only have we our eyes
obscured and darkened with some certain clouds of ignorance; but we have them
also so blind, that the Scripture calls us Ephesians. 5.8.
darkness, and plainly says of us, and of the fairest and best things we
have by nature, that 1. Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Where the Spirit of God charge us with two things; 1. Cor. 2.14.
the privation and want of all faculty, aptness, and ability to understand
and comprehend the things that are of God: Secondly, an evil and perverse
disposition and inclination; for we cannot only not comprehend the things of
God, but also we esteem them foolishnes, according to that which the Apostle
says, Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God; and therefore he adds, that 1.
Cor. 2.14, 15
these things are spiritually discerned, and that he which is spiritual
judges all things. David wrote, that it was so, when he prayed unto God,
saying, Psalm. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law;
when Saint Peter confessed the Lord to Matthew. 16.16.
be Christ, the son of the living God. The Lord presently taught him that it
was so, saying, Matthew. 16.17.
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven. The Apostle has confirmed the same,
where he prays God in his Epistles to give his Spirit unto them, unto whom he
writes, that they may comprehend these things; and assuring us, that 1. Cor.
12.3.
no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

VI. But here is the question, for they demand, Where is the Spirit? In whom
is the Spirit? A question easy to be resolved: for as if one ask, where the
soul and life of man is? a child would answer, that it is in man's body, and
in every part of the body, though more sensibly, and with more efficacy in one
part of the body, then in the other; even so, when they demand, Where is the
Spirit of Christ? The child of God will presently answer, that it is in the
body of Christ, which is the Church, united to Christ his head, and in every
member of this body. John 3.34.
In Christ, who is the head, without measure; in the other members, with
measure; in some extraordinarily, as in the Prophets; and now ordinary in all
those that are come since; in these a greater measure, in those a lesser
measure; in some more, in some less, Romans 12.3.
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. To doubt
therefore, if any one has the Spirit of Christ in him, is to doubt, if he be a
member of the body of Christ, that is to say, if he be a Christian: for no man
is a Christian, but by the holy Spirit uniting him to Christ, and inspiring
him, and quickening him that he live to Christ.

CHAP. V.
I. The words of Micah unfitly, and to no purpose alleged, cannot be
understood by allegory, but of the Church in general, whose children are
directed by the holy Spirit in the understanding of the Scriptures. II. He is
an Heretic, who obstinately defends a sense contrary to the Scriptures. III.
The argument whereby the Letter binds us to depend and rely on the
interpretation of the Fathers, because Christ has said nothing, but that he
has heard of God his Father, is impertinent and ridiculous. IIII. In what
consists our conformity with Christ. V. The argument retorted against the
Author thereof. VI. It is proved by the Scriptures and Fathers, that we are
not to rely on the exposition of the Fathers.
WHen as therefore the Author says in his Pastoral Letter, that we must not
stand to our own sense, to know the sense of the Scripture; Page 7.
but follow the counsel of the Prophet Micah, saying, Mica. 4.2.
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. Although that these words of Micah are to be understood literally of
Sion, and of the City of Jerusalem, as it appears by the words following, For
the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: If by
the mountain of the Lord, and the house of the God of Jacob, he understands
the Church of Christ Jesus; it is most certain, that we ought to go and retire
there, to have the sense and meaning of the Scripture. For there is the
Scripture, and there is the Spirit inspiring the whole Church in general, and
every true member of the same in particular, according to the gift and will of
every one. When therefore the Scripture is read by a true member of Christ, or
is preached unto him, he has the holy Spirit on his right hand, and in his
heart, inspiring the true sense and meaning thereof: and this inspiration is no
other thing, but that which S. Paul names, Ephesians. 1.18.
the eyes of our understanding enlightened, to see and comprehend the mysteries
propounded in the Scriptures, as it happened unto Lydia, Acts 16.14.
whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul. And it happens unto all the Saints, according to that which the
Apostle says; 1 Cor. 2.12.
We have received not the spirit of the world but the Spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. And S. John
writing to young babes, young children, young men, and fathers; 1. John 2.20.
Ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all things. The one and the
other, after their Ma^^er, who has decided this controversy with this notable
sentence; No Ioh. 6.44.45.
man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him: It is
written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God; every one
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
They that thus hear and learn thus of the Father, do not stand to their own
sense, nor are not wedded to their own humors, but are directed by the holy
Spirit to the sense and meaning of the Scripture, as much as is necessary for
them, that they suffer themselves not to be distracted, and with-drawne from
the salvation which is in our Lord Jesus, by the deceit of men.

II. The Pastoral Letter understands not so the words of Micah, and
acknowledges none to be the mountain of Sion, Page 7.
but the ancient Fathers, and those of these times, Pastors and Doctors, there
is difference (says he) between one heretic and another, which interprets
the Scripture according to his sense, the one with more, the other with less
obstinacy and wilfulness, but both of them are alike in error. To be like an
heretic, is to make himself like the devil, and to bear his image. This is
his argument, they are heretics which do interpret the Scripture according to
their own sense, we ought not to resemble heretics; we ought not therefore,
and must not interpret the Scripture according to our senses. The Canon Law
defines an heretic thus; 24. q. 3. Can. 27. Haeresis; quicunque aliter
scripturam intelligit quam sensus spiritu^ sancti fl^gitat quo scripta est,
licet de ecclesia non recesserit tamen haereticus appellari potest.
Whosoever understands the Scripture otherwise then the sense of the holy
Spirit, by the which it has been written, requires, although he has not
with-drawne himself from the Church, he may be called an heretic, is to be
understood, if he be obstinate, and being convicted of error by the truth, will
not leave his error to embrace the truth. 24 q. 3. can. dixit.
For they which maintain and defend their false and perverse opinion without
any stubbornes and obstinacy, being ready and willing to be corrected, are not
to be reckoned amongst heretics: but 24. q. 3. can 31. Qui in ecclesia.
they which being in the Church of Christ, have any contagious and perverse
opinion, if being reproved of it, that they may kn^w and acknowledge that which
is sound and right, they resist with stubbornness and contumacie, and will not
reform and correct their p^stilent and mortal opinions and doctrines, but
persist to defend and maintain them, they become heretics. And if we will
know, who are they which have a bad and perverse opinion and doctrine, Leo the
first will tell us, that (...). epist. 10. ad Flauianu^ and est. 24. q. 3. can.
30. quid autem.
those fall into this fury and madness, who being hindered by some obscurenes
and darkness to know the truth, have not their recourse to the voice of the
Prophets, to the Epistles of the Apostles, and to the authorities of the
Gospel, but to themselves; and therefore are masters of errors, not having
been disciples of truth. All these conditions being put and laid together, he
is an heretic, who despising all admonitions, does maintain obstinatly an
error, contrary to the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles contained in the
holy Scriptures. Of such a one the Apostle faith; Tit. 3.10.11.
A man that it an herericke (after the first and second admonition) reject
knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of
himself. I desire the Reader to mark and remember this definition, to the
end he may judge by the same, of the truth and false-hood of the matters
debated in our writings, and find and hold for an heretic the one of us; who
being an Idolater of his own sense and opinion, defends with obstinacy a
sense contrary to the holy Scripture. For, as Tertullian says, Tert. de praes
aduers. haeret. cap. 38. Inde and scripturarum and expositionum ad^lteratio
deputanda est, vbi diuersitas inuenitur doctrinae.
There is the corruption of the Scriptures, and of Expositions, where the
diversity of doctrine is found; and else where, The Ibidem ca. ^2. Hereticorum
doctrina cum Apostolica comparant, ex diuersitate and contrarietate sua
pronunciabit neque Apostoli alicuius authoris esse neque Apostolici.
doctrine of heretics compared with that of the Apostles, will pronounce by
her difference and contrariety, that she has not for her author any Apostle,
or any Apostolic person. The Pastoral Letter will not have, nor permit us to
make this comparison of the writings of men with those of the Apostles: but
binds us to depend altogether on that, which the holy Fathers, and our
spiritual Fathers, which have lawful succession will tell us and reach us.

III. Page 7.
The Christian (says the Letter) ought per omnia assimilari Christo, in all
things be made like unto Christ, who for our example said in Saint John, John
7.16.
Mea doctrina non est mea, sed eius qui misit me, My doctrine is not mine, but
his that sent me. In another place; John 15.15.
Omnia quaecunque audiui a patre, nota feci vobis: Al things that I have heard
of my Father, I have made known unto you; even so you ought not to speak of
the Scriptures, but sicut audiui a patre, as the holy Fathers do expound. This
reason may be reduced to this form, The Christians ought to be like unto
Christ in all things: but Christ has said nothing, but that which he has
heard of his Father; and therefore we ought not to say any thing of the
Scripture, but that we have heard of our fathers, or as they expound it. Who
sees not, that here are four terms (as Schoolmen speak), and that the
conclusion says more, then the premise do afforde? let us make a new this
Syllogism; All Christians ought to be like unto Christ in all things: but
Christ has said nothing, has done nothing, but that which his Father has
told him, and commanded him: the maiden daughters therefore, of whom the
question is, ought to say nothing, to do nothing, but that which their father
has told them and commanded; and consequently they ought not, nor may not
enter into the new religion, and religious House or Cloister of Saint Vrsula
the Virgin, because their father has told them, and commanded them not to do
it. Let us make it of another fashion; All Christians must be like unto Christ
in all things: but Christ has spoken of all those things, which he has heard
of his Father, who is God, the true One, and holy One; Therefore we must hold
all that we have heard of our Fathers, of whom he most holy is but man and not
God, is a sinner, 1. King. 8.46.
for there is no man that sins not; and a liar, as it is written, Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, but every man a liar. We see therefore, that the word father
is taken ambiguously by the Author of the Pastoral Letter; and that from this
ambiguitie, a thousand impertinent, false, blasphemous conclusions might be
inferred. Moreover, the proposition is false, if it be not limited: for can we
be God like Christ? Can we be Prophets, Priests, and Kings of the Church, as
Christ is? In a word, can we be mediator between God and man as Christ is?
what? are not these things proper to Christ, and uncommunicable to all
creatures?

IIII. The resemblance and likeness, which we must have with Christ, is in the
holiness of his life, in that which concerns his godliness toward god, and
his charity toward men, according to the Law. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
The new man which is renewed in knowledge, righteousness and true holiness,
after the image of him that created him. The argument then will be good in this
sort, if we say, that even as Christ has been so conscientious, so scrupulous
and holy in his vocation, that he has not taught any thing, but that which he
has heard of God his Father: so our Pastors and Doctors ought not to teach any
thing, but that which they have heard of God their Father, that is to say, that
which is contained in the holy Scriptures. And again, as Christ, although
authorized in his doctrine by that heavenly voice, Matthew. 17.5.
Hear him, submits his doctrine to the touchstone of the Scriptures, and
exhorts the people to examine it by the Scripture, saying; John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, they are they which testify of me. Our Teachers and
Doctors, which have not such an authority, and should resemble Christ in
humility and reverence toward the Scripture, ought and must submit their
doctrine to the like examination, and exhort the people to search the
Scriptures, to see and examine if it be so. And if the people ought not to
hear any other doctrine, then that of their Father contained in Scripture,
remembering that notable sentence of Saint Augustine; August. contra lit.
Petilia. lib. 3. c. 6. Si angelus de caelo vobis annunciauerit, prete^qu^^ quod
in S^xipturi^ legalibus and Euangelicis accepisti anathema sit.
If an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that which you have
received in the Scriptures, Legal, or Evangelical, let him be accursed.

V. Let us now retort and return the argument against the Author of the same,
and say; We may not speak of the Scripture otherwise then we have heard of
our Fathers, we have no other Father then God; therefore we may not speak of
the Scripture, then as we have heard it of God: the Mayor is his, as we have
seen; the Minor is his also: For by this argument he proves, that children
desirous to dwell in a cloister, ought not to obey their carnal parents, which
thwart their desires, saying to the fathers, Know ye not, Page 20.
that God forbids in Saint Matthew, Matthew. 23 9.
Nolite vobis vocare patrem super terram, vnus enim pater est vester qui est in
caelis; Call no man your Father upon the earth, for one is your father which is
in heaven. The conclusion therefore is good, according to his arguing, and
according to truth; and therefore we will hear none but God, speaking to us in
the Scripture, and will not hear the Fathers, be they never so holy, if they
preach not to us the word of God contained in the Scriptures.

VI. For so has God expressly commanded us in his word, saying, Ezech.
20.18.19.
Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their
judgments, nor defile your selves with their Idols; I am the Lord your God,
walk in my Statutes, and keep my Judgments, and do them. Conformably to
this an ancient Father says: Hier. in Ier. cap. 7. nec parentum nec mai^rum
error sequendus est, sed authoritas scripturarum, etc.
We must not follow the errors of our fathers, nor of our ancestors, but we
must follow the authority of the Scriptures. And another, Bernard. ad Abbat.
epist. 91.
Auant, and far from me and you, let them be, which say, we will not be
better then our forefathers. The former says again of himself, Hier. contra
Iouini.
As often as I do not interpret the Scriptures, but that I speak freely of
mine own sense and reason, let who will reprehend and reprove me. Saint Austin
said as much of Saint Hierome, of all Catholic authors, and particularly of
himself, as we have seen in the Preface, he tells us over and besides of
himself; August. de Trinit. lib. 3. in proaem.
Do not thou subject and submit thy self to my letters, as to the Canonical
Scripture. Of Saint Cyprian, Idem contra Crescou. lib. 2. cap. 32.
I account not the letters of Cyprian as Canonical, but I examine them by the
Canonical Scripture. That which in them is conformable to the authority of
the holy Scripture, I receive it with his praise and commendation, that which
is not conformable to it, I reject it with his good liking. Of S. Ambrose and
of the rest of the Doctors that were before him; Idem Epi. 112
Do not think, that we must follow the sense and opinion of any man, as the
truth of the Canonical Scripture. Of all them which have written from the
Apostles time to his time: Idem contra. Faustum Mani. lib. 11. c. 5.
In the small books or short Treatises of them which are come since, the
Hearer or Reader has his free judgment to approve that which is pleasing and
good, or to reprove that which is unpleasant and offensive. Cardinal Caietan,
the most learned of all the Cardinals and Bishops of his time, has the like
speech in his preface on Genesis: for having said, Caiet. praefat. in 5. lib.
Mos.
That this authority is reserved only to the sole authors of the holy
Scripture, that we believe the thing to be so, because they have so written it;
lays down this principle and maxim, Deus non alligauit expositionem
scripturaru^ sacrarum priscorum doctorum sensibus.
that God has not tied the exposition of the holy Scripture to the sense of
the ancient Doctors. Si quando occurrerit nouus sensus textui conformis,
quanquam a torrente doctorum alienus, aequos se praebeant censores.
And therefore he intreates them, which shall find in his Commentaries a new
sense or meaning, conformable and agreeable to the text, to judge justly and
uprightly, although it be against the torrent and stream of the Fathers.
Andrad. defens. Synod. Trident. lib. 2.
Andradius maintains the self same principle, and improues the allegorical
expositions of the Fathers, reprehends many expositions that they give of the
literal sense, pronounces that they spoke not oracles in the expounding of the
Scriptures; that for not having the use of a good Translation, they have often
straied and swarued from the true meaning of the holy Ghost; that many things
in Moses and the Prophets are better, and more exactly expounded in our age,
then they had ever been before. Others have said and written as much.

CHAP. VI.
I. There is none of the Fathers that has not erred, none of them therefore
that can alone be judge of the sense of the Scripture. II. No more can the
consent of the greater number of them, because all have erred together in the
same points of doctrine, either in men's opinion, or in truth. III. All the
Fathers have divided the first Table of the Law in four Commandments, and are
rejected; two only have reduced it to three, and are received of the Roman
Church. IIII. The opinion of Saint Austin alone to be preferred before that of
Saint Hierome, and of the number and multitude of the Fathers touching Saint
Peter reprehended by Saint Paul. V. The ancient Fathers (for the most part)
were Millenaries, or Chiliastae, and thought that the souls saw not not God,
before the resurrection. VI. All the Fathers have believed for the space of
1500 years, that the Virgin Marie was conceived in sin; their consent and
agreement in the same is condemned by the Church of Rome. VII. The whole
ancient and Primitive Church for 1400 years, did celebrate the Eucharist under
two Elements; that is now adays heresy, in the opinion of the Romish Church.
VIII. To make a show of, to rely on, or shroud himself under the exposition
of the Fathers, and yet to refuse and forsake them, is to make a mock of the
Fathers.
THe Bellar. de council.
writings of the Fathers are no rules, and have no authority to bind us, by
the proper confession of them, which binds the consciences of the children of
God, of the co-heires of Christ unto their authority; take every one of them
apart, take the greatest number of them, consider them altogether, and you will
find that it is so. He on whose judgment my conscience ought to rest, must be
endued with such a perfection, that he cannot be allured nor induced to any
error, and cannot seduce nor misleade me by any error; it behoues that God
give him this testimony in the holy scriptures, which give this prerogative to
none, but to the Prophets and Apostles. Let us take the others one by one,
Bellar. de verbo Dei lib. 3. c. 10.. 21. Dices.
although they have had the gift of interpreting in an high degree, and have
been spiritual; yet is it certain, that the chiefest amongst them, yea all
of them have erred, and have fallen into gross faults and grievous errors,
Canus lib. 7. de locis Theolog. cap. 3.
yea, and sometimes do engender monsters.

II. If all together, or the greater number against the l^sse, as ordinarily
they hold and maintain, yet thus do they not receive them. Maldon in Matthew.
19.20.
Maldonat expounding the history of the rich man, that said to our Savior,
that he had kept all the Commandments from his youth up, says; Some Fathers,
Hilarie, Jerome, Ambrose, Austin, Theophilact, Beda, and others say, that this
young man lied; notwithstanding, I rather like and approve (says he) the
opinion of Basil, Euthymi^s, Chrysostom, and so preferres the lesser number
before the greater.

III. All the Fathers have divided the ten Commandments, placing four of them
in the first Table, and six in the second, except Clemens stromat. lib. 6.
Clement Alexandrinus, who has acknowledged but nine. And Saint August. qu. 71
in Exodus
Austin joining the second with the first, has reduced the four of the first
Table to three, seeking in it the mystery of the Trinity, and has made two
of the last of the second Table. Notwithstanding, the common division of Phil.
de Dialogo.
Philo, Joseph. antiq. lib. 3. c 4.
Joseph, and of Aben Ezra in Exodus 20.
all the Jews, of Greg. Nazianz. in verse. de decalogo.
Gregory Nazianzen, Origin. in Exo. hom. 8.
Origin, Athanas. in Synopsi sacrae scripturae.
Athanasius, Chrysostom operis imperfect. in Mat. hom. 49.
Chrysostom amongst the Greeks, of Hieron. in epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 6.
Saint Hieromie, Ambros in epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 6.
Saint Ambrose, and of Aug. qu. vet. and noui Test. cap. 7.
Saint Austin himself, if (...) Author of the questions of the old and new
Testament, is rejected of the whole Romish Church; and that opinion of Saint
Austin contradicting himself is received, and that not without cause.

IIII. There was a great contention between Saint Ier^^^, and Saint Austin,
concerning the rebuke that Saint Paul made to Saint Peter before the whole
Church of Antioch. Saint Jerome held, that Saint Paul did dissemble with Saint
Peter, that he did use an officious lie, and an honest dispensation, and did
quote and allege for himself many Fathers, of whom he made so much, that he
feared not to say, Hyeron. Aug.
If thou do blame and (...) as one that erres, (...) me (...) them that are
such. Saint Austin held, that Saint Paul rebuked Saint Peter in earnest, and
says, that if he had read much, he might have found as many Fathers on his
side. August. epi. 19.
But (faith he) I have for them all and above them all, the Apostle Paul; I
have my refuge to him; I appeal from all them, which have expounded his
writings and think otherwise, to him, I ask and dem^^^^ himself, etc. and I
hear him crying with a religious voice in the exordium and beginning of this
narration, Concerning the things I write unto you, Behold, I say before God,
that I lie not; let those that think otherwise, pardon me, I had rather
believe so great an Apostle taking his oath in his writings, and for his
writings, then any man, be he never so learned, disputing of other men's
writings. Do not we hold now adays, that Saint Austines opinion was sounder
and truer then that of Saint Hierome and of his adherents? Medina Medina de
sacror. hom. orig. lib. 1 c. 5.
has not doubted to affirm, that Jerome, Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret,
Austin, Chrysostom, Theophylact have held, that the order of Bishops and of
Priests is one and the self same order. They that believe that now adays, are
held for heretics of the Roman Bishops, and of their clients and followers.

V. The Greg. Valent. Jes. lib. 8. anclys. c. 8. Senens bibl. lib. 3. annot.
237.
ancient Fathers for the most part were Millenaries; Papius, an Auditor of the
Apostle Saint John, Apollinaris, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Victorin, Lactantius,
Seuerus Sulpicius, and a great number of Catholics, Justin Martyr; all of them
deceived, for not understanding well that which is written in the Revelation,
Revel. 20.3.
Till the thousand years should be fulfilled. Who would now suffer himself to
be swaied and carried away with this error, should with good reason be held and
condemned for an heretic. Does not Stapleton tell us, Staplet. lib. ^. de
authorit. Scripturae c. 2.. 5.
that Clement the Roman, Tertullian, Origin, Irenaeus, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Theophylact, Ambrose, Bernard, were of opinion, that the souls do
not enjoy the vision of God before the day of judgment. Another adds to these,
Senens. lib. 6. annot. 345.
Iustine Martyr, Lactance, Victorinus, Prudentius, Arethas, John Pope of Rome.
Is not this an horrible error?

VI. Canus locorum Theolog. lib. 7. c. 1. number. 1.. Sancti namque.
Canus expounding S. Paul's words, Romans 5.12.
In whom all have sinned, says, that from these words, All the Saints do
affirm with one consent, that the Virgin Marie was conceived in sin.
Chrysostom, Eusebius Remigius, Ambrose, Austin, Bernard, Bid, Anselme,
Erardus Martyr, Saint Antonie, Doctor Bona^enture, Thomas of Aquin, Vincentius,
Hugo de Sancto Victor: why then does not he himself follow this consent and
opinion? Let he himself say, why, Although no author has contradicted it,
Infirmumest tamen ex omnium patrum consersu argumentum; The argument
notwithstanding taken from the consent of all the Fathers is weak; and the
contrary opinion is more probably and holily held and maintained. Of late then
and newly have they left and forsaken the universal belief of all the Saints
the space of 1400 years: and Salmeron Jesuit. in Romans c. 5. disp. si. Deinde.
Salmeron the Jesuit tells us, that we must answer to this whole multitude:
that which one alleages and objects, that which is written of Gods word, Exodus
23.2.
Exodus 23. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou
speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment. Let this suffice
for an answer to those that say, we may not speak of the Scripture, but only
as the holy Fathers expound it: for if it were so, we ought and should be
Millinaries with many of the holy Fathers; we should believe against all
Scripture, that the souls of the faithful departed, see not God until the
universal resurrection; with the Fathers we should race out of the catalogue
of festival days, that of the conception of the Virgin Marie, the mother of
Christ; and hold with the Scripture, that she was conceived in sin, for so
all the holy Fathers have held.

VII. The Romish Church should give unto the people the Eucharist under both
kinds: for so have they been instituted and given by the Master, received and
recommended by the Apostles, celebrated by all the Fathers, and of the whole
Christian Church the space of 1400 years; we ought to detest the new Fathers
of Constance, who have presumed against Christ's institution, the doctrine of
the Apostles, the practice of the whole Church for so many ages, to take away
the cup, to bereave and deprive the Christians of the Sacrament of the blood,
which the Son of God has shed for them in the remission of their sins.

VIII. To cry out always, the Fathers, the Fathers, to make great show of the
Fathers, to rely on them, to shelter themselves under the exposition of the
Fathers, and yet not follow the Fathers, is to do like Matthew. 26.49.
Judas, which betrayed Christ in speaking to him with great reverence and
kissing him; or like the soldiers, Mat. 27.18.30
who having clothed our King and Savior Christ with a scarlet Robe, and given
him in his hand a Reed in stead of a Scepter, they bowed their knees before
him, made a show to adore him, but forthwith did spit upon him, took the
Reed, and smote him on the head with it.

CHAP. VII.
I. What opinion we are to have, and what judgment to make of the Fathers, in
what and how far they are to be believed. II. The Author of the Pastoral
Letter ties and binds the exposition of the Scriptures unto the Pastors and
Doctors, having lawful succession. III. What is their authority, charge and
duty. IIII. They are not to be heard, unless they speak according to the
Scriptures. V. Many under the Law, and under the Gospel, Highpriests,
Bishops, and Popes, having succession, have been Idolaters, Heretics,
Sorcerers. VI. The objection taken from the words of Malachie, is contrary to
the opponent.
I Do not pretend to abate or diminish in any wise the authority of the
Fathers, I say, that they have been great men of God; that they have served
God, and his Church in their time with great profit; that their writings are of
great use, and that by the reading of them, a man may become wiser and holier.
And I hold for certain, that they are bound in the bundle of life, and do
reign in heaven with Christ Jesus their King, for whose sake God has been
merciful unto them. But when men make a buckler of their errors; and when men
say, that we may not speak of the Scripture, but as they are interpreted by
them; we are enforced to say the truth, that, first, they all were men, and not
God: secondly, they were all disciples of the truth, and not Author of the
same; all Interpreters of the law, not Law-giuers; all our fellow-Brethren, and
fellow-Seruants, and not our Masters. Thirdly, that we ought to believe them in
matters of fact, or of things done in their time, and that which they assuredly
know, when they speak of things not by hearsay, but which themselves have
seen and known these certain things. Fourthly, that in matters of faith they
are not to be believed, if they prove not their doctrine by the books of
faith, because as Canus cent. 3. and sequent. c. 4.
Canus says, All the Saints (those only excepted, who have digested and
committed unto writing the Canonical books) have spoken by human spirit, and
have sometimes erred in things which appertain to faith. The reason is, 1.
Cor. 13.9.
They knew only in part, and prophesied in part. Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh in in
them, as well as in us. The Apostles only were privileged with an
extraordinary measure of the holy Ghost, to lead them without any
imperfection, John 16.13.
in all truth. Fifthly, that the Spirit of Christ Jesus is not dead with them,
but is as yet in his Church, enlightening it in the truth, and sanctifying her
by the truth; in so much, as although there were no writings of the Fathers,
the people of God for all that, should not leave to know and understand the
Scriptures, to know the voice of Christ, and follow it. Sixthly, that the
writings of the Fathers are as much, or more obscure, then the holy Scriptures,
if it might be said without blasphemy, that there were obscurenesse in those
books which were dictated by him, John 1.9.
Who is the light, which lights every man that comes into the world.
Seventhly, that the fathers are so many in number, and their writings in like
manner, that though a man had an iron body, he could not take the pains to
read them all; and though he had a memory of steel, he could not remember the
expositions of all of them; that there is no man living which has them all, no
man living which has read all those we have; yea, I suppose and presume that I
may say truly, that all the living together have not read them all: whereas
all can, and may read the Scripture over and over, every one oftentimes, and
learn by it with prayer and labor, all that is necessary for their
salvation. Eighthly and lastly, that the Scriptures are snatched out of the
peoples hands, detained in such a brutish ignorance, that they cannot know if
the things written by the Fathers are of the Scripture or no; and the means to
read the Fathers is taken away from them, so that they cannot know how they
expound the Scriptures; and therefore it is a mere mockery to send the
ignorant to the Fathers, which they have never read, which they cannot read
though they would, and dare not read them though they could, and whom they
cannot understand, though they should read them; and therefore are taught to
refer themselves in all these things to that, which their Pastors and Doctors
will make them believe.

II. This is the sense of that which follows in the Pastoral letter, where,
to that which has been said, that we ought not to speak of the Scriptures
otherwise, then the fathers expound them, is added, And besides, your
spiritual Fathers, Pastors and Doctors, that are instituted of God, grounded
on the lawful succession of the Apostles to expound and interpret it to you;
Malach. 27.
Labia Sacerdotis custodient scientiam, and ex ore eius legem requirent; The
Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek and ask the Law at
his mouth.

III. We ought not to take away from the true Pastors and Doctors any thing of
that which God gives them, Saint Paul says of himself and of all, 1. Cor. 4.1.
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
mysteries of God: and elsewhere, 2. Co. 5.19.20.
God has committed unto us the Word of reconciliation; We therefore are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us. We ought then to
account and esteem of them, and to put them in another rank then private
persons are; we are to hear them with attention and reverence in the
declaration of their commission. And if we honor the Ministers and
Ambassadors of a Prince for the Princes sake who sends them, how much more
shall we honor and reverence the Ministers of Christ Jesus, who is the Acts
3.15.
Prince of life, and has written on his thighe, Revel. 19.16.
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, for Christ Jesus sake? But they ought
also to know, that they are but Ministers of Christ, and therefore are not Lords
and Masters over the Church, which is the body and spouse of Christ; that they
are the Ministers of Christ, and therefore are called administerium non ad
magisterium, to serve, and that with labor and pains; like those which row in
ships, (...), as the Greek word bears, and not to govern and play the
Regent according to their own fancy and affection; that they are stewards of
the great mysteries of God, of the great mysteries of the Gospel, the which
they must distribute, that is to say, preach and apply it to the use and
salvation of the Saints. That they are the Ambassadors for Christ, and
therefore they ought to produce their letters and patent of their commission,
and declare faithfully the substance of the same without any addition,
diminution, or changing thereof. They are no more privileged then Saint Paul
was, who 1. Cor. 11.23.
received of the Lord that which he delivered unto them, and Acts 26.22. Romans
1.22.
has given nothing, but that which was written touching the substance of the
doctrine. And of that whereof every one had the copy in hand to examine, if he
kept himself in the precincts and compass of his charge and commission, as
Acts 17.11.
they of Berea did with praise and commendation.

IIII. Therefore the Apostle having declared what is their charge and function,
and the dignity or excellency thereof, gives them this admonition, 1. Cor.
4.2.
Moreover, it is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful, faithful
in care, in labor, and especially in the preaching of the will of God in
pureness and simplicity, without any mixture of humane traditions, his will
(say we) wholly comprehended in the Scriptures, of the which God will that all
should have copy, as being all his children, and having right and reason to
know the contents of his Testament; to the end that if they, which are but his
Teachmen and Heralds, do interpret other language then his, relate and deliver
otherwise then that, which he has given in writing, and having sent the copies
throughout all the world, they be not heard, what succession soever they
pretend. Aaron from and by whom the Leuiticall succession began, Exodus 32.4.
made a golden calfe, and notwithstanding the Leuits who were inferior unto
him, would not be partakers of his sin, q but observed the words of God and
kept them. If a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams did arise amongst the people,
and made signs and miracles, and he say, let us go after other Gods, and let
us serve them; God commanded to put such a one to death, and says to the
people, r Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or dreamer of
dreams, etc. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God and fear him, and keep
his commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall serve him, and cleave unto
him. In like manner the Prophet Isaiah sends them to Isai. ^.20.
the Law, and to the testimony, saying, If they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. Saint Peter also to the Pastors
and Ministers, 1. Pet. 4.11.
If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God. And Saint John
writing to a woman, and in her person to all, 2. John 10.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither bid him, God speed.

V. Neither is there any succession that is free, or can privilege them. Vriah
the high Priest descended by succession from Aaron, builds contrary to Gods
commandment, an Altar according to the pattern of that of Damascus, and sets
it in the Temple, 2. King. 16.11.
according to all that the King Ahaz had sent from Damascus. Caiphas having the
succession, with the Scribes and the Elders of the people assemble together
against Jesus Christ, and caused him to die by the hand of the wicked, Saint
Paul admonishes the Pastors of Milet and of Ephesus, Acts 20.30.
that from among themselves shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw
disciples after them. Photinus, Samosatenus, Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, Marcelin the Pope, who sacrificed to Idols; John 22. Pope, who denied
that the souls see God before the resurrection; Pope Zepherinus a Montanist;
Pope Liberius an Arrian; Pope Anastasius a Nestorian; Pope Honorius a
Monothelite; Pope Siluester, who gave himself to the devil to be made Pope;
Gregory the seventh a great Necromancer; John the 23, who denied life
eternal, and the resurrection. All these had a vocation and succession as
lawful, as any Pope or Bishop of that time; and notwithstanding they were not
to be heard of any, because they al were heretics.

VI. Yea but God has said in Malachi; Malach. 2.7.
The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth. He has said it indeed, and has said it either by promise to the
Priests of the Law, that it shall be always so, or by commandment to the
Priests to observe and keep it so always: not by promise, for he has not
always determined nor done so, (...) that the same God and Lord adds, verse. 8.
But ye are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at (...)
Law, ye have corrupted the (...) of Leui, says the Lord of Hosts, therefore
have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people. And elsewhere
God complains of them, Esaias 28.7.
They (...) in vision, they stumble in judgment, Ezech. 22.26. S^ph^. 3.4
they have violated my Law, and have proph^^ed mine holy things, they have put
no difference between the holy and prophant: and because they did then as they
do now adays, crying to every purpose, Ierem. 18.18.
The Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the
Word from the Prophet; God threatens them, Ezech. 7.26.
that the Law shall perish from the Priests, and Counsel from the Ancients. It
was therefore a commandment of that which the Priests should do, and did not,
as nowadaies, when and where God may say, as anciently he said of the People
and Priests of Israel; Ose 4.6, 9.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have (...)
knowledge, I will also reject thou; thou shall be (...) Priest to me, seeing
thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forgot thy children, etc.
There shall be like People, like Priest.

CHAP. VIII.
I. The Judge of the sense and meaning of the Scripture, is public, or private.
II. The public and sovereign Judge is God alone. III. His judgment is
perfectly given in the holy Scriptures. IIII. It is not necessari^, that the
Judge be present and visible. V. The public ministerial Judges are the
Pastors. VI. The private Judges are all Christians. VII. They that forbid
Christians to judge of their writings, are nor led by the Spirit of Christ.
TO conclude this point, and to (...) no scruple concerning this whole matter
in the conscience of the Reader. We say, that the Judge of the sense and
meaning of the Scripture, is either public or private. The public Judge is
he, who judges publicly with a public authority, and declares, what is
true, what is false, good or bad; what one ought to follow or eschew, do, or
not do in matter of religion. The public Judge is either Sovereign or
Ministerial.

II. The Sovereign Judge is he, whose authority is in himself, and toward
us sufficient; irrefragable, and so absolute, that necessity is laid upon us
to yield and agree unto, without any doubting, contradiction or appeal. There
is no such Judge in heaven or in earth but one, to wit, God speaking to his
Church in Christ Jesus by his holy Spirit. There is but he alone, which has
public and absolute authority; who gouernes, swaies and commands over the
consciences; who can persuade, bind, and convince them. He has given his
judgment and sentence, and has enregistred it in the sacred Scripture,
according to which he gouernes the consciences, bowing and bending them to the
obedience of the same by his holy Spirit. And indeed what other could be the
Sovereign Judge of the sense of the Scripture, but he, who is the author of
the scripture? who can better interpret a man's words and meaning, then he which
has spoken them? And who can better interpret the sense and meaning of the
Law, then the Lawgiver which has made it? who is so fit and apt for it as
he, who being all wise and all holy, cannot; and being all good, will not
deceive or beguile us?

III. There is nothing more apparent, then that his judgment is contained in
the holy Scriptures. 2. Tim. 3.16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, it contains then the judgment
of the holy Ghost. 2. Tim. 3.15.
They are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus. And for this cause are we commanded to hear them; Luke 16.29.
They have (says Abraham touching the brethren of the rich man) Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. As they Acts 17.29.
of Berea are commended, for that they sought in the same the judgment of the
holy Spirit concerning Saint Paul's doctrine; the cause of all errors being,
that men do not stick fast to it, as Jesus Christ reprocheth and charge the
Sadduces with, telling them, Mark. 12.24.
Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures, nor the power
of God? And it being impossible that any can learn, and be persuaded or moved
elsewhere to believe in Christ, and amend his life, Abraham has so testified
and borne record to the naughty rich man, who required that Lazarus should be
sent to his brethren: Luke 16.31.
If (says he) they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Jesus Christ has more evidently
testified it unto the Jews, speaking of the Scriptures, and of himself, If
Job. 5.46.47.
ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me: but if
ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? This has been
acknowledged and granted of all the Fathers, Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph.
who refused to accept and admit of any records or evidences, then those of
Christ, Cyp. epist. 63.
who will hear none other but Christ, Ambr. de fide lib. 1. c. 4. Hieron. in
Psalm. 86. Optat. August. Chrysostom. etc.
who in all their disputations against heretics, do appeal unto the
judgment of Christ, speaking in the Scriptures; except they had to do with
such as denied the Scriptures.

IIII. But if they object, that the Judge must be present and visible: we
answer, that that is not necessary. How often do Emperors decide
controversies new sprung in their Provinces, by the authority and Jurisdiction
of the Sovereign Court, without budging from their place? How often have the
Popes remaining in Rome, or in Auignon, ended the differences of Christians a
great distance from them, by their Decre^all Epistles; and do as yet make
known their will unto all the world by their Bulls, without stirring from their
seat? The King (whom God preserve and bless with all temporal and spiritual
blessings, for his glory) is the supreme and Sovereign Judge of all this
Kingdom, although he be visibly and corporally but in one place of the same at
one time; from the place where he is, he signifies by his Proclamation what
his pleasure is, unto the which all his subjects must yield and agree. A King,
who is but a man has such a power, and shall not the King of Kings have it? a
mortal man, absent in body, shall be acknowledged of all his good subjects
for supreme Judge; and his will declared in writing, shall be a Law unto them:
and shall not the Lord Jesus, God-Man, and Man-God, be accepted of for
Sovereign Judge, nor his writings for laws, unless he make and show himself
visible and present? What impiety? But God be thanked, our Judge contained
indeed in heaven in regard of his body, Acts 3.21. is always every where
with his Church in regard of his Deity and Godhead; always present in the
same in common and general, and in every member of the same in particular, by
his holy Spirit, by his grace, by his virtue, by his counsel, by his help and
assistance, by his conduct and guiding, and by his holy and wholesome word, so
far forth that he says, Matthew. 28.20
L^e, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: for, Matthew. 18.20.
faith he, where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them. It is he then that judges us by his word, which is his
voice, which all they that are his sheep hear, which they know and follow:
John 10.27.
My sheep hear my voice (says Christ), and I know them, and they follow me.
And do not think, that he speaks there only of his sheep of then, or that
time, when he fed them with the food and refection of his mouth; he speaks of
all those that shall be gathered together under his Sheepe-hooke until the
end of the world, according to that he said before, verse. 16: Other sheep
have I, which are not of this fold, them also I must bring; and they shall
hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. They that are
not contented with this voice, and hear it not, they would not only not hear
our Lord Jesus, although he should return here in the flesh; but also they
would crucify him again, as the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and the Elders
of the people did: for if that so he should return here on earth, he would
say no other thing, then that which he has said already, and would not speak
more plainly and perspicuously, then he has spoken in the holy Scriptures.
Therefore according as he has commanded us to call none our Doctor: Matthew.
23.10.
For one is our Doctor and Master, even Christ: we will adhere and stick fast
unto him alone, and will say unto him with Saint Peter, and the other
disciples, John 6.68. Lord, to whom shall we go^, thou have the words of
eternal life, and we believe and are sure, that thou art that Christ, the
Son of the living God?

V. The public ministerial Judge is he, which has a public and lawful
calling and authority from God, to judge not of the Scripture, nor of the
sense thereof (for being immediately from God, the Law of the supreme Judge, and
the most perfect rule of all godliness, whereby all men are judged and ruled,
it cannot be judged of men by any means) but of the doctrines of men, the
which he examines by the touchstone of the Scriptures, and by them marks and
considers, if they are of God or no; such are Pastors and Doctors considered
apart in their Schools and Churches, and together in the Presbytery, Synods,
Councels National, and Occumenicall, whose whole authority is limited by the
holy Scriptures, against and besides which they may not ordain any thing, Gal.
1.8; being to speak properly and fitly, Clerks, Truch-men, Heralds, Messengers
and Ambassadors of God toward their brethren, and not Judges; their judgment
being of service, not of sovereignty; of direction, not of authority
compelling: Ephesians. 2.20.
For we are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; and not
upon the hand of humane opinions. Wherefore if Christ Jesus himself has
confirmed his doctrine by the Scriptures, Luke 24.27.
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets: Act. 15.16.17
If the Apostles assembled together in Jerusalem, refuted by the Scripture the
heresy of those, which mingled the Law with the Gospel: If Saint Paul Act.
17.2.3. Act. 26.22. Act. 28.23.
proved his Gospel by the writings of Moses and of the Prophets; surely they
that are not furnished with such authority, are bound to justify their
doctrine by the Scriptures; without the which, Orig. in Hierem. ^om. 1.
our sense, meanings, and interpretation are not faith, In regard of which the
Apostle says, that the Spirit of Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1. Cor.
14.32. And Gerson de exam. doctri. Consid. 5. number. 17.
Gers^^ says, That we must give more credit, and believe soever a simple man
not authorized, excellently skilled in the Scriptures, then the declaration of
the Pope: for it is certain, that we must so^^er believe, and rather give
credit unto the Gospel, then unto the Pope. Panerm. in cap. significat. extra
de electi^.
Pan^rmus says, In matters which concern our faith, the saying of a pr^^ate
man is to be preferred before the Popes saying, if it be confirmed with the
best reasons of the old and new Testament. Another most excellently and
evidently; Picus Mirand. de fide and ^rd. cred. The^re. 6.
A simple peasant or swain, a child, an old woman are more credible and (...)
to her believed, thou the grand Prelate or Pope and a thousand Bishops; of
these speak contrary and against the Gospel, those for and according to the
Gospel. The reason is very good; the Gospel is of the Master, and ought to
be received with all obedience of faith, by whomsoever it is preached: the
Pope and the Bishops are but servants in the Masters house, where they have no
other charge, then to serve the children of the house, according to the will of
the heavenly Father, comprehended in the Scriptures; otherwise they are no
Pastors but Impostors.

VI. As the public ministerial judgment is (without proportion and measure)
inferior to that of God revealed in the Scripture; so the private judgment is
inferior to the ministerial: for it comes not out in public with a public
calling and authority; but keeps and contains it self in the conscience for
her rest and peace, and does not extend or spread her self further then the
calling of him, which has received this gift of God. This is common to all
true Christians, who being all spiritual man, have received and had of God,
the eyes, ears, taste, heart, and judgment of the spiritual man; to see,
hear, taste, know, judge, love and affect the things of God. 1. Cor. 2.15.
The spiritual man (faith the Apostle) discerns and judges all things;
every Christian is spiritual, he which is not spiritual, is no Christian; for
to be a Christian, is nothing else then to be spiritual: every Christian
therefore knows and discerns the things of his salvation. Christians are
the sheep of our Lord Jesus; As therefore a natural sheep can by the
principle of nature make choice of that herb, which is the most wholesome to
her; and in feeding pass by that, which is contrary to her nature: so the
spiritual sheep, by the principle of grace, can judge between the true
passages and places, unto the which she is brought and led by her true
shepherd; and the bad pasture, wherewith the stronger would infect and poison
her. This doctrine is of Christ Jesus, and of his Apostles: Christ has said,
that John 10.4.5.
the good shepherd puts forth his own sheep, and goes before them, and
the sheep follow him, for they know his voice, and a stranger will they not
follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers. The
Apostle requires of all men, that Heb. 5.14.
they have their senses exercised, to discern both good and evil, he exhorts
them, saying, 1. Cor. 14.20.
Brethren, be not children in understanding, howbeit in malice be ye children,
but in understanding be men. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Saint John tells them, that it
is their duty; 1. John 4.1.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God, because many false prophets are gone out into the world. They will not
place the particulars in the pulpit to preach, but they place them at the
chaires foot, to hear with judgment, and discern between the true Doctor
and the false seducer; to follow that man, and to take heed of this man,
according to Christ's admonition: Matthew. 7.15.
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening w^lues, ye shall know them by their fruits. He presupposes
therefore, that they shall have judgment to know them: but this judgment
being a gift of God, a gift grace, not of nature; a gift proper unto the
spiritual man, unknown to the natural, the Apostle prays to God to give it
us, Phil. 1.9.10.
I pray, that your lo^^ may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all
judgment, that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ.

VII. Judge we then of what spirit are they, which of spiritual sheep would
deforme us, and transform us into brutish sheep, and destituted of reason;
do prohibit us to speak of the things of our God, Creator, Father, and
Savior, but as they list. Let us compare their spirit with that of Christ and
of the Apostles; Christ would, that we should judge of him by the Scriptures,
and not simply by his saying, said unto the people: John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures: And these would have us to judge of them by their bare
saying, and not by the Scriptures, do blame and condemn us for the diligent
search of the Scriptures. The Apostle said to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 10.15.
I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say. These fear nothing so much as
understanding men; to keep and deteine the world in ignorance, they cry out,
it is not for you to judge of what we say. If the spirit wherewith Christ and
the Apostles were guided ^^d led, was the holy Ghost; what manner of spirit can
this be, which leader these men? A spirit which would make us like to painted
clouds in a Church, or like unto those little court-cupbord gods, of whom it is
written, Ps. ^15.5. and^.
They have months, but speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have
ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not; they have
hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak
they through their throat; they that make them are like unto them, so is every
one that trusts in them. And therefore the spirit of darkness, who detaines
the Christians in darkness, to the end he may draw and bring them to the
gulf of outward darkness with himself, as it is written, Io. 3.19. 20. 21
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil: for every one
that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved: but he that does truth, comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Let him therefore
(that will) walk in darkness: As for us that Ephesians. 5.8.11
were sometimes darkness, but now we are light in the Lord, we will walk as
children of light, and will have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them; rejoicing and taking pleasure in the light
of the Scriptures without, and in the direction and conduct of the holy Spirit
within us, until James 1.17.
the father of lights, who by his grace Col. 1.13.
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his dear son, Phil. 1.6.
finishing that good work which he has begun in us, Col. 1.12.
make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, 1.
John 3.2.
where we shall be like to him, and shall see him as he is. Amen.

The end of the first Book.
OF EVANGELICALL COVNSELS. The second Book.
CHAP. I.
I. The Jewish Church has been of old, troubled by false prophets, who
pretended the name of the word of God, and laid claim to it in their false
lies. II. Saint Peter prophesied, that the like should happen unto the
Christian Church, by false doctors. III. Of this number are they, which exalt
(with puffing words) the Monastical life. IIII. Making the people believe,
that it is grounded upon Evangelical Counsels, whereas there is no such
Counsel in the whole Scripture.
THe Church of the Jews was very much troubled, abused, and seduced in her
time by the false prophets; They (says God) ^ Ier. 23.30.31.
steal my word every one from his neighbor, that use their tongues, and say,
He says. They borrowed of the true Prophets the words of God, which they
abused, to give luster and sway unto their impostures: Ier. 2.3. 17.
They say still unto them that despise me, The Lord has said, ye shall have
peace; and they say unto every one, that walks after the imagination of his
own heart, no evil shall come upon you. To them that hearkened unto them, they
cried; Ezech. 13.10.
Peace, peace, and there was no peace: but prophesied disasters, curses, and
death against those that would not give ear unto their lies; Ezech 13.18.19.
Will ye hunt the souls of my people, says the Lord unto them; and will ye
save the souls alive, that comes unto you, and will ye pollute me among my
people for handfuls of Barley, and for pieces of Bread, to slay the souls that
should not die, and to save the souls alive, that should not live, by your
lying to my people that hear your lies? Who would have believed them? (now the
greatest part of the people believed them) they saw the Visions of God, they
were Gods Messengers, they prophesied the words of God, the beginning and
conclusion of all their lies, was, The Lord has said, who believes God (and
but few believed him) Jer. 23.21.
He has not sent these prophets, yet they came; he spoke not to them, yet they
prophesied. Ezech. 13.2.
They were prophets, that prophesied out of their own hearts, foolish prophets
that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing: They have seen vanity
and lying divination, for handfuls of Barley, and for pieces of Bread; like
foxes in the deserts, which being hunger-starued, hunt on all sides after their
prey, and do cast themselves on it hastily and rauenously.

II. Saint Peter prophesied, 2. Pet. 2.1.3.
that as there were false prophets among the people; so there shall be false
teachers amongst us: who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, and through
covetousness shall with fained words make merchandise of us. And
notwithstanding the world shall become so brutish, Verse. 2.
that many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
Truth shall be evil spoken of. Saint Jude says of them, Jude 16.
that their mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in
admiration, because of advantage: he saw in his days the fulfilling of Saint
Peter's prophecy.

We see the like also in our days, abounding as much in this kind of people,
as any other that has been since the beginning of the world: we need no
other witnesses then the Patrons and fautors of the Monastical life in these
our days, who with great swelling words do display, lay open, and expose unto
the view of the whole world this Monkish life. Bellar. praefat. in lib. de
monach.. 1.
That it is a kind of life more strict more sublime and eminent then the
divine or humane Law prescribes, which the infirmity also and weakness of
many men cannot bear; Ibid..
unto the which God has promised a hundred for one in this world, an
honorable seat in the day of judgment, a place and name in the kingdom of
heaven, greater and more noble then is that of sons and daughters: yea, a
mark whereby they shall be known amongst all the rest of the blessed; a mark
which our good Doctors term aureola, which is, say they, In lexico Theologico.
quaedam decentia, and pulchritudo singulari^ repraesentatiua aureolae,
praedicatorim ore, virginibus in ill^ part, martyribus in cicatricibus, vel
alijs partibu^ corporis secundum geni^ martyrij, vt statim ex aspect^ corporis
sciatur, qualis quisque fuit, virgo, martyr, aut Doctor, words that I am
ashamed to expound and express, what more? The rule and order of Cordeliers,
or Gray-Friers of Saint Francis order, Libr^ confor.
is the book of life, the hope of salvation, the marrow of the Gospel, the key
of Paradise, the state of perfection, the contract of the everlasting Covenant.
All they, which being of this Rule and Order dye, are saved. In a word;
Bernardin in Rosario. Thomas in lib. 4. sentent. distinct. 4.
the same grace descends on him that takes an Habit or Garment of Religion,
which descends on him that is ba^tised: the taking and wearing of a Monks
Cowle, conferrs a full remission of sins, both in regard of the fault, as
also of the punishment. That is good for him: but that is a small matter, he is
borne for others, he merits for others, he does more then the Law of God or man
does prescribe. And by his overplus, by his Masses, Orisons, Preachings,
Fastings, Contemplations, by his Watching and Waking, Abstinency, Cloisterlie
and Monastical Discipline, Devotion, Songs, lessons, Labor, and other
good-deeds, he redeemes the lives of those that desire to be made partakers of
the merits of his order and society. That is that, which they term, Works of
Supererogation; properly, seeing it is more then the divine or humane Law
prescribes, and God approues and allows of, saying, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish
ought from it; and notwithstanding prudently according to the world: for these
good Fathers that are not of this world, barter and exchange their
superstitions for the goods of this world, and make good traffic and trade of
them; according to Saint Peter's prophecy, giving their spiritual goods for
corporal, eternal for temporal, the fruit of their contemplations and
monastical occupations, for the fruit and profit, that the poor abused and
gulled worldling has got with the sweat of his brow, and labor of his hands;
the fruit of their merits, which these goodly me^ know in their consciences,
are nothing but chymeracs and idle conceits, for gold, silver, houses, rents,
possessions, and other real, substantial and perdurable things. And that we
may know, how wise and provident they are in their generation; they never give
any thing, but of what they superabound and exceed, in purueying and providing
first for themselves, their brethren and companions of their Order and Society,
of so great and good store of merits, as they have need of for to carry l'
Aureola in illa part, when they shall be in the Kingdom of heaven, if this be
the means to attain unto it: and then making largess of that, which should be
to them every way superfluous and unprofitable both here and there; wise in
comparison of Lucullus, who offered all his tapistrie to him that had need of
it. -- Horat. epis. 6.
Scribit, sibi millia quinque
Esse domi Chlamydum: parten^ vel tolleret omnes.
Exilis domus est, vbi non and plura supersunt,
Et Dominum fallunt, and prosunt furibus. --


But in lieu and recompense of that, they take all the booty, skin and all, of
the poor misused and guld fool, who is desirous of their Merchandise; he shall
and must give all his goods to the Cloister; will leave by his testament hunger
to his children, poverty to his parents, and bequeath to the Monks and Friars,
and to their paunches and bellies all his goods, his body to the Monastery, his
soul to their devotions: they refuse nothing, they take all, like the
horseleech that has two daughters, which cry, Pro. 30.15, 16.
Give, give; and like unto the grave, the barren womb, and the earth, that is
not filled with water, and the fire that says not, It is enough. Their saying
is, Hic datur expoui paradifus venditioni. Let them also hear that, which
Saint Peter says to Simon the Magician, Act. 8.20.
Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought, that the gift of God
may be purchased with money. And that of an Ancient, registered in the Canon
Law, 1. quaes. 1. cause. 12. Quicunque anathema danti, anathema accipienti, etc.
Accursed be the giver, Accursed be the receiver. This is the Simoniac all
heresy. How then if they be accursed and are not holy, can they sanctify
others? How can he that is accursed, bless?

IIII. Notwithstanding all this brokage, and all this traffic (if we will
accept and admit of the saying of those that admire it) is an Evangelical
life, grounded upon that which they term, Bellar. prafat. in lib. de monachis.
Counsels of perfection, Evangelical Counsels, which are the baste, ground,
and foundation of the whole monastical building. Counsels, which the Author of
the Pastoral Letter exhorts every one to follow, with great promises of
superabundance of glory to the superabundance and supererogation of their
works; and with threatenings of excommunication, and cutting off from the
Church in this world, and of eternal death in the other world, to all them
which shall dissuade and divert their children, their parents, or any others
from so holy a purpose; or they that oppose themselus to it, or that hinder it.
Thus did the false Prophets in old time, promise, and threaten; they did fill
and stuff with vain and deceitful hopes those, whom they could seduce; and
with frighting and terror those, which would not hear them. Wherefore if we
show as plainly and clearly, as the Sun is at noone-tide, that Christ has
never counseled these things, the Apostles never heard a word of them; that
there is no mention of them, neither in the Law, nor in the Gospel: and that
falsely they cry, the Lord has said it, when as the Lord has never spoken
it; may we not lawfully apply old things to new, and cry and say unto these
fair promisers, and terrible threatners, Ezech. 13.22.
With lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made
sad; and strength ^^d the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from
his wicked way, that I should save his life. A Father bringing up his children
in that religion, which is approved by the parties, is threatened with
excommunication, and eternal damnation, for this only cause, that believing
himself to be a Christian, by consequent not believing the Christian religion
to be tied to any order, he requires of his children the honor and obedience,
that they owe him according to God; and the children, who either by seducing,
or vicious inclination do steal and go away from their fathers and mothers,
forsakes them, and rebels against them, are encouraged and imboldened in their
impiety and rebellion, by the promises of a Paradise in picture, and of I know
not what greater perfection of glory, then ever had Adam and Eve, the parents
of all the living; Abraham and Sarah, the parents of the faithful; the
Patriarchs; then David, Iehosaphat, Josias; then all the Prophets, all the
Apostles and Evangelists, and a thousand million of Saints that were never
Monks or Friars, ever had, Job 13.12.13
Your remembrances are like unto ashes, and your bodies to bodies of clay; hold
your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what will.

CHAP. II.
I. The Author of the Pastoral Letter says, that the Evangelical Counsels
are of the Law. II. That is refuted by the declaration of the difference there
is, between the Law and the Gospel. III. The Law always commands, and never
counsels. IIII. If the Counsels were of the Law, all should be bound to observe
them. V. As they are not of the Law, so are they not of the Gospel.
THe Lord said of the Prophets of Judah, which prophesied out of their own
hearts, Ier. 23.22.
If they had stood in my counsel, they had caused my people to hear my words:
If then the Author of the Pastoral Letter, who preaches to us nothing but
Evangelical Counsels, has stood in the Gospel of God, he will prove his
Counsels by Gods words. All the words of God are in the holy Scriptures, he
will then prove them to us by the holy Scriptures. The holy Scriptures are
wholly comprehended in the Law and in the Gospel, he will then find them and
light on them, either in this or in that; in the one, or in the other; he makes
them parts of the Law, let us here his words; Now dear souls, Page 8.
The Law of God consists in two points; to depart from evil, and to embrace
and do good. The first comprehends all that is forbidden, which we term
negative precepts. The second, that which is commanded to be done, and that
again is divided into Precepts and Counsels, etc.

II. Job said to his friends, whom he called Job 13.4, 5.
forgers of lies, Physicians of no value: O that you would altogether hold your
peace, Prou. 17.28.
and it should be your wisdom: even a fool, when he holds his peace is
counted wise, and he that shutteeh his lips, is esteemed a man of
understanding. That should have been practiced here, for there is no truth, no
wisdom in all his words; these Counsels are termed by the Author of this
Letter, Evangelical Counsels: How then does he say, that they are of the Law?
I think that he knows not, that the Law and the Gospel differ, not in
circumstance only, but in substance: first, the Law proposes and sets forth
the justice of God, wholly naked, simple, absolute, without any mention of
mercy: the Gospel propounds and sets before our eyes the Justice of God,
joined with his Mercy; the Justice of God on Jesus Christ our pledge, 2. Cor.
5.21.
who has been made sin for us; the Mercy of God toward us, that are made
the righteousness of God in him. So Saint Acts 13.39.
Paul, By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Secondly, the Law sends us to our
selves, to seek there her back-righteousnesse; and requires of us perfect
holiness in our nature, and perfect holiness in our thoughts, words, and
deeds, but shows us not the way to come and attain unto it. The Gospel sends
us back to the righteousness of Christ, who has paid for us that, which he
did not owe, and is Ierem. 23.6.
The Lord our righteousness. Thirdly, the Law does promise eternal life, with
condition of works in all points holy and perfect, saying, Leuit. 18.5. Ezech.
20.11. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.
The man that does them shall live in them, Mat. 19.17.
if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. The Gospel promises
eternal life freely, without any condition of works, and requires of us only
faith to embrace Christ, who is our life, Phil. 1.19.
faith which God himself gives us, Romans 4.5.
To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness, says the Apostle, having said before, Romans
3.21.22.
that now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe. Fourthly, the Law was in man, or man's nature before the
fall, and some relics thereof remains as yet in the hearts of all men, Romans
2.14.15
which do by nature the things contained in the Law, and show the work of the
Law written in their heart. The Gospel is To. 16.25.26. Ephesians. 3.5.9.
a mystery, which was k^pt secret since the world began, but now is made
manifest and by the Scripture of the Prophets made known to all Nations.
Fifthly, 1. Tim. 1.9. 1. Cor. 2.7. 8. 9.
We know, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless
and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, etc. To the end, that having
convinced them of sin, she condemn them, and kill them. The Gospel is not
preached, but to them Mat. 11.28.
that are heavy laden and labor, by the feeling of their sins, Esaias 61.1.
Luke 4.21.
and are broken hearted. Sixthly, Romans 3.20.
The Law gives the knowledge of sin, Romans 4.15.
and works wrath, that is her effect; wherefore it is called 2. Cor. 3.7.
the ministration of death. The Gospel Romans 1.16.
is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes. Seventhly,
the Law was written 2. Cor. 3.3.
in Tables of stone. The Gospel is written in fleshie Tables of the heart.
Eighthly, John 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses; grace and truth by Jesus Christ, who has brought
the Gospel himself, and has been in person, Heb. 8.6.
Mediator of the new Testament. Ninthly and Lastly, Exodus 24.7. 8.
The Law has been dedicated by the blood of beasts: The Gospel Heb. 9.12.
has been consecrated by the own blood of the Son of God. And therefore the
Law and the Gospel not being one, and the same doctrine in substance; Gal.
4.24.
but being as different, as the mountain of Sina, and that of Sion; and as
Agar the bondwoman which engendereth to bondage, according to the flesh; and
Sarah the freewoman, engendring free children by virtue of the promise:
certainly if these pretended counsels are of the Law, they have been ill, yea,
absurdly termed Evangelical; and if they are Evangelical, they are no part of
faith, and can have no communion at all with (...)

III. The Author of the Pastoral Letter says, that the Law is divided into
Precepts and Counsels. What could be said more absurd? The Law commands, or
forbids always, it never counsels. The Law hindes by authority of the
Sovereign and Master, and never lets go, or gives over her right to give
counsel or advice, which is arbitrable, and left to the will of others. The
word of the Law is one, Do these things. If it speaks not so, it is no more
Law. So Christ Jesus reduces the whole law to these two Commandments, Mat.
22.27. 39. 40.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy minds. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and says,
On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. Mark, All the
Law reduced to two Commandments: Counsels are no Commandments, they are not
therefore of the Law. In like manner the Apostle speaking of the righteousness
of the Law, and of the righteousness of faith, opposes the one to the other
in this manner; Moses Romans 10.5. 6. 7.
describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does
those things, shall line by them that the righteousness which is of faith,
speaks on this wise; Say not in thine heart who shall ascend into heaven?
That is to being Christ down from above, etc. The word is nigh thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thy, heart, that is, the word of faith which may each. The
whole Law then consists in doing, as the whole Gospel ^^beleeuing; the one and
the other to obtain eternal life. Now the Counsels are not for to obtain
life; therefore they are not of the Law, and appertain not to the
righteousness of the Law. Bellas pr^fat. de Monach. 1. Qui Euangelica consilia
Christisecuti vita genus arctioris ac sublimieris instituunt, quam aut lex
diuina aut humana praescribit. Page 10.
And indeed Bellarmine says, that they which follow the Counsels of Christ,
d^^ lead ^^stricter and (...) thou the Divine or (...) Law prescribes. If
therefore be say true, it is easy ^o conclude, that such Counsels are not of
any Law, either cli^^ne or humane.

IIII. The very words of the Pastocall Book does furnish and minister to (...)
this argument, where this difference in set down between Counsel and
Precept; Her that does the works of Counsel, shall have a greater glory; and
he that fulfills not the Precept, shall not be able to avoid the punishment.
All the world is bound to the (...), under p^^^ of everlasting torments. The
whole world is stirred up and drawn to the other, both by the authority, and
by the love of the Savior that gives the Counsel. Is not that to say, that
the Counsels are not of the Law? for the Law is given to all, and all are bound
to keep it under pain of incurring the Lords curse: for it is from thence
that the Apostle proves, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
that as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the Law to do them. Mark, that he says All the
words, and pronounces the curse against those that keep them not: for as Saint
James says, James 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. Now he that observes not Counsels, is not guilty of the
transgression of the Law, is not under the curse, according to that which
Bellarmine tells us, that, Bellar. de monach. c. 7.. 6. Consilium si non
seruetur, nullam habet poenam.
the Counsel, if it be not kept, has no penalty. Whereupon it follows
necessarily, that the Counsels are not of the Law, and have nothing in common
with it.

V. As little are they of the Gospel; it might suffice me to produce the
confession even of our adversaries, reducing them to the Law: for if they are
of the Law, they appertain not to the Gospel, for the reasons heretofore
alleged. We may add, that they cannot be of the Gospel: for they recommend
no other thing but works, and all works are of the Law, which commands us to
do them; as faith is of the Gospel, which exhorts us to believe. Christ Jesus
being demanded of a Scribe, which is the first Commandment of all, answered,
that it is to love God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
mind, with all our strength; and that the second is like, namely this, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self; that said, he pronounces, Mark. 12.31.
that there is no other Commandment greater then these. And the Scribe agrees
unto, and consents with him, saying, that Mark. 12.33.
It is more then all burnt offerings and sacrifices. What, can the Counsels
command or recommend any work, which has no relation to the love of God, or
of our neighbor? Can they recommend any work greater, more excellent, more
difficult, then to love God with all his heart, with all his mind, with all
his strength? If the most excellent and exquisit of these pretended counsels,
cannot mount and ascend higher, and cannot counsel any other thing; either the
Counsels are of the Law, (Now if they were of the Law, they should be
Precepts, not Counsels); or they are neither of the Law, nor of the Gospel,
which is true, for works appertain not to the Gospel. It is true, that there
is frequent mention of works in the Gospel, as there is often mention of
Jesus Christ, and of faith in Christ in the Law. That which is said in the Law
touching faith in Christ, is of the Gospel: And reciprocally, that which is
said concerning the works of sanctification in the Gospel, is of the Law; the
Law speaks of Christ, and of faith in Christ, because Christ alone has
fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, and alone does give to his own (that
is to the Elect) virtue and strength by his Spirit to keep it; here on earth
(in our way, and in our journey) but in part; above in our heavenly Country
perfectly. The Gospel speaks of the works of the Law, because the Spirit of
Christ brings forth in us no other works, then those which the Law commands,
according to the promise of the new Covenant, I^rent. 31.31. 33. 34.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with
the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, etc. For this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, says
the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people; they shall all know
me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. A promise
which has two heads: the first, that God viewing and looking on us in the face
of his Christ (who has satisfied his justice for us) will forgive us our
sins without any reservation of the fault, or of the punishment; because he
will remember our sins no more. The second, that he will put his Spirit
within us, that he will take away our stony heart, and will give us a heart of
flesh, and will cause us to walk in his statutes, to keep his judgments and
do them, Ezech. 36.26. 27.
as the Prophet Ezechiel says. Now that this promise appertains unto the new
Testament, it is manifest by the exposition, which is given us in the Heb. 8.8.
and cap. 10.16.
Epistle to the Hebrews; wherefore seeing that the holy Spirit, which is given
us by the Gospel, works in us no other works, but those which are commanded
in the law. The Counsels, which they propound to us under the title of works
of perfection, being in no part commanded in the Law, cannot be recommended in
the Gospel: then if they be not, neither of the Law, nor of the Gospel, they
are but the inventions and fantasies of superstitious men; whom the sword of
God has stricken with and by this sentence, Esaias 1.12.
Who has required this at your hand? Esaias 29.13.
Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men.

CHAP. III.
I. The Scriptures makes no mention of Counsels of perfection. II. How they are
defined. III. There is no greater perfection then that, which makes us like
unto God, commanded to all men. IIII. The whole perfection of man consists in
charity, which is of the Commandment. V. Charity consists in that we should
love God with all our heart, and with all our strength, etc. and leaves no part
of us free for the practicing of Counsels. VI. The reason, by the which
Bellarmine would delude this reason, is refuted. VII. If the Counsels of
perfection (as they term them) were of God, all should be bound to follow
them; which is absurd. VIII. If they lead and bring one to perfection, all
should aspire unto it, and aim at it by the duty of necessity. IX. Counsels
are not works, are no good works. X. The first distinction between Counsel
and precept, refuted. XI. The second refuted. XII. The third and fourth
refuted.
IF 1. Pet. 4.11.
any was speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. This Precept and lesson
of the Apostle Saint Peter, either is not well learned, or not well practiced
of those, which speak of Counsels; and do trick and adorn them with the
title and name of Bellar. de Monach. ^.7.. 1.2.
Perfection, to cast a mist before the cies of those, th^^ swallow without
chowing all that is set before them for there is no place, either in the old or
new Testament, that terms and names the Counsels of Perfection. It is a new
name invented of late, to advance and give credit unto a doctrine, as new as
the name, and as imaginary or chimerical, as falsehood and untruth has
published it, and set it forth for real, true, and emphaticall.

II. Ibid. 11. Consilium perfectionis vocamus, opus bonum a Christ^ nobis non
imperatum, sed demonstratum; non mandatum, sed commend^tum, etc.
Bellarmine tells us, that The Counsel of perfection is a good work not
enjoined, but demonstrated and showed; not commanded, but recommended by
Christ; different from a Precept, in respect of the matter or subject, in the
form, and in the end. In the matter two ways, first, because the matter of a
Precept is easier, that of a Counsel more difficult. Secondly, because the
matter of the Precept is good, that of Counsels better and perfecter. In the
subject, because the precept is common to all, the Counsel is not. In the
form, The precept binds by his own virtue and power, but the Counsels depend
on the free judgment and free will of man. In the end, because the precept
promises reward to the obseruer of it, threatens penalty and punishment
against the transgressor: but the Counsels not observed has no penalty; and
observed, have a greater reward. The like in substance is written, and set
down by the Author of the Pastoral Letter, though more obscurely and
confusedly.

III. They forge and invent lies, and afterward they define, distinguish, and
amplify them as truth. They define them Counsels of perfection; and not only
the name, but the thing also is unknown in the Scripture. That is certain,
this may be easily proved by concluding arguments, necessary and indissoluble.
The greatest perfection that men, yea, the elect Angels can attain unto, is
that, whereby man is made like unto God, and that is commanded to all by our
Lord Jesus, saying, Matthew. 5.48.
Be perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. Let them
remaund, and send packing their Sophistry to them, which seek by their
disputations the glory of the world in their victory; not the glory of God
in the victory of the truth; let them not abuse the world, with the
distinction Bellar. de Monach. c. 13. 5.
of a necessary perfection, which Christ commands to all; and of a profitable
perfection, which he recommended unto the rich man, counselling him to sell
all that he had, to give it to the poor, and to follow him: for there is no
such beneficial and profitable perfection as that, which make us perfect, as
God is perfect; and there is no perfection so great, and so to be followed, as
that which is commanded. Christ (say they) counseled the rich man to sell all
that he had, and give it to the poor; that was something: but Christ
commands all, Matthew. 5.44.
to love their enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. This is a
great deal more: for a man may bestow all his goods to feed the poor, and
not have charity, 1. Cor. 13.3.
according to the testimony of Saint Paul: but none can love their enemy, and
not have charity.

IIII. Now charity Col. 3.14.
is the bond of perfectness; a bond which does keep us perfectly to God, as
it is written, 1. John 4.16.
God i^ love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. A
bond, which in God, unites us one with another, makes us one and the same body
in Christ, imparts and communicate to every one that, which is in all; and
makes common to all, that which is in every one. It makes thy gift mine, and my
gift thine; and so by the communication of gifts, and of all the graves which
God has imparted to every one, it perfecteth the body of the Church. This is
the intention of the Apostle, saying, 1. Cor. 3.22.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cophas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and yet are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. This is so manifest a truth, that Bellarmine himself confesses it,
faying, Bellar. de Monach. c. 2.. 2.
that the true perfection confisteth in charity: we know that it has many
degrees, but her highest degree is no other thing, then that which she is,
namely, charity. There is also none but knows, that without any exception of
degrees: charity is commanded and recommended commended to all men, as being
Romans 13.10. 1. Tim. 1.5.
the end^ and fulfilling of the Law, to the fulfilling of the which we are
bound. Therefore charity being the best perfection, and charity being the
excellentest and greatest perfection; and no work being acceptable unto God,
but that which springs from faith, which works by charity: he that seeks
for a better and greater perfection by (I know not what) Counsels, is but ill
counseled and advised; and he that persuades himself that he may attain
unto it, is ignorant of two things; of the excellent perfection of charity,
and of the great imperfection of his own nature, an enemy to charity: for
Romans 8.7.
the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be.

V. The whole Law is comprised in charity, and this charity consists in two
points; Mark. 12.30. 31.
The first and the greatest is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind.
The second like unto this, is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. This
is that which every man must do; this is all which the holiest and perfectest
man can do, Eccles. 12.13.
Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man,
says Solomon. Wherefore there remains nothing else to be done: God having
commanded that all the parts of man, and all his strength, powers and faculties
be incessantly and for ever exercised in charity toward him, and in charity
toward his neighbor, according to him. To what purpose then is this cauilling
so much? To what end (O Bellarmine) so great a cloud of expositions,
divisions, corollaries to darken the Sun? Tell me, if man can do more, then
love God with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his mind, with all
his strength? The Angels, the Saints that are with God, can they do more then
that? If no creature, heavenly nor earthly; If Jesus Christ Man, in as much as
man, though holy without measure, could do no more; to what purpose then these
Counsels? After that the whole soul, the whole boast, the whole mind, all the
powers and faculties have been, and are employed and occupied in the love due
to God; does there remain in us any part, any faculty that may be spared to
be employed and busied in Counsels, not commanded, not due?

VI. He thinks to shift off this, and says, Bell. de Monach. c. 13.. 11.
that to love God with all his heart, and with all his soul, is nothing else
but to love him truly, sincerely, without faining, without dissimulation; and
that to love him with all his strength, is to love him pro viribus according to
his strength. He says somewhat, but he says not all: for God looks not to
that which the sinner, apostat, bankrupt of his graces can now do. He asks
and exacts that which man, whom he has created according to his image,
inricht with all his blessings, made a guardian of all his goods does owe him.
That man has received of God his body, his soul, all his faculties, all the
powers of his soul; he owes then himself wholly unto God; and there is
nothing in him, which ought not to be incessantly bandied and bent to his
service, and to the service of his neighbor for his sake, without reservation
and exception of degree, without restriction of condition, without limitation
of time. All that which man thinks, says, does, ought to be thought, said,
done for Gods glory; and there 1 Cor. 10.31.
is no place, time, action, in the which he ought not, but procure and advance
his glory. He is bound and obliged to him in a threefold manner. First, by
right of Creation, for he is bound to do all that Adam did in his state of
innocence: Adam by bond of nature did love God with all his heart, with all
his soul, with all the faculties of his soul, with all the powers of all his
faculties. Every man ought to do as much; we have wasted and consumed Gods
goods, and by our own fault are brought to that extremity, that we have not
wherewith to pay. But poverty, and specially that which proceeds from bad
husbandry, and unthriftiness is no acquittance; and binds not the creditor to
cancel and blot out our bill and obligation, and cannot hinder the creditor to
ask justly that which is his due. Secondly, by right of redemption, we are the
redeemed of our Lord Jesus, he has purchased us with his own precious blood.
And there is nothing in us, for the which he has not spilt his blood; nothing
therefore but ought to be for him, but we are bound to dedicate and consecrate
to his glory in the highest degree, and with the greatest intention that can
be possible to ye creature. This is the argument of the Apostle Saint 1. Cor.
6.19. 20
Paul, Ye are not (says he) your own, far ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. We
ought therefore to glorify God in all that with belongs unto him, we ought to
give him all that which he has purchased and bought: he has purchased and
bought whole man; all that is in man is his, therefore he ought to dedicate
himself to him in heart, with his mouth, and in effect, saying with David,
Psalm. 103.1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name;
This is not arbitrable, and at the will and pleasure of man, but necessary.
Thirdly, by express commandment, and every commandment is of necessite. The
Commandment is, Luke 10.27.
Thou shall lone the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind. A Commandment, which
comprehends all the degrees, and all the perfection of the love of the creature
toward his Creator. For if there be any degree of love which God has not
commanded, surely the Law of God is not perfect; and David shall have deceived
us, in saying Psalm. 19^.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, and naming it Ps. 119.105.
a (...) unto his feets, and alight unto his path: for there should be
certain degrees of charity, the which he could not see by the light of the
same law: God himself should have deceived us, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
forbidding us to add to his Law, or diminish from it; and propounding it to
us in his Law, as a perfect rule of all perfection convenient and suitable to
the creature in the highest degree and place. It should also follow, that it is
not the image of holiness, which was in Adam, before he did cast himself
headlong from the height of himself; that chartie is not Romans 13.10.
that fulfilling of the Law, against that which we have learned of Saint Paul;
there being some charity which the Law does not command or some perfection
which surpasses the bounds and limits of charity and climes higher then the
love of God, and of our neighbor can do. That God could not exact of man a
perfect charity, God not being able to demand justly, that which man might
justly refuse him, as not being bound to do it. These are the absurdities, in
the which they implicate and i^tangle themselves, which do expound the word of
God according to their fancies and humor, and restrain them only to the
quality of our charity, God having extended them to the quantity by the word,
All. For he which has made al, will have all, or will not have at all; he
will have no parther: he which has given us all our strength, demands all;
being more then reasonable and just, that we should employ them all, in, and
to his service, as well as to our own. Let us now retort upon Bellarmine his
own exposition; All are commanded to love God with all their strength, that is
to say, omni virtute, proviribus, with all their power, according to their
strength, says he. Now the Monks and Friars can do nothing, but that which
is according to their force and strength; therefore they can do nothing but
that, which they are commanded to do, and so the Counsels vanish away.
Again, we must love God according to our strength and force; but our heart
has his strength, our soul has her force our minds have their powers; we
must therefore unite and knit all this strength and might, and put them
together in working, to do the Lords business: we must not do like Acts 5.1.
2.
Ananias and Saphira, who having vowed and dedicated all their possession to
God, kept back part of the price of the same, and reserved it for themselves.
We have made a vow to him of all that we are, and that have we done in our
Baptism; we will then pay our vow, all of us ought to do it: he that keeps
back from him a part of himself, or the least parcel of any part, goes not
roundly to work with him, and is accursed by the holy Ghost, crying, Ierem.
48.10.
Cursed be he, that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, that is to say, He
that is slack and remiss to do the work of the Lord; and slack indeed is
he, that goes not to work with all his strength, powers, and faculties, that
diuides and shares them out between the heaven and the earth, between sin
and piety, between man and God: Romans 1.36.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever. Amen.

VII. Let us prosecute the refutation, and go on with it; There are, say they,
Counsels of perfection. If there be any, they are of God, or of men: If from
God, all men must follow the: for if the requests and desires of Kings are
commandments, as an Heathen man says; how much more then are the Counsels of
the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, who looks unto none, but such Esaias
66.7.
as tremble at his word. Christ Jesus said to the Church of Laodicea, Revel.
3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold^^ied in the fire, that thou may be rich;
and white ^^^ent, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
unkednesse do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salue, that thou
may see. This is the only place of the whole Scripture in the old and new
Testament, where God gives counsel unto man, the Creator to his creature, the
Lord to his servant, the King of heaven to his subjects dwelling on earth. And
this Counsel is such an express commandment, that the Lord has spewed that
Church out of his mouth for not following of the same: for he that gives
counsel to another, desires and wishes, that he would conform himself to
it; and is sorry, yea, angry and much offended, when it is rejected, when
especially it is a good and wholesome counsel, given by the superior to his
inferior, by the father to the son, the King to his subject: to hasten to end,
and to urge this, we say, al men are bound Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.17.
to know and proone what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God,
to do the fame, according to the prayer, which every one makes unto God, Thy
will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. All the Counsels of God, are the
will of God, wherefore all men are bound to understand them, to prove and do
them. All that which we are bound unto to do, is a commandment, the Counsels
of God are things that we are bound to do; therefore the Counsels of God are
commandments. Again, God wills and requires, that all men practice his
Counsels; God wills not, and requires not, that all men should shut up and mew
themselves in a cloister, abstain from marriage, carry a wallet or scrip, and
go like vagabonds from door to door, from town to town, to beg and crave
alms: for such a life would be the ruin and destruction of the Commonweal,
and of the Church. Therefore to abstain from marriage, live in poverty,
nourish and sustain himself with the labor and sweat of other men, to mew
himself up in a Monastery separated from the company of men, is not a Counsel
of God.

VIII. There are Counsels of perfection: If there be, all must aspire unto
them; every man is inclined to it by nature, every one tends and inclines unto
perfection by a natural principle and instinct; every Christian tends and
makes toward the Christian perfection by a spiritual instinct, by a principle
of grace; every Christian is bound to it by commandment, is drawn to it by
promise, is incited and encouraged by the example of all the Saints: Phil. 4.8.
9.
Brethren (says the Apostle) whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: of there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Those things which
ye have both learned and received and heard, and seen in me do, and the God
of peace shall be with you. If the Counsels are of this rank and number, the
Apostle commands all men and women to do them, to them that does them he
makes a promise from God, that the God of peace shall be with them. If they are
not of this number, they are neither true, nor venerable, nor just, nor pure,
nor lovely, nor of good report, there is no virtue nor praise in them. And
therefore they are not to be done, but to be eschewed and avoided. This is the
express commandment of our Master, Doctor, and Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew.
5.48.
Be perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven, is perfect; this is also
the express commandment of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 13.11.
Be perfect: Heb. 6.1.
Let us go on unto perfection. To this end the Scripture has been given us,
2. Tim. 3.17.
That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
For this end the Lord has given us Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4.13.
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of God. S. Paul made toward this perfection, and labored to come to
it, by Phil. 3.13. 14.
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, he pressed toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Noah, Job, Abraham, all the Saints of the old
and the new Testament have done the like, for which cause the Scripture terms
them perfect; God who accepts in his children the will and willingness, the
pronenes of their minds and forwardness, for the deed, honoring their holy
endeavor and affection with the name of perfection, which they did aspire unto,
and now enjoy and possess. We ^ake now, if the perfection of Counsels bring
to the Monks and Friars any greater perfection, then the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, unto which all Christians shall attain and
come unto a perfect man? If that cannot be, what use have Counsels? If it can
be, there will be some perfection out of Christ, and without Christ; and some
greater perfection, then the perfect stature of Christ, which is impossible. We
ask again, if a man in this life can attain unto a greater perfection, then
that which was in Noah, Job, Abraham, Moses, in the Patriarchs, the Prophets
and Apostles? If any man shall be advanced and exalted in glory above them in
the life to come? If this be absurd and false, to what end and purpose is this
warbling and prattling of Counsels; which brings to no man any greater
excellency and advantage, then that which infinite Saints have attained unto,
which have never bin Monks, never made vow of continency, never carried the
bag and wallet, never followed the Monastical devotions? Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Noah, Moses, etc. were great men, and rich, and lived in the state of
matrimony. The holy Apostles have never followed any other rule, then that
which is common to all Christians. Poverty and the forsaking of their goods
was never imposed to them by Christ; and they never bound themselves to it by
vow, as the whole history of the Gospel teaches us; and Extr^^. Job. 22. Tit.
14. c. 5. Quia quorundam neque Christum exprepriationem praedictam ^mnis iuris
cuin^cunque rei proprietatem, and eius vsu^ in se sernasse, noe eam imposuisse
Apostolis, noque sub voto ab ipsis fuisse inceptam Eu^^gelica seu Apostolica
docet historia, sed contrarium euidentius Manifestat.
Pope John the 22, who (according to the opinion that they have conceived of
Popes) could not err, Ibid. c. 4. Cum ^^ter assertio^^^ huiusm^di pertinacem,
cum scripturae sacrae contradica^t express, deinceps erroneam fore censendam,
and baereticam de fratrum nostrorum consilio, hoc perpetuo decla^amus edicto.
affirms the same so far forth, that he pronounces, that the contrary
opinion is contrary to the Scriptures, erroneous, and heretical, and makes a
perpetual Edict and Decree for it.

IX. These Counsels (says Be^armine) are works: but a Counsel is not a
work. It is that which persuades, or disswades the work; the one goes and
m^rcheth before as the cause, the other comes after as the effect. Iethro
gave good counsel to Moses concerning the government of the people; his
counsel was one thing, that which Moses did according to his counsel was
another thing: sometime the counsel is given, and there follows no work;
Christ gave a good counfell to the Church of Laodicea, who made no account of
it, Revel. 3.18. 2 Samuel 17.23.
Achitopel hanged himself, seeing that the counsel of Chusai was preferred
before his own. These examples do show plainly enough, that Counsel is not
a work. He adds, that the Counsel of perfection is a good work. If that were
so, the Law of God, which is the perfect rule of every good work, would make
mention thereof.

X. He distinguishes between Counsel and Precept, saying, that Counsels are
better, and more difficult to be kept then Precepts are. Falsely and fondly:
for there is no one Counsel, but is easy to be observed. And there is no
Precept, the perfect keeping whereof is not impossible. There are now ad^ies
some Monks and Friars which eat no flesh. Hieron. aduers. Jouian. lib. 2.
The Pyth^goreans did not cate any thing that did move or live. The Priests of
Egypt serving their false gods, did abstain from flesh and wine, did eat
bread rarely, did not eat eggs and mill^e, saying, that eggs were liquid
flesh, and milk was blood of another color. The Gymnosophists did nourish and
sustain themselue with apples and rice. In Crete the prophets of Jupiter did
abstain from flesh and all sodden meats. Philo Iudaeus.
The Essens amongst the Jews did taste of nothing before Sunset; some of them
fasted three days, other some six days, without taking of any refection;
when they did eat, (...).
bread and salt was their only meat, and clear water their only drink.
Their table was pure of al beasts having blood. What order amongst all the
Monks leads so austere a life? The Monks and Friars of these days do
abstain from marriage. The Priests of Egypt never had to do with women. The
Essens also did abstain from them. Many Fires live poorly, beg their bread,
and possess nothing. What do they, which the Cynick Philosophers have not
done before them? Hieron aduers. Iouian. lib. 2.
Antisthenes sold all that he had, and distributed it unto the poor, reserving
nothing for himself but his cloak to cover him. His Disciple Diogenes did we
are two cloakes against the cold, had his bag and wallet for his granarie, his
bottomless tubbe for his house, his bread for his trencher, the palm of his
hand for his cup, he had nothing but that which he got by begging, and did
reserve nothing till the morrow; whence he was called (...), A careless man,
who is only for the present day, that cares not for the morrow. We have found
among the Heathen, not in Cloisters, men keeping and observing Counsels
exactly. Let them but name us one man living in Monasteries, which has exactly
kept the Commandments. It is a Counsel to enter into a Monastery, and become
Monk. The great number of them which become Monks, and the multitude of
Priests which live without lawful wives, is an apparent demonstration, that
there is nothing more easy to be done then that. It is a Commandment, Matthew.
5.48.
to love our enemies. Now experience shows, that there is nothing more hard
then this, it being the highest degree of the love of Christ, Romans 5.8. 10.
which died for his enemies. Therefore we may easily see, that the
Commandments of God are better, and more difficult, then all ^^eir Counsels.

XI. The second difference between Precepts and Counsels is, that a Precept is
general, prescribed and given unto all, a Counsel is particular, given and
belonging only to some. Thomas Aquinas in his small Treatise of this subject,
and set down in the end of the Pastoral Letter, is of a contrary opinion and
judgment, and strives with might and maine to prove by the Scriptures and
Fathers, Page 10. ve 11.12
that it is a general doctrine propounded to the whole world, and therefore we
must take the Counsel given unto the young man, as if God himself had
propounded to all, according to that which our Savior says unto his
disciples, Mark. 13.37.
What I say unto you, I say unto all, etc. What, says Thomas Aquinas? Is it
not the doctrine of the Church of Rome, that single life is a Counsel, as the
Apostle says, I give Counsel concerning virgins, 1. Cor. 7.25: but the
Apostle gives this Counsel unto all, if it be a Counsel, 1. Cor. 7.7.
I would that all men were even as I my self. To marry to avoid fornication,
say they is an indulgence or Counsel, and to this end do they apply the
Apostles words; 1. Cor. 7.6.
I speak this by permission or Counsel, not of commandment. This Counsel
also is general, for he ordaines, 1. Cor. 7.2.
that to avoid fornication, let every ^^n have hit own wife, and let every
woman have her own husband. Therefore this second difference is vain and of
no moment.

XII. In like manner the third and fourth differences are of no moment. For
though the Counsels of men are arbitrable, and put to the choice and freewil of
him to whom they are given, to do them, defer them, or leave them; The
Counsels of God are not left to man's discretion and will, but carry with them a
necessity; and bind unto punishment those which reject them, as much as
Precepts do. For when God speaks, the servant must hearken; if he do it, he
shall receive a reward of free grace; if he do it not, he shall be justly
punished: being a thing most just, that the creature (which has not vouchsafed
to follow the Counsel of his Creator; the child that, of his father; the
servant that, of his master; man, who is but a worm, the Counsel of his God,
all mighty, all wise, wholly good) should be disdained and contemned of him,
driven and thrust out of his house, and cast into utter darkness, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

CHAP. IIII.
I. A Christian ought not to propose and prescribe to himself a greater
perfection, then that of the Law, until he has kept the Law. II. It is in
vain for men to aspire unto a greater perfection, then is that of the Law,
seeing that no man living can keep and observe the Law. III. The unregenerate
man can in no manner of ways keep the Law, being unfurnished and destitute of
all those things requisite to the doing of a good work. IIII. The first
condition is, that he be good, just, and a true member of Christ; but he is a
wicked one, and without Christ. V. The second, that his work be conformable to
the word of God. VI. And be done in faith and charity, which he has not. VII.
The third, that he do them to the glory of God, whereat he aims not at all.
VIII. His best works are nothing but sins.
Our Lord Christ Jesus asked those of his time, Luke 14.28. 29. 30.
Which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts
the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it; lest happily after he has
laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all thut behold him, begin
to mock him, saying, This man began to build and was not able to finish. And
that question did he propound unto them, after that he had said, Luke 14.20.
If any man come unto me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he ca^^ at he
my disciple. Setting before their eyes, that he which has determined in
himself to be his disciple, and confess his name, ought before all things to
enter into himself, search into his affections, weigh and ponder exactly what
he does, ask his conscience whether he feel himself disposde and ready to
be harried and vexed, and less of his (...) friends, and to leave them, to be
bared and persecuted by strangers, to pass by and pass over all manner of
reproaches, to suffer and endure the rau^shing of all his goods, to die and lose
his life for the truth of the Gospel, for the glory of his Savior: lest that
having rashly undertaken a work and task accompanied with so many
difficulties, he faint in his business, shrink and give over, and withdraw
himself from it to his exceeding shame. For it is better not to begin, then
after ha^ing ^^id the foundation of godliness, not to will o^ (...), or not be
able to build thereon, until that the building be reared and raised up, to be
a holy Temple to the Lord: Eccles. 7.8.
Better is the end of a thing, then the beginning thereof, Mat. 24.13.
for he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. As for others,
which (like dogs) return to their own vomit again: 2. Pet. 2.21.
It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered
unto them. Because that by the just judgment of God, Luke 11.2^.
the last state of those man is worse then the first. It is (says a Friar) a
wise and good device most necessary for them which travel, Stella in Lu^.
cap. 14.
that they undertake not things hard and difficult about their reach, but
measure themselves in themselves according to their power and ability. Whence
he takes occasion to blame those, which choose with small discretion and
weariness an austere and rigorous life; and afterward are at a stand, and
faint by the way, not having strength enough to bear and endure it. In Thomas
Aquinas time, there were certain men, who seeing the world abused with an
opinion of the monastical perfection, propounded, that no men entering into
religion, ought to embrace the observation of Counsels, before they be
exercised in the observation and keeping of the Commandments. Thomas in his
Treatise added to the Pastoral Letter. page 4.
Thomas reproues and reiects this proposition; but Jesus Christ commadning us
to count the cost before one build, approues it, and reason confirms it: for
Bellar. de Monach. c. 2.. 2.
Bellarmine grants us, that true perfection consists in charity. Now charity
is the fulfilling of the Law, we must then begin by that. Thomas 2. verse. 2. q.
184. art. 3.
Thomas himself tells us, likewise Extraua. Joan. 22. tit. 14. c. 3. ad
conditorem. Perfectio vitae Christianae principaliter and essentialiter in
charitate consistit.
a Pope, that perfection consists principally and essentially in precepts and
charity, but Secundario and dispesitiue in consilijys.
secondarily and dispositiuely in Counsels: It is therefore more then just and
reasonable, that all be exercised in that which is the most principal and
essential, before they trouble themselves about things, which are but
accidental and accessarie, as our Savior Christ said unto Mariha, who left
the principal for the accessaries; Luke 13.41.42
Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one
thing is needful; and Mary has chosen that good part, which shall not be
taken away from her. That good part of Mary was, that she did attend and apply
her self first of all unto the hearing of the word of God, and did learn from
the mouth of Christ Jesus the things, which appertain unto the Kingdom of
God: Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness. The same says
Thomas, that 2.2. q. 146. art. 5.
the perfection of religion consists principally in the imitation of Christ.
Therefore the Religious Monks and Friars ought first and principally to be
exercised and busied in this, before they go further and proceed on; If they
do it, there shall not remain unto them a poor minute of life (though it
were of nine hundred thereescore and nine years, as that of Methusela) to be
at leisure, and apply themselves to the imitation of the Authors of Cloisters;
we learn of Bellarmine, Bellar. de Monach. c. 7. 3.
that Counsels include Precepts, and comprehends them, and dee add something
over and above the precept. And we have heard of him, Ibidem 2. and 3.
that the matter of a precept is good, and easier; that of a Counsel better,
and more difficult. A man ought therefore before all things, to exercise
himself in that which is good and more easy, and so mount by degrees to that
which is added, and by reason of this addition is better, perfecter, and more
difficult; it being impossble to attain unto the highest step or degree of a
thing, without passing by the inferior degrees thereof. Lastly, Jbid. 6.
A Precept being observed has a reward; not being observed, a punishment: but
a Counsel not observed has no punishment, and being observed, has a greater
reward. These are Bellarmines words, whence it follows, that we ought first
to exercise our selves in the observation of the Commandments, to obtain the
reward and avoid the punishment; and that done, and not sooner to proceed on
to the keeping of Counsels: seeing that the not keeping of them is not
dammageable and hurtful to us, by the inflicting and imposing of any
punishment; and the observing of them is not profitable to us, but by the
impression of that which they term, Aureola in illa part.

II. Now if we make all them see (that have eyes in their heads) that there is
no man living in this world (never was any but Jesus Christ the just) never
shall be any, without some would of conscience, having a pure heart and
without spot, thoughts without vice, affections without passion, and a life in
all points innocent; none by consequent, that ever has kept, or that ever can,
during his soiourning in this flesh of sin, keep the Commandments of God.
We will sufficiently prove against Thomas, and him which has translated his
little book, that men do toil and labor in vain, after a diligent seeking
and inquisition of a greater glory in the observation of Counsels, not being
able to attain unto the first degree of glory by the keeping of precepts; that
most vainly they seek perfection in that which is arbitrarie, not being able
to perform and perfect that which is necessary for them. In a word, they
abuse themselves in the expectation and hope of an uncertain reward, for having
done more then they ought; not being able to avoid the certain punishment,
for not having done that which they ought to have done. And that will we prove,
not to make men careless and negligent, but to make them humble; not to
provoke them to evil, but to make them see and know their disease and misery,
to the end they may seek their cure in Christ Jesus, who Isa. 61.1.
came to bind up the brokenhearted.

III. Man is to be considered in this life two ways; out of Christ, and
altogether such a one, as he is by nature, not called effectually, not
justified in the blood of Christ, not sanctified by by the Spirit of God: In
Christ, called, justified, sanctified, living in Christ, and having Christ
living in him. We need not bring in here the ancient Heathen, we need not
take the pains to go to the Turks; or search and ransack the Synagogue of
the Jews, or transport our selves over to those other Nations, which have
never heard of Christ, or which hate Christ, and scoff at his Gospel, to
find there men of the first kind. Christendom is full of them, the
Monasteries are filled with them, the private houses do swarm with them. As
our Savior Christ speaking of his Church, said, Mat. 20.16.
Many be called, but few chosen. Even so it is. There is an infinite number of
Christians, 2. Tim. 3.5.
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, Tit. 1.16.
they profess that they know God, but in works they deuie him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. They that are
such, not having the Spirit of Christ Jesus, are not his, although they are
called by his name; for such does he hold them, and as to such will he say to
them in the last day, Luke 13.27. Matthew. 7.23.
I tell you I know not whence you are, I never knew you. All they which are of
this kind and stamp in the Church of God, as all they also which are out of
the Church, and know not Christ, we say they cannot do nor make any good
work, yea, though they were in the Church, Pastors, Doctors, Bishops, Monks;
and out of the Church had all the virtues of Solo^, Plat^, Aristides,
Epamin^ndas, Phoci^n, Fabrici^^, Camilla, and if there were any other among the
Heather commendable and praise-worthie for his prudence, continency, justice,
temperance, modesty, and other virtues, which make men to be admirable among
their fellow-companions, and to be admired of them. In a good work three
things are necessarily required, of which the man not regenerate, be he
Christian or Heathen, is unfurnished and destitute. A good Author, a good
course manner and form, a good end. If any of these conditions be wanting, he
which works, makes not a good work, he transgresses the Law, he taints
himself with preuarication, he binds himself to the curse, and makes himself
the child of hell.

IIII. The first condition is, that he, which does a good work, be good
himself, Christ our Master has taught it so, when he said, Mat. 12.33.
Either make the tree good and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt, for the tree is known by his fruit: Mat. 7.18.
for a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit. He compares men unto trees, and says, that they must be first
good trees, before they can bring any good fruit. To be a good tree, is to be
pleasing and acceptable unto God; that man which thinks and desires to do a
thing that God accepts of, and is pleasing unto him, must be first assured,
that he himself is pleasing and acceptable unto God: for it is not the work
that makes the person acceptable unto God; but it is the person, which obtaines
of God mercy and favor toward his work, as we read of Abel and Caine, Genesis
4.4.5.
that the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering, but unto Caine, and
to his offering he had no respect; he had respect first unto his person, and
in the second place to the work of his person. Now man is not a good tree by
nature, he is by nature Romans 11.24.
a wild olive tree: God said of all men considered in their own nature, Deu.
32.32.33
Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah, their
grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, their wine is the poison
of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. He describes them as being nothing
worth, as stark naught, and willing no good thing, being able to do nothing;
as being not only insufficient and incapable of good, but also (most capable
of evil) unable and incapable to think, say, do the things according unto
God; inclined and addicted to things, which are displeasing and offensive to
him. It is (says he) Isai. 9.2.
a people malking in darkness, Ephesians. 4.18.
having the understanding darkened, yea a people that is nothing else but
darkness; Ephesians. 5.8.
ye were sometimes darkness, says the Apostle; Is there any light in
darkness, which is a riuation of the light? nothing less: 1. Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. This is to describe it both priuatiuely, or by way of exclusion, by
that which he comprehends not; and positiuely, by that which he comprehends:
he retains not the things of the Spirit of God, the mystery of the Cross of
Christ, the great things which God has done to us, the things which God will
have us to do; Mat. 16.17.
Flesh and blood reveal not these things, but the Father which is in heaven.
2. Cor. 3.5.
And we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God. He comprehends the things of God, as things
which are not of God, 1. Cor. 1.23.
We preach (says the Apostle, Christ crucified unto the Jews, a stumbling
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. Behold the distribution and division
of a man that has no excellency in himself, but his soul! either he is a
Jew, and Christ is a stumbling block unto him; or elsen Greek, and Christ is
foolishness unto him. He understands the things which are displeasing unto
God, and understands not those things which are pleasing unto him. God said of
his people, Ierem. 4.22.
My people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish children, and
they have none understanding, they are wise to do evil; but to do good they
have no knowledge. What would he then say, or what would not he say of them,
which are not his people? Before the Flood, Genesis 6.5.
God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. After the
Flood, he said, Genesis 8.21.
The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Here is no place for
cauilling, he says not, some imagination of the thoughts, but every
imagination of the thoughts: he says not, that this imagination of the
thoughts is for the most part evil, but that it is altogether evil; yea more
plainly, that it is only evil, and that not by respits and pauses, but
continually. The reason is, the natural man is only flesh, the Scripture
says, that he is flesh, that he is in the flesh, that is to say, that he is
corrupted, yea, drowned in corruption; even unto the very highest part of his
soul, which is his understanding, as the Apostle speaks of Infidels, that
Tit. 1.15.
their mind and conscience is defiled, Col. 2.18.
and vainly puffed up by their fleshly minds. This is all that their good wit
and spirit serves unto, to make them swel and puff up with presumption, as
Toades do with venom: for, as for God, Romans 8.7.
(...): The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be. Christ Jesus speaking of these things,
says, Mat. 6.22.23.
The light of the body is the eye, if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light: but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be
full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness? The Lord teaching us by these words, that if the mind
and understanding, which is the light of the soul, be darkness; man cannot
think, will, say, do any thing which is good and just: for the will to will
well, must be ruled by the mind, understanding well; and the body to do
well, must be governed by the will, willing well that which is good. Now the
Scripture says of the unregenerated man, that Esaias 48.4.
his neck is as an iron sinew, and his brow, brass; What is harder then iron
or brass? such is the will of man; but the iron is tractable and plyant to the
hammer, the fire can mollify it and make it pliant, it can be framed and
fashioned in diverse forms by the hammer: It is not so with man's will, it
cannot be softened; wherefore the Scripture compares it unto a stone; and by
such a comparison declares, that it is inflexible unto good, as a stone that
breaks, but never bows. Ezech. 36.26.
A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh. Our heart is naturally so inflexible to godliness, that God promises
not to correct it or strengthen it; but to take it away, and to give us in
stead of that, an heart of flesh, a pliable heart, a heart framed and fashioned
to the obedience of his commandments. He promises to change the whole nature,
not in regard of the substance of it, but in respec of the evil qualities
thereof, which are ours, and make us saplesse and without life, when question
is of the things of God: in stead of which, he will put in us holy qualities,
by the which he will fashion us and transform us to his will. After this sort
our will is described priuatiuely and exclusiuely. God has described it also
positiuely, saying, Ier. 17.9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. In a word,
all they that are out of Christ Jesus, are termed by the holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in trespasses and sins; and by consequent, destitute of all principle
of moving, and of spiritual life, what knowledge soever they have of this
life, and what dexterity, industry and address soever they show in the things
of this world; and therefore we must not think it strange, if the Apostle
calls all of us Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath. Let a man judge now, if those that are such, naturally
unapt unto all good, inclined naturally unto all evil, they that are the
object of Gods anger, can be called good to begin, nay, to think any good
thing. To be good trees, we must be taken away from our stock and stem,
plucked out from the old Adam, transported and transplanted in a new soil,
grafted into the free Olive tree, in corporated in Christ Jesus; who has
pronounced this sentence, John 15.5.
I am the Vine, ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. They that
are not regenerated, are not grafted into Christ; the means of the union of
the Elect with Christ is his Spirit; and these are Jude 19.
sensual, having not the Spirit. Some of them may have, and have the Spirit
bridling and restraining them, staying and repressing the boiling and surging
of their flesh; as it is happened unto many Heathen, which have been esteemed
virtuous men, because God willing to preserve the states and families of this
world by good order and civil government, gave them the gift to hide their
vices: but none of them ever had the sanctifying spirit to mortify their
flesh. It is the privilege of the members of Christ Jesus, of those that in
him are made by grace the children of God, Romans 8.14.
for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God; but
Romans 8.^.
if any man have not the Spirit of God, he is none of his. Therefore the
infidels, the hypocrites, and all unregenerated Christians, of what religion
soever they be, being destitute of the first quality and condition required in
a good work, we may say of them that, which our Savior Christ said of the
Pharisees their companions; Mat. 12.34.
O generation of Vipers, how can ye being evil, speak good things? for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

V. The second condition of a good work is, that it be well done; whereunto is
required; first, that it be conformable unto the word of God in all things, so
that he which has done it, may protest with David, Psalm. 119.105.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. If it declines or
swarues never so little, the workman of the same is accursed by this sentence
and decree, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. ^.10.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. Now
as God is a Spirit, Romans 7.14.
so the Law is spiritual, and is given first and principally to the Spirit;
and is the rule not only of outward actions, but also of the most hidden and
secret thoughts of the heart. It is not enough, that a man lay not violent and
bloody hands on his brother; Mat. 5.22.
If he be angr^e with his brother without a cause; 1. Ioh. 3.15.
if he hate his brother, the Scripture says, he is a murderer. He that has
not actually committed adultery with his brothers wife; if he looks on her to
lust after her, Christ Jesus says, Mat. 5.28.
he has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Which of the
Heathen knows, that the Law has been written in his heart, to the end it
might rule his thoughts? which of them has thought, that hidden lust was a
vice? which of them has emptied and purged his heart of it? what do we
speak of Infidels? How great is the number of our Christians, that know not
the ten Commandments, although there are but ten? how few are there of them
that know them, which think on them to conform their lives according to them?
To tell them of lust or concupiscence, and to condemn it as a sin, is so
strange a pa^^doxe unto them, that if God himself should come down from
heaven to tell them of it, they would not believe it; so ignorant are they in
the knowledge of the true and lawful uses of the Law; how then can they order
and square their actions by the same. This is also the privilege of the
regenerate; to make a benefit of the Law for the direction of his life; because
God has engraven it in his heart by his holy Spirit, which the unregenerate
man knows not: Ier. 31.33.
I will, says the Lord, put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts. Ezech. 36.27.
I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and
ye shall keep my Indgements and do them. This has made Lombard to write
after Saint Austin, Prosper, and other Fathers, that Lombard. lib. 2. did. 41.
^t. A.
where the knowledge of the eternal truth is wanting, there virtue is false,
although the manners and fashions are very good.

VI. In the next place, A work to be a good work well done, must be done in
faith: Romans 14.23.
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. They which are not renewed in the
spirit of their mind, may be enlightened so far, that they may know the truth,
and make profession of it, and take pleasure in it for a time; as Simon Magus
and Judas, who believed by a temporary faith; but they have not the justifying
faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
by the which Christ dwells in their hearts, Joh. 1.12. John 3.16.
which receive the Lord Jesus, Gal. 3.14.
and all the blossing of Abraham through Christ, and the promise of the Spirit
through faith, applying and appropriating it unto themselves, as Thomas, which
said unto him, Ioh. 20.28.29.
My Lord and my God. That this is the true faith without equivocation, it
appears, for that the Lord answers him, Thomas, because thou have seen me,
thou have believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed. And by the words of the Aposile, Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who LOVED ME, and gave
himself for ME. A man shall know by her effects, if he have this faith: Acts
15.9.
Faith purifies the heart, Gal. 5.20.
works by love; 1. Tim. 1.5.
for charity proceeds out of a pure heart, and from a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned. They that are not renewed, can seele that they have not this
faith, for they feel, Tit. 1.15.
that their mind and conscience is defiled; and therefore they may resolve and
conclude with themselves, that God detests and abhorrs them, and all that they
do, because Heb. 11.6.
it is impossible to please him without faith. Witness (among others) Cain,
who offered sacrifice unto God, and was rejected; not because the sacrifice was
naught, but because he offered it without faith, as it is written; Heb. 11.4.
By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain. The
Fathers have acknowledged the same, when they said, that Prosper in lib.
Epigram. epigrammate 81. Lombard. lib. 2. did. 41. lit. A.
The whole life of Infidels is sin. For that also, though a man 1. Co.
13.1.2.3.
could speak with the tongues of Angels, and had the gift of prophecy, and
understood all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though he had all faith, so
that he could remove mountains, and though he bestowed all his goods to feed
the poor, and though he gave his body to be burned, and has not charity, he
is as sounding brass, or a tinckling cimball, he is nothing and all that
profits him nothing.

VII. The last condition of a good work is, that it be done for a good end.
Aug cont. Julian. lib. 2. c. 3.
The virtues are discerned from the vices, non officijs sed finibus, not by the
outward duties, but by their ends, says Saint Austin. The end of every work
must be the glory of God, who has given us virtue, wifedome and direction for
to do it. It ought to be the end of natural works also, 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whether (says the Apostle) ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God. How much more ought it to be the end of our moral and
spiritual works? Mat. 5.16.
Let your light sosh ^e before men, says Jesus Christ, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. It is a thing out of
all doubt, that the Infidels have never done any thing for this end; what could
they have done for the glory of God, which was unknown to them? What have they
ever done but for themselves? but Chrysostom. in opere imperfecto in Mat. hom. 33.
to advance themselves in honor, reputation and credit? It was ambition to
lade himself with thick clay, as the Prophet says; that is, great store of
riches, to join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no
place: It was brokage and covetousness: To what other end do now adays the
best and honestest of our politicians aim at? They have no other end of their
prudence and other virtues, or rather images of virtues, then themselves. If we
consider the religious, as they term them, they give alms, they pray in
public, they use many repetitions, they march with a sad countenance, they
disfigure their faces, and destroy the body with much fasting; some of them,
that they may appear unto men, that they are charitable, devout, mortified; so
did the Pharisees and other hypocrites in Christ's time, Mat. 6.2.
Verily (says Christ) I say unto you, they have their reward. The world has
them in great estimation, they have that which they sought for. It is their
reward: they serve God with hope of reward condign, as they say, and well
worthy of their meries: were it not for this hope, they would not be so
fervent and zealous toward God, that they would be blotted out of his book,
Exodus 32.32.
as Moses; or Romans 9.3.
separated and accursed from Christ for his glory, as Saint Paul. To be
short, we are in a time, whereof we may justly and truly say, as Saint Paul
said of his time, Phil. 2.21.
All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. We are in the
last days; and the perilous and trouble some times are come, whereof the same
Apostle has prophesied, 2. Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
that men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof. Of which kind of men, God in his great mercy deliver quickly the
world.

VIII. All these keep not the Law, and cannot do any good work. Some of them
will have many fair and goodly parts, as we say, the which being examined,
will be found to be nothing else then Ambros. de vo. cat. gentium. lib. 2. c. 3.
splendida peccata, glistering and beautiful sins, by the which they have
barrenly adorned the life of this age, says Saint Ambrose. We do not
condemn them, for that they are ciuilly sober, just, moderate, and do lead
an outward life without reproach. But the Scripture condemns them, for that
they live without faith, without charity, and propound unto themselves no other
scope of their actions then themselves, and so do ill, and do good things to
a bad end. Christ Jesus condemns them; John 5.44.
How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? We do not condemn them, in that they fast
austerely, pray fervently, give alms largely, and do as they say many pious
works: but, because doing nothing but that which a Turk and a Jew does, we
bewail them; because they run so fast out of the way, seeing they run not
by Christ, who is the way to God, who is the end of the race; and so they
labor and toil much, yet advance and go forward but little. As he that
makes haste, and runs a stray out of the Kings high way, takes more pains
and toiles more, then if he were in the right way, and notwithstanding he never
comes where he would. I exhort them to turn back, and return the same way
they came, toward the Commandments of God; to do according unto God, and for
God, that, which they do under him for themselves: and to the end they may
do it, to pray unto God with David, Psalm. 143.10.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good, lead me
into the land of vprightnes: For as Saint Austin says, It is better to go
softly, or to halt in the right way, then to march straightly, and run out of
the way.

CHAP. V.
I. The unregenerate man is altogether wicked. II. The regenerate man is
imperfect and defective in his most holy actions, and cannot keep the Law;
which is proved by four arguments. III. The first argument, He has in him the
flesh lusting against the Spirit. IIII. The second argument, Our imperfect
knowledge brings forth imperfect works. V. Bellarmines opinion concerning a
double perfection commanded in the Law, confuted. VI. That perfection, which
Bellarmine says is possible to man in this life, has never been found in any
man. VII. The third argument: If the regenerate man could keep the Law, he
should not need a Mediator.
THe Psalm. 14.2. 3.
Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any, that did understand and seek God: They are all gone aside, they are
altogether become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. To. 3.13.
etc.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit,
the poison of Aspes is under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in
their ways, and the way of peace have they not known. The reason of all this
is, There is no fear of God before their eyes. He that fears God, fears to
do that which displeases God; as Joseph that would not defile his masters
bed, with held and kept-in with the fear of God: Genes. 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? In like manner
comforting and assuring his brethren, that he would do them no hurt, he tells
them, Genes. 42.18.
I fear God. On the other side, he which fears not God, gives himself
liberty unto all wickedness, whenever any occasion is offered. That made
Abraham say of Gerar, Genes. 20.11.
Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my
wines sake. They which have not the fear of God in their hearts, are ordinary
adulterers, liars, Ephesians. 4.17.18.19.
walking in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts; who being past feeling, have given
themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. This is the description of a man not regenerated and renewed, of
the Jew as well as of the Gentill; of him that is under the Law, as well as of
him which is without the Law; of the Christian, who is in the Church, as of the
Infidel, which is out of the Church.

II. Isai. 64.6.
New we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy
rags. This is the description of the regenerate and renewed; the confession of
the greatest Saints, which say, Dan. 9.5. etc.
we have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled (...) by departing from thy precepts and front thy judgments; neither
have we hearkened unto thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy name. O
Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of fa^et, to
our Kings our Princet and our Fathers, because we have trespassed against
thee: As the prayer of every one is, Forgive w^^^^ trespasse^. Those can do no
good, they have neither the will nor the power. These say with Saint Paul, Romans
7.18.
To will is present with me: but how to perform that which is good, I
find^^^t. Therefore these also cannot keep the Law in that perfection, which
it requires of men in this life; they aim and make toward the perfection, and
do advance and draw near unto it more and more: but they shall not attain
vnot it, until that being unclothed of this body of sin, which does beset
them, they be clothed upon with their house which is from heaven; and that
will we prove by five arguments.

III. First, the most regenerate and holy, are not more renewed, more holy,
then the holy Apostle, who said of himself, and of all the Saints, Romans 8.23.
We have the first fruits of the Spirit. The first fruits are as it were an
handful taken from the whole heap; our sanctification therefore in this life
is little, in comparison of the full harvest, which we shall rape in the life
to come: for we are regenerated and renewed but in part, successively and by
degrees; much of the old infirmity remaining in us, and drawing us to sin
with such vigor and force, that the Apostle himself complains, saying, Romans
7.21.
I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is with me. He had that from
the original malice, which remained as yet in him; and August. in Joan. trac.
41. Minuitur in vita proficientium, quod in vita consumitur perfectorum.
which diminishes only in the life of those, which profit and go on: as it
is fully consumed in the life of those, which have attained unto perfection;
whence elsewhere he says of himself, 2. Cor. 4.16.
Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. Which
words Saint Austin has well peised and pondered, and from whence he bath
drawn this doctrine; Aug. de peccat. merit. lib. 2. c. 7. Prefect^ qui de die
in diem ^dbuc renouatur, nondum totus est renouatus: and in quantum nondum est
renouatus, in tantum adbuc in ve tustate est.
He which is renewed day by day, is not as yet wholly renewed; and in as much
as he is not altogether renewed, so much is he in his old nature. And by
consequent a child of this world, even as in so much as he is renewed, he is
the child of God; and such are all the regenerate, of whom the Apostle says,
that in them Gal. 5.17.
The flesh Insteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and
these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would. The flesh is that, which is not as yet renewed in the mind, in the
will, in the affections, as it appears by this that the Apostle attributes to
the flesh, a certain Romans 8.7.
wisdom, Col. 2.18.
reason, and understanding, and places among the works of the flesh, Gal.
5.20.21.
Idolatry, and the heresies that are conceived and borne in the mind, and
exhorts us Ephesians. 4.23.
to be renewed in the Spirit of our mind. In which respect he says of
himself, Romans 7.18.
I know that in me, (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing, understanding
by his flesh, not his body; for if he said unto the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6.19.
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, did he not know,
that his was? but this infirmity, or rather peruersitie, which did as yet dwell
in all the parts of his soul, although it did not rule there, was indeed
mortified, but not as yet dead. The Spirit therefore is that, which is renewed
in the mind, in the will, in the affections, and in all the parts of the soul
and of the body. The flesh is the old man, the Spirit is the new man: these two
men are in every true Christian, they are both together at one time in one and
the same subject of the mind, of the will, of the affections, in the mind and
understanding, knowledge and ignorance of the same thing, faith and unbelief;
in the will, confidence and distrust; in the affections, love and hate; c
witness the father of the lunatic, who confessed, saying, Mark. 9.24.
I believe, and thereupon presently prayde to Christ, saying, help thou mine
unbelief. It is with the regenerate man, and will stand upright, but it will
be in leaning on his staff, having in him as yet by reason of the relics of
his sickness, an universal indisposition in all the parts of his body. Or
else it fares with such a man, These two men therefore do fight in us, in
lusting the one against the other: the flesh lusts two ways; First, it
ingenders and begets in us all manner of evil thoughts and desires, of which
Saint James faith; (...) 1.14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed.
Secondly, withdrawes us from good, and does what he can, to smother the good
and holy motions of the Spirit in us, as Saint Paul says, Romans 7.22.23.
I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man: but I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
of the law of sin, which is in my members. The Spirit also ^usteth against the
flesh two manner of ways: First, he creates in us all sorts of good thoughts,
motions and desires: David felt it thus, when he said, Psalm. 16.7.
I will bless the Lord, who has given me counfell; my reins also instruct me
in the night-season. Psalm. 27.8.
When thou saidest, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, O Lord,
will I seek. Secondly, he stops and stays the bad motions of the flesh, to
the end they take not effect; or at the least, blunts their point, that they
do not sin excessiuely; in which fense Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in
him. To commit sin, is to make a trade and occupation of sinning, and to give
himself over to evil, with an entire and whole consent of the will, the which a
man renewed cannot do; because with the feed of sin (which is his natural
corruption) he has in him the feed of God, which is the gift of
sanctification, and is mixed in all the qualities of his soul, and in all the
works that flow thence. The supernatural knowledge, wherein the mind is
enlightened, is mingled with ignorance and natural blindness which remains in
him; so that he has need to ask every day, new enlightening of God, as David
did, who said, Psalm. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law. His
faith is mingled with unbelief, his confidence with diffidence, his hope with
despair; witness the lunaticks father, as we have seen before; witness
Job, who complaining of God, said unto him, Job 13.24.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? And at the
same time he cried our, Job 13.15.
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. His will purified and corrected,
is incessantly crossed by a contrary will, which hinders him to do the good he
would do. For as our Savior said, Mat. 26.41.
The Spirit is willing, but the fleshes weak. The will in as much as it is
sanctified, has a marvelous affection and desire to obey God; but the flesh,
with the which she is chained weakens it, and makes her slack and remiss to
do that she would do. The affections are never so well squared and ordered,
but there is disorder; they can never shake off so well this dust and dirt, but
(as 1. King. 18.21.
the Israelites did halt on both sides, following at one time God and Baal; so
do) they halt between heaven and earth, betwixt the heavenly goods, which
cannot be defiled nor wither, and the perishing goods of this world, whhose
figure passes away as swift as a weauers shittle. I write nothing, but that
which all the children of God feel in themselves; otherwise they should not
appertain unto the Church Militant. Which has no enemies so cruel, vigila^t,
pressing, hard and difficult to overcome, as those which every member of the
same nourishes within himself, and carries continually in his bosom; as
namely lust, which, says Saint James, Iam. 1.14.15.
draws, enticeth, conceiueth and brings forth sin; and therefore is a
sin like a Serpent, that engenders, conceiues and brings forth a Viper; is a
Viper, as all that which is conceived, is of the nature of that whereof it is
conceived; as the tree that brings forth bad and rotten fruit, is corrupt and
rotten, according to Christ's saying, Matthew. 7.18.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit. This natural contagion does infect all the good works of
the regenerate with so great a blemish, that the Church it self confesses,
Isai. 64.6.
All our righteousness are as filthy rags: what can we then say, yea, what
ought we to say, we I say who as Bernard says, Bernard. de verb. Esaiae. sermon.
5.
are not better then our forefathers, which have no less truly them humbly
spoken so? This is the first argument grounded on the great and general
deprauation of our nature, whereby the works of the most holiest are so
blemished and distained, that they can in no wise answer unto the
righteousness, holiness and perfection of the Law.

IIII. The second argument is taken from our knowledge: for such as is our
knowledge, such is our obedience, such are all our works that proceed from
it. Now our knowledge is very imperfect, 1. Cor. 13.9.12
For (as the Apostle says of himself, and of all) we know in part, and we
prophecy in part, we see now through a glass darkely; the perfect knowledge
being reserved for the Kingdom of heaven, which our Lord has represented by
giving to the blind man his sight; Mark. 8.22.
of whom Saint Mark says, that Christ Jesus having put his hands upon him the
first time, he saw men walking, but as trees: but having put his hands upon his
eyes the second time, he saw every man clearly: even so fares it with us, we
receive here but the first imposition of hands, we often take one thing for
another, and see the things of God but by halues; whence we must not find it
strange, if we do them but by half, and do remain and stand a far off from
the perfection and righteousness of the Law, whose first and last Commandment
cannot be fulfilled by any man living here on earth: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. It will have the soul, and the whole soul; the heart,
and the whole heart; the thoughts, and all the thoughts; the strength of the
heart, of the soul, of the thoughts, and the whole strength of the same. Aug.
lib. 1. de doct. Christ. c. 22.
It leaves no part of our life that may be void of charity. It commands all
the degrees of charity: for he that says, All, excepts nothing. If thou can
add any thing thereunto, there is not all? If thou take away any thing,
there will not be all. More charity can be added day by day unto our
charity; otherwise Saint Jude would not have prayed, Jude 2.
Mercy unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied. Let Saint Austin speak
for us, Aug. epist. 29.
Charity is a virtue wherewith we love that which is to be loved; in some
greater, in others less, in others none: but the perfect charity which cannot
be augmented, is in no man so long as he lives here. Quamdiu ^^tem augeri
potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex viti^ est.
Now so long as it can increase, surely that less that it has then it should
have, is of vice. This vice makes that there is none just upon earth, that does
good and sins not. This fault causes, that no man living shall be justified
before God. This sin effects so much, that if we say, we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. By reason of this vice, how
much forward and advanced soever we be, it is needful for us to say, forgive
us our trespasses, although all our words, deeds, thoughts have been already
forgiven us in our Baptism. Again, the Law says, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Thy neighbor, thy very enemy, the stranger whom thou
shall meet in the way; as thy self, with as great an affection, readiness
and courage, as thou love thy self. In whom shall we find this perfection?
Who loves God as he should? Who loves him for himself, and loves nothing but
for him, and according unto him? Who loves his neighbor with that seruencie of
charity, wherewith he is inflamed toward himself? Who looks upon his enemy
with a simple, sincere, and unfeigned eye? reconciles himself unto him, without
a reservation? Who lives with his entirely affected friend, without wronging
and misusing him in some sort or other, without envying him, or at leastwise
without thinking ill and hardly of him, without coveting something that
appertains unto him? Who therefore fulfilleth this Commandment, Thou shall
not covet? The Apostle could not attain unto it, and by that he acknowledged
himself to be a sinner: Romans 7.7.
I had not (says he) known sin, but by the Law, for I had not known lust,
except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. Who then shall attain unto it?

V. Bellar. de monach. c. 2.. 6.7. 8. and c. 13.. 20.21.
They who puffed up with pride and presumption, will not acknowledge themselves
to be sinners, that God may be acknowledged the alone Savior, who saues
without our merits, who saues not but in pardoning our trespasses, and
forgiving our demerits, have forged in their giddie brains a double
perfection; the one convenient and meet for the condition and state of this
present life, consisting in that, we must love God more then any creature; the
other, proper and peculiar to the life to come, where the blessed have not any
motion contrary to God, think always on God, and love God with that vehemence
and seruency of love that can be in a creature. Job 11.2.3.
Should not the multitude of words be answered? and shall a man full of talk
be justified? Thy lies, O man, shall they make men hold their peace, and when
thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed? The Law speaks but of one
charity, and that so perfect and accomplished, that it possesses all the
heart, all the soul, all the thoughts, and all the strength of man; and you
forge us an inferior and an underling charity, which a man may perfectly keep
and observe, and which God accepts, and is pleased with. Where is this charity
commanded? What, in the Decalogue, or ten Commandments? Does it appertain
unto the first, or unto the second Table of the Law? The first commands, that
thou love God with all thy strength; and you tell us of a Law that is not so
rigorous and strict, and that contents it self, that thou love God with thy
strength, without requiring all thy strength. Where is this Law? has it been
given of God upon the Mount Horeb? Has the people heard it from Gods mouth?
Has God written it in two Tables? Has Moses enregistred it in his books?
Have the Prophets ever heard word or speech of it? Read the whole Scripture,
ye shall not find it there; you shall find there but one rule of an
unchangeable and perfect righteousness; and the fame given to the living, not
to the dead, to them that (are viatores) are yet in the way, and do aim at
perfection, not to them that are comprehensores, who having already
apprehended it, do rest from their labors, and have no need of the Law;
given with this terrible sentence pronounced not against the Inhabitants of
Heaven, where there is no sorrow nor fear of mourning; but against the
Inhabitants and dwellers on earth: Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the Law, to dee them. A sentence which Saint Paul applies unto the
living, and proves by the same, that Gal. 3.10.
as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse. Badly, yea,
unaptly, yea falsely, if a man can continue in all the words of the Law; yea,
contradictorily to that which he adds, that it was necessary that Christ came,
to redeem us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
Christ (says he) has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us: For what need was there of him, if God requires not of men a
perfect observation of his Law? Or if he command them no other perfection, then
that which they may keep and observe perfectly in this life? He which has
enough, wherewith to pay and satisfy his Creditor, has no need that another
should satisfy for him. These men do err, because they know nor, that man,
although a sinner (yea, though an apostate, yea, though destitute altogether of
the glory of God) is bound by the Law, to do all that which Adam was bound to
do by his Creation, and all that which he could do, and did, during the short
time of his innocence: for we have been all of us created in him, in him the
Law has been given to us all; that Law which we have written in parchment,
being no other thing then the image of the Law, which he had written in his
heart, and the traces whereof (after his sin) remain in our hearts. Now by
right of Creation he was bound to love him, and in effect did love God with all
his heart, with all his soul, with all his thought, with all his strength; and
therefore we are bound to the same perfect, whole, and absolute obedience and
charity.

VI. Notwithstanding, put case and suppose, that the matter goes, as
Bellarmine has propounded it; and that God requires of man in this flesh but a
perfection of a mean and reasonable charity, whereby man loves God more then
the creatures. And we will argue upon that which he says, Bellar. de monach.
c. 13.. 21.
This Commandment may be perfectly kept. For if that be true which he says,
either he can produce us some just man, which has kept it perfectly, or else
he accuses the most Just of great malice. That cannot he do: for he which
keeps perfectly that which God commands him in this life, is without sin;
sin being no other thing then the transgression of Gods commandments, all
which do meet at one end and abut upon charity. Hieron. ad Rusticum epist.
44. c. 4.
Now there is none that is pure from sin, though his life had been but for a
day, says Saint Jerome, The Apostle himself does openly confess, that he and
all the Saints are tied to this unavoidable necessity of Aug. de tempore sermon.
47.
sin, says Saint Austin; and that does he confess in the seventh Chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans, as we shall see in the fourth argument. There is
none then that keeps perfectly that, which God commands him, yea, that can
keep himself; all being tied to this necessity of sinning, by the flesh
lusting against the Spirit, and by the Law of their members warring incessantly
against the Law of their mind, and bringing them into captivity to the Law of
sin, which is in their members, Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.
as the Apostle speaks. This is more perspicuously set before our eyes by
death, which is (says the Scriptures) Joshua. 23.14.
the way of all the earth, Heb. 9.27.
it being appointed unto men once to die. It is therefore a manifest
conclusion, that all are sinners, and by consequent all transgressors of the
Commandments of God: Romans 6.23.
for the wages of sin is death; and the effect of death in the faithful, is
the death of sin; Romans 6.7.
for he that is dead, is freed from sin, which made the holy Apostle to sigh,
and call after death, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Now Bellarmine not being able to name any one Saint, who has been in his life
pure from sin, and saying notwithstanding, that they can perfectly keep Gods
Commandments, he accuses and charge them with a notorious malice: for what
is the cause that they have not kept the Commandments? was it ignorance that
was in them? Noe, for they knew the Commandments; was it impotencie that was
in them? No, for Bellarmine says, that they could keep the Commandments. The
salt was then only in their will: for three things concur together in the
reasonable creature, to the producing and bringing forth of a good work;
knowledge, will, power. Now to know, and to be able to do good, and not to
will the doing of it, is the property of a malicious and perverse spirit; it
is a malice altogether condemned, as it is written, James 4.17.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. Let this
be far from Saints. And therefore we will correct the saying of Bellarmine,
and say, that the Saints and faithful have the will to keep perfectly the
Commandments of God, but they have not the power and strength to do them; and
that will we verify by Saint Paul, saying of himself, Romans 7.18.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find
not. And of us all, Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would. Lastly, because that all which Bellarmine writes touching the diverse
degrees of perfection commanded in the Law, is maintained by him for the cause
and defense of the Monkish state and life, which he terms Bellar. de monach.
c. 2.
the state of perfection. I would willingly ask Bellarmine himself, or the
most holiest Monk or Friar; if, seeing he thinks he can keep the
Commandments of God, he has ever kept them? If he says, that he has kept
them, he is a liar. For he that keeps the Commandments, has no sin: 1.
John 1.^.
Now if we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. If he confesses, that he has not kept them, he confesses himself
to be a wicked and malicious man, in that he would not do that which he
could; and by his own confession is doubly the child of hell, Luke 12.47.
For that servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

VII. The third argument is this, If a man could keep the Law, he should have
no need of a Mediator; Gal. 2.21.
For if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. They
answer, that Christ indeed should have died in vain, if man could keep the
Law by his natural strength and power: but it is by grace that Christians
keep it, and this grace has been given them through the merit of the
obedience and death of Christ, which for this cause is not frustrate, nor in
vain. An answer injurious to Christ, and altogether false. For if it were so,
our righteousness and salvation should be immediately of the Law, and not of
Christ; and Christ should not be our Savior, but only an instrument, by the
which we are aided and enabled to keep the Law, and by the observation of the
same made our own saviors. What blasphemy against the Son of God? 1. Cor.
1.30.
Who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption; In as much as 2. Cor. 5.21.
God has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. We are then righteousness, as he is sin:
he is sin, August. Encherid. cap. 41.
not his own, but ours, not in himself, but in us: even so are we
righteousness, not our own, but that of God, not in our selves, but in him.
And mark, he has been made unto us righteousness by God; it is not written,
that we are made righteousness by him. Again, we are the righteousness of
God in him, it is not said, that we are the righteousness of God by him as by
an instrument. So does the same Apostle write, that Col. 2.10.
we are complete in him, and not complete in our selves by him: he felt it so,
when being as then renewed, having been already, yea, a long time an Apostle,
and near unto death; when having fought a good fight, kept the faith, and
finished his course, he writes from prison unto his Philippians, that Phil.
3.8.9.
he counted all things but less and dung, that he might win Christ, and be
found in him, not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law but that
which is through the faith of Christ, to wit, the righteousness which is of
God by faith. He would have us to think and feel it so, when he wrote to us
in the person of the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast, referring not our
justification only, but also our salvation it self unto the grace of God,
which we embrace by faith, and excluding from the causes of our salvation our
works without exception, yea, them which the faithful do: otherwise he
would not say, least any man should boast; although he intendes not to esteem
them, or make them unprofitable, and of no use: For (says he) Ephesians. 2.10.
we are his worke-manship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before or deined, that we should walk in them. A sentence that Saint
Bernard understood well, when he termed the works of Saints, Bernard. de
gratta and libero ar^itrio, sub finem.
viam regni, non causam regnandi: The way to the Kingdom, not the cause of the
Kingdom. Auant then, and far from us, let all those be, that will divide and
share out the salvation between the grace of God and our good works, that say
unto him with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11.
God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers: we will be humble, and refer unto him all the glory of our
salvation, in his beginning, in his middle, in his end, and sing unto him with
David, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy
mercy, and for thy Truths sake.

CHAP. VI.
I. The fourth Argument: None of the Saints has ever kept perfectly the Law.
II. Because they are renewed but in part: as it appears. III. By the example
of those which were before the Law, as of Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
IIII. And by the example of Job: V. By the examples also of them, that were
under the Law, as of Moses, Aaron, their Sister Marie, and of all the Priests.
VI. Item, by the example of David, VII. Of Solomon, Ezechias, Josias, Daniel,
and of Esdras. VIII. And by the Confession of the whole ancient Church.
BE 1. Cor. 11.1.
ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. He will have us to imitate
him, but with an Even as; not absolutely, but conditionally, even as he
imitated Christ, and not otherwise: for in him there was; in the most holiest
that have been from the beginning of the world, there has been; in those that
are, there is; in those that shall come hereafter, there will be things that are
not to be imitated, but to be abhord; not to do, but to eschew and avoid
their sins; Romans 11.32. Hieron. ad Ch^esiphontem.
for God has concluded the^ al in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all. Wherefore to show that in him alone there is no darkness, and that in
the most holiest there are many clouds of error, which darken their
understanding; that he is the alone holy, only just, only good, and that all
the holy and just men have their noblest parts altered by the corruption of
sin; he has permitted the most approved amongst them, the most cherished and
beloved of him, to slip and fall into the pit of sin; and would that they
themselves were his Heralds, his Clerks, to publish, to write down their own
sins, and the sins of their forefathers: Romans 3.19.
That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God; and that God alone Romans 3.26.
might be found just and the iustifier of him which believes in Christ Jesus;
who alone, Isai. 53.9.1. Pet. 2.22.
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who alone has been able
to protest in truth, that John 14 30.
The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me, being Basil. in
Psalm. 5.
much for a man, if he can say, he has but little, and but few things in
me. This is our fourth argument, whereby we will clearly prove, that there
has never been any Saint, in whom all his old infirmity has been in such
wise consumed; but that during the days of this his perishing life, he has
fought an intestine and inward battle with the same, in the which he has
sometimes fainted and fallen down, and has never prevailed in such sort,
that he has been able to free and exempt himself wholly from sin; Basil. in
homil. de poenitent.
I accuse not therefore the righteous, but I glorify God, who alone has been
able to provoke his enemies with this defiance, John 8.46.
which of you conuinceth me of sin. We reprehend the error, we beat and
throw down the tower and turrers of pride, which our Monks have built and
reared up, thinking to skale Paradise by their works not commanded, not due;
it being evident and well known by the examples of the Saints of old, in
comparison of whom the most holiest of these times, the most retired of our
Monks and Friars are but dung, that they are far from that perfection of
those works that are due.

II. If Adam had not violated the commandment of his Lord and God, and had
remained obedient unto the heavenly mandate, he had reserved unto his own
heirs the prerogative of a natural innocence, says Saint Ambrosaed Iren.
epist. 71.
Ambrose: but affecting to attribute unto himself that, which he had not
received, to be like him that had created him, he was stripped and deprived of
that which he had received; he lost his drachme, or piece of silver, and
departing from his Fathers table to eat husks (the bread of swine) he fell
under, and came within the power of the Prince of darkness, from being able
not to sin, to not being able, but to sin; having lost altogether the
liberty of his counsel, after he had sold, delivered and inthrald himself to
him that had guld and cousoned him. In this state has he begotten men in his
own likeness after his image, all which are borne tainted with his pollution,
and stained with the bands of his death-bringing slavery and bondage; from
which servitude the elect children of God are released and delivered by him,
which has said, John 8.36.
If the Son shall make you free, yet shall be free indeed. In this life, not
to consent unto sin, and not to walk after their lusts; in the life to come,
not to sin, not to covet at all: It is the glory of Heaven, of the heavenly
Jerusalem, Revel. 21.27.
that there shall in no wise enter any thing that defiles. It is the vanity
and shame of the earth, that she cannot bear in her bosom any Saint, that is
not harried and troubled with the fierce and savage law of sin, that he may
say, Prou. 20.9.
I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin. For Gregor. Nyss. de
beatitudin. Orat. 6.
sin is conceived, borne, increases, and ends with the life of man. Idem de
oratione. Abel.
And the Scriptures do teach us, that there cannot be found any man
whatsoever, that lives a day without spot.

III. Witness Abel, Heb. 11.4.
who by faith offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Kaine, by which
he obtained witness, that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. If by
faith, surely not by his works, not by the merit of his sacrifice, but by the
merit of the Lamb without blemish and spot, the only and perfect object of
faith, represented and exhibited by and in the first sacrifice; in the offering
of the which the holy man did affirm earnestly, and avouch openly and
solemnly his death-worthy demerits; did sigh and groan after the merits of
his Savior; did embrace his sacrifice by says to have life by it. If as yet
man doubts, let him consider that he is dead, that by his death we judge and
deem of his sin, as of the cause by the effect. Romans 5.12. Noah.
For by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Witness Noah, who has
testimony, Genes. 6.9.
that he was a just man, and perfect in his generation, and walked with God:
but not that he was without sin; for after he had found grace in the eyes
of the Lord, in the ruin of the world by the Flood, the Scripture discouers
his infirmity, and accuses him, Genes. 9.21.
for that he drank of the wine of his vineyard, was drunken and was uncovered
within his tent. He was then just according to that righteousness, whereof it
is said, Prou. 24.16.
The just man falls seven times, and rises up again. According to the which
it is also said, Ezech. 18.22. and 33.19.
that the transgressions of the wicked shall not be mentioned unto him, shall
not hurt him, at what hour soever he returns from his ways unto the Lord,
Hieron. ad Rusticum epist. 44.
says Saint Hierome. Just therefore and righteous, in and by acknowledging
himself to be unjust and unrighteous, prosecuting this acknowledgement,
addicting and applying himself to righteousness, and not as having attained
unto the perfection thereof; witness Abraham.
Abraham, of whom already justified by faith, renewed already, abounding as
then in good works. The Apostle writes; Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before
God. He justified himself, that is to say, he approved and showed himself
just by his works toward men, when he offered his son Isaac, as Saint Iam.
2.21.
James observes. And that thirty years after that, the Scripture witnesses
of him, that he had been justified by faith before God: For this sentence of
holy David, wholly given to the observation of the Law, repeated and confirmed
by Saint Paul, shall for ever remain firm; Psalm. 143.2. Romans 3.20. Faith
iustifies man before God, Works justify man before men.
By the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be instified in the sight of
God. Faith embracing Christ's righteousness for the remission of sins,
iustifies the person before God: good works which proceed always from man,
which is justified, and which did never precede, or go before to justify him,
iustifies the person before men. The proofs are manifest: for Abraham after he
was Chrysostom. de penitent. hom. 6. tom. 5. infidelitate Sancti peccauit Abraham.
justified by faith, sinned through unbelief; and therefore did not escape
Gods punishment, so that his seed did serve four hundred years, says Saint
Chrysostom; Genes. 16.2.3.
and that also when he took Agar to wife, to give by hereffect to the promise
of God touching the blessed seed; not persuading himself as then, that God
would raise and give him it by his barren and old wife of fourscore years.
Then also, when distrusting of Gods providence and protection, he concealed a
part of the truth, calling her only his sister, and causing her to say so, for
the which he was justly reproved by Alimelech. Furthermore, after that he was
justified, God gave circumcision, Romans 4.11.
to be a seal of the righteousness of the faith unto him, which he had yet
being uncircumcised; a seal, I say, on Gods part, for the remission of his
sins in the blood of Jesus Christ, the which he did apprehend by faith, in
the effusion of his own, and of all his; wherefore Christ says of him, John
8.56.
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. A Sacrament also
to be to him on his side, a sign of his dut^e toward his God, to circumcise
daily the foreskinne of his heart, Col. 2.11.
in putting off the body of ^he sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of
Christ. If Abraham the Father of all those which believe, being in
uncircumcision, and Father of the Circumcision, was a finner before and after
his justification, and had need of the grace and mercy of his God to be
saved: shall we believe, that his children have been more holy, more righteous,
and just, and less sinners then he? witness his son Isaac, Isaac.
who by a like distrust told a lie concerning his wife, to the inhabitants of
Gerar, saying, Genesis 26.7.
she is my sister, fearing that the inhabitants and men of the place should
kill him for her sake, because she was fair to look upon. Which diffidence
and lie was so much the greater, because God commanded him to remain and stay
there, with promise of his protection, telling him, Genesis 26.3. Jacob.
Soiourne in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee.
Witness Jacob, who upon his deathbed renounced all his works, asking and
craving mercy and grace, cried unto his God, Genesis 49.18.
I have waited for thy salvation O Lord; to wit, the Lord Jesus, who was to
come, Mat. 18 11.
to save that which was lost; and by reason of this charge and office, is named
Luke 3.6.
the salvation of God. Witness all the Patriarchs, all whom the Scripture
incloseth and concludes under sin, that their children presume not to be
without sin: but that feeling themselves attainted with the corruption
dwelling in them, of necessity they must confess and say, we are no better
then our forefathers, and that so Chrysostom. de poenit. hom. 6. tom. 5. Quo
solus ipse in hominis corpore sine peccato inueniatur. Job.
Christ be found alone in the body of man without sin.

IIII. Witness (among an infinite number of others) the holy man Job, whom God
himself commends, to have been perfect beyond comparison, and without his
like in the world. Job 2.8.
There is none like him in the earth, says God, a perfect and an upright man,
one that fears God, and escheweth evil. A great commendation, and incident
to few persons. Now if any not understanding the language of Canaan, strives
against the sound doctrine, imagining in himself, that Job for being better
then other men, was without sin before God, he will be convinced of error by
Jobs own book, there shall he find Eliphas preaching; Job 4.17. Hier.
aduers. Pelag. lib. 2.
Shall mort all man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure then his
Maker? Behold, be put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with
fally. How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust, which are crushed before the moth? A Sermon, whence Saint Jerome
inferres, Hier. aduers. Jouian. lib. 2.
Angelos quoque and omnum creaturam peccare posse, that the Angels themselves,
and all creatures may sin. There also shall he find the same Eliphas
preaching again; Job 15.14.15.16.
What is man, that he should be should be clean? and he which is borne of a
woman, that he should be righteous? Behold, be puts no trust in his Saints,
yea, the Heavens are not clean in his sight. How much more abominable and
filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water? A sentence, from the which
Saint Hierome implies, that every man is a sinner; Hieron. ad Rusticum epist.
44. circa sin.
There is none, says he, pure from sin, though his life were but a day: Now
the years of his life are many. The stars themselves are not clean and pure
in his presence, and he has found some peruersitie in his Angels. Si in caelo
peccatum, quanto magis in terra: If there be sin in heaven, how much more on
earth; if there be trespass or omission of duty in those, which are without
corporal tentation, how much more in us that are compassed about with this
weak flesh, and may say with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
There shall he find Job agreeing and consenting unto this holy doctrine, and
sighing forth these true words from the bottom of his heart; Hieron. aduers.
Pelag. lib. 1. Job 9.2.
I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God? If he will
contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand? There shall he find
God himself rebuking Job, and reproving him of his sin, for that Job 38.2.
he darkened counsel by words without knowledge; and Job confessing his sin,
and saying to him, Job 40.4.5.
Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my band upon my
mouth, once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will
proceed no further; Job 4^.6.
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

V. Such was the condition of all those, that have lived from Abel until the
Law; which being come, has not diminished sin, but has augmented it; has
not quickened, nor given life to them that followed it, but has killed them,
and put them to death; has not made any one just, but has condemned the most
just and righteous among them, in discovering their unrighteousness. When the
Moral Law was given, after a manner fitting the Majesty of the Lawgiver, and
suitable unto the justice and rigor of the same. Heb. 12.19.21
They that heard it, entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any
more. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, Moses.
I exceedingly fear and quake; even that Moses notwithstanding, who Numb. 12.3.
was very meek above all the men, which were upon the face of the earth; with
whom the Lord spoke Numb. 12.8.
mouth to mouth, and not in dark speeches, and by whose hand the Lord gave the
Law; when God published his Law, he must needs have trembled, because he saw
in the same the Justice of God, and his own unrighteousness. Surely, if any
could have been conformable to the justice and uprightness of the same, it
was he, that was the mediator; and it is of him that we have the confession
of his sin, and of the people; Psalm. 90.8.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance. It is he himself which has written the history of his
unbelief, and of that of Aaron his brother, Aaron.
when they glorified not God at the waters of strife, for which cause the Lord
spoke unto them, saying, Numb. 20.12. Chrysostom. de p^niten. homil. 6. to. 5.
Because ye believe me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of
Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the Land, which I
have given them. Moses, who gave the Law, Aaron who kept the Law, the one a
Prophet and Leader of the people, the other the High Priest and Teacher of the
people; who should have been pure from sin, so holy, without spot, without
vice, as these? especially that carried written on his forehead, Exo. 28.36.38
HOLINESS TO THE LORD; that in his Priesthood did represent Jesus Christ, the
High Priest of his Church, who is the holy of holy ones; Exodus 30.10. Leuit.
16.2. Heb. 9.7.
who alone went into the holy place; who only bare upon his breast the Vrim and
Thummim, alone saw the Arc of the Testimony; who only asked at the mouth of
the Lord, who answered him from between the Cherubins covering the Arc. It is
he notwithstanding that made Exodus 32 4.
a molten calfe, and said to the people, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. He with his sister Miriam (a
Prophetess) Numb. 12.1. All the Priests.
spoke against Moses. It is he, who with all the Priests, that should succeed
him, was expressly commanded to offer sacrifice once every year, and to
Leuit. 16.17. Heb. 9.7.
m^ke an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the
Congregation of Israel.

VI. They which are come after them, have not been better; for sin does
propagate it self always from the fathers to the children, and passes from
the one to the other, without sparing of any one; the whole world is his
nurse-child. Excellent things are said of David by him, David.
which says always true, 1. King. 14.8.
He has k^pt (says he) my Commandments, and has followed me with all h^s
heart, to do that only which was right in mine eyes. Understand that only
with that exception and reservation, which is added in the next Chapter; 1.
King. 15.5.
Save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. A vile and villainous matter, an
inhumane and barbarous act, a cruel deed; he put his feet in the bed of his
entire friend, he took away the only lamb of his poor neighbor, he imbrued
his bloody hands in the blood of the just, who watched, who fought for him: and
in this sin he committed so many sins, and all of them so great, that to blot
them out and wipe them away, he craves for not one compassion, but many; not
one washing and clensing, but a washing, and a washing again over and over,
crying unto his God with a broken heart and contrite spirit, Psalm. 51.1.2
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according unto the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions, wash me thoroughly
from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. He desires that a great sin
be blotted out by a great mercy, Hier. aduers. Julian. lib. 2.
Magnum peccatum magna deleri vult misericordia. Furthermore, that only must
be understood in regard of crimes, whereof David (that act of his in the
matter of Vriah only excepted) has been clear; not in regard of his sins
of infirmities, of his faults committed by error: for after that crime
committed and perpetrated in the person of Vriah, 2. Sam. 24.1.2. Chron. 21.1.
Satan kindling in his heart the fire of pride, which was not as yet altogether
extinguished, provoked David to number Israel, so that the anger of the Lord
was kindled against him, and against his people: and it is of him, of whom we
have these prayers and confessions, Psalm. 19.12.
Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy
merci remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord: Psalm. 40.11.12
Withold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord, let thy loving
kindness, and thy truth continually preserve me; for innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up; they are more then the hairs of mine head, therefore my heart
fails me. Psalm. 130.3.4.
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? But there
is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. Psalm. 143.1.2.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications, in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment with thy
sernant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. He which so often
recommended the righteousness of hi cause to God, when his enemies did pursue
him, and persecute him wrongfully, and then cried, Psalm. 7.8.
Judge me, O Lord, according to thy righteousness, and according to mine
integrity that is in ME. When he presents himself before God, as a creature
before his Creator, the servant before his Lord, the child before his father,
to give him an account of his demeanor and service toward him, he renounces
his own righteousness, and flies to that of his God; distinguishing as he
ought, between the justice and righteousness of his cause, and his actions
toward men, and between the justice and righteousness of his person before
God. For touching that, he does protest, that he is just and innocent, and
takes God to witness as his defender and a revenger of wrongs. Touching this,
he yields and confesses his unrighteousness, he declines by all manner of
deprecation the ang^, fury, and just vengeance of his Judge, crying, Psalm. 6.1.
O lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure. Implores by all manner of supplication the mercy, peace and grace
of his God, and having obtained it, he preaches and publishes it to all, Romans
4.6.
describes and declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, saying, yea, crying with a loud voice, to the
end all men may hear, all may in^ouour to feel it: Psalm. 32.1.2.
Blessed is he, whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. This is that
text, on the which the ancient Fathers have spoke very excellent things.
Hieron. in Psalm. 32. Quod ^egitur non videtur, quod non videtur non imputatur,
quod non imputatur nec punietur.
Saint Jerome, That which is hid, is not seen, and that which is not seen is
not imputed, and that which is not imputed is no^ punished. If you object, that
David adds, and in whose mouth (or according to the Hebrew, in whose spirit)
there is no guile, he expounds that, of the mouth of him which confesses
himself a sinner. Aug pr^^fat. in Psalm. 31.
Saint Austin: Who are the blessed? Not th^se in whom God finds no sin; for
he finds it in all men: Romans 3.23.
for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. If then sins are
found in all, it remains, that there are none blessed, but those, whose sins
are remitted. Thou have done no good thing, and the remission of thy sins is
given thee; man looks vp^n thy works, Et omnia inueniuntur mal^.
and all of them are found bad and evil. If God should give to those works
that which is their due, without doubs he would condemn them; Romans 6.23. Non
tibi deus reddit debitam poena^, sed donat indebitam gratiam.
For the wages of sin is death: what is due to bad works but damnation? what
is due to good works? the Kingdom of Heaven. Now art thou found with bad
works of thou should have what thou ^ast deserved, thou should be
punished. But how goes the matter? God gives th^^ ^ot the punishment due to
thee, but he gives thee grace not due to th^^. Debebat vindinctam, dat
indulgentiam; He owed vengeance, he gives indulgence and mercy. Item: Ibid.
Conc. 2. Noluit aduertere noluit animadnertere: noluit agnoscere: maluit
ignoscere.
Blessed are not they, in wh^m no sins are found, but they whose sins are
covered. Are they covered? they are abolisht and blotted out. If God has
covered sins, he has not had the will to mark or note them: if he has
not had the desire to mark them, he would not take any knowledge of them; he
has not had the desire to punish them, he has not minded to ordeine of them,
he had rather pardon them. Saint Bernard, Bernard. in Cantica, ser. 23.
O he alone truly happy, unto whom the Lord has not imputed his sin! for
there is no man but has bad s^^^ sin; for all have ^inned, and all have
need of the glory of God. Notwithstanding, who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? Non peccare, Dei iustitia est: beminis iustitia,
iudulgentia Dei.
I^ suffices me in li^^ of all righteousness, that I have him alone
prop^^ious, against whom alone I have sinned. All that which he has ordained
not to impute unto ^^e, is as if it had never ^e^ne. Not to sin (...) the
righteousness of God, the righteousness of (...) i^ the (...) and gentl^^^sse
of God. In a word, Saint Ambrose writes, that Ambros. de bono mortis c. 2. vita
aeterna, pe^ catorum remissio est.
life eternal is the remission of sins. They are, as many blows of a
battle-axe upon all the satisfactions, righteousness and merits of men: for if
he whose sin is pardoned, is not punished with the penalty of sin, which
is eternal death, consisting in a total and everlasting privation of the
favor, grace and blessing of God; he must of necessity for ever enjoy the
presence of God, wherein life eternal consists. To be delivered from Gods
curse, is to be saved; because to be damned, is to be hated, rejected, and for
ever forsaken of God; wherefore who is not damned, is not hated of God; and he
which is not hated of God, is beloved of him. Now he whom God loves, has
always God on his right hand, enioyes always his presence, and therein
eternal happiness, as it is written, Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. And therefore is it that David declares, that the happiness, the
whole felicity of man, life eternal depends upon the remission of sins; so
much say the Fathers also, to this end, that all they may be ashamed, who
confessing that Jesus Christ has delivered them from eternal death by his
death, devise, that we must do good works to merit life eternal. For as S.
Bernard says, Bernard. ad milites Templi c. 11. Sic namque mortua morte
reuertitur vita, quemadmodum ablato peccato redit iustitia. Solomon.
So death being dead, life returns again; as sin being taken away,
righteousness returns again, that none say that he is happy, because he is
no sinner; but that they only esteem themselves happy, which have obtained
the remission of their sins.

VII. I should be too long, if I should make a catalogue of all the other
Saints of the old Testament; I will not speak of 1. King. 11.4.5.6. Hieron.
aduers. Iouian. lib. 2. Ezechias.
Solomon the beloved of the Lord, who for that he loved many strange women, he
turned his heart from the love of the Lord; his heart was not perfect with the
Lord his God, but went after Ashtareth, the goddess of the Sidonia^s; and
after Milcom, the abomination of the Am^rites, and did evil in the sight of
the Lord. I will not speak of Ezechias, who being sick, prayed unto God and
said, Jsai. 38 3.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight: when
he gives God thanks for the recovery of his health, he confesses himself a
sinner, and says, Isai. 38.17.
Thou have in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption, for
thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. I will omit also, that the
Spirit of God blames him, 2. Chron. 32.25
that he rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him, for his
heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him. Josias.
I will not recite, that Josias, who in the whole course of his life, 2. Chron.
34.2.
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, toward the end thereof
puffed up with his prosperity, 2. Chron. 35.22 Hieron. ad Stesiphont. in s^^e.
Daniel.
hearkened not unto the words of Neco proceeding from the mouth of God. I see
Daniel, to whom God revealed all that which should happen to his Church, until
the last destruction of Jerusalem, of whom God himself testifies and
witnesses of his singular Ezech. 14.14.
righteousness and Ezech. 28.3.
wisdom; I see him condemning himself and the whole people of sin, and
justifying God in his just vengeance which he had taken of them, Dan. 9.10.11.
We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God to walk in his Laws; and
all Israel have transgressed thy Law even by departing, that they might not
obey thy voice. Esdras.
I see Esdras the Priest and Scribe making a semblable and like confession to
his God, and saying, Esdr. 9.6.7.
O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our
iniquities are increased over our ^eads, and our trespass is grown up unto
the heavens, The whole ancient Church.
since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass unto this day.

VIII. Lastly, I see the whole ancient Church, presenting her self before God
like a poor malefactor, and guilty offender with this confession; Isai. 64.6.
But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy
rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind. A
Confession, which the ancient Doctors do judge appertains also to the
Christian Church. Origin, Austin, Macarius, etc. Bernard. in festiuit. Omnium
Sanctor. Sermon. 1. Iniustitia inuenietur omnis iustitia nostea, and minus habens.
and after them Saint Bernard, What might be all our righteousness before God?
shall it not be reputed as filthy rags, according to the Prophet^ and if we
judge according to rigor, all our righteousness will be found to be unjust,
and not current; what then will it be of sins, seeing that righteousness
cannot answer for her self? and therefore crying aloud with the Prophet, Enter
not into judgment with thy servant good Lord, let us have recourse in all
humblenes unto that mercy, which alone can save our souls. Adrian de Traiecto,
de Eucharistia fol. 20. Iugiter super pannu^ vitae quem iustitiae operibus
teximus, stictamus saniem diuersorum criminum.
Adrian of Vtrecht says, That our merits are a staff of reed, which breaks
and pierces the hand of him that leanes on it; they are at an unclean thing,
as filthy rags: on this cloth of good life, that we think to weaue and work
upon by our works of righteousness, we distill continually the corrupt,
filthy, and putrified matter of diverse crimes. What confidence then can man
have before God, who loves none, that is not converted to him with all his
heart? Thus spoke he, who since has been Pope, named Adrian the VI.

CHAP. VII.
I. Although that the Spirit has been more plentifully given under the
Gospel, then under the Law, yet none has perfectly kept the Law, under the
Gospel. II. Not Zachary, and Elizabeth. III. Not John Baptist. IIII. Nor the
Virgin Marie. V. The Fathers have taught, that the Virgin Marie was conceived
in sin. VI. What honor is due to the Virgin Marie, and other Saints. VII.
Saint Paul has not fully and perfectly kept the Law, as he witnesses, Romans 7.
VIII. He speaks of himself in the state of a regenerate man. IX. Saint James,
Saint Peter, Saint John have not kept the Law. X. The whole Church prays for
the remission of sins, which are the transgressions of the Law.
Received Gal. 3.2.
ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? It is the
demand which the Apostle makes to the Galathians, which had received the holy
Ghost by the preaching of the Gospel, and not by the preaching of the Law: for
the Spirit is not of the Law, but of the Gospel. The Spirit was under the Law,
but it was not of the Law. They that were clothed with the Spirit, and had put
on the Spirit under the rule and government of the Law, had this benefit from
the Gospel, which was as then promised unto them, as it is now exhibited and
set forth to us; whence the Gospel is termed, 2. Cor. 3.8.
the ministration of the Spirit, the Law, 2. Cor. 3.7 9.
the ministration of death, and the ministration of condemnation. We have then
now to see, if the Spirit, which is given by the Gospel, and which is given
more sensibly, effectually, and abundantly under grace, then under the law,
according to Ioels Joel 2.3.8.
prophecy, has given strength to any under the Gospel to keep the Law, so
that he has not failed and offended therein. Zachari^ and Elizabeth.


II. We will begin with the first Saint named in the Gospel, who although he
was not of the Gospel, notwithstanding having been the father of him, that
was the forerunner of the Gospel, is brought in in the beginning of the
history of Christ Jesus, adorned and graced with his wife with this great
commendation, Luke 1.6. Hieron. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1. Hoc testimonio quasi
impenetrabil^ vteris clypeo.
that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
ordinances of the Lord, blameles. And this is the place whereof the Pelagians
made use, as of an impenetrable buckler; thinking they might very pertinently
conclude by it, that a man may be without sin, and easily keep the
Commandments of God, if he will; unto the which some added, that that may be
with the help of grace; having left in writing, August 95. Etiam in hac vita
posse esse hominem sine peccato, non ab initio natiuitatis suae, sed
conuersione a peccatis ad iustitiam. Hinc quod dictum est, sine querela, sine
peccato dictum acceperunt, non quidem negantes, imo etiam con^itentes
adiutorium gratiae Domini nostri, non per naturalem spiritum hominis, sed per
spiritum principalem Dei.
that also in this life there might be men without sin, not from the
beginning of their birth, but by the conversion from sin to righteousness,
and from a bad to a good life; and interpreting the word blameless, as if it
were to say, without sin, not denying but confessing according to godliness,
the help of the grace of our Lord; not by the natural spirit of man, but by
the principal Spirit of God. These are the very words of those of that time,
who being enemies of the grace of God, and of the merit of Christ, do part and
share out man's salvation between the grace of God and man's nature; betwixt
Christ's merits and man's merits: let them therefore hear Saint Austin refuting
their heresy in the person of them, and reproving them, that they have not
enough considered, that Zachary was a Priest, and that all Priests were then
bound by the Law of God, to offer sacrifice, first for their own sins, and
then for the people. That was his first argument; He that was bound to offer
sacrifice for his sin, was a sinner; Zachary was bound to offer for his
sin, therefore he was a sinner: in like manner all the Priests, and all the
people; for they offered sacrifice for their sins, and the sins of the
people. And therefore there were none at that time without sin: neither has
there been any since; for he adds, It suffices us, that in the Church of God,
there is not one faithful found in what progress, excellency, or
righteousness soever he be, that dare say, that this request of the Lords
prayer appertains not to him [forgiue us our debts] and tha^ (says he) has
not sinned, lest he abuse himself, and truth be not in him, although he line
blameless. And concerning Zachary, Saint Ierom observes, that Luke 1.18.20.
Hieron. aduers. Pelag lib. 1. Idem epistol. 44. ad Rusticum. Denique and
Zacharias pa^er Ioannis, qui scribitur iustus, peccauit in eo, quod non
credidit, and statim silentio condemnatur.
he sinned, in that he believed not, and was incontinently adjudged to be
dumb, and not able to speak. What is it then to be blameless? Aug. in Joan.
tractatu 41.
It is, says Saint Austin to be without crime, it is to live Idem de gratia
Christi lib. 1. c. 48.
according to some approved and laudable conversation among men, whom none can
justly accuse. And it is said, that Zachary and his wife have had that
righteousness before God, because they deceived not men by any dissembling,
but as they appeared to men, so were they known to God; and this is not said
according to that perfection of righteousness, in the which we shall live, and
which is wholly unspotted and perfect: for the Apostle Paul himself has said,
Phil. 3.6.
that according to the righteousness which is in the Law, he was blameless,
in which law Zachary has lived blameless. But the Apostle counted that
righteousness but dung and l^sse, in comparison of the righteousness which we
hope after, and whereof we ought to be a hungry and adry, to the end we may be
one day filled and satiated with the sight thereof, which is now in faith, so
long as the just live by faith.

III. The son follows the father, namely, John Baptist; John Baptist.
of whom it was said before his conception, Luke 1.15.
He shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his mothers womb.
Certainly not to purge and cleanse him wholly of all spot of sin, but to
make his ministry the more commendable and praiseworthy, by the
extraordinary and particular marks of the virtue, efficacy, and power of God
dwelling in hi^ from his first infancy. For he himself confesses himself a
sinner, saying to Jesus Christ, Mat. 3.14.
I have need to be baptized of thee, that is to say, according to the
interlineare Gloss, Gloss. ordinar.
To be washed of original sin, because thou art the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. And according to Saint Chrysostom, or
whosoever is author of the imperfect work on Saint Matthew, Chrysostom. in
Matthew. c. 3. hom. 4.
To be made righteous and worthy of heaven: and therefore to be washed in his
blood, to be renewed and sanctified by his spirit, which are the two
significations of Baptism.

IIII. If any among the living should have been clean and pure from sin,
The Virgin Marie.
the holy Virgin, the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ ought to have been; of
whom the holy Ghost witnesses, that Luke 1.42.
she is blessed among women, and whom until the worlds end, Luke 1 48.
all generations shall call blessed. Blessed certain, for having received that
grace to be the mother of our Savior; and not for being without sin, and
exempted from the number of those which have need of a Savior; for she was
conceived in sin, according to the Lords sentence, John 3.6.
That which is borne of flesh is flesh. To be borne of flesh, is to be borne
by generation according to the ordinary course of nature, whosoever is so
borne, is flesh; August. de fide ad Pet. Di^conum. c. 26.
Account surely says Saint Austin, that he is borne in original sin,
subject to impiety, subject unto death, and therefore the child of wrath. The
reason is rendered by Saint Paul, Romans 5.12.
where he says, By one (...) sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. And there is none
exempted from this number, but Jesus Christ, Chrysostom. de quinta feri^
passionis hom. 6.
who alone knows not what is sin, alone does not participat with our fault,
and did one nothing to sin and death, says S. Chrysostom, following Saint
Paul the Apostle, who attributes unto Christ alone the prerogative, to have
been Heb. 7.26.
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, because indeed he alone
Pet. diaconus ad Fulgentium.
is borne after a new manner of generation: borne, I say, of man, of the
substance of a chosen virgin; but not by man, not by natural generation, but
by the supernatural operation of the Holy Ghost; who of the substance of the
virgin formerly sanctified by him, did appropriate and fit a body to our
Savior, and inspired in the same a most pure and a most holy soul. This new
manner of generation and conception without spot, has caused that our Lord
has not felt the contagion of earthly corruption, being he alone, Dan. 2.45.
who has been cut out of the mountain without hands; being the immediate
work of the hand of God, which not appertaining to the holy Virgin, conceived
and borne after the manner and common order of other men, she has had need of
Gods grace and mercy, as other men have; she has prayed, forgive us our
debts, as well as other men, and as a member of the Church, she has believed
for her self all the Articles of the belief, and this Article among the rest,
I believe the remission of sins. To be short, seeing that she died as other
men do, she was a sinner as other men are; 1. Cor. 15.56.
for the sting of death (that which gives life and strength to death) is
sin; take away the sting from death, and it is dead; whosoever is without
sin (as all of us shall be in the Kingdom of heaven) may boldly defy
death, and vpbraide it with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.55.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? That is the reason
why Christ could not have died, if God 2. Cor. 5.21.
had not made him to be sin for us; that is to say, if he had not imputed
unto him our sin, as to him who had constituted himself the pledge and
surety for sinners, and their prayer unto the very last farthing or mite. I
believe religiously, that the Virgin has been a less sinner then other men,
but I also believe that a woman-sinner she has been as well as other men,
because she her self has taught me to believe it so. I read her Song, and I
see her publishing with a loud voice, Luke 1.47.
that her spirit has rejoiced in God her Savior. In God therefore, who has
forgiven her her sins: for Christ is not otherwise a Savior; Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, (says the Angel to Joseph) for he shall save
his people from their sins, and shall not save them otherwise, as he himself
protests, saying, Mat. 9.13.
I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance. Mat. 15.24.
I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Mat. 18.11.
The Son of man is come to save that which was lost: for them alone has he
been sent, Isai. 61.1.2.3. Luke 4.18.19.
to preach good tidings unto the meek, and unto the poor; to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound; to comfort all that mourn, etc. To them only
came he, and them alone he calls unto him, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, John 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me; Mat. 9.12.
and that are sick, declaring that they that are whole, and holy, have no
need of him: wherefore, either the Mother of our Savior was a sinner, or our
Lord and Savior was not her Savior and Redeemer; and she should have sung
for others, and not for her self, that the Lord Luke 1.53.54.
has filled the hungry with good things, and has remembered his mercy: which
mercy she should never have felt, she should never have thirsted after, seeing
she should never have felt the misery of sin, nor the wrath of God, the
just wages of sin. This is so clear and apparent, that it needs not any
longer and ampler proof.

V. Notwithstanding, if the consent of the Church can be of some weight, to
make it the more credible, it is the common and ordinary voice of the Church,
that August. cont. Iulianum.
All humane flesh (Christ's flesh only excepted) is flesh of sin; because
that Idem contra Pelagium lib. 2. c. 40. ex Ambrosio.
of man and of the woman, that is to say, of the conjunction of their bodies,
none is without sin; and he that is without sin, is engendered and borne
without this conception. And so all the rest, Origin, Chrysostom, Anselme,
Fulgentius, Bernard, and Peter Lombard, the Master of the Schoolmen, all which
write, that the holy Virgin was conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity as
all other men are. And from thence Saint Bernard draws an argument to condemn
the feast of the conception of the Virgin Marie, then newly instituted and
ordained, saying, that Bernard. ad Canonicos Lugdun. epist. 174. Quum ritus
ecclesiae nescit, non probat ratio, non commendat antiqu^ traditio.
the custom of the Church is ignorant of it, reason approues it not, neither
does ancient Tradition recommend it. Origin. in Luc. homil. 17.
Origin goes further, even to her actual sins, and says, that she was
scandalizd in the death and passion of our Lord; that if she had not suffered
scandal, Christ should not be dead for her sins. Saint Chrysostom accuses
her of ambition, of ostentation and of vain glory, in that when our Savior
taught the people, she with his brethren stood without, and interrupted him,
Mat. 12.46.
desiring to speak with him. Chrysostom. in Mat. homil. 45.
Consider (says he) the importunity both of the mother, and of the brethren,
for in stead that they should have entered within, and heard with the people; or
stayed without until the end of the Sermon, and then should have resorted unto
him; stirred up with ambition and ostentation, they call him forth in the
presence of all the people, to the end they might seem to command Christ
easily, and with great power and authority: whence it appears, that they
were moved by some vain glory, not making as then any great reckoning or
estimation of him. Chrysostom. in Joan. homil. 20.
As much says he, expounding the miracle done by our Savior at the marriage
in Cana of Galilee; and surely when she adrest her self to Christ, saying
unto him, John 2.3, 4.
They have no wine: If she had not done amiss, nor had failed, either in that
she would prescribe unto him a time to work miracles, or in desiring (by human
affection and infirmity) to be in more esteem for his sake, Christ had never
answered her so, Woman, what have I to do with thee. Tertul. de Carne Christi.
c. 7.
Tertullian says no less, and Salmer. comment. in epist. ad Romans c. 5.
disput. 51.
Salmeron the Jesuit tells us, that some have proved and verified by two
hundred Fathers, some by three hundred; Ca^etan by fifteen, and they (says
he) irrefragable, that the holy Virgin has not been preserved from all sin.

VI. I write not these things to dishonor or disgrace the holy Virgin, nor to
match or equal any man with her in holiness; I render her all the honor can
be given to a creature, without transporting to her the honor due to the
Creator; I honor her remembrande, I esteem her, I believe, I say that Luke
1.48.
she is blessed, according as she her self has foretold. I give God thanks
for the grace he has done to her, for the grace he has done to the Church by
her, in making her the Mother of him, who is the head, the Spouse and Savior.
I strive and endeavor to ^mitate her humility; her faith, her meekness, and
other Christian virtues, wherewith God had adorned and graced her, and pray to
God to give me grace to do it. This is all the honor which is due unto
Saints; he which gives them more, is an idolater; he honors them not, but
dishonors them. I reserve unto Christ Jesus my only Savior, my only Head, my
only Redeemer, my only All, the honor which the Scripture gives him, and
gives to none but him; Tertul. de pr^s^r. c. 3. Soli enim Dei filio seruabatur
sine delicto permanere.
For it was reserved to the only Son of God, to live, to be, and abide
without sin. Of all others it is written, Romans 3.22.
That all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, that is to say, of
the honor which God had given them, creating them after his image in
knowledge, righteousness and holiness, that Romans 11.32.
God has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

VII. In the second rank after the Virgin, I place the Apostles, and I behold
them acknowledging, confessing, bewailing their sins. Saint Paul.
Saint Paul some twenty years after his conversion, already an Apostle, and
so far, yea, so much aduanst in sanctification, that he is not afraid to
protest, Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: Romans 7.
describes unto us an horrible war that he felt in himself, a perpetual
warfare of the flesh and the spirit, by the which he was so divided and
distracted between evil and good, that he cries out, Verse. 14.
I am carnal sold under sin. He had his mind enlightened, and knowing the
good, he had also his will inclined to follow the direction of the mind and
understanding, and to obey the Law; and that had he as touching the inward man,
and as touching that that was renewed in him; but he complains, that he had
also in himself, his flesh impugning and thwarting his good will, and
repugning his understanding and the Law of God, and haling him (will he, ^ill
he) to commit the sin he hates: Verse. 15.
for (says he) that which I do, I allow not; behold, the mind and
understanding enlightened condemning the evil, for what I would, that do I
not: but what I hate, that do I. Lo, the sanctified will abhorring the evil;
and notwithstanding he feels in himself so great a peruer^itie, that he does
the evil which he hates and condemns: and this perverseness is sin, the
corruption of his nature withdrawing him from good, and drawing him to evil:
Verse. 16.
If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law that it is good;
Verse. 17.
now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. And this
sin is his flesh, his natural corruption spread over all the parts of the
soul and body, which hinders him to do the good he would, and forces him to
do the evil he hates, as he adds; Verse. 18.19.
For I know that in me (that is) in my flesh, dwells no good thing; for to
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not;
for the good that I would I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I
do, etc. And so continues his complaint, and declares, that not only he
knows, approues, wills the good, but also loves it, and takes delight in it.
Verse. 22.
For, says he, I delight in the Law of God after the inward man: what was the
cause then that he did it not, or rather that he found not the means to
perfect it? The outward man, his flesh, which he terms Verse. 23.
the Law of his members; as he terms the inward man the Law of his mind, as
it follows: But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my
members. And surely those members are all the parts of the soul and body
infected with sin, and this combat is so sharp and harsh, and the event
thereof so heavy and doleful in this life, that nothing is left to him, but
to bemoane his misery, and call after death to be delivered of it, Verse. 24.
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Who? Surely God by Jesus Christ, who by the corporal death will deliver and
free the members of his body from the necessity of sinning, and will make them
fully victorious over the flesh; whence he concludes with this solemn action
of thanksgiving, Verse. 25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: and comforts all those that are
excercised with the like combat, assuring them, that Romans 8.1.
Now there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.

VIII. The Pelagians Hieron. aduers. Pelagian. lib. 2. in principio.
in Saint Ieroms time did expound all these words of the unregenerate man;
affirming, that the Apostle speaks in the name and person of a man not as yet
called, justified, sanctified, and not in his own person. There are some now
adays which maintain the same opinion. August. lib. 1. Retract. c. 13.
Saint Austin was (at the beginning) of this opinion; but afterward overcome
by the truth, he retracts and recants, acknowledging, that in the words of the
Apostle, Idem contra Julian. li. 6. c. 11.
is the groaning and heavy lamentation of the Saints, warring against the
concupiscence of the flesh. After him Prosper contra Collatorem, c. 8. Vox
vocati est sub grati^ constituti.
Prosper writing against Cassian S^mipelagian, and Father of many of our time,
says, that this sentence, For to will is present with me: but how to perform
that which is good, I find not, is the voice of a man called, and that is
under grace. All the circumstances of the Text do show and express as much.
The Apostle speaks always of himself, and in the present tense, I am carnal
sold under sin. The things whereof he complains, cannot belong to any other,
then to the regenerate man: for he allows the good, he wills the good, he
consents unto the Law that it is good, he delights in the same. That is proper
and peculiar to a regenerate man, Psalm. 1.2.
whose delight is in the Law of God, he wills not the evil, when he does it, he
hates it; when he does it, it is perforce as a poor gally-slue tied to his
chain, is forced to go where he would not; shall we say that these words are
of an infidel, of a carnal man, which drinks iniquity like water? Surely
the language of a carnal man is, I do that which is evil, and I will do it;
I do not that which is good, and I will not do it. It is his free will to
will to do evil, to will not to do good. On the other side, the speech of a
spiritual man in this life is, Alas, I do the evil which I would not do;
for I hate it: I do not, and cannot perfect the good I would do, I desire to
perfect it, for it is my delight: As the language of man glorified in heaven
is, I do not that which is evil, and I will not do it; I do that which is
good, and I will do it. Moreover, the Apostle writes, that he delights in the
Law of God after the inward man: there is no inward man in a carnal man, he is
all outward; he thinks, meditates, wills, desires, pursues and follows
eagerly after outward and worldly things. The Apostle feels after such a sort
his sin, and esteems, yea, finds it so heavy a burden, that he publishes
himself as it were by proclamation miserable and wretched for the same, and
desires death with great affection, to be delivered and freed of it. The man
not renewed, esteems himself wretched when he sins not, he will not live
but to sin; and would not die, but when he can sin no more. The Apostle
comforts himself in the grace and mercy of Christ Jesus his Savior, and
gives him thanks for it. The man not regenerate, who is such a one as we have
described in the fifth and sixth Chapter, knows he Christ? Or if he knows
him, does he love him, or call upon him? Christ may be Ier. 12.2.
near in their mouth, but far from their reins. The mark wherewith God
designs them is, Psalm. 14.4.
They call not upon the Lord. This doctrine has excellent uses. The regenerate
man is compounded of the outward and inward man, of the old and new man, of the
flesh and spirit; he has as yet in him the infirmities of the flesh, it is a
remedy against pride. He has in him the Spirit of Jesus Christ, his sins
are pardoned and forgiven him, and he shall not come into condemnation. This is
a remedy against despair. But of this we will hereafter speak.

IX. If Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 12.4.
who was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words which it is not
lawful for a man to utter, found and felt himself faint and weak, and often
carried away captive by his most secret and dear infirmities; if he confess,
that 2. Cor. 12.7.9.
he has had a thorn in his flesh, for remedy against the which, he had need
of the grace of God; none of the other Apostles could boast or glory to have
lived without sin. Not Saint James, for he ranks himself with sinners,
Saint James.
saying; James 3.2.
In many things WE offend all. Hierom. aduersus Pelagian. lib. 2. Non pauca
peccata sed multa, nec quorundam sed omnium posuit. Saint Peter.
He has not (says Saint Jerome) put down a few sins, but many; not of some
few persons, but of all. Not Saint Peter; for he has also said, that 1. Pet.
2.24.
Jesus Christ bare OUR sins in his own body on the tree. Hier. aduers.
Pelag. lib. 1. J^reprehensibilis aut nullus aut rarus. qui^ enim est, qui non
quasi in pulchro corpore aut nae^um aut ve^rucam habeat?
There is none that is faultlesse, or they are very rare; says Saint Jerome:
for who is he that has not, as in a fair body a mole, a wart, or some
natural mark: for if the Apostle says of Saint Peter, Gal. 2.14. Saint John.
that he walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, and was
to be blamed; in so much that Barnabas also was carried away with the like
dissimulation: who would chafe and be angry, if that which the Prince of the
Apostles has not had, be denied to him? Not Saint John, who being the well
beloved Disciple, leaned on Jesus bosom; for he also places himself amidst
the number of sinners, and says; 1. John 1.8.
If WE say that WE have no sin, WE deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in US. And this is the voice of Saints, Aug. de peccat. merit. lib. 2. c. 7.
Austin. A voice from whence Saint Cyprian inferres, Cypri. de ^pere and
El^emosia. The Martyrs.
that none can be without sin; that there remains as yet to those which are
healed some wounds; that whosoever says, he is without sin, is either proud
or senseless. Not the Martyrs, for it is written of all of them, Revel. 7.14.
That they washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Then had they them soiled and distained, and have not found any thing in
themselves, wherewith to make them white. Revel. 14.5.
These are such in whose mouth was found no guile. Surely, says Saint Austin,
August. de peccat. merit. lib. 2. c. 7.
because they have reproved themselves sincerely, and therefore no guile was
found in their mouth. For if they said, that they had had no sin, they should
deceive themselves, and truth should not be in them, and where truth is not,
there is untruth.

X. Not the whole Church, The whole Church.
which so long as it wars in this vale of misery, believes by an article of
faith the remission of sins; not (surely) the sins of others, but her own
sins: for sins are pardoned to none but to the Church. This is her voice;
Canticles 1.5.
I am black, but comely. She is not (says Saint Bernar. in Cant Sermon. 25.
Bernard) without some spot of blackness: but surely here in the place of her
pilgrimage; for the time will (...), when the Spouse of glory will make her
glorious without spot, without wrinkle, and such like things. But if she should
now say, that she has no blackness at all, she should deceive her self, and
truth should not be in her. Neither says she so, but contrariwise she cries
incessantly upon God in all her members, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses, in her most holy members. For as Saint Austin
says, August. in Psalm. 142.
The excellent Rams amongst Christ sheep have received commandment to pray
so. Then how much more the rest, whereof none can say, that he is without the
contagion of ^^^ne, that he need not pray even so. Not Moses, not Samuel, not
Elias, not John Baptist, not Saint Peter, not Saint Paul, not Saint John; not
any one of those, that have obtained good witness and testimony from God in
the Scripture. This voice, this language, ^aith Gregor. Nysse. de orati. domin.
Sermon. 5.
Gregory of Nyssen, appertains unto them all. If they were now in the world
living on earth in this humane frailty, the necessity of sinning would impose
upon them a necessity of praying, in regard of their sins past, Forgive us
our sins; and in respect of their sins to come, Lead us not into
t^ntation; and that not only for others, but also for themselves; not only in
humility, as the Pelagians said, but also in truth: for, saying they were
sinners by humility, and not being sinners truly, they should lie through
humility; and in lying, they should be sinners: as it h^th been decided of
old by Council. Mileuit. can. 6.7.8.
the Council held at Mileui^um in Numidia, with denunciation of Anathe^^ and
curse against those, that made the Apostles and other Saints confessors of
their sins, for humbleness sake; in (...), not in truth. Canon 8. Quis enim
ferat ^rantem, and non hominibus, sed ipsi D^min^ menti^n^em?
It were (says the Council) to lie unto God, and not unto men. Let us
therefore conclude this argument with Saint Ierom^, and say, Hieron. ad
Rusticum. epist. 44.
If Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets also and Apostles have not been
without sin. If the purest wheat has had his straw and chafe; what can be
said of us, of whom it is written, Jerem. 23.28.
What is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord?

CHAP. VIII.
I. The places above mentioned, are expounded and understood of venial sins,
by Bellarmine. II. Every sin is mortal in his nature, which appears, III.
If it be measured to God, IIII. To the Law, V. And to the death of Jesus
Christ. VI. All sins are venial by grace to him, that is in Christ Jesus.
VII. Are notwithstanding some greater then othersome. VIII. The last Argument;
Never any Monk kept, never could have kept the Law.
BEllarmine Bellar. de monach. c. 13.. 32.36.
expounds all these places of venial sins, without the which we are not, or
are very rarely in this life; notwithstanding, for all this we may be just, and
do works of supererogation.

II. This man, when he writ thus, was doubtless cauterized and seated in his
conscience, in regard of the feeling of sin. And thus it is, that now adays
they sew cushions under the elbow of the poor abused world; and cry Peace,
peace to them, for whom there is no peace: they make many souls live, that
should not live, flattering them in their sins by a wretched distinction of
sins into mortal and venial; a distinction contrary unto the Scripture,
which speaking of sin in general, without distinction, without limitation,
says, Romans 6.23.
that the wages of sin is death; and denounces plainly, that Ezech. 18.4.
the soul that sins, it shall die. Let sin be measured to God, to the
Law, to Christ Jesus, and they will find that it is so.

III. To God. Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight,
says David unto God; and the most holy men must say the like with him: for can
a man sin without transgressing the Law of God, and therefore without
offending God? And who will say, that a trespass against God is a venial
sin? Among us men, the sin and offense multiplies according to the
proportion of the person which is offended, and of the place where it is
committed. The wrong done to a private person either in word or deed, may be
repaired and satisfied by an honorable amends, or by a pecuniarie fine and
amercement: but to think ill of his Prince, is a crime of high treason; to
speak ill of him, deserves not the gallows, not the sword, but the pinsers,
the wheel, the fire, the extremest torments. If a son rebel against his
father, if the servant disobeieth his Master, if the subject despises the
commandments of his Sovereign; the father thinks he has just occasion to
disinherit his son, the Master to use hardly his servant, the Lord to reject
his subject, to pursue him, to pr^scribe him, to put him to death. And the
Creator of all, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, the Father, the
Redeemer, the Savior of us all, shall be wronged and injured in words, in
thoughts, in bad and wicked deeds, and actions, by his creatures, by his
servants, by his children, by his subjects, and shall be wronged and offended
in his own house, and in his presence; and some one or many of evil servants
shall call and cry unto their fellow-mates and companions, that it is no great
matter, it is but a venial sin, God will not regard it. By sin the great
God, the infinite, immortal, immense God is offended, and men dare say, that
it is a small sin. O sin not venial, but mortal! not small but great, but
worthy of an infinite and immortal punishment, of all those which dare teach,
that man can sin against the infinite Majesty of the Almighty, and yet not
sin infinitely, nor be guilty of an infinite punishment.

IIII. Let sin be measured by the Law: 1. John 3.4.
for sin is the transgression of the Law. Now the Law-spares not him, which
transgresses the least i^t or tittle of the same, but pronounces this
sentence and decree; Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the Law to do them. What? is there any sin so small, which is
not committed against some word or other of the Law of God, which by consequent
draws not the curse upon the head of him which transgresses it? This cannot
be denied me, that he which is guilty of the transgression of all the
Commandments of the Law, is worthy of death: James 2.10.
But whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is
guilty of all, says S. James: for as much as the Law generally understood,
requires nothing but obedience, which is not rendered by him, which
transgresses the least word thereof. Wherefore such a one is worthy of death,
although he had spoken but an idle word; seeing that Christ declares, that Mat.
12.36.
Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgment; or had uttered Ephesians. 5.4.6.
but foolish talking or jesting, seeing that the Apostle says, because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. The
Saints, which have prayed with such seruencie for the remission of sins;
which have confessed, that they could not subsist before God, if he would
proceed against them in rigor and extremity; who renouncing unto their own
justice and righteousness, have called upon him for grace and mercy to their
unrighteousness, have known this, have ^elt it thus, have acknowledged and
confessed it.

V. All they that will compass and measure their sins by the satisfaction,
which our pledge has made unto the justice of God, will know and find it so,
will confess this, and feel it so. What? termest thou that a sin venial,
not to be punished by death, for the which the God of glory died? Will thou
say that, to be venial and pardonable for a little asperges, a little
Holy Water sprinckle, for the which the only and best beloved Son of God
has spilt his blood? Will thou bless thy self in thine heart in committing a
fault, a sin for the which 2. Cor. 5.21.
God has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; yea, Gal. 3.13.
a curse for us, to redeem us from the curse of the Law. Of that Law which
accurseth all them, which keep not every word thereof. Now such are the sins
which they term venial, 1. John 1.7.
for the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And as Saint John
says, speaking as well of himself as of others; 1. John 2.1.2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Sin thus examined and
measured to God, against whom it is committed; to the Law of God, by the which
it is condemned, to Jesus Christ, who has spilt his blood to blot it out,
cannot seem venial to none but to him, who insensible of his own corruption,
mockes at God, despises the Law, and sets naught by it, and counts the blood
of the Covenant, the death of our Immanuel God-Man, and Man-God, an unholy
thing. All sins therefore are mortal in their nature, and are always
mortal to them, which live not by the Spirit of Christ.

VI. Romans 8.1.
But there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, to them which
have Christ living in their hearts by faith, and are true members of his body:
To these all sins are venial, and in effect are pardoned and forgiven them
by the merit and indulgence of God.

VII. All this hinders not, that some sins are greater then othersome, and
more or less rigorously punishable with death eternal, as our Savior Christ
himself declares, when he says, that Ma. 10.14.15. and 11.24.
it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gom^rra in the day of
judgment, then for them which hear not, nor receive his word. Even so among
men, capital crimes are unequal and different, and punished with a more
sharp and cruel death in some, then in othersome.

VIII. I have sufficiently proved, that not one of those which are recommended
in the Scripture for their holiness, has kept the Law. I have brought in a
great number of Fathers, Bishops, Priests, Monks, which subscribe unto this
whelsome and holy doctrine, have yielded unto it, condemned themselves, and
confessed themselves to be sinners as other men. I would feign see now, if
these righteous men, these bo^sters, these sellers of merits, could make any
one come forth out of their Monasteries, whom the Cowle, the Sackcloth, and
Monastical discipline have so sanctified and renewed, that he has observed
and kept all the Commandments, has no need to say, Forgive us our trespasses,
nor to confess himself a sinner to his brethren in life and death. Let them
not iuggle and dodge with the truth, as the Pelagians did: for when Saint
Hieron. ad C^esiphontem. Egregij Doctores, dicunt esse posse, quod nunquam
fuisse demonstrant.
Jerome asked them, who those were, whom they esteemed to be without sin;
they shifted of his demand by a new trick, affirming, that they spoke not of
those that are so, or have been so, but that may be so. They that would avoid
it with such a ^est and wile, I will oppose to them (as a wall of iron) S.
Ierom^ answer; Goodly Doctors, which say, that that may be, which they cannot
show that it has ever been; seeing the Scripture says, Eccles. 1.9.
The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, and that which shall be
done, is that which has been done. Let then these holy Fathers, these
mortified men display and lay open their righteousness before God, and give
God thanks with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11.12.
God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
of all that I possess. As for me, acknowledging my self with Saint Paul 1.
Tim. 1.15.
the chiefest sinner. I will go unto the throne of grace to obtain mercy;
and will cry and call upon my Judge with the Publican, Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner; and I am assured, that I shall return to my
house justified, because Psalm. 145.18.
the Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in truth.

CHAP. IX.
I. The Righteousness of the Saints in this life consists rather in the
remission of sins, then in the perfection of virtues. II. The first
objection. God has promised to circumcise our hearts, to the end, we love him
with all our heart. III. An Answer to this objection. IIII. Second objection;
Many have this testimony, that they have kept the Law, and have loved God with
all their heart. V. An Answer to this objection, VI. According to David's words
in the 119 Psalm. VII. And the consent of the Ancient Fathers.
THe Psalm. 19.7.8.9.
Law of the Lord is perfect; The Testimony of the Lord is sure, the Statutes
of the Lord are right, the Commandment of the Lord is pure, the Judgments of
the Lord are true and righteous altogether. In this word therefore there is
nothing imperfect, nothing doubtful, nothing crooked, nothing impure, nothing
false, nothing that bends to one side, there is no opposition, no
contradiction. By it have we proved that there is no thought, word, or action
of the holiest men, which being ruled and leuelled by the Law of God, is not
found crooked and oblique. For S. Austin said, August. in Psalm. 42.
How straight and upright soever I seem to my self, thou drawest a rule from
thy treasury, thou measurest and squarest me by the same, and I am found
crooked and awry. Whence I concluded, and do conclude again, August. de
Ciuit. Dei lib. 19. cap. 27.
that our righteousness it self, although it be true, having respect unto the
end of true good, whereunto it is referred and applied, is notwithstanding
such, and of that nature in this life, that it consists rather in the remission
of sins, then in the perfection of virtues. Witness (says S. Austin) the
prayer and supplication of the City of God, which is a Pilgri^esse on earth,
which cries to God in all her members, Forgive us our debts. By this word
notwithstanding, they, that are ashamed to be too much bound unto God, and
presume to have obtained plenteously grace of Christ, to have no more need of
Christ, endeavor to improve and impugn this truth; and opposing the Scripture
to it self, do seek in it men that have perfectly kept the Law, and
arguments concluding, that the Law may be kept by him, that is here living on
earth assisted with the grace of God.

II. God (say they) has promised so to work in men, Objection.
that in the time of the new Testament, he may be loved with all the heart,
with all the soul; and Moses said unto the people, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Bellar. de
monach. c. 13.. 24.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul^, that thou may
live. And there are many such like promises in the Prophets; wherefore either
God has lied, which cannot be; or this Commandment is simply fulfilled in
this life.

III. Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, but every man a liar, as it is written, that thou might
Psalm. 51.4.
be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art judged. That
which he promises he performs; but he has not promised, that we shall love
him in this life with a perfect love, wherein nothing is omitted, nothing can
be desired; but only that he will circumcise our hearts, that we may love
him with all our hearts, which he does by order and successively, giving us here
the beginnings and proceedings, and so prosecuting that which concerns us,
until he folly consummate it, and finish it in the Kingdom of heaven; unto
which is reserved the prerogative to be inhabited by the Saints, which have
neither wrinkle, nor spot, nor any such like thing.

IIII. Objection. Bell. ibid.. 2^.
But there have been some found that have kept the Law. God says of David, 1.
King. 14 8.
He has kept my Commandments, and has followed me with all his heart, to do
that only which was right in mine eyes. And of Josiah, 2. King. 23.25.
like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the
Law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him. David witnesses also
of himself before God, and says, Psalm. 119.10.
With my whole heart have I sought thee. Bellar. de iustificat. lib. 4. c. 11..
11 12. 13.
Saint Luke writes of Zachary and Elizabeth his wife, Luke 1.6.
They were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
ordinances of the Lord, blameless. And Jesus Christ says of his Apostles,
John 17.6.
They have kept thy Word; these therefore have kept the Law.

V. Surely, if they speak of a sovereign and singular perfection, and such a
one as the Law requires under pain of eternal damnation, condemning
concupiscence, and all the first bad motions of the Spirit; we have heretofore
proved and convinced, that no man living has so kept the Law, Jesus Christ
only excepted. Thom. 2.2. q. 184. art. 3. Est autem infimus diuinae
dilectionis gradus, vt nihil supra eum, aut contra eum, aut aequaliter ei
diligatur. A quo gradu persectionis qui deficit, nullo modo implet praeceptum.
The lowest degree of the dilection or love of God is, that nothing be beloved
above him, or against him, or alike to him; whosoever fails of this degree of
perfection, accomplisheth in no wise the precept, says Thomas. None therefore
has ever kept the precept: for since the fall, there never was found any,
which has attained unto this lowest degree of divine charity, yea, that has
not been exceeding far from it. For seeing that Eccles. 7.20.
there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not, as Solomon
says: and that David, Josiah, Zachary, the Apostles have sinned, as we have
seen; it cannot be but that they have loved (in regard of the flesh) sin
above God and against God; seeing that sin is against the will of God, and
displeases infinitely the Majesty, goodness, holiness, and justice of God.
The Saints therefore are said to love God with all their heart, because they
love him sincerely and truly, without fraud and hypocrisy. For sometimes the
Scripture opposes all the heart unto a double heart; witness that which is
said of those of Zebulun to establish David King over Israel, 1. Chro. 12.33.
they kept their rank without a heart and a heart; that is expounded by these
words, these men of war that could keep their rank, came with Verse. 38.
a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David King over all Israel. Even so,
whosoever warring against his infirmities, addicts himself to seek the Lord
with a simple and sincere heart, and endeavors the best he can, according to
the measure of the grace of Jesus Christ in him, to love God with all his
heart; God accepting of so holy an endeavor for the effect, and pardoning him
all that is wanting for Jesus Christ's sake, whose member he is, he holds him,
reputes him, names him, as if he had done whatsoever the Law requires; and it
is in this regard that he is called Righteous. For even as he which meditates,
proiects, designs the evil, takes pleasure in it, is called Mat. 9.11.
a sinner in the highest degree, and is said 5. Job. 3.8.9.
to commit sin; although God either foreslowes, or hinders, or dissipates his
most wicked and wretched plots and proiects, because it is not long of
himself, that he puts not in execution the pernicious designs of his heart:
God, who Job 10.4.
has not the eyes of flesh, nor sees as man sees; 1. Sam. 16.7.
For man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart,
holds and accounts for done, that which he would have done; terms him a
sinner, and committing sin, as if he did always sin in effect, as well as
he sins in affection. According to this the Lord says to Judas, who had
resolved in himself to betray him, John 13.27.
That thou do, do quickly. In like manner, he which according to the
ordinary course of his life, walks in the fear of the Lord, in his Law does
meditate day and night, and all his delight is in the same, is called 1. John
3.7.
righteous, and doing righteousness, although the Devil, the World, and his
Flesh do hinder him often to do the good he would, and do always hinder
him to perfect it, and to do it so holily as he would; God, Psalm. 7.9.
who tries the hearts and reins, accepts his good affection, and as his
Father in Christ Jesus, and now no more his Judge, gives the title and name of
righteousness to his sanctified, his holy and religious will; holding and
reputing as done, the good which he would have done.

VI. So David protests often, that he has kept the Law, as we may read in the
119. Psalm. 119.
Psalm, because he had determined in himself to keep it; because he
endeavored and strove with might and maine to keep it, and applied himself
unto it with great zeal and devotion, as he declares it in the same Psalm,
Verse. 8. etc.
I will keep thy statutes, verse. 8. I have chosen the way of truth, thy
judgments have I laid before me: verse. 30. I have said, O Lord, that I would
keep thy words, verse. 57. I have sworn and I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments, verse. 106. This is his resolution grounded upon
the love of the Law, I have rejoiced in the way of thy Testimonies as much as
in all riches: verse. 14. I will delight my self in thy Statutes, I delight in
thy word. Verse. 16. My soul breaks, for the longing that it has unto thy
judgments at all times. Verse. 20. O how love I thy Law, it is my meditation
all the day! verse. 97. etc. This affection bred this resolution to keep it,
and this resolution was followed with the effect, he says, Thy testimonies are
my delight, and my counselors, verse. 24. I remembered thy judgments of old, O
Lord, and have comforted my self, verse. 52. I made haste, and delaied not to
keep thy Commandments, verse. 60. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, then
thousands of gold and silver, verse. 72. It is my meditation all the day, verse.
97. I have not departed from thy Judgments, for thou have taught me, verse.
102. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path, 105. Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of
my heart, verse. 111. My soul has kept thy Testimonies, verse. 169. etc. But
this effect and work is not perfect: for there was as yet darkness in his
understanding, and therefore he prays, Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
the wondrous things of thy Law, verse. 18. Give me understanding, and I shall
keep thy Law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart, verse. 34. Teach me
good Judgment and knowledge, verse. 66. Deal with thy servant according unto
thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes, verse. 124. There was some opposition in
his heart, therefore he prays to God, to incline his heart unto his
Testimonies, and not to covetousness, verse. 36. He that prays so, has not
attained unto perfection, and notwithstanding he says, that he has kept the
Law, that he has done the Commandments, as he himself expounds it saying, I
have inclined mine heart to perform thy Statutes always, even unto the end,
verse. 112.

VII. The ancient Fathers have thus expounded these places of Scripture, as
indeed they cannot be otherwise expounded then so; considering the sins of
the holiest, which have often tript and stumbled in the Law. Saint Bernard
shows in what sense the Scripture terms Christians Saints; Bernar. sermon. 3.
Ad fratres. in quo verbo non te terreat sanctitatis nomen, quando non secundum
meritum sed propositum, non secundum affectionem sed secundum intentionem
sanctos vocat.
Let not the name of holiness amaze thee: for God calls not his Saints
according to their merit, but according to his purpose; not according to their
affection, but according to his intention. Which he proves by the examples of
David, and of Saint Paul, who had not as yet apprehended that holiness, which
men judge it to be; he adds afterward, And thou also, if thou have resolved in
thy self to decline from evil, and do that which is good, hold fast that
which thou have received, and continually profit better and better; and then if
thou do something less uprightly (according to humane frailty) not to
persist in it, but to repent and amend thy self according to thy power, Ibid.
Eris sine dubio sanctus and t^.
doubtless thou shall also be holy. Prosper Aquitanus rendering a reason, why
the righteous which have always in them things, from the which they desire to
be freed and released, are not called sinners, but righteous, but Saints,
says, Prosper in Psalm. 105. Scriptura peccatores non leuium culparum homines,
sed multorum facinorum, and profunde iniquitatis hoc nomine appellare consueuit.
That although the righteous, and they which live praiseworthy, are not
without sin; the Scripture terms commonly sinners, not those which commit
slight faults; but those which commit many crimes and heinous sins, and are
profoundly wicked. S. Austin declaring why being sinners, they are named
Saints, says; August. de Ecclesiast. dogmat. c. 85. nullus sanctus and iustus
caret peccato: Nec ^amen ex ^o^ desi^it esse iustus vel sanctus, cum ^ffectu
tenent sanct^tatem.
There is no holy nor righteous, man without sin, who notwithstanding cease not
for all that to be holy and righteous, because they retain holiness in
affection. In another place he says, that Jdem in Joan. tract, 41.
many have bin called righteous, because they were (sine querela) blameles,
that is to say, without reproof: for there is no just complaint among men
against them, which are without crime. Now a crime is a great sin worthy of
accusation and condemnation. But if you think, that to be righteous, is to be
without sin, read a few lines before, and he will tell you, Discuss and
sift me out any, how righteous soever he be in this life, although he be
well-nigh worthy of the name of righteousness, he is not for all that without
sin. And that proves he by the confession of Job, and of Saint John, and
excepts none but Jesus Christ. In like manner expounding in what manner the
Scripture terms good those that are bad, he says, Idem. epist. 54. Ad
Macedomu^ Sed enim ^icimus bonum, cuius praeualent: eumque optimum, qui peccat
minimum. Idcirco ipse Dominus quos dicit bonos propter participationem gratiae
diuinae, eosaem etiam malos dicit propter vitia infirmitatis humanae, etc.
that how much a man does well, that is to say, wittingly, charitably, and
religiously, so much is he good: but so much as he sins, that is to say,
strayes from the truth, from charity, and from godliness, so much is he
evil; and who is in this world without some sin? but we call him good,
whose goodness ouercomes; and him best, who sins least. And therefore they
whom the Lord calls good by participation of his divine grace, even those he
calls evil, because of the vices of humane frailty; until that all, whereof
we consist, healed of all vice and corruption, pass into that life wherein we
shall not sin at all. For surely they were good and not evil, whom he
taught to pray, Our Father which art in heaven: For they are good, in as much
as they are the children of God, not begotten by nature, but made by grace.
Afterward he adds, that Christ himself calls his Apostles evil, when he
says to them; Mat. 7.11.
If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, Quid
simus Dei dono, quid human^ vitio; ho^ commendans, illud eme^dans.
declaring unto us the truth of the one, and of the other: What we are by Gods
grace, and what we are by humane corruption, recommending the one, and amending
the other. Lastly, he says, that men are named righteous, because their
unrighteousness is forgiven them, and the righteousness of Christ is imputed
unto them. Idem in Job. traci. verse. Omnes qu^ per Christum iustificati sunt,
^usti ^on in se sed in illo sunt.
All they (says he) that are justified by Christ, are righteous, not surely in
themselves, but in him. As we have heard of him in the beginning of this
Chapter, that all our righteousness in this li^e consists rather in the
remission of sins, then in the perfection of virtues. So then Christian^
according to the Fathers are said to be righteous in this life, because God
esteems them as righteous and upright in Jesus Christ, because they apply
themselves unto righteousness and holiness; and because they live uprightly
and righteously, that is to say, blameless, and without imputation of crime
among men.

CHAP. X.
I. The third Objection; Noah, Asa, and many others are named perfect in the
Scripture. II. The Answer. Those notwithstanding were sinners, and are said to
be perfect. III. In regard of the perfection of parts. IIII. By the which a man
may assuredly know, if he be the child of God. V. But they were not perfect of
the perfection of degrees. VI. They have also been called perfect, in
comparison of others less perfect. VII. And in regard of their affection,
whereby they made toward their perfection. VIII. As also by reason of the
perfection of Christ Jesus, in whom they are complete. IX. Which is proved by
the Fathers.
THe third objection is, 3. Objection. Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 4. c. 11.
concerning perfect men: for it is written, that Genes. 6.9.
Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation, walking with God. 2. Chro.
15.17.
The heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 1. Cor. 2.6.
We speak (says S. Paul) wisdom among them that ar^ perfect. And elsewhere;
Philip. 3.15.
Let us, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. By these examples and many
others it appears, as it seems unto them, that many have perfectly kept the
Commandments of God; for otherwise they should not be said to be perfect.

II. It has bin proved, that even these men have transgressed the Law, and
have never attained in this life unto the perfection of the righteousness of
the Law: in whose balance if the most perfect works of the most perfect were
weighed, they should be found all too light, all too imperfect. Surely Asa who
obtained witness, that 2. Chro. 15.17.
his heart was perfect all his days, is in the same place accused, that he
took not away out of Israel the high places; and in the Chapter following, 2.
Chro. 16.7.
reproved by Hanani the Seer, to have relied on the King of Syria, and not on
the Lord his God; Verse. 10.
and to have put in prison the Prophet Hanani, for reproving of him in the name
of the Lord, and to have oppressed some of the people the same time. And Verse.
12.
being sick and diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great;
yet in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. He
notwithstanding with the rest above mentioned, have not (for all that) left to
be called perfect, for diverse considerations.

III. First, there is a double perfection, The perfection of parts.
the one is of this mortal life, the other of life eternal; in this life,
that man whom the Spirit of Christ renews, is sanctified in all the parts of
his soul and of his body; his understanding is enlightened, his heart softened
and made pliant; of a stony one it is made fleshie, or rather of a stone it is
made flesh: his affections are freed from the bondage of sin, and ranged
under the conduct of the understanding and of the will; all the members of his
body, al his parts and limbs, his eyes, his ears, his tongue, his feet his
hands, etc. are sanctified to serve unto righteousness in holiness. But it is
so, that in every part there is always some imperfection in this life: for the
light of the understanding is mingled with darkness, the doctrine of the will
is infected by the natural peruersitie remaining yet in it; the holiness of
the affections is soiled and troubled with evil, villainous and disordered
motions; and the limbs of the body are often applied unto filthiness and
wickedness. In like manner in regard of the Law, he which is led and guided by
the Spirit of Jesus, is sanctified in regard of all the Commandments of the
Law. He finds them equally just, he affects them all, he applies himself to
the observation of all of them, without omitting any one; and notwithstanding
by reason of his frailty he cannot keep so much as one perfectly (namely, with
all his heart, with all his soul, with all his thought, with all his strength)
for God only, without mingling therein the consideration of his own interest,
which is the perfection which the Law commands, and demands under pain of
damnation.

IV. Because this imperfect perfection resides and remains in all the parts of
the soul, and of the body, as in his subject; and extends it self unto all
the parts of the Law, as to his object; it is termed, The perfection of parts,
and is a sure mark, whereby a man shall know, whether he be renewed or no, and
whether he have a heart without hypocrisy. For the whole religion of an
hypocrite is upon the tippe of his tongue, and at his fingers ends; it
consists wholly in words and outward show, his heart is far from God, as it
is written, Mat. 15.8.
This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth and honors me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me. His understanding may be enlightened
to know God, but his heart is never sanctified to know God; he will strive to
keep some Commandments of the Law, but there will be always some one or
other of them that will go against his stomach: as Mark. 6.20.
Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and an holy, and observed
him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly: but he
could not forgo his brothers wife for all Saint John's warning and admonition,
telling him, Verse. 18.
that it was not lawful for him to have his brothers wife; showing in this one
thing, that he hated in his heart Gods Commandments, and that he was destitute
of the sanctifying Spirit, which crucifies the whole man, and makes him
affected to all the commandments. Of this perfection speaks Saint Paul, when
he speaks of himself, as also of others, 1. Cor. 13.9.
We know in part, and (...) prophecy in part. And in this sort were Noah,
Abraham, Aza, Job, etc. perfect.

V. But the other perfection, whereof the Apostle speaks in the next verse,
The Perfection of degrees.
Verse. 10.
that when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away, is the privilege of the Kingdom of heaven, and is named the
Perfection of degrees; because then the Image of God shall be restored in man
in the highest degree, he shall have perfection of holiness, according unto
his capacity in every part of his soul and body; and shall perfectly keep all
the Commandments, and every one thereof. In this sense August. in Joan. tract.
verse. Ex part libertas, ex part seruitus; nondum tota, nondum pura, nondum
plena, quia nondum plena aeternitas; habemus enim ex part infirmitatem, ex
part accepimus libertatem.
Saint Austin says, that There is not yet a perfect liberty, because the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc. but liberty in part, in part bondage, not
as yet an entire and whole liberty, not yet a pure freedom, nor yet full,
because not as yet a full eternity. For partly we have infirmity and
feebleness, and we have partly received liberty. And he proves this by those
places of Scriptures, which we have in the Episile to the Romans, particularly
because the Apostle says, Romans 7.18.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find
not. When then shall be the perfect liberty and freedom? When (says he)
there shall be no more enmity and hostility; 1. Co. 15.26.53 54 55
when the last enemy shall be destroyed, which is death, for this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality; then shall
be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory; O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where, is thy victory? What is
that to say, O Death where is thy sting? the flesh lusts against the spirit,
etc. that is to say, The s^ing of death is sin, as the Apostle speaks; and
sin is always in us until death, and we consequently are always
imperfectly perfect. Saint Jerome says to this purpose, that Hieron. ad
^tesiph. Haec hominibus sola perfectio, si se imperfectos esse nouerint.
this is the only perfection of men, if they know themselves to be imperfect.

VI. Secondly, there are two sorts of faithful in the Church, the one less,
the other more advanced in knowledge; Heb. 5.13.14.
some are babes and have need of milk, others are of full age, perfect men,
and have need of strong meat, even those, who by reason of use, have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil. These in comparison of those
are called perfect. And it is in this sense that Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 2.6.
We speak wisdom among them that are perfect. And in another place; Let us
therefore Phil. 3.15.
as many as be perfect, be thus minded. He means US that are more forwards and
advanced, let us be thus minded, let us have this feeling; And what feeling?
Surely that we are not as yet perfect, as it is manifest by the words going
before, for he had said; Not as though I had already attained, Verse. 12.13.14
either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that,
for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self
to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which
are behind, and reaching forth unto those which are before; I press toward
the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Then he
adds, Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, to wit, says
Saint Jerome, Hieron. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1. Imperfectos nos esse con^iteri,
and nec dum comprehendisse, nec dum accepisse; haec est hominis vera sapientia,
imperfectum esse se nosse: atque vt ita loquar, cunctorum in carne iustorum
imperfecta perfectio est.
to confess that we are imperfect, that we have not as yet apprehended, not
yet received. This is the true wisdom of (...), to know and acknowledge
himself to be imperfect; and that I may so say, The perfection of all the
righteous which are in this flesh is imperfect.

VII. Thirdly, the Saints are termed perfect, as they are termed righteous, ab
affectu non ex effectu, because they tend unto perfection, and without any stop
or stay gain always way, and go on forwards, until God has filled their
cup with the full measure of his blessings. Saint Jerome expounding the words
of Moses to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 18.13.
Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God, whereby the Pelagians would prove,
that man can be perfect in this life if he will; shows unto them, Hieron.
aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
that he is said to be perfect, not who has all the virtues, but which
follows God, the only perfect. And he proves this by all the circumstances
of the Text.

VIII. Lastly, being members of Christ Jesus, who has fulfilled all
righteousness for us, God imputes unto them the righteousness and perfection
of Christ their Head and Pledge; and in him accounts them, and holds them for
righteous and perfect, as it is written, Col. 2 10.
Ye are complete in him. Saint Jerome writes, Hier. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
that we are righteous, when we confess our selves sinners, and our
righteousness consists not in our own merit, but in the mercy of God. Saint
Austin speaking of the perfection that was in the Apostles, says, that all the
August. Retract. lib. 1. c. 19. Omnia mandata facta deputantur, quando quic
quid non fit ignoscitur.
Commandments are judged and said to be accomplished and fulfilled, when that
which is not done is pardoned. We will end our answer to this Pelagian
objection with the answer of Fulgentius. Fulgentius ad Monimum lib. 1. c. 15.
Now the perfection of divine gifts is not yet perfect, it being so, that all
the perfect have need of perfection. For he that said, let us, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded, says also, not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect. He was then perfect in the hope and expectation of
the glory to come; he was imperfect by the burden of corruption and
mortality, etc. He was perfect in the expectation of the gift, imperfect in
the trouble and tediousness of the combat. He was perfect, in that he obeyed
the Law of God with the mind; imperfect, in that with the flesh he obeyed the
Law of sin. He was perfect, having a desire to depart, and be with Christ:
Imperfect, because so long as he was in this body, he was absent from God.
Perfect, in that he knew fully, that God is able to do that which he
promises to his children: Imperfect, in that God has not as yet done in his
Saints all that, which he has promised them. All this comes to this point,
that none keeps perfectly the Law, Aug. de peccat. merit. lib. 2. c. 13. and
15.
and that this man or that man may be said to be perfect in one thing, who is
imperfect in another: A perfect Auditor of wisdom, which is not ac yet a
perfect Doctor and Teacher; perfectus iustitiae cognitor, knowing perfectly
righteousness, nondum perfectus effector, not as yet a perfect doer of it;
perfect to love his enemies, not yet perfect to suffer and forbear them, not
yet perfect in this love; perfectus viator, a perfect traveler, that is to
say, tending unto perfection, nondum ipsius itineris perfectione peruentor, but
not at yet having attained unto the perfection and end of the voyage. As these
places are expounded by Saint Austin, who shows, that we must not think that
a man is without sin, because he is said to be perfect in some things. Now he
that is not without sin, keeps not the Law according to the unchangeable
rule thereof.

CHAP. XI.
I. The fourth Objection. If God has given a Law impossible to be kept, he
should be more unwise, and more cruel then a Tyrant. II. The adversary has
borrowed this sottish and cruel objection of the Pelagians (ancient
Heretics). III. Saint Ieromes answer to this objection. IIII. The Law weak
through the flesh, is fulfilled in us by Jesus Christ, and the manner how. V.
The Law was possible unto man in the state of Innocence. VI. The Law is made
impossible unto man in the state of sin through his own fault, and not by
the default of the Law, which requires nothing of him, but that which he owes.
VII. Four uses of the Law concerning the unregenerate man. VIII. The Law is
possible to the regenerate man, in regard of the perfection of parts. IX. The
Law is in all manner of ways possible to man glorified.
THe Flesh gain-saies this doctrine, Bellar. de Moc. 13. 30. Idem de Justific.
lib. 4. c. 13.. 6. Si le^ domini esset impossibilis, requireretur, Deum omni
tyranno crudeliorem, and stultiorem, etc.
If the Law of God were impossible, God should be more cruel, and more foolish
then any tyrant. For he should require, yea, exact, and that of his friends a
tribute, that none could pay; and should make Laws, which he knows cannot be
kept and observed.

II. This is sottishly and cruelly spoken; and he shows, that he was inspired
with the same spirit of error and blasphemy, wherewith the Pelagians were
possessed, whom S. Jerome charge, Hieron. ad ^tesiph. Soletis and hoc dicere,
aut possibilia esse mandata, and recte a Deo data; aut impossibilia, and non in
his esse culpam, qui accepere mandata, sed in (...) qui dedit impossibilia.
Idem aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
that they were went to say, Either the Commandments are possible and rightly
given of God; or else they are impossible, and then the fault is not in them
that received them, but in him that gave them. Again, If they are possible, we
can do them if we will? If they are impossible, we are not blame worthy, nor
guilty, if we do not that, which we cannot perform. And again, Either we
can eschew bad thoughts, and consequently we can be without sin: or if we
cannot avoid and shun them, that which cannot be avoided, is not accounted a
sin.

III. Let them therefore patiently hear S. Ieroms answer. First, he returns
the argument upon ye adversary in this manner: Hieron. ad Ctesiphontem.
The Commandments of God are either easy, or hard. If easy, show me any one
that has fulfilled them, etc. If difficult, how dare you say, that the
Commandments of God, which none has kept and observed, be ease? For either
they be easy, and there is an infinite number of men which have kept them; or
else they are hard, and thou have rashly said, that that is easy which is
difficult. Secondly, answering unto that which they did produce and allege
concerning the possibility and impossibility of the Commandments, he says,
Has God commanded, that I should be that which God is? that there should be
no difference between me and the Creator? that I should be advanced higher
then the Angels? and that I should have that which the Angels have not? Of him
(namely, of Christ) it is written, as a thing proper to himself; he did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. If this be common to me and
Christ what had he proper to himself? And so he makes the Law possible to
none, but to Christ alone; and attributes unto Christ, as a thing proper to
him, the perfect keeping of the Law. But these answers satisfy and pacify
not the conscience, and therefore he adds a third answer. Thou say, the
Commandments of God are possible; (he speaks to the Pelagian, and answers
him, saying) and who denies it! but how this is to be understood, the chosen
vessel shows plainly: for (says he) Romans 8.3.
What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin, in the flesh.

IIII. The sense and meaning is, that the impossibility of the Law proceeds
not from the Law; for if a man could keep the whole Law, it would justify
him: but it comes from the flesh, that is to say, from the corruption of the
humane nature, which makes man incapable to fulfill the Law, and consequently
makes the Law unable to justify man. But God in his mercy has provided, and
has sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, that is to say, in
the human nature altogether like unto ours, sin excepted, and in this flesh
of the Son, in our human nature which he has put on, God has condemned
sin, surely in that he has punished it in the humanity of the Son, being
made a curse for us. And that the Romans 8.4.
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; questionless in as much
as that in our nature, and in our name Christ has satisfied the curse thereof,
by the curse of his cross, which is allowed of God, as if we had satisfied in
our own persons; as also in as much as we being justified by faith in Christ,
we are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and by the same guided and
fashioned to the willing obedience of the Law; which begins here in the place
of our pilgrimage, and proceeds on daily from good to better, and shall be
consummated and perfected in our country, the place of our rest. For that none
has ever fulfilled, and cannot fulfill the Law during the days of this life,
Hieron. ad Ctesiphontem.
Saint Jerome proves it by the Apostles example, lamenting To. 7.14.24, 25
that he was carnal, sold under sin; so that he cries out, O wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? and then he
comforts himself with his answer; The grace of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord? What say I? the example of the Apostle alone? when he proves Hieron.
aduers. Pelagia. lib. 1. and lib. 2.
by a great number of places of the old and new testament, and by the example
of all the Saints, that none ever has fulfilled the Law but Jesus Christ
alone, who said, Mat. 5.17.
I am not come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfill.

V. But to answer plainly to this objection, we will confider man in a
fourefold differing state and condition, in the state of his innocence, in the
state of his rebellion, and of his fall, in the state of his regeneration, and
in the state of his glorification. In the state of innocence man was upright,
perfectly holy, perfectly righteous; God gave to this upright, holy, and
righteous man, his just and righteous Law, possible in it self, and possible
to him which had received grace to be able to keep it, to be able not to
transgress it, remaining in this state, it did direct him unto all perfection,
and he kept it in all perfection.

VI. But having allied himself with Satan, the Prince of darkness, and
alienated himself from God, who dwells in the light which no man can approach
unto, he fell into darkness, and having withdrawn himself from the obedience
of his Creator, Psalm. 36.10.
with whom is the fountain of life, and inthralled himself to his enemy,
Heb. 2.14.
to him that had the power of death, that is the devil, he became Ephesians 2.2.
Impossible to the corrupt nature.
dead in trespasses and sins, and in such wise the slave of sin, that he
cannot but sin. In this state God gives him his Law, which he cannot keep,
not through the default of the Law, but through the fault Romans 8.7.
of the wisdom of the flesh, which is enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; yea, it will not be subject
to it, and will not observe it, but applies her self with all her power to the
transgression thereof. Now it is not cruelty nor tyranny to require of this
man, the slave of sin, the bondsman of the devil, that which he cannot pay:
as it is not cruelty to ask of a bankrupt, payment of his debts. A Tyrant
exacts of his subjects that which they owe him not. God exacts nothing of man,
but that which man had received of him; all the heart, all the soul, all the
thoughts, the whole body, and all the strength of that all. What is the cause,
that man cleares not this debt? It Is not long of God, who Eccles. 7.29.
has made man upright, enriching him with all spiritual blessings; but it is
long of man, who being an unthrift, a prodigal spend-all, has wasted and
consumed the goods which he had received, and by his own fault is become
unable and unapt to pay.

VII. Furthermore, a Tyrant demands unjustly of his subject, that which is not
his due, nor in the power of his subject, and has no other end then the ruin
of his subject. In respect whereof notwithstanding it has some uses. 1. The
Law accuses him of sin.
But God demanding justly of man, that which man owes him justly, and whereof
he cannot acquit himself, by reason of his voluntary unrighteousness, seeks
but man's salvation: for he gives him his Law, to make him see his own debt, as
it is written, Romans 3.20. 2. It condemns him of sin.
By the Law is the knowledge of sin. And to make him shun and avoid Gods
anger and wrath, which is revealed from heaven against him, because of his
debt, as again it is written, Romans 4.15. 3. In condemning him, it leads him
unto Christ.
The Law works wrath; that he knowing and acknowledging his infinite debt,
and feeling himself bound by the same unto an infinite punishment, he may
seek out him, who would and could answer for him as a pledge and surety, and
who has paid for him that which he owed not, as a principal debtor. Thus
Saint Paul writes; Gal. 3.24.
The law was our Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith. The ancient Fathers have acknowledged these uses of the
Law, saying, that the Law does profit us, in as much as it makes us confess
that which we deny, acknowledge our sin, and cover no more our
unrighteousness; in as much also, that it shows to us Ambros. de Jacob. and
vita beata, lib. 1. c. 6. August. de spiritu and titera c. 5. and seq.
our infirmity, that having our recourse and refuge by faith to the mercy of
God in Jesus Christ, we may be healed. These be the reasons, why God gives his
Law to the unregenerate man which cannot fulfill it. By it he accuses and
conuinceth him of sin, he condemns him for his sin, to this intent that
from being proud, he may wax humble; that seeing, that feeling thereby his
malady, he may cry to the throne of grace, and ask for the Physician; that
finding himself the slave of sin, he may implore the help of the Redeemer.
In a word; acknowledging that he cannot do that which the Law commands, he
may have his recourse and retraite to the grace of God in Jesus Christ, in who^
as in our Head, Pledge, and Surety, God has punished in his most rigorous and
severe justice all our sins committed against the Law, and forgiven us all of
them in his greatest mercy. When man is thus of great made little; when from
whole and sound that he thought he was, he finds himself mortally sick; from
being alive, he feels himself dead; when he sees hell open to swallow him up,
without hope of recovery, and so is as it were reduced, and brought to
despair, then is he disposed and prepared to receive his Patent of pardon, to
hear the good news of the preaching of faith: for the Law leads him to the
Gospel, Moses to Christ, the preaching of the righteousness by works, to the
preaching of the righteousness by faith. But if the natural man makes not
this use nor benefit of the Law, and is not moved and stirred up to seek
Christ: 4. It will restrain and bridle the outward man.
yet it will in him profit and avail another, in as much as it will curb the
outward man, and will musle him with bridle and bit, keeping him by the
threatenings of punishment and damnation in his duty, and constraining him to
do in the Church and Commonwealth the good he hates, and which he would not
do with out this compulsion. The Apostle had respect to all these uses of the
Law, when he said, 1. Tim. 1.9.
That the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, etc. For it accuses, condemns, astonisheth the wicked, and will
they, nill they, in spite of their hearts, rangeth them outwardly to their
duty.

VIII. But as for the righteous, Ho^ the Law is possible to nature renewed.
which are justified in the blood of our Lord Jesus, and sanctified by the
Spirit of our God; the Law can neither accuse them, nor condemn them, as it is
written, Romans 8.33.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. It cannot also
compel them as they are regenerate, for they have the Law written in their
hearts, and they Psalm. 110.3.
are a willing people; and as David says of himself, Psalm. 119.
they set before their eyes all the Commandments, love them, rejoice and take
their delight in them, Psalm. 1.2.
they meditate day and night in his law, being renewed (as we have seen) in
all the parts of their souls, and in regard of all the parts of the Law. In
this state the Law is possible, in regard of the perfection of the parts
thereof. For the observation of every Commandment thereof is begun in those,
that are renewed in this life after the Image of Christ, which proceed daily
forwards, go on and purchase day by day a greater perfection. But by reason of
the rebellion of the flesh lusting against the Spirit, they cannot attain unto
the sovereign perfection of the Law (during their soiourning in this mortal
body), which will be kept perfectly, both in regard of the matter, and of the
manner.

IX. The perfect state of the Church, being the right, prerogative, and
privilege of the heavenly Country: For as Solomon desiring to build the house
of the Lord, caused the stones, and wood, and other stuff to be prepared in
their own place, and then caused all that, that was ready, prepared, and made,
to be brought to the place of building; 1. King. 6.7.
for the house when it was in building, was built of stone, made ready before
it was brought thither, so that there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any
tool of iron heard in the house while it was in building. In like manner, the
even and smooth stones, whereof our King of peace builds a holy house unto God,
are carved and engraven here, here prepared, the wood is hewed and wrought
here, withened, planed, and leuelled; these stuffes are casted, and casted
anew; melted and melted again here. The last Founder and melter is death,
which freeing the soul from the body which oppresses it, and from the
tentations of this world, and from him who is the prince thereof, gives her
free passage and access unto his heavenly habitation and mansion, where there
is neither Revel. 21.4.
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. Here John 13.10.
he that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet. Here the heavenly
husbandman John 15.2.
purges every branch that bears fruit. Here the Church is in fier^, she is
in making. In her native country only, she is in factum esse, she is made,
she is perfect. Here she is militant, Ephesians. 6.12.
wrestling not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities; against
Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places. There she is victorious and triumphing over Satan,
over the flesh, and over the world. There she shall celebrate and solemnize an
eternal Sabbath unto God. There the Saints Revel. 7.15.
are before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and
he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them. It is there, and no other
where then there, where they have perfected that which they did here; where
they keep perfectly, and fulfill the Law, which they kept here; where their
righteousness is without spot, which was here as an unclean thing, and as
filthy rags. And therefore we say, that God has not given man an impossible
Law: the Law was possible to man in the integrity of his nature, and is
possible in some measure to the regenerate man by grace; by the increasing of
grace it is possible to man glorified in all sorts and manners, and is not
impossible, but to the carnal man by his own fault, and not by any fault of
the Law.

CHAP. XII.
I. The fifth Objection. The Commandments are not grievous to the regenerate
man, according to the Scriptures. II. Saint Ieromes Answers to this Pelagian
objection. III. The Commandments are not grievous, for diverse considerations.
IIII. The sixth Objection. Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin;
now if he commit not sin, he keeps perfectly the Law. V. Saint Ieromes and
Saint Austins Answer to this Pelagian objection; He commits not sin, as he
is a regenerate man. VI. An other Answer: He sins not with a full and entire
consent of the will.
But they again Bellar. de monach. cap. 13. verse. 28.
reply malepartly, Ma. 11.29.30
Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. And Saint
John says, 1. John 5.3.
that his Commandments are not grievous.

II. This objection is also of the Pelagians, to the which Hieron. aduers.
Pelag. lib. 2.
Saint Jerome answers, that that is said in comparison of the superstition of
the Jews, who had diverse sorts of ceremonies, which none could fulfill
literally nor precisely; and in comparison of that sentence of Saint Peter,
Act. 15.10.
Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples,
which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? And this yoke is extended
by Saint Jerome even unto the Moral Law, as it appears by infinite instances
which he draws from thence, showing that in them all man is made a
transgressor; whence he pronounces these sentences; So long as we live, we
are in the combat; and so long as we fight and war, there is no certain and
sure victory. The Apostle and all the faithful cannot do that which they
would. Observe, The Apostle, then how much less the other faithful? Again,
1. John 1.5. Ostendit omnium aliorum lumina aliqua sorde maculari.
God (says he) is called light, and in him is no darkness at all; when he
says, there is no darkness at all in the light of God, he declares, that all
other men's lights are tainted with some filth and pollution. Lastly, the
Apostles are called the light of the world, but it is not written, that there
is no darkness at all in the Apostles light.

III. We answer therefore, that the yoke of Christ is not the Moral Law,
considered in her strictness and rigor; for the Apostle says, Romans 6.14.
Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. The yoke of Christ is the doctrine
of the Gospel, wherein we find a remedy against the yoke of the Law, which
commands to do that which surpasses the strength of the whole man living,
gives him no strength to do it, and notwithstanding accuses him, curses him,
rackes and torments him, if he does it not; as Exodus 5.6.7.8.
Pharaoh, who did impose a great task on the Israelites, Ye shall give (says
he to the Taske-masters of the people) the people no more straw to make brick
as heretofore; let them go and gather straw for themselves; and the tale of the
bricks which they did make heretofore, you shall lay upon them, you shall not
diminish ought thereof, let there more work be laid upon the men; and so
increasing the Israelites task, did beat the Officers, demanding of them,
Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task, in making brick both yesterday
and to day as heretofore? True it is, that Pharaoh exacted tyrannously that
which was not due to him: but the Law exacts justly that, whereunto we are
bound by right of Creation and Redemption. And God had given us straw, which we
having burned and consumed, the Law is by our fault become to us yoke of iron;
whereof we are freed by the Gospel, wherein Christ is propounded unto us,
easing us, yea delivering us from this hard bondage two manner of ways: First,
he disburdens us of all that which is troublesome and intolerable in the Law,
as namely, from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
For Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us. Secondly, he creates in us a clean heart, and renewes a right spirit
within us; suggesting and ministering in us new force and strength, to wrestle
with our flesh, an enemy to the Law. In this manner the yoke of Christ, the
Gospel of Jesus Christ (as the ordinary Gloss also expounds it) is easy,
his burden is light. Thus Gods Commandments are not grievous, to wit, to him
which is in Christ, for they can neither accuse him, not condemn him, but they
are to him pleasant, delightful, easy, and acceptable. For as Saint John
adds, 1. John 5.4.
what soever is borne of God, overcomes the world, and this is the victory
that overcomes the world, namely, even our faith. They are therefore easy to
faith, but hard, yea, impossible to the flesh. And because the flesh is mingled
with faith, and that our spiritual strength is weakened by our natural
infirmity, they are to us jointly both easy and hard, possible and
impossible, grievous and pleasant, heavy and light; and shall be so, until
that our old man be wholly destroyed, and our new man be perfectly
re-established after the Image of him that created him.

IIII. He which has not a feeling of these things, Bellar. de iustif. lib. 4.
c. 13. para. vltimo.
has a leprous, cauterized, and putrified soul: but such a one feels them,
that makes as if he did not feel them, and against his feeling and conscience
seeks yet, even in the Scripture, whereupon to ground falsehood and untruth.
He that sins not, transgresses not the Law, but fulfilleth it; say they: 1.
John 3.9.
But whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains
in him, and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God, says Saint John.
therefore, whosoever is borne of God, transgresses not the Law, but keeps it.

V. Too much of one thing is death to the Reader, they do nothing but set
before us the unsavory coleworts of ye Pelagians, for this objection is also
of the Pelagians; S. Hieron. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
Jerome resolves it, opposing unto it another sentence of S. John; 1. John 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
How then do these things agree together? is there any contradiction in the
Apostle? God forbid. But there are tares with this seed of God, says Saint
Jerome, that shall not be separated from the wheat, until the end of the
world. In as much then as the seed of God remains in him that is borne of
God, he commits not sin: but in as much as there are tares and darnell in
him, he sins. In like manner Saint Austin, We are, says he, the children of
God, and the children of this world, August. de Peccator. merit. lib. 2. c. 8.
Per quod filij dei sumus, per hoc peccare omnino non possumus; per quod adhuc
filij saeculi sumus, per hoc and peccare adbuc possumus.
By that whereby we are the children of God, we cannot sin after a sort,
etc. By what we are the children of the world, we can yet sin. In another
place he expounds this sentence by another, where the same Apostle says, 1.
John 4.7.
Love is of God, and every one that loves, is borne of God, and knows God.
August. de gratia Christi contra pro lib, 1. Cor. 2.1.
According to this love (says he) this sentence may be better understood, He
that is borne of God, does not commit sin, and thinks not on evil.
Therefore when a man sins, he sins not according to charity and love, but
according to lust, according to which he is not borne of God. Their resolution
and answer is, that man as he is regenerate cannot sin, and sins not; as
he is not regenerate, he sins.

VI. We add a second answer: He sins not maliciously, and with a full and
whole consent of the will, he makes not a trade of sin, Psalm. 1.1.
He walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of
sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful. The Scripture terms such
as spend their days in wickedness, Mat. 7.23.
workers of iniquity. Prou. 4.16.17.
They sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken
away, unless they cause some to fall, for they eat the bread of wickedness,
and drink the wine of violence. The man that is borne of God is no such man:
for the seed of God (the gift of regeneration that is in him) preserves him
from sins committed by insolency and arrogancy, that he never withdrawes
himself from Gods love, and from faith. His sins are sins of infirmity, and
he commits them unwillingly, overcome by some sudden passion of the flesh; as
it happened to David and Saint Peter, when the one committed adultery and
murder, the other denied his Master and Savior: for the spiritual man warring
against the flesh, it oftentimes borne down; but the blows he receives, makes
his courage to swell, so that he rises up incontinently, and returns to the
combat armed with flame and fire; he buckleth and grapleth with his enemy,
and angry with himself to have been thus foiled, he beats his breast, and
cries, Have mercy upon me miserable sinner, as David did; he goes speedily out
of Caiphas house, and weeps bitterly, and returns with the Saints, as Saint
Peter did; he is like unto that brave Roman Captain Marcellus, who though
often beaten, did always return to the combat, could not endure to be
overcome, never gave over, never left his enemy in rest, till he had overcome
him. The seed of God that is in him, gives him always courage and strength.
After this manner, says Saint John, 1. John 5.18.
We know, that whosoever is borne of God, sins not: but he that is begotten
of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

CHAP. XIII.
I. The seventh Objection: All God works are perfect. II. The first Answer:
That which God does perfectly, man comprehends it imperfectly. III. The second
Answer: God perfectth not our regeration, but successively and by degrees.
IIII. The third Answer: All the works which God makes, alone are perfect, but
he makes good works in us and by us. V. The last Objection: If good works are
sins, we must not do good works. VI. We must do good works, and for what
cause. VII. Good works are not sins. VIII. Notwithstanding are not perfectly
good, because they are tainted and soiled by the flesh. XI. God forgiving the
regenerate man the imperfection of them, accepts of them for Jesus Christ his
sake. X. According to his mercy, and not for our merit.
THis should content the most contentious; but because they seek themselves;
and not the truth of God in their disputations, nothing can content and
satisfy them. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
He is the rock, his work is perfect. Regeneration, and the good works that
flow from thence, are works of God; they are therefore perfect; and if
perfect, then they which do them, keep perfectly the Law.

II. I answer to this objection three manner of ways. First, that which God
does perfectly, is imperfectly comprehended of us; we are always children,
always disciples, and do learn imperfectly and with great difficulty the
perfect lesson of our Master. The documents and precepts of Jesus Christ were
perfect. John 15.15.
All things (says he) that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto
you: but the Apostles could not conceive and understand them, but successively
by little and little, one after another, and had need after their
regeneration, that the Luke 24.45.
Lord should open their understanding a new, that they might understand the
Scriptures; and that yet after all, he should send the comforter, which, says
he, is the holy Ghost, John 14.26.
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance
whatsoever I have said unto you, John 16.13.
and will guide you into all truth.

III. Secondly, although that which God does, is perfect in his degree and
rank, and that our regeneration is perfect, in regard of the perfection of
parts: he works but successively and by degrees in us, because that being a
free agent, he does al things in all men, according unto the counsel of his
good will. To be borne deformed, blind crump-shouldred, a cripple, etc. is a
defect, an imperfection, in comparison of Moses, that was Acts 7.20.
borne exceeding fair, yet notwithstanding, he which is so borne, is the work
of Gods hands, and a perfect work in that perfection, which the eternal
wisdom of God has intended to confer and give him. God, who created our
first father, created him a perfect man in the full measure of age and stature;
but he has determined, that all they which descend from him, should be borne
babes, and should grow from age to age, until they came to man's estate; the
first age being imperfect, in comparison of the second, and so consequently
unto the declining age, Eccles. 12.3.
When the evil days come, and the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them: Notwithstanding every age is perfect in his degree.
Even so it fares with us in regard of our spiritual new birth. 1. Pet. 2.2.
First, we are as newborn babes, having need of the milk of the word, that
we may grow thereby, and then we grow Romans 1.17.
from faith to faith, we advance and go on from age to age: Ephesians. 4.13.
Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.

IIII. Thirdly, all the works that God makes alone, and without the co-working
of the creature, are perfect in their kind: but in our regeneration our will
works together with God, and the flesh that is in us by nature, resists the
Spirit, which he puts in us by grace; whence it is impossible, but that the
good works which we do, have a smacke of the corruption that is in us. An
expert Scriuener handling alone his pen, will write neately and perfectly: but
if he holds his young Scholars hand, and guides his pen in his hand, the
writing will not be so neat, and will manifest it self by her imperfection,
that it is not the Masters hand alone; as it will appear also by reason of the
straightness, measure, and neatness, that it is not the Scholars hand alone.
Even so is it with us, all the good works we do, do issue and proceed from
two contrary principles in us, from Gods Spirit, and from our flesh. God does
them in us and by us, as by young ignorant prentises and nouices, which cannot
follow the perfect direction of the Spirit, by reason of our flesh unprofitable
and unserviceable to good, and strong unto evil; whence it follows, that as
they are defective and vicious, they belong to us as our own; so as they are
good and holy, God claims and challenges them himself as his own.

V. Now follows the answer to the last objection: Bellar. de iustif. lib.
4.. 5. and seq.
If our good works are thus vicious and corrupt, then are they sins; and if
sins, then worthy of death; and therefore are not to be done, but are to be
left undone, yea, avoided. It would also follow, that God should be the author
of sin, for he is the author of every good work in us, Phil. 2.13.
working in us both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure.

VI. This is a subtle cavil to shift of the truth, and to cast a miste
before: the eyes of the ignorant; we ought, we ought and must do good works,
1. Sam. 15.22.
to obey God, Mat. 6.33.
to seek and aeduance the Kingdom of God; Mat. 5.16. 1. Pet. 3.1.
to win by our holy conversation those, which obey not the Word; 1. Pet.
2.12. and 3.16.
to stop the mouths of the enemies of the Gospel, when they speak against
us as evil doors; Ephesians. 4.1.
to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, and Phil. 1 27. Col.
1.10.
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, 1. These. 2.12.
who has called us unto his Kingdom and glory by grace, who gave Tit. 2.14.
himself for us, that he might be our head, to whom the Father has given us
to be members of his body, and a peculiar people, zealous of good works;
James 2.18. 1. Pet. 3.15.
to testify of our life, and the truth of our faith before the Church, to
testify it to our selves, and to 2. Pet. 1.10.
make our calling and election sure, that we may Romans 8.5. Gal. 5.16.22.2^
learn and know by the works of the Spirit, if we walk after the Spirit, and
that we may Mat. 6.16.
know the tree by his fruit.

VII. He which does good works to these ends, sins not; and tho works
which he does in this manner, are not sins. They are good in their
principle, for they proceed from God; they are good in their manner of doing
them, for they are done in faith, in obedience, in charity; they are good in
their matter and substance, for they are conformable to the Law; they are good
also in their end, for they tend and extend to the glory of God, to our
neighbors good, to our strengthening and setting in the fear of God, in the
assurance of the grace of God toward us. Sin is no such matter, it proceeds
from the stinking sink of the flesh, it is contrary to the Law, contrary to
faith and charity; sin is committed in vnbelie^^ and disobedience, and has
for his faith and belief the world; and the things that are in the world; so
that it is as unpleasant and displeasing unto God, as the good works are
pleasing and acceptable unto him.

VIII. But man being composed of flesh and spirit, it falls out, that when
the spirit makes his good works, the flesh steps in unlooked for, and taints
them with the stench of his corruption, to the great grief and displeasure of
the spirit of the new man, who ^urceaseth not to proceed and go on to do the
best he can; being assured, that God, who has already accepted of his person
in Jesus Christ, will also accept, approve, and receive in good part, the
little good he does; forgiving him for Christ Jesus sake the evil that the
flesh has foisted in, and accepting for the love of Christ that good which
remains, as being the work of his Spirit.

IX. Even so has he promised it, saying, Mal. 3.17.
I will spare them at a man spares his own son that serves him: so does
God, Psalm. 103.13.14.
like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him, for he knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust. He accepts first
our persons, he adopts us to himself, and makes us his children in Jesus
Christ, and afterward he accepts our works, because of our persons. If once
we are his children and heirs in Christ, he handles and intertaines us as
father, and no more as a Judge; he accepts the holy endeavor, which our new man
brings and yeeldes to his service, and supports the opposition, and impugning
of our old man against him. In a word, when he viewes and beholds in our good
works the evil, which is ours, he forgiues us it for Christ his sake, Jsai.
53.5.
who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: and
when he beholds and considers the good which is his, he crowns it for the same
Christ Jesus sake, Ephesians. 1.6.
in whom he has made us accepted.

X. Not therefore for our merits, but according to his mercy, whereof he
says, Exodus 20.6.
I will show mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments; that his sentence remain for ever, Tit. 3.4. Verse. 5.
After that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared; not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost; Verse.
6. Verse. 7.
which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. That being
justified by his grace we should be made heirs, according to the hope of
eternal life. And that we acknowledging for ever with Saint Peter, that Act.
4.12.
there is no salvation in any other, there is none other name under heaven
given among men, whereby we must be saved; we may refer and attribute to him
the whole glory of our salvation, in her beginning, in her middle, and in her
end, as to him Berna^. de byrat. and libero arbitrio. Domini est salus imo
ipse salus, ipse and via ad salutem.
of whom, and from whom is the salvation, who is the way to salvation, yea, who
is the salvation it self, i. John 14.6.
the way, the truth, and the life.

CHAP. XIIII.
I. A curious question: Why does not God perfect our regeneration here on
earth? II. The first answer: He does not perfect it, that we acknowledging our
infirmity, may be humble. III. The second answer: He does it not, that we
may feel, that we have always need of Christ, to whom we may have our
recourse and refuge. IIII. The third answer: He does it not, that having
sought the good fight in this world, we may triumph in the other. V. The fourth
answer: He does it not for the manifestation of his glory. VI. According as
these things are handled and declared by Saint Bernard.
THere remains yet a question, to the which we will answer, and so will we
shut up and finish this Treatise of the Law. They that feel not God in
themselves, do always seek some exception, some accusation against God, and
do ask in manner of expostulation and complaint; wherefore does not God
perfect our regeneration in this life? Whereunto I could answer with the
Apostle, Romans 9.20.
O man, who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to
him that firmed it, Why have thou made me thus? But that it may serve both for
our instruction and consolation, I say, that God has willed it so for our good
and salvation, and for his glory.

II. For our good surely, as experience teaches us, that it is expedient for
us to be thus exercised and enured in the combat of the spirit and the flesh.
Adam crowned by God with glory and honor, took occasion from the excellency
and dignity wherein he was created, to wax proud; so that mounting and
raising himself higher then he should, he was cast down lower then he
would. We read Saint Paul's words writing of himself, 2. Cor. 12.7.
Least I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure? What? Is that
happened unto Adam? Has Saint Paul also been in danger; that the like had
happened to him? What should we be, I pray you, that are not so much
privileged as the Apostle? In what danger should we be to puff up, to cast
away our selves by presumption, if we were perfect, considering our
inclination to magnify out selves too much, in this so small and so imperfect
a measure of Gods gifts in us. Wherefore as Exodus 23.29. Deuteronomy. 7.22.
God drove not out the Canaanites from before his people in one year, nor in
two, but by little and little, lost the Land become desolate, and the beasts of
the field multip^^e against thee: as also, Judge. 2.22. and 3.4.
that through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the
Lord to walk therein. In like manner God takes not from us the remainders of
sin, that we being incessantly exercised and troubled by them, we may
acknowledge our infirmity, and become humble, we may exercise our selves in
this combat against our enemies; and that we may plow and till the good seed
that is in us, with so much the more care, hindering it from being choked and
smothered by ill weeds, seeing we cannot hinder them from growing up with
them. This is our first benefit, a perfect state in this life, would make us
proud, careless and negligent; this carelessness would make the vices increase
and grow up anew in us, and pride would make the virtues to decrease in us.

III. Furthermore, God will have us feel the need and want we have of his
grace and mercy in all, and every part of our life, that we can do nothing,
we can begin, continue and end nothing without him; we cannot be saved, but by
him; we cannot ascend up to heaven, but by Jacobs Ladder, we cannot go to the
Father, but by Christ. And therefore that we go to Christ, to discharge and
unload our burdens on him, as he himself inuites us al to come unto him with
so sweet, so gentle and kind a voice, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye, that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest; that being disburdened, eased, and comforted by him, we may confess,
Romans 6.23.
that the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

IIII. Moreover, God has appointed this world to be the camp place of
battle, where his Church is exercised in a continual fight; as has appointed
heaven to be the place, where it shall triumph eternally over all her enemies.
If that part of the Church, which is now glorious and without wrinkle in
heaven, had not been thus Militant in this world, it should not be now
triumphant in heaven. For if there be no enemy, there is no victory, no
triumph, and consequently no crown, no price: 1. Cor. 9.24. Revel. 2.10.
for the price, the garland, the crown of life, is not given but unto
conquerors.

V. And as for God, his power and efficacy is better and more known, when man
feels himself supported and vpholden therewith, against the assaults which
are given him by his flesh; and the glory of his grace is so much the greater
and more sensible, that he saues us, notwithstanding our infirmities and great
imperfections. It Is that which he said unto S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness. And therefore says the Apostle, Most gladly will I rather glory in
my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. So much say I, so
much say all the Saints after him.

VI. Saint Bernard has observed these reasons, and has written them down.
Bernard. de scala claustrali, si^e de modo orandi. c. 7.
Fear not, O Spouse (says he) despair not, think not that thou art
despised, if thy Spouse hides his face from thee for a while; all these things
work together for thy good, and De accessu, and recessu lucrum acquiris, tibi
venit, tibi and recedit, venit ad consolationem, recedit ad cautelam, ne
magnitudo consolitionis extollat te, etc.
whether he comes near thee, or goes from thee, it is thy gain. It is for
thee that he comes, it is for thy sake that he withdraws himself; he
approaches for thy comfort, he withdraws himself of purpose, for fear least
the greatness of consolation puff thee up; lest if the Bridegroom should be
always with thee, thou would begin to despise thy companions, and attribute
this continual visiting no more unto grace, but unto nature. Now the Spouse
gives this grace, does this favor to whom he will, and when he will, it is
not possessed by right of inheritance. It is a common proverb, Too much
familiarity breeds contempt. He withdrawes himself therefore, lest being too
frequent and familiar, he should be contemned and neglected; and that being
absent, he may be the more desired and longed for; and being longed for, he may
be more earnestly and diligently sought after; and being a long time sought
for, he may be found out with greater delight and contentment. Praeterea si
nunquam hic deesset consolati^, etc. putaremus forte hic habere ciuitatem
manentem and minus inquireremus futuram.
Moreover, If we were never here without consolation (which is in part, as it
were a riddle, a dark, obscure, and mystical thing, in comparison of the
glory, that shall be revealed in us), we should perhaps think, that we have
here a permanent and continuing City, and we would inquire less of that
City, which is to come. Ne ergo exilium deputemus pro patria, Arrham propretij
summa, venit sponsus and recedit vicissim, etc.
To the end therefore that we should not esteem, nor deem, nor take our exile
for our native country, our earnest penny for our sum and principal; the
Spouse comes and goes interchangeably, one while bringing comfort, another
while changing all our estate in infirmity; he^ makes us taste for a small
time how sweet and good he is, and before we have fully felt him, he
withdrawes himself, and so as it were flying and fluttering with his wings
stretched over us, he prouokes us to fly; as if he should say, Behold, yea
have tasted a little ^^w gracious and sweet I am; but if you will be fully
filled, and satiated with this sweetness, run after me, following the sent
of my perfumes, lifting your hearts on high, where I am at the right hand of
God my Father; there shall ye see me, not through a glass darkely, but face to
face, and your hearts shall fully rejoice, and no man shall take from you your
joy. The soul must bestow much care and diligence that it be not totally and
utterly forsaken of God. But, O Spouse, look unto thy self: when thy Spouse
absents himself, he will not go far off, and if thou see him not, he
sees thee notwithstanding always, full of eyes before and behind, thou can
not be hid from him, etc.

CHAP. XV.
I. The Counsels of God are his Commandments, and there are no other. II. The
Heretics do filch the words of the Scriptures, to display their errors, as
Bellarmine, and the Author of the Pastoral Letter have done, to set forth
their Counsels. III. The first objection taken out of the 56. of Isaiah, where
promise is made to Eunuchs. IIII. This place is not to be understood of
voluntary Eunuchs, but of those only that are such of necessity. V. And
cannot be applied in any wise unto Counsels. VI. Bellarmine refuted, in that he
writes, that the Commandments are framed unto man's human infirmity, and that
to choose that wherein God takes delight, is to keep the Counsels. VII. He is
also refuted, in that he says, that there is in heaven a better name, then
that of the sons, and of the daughters of God. VIII. The true meaning of the
Text. IX. Confirmed by the Fathers. X. Bellarmines second objection taken from
the Book of Wisdom, which is an Apocryphal Book. XI. Howbeit, that which
he alleges, serves nothing to his purpose.
I Psalm. 16.7.
Will bless the Lord (says David) who has given me counsel, my reins also
instruct me in the night-season. The Lord gave him counsel by his
Commandments, of the which this holy man faith, Psalm. 119.24.
Thy Testimonies are my delight, and my counselors. Of these counsels it is
written, Psalm. 19.11.
that in the keeping of them there is great reward; and therefore great
punishment in the transgression of them, as it is also written, Ps. 107.11.12.
Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of
the most high; therefore he brought down their heart with labor, they fell
down, and there was none to help. Again, Prou. 1 25.26.30.31.
Because ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof,
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, etc.
They would none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof; therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devices. Such then are the Counsels of God, Counsels given unto all without any
exception of persons; Counsels, in the observation of which is eternal life:
And what desire we? What can we require more? Counsels, in the transgression
of the which is eternal death. And what abhor we? What shun we more? What
fear we worse? In a word, such Counsels in the perfect observation of the
which, all men ought to employ and busy themselves, the most holy cannot
attain unto, whilome his soiourning in his house of clay, as I have proved it.
To what end then shall we seek any others? Wherefore shall we take pains,
and torment our selves to keep other Counsels, seeing that we may be saved
without keeping them, and we are not damned for not keeping them; neither
surely are there any others, either in the old or new Testament.

II. Notwithstanding, seeing that our Author of the Pastoral Letter endeavors
to prove by the Scripture, that there are other Counsels, and that better and
perfecter in themselves, and of greater reward to the obseruers of them. It
will be fit, and to the purpose, that we see and consider his reasons. Saint
Hieron. in cap. 23. Hieremiae.
Jerome writing upon the Prophet Jeremy, says, that Falsehood counterfeits
and imitates always the truth: for if it have no appearance and show of right
and reason, it cannot delude nor deceive the innocent and ignorant. And
therefore as the Prophets told lies to the first people, and said unto them.
The Lord has said, and I have seen the Lord, and the word of the Lord came to
such a one, or to such a one; so the Heretics take the testimonies of the
Scriptures out of the old and new Testament, and do steal the words of the
Lord, every one of his neighbor, of the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists.
That is happened to Bellarmine, and to our Author of the Pastoral Letter: for
they do steal and pick out the words of the Lord, and apply them unto those
things, which the Lord never spoke. Let us see wherein, and wherewithal.

III. The Lord says concerning Eunuchs; Isa. 56.3.4.5.
Let not the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree: for thus says the Lord unto
the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and
take hold of my Covenant; Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within
my walls, a place and a name better then of sons and of daughtes: I will
give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. Bellar. de Monach.
c. 9.. 3. and seqq.
Bellarmine maintains, that this place is to be understood of voluntary
continent, or chaste men; and he proves it, first, by the authority of Saint
Jerome, Cyrill, Austin, Basil, Gregory; Secondly, by the words, which choose
the things that please me: for they are said to choose, which are not compelled
by any precept. Thirdly, because the Lord says unto them, I will give unto
them a name better then of sons and of daughters: for they that are not
Eunuchs, are not excluded from the Kingdom of heaven, yea, they are also
called sons and daughters. Now that continency and chastity is truly
meritorious, and worthy of a singular and peerless glory, he proves it by
these words; I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

IIII. I may with right and reason employ and apply in this place Elihu's
words, which he spoke to Jobs friends; I said, Job 32.7.8.9.10.
Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom: but there
is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand
judgment; therefore I said, Hearken to me, I also will show mine opinion. The
Ancients have seen much, but they have not seen all; they were wise, but
wisdom died not with them. The spirit which blows where it lists, was not
only in them; but yet inspires them whom he will, and manifests unto many
that, whereof they were ignorant. They have reaped, but they have left somewhat
to gleane after them; they have finished their vintage, but not without leaving
us some grape-gleaning. The exposition of this place amongst many others
confirms this. Some of them, but not all of them have expounded this
allegorically; and we have learnt and seen heretofore Thomas summa 1. q. ^.
art. 10. ex Augustino.
by one of them, that we may draw an argument from the literal sense alone,
and not from things that are spoken by allegory. The allegory can have here
no place: for the Eunuchs which lamented, because they were dry trees, are
comforted there; the voluntary chaste men are not dry trees, they are (if we
believe them) trees planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth their
fruit in their season, whose leaves shall not wither, yea, which bring forth
fruit in such superabundance, that they have them plentifully both for
themselves and for others; and a reward is promised to them, not because they
are Eunuchs, but because they keep the Sabbath, choose the things that please
God, and take hold of his Covenant. That which was taken literally, is of the
Law, and not of Counsels, Our Eunuchs hope to receive a reward, because they
are continent and chaste in keeping the Counsels, and not for keeping the
Sabbath, and taking hold of the Covenant, according to the Commandment. The
reward which is promised to them, is, that God will give them a place in his
house, a reward not necessary to the voluntary continent, which were not
excluded from Gods house, but had their place as other men. As for the reward
which God promises to give them, it is not said, that they have merited it,
unless that they will falsely say, men merit, that Act. 14.17.
God gives them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons: When they beg their
bread of God, and cry, Give us this day our daily bread, they merit that God
give them this bread; and Saint Paul says not well, that it is not Romans 9.16.
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy;
and therefore it is not God that gives to man, and man ought to ask no more
with David, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? that we
ought no more to believe, that Romans 6.23.
the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord; and Ephesians.
2.8.9.
that we are saved, (mark the word, Saved) by grace through faith, and that
not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should
boast: but it is man that gives to God, that merits of God, and it is Gods part
to ask; What shall I render unto man? And again, the Scripture is faulty,
when it demands, Romans 11.35.
Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompe sed unto him again? And
proves, that man can give nothing to God, merit nothing of God, because Romans
11.36.
that for him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever, Amen.

V. In this Text therefore, no mention is made of any keeping the pretended
Counsels: for being such, they should be such, either of the Law, which lasted
and continued then; or else of the Gospel, which came since. They could not
be of the Law, because Counsels are not of the Law, but of the Gospel. I
speak now according to the hypothesis and position of those, which call them
Evangelical Counsels, and place them in the highest degree of the perfection
of the new Testament. No more are they of the Gospel; for the reward is not
promised unto them, but under this condition, that they shall keep the
Sabbaths; and the Sabbaths understood literally, are not of the Gospel, but of
the Law: for it is expressly said to us, that are of the new Testament, Col.
2.16.
Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an Holy day, or
of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days.

VI. Notwithstanding Bellarmine urges the words, Bellar. de monach. lib. 2. c.
9.. 5.
that choose the things that please me. And expounds them, as if God had said,
which transcending and surpassing the things which I have commanded, framing my
self unto man's frailty, shall willingly choose the most perfect things that I
desire and would have. A false and wretched exposition; First, because he
makes God say, that in giving the Commandments, he has framed himself unto
human frailty, as if the Commandments were possible and easy to man in his
infirmity; whereas we have proved, that God regards not in his Law, what man
can do now in his infirmity, but to that which man, who has heretofore been
^ound and whole, owes him. Bernar. in Cantic. ser. 50. Nec latuit praeceptorem,
praecepti pondus hominum excedere vires: sed iudicauit vtile ex hoc ipso suo
illes insufficie^tiae admoneri, and vt scirent sane ad quem iustitiae finem
niti pro viribus oporteret. Ergo mandando impossibilia, non praeuaricatores
homines fecit, sed humiles, etc.
The Master was not ignorant (says Saint Bernard), that the burden of the
Commandment did surpass the strength of man: but he thought it good and
necessary, that by the very same they should be warned of their
insufficiency, that they might know to what end and mark of righteousness
they ought to make toward, with all their strength and power; commanding
therefore things impossible, he has not made men preuaricators, but humble;
that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become subject to the
judgment of God, because that by the works of the Law, there shall be no
flesh justified in his sight; for receiving the Commandments, and feeling our
defect and want, we will cry up to heaven, and God will have mercy upon us,
and we shall know in that day, that he has saved us, not by the works of
righteousness that we have done, but according to his mercy. Secondly,
because he understands not the language of the Scripture, he restraines the
choice to voluntary and free things, to the observation of the which, man is
not bound and compelled by any Law. He might have read the words of the
Prophet Moses, saying to the people of Israel touching the Law, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before
you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both then
and thy seed may live. As also Ioshuahs words to the same people; Joshua 24.15.
If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will
serve. Conformably to this David says, Psalm. 119.30.
I have chosen the way of truth, thy judgments have I laid before me. And
Saint Cyrill expounds the Prophets words, of them which choose and retain
Christ's Testament; as Lyrinensis of those that live righteously and uprightly
with their neighbor.

VII. He expounds as falsely these words; I will give unto them a name better
then of sons and of daughters: Bellar. de monach. c. 9. parag. 3. and 9.
maintaining, that by sons and daughters, God means those good and godly
persons that are married, which are Gods sons and daughters; and that God
promises to those which are virgins a greater good, and a greater glory then
to these. What could he say more impertinently then this? For to be a son and
a daughter of God, is the common name of all the faithful, and their highest
and most excellent title and degree of honor, from whence depends all their
prerogative, glory, joy, and consolation both in life and death; and it is not
a name of an inferior quality appertaining only to some less privilege.
Witness our Savior Christ, when he says, To as many as received him, to them
John 1.12.
gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe in his
name. Witness God himself, saying by his Prophets and by his Apostle, Isa.
52.11. Ierem. 31.1.9. 2. Cor. 6.17.18.
Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not
the unclean thing, and I will receive you; and will be a Father unto you, and
ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Romans 8.17.
And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and ioynt-heires with Christ,
says the Apostle. What may we? What can we hope, desire, wish more? It is that
which is given to honest and good men, married persons by Bellarmines
confession, what remains then to the Monks? what have the Friars else? a name
(says he) more excellent then of sons of God; why? then they are not sons
of God. And to maiden Virgins? a name better then of daughters of God: why,
then they are not Gods daughters? what other name shall we give them? for he
which is not the child and son of God, is the son of rebellion, the child
of wrath, whose father is the Devil: a name (says he) better then of sons.
What greater or better name, I pray you, can we have on earth, then to be
sons and heirs of a King, except we were Kings? And what better or greater
name in heaven, then to be Gods son and heir, without being God? The Angels
are called Job 1.6. and 2.1.
the sons of God. The Saints are called the sons of God, he which is the
Son of God by nature, was manifest in the flesh, that we might be made the
sons of God by grace. The holy Ghost is sent into our hearts, to assure us,
that we are the sons of God: Romans 8.15.16
Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
Spirit it self bear^th witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. And there is no name in the Scripture so express, so significatiue, and
of so large extent; for it comprehends in it all the good, that God bestows on
his elect and chosen people, unto whom he gives all his blessings, in the name,
title, and state of children; and out of this state and condition he give them
no spiritual, wholesome, and saving blessing.

VIII. Now we shall find the true sense and meaning of this place, if we add
thereunto that which goes before, and that which follows after, which has
been industriously and wittingly omitted by Bellarmine, lest it should have
hindered hi^ bad cause. The words going before are, Let not the son of the
stranger that has joined himself to the Lord speak, saying, The Lord has
utterly separated me from his people, neither let the Eunuch say, Behold, I am
a dry tree. Here then the stranger, and the Eunuch fearing God, are joined
together, both of them bewailing their misery. The one, because he was
separated from Gods people. The other, because he was a dry tree. The Eunuch
is first comforted by the words of this place, whereupon Bellarmine grounds
his Counsels. The stranger is comforted in the verses following, in these
words; Also the sons of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to
serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, etc. even them will I bring to my
holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer, etc. The Gentiles,
called by the Prophet the sons of the stranger, Ephesians. 2.12.
were at that time without Christ, being aliens from the Commonweal of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. As for the Jews, God made a promise to Abraham their
father, saying; Gens. 22.17.
In blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply thy seed
as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the seashore.
Afterward a particular promise is made unto every one of them; Deuteronomy.
7.12.13.14.
Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep
and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant, and the
mercy which he swear unto thy Fathers. And he will love thee, and bless
thee, and multiply thee. He will also bless the fruit of thy womb, etc.
Thous^ al^^^ blessed above all people, there shall not be male or female barren
among you. Wherefore it was a great reproach among them to be ba^ren and without
children; as we may gather from the words of E^izabeth, who having conceived in
her old age after so long a barren^es^e, says, Luke 1.25.
Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the day^s wherein he looked on me, to
take away my reproach among men. But especially the Eunuch, who is impotent and
unable to engender and beget children, was marked and branded with a special
and peculiar infamy and reproach by the Law of Moses: Deuteronomy. 23.1.
He that is wounded in the stones, or has his privy member cut off, shall not
enter into the Congregation of the Lord. It is this Eunuch, who is such a one
by defect, whether of nature, or by necessity, who complains, that he is dry
tree, and therefore altogether unfit to be planted in Gods house. God comforts
him with the Gentile by this promise, that when the Messiah shall come, it
shall be no more so, because that in Christ there is no difference and
distinction of father or Eunuch, Jew or Gentile; the Gentile and the Eunuch
that keeps his Covenant, is as well and as much accepted as the Jew, and he
which is the father of many children. Therefore God says concerning the
Eunuchs, unto them that keep my Sabbaths, etc. I will give a place in mine
house; applying the things appertaining to the divine service at that time, to
the things of these times; and promising to those that by faith shall stick
fast unto Christ, keep judgments, and do that which is just and lawful, to
receive them in his house, and to give them in the same, a name better then of
sons and of daughters, an everlasting name that shall not be cut off. That
name whereof he says in the Revelation, Revel. 2.17.
To him that overcomes, will I give him a white stone, and in the stone a new
name written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. The name of
the ^onne of God, of the member of Jesus Christ, of the child of the Church;
the witness of the Spirit of Christ sealing his election, vocation,
justification, and sanctification in his heart, whereby he cries, Abba Father,
by the assurance which he gives him that he is the child of God. A name a
great deal better then to be called the father of sons and daughters; yea, a
name and fame far surpassing that, which comes from the multitude of
children: for such a one is a father of many children, who is the son of
wrath and execration: but he whom the Lord receives in his house in the number
of his children, and auowes him as his own, willing that his name be named on
him, that he be in effect, and be called his son, that man cannot perish;
but it shall be said unto him in the last day, as also to all others, whom God
has adopted in Christ Jesus by their eldest brother, in whom they have been
adopted, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. And the ^eason is rendered by the Apostle, saying, Romans
8.17.
And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. For
the Inheritance is for the children, an inheritance that cannot fail them,
because they cannot fall away from God, nor loose their adoption, which is not
grounded on them, but upon Jesus Christ, in whom and by whom the Father has
adopted us to himself, and who keeps so well those, whom the Father has
given him, that not only John 6.37.
he never casts them out, but also Phil. 1.6.
performs and finisheth the good work begun in them, John 17.15.
keeping them from the evil, Ephesians. 4.30.
and sealing them by his Spirit unto the day of redemption, in the which he
will give them the crown of righteousness; John 10 27.28.29.30.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck
them out of my hand; My Father which gave them me, is greater then all, and no
man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand: I and my Father are one.
Thus have they an everlasting name, which shall not be cut off and taken away;
and therefore a better name then that of sons and daughters, because that the
name and reputation that a man has by having children, being grounded upon the
childrens lives, if they come to fail and die, fails and dies with them, as
we often see, that 1. Sam. 2.5.
she that has had many children, is waxed feeble; as it happened unto Naomi,
Ruths mother in Law, who having lost her husband, and all her children, said
unto her neighbors, Ruth. 1.20.21.
Call me not Naomi (that is, pleasant), call me Mara, for the Almighty has
dealt very bitterly with me; I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home
again empty, Why then call ye me Naomi? seeing the Lord has testified
against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me. There are some which read, A
name better then to sons and daughters, which ought to be referred to the
Jews, who are called by our Lord Jesus, Mat. 8.1^. and 15.26.
The children of the Kingdom, because that before the time of the Law, the
privilege and title of the children of God appertained unto them. So then the
meaning should be, that God will more abundantly bless the Eunuchs under the
new Testament, then he has blessed the Jews under the old Testament: but the
first exposition is the true and natural one, grounded upon the right
construction of the Text. The selfsame promise is made to the Gentiles,
adjoining themselves unto Christ, that they shall not be separated from the
people of God, but shall be received in Gods house, and that their prayers made
unto God, shall be heard and accepted of God. And these promises made both in
general to the Gentiles, and particularly to the Eunuchs, do tend to testify
that which the Apostle declares has been effected, when he says, that Christ
Ephesians. 2.14.
has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition
between us; and that now Gal 3.28.
there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female, and consequently neither perfect sound man nor Eunuch,
but they are all one in Christ Jesus; Act. 10.35.
And that in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him, as Saint Peter says.

IX. As this is the only true, and sole exposition conformable to the Text, so
is it of the ancient Doctors. Clemens Alexand. stromat. lib. 3. (...).
Clement Alexandrinus says, that the Eunuch is not he that is gelded, nor he
that is not married, but he which ingenders not the truth. Such a one was
heretofore dry wood: but if he obey the word, and keep the Sabbaths by
abstinence from sin, and does the Commandments, he shall be more honorable,
then those which without an upright conversation are instructed by the Word
alone, etc. and therefore the Eunuch shall not enter in Gods Church, namely, he
which is barren and bears no fruit, neither in conversation nor in word. But
they that geld themselves from all sin for the kingdom of heaven, they are
those happy ones, which fast and do abstain from the world, that is to say,
from worldly desires. This exposition is allegorical, and comes near the true
one; Cyrill. in Isai. lib. 5. tom. 3.
Bellarmine belies Saint Cyrill, who having showed, that the Jews did glorify
in their children, and boasted of them, thus expounds the Prophets words; Id
est, carens liberis and sobole. Id est, ne molest e ferat orbitatem.
Although a man be an Eunuch, that is to say, destituted of children and
offspring, let him not say in himself, I am a dry tree; that is to say, let
him not bear impatiently the want of children; for that is nothing toward
God, and God will not cast him off for that; for what virtue is it? what great
exploit, the luster and glistering, whereof is to have a linnage and succession
of children? For these things are the work of the flesh, and deserve neither
reproof nor commendation. For although that has been given to some in lieu of
blessing; God calling them unto it, it shall be no discommodity to them that
have none at all. At nibil erit non habentibus incommodi.
He adds, that these words of God may be appropriated to them, which have made
themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake. And in that he gives us to
understand, that the natural sense and meaning of the Text, agrees and
consents with the true Eunuchs only; and cannot be referred to those, which
make themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of God, but by application. Now to
make himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of heaven, is not to enter into a
cloister, as it shall be showed in his place. He goes on, and expounds the words
of comfort given unto the stranger: These words (says he) are to be annexed
unto the words going before, that the meaning of that which has been said, be;
The Lord says these things unto the Eunuchs, and unto strangers: which is
worthy to be observed; for in that the Eunuch is placed in the same rank the
Gentile is, and is comforted alike, it follows, that as it was a vice and
defect to be a Gentile, in like manner it was a defect to be an Eunuch, a
defect of the one and of the other, which had need of comfort; whereas to be a
voluntary Eunuch, and to abstain from marriage for the Kingdom of heavens
sake, is not a vice but a virtue; not a defect that wants consolation, but the
highest degree of perfection, yea, a work of supererogation worthy of
recompense, stipend and reward, say our Monks and Friars. Saint Ierom
expounding the same place, Hieronim. in Esai. c. 56. Qai ^u^mli^er hunc (...)
intelligunt, ad proselyto^ ex gentibus and vere Eunuchos referunt quae
dicuntu^, etc.
They which expound this Text humbly, do refer the things which are said
unto the Proselites among the Gentiles, and unto right Eunuchs; that the
strangers if they keep the Law, and are circumcised, and the Eunuchs, such as
was the Ethiopian Eunuch of Candace, are not strangers from the salvation of
God. Therefore he shows, that in his time some understood this place as we
expound it, although he prefer before it his allegorical exposition contrary
to the Text; wherein God under the name of the persons and service of that
time, did declare what grace and favor he would do unto all persons without
exception under the Gospel. Now in that time there was no Counsel of
chastity, but it was the glory of the Jews to have wives and children. Saint
Chrysostom. in Mat. homil. 56. in fine. Prophetae quidem omnes and vxores and
domos habebant, ^icut Esa^as and Ezec^iel and eximius ille Moses, and nihil
hinc virtuti illorum fuit impedimento.
Chrysostom tell us, that all the Prophets had wives and children, as Isaiah,
Ezechiel, and that great man Moses, and that it has not been any hinderance to
their virtues. If all the Prophets (which were the holiest and perfectest) were
married, surely the rest of the people have not sought perfection in abstaining
from marriage. Lyrienesin Esai. c. 6. Jd est impotens ad generandum, non
faciens prolis fructum.
Lyriensis expounds word for word as we do. The Eunuch, that is to say, he
which is impotent to engender, let him not say, I am a dry tree, and have not
linnage. For thus says the Lord, etc. Here the contrary truth is affirmed,
namely, that the Eunuch and the Gentile having faith, shall obtain as much
good, grace in this life, and glory in the world to come (the other things
being alike) as the Jew by nation, and he which is enriched and endowed with
many children shall receive; and it appears, that this has been fulfilled in
the new Law. Act. 10.44. Where it is said, that the holy Ghost fell on
Cornelius, and the other Gentiles which heard the Word with him, as it fell on
the Apostles and other Saints which were Jews; wherefore the Apostle Paul
says, Romans 10.12. There is no difference between the Jew and the Greek, for
the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him, etc. The second
objection. Bellar. de Monach. c 9. 11.


X. The second Argument of Bellarmine is taken out of the book of Wisdom,
which book was never in Hebrew; and therefore has never been in the Canon of
the Hebrews; a book which Athanas. in Synops. Cypr. in symbol, Hieron. in
prologo galeato, and in praefatione in libros Sal^monis. Epiphan. lib. de
mensur and ponderib. Hugo de S. victore sacram. lib. 1. c 7. Lyran. in Esai. c.
1. and in praefat. in Tobiam. Caietan. in lib. Hest. c. 10.
Athanasius, Cyprian, or Ruffinus in the exposition of the Creed, Jerome,
Epiphanius, Hugo de S. Victore, Lyrinensis, Caietan, etc. do acknowledge is
not Canonical, and has never been put in Aaron, neither in the Arc of the
Covenant; and therefore an Apocryphal book, which may be read for the
instruction of our life, as being full of holy instructions and documents
touching manners, but not for confirmation of Ecclesiastical doctrine and of
faith: a book, which Bellarmine confesses, has been compiled and made by a
certain Philon before Christ's time, of whom no Historiographer makes mention:
but which Ierom, Lyrinensis, Sixt^s Senensis, B^^auentura, Briton, etc. do
witness to be the work of Philon, the most learned among the Jews, who lived
in the time of the Apostles, but did not adhere nor stick fast unto the
Apostles, and could not make any Canonical book appertaining unto the old
Testament, Bellar. de verbo D^i li. 1. c. 13.
which has been finished and perfected in the death of our Savior, to give
place to the New. It is then unfitly and little to the purpose that Bellarmine
alleges and urges it, to strengthen his opinion.

XI. Notwithstanding that which he alleges, serves nothing to his purpose. We
read there; Wisdom 3.13.14.15.
Blessed is the barren that is undefiled, which has not known the sinful
bed, she shall have fruit in the visitation of souls. And blessed is the
Eunuch, which with his h^nds has wrought no iniquity, nor imagined wicked
things against God: for unto him shall be given the special gift of faith, and
an inheritance in the Temple of the Lord more acceptable to his mind: for
glorious is the fruit of good labors, and the root of wisdom shall never
fall away. This exquisite grace and gift of faith given unto the Eunuch is,
says Bellarmine, a certain singular gift, answering to his faithfulness. But
let us see what he speaks of; he had said, that grace and mercy is to his
Saints, and he has care for his elect. Verse. 9. But the ungodly shall be
punished according to their own imaginations, etc. He proves the one and the
other part of his saying, by a comparison of a woman having children, which
fears not God, with a barren woman that fears him; and by another comparison
of an Eunuch with an adulterer; Who so despises wisdom and nurture, is
miserable, etc. their wives are foolish and their children wicked, their
offspring is cursed. He opposes to these women the barren woman, namely, that
woman, who being married has no children, because she is barren, and says,
Blessed is the barren, because (says Lyrinensis) Lyrinens. in sapient. c. 3.
Quia licet sit in matrimonio, non tamen habet filios in eius ignominiam
cedentes.
she has no children, although she be married, which may make her a shame and
dishonor her. And what barren woman? She that is undefiled: for (says he) if
she were barren and an adulteress, she should not be happy, but miserable. It
is she which has not known the sinful bed. She has known the bed, because
she is married: but not in sin, because Heb. 13.4.
that marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: she shall have
fruit in the visitation of souls, she shall receive it from God for her
co^i^gall chastity, better then if she had sons and daughters. This barren
woman therefore is not she which lives in the state of Virginity, which cannot
be called barren, yea, cannot know whether she be barren. The same Lyrinensis
says of the Eunuch; That it is he which is unable to engender, and that the
exquisit gift of faith which shall be given him, is not any singular gift
answering his fidelity: but the gift of glory given for his faith, Donum
gloriae quod pro fide formata charitate.
working by love, a gift common to all the elect, a condition in the Temple of
the Lord acceptable to his mind, surely acceptable and worthy to be wished
for, above any other condition; a thing to be desired and asked of all men
above all things. Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord (says David) that I will seek after,
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. This is that which is
promised to the Eunuch deprived, by reason of his impotencie of all hope of
offspring. This is his comfort, whereunto is opposed the desolation and
misery of the adulterer. As for the children of adulterers (says Philo) they
shall not come to their perfection, and the seed of an unrighteous bed shall
be rooted out, etc. Therefore he says, that the condition of Eunuchs is
better then that of adulterers; and who doubts of that? But he says not, that
the Eunuchs are more happy and blessed, then they which are married; except
they say, that all married folks are adulterers, and that marriage is more
Heb. 13.4.
the bed undefiled. Lastly, Bellarmine confesses, that this place is like to
that of Isaiah alleged heretofore; wherefore if he has in vain, and with no
effect built his Counsels upon Isaiahs words which are canonical; these then
which are Apocrypha, will serve him to no purpose, no more then a staff which
is naught but a broken reed.

CHAP. XVI.
I. As the pretended Counsels are not to be found in the old Testament, no
more are they to be found in the New. II. Bellarmines third objection taken
from the parable of the ground, bringing forth an hundred, sixty, thirty
^old. III. The true meaning of the Parable is expounded, and Bellarmines
exposition refuted. IIII. The fourth objection, concerning the Eunuchs, which
have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake. V. The true
sense of the words of our Savior Christ. VI. In those words the Lord gives a
precept to them, which have the gift of continency and chastity. VII. To make
himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heaven, is not to abstain from
matrimony to merit eternal life, as Bellarmine says. VIII. But to advance
the Kingdom of God, according unto the testimony of Lyrinensis, and of Ferus.
IX. Another interpretation of this place. X. The Argument retorted and returned
upon the Adversary.
Origin writes, Origin. ^n^ Mat. Homil. 25.
that for the testimony of our words which we produce and allege in
doctrine, we ought to propound and set forth the sense of the Scripture,
confirming the sense and meaning which we expound. For even as all the gold
which shall be without the Temple, shall not be sanctified; even so all sense
which shall be without the holy Scripture, although it seems admirable to
some, is not holy, because it is not contained in the sense of the Scripture,
which has accustomed to sanctify it. Bellarmine and the Author of the
Pastoral Letter do allege Scripture for confirmation of their pretended
Counsels; but against the sense, yea, even against the very words of the
Scriptures, which make no mention at all of Counsels, neither in word, nor in
sense. The Scriptures are contained in the oracles of ancient Prophets, in the
books of the Evangelists and Apostles. Bellarmine has found nothing for his
Counsels in the Prophets, let us see if he can find any thing to serve his
turn in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. For seeing that they
properly appertain unto the Gospel, and to the Christian Church, and do
bring so excellent and great a reward to the obseruers of them. They ought to
be evidently and plainly recommended in the new Testament.

II. The Lord Jesus propounding the Parable of the Sower, Objection.
compares the Church to good ground, which having received seed, Mat. 13.8.
brings forth fruit, some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, some thirty
fold. By this Parable (says Bellarmine) the merit of chaste matrimony, of
virginity, and of widdow-hood is distinguished; and that proves he by Saint
Cyprian, Saint Ierom, and Saint Austin. Whence (says he) it appears, that the
virgin-like continency is a greater good, and more meritorious toward God,
then matrimonial chastity is, because that it is a divine Counsel; for that
which God commands not, and notwithstanding recommends, and preferrs before
all other things, without doubt he counsels it.

III. But this cannot be shown in any wise by our Saviors words, who speaks
neither of virginity, nor of marriage, nor of widdow-hood, but of those only
which hear his word, of what condition and state soever they be, according to
the exposition which he himself gives; Mat. 13.23.
He that received the seed into the good ground, is he that hears the Word,
and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth, some an
hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty fold. It is he therefore which hears
the Word of God and keeps it; living holily, and doing good works, according
to that measure of grace which he has received; who seeks here any other
sense or meaning, forgeth to himself chimeraes, and fruitless imaginations,
buildes castles in the air, and deceiues himself with those which hear him.
And therefore we object against Saint Jerome that which he himself says in
his Commentary upon this Parable. Hieron. in Mat. 13. Canendum est vbicunque
dominus exponit sermones suos, ne velaliud nec plus quid velimus intelligere
quam ab co expositum est.
Observe (says he) that this is the first parable, which is set down with his
interpretation, and we must beware in what place soever our Lord expounds his
words that we understand no other thing, nor more then that, which has been
expounded by him. If he had kept this rule which he prescribed to others, he
would have taken heed, and not allowed an hundred fold to virgins, sixty to
widows, and but thirty only to married folks. Falsely by his leave and
favor, seeing that Abraham who was married and remarried, is propounded in the
Scripture, as Romans 4.11.
the Father of all them that believe, Luke 16.23.
in whose bosom Lazarus lies; and of whom Christ Jesus says, Mat. 8.11.
that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven. He is then advanced on high, and
living in a glory so eminent and so excellent, that all the happiness of all
the faithful, of all nations, is described by the part and portion they shall
have therein; because the Apostle says, that Gal. 3.9.
they are blessed with faithful Abraham. The Virgin Marie her self, a
daughter of Abraham, not only according to the flesh by birth, but also by
faith in believing, has no greater glory in heaven, then Abraham has, neither
does she attribute to her self any thing above him, but contents her self to
have part in the promises that have been made to him, as we find it Luke 1.55.
in her Canticle. It is not for me to play the harbinger in heaven, or the
Steward, to set at table the friends of the Spouse, every one according to his
degree: but all that which we say and can say, is grounded upon conjecture. I
say that I guess and conjecture, that Abraham, who has been twice married,
has the highest degree and rank of glory in heaven, seeing that none enters
into heaven, but in as much as he has followed the trace of Abraham's faith.
Saint Ignatius (a single and unmarried man) was of this opinion, when he said,
Ignati. ad Philadelp.
I desire that God find me worthy to be in the Kingdom of heaven at the feet
of them which have been married, as of Abraham, Isaac, and of Jacob, of Joseph,
Isaiah, and of the other Prophets, as also of Peter, and of Paul, and of the
other Apostles, which have been married. The Fathers which have attributed an
hundred fold unto virgins, and thirty unto the married; yea, an hundred unto
the Martyrs, sixty to the Virgins, and thirty unto Widows, and nothing to
the married folks, according to that we read in Saint Jerome, if the Martyrs
have an hundred fold, Hieron. in Mat. c. 13. Quod si ita est, sancta consortia
nuptiarum excluduntur a fructu bono.
The holy conversation in marriage is excluded from the good fruit. All these
Fathers (were they an hundred) have intruded themselves into matters which they
have not seen, they have spoken of the things of God without the Word of God,
they have spoken by the spirit of man, and not by Gods Spirit: and therefore I
will answer to all that they say, and to all that can be said until the end
of the world, that which Saint Jerome answered to those which did broach and
propound their opinions without Scripture; Jdem in Mat. c. 23. Hoc quia de
scripturis non habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur.
Because this has not his authority from the Scripture, it is rejected with
the same facility wherewith it is proved; being able notwithstanding to name
for my part, both ancient and modern Doctors, Chrysostom, Theophylact, etc.
which have seen no such great and deep mystery in this Text: let Friar Ferus
be heard at this time for them all, giving us the right understanding thereof.
This (says he) is diversely expounded, etc. but it seems that Christ says
and means in this place, that the Word of God does altogether convert more
men in one place, then in another; as it has done more good, and borne more
fruit among the Gentiles, then among the Jews. Again, that the same Word of
God fructifies more in one man, then in another; in this man, then in that man,
according as the ground is the more fit and apt.

IIII. It follows, that we see in the second place, Objection.
that which is written in the self same Gospel, chap. 19. where the Apostles
having said unto Christ: Mat. 19.10.11.12.
If the case of man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry. Christ says
unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, saving they to whom it is given:
For there are some Eunuchs which were so borne from their mothers womb; and
there are some Eunuchs which were made Eunuchs of men; and there be Eunuchs,
which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake. He that
is able to receive it, let him receive it. Bellarmine says, that Christ gives
not here a Precept, but a Counsel: and he proves that, because Christ forbids
not marriage, and therefore commands not chastity, because that Christ also
has said, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. Whereupon he
allegeth Saint August. de Tempore. ser. 61. Page 9.
Austins words, which are also alleged in the Pastoral Letter to the same
purpose in these words; A Counsel is one thing, and a Precept is another
thing. A Counsel is given, to the end that Virginity be preserved, that men
abstain from wine and flesh, that all things be sold and given unto the poor:
but this precept is given, to the end that justice be observed and maintained.
At least it is said of virginity, He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it: but it is not said of justice, He that is able to do it, let him
do it; but every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the sire. He that does and keeps a Counsel, shall have a greater
glory: but he which keeps not the Precept cannot avoid the punishment. The
Author of the Pastoral Letter adds to this: The whole world is bound to the
one under pain of everlasting torments; the whole world is stirred up, and
drawn to the other, both by the authority, as also by the love of the
Savior, who gives this Counsel; as when he commends in Saint Matthew the
continent under the name of an Eunuch, he stirs up and incourageth all the
world to it; Qui potest capere, capiat; He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it. Thus they prove, that these words contain a Counsel, and not a
Commandment. Now that chastity does not only confer a corporal benefit,
but also has a reward in heaven, it appears by these words, says Bellarmine,
there be Eunuchs, which have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heavens sake. We are to see therefore, if there be a Counsel or a Precept in
these words of Christ; and if by the Kingdom of Heaven, Christ understands a
certain reward reserved in heaven, for those that abstain from marriage.

V. Jesus Christ having declared, yt whosoever shall put away his wife, except
it be for fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery. The
Apostles said, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to
marry, and so condemned marriage, as hurtful unto man: whereupon our Savior
Christ takes occasion to show the necessity of marriage, and who those are
that can and ought to abstain from it; All men (says he) cannot receive this
saying, save they to whom it is given; That is to say, Maldon. in Mat. 19.
verse. 16. I lest, non omnes praestare possunt, vt siat sine vxore, q^ia carent
dono continentiae. Sic fere omnes exponunt, quibus equidem non ^ssentior.
All cannot take upon them to be without wives, because they have not the gift
of continency, (as almost all expound it) whereunto (says Maldonat) I cannot
consent nor agree. And wherefore my friend? is it not a Maxim of some of your
side, that Salmeron Jesuit. in proem. epist 3. d. Pauli disput. 6. in fine and
in 1. Joan. 3. disput. 25.. 3. Est incuitabile argumentum veritatis, est
infallibilis regula iudicandi.
What is taught of all, or almost of all, is an vnauoideable argument of truth,
an infallible rule of judging. But whether Maldonat consents to it or no, it is
the true sense of Christ's words, who continuing his discourse, teaches who
they are to whom it is behouefull and expedient not to marry, saying, that
there are but three sorts of them; first, the Eunuchs, which were so borne from
their mothers womb, that is to say, which are naturally weak, and unable.
Secondly, Eunuchs, which were made Eunuchs of men, where of there was
anciently a great number among the Pagans and Gentiles. Thirdly, Eunuchs,
which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake; That is
to say, who having received of God the gift of continency, and being called
thereunto, do abstain willingly from matrimony; not for their particular
commodity, but for the kingdom of heavens sake, for the advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ Jesus; or as Saint Paul expounds it, 1. Cor. 7.34.35
to have care for the things that belong to the Lord, and to attend upon the
Lord without distraction. The Apostles seeing the liberty of diuorcement
restrained and limited, judged, that if a man might not put away his wife for
every cause, it were better not to marry. Jesus Christ corrects this error, and
declares unto them, that none but three sorts of men can live without a a wife;
Eunuchs so borne, Eunuchs so made of men; and such men as being capable of
marriage, have received of God the gift of continency. They (says the
Apostle) 1. Cor. 7.9.
that can contain and burn not. Moreover, he enacts, that those abstain from
marriage, not because of tribulations that do accompany it, neither for the
ease of the flesh, nor for particular commodity; but for the kingdom of
heaven, for the edification of the Church, called commonly in the Gospel, Mat.
13.24.
the kingdom of heaven, for the 1. Cor. 10.31.
glory of God, which ought to be the end of all our actions; to whom we must
add a third condition, that he be called thereunto, according to the doctrine
of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.24.
Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. Adam had the gist
of continency in his state of innocence; and notwithstanding if he had not
sinned, be should have rendered unto his wife due benevolence, whom God had
given him in his innocence, and he should have begot of her children in
Paradise, because that by Gods calling he was ordained to be the Father of
mankind. Wherefore Christ concludes this speech with a Commandment, and not
with a Counsel; He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. For they
that can abstain from marriage by the gift of continency, by their calling
unto continency, and by the heavenly end of their gift and calling; those (I
say) are bound by Gods Commandment to abstain from it. It is no more an
arbitrable thing left to their choice, but necessary. We must say of all the
rest, whatsoever they be, He which is not able to receive this saying, let him
not receive it. He that has not the gift of continency, let him marry, for it
is not expedient for him to salvation, to live without a wife. Let us reduce
our Sauiors words into a syllogism, and the sense thereof will be plain.
Saint Peter said, that it was not good for a man to marry; Christ refutes his
saying by this syllogism; whosoever is such a one, as that he is no Eunuch,
neither by nature, nor by necessity, nor by the gift of God that he be able to
abstain from marriage with quietunes, and with peace of conscience, it is not
good for such a one for the salvation of his soul to be without a wise, but
contrariwise it is expedient for him to marry; for there are but these three
sorts of men that can commodiously live out of the state of marriage: but it is
not given to all to be wiuelesse. Now if it be not expedient for them not to
marry, it is expedient for them to marry, and they ought and must marry, if
they desire to be saved. Saint Paul, who had in him Gods Spirit, expounds the
Lord words after this manner, 1. Cor. 7.8.
I say to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if they abide even as
I. This is that which our Savior says, He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it; and that which our Apostle said in the verse going before, 1. Cor.
7.7.9.
Every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another
after that. He adds, But if they cannot contain, let them marry, for it is
better to marry, then to burn. This is that which our Savior says, All men
cannot receive this saying. It is expedient and good for them that are such, to
marry.

VI. This therefore is a precept and no counsel; but because there are two
sorts of precepts, the one common to all, as to love God, practice
righteousness, etc. the other particular to some only, according to the gift
and particular calling of God, as to sell all that we have, and to give it to
the poor, to follow Christ. The ancient Doctors do call a precept, a
commandment given to all; and a Counsel, a particular Commandment made
particularly unto some according to Gods gift and calling, which also they call
sometimes, Precept. So the ordinary gloss calls this our Lords exhortation,
Glossa in Mat. 19. verse. 10. Non omnes capiunt, id est, non omnes implere
possunt praeceptum continentiae.
A precept of continenci^. So Saint Austin calls a Commandment, the words of
our Lord to the rich man, Go and sell that thou have, etc. August. epist. 89.
quaest. 4 cui dominus haec praecepit.
to whom (says he) has the Lord commanded these things? and he repeates the
same thing often in 89. Epistle, the fourth question. In like manner Saint
Jerome, Hieron. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1. In qua praecipitur.
we must seek the Euangelical perfection, wherein this is commanded, If thou will be perfect, go, and sell that thou have, etc. It is an easy matter then
to understand Saint Austins words: He distinguishes between a precept and a
counsel; that is to say, between precepts given to all, and precepts given to
some: all they which will not keep those shall be punished, because they are
directed and given unto all; but all they that do not these, shall not be
punished, because they are not given to all: but as concerning those to who^
they are given, how can they escape the judgment of God, if they do not that
which he commands, which he counsels and requires them to do, and whereunto he
exhorts them? Let them call it what they will, that man which does not the
counsel of his God, cannot be innocent nor guiltless, as we have seen
heretofore. Moreover Saint Austin puts among Counsels, the abstinence from
flesh and wine; Chap. 11.. 12.
and how few are there among the orders of Friars, that do abstain from
flesh? the Jesuits that are the most exact sect of them all, do they abstain
from it? and is there any of them all that value so much that greater glory,
that aureola in illa part, that for it they would forgo their wine, Psalm.
104.15.
that makes glad the heart of man? let them tell me therefore, if Christ
having given this counsel with many others, according to Saint Austin; a
counsel easier to be observed then the rest, they shall obtain the greatest
reward in doing the others, and not intending to do this. Lastly, it appears
by this place, that S. Augustine held, that a Counsel is of things
indifferent, that is to say, which are neither good nor bad, but in as much as
they are used well or ill; to eat flesh, and drink wine, being a thing in it
self wholly indifferent. But Counsels (says Bellar. de monach. c. 8.. vlt.
Bellarmine) are not things indifferent, but acceptable to God, and recommended
by him; which abstinence from flesh and wine is not, because Romans 14.17.
that the Kingdom of God, is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. It is therefore little to the purpose, that
they produce and allege this place of Saint Austin, which is not to the
purpose.

VII. But it is worse to the purpose that they tell us, that for a man to make
himself an Eunuch, for the kingdom of heavens sake, is to abstain from
marriage, thereby to merit a reward in heaven. These good men would not be
debtors to God; for God must needs remain their debtor, and must give them
always some return, as having paid to God more then was due, for the which
he is beholding to them. Hirelings, that would do no service to God, if they
did not hope for a reward; that keep not the Commandments, but to merit the
reward of eternal life; that keep not the Counsels, but to merit a greater
glory in the life to come: hirelings indeed, who in doing service to God, have
no other aim then themselves; and if God give them not the reward, which they
believe is due to them, they will repent that they have served him, and will
blaspheme him before his face, as unjust. Not children, who in serving God,
have no other scope nor end, then the glory of God; who would be contented to
be blotted out of his book of life, to be accursed and separated from Christ
their dear Savior (if it could be possible), if that could advance his
glory. Hirelings worthy to be expelled out of the house of God, as enemies of
his grace, who will reckon with God, and bind him to give them, as a reward
justly due to them, that which he declares to be a free gift of his grace:
unworthy that Christ should aduow and take them for his own, seeing that they
deprive him of his glory, and attribute to themselves the reward which is not
due, which is not given but to his merit. Let them not cry out, The ancient
Fathers, The ancient Fathers. The Ancient of days has told me by Saint Paul,
more ancient then them all, Romans 6.23.
that the gift of God, is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. The same
ancient Fathers do teach me, that the merits of the faithful, are the mercies
of God, the merits of Christ, to whom eternal life is given for a reward, to
the end he give us it of pure grace. But let us consider a little nearer the
words, To make himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of heavens sake, say they,
is to merit heaven by single life. Falsely, for if it were so, the vestall
virgins among the Romans, the Priests of Cybele, grand necce to the false gods,
the Monks among the Turks should merit eternal life. Falsely again, seeing
that heaven is replenished and filled with those which have lived and died in
the state of marriage. Falsely, again, and again, seeing God promises nothing
unto Eunuchs, but on condition, Isai. 56.4.
that they choose the things that please him, and take hold of his Covenant. It
is not therefore for their single life, which makes the^, nor more nor less
acceptable unto God, Act. 10.34. 1. Tim. 4.8.
who is no respecter of persons; but for their godliness, whereof the Apostle
speaks, that bodily exercise profits little, (such is single life), but
godliness is profitable unto al things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come.

VIII. What is then to make himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of heavens
sake? I have already told it: but because they will not believe me, let others
say what it is. Lyra in Mat. 19. vt liberius continentes vacent contemplationi
diuinae.
Lyrinensis, That the continent and chaste may apply and give their mind more
freely to divine contemplation. A man must not believe him, unless he prove it
by Scripture, and therefore he adds, as it is written, 1. Cor. 7.32.33.
He that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he
may please the Lord: but he that is married, cares for the things that are of
the world, how he may please his wife, and he is diuid^d. Ferus a Friar, whose
authority ought not to be small among the Friars and Monks; Ferus in Mat. 19.
verse. 11.
Do not prefer thy self before another for thy continency; for it may be,
that the marriage of another is more acceptable unto God, then thy chastity:
for here thou have expressly set down before thee, that all continency is
not acceptable unto God. For thou have here three sorts of chaste men; of them
that are Eunuchs by nature; Item, of them that are made Eunuchs of men,
whereunto it seems, that we must add those that li^e continently by
constraint, and against their will; or which refrain themselves from it to be
praised of men. Neutri autem Deo placent, sed tantum by, qui propter regnum
coelorum continent, vt scilicet liberius Deo vacent, ac curare possint quae
Domini sunt.
None of these please God, but they only that abstain an refrain for the
Kingdom of Heavens sake, to the end they may more freely serve God, and have
more care of the things that belong to the Lord. This is that we say,
Continency to him that has that gift is more commodious for the service of
God, then marriage. But he that has not that gift, will serve God better
being married, then being unmarried, and burning. But we will speak more
largely of this matter hereafter.

IX. Such has been the exposition of this place until now, all having
understood it, as if Jesus Christ spoke there of Eunuchs, that should make
themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens sake in the Church of Christ:
But I intre^^ the Reader to consider two things; first, that Christ speaks of
that which is past, not of that which is to come; of that which happened among
the Jews, not of that which should happen, among Christians; for he says,
There be Eunuchs (...), which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom
of heavens sake, and says not, that shall make themselves Eunuchs. Secondly,
that Saint Paul says evidently, 1. Cor. 7.25.
Concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord. With what truth? If
God has spoken thereof in Isaiah, and the Lord Jesus in Saint Matthew, It is
(will they say) a Counsel: but every Counsel of God is a Commandment; and if
God had given this Counsel, the Apostle would have said, I have no
Commandment, but I have a Counsel of the Lord; according unto that which he
protests elsewhere, saying, Act. 20.27.
I have not shanned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God. Now he says
manifestly, Ephiphan. baeres. 16. Quidam eorum cumse exercebant, praescribebant
sibi decennium aut octennium, aut quadriennium virginitatis, and continentiae.
that it is his advice an judgment, whereof the Lord had imparted nothing unto
men before him. Wherefore it seems, that these words concerning Eunuchs,
contain neither a precept nor a Counsel of the Lord; but that the Lord
rehearses there simply that which certain Jews did then, and had done since
the corruption of the state and of the religion among them. For we read, that
the Pharisees which had introduced many superstitions in the Church, and
particularly the doctrine of merit, when they did exercise themselves, they
prescribed unto themselves ten, or eight, or four years of virginity and
continency. And then Idom here is. 15
they did carry their phylacteries, that is to say, the fringes and borders of
purple upon their garments; to the end that they which saw them, should take
heed to touch them, as being for the time, sanctified, and separated from the
world, and that did they, imitating therein the Essenes, Joseph. de belle Iud.
lib. 2. c. 7.
that despised marriage. The one and the other for the Kingdom of heavens
sake, that is to say, thinking to merit by it eternal life; whom our Lord
reproues of rashness, in that they sought the Kingdom of God by continency,
which surpasses the strength of man, and is a gift of God, which is given but
to few. All men (says Christ) cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it
is given. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. That is to say, No
man can comprehend that, which those men strive to do, save they to whom it is
given of God; as when he says, Mat. 13.9.
Who has ears to hear, let him hear. Which is, as if he should have said,
No man has ears to hear and understand the holy mysteries, save he to whom
it is given: for so he expounds it in the eleventh verse; It is given unto you
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.

X. Let us now retort the Argument against our adversaries. They tell us, that
he which shall keep the Counsels, shall have a greater glory, and do prove it
by this Text. Let us grant unto them this for this time, and put the case that
this untruth be true. Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.2.
That to au^ide fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every
woman have her own husband. This is an express Commandment, as it shall be
shown and seen in his place, notwithstanding Bellar. de clericis c. 21.. 6.
add non esse praeceptum Apestoli, sed consilium. page 10.
Bellarmine cries out, This is not a precept of the Apostle, but a Counsel.
Let us suppose also, that this second falsehood be truth, and let us argue in
this manner. He which does the works of a Counsel, shall have a greater
glory, says our Cardinal; He that has his own wife to a^oide fornication,
does a work of Counsel, according to Bellarmine. Wherefore our Cardinal and
Bellarmine must conclude, will they, nill they, that he, who to avoid
fornication has his own wife, shall have a greater glory. If Bellarmine says
true, the Vrseline virgins, which they feed with vain hope of a greater glory
in show only, should marry to avoid fornication, and not give men occasion to
speak ill of them.

CHAP. XVII.
I. The first objection, taken from the words of Christ, Mat. 19. Go, and sell
that thou have. II. The Author of the Pasterall Letter gives us to understand,
that these words are no Counsel, but a Precept. III. It is a shame for their
Bishops to speak of this Counsel, and not to follow it. IIII. These words do
nothing avail the Vrseline virgins, nor any order of Monks; because they
sell nothing, and give nothing to the poor. V. The young man asking our Lord
Christ, what good thing he should do to have eternal life; our Savior sends
him to the Commandments, and the reason why? VI. The young man saying, that he
had kept all the Commandments from his youth up, lied. VII. Thinking that the
Law was not given, but to the outward man. VIII. Why he asked, what he lacked
yet. IX. In what sense it is said, that Christ loved him. X. A refutation of
Bellarmines exposition of these words, If thou will be perfect, etc. XI. The
true meaning of these words. XII. The words, Go, and sell that thou have, etc.
are a particular Commandment of Charity. XIII. Bellarmines reply refuted by
three reasons. XIIII. The words, Come and follow me, are a Commandment of
faith, and not a Counsel. Christ is followed two manner of ways. XV. The
promise, And thou shall have treasure in Heaven, imports not any merit of a
singular reward, as Bellarmine says. XVI. In what sense the Apostles said unto
Christ, that they had forsaken all, and followed him. XVII. All Christians are
commanded to forsake all, to follow Christ, and in what manner.
THe Hieren. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
truth may be assaulted, but cannot be overcome, says Saint Jerome: men take
pains to hide it, to cast a mist over it, to supplant it, and to oppress it,
but all in vain. For as the proverb is, She is the strongest, and makes her
self known and found such of all, yea, of her enemies, having the skill to
make use of their own weapons to their ruin; as David did, who took up
Goliahs sword, slew him, and cut off his head therewith; we need no other
proof for this time, then our Cardinals words, alleging an argument for the
pretended Counsels, and overthrowing them by the same argument. The first
objection. Page 8.
Having made a distinction between Precepts and Counsels, he proves his
distinction, saying, that our Savior Christ himself shows it us in Mat.
19.16.
Saint Matthew 19. and Saint Mark 10. where one asked him what good thing he
should do, that he might have eternal life. He said unto him, Thou shall do
no murder, Verse. 18. Verse. 19. Verse. 20.
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear
false witness, Honor thy father and thy mother, And thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. The young man says unto him, Verse. 21.
All these things have I kept from my youth up, what lack I yet? This answer
is no sooner made, but see the Counsel of our Savior. If thou will be perfect,
go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. This is Bellarmines first objection.

II. Here, say you, is the Counsel of our Lord. How shall I believe that which
you say? for you say so indeed, but by your words you show, that it is a
Precept; for you add, Page 9.
Whereupon our Savior pronounces this fearful sentence against rich men,
Amen dico vobis, dives difficile intrabit in regnum caelorum. Mat. 19.23.
Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Luke 18.24.
Quam difficile, qui pecunias habent, in regnum Dei introibunt: How hardly
shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God? Let us add for the
explanation of this matter, the sequel of Christ's words. And again I say unto
you, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Whereupon Saint Jerome: Hieron.
aduers. Pelag. lib. 1.
In this, that which can be done is not said; but that which is impossible, is
compared with the impossible: for as a Camel cannot go through the eye of a
needle; so a rich man shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. It is a
terrible sentence pronounced against this rich man, who went away sorrowful,
for he had great possessions. Sorrowful (says Saint Hieron. in Mat. 19.
verse. 22 Haec est tristitia quae ducit ad mortem, etc. Chap. 11.
Jerome) of that sorrow which works death; and the reason of this sorrow is
rendered, because he had great possessions, that is to say, thorns, briers, and
bushes, that choked the seed of the Lord. Let us now remember the difference
heretofore specified between a Counsel and a Precept. A Precept not observed,
has punishment; but a Counsel not observed, has us punishment. This is the
first difference; whence I argue in this manner, that which not being observed,
threatens punishment, is no Counsel, but a Precept; Christ's words not kept by
this young man, threatened punishment against him. For Christ declares him
excluded not of the Kingdom of heaven, for the not observing of them;
therefore Christ's words to this young man were no Counsel, but a Precept. The
mayor of this is Bellarmines and the Authors of the Pastoral Letter. The minor
thereof, is also taken out of the same Letter. For wherefore should this
sentence have been terrible and dreadful to this rich man, if he might have
left the observation of the words of our Lord without danger of punishment. The
second difference between a Counsel and a Precept is, that A Precept
observed, has a reward; a Counsel observed, has a greater reward. There were
certain heretics in Saint Austins time, August. e^^st. 89. quast. 4.
which taught, that a rich man remaining in his possessions and riches, cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, although he has done the Commandments of
God with his riches. Saint Austin answers and refutes them by the examples of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Our Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that are
departed out of this world so long before, have escaped the disputations of
these men: for all these had n^ small riches, as the most faithful Scripture
witnesses it; and notwithstanding even he, who being truly rich, became poor
for us, has foretold by a most true promise, Mat. 8.11. Non supra ipsos, vel
extra ipsos, sed cum ipsis.
that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down in the
Kingdom of Heaven, not above them, nor beyond them but with them. These words
do minister unto me a second argument; That which being observed, brings not a
greater glory, then if it were not observed, is no Counsel: but to sell all
that we have, and give to the poor, procures not a greater glory, then is that
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which have not sold that which they had. Therefore
to sell what we have, and give to the poor, is not a Counsel. The Mayor is
grounded upon the definition of a Counsel, such a one as is in the Pastoral
Letter. The minor is of the Scripture, witnessing that none shall have a
greater glory, then Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who have lived and died,
abounding in great wealth and substance; because as Saint Austin has observed,
They which shall come from the East and West, of what quality and condition
soever they be, shall be in heaven with them; and not beyond them, nor before
them. Therefore the conclusion is necessary.

III. Nay furthermore, although it were a Counsel, all the world may see, that
the Author of the Pastoral Letter alleges it against himself, and
overthrows that which he pretends to build by it: for if to sell all that we
have is a Counsel of perfection, meritorious, and worthy of a greater reward
and glory, why does he not it himself? why gives he not over his Cardinals
Hat? why desires he to be called any longer the Prince of the Church? with what
conscience does he possess and enjoy the reuenew of two thousand pounds
yearly? why sells he not all? gives not all? takes not the scrip, and so
follow Christ? The Pope abounding more in gold and silver, then any King in
Christendom; the Cardinals, whereof some of them are richer then any Prince or
Lord in Christendom; the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons, that are
overwhelmed in riches and pleasures, why do they not as much? Saint Peter (of
whose succession the Pope boasts) Act. 3.6.
had neither silver nor gold. Saint Paul was so poor, that Act. 18.3. and
20.34. 1. Cor. 4.12. 1. These. 2.9. 2. These. 3.8.
he got his living by making tents. The other Apostles were no better at ease.
Mat. 19.27.
Behold, say they unto Christ, we have forsaken all and followed thee. Where
shall we find any of their Bishops (which maintain, that they are their
successors) any one of them, that forsakes his riches to follow Christ? who
amongst them would be Bishop, but to have riches? who amongst them would burden
and charge himself with that office, if that office were not charged with many
fat and great benefices? These are notwithstanding they, who living in the
world, and in pleasure as much as any of the world, do preach poverty, and
extreme misery unto others; like the Pharisees in this point, of whom Christ
Jesus our Master said, Math. 23.4.
They bind heavy burdent, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

IIII. As he condemns himself in alleging this pretended Counsel, as a
greater lover of the perishable riches of this world, then of the greatest
glory of heaven, Mat. 6.20.
Where neither moth, nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal: Even so he overthrows his cause, which he would recommend.
He threatens with excommunication ^ father and a mother that have opposed
themselves, that their daughters should not resort, nor give themselves to the
Vrselines. It must be a matter of very great importance, for the which a man
is excommunicated, that is to say, cut off from the Communion of Saints, and
delivered unto Satan. What have they done? They have labored to hinder their
daughters entering into the Covent of the Vrseline Nuns. Is that a sin
worthy of excommunication? He that opposes himself against the observation
of the Counsels of Christ, is worthy of execration; I will say with Saint Paul,
1 Cor. 16.22.
Let him be Anathema maranatha. I will say unto him, as Saint Paul did to
Elymas, Act. 13.10.
O full of all subtlety and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou
enemy of all right cousnesse, will thou not cease to pervert the right wa^^s
of the Lord? But where are these Counsels? Behold here one, Go and sell that
thou have, etc. Is this Counsel given to the Vrselines? is it followed and
done by the Vrselines? Do they sell all that they have to give to the poor?
Do they not take away and convey their wealth with them into the Cloister of
the Vrselines? Do they not rob their fathers and mothers, and parents, by an
impious, barbarous, and cruel devotion, to enrich the Vrselines? Are the
Vrselines those poor, of whom Christ says, and give it to the poor? Here I
appeal unto the conscience of Monks; Is there any of them all, that selles
all that he has, an gives it to the poor? They which beg among them (and
others) become Monks, or are often compelled by their fathers and mothers to
become Monks, that their goods and patrimony remain in the house, to
entertain the greatness and honor thereof, and enrich their eldest brother.
Others transporte their patrimony with them into the corporation of the
Cloister, and make good cheer therewith. Is that a selling of all that they
have, and giving it to the poor? Therefore it is a pure mockery, yea, they
gull the world by preaching so much the Counsel of Christ, and covering with so
fair a name the hypocrisy of those, which do not Christ's words, which sell
nothing, give nothing to the poor, which seek all means to enrich
themselves, by making many families poor. Such are the Jesuits, and such
would the Vrselines be shortly, if men would let them do it.

V. I have sufficiently proved, that Christ's words to the rich man are no
Counsel, in the sense, wherein this word is taken in this disputation; I will
make you now see by the true exposition thereof, that they are a particular
precept given unto this young Lord. The Evangelists do declare, that a
certain man, called by Saint Luke, Luke 18.18.
a Ruler, coming unto our Lord, said, Mat. 19.16.
Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? He
desires to obtain eternal life, and persuades himself, that the only
meritorious cause thereof, is to do a good thing: he asks not what he must
believe, but what he must do to be saved. This was the arrogant and
ouer-wee^ing persuasion of all the Jews, of whom the Apostle writes, Romans
9.3^.32.
that Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained
to the Law of righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not by faith,
but at it were by the works of the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling
stone. And therefore answering his demand, and according to the hypothesis and
position thereof, says unto him, If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments. For when the question is made of works, the Moral Law is the
rule of good works. He commands him therefore to keep the Commandments,
Ferus in Mat. vt sciret se nunquam implesse. Quis enim de hoc gloriabitur, etc.
to the end (says Ferus) he might know, that he had never kept them; for who
ca^ beast of that? If we say (says Saint 1. John 1.8.
John) that we have no sin, we deceive our selves. If none can beast that he is
free from sin, none also can glory nor vaunt that be has kept the Law,
seeing that sin it no other thing, then the transgression of the Law. He goes
on, and asks again, Which? Not that he was ignorant of the Commandments,
but because he expected, that the Lord should have prescribed to him others
more perfect. Notwithstanding, the Lord to instruct him, that the Moral Law is
the unchangeable rule of the will of God, to him that seeks salvation by his
works; and to show, Ferus ibid.
that he is not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill, rehearses some of the
Commandments; Thou shall do no murder, etc. Then shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. And that to the end, says the same Ferus, Ibid. Vt arr^gans ille
iuuenis vitam suam ad illa conferens discat, quam ne micam quidem verae
pietatis haberet, etc.
that the arrogant young man comparing his life with the Commandments, might
learn, that he had not so much as (...) crumme of true godliness. For there
is nothing that stoppes (...) w^ll the mouth of the arrogant and proud men,
then when they art warned of Gods Commandments; and thou see not so clear^ly
in a looking glass the blemishes of thy body, as thou see thy sin^ in the
Law. Furthermore, he rehearses specially the Commandments of the second
Table. For he which is convicted, that he has not kept the things that
concern his neighbor, is a great deals more convinced, that he bath not kept
the things that are of God. For if a man say, I love God, and hates his
brother, he is a liar, says Saint 1. John. 4.20.
John.

VI. Therefore our Savior answering this young man according to his demand,
remaunds him to the Law, that (being convicted in his conscience, how he was
very far from the perfection of the righteousness required in the same) he
might he humbled, disposed, and prepared to hear and receive by faith the
Gospel of the remission of sins, whereby to be saved: but the wretched young
man, young in years, but younger in the knowledge of himself, and of the
spiritual use of the Law, puffed up with a presumptuous opinion of his
uprightness, dared to open his mouth, and say, All these things have I kept
from my youth up. It was (says Saint Ambrose) Ambros. in Luc. c. 18. inani^
iactantia.
a vain boasting. Saint Jerome says plainly, Hieron. in Mat. c. 19. mentitur
adolescens, etc.
the young man lied; for if he had fulfilled in word and deed that which is
contained in the Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; how comes it
afterward, that he having heard say, go and sell that thou have, and give to
the poor, he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions? Saint
Hilarie writes, Hilar. in Mat. c. 19. Neque superiora illa egerat, ad quae
remittitur.
that he has not kept the things he is sent back unto. And Saint Austin
arguing upon that he went away sorrowful: August. Epist. 89. quaest. 4. Qui.
viderit, quemadmodum illa legis mandata seruauerat, puto enim quod se
arrogantius quam verius seruasse responderit.
Let him consider, how he has kept those Commandments; for I think that he
answered more arrogantly, then truly, that he had kept them. Ferus among the
Modernes, a great Preacher in his time, and of great reputation among his own,
proves that he lied, Ferus in Mat. c. 19.
I will not say (says he) that be has perfectly fulfilled the Commandments
of God, unless I should say, that he was pure from sin, whereunto the
Scripture gaine-saies evidently. For who can boast, that he has no sin,
seeing Solomon says, 1. King. 8.46.
that there is no man that sins not; and Saint John; 1. John 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us. And the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.3.
If thou should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? and Saint James,
Iam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all; and the Wise man; Prou. 24.16.
A just man falls seven times the day. For which cause Christ commands all
to pray and say, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses; Who is he then, that sees not that this young man
spoke very presumptuously, All these things have I kept, and that with this
addition, even from my youth up? seeing that Christ vpbraides evidently and
manifestly reprocheth the Jews, John 7.19.
Did not Moses give you the Law, and yet none of you keeps the Law. These
reasons are irrefragable, and without any reply.

VII. How then, says this young man that he has kept the Law? Surely because
he understood not the true use of the Law. He had laid no violent and bloody
hands upon any to kill him. He had not defiled his neighbors bed. He had not
stolen another man's goods. He had not borne false witness against his
neighbor before the Magistrate. He had done no wrong to his neighbor. He was
taught, that to live blameless before men, was to fulfill the righteousness
of the Law. For the false Doctors had restrained the use of the Law to the
outward observation thereof, even to say, Mat. 5.43.
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; as if an enemy were not
a man's neighbor, and this false doctrine was propounded by them, as derived
from the Elders. So Saint Paul says, that Phil. 3.7.8.
being a Pharisee, touching the righteousness which is in the Law blameless,
which things he esteemed gain as then to him, judging that he was well
provided of all the righteousness of the Law, necessary to salvation. Even so
the Pharisee, Luke 18.11.12
God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
of all that I possess. It might be that he spoke truly, but he deceived
himself, in that he thought that God was as man to content himself with an
outward righteousness; whereas if he had come to the School of Christ, Mat.
5.21.
or else had well considered and pondered the sum of the Law; he had learned,
that God, who is a Spirit, and that above all asks the heart, as he says,
Prou. 23.26.
My Son give me thine heart, has given a spiritual Law to the spirit of
man, that he may be served John 4.23.
in spirit and in truth. Thus Saint Paul learnt it after his conversion; and
instructed, that the last Commandment, Romans 7.7.
Thou shall not covet, did condemn the first bad motions of the heart, did
acknowledge and confess himself a sinner; and declared, that then he began to
count all his pretended righteousness, and all his other prerogatives Phil.
3.8.9.
but loss and dung, that he might win Christ, and be found in him not
having his own righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is through
the faith of Christ, namely, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Ferus
gives this reason, saying, Ferus in Mat. 19. Adolescens Iudaeorum more
praecepta tantum externe aspiciebat, ideo in hanc praesumptionem inciderat.
The young man according to the custom and manner of the Jews, did only
consider the Commandments outwardly, therefore he fell into this presumption,
etc.

VIII. Lastly, he asked, What lack I yet? Ibidem.
looking (says Ferus) that Christ would have told him, that he lacked nothing.
They stumble at this stone, which do refer and restrain the Commandment to
outward things only. For these do easily rush headlong into presumption, and
that is fulfilled in them, which is written in the Revelation; Revel. 3.17.
Thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing,
and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. Finally, these are more dangerously sick and more difficultly
healed, then if they were openly wicked. To these therefore this sentence
appertains, Revel. 3.15.
I would thou were cold, or hot. What can we say more smoothly, and
conformably to the words of Christ, unto the Priests and Elders of the Church,
as righteous as this young Ruler? Mat. 21.31.
Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and the Harlots go into the
Kingdom of God before you.

IX. But this seems to disagree with that, which we read in Saint Mark,
namely, that the rich man having said, that he had kept all the Commandments
from his youth; Mark. 10.21.
Jesus beholding him, loved him. Now the Lord loves no liars, and therefore it
is credible, that he said the truth, says Bellar. de mon. c. 9.. 24.
Bellarmine: but truly it is in no wise credible, that he was never angry with
his brother without a cause, that he never coueted in his heart any thing
appertaining unto his neighbor. To be short, that he loved his neighbor, his
enemy, yea, the stranger, an unknown man; yea, his very friend as himself,
that is to say with such an affection, sincerity, feruencie, earnestness,
readiness of courage, and with such loyalty as himself. If he had loved only
the poor of his Country, of his town, of his neighborhood as himself, he
had not reserved to himself so much wealth. Wherefore it is certain, that he
lied in respect of the true understanding of the Law; but he lied not, in
regard of the interpretation and meaning that the Pharisees gave, leading a
blameless life from his youth up among men; for the which cause our Lord loved
him, that is to say according to Lyras exposiposition, he showed him an amiable
countenance. Lyra in Marc. c. 10. Ostendit sib^ vultum am^cabilem.
For the Greek word, Eustath. in Odyss. Origin. in hunc locum.
(...), which is here turned, to love, among other things signifies to receive
one courteously and friendly. Saint Marks words do bear plainly this sense,
for he says not simply, that Jesus loved him, but that he beheld him and loved
him, that is to say, did behold him with a meek and lovely look; testifying
to him, that he did make much esteem and account of this affection, wherewith
he was carried to the outward observation of the Law. For it was prophesied of
Christ, that Isai. 42.3. Mat. 12.20.
a bruised reed shall be not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench;
that is to say, he would approve the least appearance of good that he should
find in men, intertaining it, and not quenching it; as it is also written in
Zachary, Zach. 4.10.
who has despised the day of small things. And truly it was a good beginning,
and worthy of praise and commendation, to see a young man, shunning from his
tender years the desires of youth, and following after all honest and laudable
things among men. O that our Christians, young and old, could represent every
where in their lives, the innocent life of this young Ruler, that they did not
use their tongues to deceit, that they had not their feet so swift to do
evil, that their hands were not so full of blood! the widow should not be so
trodden under foot, the weak should not be so harried and oppressed, the
simple circumuented, the poor despised, and Achab should not take away quo
iure qua iniuria, poor Naboths vineyard. Were they but good only in equal
comparison with certain Heathens, that would be profitable to them; for they
should thereby have more glory among men, and less torment in hell. But alas
our life justifies and excuses the lives of the Pharisees and Heathen men,
which have not sinned half so much as we have done. If God bless some with
prosperity, (and how many do we see, Psalm. 113.7.8.
whom he raises out of the dust, and lifts out of the dunghill, making them
to sit with Princes, yea, with the Princes of his people, as David says.
Suddenly, Psalm. 73.6.7.8.9.
pride compasses them about as a chain, violence covers them as a garment.
Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more then heart could wish; they
are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression; they speak loftily;
they set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walks through the
earth; Genes. 6.11.
which is now as much, nay, more corrupt before God, and filled with violence,
then when Genes. 6.2.
the sons of God saw the daughters of men, and took them wives of all which
they chose. To prove this, we need but enter into great Cities, and may justly
cry against them, as in old time the Prophet cried against Jerusalem, (...).
3.1.
We to her that is gluttenous, filt his, and polluted, to the oppressing
City. The strong are within her roaring Lions, they are night-wolues, which
leave no bones to gnaw upon in the morning; of whom the Prophet Micah
prophesied; Mica. 2.1.2.
We to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds; when the
morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand;
and they covet fields, and take them by vilence, and houses, and take them
away; so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. The
women and maids do paint their faces, and tire their heads like 2. King. 9.30.
Iezabel. They dance as the daughter Mat. 14.6.
of Herodias did. They go abroad with a Mercers shop on their shoulders, of
whom it is written, as otherwhiles of the daughters of Sion; Isai. 3.16.17.
Because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinckling
with their feet; The Lord will smite with a scabbe the crown of the head of
the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts. There are
but few that can say with this young Lord, that they have not committed
adultery, that they have kept the Commandment, in regard of the outward
righteousness of the Law; yea, few that know the Commandments, yea, that will
hear speak of them; few therefore whom our Lord Jesus Christ loves, as he
loved this young man, although he loved him not with that special love, whereof
S. John witnesses, that having John 13.1.
loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. He loved
him, because he saw in him a desire to profit, but he loved him not, as having
profited much. He loved him to convince him of sin, but he loved him not to
convert him from his sin. He loved him, to warn and admonish him of that
which he should do, but he loved him not, to make him to do it. He loved him
to instruct him, he loved him not to save him. He loved him with that measure
of love, wherewith he loved the Doctor of Law; who, although he asked him,
which is the great Commandment in the Law in tempting him, Mat. 22.35.
he omitted not to approve the good he found in him, and to say unto him,
Mark. 12.34.
Thou art not far from the kingdom of heaven. But he loved him not with that
love, wherewith he loved his disciples; John 15.9.13.
As my Father has loved me, so have I loved you; greater love has no man then
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. In a word, he loved him
with a common love of a Doctor, teaching with mildness those which came to
him, but he loved him not with that special love of a Savior, wherewith he
has loved none but his Church, as it is written, Ephesians. 5.25.26.27.
He loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy, and without blemish. Loving him therefore with that
common love of a Doctor and Teacher, he proceeds to instruct him, and says
unto him;

X. Mat. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. What is that to
say; If thou will be perfect? It is as much as to say, says Bellarmine,
Bellar. de monach. c. 9.. 18. Si nones contentus vita aeterna, sed aspiras ad
excellentem gradum in ipsa vita aeterna.
as if thou art not content with eternal life, but do aspire unto an
excellent degree in eternal life. O man, wherewith can he content himself,
that is not contented with eternal life? which is the gain of the death of
the Son of God, and of all that which God promises, which God gives unto
those he loves; all that the Saints sigh after, the Abstract and epitome of all
that which they believe, all which they desire and endeavor to apprehend, all
that which they obtain and apprehe^d. Where has Christ Jesus taught any not
to content himself with eternal life? Where is it written, that to be
perfect, is as much as not to be content with eternal life, as much as to
aspire unto a more excellent degree in eternal life? How can such a gloss
agree with the Text? For let them tell me, if this young man had already
merited eternal life, or no? If he had merited it, then it would follow, that
he that is no Christian, that is not justified in the blood of Christ, that is
not sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, that has not acknowledged Christ but a
good Master and Doctor, and not for his good Savior, that never followed
Christ, that refused to follow Christ, can merit eternal life. Now if eternal
life can be gotten without Christ, Christ came into the world in vain, in
vain is he dead, and has fully finished the work of our redemption in vain.
If he had merited it, how went he away sorrowful, when Christ counseled him
to sell all that he^ had, and to follow him? How came it to pass, that he went
not rather away altogether joyful and content? For he enquired only of
eternal life, and Christ gave him this testimony (if we believe Bellarmine)
that he had already merited eternal life, there was then great occasion of
great joy. And as touching the words, Go and sell that thou have; it was
(says Bellarmine) but a Counsel which Christ left to his choice, either to
do it, or to leave it undone without danger. There was then no subject, no
cause of sorrow, except they will affirm, that the Saints which never wore a
Monks Cowle, nor ever haunted a Cloister, shall have wherewith to be
sorrowful in heaven; seeing themselves deprived of that more excellent degree
of glory, which is nothing else but the Aureola in that part there, to the end
the holy Ghost may be condemned of falsehood in the description of the eternal
happiness, which he sets down, saying, that there shall be no more
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain. And if he has not
fulfilled the Law, he has not deserved eternal life, as his own conscience
witnessed against him, when he went away sorrowful, as our Savior Christ
declared after he was gone, saying, Mark. 10.24.
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. If he trusted in his riches he was covetous, and if
covetous, an idolater, for Col. 3.5.
covetousness is dolatrie, and Ephesians. 5.5.
the covetous is an idolater; and if an idolater, he has not kept the Law; if
he has not kept the Law, he has not merited eternal life. Contrariwise he
has been excluded and debarred from it by the transgression of the Law, and
namely by his covetousness, that made him Job 31.24.
make gold his hope, and say to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence.
Whereupon the Lord pronounced, that he shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, when a Carnell can go through the eye of a needle. And if he has not
kept the Law, he has not merited eternal life; but for his covetousness is
punished with everlasting torment; surely the perfection whereof the Lord
speaks, is not a more excellent degree of eternal life in heaven, but has
another sense and meaning, which offers it self evidently in the Text.

XI. After the young man had said, that he had kept the Commandments, to the
which the Lord sent him back, he asks again, Mat. 19.20.
What lack I yet? He had made his first demand touching the means of
attaining unto eternal life. He asks again, if he lacked yet something? Of
what? Surely of the means whereby he might have eternal life. For he was not
as yet taught, that there were in heaven Aureolae; and therefore he made no such
demand. He would have been content to have lain in Abraham's bosom, and to
have sat at table with him in the kingdom of heaven. Therefore the Lord
answers to his demand, If thou will be perfect, that is to say, if thou
desire that there be nothing wanting in thee to the obtaining of eternal
life, Go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, etc. Either this is
the sense of the answer, or else the Lord answered not to his question; let
the other Evangelists be heard, and you shall find, that this is the true
sense and meaning. Saint Mark sets down Christ's answer in this manner,
Mark. 10.21.
One thing thou lackest. Saint Luke in these words, Luke 18.22.
Yet lackest thou one thing, sell all that thou have, and distribute unto the
poor, etc. Certainly he lacked this one thing to have eternal life, whereof
only he made the demand; and therefore the sense of our Saviors words is,
Thou have not yet all that is necessary to eternal life; wherefore if thou will be perfect, and desire to lack nothing whereby to be saved, go and sell
all that thou have, etc. The Lord therefore speaks not of a greater
perfection, then that which is commanded in the Law, much less of a more
excellent degree of glory in heaven. For to what purpose should he have
counseled such a perfection to a man that was a Jew by profession, and, that
was not his disciple? For reason would have required, that he should make him
first of a Jew a Christian, and so by degrees of a Christian a Monk; seeing
that to be a Monk or Friar is the highest degree of Christian perfection in
this life, and has the highest degree of glory in the life to come, as the
Monks do say.

XII. Now follow the words, Mat. 19.20.
Go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. In these words is a twofold
commandment and promise; the first is a commandment of charity, the second a
commandment of faith. Of the first, Clement Alexandrinus writes thus; Clemens
Alexand. stromat. 3. lib. 3. Refellit eum qui gloriatur, quod omnia a iuuentute
praecepta seruauerit. non enim impleuerat illud, Diliges proximum tuum sicut
teipsum; Tunc autem vt qui a Domino perficeretur, docebatur communicare and
impertire per charitatem. Pulchre ergo non prohibuerat esse diuitem, sed esse
diuitem unjust and inexplebiliter.
That when the Lord says, go and sell all that thou have, and give to the
poor, he refutes him which boasts, that he had kept all the Commandments
from his youth up: for he had not fulfilled the Commandment, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. But then that he might be made perfect by the Lord,
he was taught to impart, and give by charity; and therefore he prohibits him
not to be rich, but to be unjustly and unsatiably rich. Origin. in hunc locum.
Origin says plainly, that if he had kept the Commandment, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self, the Lord had not spoken to him of a greater
perfection; and he alleges to this purpose a certain Gospel according to
the Hebrews, non ad authoritatem sed ad manifestationem propositae
quaestionis, not for the authorizing, but for the clearing of the question
propounded; where our Lords words are thus set down, Jbid. Quomodo dicis legem
feci and prophetas? quoniam scriptum est in lege, Diliges proximum, etc. and
ecce multi fratres tui filij Abrahae amicti sunt stercore, morientes prae fame,
and domus tua plena est multis bonis, and non egreditur omnin^ aliquid ex ea ad
cos.
How say thou, I have kept the Law and the Prophets? seeing that it is
written in the Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and behold, many
of thy brethren, the sons of Abraham are covered with dung, and die for hunger,
and thy house is stuffed with store of goods, and there goes nothing out of it
to them. And then declaring his opinion; Ibidem. Verum est ergo, quia non
impleuit dives mandatum, etc.
It is true (says he) that the rich man has not fulfilled the Commandment,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; for he despises many of the poor,
and has given none of his riches to them. And a little after expounding the
meaning of the words, Ibid. Volens arguere diuitem illum dominus noster, quasi
non vera dicentem, etc. dixit ad eum si vis, etc. Sic enim apparebis dicere
verum, si dilixisti aut diligis proximum tuum sicut teipsum.
The Lord (says he) intending to convince this rich man, as one not telling
the truth, etc. says unto him, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou
have, and give to the poor; for so it will appear that thou say true, if
thou have loved, or if thou love thy neighbor as thy self; It is therefore
a Commandment, and a Commandment of charity.

XIII. Bellarmine gain-saieth this, saying, that this is not a Commandment of
charity, because that Bellar. de monach. c. 9.. 19.
Charity requires only that we love our neighbor as our selves, and
therefore requires not that we give all that we have to our neighbor, and
keep nothing for our selves: but we keep this Commandment if we give
partly, and retain in part. But Bellarmine dissembleth to say, that in the
Commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, the word As does not
signify the quantity, measure, and rule of our charity, but only the
quality thereof: for we love our selves without measure and limit, and God
will not have us to love our neighbor in this manner. Furthermore, if the love
we bear to our selves, were the rule of our charity toward our neighbor,
the common proverb would be true, that charity begins at her self. But reason
and experience shows, that to be false; for we are bound to love Father,
Mother, our King, our Country, the Church of God more then our selves. The
Scripture says, that 1. Cor. 13.5.
Charity seeks not her own, and according to that gives us this express
Commandment, Phil. 2.4.
look not every man on his own things, but every man on the things of others;
wherefore this As is not a mark of equality, but of similitude, and signifies
the truth and sincerity that ought to be in our charity: for as we love our
selves in truth, and without dissimulation or reservation; so ought we to love
our neighbor, 1. John 3.18.
not in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth, says Saint John.
The rule and measure of our love toward our neighbor, is the love of Christ
toward us; John 13.34.
A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. Now his love consists in this, that he
died for us; therefore ours also toward our neighbors ought to consist in
this, if God call us thereunto, 1. John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and
we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. If our lives, how much more
all our goods, that are not so much as our life is? Secondly, Jesus Christ
commanding this rich man to sell all that he had, did not bid him give all to
the poor, to become a beggar, a vagabond, and a wallet bearer; for in the Text
there is but, and give to the poor. Now he could have give of his all, without
giving all. But because Christ would have made him a Disciple, and one of his
attendants and followers during the days of his flesh; and afterward a
Preacher of his Gospel in those places where it would have pleased him to have
sent him; he commands him to rid himself speedily of his possessions, that
they might not withold, nor hinder him to follow Gods calling, and to give
liberally to the poor; but he commands him not to give them to the poor,
without reserving any thing for his need; and there is nothing in the Text,
from whence they can gather any such, either Commandment or Counsel. Thirdly,
it is true in general, that charity requires not of us, that we give all we
have to the poor, without any reservation for our selves, neither also that
we sell all that we have, for ordinarily this sentence of the Apostle takes
place, 2. Cor. 8.13.
I mean not that other men be eased, and you burdened, but by an equality.
But such a time may happen, that a man shall be called of God, to lay down not
all his goods only, but his life also for his brethren; then such a one
receives of God a true Commandment to do so; if he does not so, he
transgresses the Commandment of God, and becomes guilty before God. It is
not a general Commandment to every man, to go out of his Country to serve
God, and to offer up to God his children to obey God. Notwithstanding, this was
a particular Commandment given to Genes. 12.1.4. Genes. 22.2.3.
Abraham, which Abraham could not have refused to do, without showing himself
an hypocrite; without offending God. Thus although it be not a general
Commandment of charity, to sell all that we have, and to give it all to the
poor; yet was it a Commandment of charity particularly given, and in
express terms from Christ's own mouth to this young Ruler; who for not
obeying thereunto, is by the Lord declared to be excluded out of the Kingdom
of heaven. This I say, presupposing with the most part, that it was enjoined
him as well to give all, as to sell all.

XIIII. The other Commandment is, And come and follow me, expressly added to
the first, August. epist. 89. quaes^. 4 Deinde addidit, veni and sequere me, ne
cuiquam quando haec fe^^rit, aliquid prodesse, existimetur, si non sequitur
Christum.
to the end (says S. Austin) we think not, that it can profit any body, when
he shall have done these things; when he shall have sold all that he has, and
shall have given it to the poor, if he follow not Christ. This commandment is
termed by Bellarmine, Bellar. de Monach. c. 9.. 41.6 Objection.
A Counsel of obedience: A Counsel (says he) and no Commandment, because it
is given but to him to whom it has been said, Go and sell all that thou have.
And this is his sixth objection, whereby he pretends to prove the obedience,
which the Monks yield and give to their Abbot, Prior, General, or other
Superior; Nothing can be more ridiculous, as if an Abbot were Jesus Christ,
and to follow an Abbot, were to follow Christ; Jesus said, And follow me, and
did not command this young man to become a Monk, and to rank himself under
the obedience of an Abbot in a Monastery. Friars, Abbots, Cloisters, and
Monasteries were things unknown in those times, and a long time after. To
follow Christ is taken diversely in Scripture; Sometimes it is referred to the
time only wherein our Savior Christ was in the flesh, and to the attendance
of his person, in which sense he said unto one of his Disciples, that asked him
leave Mat. 8.22.
to go and buri^ his father, Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead; and
unto Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom, Mat. 9.9.
Follow me, and he arose and followed him; As much said John 1.43.
he unto Philip. To follow him, was to accompany Christ from place to place,
and to become his disciple, for to be after employed by him in the ministry
of the holy Gospel; Thus all the Apostles, except Paul, have followed Christ,
not by counsel, but by express commandment; Thus would Christ have had this
young man to have followed him corporally, and accompany him wheresoever he
went; And in this manner he commanded him to follow him, not by a commandment
common to all men, but by a personal commandment directed and given but to a
few persons. For our Savior Christ refused to take to his corporal attendance
some men that would have ranked themselves thereunto, Mat. 8.19.
A certain Scribe came and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee whither
soever thou go, and he refused him. He that had been possessed with the
Devil, and was delivered by Christ, Mark. 5.18.19
prayed him that he might be with him, but Jesus suffered him not. But most
commonly to follow Christ, is to deny himself, to take up the cross of
Christ, to rest in him with a true and lively faith, and depend on him in life
and death. This following is common to all, commanded to all men: Mat. 16.24.
Whosoever says he will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. The Lord would have this young man to follow him,
specially in this manner; and therefore we have said, that these words were a
commandment of faith, for it is with the feet of faith that we follow the
Lord, go to the Lord, and obey the Lord. There being therefore no other
following of Christ, then that which was corporal and of few persons, which
has ceased; and that which is spiritual, common to all the faithful, which
is perpetual; there is nothing in this text for the Monks and Friars. For to
follow Christ, is not to frame and apply himself unto the judgment and will
of another, as Bellarmine falsely says, but to frame himself unto the will of
Christ alone, Mat. 23.10.
who is our only Doctor and teacher, whom we must hear; and our only pattern,
whom we must imitate; and our Lord, whom we must obey. There is no more due
unto the others, how holy soever they have been, then to S. Paul, that says,
1. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

XV. The promise annexed to this commandment is, And thou shall have treasure
in heaven; whence Bellarmine inferres, that to give all, deserves a singular
and special reward. This man turns all the promises, that God makes to them
which obey him, into salaries and wages due, and justly given to the merits of
men; as if the creature could merit of his Creator, man (which is but a little
worm) could make God beholding to him, and could purchase to himself for a
little money that glory, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
has entered into the thought of man. How much better Ferus in Mat. c. 19.
Ferus expounding this promise, Admirable (says he) is the goodness of God,
he might exact without any remuneration, and damn the disobedient: but behold,
he allures by promises, and makes himself a debtor, he, who is debtor to none,
but unto whom all creatures are indebted: what other thing then can I say, then
that which David says, Psalm. 106.1.
Praise ye the Lord, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his
mercy ^ndureth for ever, let Israel say he is good? God then promises unto
men eternal life to draw them to their duty, and he does that as a Father,
whereas he might compel them as a Judge: He promises them that which he owes
them not, to the end they give and render that which they owe; he gives them
that which he promised them, not for their merit, but for his mercy sake. He
gives them, I say, a treasure in heaven, and this treasure is nothing else but
eternal life, which only the rich man asked for, which only the Lord
promised; and was it not enough, and more then enough? an exchange without
proportion, of earth for heaven, of a treasure of dirt and mud for a treasure
of an unspeakable price, of the vanity of riches for the eternal weight of a
glory exceedingly excellent? This treasure signifies no other thing in the
holy Scripture. I will say unto him that believes otherwise, and that seeks
eternal life in his oil, in his gold, in his silver and other corruptible
things, as S. Peter said unto Simon Magus, Acts 8.20.
Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may
be purchased with money.

XVI. The rich man hearing that Christ's words did import a condition, without
the which he could not obtain life everlasting, discouers his hypocrisy; and
showing that his money was dearer and more precious to him then his God, and
the treasure he possessed here on earth was better to him and more esteemed,
then that which was promised him in heaven, goes away sorrowful, and gives
Christ occasion to pronounces dreadful sentence against him, and against all
rich men that set their hearts on riches, and put their trust and confidence in
them, that they shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 19.27.28
Then answered Peter, and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all and
followed thee, what shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I
say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the
Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Bellar. de monach. c. 9..
32.
This is as much (says Bellarmine) as if Peter had said, Behold, we have done
that which this young man will not do, what will thou give us therefore?
Whereunto our Savior said not, I will give you nothing, for I spoke but to
this young man, and that not in earnest, but only that he might not know that
he lied; He answered not so, but said, Verily I say unto you, etc. This gloss
spoils the text, and is contrary to the truth. For the Apostles sold not all
they had, and gave not all to the poor; for although they had left their
ordinary vocation whereby they might have got their living, and had left the
care of their domestical business to follow Christ's calling, they renounced
not for all that the possession, the right and prerogative, nor left the use
thereof, when they were in those places. The history shows plainly, that
after Mat. 9.10. Luke 5.29.
Matthew had followed Christ, he made him a great feast in his own house. Yea,
Peter that said these things, had yet his house, as it is written, Mat. 8.14.
When Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wives mother laid, and sick
of a fever. Christ telling his disciples what should befall them at his death,
says he not, John 16.32. (...), in propria.
The hour comes, yea, is now come, that ye shall be all scattered every man
to his own? And being upon the Cross said unto John touching the Virgin, John
19.27.
Behold thy mother, is it not said, that from that hour that Disciple took
her (...), unto his own home. They had therefore yet their houses; and
therefore Bellarmine imputes unto them a lie in making them say, Behold we have
done that, which this young man will not do. For they had not sold all, nor
given all; but it appears by the last Chapter of Saint John 21.3.
John, that they had yet their ships and nets. Now although they had left all
without reserving to themselves any right and propriety, they had done it by
commandment and special calling; as being particularly called to follow
Christ every where, and after his ascension to preach the Gospel throughout
the world. And therefore the fact of the Apostles serves nothing to the purpose
of Monks and Friars, unless they show that they have received a commandment
from Christ, as the Apostles have; that they forsake all, and give alto the
poor, as they pretend to have been done by the Apostles; that they follow
Christ, as the Apostles have done. This is the chiefest point; Hieron. in Mat.
19. Sequitur dominum qui imitator eius est, and per vestigia eius graditur.
For it suffices not unto perfection (says Saint Jerome) to sell all a man
has, if after the contempt of riches he follows not Christ, that is to say,
if in departing from evil he does not the good, etc. Many leaving their
riches, follow not the Lord. Now he follows the Lord, who follows his
steps; 1. John 2.6.
for he that says, he believes in Christ, ought to walk even as he walked.
Again, expounding Christ's answer to the Apostles, He has not said, ye that
have left all; for Socrates the Philosopher has done that, and many more have
left their riches: but he says, Ye which have followed me, which is proper to
the Apostles, and all the faithful, etc. Therefore the true perfection is to
follow Christ, and this perfection is of all the believers, says Saint Jerome:
but to sell all that we have is not a state of perfection, but only a help
to perfection; a remedy against all that could hinder us from following
Christ; notwithstanding not to all, for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Ezechias,
Josias, Zacheus, Nicedemus, Joseph of Arimathea, many rich persons have
followed Christ, and can follow him without renouncing actually their riches;
but to them only which resemble this young Ruler, in whom the care of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the good seed which the Lord
sows in their hearts. Therefore they say nothing to the purpose, unless they
can prove that to wear a Friars Cowle, to thrust himself into a Monastery,
is to follow Christ; that Christ commanded o^ counseled this young man to wear
a Monks Cowle, and to enter into a Cloister; that the Apostles have not
followed Christ but by a Monkish life; or that the Monks do follow Christ, as
the Apostles have done.

XVII. Hieron. in Mat. c. 19. Quod pr^prie Apostolorum est, atque credentium.
Saint Jerome says, that to follow Christ is peculiar to the Apostles and all
believers. It is not therefore a particular perfection of Monks and Friars,
but a duty whereunto all are bound, and which is now offered and given to
Christ, not with the feet but with the affection; not by changing place, but by
changing the heart and will; as it is the duty of us all to purify our souls
from all carnal concupiscence, and to be always disposed, ready, resolved to
sell all, to give all to the poor, to forsake all for God, for Christ, for the
Churches sake, if need be. For Christ says, Luke 14.26.
If any man come to me, and halt not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple, etc. Luke 14.33.
So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple. And thus it is, that Antonius tit. 23. c. 8.. 1.
Mandatam esse ibi paupertatem habitualem non actualem; id est flagitare
Christum a nobis, non vt iam omnia abijciamus quae habemus, sed vt cum
confessio diuini nominis, and gloria Christi postulauerit, tum propter eum
omnia deserere parati simus, sicut and cum odium patris and matris, and
propriae anima a sectatoribus suis Christus requirit, non iubet simpliciter vt
non honorent parents, multo minus vt eos odio habeant; sed vt re ita
postulante omnia propter Christum negligere parati sint.
Guilielmus de Sancto Amore, Doctor of the Sorbon faculty, about the year
1250, expounding the words of Christ, Go and sell that thou have, etc. says,
that an habitual poverty, and not actual is there commanded, that is to say,
that Christ requires of us, not that we should incontinently cast away all
that we have; but when the confession of the name of God, and the glory of
Christ requires, we be ready to leave and forsake all things for his sake; as
also when Christ requires of his followers, that they hate father and mother,
yea their own lives; he commands them not simply that they honor not their
parents, much less that they hate them, but that when the case shall require,
they be ready to leave all for Christ. Thus in what manner soever we take the
words, either literally, they are a particular commandment given to the young
rich man, who sinned grievously, in that he obeyed not Christ, and was punished
therefore; or by application to others, they are a general Commandment given
to all, whereto all are bound to obey, men, women, great, little, poor, rich,
all orders of what condition and quality, state or degree soever they be; with
threatening against the wilful and refractaries, that they shall not be
accounted the Disciples of Christ, and with promise to the willing and free,
Mat. 19.29.
Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Mark, he says, shall
inherit, and not, shall merit, that we may know that eternal life is an
inheritance of children, and not a stipend of hirelings; an inheritance given,
not due; promised to them that work, not merited by their works.

CHAP. XVIII.
I. The false Conclusion of the Author of the Pastoral Letter, saying, that he
joins his Counsels unto the Counsels of God. II. The seventh Objection taken
from the 1. Cor. 7. yet give I Counsel, grounded upon a false interpretation.
III. The Apostle gives no Counsel, but gives his judgment, and his judgment
is a Commandment. IIII. Retaining the name of Counsel, the Counsel of the
Apostle proceeding from the holy Ghost is a Commandment. V. It is proved by
the very words of the Text, that the Apostle gives a Commandment, and not a
Counsel. VI. The Apostles words partly falsely translated in the Pastoral
Letter, partly alleged against the intention thereof. VII. The Apostle
commands those that have the gift of continency, and are thereto called, to
use it; and those which have it not, to marry. VIII. In what sense it is said,
He that gives his virgin in marriage does well, but he that gives her not in
marriage does better; Item, the widow is happier if she so abide.
IF therefore these Counsels are given by God, 7. Objection. Page 10.
who will make difficulty to join his Counsel with that of the eternal
wisdom, says the Pastoral Letter, grounding a false conclusion upon a false
exposition of Christ's words, Mat. 19.12.
There he Eunuchs which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of
heavens sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. Mat. 19.21.
Go and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor. We will therefore
correct this conclusion and say, If these Counsels are not given by God, as it
appears sufficiently by the exposition of the foresaid places. A Bishop, one
that esteems himself Gods Ambassador, who therefore should counsel nothing,
say nothing but that which he has heard of God, should have made difficulty,
yea, should have abstained from giving Counsel in a matter that is not of his
Commission. Moses being asked touching things that God had not revealed unto
him, Leuit. 24.11.
as the punishment of the blasphemer, Numb. 27.5.
the succession of daughters in their fathers goods and possession, where no
male children are, and such like things, would never give his judgment and
advice, much less give any Counsel, yea, and much less ordain any thing
before he had asked Counsel of the Lord. The Prophets lesson is, Ezech. 3.17.
Hear the Word at my mouth, Ierem. 1.7.
whatsoever I command that thou shall speak, and their prophesying was nothing
else, but a repetition of the lesson of their God, word by word to the people.
The Apostles lesson was, Mat. 28.19.20
Go and teach all Nations, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you. Their practice was, 1. Cor. 11.23.
I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you. Their
instruction to others was, 1. Pet. 4.11.
If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; and these words, say
we, are wholly contained in the holy Scripture, wherein there is no mention at
al of Monkish Counsels; and notwithstanding, they that are not Prophets, nor
Apostles, usurping more then has been permitted, even to the Prophets,
Apostles, and Evangelists, do counsel us to follow their Counsels, do exhort
us, yea, urge us to the observation thereof, without God, without Christ,
without Scripture, pretending therein notwithstanding the Scripture, and the
name of eternal wisdom; surely not without enfolding themselves in impiety,
in cloaking with the name and title of eternal wisdom, a doctrine, which is
altogether sensual and earthly; and calling the Counsel of God, an
intolerable yoke, wherewith men have charged the consciences of Saints, set at
liberty by our Lord Jesus Christ. A Counsel notwithstanding that our Cardinal
joins with that of God, and that (if we believe him) after the imitation of
Saint Paul, who speaking of virginity, says,

II. 1. Cor. 7.25.
Consilium autem do, Page 10.
tanquam misericordiam consecutus. Yet give I counsel as one that has
obtained mercy of the Lord. But Saint Paul confesses, that he has not joined
his Counsel unto any counsel coming from the Lord, writing these words which
go immediately before. Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the
Lord. Wherefore he joins not his Counsel to Gods Counsel, according to
Saint Paul's imitation. He will say, that it suffices that he imitates Saint
Paul, and that Saint Paul says, I give Counsel, etc. But I answer him, that
Saint Paul has written in Greek, and says, (...), that is to say, I give my
judgment, and not I give Counsel. His judgment which he authorizeth by his
fidelity in the service of God, by the mercy he has obtained of the Lord to
be faithful, by the Majesty of the holy Ghost, by whose inspiration he gives
it, 1. Cor. 7.25.
I give my judgment, says he, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to
be faithful.

III. An advice therefore that he gives, not as a private man, neither also as
one of the troop of Pastors, but as he that has obtained mercy of God to be
an Apostle, and very faithful in his charge, as he who was according to the
Lords promise guided by the holy Ghost into all truth, to be not able to err
in his advice and judgment. 1. Cor. 7.40.
Now (says he) I think also that I have the Spirit of God. Arist. ethic. ad
Nicomach. lib. 6. c. 11. (...).
Aristotle says, that (...), advice, is a right judgment of that which is
seemly, and right is that which is of a true man. Among men, who more true and
upright, then an Apostle guided and inspired by the holy Ghost, which is the
Spirit of truth, yea, the truth it self? Let them now show me, if a good and
upright advice and judgment, given by an Apostle, faithful in his charge and
office, having authority of the Lord Jesus to be heard without replying, as
guided by the holy Ghost into all truth, can be rejected without punishment? I
argue therefore after this manner. That which can not be rejected with
impunitie, is no Evangelical Counsel, according to that we have heard
heretofore, that A Counsel not observed, has no punishment. Now the judgment
of the holy Ghost given by the mouth of a faithful Apostle, is such a one, as
that it cannot be refused without punishment; therefore such a judgment is no
Evangelical Counsel. But let it be a Counsel, it is a good Counsel given
by the good Spirit of God to man, to his creature, to the work of his hands, by
the heavenly Father to his child that is earthly.

IIII. A Counsel properly is of the inferior to his superior, or of a man to
his equal; the superior armed with power and authority counsels not, but
commands that which he judges to be right and good, and if he uses words
of Counsel, his meaning is, that they take and keep them as Commandments;
yea, all the world knows, that the prayers and entreaties of great men, are
commandments to all them that are under their power and authority. Now God is
the great of great ones, the Lord of Lords, and the King of Kings, Isa.
40.22.23.
It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants
thereof are as grasshoppers, that brings the Princes to nothing, and makes
the Judges of the earth as vanity. It is he that is our Father, and we are his
children, Jsa. 64.8.
we are the clay, and thou our potter (says the Church unto him) and we all
are the work of thine hand. He is our Lord, and we his servants; our
Shepherd, and we his sheep; our Redeemer, and we are 1. Pe. 1.18.19.
those whom he has redeemed from our vain conversation, received by tradition
from our fathers, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. As
many titles and names of God, so many arguments for God against us. Isai. 66.2.
To whom will I look? to him that trembles at my word. His Counsel is his
word. He is our Lord and Father, Mal. 1.6.
A son honors his father, and a servant his master; If then I be a
Father, where is mine honor, and if I be a Master, where is my fear? This
honor and fear consists principally in that we obey his voice, that we say
unto him with Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.10.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. He is our shepherd, and we are his
sheep, and this is the mark of his sheep, John 10.27.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. He that
hears him not, is none of his, John 8.47.
He that is of God, hears Gods words; ye therefore hear them not, because
ye are not of God, said Christ unto the Jews. 1. Pet. 2.9.
We are a chosen generation, a peculiar people, says Saint Peter, and Saint
Paul, 1. Cor. 6.19.20
Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price. And therefore we ought
not to have any will but his whose we are, to follow it in all things. If
these Counsels depended on our will, we should be our own, against the Apostle,
and against the right whereby the slave is subject in all things to him that
has purchased him, and is despoiled of all liberty and disposing of his own
will. I appeal now unto the conscience of the Author of the Pastoral Letter,
that he tell me upon his soul, if he think that God can Counsel a thing unto
man, whereunto man is not bound to yield and render quick and speedy
obedience, which he may reject, without putting his soul in danger? The
clause of his conclusion shows evidently that he thinks so. For if he
esteems not his pretended Counsels to be Commandments; If he believes that
they may be rejected without offending God; with what equity and conscience
has he stormed and thundered against those, yea, made a seizure of the
possessions of those that have rejected them?

V. But whatsoever he thinks, the truth shall be always one and the same,
and if he will deny it, she will defend her self, and will get her self
credit against his credit. He says, that Saint Paul's advice and judgment is
a Counsel. She says even by the mouth of Saint Paul, that it is a
Commandment; for the Apostle having said both touching marriage and single
life, 1. Cor. 7.17.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one, so
let him walk. Which is an express Commandment, and altogether necessary in
a Commonwealth, and in the Church; 1. Cor. 7.25.
he adds, and so ordain I in all Churches; where he uses a Greek word
(...), signifying to ordain, and command precisely, as it appears by the 25
verse, where he says, (...), Concerning virgins I have no Commandment of the
Lord. This will more evidently appear by a like manner of speech, which the
Apostle uses in this very same Chapter, verse. 12. where being asked, if the
party that believes, ought to remain with the party that believes not, who
is joined to him by marriage, he says, but to the rest speak I, not the Lord.
For God had set down nothing thereof in the old Testament, and the Lord had
not given any Commandment thereof to his Disciples, because the religion was
yet limited within the borders of Judea; there was not then any diversity nor
difference of religion between the husband and the wife. But the Gospel
having been carried unto the Gentiles, it happened that one while the husband
did embrace it, another while the wife, the one or the other remaining an
Infidel. Now the advice that the Apostle gives them, is a formal and flat
Commandment. 1. Cor. 7.12.
If (says he) any brother has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased
to dwell with him, let him not put her away, etc. They are words of command,
the reasons which he adds to his advice do witness it: First, The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, Verse. 14.
and the vnbeleeleeuing wife is sanctified by the husband. So that their
mutual conjunction and conversation cannot defile the party which believes.
Verse. 15.
Secondly, But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister
is not under bondage in such a case. And then if the unbelieving remain and
consents to dwell with the believing, the believing is bound in such a case.
Thirdly, God has called us to peace, wherefore he that believes, ought not to
disturb the peace of the house. Fourthly, For what know thou, Verse. 16.
O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? Or how know thou, O man,
whether thou shall save thy wife? Now all are bound by Gods Commandment, to
do all that which can save a soul from death. Verse. 17.
But as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one,
so let him walk. And who can deny, but that every one is bound to follow the
gift and calling of God? Behold how impertinent it is to conclude, that the
Apostles judgment is a Counsel left to a man's devotion and will, and not a
Commandment, because it is he that has given it first, and that the Lord had
said nothing thereof before him.

VI. Notwithstanding, let us see what this pretended Counsel is. The Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 7.39.40
Cui vult nubat; Beatior autem si sic permanserit secundum meum consilium, puto
autem quod and ego spiritum Deihabeam. The virgin is a^ liberty to be married to
whom she will: but she is happier if she so abide after my counsel, and I
think also that I have the Spirit of God. This translation is the Authors of
the Pastoral Letters translation, wherein there is a notable falsehood: for
the Apostle speaks here of a widow, The wife is bound by the Law as long as
her husband lives; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married
to whom she will, etc. And the Author of the pastoral letter expou^ds these
words of a virgin, that has not the right and power to marry her self to
whom she will, being under the fathers authority and power, unto whom alone
the liberty of giving her in marriage appertains, as the Apostle declares,
1. Cor. 7.38.
Qui iungit virginem suam, been facit; and qui non iungit, melius facit. He
that gives her in marriage (namely, his virgin) does well: but he that gives
her not in marriage does better. A Text alleged by the Author of the Pastoral
Letter against himself: for if it belongs to the father to give his virgin in
marriage, or not to give her in marriage, he has played the tyrant to have
handled so rigorously a father and mother that practiced on their daughters,
virgins, that lawful power and authority, which nature has given unto them,
the Scripture has authorized, and the right of Nations has confirmed unto
them. But we will speak of this here below, as also of the intention of the
Apostle in this Chapter.

VII. The which I will but touch cursarily in this place; the Corinthians asked
the Apostle, if it was expedient for a Christian to marry. He answers: 1.
Cor. 7.1.
Now concerning the things where of ye wrote unto me, it is good for a man not
to touch a woman, calling good that which is commodious, profitable, and as he
himself expounds it, verse. 35. expedient or comely; he gives the reason,
saying, that they that marry, shall have trouble in the flesh, verse. 28. It is
therefore good to be unmarried by reason of the charges and troubles of
marriage, and of the disturbance that it brings to the free confession of the
Gospel in time of persecution: as he says, verse. 26. I suppose that this is
good for the present distress and necessity. For then the persecutions were
so hot and violent, that they which were without wife and children, were freed
from a great burden, having nothing to care for but Gods service and
themselves. Those during that present necessity, did well not to marry. This
is the Apostles advice; yet not absolutely, but with a restriction of the gift
and vocation of God, saying, that marriage is necessary for them that have not
received the gift of continency; 1. Cor. 7.2.
Nevertheless to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let
every woman have her own husband. Bellarm. says, that it is a Counsel; which
is against himself, for if it be a Counsel to marry to avoid fornication,
he that marries to this end, shall have a greater merit, and consequently a
greater glory, then he that marries not. But the words are of the imperative
mood, and bind all those which have not the gift of continency to marry. He
repeates them again, and says, If they cannot contain, let them marry, for
it is better to marry then to burn. Concerning those that have the gift of
continency, he says, Verse. 8.
It is good for them, if they abide even as I; yea, he commands them so to
remain, if they feel in themselves that they are called to it of God; Verse.
17.
As God has distributed to every man, there is the gift, yea, as the Lord has
called every one, there is Gods calling; so let him walk. Now where there is
the gift and calling of God to a thing, there is a necessity to do it, and a
punishment for him that does it not. 1. Cor. 7.24.
Brethren, says he, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with
God. If then a man has received the gift of continency, and is called thereto
by God, he ought to follow his calling. But if he burns, and feels that the
gift is taken away, God calls him to marriage. It is a Commandment on the one
and the other side, and not a Counsel.

VIII. The conclusion is added to the one and to the other, 1. Cor. 7.38.
So then he that gives her in marriage does well; but he that gives her not
in marriage does better. To wit, because that this man looks better to his
virgin, in not giving her in marriage in so dangerous and troublesome a time
(it being presupposed that she have the gift of continency) then does that
man. In like manner, the widow Verse. 40.
is happier if she so abide, happier indeed not toward God, who is not moved
with these outward things wherein godliness consists not; but in respect of
men, and of the domestical life, in so much as being a widow, she has not
such care, nor so many distractions in the time of persecution, as the married
woman has. But what serves all this to the cause of the Vrselines, and the
Counsels of the Monkish life? for the father that gave not his virgin in
marriage, kept her at home. And the widow remaining so, did serve God in her
house. This ought to be observed every where. For there is not to be found any
place of Scripture, what sense soever they coin and make thereof, that
concludes any thing for the Monkish life, and therefore that can be alleged by
them to the purpose in this controversy.

CHAP. XIX.
I. The eight objection, Saint Paul, by a work of supererogation has preached
the Gospel freely and frankely 1. Cor. 9. II. This objection is nothing to the
purpose, is false and contrary to all Saint Paul's doctrine. III. The true
meaning of the Apostles words. IIII. In preaching for nothing, he aimed not at
any greater perfection and reward in heaven; and did nothing but that which he
ought to have done. V. The ninth objection taken out of the Revelation, Chap.
14. touching the hundred four and forty thousand virgins. VI. This is a fond
and vain objection, and which draws with it many falsehoodes and
inconveniences. VII. The true exposition of this place according to Origin,
Ambrose, Austin.
BEllarmine sets down his eight objection, The 8 objection.
saying, Bellar. de Monach. c. 19.. 61.
that Saint Paul in the whole ninth Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, does endeavor to show that he has done more then he was
commanded to do, and therefore has merited a singular and special glory of
God: for the Lord having ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel, Paul had rather preach the Gospel without charge, and so
do a work of supererogation. 1. Cor. 9.15.16.18.
It were better for me to die, then that any should make my glorying void;
for, says he, though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for
necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. What
is my reward then? verily that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the
Gospel of Christ without charge.

II. Job 15.2.3.
Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the
East-winde, should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches
wherewith he can do no good? Yes, for in all his discourse and purpose there
is nothing that serves to the purpose, whereof the question is. For Saint Paul
was no Monk nor Friar; he preached not the Gospel gratis and without cost by
any counsel he received of the Lord, who contrariwise declared, that Mat.
10.10.
the workman is worthy of his meat. He preached not for naught by any vow. For
he should have broken his vow, having Phi. 4.15. etc.
received maintenance abundantly of the Philippians, 2. Cor. 11.8.
and of other Churches. And never thought to merit of God everlasting life,
much less an excellent degree of glory therein; for he challenges nothing to
himself, but attributes all to the grace of God, 1. Cor. 15.10.
By the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed upon me
was not in vain: but I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but
the grace of God which was with me. And although he protests, saying, I know
nothing by my self; namely, in the exercise of his Ministry, concerning his
affection, fidelity and zeal, yet (says he) am I not hereby justified. He
was then far from thinking on works of supererogation, and obtaining a
greater glory; he that knew that he was not justified, no not by his works,
esteemed himself 1. Cor. 15.9.
not meet to be called an Apostle, because he persecuted the Church of God;
felt, yea acknowledged himself 2. Cor. 12.11.
to be nothing; preached his demerits, his misdeedes toward God; the merits of
Christ his Savior; the mercies of God toward himself. 1. Tim. 1.15.
Christ Jesus (says he) came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am
chief; howbeit I obtained mercy, etc. He that in the combat of the law of his
members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity
to the Law of sin, which is in his members, has no other refuge, then to the
mercy of God in Christ, Romans 7.25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; no other comfort then in the
assurance he has, that Romans 8.1.
there is now no condemnation to them which are in Jesus Christ; that says of
Abraham his father, and the father of all the faithful, Romans 4.2.
if he were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God;
declares, that not the righteousness only, but Romans 4.6.
the blessedness of the man, also consists, in that God imputes unto him
righteousness without works; affirms, that all they that are saved, are
saved freely, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
ye are saved by grace through faith; and thereby draws an argument to
exclude works, saying, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not
of works, lest any man should boast. Because he says elsewhere, Romans 11.6.
If by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace.
But if it be of works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more
work. And that says he of free election, and therefore of vocation,
justification, sanctification, and glorification also which proceed from it,
according to the Schoole-mens rule, Quod est causa cause est causa causati;
That which is the cause of a thing, is the cause of all the effects that
proceed from thence. Such an Apostle, who in all his Epistles abaseth man,
yea, makes him as a thing of naught, that God may be his all, who will know
nothing, 1. Cor. 2.2.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified, who cries out, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world; who feeling 2.
Cor. 12.7.9.
a thorn in his flesh the messenger of Satan to buffet him, protests that he
will glory, not in his virtues, not in merits of supererogation, but in his
infirmities, that the power of God may rest upon him. Such a man so sensible of
his infirmities, so humble by reason of them, so great a Preacher of the
mercies of God, such an enemy of man's merits, such an Heralde and Trumpeter of
their sins and demerits; should he have boasted of so small a matter before
God? should he have made of so easy a thing a work of supererogation? a merit
of a greater glory, because he preached the Gospel to the Corinthians without
charge, whilst he lived at the cost of other Churches? as he tells them, 2.
Cor. 11.8.
I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do you service. If it be
merit to preach the Gospel without wages, wherefore took he relief of other
Churches? How suffered he that this his glory should be made void? But
although he preached the Gospel unto all without wages. Do the Monks preach
the Gospel for nothing, freely? The preaching without wages freely is it an
Evangelical Counsel? if it be, where, to whom, by whom given, kept by whom?
not by the Apostles, not by the ancient Bishops, not by the modern Bishops,
not by Friars and Monks. How few Bishops, Priests, Monks can preach? How
great is the number of those perfect ones, that cannot so much as read well?
And how few are they which in preaching recommend not their wallet and bag?
that would preach if it were not for the scrip? that would do the office, if
it were not for the benefice?

III. Let us leave this trifling, and let us seek in the Apostle the meaning
of his words. The Corinthians were a covetous people, and given to lucre. The
Apostle had converted them to the Gospel without charges to them, for the
reason he renders, verse. 12. We have not used this power, but suffer all
things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. This people would not have
bought the Gospel with money, his enemies would have accused him of
covetousness, would have vpbraided him, that he preached the Gospel for his
belly-sake, would have slaundered him, and called him an hireling. The
covetousness of those, and the malicious calumnies of these would have hindered
the course of the Gospel. The Apostle knowing this, did labor with his hands;
and when his work could not suffice, he lived by the liberality and
maintenance of other Churches: 2. Cor. 11.9.
When I was present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to no man; for that
which was lacking to me, the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied, and
in all things I have kept my self from being burdensome to you, and so will I
keep my self. Surely in regard of his place and office, they owed him his
intertainement, and he might have justly demanded and taken it: but by reason
of the circumstances, and of the end of his function, he might not have asked
it, nor taken it. The end of his calling was the edification of the people,
the advancement of the Gospel. Now he confesses, if he had been at charges
with them, he had hindered the Gospel, therefore he might not do it. 1. Cor.
10.23.
All things (says he) are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient;
all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. This was one of
those things; If he had taken wages of the Corinthians, he had not edified, he
had brought hinderance to the Gospel, for the which it was expedient, yea,
necessary that he should spare them: for in things indifferent, as this was
one, that which is lawful in it self, becomes unlawful, by reason of the
circumstances of times, places, persons, etc. The other Apostles did live of
the Gospel without scandal given or taken, because they preached the Gospel
to a free and willing people. S. Paul also refused not the liberality of other
Churches, but he could not have lived of the Gospel at Corinth among a
sordide, base, ^n^ nigardlie people, without scandal given by him, taken by
them; for he says, that in so doing, he should have hindered the Gospel of
Christ. To this he adds, that it were better for him to die, then that any man
should make his glorying void. What glory? nor the merit of any excellent
glory before God, as Bellarmine says: for man that is but dust and ashes, has
nothing whereof to glory before him, which has created him. Neither also
because he preached the Gospel; 1. Cor. 9.16.
For (says he) though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for
necessity is laid upon me, yea, w^e is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.
What glory then? Surely even the very same that is his stipend, his reward. For
(says he) if I do this thing willingly, I have my reward. What reward have I
then? A special glory before God (says Bellarmine:) but he himself says not
so; but his glory, his reward is, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make
the Gospel of Christ without charge. This glory, this reward, that he has
preached the Gospel, and advanced the Kingdom of Christ without charges to
them, is more to him then all the riches; a glory then which he had among men,
and not before God. And thus he has himself expounded it, telling them
elsewhere, 2. Cor. 11.10.
As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the
regions of Achaia. A glory, in that he had not been burdensome to them, as he
says in the line going before, and glory in the regions of Achaia, and not in
heaven; and that to the end that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. Which he
expounds, when he says in the eleventh Chapter of his second Epistle, which
may serve as a commentary upon this place, What I do, that I will do, that I
may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion: for he sins grievously
that gives (in the use of things indifferent) occasion to any, to refuse or
forsake the Gospel.

IIII. Therefore we see here; first, that the Apostle abstained not to take
wages of the Corinthians for any hope of a greater reward before God, but he
abstained, that he should not abuse his power in the ministry of the
Gospel, and in so doing, to hinder the advancement of the Gospel of Christ.
Secondly, that his glory and his reward is not a greater perfection and merit,
but the contentment he had to have preached to them the Gospel without taking
any thing, and that they had heard him, without giving him any thing; for if to
preach without wages, deserves an Aureola, and a certain higher degree in
heaven, the good Saint Peter shall not be the Prince of the Apostles in heaven;
but because he has lived here of the Gospel, shall be seated, and shall
remain in a place and degree inferior to the Apostle Saint Paul. Thirdly,
that in all this he has done naught, but that he should have done. For when
the Law permits the use of things indifferent, it is always with the exception
of scandale of the weak. And so does the Apostle expound it; Romans 14.21.
It is good to do nothing, whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is
made weak: Romans 15.1.
We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not
to please our selves. We ought, says he; it is not therefore a thing undue.
And by what Law? Surely by the Law of charity, which binds us Mat. 22.39.
to love our neighbor as our selves, and not to seek our own profit, which
he does that abuses his power he has in things indifferent, to the offense of
the weak. Whereupon the Apostle gives these rules, 1. Cor. 8.9.
Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block
to them that are weak; 1. Cor. 10.24.
let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. He has so commanded
it, he has so practiced it; 1. Cor. 9.19.2^.
For though I be free (says he) from all men, yet have I made my self servant
unto all, that I might gain the more. To the weak became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak; I am made al things to all men, that I might by all
means save some. He that seeks here any other mystery, is either without
knowledge, or without conscience, or without both of them.

V. The last place which they allege, The 9 objection.
is taken out of the Revelation, where it is written; Revel. 14.3.4.
No man could learn that Song, but the hundredth and forty and four thousand
which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not defiled with
women, for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whither
soever he goes; Bellar. de Monach. c. 9.. 79.
By which place it appears, (says Bellarmine) that the virgins have a
singular reward, seeing they sing a Song that none of the rest of the blessed
can sing. He adds, that the ancient Fathers have expounded this place of true
virgins, and the Author of the Pastoral Letter, All the Saints do well to
follow our Lord, that is to say, Page 33. and 34.
do imitate him; the Martyrs in his Cross, the Confessors in his sufferance
and patience: but the Virgins do follow him in all, and euerywhere; Virgins
enim sunt and sequuntur agnum quocumque ierit: They are virgins which follow
the Lamb whither soever he goes.

VI. This is as little to the purpose as the rest, they should prove to us,
that there are Evangelical Counsels, that the vow of virginity is recommended
in the Gospel, and that such a vow merits a greater glory. And they tell us,
that there are virgins in heaven, etc. Who doubts but that there are many? but
they must prove, that they were such by vow, and by the observation of
Evangelical Counsels, and that in Saint John's time there were Cloisters of men
and Nunneries of maids. That was their task, from the which they lose
themselves, and do toil in vain to prove that, which no man denies them,
that there are many virgins in heaven. That is their first fault, which is
followed by another greater: for to exalt virginity or chastity, they allege
a place, which being understood literally and strictly of virgins that never
lived in matrimony, infolds untruths, absurdities, and no small
inconveniences: first, that in heaven there is a defect and imperfection in all
the other Saints, which had endeavored and labored to have learn this new
Song, and could not learn it. What, was it too deep for their small
capacity? or too long for their short memory? either they ought to have
learned it, or else they ought not to have learned it; if they ought not to
have learned it, then they have out-gone their commission, and ouer-passed
their duty, and in so doing have sinned; and if they sin, or can sin, they
are not happy. If they ought and would have learned it, but could not compass
it, they are yet defective and imperfect; and therefore they are not happy.
Secondly, that ye other Saints were not redeemed from among men. For this is
the privilege of those hundred and four and forty thousand. Thirdly, if
these words (these are they which were not defiled with women) signifies, that
they have not been married; it would follow, that God has instituted a
pollution, that Adam, Seth, Abraham, David, all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and particularly S. Peter the head (say they) of the whole Church,
and consequently of these virgins, have been all defiled, and follow these
virgins a far off; which by this reckoning are perfect^r then Adam, the
Father of the living; then Abraham, the Father of the faithful; then Saint
Peter, the Head of Christians, and are exalted in a higher degree, then their
Father and Head; yea, we should also confess, that God contradicts himself,
for he says, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bad undefiled; and elsewhere he should
have called it a pollution, and the Church of Rome that boasts, she is pure
from all spot of error, does grossly err, and sin daily, in sanctifying
and blessing the marriages that defile men; yea, that she contradicts her
self, in that she call them defiled that are married, and calls the marriage
a holy Sacrament of the holy Church, conferring grace to the married folks, ex
opere operato. Fourthly, that the other Saints see not always the face of the
Lamb, and therefore are not always happy; for the blessedness of Saints
consists, in that 1. John 3.2.
they see Christ as he is, as Christ himself declares in that excellent
prayer, which he has made for all those that shall believe in him, saying;
John 17.24.
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou louedst me
before the foundation of the world. For if the virgins have alone this
privilege to follow him every where, he absents himself from the others, and
sometimes hides his face from them; then that must needs befall them which
David says, Psalm. 30.7.
Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, which is contrary to the
Scripture, which describe everlasting life by the contemplation of Gods face;
Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore; this was his greatest comfort in his life; Psalm. 17.15.
I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake
with thy likeness. This is that comfort which Christ Jesus himself gives us,
saying, John 14.3.
I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you
may be also. He said that to the Apostles being married; he says as much to
all, John 12.26.
If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my
servant be; if any man serve me, him will my Father honor. The Apostle
speaking by the same Spirit, tells us, that then 1. Cor. 13.12.
we shall see him face to face, and 1. These. 4.17.
we shall ever be with the Lord. So Saint John describing the holy City, and
the blessedness of the Inhabitants thereof, says, Revel. 21.22.23.
The Lamb is the Temple, and the light thereof, Revel. 22.3.4.
there his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face, and his name
shall be in their foreheads. They therefore shall be always with him, and he
always with them. Revel. 21.3.
Behold, (says the same Apostle) the Tabernacle of God is with men, and be
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God. And there are none of the Fathers, whose
authority can authorize, and make good those vntrust^^ and absurdities which
accompany their exposition, whereby they turn an allegory into a literal
sense, as they do also but too often turn the literal sense into allegories.
Although all the Fathers are not of one: opinion in this point.

VII. Origin writes, that these hundred and four and forty thousand are they,
of whom mention is made in the seventh Chapter Revel. 7.3.4. etc.
of the Revelation, where it is said, that of every Tribe of Israel, twelve
thousand were marked with Gods seal in their fore heads. Origin. in Exodus
homil. 1. Quos simul omnes dicit esse creatum quadraginta, quatuor millia, etc.
John (says he) writes in the Revelation, of the Jews which have bel^eued in
Christ, there were twelve thousand sealed of every Tribe, which being put
together, are an hundred and four and forty thousand, which were not defiled
with women, and have remained virgins. The number agree, for twelve times
twelve thousand make an hundred forty and four thousand. Their marks agree,
for the twelve thousand of every Tribe were marked Revel. 7.2.3.
with the seal of the living God; and it is said, that these hundred forty
and four thousands Revel. 14.1.
had the name of the Lambs Father written in their foreheads. It is manifest,
that those were of the Tribes of Israel. It is also written, that these were
with the Lamb on the Mount Sion, that is to say (according to Origin) they
were Jews. Now there was never among the Jews any profession of virginity by
Counsel from God, and by vow according to God. Wherefore it being improbable,
that there were so great a number of virgins among the Jews, we must not
think that they were corporal virgins. They are the elect of God, whether
from among the Jews then gathered together in heaven, as Origin thinks, o^
from whole Christendom which are here described; first, by their mark, they
had the name of the Father written in their foreheads. Secondly, by their
present actions, They sung as it were a new Song, which none but they could
(...). For (...) the elect, they alone which have been red^^^^^^ from the (...)
made capable to hear^ and comprehend the mysteries of God, which flesh and
blo^d cannot comprehend (...) are unto the natural man foolishnes. Thirdly, by
their actions past, they have not been (...) with women, for they are virgins.
That is to say; They have abstained from all spiritual and corporal
whoredom, and as chaste virgins have kept themselves from all impiety and
unrighteousness. Let us hear Ambres. in 2. Cor. 11.2. Virgins vult eos esse
in fide. In mulieribus errorem significauit.
Saint Ambrose expounding the words of the Apostle to the Corinthians that were
married; I am jealous over you with godly jealousy, for I have espoused you to
one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. He writes,
that the Apostle requires, that they be virgins in the faith. He alleges to
this purpose these words of Saint John, and says, He signified the error in
women, because that error began by a woman, as also he names the woman Iezabel,
because of Achabs wife, who by a zeal she bare toward Baal, killed the
Prophets of God, understanding the idolatry, whereby the manners and the truth
of faith are corrupted and tainted. Excludis ab hac gloria sanctos, quia omnes
Apostoli (exceptis Io^^ne and Paul^) ^xo^es habuerunt.
For if you understand by the women light women indeed, and think that they
are called virgins, because they have kept their bodies untouched, thou
excludest the Saints from this glory, because all the Apostles, except John and
Paul, have had wives, and see if it be f^^^t to accuse the Apostle Saint Peter,
who is the first among the Apostles, how much more among the rest? Let us hear
Saint Austin, or whosoever is Author of the Homilies upon the Revelation, Jn
Apocal. homil. 11. Virgins hoc l^co non solum corpore castos intelligimus, sed
maxim omnem ecclesiam quae fidem puram tenet nulla adulterina haereticorum
mixtione pollutam, etc.
We understand (says he) by virgins, not only those that are chaste of body,
but principally the whole Church that holds a pure faith. As the Apostle says,
I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin
to Christ, not polluted and defiled by the adulterous company of heretics,
nor tied by a wretched perseverance to her lives end unto the dangerous
alluring and deadly pleasures of this world without the remedy of repentance.
They are then virgins, not corporal but spiritual, not that have kept their
body from the lawful touching of women, but that have preserved their souls
from the unlawful touching of heresies, compared to whores in the Scripture,
which being stored with cunning pranckes, assurements and flatterings, and
which a thousand inticements do make the ill advised to swerve from their
right way. So the Antichristian heresy is called Revel. 17.1.2.
the great whore, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication.
According to that which Moses and the Prophets say so often of the Idolaters,
that go a whoring after the false gods. Origin in Leuit. hom. 12. Simplicitas
fide^ virginitas appellata est, etc.
And contrariwise Origin says, that the simplicity of faith is called
virginity, etc. and that the soul by the singleness of faith, and purity of
her actions is held to be a virgin. We oppose therefore these Fathers to the
others, and do affirm, that these hundred and forty and four thousand, are
either the elect among the Jews, or all the elect of the Jews and of the
Gentiles, few in number in comparison of the reprobates; which have not defiled
themselves by whoredom with dumb idols, but have followed in all their
actions the conduct and leading of the Lamb of God, adhering unto him by
faith, as now they walk with him by sight, enjoying continually his glorious
presence, according as he had redeemed them by his blood, and sanctified and
separated them from the rest of the world for this end, as the first fruits
were separated from the whole heap that remained common. The spouse speaks of
these virgins, when she says unto her Spouse, Cant. 1.3.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment powered
forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. Virgins surely not by vow of
virginite and chastity, whereof there was no mention in Salomons time, the
parents thinking in that time that they did injury and wrong to their Virgins,
to their Families, to their Tribe, if they gave not their daughters in
marriage: but virgins by spiritual chastity and purity, as it has been said.

CHAP. XX.
I. The tenth objection taken from examples. II. The first example of the
vestall virgins. III. Impertinent, and nothing to the purpose. IIII. Saint
Ambrose judgment touching marriage. V. And touching the vestall virgins. VI.
The second example of Jesus Christ, who was never married. VII. Why Christ
abstained from carnal matrimony. VIII. Virginity makes not virgins like
unto Christ. IX. The third example of the four virgins, daughters to Philip
the Evangelist. X. This example is false and impertinent. XI. The fourth
example of virgins in Iustines and Cyprians time. XII. As much impertinent as
the rest.
THere is no good work in all the Scripture, The tenth objection.
but has a commandment to do it, a promise to them that do it, and examples
of Saints which have done it. Vows are good works, say our adversaries; and
Bellarmine and the Author of the Pastoral Letter have labored much to
authorize them, both by the Counsels of Christ, as also by large promises made
unto the obseruers thereof. But they have turmoiled themselves in vain, and
have alleged nothing that serves to their purpose. They have seen vanity, and
have written lies. Let us see, if they speak better to the purpose in the
allegation of the examples of Saints, that have kept their Counsels.

II. The first example is that of the Vestall virgins or Nuns of the
Heathenish Romans. Page 34.
For so read we in the Pastoral Letter; The only light of nature had taught
the Heathens the price and value of this virtue; and although few followed it,
yet all bad it in admiration, witness Augustus the Emperor, who gave great
rewards and prizes to virginity. Tit. Liui. 1. decad. lib. 5.
And Albinus seeing the Vestall virgins go afoote, commanded his wife and
children to come down from their chariot, and made the virgins get up in their
place. To this purpose the Author alleges a long sentence of Saint Ambrose,
taking an argument from the honor that men gave in time past unto the Vestall
virgins, to the honor due to Christian virgins.

III. And in all that how many faults? To say, that the Heathen have
acknowledged by the light of Nature, that virginity was a virtue of great
price, and therewith to call it an Evangelical Counsel. For if it be of the
Gospel, it is unknown by Nature; the Gospel Ephesians. 3.4.5. Romans 16.25.26.
being a mystery, which in other places was not made known unto the sons of
men, as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles, and Prophets by the Spirit.
Flesh and blood reuealeth nothing of the things of the Gospel; how then could
the Heathens, that were naught but flesh and blood, have known the value of
this virginity? the price and merit thereof? the Aureolas that are reserved to
it in heaven in illa part, things whereof there was never any mention made but
under the Gospel? Here then the Author of the Pastoral Letter contradicts
himself, and to his contradiction adds an untruth. The Heathen (says he)
have known the excellency and price of virginity by the light of Nature. What
Heathen? the ^^ings that are natural, are indifferently observed by all
Nations. All Nations know by the light of Nature that there is a God, and
therefore there was never any Nation found to be without a God, and without
some kind and smack of Religion. But all the world has continued until the
time of Monks without esteeming so much virginity, except some few bewitched
by the devil. For nature teaches, that maids have been made for marriage,
being a thing natural to desire marriage and use it, as to be an hungry and
dry, as to eat and drink. During the Law of Nature God said, Genes. 2.18.
It is not good that the man should be alone, I will make him a help meet for
him. This help is the woman, expressly created of God to be a meet help for
him in the state of marriage. The Law of nature has been renewed by Moses, and
there is no mention of any price of virginity, of any promise made to it: but
contrariwise there is often mention of marriage, and great are the promises
that God has made to that state, which cannot be but most holy, and of great
value to the Church of Rome, seeing that she has made a Sacrament thereof;
although in effect marriage and virginity are things indifferent, wherein
there is neither vice nor virtue nor any part of the service of God. For that
which the Apostle says of meat and drink, is true of all outward things; The
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but right (...) and peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost. Chas^^y whether in virginity, or in marriage is a virtue, but
corporal virginity is no virtue; Clemens Alexand. str. lib. 3. Quemadmodum
autem humilitas est mansuetudo, non afflictio corporis; ita etiam continentia
est animae virtus, quae non est in manifesto sed in occulto.
For as humility is the meekness, and not the affliction of the body; so
continency is a virtue of the soul, which is not manifest but secret, faith
Clement; affirming, Jbidem Paulo ante. Quid enim a^ non ^iset etiam continenter
vti matrimonio.
that a man may use marriage (...) continency. And to show that the Romans did
abuse themselves in that opinion which they had conceived of virginity;
commanding that the continual fire should be kept by these Vestal virgins, as
if they had been holier then the married women; God on the other side ordained,
that the Priests (which were all married) Leuit. 1.7.
should put fire upon the Altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire,
Leuit. 6.12.
and should keep the fire burning continually upon the Altar. Whence I could
also conclude in like manner, that matrimony is a great virtue, and the price
thereof is great. The honor that Augustus and Albinus yielded, and gave unto
the Vestals, had reference to their office, and not to their virginity. Now
their office was the service of Devils. And if this be a good argument,
Augustus and Albinus did much honor to the Vestall virgins, therefore they
did much honor Virginite. This will be a better one, God advanced in great
dignity the high Priests, which were all married; he would have them to bear
on their forehead a plate of pure gold with this inscription, Exodus 28.36.
Holiness to the Lord, and expressly ordained, that all should have them in
singular estimation and reverence; therefore he has th^^ honored marriage.
Let us now judge of the worth of this proof: We seek the examples of those
that have kept Evangelical Counsels, and they allege the superstition and
idolatry of the Vestall virgins, the price of their virginity, the esteem
that was made thereof by two idolaters that knew not God. After this manner
they find out purgatory in Plato and Virgil, and so might they reduce and
bring back all the Paganism of the Heathens. Then should their Priests among
them geld themselves, to observe so much the better a single life, and clear
the world of their bastards: for in this sort did the Priests of Cybele, the
grand mother of the gods, geld themselves. Thus many Friars do whip
themselves, till they fetch blood; for so did the Priests of 1. King. 18.28.
Baal cut themselves after their manner with knives and la^cers, (...) the
blood gushed out upon them. Lucia de Dea Syria. Apule^us lib. 8. de Asino.
Thus the Priests of the Syrian goddess did flash and mangle themselves,
begging from door to door, and gathering into their waller, cor^e, pease,
cheese, bread, all fortes of meats, the best wine in their great leather
bottles, in their purses all manner of coin, of brass, silver or gold. Thus
(...) the Papists celebrate Candlemas day, in honor of the Virgin Marie, the
Queen of Heaven; for thus did the Heathen celebrate it, in honor of
Proserpina the Queen of Hell: the service remains, but the name is changed.
So are the Churches full of images of men and women, representing the Saints of
either sex, because the Heathen had their Temples adorned with the like
images, representing their gods and goddesses: so we need not to enquire any
more what God commands, and what the Saints have done according to his
Commandment, but the examples of the Heathens shall be the rules of our
actions. O Christians! how long will ye love, believe, and follow them, which
seduce you by their lies?

IIII. Saint Ambrose Rhetoric is better then his Divinity in his books of
virgins; he was accused by those of his time, that he preached and exalted too
much virginity. He glories in it, saying, Ambros. de virginit. lib. 3. Vtinam
possem reuocare nupturas, vtinam possem flammeum nuptiale pro integritatis
mutare velamine.
Would to God I could repeal and cal^ back those that will marry, that I
could change their nuptial veil into a holy veil of integrity. This is to
tax obliquely marriage of vice and pollution, contrary to the Apostle that
says, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled. This is to desire that
which the Apostle forbids, 1. Tim. 5.14.
I will (faith he) that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the
house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reprochfully. This is to
contradict himself, and to make way for false dealing and perjury. For some
lines after, he sets down with his approbation the sentence of our Lord,
prohibiting to dissolve Mat. 19.9.
marriage, except it be for fornication; and that of Saint Paul, Art thou bound
unto a wife, seek not to be loosed. For they which marry, do promise one
another firmly to live together so long as life does last, and do contract a
covenant between them, called in the Scripture Prou. 2.17.
The Covenant of God; which they cannot violate without disloialtie and
perjury against God, and against men. With what conscience then has Saint
Ambrose desired, that he could have persuaded the married folks to forsake
their nuptial veil; was he more then a man? and he says unto man, Mat. 19.6.
What God has joined together, let no man put asunder. And notwithstanding
this his sentence, whereby he complains, that none did dissuade nor divert the
Vestall virgins from their profane ceremonies, and that some undertook to
banish virginity out of the Church, though this sentence could well conclude,
yet it concludes nothing to the purpose and intention of the Author of the
Pastoral Letter. The question was not, if a father might compel his daughters
virgins to marry, but if he may oppose himself for good considerations that
they leave him not, nor affect and give their persons, their goods, and their
service to the College of the Vrselines. Now seeing that they have alleged
the Vestall virgins with a sentence of Saint Ambrose; I will also set down in
counterchange the commendation which Saint Ambrose gives them, that the Monks
and Friars may view themselves in their single life.

V. Ambros. de virgin. lib. 1. Itaque nec casta est quae metu cogitur, nec
honesta quae mercede conducitur, etc. Conferuntur immunitates, offeruntur
pretia, quasi non hoc maximum petulantiae sit indicium, castitatem vendere;
quod precio promittitur, precio soluitur, precio addicitur, precio adnumeratur,
nescit castitatem redimere, quae vendere solet. Page 35.
She is not chaste who is compelled by fear, nor honest which does it for
reward, etc. freedom and privileges are given to them, some offer them wages,
as if it were not a very great sign of impudency and uncleanness to sell
chastity. That which is promised for a price is paid with a price, is sold
with a price, is reckoned by a price. She that is wont to sell her chastity
cannot redeem it. If this accusation be true as it is, to whom belongs it
better then to the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Abbots, Priours,
Commanders, Munkes, Nuns, etc. whereof some are compelled by a fatherly
fear, others are allured by fair promises, and rich rewards to abstain from
marriage; that live not in the state of single life, but for to live idely,
richly, luxuriously, and in honor; for otherwise they would not abstain from
honorable marriage, seeing they abstain not from fornication, filthy and
prejudicial.

VI. The second example is that of Jesus Christ, that was a virgin, and the
son of a virgin. Therefore Saint Jerome against ^ou^an, says that though he
had not given us any Counsel of virginity, his birth, his life, his
affections during the time he lived and conuersed in this world, teaches us it
enough. For this cause Saint Cyprian calls virginity the image and
resemblance of Jesus Christ. These are the words of the Author of the Pastoral
Letter.

VII. Derived originally from heretics, more ancient then Saint Cyprian,
Basil, or Jerome. Clemens Alexand. strom. lib. 3. Dicunt autem gloriosi isti
iactatores se imitari dominum, qui neque vxorem duxit, neque in mundo aliquid
possedit.
There are that say openly (says Clemens Alexandrinus) that marriage is
fornication, and maintain, that it has been instituted by the devil. Now
these glorious boasters say, that they imitate our Lord, who never was married,
nor possessed any thing in this world, boasting that they understand a great
deal better the Gospel, then others do. This is the language even of our
Monks, saving that they dare not openly condemn marriage, although they are
compelled to condemn it in effect, if they think that Christ has taught us
single life by his example. For Christ is to be imitated of us all, in all that
wherein he has proposed himself for an example. If then he has given an
example of single life in his person, all ought to abstain from marriage. For
the life of Christ is the rule of ours. But (says Clement) Jbid. Deinde causam
nesciunt cur dominus vxorem non duxerit; primum quidem propriam sponsam habuit
ecclesiam: Deinde ver^ nec home erat communis, vt opus haberet etiam adiut^re
aliquo secundum carnem. Neque erat ei necesse procreare filios qui manet in
aeternum, and natus est solus Dei filius.
these fellows know not the cause, why our Savior Christ did not marry: for
first he had the Church for his Spouse. Secondly, he was not a common man, as
having need of a help according to the flesh, neither was it necessary that
he should beget children who dureth for ever, and is borne the only Son of
God. He will say in substance, that the Son of God became man by a special
dispensation of God, and came into the world by a particular calling to make
children, not by ingendring after the flesh those that were not, but by
renewing after the Spirit those that were. The generation is of ye first Adam,
the regeneration is of the second Adam. They that are borne of the first, are
borne of flesh and and blood, and are called the sons of men. They that are
renewed by this second, are borne again of his Spirit, and of his word, 1.
Pet. 1.23.
Being borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, namely, by
the word of God which lives and abides for ever, and are called the Sons of
God. The first begat in his life, and being dead ceased to beget. The second
begat in his death, and since his death cease not to engender, as Isaiah
prophesied, saying; Isai. 53.10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed.
Therefore carnal marriage was not so consonant to his calling. If he had begot
children after the flesh like the first Adam, he could not have been our
second Adam, ingendring children to God after the Spirit. As he was not borne
of carnal marriage, so has he not willed that any should be borne of him by
carnal marriage. It is Adams right to be the Father of the natural man, it is
his right to be the Father of the spiritual man, and notwithstanding to show
that he gave no example to any to abstain from marriage, he chose married men
for his Apostles, he honored John 2.2.
the marriage feast with his presence, and by his first miracle; he declared,
that marriage is an institution Mat. 19.4.
of God, and that the bond thereof is indissoluble and inseparable.

VIII. The ancient Father have exceeded and have spoken (be it spoken by their
leave, and with their favor) against all truth: for as marriage makes not the
faithful which uses it holily, unlike to God, so does not virginity make
Basil. lib. de vera virginitat^.
man even like God, though Saint Basil says so. Virginity also is not the
image and resemblance of Christ, as Saint Cyprian affirms. Holiness alone
makes man like God, and this holiness may be in as great a measure in them
which are married, in Abraham, in Saint Peter, in the Brethren of our Lord, as
in the eleven thousand Virgins. It is unto the married folks, and not unto any
virgins by Counsel and by Vow, that God says in his Law; Ye shall be holy,
for I am holy. Leuit. 11.44.
It is unto all, both married and unmarried, that Peter speaks; 1. Pet. 1.15.
As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; and the image of Christ consists in Colos. 3.10.
knowledge, Ephesians. 4.24.
righteousness, and true holiness, says Saint Paul; and this knowledge,
righteousness and true holiness has been as great in Adam and Eve, in Noe, in
Abraham and Sarah, in Isaac and Rebecca, in Jacob and Rachel, in Moses, with
whom God spoke face to face, and who has had testimony Numb. 12.3.
to have been very meek above all the men which were upon the face of the
earth, in Ioshue, Judge. 4.4.
in Deborah the wife of Lapidoth, and notwithstanding a Prophetess; in Samuel,
in David, in Josias, in 2. Chro. 34.22.
Huldah the Prophetess, the wife of Shallum; in Isaiah and his wife, who also
was Jsai. 8.3.
a Prophetess; in the 1. Cor. 9.5.
Brethren of our Lord, in Cephas, and the other Apostles which did lead with
them their wives; and it may be yet as great as it has ever been, as it can be
ever in any virgin or unmarried person; Deuteronomy. 10.17. Act. 10.34.
God is no respecter of persons; Job 34.19.
for they all (great and little, married and unmarried) are the work of his
hands. If it were otherwise, if virginity were the image of Christ, the
Vestall virgins should have been like unto Christ. Clement Alexand strom.. lib.
3. Q^^^ et (...) a cibis and ve^ere abst^^ent. Certe Magis quoque curae est,
qui angelos and daemones colunt, simul a vino and animatis and rebus abstinere
venereis.
They which adore idols, (says Clement) do abstain from meats and carnal
lust, now the Apostle says, that the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink,
surely the Sorcerers which adore the Angels and the Devils, do abstain
altogether from wine, from living things, and from women. Where shall we find
any in the most austere Cloister which do as much? The Fathers then have
mistaken, when they have established the image and resemblance of God, in that
which was to be found in the Heathen, and is to be found in these days among
the Turks, with a great deal more excess of severity, then among all the
Monks of Christendom.

IX. The third example is of the beginning of the Primitive Church: Page 11.
for our Author of the Pastoral Letter says, This Counsel had so penetrated
and passed through in the beginning of Christianity, as Saint I^rome observes
it eloquently upon the Acts of the Apostles: Post crucem Christi statim vna
domus Philippi quadrigam producit virginum filiarum; That after the Cross of
Christ, presently the house of Philip yields four daughters virgins.

X. What could the Author of the Pastoral Letter have alleged worse against
his cause and intention? he has heretofore spoken of an Evangelical Counsel,
recommending single life and voluntary poverty, and now he speaks of Act.
21.8.9.
Philip the Evangelist keeping house in Cesarea, married, and having his
daughters with him in his house. Philip then has not kept the Evangelical
Counsels, and has not been less perfect for all that I hope, then the
perfectest Monk or Friar. Secondly, he will prove, that the daughters ought
to leave father and mother, and withdraw themselves into a Monastery to keep
there their virginity, and that the fathers and mothers ought to consent
thereunto; and he sets us down the example of four daughters virgins
dwelling in their fathers house, and living there as Christianly as any
cloisterly Nun. Thirdly, he presupposes against the truth of the history,
that these maids have perseuered in their virginity al their life time. For
the Scripture says it not, and Clemens Alexandrinus says the contrary,
writing against the heretics hertofore mentioned, and asking them; Clemens
Alexand. strom. lib. 3. An etiam reprobant Apostolos? Petrus enim and Philippus
filios procrearunt; Philippus autem filias quoque suas viris tradidit. Eusebius.
lib. 3. Eccles. hist. cap. 27.
Do they reprove the Apostles also, for Peter and Philip have begot children,
and Philip has given his daughters in marriage. They were then virgins when
Saint Paul passed by that way, but they ceased to be virgins when they were
married. Bellarmine answers, Bellar. de monach. c. 10.. 2.
that we ought to believe, that they have beeue perpetually virgins, and by
election, because that Saint Luke relates that as a great matter, to wit, that
one man had four daughters virgins. Now what great matter is it to have four
daughters virgins, which being mariageable, did marry? But Saint Luke recites
not as a great matter that Philip had four daughters virgins, but that he had
four daughters virgins Act. 21.9.
which did prophecy. A thing recommendable and worthy to be registered to
posterity, that one man has had in his house four daughters virgins, which
being Prophetesses, the prophecy of the Prophet Joel has been fulfilled, Joel
2.28.
your sons and your daughters shall prophecy.

XI. The last example is of the Church, in the time of Cypria^ and Iustine
Martyr. Cyprian says of his time, Cypri. de habitu virg.
The world is filled with those which can comprehend continency, which live
like Eunuchs for the Kingdom of God. Justin. Apolog. 2.
Justin elder then he faith; Surely many of the one and of the other sex of
sixty and seventy years of age remain Eunuchs and Virgins, and in this
state have kept the discipline of Jesus Christ, even from their youth up; and I
glory that I can show such among all the sexes of those of our religion. Behold
the first fruits of the Gospel, says our Author of the Pastoral Letter.
Page 11.


XII. The fruit of the Gospel is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.23.
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, etc. Of these fruits are not virginity nor marriage, but chastity
in the one and in the other state, is a true fruit of the Spirit, and is
comprehended under the virtue Temperance. Justin and Cyprian say not that
virginity is a fruit of the Gospel: for that which is common to Christians
and Heathens is not of the Gospel; but they recommend those, which in so
woeful a time wherein the fires were lighted, the sword drawn, the public
power and strength armed with fury, with threatenings, and with vengeance
against the faithful, did abstain from marriage for the Kingdom of Heavens
sake. For he who in time of persecution is charged with wife, and children, and
sees himself brought to this hard necessity, either to bow the knee before
Baal, or to be deprived of that wherewith he should sustain his family; to
be separated by banishment or death from those that are the half of himself,
his flesh, his bones, and his blood; or else to traile and lead them all after
him with great fear, toil, and continual danger, has no small tentations;
he that faints not, nor yeeldes unto them, may well say, that he has in him
a greater strength, then that of the world. But he which is alone, whether he
must fly, or must die for the Gospel, is far from these tentations, and is
rid from all that which might stay him, which might divert, or quench the
zeal, whereby he is carried to a free and constant profession of the Gospel.
For which cause the ancient Fathers seeing the Church of God pressed and
oppressed with this necessity, did by long and vehement orations, exhort men
and maids to virginity; and many of them did follow their exhortations, not
by vow, but by Gods gift and calling, not by superstition and opinion of any
merit and greater perfection, but to apply themselves the better to the service
of God with less disturbance, without shutting themselves into a Monastery,
without forsaking their houses, without selling their goods, or leaving them,
and without tying themselves to a continual continency. For the daughters
went abroad in public as the others, clothed like others, and sometimes too
sumptuously, which Saint Cyprian reprehends, saying, Quid ornata, quid compta
pr^cedit, quasi maritum aut habeat, aut quarat? Why goes she forth decked and
tricked up, as if she had a husband, or else sought one? Some of them were very
rich, and did debate (to maintain their vanity) that they ought to use their
riches. The holy man commands them not to sell them, but take the use of thy
riches, O virgin, Cyprian. de habit. virg. vtere, sed ad res salutares; vtere,
sed ad bonas arts; vtere, sed ad illa quae Deus praece pit, quae dominus
ostendit. Diuite^ tesentiant pauperes, locupletem sentiant indigentes;
Patrimonium tuum Deo foenera Christum ciba, etc.
(says he) use them, but unto wholesome things, use them but to good arts,
use them but in such things as God has commanded, as the Lord has showed; let
the poor feel that thou art rich, the needy that thou have means; give thy
patrimony to usury unto God, feed Christ, etc. Justin Martyrs words are ill
translated and altered from their sense. For he speaks not there of virgins,
but of those only which (...), remain chaste, or without defiling themselves
with fornication, as the Gentiles did among whom it was a hard matter to find
one that had lived without defiling themselves with that sin, whereas Justin
boasts, that he could show, not those which have kept Christ's discipline (as
if single life were the discipline of our Lord Jesus Christ) but those which
have learned the doctrine of Christ from their infancy, (...), many of all
orders, men and women, of threescore and of seventy years of age, which have
never defiled themselves. But that he spoke of virgins closely shut up in a
monastery separated from the world, vayled, and clothed with a particular habit
affected by their order, bound by the vow of perpetual continence; that they
sold all, forsake all, transported their patrimony over to the Cloisters, that
they were holier, perfecter, better then the married women, that they did more
then they were commanded, that they merited Aureolas by their works of
supererogation? This is that which they should prove against us, and this is
that wherein all they that undertake this task shall come short, unto whom I
will say that which Job said unto his friends; Ioh 6.29.
Turn, I pray you, let there be none iniquity: return, I say, and ye shall
see yet my righteousness in that behalf.

Come Lord Jesus, even so come.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line. 9. the introgation is to be put after these words, walk.
deceived, die. Page 7. l. 18. r. consolations. p. 8. l. 4. r. gardiens. p. 14.
30, r. their enlightening. p. 20. l. 11. put out that. p. 21. l. 13. put out
defend them and. p. 27. l. 36. r. defining. p. 30. l. 27. r. and the people. p.
33. l. 15. put out of. p 37. l. 28. r. Authors. p. 40. l. 24. r. Truch-men. l.
26. put out and. p. 46. l. 17. r. sand. p. 55. l. 31. r. in the Counsel, p.
56. l. 28. put out back.

Courteous Reader, in reading over this Book, thou may chance to meet with
some other faults, the which I entreat thee to mend with thy pe^.


