THE RIGHT OF KINGS, CONTAINING A DEFENSE OF THEIR SUpremacy, over all persons,
and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil, within their several
Dominions.

HEREWITHALL IS PROVED BY TESTIMONY of Holy Scripture, That Christian Kings
are to have such Dignity, and execute such Office in the Christian Church, as
Gods Kings had and exercised in the Church under the Law.

WHICH PART OF THE MYSTERY of Gods Will, as it has been wickedly under
Popery shut up from Men, so it is in our times right needful that the same be
opened to all Christian Nations.

Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject, to the Higher Powers.

Printed 1621.

The epistle to the Reader.
WHo that considers the evils done unto the Son of God by Kings: Who that
considers that most cruel persecution of the Church by Kings in the primitive
times, and this also for about three hundred years of continuance: yea, who
that considers the Churches persecution by Kings in these last times, wherein
our Princes being miss-led by the delusions of the Roman Bishop, have
persecuted them who suffered their faith and service of God, to be instructed
and ordered by the word of God: who (I say) that considers these things, would
not expect, that the Lord, even our most blessed God, should utterly reject
them, denying them any dignity or office in his Church upon earth? But the Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, Righteous beyond our apprehension, and merciful
beyond all expectation, has contrariwise reveiled from heaven by his word, and
witnessed unto it with miraculous power, that the Kings among the Nations of
the Gentiles, are accepted by him for his Ministers, unto whom, as unto Kings
allowed by God, all Christians must be subject. By how much the less therefore
their desert has been, by so much the more is this Grace of God to be
magnified: By how much the less their desert of this grace has been, by so
much the more are they bound, to attend diligently to the due execution of the
will of God. Is it not sufficient, that Kings being miss-lead, partly by
Heathenisme before their conversion to Christianity, partly by Popery after
their conversion, have heretofore bloudily persecuted and slain those, who
have yielded obedience to the word of God? Shall the Saints, even to this day
also, be butchered by their power? when the Lord is so gracious as to mainteyne
the right of Kings, will not they do right to the children of God? how long
shall a falfe word misslead the most of them? how long will they be, before
they by the light of the word of God discern the Lords sheep from others?
Blessed be God, who has opened the eyes of many of them, and moved their hearts
to be Protectors of his flock. His Flock are those, who, if not fully, yet most
nearly conform their faith, their life and conversation, to the reveiled will
of God, as it is preserved in the sacred scriptures. As therefore the Lord is
merciful to Kings, so ought they in duty to God, by the word of God in
scripture to discern, and discerning to protect the people of the Lord. Much
of the Lords people are miss-lead by Teachers, who teach evilly in some things,
and hardly find we any wholly conformable to the instruction of the Lords word
in Scripture; but yet difference is to be put, between those who in the
greatest part obey the word of the Lord, and those who in the greatest part
walk in disobedience. And my hope is, that as by this Treatise I move Gods
people, to consider advisedly the great Dignity and Office of Princes, so
Princes will be gracious to those, who most nearly Believe and live as
becomes Saints. Neither would I have my Reader here to expect, that I would
judge who or who are lawfully Kings; but only that these who are Kings by the
permission and grace of God, may be put in mind of their Dignity and Office in
the Church and be also obeyed by those of the Church, as God by his instruction
reveiled to the Church gives direction. This is the end of my writing this
following Treatise: this the aim of my heart; which having now showen in this
epistle, I think fit to put an end to the same, and to proceed to the Treatise
it self.

Yours in the Lord, Thomas Proctor.

A TREATISE OF SUPREMACY.
Wherein is proved by testimony of sacred Scripture, that Kings or independent
civil powers or States, are by Gods Ordinance to be supreme Governors, over
all persons, and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as Civil, within their
several Dominions.
IT has been of long time, and in too many Nations of Christendom still is,
an error of no small importance to think, That Kings are not to judge in
things perteyning to the Church of God, nor to order the offices and affairs
of the Church, nor to govern over all ecclesiastical persons, within their
several kingdoms or Dominions. From which errors possessing the minds,
alwell of Princes as of private persons, strange troubles have arisen to the
church of God; both Princes and private persons mistaking their duties; and so
Princes not doing in the church what God appoints them, others, (and even of
their subjects) have been scourges unto them, by practicing against them things
far differing from the teaching of Christian Religion. Alas how much innocent
blond have Princes shed, whilst guided by a false word of the Roman Bishop,
they have neglected to meditate in the word of God, and to Judge and Govern
according to its directions, and so have butchered the Saints of God in all
Nations, and on the contrary have exalted them who most have trodden under
foot, the sacred word and ordinances of the living God. What should therefore
be more dear to Princes, then to know the dignity and true office, wherein God
by his Ordinance has set them? Or what greater honor can be done them, then
when some wicked Bishop would depresse their right herein, God by his word
declares his wickedness, and by his strange and mervailous Acts in our times,
raises his Princes, (will or nill that Bishop, and all his Adherents) to their
true dignity and office in the Church? Verily we see in these times, how God
tendereth the rights of Christian Princes, when under the Reformation, as he on
the one hand has freed them from the usurpations and bondage of the Roman
Bishop, so on the other hand he has preserved their right against all, who
under any pretenses whatsoever, have endeavored to deprive them thereof. It is
therefore dangerous for any, as well for Princes as for people, to do oughts
against the will of God, as he has revealed the same by his word preserved in
scripture. True it is, that many are not suffered to be informed hereof,
because by such information, that Bishop of Romes delusions, and his
insufferable abusions would be discovered. But fitter it is, that Princes know
their Right, and people their duties, then that the consciences of both being
missinformed, they be led thereby into the fierce wrath of God, by their doing
things contrary to his sacred Mind. The consideration whereof provoked me to
the writing of this Treatise, that so I also with others before me, may help
to satisfy the consciences of men, in this great point of Christian Religion,
concerning the Supremacy and government of Kings in the Church upon earth.
Thus having showen you the Aim, Occasion and End of this writing, I will
proceed to prove this point, by testimonies of holy scripture; that so, as
there is no safer direction for men what to believe herein, then the direction
of Gods own word, so men may rest satisfied in Conscience, with that which
truly is made manifest therefrom.

In the epistle to the Romans, chap. 13. verse 1, we thus read; Let every
soul be subject to the Higher Powers: for there is no power but of God: and
the powers that be are ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves judgment. For Princes are not to be feared for good works but for
evil; will thou then be without fear of the power? Do well: so shall thou
have praise of the same: for he is the Minister of God for thy wealth; But if
thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword for naught: for he is the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore ye must be
subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake: for for this
cause ye pay also Tribute: for they are Gods ministers, applying themselves
for the same thing.



In this portion of scripture given us, as a declaration of the will of God
concerning this matter, I wish you to observe; 1. To whom the Apostle gives
this charge concerning subjection. 2. Of what kind of powers he here speaks.


Concerning the first of these, we shall do well to observe, both the
direction and also the close of this epistle: for by them will appear, to whom
the Apostle gives this charge concerning subjection. The direction of the
epistle, has (chap. 1. verse 7.) these words: To all you that be at Rome,
beloved of God, called to be Saints, etc. The Close of the epistle, is, chap.
16.3. where we find a number saluted by name, of whom we may well believe
that some were of the Clergy: and this the rather also, because (verse 7.) the
Apostle says, Salute Andronicus and Iunia, my cosens, and fellow prisoners
which are notable among the Apostles, and were in Christ before me; for we may
well think, that they who were notable among the Apostles, were of the Clergy,
yea of the chief among the Clergy. Moreover, seeing this epistle was written in
a time of good growth of the Christian Church, (for it was written after Paul
had been a prisoner, chapter 16.7.) should we think that the Church at Rome, was
not at this time provided of Clergy as other Churches then planted were? To
conclude, seeing the Apostle writes to the Saints at Rome, it argues he wrote
to the Church at Rome; therefore also the charge concerning subjection, is
given to All that were then in the Church at Rome. Wherefore unless we will be
disobedient to this charge of the Apostles: or unless we will prefer the now
Bishop and Clergy of Rome, to these who were notable even among the Apostles of
the Lord, we ought not to exempt the now Clergy of the Church of Rome, from
yiedling submission to the Higher powers. Thus having showen to whom this
charge concerning subjection is given, proceed we to consider, of what kind of
powers the Apostle here speaks.

The kind of power which the Apostle here speaks of, is noted and declared
unto us by two things: first, by bearing the sword: secondly, By receiving
tribute; but in those times Bishops bare not the sword, nor received Tribute,
but Kings and independent Civil powers only did this; therefore the powers
whereof the Apostle here speaks, were not Bishops of the Church, but Kings,
or independent Civil powers. To conclude then, seeing the Apostle writing to
the Church, commands all in the same to be subject to the Higher Powers: and
seeing by those Higher powers he means those who bare the sword, and received
Tribute, that is, the Emperor, Kings, and other Civil powers; therefore the
powers ecclesiastical at that time at Rome, were subjected to the Emperor,
and to them that bare the sword and received Tribute, that is, Kings and
Sovereign Princes, It is therefore the manifest will of God, that the powers
of Christian Churches, should be subject to Kings and Sovereign Civil
States, as to the Higher powers by the Ordinance of God: for this Rule of the
Apostle here set down, must be taken for a Rule unto all Christian Churches,
and not as serving for the Church of Rome only, and only for that present
time. If it be objected that by this Rule I subject the Son of God also to
Kings and Princes, I answer, seeing the Lord paid tribute, Math. 17.24. and
seeing the Apostle makes the paying of Tribute, an argument of subjection, Romans
13.6. therefore there was one part of our Lords Humiliation, that he was made,
as inferior to Angels, Heb. 2.7, so subject to Kings and Princes. Thus having
written of these two things, proceed we now to consider further: 1. The
Supremacy of Kings. 2. Some particulars of their Office here mentioned by the
Apostle.


The Supremacy is noted unto us, by the Apostles styling them The Higher
Powers: for they are called here Higher Powers in respect of the Churches
powers and ministrations to which the Apostle wrote. I conclude therefore, that
seeing the Apostle writing to a Christian Church, commands subjection to some as
to Higher powers, therefore of the two powers, (that of the Church, I mean,
and that of Princes,) the power of Princes is the Higher by the Ordinance of
God. And this is answerable to the Custom of Scripture, which speaking of the
two Powers of Kings and Priests, prefers that of Kings to that of Priests,
saying, Rev. 5.10, Kings and Priests, not Priests and Kings; Both are powers
of great excellence; but in the matter of preferring powers to powers,
ministrations to ministrations, it is fit we follow the Teaching of God, rather
then the vain word of a puffed up Bishop. Lastly, seeing the Apostle says: let
every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, this plainly proves the Supremacy
to be in those powers: for subjection to any as to the Higher argues Supremacy
in the Higher, though every subjection proves not a Supremacy in him to whom
an other is subjected; for even Kings are subjected to be obedient to
Priests, when yet they obey not them as Higher then themselves. Thus having
written of the Supremacy, proceed we to such particulars of the Kings Office as
are here mentioned.

The particulars here mentioned are two, first, That they are appointed for the
wealth of them that do well: secondly, That they are to take vengeance on him
that does evil Now then, if they be Gods Ministers to punish him that does
evil, how is any evil doer exempted from this Ministers sword? and if none,
then no Bishop doing evil, but is subjected by God to be struck by the sword
of these Higher powers, as Gods Ministers to take vengeance on him for doing
evil. Moreover, what is well doing: but the observation of Gods commandment or
ordinance? and what is evil doing, but the violation of the same? therefore in
as much as this Minister is to punish evil, his punishment must stretch unto
evil of all kinds, as well evils of the Church, as evils of the Common
wealth, for the Commandments or Ordinances of God stretch to both. If
therefore any Teachers teach wholesome doctrine, according to the will of God
reveiled, this is to do well, and such are to be cherished and defended by
this Minister of the sword; but do any teach false doctrines, contrary to the
teaching of Gods will revealed, this is to do evil, and such Teachers are to
be punished by this Minister as evil doers. Again, do any ecclesiastical
Officers do the duetyes ordained by God to their offices, this is well doing,
and such Officers are to be cherished and rewarded by this Minister; but do
any neglect the proper duties of their Ministration, giving themselves to do
other things rather, and leaving them to be done by others, this is evil doing
in such Officers, and they are to be punished by this Minister. Lastly, do any
Christians, (of what sort, or condition soever) believe according to the
instruction of Gods word; and live in their lives and conversations
accordingly, this is well doing, and such are to be cherished and defended by
this Minister; but do any refuse to Believe according to wholesome doctrine,
or to live in life and conversation according to Gods Commandments, this is
evil doing, and such are to be punished by this Minister as for evil doers.

Thus having briefly showed the things most evident in this Scripture, I
proceed to a yet further opening of this Scripture unto you.

You see here that Princes whose office properly it is, to bear the sword,
and to receive Tribute, are declared by the Apostle to be Gods Ministers: for
so the Apostle says: He is the Minister of God for thy wealth, and again, He
is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. Now Princes
bearing the sword, and receiving Tribute, are Kings, or independent powers or
States, whom God, (not any Bishop, nor the Church,) orders to this
independancy or Soueraignety in power; for so the Apostle would have us to
understand when he says: there is no power but of God, therefore whosoever
resists the power resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall
receive to themselves judgment. And it is the Apostles strong argument, that
because Princes are allowed of by God as for his Ministers, therefore of
conscience toward God, and not for fear of wrath only, we must be subject.
Now then, seeing God graciously accepted of the Kings among the Gentiles as for
his Ministers, what ministration is approved of in their hands by the Lord but
the Kingly? For God accepting of them as Kings, and not as private Persons
only, he declares himself hereby to approve, of their exercising upon earth
the Kingly Ministration: for he that accepts them as for Ministers allows in
them a ministration, and what ministration allows he in Kings but the kingly?
Therefore it is a point of Christian faith necessary to salvation, to believe
of the Sovereign Kings and Princes, which the Gospel found among the
Gentiles, that God accepted of them as for his Kings, to serve him in the
kingly Ministration. It was commanded to the Church under the Law, Deuteronomy.
17.14. that if it would set a King over it, it should not then take liberty to
its self to set this or that person over its self, but should wait upon God
to set him over it whom the Lord should choose; for so we read there in these
words: when thou shall come into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee,
and shall possess it and dwell therein, if thou say, I will set a King over
me, like as all the Nations that are about me, Then thou shall make him King
over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. It is no small matter therefore
to the Church of God to yield its self to any as for its King; for if it wait
not upon Gods election, it surely transgresses grievously against God.
Therefore the Christian Church also, as it was not (hand over head, at its
pleasure) to set Kings over its self, so it was to acknowledge and obey the
Kings and Princes, already reigning over the Nations whereinto it stretched, as
for kings already provided for it by the ordering and Ordinance of the Lord.
This approving therefore of the kings and Princes, which the Gospel found
reigning over the Nations of the Gentiles, serves as Gods election or choice
made by him, of who the Church should take and acknowledge, as for her kings
and Princes set Over her by Gods providence. They then arose and fell, on
subverting another, now the army, now the City, now the Nations, now the
Emperors, choosing who should Rule over the Nations here and there, and yet for
all this, Gods disposing hand was busy, ordering such to Soveraignety, as he
would have to manage the power of the sword here and there: and the Church was
subjected to receive and acknowledge those, whom God permitted to atteyne to
Soveraignety in this Nation or in that. Princes therefore may by diverse Means
attain to Soveraignety, and the Nations may here and there change from one to
another as occasion shall be given; but the Church as the Church must not set
over its self a king or kings, but must wait upon God, acknowledging them
that attain to the Soueraignety of power here or there. But now, Gods
approving of the Kings, which the Gospel found reigning over the Nations of
the Gentiles, as for his Ministers, what follows, but that he approves in
them, an exercising the kingly Ministration? And what can be more truly the
kingly Ministration, then that which Gods Kings before time allowed by God,
exercised in the Church under the Law? for where there is no new description
of the Ministration, there the same Ministration before approved of by God in
his Kings, serves for an example of the kingly Ministration.

Wherefore seeing God accepts of Kings as Kings for his Ministers, it
necessarily follows, that those Kings exercise such Ministration, as with Gods
approbation Gods Kings before time exercised. I conclude therefore, that the
Kings or Sovereign States or Powers among the Gentiles, were now declared by
Gods Apostle to have right, to exercise such Ministration, as Gods Kings
exercised with Gods approbation under the Law. And you see, that as under the
Law, Kings had the Supremacy, and were Gods Ministers, for the wealth of them
that did well, and for the punishment of evil doers, so the Apostle calls the
Kings and Princes among the Gentiles The Higher powers, and declares them for
Gods Ministers, for the wealth of them that do well, and punishment of evil
doers; the likeness therefore in these particulars, argues Gods approving, that
they should be like his former Kings in their Ministration. As therefore the
church under the Law, took example for her King from the Kings of the
Gentile Nations, so God approving of the Kings among the Gentiles, they are to
take example for their Ministration, from that which with Gods approbation
Kings did in the Church under the Law. This I press the more, because the
Pope of Rome admits easily of Kings as of hang men, to punish the Clergy of the
Church for evil doing, when he shall give up such Clergy to be executed or
punished by the sword; but at no hand will admit, that they should exercise
such Ministration, as Gods Kings with Gods approbation exercised in and over
the Church under the Law. This is one of his delusions, this one of his
presumptions against the ordinances of God and of Christ, and by this he
works to the Christian world, not a little mischief. But now, unless the
Christian Nations will make the Pope of Rome their Apostle, they ought to
believe concerning this matter, according to the revelation of the will of God
by the Apostle Paul; neither shall they be guiltless before God, if they
believe the Popes word, the same being diverse from the word of Gods true
Apostle. To conclude, seeing God approves of Kings as Kings for his Ministers,
they are bound as they will answer it to God, to exercise such kingly
Ministration, as with Gods allowance his Kings before time exercised; for seeing
Christian Religion allows not, of all things done by Kings among the Gentile
Nations whilst they were Infidells, it must needs be, that the Kings of the
Gentiles are not to do all that which they as Infidels did, but such things as
with Gods allowance his Kings before time did, so fair forth as Christian
Religion permits. This I add here, because of the abolishing of Sacrifices for
sins, which under the law were offered by Kings: as also because that under
Gentilisme, Kings were both Kings and Priests, whereas Gods Ordinance under
the Christianity, as under the Law, permits not this. But now, having proved,
that God accepts of the Kings of the Gentiles as Kings for his Ministers: and
having showen you, they are to take example for the same from Gods Kings in the
Church under the Law, I think fit in the next place to put you in mind of two
special things: 1. That under the Law, the word of God was given to the
King. 2. That it was given to him as to a Judge.


That the word of God was given to the King, may appear by the testimony of
our blessed Savior, who (Ioh. 10.35.) says: If he called them Gods, unto whom
the word of God was given, etc. for, though Priests are comprised under the
Name of these Gods, yet Kings are not excluded, seeing none can deny Kings to
be Princes. And here I would have you to note, that this manner speaking of our
Lord, argues a kind of trust, as if God entrusted the keeping of his word unto
Kings and Priests: for when it is said that the word is given to them, it
implies that God trusts them with his word. But to this scripture, we may add
another, Deuteronomy. 17.18. where the charge of God to the King, is given in these
words, saying: And when he shall sit upon the throne of his Kingdom, then
shall he write him this Law, repeated in a book by the Priests of the Levites.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of
this Law, and these Ordinances for to do them. That his heart be not lifted
up above his brethren, and that he turn not from the Commandment, to the
right hand or to the left. Here observe, first, That not what the Priest will
deliver for Law, but the Law its self, This Law he has right, yea and
charge also from God to take: Secondly, that this Law is given to him as to a
King, therefore as to to a Minister, and not as to a private Person; therefore
also it is not given him for his private direction only, what to believe and
do for his own salvation, but it is given him for a direction of his
Ministration: for what is given to an Officer as an officer, is given for a
direction what to do in his office. Therefore Kings have a charge of Gods word
as well as Priests, and they are to be directed by it in their Ministration; so
that they may not content themselves to say, I do this and this in my Office,
by the teaching of the Priests, but they must read and meditate in the word
its self of God, by it to be instructed what to do. There is difference to be
put, between the Minister revealing primarily the word of God, and the
Minister of the word already reveiled; of the first, the greatest Kings are
subjected to receive the word as they deliver it; but the word once so
delivered, the King is to take it, and to read and meditate in it, and is not
bound to take only the interpretation or word of him, who is but the Minister
of the word already reveiled. Therefore also the King is interposed, between
God, and the Minister of the word already reveiled, as having right to take
the word its self reveiled, and not whatsoever the Minister of the word
already reveiled, will deliver as for that word. Would God that Christian
Princes did duly consider, this gracious goodness, and mervailous favor of
God toward them; for if they duly considered this, it would much provoke them
to read themselves the revealed word of God, and not to leave this to the
reading of Priests only. How will they answer it to God, if being Kings, as by
Gods ordination, they neglect this charge given by God to his Kings? Ah the
evils which the false word of an evil Priest has brought upon them, through
their neglecting themselves to read the word of God in Scripture. But now, as I
have before proved, that Gods accepting of the Kings of the Gentiles, as kings
for his Ministers, serves both as for Gods gracious election made of them, and
also as for a warrant, that they should serve God in the kings ministration,
approved of by God in the hands of his kings under the law, so it may now
appear unto them, that the charge of God given to his kings in the Church
under the Law, serves also for a charge unto them. And seeing this charge is
given to the king as king, it proves, that his charge is, that he see all the
ordinances of God observed by all: for this use of this charge, made the good
kings in the Church under the law, as their manifold actions, both in restoring
true Doctrine, and ordering the Priests and Levites to their several offices,
as also in ordering the divine service, and other like, plentifully declare.
What therefore God has commanded or ordained, whether for matter of faith
necessary to salvation to be believed, or for matter of Ecclesiastical
government, or the like, that is the King to see done, as well by Priests as
People, and to punish the negligent for evil doers, as well Priests as others.
Thus having written of the first things, proceed we to the second.

That Gods word is given to the King, as to a Judge, and not as to one who must
do after the judgment of the Priest only, may appear Psalm. 82.1. where we
thus read: He judges among Gods: How long will ye judge uniustly, and accept
the persons of the wicked? Do right to the poor and fatherless: do justice
to the poor and needy: save them from the hands of the wicked. Here you see,
that Princes of whom our Lord testifies (as before I have shown) that they are
called Gods, are also Judges; therefore the word given to them, is given to
them as Judges. And whereby then should they be directed in their judging, if
not by the word given by God unto them? The Pope of Rome would have them to
reward the good, and punish evil doers, after he and his Clergy has judged
them good or evil; but they are not to be directed by an others judgment,
seeing God has made them Judges, and given them his word to direct their
judgment. As therefore their office stretches, to reform Doctrine, to order
Ecclesiastical Officers, to see to their executing their offices according to
Gods ordinance, to order the Divine worship, and to cause people to live as
Gods word commands, (for all this did the good Kings in the Church under the
Law) so they are to Judge also in all these things, what is to be done, what
not: what well, what evilly done. If any will say, that now I sow the seeds of
grievous tribulation to Gods Church, seeing I make Kings or Princes (who are
apt to maintain every conceit of theirs by the sword) Judges of Doctrine,
Ecclesiastical offices, ordering Divine Service, and of Manners, then I
answer: If the Apostle taught this Doctrine of them, implied in his declaring
that God accepted them for his ministers, even whilst as yet they were
Infidels, and would not be directed by the word of God, should we deny Kings
this power and office when they are Christians? Therefore let us in these days,
as the Apostle in those, acknowledge unto Princes their Right and Power, yea
though they execute not their Ministry rightly, but persecute rather the
Saints and Church of God: for it becomes Christians to acknowledge their
right, yea when they do not according to right, but are rather enemies as yet,
and persecuters. Let us fear even then to do evil, because if even then they
punish us for evil, their punishment is Gods, seeing they are the Ministers of
God. But if we suffer for well doing (they being negligent to read the word,
or to judge us by it) let us take to us the comfort of the Apostle Peter, where
1. Pet. 2-20. he says, If when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it
patiently, this is acceptable to God. This gracious consolation against the
afflictions laid upon us, by misguided, or mis-judging Princes, should be our
refuge, as it was the refuge of Gods Saints in those times of the Apostles. Yet
here I think fit to put men in mind, that wherein Gods word preserved does not
speak for us, there, we who suffer, bear our own burden and hurt: for we
ought to prefer the judgment of Gods Judges before ours, though we prefer
justly Gods word it self to their erring in the use made of it. For Gods word
which is plain, or indeed truly collected, let us suffer, if our Kings,
erring, will persecute us for our faith, and ordering of things according
thereto; but let us not suffer for maintenance of our own judgment only,
opposed to the judgment of Gods Minister. True it is, that Kings and Princes
may, and in fact have erred, and this also in things wherein they think
themselves free, to do with their own what they will; therefore Princes may
do well in such things, to admit of wholesome counsel, rather then to go on
in doing evil through error. Some Princes thinking themselves free, to Honor
Priests as they will, have in way of honor to them, left all judging of
Doctrines of faith, and all ordering of Ecclesiastical matters to them only,
not daring to be themselves Judges in these things; but such honoring is not
acceptable to God, seeing themselves neglect the office of Judging, which God
has entrusted to them as well as to Priests. Others have in way of Honor
freed the Clergy from being subject to be judged and punished by themselves,
unless by the Pope, or other chief among the Clergy, they be given up to
the secular power; but this kind of honoring also is evil, inasmuch as
Princes exercise not that power and authority to judge and punish the Clergy
for evil doing, as Gods Kings in the Church under the Law did. Others again;
by way of honor to Priests, have employed them so in civil Courts of Justice,
as that they have not, yea have not been able thenceforth to perform the true
duties of the Bishops office, but have left the same to the performance of
others substituted under them; but this kind of honoring also is evil,
inasmuch as Gods Ministers of his word, who should be diligent Preachers of the
same, content themselves to busy themselves in civil judgments, and to
preach the word once in a Lent time only, or upon some solemn time only.
Others again, as for a greater honor to Bishops, have made them Ministers of
the Sword; but God having appointed Kings for the ministration of the Sword,
the other Ministers must not be ministers thereof: for God having put a
difference between Ordinance and Ordinance, Office and Office, Power and power,
appointing one to one Minister, the other to another Minister, what is it but a
confusion, and an inversion of the ordinance of God, to make one Minister
Minister of both? It has been an evil collection made by some, that what Gods
Priests under the Law did, that the Ministers of the Gospel may do, even as
Kings under the Gospel may do what Gods Kings under the Law did: for the
Ordinance of God concerning the Ministers under the gospel, permits us not to
make such collection concerning Priests and their employment and actions. In
all these things Princes have erred, and easily may again err, to the great
hurt of the Church of God, and inversion of his holy Ordinances; therefore if
they suffer wholesome advice and counsel in such things, they shall the better
please God by a true ministration of their office. Surely whatsoever Princes
do to Bishops or Priests, which necessarily occasions their not doing the
proper Duties of their Episcopal or Priestly Ministration, or which occasions
their over seldom or negligent doing the same, that is ill done by Princes,
and God will visit them, both for drawing his Ministers of the word, from
performing their proper duties of such Ministration, and also for suffering
unpunished any such omission, or neglect of these duties. These things I
thought good here to touch at, because it might occasion our Princes, to hold
Gods Priests to the duties proper to their Ministration, and to punish in them
any omission, or over negligent performance of the same. But now to conclude
this point, Princes are not barely as executioners, to reward the good, and
punish evil doers, but they are costituted also Judges by the Lord, that they
also may judge in all things, to which the word already revealed from God,
stretches. And verily, even the Ministers of the word already revealed, are,
preaching the same to them, to preach as to Gods Judges of doctrine preached.
Not that they are all alike capable of judgment in such things, but that this
is the right of their office, which also for conscience toward God, must be
had in Reverence.

Thus have I proved, that Kings under the Gospel, are to exercise such
Dignity and Ministration, as, with Gods blessed approbation, we find in
Scripture, that Gods Kings exercised under the Law. As therefore under the Law,
the King was over the Church in the Nation of the Jews, as Moses said, If thou
say I will set a King over me, etc. (which manner Supremacy, the Kings under
the Law did in fact exercise and hold): And as under the Law the Kings did not
only reward the good, and punish the evil, but did also Judge of good and
evil by the direction of the word given him, restoring pure Doctrine, and
setting the Priests and Levits to their due offices, and ordering the Divine
Service; so are the Kings under the Gospel likewise to do, being over the
Church in their several Dominions, and judging of what is good and evil by
the word of God in Scripture, and restoring Religion, setting the Clergy to
their due offices, and ordering the Divine Service in the Church. Wherein,
though they are not to neglect, not the advice only, but authority also of the
Bishops and Priests, yet they are not to take for their direction, whatsoever
they shall advise and press, but they ought themselves to read and meditate in
the word of God, and to judge by it, of that advised and urged by the Bishops.
These things concerning the Supremacy and Government of Kings, I have here
pressed upon the observation of Princes, partly to stir them up to mind their
own Authority in the Church, partly to instruct all Christian Subjects, what
to believe concerning their duty toward Princes; but now having this done, I
think it fit to answer in the next place, one or two objections, which either
are, or may peradventure be made, against this which formerly I have written.

The first objection.
AGainst the Supremacy of Kings, and their judging in all causes, and governing
over all persons within their several Dominions, it commonly heretofore has
been, and to this day is alleged. That our Lord committed unto Peter, to be
continued in his Successors, the Supreme vicariate power of governing the
Church for ever. This opinion they fortify partly by Scripture, partly by
Tradition, partly by the sayings of Doctors of great authority in the Church.
The Scriptures which they commonly make use of, are, first, Math. 16.18. where
the Lord said thus unto Peter, I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not overcome it.
Secondly, John 21.15. where again the Lord said thus unto the same Apostle:
Simon the son of Iona, love thou me? He said unto Him, Yea Lord, Thou
know that I love Thee. He said unto him, Feed my Lambs. He said unto him
again the second time, Simon the son of Iona, love thou me? he said unto
Him, Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. He said unto him, Feed my Sheep.
He said unto him the third time, Simon the son of Iona, love thou me?
Peter was sorry because he said unto him the third time, love thou me? and he
said unto him, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.
Jesus said unto him, Feed my Sheep. From both these Scriptures they collect,
that the Apostle Peter should feed all the Lords sheep for ever, both with
Doctrine and Government; therefore all the Lords sheep, must receive from this
Apostle their Doctrine and Powers, or Offices, that so they may be built upon
the Rock of this Apostles approbation or allowance. And because the Apostle was
to do this for ever, therefore after his death this must be done by his
Successors, the Popes of Rome. Hence it is that they seek the Popes
approbation of all Doctrines, and receive their Episcopal authority from him,
yea Kings also receive kingdoms of him. But now I will in the next place
discover the fallacy of this collection, showing that these Scriptures are not
so to be understood, neither do intend any such matter. And I think fit to
write first of the latter Scripture, because the false use made thereof being
discovered, it will the more easily appear, that they make a false use of the
first Scripture also.

If from the Lords words in saying to Peter, Feed my Lambs, feed my sheep, it
be collected, that Peter must feed all Christ's sheep, and this also both with
Doctrine and Government, then it follows, that the rest of the Apostles, as
well as any other, must be thus fed by Peter, seeing they also are a part of
the Lords sheep; but seeing feeding is taken in matter of Doctrine, for the
receiving of doctrine from him, or grounded upon the authority of his
approbation: and seeing feeding in matter of Government, is taken for a bearing
rule over all Christ's sheep, and that all Powers or Offices Ecclesiastical and
civil, are to be derived from him, or grounded upon the authority of his
approbation; therefore I am to prove by testimonies of holy Scripture, that we
are not thus to understand the Lord in this speech of his. For matter of
Doctrine, it is well known, that the rest of the Apostles received not their
Doctrine from Peter, but from the Lord Christ, even as Peter himself did;
neither were they to ground or build that upon the authority of Peter's
approbation, which they received immediately from the Lord; therefore I conclude,
that the rest of the Apostles were not fed by Peter in matter of Doctrine.
Moreover, the Apostle Paul, Galat. 1.11. testifies, saying: I certify you
brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after man, for
neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. By this testimony it is plain, that the Apostle Peter fed not
the Apostle Paul with Doctrine, but rather the Apostle Paul purposely provides,
that none should conceive him to have received his Doctrine of Man, or by Man.
And as for building upon the Apostle Peter's allowance or approbation of his
Doctrine, it were verily absurd, that the Apostle Paul should build or ground
himself for his Doctrine, upon Peter's allowance thereof, or the authority of
such allowance, when he received his Doctrine from the Lord himself: for it
were truly absurd to seek an Apostles allowance, and to build upon the
authority of such allowance, for that received immediately from the Lord of
the Apostles. So likewise the Churches who received the doctrine of the Apostle
Paul, inasmuch as they believed that he received it not of Peter, but of
Christ, how sought they either, or how built they, upon the authority of the
Apostle Peter's approbation. There was indeed an approbation, Gal. 2.7. but not
a building upon such approbation, seeing the Apostle had a higher warrant and
authority for his doctrine. Lastly, seeing it is very apparent, Mark 3.14. that
our Lord himself chose the Apostles, and authorized the^ to the Apostolical
Ministrations: and seeing the Apostle Paul, Gal. 1.1. says: Paul an Apostle,
not of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ; therefore who received not
their Ministration from Peter, how should they receive from him the Doctrine
whereof they were Apostolical Ministers? I conclude therefore, that all the
Apostles were not fed with doctrine by Peter, and consequently that Apostle was
not to feed all the Lords sheep with matter of doctrine. And as for feeding
them with Government, by exercising a supreme Rule over them, this also
appears to be a false collectio^, from this Scripture, inasmuch as we find
that our Lord expressly forbadd unto his Apostles, any one of them to rule over
the rest. For, Mark 10.42. our Lord said thus unto the Apostles: ye know that
they which delight to bear rule among the Gentiles, have Domination over them,
and they that be great aamong them, exercise authority over them; But it shall
not be so among you. By which scripture appears manifestly, that how ever
every one of the Apostles, was to govern and exercise authority over others,
yet none of them was to govern or exercise Authority over the rest of the
company of the Apostles. It must needs therefore be a false, and very
pernicious interpretation or collection, to affirm, that the Apostle Peter was
made Governor, to exercise authority over all Christ's sheep, for then he was
to govern and exercise authority over the rest of the Apostles, which thing
the Lord expressly forbadd. Now, if the generality hold not in the Apostles,
how can it hold in all Christ's sheep for ever. If Peter exercised not such
universal government and authority over all Christ's Sheep, why under the
pretense of this speech of the Lords, should he govern and exercise authority
over all Kings? And indeed, if a man having already diverse Sheepherds, say to
one of them, feed my Sheep, should that one Shepherd gather hereupo^, that now
he has the charge of All his Masters sheep? Why should he not rather
understand this, of some portion of sheep only, which his Master would surely
allot out to his particular charge? for he might well think with himself, that
where many shepherds are already appointed, there all the sheep shall not be
committed to one only. Verily, that Apostles excellency, even among the very
Apostles themselves, was such, and such will be acknowledged by all good
Christians for ever, that it needs not to be helped with unsound and false
interpretations of, and collections from holy scripture. Thus having discovered
the false use made of the latter of the two scriptures, proceed we to the
first scripture. As for the first scripture, from whence some would collect,
that all doctrine must be received from Peter, and all power or offices, or at
least wise must be authorized by the authority of his allowance or approbation,
that so they may be built upon the Rock, which Christ has given to be a Rock
whereon he will build his Church, this collectio^ appears to be a false use of
this scripture, in as much as the rest of the Apostles received not their
doctrine, nor Power of Apostleship from the Apostle Peter, but from Christ
himself; but what they received from the Lord himself, it were absurd to seek
to build it upon the Authority of Peter's allowance or approbation. The Apostle
Paul (as I have before noted) speaking of the power of his Apostleship, says,
Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ; why said he
this, but to teach us, that we ought not to believe, that he was such by virtue
of the allowance or approbation of any man whatsoever. And whilst the
Apostolical power was neither received from Peter, nor built nor grounded upon
the Authority of his permission, approbation or allowance, why should this be
required of Kings and Princes? These scriptures therefore what ever they
intend, yet this which Papists collect, may not be Believed to be the thing
which they intend, for you see, that that which is collected from them by
Papists, is directly contrary to a most plain commandment of our Lord to his
Apostles, and to the testimony of the Apostle Paul. Thus having by testimony of
several scriptures, confuted these collectio^s made by some from these
scriptures, I think it sufficient to oppose, both against tradition, and also
against the greatest Fathers or Bishops, this testimony of holy scripture, by
which is proved, that the rest of the Apostles were not fed by the Apostle
Peter in matter of doctrine, and that he was not to exercise authority or rule
over them.

But if the scripture thus witness, that the Apostle Peter himself might not
lawfully claim, this supreme government or rule over the rest of the Apostles,
nor consequently over all Christ's Sheep, how much less lawfully then may his
Successor claim this? For, as no Apostle could make an other man an Apostle,
so no successor could be made an Apostle by the Apostle Peter; and not being so
much as an Apostle, how should he claim the chiefest singularity of the
Apostle Peter? And that no Apostle could make an Apostle, I gather from the
Apostle Paul, who (Gal. 1.1.) says: Paul an Apostle, not of Men, neither by
Man, but by Jesus Christ; for this argues, that an Apostle, should not be of
Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ. I conclude therefrom, that no
Successor could be in all things like the Apostle to whom he succeeds, and
much less then in those things by which (if by any thing) the Apostle Peter was
preferred unto the rest of the Apostles. If the successor have conferred upon
him, all the gifts and prerogatives of an Apostle, what is he then but an
Apostle? But such gifts and prerogatives as by which Apostles, were Apostles,
could not be given by men, but by Christ only; therefore the Apostle Peter
neither might nor could confer upon his Successor all the power, office,
prerogatives or dignity, which himself as an Apostle had received of the Lord
Christ. Moreover, seeing the Lords Apostles were the Lords governors, set over
the rest of the ecclesiastical Governors of the Church, how unfit were it to
conceive, that the Successor only of an Apostle, should be Governor over any
Apostle? But some are of opinion, that the Apostle John remained long after the
death of the Apostle Peter; if therefore the successor of Peter, have a
Vicariate power to govern and rule over all Christ's Sheep, then must he be
this to the Apostle John; but what manner unsufferable ambition this favors
of, I leave to the judgment of all men. Let us therefore rather believe that
if the Apostle Peter, appointed his successor, then yet he conferred not upon
him, neither all the gifts by which himself was an Apostle, nor all the power
Ministerial, nor dignity, which as being an Apostle, and one of the chief
among the Apostles, he held and enjoyed in the Church of Christ; but only, (as
Paul upon Timothy and Titus) he conferred a portion of power and charge, such
as a Successor might be capable of. To conclude, seeing no Apostle could
conferr upon an other man, all the gifts, offices, and dignity, which himself
enjoyed as an Apostle, therefore the successor must be a Minister of a far
inferior rank, dignity, and charge of Government in the Church, then was the
Apostle Peter himself. Now then, why should not such a Minister, though he be
successor to that Apostle, subject himself to the supreme government of Gods
Kings, so witnessed unto by holy scripture as before I have showen? Thus
having answered this objection, let us proceed to an other.

The second Objection.
SOme peradventure may object, saying: The Kingdom of heaven coming in among
the Gentiles by Apostles and Bishops, it were a subiecting the Kingdom of
Heaven to the powers of this world, if we maintayn not the supreme Government
to remain in Bishops, and specially in the Apostle Peter's successor. If any
should thus object, then I answer: the kingdom of heaven comprehending all
power, (as the Lord said, Math. 28.18. All power is given me in heaven, and in
earth) the power Apostolical and Episcopal, must not be taken for the
Kingdom of heaven, as if the kingdom of heaven had in it none other powers
then it. But you see that I have showen before, that there are the powers of
Kings in the earth, which it pleased God to allow and confirm, accepting
graciously also of them as for his Ministers. Now, though in God the fountain
of power, all power is alike as water in a fountain, yet in distributing of
that Power into Ministerial Streams, the Lord may ordeyne which part to
which shall be subordinate; therefore seeing before I have showen, that the
Apostle Paul calls the Ministers of the sword The Higher Powers: and seeing I
have before proved, that these powers are allowed by God as for his Ministers,
and consequently are to exercise such dignity and office in the Church, as Gods
Kings exercised in the Church under the Law: And lastly, seeing all the
scripture shows, that those Kings were over all the Church, exercising a
supreme government over all ecclesiastical persons; therefore (I say) it is
no subjecting of the kingdom of heaven to the powers of this world, to subject
the Bishops of the Church, to Gods Kings and Sovereign States. Bishops are
Ministers of the kingdom of heaven, but they are not all the Ministers thereof,
for Kings also are declared by the Gospel to be Ministers of the same, seeing
God has declared himself to accept of them as for his Ministers; therefore, to
subject one kind of officer of a kingdom to an other officer, is not to
subject the kingdom to an other kingdom. Bishops preach the word to these to
subdue them to Christ; but being subdued by the word ministered, Bishops may not
say, The kingdoms of this world are ours, and we will dispose of them; but
they must say, as Rev. 11.15. The kingdoms of this world are our Lords and
his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore. True it is that even the
greatest Kings are comprehended in that commandment, Heb. 13.17. where it is
said: Obey them that have the Oversight of you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, that they may do
it with joy, not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Therefore even
the greatest Princes are subjected by Christian religion unto spiritual
Pastors, in the things whereof they are Ministers; but this may be, without
Bishops having the Supreme government. For, as a Lord of greatest authority in
a kingdom, must obey to every the meanest Constable of a kingdom, within his
precinct of charge, and in that wherein such Constable is endued with power and
authority from the King, when yet this makes not such Lord to lose his
superiority, which in the kingdom he has over such Constable; so is it
between a King and a Bishop. God has declared the Kings of the Gentiles for
his Ministers, therefore as Kings were to Priests under the Law, so must
they be to Bishops under the Gospel: and on the contrary, as Priests were to
Kings under the Law, so may Bishops be to Kings under the Gospel. The King
under the Law left the Priestly power and ministration to the Priest, and was
obedient in all things, when yet he ceased not hereby to be governor over the
Priests; even so are Kings to do under the Gospel. The King that must submit
himself, to hear the Gospel preached by the Bishop, to receive of his hand
Gods Sacraments, to use him as Gods Priest to pray for him, and other like, yet
is such a Minister for God over such Priest, as that such Priest preaching
false doctrine, or ministering the sacraments otherwise then according to Gods
institution, or doing any thing otherwise then as Gods word in scripture
prescribes, in stead of obeying such Priest, he is over him to take vengeance
on him in Gods stead as for an evil doer. So likewise the King that doing
evil, is subjected to the Priests proceeding against evil doers, whether it
be to discipline of humiliation or shaming, to sequestration, or
excommunication, is yet such a Minister for God over the Priest, that the
Priest doing this upon unjust cause, or pressing unjust ends or effects of such
discipline, the King in stead of obeying, must punish such Priest as for an
evil doer. The Pope is one of these wicked Priests, for even for obedience to
the true word of God, and for ordering things according to its direction, he
uses the sword of the Church against men, yea against Kings: and not only so,
but having excommunicated any, he teaches, that subjects should not
acknowledge nor obey their excommunicate Kings, children their excommunicate
Parents, nor wives their excommunicate husbands, and the like; but with what
peace of conscience shall a man break Gods word, to do according to this word
of the Popes? Excommunication indeed changes condition in the Excommunicate,
but not in this measure, nor to this effect, for then we must not do as the
scripture commands, in obeying the King, Honoring our parents, and yielding
one to another due benevolence. And truly of all the wicked Priests that ever
were in the Church, the Pope of Rome is the wickedest, changing Gods Ordinance,
and the effects of Ecclesiastical Discipline so, that it is a wonder that he
is suffered; sure I am, Gods Kings shall answer for it to God, if they as Gods
Ministers take not vengeance for God upon him for this. Thus having answered
this Objection also, I will now conclude this Treatise with an exhortation to
subjects.

An Exhortation to Subiests.
SEeing God reveiling his will by his Apostle, declares himself to accept
graciously of the Kings and Princes already among the Gentiles, as Kings and
Princes already provided for the Church among the Gentiles, and confirmed as
ordained by him: And seeing Kings, being so accepted of and confirmed, are to
take example for their regal dignity and Government, from the approved of
dignity and government, of Gods Kings in the Church under the Law; therefore
it behooves all men to yield them due subjection, obeying the^ willingly as
Gods Ministers, in all things wherein we find Gods Kings under the Law
obeyed with the Lords approbation. As under the Law therefore, Kings were over
the Priests, exercising Authority over them, both in setting them to their due
Offices if they neglected them: and also in punishing them for evil doing, 1.
Chron. 2.26. so if Kings in the Christian Church do likewise, Christian people
ought to acknowledge, that the King is by Gods ordinance thus to do. Again,
if Christian Kings take care of doctrine also, seeing to it that Bishops and
Teachers teach according to Gods word: or if they order the divine service,
according to the will of God reveiled in his word: and in a word, if they see
the Ordinance of God observed, as well in ecclesiastical as civil affairs,
punishing also as well the Clergy as others offe^ding, we ought to acknowledge,
that the King is by Gods ordinance such a Minister, as has right to use this
Ministration in the Church of God within his own dominions. Let not men being
led away of that Romish delusion, by which Kings are debarred from exercising
in the Church, the dignity and Office of Gods Kings in the Church under the
Law, disobey their Princes in their using their authority in these things,
seeing in all these things the Scriptures witness, that Gods Kings under the Law
exercised their authority; but rather let men with comfort of conscience,
acknowledge this Supreme dignity and office in Kings, that so they be not
found resisters of the Ordinance of God. If any say, should we not make
conscience of things as our Teachers teach us? then I answer: That if you by
evil Teachers be led to do evil, in disobeying the lawful things done by
your Kings, it will not serve for defense of the evil to say, your Teachers
taught you so; for, by what means soever you do evil, the King is Gods
Minister to punish you for evil doing. You must beware therefore of false
Teachers, that you be not lead by them as their Disciples into error, Act.
20.30: And you have a charge given you by the Apostle, 2 These. 2. 15, that you
be not moved by any from that which in Scripture is received from the Apostles.
Remember how the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.15. exhorts you, saying: Let none of
you suffer as an evil doer. But, are you not evil doers, if you deny your
Kings such Dignity and Office, as God by his word has conferred upon them? If
therefore your King see to the Reforming of Religion, according to the
instruction of Gods word: and see the word to be purely preached and the
sacraments rightly administered unto you, are not you evil doers, and resisters
of Gods Ordinance, if you will not come to the word so administered, nor partake
of the Sacraments rightly ordered? What would you think of those in Judah and
Israel, who when Hezekiah or Josiah, or Iehoshaphat, restored pure religion,
by the instruction of the Law preserved in scripture: or took away offensive
things: or ordered the Priests and Levites to their due ministratio^, or the
like, would not then be obedient in such Reformation? were they notevill doers
think you? were they not worthy to be punished by the King for evil doers? As
you therefore would not fall into the like error, and danger, so ought you to
obey unto the Reformation of doctrine and of the Church, confirmed by Gods
Minister the King, so long as by the word of God, you cannot prove any thing
taught, or done, to be against the reveiled will of God. Think not to plead
your conscience, seeing that your conscience ought to admit of Information; and
there has now long time of information passed, wherein you ought to have been
instructed by the Truth. Neither think, that the sword must of duty stay, till
the word have prevailed to convert you: for the Minister of the sword must
punish you for evil doing, and is not bound (save in showing mercy for a time)
to stay his hand, till you obey the word, and convert from your error. One
Minister cannot warrant you against an other, the Priest against the King, nor
the King against the Priest, because God has subjected you to obey unto both
of these; therefore nothing but the true word of God its self, will serve to
be alleged for your disobeying of either. If therefore you neglect your self
to read, or hear read unto you the word of God in scripture, by which Means
also you might come to know it: Or, if you, when your Bishop or Priest,
declares plainly the word of God out of the Scripture unto you, you then will
follow an other Priest, who shows you not plainly the word of God for that
which he teaches you, so following his word, be it right or wrong, not caring
to know the word of God, then go you a wrong course, and as neglecters of the
word of God, are ready for that judgment, 2 These. 2.10, of being given up to a
strong delusion, that you should believe lies. And truly, a very strong
delusion has the Popes pretended Supreme Vicarship been, leading thousands
into error, and producing in some very pernicious effects. But now, seeing I
have showen you by the word of God, that such General and Supreme Vicarship,
is contrary to the express teaching of the word of God in holy Scripture, make
conscience henceforth, to hearken to the word of God, and to be guided by it in
your faith, that so, obeying the Truth, you may be saved with the children of
Truth.

*


