HISTRIO-MASTIX. THE PLAYERS SCOVRGE, OR, ACTORS TRAGAEDIE, Divided into Two
Parts. Wherein it is largely evidenced, by diverse Arguments, by the concurring
Authorities and Resolutions of sundry texts of Scripture; of the whole
Primitive Church, both under the Law and Gospel; of 55 Synodes and Councels;
of 71 Fathers and Christian Writers, before the year of our Lord 1200; of
above 150 foraigne and domestique Protestant and Popish Authors, since; of 40
Heathen Philosophers, Historians, Poets; of many Heathen, many Christian
Nations, Republiques, Emperors, Princes, Magistrates; of sundry Apostolical,
Canonical, Imperial Constitutions; and of our own English Statutes,
Magistrates, Universities, Writers, Preachers.

That popular Stage Plays (the very Pompes of the Devil which we renounce in
Baptism, if we believe the Fathers) are sinful, heathenish, lewd, ungodly
Spectacles, and most pernicious Corruptions; condemned in all ages, as
intolerable Mischiefs to Churches, to Republickes, to the manners, minds, and
souls of men. And that the Profession of Play-poets, of Stage Players;
together with the penning, acting, and frequenting of Stage Plays, are
unlawful, infamous and misbeseeming Christians. All pretenses to the contrary
are here likewise fully answered; and the unlawfulnes of acting, of beholding
Academicall Enterludes, briefly discussed; besides sundry other particulars
concerning Dancing, Dicing, Health-drinking, etc. of which the Table will
inform you.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, an Vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inn.

Cyprian. De Spectaculis lib p 244. Fugienda sunt ista Christianis fidelibus,
ut tam frequenter diximus, tam vana, tam perniciosa, tam sacrilega Spectacula
^quae, essi non haberent crimen, habent in se et maximam et parum congruente^
fidelibus vanitate^. Lactantius de Vero Cultu cap. 20. Vit^^da ergo Spectaculo
^^^xia, (...) ne quid vitiorum pectoribus i^side et, etc. sed ne cuius nos
voluptatis consuetudo delineat, atque a Deo et a b^ri^ operibus ^ve^tat.
Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 299. B and Hom. 8 De Poenitentia,
Tom. 5. Col 750. ^mmo vero, ^is Theatralibus ludis eversis, non leges, sed
iniquitatem evertetis, ac emnem civitatis pestem extinguetis. ^Etenim Theatrum,
communis luxuriae officina, publicum incontinentiae gymnasium; cathedra
pestilentia; pess^^us locus; plurimer^mone mo^herum plena Babylonica fornax,
etc. Augustinus De Civit. Dei, l. 4 c. 1. Si tontummodo boni et honesti homines
in civitate essent, nec in rebus humanis Ludi scenici esse debuissent. LONDON,
Printed by E.A. and W.I. for Michael Spark, and are to be sold at the Blue
Bible, in Green Arbor, in little Old Bailey. 1633.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FRIENDS, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTERS OF THE BENCH of
the Honorable flourishing LAVV-SOCIETY of LINCOLNES-INNE.
RIGHT WORFVLL, The due respect I owe unto your famous Nurserie both of Law and
Piety, as my last Nursing Mother, and to your Worships in particular, as my
especial good Friends; has at this time imboldened me to commend this
HISTRIO-MASTIX to your worthy Patronage; which being wholly compiled within
your Walls, implores no other Sanctuary but your benign Protection; of which
your former Play-oppugning Actions promise it good assurance. For whereas other
Innes of Court (I know not by what Malus usus abolendus. Li^s telton sect. ^12.
evil custom, and Plus exemplo quam peccato nocent; quod non solum vitia
concipiunt ipsi, s^d ea infunduut in civitatem; neque solum obsunt, quod illi
ipsi corrumpuntur, sed etiam quod corrumpunt. Cicero De Legibus lib. 3.
worse example) admit of common Actors and Enterludes upon their Viz.
All Saints, and Candlemasse day.
two grand Festivals, to recreate themselves withal, notwithstanding the
Statutes of our Kingdom (of which Lawyers of all others should be most
observant) 22 H 8. c. 12 14 Eliz. c. 5. 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Iac. c. 7. See here
p. 492, to 497.
have branded all professed Stage Players for infamous Rogues, and Stage Plays
for unlawful pastimes, See 1 Car. c. 1. 5 and 6 E. 6 c. 3. and here p. 241,
242, 243, 492, to 497.
especially on Lords-dayes and other solemn Holy Days, on which these
Grand-dayes ever fall: yet such has been your pious tender care, not only of
this Societies honor, but also of the young Students good, (for the advancing
of whose piety and studies, you have of late erected a magnificent Chapel,
and since that a Library;) that as you have prohibited by late public Orders,
all disorderly Bacchanalian Grand-Christmasses, See here p. 743, to 783.
( more fit for Pagans tha^ Christians; for the deboisest Roarers, than grave
civil Students, who should be patterns of sobriety unto others;) together
with all public Dice-play in the Hall; ( a most pern^cious, infamous game;
condemned in all ages, all places, not only by See here Act. 7. Scene 3.
especially page 618, 626, 627, 655.
Councels, Cyprian. De Ludo Aleae lib. Tertullian d^ Pallio c. 8. p. 233. Ambr.
de Tobia, lib. c. 11. Tom. 2 p. 280, 281. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. ad^ Pop. Antioch.
here p. 4^3. Bernard. ad Mili^es Tempii Sermo, c. 4 here p. 560. Isiodo^ Hisp.
Originum ^. 19. c. 60, to 66. Ioannis Saresberiensis de Nugis Curialium l. 1.
c. 5. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 74.
Fathers, Bp. Hoopers 3. Sermon upon Jonah, Bp. Latimer his 4. Sermon on the
Lords Prayer, fol. 2^. his 6. Sermon before King Edward, ^ol. 70. his Sermon at
Stamford, ^ol. 1^6. Thomas Beacon his Catechism, f. ^61, 369, 400. Rober us de
Sorbona, De Conscientia lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 13. p. 382. with others here
quoted, p. 626. in the margent.
Divines, See here p. 626. in the margent.
Civilians, Vid. ibidem.
Canonists, Andreas Fricius de Repub. Emendanda, l. 1 c. 17. p. 62, 63. See
here p 626
Politicians, and Petrarcha de Re^edio utriusque Fortunae, l. 1. Dialog 26, 27.
Erasmus Moriae Encomium p. 68, 69. Osorius de Regum Instit. l. 7. ^ol. 233. See
p. 626.
other Christian Writers; by Ovid. De Remedio Amorisl 1. p. 215, 216. Virgil.
Epigram^ de Ludo p. 432 Horat. Carm. l. 3. Ode 24 p. 98. Epist. l. 1. Epist.
18. p. 269. Iuvenal Satyr. 8, 1^, 14. p. 75, 110, 125. Suetonii Octavius sect.
71. Claudius s. 5, 33, 39. Nero s. 36. Domitianus s. 2. Athenaeus Dipnosoph. l.
10, c. 15, p. 703, 704. Platonis Lysis p 401. Zenopho^ hist. Graecae, l. (...)
593. Cic^^^^ Philip. 1. (...) tus de Mo (...) Germ. c. 8. (...) tarchi
A^^^^thegm. Ale^^^^der p. 409. ^^^^mianus Ma^^^linus Hist. l. (...) c. 9, 10.
See ^^^^annis Sari^^^riensis De ^^^^gis Curiali^^^ l. 1, c. 5. Pet^^^ Blesensis
Epi^^^ 74. Danaeus (...) Ludo Aleae. ^^lexander ab ^^lexandro l. 3. ^^ 21.
Purchas^ Pilgr. l. 5, c. 15. and l. 3, c. 4. Herodoti Clio sect. 18.
accordingly.
diverse Pagan Authors of all sorts, and by See here p. 655.
Mahomet himself; but likewise by See here p. 657, to 661. Justinian Codicis
l. 3, Tit. 43, Lex. ^5. George Whetston his Enemy of Unthriftiness, p. 15, 16.
Centuriae Magd. 13. Col. 7^9, l. 42. The general History of France, p. 114,
123, 138 Paulus Geschinius Constitutiones Carolinae, Rubr. 30, 31. p. 14, 15.
sundry Heathen, yea Christian Magistrates Edicts, and by the 12 R. 2, c. 6. 17
^. 4, c. 3. with sundry others here quoted, p. 494, 495.
Statutes of our Kingdom; as the occasions of much idleness, prodigality,
cursing, swearing, forswearing, lying, cheating, mispence of money and time,
theft, rapine, usurie, malice, envy, fretting, d^scontents, quarrels, duels,
murthers^ covetousnes, acquaintance with ill company, poverty, ruin of many
young G^ntlemens, yea and Tradesmens fortunes and estates; with a world of such
like mischiefs: which as they proclaim all public Dice-play unsufferable in
a Republike; so much more in an innes of Court: which cannot more dishonor it
self, than in turning a professed Christmas Dice-house, or public receptacle
of all sorts of Dicers, of purpose to enrich the Butlers, or to defray their
Christmas expenses; as if Innes of Court Gentlemen were so beggarly, that they
could neither maintain their Officers, nor Christmas Commons, without the
infamous Alms, or turpe lucrum of their Dice-boxes; which empty many a young
Students, trades-mans, apprentices, unfortunate gamesters purse, and See 17 E.
4, c. 3. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 74. Cyprian. De Ludo Aleae, with others
accordingly.
bring diverse unhappy Dicers yearly to the Goal, if not the Gallows, whiles
they seek to repair their losses by robbery, cheating, and unlawful means;
leaving the guilt of all their sins, with many a bitter execration upon those
Societies where they have lost their money: (All which your Worships have
piously prevented to your deserved honor, by suppressing Dice-play:) So
likewise in imitation of the Sea Act. 6, Scene 5, p. 455, to 465.
ancient Lacedaemonians and Massilienses, or rather of the Sea here p. 465, to
473. and Act. 7, Scen. 2, 3 7.
primitive zealous Christians, you have always from my first admission into
your Society, and long before, excluded all Common Players with their lewd
ungodly Enterludes, from all your solemn Festivals; not suffering them so much
as once to enter within your gates, for fear they should See Act. 6, Scene 3,
4, 5, etc.
corrupt the minds, the manners, the virtuous education of those young
hopeful virtuous Gentlemen committed to your care, by drawing them on to
idleness, luxury, incontinencie, profaneness, and those other dangerous vices
which Plays and Play Houses often occasion: they being no other, as the Fathers
phrase them, but See here Act. 6, Scene 5, p. 474, to 477. Tempore illorum
Consulum gravissima pestilentia universam Roman per biennium afflixit, pro qua
depellenda Pontifices ludos scenicos instituerunt: et sic pro depellenda peste
corporum, accessit morbus animarum. Hermannus Schedel. Chron. Chronicorum,
AEtas 3, f. 83. a.
the very plagues and poisons of men's minds and souls. Which praiseworthy
imitable act of yours, assures me of your kind entertainment of this my
last-borne Issue: which though (by reason of some intervenient subjects
diverting my studies into another channel) it be ultimus in executione, yet it
was primus in intention, of all my printed Treatises, as some scattered
passages against Stage Plays in my See my Perpetuity, Edit. 2, p. 586, 587.
Healthes Sickness, Edit. 2, p. 74, 75. The Survey and Censure of Mr. Cozens
his cozening Devotions, p. 90. Lame Giles his Haultings, p. 1. and the Appendix
to it, p. 14.
former Impressions, evidence. For having upon my first arrival here in
London, heard and seen in four several Plays (to which the pressing
importunity of some ill acquaintance drew me whiles I was yet a novice) such
wickedness, such lewdnes as then made my penitent heart to loath, my conscience
to Ille poenitentiam digne agit, qui sic praeterita mala deplorat, ut futura
iterum non committat Isi^dor. Hisp. de Summo bono, l. 2, c. 13.
abhor all Stage Plays ever since: and having likewise then observed some
woeful experiments of the lewd mischievous fruits of Plays, of Play Houses in
some young Gentlemen of my acquaintance, who though civil and chaste at first,
became so vicious, prodigal, incontinent, deboist, (yea so far past hopes of
all amendment) in half a years space or less, by their resort to Plays,
where whores and lewd companions had inveagled them, that after many vain
assaies of their much desired reformation, two of them were cast off, and
utterly disinherited by their loving Parents, whom I heard often complaining even
with tears; That Plays and Play Houses had undone their children, to their no
small vexation: (A good caveat for all young Students to Faelix quicunque
dolor Alterius disces posse carere tuo. Tibullus Elegiarum l. 3. Eleg. 7.
keep themselves from Play Houses by these two Youngsters harms:) hereupon I
resolved (out of a desire of the public good) to oppugn these common
vice-fomenting evils: For which purpose about some 7 years since,
recollecting those Play-condemning passages which I had met with in the Fathers
and other Authors, I digested them into one entire written Discourse; which
having since that time enlarged beyond its intended Bulk, because I saw the
number of Players, Play-books, Play-haunters, and Play Houses still increasing,
there being above forty thousand Play-books printed within these two years,
(as Stationers inform me,) they being now more vendible than the choycest
Sermons; The Fortune and Red-bull.
two old Play Houses being also lately reedified, enlarged, and one White
F^iers Playhouse.
new Theater erected, the multitude of our London Play-haunters being so
augmented now, that all the ancient Devils Chapels (for so the Fathers style
all Play Houses) being five in number, are not sufficient to contain their
troops, whence we see a sixth now added to them; whereas even in vicious Nero
his reign there were but Whence Seneca ( writing of the vastness and
populosity of Rome) thus complains: Quod tribus eodem tempore Theatr^s viae
postulantur. De Clementia l. 1, c. 6. And if three Play houses were too much in
heathen Rome, shall six be suffered in Christian London? God forbid.
three standing Theaters in Pagan Rome, (though far more spacious than our
Christian London) and those three too many: Hereupon I first commended it being
thus augmented to the Licencer, and from him unto the Press, where it has
lingered longer than I did expect. Which being now at last brought forth into
the world in such a Play-adoring age, that is like to bid defiance to it, I
here bequeath it to your pious Patronage, to whom it was at first devoted, not
caring how it fares abroad, so it may do good and please at home. Thus wishing
all grace, all happiness and prosperity to your Worships, and to the whole
Society of Lincolnes Inn, together with all prosperous success to these my
unworthy labors, I commend both you and them to Gods own blessing. Ever
resting

Your Worships, in all devoted Service and respect, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

TO THE RIGHT CHRISTIAN, GENEROUS YOUNG GENTLEMEN-Students of the 4 famous
Innes of Court, and especially those of LINCOLNES INN.
RIGHT Summa apud Deum est nobilitas, clarum esse virtutibus. Sola apud Deum
libertas est, non servire peccatis. Hierom. Epist. ^4. c. 5.
virtuous, pious, and most accomplished Gentlemen, the present hope, the future
prop and honor of our English Nation; that cordial longing desire of your
temporal and eternal felicity, which has a long time harbored in the very
innermost receptacles of my soul, has, as at first provoked me to pen, so now
at last to publish this HISTRIO-MASTIX for your common good, which here lies
prostrate at your feet, imploring not only your naked acceptations, but your
unprejudicated affections too; that so you may thoroughly scan it with an
impartial scrutinie, before you preposterously fore-judge it out of a
misinformed prejudice. It is not I suppose unknown to any, Homines vitiis suis
sapientiam inscribunt, ut abscondenda profitentur. Ita non ab Epicuris impulsi
luxuriantur, sed vitiis dediti luxuriam ^uam in Philosophiae sinu abscondunt,
et eo concurrunt, ubi audiunt laudari voluptatem; quaerentes libidinibus ^uis
patrocinium aliquod ac velamentum. Itaq, quod unum ha^bebant in malis bonum
perdunt, peccandi verecundiam. Laudant enim ea quibus erubescebant, et vitio
gloriantur: ideoque ne resurgere quidem adolescentiae licet, cum honestus turpi
desidiae titulus accessit. Senec^ De Vita Beata cap. 12.
what favor, what estimation Plays and Players have lately purchased in the
opinions and hearts of most; which I fear are so strangely forestalled, so
desperately infatuated with their Syrenian enchantments, that they will hardly
brook the sight, much less the reading of this Play-scourging Discourse,
whose very title will be a sufficient warrant for many to condemn it, if not a
Supersedeas to them to peruse it: such being the froward disposition of
prejudicated persons, (especially when their popular universal overspreading
pleasures of sin in which they most delight, come once to See August.
Enarratio in Psalm. 128. p. 750, 751, 752, accordingly.
be controlled by some one private person, which is now the case of
Stage Plays:) that let the truth be never so evident, the arguments, the
authorities against them never so convincing, yet they will quite reject and
precondemne them, ere they have once examined them. What therefore Octavius,
page 96.
Minucius Felix, that famous Christian Lawyer, and De Idolorum Vanitate Tract.
St. Cyprian complained of long since, against the Pagans of their age, in the
name of all the Christians: Sic occupant animos et obstruunt pectora, ut ante
nos incipiant homines odisse quam nosse, ne cognitos aut imitari possint, aut
damnare non possint: Or what Apologia advers. Gentes, c. 1, 2.
Tertullian writes in the selfsame case; Nolunt audire quod auditum damnare
non possint. Malint nescire, quia jam oderint, adeo quod nesciunt praejudicant
id esse, quod si sciant odisse non poterant, quando si nullum odij debitum
depraehendatur, optimum utique si^, desinere injuste odisse. Quid vero
iniquius, quam ut oderint homines quod ignorant, etiamsi res meretur odium?
Tunc etenim meretur cum cognoscitur an mereatur. Vacant autem meriti notitia,
unde odij justitia defenditur? quae non de eventu, sed de conscientia probanda
est, etc. Or what De Iustitia l. 5. c 1.
Lactantius of old lamented upon the like occasion: Student damnare tanquam
nocentes quos utique sciunt innocents; itaque constare de ipsa innocentia
nolunt; quasi vero major iniquitas sit probatam innocentiam damnare qua^
inauditam: the same I fear may be the just complaint of this my HISTRIO-MASTIX
now^ Many, I doubt, will censure, if not exclaim against it ere they read it;
Omnis enim malus ideo persequitur bonu^, quia non illi consentit bonus ad
malum. Facia^ aliquid mali, non obiurget Episcopus, bonus est Episcopus,
obiurget Episcopus, malus est Episcopus^ Sonat verbum, sonat sermo contradictor
libidinis. At ille amicus libidinis suae, et inimicus sermoni contradicenti
amicae suae, infestus est, et odit sermonem Dei. August. Enarratio in Ps. 128,
Tom. 8. pars ^, p. 751. Vid. Ibid.
because it reprehends their vices: and some perchance will purposely disdain
to cast their eyes upon it, for fear they should approve it, at leastwise be
unable to control it. But however others may chance thus ignorantly or
maliciously to forejudge it; yet I hope it shall find no such ungenteile
discourteous entertainment from you dear fellow-Brethren, whose generous
ingenuous education has taught you thus much courtesy, whose religion and
profession have learned you this good Lesson; to hear and know, before you
sentence: since Gods Law, and ours too, John 7.51.
does not judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he does. What
Seneca, Medea, Act. 2, f. 145.
Medea therefore requested of Creon; Si judicas, cognosce: or what Epistola 110.
Seneca desired of his friend Lucilius; Adhibe diligentiam tuam, et intuere
quid sint res nostrae, non quid vocentur; shall be my present suite to you;
Legant prius et poste^ despiciant, ne videantur non ex iudicio sed ex odii
praesumptione ignorata damnare. Hier^n. Apologia advers R^finu^, l. 3. c. 9, p.
2^1.
to peruse my HISTRIO-MASTIX first, and then to censure it as you find it.
Perchance it may seem some Paradox, some mere fantastique Novalty, or strang^
Monster at the first in this Play-admiring age; wherein most men like the Acts
17.18, 19, 20. See Chrysostom, Theophylact, HRabanus Maurus, and Lyra, Ibidem.
Athenian Epicurean Stoicke Philosophers, who encountered S. Paul, will be ready
to demand in scorn, What will this Babbler say? May we know what this new
doctrine whereof thou speak is? for thou bring certain strange things to
our ears; we would therefore know what these things mean. But if you will do
it so much honor as considerately to revolve it, you shall find it to
contain naught else but resolved, uniuersally received ancient (though now
forgotten) truths; so far from any suspicion of factious Novalty, or
puritanicall singularity, that they have the concurrent testimonies, the
unanimous resolutions of See Act. 7, Scene 1, here p. 545.
sundry sacred texts of Scripture, of the Sea Act. 7, Scene 2, p. 551, and Act.
6, Scene 3, 4, 5.
whole primitive Church and Saints of God, both before and under the Law and
Gospel; See Act. 7, Scene 3, p. 570, to 668^
the Canons of 55 several oecumenicall, national, provincial Synods and
Councels of diverse ages and Countries: together with the canonical, the
imperial Constitutions of the Apostles themselves, of Emperors, Popes and
other Bishops, See Act. 7, Scene 4, p. 668, etc. and Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5.
the works of 71 Fathers and ancient Christian Writers of chiefest note, from
our Saviors Nativity to the year 1200. the suffrages See Act. 7, Scene 5, p.
688, and Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5.
of above 150 Christian Authors of all sorts, from the year 1200 to this
present; the sentence of See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. and Act. 7, Scene 6. p.
70^, etc.
40 Heathen Philosophers, Orators, Historians, Poets; together with the
Play-condemning See Act. 6, Scene 5^ p. 455, to 473. and Act. 7, Scene 7. p.
713^ etc.
Laws and Edicts of sundry Christian, yea Pagan Nations, Republikes,
Emperors, Princes, Magistrates in several ages; with the Sea Act. ^, Scene 5
p. 485, to 498. Act. 7, Scene 5, and 7. p. 715, 716.
Statutes, Magistrates, Universities, Writers and Preachers of our own
renowned Kingdom; to back, to second them in all particulars; who all have
long since passed this heavy Censure against Stage Plays: that they are the
Se^ here p. 42^ to 62. Act. 6, Scene 12. p. 522, to 525. and Act. 7. Scene 2.
p. 561, to ^68.
very works, the pompes, inventions and chief delights of the Devil, which
all Christians solemnly abjure in their baptism: See Act. 6^ Scene 5. p. 447,
etc.
the most pestilent corruptions of all men's (especially young men's) minds and
manners; See Act. 6. throughout.
the chief fomenters of all vice and wickedness; the greatest enemies of all
virtue, grace and goodness; the most mischievous plagues that can be harbored
in any Church or State; yea lewd infernal pastimes not tolerable among
Heathens, not sufferable in any well-ordered Christian Republike; not once to
be haunted or applauded by any civil virtuous persons, who are either mindful
of their credits, or of their own salvation. Which as it controlls the gross
mistake of diverse voluptuous paganizing Christians in our days, who dote on
Stage Plays as the most laudable, generous, if not necessary recreations; so
it should now at last engage all Christians for ever to abandon them; as the Sea Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 6, S^ene 3, 4, 5, 12, 20. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7. accordingly.
very best of Saints, of Pagans have done in former ages. Alas, what goodness,
what profit do men reap from Stage Plays, that should any way engage their
affection^ to them? Do See Act. 7, Scene 3, 4, 5.
they not enrage their lusts, add fire and fuel to their unchaste affections;
See Act. 6, Scene 5.
deprave their minds, corrupt their manners, See Act: 6, Scene 12, 18, 20.
cauterize their consciences, obdurate their hearts, multiply their heinous
transgressions, See Act: 6, Scene 1, 2. Haec mala dedecoris impie^atisque
plenissima, adorentur in templis, ride^antur in theatris, cum his victimas
immolant, vastetur pecus etiam pauperum; cu^ haec histriones agunt et saltant^
effundan^ur patrimonia divitum. Aug: Epist: 202, Tom: 2, p: 953.
consume their estates, mispend their time, See Actus 6, throughout.
canker their graces, blast all their virtues, interrupt their studies,
indispose them to repentance and true godly sorrow for their sins; make all
Gods ordinances ineffectuall to their spiritual good, draw down the guilt of
sundry Playhouse abominations on their persons, incorporate them into lewd
ungodly company, and without repentance damn their soules^ Do See Act: 3, 6,
and 7, throughout accordingly.
they not dishonor their most holy God, abuse their most blessed Savior
sundry ways, blaspheame and grieve Gods holy spirit, profane the sacred
Scriptures and the name of God, deride and jeare religion, holiness, virtue,
temperance, grace, goodness, with all religious, virtuous persons, advance the
Devils scepter, service, kingdom, by sowing, by cherishing the seeds of
atheism, heathenisme, profaneness, incontinency, voluptuousnes, idleness, yea,
of all kind of wickedness both in their Actors and Spectators hearts? How many
thousands have Stage Plays drawn on to sin, to lewdness, to all sorts of
vice, and a^ last sunk down to hell, with the weight of those prodigious
evils which they had quite avoided, had they not haunted Play Houses? How many
Novices and Youngsters have been corrupted, debauched, and led away captive by
the Devil, by their own outrageous lusts, See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5.
by Panders, Players, Bawdes, Adulteresses, Whores, and other lewd companions,
who had continued studious, civil, hopeful, towardly and ingenious, had they
not resorted unto Stage Plays, the original causes of their doleful ruin?
which bring no other benefit to their Actors, their Spectators at the last, but
this, See Act. 6, Scene 12, 18, 19, 20.
to post them merrily on to hell with a greater load of soule-condemning
sins; Hieron^ Epist: 3, cap: 3.
quasi vivendi sensum ad hoc tantum acceperant ut perirent; as if they had
received life for no other purpose, but to work out their own eternal death,
which needs no other instruments to effect it, than lewd lascivious
Enterludes. O therefore (dear Brethren) as you tender Gods honour^ the public
welfare, or your own souls safety, abominate these glittering gaudy pompous
snares, these See Act: 8, Scene 5, p: 789 etc.
sugered poisoned potions of the Devil, by which he cunningly endeavors your
destruction when as you least suspect it: and if any of you have formerly
frequented Stage Plays, either out of Adhuc enim non pueritia in nobis est,
sed quod est gravius, puerili^as remanet: et hoc quidem peius est, quod
auctorita^em habemus senum, vitia puerorum, nec puerorum tantum, sed infantium.
Seneca Epist: 4.
childish vanity, or injudicious ignorance of their oft-condemned mischievous
lewd effects; or through the Arbitror es^e hic nonnullos quos amici sui
volebant rapere ad Circum, ad theatrum, et ad nescio quas hodiernae
festivitatis nugas. Forte ipsi illos adduxerunt ad Ecclesiam: sed sive ipsi
illos adduxerunt, sive ab iis ad Circum adduci non potuerunt, in aqua
contradictionis probatisunt: August: Enar: in Psalm. 80, Tom. ^, pars 2, p. 8.
over-pressing importunity of voluptuous carnal acquaintance; or by reason of
that popular erroneous good opinion which our wicked times conceive of
Stage Plays which humor them in their lusts; or because such In vitia alter
alterum trudimus: Quomodo autem ad salutem revocari possint, quos iam nemo
retinet, populus impellit? Seneca, Epist: 41.
multitudes resort now daily to them, that they carry one another headlong to
these sinful pleasures without any sense of danger, or hopes of reformation;
be you henceforth truly penitent for what is past, August. Enarratio ^n in
Psalm. 84, p. 55.
Quem delectaba^ spectare, delectet orare; quem delectabant cantica nugatoria
et adulterina, delectet hymnum dicere Deo, currere ad Ecclesiam, qui primo
currebat ad theatrum: as St. Augustine sweetly councels: and wholly abandon
them for all future time. And so much the rather, that you may now at last
falsify that ignominious Censure which some English Writers in their printed
Works have passed upon Innes of Court Students; of whom they record^ See
Earls Character of a Player, Charact. 38. and Sir Thomas Overbury his
Character of an Innes of Court man, accordingly.
That Innes of Court men were undone but for Players; that they are their
chiefest guests and employment, and the sole business that makes them afternoons
men: that this is one of the first things they learn as soon as they are
admitted, to see Stage Plays, Bishop Halls Epistles Decad. 6, Epistle 6. Mr.
Bolton his general Directions for our comfortable walking with God, p. 73, 74;
here p. 364, 365 Stephen Gosson his Epistle to the Right Worshipful Gentlemen
and Students of both Universities and the Innes of Court prefixed to his Plays
confuted in five Actions.
and take smoke at a Playhouse, which they commonly make their Study; where
they quickly learn to follow all fashions, to drink all Healths, to wear
favors and good clothes, to consort with ruffianly companions, to swear the
biggest oaths, to quarrel easily, fight desperately, game inordinately, to
spend their patrimony ere it fall, to use gracefully some gestures of apish
complement, to talk irreligiously, to dally with a Mistress, and hunt after
harlots, to prove altogether lawless in steed of Lawyers, and to forget that
little learning, grace and virtue which they had before: so that they grow at
last pas^ hopes of ever doing good, either to the Church, their Country, their
own or others souls. Which heavy Censure, if any dissolute Play-haunters
have justly occasioned heretofore, to the dishonor of those famous
Law-Societies wherein they live, I hope their subsequent reformation will
reverse it now; that so all England may henceforth experimentally discern,
that Stage Plays and Actors are as well condemned, detested by her Lawyers, as
by See here page 492, to 498
her Laws and Statutes, which brand all Stage Plays for unlawful pastimes;
all common Actors, for notorious Rogues; too base Companions for generous
spirits to behold or dance attendance on, who were created for more noble
objects, more sublime employments than base infamous Enterludes, or most abject
Players. O therefore let the serious consideration of your own native
generositie, of your heroicke Studies, elevated with the sublimer
contemplations of your transcendent Christian Nobility; which makes you Romans
8.17
heirs of heaven, coheires with Christ, yea, Revel. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.
Kings and Priests unto God your Father, (who has not only Hebr. 2.7, 9. 1
Pet. 5.4.
crowns of glory, but likewise an Luke 12.32. 1 These. 2.12. Hebr. 12.28. James
2.5.
heavenly eternal Kingdom to bestow upon you) raise up your depressed minds
and thoughts so far above these earthly childish vanities, as with a kind of
holy magnanimity to trample them under feet Hebr. 11, 25
as drossie filthy pleasures, unworthy any Christians presence, much less his
approbation, who has far better, far sublimer spectacles to behold; even
those which I shall here commend unto you in Cyprians words, in his elegant
Book against Stage Plays: De Spectaculis lib. Tom. 2, p. 244, 245. See
Augustine Enarratio in Psalm. 39, Tom. 8, pars 1, p. 416 417, 418. De Symbolo ad
Catechumenos l. 2, Tom. 9, pars 1, p. 1393, here p. 345, to 347; and Tertullian
de Spectaculis, c. 28, 29, etc. to the like purpose.
Habet Christianus Spectacula meliora, si velit; habet veras et profuturas
voluptates, si se recollegerit, et ut omittam illa, quae nondum contemplari
potest, habet istam mundi pulchritudinem, quam videat atque miretur; solis
ortum aspiciat, rursus occasum, mutuis vicibus dies noctesque revocantem,
globum lunae, temporum cursus incrementis suis, decrementisque signantem,
astrorum micantium choros, et a summo de summa mobilita^e fulgentes, anni
totius per membra divisa, et dies ipsos cum noctibus per horarum spatia
digestos, et terrae molem libratam cum montibus, et proflua ^lumina cum suis
fontibus, extensa maria cum suis fluctibus atque littoribus: Interim constantem
pariter summa conspiratione nexibusque concordiae, extensum aerem medium
tenuitate sua cuncta vegetantem, nunc imbres contractis nubibus profundentem,
nunc serenitatem refecta raritate revocantem, et in omnibus istis incolas
proprios, in aere avem, in aquis piscem, in terra hominem. Haec inquam, et alia
opera divina, sint Christianis fidelibus Spectacula. Quod theatrum humanis
manibus extructum istis operibus poterit comparari? magnis licet lapidum
molibus extruatur, crusta sunt montium; et auro licet ^ecta lucanaria
reluceant, astrorum fulgore vincentur: nunquam humana opera mirabitur quisquis
se cognoscerit filiu^ Dei. Dejicit se de culmine generositatis suae qui
admirari aliquid post Deum potest. Therefore every Christian though a Layman
ought t^ read the Scriptures.
Scripturis in quam sacris incumbat Christianus: (let Papists, and those who
are given so much to Play-bookes consider this:) ibi invenie^ condigna fidei
Spectacula. Videbit instituentem Deum mundum suum, et cum caeteris animalibus
hominis illa^ admirabilem fabricam melioremque facientem: spectabit mundum in
delicijs suis, ^justa naufragia, piorum praemia, impiorumque supplicia: maria
populo sicca^a, et de pe^ra rursus populo maria por^ecta: spectabit de coelo
descendentes messes, non ex areis: inspiciet flumina transitus siccos
refraenatis aquarum agminibus exhibentia: videbit in quibusdam fidem cum igne
luctuantem: religione superatas feras, et in mansuetudinem conversas:
intuebitur et animas ab ipsa morte revocatas: considerabit etiam de sepulchris
admirabiles ipsorum consummatoru^ jam vitas corporum redactas: et in his
omnibus jam majus videbit Spectaculum, Diabolum illum qui totum detriumphaverat
mundum, sub pedibus Christi jacentem. Quam hoc decorum Spectaculum Fratres?
quam jucundum? quam necessarium? intueri semper spem ^nam, et oculos aperire ad
salutem suam. Hoc est spectaculum quod videtur etiam luminibus amissis. Hoc est
spectaculum, quod non exhibet Praetor, au^ Consul, sed qui est solus et ante
omnia, et super omnia, immo ex quo omnia, Pater Domini nostri Jesus Christi, cui
laus et honor in saecula saeculorum. These (my beloved Brethren) are the true
celestial worthy Spectacles of every pious Christian: O let your hearts, your
minds, your affections, your eyes and ears be wholly ravished and taken up
with these, which will only bring true comfort to our souls. Let me
therefore ^lose up my Epistle to you with St. Augustines words: Enarratio in
Psalm. 80, and 81. To^. 8, pars 2, p. 1, 18.
Intendite ad magna haec spectacula. Ista sunt spectacula utilia, salubria,
aedificantia non destruentia, imo et destruentia et aedificantia: Destruentia
recentes Deos, aedificantia fidem in verum et aeternum Deum: Let other men
therefore who love their Stage Plays 2 Timothy 3.4
better than their God, their souls, resort to Theaters whiles they please; (
August. Enar. in Psalm 81. p. 18
Illi habeant mare in theatro; nos habeamus portum in Christo:) but let Christ
Jesus be your Ephesians. 1.23. 1 Cor. 15.28.
all in all, your only solace, your only Spectacle, and joy on earth, whose
soule-ravishing heart-filling presence, shall be your eternal solace, your
everlasting 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2 Rev. 21.22, 23.
visible all-glorious most triumphant Spectacle in the highest heavens; whither
God bring us all at length for this his Son and mercies sake. Amen.

Your loving Christian Friend, and Brother to command: WILLIAM PRYNNE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THREE things there are, beloved Readers, in this my HISTRIO-MASTIX, for which
I am necessitated to make some Apology, to prevent all causeless cavills.

The first, is its tedious prolixitie; Phoebus his palace; that Materiam
superabat opus; Ovid. Metamorph. l. 2.
the workmanship of it did exceed the matter; so I hope it will be no
prejudice to this Treatise, if Hierom Com. in Matthew. c. 21, Tom. 6, p. 45, C.
Malo nodo malus cuneus, may be allowed for a Plea. He who intends to
encounter a potent enemy, Luke 14.31, 32. and Ioanni^ Sarisberiensis, de Nugis
Curialium, lib. 1, c. 1^ 2, 3, 4, 5.
had need provide a puissant army: He who will cure a large spreading
gangrene, must proportion his plaster to the malady; he who would discover or
refute an inveterate generally received Error, must come strongly armed with
convincing reasons and authorities, else he is like to do more harm than good.
Players and Stageplaies, with which I am now to combat in a public Theater in
the view of sundry partial Spectators, are grown of late so powerful, so
prevalent in the affections, the opinions of many both in City, Court and
Country; so universally diffused like an infectious leprosy, so deeply
rivited into the seduced prepossessed hearts and judgments of voluptuous
carnal persons, who swarm so thick in every Playhouse, that they leave no
empty place, and almost crowd one another to death for multitude; as they did
in Sunt enim multi non digne viventes baptismo quod perceperunt. Quam multi
enim baptizati hodie Circum imple^e quam istam basilicam maluerunt. Si mimus
est, curritur ad Amphitheatr^^; quantis turbis impletur? stipantur parietes,
pressuris se urgent, prope se suffocant multitudine: isti super numerum sunt.
In Psalm. 39, Enar. Tom. 8, ^ars 1, p. 418; and in Psalm. 80, pars 2, p. 5.
Augustines time, choosing rather to fill the Theater than the Church; that had
not this my HISTRIO-MASTIX overgrowne its first intended pigmies stature, it
had Magnis enim telis, magna portenta feriuntur. Seneca Epist. 82.
never been able to foil those many Giantlike Enemies with which it is now to
grapple; neither could it have borne any geometrical proportion with those
festring ulcers, those many practical applauded Errors, whose cure and
refutation it endeavors. Ben-Iohnsons, Shackspeers, and others.
Some Play-books since I first undertook this subject, are grown from Quarto
into Folio; which yet bear so good a price and sale, that I cannot but with
grief relate it, they are now Shackspeers Plays are printed in the best
Crown paper, far better than most Bibles.
new-printed in far better paper than most Octavo or Quarto Bibles, which
hardly find such vent as they: And can then one Quarto Tractate against
Stage Plays be thought too large, when as it must assault such ample
Playhouse Volumes? Besides, our Quarto- Play-bookes since the first sheets of
this my Treatise came unto the Press, have come forth in such Above forty
thousand Play-bookes have been printed and vented within these two years.
abundance, and found so many customers, that they almost exceed all number,
one study being scarce able to hold them, and two years time too little to
peruse them all: And this made this Treatise swell the greater, because these
Play-bookes are so multiplied. Again, I considered with my self, that our
Players, our Play-haunters are now more in number, more various in judgments,
in humors, in apprehensions, than they have been in former ages; whereupon I
thought good to produce Nam quoniam variant animi variavimus arts: Mill mali
species, mill salutis ^^unt. Ovid. De Remedio Amoris, l. 2. p. 225.
more store of different Play-refelling Arguments and Authorities than else I
should have done; that so I might satisfy every Reader to my power, and meet
with all evasions. All which being l^id together, will easily excuse my
overmuch p^ines; which if it seem irksome to any Reader, I am sure it ^as
far more troublesome to me the Author, who if I am peccant in this kind, it
is only out of too much love to do the Readers greater good: who if they
complain for want of time, may soon peruse it without any loss, by devoting
their Playhouse hours to it, till they have read it over.

The second, is some passages, terms and phrases, which

To the two first of which I answer: First, that I have Joan. Saresberiensis
Prologus in lib. De Nugis Curialium, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 15. p. 341. G.
Novi enim quod et praesens aetas corrigitur, dum praeterita suis meritis
objurgatur. Secondly, inveterate Vt valiant alii ferrum patiantur et ignes.
Fert aliis tristem succus amarus opem. Corpora vix ferro quaedam sanantur
acu^o. Auxilium aliis succus et herba fuit. Ovid. Epist. 19, p. 83. De Remedio
Amoris l. 2, p. 225.
gangrend ulcers, as Plays and Players are, need sharp emplaisters, bi^ing
corrosives, else they will not be cured; because gentle lenitives cannot
cleanse them. Thirdly, the greatest virulency is only against Players and
Play-haunters vices, not their persons; Tertul. Apol. Advers. Gentes.
Hosts plane sumus, non generis humani tamen, sed erroris: Yea I have
therefore censured their errors, their vices so severely, because I love their
persons, whose happiness, salvation and amendment I here only seek, by
withdrawing them from Plays and Play Houses, the very greatest corruptions of
their minds and manners. Leo de I^iun. Pent. Ser. 1. c. 2. fol. 158.
Hoc enim interiora maxim corrumpit, quod exteriora delectat. What therefore
St. Augustine writes to Macedonius in this very case; Epist. 54. Tom. 2. p. 271.
Facile est atque proclive malos odisse, quia mali sunt, rarum autem et pium
eosdem ipsos diligere quia homines sunt, ut in uno simul et cu^pam improbes, et
naturam approbes; ac propterea culpam justius oderis, quod ea faedatur natura
quam diligis. Non est igi^ur iniquitatis, sed potius humanitatis societate
devinctus, qui propterea sit criminis persecutor ut sit hominis liberator: the
same shall be my Apology now. And if any Play-A^tors or Spectators think
themselves injured by any censure I have here past upon them, I must return
them an answer in St. Bernards words: Bernard. Ep. 78. f. 196.
Cum carpuntur vitia, et inde scandalum oritur, ipse sibi scandali causa est,
qui fecit quod argui debeat, non ille qui arguit: or at leastwise in Epist. 2.
ad Nepotianum, cap. 20. Tom. 1. p. 7.
St. Hieroms language: Aut enim nihil scribendum fuit, ne hominum judicium
subiremus, aut scribentes nosse, cunctorum adversum nos maledicorum ^ela esse
torquenda. Quos obsecro, ut quiescant, et definant maledicere. Non enim ut
adversariis, sed ut amicis scripsimus; nec invecti sumus in eos qui peccant,
sed ne peccent, monuimus. Nullum laesi, nullius nomen mea scriptura designatum
est. Neminem specialiter meus sermo pulsavir. Generalis de vitijs disputatio
e^t. Qui mihi irasci voluerit, prius ipse de se, quod talis sit, confitebitur.
Wherefore, since all I aim at in this Treatise is men's eternal good; Bernard.
Epist. 42.
Sustinete hanc virgam corripientem, ne sentiatis malleum conterentem:
remembering that good lesson of Solomon: Prove. 12.1. c. 15.10, 32.
He that hates reproof, is brutish; yea, he despises his own soul, and he
shall surely die. To the third of these, I answer; that he who stirs a
noisome kennell, must needs raise some stench; he who would lively portraiture
^ Devil, or a deformed monster, must needs draw some ghastly lines, and use
some sordid colors: so he who will delineate to the life, the notorious
lewdness of Plays, of Play-haunters, is necessarily enforced to such immodest
phras^s as may present it in its native v^lenesse; else he shall but conceal
or masque their horrid wickedness that none may behold it, not rip it open
that all may abhor it. This is the only reason of those more uncivil or
seemingly immodest passages and phrases that are here and there scattered in
this Discourse; which as they are for the most part the Fathers, or some other
Authors, not mine own, and so the more excusable; so necessity only has
enforced me to them; the impurity and lewdness of Stage Plays being such,
that a man can hardly remember, much less reprove them without sin or shame.
De Gubern. Dei l. 6. p. 185, 186.
Talia autem sunt ( writes Salvian) quae in theatri^ fiunt, ut ea non solum
dicere, sed etiam recordari aliquis sine pollutione non possit. Quae quidem
omnia tam flagitiosa sunt, ut etiam explicare ea quispiam atque eloqui salvo
pudore non va^eat. Quis enim integro verecundiae statu dicere queat illas rerum
turpium imitationes, illas vocum ac verborum obscaenitates, illas motuum
turpitudines, illas gestuum faeditates? quae quanti sunt criminis, vel hinc
intelligi potest, quod et relationem sui interdicunt. Nonnulla quippe m^xima
scelera incolumi honestate referentis et nominari et argui possunt, ut
homicidium, latrocinium, sacrilegium, ca^teraque hujusmodi. Solae theatrorum
impuritates sunt, quae honest^ non possunt vel accusari: ita nova in coarguenda
harum turpitudinum probrositate res evenit arguenti, ut cum absque dubio
honestus sit qui accusare ea velit, honestate tamen integra ea loqui et
accusare non possit. It was this Fathers Preface to his Play-condemning
Treatise, and it shall be my Apology. To the fourth of these, I answer; prima
facie may seem heterogeneous to the present subject, as See Act. 5^
throughout. Act. 7. Scene 3. and 8. Scene 3, 7.
those concerning Dancing, Music, Apparel, Effeminacy, Lascivious Songs,
Laughter, Adultery, obscene Pictures, Bonefires, New-yeares gifts, Grand
Christmasses, Health-drinking, Long hair, Lords-dayes, Dicing, with sundry
Pagan customs here refelled: but if you consider them as they are here
applied, you shall find them all materially pertinent to the theme in
question^ they being either the concomitants of Stage Plays, or having such
near affinity with them, that the unlawfulness of the one are necessary
mediums to evince the sinfulness of the other. Besides, though they differ in
Specie, yet they are homogeniall in their genericall nature, one of them
serving to illustrate the quality, the condition of the other: It is no
impertinentie therefore for me to discourse at large of all or any of these,
the better to display the odiousness of Stage Plays, with which they have
great analogy, to which they have more or less relation, as the passages
themselves sufficiently manifest. But admit that some of them are
heterogeniall, yet it is no absurdity by way of digression, to touch on such
parti^ulars, as See Claudius Espencaeus, Digre^sionum in Epist. 1. ad Timotheum
lib. Dr. John Whi^es Way to the True Church; Dr. Field of the Church, Edit.
ult. Dr. Crakenthorps Vigilius Dormitans^ and Dr^ Twists Answer to Armi^ius his
Examen: accordingly.
other Writers often times do, yea and the Fathers too, who have their
digressions as well as others, in their Commentaries, Homilies, and moral
Treatises; where they often times lash out into collateral Discourses against
Stage Plays, Dancing, Drunkenness, effeminacy, lascivious songs, fantastique
costly apparel, Pagan Customs, and those other particulars which I have now
discoursed against, as their passages here^ recited plentifully manifest. Their
practice therefore may be my excuse. And so much the rather, because the
particulars I have thus lightly glanced upon in the by, are universal
overspreading still-increasing evils, which need some present opposition,
especially out of those pregnant venerable Authorities of Councels, Fathers and
ancient Writers that are almost forgotten in the world, (whose memory I have
here in part revived a^ far as opportunity would permit:) which manifest to
all men's judgments, See Act. 5. throughout, and Act. 7. Scene 3. Act. 8. Scene
3, 4.
that effeminate mixed Dancing, Dicing, Stage Plays, lascivious Pictures,
wanton Fashions, Face-painting, Health-drinking, Of which Mr. Purchase in his
Pilgrim. c. 51. page 490. writes thus. Long hair is an ornament to the female
sex, a token of subjection, an ensign of modesty: but modesty grows short in
men as their hair grows long, and a neat perfumed, frizled, pouldred Bush,
hangs but as a token Vini n^n vendibilis, of much wine, little wit, of men
weary of manhood, of civility, of Christianity, which would feign turn (at the
least do imitate) American Salvages, Infidels, Barbarians, or women at the
least and best.
Long hair, See my Vnlovelinesse of Lovelockes, and here Act. 5. Scene 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Act. 7. Scene 3. and Act. 8. Scene 3.
Love-lockes, Periwigs, women's curling, pouldring and cutting of their hair,
Bone-fires, New-yeares-gifts, May-games, amorous Pastoralls, lascivious
effeminate Music, excessive laughter, luxuriovs disorderly Christmas-keeping,
Mummeries, with sundry such like vanities which the world now dotes on, as
la^dable, good, and Christian, are mere sinful, wicked, unchristian pastimes,
vanities, cultures and disguises, which the primitive Church and Christians,
together with the very best of Pagans quite abandoned, condemned; however we
admire, applaud them now to Gods dishonor and religions shame: My short
Digressions therefore against these new-revived old-condemned spreading evils,
which most men countenance, few can or dare oppose, may well be pardoned in
this my HISTRIO-MASTIX, most of them being either concomitants or fruits of
Stage Plays: by the present censures of which, the Reader shall be sure to
reap, either fuller satisfaction, or greater variety of knowledge than else
he should have met with in this Treatise.

The third, is the repetition of some quotations, some passages ( especially
See p. 9. to 26.523, 524, 731, 732.
the idolatrous original of Stage Plays, and See p. 42. to 61.522, to
525.561, to 567.
that they are the very pompes of the Devil which Christians have renounced in
their baptism) yet it is either to different purposes, or where they are
amplified and confirmed by new-recited A^thorities; which as I could not couple
all together, so I was unwilling to omit, for fear of doing prejudice to the
cause. Secondly, though the same Authorities and qu^tations are often reiterat^d,
yet it is only in these two cases, where the words and ends for which I cite
them are diverse, or where one sentence, one discourse tending to several
purposes, is so entire, that it could not be sundered into fractions without
perverting the sense, or blunting the life, the edge and vigor of it. Thirdly,
what ever is often repeated, is something or other worth remembering: if therefore
Seneca speaks truth, Epistola 27.
Nunquam nimis dicitur quod nunquam satis discitur; this fault may easily be
excused. The Scripture it self (we know) Deuteronomy. 4.2. c. 12.32. Josh. 1.7 Prove.
9.30 6. Rev. 22.18, 19.
where there is no superfluity nor defect; has often times Isay 28.9, to 14. 2
Pet. 1.12, 13. Phil. 3.1.
precept upon precept, line upon line, yea frequent repetions of the selfsame
things, ( especially in the Books of Moses, the Books of the Kings and
Chronicles, the Psalms of David^ the Proverbs, the Prophets, the four
Evangelists, and St. Paul's Epistles) in such cases where men are either dull to
learn, apt to forget, ^^ow to believe, or when as the things repeat^d are very
observable. The like repetitions with little variation, we shall find in
diverse Authors: and in most of those who write of the selfsame subject, (but
principally in Commentators and the Schoolmen) we find the selfsame matter
clothed in a different method or dress of words; Eccles. 1.9, 10
there being no new thing under the Sun, Et nihil dictum quod non dictum
prius: all being but reiterations of what has been written or spoken in
former ages. This therefore may excuse my short rei^erations of the selfsame
passages against Stage Plays, with which men are so far inamoured, that they
need many often repeated arguments to divorce their affections from them.

Having thus far apologized for this Treatise, I shall here by way of
advertisement for thy better satisfaction inform thee, Christian Reader,
something concerning the Authorities quoted in it. As first, that I have cited
the very Words of the Fathers themselves, for the most part, in the margent,
which I have faithfully englished in the Discourse it self, and sometimes
alleged them in the margent at large, when as I have but touched them in the
page: whence I shall advise thee to read the margent and the page together.
Secondly, that I have often times only quoted the names, the Works of Fathers
and other Authors for brevity sake, omitting their words, which the studious
Reader may do well to Nam a vitii^ redimitur animus, et suavi et mira quadam,
etiam in adversis ^^cunditate re^icitur, cum ad legendum^ vel scribendum
^tilia, menti^ intendit acumen^ I^annis Saresberiensis Prologus in lib. De
Nugis Curialium.
peruse at leisure in their works; whose several passages had I transcribed,
I should have often repeated the selfsame things, and augmented this Quarto
Treatise into many Folio Volumes. Thirdly, I have faithfully recorded the
Books, the Chapters, Columes and pages of those Authors here alleged, together
with the Impressions which I follow; all which you shall find expressed, Part.
1. Act. 7. Scen. 3, 4, 5, and 6. Which Editions if any Reader want, let him
then only examine the number of the Books, the Chapters, Homilies or Sermons
here quoted, in those Editions which he has, omitting the pages, and he shall
find every quotation true, save only where the Editions vary. And if any
shall here quarrel with me for the multitude of Authors and quotations: let
him know, that I produced them Quicquid enim omnes vel plures, uno eodemque
sensu, manife^te, frequenter, perseveranter, velut quodam sibi consentiento
Magistroru^ Concilio, accipiendo, tenendo, tradendo firmaverint, id pro
indubitato, certo, ratoque habeatur. Vincentius Le^^^en^is con^r. Haer^ses,
cap. 39. Illud reprobu^ fuisse non ambiges quod omnium doctorum turba
condem^at. Io^nnis Sarisb. de Nug^s Curi^liu^ l. ^.^.4.
only for the Readers better satisfaction, to evidence the damnable
odiousness of Stage^playes in all ages, not out of any vainglorious
ostentation, which I much abhor.

Which advertisements being thus premised, I shall now beseech thee, courteous
Reader, in the fear of God, to peruse this HISTRIO-MASTIX with an impartial
eye, and even seriously to consider with an unprejudicated affection, what all
the primitive Christians, what all the Councels, Fathers, Emperors,
Magistrates, and Authors here enumered have constantly thought of Stage Plays,
and other particulars here recited: And then I doubt not but what a noble Earl
of this Kingdom in his late dangerous sickness, professed publicly (even
with detestation) of his effeminate fantastique Love-locke; that he sensibly
perceived it to be but a cord of vanity, by which he had given the Devil
holdfast to lead him captive at his pleasure; who would never let go his
holdfast of him as long as he nourished this unlovely Bush: whereupon he
commanded his Barber to cut it off: (a speech, a president well worthy those Q^i
virilem sexum muliebri mollitie dehonestant. Joan. Saresbericusis de Nugis
Curialium, l. 1. c. 5.
womanish Ruffians consideration, who yet are peccant in this kind:) the same
will thou affirm of these lascivious Enterludes; See here Act. 6. Scene 4, 5,
12, 18, 19, 20, accordingly.
that they are the very Devils pompes and Retia sunt quaecunque vides,
hominemque ligatum, Ad miseram morte^ per mala quaeque trahunt. Joan.
Saresberien^is Ad opus suum. B^hl. Patr. Tom. 15. p. 339, G.
snares, by which he captivates and inthralls men's souls; who can never
enfranchise themselves from his infernal vassalage, till they have cordially
renounced these his sugered gins, which detain them captive in his service,
and bind them over to damnation: as the here recited Councels, Fathers and
other Authors witness: whose works if Play-haunters would but study, at
those vacant times which they sinfully waste on Plays, on Play-bookes, and
such like unprofitable pleasures of sin, Rev. 18.7. Eccles. 11.9. Prove. 14.13.
which will end in horror at the last; they would speedily abandon all
Enterludes, all Play Houses, as the most execrable pernicious corruptions,
which now they so much dote on as their chief delights. The Lord therefore
open all such blind Stage-haunters eyes by these my poor endeavors, who are
yet so besotted with ignorance and these enchanting Spectacles, that they
cannot discern those infinite mischiefs that attend them, Quis vero eo
indignior, qui sui ipsius contemnit habere noticiam? qui tempus quod parca manu
datum est ad mensuram, et solum reparari non potest, usuraria quadam acc^ssione
et poenali repetendum in vitae dispendia prodigit, et in contumeliam auctoris
effundit? Joan. Sare^beriensis De Nugis Curialium, l. 1. c. 1.
wasting their precious time upon them even from day to day, and quarrelling
with all such pious Christians as would reclaim them from them: Of whom I may
fitly use St. Augustines memorable passage: August. Enar. in Psalm. 39^ Tom. 8.
pars 1. p. 416.
Quem itaque comprehendam istorum insanorum? Quis me audia^? quem eorum nos non
miseros dicat, quia cum eis non insanimus? Amisisse nos putant varias et magnas
voluptates in quibus ipsi insaniunt, nec vident quia mendaces sunt. Quando
illis ovum invito, vel calicem salutarem porrigo saucio: et quomodo reficiam?
Hortor ut reficiant, pugnas parant; saevire volunt in medicum. Et si
percusserint, diligantur; et si injuriam fecerint non relinquantur; redituri
sunt ad mentem, gratias acturi. Oremus itaque pro ipsis fratres charissimi;
inde crescit numerus sanctoru^, de numero qui erat impiorum. It was this
Fathers speech of those Play-haunters whom he endeavored to reclaim in his
time; and it shall be mine of ours now; whose conversion I shall truly pray
for, how evil soever they entreat me or this work of mine; which if it do
no good to others, or purchase naught but hatred, but contempt unto my self,
yet Symmachus his speech shall be my comfort: Ambrose Ep. l. 2. Ep. 2. Tom. 5.
p. 97.
Saluti publicae dicata industria, crescit merito cum caret praemio: or if not
his, the Prophet Isaiah's: Isay 49.4.
Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my ^trength for naught and
in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my reward with my God:
to whose only blessing I shall now commend this Treatise, and thee true
Christian Reader; whose spiritual good being the primum mouens, that set my
thoughts upon this Subject; I hope it shall find thy favorable acceptance:
Ioannis Saresberiensi^ Prologus in lib. de Nugis Curialium. Bibl. Pat. Tom. 15.
p, 341. ^.
Sciens, quia sicut non habet unde placeat ex venustate, sic ex devotione
scribentis non pot^rit displicere. And so I rest,

Thine in the LORD, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

Author ad Opus suum.
Ex Ioanne Saresberiensi, ad Opus suum de Nugis Curialium. Bibl. Pa^rum Tom.
15. p. 339, 340.
SI mihi credideris, linguam cohibebis, et aulae,
Limina non intret pes tuus, esto domi.
Aspectus hominum cautus vitare memento,
Et tibi commissas claude libelle notas.
Omnia sint suspecta tibi, quia publicus hostis
Et maiestatis diceris esse reus.
Ignis edax, gladiusque ferox tibi forte parantur,
Aut te polluta subruet hostis aqua.
Cum tamen exieris faciem velabit amictus,
Deformentque tuam pulvis et aura cutem.
Sit gradus et cultus habitus peregrinus eunti,
Non nisi barbariem barbara lingua sonet.
De Pictavorum dices te gente creatum,
Nam licet his lingua liberiori loqui.
Nusquam divertas, ne quis te laedat cuntem,
Nugarumque luat garrula lingua notas.
Omnia si nescis, loca sunt plenissima nugis,
Quarum tota cohors est inimica tibi.
Ecclesia nugae regnant, et principis aula;
In claustro regnant, Pontificisque domo.
In nugis clerus, in nugis militis usus;
In nugis i^venes, totaque turba senum.
Rusticus in nugis; in nugis sexus uterque:
S^rvus et ingenuus, dives, egenus in his.
Accelera gressus, cauto diplomate perges;
Vt valeas, esto sobrius, esto gravis.
Gens penetranda tibi perlarga, bibaxque loquaxque,
Et cui ni morem gesseris, hostis eris.
I ci^us atque redi; ne quorum carpere nugas
Aususes, infligant tela, necemque parent.
Hospiti^que fidem quaeres super, omnia, quo sii^
Tutus ab insidiis, quas tibi quisque parat.
Stultos, prudentes nimium, pravosque cave^is,
Et quos insignes garrula lingua facit.
Si quis amat verum, tibi sit gratissimus hospes,
Et quem delectat gloria vana, cave.
Iuie patronatus illum cole, qui velit esse,
Et sciat, et possit tutor ubique, tuus.
Sperne malos, venerare bonos, ignos^e volenti
Laedere; nulla bonis ultio grata magis.
Et nisi festinus fugeres, te plura monerem,
Vix pateris dici pauca, vel ista tene.
ERRATAES.
COurteous Reader, I shall desire thee ere thou read this Treatise to correct
these several following Errataes which in my absence through the Correctors and
Printers oversight have escaped the Press.

IN the Pages, Page 12, l. 24. for ready read, readily. p. 76. l. 18. for
Contr. r. ad. p. 77. l. 27. their: his. p. 92. l. 7. r. displaied. p. 142. l.
12. r. protervos. p. 145. l. 6. r, whence. p. 168 l. 6. for. p. r. and. p. 169.
l. 24. r. inflections. p. 179. l. 3. r. Those p. 180. l. 29. f. ground, r.
grand p. 182. l. 24. r. Euclid. p. 185. l. 15. r. Melania. p. 188. l. 19. r.
perfumed. p. 223. l. 2. f. 20. r. 5, 6. p. 236. l. 27. r. Christians. p. 245.
l. 25. f. two, r. rare. p. 267. l. 6. r. those. p. 281. l. 28. r. muliebribus.
p. 310. l. 15. f. which, r. with. p. 320. l. 7. f. c. 141. r. c. 41. p. 325. l.
23. and p. 326, l. 11, r. Stage players. p. 328, l. 28, r. Majors. p. 332, l.
14, r. avocated. p. 333 l. 29. f. or, r. of. p. 336, l. 10, f. done, r. not. p.
348, l. 28, r. those. p. 363, l. 19, r. Gosson. p. 385, l. 22, r. Christians.
p. 398, l. 19, f. this, r. his. p. 417, l. 5, r. comforts. p. 425, l. 31, f.
Christ, r. Christian. p. 426, l. 20, r. Catechumenist. p. 438, l. 25, r.
defend. p. 453, l. 8, r. militibus. p. 464, l. 22, f. in, r. in three. and l.
33, r. displeased. p. 468, l. 14, f. and, r. but. p. 474. l. 2, r. chair. p.
478, l. 23, r. persons. p. 488, l. 22, r. kind. p. 495, l. 26, f. in, r. of.
p. 500, l. 11, r. originally. fol. 549, l. 33, f. perfecting, r. protecting.
fol. 550, l. 27, f. that, r. fit. fol. 551, l. 22, f. which, r. with. fol. 553,
l. 30, r. returning. f. 555, b, l. 9, f. Polycarpus, r. Pollio. fol. 557, l.
31, f. Nisina, r. Misnia. fol. 558, b, l. 1, f. and not, r. not. fol. 559, l.
30, f. washed, r. crushed. Ibid. b, l. 4, f. might, r. nigh. fol. 560, b, l. 7,
f. their, r. our. fol. 561, l. 17, f. new, r. now. and b, l. 12, r. vitiated.
f. 562, l. 32, f. and the, r. the. and b, l. 7, f. these, r. such. fol. 567, l.
32, f. them, r. men. p. 568, l. 12, r. inconsistent. p. 570, l. 23, f. 54, r.
55. p. 708, l. 34, r. procedente. p. 709, l. 28, r. intercidit p. 733, l. 8, f.
it be, r. it. p. 756, l. 14, r. viz. of Altisiodorum. p. 786, l. 11, r.
prescription. p. 791, l. 19, r. praecolorant, and l. 33, r. Helleboro. p. 803,
l. 11, f. And r. are. p. 814, l. 8, f. carnemque r. carmenque. p. 815, l. 30,
f. malum, r. bonum. p. 823, l. 17, f. and teaching, r. teaching. l. 18, f.
that, r. that they. p. 829, l. 34, 35. f. the sin, r. your sin. p. 830, l.
13, f. the, r. your. In the margent, p. 1, l. 15, read Gubernator. p. 27, l.
4, r. quod. p. 40, l. 39, for cap. r page. p. 66, l. 2, dele ad. p. 67, l. 43,
r. Loci. p. 74, l. 2, r. Legatio. p. 65, l. 4, r. cap. 25. and l. 15, dele cap.
p, 78, l. 5, r. numerantur. p 124, l. 24, and 26, r. liberioris and Fastorum.
p. 133. l. 31, r. flagitiosissime. l. 39, r. inquietaret. l. 45, r. Aluarus. l.
47, r. Dierum. p. 134, l. 39, r. 38. p. 138, l. 2, r. 35, and l. 3, r. 4. p.
145, l. 22, r. Cassiodorus. l. 49, r. R^med. p. 152, l. 4, r. rideat. p. 153,
l. 40, r. Vnus. p. 152, l. 38, r. deteriora. l. 45.46, r. Vua, liuorem. p. 157,
l. 41, r. from Plays. p. 165, l. 25, r. decipientes, and l. 31, propitios. p.
178, l. 14, r. inextinguibiles. p. 184, l. 10, r. tondeat quos. l. 36, r.
Amatorius p. 186, l. 28, r. 1009. l. 40, r. submouens. p. 188, l. 35, r.
perficiunt. p 189, l. 35, r. ultro. p. 199, l. 11, r. 122. p. 213, l. 17, r.
83. p. 214, l. 30, r. aperto, l. 35 r. Tim. 1. p. 224, l. 29, r. sempiternam.
p. 230, l. 29, r. letali. p. 248, l. 28, r. rerum, l. 31, r. ad. p. 280, l. 15,
r. quaeso. p. 287, l. 18, r. Sic. p. 326, l. 29, r. c. 41, l. 31, r. minus. p.
336, l. 36, r. idoneus. p. 366, l. 21. r. igitur. p. 383, l. 39, r.
contaminent. p. 389, l. 28, r. AElij, l. 43, r. sunt p. 390, l. 44, r.
Babingtons. p. 394, l. 23, r, nobilium. p, 447, l, 5, 6, dele haeter. p, 455,
l, 44, r, c, 6. p, 456, l, 41, r, ^, 4. p, 504, l, 35, r. Et. fol, 513, b, l,
37, r, iuvenes. f, 514, l, 35, r, seruitus. f, 551, b, l, 30, r, Callist: f,
559, l, 40, 1, Cornelius. b, l, 26, r, Musicae. f. 568, b, l, 13, r. fl^tibus.
f, 565, l, 39, r, Tom. 12, pars 1. p, 568, l, 32, r, blasphematur. p, 636, l,
15, 16, r, Waldensia. p, 671, l: 37, r: tuenda. p: 765, l: 19, r: Vrbis. p:
790, l: 44, r: Setinum. p: 793, l: 2. r: Prouidentia. p: 795, l: 9, r:
delinquunt. p. 798, l: 42, dele pro. p: 804, l: 21, r: adultis. l: 38, r.
Nen^ea. p. 807, l. 40, r. Theodosius and l. 43, Prateus. p. 811, l. 38, r.
^aledicendi, dicam. l. 40, r. fol. 153. l. 43, r. oblectare. p. 824, l. 34, r.
l: 5, c: 1. p: 828, l: 44, r. Casares. p. 827, l. 12, r. hosts. p. 828, l. 9,
r. l. 6.

HISTRIO-MASTIX; OR, THE ACTORS TRAGEDY.
THE PROLOGVE.
SVch has always been, and yet is, the perverse, and wretched condition of
sinful man, Genesis 6.5.
the cogitations of whose heart are evil, and only evil before God, and that
continually: that it is far more easy to estrange him from his best, and
chiefest joys; then to divorce him from his Nulla verior est miseriae, quam
falsa laetitia. Bernard. De Gratia. and lib. Arbitrio. Col. 909. B.
truest misery, Hebr. 11.25.
the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, Deliciae temporariam
habent voluptatim, poenam autem sempiternam. Chrysostom. hom. 54. ad Pop. Antioch.
yet set in endless grief: Man always hugges his pleasurable sins so fast,
out of a preposterous, and misguided love, Quod pler^sque inemendabiles facit^
omnium aliarum artium peccata, artificibus pudor^ sunt, offendantque: errantem
in vita peccata delectant. Non gaudet nauigio gubernatur euerso, non gaudet
aegro medicus elato: non gaudet Orator, si patron^ culp^ reus cecidit. (...)
contra omnibus crimen suum voluptati est. Sen. Epist. 97.
which makes his reformation desperate:) that if any soule-compassionating
Christians attempt to wrest them from him; he forthwith takes up arms against
them; returning them no other answer, then that of Ruth to Naomie, in a far
better case: Ruth 1.17.
The Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part them and me:
where they dye, I will dye, and there will I be buried^ and thus alas he
lives, Non prius est vt de vita homines quam de iniquitate discedant: Quis enim
non cum iniquitatibus suis moritur, and cum ipsis admodum atque in ipsis
sceleribus sepelitur? Salu. De Gub. Dei. lib. 5. page 171. Clemens Alexand.
Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11.
nay, dies, and lies (as too too many daily do) intombed both with, and in,
his darling crimes. How naturally prone men are to cleave to worldly pleasures,
and delights of sin, in despite of all those powerful attractiues, which
might withdraw them from them; to omit all other particular instances: we may
behold a real, and lively experiment of it, in profane, and poisonous
STAGE PLAYS; the common Idol, and prevailing evil of our dissolute, and
degenerous Age: which though they had their rise from Hell; yea, their birth,
and pedigree from the very Devil himself, to whose honor, and service they
were at first devoted: though they have been often condemned, and quite exploded
by the whole Primitive Church, both under the Law, and Gospel: by the unanimous
vote of all the Fathers, and sundry Counsels from age to age: by Modern
Divines, and Christian Authors of all sorts: by diverse Heathen States, and
Emperors; and by whole Grand iuries of profane writers, as well Historians,
and Poets, as Philosophers^ Tertul. De spectac. lib. Cyprian. De spectac and
Ep. li^. 2. Epist. 2. Salu de Gub. Dei. li. 6. Chrysostom. hom^ 6.7. and 38 in Mat.
Ioannis Salisburiensis ^e Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 8. Orosius hist. l. 3. c.
4. Bodinus de Republi. l. 6. cap. 1. Doct. R^inolds Overthrow of Stage Plays
accordingly.
as the Incendiaries, and common Nurseri^s of all Villainy, and Wickedness; the
bane, and overthrow of all Grace, and Goodness; the very poison, and
corruption of men's minds, and manners; the very fatal plagues, and ouertures
of those States, and Kingdoms where they are once tolerated, as I shall
prove anon: Yet we, we miserable, and graceless wretches, after so many
sentences of condemnation passed upon them: after so many Judgments already
inflicted on, and yet threatened to us, for them: after so many years, and
Iubilies of the glorious Gospel-sun-shine: Tit. 2.11.22.
which teaches us to deny ungodliness, and all worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the coming,
and appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; yea, after our
very vow, and sacred covenant in Baptism, which binds us, Dionysius
Areopag^ta. Eccles. Hierar. c. 2.3. Tertul. de Baptismo. Cyprian. Epist. lib.
1. Epist. 5. Cyrillus Hier^. s^l^mitanus Catechesis: Mystag. 1. Hierom. Epist.
8. c. 5 Chrysostom. hom. 6. in Colos. 2. Council. Constantino^. 6. in Trullo, Can.
96.
to forsake the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps, and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh, Tertul. de spectac cap.
24. August. de Symbolo. ad Catech. lib. 4. c. 1 Cyrillu^. Hierusol. Catechesis
Mystag. 1 Salui. de Gub. De^. lib. 6 page 190. to 197. Hookers Ecclesiastical
Policy. lib. 5. cap. 64. accordingly.
of which these Stage Plays are the chief: as if we were quite degenerated,
not only from the grace, and holiness of Christians; but even from the
natural goodness, and morality of Pagans in former Ages; do now, even now,
in the midst of all our fears at home^ and the miserable desolations of Gods
Church abroad; (the very thoughts of which should cause our hearts to bleed,
and souls Iam. 4.9, 10.
to mourn; much more our Hellish iollitie, and mirth to cease:) as if we had
made a covenant with Hell, and sworn allegiance to the Devil himself; Ad
mundana gaudia and corporalia bona multitudo procliuis est: Et quamuis incertum
ca^ucumque sit quod cupitur, libentius tamen suscipitur labor pro desiderio
voluptati^, quam pro amore virtut^^. Ita cum innumeri sunt qui visibilia
concupiscunt, vix inueniuntur qui temporalibus aeterna praeponant^ Leo de
Quadrages Sermo. 11. cap. 1.
inthrall, and sell our selves to these Diabolical, and hellish Enter-ludes,
notwithstanding, all that God, or man have said against them: and would rather
part with Christ, Religion, God, or Heaven, then with them. Yea so far are
many men's affections wedded to these profane, and Heathenish vanities; that as
it was in Saint Augustines time, even so it is now: Populi laudant non
consultoribus vtilitatum su^rum, sed largitoribus voluptatum. Opipera conuiuia
frequententur, vbi cuique libuerit and po^uerit, diu noctuque ludatur, bibatur,
vomatur, d^ff^^atur: saltationes vndique concrepent: Theatra inhonest^ laetitia
vocibus, atque omni genere sieve crudelissimae, sieve tur^^s^imae volupt a^is
exaes^uent Ille est publicus inimiciss cui haec f^licit^s displic^t. Quisquis
eam mutare vel auferre tenta^erit, ^um liber^ multitudo auertit ab auribus,
euertit e sedibus, aufert a viuentib^^. August. De Ci^. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 20.
whosoever is but displeased, and offended with them, is presently reputed for
a common Enemy: he that speaks against them, or comes not at them, is
forthwith branded for a Scismaticall, or factious Puritan: and if any one assay
to alter, or suppress them, he becomes so odious unto many; that did not the
fear of punishment restrain their malice, they would not only scorn, and
disgrace; but even stone, or rent him all to pieces, as a man unworthy for to
live on earth: whereas such who further these delights of sin, are highly
magnified, as the chief contriuers of the public happiness. There was once a
time, Nihil nobis dictu, visu, vel auditu cum insania Circi, ^um impudic^tia
Theatri, cum atrocitate Arena, cum Zysti vanitate: Spectaculis non conuenimus.
Tertul. Apolog. adu. Gentes. cap. 38.42. Clemens Alexand. Oration Exhort. ad
Gentes. Tatianus Oration aduers. Graecos^ Athenagoras pro Christianis Legatio.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2 p. 138.139. Theophylus Antiochenus aduers. Autolichum l.
3. accordingly.
if Tertullian, with some other ancient Fathers, may be credited:) when as it
was the chiefest badge and character of a Christian, to refrain from
Stage Plays: yea, this Vos suspensi interim atque solliciti honestis
voluptatibus abstinetis: non spectacula visitis: non pompis interestis.
Minutius Felix. Octauius. page 34.123. Virgil.
was one great crime which the Pagans did object against the Christians in the
Primitive Church; that they came not to their Enterludes. But now, (as if
Stage Plays were our Creed, and Gospel, or the truest emblem of our Christian
profession,) those are not worthy of the name of Christians; they must be
Puritans, and Precisians; not Protestants, who dislike them.

AEneidos lib. 2.
Heu quantum mutatus ab illo?
Alas, how ^arre are Christians now degenerated, from what they were in ancient
times; when as that which was their badge and honor heretofore, is now become
their brand and shame? Saluian. de Gub. Dei. lib. 4. page 110.
Quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est, vbi religio ignobilem facit?
How little do we Christians honor Christ, when as the ancient character; and
practical power, of Religion, (I mean the abandoning, and renouncing of
sinne-fomenting Stage Plays) subject men unto the highest censure, and
disgrace?

Ovid de Ponto. lib. 4. El. 3.
Conquerar? an taceam?
This being the dissolute, and unhappy constitution of our depraved times, it
put me at the first to this Dilemma; whether to sit mute and silent still, and
Iere. 13.17.
mourn in secret for these Dan. 9.27.
ouerspredding abominations, (which have got such head of late among us; that
many who visit the Church scarce once a week, frequent the Playhouse once a
day:) or whether Isay 58.1.
I should lift up my voice like a trumpet, and cry against them, to my power?
If I should bend my tongue, or pen against them, (as I have done against some
other sinful, and Unchristian vanities,) my thoughts informed me; that I might
with the unfortunate Disciples, Luke 5.5.
fish all night, and catch just nothing at the last, but the reproach, and
scorn of the Histrionicall, and prophaner sort, Iam. 3.6.
whose tongues are set on fire of Hell, against all such as dare affront their
Hellish practices; and so my hopes and travel would be wreckt at once: If I
should on the other side, neglect to do my uttermost, to extirpate^ or
withstand these dangerous spectacles, or to withdraw such persons from them, as
my pains, and brief collections in this subject might reclaim, when God had
put this opportunity into my hand, and will into my heart, to do it: my
Conscience then persuaded me; that my negligence, and slackenesse in this
kind, Qui enim succurrere perituro potest, si non succurrit occidit. Lactan.
de vero Cul^n. cap. 11.
might make me guilty of the death of all such ignorant, and seduced So^les,
which these my poor endeavors might rescue from these chains of Hell, and
cords of sin: and Qui cum possit malum non impedit, mali potius est auctor,
quam qui id facit. Thucidide^ Histor. lib. 1. page 50.
interest me^ in all the evil which they might suppress: Whereupon I resolved
with my self at last, Hebr^ 12.2. Et gratias ^go Deo meo, quod dignus sum quem
mundus oderit Hierom. Epist 99.
to endure the cross, and despise the hate, and shame, which the publishing of
this HISTRIO-MASTIX might procure me, and to Qu^a antiquorum morborum
difficilis ac ^arda curatio est, tanto velocius adhibeantur remedia, quanto
recentior^ sunt vulnera. Leo. de Resurrect. Domini Sermo. 1. cap. 6.
assuage (at least in my Est nobis veluisse Satis. Tibullus. lib. 4. ad
Messaliam^ page 99. Quod si deficiant vires, audacia certe Laus erit, in magnis
and voluisse sat est. Proper^ius Eleg lib. 2. Eleg. 10.
endeavors, if not otherwise,) these inueterate, and festred ulcers, (which may
endanger Church, and State at once,) by applying some speedy corrosiues, and
emplaisters to them, and ripping up their noxious, and infectious nature on the
public Theater, in these ensuing Acts, and Scoenes: which I thought good to
style, The Players, or Actors Tragoedie: not so much for the Style, or Method
of it, (for alas, here is neither Nihil hic Tragico, aut Sophocleo dign^m
Cothurno: See Horace, De Art Poetica. Iuuen. Satyr. 6.7.15. C^lius Rhod.
Antiq. Lect. lib. 21. cap. 20.
Tragic style, nor Poetical strains, nor rare Invention, nor Clown, nor
Actor in it, but only bare, and naked Ma^na vis est veritatis, quae contra
hominum ingenia, calliditatem, solertiam, contraque fictas omnium insidias
facile se per seipsam de fendit. Ci^^ro. pro M. Celio Orat. page 577. Oration
veritatis simplex est, and non habet opus multis hinc inde interpretationibus,
res enim ipsa pro se dicit: mala ver^ causa languens in sese, habet opus
accuratis pharmacis: Eu^ip. Phaenissae. page 193. Number. 47. Fides pura and
aperta confessio non quaerit strophas and argumenta verborum. Quod simpliciter
creditur, simpliciter con^itendum est. Hierom. Epist. 63. cap. 2.
Truth, which needs n^ Eloquence, nor strain of wit for to adorn, or plead
its cause:) as for the good effects I hope it may, and will produce, to the
suppression, and extirpation; at least the restraint, and diminution both of
Plays, and common Actors, and all those several mischievous, and pestiferous
fruits of Hellish wickednesses that issue from them: which much desired
success, and reformation, if I could but live to see; I should deem my self
an happy man, and think my labor richly recompensed.

The Argument, Parts, and Method, of the ensuing TRAGAEDIE.
But not to spend more time in Prologues; I shall now address my self unto
the Argument, or Subject, of this Tragical Discourse, which is no more in
brief, then this Conclusion.

That all popular, and common Stage Plays, whether Comicall, Tragical,
Satyricall, Mimicall, or mixed of either: (especially, as they are now compiled,
and personated among us,) are such sinful, hurtful, and pernicious
Recreations, as are altogether unseemly, and unlawful unto Christians.

A Paradoxicall, new, and strange Conclusion, or Problem unto many, and yet an
ancient; and resolved truth, acknowledged at first by Heathen Emperors,
States, and Writers, yea, and Jewish Authors, both before, and after Christ;
and since that, ratified by the concurrent voice, and verdict of the whole
Church of God, from age, to age, even to this present day: as the venerable
records of all the Fathers; the irrefragable Decrees of sundry Counsels; and
the learned Treatises of diverse Modern Christians, both Protestants, and
Papists, do at large declare; a catologue of whose names, and works shall be
presented to you in its proper Scaene.

Not to enter into any curious division, or enumeration of such Plays, or
Enterludes, as were usual among the Greeks, and Romans: such as were their
Ludi Circenses with Chariots: their Ludi Gladiatorij, or Sword-Playes: their
Ludi Compitalitij, Florales, Gymni^i, Lupercales, Megalenses, Cereales,
Martiales, Appollinares, Consuales, Capitolini, Laquearij, Retiarij, Troiani,
Plebeij, and the like: since Godwin. Roman Antiquities lib. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 1.
to 14. Alex. ab Alexand. Genesis Dierum lib. 6. cap. 19. Coel. Rhod. Antiq. Lect.
lib 8. c. 7.8. Lipsius de Gladiatoribus. Mr. Northbrooke against vain Plays,
and Enterludes. fol. 29. Polyd. Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 13.14.
lib. 4. c. 14.
diverse now of late, as well as heretofore, have discribed them to the full, in
sundry Treatises: nor yet to show you the exact differences between Comicall,
Tragical, Satyricall, or Mimicall Enterludes, together with their several
circumstances, inventions, parts, or properties, (delineated likewise by the
marginall Authors,) which differ more in substance, then in form, or action,
in which they near accord: I shall only inform you of one modern
distinction, which some have pleased for to make of Stage Plays. Doct. Case.
Ethic l 4. c. 8. page 307. Polit. l. 5. c 8. p. 474.475. Doct. Gager in his
Reply to Doct. Re^nolds. Doct. Gentilis in his 2. Ep. to Dr. Reinolds.
Of Stage Plays (say they) there are two sorts: The one popular, or public,
acted by hired, and professed Stage Players: ( the Plays we have now in
hand,) and these they all confess to be abominable, and unlawful Pas-times:
The other Academicall, managed only by Scholars in private Schools, and
Colleges at some certain seasons: and these they hold at least wise
tolerable, if not lawful, so as these six prouisoes be observed: Mr.
Northbrooke against vain Plays, and Enterludes. fol. 37. Bucer de regno
Christi. Sempiterno^ lib. 2. cap^ 54.
First, that there be no Obscenitie, Scurrilitie, Profaneness, Amorous
Loue-toyes, Wantonness, or Effeminacy mixed with these Plays: Secondly, that
there be no Woman's part, no Dalliance, no Lustful, nor Lascivious
Complements, Clippings, or Embracements in them: Thirdly, that there be no
mention, or Invocation of Heathen Gods, or Goddesses in them: Fourthly, that
there be no putting on of Woman's apparel, or any sumptuous, or costly attire:
Fifthly, that these Plays produce no prodigal, or unnecessary expense, either
of money, or time: Sixthly, that they be not ordinarily, but very rare, and
seldom Acted; and that for the most part in the Latin tongue, for utterance,
and learning sake alone; not for any gain of money, or vainglory.

If all, or any of these conditions fail (as what Achademicall Enterludes
fail not, either in all, or most?) these very scholasticall Spectacles, become
unlawful, even by the most moderate men's confession. For the lawfulness, or
Illegitimacy of our Achademicall Stage Plays, I shall discuss it in its
proper place: in the mean time, I shall address my self unto the probate, of
my precedent Conclusion: by Reasons, by Authorities.

Reasons against Stage Plays.
My Reasons to euince the unlawfulness of Stage Plays, I shall branch into
these six several Acts.



Authorities against Stage Plays.
My Authorities do marshall themselves into seven several Squadrons: The
first, consisting of Scriptures: The second, of the whole Primitive Church,
both under Theatricall Enterludes; will give no doubt a fatal, if not a final
overthrow, or Catastrophe to Plays, and Actors, whose dismal Tragoedie does
now begin.

ACTVS 1.
SCAENA PRIMA.
THat all popular, and common Stage Plays, Argument. 1.
whether Comicall, Tragical, Satyricall, Mimicall, or mixed of either,
Stage Plays had their original from the Devil himself, therefore they must
needs be evil.
(especially, as they are now composed, and personated,) are such sinful,
hurtful, and pernicious Recreations, as are altogether unseemly, and
unlawful unto Christians: I shall first of all evidence, and prove it, from
their original parents, and primary Inuentors: which were no other, but the
very Devil himself; or at leastwise, Idolatrous, and Voluptuous Pagans,
impregnated with this infernal issue from Hell it self: from whence I argue
in the first place, thus.

That which had its birth, and primarie conception from the very Devil
himself, who is all, and only evil; must needs be Sinful, Pernicious, and
altogether unseemly, yea, Unlawful unto Christians.

But Stage Plays had their birth, and primary conception, from the very Devil
himself, who is all, and only evil.

Therefore they must needs be Sinful, Pernicious, and altogether unseemly,
yea, Unlawful unto Christians.

The Minor, (which is only liable to exception,) I Clemens Alexandrinus,
Oration Exhortatoria, ad Gentes. fol. 8. Tertullian de Spectaculis. cap.
5.7.10.24. Clemens Romanus, Constitutionum Apostolorum. lib. 2. c. 65.66. S.
Cyprian, De Spectaculis. l. and Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio, Arnobius
Disputation Aduers. Gentes. l. 7. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Cyrill of
Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1. S. Chrysostom, Hom. 6.7. and 38. on Mat. S.
Augustine, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32. l. 2. c. 6. to 23. Saluian. De Gub.
Dei. lib. 6. page 206.207. Tertullianus apud Latinos omnium facile princeps
iudicandus: Quid enim hoc viro doctius? quid in diuinis atque humanis rebus
exercitatius? Nempe omnem Philosophiam and cunctas Philosophorum sectas,
auctores, adsertoresque sectarum, omnesque ^orum disciplinas, omnem historiarum
^c studiorum varietatem mir ^qu^dam mentis capacitate complexus est. Vincenti^s
Le^inensis, Contra. Haereses. cap. 24.
All excellently learned in all the learning of the Heathen, and therefore,
best able to determine of the Original of Stage Plays, especially, since they
lived so near unto their birthday.) All these, I say, to whom I might add:
Pope Innocent the first, Epistolarum Decretalium. Epist. 2. ad Victricium. cap.
11. (which you shall find in Surius, Conciliorum. Tom. 1. page 529. and in
Gratian. Distinctio. 51. cap. Praeterea, frequenter:) Ludouicus Vi^es, Comment.
in Augustinum, De Ciu. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32. lib. 2. cap. 6. to 22. Coelius
Rhodiginus Antiquarum Lectionum. lib. 8. cap. 7. Agrippa De Vanitate
Scientiarum. cap. 59. Ioannes Mariana, Doct. Reinolds, Gosson, with sundry
others in their Books, and Treatises against Stage Plays: do expressly
testify: That all Theatricall Plays, or Enterludes, had their Original birth
from the very Devil himself, who invented them for his own honor, and
worship, to detain men captive by them, in his infernal snares: Whence they
all condemn them, as sinful, hurtful, abominable, and unlawful pleasures:
stiling all Play Houses: the Diabol^ Ecclesia: Officina scelerum; Cathedra
pestilentiarum, etc Tertul. Apolog. and De Spectac. lib. Clem. Alex. Paedag.
lib. 3. cap. 11. Basil. He^aem. hom. 4
Temples, Chapels, Chaires, Shops, and School^s of Satan: and Plays, the
Devils Spectacles, Lectures, Sacrifices, Recreations, and the like. If all
these several Witnesses then have any credit: (as their testimony in our
present case, was never contradicted to my knowledge, by any Christian, or
Pagan Author:) my Minor, (yea, my Mayor likewise,) need no farther proof: But
yet to satisfy vncredulous spirits in this point, I shall here in the second
place, recite some two, or three Histories of note, and credit, De Spectac.
cap. 26.
in Tertullian; who informs us: that a Christian woman in his time, going to
see a Stage Play acted, returned from it possessed with a Devil: which Devil
being interrogated by the Exorcists, and Christians that came to dispossess
him, how he durst assault a believing Christian in such a presumptuous manner?
Returned them this answer, with much boldness: that he had done most justly
in it, in meo enim eam inueni: for I found her in my own Temple, negociated,
and employed in my service: Whence this acute, and learned Author does (as we
also from it may) conclude: De Spectac. cap. 24. to 28.
that Plays, and Play Houses came originally from the Devil himself, because
he claims both them, and those who do frequent them for his own. Valerius
Maximus. l. 2. cap. 4. sect. 4. Polydor Virgil. De Invent. Rerum l 4. c. 14.
Add we to this, the story of one Valesius a wealthy Roman: whose three
children being desperately sick of the Plague, and afterward recovered by
washing them in hot water, taken from the Altar of Proserpina: which remedy,
was prescribed unto him by an immediate voice from his Deuill-Gods, after his
earnest prayer to them, to translate their sickenesses on himself: these
infernal Spirits, in recompense of this their cure, appearing to those
recovered Patients in a Dream: commanded them to celebrate Plays unto them;
which Valesius did accordingly: This story I shall couple with that of
Dionysius Hallicarnasseus An^iq Romans l. 7. c. 9. Cicero de Diuinatione lib. 1.
Arnobius Disput. aduersus Gentes. l. 7. Lactantius de Orig. Erroris. cap. 8.
Minutius Felix.

Octauius. p. 19. Augustine De Ciui. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 26. Ludo. Vi^es Notae.
in August. Ibid. Li^^e. Romans Hist. lib. 2. Sect. 36. Relate this story.


Titus Latinus, as some; or Tiberius Atti^ius, as others style him: to whom the
great Deuill-God Jupiter Capitolinus, under the Consulship of Qu. Sulpitius
Camerinus, and Sp. Largius Flauus, in a great mortality both of men, and
beasts, appeared in a dream: commanding him, to inform the Senate; that the
cause of this fatalitie, was, their negligence, in not providing him an expert,
and eminent Presultor in their last Plays, that they celebrated to him: and
withal, to enjoin them from him, to celebrate these Plays afresh unto him,
with greater care and cost, and then this Plague should cease: He supposing it
to be a mere dream, and fancy of his own, neglects his arrant; upon which
this great Master-Deuill appears unto him the second time, threatening to
punish him for his precedent neglect, and charging him to di^patch his former
message to the Senate: Who neglecting it as before, as being ashamed, and with
all affraide, to relate it to the Senate, Quanquam hand sa^e liber erat
religione animus: vere cundia tamen maiestaris Mag^stratuum timorem vic^t, ne
in ore hominum pro ludibrio abiret. Liuie. Romans Hist. l. 2. Sect. 36.
left it should prove nothing but his own^ private fancy^ some few days
after, his Son was taken away from him by sudden death, and a griping
sickness seized upon every part, and member of his body, so that he could not
so much as stir one joint, without intolerable pain and torture. Where
upon, by the advice of some of his friends, to whom he did impart these
dreams, he was carried up out of the Country in a litter, into the Senate
house, where he delivered his former message: no sooner had he ended his
relation, but his sickness forthwith leaves him; and rising out of his bed,
he returns unto his house an healthie man: The Senate wondering at it,
commanded these Plays to be again renewed, with double the former pomp and
cost; and so the Pestilence ceased.

These two precedent parallel Histories, (the truth of which the Fathers in
the margent testify, (do insallibly demonstrate, the Devil himself to b^e
the Author of these Stage Plays, since he inioynes his Pagan worshippers to
celebrate them to his honor, and takes such pleasure, and contentment in them.
To these, I shall annexe one story more, which though most Protestants may
chance to slight, as a fable; yet all our Roman Catholics, (who are much
devoted to these. Theatricall Spectacles,) will ready subscribe unto it, as an
undoubted truth: and that as our rare Historian, Historia Angliae, Tiguri
1589. page 209.210.
Matthew Paris at large relates it, is briefly this: Saint Dominicke, Saint
Julian, and one Thurcillus a plain Husbandman, being in the Church of Saint
Mary's, about the middle of the world, where there were many Souls of Saints
departed, in endless Bliss, others^ in Purgatory: on a Saturnday evening
near night: saw a Devil toward the North part of the Church, riding post
toward Hell on a black horse, with many damned Souls: Saint Dominicke
charge this Devil to come presently to him: who delaying to do it, out of
joy for the great booty of Souls which he had gotten, Saint Dominicke takes a
rod, and whips him well, causing him to follow him to the North side of the
Church, where Souls were usually freed; where the Devil among other things
informs him, that every Lords day at night, (a time which some men consecrate
and set apart for Stage Plays, and such infernal Pastimes, whereas Act.
20.7.9.11.
Saint Paul did spend it all in preaching:) the Devils did use to meet in
Hell, and there did recreate, and exhilarate themselves Ludis Theatralibus.
with Stage Plays: Which Saint Dominicke, and the others hearing, they desired
the Devil, that they might go along with him to Hell, to see their
Enterludes: who putting by Thurcillus, per^itted Saint Dominicke, and Saint
Julian to accompany him: the Devil brings them into a large, but smokie house
toward the North, environed with three walls; where they see an ample Theater
with seats round about it, where sundry Devils sat in a row laughing, and
making themselves merry with the torments, and sins of the Damned, whom the
Prince of the Devils commanded to be brought upon the Stage, and to Act their
parts in order. And first of all, the Proud man is brought upon the Theater:
next an Animarum nec casu^ reputatur, nec salus. Male viuunt, and subi^ct^s
male vi^^re volunt. Bernard. ad Cle^um Sermo Col. 1726. C.D
idle Nonresident, who did not feed his Flock, neither by Life, nor Doctrine:
then a Soldier, who had lived by Murder, and Rapine: then an Oppressing, and
Bribe-taking Lawyer, who was once an Officer in the Kings Exchequer, and did
much oppress the Subjects: next a^ Adulterer, and an Adulteress: then a
Sclanderer: next a Theife: and last of all, a Sacrilegious person, who had
violated Sanctuaries; all these coming in their several garbes, and postures,
did Act their proper parts, and had several Tragical tortures inflicted on
them by the Devils Ministers, who were likewise Spectators of-these Ludibrious
Spectacles. If then the Devils recreate themselves thus in Hell with
Stage Plays, as this Historian reports; if they thus Project, and Puruay for
them; they may be well reputed the primary Authors, and Inuentors of them.

Lastly, that which is utterly displeasing unto God, and Psalm. 99.5. Hab. 1.13.
1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
who is infinitely holy, Nihil turpe ex honesto nasci potest. Lactant. de Falsa
Sapientia. cap. 11.
and therefore, no Proiector of such unholy pleasures:) or of Christians, or
civil Pagans; Nihil Diaboli non est, qui^quid D^i non est, vel deo displicet.
Tertul. de Spectac. cap. 24
must of necessity be fathered on the Devil himself, who is the common
seed-plot of all uncleanness, and prophannesse whatsoever: But such are
Stage Plays: as See Scaene 2.
hereafter I shall prove at large: Therefore they must of necessity, call the
Devil Father, and be reputed as his of-spring^ so that the Assumption of my
former argument is irrefragable.

For the Mayor: That things which had their birth, and primary conception from
the Devil himself, who is all, and only evil, must needs be sinful,
pernicious, unseemly, and unlawful unto Christians: I presume, no Christian
dares gainsay it: For what honest, profitable, good, or lawful thing, can
flow, or issue from him, 1 John 2.13, 14. Math. 5.37.
who is wholly evil, 1 Pet. 5.8. Job 1.7. c. 2.2.
and walks about in an indefatigable, and restless manner, like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour? Iam 3.1^, 12
Can a bitter Fountain, send forth sweet; and pleasant streams? Math. 7.17,
18.19.
Or can a corrupt Tree bring forth good, and wholesome fruit? Job 14 4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness; or a good thing out of
wickedness? It is past the skill of any Chymicke, or artist to effect it.
Certainly, Ezech. 16.44
such as the Mother is, such is the Daughter: John 3.6.
that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit: Now the Math. 10^1. chap. 12.43. Mark 3.30. 1 Ioh. 2.13,
14. Peter 5.8.
Devil, is an unclean, a wicked, a sinful, and pernicious Spirit: there is
no good at all within him: his inventions, works, and offspring, therefore
must resemble him: Facit ad originis maculam, ^e bonum existimes quod initium a
malo accepit. Tertul. De Spectac. cap 8.
they must be evil, unclean, pernicious, and abominable, like himself: Math.
7.16. Luke 6.43. James 3.12.
Men do not, men cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles: such
as the stock is, such must be the fruit; as Scripture, Nature, Reason, and
Experience teach us. Since then the Devil himself, is all, and only evil,
abominable, polluted, and pernicious; I mean in his quality, as a Devil,
Diaboli natura non improba, sed opera iniqua. Ambr. Comment. lib. 5. in Luc. 4.
Tom. 3. page 33. H. and 85. B.
not in his ^ntitie, as a creature: these Stage Plays (which are his proper,
and immediate issue) must be so too: if not to Pagans, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26.
inthralled to his bondage, and captiuated at his pleasure in his snares: yet
at least to such, as lay any title to the name of Christians: who have vowed in
their very Baptism, and first admittance into the Church of Christ: Cyril.
Hierusol^ Catech. Mystag. 1. Concil^ Constantinop. 6. in Trullo. Can. 96.
to forsake the devil, and all his works: of which these Stage Plays, are
well-nigh the chief: Tertul. D^ Spectac. cap. 10.
Oderis itaque Christian, quorum Auctores non poteris non odisse: needs then
must all Christians hate these Stage Plays, whose Author they cannot choose but
hate: needs must they repute them evil, abominable, and pernicious; Qu^d
pessimo initio nititur, in nullo vnquam censeri poterit bonum. Athanasius
contra Gen^iles. lib.
yea, altogether such; since the genitor, and parent of them, is wholly, only,
always such. John 1.46.
Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? was a question, that sincere
Nathaniel demanded once of Philip, when he brought tidings to him of Christ:
Can any good thing come out of Hell? out of Satan; out of that wicked, and
unclean infernal Spirit, Diabolus omnem hominem and omnem spi^itum qui sub
caelo est, subito in ^cti^ oculi perderet, deleret, interficeret, si
permitteretur^; and si iuxta voluntatem iniquitatis suae potestatem haberet.
Origin. in Job. lib. 1. Tom. 2. fol. 13, D.
who plots the ruin of men's Souls, and nothing else? is the demand I make to
such who are inamoured with these Stage Plays. Alas, what Christian, or Pagan
heart, can so much as once conceive; Diabolus est humani generis inimicus.
Greg. Mag. in 7. Psalm. Paenitentiales. fol. 363. H. 1 Pet. 5.8. Mat. 13.39.
Ambros. de Paradiso. c. 12.
that the professed enemy of mankind, of God, of goodness: the fountain of
all sin, and wickedness: the very sincke, and center of all uncleanness,
should be the Author, Propagator, or Contriuer of any real good: of any thing
that furthers the happiness, or welfare of the sons of men? Was it ever
known since the world was framed; that this only Author of all evil, was the
cause of any good? of any invention that might benefit the Bodies, or Souls of
men, or further their Temporal, or Eternal welfare? Oh no: the experience
of all ages, all men, all Christians proves it: For though the Devil may
sometimes commend some seeming good unto us: yet Virgil. Eclog. 3. page 9.
latet anguis in herba: there is always poison, in his best, and sweetest
Potions: there is a Soule-intangling snare, in all his inventions: a dangerous,
and inevitable hook in all his baits: all his works, contriuances, and
delights, Immundi spiritus inn^ meris contranos fraudibus accin^t^, ^^m suadere
nobis iniqua nequeunt, ea sub virtutum spe cie nostris obtutibus exponunt.
Greg. Mag. Moral. lib. 39. cap. 28.
what ever glittering outside, or Honey tastes, they seem to have; are but so
many Diabolus blanditur, vt fallat; ar^idet, vt noceat: illicit, vt occidat.
Cypr. De Hab. Virginum. Diabolus non diligit f^lios suos, sed odit, quia non
amat nisi vt perdat. Ambrose. Sermo. 44.
trapp^s, and poisons, to captiuate, and endanger Souls: they are all
abominable, and pernicious, like himself: and so are Stage Plays too, as well
as others: O then let this convince them to be unlawful, unseemly, and
pernicious vanities: (as the fore-quoted Fathers, and Authors in the Minor have
deemed them for this very reason;) and now at last persuade all Christians, all
Pagans, (unless they will swear homage to the Devil, and renounce the
service, and protection of the Living, only God;) for ever to abominate them,
as the very product of Satan, and the brood of Hell.

SCAENA SECVNDA.
Argument 2. Stage Plays were invented, and practiced by Infidels, and Pagans,
who were the Devils instruments: therefore they must needs be sinful, and
abominable.
But admit, that the Devil himself were not the immediate forger, and parent
of these Theatricall Enterludes, which no man can disprooue by any Orthodox
records: yet this must needs be granted: that Idolatrous Infidels, and the
deboisest Pagans, were the first Actors, and Contri^ers of them, and that by
the Pagan^ ista docente Diabolo adinuenerunt. Council. Ar^l^tense. 3. Surius
Con^il. Tom. 3. page 727. Affl^tu Dia^oli tradunt ista quae mortem afferunt,
^idem euertunt, etc. Clemens Romans Cons^it. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 65.
very Instinct, and Tutorship of the Devil, whose instruments they were: and
this alone does brand them for evil, and unlawful pleasures, which
Christians may not practice; as this second Argument will clearly evidence.

That which had its rise, its pedigree, and being from Idolatrous Infidels; and
the Deboisest Pagans, (who were the Devils agents in this service:) must needs
be sinful, unlawful, unseemly, and pernicious; at least wise unto
Christians.

But Stage Plays, if we take them in their very best conception, had their
rise, their pedigree, and being, from Idolatrous Infidels, and the Deboisest
Pagans, who were the Devils Factors in this service.

Therefore they must needs be sinful, unlawful, and pernicious; at least
wise unto Christians.

For the Mayor, I shall clearly evidence it, by Authentic Records; which
though they somewhat vary in the particular persons, yet they all concur in
this: that Pagans, and Infidels, were the first contriuers of these
Stage Plays. Dipnos. l. 2. cap. 1. Horace de Art Poetica. l. Polyd. Virgil de
Invent. Rerum. lib 1. cap. 10. Alex. Sardis. de Rerum Inuentor. lib. 1. p. 41,
42. Theatrum Vitae humanae. lib. 1. page 75, 76. Ovid. Fastorum. l. 3. c. 57.
Lud. Viues Comment in Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 2. cap. ^.
Athenaeus, with others, informs us: that the Athenians were the primary
composers of Comicall Enterludes, in imitation of those drunken Husbandmen,
who Sacrificed, and made Plays to Bacchus, the God of their Vineyards: De
Homero. lib See Dionys. Hallicarnas. Antiq. Romanorum. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Plutarch relates, that Comedies, and Tragoedies, took their Original from
Homer: Stromatum. lib 1, fol 64.
Clemens Alexandrinus records: that one Thespis: Instit. Orat. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Quintilian, that AEschylus, was the first who brought Tragoedies to light. Who
ever he was, that first invented these Plays among the Graecians; yet all
concur, that the Romans (who as it seems, Dionys. Hallicarnas. Antiq. Romans
lib. 7. cap. 9. Ludou. Viues Comment. in August. De Ciu. Dei l. 2. c. 8.
Accordingly.
derived them from the Greeks,) did first embrace them upon this occasion.
Liuie. Hist. lib. 7. Sect. 2. Plut Quest. Romans lib. Quest. 107. Tertul. de
Spectac. cap. 3. to 8. Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap. 4 Sect. 4. Macrobius
Saturn. lib. 3. cap. 14 B^emus de M^r. Gentium. lib. 3. cap. 8. August. de Ciui
Dei. lib. 2. cap. 8. and Ludou. Viues Ib. Orosius. Hist. lib. ^. cap. 4. Cael.
Rhod. Antiq. Lect l. 8. c. 7. Polyd. Virgil. de Re^. Invent. lib 3. cap. 13.
Alexander, Sardis, de Rerum, Invent. lib. 1. Godwins Roman Antiquities. lib. 2.
Sect. 3. cap 11. Alex. ab Alexand. Genesis Dierum. lib. 6. cap. 19.
When as there was a great Plague in Rome, which could not be aswaged by any
Divine, or humane helps, the Romans to appease the wrath of their enraged
Deuill-gods, sent into Tuscanie for Stage Players: among whom, one Hister,
being more eminent, and expert then the rest, as most: or the AEtrurian word
Hister, which signifies a Play, as others: gave the name of Histrio, which
denominates an Actor, or Player, to all succeeding Stage Players: How
Stage Plays, which were more rude, and plain at first, came to be more
refined, and enlarged afterward, I shall refer you, to these marginall Liuie
Hist. Romans lib. 7. Sect. 2. Alex. Sardis de rerum Invent. lib. 1. page 41. to
46. Horat. de Art^ Poetica. lib. Godwins Roman Antiq. lib. 2. Sect. 3 c. 13.14.
Authors, which will at large inform you: only this I shall say in brief;
that both the inception, and grouth of Stage Plays, by the consent of all
Records, was from Idolatrous Infidels, and voluptuous Pagans, whose ways, and
works, we Christians must not follow.

For the Mayor, I willingly acknowledge; that Tota pars humanarum institutionum
quae ad vsum vitae necessarium proficiunt, nequaquam est fugienda Christiano,
immo quantum satis est intuenda, memori^que retinenda. Omnes vero arts
huiusmodi vel nugatoriae. vel noxiae superstitionis, ex quadam pestifera
societate hominum and damonum, quasi pacta infidelis and dolosae amicitiae
consti^^tae, penitus sunt repudiandae Christiano. August. De Doctr. Christiana.
l. 2. cap. 23, 24, 25, 26. Tertul. de Corona Militis. cap. 6.7. Gossons
Confutation of Plays. Act. 1. accordingly.
those inventions of Infidels, and Pagans, which may further Gods glory, or the
good of men: as Music, Poetry, Husbandry, Navigations, Architecture, Letters,
Writing, and the like: are lawful unto Christians; because they issue from
those common gifts, which God himself implanted in them: but as for all their
noxious, improfitable, and vain productions, which dishonor God; which
prejudice men's Souls, and were destinated at first to sinful ends, (which is
the case of Stage Plays:) these Christians must avoid: if for no other
reason, yet for this one alone: that the Heathen Gentiles were the Authors,
fomentors, and frequenters of them. Hence God himself does charge the
Israelites: Leuit. 18.30. Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30.
That when they were possessed of the Land of Canaan, they should beware, that
they committed not any of those abominable customs, which were committed
before them, by the Cananites: that they should not defile themselves therein,
but take heed, lest they were taken in a snare after them, lest they should
ask after their Gods, saying: how did those Nations serve their Gods, that I
might do so likewise: Hence Christ himself enioynes all Christians, Mat. 6.7,
8.31.32.
not to use vain repetitions when they pray, as the Heathen do, who think to
be heard, for their much babbling: be ye not therefore (says he) like unto
them: Not to take thought, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or
wherewith we shall be clothed: and what is his reason? For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek: Hence Saint Paul does exhort the Thessalonians,
1 These. 4.4.
to possess their vessels in holiness, and honor; not in the lust of
concupiscence, as the Gentiles do: Hence Saint Peter informs us: 1 Pet. 4.3.
that the time past of our lives, may suffice us to have wrought the will of
the Gentiles: Hence Saint Paul exhorts the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19. cap.
2.3.
that they should not henceforth, walk as other Gentiles in the vanities of
their minds, in Lasciviousness, and all Uncleanness: Hence the Prophet
Jeremy, speaks thus unto the house of Israel: Ier. 10.1, 2, 3
Thus says the Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at
the signs of Heaven, mark his reason: for the Heathen are dismayed, at them.
Hence God himself, does 2 Kings 17.15. ^ Chro. 33.2. Chap. 36 14 Psalm.
106.35. Ezech. 11.12 Ch^p 20.32. Cha^ ^3.30. Chap. 25.8.
often times in the Scriptures, reprove, and blame the Israelites, Manasseh, and
others, and likewise threaten Judgments against them, for going after the
Heathen, that were round about them: for running after their vanities,
customs, fashions, and abominations, conc^rning whom the Lord had said, that
they should not do like them, nor learn their works: Hence is it, 1 Samuel
8.5, 6, 7.20. Chap. 12.17, 18, 19.
that God reputed the desire of a King, which in it self is lawful, a heinous
sin in the Israelites, because it issued from an apish imitation of other
people: that they also in this respect, might be like all other Nations: and
hence, Zeph. 1.8. Isay 3.17. to 2^.
did he threaten to visit, not only the inferior rank of the Israelites;
but even the Children, and Courteours of their Kings, for wearing strange
Apparel, and taking up the garbes, and fashions, of those Pagans which
bordered round about them. If then it be unlawful to imitate, not only the
abominations, rites, and ceremonies: but even the prayers, cares^ and fear:
the government, and strange Apparel, of Infidels, and Pagans, as all these
Scriptures strongly evidence: much more must it be vile, and sinful, to trace
their foote-steps, in practicing, approouing, and frequenting, their
Histrionicall Stage-inuentions, which have no good, nor profit in them. How
chary, and fearful the Saints of God in former ages were, of admitting the
Festiuities, Customs, Ceremonies, Relics, or Inventions of Idolatrous
Pagans; how ready they were to disauow them; may appear by sundry instances,
that are Parallel with Stage Plays. De Corona Militis. lib. cap. 6, 7, 8.
Tertullian, cond^mnes the wearing of a Laurel Crown, or flowrie Garland by
way of Triumph, in a Christian Souldi^r; because those Crowns, and Garlands,
were first invented by the Devil, and See Demost. Oration De Corona. Oration
aduersus Midiam. Virgil. Copa p 510.
worn by his Minions, to his honor. Surius. Tom 1. Con. p 577.
The Council of Africk^, Canon 27. Prohibits Christians to make Feasts, or
Morricedaunces, on the Birth-dayes of Martyrs, because such Feasting, and
Dancing, Qu^ ab errore Gentilium attracta sunt.
had their Original from Gentilisme. Surius. Tom 1. page 299.
The Council of Ancyra, or Engury, Canon 21. exposes all Christians to five
years penance, who shall observe any Prophesies, Dreams, Diuinations, or
Fortune Tellers, after the customs of the Gentiles, or should entertain such
Diuiners, or South-s^yers in their houses. Surius. Tom. 2. p. 647.715.
The second Council of Towers, Canon 23. The Council of Antisyodorum, Canon
1. Saint Augustine, De Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersationis. Tract. Tom. 9. page
1448. Tom. 5. page 8. B.
Saint Ambrose, Oration. 11. Gratian, Causa. 26. Qu^st. 7. condemn the
observation of Newyeeres-day, and the sending of New-yeeres-gifts, as a sin,
threatening Excommunication, both from the Church, and Sacraments, to such who
should obs^rue it: because they were but the Relics, and Observations of
Pagans, See Ovid. Fastorum. l. 1. Caeli^s. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. lib. 23. cap. 11.
Polyd. Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 4. Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. cap.
9. Al^x. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 8.
who Cons^^rated this day, to the honor of Ianus their Deuill-God, and sent
reciprocal Newyeeres-gifts to their friends upon it. Surius. Tom. 2. page 748.
B.
The first Council of Braga, Canon 29. Prohibits all such, who are ordained
Readers in the Church, to sing in a Secular habit, or to give over their
degree, after the manner of the Gentiles: Surius. Tom 3. page 40. B. Gratian
Cau. 26. Quaest. 5. and 7.
The French Synod under Pope Zachary, in the year 742. enjoined all Bishops,
to give all diligence to inhibit, and keep back Christians, from all the
Relics of Paganism, and G^ntilisme: as Pageants, Southsayings, Diuinations,
Lot-fortunes, Sacrifices to Saints, and Martyrs, near to Churches, after a
Pagan manner; Sacril^gious fires, called N^dfire, or Bonefires, with all other
Heathenish Observations, and Ceremonies; because they are unbeseeming
Christians. Su^ius. Tom 2. page 757. B. Gratian^ Cau. 26. Quaest. 5. and 7.
The Canons of the Greeks Synods, collected by Martin, Bishop of Braga, Can.
71, 72, 73, 74, 75. Prohibit the entertainment of Southsayers,
Fortune Tellers, and Diuiners, into Christians houses, after the custom of the
Pagans, ^ither to expel some evil out of them, or to purge them by some Pagan
Spelles, under five years penance. Yea, they say expressly: that it is
unlawful for Christians, to retain the traditions of the Gentiles, in See
Ier. 10.1, 2, 3 Gratian. Causa. 26. Quaest. 5. Aug. De Rectitud. Cathol.
Con^uersat. Tract. Tom. 9. page 1447, 1448. Accordingly.
observing the course of the Elements, Moon^, or Stars, or the vain
fallacies of Signs; in building Houses, in sowing Corn, in planting Trees, or
solemnizing Marriages: that it is unlawful to obser^e Calends, or to addict
themselves to Heathenish Feastiualls, and Delights; or to deck up their Houses
with Laurel, Hedera est gratissima. Baccho. Ovid. Fastorum. lib. 3. page ^7.
Yuie, and green boughs, (as we use to do in the Christmas season:) because
all this observation is descended of Paganism: and that Christians ^ay not
observe, or use any Spelles, or Ceremonies, in gathering medicinal Herbs, or
in their lanifices; because the Heathens did observe them. Surius Tom. 1. page
513. B. Carranza. fol. 70.
The fourth Council of Carthage, Canon 16. together with Saint Hierom^, Epist.
22. cap. 13. Prohibit Christian Bishops, to read the Books of the Gentiles.
Surius. Tom 1. page 457.294, 295.
The Council of Laodicea, Canon 37.39. The Council of Ancyra, Canon 5, 6, 7.
Saint Ambrose Orat. 3. Tertullian De Spectaculis. lib. with sundry others
inform us: that it is a great sin to observe the Feastiualls, or Solemnities
of Pagans; to be present with them at their Feasts; to retain their
Feastiuall-gifts; or to communicate with them in their Ceremonies, which are
not of God: whence they prohibit Christians from them, under pain of
Excommunication, and two years Penance. Surius. Tom 2. page 1053. A. 1^49. B.
1050. S^e August. De Rect. Cathol. Conuers. Tract. Tom. 9. part. 1. p. 1447,
1448.
The sixth Council of Constantinople, Canon 96. Excommunicates all such as
shall swear the Oaths of the Gentiles: Yea, the same general Council, Canon
62. disanulles, and condemns the observation of the Sea Alex. ab Alexandro.
Genial. Dierum. lib. 3. cap^ 8. AElij. Lampridij. Seuerus page 23^ 1. Ovid.
Fastorum. lib. 1.2, 3.5. How the Pagans observed them.
Calends, and Winter votes: all meetings, on the first of March; all public
Dancing of Women: all Mummings, Dauncings, Sportes, and Ceremonies, which
might provoke Laughter, under the name of Bacchus, or any other, which was
falsely named a God among the Graecians: inflicting Excommunication, and
Deposition on those that should from thence observe them, because they were the
Impostures of Satan, and the Sportes, and Vanities of the Heathen: Yea, Canon
65. It prohibits the making of See August. De Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersat.
Tract. Tom. 9. part. 1. page 1448. Accordingly.
Bonefires on New-moones, before the Houses, or Shops of Christians; together
with all skipping, jesting, and fooling about them, after the Ancient custom,
under the foresaid penalty; as being a Pagan practice, condemned in Manasseh:
in the 2 Chro. 33.2.5, 6. And Can. 70. it informs us: that Christians who are
taught the Laws of God, ought not to use the manners, Tumblings, Plays, and
Vestments of the Grecian Infidels. De Ebr^etate and Luxu. Sermo.
Saint Basil, and De Tempore. Sermo. 132. See my Healthes Sickness. Argument.
14.
Saint Augustine, condemn the Drinking, and Pledging of Healthes, from this
very ground; that they were the invention of the Devil, and the observations,
or relics of Infidels, and Pagans: Clemens Romanus, Constit. Apostol. lib. 2.
cap. 66. Surius. Tom. 3. p^g. 727. Gratian. Cau, 27. Quaest^ 1.
The third Council of Arles: The third Council of Toledo, Canon 23.
Nazienzen. Oration. 48. p. 796, 797. Cyrillus. Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1. with
sundry other Counsels, and Fathers, which I might enumerate, prohibit, and
condemn all lascivious Dancing, all scurrilous Songs, and Jests, with sundry
other Sportes^ and Mer^^ments, because they were the Recreations, Ceremonies,
and Inventions of Heathen men. The Council of Eleberi^, Canon^ 34.37. The
second Council of Arles, Canon 23. Tertullian in his Apology against the
Gentiles: and his Book against Idolatry. Lactantius De vero Culta. lib. 6.
cap. 2. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus. Catech. Mystagogica 1. together with Ormerod
in his Pagano-Papismus. Semblance 37.123, 124, 125. Condemn the burning of
Tapers in Church-yardes, or Churches, See Nazienz^n. Oration. 48. page 796.
Hierom. aduers. Vigilantium cap. 23. Nazienzen Oration in Pascha. Rhenanus in
Ter^ul^ Apolog. August. De Tempore. S^rmo. 3. Arti^les of Ireland. Art. 52.
Queen Eli^abeth^ Iniuncti^ons. Iniunct. 23 Doct^r Reinolds Con^^rence with
Heart ^ap. ^. Division 4. page 512, 513.492 494, 495. Homely against the peril
of Idolatry 3. part. page 75. Polyd. Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap.
23. lib. 6. cap. 12.
especially in the daytime, as the Papists do) upon the selfsame reason:
even because the Pagans practiced it: as i^ evident by Baruch 6.19. by Pliny.
Not. Hist. lib. 16. cap. 37. Suetonij C^lig. cap. 13. Virgil. AEneid. lib. 11.
p. 353. Copa. p. 510. and Tatianus Oration aduers. Graecos. And yet the Papists
are not ashamed for to use them: Saint Hierome, and Theodoret, in their
Commentaries, and Interpretations on Ezech. 44.20. which inioyne the Priests,
not to shave their heads, but only to poll them; make the ground of this
Iniunction, the practice of the Idolatrous Priests of Isis, and Serapis, Baruch
6.31. Apuleius Aurei. Asini. lib. 11. AElij Lamprid. Commodus page ^8. AElij
Spar^iani. P^scennius. page 137. Herodoti. Euterpe. Sect 45. page 102.
Diodorus. Siculus. Bibl. Hist. Sect. 83, 84. Bo^mus De Moribus Gent. lib. 1.
cap. 5. p. 34. Plu^arch. De Iside and Osiride. lib. M^r. Tom. 2. page 131.
Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dierum. lib. 6 cap. 12. fol. 349. Polyd. Virgil^ De Invent.
Rerum. lib. 4. c. 8. Ormerod^ Pagan^ papismus Semblance^ 99. Ainswort^, on
L^uit. 19.27. and 21.5. Munster. Cosmog. lib. 3. cap. 38. page 1311.
Accordingly.
who did use to shave their crown, and beards, and make bald their heads. Yet
notwithstanding, this express command of God himself, which is likewise
seconded by L^uit. 19.27. and 21.5. Gotardus Histor. Indiae page 307. Guagninus
Re^um Polon. page 305. Erasmus Moriae Encomium. page 301. Polyd. Virgil. De
Invent. Rer^m. lib. 4. cap. 8.
All Popish Priests, and Friars, do shave their heads, and beards, in
imitation of these, and other Idolatrous Busbequius. Epist. Eccles. Ep. 4. page
277. Bo^mus De Mor. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 6. page ^3. Zenophon, Histor^ Graecae.
lib. 1. page 449. Acosta. Indian. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 16. page 373. Orosius,
Histor. lib. 4. cap 20. page 225. Guagninus, Rerum Polon. Tom. 3. page 444.
Lerius, De Nauigat. in Brasil. cap. 8.
Priests, and Nations; yea, they do Concil^ Toletanum. 4. Canon. 40.
Aquisgranense Council. Sub. Lud. Pio. cap. 1. Council Romans Sub. Greg. 2. Can. 17.
Lateran. Sub. Innocent. 3 part. 28. ca^. 4 Agathense^ Can 20. Capit^ Graecar.
Synod. Can. 66. Lateranense. Sub. Leone. 10. Sess. 9. Su^ Tom 4^ page 633.6.
Gratian. Distinc. 33.
inioyne this To^sure to them by sundry Counsels, and Decrees: for which not
only BB. Babbingtons Notes on Leuit. 19. Sect. 14. D. Reinolds Conference with
Heart. cap. 4. Diuis. 8. page 494, 495. Will^ts Synop. p. 353, 354. Ormerod.
Pagano-Papis. Sembla 99. Ainsw. Ca^u Lauat^r and most other Protestant
Commentators on Leuit^ 19.27. cap. 2^.5. and Eeze. 44.20.
Protestants, but even their own John Valerian. De Sacerdotum Barbis lib.
E^asmus Moriae Encomium. page 301. Pol^d Virgil. De Inu^nt rerum^ lib. 4. cap.
8. Agrippa. De Van. Scient. cap. 62.
Popish writers do condemn them, as Heathenish, and absurd; Pope Anicetus was
the first that made this innovation: as Gratian. Distinctio. 33. Polyd. Virgil.
De Invent. Rerum. lib. 4. cap. 8. and Lorinus on Leuit. 19.27. record: contrary
to the express Word of God; and the fourth Council of Carthage. Canon 44.
which inioyneth Clerks, or Clergymen: neither to let their hair grow long,
nor yet to shave their beards: which their Binius, Surius, Carranza, and Crabb,
have miserably corrupted: as John Valerian in his Book, De Sacerdotum barbis,
witnesses: rendering it in this manner. Clerici nec comam nutriant, nec barbam;
shauing away this word radant, from the latter clause, as a superfluous
excrement; because it expressly condemns their See Clem. Alexa. Paedag. lib.
3. cap 3. and 11. Clem. Romanus Constit. Apost lib. 1. cap. 4. Lorinus Com. in
Leuit. 19.27. who utterly condemn the shauing of men's beards
Effeminate, Unnatural, Heathenish, and Popish shauing. If then these several
Fathers, and Counsels have utterly condemned, these Morrice-daunces,
Bonefires, Newyeeres-gifts, Newyeeres-dayes, Diuinations, Lotteries, Mummings,
Dancings, Healthes, Tapers, See Council. Eliberinum. Can 55.
Shauen-crownd, and bare-chind Priests, together with all the other
fore-recited Ceremonies, Customs, and Observations, (which are now too
frequent among Christians,) as sinful and abominable, because they were in use
among the Gentiles, and had their rise, and birth from Pagans: then certainly,
by the same analogy of reason; we must needs reject, and censure
Stage Plays, as pernicious, unseemly, and unlawful unto Christians, because
they had their birth, their authority, use, and progress from Idolatrous
Heathens, and the deboisest Pagans. Upon this very ground, among sundry others:
Tertullian, and Cyprian, in their Books De Spectaculis. Clemens Romanus
Constit. Apost. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. Clemens Alexandrinus Oration. Adhort. ad
Gentes. fol. 8.9. Tatianus Oration. aduersus Gr^cos. Bibliotheca Patrum.
Coloniae Agrip. 1616. Tom. 2. p. 180, 181. Athen^goras, pro Christianis
Legatio. Ib. page 138, 139. Theophilus Antiochenus Contr. Autolichum. lib. 3.
Ib. page 170. Arnobius Disput. aduersus Gentes. lib. 7. page 230. to 242.
Lactantius De vero Cultu. cap. 20. Diuinarum Instit. Epit. cap. 6. Cyrillus
Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1. Fol. 175. B. Minutius Foelix Octauius. page
34.101.123. Hierom. Epist. 18. cap. 1. Com. in Ezech. lib. 6. cap. 20. Tom. 4.
page 389. H. Chrysostom, Hom. 6, 7. and 38. on Mat. Ambrose, Sermo. 11. and
81. Augustine De Ciu. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31, 32, 33. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 15. De
Rectitudine Cathol. Conuersationis Tractatus. De Doctrina Christiana. lib. 2.
cap. 25. Saluian. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6. Ioannis Salisburiensis. De Nugis
Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 7, 8. Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 62. The Council of
Afric. Canon 26, 27. D. R^inolds, Gosson, and Northbro^ke, in their Books
against Stage Plays; together with sundry other Counsels, and Authors, which I
shall muster up hereafter; condemn these Stage Plays, as unlawful, and
misbese^ming Christians; even because they were the Inventions, Sportes, and
Ceremonies of Gentiles, which Christians must not entertain. Now there is in
truth great reason, why Christians should not imitate, nor embrace the
Pleasures, Sportes, and ceremonies of the Heathen, though many Libertines, and
Non minu^ de^ecti qua^ el^ti animi est, voluntate vti, negligere rationem: and
veluti rationis expertem, non pro rati^one, sed pr^ libitu agere; nec iudicio
vti, sed appetit^. Bernard. De Consid. lib. 3. cap 4.
Licentious Christians, who make their will, and lusts their law, may deem it
Puritanisme, or brand it for ouerstrict preciseness, in this dissolute, and
unruly age.

For first, the Scriptures do positiuely inform us; 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. 1
Cor. 10.21.
that Righteousnesse^ has no fellowship with Unrighteousness; nor Light with
Darkness: that Christ has no concord with Belial; that he that believes,
has no part, nor portion with an Infidel: that the Temple of God has no
agreement wi^h Id^les: and that we cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of De^ils, nor be partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils.
If then Christ, if Christians, and Infidels have no communion; great reason is
it, Quis agis? Deum in teipso gestas; and ad illos curris quibus cum Deo nihil
commune est? Haec cine veni^ digna ^unt? Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in 2 Cor. 6.
that they should not intercommon in these Heathenish Spectacles, and delights
of sin.

Secondly, all Christians have vowed in their Baptism: to forsake the Devil
and all his works, the Pompes, and Vaniti^s of this wicked world, and all the
sinful lusts of the and have they any reason then, to harbor, or retain the
Ceremonies of Worldlings, or Enterludes of Pagans, which they have thus
seriously renounced?

Redeemed by the red, and precious blood of Jesus Christ, from Col. 2.20, 21,
22.
the ordinances, rudiments, and customs of the world: 1 Pet. 1.18.
from their vain conversation received by tradition from their Fathers: Ru.
14.3, 4.
they are purchased from off the earth, and from among the sons of men: John
15 19. Cap. 17 14.
they are ransomed, and taken out of this World, and made m^n of another world,
that so Phil 3.20.
they might have their whole conversation with God in Heaven; 1 Pet. 1.15. 2
P^t. 3.1^. Luke 1.74, 75.
and walk on in all holy conversation, and godliness, serving God in
holiness, and true Righteousness, all the days of their lives: Christ Jesus
himself has bought them at the dearest rate for this very end, Romans 14.8.
Cap. 12.2. Gal 2.1^, 20. 1 Pet. 4.2. 2 Cor. 5.15.
that they should no longer live to the world, or to the will, and lusts of
men, but unto him alone: Ephe. 5.8.11
that they should cast off the works of Darkness, and put on the armor of
Light: Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19. Cap. 2.2.3.
that they should not henceforth walk as other Gentiles, in the vanity of
their minds, following the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, giving
themselves over to Lasciviousness, and uncleanness: 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3.
that the time past of their lives might suffice them to have wrought the will
of the Gentiles, when as they walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Reuellings,
Banquetings, and abominable idolatries: Tit. 2.12, 13, 14.
that they should now deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and walk soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed coming,
and appearance of their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
that they should not henceforth walk according to the course of this world,
according to the power of the Prince of the air, which now works in the
children of disobedience: Iam. 1.27. Acts 2.40.
but that they should be pure, and undefiled before God, keeping themselves
unspotted from the World: Since therefore Ie^us Christ ha^h thus Redeemed all
Christians from the World, and all i^s Pagan customs, pleasures, ceremonies,
and delights of sin, Ephesians. 1.4. Col. 2 22.
that so they might be holy, and blameless before him in love, Titus 2.14. ^
Pet. 2.9.
and become a peculiar people to him, Zealous of good works: great reason is
there, that they should abominate all Pagan practices, Enterludes, and
Ceremonies, as unlawful, and misbeseeming Christians: else they should but
euacuate, and make void unto themselves the death of Christ: H^br. 10.29.
yea trample under feet his precious blood, and put him unto open shame: And
would any Christian be so ungrateful, so dispitefull to his blessed Savior,
(whose Clamat clauus, clamat vulnus quid vere D^us sit in Christo mu^dum
reco^cilians sibi: Patent viscera misericordiae, patet arcanum cordis per
foramin^ corporis. Quid tam ad mortem quod non Christi morte saluetur? Bernard.
Super. Cant. S^rm. 61.
bleeding wounds do preach Salvation to his fiercest enemies,) as thus to
wrong, and shame him?

Fourthly, man's nature is exceeding prone to Paganism, and Heathenish
superstition; as is evident, not only by the frequent Apostasies of the
Israelites to gross Idolatry, recorded Se^ 2 Chro. 33 2. to 10.4. Ezech. 8.6.
to 18. Psalm. 106.33. to 40. Iere. 7.17, ^8.31. Ezech 16.15. to 36. ^or all the
rest.
in the Scriptures; but likewise by that general deluge of Heathenisme,
Mahometisme, and hideous Idolatry, which now, and always heretofore, has
ouerspred the greatest part of all the world: God See Hi^rom, and Theodore^s
Com. in Ezech. 44.5. Amb^os. Sermon. 11. Lorinus, BB. Babington, Caluin^ and
Ainsworth^ on Leuit. 19.27. Willets Synopsis Papismi. page 354, 355. Who give
this reason.
therefore out of his Fatherly care, and compassi^n ^o his Children, to
anticipate all occasions, which might withdraw them from him, to Idolatry;
does often times prohibit them, to imitate the Fashions, Customs, Vanities,
Habites, Rites, or Ceremonies of Infidels, and Heathen Gentiles; for fear lest
one thing should draw on another by degrees, till they were quite Ap^statized
to Idolatry, and seduced from the Faith. Whereupon, Ludos diabolicos, ve^
vacillationes, vel cantic^ gentilium fieri vet^te: nullus Christianus hoc
exerceat, quia per hoc Paganus efficitur. De Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersationis.
Tract. Tom. 9. page 1447, 1448.
Saint Augustine exh^rts all Christians, to prohibit the use of all diabolical
Enterludes, Vacillations, and songs of the Gentiles: and that no Christian
should exercise any of these, because by this he is made a Pagan. Since
therefore the imitation of Pagan customs, pleasures, and delights, are but so
many ingredients, and See Leuit. 18.30. Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30.
allectiues to Paganism, and gross Idolatry; and since they alienate, or at
least in some degree, disioyne our affections from God, and heavenly things;
there is ground, and cause enough, that Christians should reject them, as
sinful, and pernicious. So that upon all these authorities, and reasons, (the
force of which no pious heart is ever able to withstand:) I may safely conclude
this second Scaene, with this short Corollary: That Stage Plays are sinful,
unseemly, pernicious, and unlawful, at least wise unto Christians; because
they were the inventions, ceremonies, and pastimes of Idolatrous Infidels, and
the most Licentious Heathens, ( who were no other but the Ipsi scilicet sibi
procurauerunt Daemones, per ^os in quibus esurierant an^equam procurauerunt.
Tertul. De Coron. Militis. cap. 6.
Devils Purueyers,) whom Christians must not imitate.

ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Argument 3. Stage Plays were at first invented, and destinated to Idolatrous,
and sinful ends^ therefore they must needs be sinful, and unlawful.
SEcondly, as Stage Plays are thus sinful, unseemly, pernicious, and
unlawful unto Christians, in regard of their original, and primitive
Inuentors: so likewise are they such in respect of those Idolatrous,
unwarrantable, and Unchristian ends, to which they were destinated, and
designed at the first. The chief and primarie end of inuenting, instituting,
or personating Stage Plays; was the Dubium non est quod laedunt Deum vtpote
Idolis consecratae. Colitur namque and honoratur Minerua in gymnasiis, Venus in
Theatris, Neptunus in Circis, Mars in arenis, Mercurius in palestris, and ideo
pro qualitate auctorum, cultus est superstitionum. Alibi est impudicitia, alibi
lasciuia, alibi intemperantia, alibi i^sania; vbique d^mon: imo per singula
ludicrorum loca vniuersa daemonum monstra, Praesident enim sedibus suo cultu^
dedicatis. Salu. De. Gub. Dei. lib. 6. page 206.
superstitious worship, or at least wise, the pacification, or atonement, of
Jupiter, Bacchus, Neptune, the Muses, Flora, Apollo, Diana, Venus, Victoria, or
some such Deuill-gods, or Goddesses, which the Idolatrous Pagans did adore; to
whose honor, names, and memories, these Plays ( which were always Acted, and
celebrated heretofore, as the ensuing Authors testify, on those Festival,
and Solemn days, which were dedicated to the special service, and
commemoration of these Idols:) were at first devoted. That Stage Plays, (yea,
and Theaters, or Play Houses too,) were primarily invented for the honor, and
Dedicated to the service (or at leastwise often times Celebrated in times of
Pestilence, to appease the anger,) of these Idole-Gods, whose Images, and
Pictures, were carried about, and represented in them: we have the express
authorities, not only of Plutarch, in the life O^ Romulus, and Romanae Quaest.
Quaest. 107. of Dionysius Hallicarnasseus Antiq. Roman. lib. 2. cap. 3.5. and
lib. 7. cap. 9. Of Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap. 4. Of Thucidides. Hist. lib.
3. Of Liuie. Romans Hist. lib. 2. Sect. 36. l. 1. Sect. 9.20. l. 7. Sect. 2.3. l.
26. Sect. 23. lib. 5. Sect. 1. lib. 42. Sect. 20. Of Demosthenes Orat. aduersus
Midi^m. Of Horace De Art Poetica. lib. Of Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Diodorus Siculus. Histor. lib. 17. Sect. 16. with sundry Rusticus ad ludos
populus ventebat in vrbem: Sed dis, non studiis ille dabatur ^onos: Luce sua
ludos vuae Commentor ha^ebat: Quos cum taedifera nunc habet ille D^a Quid.
Pastorum. l. 3. page 57.
other Pagan Authors: but likewise of Tatianus. Oration. aduersus Graecos. Of
Theophilus Antiochen^s aduers. Autolicum. lib. 3. Of Clemens Alexandrinus.
Oration. Exhort. ad Gentes. fol. 8, 9. Of Tertullian. De Spectaculis. cap. 5, 6,
7. Of Cyprian. De Spectaculis. lib. Of Arnobi^s aduersus Gentes. lib. 7. Of
Lactantius Diuinarum. Instit. Epit. cap. 6. and De vero Cultu. cap. 20. Of
Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Mat. and Hom. 3. De Dauide and Saul. Of Saint
Hierom. Comment. in Ezech. lib. 6. cap. 20. Epist. 9. cap. 5. and 10. cap. 4.
and 13. cap. 2. and 23. cap. 1. Of Saint Augustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap.
32, 33. lib. 2. cap. 6.8.10, 11. lib. 4. cap. 1. Of Theodoret. Contr. Graecos
Infideles. lib. 7. Of Saluian. lib. 6. De Gub. Dei. Of Orosius. lib. 3.
Historiae. cap. 4. Of Isiodor. Hisp. Etymolog. lib. 18. cap. 27. Of Cassiodorus
Variarum. lib. 1. cap. vel. Epist. 27.30. lib. 3. cap. 51. lib. 7. cap. 10.
with other Fathers: Of John Mariana, Master Northbrooke: Doctor Reinolds, and
Master Gosson, in their Books against Stage Plays: Of Ludouicus Viues.
Comment. in lib. 1. and 2. August. De Ciu. Dei. Of Alexander, ab Alexandro.
Genesis Dierum. lib. 5. cap. 26. Of Polydor Virgil. De Inuentor. Rerum. lib. 1.
cap. 10. Of Coelius Rhodiginus. Antiq. Lect. lib. 8. cap. 7. Of Alexander
Sardi^. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 1. Of Master Godwins Roman Antiquities. lib. 2.
Sect. 3. cap. 1. to 12. with many other Modern writers; who all give
punctual, unanimous, and uncontrollable testimony: That Stage Plays were at
first invented, and celebrated to the honor: and for many hundred years
together appropriated to the solemn worship, and service of these Idole-Gods;
who often times called for them to atone their anger, divert their judgments,
demerit their protection, or reward their favors. The original end, and
primary use of Stage Plays then, was odious, and Idolatrous, as all these
Authors testify: Therefore these Plays themselves, (as the recited Fathers,
and Christian Writers do from thence infer,) must needs be sinful, and
utterly unlawful unto Christians. I confess, that since ^he nativity, and
birth of Stage Plays, they have been sometimes wrested by the Heathen, to
some other distorted, and Unchristian ends, besides the worship, or
pacification of their Idole-Gods. Sometimes they have been instituted, and
performed, by way of Victory, and Triumph; and that commonly, in execution of a
preuious solemn vow, made to some Deuil-God, by the victorious General,
before the Battle joined: of which we have frequent examples in the Liuie.
Romans Hi^t. lib. 4. Sect. 12 27.35. lib. 5. Sect. 1^. lib. 7. Sect. 15.11. lib.
26. Sect. 23. lib. 27. Sect. 25. lib. 22. Sect. 10. lib. 34. Sect. 43. Trebel
Pollionis Gallieni. page 309.
Roman Histories: whose chief Commanders, did usually vow some solemn Plays,
and Sacrifices to their Gods, if they would be so propitious toward them, as
to give them the honor of the Field, and chasing of their Enemies: which vows
they did perform accordingly, upon their wished success. Other times they
have been purposely celebrated, to be a kind of Pander to men's lusts: Liuie.
Romans Hist. lib. 1. Sect. 9. Dionysius Hallicar. Antiq Romans lib. 2. cap. 5.
Plutarchi Romulus Macrobius. Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 9. Strabo. Geogr. lib. 5.
p^g. 460. Orosius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 4. Eutropius. Rerum. Romans lib. 1. Romuli
vita. Cyprian. De Specta^. lib. August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 17. Opmeer^s
Chronog. page 89 Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dierum. lib. 5. cap. 26. Zonaras Annal.
Tom. 2. fol. 54. ^lin. Not. Hist. lib. 15. cap. 29. Petrarch. De Remed. Vtr.
Fort. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Primus sollicitos f^cisti Romule ludos. Cum iuuit
viduos rapta Sa^ina viros, Romule militibus sci^^i dare commoda solus: Haec
mihi si dederis commoda miles ero^ Scilicet ex illo solemnia more Theatra, Nunc
quoque formosis insidiosa manent. Ovid. De Art amandi. page 160.161.
Witness the Plays that Romulus made, to betray the Sabine Virgins, to the
Rape, and Lusts of his unmarried Soldiers: (upon whose Rauishment, there arose
a bloody war:) to which end, and use, they serve as yet. Other times See
Plato. Legum Dialogus. ^. and Coelius Rhod. Antiquarum. Lect. lib. 8. cap 7.
Accordingly.
they have been Acted for Lasciviousness, delight, and pleasure sake, (the
only use which men pretend for Stage Plays now:) Hence De Inuenttoribus Rerum
lib. 1. ^ap. 10.
Polidor Virgil observes; that Comedies took their denomination from the
Greek words (...): which signifies, to play the Wanton, or Lascivious person.
Minshew Dictionarie. Numb 2719.
Others derive their name, from Comus; the God of wantonness, and riot: Ludo.
V^ues Com. in lib. 2. cap. 8. August. De Ciu. Dei.
others from (...): because they were Lasciuiously Acted heretofore in ways,
being fraught with petulant, and wanton words: all of them concurring in this;
Gossons Con^utation of Plays. Act 3. Master Northbrooke, and Doct. Reinolds,
in their book^ against Plays. Accordingly.
that their end is nothing else, but Lascivious, Carnal, and Unchristian
mirth; and therefore evil, and unlawful. If then this be yielded to me, (as
of necessity it must be:) that Stage Plays were originally, destinated, yea,
appropriated, to the fore-recited Idolatrous, and unlawful ends, but more
especially, to the honor, and service of abominable Idols, to whose solemn
worship they were actually devoted, for many hundred years together, and that
by their own special command, which makes them Porro si quae alis idolis
faciunt, ad daemones pertinent; quanto magis quod ipsa sibi Idolae fec^runt cum
ad^iuerent? Tertul. De Corona Militis. cap. 6.
wholly theirs: I shall hence infer a third argument.

That invention which was primarily ordained, yea, for many hundred years
together, appropriated, and devoted, to the immediate worship, and solemn
gratification of Deuil-gods; Admisceri huic Christianum hominem superstitions,
genus est sacrilegii: quiae eorum cultibus communicate, quorum festiuitatibus
delectatur. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. page 206. Se^ Gualth^r. Hom. 13. in
Hoseam. Accordingly.
must of ne^essitie be pernicious, unseemly, and unlawful unto Christians,
especially, if it be not necessary, or useful unto men.

But Stage Plays were primarily ordained, yea, for many hundred years
together, appropriated, and devoted, to the immediate worship, and solemn
gratification of Deuil-gods, and they are no ways necessary, nor useful unto
m^n.

Therefore they must of necessity be Pernicious, Unseemly, and Unlawful unto
Christians.

The Mayor is evident by the cloud of witn^sses, recited in the premises; by
those several Historical authorities, recorded in the first Act, and Scaene
of this Tragedy, to prove the Devil, the Author of these Enterludes: and by
the general acknowledgement of all See Ovid. F^storum. l 5. page 88, 89 95.
Learned writers: so that I may spare all further proof. The Mayor, no
Christian can, or dares deny, unless he will turn professed Proctor for the
Devil: If any be so Heathenish, or Atheistical, as to gainsay it, I shall
easily euict the truth of it, by these ensuing reasons.

See Cyril. Hierusolom. Ca^echisis. Mystag. 1. Accordingly.
primarily ordained, and for many hundred years together appropriated, to the
solemn worship, and gratification of Deuil-gods, (as Stage Plays were:) for
he covenants by his sureties; to forsake the Devil and all his works:
therefore the Mayor must be yielded.

Leuit. 18.30. Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30.
not to follow the customs of the Canaanites, nor yet to inquire after them,
saying: how did these Nations worship their Gods, that I might do so likewise?
Hence he commanded them, Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3, 4.16.25, 26. Cap. 12.3. Cap. 20.16, 1^,
18. Josh. 7.12. Cap. 11.12. Judges 2.2. Number. 33.^2. See Hookers Ecclesiastical
Policy. lib. 5. cap. 17.
to burn the Groves, the Images, with all the appurtenances of Idole-gods,
with fire: to destroy their Altars, pull down their Temples, cut off their
Priests, and worshippers, abolish their memories, abandon their ceremonies, and
not s^ much as ^o save, or reserve any remnant of them, but utterly to abhor,
and detest them, as an accursed thing. Yea, hence he obliges them, Exodus
23.13^ Deuteronomy. 6.13, 14. Cap. 12.3. Psalm. 16^4. Hosea 2.17. Zech. 13.2^
to destroy even the very names of their Idols: not to make mention of the
names of other Gods: not to suffer them to be heard out of their mouths: nor
yet so much, as to participate of any of their Sacrifices, Rites, or
Ceremonies. Therefore since God has given such special charge against the
relics, and monuments of Idolatry heretofore: it cannot but be sinful,
unseemly, and Unchristian, for us to foster, or admit of Varro non tantum in
rebus humani^ sed in rebu^ diuinis ponit ludos scenicos e cum vtique si
tantummodo boni and honesti homi^es in ciuitate essent^ nec in rebus humani^
ludi scenic^ esse debuissens. Quod profecto non autoritate sua fecit, sed
quoniam e^s Romae natu^ and educat^^ in diuinis rebus inuenit. August. De Ciu.
Dei. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Stage Plays, or any other Inventions now, which were originally ordained, and
for many hundred years together appropriated, to the solemn worship, and
gratification of Idole-Deuill-Gods.

Thirdly, the Scriptures do peremptorily enjoin all Christians, Act.
15.20.29. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. Psalm. 16.4 1 Cor. 8.1. to 11.
to abstain from things offered, or consecrated unto Idols: as these
Stage Plays were.

First, 1 Cor. 10.20. Omni ^^udio Gentilium fe^^iuitates and ferias declinemus,
quia qui vult esse diuinorum particeps, non debet esse socius Idolorum.
Ambrose, Sermo. 11.
because the things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils,
and not to God: therefore those that participate of them, must needs have
communion with the Devil: and I would not (says the Apostle) that ye should
have fellowship with Devils. Secondly, 1 Cor. 10.21. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.
because Christians cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils:
they cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils: for what
fellowship has Righteousness, with Vnrighteo^snesse? What communion has
Light with Darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? what part has
he that Believes with an Infidel? or what agreement has the Temple of God
with Idols? God, and the Devil, Christ, and Belial, are contrary, are
inconsistent: therefore the service, and ceremonies of the one, are altogether
incompatible with the other. Thirdly, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
because Christians must not be unequally yoaked with unbelievers, with whom
they have no part nor fellowship: now if they should communicate with the
Gentiles in Stage Plays, or things consecrated to their Idols: they should
be then unequally yoaked, they should have part, and fellowship with Infidels,
in this respect: which God will not allow of. Fourthly, 1 Cor. 8.4. to 13. Romans
14.15, 16.20.21.
because the Consciences of the weaker brethren, should not be grieved,
offended, defiled, or emboldened, by others participation of these Idolatrous
Sacrifices; to their ruin, and the Gospels scandal: Fifthly, Leuit. 18.29, 30.
Deuteronomy. 12.31. Cap. 20.18. Cap. 18.9, 10. Cap. 7.25, 26.
because all the Sacrifices, relics, and ceremonies of Idols, are an
abomination to the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.22. Leuit. 18.28, 29.
and therefore provoke him unto wrath, to our destruction. Lastly, Deuteronomy. 7.25.
Cap. 20.17.18.
because they are a ready means to withdraw our hearts from God unto
Idolatry: therefore 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Omnia peruersas possunt corrumpere
mentes. Ovid. Trist lib. 2. page 155.
we must separate from them, and not so much as touch them, else God will not
rec^iue us as his people. Since therefore God upon all the former reasons does
thus seriously, and frequently prohibit, such ceremonies, and inventions, as
were instituted, and destinated to the Devils service at the first: My Mayor
is irrefragable, and my Conclusion true: That Stage Plays are pernicious,
unseemly, and unlawful Quale igitur habendum est, apud homines very Dei, quod
a ca^did^tis Diaboli introductum, and ipsis a primordio di^atum est, quodque
iam tunc idololatriae ini^i^batur ab Idolis, and i^ Idolis adhu^ vi^is? non
quasi aliquid sit Idolum, sed quoniam quod Idolis ali^ faciunt, ad damones
pertinent. Tertul. De Corona Militis. cap. 6.
unto Christians; because they were at first devoted to the honor, and for
many hundred years together, designed to the worship of some Idole-Gods, by
the very Devils favorites.

All that can be here replied to euade this Argument, is reducible to these
two heads. First, that the Dedication of Stage Plays to these Deuill-Gods, did
only Contract a Guilt, or Sinfulness upon those particular Plays, that were
really appropriated to their worship, and Celebrated to their honor: but Malum
videtur esse bonum illi, eui mentem deus impulit ad exitium. Sophocles.
Antigone. page 353. Number. 620.
not upon all the kind. Secondly, that though Pagans, or others have abused
Stage Plays, to Idolatrous, and unlawful ends, yet this is Let these
obiectors remember this: Difficilius est male percept^ dediscere, qu^m been
praecepta discere. Case. Polit^ lib. 4. cap. 1. page 313.
no impediment, but that Christians may reduce them to a commendable, and
lawful use, so that we cannot well conclude: That all popular Stage Plays are
unlawful, because the first of them were invented, and for a long tract of
time devoted, to the Devils worship.

To the first of these, Answer 1.
I answer with De Corona Militis. cap. 6, 7, 8.
Tertullian: that though the consecrating of any profitable, and useful
Inventions to Idole-Gods: See Polyd^ Virgil, and Alexander Sardis, De Rerum
Inuentoribus Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 1.2.
as of Letters, and Trade to Mercury: of Musick^, and Poetri^ to Apollo: of
Physic, to AEsculapius: of Ships, and Navigations to Neptune, and Minerua: of
Wins to Bacchus: of Corn, and Husbandry to Ceres: of Fire, and Smitheri^ to
Vulcan: and the like, by whom they were invented, as Heathen Poets, and
Historians feign: does no ways vitiate, or defile them in the general, but
that they are, and may be lawful unto Christians; because they are absolutely
necessary, at least^ise useful, unto men: for whose benifit by Gods
providence, they were at first invented: Even as the sacrificing of Tertul. De
Corona Militis. cap. 7.8. Alexander. ab Alexandro. Genesis Dierum. lib 3. cap. 12.
Ovid. Fasto^um. lib. 1.2.5 Horace. Carm. lib. 1. Ode. 36.
a Male-goate to Bacchus: of a Cock to AEsculapius: of a Bull to Jupiter: of a
Lamb, or She-goate unto Juno: of an Horse to Mars: of a Dove to Venus: of a
Swine to Pan: of a Do, or Heifer to Minerua: or of Myrre, and Frankincense to
other Idols, did stamp no Impresse of unlawfulness, or unholiness, on the
whole kinds, or species of these several creatures; (which did still retain
their entiti^e goodness in them:) though it did Acts 15.20^29. Psalm 16.4. 1
Cor. 8.1. to 11. Cap. 10.20, 21. Te^tul. De Corona Militis. cap^ 8. Carnes, and
panes, and ^i^us eiuscemodi pompae Satanae qui in Idolorum sole^^itatibus
suspendi solent, suapte quidem natura puri sunt, inuocatione tamen daem^num
impuri efficiuntur. Cyril. Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1.
so defile th^s^ individual, and particular creatures that were immediately
offered up in Sacrifice to them, that Christians might not lawfully eat of
them. Though, I say, it be always true in case of profitable Inventions, or
Gods good creatures: that the perverting of them to Idolatrous ends, does lay
a blemish upon the depraved Indiuidualls only, not impose an unlawfulness on
the whole species, or other Indiuidualls of their kind: Yet it is undoubtedly
true; Tertullian, De Corona Militis. cap. 7, 8. August^ De Doctrina.
Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 23. to 28. Gossons Consutation of Plays. Act. 1.
Accordingly.
that the destinating, and deuoting of Unprofitable, Pleasurable, Heathenish,
Infamous, Scandalous, and unnecessary Inventions, which neither the Scriptures,
nor Primitive Church approved, to Idolatrous, and Sinful ends, (and that from
their very first conception, which is the case of Stage Plays,) does make not
only the devoted Indiuidualls; but likewise the whole kind it self,
unlawful unto Christians^ so that no particulars of this nature may be used.
Hence Tertullian concludes; De Corona Militis. lib. cap. 7, 8, 9.
that it is utterly unlawful for Christians to wear a Laurel Crown, or
flowrie Garland in any case, though it be by way of Triumph: because these
Crowns were first invented for the honor, worn to the worship, and
consecrated to the service of Mill venit variis florum Dea nexa coronis. Ovid.
Fastor. lib. 4. page 81. Bacchus amat flores: Baccho placuisse coro^am, ex
Ariadnaeo sidere nosse potes, etc. Ovid. Fastor. lib. 5. page 89. vid. Ib. etc.
Pagan Deuill-gods: Hence the selfsame Father affirms; De Idolatria lib. cap.
18. to 24. See Gratian Distinctio. 86. Gregor. Mag. Epist. lib 9. cap. 48.
that it is no ways lawful, for Christians to retain the names of Jupiter,
Bacchus, Apollo, or other Idole-gods, or to impose them on their children:
because they were the names of Idols at the first: therefore unlawful to be
used now: Hence See page 22. to 2^.
the Fathers, Counsels, and fore-recited Protestant Authors, condemn all
Diuinations, Morrice-dances, Bonefires, Newyeeres-gifts; the observation of
Newyeeres-day; or the Calends of January: Effeminate mixed Dancing; Non oportet
Christianos ad nuptias euntes v^l balare, vel saltare, sed modeste co^nare and
prandere, sicut competit Christianis. Council. Laodicenum. Can. 53. Council.
Ilerdense. Can. vlt.
especially, at Weddings, where it is now most in use: burning of Hinc Cereris
sacris nunc quoque ^eda datur. Ovid. Fastorum. lib. 4. page 71.
Tapers in Churches, especially in the daytime, as the Papists use: shauing of
Priests crowns, and beardes, etc. as utterly unlawful unto Christians now;
Propterea Ap^stolus inclamat: Fugite Idololatriam: omnem vtique and ^otam.
Recogita siluam, and quantae latitant spinae. Nihil dandum Idolo: sic nihil nec
sumendum ab Idolo. Si in Idolio recumbere alienum est a fide, quid in Idoli
habitu videri? Quae communio Christi and ^eliae? and ideo fugite. Longum enim
diuortium mandat ab Idololatria, in nullo proxime agendum. Draco enim terrenu^
de longinquo, non minus spiritu absorbet alites. Ioannes filioli, inquit,
custodite vos ab Idolis: non iam ab Idololatria quasi ab officio, sed ab
Idolis, i^ est, ab ipsa effigy eorum, etc^ Tertul. De Corona Militis. cap. 8.
because they were Relics of Idolatry; yea, Sacrifices, appendices, and
devoted ceremonies of Idols heretofore: If then it be true in all these
cases; that the appropriating of some particulars to Idolatrous uses, does
wholly vitiate, and defile, not only the Indiuidualls thus devoted, but
likewise the whole Species of them, unto Christians: then needs must it be
true of Stage Plays, (which bring no glory at all to God, nor good to Church,
or State:) that the Idolatrous, and Unchristian ends, to which they were first
invented, and for many hundred years designed, must make them altogether
unlawful, abominable, and unseemly unto all Gods Children. And good reason is
there, that it should be so: See page 14, 15.
For where the Fountain is polluted, the streams are always filthy: where
the root is bitter, and corrupt, the fruit, and branches are so too: where
the foundation is decayed, the building must be ruinous. If Adam be but once
defiled by his fall, Psalm. 51.5. Job 14.4. Romans 3.4. to 24. cap. 5.8. to the
end. Ephesians. 2^ 23. Psalm. 14.2, 3. Genes 6.5.12, 13.
all his posterity must of necessity be borne sinners. The first invented
Stage Plays, were the Fountain, the Root, the Foundation, and common Father
of all the rest: now these were wholly Idolatrous, and polluted: they had the
Devil, and his Instruments for their Fathers; the Devils, honor, worship,
adoration, and recreation, for their maine, and utmost end: This all the
Fathers, and Christian Authors quoted. page 29 do testify in those their
writings. Spectacula vitanda sunt totaliter and cauend^ sapi^enti^us, quod ad
celebrandos deorum honores inuenta memorantur. Lactant. Diuinorum Instit. Epit.
cap. 6.
therefore all subsequent Plays which issue from their materials, or example;
must needs be detestable, unseemly, pernicious, and unlawful unto
Christians, in despite of this evasion, or all that any Libertines, or
voluptuous persons (who are but Satan's Proctors) can aleadge against it.

To the second reply: Reply 2.
That though Pagans did pervert these Stage Plays to an Idolatrous, yet
Christians may purge out their corruptions, and reduce them to a lawful use:
Hookers, Ecclesiastical Polity. lib. 4. Sect. 12.
Since that which was ordained impiously at the first, may wear out that
impiety in tract of time, and then the use thereof may stand without offense.

I answer, Answer 2.
that though it may be true in some particular cases; (as perchance See
Hookers Ecclesiastical Politie^ lib^ 4. cap. 12. lib. 5. cap. 11, 12.17. BB.
Halls Apology against Brownists. Sect. 45, 46. Accordingly.
in case of needful ceremonies; or of Temples built, and Dedicated to
Idolatry,) that their impiety in tract of time may vanish, and then they may
be Consecrated to Gods service, and reduced to a lawful use; as the Cathedral
Church of Paul's, afore-time the Temple of Diana, as Can^^e^i Bri^an^ia.
Middelsex. page 329, 330. Speedes History of Great Britain. lib. 7 cap. 8.
fol. 234. in the li^e of Seb^rt.
some record:) and most of all our English Churches, at ^ir^t devoted unto
Mass, and Popish Idolatry, are now designed to Gods public worship; whence
the Hookers Ecclesiasti^all Polity. lib. 5^ cap. 11.17.
Brownists style them, Idol Synagogues, Baals Temples, abominable sties, and
would have them rased to the ground; for which we all condemn them: yet it
cannot hold in case of Stage Plays.

First, because they are altogether unnecessary vanities, Vitiosum est vbique
quod supersl^um est. S^neca. De Tranquil. Animi cap. 8.
and superfluous pleasures, which may be better spared, then retained.
Secondly, because they have been, are, and always will be, 1 Cor. 10.32.33.
Phil. 4.8. Puta tibi non licere, (etsi alias fortasse liceat,) quicquid male
fuerit coloratum. Bernard. De Consid l. 3. c. 4.
scandalous, offensive, and of ill report among the Church, and Saints of God,
who have always declaimed against them, yea, censured, and rejected them, from
age, to age, as I shall prove at large hereafter. Thirdly, because from their
very first invention, to this present, (which is at least Neque vetustate
minuuntur mala. Cic. Tus^. Quest. lib. 3.
2000. years, or more,) they were never yet in any Age, or Country, that I
can hear, or read of; so regulated, or reformed by Laws, or other wise; as
to be thoroughly defaecated, and purged from their filthiness, or reduced to
such honest, commendable, profitable, necessary, or Christian ends, as might
justly plead in their defense. See 3. I^cobi. cap. 21.1. Iacobi cap. 7 14.
Eliz. cap. 5.33. Eliz cap. 7. Bodinus De Republica. l. 6. cap. 1. Marcus
Aurelius. cap. 14. and Epist. 12 to Lambert. Cassiodorus Variarum^ lib. 1.
Epist. 20. and 30. lib. 3. Epist 51. lib. 7. Epist. 10.
Many are the Laws which have been enacted; much the care that has been
taken by sundry States, and Censors in all Ages^ to loppe off the enormities,
allay the poison, purge out the silth, and gross corruptions of these
Stage Plays, and so to reduce them to a laudable, and inoffensiue use: but yet
these I^r. 13.23.
AEthiopians, still retain their black infernal hue: these Vipers keep
their Soule-deuouring poison still: these Augaean stables, are as polluted Ego
amplius dico; non solum agi nunc illas ludicrorum i^famium lab^s, quae prius
actae sunt; ^ed criminosius mult^ agi quam prius actae sunt. Salu. De Gub. Dei.
l. 6. p. 201.
yea, more defiled) now, as ever heretofore: no Art, no Age, no Nation could
ever yet abridge, much less reform, their exorbitant corruptions, and
enormities: their hurt does far transcend their good; their abuses ouerpoyse
their use: they are so Eccles. 1.15.
crooked, and distorted in themselves, that no Art can make them strait: there
is no other means left to reform them, but utterly to abolish them: It is
AEger est recursus ad honestatem his quae iam gradum ex nequitia protulerunt:
nihil sibi ipsis tecum putant commune, quia nihil simile est Pliny. Paneg.
August. Dictus. page 183. See Case. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 1. page 313.
bootelesse, it is hopeless therefore for any Christian to attempt, or
undertake their reformation: and so this Replication is but vain. Fourthly,
these Stage Plays are very like to poison: Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Ephesians 4.
vt laedant, nullo indigent; vt prosint multis: they are Non est in ^^s
reme^tum Christii+, sed vene^^m Diaboli August. De Recti^^. Cathol. Conuersat.
Tract. Tom. 9. page 1448.
poison of themselves, but they must have many ingredients to make them
wholesome: yea, the most accurate Chemist cannot so refine them, so compound
them, but that they will be more poisonous then wholesome; more pernicious then
useful, in their best condition: their vanity, and frothie discourse: their
lascivious complements, and wanton dalliance; their mispence of money, and that
which far transcends all treasures, Sumptuosissima est iactura temporis.
Lypsius. Epist. Cent. 1. Epist. 55. p. 69.
of precious, peerless time, (to omit all other circumstances;) will
ouer-ballance all the good, that the most refined Stage Plays can produce: It
is then but Neque enim q^^ s^^it, id quod ^ucun^ dum est, ei quod est (...)
praetulerit. Clemens Alexand. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11.
folly, and madness, yea, sin in Christians to retain them; though they
have hopes for to reform them, because Ex malis eligere minima oportet.
Cicero. De Officijs. lib. 2.
their evil would still exceed their good. Fifthly, it is but a mere
Sophistical, and deceitful Apology, to argue thus for Stage Plays: A posse
ad esse non valet argumentum R^^o^ Keckerman: and other Logicians.
They may be regulated, and reduced to good, and lawful uses; therefore they
are lawful unto Christians now: I take it for my own part; that Christians
should rather argue thus: They are only reduceable to good, and lawful ends,
but they are not yet reduced: their abuses may be reformed, but as yet they
are not corrected: therefore 1. These. 5.21. Ephesians. 5.10, 11.
we must take them as we find them now, unpurged, uncorrected; and so we must
1 These. 5.23. 1 Pet. 2.11. Jude 23.
needs avoid them, yea, condemn them. He that will plead for Stage Plays
thus: let him first reform them, then justify, and embrace them: else let him
join with us in their deserved condemnation, till he can evidently Non satis
est dicere sanandum esse vulnus, nisi dicatur quo modo. Pachymerus. Hist. lib.
4.
demonstrate to us their actual hopeless reformation. Sixthly, if Plays may
be reformed, and reduced to their lawful ends; what parties are there, that
should undertake their cure? Good men will not: they rather Vtinam omnes
diluerentur. Chrysostom. Ho. 38. in Mat.
wish their ruin, then their hopeless, vselesse welfare. Bad men will not,
because they approve them not, Nobis autem ridere and gaudere non sufficit,
nisi cum peccato atque insania gaudeamus: nisi risus noster impuritatibus, nisi
flagitiu^ misceatur. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. page 192.
but for their pleasing corruptions, which feed their carnal lusts: Yea, both
of them together cannot cleanse them from those inueterate corruptions, and
native obscenities, which adhere unto them. For my own part, I cannot possibly
conceive, how all our popular Stage Plays should be so refined, as that their
use, and practice should be every way Christian, and Legitimate; because I see
no means, no persons to effect it: therefore I cannot but conclude them, to
be desperate, hopeless, Solae Theatrorum impuritates sunt, quae honest non
possunt vel accusari, multo minus emendari. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6.
cap. 186.
and incorrigible evils, incapable of any cure, vntractible by any Christian,
insufferable in any Christian State. Seventhly, admit they might be reformed,
and reduced unto honest, necessary, and Christian uses; what ends, and uses
should these be? If carnal mirth, and riotous iollitie? (the only use that I
know for them:) all Christians know, James 4.9. Chap. 5.5. Revel. 18.7. Luke
6.25. Risus est corruption disciplinae. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. page 192.
that these are sinful: But admit they were not: yet if all ribaldrie,
wantonness, and scurrilitie, were exploded out of Stage Plays; this mirth,
and iollitie would quickly wither. Si dixerint enim, pro ludo aessumi
spectacula ad recreandos animos: dicemus, non sapere civitates, quibus ludus
pro re seria habetur. Clemens Alexandr. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11.
If honest recreation only? what need of any Stage Plays for this purpose,
since there is so great variety of far honester, cheaper, pleasanter,
shorter, and more obuious recreations, which would more refresh us then
Stage Plays would do, Infiuctuosum putamus gaudiu^ simplex, nec delectat
ridere sine crimine. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 5. page 192.
if all their filthiness, and vanity were expunged? Since therefore
Stage Plays, can have no such necessary, or useful ends, Melius est peccatum
cauere, quam emenda^e. Ambros^. Sermon. 11.
but that they may be better omitted, then retained: since they always have
been, are, and will be scandalous, and offensive to the Church, and Saints of
God: since their reformation is hopeless, their Facilius est excludere
perniciosa, quam ^egere; and non admittere, quam admissa moderari. Seneca. De
^ra. lib. 2. cap 7. Mul^o difficilius est deprauata corrigere, quam ora^^care;
vel a fundamentis noua constr^ere. Case. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 1 page 313.
cure hard, and desperate, but their extirpation easy: since their refining
cannot purge out all their dross, but that they will be more poisonous then
wholesome: always evil, though Et omne malum etiam mediocre magnum est.
Cicero. Tus^ul. Quast. lib. 3.
less evil, but not entirely good: since their present condition makes them
odious; and there is no Censor, no person likely to reform them: (For private
persons cannot effect it: and suppose the King, and State might do it: Non
vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui. Ex te pendentem sic cum circumspicis orbem
Effug^unt curas inferiora tuas. Non ^a te moles Romani nomini vrget: ^nque tuis
humeris ^am leave fertur onus, Lusibus vt possis aduertere numen mep^is. Ovid.
Tristium. lib. 2. page 153.
as it would take them off from more eminent, and weighty affairs, to the
public prejudice; and Non est tam sordida Diuis Cura neque extrem^s iu^ est
demittere in arts Sidera: subducto regnant sublimia ca lo, Illa neque
artificum curant tractare labores^ Virgil. AEtna. page 471, 472.
misbeseeme their grauities, to spend many serious, and teadious consultations
upon such toys as these: so the reformation of them, (which would be always
dubious,) would never counteruaile the care, the time, and cost that must be
spent about it: Generis humani fragili^as ^ronior dilabitur ad corrigenda, quam
studeat conserua^e correcta: Synodus Meldensis Praefatio. Su^ius. Council. Tom.
3. page 453.
and no sooner should their corruptions be exiled, but they would presently
reuert again, without redress:) I may safely auerre; that they are
irreducible, vnconuertible to any lawful, good, or Christian purposes, which
may benefit Church, or Commonwealth, or the bodies, souls, estates, or names
of men: and so conclude; that they Generaliter aduersu^ Deum sapit q^icquid
Diaboli est. Hi^rom. Epist. 1. cap. 4.
are utterly unlawful, unseemly, and pernicious unto Christians; because they
had their Alpha, and Omega; their beginning, and end: their birth, and use from
Hell; being not only invented by the Devil himself: but likewise by his own
special command, and his greatest minions advice, appropriated, and de^oted to
his peculiar honor, and immediate worship for many hundred years.
Stage Plays they had their rise from Hell: we Christians John 1.12, 13. 1
Cor. 15.48, 49.
our nativity, and descent from Heaven: they were at first devoted, (yea, yet
continue destinated) unto Satan: Romans 6.4.13.19, ^2. cap. 12 1 cap. 14.8. 1 Cor
6.15.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 3^ 27, 28, 29.
we were at first Baptized into, yea, consecrated wholly unto Christ: they were,
they are the Devils; we were, Cant. 3.16. cap. 63. cap. 7.10. 1 Cor. 3.23.
cap. 6.19 20.
yet now we are not his, but Gods, but Christ's alone: Quid tibi cum pompis
Dia^oli amator Christi? Renunciate non solum vocibus, sed etiam moribus: non
tantum sono ling^ae, sed and actu vitae: non tantum labiis sonantibus, sed and
operibus pronunciantibus. August. De Symb. ad Catech. lib. 4. cap. 1. Tom^ 9.
part. 1. page 1427, 1428.
this must, this cannot therefore but persuade us, to abominate them, to
condemn them, both in words, and deeds, as sinful, and unlawful.

CHORUS.
Argument 4.
ANd here before I pass to the ensuing Act, I shall propound a fourth Argument
against these Stage Plays, Stage Plays are those works of Satan, those
Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked world, which every Christian renounceth in
his Baptism: therefore they are unlawful.
(which several Fathers have framed to my hands,) as a Chorus, or Corollarie
to the premises.

If Stage Plays be those Works of Satan, those Pompes, and Vanities of this
wicked World, See Council. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 9^ 10. Surius. Council. Tom.
3. page 366.367. and here page 3. in the margent^ (k)
which every Christian has seriously renounced, and solemnly vowed against in
his very Baptism; they must then of necessity be pernicious, abominable,
unseemly, and unlawful unto Christians.

But Stage Plays are those works of Satan, those Pompes, and vanities of this
wicked world, which every Christian has seri^usly renounced, and solemnly
vowed against in his very Bapt^^me.

Therefore they must of necessity be pernicious, abominable, unseemly, and
unlawful unto Christians.

For the former part of the assumption: That Stage Plays are the works, and
Pompes of Satan; it is infallibly evident: For first, Non enim Deus dat ludere,
sed Diabolus, Ille enim est qui etiam in artem iocos ludosque digessit, vt per
haec ad se traheret milites Christi, virtutisque ^orum neruos faceret
molli^res. Propterea in vrbibus etiam Theatr^ construxit, and illos r^suum ac
turpium voluptatum incentores parauit, and per illorum luem in vniuersam vrbem
talem excitat pestem. Chrysostom. Hom 6. in Matthew. Ludi scaenici spectacula
turpitudinum, and licentia vanitatum, non hominum vitiis, sed Decrum ves^rorum
iussis Romae instituti sunt. Augustine, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32^ Hoc
di^o, quod negantes conuincit Historia, ersdem illos l^dos in qui^us regnant
figmenta Poetarum, non per imperitum o^s^quium obsequentium, sacris Deorum
suorum intulisse Romanos, sed ipsos Deos vt sibi solenniter ede^entur, and
honori suo co^secrarent^r, acerbe imperando, and quodam^odo extorquendo fecisse
Ib. lib^ 2^ cap. 8^ See Act 1, 2.
they were invented by him: Secondly, he did exact, and require them of, and
extort them from his worshippers. Thirdly, they were consecrated to his honor,
and appropriated to his service, by his own special command: Fourthly, they
were Ludorum celebrationes Deorum ^esta sunt; siquidem ob nat^le ^orum, vel
Temploru^ nou^rum dedicationes sunt constitut^. Et primi^us q^idem ven^tiones
Saturno sunt at^^^^utae, ^ud^ s^e^i^^ Liber^, Circenses Neptuno: ^aulati^^ vero
and cateris Diis ^^em honos trib^^ caepit, singulique lud^ ^orum nominibu^
consecr^^i s^nt, sicu^ (...) Ca^^^o in L^^ris Spectaculorum docet. Lactanti^s
D^ ve^o Cultu cap. 20.
usually celebrated by his followers on the Feastiualls, and Birth-dayes, of;
or at the solemn Dedication of some new erected Temples, to those dunghill
Deuill-gods, which Pagans did adore: Fifthly, the Sea page 4. (p) (q) page 9,
10.24, 25. and Act. 2. S^aene. 2.
Primiti^e Church, and Christians, did not only constantly condemn, but
likewise, utterly reject them, as the works, and Pompes of the very Devil:
all which is irre^ragably confirmed in the premised Acts: Sixthly, they See Act.
1. S^a^^^. 2.
never issued from God, or from his Children; but from the Factors, and Minions
of the Devil, who only did frequent, and Act them heretofore, and applaude,
perform, and haunt them now: Seauenthly, God gains no glory by them, men no
good; only the Devil works his ends, fulfills his pleasure, both in us, and
of us; and propagates his kingdom by them, as I shall prove anon. If we will
but seriously^ suruay the end, and fruit, or sum up the loss, and gain
that comes by Stage Plays, we shall find that Quicquid enim illi^ geritur,
non est oblectatio, sed pernicies, sed poena, sed supplicium. Ch^v. Hom. 3. De
D^u. and S^ul. Tom. 1. Col. ^52. A.
all are losers; none gainers by them, but the Devil, whose ends they do
accomplish. See Chr^s. Hom. 3. De Dau. and Saul. Hom. 7. and 38. in Mat.
Accordingly.
God the Father, he loses his honor, his worship, his love, his fear, his
obedience, the fruit of all his ordinances, and the labor of his faithful
Ministers by their means. Christ Jesus, he loses his glory, his respect; the
worth, and dignity of his person, the e^ficacy, and merits of his blood: the
honor, Suscepturi Nasalem Domini, ab omni nos aelictorum faece purgemus^ Rex
noster Christus non tam nitorem vestium, quam animarum requirit affectum, etc.
Ambr. Se^m. 4. Tom. 5. page 5.
and true solemnizing of his Nativity, his Circumcision, his Resurrection, and
Ascension: which Stage Plays Hebr. 10.29. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De D^uide and Saul.
Tom. 1. Col. 511. A. B. C. Accordingly.
trample under feet, as despicable, and unholy things, and cause men for to
vilify: yea, he loses the Nulla res enim aeque eloquia Dei in contemptum
adducit, atque Spectaculorum quae illic prop^nuntur admiratio. Chrysostom. De verbis
Esaia^, etc. Hom. 1. Tom. 1. C^l. 1283. C.
desired fruit of his Gospel, his Sacraments, his Ambassadors, and of all his
travel, whereby he does solicit, and woo us to come in, and match our
souls with him, who is happiness, pleasure, comfort, and delight it self.
The Holy Ghost by means of Plays, does often times Ephesians. 4.29.30. ^ These.
5.19. Hebr. 10.29. 1 Samuel 16.14.
to his grief, even lose his blessed residence in, his heavenly influence
into, his sweet regiment over, his flexanimous solicitations to, those good
persuasions, purposes, resolutions, and sparks of grace, which he has
kindled in, our hearts: The Angels they lose Luke 15.7.10.
their joy, in our conversion; Psalm. 3^.7. and 91.10.11. Hebr. 1.14.
their office, in our protection: Mat. 18.10. Luke 15.10.
their happiness in our Salvation: Luke 2.13. cap^ 30.36. Hebr. 12.22.
their fellowship, in our association: The Church she loses her outward
beauty, and splendour, her honor, See Tertul. De Spectac. cap. 24.25. Puto
ego, nec M^iestati diuinae, nec Euangelicae disciplinae congruere, vt p^dor and
ho^or Ecclesiae tam turpi and infami contagione Histrionum ^oede^ur? Cyprian.
Epict. lib. 1. Epist. 10. See Chrysostom. Hom. De Dau. and Saul. 3. Accordingly.
her purity, her joy, her external tranquillity, and prosperity; her
members, her fruitfulness, and fullness by them. The Sea Chrysostom. Hom. De Dau.
and Saul. De verbis Isayae. vidi Dominum, etc. Hom. 1.
Word, and Sacraments, they lose their powerful efficacy, their reverend
respect, their due esteem, their spotless purity, their fruitfulness, and
their frequent resort. The Chrysostom. Ibidem.
Ministers, they lose their prayers, their preaching, their exhortations, and
reproves, their reverend respect, and love; their rewards, encouragements, and
resort: together, 2 John 4. 3 John 4. Hebr. 12.13^ Neque enim vlla res tantum
adfert gaudi^ vitae nostrae, quantum hoc, quod ex ^nimo gaudetis in Ecclesia
congregati. Chrysostom. De verbis Esaia^. vidi Dominum sedentem. Tom. 2. Col.
1280. C.
with the joy, and fruit of all their Labors: The Saints of God, they lose
their kindred, their friends, their companions, their joys, their hopes, their
prayers, their admonitions, their good names, yea, the glory of their Christian
profession, and the praise, and innocence of their holy conversation, See Act.
3. Scaene. 5.
which are often times vilified, traduced, and derided on the Stage: The Sea Act.
6. Scaene. 1. to 8. and part. 4. Histriones non parua rerum publicarum pestis
sunt. Nam and libidinum ministri sunt, and mores bonos corrumpunt, and
Magistratum in contemptum adducunt: and opes ta^^ publicas quam priuatas m^xime
attenuam, and quod in pauperum subuentionem impendi deb^at fere intercipiunt.
Quamobrem vir^ graves omnibus seculis hoc hominum gen^s a republica sua
exclusit, quod illos and m^ribus officer^, and Deorum contempium inueh^re
intelligerent. Gualther in Nahum. 3. Hom. 11. See Bodinus, De Repub. lib. 6.
cap. 1.
Commonwealth is put to prejudice, by the general corruption of men's minds,
and manners; the abundance of Idl^nesse, Prodigality, Riot, Pride, effeminacy,
Treachery, Cruelty, Whoredom, Adultery, Wickedness, and Profaneness, which
these Plays produce. The poor are spoiled of that alms, that succor, and
relief which should refresh their bow^ls, and make glad their hearts. The
miserable Spectatours, and Frequenters of these Infernal pleasures, they See
Act 6. ^caene. 3. to 19.
lose their time, their modesty, their honesty, their credit, and respect
with God, and all good men: yea their civility, their chastity, their money,
and estates sometimes^ and if all this be not enough, Qui Spectaculis and ludis
Theatralibus oblectantur, non i^unt i^ regnum and vitam citra laborem and
pugnam, quoniam angusta vi^ est, and afflictionis plena. Macarius Egypt. Hom.
27. page 212.
their very souls, and bodies too, without repentance: too dear a price
Godwot, for such momentany shadows, and delights of sin, Voluptas fragilis
ac breuis est, cuius necesse est aut poeniteat, aut pudeat. Sen De Benefic.
lib. 7. cap 2.
of which we must of necessity repent, or be ashamed, unless we will be
damned. As for the prof^ssed Actors of these Enterludes, they gain perchance a
little vain applause upon the Stage, which they put off with their Players
robes: or at the most, See Part. 2. Act. 2.
a little filthy gain, or ill gotten Estate, (which they are bound in
Conscience to restore, as I shall prove anon,) and that Deuteronomy. 28.16. to 21.
Prou. 3.33. Mal. 2.2. c. 3.9. Eccles. 5.13, 14.
so blasted with the curse of God upon it; that it either turns Wormwood,
Gall, or Poison to the owners, Psalm. 37.2.20.36. Prou. 28.22.
or meltes away like Snow before the Sun in their very life time: or else,
Psalm. 37.28. Psalm. 109.10, 11, 12, 13. Eccles. 5.13, 14, 15. Prou. 12.7. cap.
14.11. Male partis vix gaudet tertius haeres. I^^. Sat. 6.
it proves Rottenness, and consumes to Ashes in their next Heirs hands: But
alas, their loss transcends their gains: Romani cum artem ludicram scenamque
totam probro ducunt, actores talium fabularum, non modo honor ciuium
reliquorum carere, sed etiam tribu moueri notatione censoria voluerunt.
Augustine, De Ciuitat. Dei^ lib 2. cap^ 13, 14. See Liuie. lib. 7. cap. 2.3.
and Act. 7. Scaene. 6.
they lose their credit, their respect, their good names, their time, their
civility, their modesty, their chastity; and all that was commendable in
them heretofore: yea, they lose their God, their Heaven, their Savior, their
Sanctifier, and Oh that I could not say their very Souls, and Bodies for all
Eternity, unless God miraculously call them Ne igitur desinatis super
huiusmodi licentia gemere ac s^e^ius remorder^. Hic enim dolor fiet vobis
conuersionis ad meliora principium. Chrysostom, Hom 6. in Matthew.
to Repentance, and cause them to renounce their Unchristian, and Infernal
profession. Thus all are losers by their Stage Plays, none gainers by them,
but the Devil, and Hell: the one gains vassals to ^ffect his will, and lusts
here; and damned Souls, to associate him in his everlasting torments
hereafter: the other fuel to nourish those scorching, and Eternal flames, in
which the Souls, and Bodies of all Fuge pes^iferam illam piscinam Theatri.
Haec est enim, quae spectatores suos in flammcum illud p^lagus mergit, quaeque
profundum illius ignis acc^^ndit. Chrysostom, Him 7. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col.
60. B.
impenitent Stage-frequenting Christians, shall have their portion. Since
therefore, the Devil is the only gainer by these Stage Plays; which Saint
Hierome rightly styles Daemonum cibus est carmina Poet^rum. Hierom. Damaso.
Epist. 146. Tom. 3. page 408.
the Devils food: Since Quis enim alius spiritus occul^o instinctu nequissimas
agitat mentes, and instat faciendis adulteriis, and pascitur factis, nisi qui
etiam sacris tali^us oblectatur, constituens in templi^ simulachrae Daemonum,
amans in ludis simulachrae vitiorum: susurrans in occulto verb^ iustitiae ad
decipiendos etiam paucos bonos; frequentans in aperto inuitamenta nequitiae, ad
possidendos innumerabiles malos. August. De Ciuitat. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 26.
he is only honored, and enriched by them, served in them, delighted with
them, puruaying for them: we may safely, yea, infallibly conclude on all the
premises; that they are his proper works, and pompes.

For the second branch of the Assumpsion: That Stage Plays are the Pompes, and
Vanities of this wicked World; these impregnable reasons will euince it. First
their very inchoation, and conception, as my first Act proves, was merely
from the Devil, 2 Cor. 44. Chap. 14.13. John 12.31. Chap. 16.11 Ephesians. 2.2.
the God, and Prince of this World; from ^nfide^s, and Idolaters, the Ephesians.
2.2, 3. Chap^ 5.12. John 8.22, 23. Chap. 15.18, 19. Chap. 17.14. 2 Peter 2.5. 1
John 4.5. 1 Cor. 2.6.8. Chap. 5.10. 1 Timothy 6.17. James 4.4.
natural, and most genuine, if not the principal parts, and Agents of this
world, Gal. 1.4. 1 John 5.19.
which lies in wickedness: Secondly, the common Actors, frequenters, and
admirers of them, both now, and hereto^ore, are no other but Psalm. 17.14.
the men of the world, who have their portion only in this life, 2 Timothy 3.4.
being lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God: Thirdly, their See Act. 3.
subject matter, their several parts, and passages, as experience teaches,
do savor only of worldly Pomp, and Vanity, if not of sin, and all
profaneness: Fourthly, those Pompous, and stately shows, and Scenes; that
effeminate, rich, and gorgious Attire: that glittering, and glorious Apparel;
those mimicall, antique, clownish, hellish, amourous, filthy, foolish,
ridiculous, obsceane, and wanton parts: those licencious complements,
clippings, and embracements, withal those other See Act. 4.5.
ceremonies, and circumstances, which attend our Stage Plays; what are they
but the chiefest Pompes, and Vanities which this world affordes? Fifthly, is not
the very ground, and end of all Theatricall Spectacles, (especially, such as
are acted in private houses, and societies,) a vaineglorious desire of some
worldly Pomp, and State? or an o^ficious compliancy to the course, and fashion
of this wicked World? Why do men send for Stage Players to their houses; why
do they flock unto their Theaters Maiorem obtinent insana Spectacula
frequentiam, quam beata Martyria. Leo. Sermo. in Octaua. Petri and Pauli. cap.
1. fol. 165.
thick, and threefold, on Feastiuall, and Solemn seasons, especially in the
Christmas time? Is it not out of worldly Pomp, and State? out of a prodigal,
and vaineglorious humor? a degenerous, and Unchristian symbolization with this
present World? a voluptuous, and base seruilitie to our filthy carnal lusts?
or at least wise, out of an affected desire, to post, and pass away our
peerless time, ( which Tempus vitae meae leuius cursoribus: vt enim illi
priusquam been stent, exiliunt: ita and h^c euol^t an^equam veniat. Chrysostom. ad
Theodor. Epist 6. Tom. 5 Col 862. A. Quotidie morimur, quotidie commutamur, and
tamen aeternos nos esse credimus: hoc ipsum quod dicto, quod scribitur, quod
relego, quod emendo, de vita mea tollitur: quot puncta notarii, tot meorum
damn^ funt temporum Hierom. Epist. 3. cap^ 10
flies too faest without these wings, and spurs to speed it:) to banish God,
and Christ out of our Hearts; Grace out of our Souls; all thankful
remembrance of Gods favors to us on such times as these, out of our minds,
and thoughts? and wholly to auocate, and estrange us from all true Christian
joy, and heavenly solace? which expresses it self, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3 16.
Iam. 5.13. Psalm. 149 and 150. and 103. Ne que enim quicquam ^st quod in hac
vita nos su^uius and iucundius afficere sol^at, atque ea, quae ex Ecclesia
capitur, laetitia. In Ecclesia enim eorum qui laetantur, laetitia conseruatur;
in Ecclesia, dolentes ad animi tranquill^ a^e^ deducuntur: in Ecclesia it qui
dolor afficiuntur, gaudio delin^untur. Chrysostom. Orat. 7. Tom. 5. Col 1480, 1481.
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; in divine Meditations, and
discourses of Gods mercy toward us: in pouring out hearty praises, prayers,
and thankesgiuings unto our Gracious, and ever blessed God, with inflamed, and
enlarged spirits, for all his superabundant favors, and compassions to us: not
in Hellish Plays, and carnal merriments, which Christ, and Christians do
abhor: If this then be the use, the end, and ^ruite; these the appendices,
and parts of Stage Plays: needs must we now subscribe: that they are, if not
the greatest, and most assiduous; yet not the meanest Pompes, and Vanities of
this wicked World, to whose use, and ends they only serve; as their Haywoods,
Apology f^r Actors.
own professed Apologist does acknowledge.

Now to prove unto you further; that Stage Plays are the very works, and
Pompes of Satan; yea, the very selfsame Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked
World, which Christians have renounced in their Baptism: I shall vouch unto you
the express resolution of sundry Fathers: Stage Plays, (says Hoc erit
Diaboli Pompa aduers^^ quam in signaculo fides e^eramus. Cum aquam ingres^i
Christianam fidem ex legi^ sua verba profitemur, renunciasse nos Diabolo, and
Pompae, and Angelis eius ore nostro contestamur. Quid erit summum ac
praecipuum, in quo Diabolus, and Pompae, and Angeli cius censeantur, quam
Idololatria? Igitur si ex Idololatria, vniuersam Spectaculorum paraturam
constare constiterit, indubitate praeiudicatum erit, etiam ad Spectacula
pertinere renunciationis nostrae testimonium in lauacro, quae Diabolo, and
Pompae, and Angelis eiu^ sint m^ncipata, etc. De Spectac. lib. cap. 4, 5, 6.
and 24. See Hookers Eccles. Polity. lib. 5. c. 64.
Tertullian,) are the Pompes of the Devil, against which, we have renounced in
our Baptism; because their original, and the materials of which they are
composed, consists wholly of Idolatry: whence he styles Play Houses, Diabol^
Ecclesia et Templum. Ib. cap. 7.25.
the Devils Church. Fugite Theatra and Graecorum ludos: vitate omnem Idolorum
Pompam, speciem, denique omnia Daemoniaca Spectacula: Constit. Apost. lib. 2.
cap. 6^.
Clemens Romanus, (if the work be his,) calls Stage Plays; the Pompes of
Idols, and Spectacles of the Devil; wishing all Christians to shun, and
avoid them. The Devils Pomp, (says Renuncio Sathanae, and omnibus eius
operibus. Poste^ dicis, and omni Pompae illius: Pompa Diaboli est, in Theatris
Spectacula, in bippodromo cursus equorum, and venationes, and reliqua omnis
eiuscemodi vanitas: a qua postulans^liberari sanctus ille Dei; Auerte, inquit,
oculos meos, ne videant vanitatem. Non ergo sis curiosus in frequentia
Spectaculorum, vbi conspicias mimorum petulantias, omni contumelia, and
impudicitia refertas, and virorum effaeminatorum choreas secteris. Catech.
Mystagogica. 1.
Cyril of Jerusalem,) which we renounce in our Baptism; are those
Spectacles, or Plays in Theaters, and all other vanities of this kind: from
which the holy Man of God desiring to be freed, says: Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity. Be not therefore diligent in the assemblies of Plays.
Saint Augustine likewise styles these Stage Plays the Pompes of the Devil,
which we renounce in Baptism. Depraehenderis enim and detegeris Christian,
quando aliud agis, and aliud profiteris: fidelis in nomine, aliud demonstrans
in opere, non tenens professionis tuae fidem: modo ingrediens Ecclesiam
orationes fundere; post modicum in Spectaculis cum histrionibus impudice
clamare. Quid tibi cum Pompis Diaboli quibus renunciast^? Huic vos renunciare
professi estis: in qua professione non hominibus, sed Deo, and Angelis eius
conscribentibus dix^stis, Re^uncio, etc. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 4.
cap. 1. Tom. 9. part. 1. page 1427. See Hom. 21. Tom. 10. page 592.
Thou art apprehended, thou art detected Oh Christian, (says he) when thou
do one thing, and professest another: when thou art faithful in name,
faithless in work, not keeping the faith of thy promise: going one while into
the Church to pray; and a while after, running to the Playhouse, to cry out
impudently with Stage Players. You have professed to renounce the Devil; in
which profession, you have said: I renounce: not only men, but even God, and
his Angels subscribing together with you. What then have thou to do with these
Pompes of the Devil, which thou have renounce? Saint Chrysostom, who of all
the Fathers is most Copious, most Zealous, and divinely Rhetorical, against
all theatricall Enterludes, endeavoring out of an holy Zeal, to withdraw all
Christians from them, unto God: does often times style these Stage Plays: Atque
vbi spiritus insusu^ est vnguentum, eo Diabolicas Pompas immittemus? eo fabulas
Satanae, eo can^tilenas meretriciae turpitudinis plenas? Hom. De Dauide and
Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511. B. Proinde frequenter vos hortatus sum, ne quis eorum
qui horrendae, ae mysticae victimae participes sunt, ad illa iret Spectacula,
non diuina cum Daemoniacis commisceret mysteria. De verbis Isaiae. vidi
Dominum, etc. Hom. 1. Col. 1283. C. D. In Theatro omnia contraria, risus,
turpitudo, pompae Diabolica. Magna ili Diaboli Pompa, Cymbala, tibiae and
cantica plena scortationum ac adulteriorum. In Act. Apost. Hom. 42. Tom. 3 Col
611. C. 612. A. Quo tempore, alii quidem cum nos haec ex hoc loco dissere^em^^
in Theatris otiose Diaboli Pompam Spectarunt: and impurissimis Diaboli escis
vescebantur. Oration. 6. Tom. 5. Col. 1471. B. Considera ergo Theatrum illud, ac
Diabolicos istos refuge conuentus. Si vero in eisdem perseueraueritis acutiore
ferro, and altiore incisione discindam: nec vnquam prorsus quiescam, quoadusque
Diabolicum illud dispergam Theatrum, vt mundus Ecclesiae caetus purusque
reddatur. Ita enim and praesenti turpitudine liberabimur, and vitam acquiremus
futuram, gratia and misericordia domini nostri Jesus Christi. Hom. 7. in Matthew.
Tom. 2. Col. 60. D. 61. B. C.
the Devils Pompes: the fables of Satan: Daemoniacall mysteries: the im^ure
food of the Devil: and Play Houses: the Devils conuenticles: And from hence
he does seriously, and frequently persuade all Christians to avoid them.
Yea, says he, (such was his implacable indignation, and holy detestation
against Stage Plays; not out of passion, or Puritanisme, but true Christian
Zeal,) I will never give over preaching, until I have dissipated, and rent a
sunder, that devilish Theater; that so the assembly of the Church may be made
pure, and clean; freed from its present filthiness, and enjoy eternal Life
hereafter, by the Grace, and Mercy of Jesus Christ their Lord: a memorable, and
Christian resolution. That holy man of God, and professed enemy of
Stage Plays, Saluian Bishop of Marcelles, is very Elegant, and Copious in this
Theme. In Spectaculis enim quaedam Apostasia fidei est, and a Symbolis ipsius,
et a C^lestibus Sacramentis letalis pra^aricatio. Quae est enim in Baptismo
salutari Christianorum prima confessio? quae scilice^, nisi v^ re^unc^are se
Diabolo, et Pompis eius a^que Spectaculis et operibus protestentur? Ergo
Spectacula et Pompae, etiam iuxta nostram professionem opera sunt Diaboli.
Quomodo, o Christian, Spectacula post Baptismum sequeris, quae opus esse
Diaboli confiteris? Renunciasti semel Diabol^, et Spectaculis eius, ac per hoc
necesse est, prudens et sciens dum ad Spectacula remeas, ad Diabolum te redire
cognoscas. Vtrique enim rei sim^l renunciasti, et vnum vtrumque esse dixisti.
Si ad vnum reuerteris, ad vtrumque remeasti: abrenuntio enim, inquis, Diabolo,
Pompis, Spectaculis, et operibus eius. Et quid postea? Credo, inquis, in Deum
patrem omnipotentem, et in Iesum Christum filium eius Ergo primum renunciatur
Diabolo, vt credatur Deo: quia qui non renunciat Diabolo, non credit Deo: et
ideo qui reuertitur ad Diabolum, relinquit Deum. Diabolus autem in Spectaculis
est et Pompis s^is: ac per hoc cum redimus ad Spectacul^m, relinquimus fidem
Christi. Hoc itaque modo omnia Symboli Sacramenta soluu^tur, et totum quod in
Symbolo sequitur, labefactatur et nutat. Nihil enim sequens ^^at, si principale
non steterit. Si cui itaque leave Spectaculorum crimen videtur, respici^^ cuncta
ista quae diximus, et videat in Spectaculis non voluptatem esse, sed mortem. De
Guber. Dei. lib. 6. page 193, 194.
In Stage Plays, (writes he) there is a certain Apostasy from the Faith,
and a deadly preuarication, both from the Symboles of it, and the heavenly
Sacraments: For what is the first confession of Christians in their wholesome
Baptism: what else, b^t that they protest they do renounce, the Devil, his
Pompes, his Spectacles, and his works? Therefore Plays, and Pompes according
to our profession, are the works of the Devil. How then, Oh Christian, do
thou follow Stage Plays, after Baptism, which thou confessest to be the work
of the Devil? Thou have once renounced the Devil, and his Spectacles, and by
this thou must needs know, that thou do return to the Devil, when thou
do wittingly, and knowingly return to Stage Plays: for thou have renounced
both of them together, and thou have professed both of them to be one. If then
thou reuert to one, thou have returned unto both; for thou say, I renounce
the Devil, his Pompes, his Spectacles, and hi^ Works. And what follows? I
believe, say thou in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his Son.
Therefore the Devil is first renounced, that God may be believed in: because
he, who does not renounce the Devil, does not believe in God: and therefore
he who returns to the Devil, forsakes God. Now the Devil is in his Plays,
and Pompes: (yea the Playhouse, the Temple of all Devils, as Amphitheatrum
omnium Daemonum Templum est. Tot illicimmundi spiritus considunt, quot homines
capit. De Spectac. lib. Tom. 2. page 393.
Tertullian observes, is always full of Devils:) and by these means, when we
return to Stage Plays, we r^linquish the Faith of Christ, and return to the
Devil. By this means then, all the Sacraments of the Creed are abrogated, and
all that which follows in the Creed is demolished. If then the crime of
Stage Plays seems but small to any man, let him reflect on all this which we
have said, and he may see, that there is no pleasure in Stage Plays, but
death: All which, if our Actors, Play-Poets, and Stage-haunters, would but a
whiles consider, it would make them for ever to abominate, and renounce all
Stage Plays, See Danaeus Ethicae Christianae. lib. 2. cap. 8. page 107.
Accordingly.
as they ought to do, because they were consecrated to the Devil, as his
chiefest Pompes.

You see now by all these concurrent Testimonies of the Fathers: that
Stage Plays are those very Works, those Pompes, and Vanities of the Devil,
which every Christian has solemnly renounced, and seriously vowed against, in
his Baptism, in the very presence of God himself, and all his Angels. That
they are likewise, those Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, which they
have then, and there renounced; the former reasons, together with the express,
and punctual suffrages of Saint Hilary, Saint Ambrose, Saint Chrysostom, and
Saint Augustine in their Comments, and Expositions on the 118, alias the 119.
Psalm, verse 37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: (to whom I might
add, De Spectaculis, and Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Saint Cyprian, De vero Cultu. cap. 20.
Lactantius, Catechesis Mystagogica 1
Cyril of Jerusalem, Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Oration ad M^lites Templi. cap. 4.
Saint Bernard, Hom. 44. page 264.
Macarius AEgyptius, Hexaemeron. Hom. 4. De Legendis libris Gentilium Oration.
Saint Basil, Oration. 48. and De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum. page 1063, 1064.
Nazianzen, and De Guber. Dei. lib. 6.
Saluian, omitting all those See Doctor Reinolds, Master Northbrooke, and
Master Gossor, in their Treatises against Stage-Play^s.
Modern writers, which are copious in this Theme,) do abundantly testify:
and indeed, what are, what should be the Works, and Pompes of Satan; the
Spectacles, Pleasures, Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, which we
renounce in Baptism; if Stage Plays are exempted from that order?

If then this my Assumption be yielded to me, as of necessity it must, (for
who can, or dares control it, against such punctual, and pregnant evidences?)
my Sequel, and Conclusion must be granted without any more dispute. For what
man, who dares to style himself a Christian, can be so Diabolically absurd,
so Audaciously impious, or Desperately profane, as to deny that Quod eni^
facto negam^^s neque fac^o neque dicto, neque visu, neque prospe^ctu
participare debemus. Tertul. De Spectac. c. 24.
to be abominable, pernicious, indecent, and unlawful unto Christians, which
they have all renounced, and abominated in their Baptism? Doubtless, if there
be any odious, hurtful, unseemly, or illegitimate thing in all the world; if
there be any evils, any vanities, or delights of sin that Christians must
refrain; Si iura humanae pactionis firmiter conseruantur, fixius tamen atque
feruentius iura tanti pacti, quae cum Deo facta sunt, inuiol^^biliter sunt
obseruanda. Council Pa^isi^nse. lib. 1. cap. 10. Su^ius. Tom. 3 p. 367.
then certainly those which they have vowed, sworn, and solemnly protested
against, in the very house, and presence of God himself, and that in the
audience both of men, and Angels; those whom they have everlastingly abiured,
in that init^atory Sacrament of Baptism, which gives them their primarie
admission into the visible Church of Christ, must needs be they; no Man, no
Christian, no Devil can gainsay it. Since then I have proved by
irrefragable Testimonies; that Stage Plays, are those very works, P^mpa
Diaboli hoec est, qu^ et P^mpa mundi: id est, am^itio, arrogantia, vana gloria,
omnisque ^uiuslibet rei superfluitas in humanis vs^tus. Council. Parisiense.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Ib.
and Pompes of the Devil; those very Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked
world, which every Christian, has solemnly disclaimed, and seriously P^mpa
Diaboli hoec est, qu^ et P^mpa mundi: id est, am^itio, arrogantia, vana gloria,
omnisque ^uiuslibet rei superfluitas in humanis vs^tus. Council. Parisiense.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Ib.
renounced in his Baptism; who can, who dares stand out to justify them? who
can, who dares deny them, to be abominable, incompatible, and utterly
unlawful unto Christians? God forbid, that any who have been dipped in the
Sacred lauer of Regeneration; any who have been bathed, and purified in the
Soule-cleansing, and Sinne-purging blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, any who have
pledged their Faith, and Troth to God in Baptism; any who have been Baptized
with the name of Christians; any who have either by themselves, or others,
Abrenunciare enim Diabolo, est penitus ^um respue^e, spernere, reiicere, eique
contradicere, seque, et vnumquemque ab eo alienare, sieve aliud quid quod in hoc
verbo et hoc sensis exprimi potest. Council. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 10. Ib.
renounced the Devil, withal his Pompes, and Works: together with all the
Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, 1 Peter. 1.14, 15, 18. Colos. 2.20,
21, 22. Reu 14.3, 4.
from which Christ Jesus has Redeemed them; should prove such desperate,
Diabolo seruientes Daemones sunt. C^rysostome Oration. 5. Col. 957. A.
incarnate Devils; such mo^sters of Impiety; such Atheistical, Prodigious,
and infernal Miscreants; such treacherous Iudasses to their Lord, and Master;
such perjured, and professed Rebels to their God; Magna quippe ex part
Christianorum decus vilescit, quando renati in Christo ea quibus in Baptismate
renunciauerunt nec intelligere curant, nec ab his se, vt Christo polliciti sunt
abstinere satagunt. Council. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 10.
such blemishes, and cut-throates to their Religion; such Apostates, and
underminers to their Faith, and Baptism: such unnatural, and deplored Enemies
to their own Salvation; or such will-full bloody Murderers to their own
Souls; as to approve, to justify, to practice, or frequent these
Stage Plays, which they have thus abiured; or to deem them tolerable, or
lawful unto CHRISTIANS. Alas, Hosea 14.8. Quid nobis cum operibus Diaboli?
Quid mihi and tibi est Belial? Ego Christi seruus sum, illius Redemptus
sanzuin^, illi me totum mancipaui. Quid mihi and tibi est? Tanto magis nos
oportet seperare a Diabolo, quanto ille se discernit a Christo. Ambrose De
Elia, and Ieiun. cap. 20.
what have Christians any more to do with Idols? what will the Devil? what
with the Pompes, and works of Satan? what with the shows, the pleasures, and
vanities of this wicked world? yea, what with Stage Plays, which they have
abiured? Is there any late, or new agreement signed between Christ, and
Belial? between Righteousness, and Unrighteousness? Believers, and Infidels?
Is there any peace, or contract newly made between God, and Satan? between
Christians, and the Devil? between Heaven, and Hell? between the Citizens of
the new Jerusalem, and this present evil World, which Romans 8.5.7. Galat.
5.17. 1 Corinthians. 6.14, 15, 16. Genes. 3.15. Galat. 4.29. Diabolus semper
Christi aduersarius est. Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 887. A.
are everlasting enemies, incapable of any truce, or mixture? Or has God
dispensed with our vow in Baptism? or have we lately renounced our covenant
with our God, and sworn allegiance to the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
or else been 1 Corinthians. 1.13.
Rebaptized in their names? If so, then let us flock, and run to
Stage Plays, and take of them our fill, I will not interrupt, or keep back
any. But if the Devil, the World, and God be as far at var^ance now, as
(...): 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. James 4.4.
is Righteousness, and Unrighteousness; Christ, and Belial; Believers, and
Infidels; the Temple of God, and the Temple of Idols; yea, the World, the
Flesh, the Devil, and Christians, be yet at irreconcilable, and everlasting
enmity, as they are: If the ancient contract between God, and us in Baptism,
Romans 6.3, 4. Hebr. 9.16, 17, 18.
confirmed, and ratified in the precious blood of our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ,) stand good: and there be no new league, nor covenant between the
World, the Devil, Hell, and us: how can, how may we then approve of
Stage Plays? how can we tolerate, act, admire, or frequent them, as alas we
do? What, shall we renounce the Devil, and all his Works? Nihil ad vos de
Pompis saeculi attinet qui renunciauistis in Baptismate, mundo, Diabolo and
Pompis eorum, quod postmodum confirmastis sub pollicitatione iuramenti. Hierom
De Regula. Monachorum. cap. 30. A^renunciasti mundo, abrenunciasti saeculo,
esto sollicitus. Qui pecuniam debet semper cautionem suam considerat. Et tu qui
fidem debes Christo, fidem serua, quae multo preciosior est quam pecunia.
Ambrose De Sa^ramentis. lib. 1. cap. 2. Tom. 4. page 168. A.
shall we abjure the Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, (which serve
only to feed the sinful lusts of the flesh;) and yet shall we Plead for
them with our Tongues, Cherish them with our Purses, Run to them with our
Feet, Quale est^ illas manus quas ad dominum extuleris, postmodo laudando
histrionem fatigare? Tertul. De Spectac. cap. 25.
Applaud them with our Hands, Magnify them in our Judgments, Harbor them in
our Houses, yea, Lodge them in our Hearts? Alas, poor sinful wretches, who
are thus grosely Deluded, thus miserably Perjured; How, how shall we answer,
how excuse, or justify this our notorious, and will-full Perjury to our great
Creator? how shall, how can we look our God, our Judge, our Savior, or any
of the blessed Saints, and Angels in the face? Psa. 1.5. 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. I^r.
5.31.
where can we appear, how can we stand in Judgment, what shall we do, or
which way shall we turn our selves, when God himself shall challeng us, when
Christ Jesus shall arraigne us, and he Dan 7.10. Mat. 25.31. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
Jude 14.15.
together withal his holy Saints, and Angels, condemn us, in that great, and
terrible day of Judgment, for breach of this our vow? O let us now at last
remember, that there is an Audit, a day of Judgment coming, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans
14.11.1 Qua^ tremendus est ille dies iudicii in q^^^ Dominus nosier Jesus
Christus proposuit venire cum flamma ignis quae consumptura est aduersarios
suos, and eos qui faciunt iniquitatem? etc. Ambrose. Sermo. 33.
wherein we must all appear, before the great Tribunal of the (...) Jesus
Christ, (...) all the breaches of this our solemn covenant: and what will then
become of us, if we thus treacherously infringe it now, in frequenting
Stage Plays? Excuse our selves we cannot; Perish, perish we must, and that
eternally without recovery; without all pity. For is it not equal, that such
who readily serve the Devil, in practicing all his works, and resorting to
his Pompes, which they have couenanted to abjure, Mat. 25.41.
should participate of his wages, and everlasting torments? that such who
follow the Pleasures, Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked world, 1 Cor. 11.32
Revel. 18.4. Qui vult ga^dere cum soeculo, non possit regnare cum Christ^.
Ambrose. Sermo. 11.
should likewise be condemned with the world, and be partakers of its
punishments? who can Commiserate, or Pity such a one, or deem him worthy of
Salvation, who leaves his euer-blessed God, Romans 14.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Luke 17.10.
to whom he owes himself, and all his service; to serve the Devil whom he
has defied? or willingly parts with Heaven, and Eternal glory, by departing
from the Prou. 2 13. chap. 12.28. Matthew. 7.14.
ways of Grace, which lead men to it, to embrace the very vainest vanities,
and Enterludes of this wretched world, which he has thus abiured? Certainly
such a man's Damnation is exceeding just, and his Salvation, (without
repentance) desperate: And is not this the case of all such persons, who resort
to Stage Plays after Baptism? O then good Christian Readers, in the name, and
fear of God, and in tender compassion to your own distressed Souls, I
beseech y^^, I entreat you, even with sobs, and tears proceeding from a
bleeding, and lamenting spirit, anxious of nothing but your Eternal good; that
you would now at last, consider seriously what you are, and what you have done.
Acts 11.26. Christiani a Christo nomen acceperunt, and opera precium est vt
sicut sunt haeredes nominis ita sint imitatores sancti^atis. Bernardi.
Sententi^. Col. 996. L.
You are all Christians in name; and it is my desire, my prayer, that you may
be such Esse Christianum grande est, non videri. Hierom. Tom. 1. Epist. 13.
cap. 3. Tunc vera est Dei gratia si hoc rebus exhibeat, quod verbis sonat.
August. Contr. Iulianum. lib. 4. cap. 7.
in truth. You have all proclaimed a solemn defiance to the Devil, and all
his Works, and openly renounced the several Pompes, and Vanities of this
wicked World, of which Stage Plays are the chief, and most assiduous: as
being the Acts. 16.17. 1 Cor. 7.22, 23. 1 Pet. 2.16.
Servants, and Saints of God, the Romans ^.17. James. 2.5. Galat 4.7.
Heirs of Heaven, the 1 These. 4.4. 2 Timothy 2.21.
Vessels of Holiness, the 1 Cor. 3.16. Chap. 6.9. Ephesians. 2.22.
living Temples of the holy Ghost, the Ephesians. 2.19. Hebr. 12.22.
fellow Citizens of the Saints in Glory, and the Inhabitants of a better World
then this: Oh answer therefore your profession with a correspondent
conversation: If you are, or would be Christians, do not you henceforth live
like Pagans: Non agamus similem Infidelibus vitam, sed a quibus fide
discernimur, ab ^orum studiis etiam and moribus diuidamur. Declarat fidem tuam
qu^tidian^ actio tua: confirmet tuam ad Christum charitatem, euidens a
carnalibus concupiscentiis discessio t^^. Chrysostom. De Militia Christ. Hom. Tom.
5. Col. 633. A. See my Healthes, Sickness. page 22.42.78. Edit 2.
but as you differ from them in your Faith, be you likewise distinguished from
them by your Works. If you have renounced the Devil, and all his Works; O
live not any longer to them: If you have abiured the Pompes, and Vanities of
this wicked World; O then return not to them, as Dogs unto their vomit:
Inisti pactum cum aduersario tuo, di^ens e^; Renuncio ti^i, Diabole, and saculo
tuo, and Pompae tuae, and operibus tuis: serua f^d^^ quod pepigisti, etc.
Hierom. Epist. 8. cap. 5. Tom. 1. page 22.
why should you serve, why should you re-embrace, how can you tolerate, or
approve the things, which you have thus abiured? God commands you, Ephesians 4.37.
James 47. 1 Peter 5.9.
not to give place to the Devil, but to resist him steadfastly in the Faith,
that so he may fly from you^ how dare you then to entertain him in these
Enterludes, which are his chiefest Pompes, and Works; against this Precept,
and your Vow? God commands you, 1 John 2.15.
not to love the World, nor the things of the World; Romans 12.1, 2. Colos. 2.19,
20. Ephesians. ^.2, 3.
not to conform your selves to the Course, the Fashions, Pompes, and Vanities
of this present evil World, 1 John 5.19.
which lies in wickedness; James 1.27.
but to keep your selves unspotted from it: James 4.4. 1 John 2.15.
because the friendship of the World, is enmity to God, and the friends of
this World, 1 John 2.16. Seculum Dei est, secularia autem Diaboli. Tertul. De
Spectac^lis lib.
which is not of God,) are professed enemies unto God: How can you then admit,
or harbor Stage Plays, (the greatest Pompes, and Vanities, that this World
affords,) against these Precepts, and your Co^enant, without the danger of
Rebellion, and the highest Perjury? Christ Jesus informs you; Matthew. 6.24.
Luke 16.13. James 4.4.
that you cannot serve two contrary Masters, as the Devil, or the World, and
him: and therefore you disclaim the one in Baptism, that so you may
appropriate your selves, and service to the other. And can you then yoke, and
serve them all together? Can you serve Christ Jesus, and the Devil? Plus
placent mundo qui Christo displic^nt^ Hierom. Epist 3. cap. 31.
Christ, and the World? Christ, and Stage Plays? Or can you be so besotted by
the Devil, (as alas too many are,) as to think to please, to honor, court,
and entertain Christ Jesus, to welcome him into the World, or celebrate his
Nativity, with infernal Stage Plays, Ludi omnes Originem de Idololatria
sumpserunt. Tertul. De Sp^ctac. cap. 6. to 12. Idololatria ludorum omnium
matter. Cyprian De Spectaculis.
the very Monuments, and Insignes, with which the Pagans did Gratify, and See
Cicero. De Arusp. Respons. Orat. See Act. 2. and Tertul. De Spectaculis. cap.
6. to 22. and page 43. Accordingly.
Court their Deuill-gods upon their Feastiualls, and solemn Birth-dayes:) as
if Christ, and the Devil, Christians, and Pagans were accorded? as if
Stage Plays, were the chiefest works of the Lord Jesus Christ, (who was Luke
1.74, 75. 1 John 3.8.
borne of purpose to Redeem us from them, and to destroy out of us these
works of the Devil:) the principal recreations, and delights of Christians;
not the Inventions, Pompes, and Solemnities of Satan; not the remainders of
Idolatry; not the Ludi scenici animorum pestilentia. August De Ciuit. Dei.
lib. 1. cap 32. Quippe nec i^a Deum tantum, nec tela, nec hosts; Quantum sola
nocet animis illapsa voluptas. Silius Italicus. lib. 15. page 186.
Soule-poysoning pleasures, shows, and vanities of this sinful World, which
we have all Idolorum nec minus Templa, quam monument^ des^u^mus: quia non
possumus coenam Dei edere, and coenam Daemoniorum. Tertul. De Spectac lib. page
393, 394.
renounced. Beloved Christians, consider I beseech you, that God himself
commands you: 1 John. 5.21.
to keep your selves from Idols; 1 Cor. 10.14. Apostolus inclamat: Fugite
Idololatriam: omnem vtique and totam. Ter^ul. De Corona Militis. cap. 8.
and to flee from all Idolatry, as Principale crimen generis humani, summ^^
seculi reatus, tota causa ^udicii, Idololatria. Tertul. De Idololatria. lib.
cap. 1.
being the most capital, and dangerous sin of all other: and can you then
embrace these Stage Plays, (which were originally Ludiquibus Floralibus and
Megalensibus nomen est, caeterique omnes al^^ sacros esse voluistis, and
religionum inter officia, and res diuinas deputari. Arnobius Aduers. Gentes.
lib. 7. page 232. August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 13.27, 29. lib. 4 cap. 1.
consecrated unto Idols, as holy, and religious things; as parts, and
ornaments of their Pomp, and Worship: and have therefore been condemned by
the Tertul. De Spectac. lib. cap. 4. to 12. and 24, 25. C^prian De Specta^ lib.
Lactantius De v^ro Cultu. cap. 20 See page 28, 29, 30.
Fathers; as the Issues, Limbs, and Monuments of Idolatry, from whence they
had their birth:) without any breach of these commands, or of your vow in
Baptism; wherein you did renounce all Idols, and Idolatry, with all their
Pompes, and Relics? O therefore, as you are Christians; as you have Souls to
save, or lose for ever; be you now at last entreated, to lay all these
considerations close unto your Souls; before it be to late. The time will
come ere long, (and who can tell how soon, since the Apostle has long since
forewarned us; Phil. 4.5. James 5.8, 9. Iudicium Dei prae sortbus est. Chrysostom.
Kalendis Oration. Tom. 5. Col. 800. C.
that the Lord is at hand: that the coming of the Lord draws nigh; and that
the Judge stands before the door;) when 1 These. 4.16.2 Cor. 6.10.
that last, and dismal Trumpe, (which should be Semper ^u^a illa terribili^
v^stris perstrepet auribus: Surg^te mortui, venite ad iudicium. Hierom. De
Regula Monach. cap. 30. Tom. 9. page 268. D. Chrysostom. Hom. 71. ad Pop. Antioch.
always sounding this into your eares^ arise ye dead, and come to Judgment,)
shall summon you before Christ's glorious Tribunal, Romans 14.10.12.
to render an account of your selves to him, how well you have kept this vow,
these Precepts, which now I press upon you: and then alas, what can you
plead, or answer for your selves? Can you reply, that you have kept, or Acts
24.16. 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. Haud est nocen^, qu^cunque non est sponte nocens.
Seneca. Her. ul. O^tius. Act. 3. fol. 221.
at leastwise endeavored for to keep, to the utmost of your power, these
several Injunctions, or your vow in Baptism? that you have renounced the
World, the Flesh, the Devil, or Idols, and Idolatry, with all their several
Vanities, Pompes, and Works; whiles you thus justify, magnify, and harbor
Stage Plays, which not only August^ De Ciu Dei. lib. 2. cap. 26. Arnob.
Aduers. G^ntes. lib. 7^ See page 49, 50, 51.
Fathers, but even Pomp^, Pompa ludorum: Pompa sacrorum: De^rum Pompa. Dionys.
Hallicarnas. Antiq Romans lib. 7. cap. 9. Minutius Felix. Octauius page 34.
Cicero. Epist. ad Atti^. lib. 13. E^ist. 28.43. Circus ^rit Pompa celeber,
numeroque D^orum^ Ovid. Fastorum^ lib. 4. page 68. Godwin Roman Antiq. lib. 2.
Sect. 3. cap. 2. page 85.
Pagans themselves, repute, and style; the Worlds, and Devils Pompes? Alas,
Quomod, renunciauimus Diabolo and Angelis eius, si eos facimus? Quod repudium
diximus his, non dico cum quibus, sed de quibus viuimus? Quam discordiam
suscipimus in eos, quibus exhibitionis nostrae gratia obliga^i sumus? Potes
lingua neg^sse, quod manu c^nfiteris? Verbo distruere, quod facto struis? Deum
vnum praedicare qui tantos ^fficis? Deum verum praedicare qui falsos facis?
Negas te quod facis colere? Tertul. De Idololatria lib. Tom. 2. page 448.
how have you renounced the Devil, World, or Idols, whiles you retain their
shows, or do their works? What divorce have you given to all, or any of
these, with which, by which you live? What enmity have you taken up against
them, whiles you are thus obliged to them? Can you deny that (think you,)
with your tongues, which you confess with your hands? Or do you destroy that
in word, which you support in deed? O my beloved, how can you ever say, Qui
Christiani nominis opus non agit, Christianus non esse videatur. Saluian De
G^b. Dei. lib. 4. page 94^
that you have lived like Christians, not like Pagans? that you Quid ergo illi
cum terra qui possidet coelum? Quid illi cum ^umanis, qui adeptus est iam
diuina? Chrysologus. Sermo. 25. Nunquam humana opera admirabitur, quisquis se
cognouerit filium Dei. Cyprian. De Spectaculis.
are the Saints of God, and Citizens of Heaven; not Satan's Minions, or Burgers
of this present wicked world? that you have in truth renounced the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, with all their Pompes, and Works; whiles you wast your
time, and your affections, on those Heathenish, and Infernal Enterludes, and
delights of sin, which are the chiefest Works, and Pompes of Satan; the
eminentest Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World; to which Infidels, and
worldlings have been most devoted? Can you plead Not-guiltie of Perjury, and
Rebellion in all these particulars unto God hereafter, when as you cannot plead
thus, now to men, Se iudice nemo nocens absoluitur. Iuuenal^ Satyr. 13. page
117. Quod quisque fecit, patitur: autorem scelus repeti^, suoque premitur
exemplo nocens. Seneca. Hercules Furens. Act. 3. fol. 36. (b)
or to your own condemning Consciences? If you hope to prove Not-guiltie
then; why do your Sunt vero nonnulli qui aeterna quae audiunt veraciter
credunt, and tamen eidem quam tenent fidei mor^^us contradicunt. Greg. Magn.
Moral. lib. 29. cap. 3.
Lives, your Works, your Consciences cry Guilty now? If you confess your
selves Guilty now, how can you plead Guiltless, Romans 2.3.
or escape Christ's doom, and judgment then? Since therefore it is undeniably
e^ident by all the premises: that Stage Plays are those Pomps, and Works of
the Devil, and Idols; those Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, and
heathen Pagans, which every Christian has everlastingly renounced, and
solemnly abiured in his Baptism: Let this, yea this alone, persuade all such
as are Baptized with the name of Christians, (unless, Nonnulli etiam ^unc
Christiani ^sse non appetunt, sed videri. Gregor. Mag. Moral. lib. 1^. cap. 11.
they desire only to seem Christians, not to be Christians, as many do,) to
See page 42. (z) In die Baptismatis omnibus ^os antiqui hostis operibus, a^que
omnibus Pompis cius renunciare promisinius. Itaque vnusquisque ad
considerationem suae mentis oculo^ reduca^; and sic seruat post Baptismum, quod
ante Baptismum spo^ spondi^, Per praesentem abrenuntiationem expulsus est prior
hospes; per confessionem creduli^atis, intr^e^t secundus. Amalarius Fortunatus.
De Ecclesiast. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 23.
abominate, and condemn all Stage Plays; not only in judgment, but in
practice too; as Per^icious, Unchristian, and unlawful Pompes, and Vanities,
See Act. 7. Scene. 2, 3, 4, 5.
as the Church, and Saints of God have always done in former Ages. (And so
much the rather; because Christians in the Primitive Church, (how ever the
times are changed now,) were Atque hin^ vel maxim intelligunt factum
Christianum de repudio Spectaculorum. Neg^t itaque manifest qui per quod
agnoscitur ^ollit. Tertul. De Spectaculis. cap. 24. See page 4. (p) (q)
especially known, and discovered to be Christians, by their abstinence, and
divorce from Stage Plays.) Else if they approve, applaude, and haunt these
Stage Plays still; let them know this to their endless terror: that though
they bear the name of Christians, or yield some superficial worship unto God;
yet they do in truth renounce their Christianity, Nonne eieramus and
rescindimus signaculum, rescindendo testationem eius? Tertul. D^ Spectaculis.
cap. 24. See page 49, 50, 51.
annihilate their Baptism, abjure their Religion; deny their Faith, their
God, their Jesus: Multi sunt qui faciunt eleemosynas and tamen peccare non
cessant. Isti quasi sua offerunt Deo, and seips^s Diabolo. Ambrose. Sermon. 12.
See page 59, 51.
and bequeath themselves wholly to the Devil: yea, they forfait^ Heaven, and
their own Salvation, and wrecke their dear immortal Souls for all
eternity. And who is there that believes a God, a Heaven, a Hell, so
desperately prodigal of his own Salvation, as to incur all these, or to put
himself to such a loss, to favor Stage Plays? but of this enough.

ACTVS 3.
SCENA PRIMA.
The style and subject matt^r of Stage Plays, is vnlaw^ull, therefore the
Play^s thems^lues.
THirdly, as Stage Plays are thus odious, unseemly, pernicious, and unlawful
unto Christians in all the precedent respects: so likewise are they such in
regard of their ordinary style, and subject matter; which no Christian can, or
dares to patronize: If we sur^ay the style, or subject matter of all our
popular Enterludes; we shall discover them, to be Ad malum malae res plunimae
se agglutinant. Plauti. Aulularia. Act. 4. page 102
either Scurrilous, Amorous, and Obscene: or Barbarous, Bloody, and
Tyrannical: or Heathenish, and Profane: or Fabulous, and Fictitious: or
Impious, and Blasphemous: or Satyricall, and Inuectiue: or at the best but
Frothy, Vain, and Frivolous: If then, Necesse est vt initia and exitus inter
se congruant. Seneca. Epist. 9.
the composure, and matter of our popular Stage Plays, be but such as this,
the Plays themselves must needs be evil, unseemly, and unlawful unto
Christians.

Not to insist upon this General: that the subject matter of most Comedies,
and Tragedies is some vile, and odious sin: Has ob res non chachinnis
diffluere sedentes, sed lachrymis gemere ac doler^ oportet. Chrysostom. Hom. 3^. in
Mat. Religiosa tristitia, aut aliorum luget peccatum, aut proprium: Be^ti
quorum l^ctus in haec inte^tione versatur. Bernardi. Sermon. in F^sto. Mar. Magd.
Col. 244. H. See De Modo been viuendi. lib. Col. 1252. The style, and subject
matter of Stage Plays, is Amorous, and Obscene: therefore the Plays
th^mselues unlawful.
which should be rather a grief, and abomination, then a recreation unto
Christians: I shall for the present confine my self to the particulars here
specified.

First, I say, that the style, and subject matter of most popular, (especially
Comicall) Stage Plays, is Amorous, Scurrilous, and Obscene, unbeseeming all
Chaste, and Christian ears: from whence I raise this fifth Argument.

That whose very style, and subject matter is Lascivious, Scurrilous, and
filthy, See Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 6. B B. Babington.
Mr. Perkins. Mr. Dod. Mr. Elton. Mr. Calvin. and others on the seventh
Commandment. Accordingly.
must needs be unseemly, unlawful, and pernicious unto Christians.

But the very style, and subject matter of most, if not of all our popular
Stage Plays is such.

Therefore they must needs be unseemly, unlawful, and pernicious unto
Christians.

For the Mayor, I hope no Christian, no Pagan dares to question it. For God
himself, has laid this peremptory Iniunction upon men: Psalm. 34.13.
to keep their tongues from evil, and their lips from speaking guile: yea, he
has given this in special charge to Christians. Colo^. 4.6.
Let your speech be always gracious, seasoned with salt: Ephesians. 4.29, 30.
cap. 5.3.4. See Ambrose, Hierome, Primasius, Theodoret, Chrysostom, and
Theophylact, on Ephesians. 5.3.4. Accordingly.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
for the use of edi^ying, that it may minister grace to the hearers: Let all
evil speaking be put away from you: and as for fornication, and uncleanness,
(the common subjects, and principal ingredients of our Comedies,) neither
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, let them not be once
named, (much less then acted, or applauded) among you, as becomes Saints:
Apud Christianos enim s^l^^cismus est magnus, est vitium, turpe aliquid vel
narrare, vel facere. Hierom. Aduers Heluidium cap. 8. Tom. 2. page 139.
It is a great solecisme, yea, a sin among Christians, either to relate, or
do, (much more, to Personate, Pen, or Pleasingly to behold,) any obscene, or
filthy thing: Christians they are, at leastwise should be, Romans 1.7. Ephesians.
1.1. 1 These. 4.7. Hebr. 3.1.
Saints; yea, 1 Cor. 3.16. cap 6.17. 2 Cor. 11.2. 2 Timothy 2.21. Reu. 14.4.
Chaste, and holy Virgins, Temples, and Vessels for the Lord: 2 Cor. 7 1.
cleansing themselves from all pollution, both of Flesh, and Spirit: Isay 33.15.
stopping their ears from hearing blood, sh^tting their eyes from seeing
evil: yea, not so much, Isay ^2.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
as touching any unclean thing: therefore they must abandon all Unchaste, all
Scurrilous, and filthy things: their Eyes, t^eir Ears, their Hands, Nihil
aliud nouerit linguae nisi Christum: nihil posset sonare nisi quod sanctum est.
Hierom. Epist. 9. cap. 1^.
their Tongues, their Hearts, must know nothing but Christ, intermeddle with
nothing but pure^ and holy things: Le^it^ 11.44. cap. 19.2. 1 P^t 1.15.
Their God is holy: Luke 1.35. Acts. 4.27.
their Sauiou^ Jesus Christ is holy: Psalm. 51.11. 2 Pet. 1.21. Revel. 4.7.
their holy Ghost is holy: James 1.27.
their Religion, Romans 1.2. 2 Timothy 3.15. 2 Pet. 2.22.
their Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11 27.29. Heb. 10.29.
their Sacraments, Jude 20.
their Companions, Ephesians. 1.4. Hebr. 3.1. 1 Peter 2.9.
their Faith, Reu 21.2.10.
their Inheritance, and 1 These. 4 7. Hebr. 12.14.
Profession holy, Chaste, and Undefiled: and so must 1 Pet. 1.15.16 2 Peter 3.11.
they be too, in all manner of con^ersation, at all times: therefore all
Amorous, all Lascivious, filthy, and polluted things, which have no analogy,
nor proportion with them, must needs be sinful, hurtful, and unseemly,
yea, odious, and displeasing to them. Obscenitie, or rotten discourse: (which
the Fathers in the margent who condemn it, define to be nothing else,
Turpil^quium iure vocatur quae de vitiosis factis habeturoratio; cuiusmodi est,
si de adulterio, vel de puerorum Amore disseratur, etc. Clemens Alex. Paedag.
lib. 2. cap. 6. See Chrysostom Hom. 17. in Ephesians. 5. Hierome, Ambrose, Theodoret,
Primasius, Theophylact, and Haymo, in Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Accordingly, where they
together with Saint Augustine. De Rect. Cathol. Conu^rsationis. Tom. 9. part.
1. page 1447. and Saint Bernard. De Pass. Domini. Tract. cap. 27. condemn
scurrilitie, and jesting.
but a Narration of some Vicious, Amorous, Adulterous, and filthy action, to
pass away the time, or to provoke, and stir up laughter: of which sort, are
all ribaldrie Songs, and Jests; all Theatricall, Complementall, Poetical, or
Table-discourses of the Adulteries, Incests, Loves, and vile Obsenities of
graceless wicked men, or Heathen-gods, Exprimunt adulterum ^ouem non tam reg^o
suo quam vitiis praepotentem. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato.
who transcended others in their vices, as much as in their Deity:) was
always detestable, and odious unto Pagans: Hence Gellius informs us, Non in
facta modo, sed etiam in voces petulantiores public Romae vindicatum est.
Noct. At. lib. 10. cap. 6.
that the Romans did publicly punish, not only Obscene, and petulant deeds,
but words: Hence Plutarchi, Romulus. Opme^rus. Chronogr. page 90. Dionys. Hal.
Antiq. Romans lib. 2. Sect. 4.
Romulus inacted this Law: Ne quis praesentibus foeminis obscaena verba facito:
Let no man use any obscene speech in the presence of any women: Hence Sophocles
informs us, Non pulchrum est dicere ea qua factu turpia sunt. Oedip. Tyr. page
301. Theodoret, Chrysostom, Primasius, and Theophylact, in Ephesians. 5.4, 5.
Accordingly.
that it is not seemly, nor honest, to speak such things, which are unseemly
to be done: Hence was that ingenious checke^ which Diogenes gave to a
beautiful youth, when he heard him uttering some obscenities: Non erubescis;
ait, ex eburnea vaegina plumbeum educens gladium. Diog. Laert. lib. 6. Diog.
page 349.
do thou not blush, (says he) to draw a leaden Sword out of an Iuorie
scabbard? Hence was that brand, which Seneca stamped upon all scurrilous
persons, which I would such Christians whose tongues are tipped, and hearts
delighted with Ribaldrous Songs, and Jests, would seriously apply unto their
Consciences: wheresoever (says he) thou Vbi^unque videris orationem corruptam,
ibi quoque mores a recto desciuisse non erit dubium. Epist. 114. Magna mala
habitant in illa anima quae verba vsurpat malae and faceta. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in
Ephesians. 5.
meetest with corrupt discourse, there doubt not but the heart, and manners are
depraved: and no wonder: for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks, and evil words corrupt good manners, Mat. 12.34. Luke 6.45. 1 Cor.
15.33.
as the Scriptures teach us Hence Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 9. page 60. Al^aei.
Carm. apud P^nda^um. page 405.
Aristotle magnifies the modesty of that ingenuous Pagan, who when he was
about to utter an unchaste obscenitie, was tongue-tied out of modest shame:
Valerius Max^ lib. 2. cap. 6. ^ect. 7.
the Citizens of Marcelles though Pagans, would admit no Stage Plays into
their City, least their filthiness, and obsceniti^ should corrupt their
youth: Yea, the very Nil dictu faedum visuque haec limina tangat Intra quae
puer est: procul hinc, procul inde puellae Lenonum, and cantus pernoctantis
parasiti. Maxima debetur pueris reuerentia. Iuuenal. Satyr. 14. page 126.
Heathen Poet himself, would have all scurrilitie, and ribaldrie, exiled from
such places where Youths, and Children were, for fear they should deprave
their minds, and manners. If then God himself, if the Fathers, yea, if all
these Pagans have utterly condem^ed all filthy, Scurrilous, Vncha^t, and
Amorous speeches, Jests, and Poemes, as misbeseeming Chaste, and Modest eyes, or
Lips, or Ears; my Mayor cannot but be granted: and so much the rather,
Obscaenus s^rmo and scurrilitas vehiculum scortationis: Ne dixeris vrbana,
scurrilia, nec turpia, nec feceris, and flamniam cupiditatis extingues.
Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in Ephesians. 5. and Theophylact. Ib.
because Unchaste, Obscene, and Amorous words, are but so many vehiculaes, to
carry m^n on to Adulterous, and Sinful deeds, both which, all Christians
must abominate.

For the Mayor; that the Style, and subject Matter of most Comicae fabulae de
stupris virginum loquuntur and am^ribus meretricum. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu.
cap. 20.
Comicall, and Theatricall Enterludes, is Amorous, and Obscene; it is as
evident, as the Morning Sun: First, by the express, and punctual testimony
of sundry Fathers. Read but Bibliotheca Patrum. Coloniae Agrip. 1616. Tom. 2.
page 180.181.
Tatianus Oration. Aduersus Graecos. Ib. page 170. G. H.
Theophylus Antiochenus Contra Autolicum. lib. 3. Clemens Romanus Constit.
Apostolorum. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. Clemens Alexandrinus Oration. Exhort. ad
Gentes. fol. 8.9. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 6.7. and Quod enim turpe factum non
ostenditur in Theatris? quod autem verbum impudens non proferunt qui risum
mouent scurr^ and histriones? Ib.
lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 10.17. to 28. Apologia aduersus
Gentes. cap. 38. De Pudicitia. cap. 7. Minucius Felix Octauius. page 101. Philo
Iudaeus De Agricultura. lib. page 271. De vita Mosis. page 932. De vita
Contemplatiua. lib. page 1209. Cyprian Sed ad scenae inuerecundos ad sales iam
transitum faciam; pudet refer quae dicuntur, pudet etiam accusare quae fiunt.
Agentium strophas, a^ulterorum fallacias, mulierum impudicitias, scurriles
ioc^s, parisitos sordidos, ipso^ quoque patres familias regale^, modo stupido^,
modo obscaenos, modo stotidos, certis nominibus iuuerem. Ib.
De Spectac. lib. and Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2. Donato. Origin in Romans 11. lib. 8.
Tom. 3. page 203. Arnobius aduers-Gentes. lib. 3. page 114. lib. 4. page
149.150. lib. 5. page 182. and lib. 7. page 230. to 241. Lactantius De vero
Cultu. cap. 20. Diuinarum Institutionum Quin scena? number sanctior? in qua
Comoedia de stupris and amoribus; Tra^adia de incest^^ and parricidiis,
fabulatur. Ib.
Epit. cap. 6. Basilius Magnus Hexaemeron. Hom. 4. De Legendis libris Gentilium
Oration. and Ascetica. Tom. 2. page 180.181. Gregory N^zianzen Oration. 48. page
796.797. ad Seleuchum De recta Educatione Epist. page 1063.1064. Gregory
Nyssen. Vitae Moseos Enarratio. page 525. Ambrose De Paenitentia. lib. 2. cap.
6. and Enarratio in Plasm. 118. Octon. 5. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus Catechesis
Mystagogica. 1. Hilarie Enarratio in Psalm. 14. and in Psalm. 118. He. Hierom
Comment. in Ezech. lib. 6. cap. 20. Tom. 4. page 389. H. and Epist. 2. cap. 6.
Chrysostom Hom. 3. De Dauide and Saul. Hom. in Psalm. 140. Hom. 6.7. Cuncta
enim simpliciter quae ibi fiunt turpissim^ sunt: verba, vestitus, tonsura,
incessus, voces, cantus, modulationes, oculorum euersiones, motus, tibiae,
fistulae, and ipsa fabularum argumenta, omnia (inquam) turpi lasciu^^ plena
sunt: quae aures mentis solent magis quam quauis sordes obst^uere: vel potiu^
non obstruunt tantum, sed etiam impurum faciunt, and immundum. Chrysostom Ib.
and 38. in Mat. Hom. 62. in Acta. Apost. Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Hom. 17. in Ephesians.
5. and Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antiochiae. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap.
32.33. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 15. cap. 26.29. De Consensu. Euangel. l. 1. cap. 33.
Confessionum. lib. 3. cap. 1.2. Prosper Aquitanicus De Gloria Sanctorum
Peroratio. page 73. Orosius Historiae. lib. 3. cap. 4. Isiodor Hispalensis.
Etimolog. lib. 18. cap. 41.42. Saluian De Gubernat. Dei. Solae Theatrorum
impuritates tales sunt quae honest non possunt vel accusari. Ib. p. 186.
lib. 6. and 7. Bernard Oration ad Milites Templ^. cap. 4. Bibliotheca Patrum.
Tom. 15. p. 348.463. D. 466. C.
Ioannes Salisburiensis De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. and lib. 8. cap.
6.7. Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1. cap. 27. and lib. 7. cap. 10. To whom I may
add, Concilium Parisiense sub Ludouico and Lothario. lib. 1. cap. 38.
Concilium Agathense. Canon. 39. Synodus Turonica. 3. Canon. 7.8. Synodus
Cabilonensis. 2. Canon. 9. Synodus Moguntina sub Rabano. Canon. 13. Concilium
Coloniense. Anno. 1536. pars. 2. cap. 25. pars. 9. cap. 10. Concilium.
Coloniense sub Adolpho. Anno. 1549. and Gratian. Distinctio. 33.48.86. Peruse,
I say, these several Fathers, and Councels; (whose words, if I should at large
transcribe them, would amount unto an ample volume:) and you shall find them
all concur in this: Comoedia and Tragadiae incestis gloria^tur, quas vos
libenter legitis and auditis. Minucius Felix Octa. page 101.
that Stage Plays are wholly composed of, or at leastwise fraught with
Ribaldrie, Scurrilitie; Unchaste, and Amorous streines, and passages: Obscene,
and filthy Jests, which inquinate the Minds, corrupt the Manners, and defile
the Souls of men, Nonne erg^ fugies sedilia hostium Christi; illam cathedram
pestilentiariam, ipsumque aerem quae desuper incuba^ scelestis vocibus
constupratum. Tertul. De Spectac. c 27.
yea pollute the very places, and common air, where they are but acted: Whence
they all condemn, these Theatricall Enterludes, as unseemly, pernicious,
abominable, and utterly unlawful unto Christians: as exceeding odious, and
displeasing unto God; stiling them, Ludi scaenici spectacula turpitudinum, and
Licentia vanitatum: per^etuus morbus animarum; malae cupiditatis inductio,
adulteri^ meditatio, tur^itudinis exhortatio. August. De Ciu. Dei. l. 1. c. 32.
l^ 2. c. 8.9. Orosius Hist. l. 3 c. 4. Chrysostom. Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antiochiae and
Hom. 42. in Act.
the very sinckes of all uncleanness, the Lectures of Obscenitie, the
Meditations of Adultery, the examples of dishonestie, the exhortations, and
instructions of ^ilthinesse, and the like: and Play Houses, Sacrarium Veneris:
Templum and Ecclesia Diaboli: Arx omnium turpitudinum: Consistorium
impudicitiae: Cathedra Pest^lentiaria: sedilia hostium Christi. Tertul De
Spectac. c. 10.17.2^. Cathe^ra Pesti^entiarum. Clem. Alex^ Paedag. l. 3. c. 11.
Pudoris pu^lici ^upa^arium, and obscaeni^atis magisterium. Cypr. De Spectac
l^b. Communis and publica offic^^a sce^erum. Basil. Hexaem. Hom. 4.
Fornicationis g^mnasium; ^ntemperantiae Schola. Chrysostom Hom. 62. ad. Pop.
An^io^hiae and Hom. 42. in Act. Lasciua faeditatis and impuritatis omnis
officina. Nazianz ad Seluchum de Recta educatione. p. 1063. Loca and habitacula
turpitudinum. Salu. De Gub. Dei l. 6. p. 198. Cauiae iurpitudinum. August. De
Cons^nsu Euang. l. 1. c. 33. Animarum labes and pestis: probitatis and
honestatis e^ersio. August De Ciu. Dei l. 1. c 33. Vere fugalia, sed pudoris
and honestatis. Ib. lib. 2. cap. 6. See Act. 6. Scene. 1, 2, 3.
the Temples of Venery; the St^wes of Modesty, the Schools of Ribaldry, and
Obscenitie: the Dens of filthiness: the Chaires of Pestilence, and
corruption: the Seats, the Places, and Mansions of all filthinesses, and
unchastity: and the common, and public Shops of all wickednesses, and
defilements whatsoever. Zenophon in his Conuiuium. Plato De Republ. lib. 8. and
10. Legu^ Dialogus. 7. Aristotle Politicorum. lib. 7. cap. 17. Diogenes
Laertius. lib. 2. Socrates. Isocrates Oration ad Nicoclem; and Oration De Pace.
Tullie Quoted by Augustine. De Ciuitate D^i. lib. 2. cap. 9.
De Republica. lib. 4. Tus^. Quaest. lib. 1. and 2. De Legibus. lib. 7. Ad
Marium. Epist. 1. Seneca. Epist. 7.90. and 123. Plutarch De Audiendis Poetis.
lib. De Gloria Atheni^nsium. lib. Symposiarum. lib. 7. Quaest. 8. Liuie Roman
Hist. lib. 7. cap. 2.3. Dionysius. Hallicar. Romans Antiq. lib. 2. Sect. 3. lib.
7. Sect. 9. Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap. 4. Cornelius Tacitus. Annal. lib.
14. Sect. 2.3. Lampridii Heliogobalus. Pliny. Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 20. Ovid
De Art Amandi. lib. 1. Tristium. lib. 2. and Fastorum. lib. 3. page 55. Horace
De Art Poetica. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. Iuuenal Satyr. 6.8.9. yea, Plautus
himself, (as obscene as he is) Captiuei Prologus. page 105. You shall find
all these See Ludou. Vi^es. De Cause. Corrupt. Artium. lib 2. Inde ioci veteres,
obscaenaque verba canuntur: Ne^ res h^c Veneri gratior vlla fuit. Ovid.
Fastorum. lib. 3. page 55.
acknowledging, yea, condemning the Amorousnesse, Scurrilitie, and lewdness of
Stage Plays, as I shall prove See Act. 7. Scene. 6.
anon. If any now reply, that the Plays of our age are defecat^d from these
gross Obscenities, and purged from all Ribaldrious, Amorous, Unchaste, and
filthy passages: Let him then consider in the third place; that many Modern
Authors of all sorts, do not only indite our popular Enterludes of the
self^-same crimes, but likewise pass a fatal, and final sentence of
condemnation on them, for Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. 3. page 214.215^ on
Petrarch. De Remedio vtr. Fortunae. lib. 1. Dial. 30. on Bodinus De Republica.
lib. 6. cap. 1. on Polydor Virgil De Inuentoribus Rerum. lib. 1. cap. 11. on
Alexander Sardis De Invent. Rerum. lib. 1. page 43.44. on Ludo^. Vines, De
Caus^ Corrupt. Arti^m. lib. 2. on Iohannis Mariana, and Barnabas Bristochius,
in their books De Spectaculis^ on Doctor Reinolds his Overthrow of
Stage Plays. on Master Northbrookes Treatise against vain Plays, and
Enterl^des. page 57^ to^ 77. on Master Gossons Confutation of Plays. Act. 4.5^
on Master Stubs his Anatomy of Ab^ses. Edit. 3. page 101. to^ 107. o^ I. G. in
his Refutation of Haywoods Apology for Actors. on Master John Brinslies True
watch. part. 1. Abomination. 19. page 227.228. on Bishop Babington. Master
Perkins, Master Dod, and Master Elton, on the 7. Commandment. on Doctor
Laytons Spec^lum belli sacri. cap. 45. on The Co^e^ant between God, and Man,
by I. P. London. 1616. page 382, 383. on Master John Downhams Guide to
Godliness. lib. 3. cap. 21. Sect. 5. on Master Robert Bolton, in hi^ Discourse
of True Happiness. page 73.74. You shall see our Modern Stage Plays, even
copiously Anatomized, yea, condemned by them: as being fully fraught, and
wholly composed, of Ribaldrie, Obscenitie, Lasciviousness, Vnch^st, and
lustf^ll parts, and passages, which misbeseeme all modest eyes to see, all
Christian ears to hear, or tongues to utter: Whence they style all Plays,
Vitiorum semina s^nt, s^^lerum pabula, mortis iter. Ioannes Salisburiensis. De
Nugis C^rialium. P^oce. See Master Bolton Discourse of True Happiness. p 73^74.
the grand empoyso^ers of Grace, Iugemio^^^esse, and all manly resolution: the
Lectures of obscenitie, the Seeds of vices, the Food of wickedness, yea the
Plagues, and Poison of men's Souls, and Manners: Theatra recte defini^e
poss^mus^ turpitudinis vitiorum que omnium sentinam ac scholam. Bodinus De
Republi^a. lib. 6. cap. 1. S^e Gualther Hom. 1. in^ Nahum. 3. Accordingly.
and Theaters, the Oratories of the Deuill^ the Synagogues of Satan; the
Schools of lewdness; and the very ^inckes of filthiness, and all other
vices^ which Christians should abhor, yea fear, and fly, as much, nay more
then any Pesthouse: as these their writings, will at large demonstrate. If
then these several Fathers, Counsels, Pagan Authors, and Modern CHRISTIAN
writers, (with sundry others, which I shall receipt hereafter in their proper
places:) conclude the very Structure, Style, and Subject Matter of popular
Stage Plays, to be Amorous, Scurrilous, and Obscene; and thereupon pass this
Judgment on them: Talia sunt quae illic tiunt, vt ea non solum dicere, sed
etiam recordari aliquis sine pollutione non possit: In Theatris, and
concupiscentiis animus, and auditu aures, and aspectu oculi polluuntur. Quae
quidem omnia tam flagitiosa sunt, vt etiam explicare ea quispiam aut eloqui
saluo pudore non valeat. Sal. De Gub. Dei. l 6. p. 186, 187.

Mel meum, lumen meum, meum desiderium, omnes delicias and lepores, and visis
dignas vrbaenitates, and caeteras ineptias amatorum, in comoediis erubescimus,
in saeculi hominibus detestamur: quanto magis in clericis, and in sanctis
viris. Hierom. Epist. 2. cap. 6.


that they are altogether unfit for Chaste, unlawful for Christian, unseemly
for Gracious, or modest Ears to hear, or Lips to utter: I hope that none will
be so obstinately incredulous, as not to believe them in the one: or so
desperately impious, as not to give sentence with them; not to conform their
practice to them, in the other. But if all these several Testimonies are not
sufficient to convince the most incredulous Play-haunters of the obscenities of
Stage Plays; I appeal for final proof of my Assumption unto every man's
experience. Not to record those several profane, and gross Scurrilitas atque
Lasciuia te praesente non habeant locum. Nunquam verbum inhonestum audias: aut,
si audieris, ne inesceris. Hierom. Epist. 8. cap. 6.
Obscenities, those Amorous streines, Lascivious passages, and unsavory
Jests, which are scattered in Aristophanes, Terrence, Plautus, Catullus,
Tibullus, Propertius, In his Amorum: De Art Amandi: Pulex, etc.
Ovid, and other ancient Comedians, and wanton Poets; which every Chaste, and
Gracious Christian must condemn: I shall confine my self unto the Comedies,
and popular Enterludes of our present Age, Ego amplius dico: non solum agi nunc
illas ludicrorum infamium labes quae prius acta sunt; sed criminosius multo agi
quam prius actae sunt. Saluian. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6. page 201.
which far exceed them in all these. Alas, what are the Mayor part of all
our Modern Stage Plays, but so many Lectures of Ribaldry; so many Abstracts,
Compendiums, or Miscellaines of sublimated, Elegant, Witty, or more Accurate,
and choice Obscenities? which Vocis dulcedines per aurem animam vulnerant; quae
quanto licentius adeunt, tanto difficilius euitantur. Hierom. Epist. 12. cap. 3.
the more refined, and accute they are, the more do they empoyson, endanger,
and deprave the Auditors: Do not the ordinary Theames, and Subjects of our
Modern Comedies, being nothing else but the Adulteries, Fornications, Rapes,
Loue-passions, Meritricious, Unchaste, and Amorous practices, of Lascivious
Wicked men, See Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. August. De Ciuit. Dei. lib.
2. cap. 4. to 15 26, 27, 28, 29. Arnobius Aduers. Gentes. lib. 7. Accordingly.
See here Scene. 3.
or Heathen Idole-gods; Ephesians. 3.3, 4.
which should not be so much as named, (much less then acted) among
Christians? do not those Of which see Act. 5.
Wanton, Whorish, lustful Parts; those Ribaldrous Songs, and filthy Ditties:
those Meretricious, and Unchaste Attires, Looks, and Gestures: those Amorous,
and lustful Complements, Kissings, Clippings, and Embracements: those lively,
if not real representations, or ocular demonstrations of the very acts of
Whoredom, and Adultery, which are usually represented to us on the Theater:
together with all those Obscene, and filthy Jests; those Scurrilous, and
beastly passages, those quaint, Subtle, Rhetorical, and Flexanimous streines
of contemplative, Elegant, and witty Obscenities, with which our Plays are
fraught, and enterlaced: 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Ezech 9.4. Psalm. 119.136.158. See
Chrysostom. Hom 38. in Matthew. Cyprian De Spectaculis. lib. Saluian. lib. 6. De
Guber. Dei. Nonnullae prudentiores, (speaking of Pagans,) auertebant faciem ab
impuris motibus foenicorum, and artem flagitii videre erubescentes, furtiua
intention discebant. August. De Ciu Dei. lib. 2. cap. 26. And should not
Christians much more blush to see them?
the very sight, and hearing of which, should cause all modest Eyes to Blush,
and Weep; all Christian Ears, to Glow, and Tingle; all Chaste, and Gracious
Hearts, to Mourn, and Bleed:) do not all these (I say) proclaim and
testify to the world; that the Style, and subject Matter; yea, the very
Action, Circumstances, and Appendices of our popular Stage Plays, are
Scurrilous, and Obscene? what need we then any further witnesses? Doubtless,
the Obscenitie of our Plays is such, that if the very Stones, and Pillars,
which support the Playhouse; if the Seats, and Scaffoldes, which adorn it:
or the very Theater, and Stage it self, had Tongues to speak; they would
presently exclaim against it, and reprove it. And dares any Christian then,
be so audaciously absurd, as to gainsay it? so wil-fully blind, as not to
see it? so desperately profane, as not to loathe it? when as his own
experience must acknowledge, and his very Conscience does, yea cannot, but
condemn it? Since then the very Style, and subject Matter of our Plays are
such; this must, this cannot but enforce us to reject them, as pernicious,
unseemly, yea, utterly unlawful unto Christians; yea, as Si proferas verbum
spurcum, and Christiano ore indignum, non hominem contristasti sed Spiritum
Dei, a quo beneficium accepisti; a quo sanctificatum est os tuum. Non pudet
igitur nos illum contristare? Signatum est os tuum a Spiritu, vt nihil indignum
ipso loquaris: ne dissoluas igitur sigillum. Theophylact. in Ephesians. 4.30.
grievous, and offensive to Gods blessed Spirit, who has Sanctified, and
Sealed up our Mouths, and Ears from all Scurrilitie: as all the fore-recited
Fathers, and Christian Authors have already done, upon the selfsame grounds.

SCENA SECVNDA.
SEcondly, as the Style, and subject Matter of Stage Plays is Scurrilous, and
Obscene, so likewise it is Bloody, and Tyrannical; breathing out Malice, See
Seneca. He^^ul. Furens. and Medea.
Fury, Anger, Murder, Cruelty, Tyranny, Treachery, Archil^c^um proprio
rabies ^rmauit ^ambo^ Hor. De Art Po^t lib.
Frenzy, Treason, and Revenge, (the constant Theames, and chief Ingredients,
of all our Tragedies,) which See Act. 6. Scene. 10. Argument. 6. The Style, and
subject Matter of Stage Plays is Bloody, and Tyrannical: Therefore ^uil and
unlawful unto Christians
Efferate, and enrage the Hearts, and Minds, of Actors, and Spectators; yea,
often times animate, and excite them to Anger, Malice, Duels, Murders, Revenge,
and more then Barbarous cruelty, to the great disturbance of the public
Peace. From whence I frame this sixth Argument.

That whose Style, and subject Matter is Bloody, and Tyrannical, breathing out
Malice, Anger, Fury, Cruelty, Tyranny, Piercenesse, Treason, Rapine,
Violence, Oppression, Murder, and Revenge, must needs be Odious, Unseemly,
and Unlawful unto Christians.

But such is the Style, and subject Matter of most, (but especially of our
Tragical) Stage Plays.

Therefore they must needs be Odious, Unseemly, and Unlawful unto Christians.

The Minor is evident: First, by Experience: Secondly, by Chrys^ Hom 38. in
Matthew. Lact. l. 6 c. 20. Cypr. and Tert. De Spectac. Polyd. Virg. De Invent.
R^rum l. 1. c. 10. Mr. Northbrookes Treatise against vain Plays, and
Ente^ludes. f. 30.37. Mr. Stubs Anat^mie of Abus^s. p. 10^, 105, 107 Mr.
Gossons Play^s Confuted. Act. 4, 5. Seneca. Epist 7. Read Sophocl^s, Euripides,
and Seneca his Tragedies, with all our Modern Tragedies, which confirm it.
express Authorities; both which do testify: that the Style, and subject
Matter of our Tragedies are Bloody, and Tyrannical; abounding with Envy,
Malice, Fury, Clamours, Wrath, Cruelty, Treachery, Frenzy, Murders,
Treasons, Villainy, Vnplacablenesse, Discordes, Mutinies, Rebellions,
Conspiracies, Rapes, Duells, and Revenge, which provoke, and whet on the
Spectators to all these Barbarous, and inhumane Vices, which they should
abhor.

The Mayor is uncontrollable: First, because the Scriptures do expressly
enjoin us: Ephesians. 4.26^ 27.31. Genes. 4.5, 6. Cap. 49.6.7. James 3.14, 15, 16.
Psalm. 71.4. Psalm. 55.9, 10. Psalm. 86.14. Psalm. 140.11. Psalm. 27.12. Psalm.
74.20. Prou. 11 17. Cap. 12.10. Cap. 27.4. Acts 8.3. Romans 1.29, 30, 31. 2 Timothy
3 2.3.4.
to put away all Malice, Anger, Wrath, Contention, Sedition, Strife, Cruelty,
Violence, Rapine, and Revenge; together with all Ephesians. 4.31. Psalm. 27.12.
Acts 9.1. Psalm. 52.4. Psalm. 55.21. Psalm. 64.3. Prou. 12.6. Cap. 15.1. Romans
1.29, 30, 31. Galat. 5.15. Romans 3.14. Colos. 3.8. Cap. 4.6.
Truculent, Clamorous, Furious, Irefull, Tragical, Bloody, Fierce, Malicious,
and reuengefull speeches: and that for sundry reasons: First, because such
words, and actions as these, I^mes 3.6.14, 15, 16, 17. Galat 5.20, 21. Romans
1.29, 30, 31.
are Earthly, Carnal, Devilish; proceeding from the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, ( who are fraught Genesis 49.6.7. 1 Peter 5.8. Prou. 12.10.
with Rage, and Cruelty:) not from the wisdom of God from above, which is
Pure, Peaceable, Gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy, and good
Fruits: Secondly, because such speeches as these, Prou. 15.1. Equus est
vociferatio, ascensor autem ira, impedi equum, and subuertisti as^ensorem.
Theophylact Enar. in Ephesians. 4.31.
are the Fomenters of Contention, yea, the Chariots of Anger, Cruelty, and
Revenge: Thirdly, because such Tragical, Fell, and Bloody discourses as these,
are altogether unsuitable unto Christians; who are, or should be, Ephesians. 4 31,
32, 33. Mark 9.50. 1 Cor. 14.33. 2 Cor. 13.11, 12. Ephesians. 6.23. Galat. 6.1.
Phil. 4.7. Col. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.
Men of a Quiet, Peaceable, Gentle, Meek, and tenderhearted Disposition,
being Kind, and Loving one toward another, and forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ's sake, has forgiven them. The God of Christians, Romans 15.33.
Cap. 16.20. 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 4.9. 1 These. 5.23. 2 These. 3.16. Heb. 13.20.
is a God of Peace: the Head of Christians, Isay 9.6. Heb. 7.2.
is a Prince of Peace: the Guide of Christians, Ephesians. 4.3
is a Spirit of Peace, and Unity: the Rule of Christians, is a Ephesians. 6.15.
Word, a Gospel of Peace, Luke 10.5. Cap. 19.42. Act. 20.36.
which brings, and proclaims Peace to all, Romans 12.18 Heb. 12.14. 1 Pet.
3.11.
and persuades Peace with all Men: the way of Christians, Luke 1.79. Romans 3.17.
is a way of Peace; yea, their 1 Cor. 7.15.
Vocation, 2 Cor. 13.11. 2 Timothy 2.22. 1 Timothy 2.2.
Life, Psalm. 37.37. 2 Pet. 3.14.
and End, are Peace: therefore all Irefull, Truculent, ^ierce, and Tragic
Spectacles, or Poemes, which breathe out nothing but Cruelty, Blood,
Unmercifulness, Discord, Vnplacablenesse, and Revenge, must needs be
unseemly, and unlawful to them; as being opposite, and Repugnant to their
Peaceable, Meek, and Courteous constitution. Secondly, such Barbarous, Bloody,
Tyrannical, Fierce, and Cruel Spectacles, and Enterludes as these, where
Tyranny, Envy, Malice, Murder, Fury, and Revenge, are Acted, and Applauded
to the Life, Luxuriosior redeo, immo vero crudelior and in humanior, quiae
inter homines in Spectaculis fui. Seneca. Epist. 7. vid. Ib.
must needs Inrage, Imbitter, Exasperate the Spectators, and provoke them to
Cruelty, Passion, Rage, Revenge, and Discontent, upon very small occasion, as
I shall prove at large Act. 6. Scene. 10.
anon: therefore they must needs be Evil. Upon this very ground, Aduers.
Haereses lib 1. cap. 1. page 23.
Irenaeus, De Spectaculis. lib.
Tertullian, Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Cyprian, Pro Christianis Lagatio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2. p. 139.
Athenagoras, Contr. Autolicum. lib. 3. Ib. page 170. G. H.
Theophylus Antiochenus^ O^atio. Contra. Graecos. Ib. page 180. C. D.
Tatianus, De Vero Cult. cap. 20. Diuinarum Instit. Epit cap 6.
Lactantius, Oration. 48. and De Recta Educatione ad Selcucum. page 1063, 1064
Nazianzen, Compend. De Doctr. and Fide Eccles. Catholic. page 922.
Epiphanius, Hom. 38. in Matthew. and Hom. 12. in Roman^s.
Chrysostom, De Ciuitat. Dei. lib 2. cap. 25. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Augustine, Octa^ius. page ^23, 124.
Minucius Felix, De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6.
Saluian; together with all the Christians in the Primitive Church, as these
record, did utterly condemn, and avoid all Sword-Playes, Tragoedies, and
bloody Spectacles of cruelty; as Fightings, and Combats of Men, with Men, or
Men, and Beasts together, (which the Plutarch. Laconica Instituta.
Lacedaemonians, together with De Republica. lib. 8.
Plato, and Epist. 7.
Seneca, though Pagans, did likewise censure, and reject:) because See Ioannes
Mariana De Specta^ulis. lib. Lipsius De Gladiatoribus, Agrippa De Vanitate
Scientiarum. cap. 13. Peter Mar^yr Locorum Commun^ Classis. 4. cap. 18, Sect.
2, 3, 4.
they did excite, and stir men up to Murder, Cruelty, and Revenge; and make
them guilty of the Wounds, and Blood of all those Combatants, and
Sword-Players, which they did behold. And hence likewise was it, that the good
Emperor Eusebius De Vita Constantini. lib. 4. cap. 1. Zozeman. Historiae.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 8. Nicephorus Calist. Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 46.
Eutropius Rerum. Rom Hist. lib. 11. page 142.
Constantine; together with Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. Imperium Neruae. fol. 101.
Col. A.
Nerua, Eutropius R^rum. Rom lib. 13. Arcadius and Honorius. page 174. See
Doctor Hackwells Apology. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 9. cap. 10.11.
Arcadius, and Honorius; prohibited all Sword-Playes, Duels, and such like
Cruel, and Bloody Spectacles; as misbeseeming Christian hands to act, or eyes
to see; because they were but so many Incendiaries, and Fomentors of Cruelty,
Quarrels, Murders, and Revenge. Since therefore the Style, and subject Ma^ter
of our Plays, together with the consequences of them, are such as these, we
must, we cannot but reject them, on the foresaid reasons, as those
fore-quoted Authors have already done.

SCENA TERTIA.
THirdly, the Style, and subject Matter of most popular Stage Plays, is
Heathenish, and Profane, consisting of the Exprimunt impudicam Venerem,
adulterum Martem, louem illum suum, non magis regno quam vitiis prin^ipem, in
terr^nos amores cum ipsis suis fulminibus ardentem, etc. Cyprian. Epist. lib.
2. Epist. 2. The Style, and Subject Matter of Stage Plays, is Heathenish, and
Profane: therefore unlawful.
Acts, the Rites, the Ceremonies, Names, and Persons; yea, the very Rapes,
Adulteries, Murders, Thefts, Deceites, Lasciviousness, and other exc^rable
Villainies of Dunghill, Idol, Pagan-gods, and Goddesses, or wicked men which
should be buried in everlasting oblivion lest the memory, and reuiuall of them
should defile the light: From whence I raise this seventh Argument.

Those Stage Plays, whose Style, and Subject Matter is Heathenish, and
Profane, consisting of the Parts, the Persons, Ceremonies, Rites, and Names;
yea, the Imprecations, Inuocations, Adorations, and Applauses; together with
the very Loue-passions, Lusts, Adulteries, Incests, Rapes, Impostures, Cheates,
Conspiracies, Treacheries, Murders, Thefts, Debates, and other abominable
villainies, and execrable practices, of Demoniacall, Incestuous, Adulterous, and
Infernal Heathen-Gods, or Men whose very Names, and Practices should rot, and
perish in oblivion; must needs be odious, unseemly, yea, utterly unlawful
unto Christians.

But such is the Style, and Subject Matter of most Theatricall Enterludes.

Therefore they must needs be odious, unseemly, yea, utterly unlawful unto
Christians.

For the Minor; not only our own Experientia mortalium Index. Pindarus. Ode.
4. page 39. Quam multa homines experientia docet. Sophocles Ajax Flagellatus.
Number. 1465. page 103.
experience, which is a thousand Witnesses, and the truest Index; but even
sundry Fathers, and Modern Authors: as Clemens Alexandrinus Oration Exhort. ad
Gentes. Clemens Romanus Constit. Aposto. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. Tatianus Oration
Aduers. Graecos. Theophylus Antiochenus Contr. Autolicum. lib. 3. Tertullian De
Spectac. lib. Cyprian De Spectac. lib. and Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Arnobius
Aduers. Gent. lib. 3.4. and 7. page 230. to 242. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. cap.
20. Diuinarum Instit. Epit. cap. 6. Basil De Legendis libris Gentilium Oration.
Nazianzen Ad Seleuchum. Eusebius De Praeparatione Euangelii. lib. 4. Theodoret
De Sacrificiis. lib. 7. Chrysostom Hom. 6, 7. and 38. in Matthew. Augustine De
Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31, 32. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 29. Saluian De Gubernat.
Dei. lib. 6. Minucius Felix Octauius. together with Doctor Reinolds, Master
Northbrooke, Mr. Gosson, John Mariana, in their Books against Stage Plays:
Ludouicus Viues De Causis Corruptionis Artium. lib. 2. and Comment. in lib. 2.
Augustini De Ciuitate Dei. Master Stubs in his Anatomy of Abuses: with sundry
others, do expressly testify: O impietatem! scenam coelum fecistis, and Deus
vobis factus est actus: and quod sanctum est, Daemoniorum personis ludificati
estis, verum Dei cultum ac religionem, D^monum superstitione, libidinose, and
obscaene inquinantes. Canunt Furtiuum pulchrae Venerisque and Martis amorem,
etc. Clemens Alexand. Oration. Exhortat^ ad Gentes. fol. 8. E. F. See Augustine
De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8^26.
that Stage Plays are fraught with the Genealogies, Ceremonies, Images,
Relics, Imprecations, Inuocations, Names, Adulteries, Whoredoms, Incests,
Rapes, Loue-prankes, Furies, Lusts, Lasciviousness, Thefts, Murders, Cheates,
Persons parts, Histories, and abominable Villainies of Heathen Idole-gods: and
for this very cause, they utterly condemn them, as sinful, and pernicious:
And so much the rather: Immundissimi Spiritus, mal^gnissimi and fallacissi^i
Damones, vsque adeo aut veris, aut fictis, etiam suis tamen crimini^us
delectantur, quae sibi celebrari per sua festa voluerunt, vt a perpetrandis
damnabili^us factis humana reuocari non possi^ infirmitas, dum ad haec imitanda
velut diuina praebetur autoritas. Aug. De Ciu. Dei. l. 4. c. 1. Sec l. 2. cap.
10.25.27. Accordingly.
because these Demonicall, and Infernal Deities, being delighted with these
their true, or feined wickednesses; did purposely command them to be Acted on
their solemn Feastiualls; that so men might be encouraged to imitate them, and
to proceed, yea persevere without redress, in these their Adulterous,
Inhumane, and Infernal Vices, which were Countenanced, Authorized, yea
Legitimated, and commended by their practical, and Divine examples. All Times,
all Ages, yea all Ancient, and Modern Stage Plays, and Experience, Subscribe,
and Suffragate with these our Authors to our Minor: therefore we must, we
cannot but acknowledge it.

For the Mayor, it is clearly evident by its own light, and by the luster of
the Scripture. For first of all; God himself, enioynes his People: Exodus
23.13. Josh. 23.7.
not to make mention of the names of other Gods, not to let them be heard out
of their mouths, Deuteronomy 12.3. Judges 2.2.
but to overthrow their Altars, break their Pillars, burn their Groves, hew
down their graven Images, and to destroy their very Names out of their places:
Whence David does solemnly profess: ^sal. 16.4.
that he will not offer the drink Offerings of Idole-gods, nor yet take up
their names within their lips. The very names of Pagan-gods are so odious,
and displeasing unto God, so vnsuiteable unto Christian mouths, and ears;
that God himself protests; Zech. 13 2.
he will cut off the name^d of Ioles out of the Land, and they shall be no more
remembered: yea, Hosea 2.17.
that he will take away the names of Baalim out of his peoples mouth, and they
shall be no more remembered by their name. Hence was it, Ad mortem vsque
contendunt Christiani ne Iouem Deum appellent: neue hunc ipsum alia li^gua
denominent. Christiani ea sunt erga Deum reuerentia and pi^tate, vt nil prorsus
nominum quae poetarum fictionibus compraehenduntur rerum omnium conditori
accommodent^ Origin Contr. Celsum. lib. 1. Tom. 4. fol. 5. ^.
that the Christians in the Primitive Church, would rather die, then call Jove
a God; as he is often times styled in our Stage Plays: (and truly they Etiam
ne habet hic aliquid numinis cuius plura munerantur Adulteria quam partus?
Viderimus an maeximus, certe optimus non est. Lactan^i^s De Falsa Relig lib. 1.
cap. 16. and 10. Ath^nasius Contra Gentil ^ lib.
had little reason for to deem him a God, whose Adulteries did exceed his
issues in their number:) Yea, such was their reverence, and Piety toward God,
that they would not so much as apply any Poetical names unto him; as we
Christians to our shame, and his dishonor, often times do: Christians have
been always coy, and charie of the very naming of Heathen Idols, unless it
were with detestation, and dislike. Absit vt de ^re Christiano sonet, Jupiter
omnipotens, and me Hercule, me Castor, and caetera magis portenta quam numina.
Epist. 146. Damaso Tom. 3. page 408.
God forbid (says Saint Hierome) that omnipotent Jove, O my Hercules, my
Castor, or other such monsters rather then Gods, should ever ^ound out of a
Christian mouth. Christianus fidelis non carmen ethnicum, neque cantilenam
meritriciam canere debet, quoniam continget eum in cantione Daemoniacorum
nominum idolorum mentionem facere, and in locum Spiritus Sancti inuadet in eum
Spiritus malu^. Constitut. Apostol. lib. 5. cap. 10.
A faithful Christian, writes Clement of Rome; ought not to sing any Heathen
verse, or Meretricious song; because he may chance in singing to make mention
of the names of Devilish Idols; and so instead of the holy Ghost, the evil
Spirit may seize upon him. De Lege^dis Libris Gentilium-Oratio.
Saint Basil, and Ad Seleucum De Recta Educatione. page 1063.
Nazianzen, persuade, and advise all Christians; Haec omnia tanquam malorum
geniorum Doctrinas, tum risu, tum lachrymis dignas, imo tanquam laqueos and
decipula^ auersaere. Ib.
to avoid all Heathen Poemes, and Writings, which treat of Heathen Gods;
relating either their Genealogies, Histories, Adulteries, Loves, or Rapes; as
being the Doctrine of Devils, or so many Traps, and Snares, to endanger them.
De Recti^ud. Cathol. Conuersationis Tract. Tom. 9. pars. 1. page 1448.
Saint Augustine, inhibites Christian women, so much as to name Minerua, or any
such unlucky persons, in their Spinning, Dying, or any other work. Epist.
lib. 9. Epist. 48.
Saint Gregory the great, and Distinctio. 86. cap. Cum multa.
Gratian, inform us: that the Praises, Histories, or mention of Jove, do not
beseem any Godly Lay-mans mouth, much less a Bishops: whence they blame
Desiderius a Bishop of France, for teaching the Art of Grammar, in which he
must discourse, both of the Names, and Praises of Heathen Gods: upon which
ground, the fourth Council of Carthage. Canon 16. together with Saint Hierome
Epist. 22. cap. 13. Isiodor Pelusiota. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 63. Tertullian De
Idololatria. lib. cap. 18. to 24. Isiodor Hispalensis De summo bon^. lib. 3.
cap. 13. and Gratian Distinctio. 37. Prohibit Bishops, and other Christians
from reading the Books of the Gentiles; Non enim thura solum ^fferendo
Daemonibus immolatur, sed etiam eorum dicta libenti^^ capiendo. Isiodor, and
Gratian. Ib.
least by Applauding the Names, and Approouing the speeches of their
Idole-gods, they should incur Idolatry. And good reason is there, that
Christians should not admit of the Names, and Histories, (much less of the
imprecations, and abominable practices,) of Heathen Gods. First, because God
himself, with all these Fathers, do thus inhibit them. Secondly, because the
Quo diserte cauetur, ne admittant sigmenta fabularum de Deor^m connubiis and
natalibus, and qui hinc oriuntur variis casibr^s. De Decalogo. lib. page 1037.
second Commandment, as Philo Iudaeus well observes; does not only prohibit
the Images, and Pictures, but even the Histories, and Fables of the Marriages,
Birthes, and casualties of Heathen Gods. Thirdly, because the recital of their
Names, and Histories, by way of approbation, or d^light, does Origin Contr.
Celsum lib. 1. fol. 5. I. Tertullian De Idololatria. lib cap. 18. to 24.
give a tacit, or secret allowance of them to be Gods: where as in truth,
they are Deuteronomy. 32.17. Psalm. 106.37. 1 Cor. 10.20. August. De Ci^. Dei. lib. 2.
cap. 3. to 29.
but Devils; Clemens Alexand. Orat: Exhort. ad Gentes. Tertullian Apologia.
Arnobius Aduers. Gentes. Cyrian De Idol^rum Vanitate. Lactantius De Falsa
Religione cap. 4. to 23.
or wicked Men; or rather as Saint Paul informs us, 1 Cor. 10.19. Isay
41.24.29.
nothing in the World. Fourthly, because Qu^d^m plus meditari delectantur
Gentilium dicta propter t^mentem and ornatum sermo^em, quam Scripturam Sanctam
propter Eloquium humile. Sed quid predest in mundanis Doctrinis proficere,
inanescere in Diuinis: cadu^a sequi figmenta, and Caelestia fas^idire mysteria?
Cauendi sunt igitur tales libri, and propter amorem sanctarum Scripturarum
vitandi. Isiodor Hispalensis De Summo Bono lib 3. cap. 13.
the Hearing, and Reading of such Histories, and Fables as these, which are often
times sugared, and gilded over with the very quintessence of Art, and
Rhetoric,) does alienate, and cool our love unto the Sacred, and
Soule-sauing word of God, which runs in a less Elegant, and more humble
Style. Fifthly, because the recital, acting, and personating of their Names,
their Histories, and notorious Villainies, does revive their names, and
memories, which should rot, and perish in oblivion: It is the will, and
pleasure of God: Prou. 10.7. Psalm. 109.13. Psalm. 9.5, 6.
that the Names of the wicked should rot: Isay 26.13, 14. Exodus 23.13. Psalm.
16.4 Deutr. 12.3. Josh. 23.7. Hosea 2.17. Zech. 13.2 Zeph. 1.4, 5.
that the Memories, Relics, Ceremonies, Names, and Monuments of Idole-gods,
should utterly be abolished from of the Earth, and quite exiled from the
Tongues, and Pens of Christians; as being the original authors, and chief
Fomentors of Idolatry; See August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 10.25, 26, 27.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
the propagators of all sin, and villainy; and the very Isay 42.8. Exodus
20.23. Deutr. 12.2.30.
Corriualls of God himself, whose Sovereign Deiti^ they would, yea, did
usurp: the reuiuall therefore of their Names, and Memories, the Varnishing of
them with fresh, and lively Colors in our Stage Plays, with affectation, and
delight, must needs be evil; because it thwartes the Lords good pleasure.
Sixthly, because those Plays, and Poemes, which are fraught with the
Genealogies, Names, and Histories of Heathen Gods, are a means to revive that
Heathenisme, and propagate that Idolatry, which the light, and power of the
Gospel, has long since abolished: It is the unanimous resolution of Minuc^us
Felix Octauns. page 68, 69. Justin Martyr Oration. 1. Pro Christianis. Clemens
Alexandr. Oration. Exhort. ad Gentes, and Stromatum. lib. 1.2. Tertullian
Apolog. Aduers. Gentes. Tatianus Oration Aduers. Graecos Arnobius. lib. 7.
Aduers. Gentes. Cyprian De Idolorum Vanitate. Lactantius De Falsa Religione,
and De Origin Erroris. lib. Epiphanius Aduers. Haereses. lib. 1. Tom. 2.
Haeres. 26. Athanasius Contra. Gentiles. lib. 1. Eusebius De Praeparatione
Euangelij. lib. 4. cap. 5. Basil De Legendis lib^is Gentisium Oration. Nazianzen
Oration. 48. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Roman. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. and
2. Theodoret De Principijs. lib. 2. De Angelis, Dijs, ac Daemonibus Malis. lib.
3. Contra. Graecos Infideles. lib. 7. Ludoui^us Viues De Causis Corrupt. A^tium
lib. 2. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 4. and Cicero De Natura Deorum.
lib. 1. Accordingly.
sundry Fathers: that these Comicall, Tragical, and Theatricall Poemes,
wherein the Genealogies, Marriages, Birthes, Ceremonies, Histories, and
Lascivious actions of Heathen Gods, were but f^inedly, and sportingly
desciphered, were the chief, and primary cause of that Paganism,
Profaneness, and Execrable, or Atheistical Idolatry, which did formerly
ouerspred the World: which Poemes the Gentiles dis^ often times embrace, for good
Diuintie. If then these Plays, and Poemes have hatched, have propagated
Idolatry, and Paganism heretofore; they may likewise resuscitate, and foment
it now, unless Gods grace withhold us from it; since we are See page 27. Deuteronomy.
6.12. cap. 8.11. 1 John 5.21. 1 Cor. 10.7.1^.
all by nature prone unto it, as the sundry exhortations, and cau^ats to
avoid it testify: See Psa. 106.13.19, 20, 21.28 35^ 36, 37, 3^ Iere. 5.23.
Cap. 6.28. Cap. 3.6. to 15. Cap. 14.7. Hosea 11.7.
No sin more natural, more pleasing, and agreeable to man then this; 1 John
5.19. 1 Peter 4.3. Isay 2.8 Cap. 10.10.
no sin so generally practiced, 1 John 5.21. 1 Cor 10.7.14.
so hardly avoided, so ensely entert^ined, as this one alone; which has
always captiuated, the greatest portion of the World; and often times conquered,
and bewitched the very chosen people of the Lord himself, who Ps 106.36.38
Isay 57.5. Ezech. 20.8.16.18.24.32.39. Hosea ^.17. Ca^r 13.2. Ierem. 5.23.
often revolted to its love, and service. It is dangerous, it is sinful
therefore to applaude such Plays, admit such Poemes, which may withdraw us
Christians from our God, to gross Idolatry, as they have often seduced others,
as able, Josh. 24.15. to 28. Iudg^^ 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
as resolute to withstand this insinuating, and bewitching sin, as we: these
Authorities^ these Reasons then should cause, yea, force us to condemn them.

Secondly, the Scriptures do expressly condemn all Imprecations, all
Adiurations, all Admirations by, all Inuocations of, all Heathen Gods: God
himself commands us: Genes. 21.23. Deuteronomy. 6.13.14. Cap. 10.20. Josh. 2.12. 1 Samuel 30.15 2 Samuel 19.7. Isay 45.23. Ierem. 4.1. Cap. 12.16. Mark 5.7. Revel.
11.6.
to swear by his own Name: Josh. 23.7. Ierem. 5.7. Cap. 12.16. Amos 8.14.
Zeph. 1.5 Zech. 13.2. Hosea 2^17.
not by the names of Idols, Ba^l, or Malcham, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36. Cap. 23.16.
to 23. James 5.12.
or any creature whatsoever: He enioynes us to Psalm. 50.15. Psalm. 32.6.
Psalm. 56.2. Ierem. 29.7.12. Dan. 9.13. Isay 45.21, ^2
Invoke, Imprecate, and Admire none but himself alone; Isay 45.20, 21.
not Pagan Idols, not Colos. 2 18. Revel. 19.10. Cap. 22.9. Isay 63.16.
Saints, or Angels, who can neither hear, nor help^ us at our needs. How then
can it be lawful, to Invoke, or Implore the alde, or help of Jove, of
Juno, Apollo, Minerua, Neptune, Bacchus, or such like Heathen Idols? How can
See Clemens Romanus Constit. Apost lib. 5. cap. 11.
we Swear by Jove, by Mars, by Venus, by Hercules, by the Celestial Gods, or
such like Pagan Oaths? How can we exclaim, (as often we do in Stage Plays,)
Absit vt de ore Christiano sonet Jupiter omnipotens, and me H^rcule, me C^stor,
etc. Hi^rom. Epist. 146.
O Jove! O Muses! O Cupid! O Venus! O Neptune! O ye Gods! O Vulcan, Hercules,
Mars, Apollo, Minerua, Castor, Pollux, Lucina, and the like; without a great
offense? Certainly, if these infernal Deities may Exodus 23.13. Psalm. 16.4.
not be named, much less may they be Inuocated, Imprecated, or Sworn by
among Christians: their very names are odious, and worthy highest indignation;
how then can we approve their Oaths, and ^mprecations, their Praises, and
Applauses, Prohibitum est iurare ^er Idola, and in ore habere illorum
abominabilia nomin^, vel ea colere vel ^imere velu^i D^os: non enim D^^ sunt
sed improbi Demones, and ridicula opera. Clemens Romanus Constit Apost. lib. 5.
cap. 11.
which our God condemns? How Execrable, and Vile these names have been to
Christians in the Primitive times, the former Section can inform you: and
shall not then their Oaths, and Inuocations, be much more detestable, and
loathsome unto us? The sixth Council of Constantinople, Canon 94. Eos qui
Gentilium iuramenta iurant Canon poenis subi^^it: and nos iis quoque
segregationem discernimus. Surius Council. Tom. 2. page 1053.
subjects all such to the penalty of Excommunication, who should swear the
Oaths of the Gentiles: and shall we then approve them in our Enterludes, as
Elegant, and comely Ornaments? Certainly we cannot do it, without the peril
of Idolatry, or affronting God unto his face. For first these Heathenish
Oaths, and Imprecations, or Inuocations of Pagan Gods, Origin Contra. Celsu^.
lib 1. Isiodor Hispa^ensis. De Summo bono. lib. 5. c. 33 Clem. Romans Constit
Apost. l^ 5. c. 11.
do give a kind of tacit, yea, attribute a manifest Divinity to these
Idols, since nothing is ^o be Inuocated, or Sworn by, either in sport, or
earnest, Ier. 5.7. Romans 10.13, 14.
but God alone. Now to attribute a Deity to these Pagan Gods, Si quis ^orum
qui dicuntur apud illos Di^, actus inspiciat, eos non modo deos non esse, verum
homines n^quissimo, turpissimosque fuisse comper et. Omnibus post hac futuris
certum ^^^ere argumentum liceat, eos non esse Deos, qui huiusmodi patrassent
s^^lera. Athanasius Contr Gent. ^^s. p 17, 18.26.
whose Villainy did manifest them to be worse then men, Exo 20.3, 4, 5 23. and
all Exp^si^ors, and Commentators on it.
is gross Idolatry. Certainly, if the reading of a Lecture of some Heathen
God: If the stiling of an Idol by the name of God, without this addition^
Heathen Idol, or Dunghill God: if the receite of a blessing from a Pagans
mouth, Haereticorum benedictiones, sunt maledictiones potius, quam
benedictiones. C^ncil. Laodicenum. Can. 32.
which, in truth, is rather a cursing, then a blessing,) in the name of an
Idol, without rejecting, or disapproouing it, be flat Idolatry, as De
Idolo^a^ria. lib. cap. 18 to 24.
^ertullian, with Isiodor Hisp^lensis De Summo bono. lib 3. cap. 13. Gregori.
Mag. Epist. lib. 9. Epist^ 48. Gratian Distinctio. 86.
others, has affirmed; because it gives an approbation to these Idols, and
ascribes a covert Divinity to them: then much more must the Admirations, the
Inuocations, the Imprecations, and Exclamations in these Idols names, which
are frequent in our Stage Plays, be palpable, and gross Idolatry;
Idololatri^ perimpium and grauissimum delictum est. Ambr. Com. in Romans 1. Tom.
3. page 117. E.
which is the highest sin, and iussells God out of his Throne. Secondly,
these Oaths, and Imprecations, as they are exceeding Heathenish, and Profane,
unbeseeming Christian mouths, or ears; as they are Ridiculous, Vain, and
Foolish, and so within the verge, Matthew. 12.36, 37. Ephesians. 5 4.
of vain, and foolish words, which God condemns, and will at last severely
Judge: so they are a direct breach of the third Commandment: Exodus 20.7.
Leuit. 19.12. Deuteronomy. ^.12.
thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; in that they
attribute the Name, and Prerogative of GOD to Deuteronomy. 32.21. 1 Kings 16.13. Psalm.
31 6. Isay 41.29. Cap. 44 9. Ier^m. 8.19. Cap. 10.8.15. Cap. 14.22. Cap. 18.15.
Idols, which are the greatest vanities of the World, yea Vanity it self:
and a manifest violation of these peremptory Injunctions: Mat. 5.34, 35 James
5.12.
Swear not at all: and above all things my Brethren Swear not: no, Exodus 20 7.
with all Expositors on the third Commandment.
not by the Name of God, unless we are lawfully called to it: much less, by
the names of Pagan Deuill-Idoles; which is I^rem. 5.7. Clem. Romans Constit.
Apost. lib. 5. cap. ^^.
the worst, the vainest, and prophanest Oath: therefore they must needs be
odious, and abominable; yea, displeasing unto God, and dangerous unto us.
Thirdly, these Oaths, these Inuocations, and Imprecations, as they renew those
Heathenish, and Infernal Deities, See p. 79.80.
whose memories should for ever rot: so they do likewise engender Heathenisme,
and Prophanen^sse in men's lives, and speeches: See Chrysostom. Hom. De Dauide and
Saul. Hom. De Verbis Isay^^ Vidi dominum Sedentem Ho^. 38 in Matthew. Salu^an
li^ 6. De Gubernat Dei. See page 27. Accordingly.
they alienate men's Hearts, and Thoughts from God, and heavenly things: they
tip their Tongues with Vanity, and Profaneness, which Eph^s 4 29. Col 4.^.
should flow with Grace, and Holiness: they stamp their lives, and actions
with dissoluteness, and gracelesnesse: they cause them, Ephesians. 2.12. Psalm 10.4.
to live without God, in this World; and to admire, Plautus sumebatur in manus:
si quando in memet ipsum reuersus, Prophetas legere capissem, se^me horrebat
incultus, etc Hierom Epist^ 22. cap. 13.
and relish Heathen Deities, and Discourses, more then God, or his Soule-sauing
Word: how may, how dare we then approve them? how can we but condemn them?

Yet lo the Impious, and strange Prophanen^sse, yea, the Impudent, and sottish
Idolatry of our sinful Age, which not only tolerates, and applaudes, but
likewise iustifies, and defends the naming, and inuocating of; the Swearing,
and Exclaiming by these Hellish, Heathenish Deuill-Idoles, in despite of Gods
Command, with these two Witty, or rather Nulli peccatori deest impudens
praetextus. Chrysostom Hom in Psalm. 14. Tom. 1. Col. 1110. C.
Impudent pretenses, and Euasions.

Excus^ 1.
First, that these Idols are Inuocated, Adjured, Named, Imprecated, and sworn
by, in sport, and merriment only; not seriously, or in earnest.



Answ. 1.
To the first of these I answer: First, that the Heathen Poets did Nominate,
Invoke, Adjure, Adore, and Supplicate these Idols, and discourse of all
their Genealogies, Villainies, and Obscenities, Athanasius Contr. Gentiles. lib.
page 23.24, 2^. Arnobius. lib. 3, 4. and 7. Contr. Gentes. Clemens Alex. Orat.
Exhort. ad Gentes, and Strom. lib. 1. and 2. Tatianus Orat. Aduers. Grae^os.
Aug. lib. 2. De ^iuit. Dei. cap. 4. to 13.25. to 29. Ludouicus Viues De Causis
Corrupt. Artium. lib. 2. page 78. to 83. Agrippa D^ Vani^ate S^ient. cap. 4.
Lactantius De Falsa Relig. cap. 11, 12.
but in a Fabulous, and sporting manner, and that in Theatricall Enterludes,
and Poemes, as we now do: yet this the fore-recited See page 80.
Fathers tax in them, as gross Idolatry; as an abominable, and filthy
crime. If then this were detestable, and Idolatrous in them who knew not God,
must it not be much more so in us, who not only know him, but profess him
too? Certainly, if their fabulous, and jesting discourses of these Idols,
were a notorious crime, Nos qui Christiani catholici esse dicimur, si simile
aliquid barbarorum impuritatibus facimus, grauius erramus. Atrocius ex^^ sub
sancti nominis professione peccamus. Salu. De Gub. Dei. lib. 4. page 12^.
ours cannot be less then an abominable, and transcendent wickedness.

Secondly, the Scriptures know no such distinction between jest, and earnest:
they enjoin us peremptorily: Exodus 23.13.
not to make mention of the names of Idols; Isay 44.9. to 21. Exodus 20.7.
not to Invoke, or Adjure them; Josh. 23.7.
not to Swear by them, Deuteronomy. 12.3.
but utterly to abolish both their memories, names, and relics: which
precepts being universal Negatiues, admit of no evasion: If then we may not
Name them, Implore them, or Swear by them at all, Nihil ad Deum pertinens leave
est ducendum: quia quod videtur exiguum esse culpa, grande hoc facit
de^ixitatis iniuria. Salu. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6.
much less may we do it by way of Sport, or Merriment: since it is more
tolerable, less heinous, to sin in earnest upon some pretended necessity,
Nulla est neces^itas delinquendi qui^us vna est necessitas non delinquendi.
Te^tul. De Corona Militis. cap. 11.
though no necessity can once authorize or force us for to ^inne,) then thus
to sin in jest.

Thirdly, if this distinction of breaking Gods Commandments in jest, or
earnest, should be warrantable; then every man Prou. 10.23. Chap. 13.9.
as many do,) would daily violate them by way of sport, and merriment, not in
earnest, and yet they should be no sinners, because they sin in jest: and so
all Gods Laws should be euacuated, Religion undermined, and sin made a jest.

Fourthly, this Inuocating, Naming, and Swearing by these Heathen Gods in jest,
is far more odious, and sinful, then to do it in good earnest, out of
ignorant Superstition, or blind Devotion. He that sins thus in jest, and
merriment, Et hoc Deum maxim irritat quando con^ulto, and praemeditato, and
dedita opera ab improbis mala fiun^. Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 108. Tom. 1. Col.
926. B.
sins more wittingly, wilfully, contemptuously, and presumptuously, then he
that sins in earn^st; he contemnes, and slights both God, and these his
precepts more; he loves, and approoues sin more, Neque enim peccantes it a
aduersatur Deu^, quam eos qui post peccata securi sunt. C^rysost. Hom. 6. in
Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 51.8. Gra^ius est peccatum diligere quam perpetrare.
Gregory Magnus Mor. lib. 25. Cap. 16.
he fears, and hates it less; he sins upon fewer, and less weighty
prouocations, then those who sin in earnest: therefore his sin is far
more heinous, and abominable then theirs is, or this his own had been, had
he committed it with greater seriousness, as the Pagans did.

Fifthly, King Solomon informs us: Prou. 10.23. Cap. 13.9. Stul^us per ri^um
operatur scelus. Salu. De Gub. Dei. page 205.
that it is the property of Fools to make a mock of sin, and a pastime to
do wickedly: Pro. 26.18, 19
that he who deceives his Neighbor, (much more then he who Ephesians. ^.6. 1
Cor. 6.9. Galat. 6.7.
thinks to deceive God, yea deceiues himself,) and says: Am I not in jest:
is as a madman who casts abroad Fire-brandes, Arrows, and Death. If then
we make a mock, and sport of the Names, and Oaths of Idols, we prove our
selves Ludere in iis rebus in quibus non ^st ^udendum, inscitia e^t.
Pachymerius. Histor. lib. 4.
but fools, and madmen, and cast abroad Fire-brandes, Arrows, and Death to
our own Eternal ruin.

Sixthly, these Lusorie, and sporting Oaths, and Imprecations by, or Discourses
of these Idole-gods; may now as well engender Heathenisme, and Idolatry, or
foment a secret Atheism in men's Hearts, See page 80.
as they did in former times; Yea, they do as really revive the names, the
relics, and memories of cursed Idols, (which should putrify, and perish in
obliuions Lethe:) and as His, atque huiusmodi figmentis, and mendaciis
dulcioribus corrumpunt ingenia puerorum: and in eisdem fabulis ^nhae rentibus,
adusque summa atatis robur adol^scunt; and in eisdem opinioni^us miseri
consenescunt: cum sit veritas ^buia, sed requirentibus. Mi^ucius Felix. Oct^u.
page 70.
effectually propagate all profaneness, as if they were uttered in the most
serious earnest. This jesting distinction therefore, of jest, and earnest, can
neither palliate, nor salve this festered sore, nor justify these Pagan, and
Infernal Oaths, and passages, which Christians must abominate, unless they
mean to Deifie the Devil, and adore these Idols.

Lastly, the taking of Gods name in vain, is simply evil; yea, so evil,
Exodus 20.7. Leuit. 29.12. Deuteronomy. 5.11. See Ca^uin. Instit. lib 2. cap. 8. S^ct.
25.
that God will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain. But the
attributing of a Divinity to these Idols; the stiling of them Gods: the
Supplicating, and Adiuring of them, together with the swearing by them, as God,
with approbation, and delight; and that by way of Sport, and Merriment only,
without any necessary, or urgent cause, (which is frequent in our
STAGE PLAYS,) is the Vanum enim dicitur quod non ha^et bonum finem: quod ad
nihil est vtile. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Ephesians. 4.
highest taking of Gods Name in Vain; since both the M^rriments, Passages,
Idols, O^thes, Imprecations, yea, the Auerte ocu^los a L^d^^um, and Theatrorum
Spectaculis, auerte ab omni secular^. Pompa: Vanita^ est illa quam cernis.
Pantomimum aspicis, vanitas est. Luctatores aspicis, vanitas est, etc Ambrose
Enarrat in P^al. 118. Octon 5. T^m. 2. pag^ 430. F. G.
very Actors, Spectacles, and Enterludes themselves are wholly vain; therefore
it must needs be sinful in despite of this evasion.

To the second, that they are uttered by way of Proxy, or Representation
only, not as the Words, the Oaths, and Imprecations of the Poets, or Actors,
but of those feined persons, whose parts they represent: I answer:

First, that Basil De Legendis Libris Gentilium. Oration. Nazianz^n Ad
Sel^u^hum. page 1^63. Isiodor Pelusiora Epist^ lib. 1. E^ist. 63.
it is sinful to utter, yea, to hear, and read such Heathenish discourses,
Oaths, and Imprecations as these, with Approbation, and Applause; because the
fore-quoted Scriptures do condemn them.

Secondly, it is infallibly true, Ezech. 18.19, 2^. Galat 6.5
that every man shall bear his own iniquity, and answer for his sin: it
is likewise as unquestionably true; Joshua 2^.7. Exodus 23^ 13. Psalm. 16.4.
I^rem 5.7. D^ut. 12.3.
that these Pagan Oaths, and Passages^ are sins; and that Isay 3.8, 9.11, 14
they shall be^ imputed as sins to some men, because no sin can ever
subsist without its proper subject. If then all this be granted: on whom shall
all these Oaths, these Heathenish discourses, and Imprecations light? on the
persons whose parts they help to fill? Why these are eith^r feined, or long
since departed: or suppose they are alive, 1 Timothy 5.22. Revel. 18.4. Non
peccatum in a^iis sentiendo, sed ei consentiendo peccamus. Prosper Aquit^ De
vita Conte^pl lib. 3. ^ap. 2.
yet they give no allowance to them, therefore they cannot rest on them: nee^es
then must they rest upon the Poets, Actors, and Spectators heads, Romans 2.6.8, 9.
their Souls shall answer for them all at last, and then this vain Evasion
will not help them.

Thirdly, this absurd Delusion, has neither color, ground, nor warrant in the
Scripture; which gives commission unto none, to Act an others part, or person
on the Stage; Quid ergo ais, simulatio est illa, non cri^en? Et ^ropterea mill
illi mortibus digni sun^, quoniam quae f^gere c^nct^s prorsus imperant leges,
ea i^i ^aud verentur imitari. Si eni^ Ad^lterium malum est, malum est sine
dub^o and eius imitatio. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 52. C.
much less, to personate another sin, which is it self, an heinous sin,
well worthy of a thousand Deaths. Suppose that God should enter into Judgment
with any Play-Poets, or Actors, for these Idolatrous Imprecations, Profane,
and Pagan Oaths, or Heathenish Stage-Plaies, Eccles. 12.14 2 Cor 5.10.
as he will surely do at last,) what answer could they make? Can they say,
that all was done in sporting mirth, or in the part, and person of some other,
who gave no such commission to them? Alas, this Plea will not a^aile them then,
let it not therefore g^ll, and cheat them now: Questionless, all such
incarnate Devils, who dare to Countenance, Admit, Applaude, or Act these
Idols persons, Parts, Names, or Oaths in jest, shall be Damned for them, in
good earnest: As it was wittily, and truly said of Nonresidents, and
Plurality Ministers, who put over their Flock to Hirelings: Qui gregem suum
pascendum vicario relinquit, in caelum i^^t for^asse per vicarium, in gehennam
per seipsum. See Aquisgran. Council. Sub. Ludou. Pio. cap^ 9. to 37.
that he who feeds his Flock by Curate, shall perchance, go to Heaven by his
Vicar, but undoubtedly to Hell by himself: so he who personates these Heathen
Gods, or Supplicates, or Swears by any of their Names, by representation
only, in another person, may chance to enter Heaven in that others person,
but Hell undoubtedly, in his own: These euasions therefore are but vain, and
cannot justify that they plead for.

Thirdly, the Scriptures do expressly prohibit, the Prou. 10 23. Cap. 13.19.
Jude 23. Romans 1.29.32. Romans 3.8.
personating of any sin; much more then, the acting of Adulteries, Incests,
Rapes, Murders, Thefts, Loue-prankes, or leaude, and execrable Vanities of
Jupiter, Bacchus, Cupid, Venus, and others of that Devilish, and Infernal
crew, which pester, and defile all Theaters; which Saint Chrysostom rightly
styles; Diabolicam hanc c^nfoues officinam. Hom. 6. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 52. B.
the Devils shop. If we did but suruay the Scriptures, as seriously, as
frequently, as we behold these Hellish Enterludes, we should there find God
himself commanding us: to 1 These. 5.22. Jude 23. Col 2.20 23. 2 Cor. 6.17.
abstain from all appearance of Evil, yea from the very resemblances, and
shows of sin: and can we then personate, or Act these gross, and odious
sins to the very life, (whose representations are at leastwise, the
appearances, and resemblances of sin,) without offense? God himself enioynes
us, Exodus 20.4^ Leuit. 26 1. Deuteronomy. 5.8. Psalm. 97 7.
not so much, as to make an Idol, or the likeness of any thing that is in
Heaven, or Earth: And can we then lawfully take up, not only the Exodus 23.13
Sir Thomas Eliot o^ the Governor Book. 1. chap. 19. See here Act. 1.2.3. and
page 77 accordingly.
interdicted names and rites, but even the very persons, images, habites,
shapes, and representations of D^vill-Idols ( expressly Josephus Antiqu.
I^d^orum l. 15. c. 11. Philo I^d^eus de Decalogo l. page 1037. Tertullian De
Idololatria lib. Augustin^, Calvin, Bishop Babington, B. Andrews, M. Perkins,
M. Dod^ Master Downham, M. El^^n, Doct. Williams. with all other anci^nt and
modern Expositors, both Protestants and Papists on the 2 Command^ment, and on
Exodus 20. Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. ^.
prohibited by the second Command^ment) that so we may the Miramini nolim vos,
qua propter nunc Jupiter histriones curet. ne miremini, ipse hanc da^urus est
Jupiter Comaediam. Quid admirati estis? quasi vero novom nunc proferatur Iovem
facere histrioniam, etc. hanc fabulam, inquam, hic Jupiter hod^e ipse agit, and
ego una cum ^o etc. Operae praetium hic spectantibus Iovem and Mercurium face^e
histrioniam. Plauti Amphitiuo, Pr^logus.
more liu^ly personate their most execrable wickednesses; when as not only
Nihil dandum Idolo, sic nihil sumendum ab Idolo Si in Idolio recumbere alienum
est a ^ide, quid in Idolihabitu videri? Quae communio Christi and ^eliae?
Ioannes, Filioli, inquit, custodite vos ab Idolis: non iam ab Idolo atria quasi
ab officio; sed ab Idoli^, id est, ab effigi^ eorum. Indignum enim est vt imago
Dei viui, imago Idoli and mortui fiat. De Corona Militis lib. cap. 8.
Tertullian, and In cap. 14. Isa^ae tom. 3. Operum p. 469.
St. Basil; but even an whole Qui se daemone correptos esse simulant, and mo^um
improhitate eorum figuram and habitum simulate prae se ferunt, visum est, omni
modo puniri, and eiusmodi afflictionibus laboribusque subiici cos opor^ere,
quibus ii qui vere a d^mone correpti sunt. vt a daemonis operatione liberentur,
iure subiiciantur. Concilium Constantino p. 6. in Trullo Ca^ 60 S^^ ^aenon. 62.
accordingly.
general Council, have both prohibited and condemned all representations,
either of Idols or Devils, under the s^verest censures: because such
representations, do not only cause men to frame the very images and
portraitures of Pagan Deities, Exodus 20.4. Leuit. 26.1. Deuteronomy. 4.15.16, 17. c.
5.8. c. 16.22. Psalm. 9^.7.
which is gross Idolatry; but likewise transform even men themselves, (the
Genesis 1.26, 27. cap. 5. l. c. 9.6.
most lively image of the living God) into the very portraiture of those
Divell-Idols, whose parts they are to act: and so turn the express Image of
God himself into the very image of the Devil; a sin beyond expression:) and
yet deem our selves guiltless of the breach of this most sacred Precept? It
is the Apostles peremptory command: Ephesians. 5.3.4. Col. 3.8.
But fornication and all uncleann^sse, and filthiness and foolish talking, let
it not be once named among you as becomes Saints: And can we then practice or
approve, not only the a^siduous commemoration of the names, but likewise the
artificial, if not real acting, not only of the Parts, but also of the Sea
Cyprian. Epist. lib. ^. Epist. ^. Donato. August. de Ciu. Deil. 2^ cap. 4. to.
14. lib. 3. cap. 18^ l^ 4. c. 3.10^ 36.27.28.
incests, rapes, adulteries, whoredoms, and such like execrable abominations
of the beastliest Divell-gods, or infernal Men-monsters ( which were Nih^l.
turpe ac flagitiosum spectandum i^itandumque proponitur, ubi very Dei aut
praecepta insinuantur, aut miracula narrantur, aut beneficia postulantur,
August. D^ Ciu. Dei lib. 2. cap 28.
anciently exiled all such places where Christ's Gospel came, as inconsistent
with it,) and yet think to pass for pious Christians? It was David's
importunate prayer unto God; Psalm. 119.37.
Turn away my eyes from beholding vanity (which Hilarie Ambrose, Augustine,
Chrysostom, Bruno and others, in Psalm 118. He. see p. 52.
the Fathers generally apply to Stage Plays) and quicken me in thy way: And
can we, dare we then once turn our eyes, and ears ( which Psalm. 121.1. Psalm.
123.1.2. Nihil aspectu gratum sit, nisi quod pi^, quod just fieri videas:
nihil auditu suaue, nisi quod alit animam, melioremque ^^ reddit. Lactantlus De
vero Caelii^ lib. 6. cap. 21.
should be always centred upon God and heavenly objects, that might meliorate,
nourish and refresh our souls,) unto those matchless obscenities of Pagan
Idols that are daily acted on the Stage ( the Sea August. De ciu. Dei. lib. 2.
cap. 4. to. 15. lib. 4. c. 26.27.28. and lib. 6. c. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.
accordingly.
very filthiness of which might cause even Devils themselves to blush and
tremble) and yet flatter our selves, that we are in David's pious condition?
Certainly, every true Christian indeed (if we may beleve the Scripture)
Eccles 9.2. 1 Samuel 24.5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Jude 23. Quid inter haec christianus
fidelis facit cui vitia non licet cogitare? Cyprian De spectac. lib.
does fear and tremble, not only at the act, but likewise at the very
appearance and thought of sin: yea, Isay 33.15. Vanus enim sermo cito polluit
mentem, and facile agitur quod libenter auditur. Bernard. De I^t^riori Domo
cap. 43.
he stops his ears from bearing blood, and sh^tteth his eyes from seeing
evil. And can we then prove our selves to be Christians, either in Gods, or
our own consciences account, when as we are so fa^re from trembling, that we
do Isay 3.9. Romans 1.^2.
even rejoice at the sight, the hearing of these lewd Theatricall Enterludes:
being so far from shutting our eyes, or stopping up our ears against them,
that we do readily open them with greediness and delight to these infernal,
diabolical, prodigious Stage-abominations, which Quis talia fando Temperet a
Lachrymis? Virgil AEneid. lib. ^. See Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Mat. Nazienzen ad
Se^^ucum page 1063. accordingly.
would pierce an heart of steel with gri^fe, and dissolve even eyes of Adamant
into brinish tears? It was David^ religious protestation, Psalm. 101.3.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, I will not know a wicked person:
And shall we Phil 3.17. Hebr. 6.12. cap 13.7.8.
who ought to follow David's steps in this his pious practice, be never better
recreated, more delighted, then when the laruated persons, parts and
wickednesses of the very worst of men and Devils, ( that are Deinde quale illud
est, vt cum in platea nudam foeminam nolis aspicere, imo neque domi quidem, sed
s^ id ^tiam forte contingat in iniuriam tui factum putescum vero ascendis
The^trum vt violes vtriusque sexus pudorem, obtutusque proprios pariter
incestes nihil ^^bi inhonestum credat accidere? Si enim nihil in tali re esse
opinaris obscaenum, qua gratia cum id ipsum in plate^ videas a ^xpto re^ilis
incessu, and inverecundiam severius exagitas? nisi forte credis candem rem non
similiter esse turpem cum seperati simus, and quum congregati omnes vna
sedemus. Chrysostom. Hom. ^. in Matthew. tom. 2. ^ol. 52. c. D.
every where abominable in the eyes of all men, but only on the Stage, Si quid
horum quibus Circus furit aliubi competit sanctis, etiam in Circo licebit. Si
vero nusquam ideo nec in Circo. Nusquam and nunquam licet, quod semper and
vbique non licet. Tertul. de spectac. l. c. 16.20, 21.
which has n^ such sanctifying virtue in it, as to make ill things good, when
once they are brought upon it,) are most emphatically represented to our eyes
and ears at once? It is registered of righeeous Lot; 2 Pet. 2.7.8. See Beda and
Oecumemus ibidem.
that he dwelling among the wicked S^domites, vexed his righteous soul from
day to day, in seeing and hearing their unlawful deeds: And can any Players or
Play-haunters then persuade themselves, that they are in Lots condition, when
as their unrighteous souls, are so far from being vexed at the sight and
hearing of those-more then Sodomiticall uncleanness of Pagan Deities, which
are acted on the Stage, Instructuosum putamus gaudium simplex, ne^ delectat
ridere sine crimine, Sal^ian de Gub. dei lib. 6. p^ 192.
that they are more abundantly recreated and delighted with them, then with
all the soule-ravishing pleasures, of Gods house, or the most delightful
consolations of his Word and Spirit, Quam tu ergo satisfactionem parabis
responde quaeso, qui ea quae nominari fa^ non e^t summo studio spectas: quae
etiam memorare ^urpe est, ea cunctis honestis artibus sanctisque praeponis?
Chrysost^ Hom. 7. in Mat. tom. 2. Col. 61. B.
before which they often prefer them? O the Converte hinc vultus ad diverse
spectaculi non minus paen^tenda contagia: in theatris quoqu^ conspicies, quod
and dolori tibi sit and pudori, Aspicias ab impudicis geri, quod nec aspicere
possit fronspudica: videas, quod crimen sit and videre, etc. Cyprian. Epist.
lib. 2. Ep. 2. Donat^.
horible incests, the execrable adulteries, rapes and whoredoms; the
unparalleled wickednesses, the infernal practices of those lewd Pagan-Deities,
and stupendiou^ Men-monsters that are daily acted on our Theaters? What chaste,
Qui^ ^nim integro ve^ecundiae statu dicere que at illas rerum turpium
imitationes, illas uocum and verborum obscaenitates, illas motuum turpitudines,
^llas gestuum ^^ditates? quae quanti ^int criminis hinc intelligi potest, quod
and relationem sui interdicunt; Saluian de Guber. Dei. lib. 6. p. 18^.
What modest Christian heart can once recount, what tongue relate, what eye
behold, what ear receive, what pen diseypher them (unless Quamvis animus
meminisse horret; luctuque refugit. Virgil. AEneid. lib. 2.
necessi^ated to display their filthiness) witho^t shame and horror, if not
sin it self? Are See Minucius Felix octavitis: Arnobius adu: Gentes: lib. 7.
Lactantius de vero cultu cap. 20. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. and August.
De Civit. Dei l 2. c. 4.6, 8, 9, 27. lib. 4. c. 1. 26, 27, 28 lib. ^. c. 6, 7.
and Salvian de Gub. Dei lib. 6. accordingly.
not the very Masterpeeces, dregs and off-sceuring of all those horrid
adulteries and transcendent wickednesses, that either the prauitie of man, or
the wit of h^ll could hitherto invent, epitomized and diplayed on the Stage?
Do not Play-Poets and common Actors ( the August. de Civ. Dei. lib. 2. c. 13,
14, 29. Chrysostom. hom. 7. and 38. in Matthew. Cyprian Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10
Tatianus Oration advers. Graecos Nazianzen. ad Seleucum, p. 1063. Agrippa De
Vanitate scientiarum, cap. 20.63, 64. and the third Blast of retrait from
Plays and Theaters, p. 92. and 102 to 117. prove and style them such.
Devils chiefest Factors) rake earth and hell it self; do not they travel
over Sea and Land; over all Histories, poemes, countries, times and ages for
unparalleld villainies, that so they may pollute the Theater with Nihil potest
confing^ vitiorum quod non in Thea^^^^ repertatur. August. De Civit. Dei^ lib.
4. c. 27.
all the hideous obscenities, with all the detestable matchless impieties,
which hitherto m^n or Devils have either actually perpetrated, or fabulous^y
divulged? What shall I record the several For which you may read^, Clemens
Alexandr^ Oration Adhort ad Gentes, Tertullian. Apolog. advers. Gentes, ^a^^anus
Oration adver^. Gr^ecos. Minucius Felix Octavius, Arnobius advers. G^ntes lib.
7. Cyprian Epise^ lib. 2. Epist. 2. Lactantius De falsa religione, lib. 1. cap.
9. to^ 22. De vero cul^u. P. 6. c^ 2^^ Athana^us Contr. Gentes lib. Augustine
l^b. 1 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, De Civi. Dei. Na^ales ^omes, Diodorus Siculus, Livie,
Ovid, He^iod, Homer, Macrobi^^^ Pl^tarch, Alexander ab Alexandro, Varro and
other^
abominable adulteries of Venus; the i^finit suparlative incests, rapes,
fornications, love-prankes, Sodomies, murders, cheats, with other such
ex^crable wickednesses of Jupiter, the very worst, though greatest of the Pagan
Deities? What shall relate the several b^astly flagitious practices,
ceremonies, obsceniti^s, of Juno, Bacchus, Cupid. P^iapus, Mars, Serapis, Atys,
Flora, the Mother of the Gods, or of the rest of that infernal crew, which come
so frequen^ on o^r Theaters? Is not their fil^hinesse, their lewdness so
barbarously, so stupendiously impious, Talia sunt quae in Theatris frunt, vt ea
non s^lum dicere, sed etiam recordari aliquis sin^ pollutione non possit. Quae
quidem omnia tam flagitiosa sunt, vt etiam expli^are ea atque elo qui quis^iam
sal^o pud^re non valeat. Saluian, de Gub^ Deil^ 6. p. 185.186. Seo ^ before.
that it even strikes men's h^arts and tongues with horror, forbidding them to
relate it? And can any then behold, or act these gros^e abominations with
delight, (the very relation of which is suf^^^ient to pollute the ears that
hear them, the common air that receives them, yea the breath that utters
them) and yet be innocent, be untainted by them? Alas, we cannot but with shame
and grief acknowledge, that our modern Play-Poe^s do not only record and
publish to posterity in their lascivious Enterludes, the execrable lewd
examples of our present Age ( which See D. Hackwel^ Apology, lib. 4. c. 12.
sect. 1.2.
parallel or surpass all those of former times) but likewise Cothurnus est
tragicus priscafacinora carmine recensere, de parracidis and incestis horror
antiquus, expressa ad imaginem veritatis action replicatur, ne soeculis
transeuntibus exolescat quod aliquando factum est. Nunquam aeui senio delicta
moriuntur; nunquam crimen tempo: ibus obruitur, nunquam seelus oblivione
sepelitur, exe^ pla fiunt quae iam esse facinora destiterunt. Quae ^tiam aetas
absconderat, sub o^ulorum memoriam reducuntur. Non est libidini satis malissuis
vti presentibus, nisi suum de s^^ctaculis faciat, in quo etiam a^tas superior
e^rav^ra^. Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. l. De spectac. lib.
dive into oblivions deepest Lethe, resuscitating those obsolete putred
wickednesses of former ages, which Hell had long since buried in ^er lowest
Cells, lest present and future times should be so happy as not to imitate them,
or finally to forget them. And can we then act, or see the action of these
modern, these ancient, these moth^eaten filthy crimes, without a crime? No
verily. O therefore let Stage Players Pereant ista vnd^ vitiorum memoria menti
renovatur. Tatianu^ Oration advers. Graecos Bibl. Pastrum t^m.2. p. 182. D.
perish, yea, for ever perish, which thus revive the cursed memory of Pagan
Idols, and their infernal wickednesses, whose remembrance should for ever be
forgotten lest we perish by them: O let those filthy Enterludes, those
shameless Actors, who fear not to display those shameful works of
da^kenesse in the sight of thousands on the open Theater, with more then
Erubescunt videri et^am qui pudorem vendiderunt. At istud publicum nostrum
omnibus videntibus geritur, etc. Cyprian. De spectaculis lib. See Chrysostom,
Homil. 6, 7, and 38. in Matthew.
blushlesse impudency, which their very Pagan, yea, infernal Authors did even
blush, ^id tremble to commit in sec^et, where no eye was present to behold
them, but their own, and that Job 42.2. 1 John 3.20. Psalm. 139.1.2.
omniscients, who is Psalm. 139.3. to.14. Prove. 15.3. Ier. 16.17. c. 32^19.
Prove. 5.21. Job 34.21. c. 31.4. Heb. 4.13.
omnipraesent, beholding both the evil and the good; be ever execrable to all
pious Christians, Romans 12.1.2. 1 Cor. 6.19.20.
whose eyes and ears ^re for ever consecrated to that holy God, Hab. 1.13. Nos
quomodo haec facimus qui odisse Deum nostrum haec certi s^mus? Salviax. De
Guber. Dei. l. 6. p. ^88.
who is p^rer of eyes then to behold the least iniquity, then to i approve our
filthy Stage^playes; which might cause even heaven, earth, nay, hell to blush
for shame, and move the very Sun it self to veil his Cristall beams for
fear they should defile their light. The Numbers 33 52.
Scriptures, Clemens Alexandr. Oration Adhort. ad Gentes Fol. 8. f. and 9. A
Gregory Nyssen. vitae Moseos Enarratio, p. 503.
Fathers, In Council. Constantinop. 6. in Trullo. Can. 100. Synod us
Augustensis. A^no 1548. cap. 28.
two famous Councels, with ^he third part of the Homily against the peril of
Idolatry, B. Babington, B. Andrews, M. Dod, M. Elton, Master Downham, and
sundry others on the se^enth Commandment.
sundry Protestant Divines, have utterly condemned the making, the beholding of
all obscene lascivious pictures; as being a mean to inflame men's hearts with
lusts, with filthy pleasures, and to draw them on to actual uncleanness. And
shall not then those Saint Cyprian, De spectaculis lib. and Lactantius De v^ro.
cultu cap. 20. call theatricall representations. Simulachra libidinis: Salvian
de Guber. Dei lib. 6. page 187. styles them, Imagines fornicationum, and
Plutarch de gloria Athoniensium. lib. writes; that poesis est pict^ra l^quens.
lively, if not real pictures and representations of the adulteries, rapes,
incests; Love-prankes, murthers^ ^reasons, and other such practices of Pagan
Idols, which ar^ so artificially acted on the Stage, that a man can hardly
difference the representations of them from the sins themselves, be much more
liable to condemnation on the selfsame grounds? Doubtless, if the substance
be evil, the 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
shadow of it cannot be good: if the person be odious, the picture will be
such: if the thing acted be simply evil, the representation of it will
resemble it. Ezech. 36.31. Job 42.6. Psalm. 119.104.
All sins (much more the Levit. 18.30. Deutr. 12.31. cap. 7.16.25, 26.
Chrysostom. Hom. 6. and 7. in Matthew. Cyprian de spectac. lib. M. Perkins Cases of
Conscience lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 4. accordingly. See Here: Scene 1.
loathsome facts of Devill-Idols) are detestably evil in themselves, s
therefore the personating, the imitation of them on the Stage, the
characterizing of them in their freshest colors in our Theatricall Poems, must
needs be sinful, yea, abominable, unto all good Christians. The Non pulchrum
est dicere ea quae factu turpia sunt. Sophocles Oedipus, Tyr. Number. 1400.
Isocrates Oration Demonicum.
perpetrating of such sins is evil, therefore the personating. Tertullian de
spectaculis, cap. 17.18.
Quod in facto reijcitur, in dicto non est recipiendum. Since then we cannot
but abominate these odious transcendent sins themselves, which sunk their
original Authors, down as low as the uery deepest depthes of hell it self,
from whence there is no return for ever, let us not justify their
representations, nor applaud their action. And so much the rather,
Malignispiritus, quos isti Deos putant, etiam flagitia quae non admis^ runt de
se dici volunt, vt humanas mentes his opinionibus u^lut retibus induant, and ad
praedestina tum supplicium securn trahant. Maec de numinibus fingi libenter
accipiunt fallacissimi spiritus, vt ad scelestia and turpia perpetranda, velut
ab ipso coelo traduci in terra, satis idonea videatur autoritas Quantum
moliantur malignispiritus exemplo su^, velut divinam autoritatem praebere
sceleribus? hac astutia etiam ludos scenicos sibi dicari sacrari que iusserunt,
vbi deorum ta^ta flagitia theatricis ca^ticis atque fabularu^ actionibus
celebrata sunt, vt quisquis eos talia fecisse crederet, and quisquis non
crederet, sed tamen illos libentissime sibi talia velle exhiberi cerneret,
securus imitaretur. August. De C^v. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 10. and 25. lib. 4. ca.
1. vid. 2^. Hoec omnia in hoc prodita vt vitiis hominum quaedam autoritas
pararetur. Isti enim spiritus post quam simplicitatem substantiae suae onusti
immersi vitiis perdiderunt, ad solatium calamitatis suae non definunt perditi
^am, perdere, and depravati er^orem pravitatis pravis religionibus a Deo
segregare. Minu^ius Felix. Octa vius page 70. and 85. See Julius Firmic^s de
errore profanarum Religionum cap. 13. accordingly.
because these filthy Divel-Idols, (as the Fathers testify,) did heretofore,
either really commit those beastly crimes that are acted in their persons on
the Stage; or else purposely admit them to be Poetically forged of them, and
then openly to be divulged to the people o^ the Theater in their names, that so
they might give a kind of divine approbation or public allowance to these
their notorious wickednesses by their own personal examples, to animate and
draw on the Spectators more securely, more boldly to commit the selfsame
sins, to the eternal ruin of their souls. Whence Athanasius informs us
from his own experience, Hinc iam profecto hominibus mali multum adiectum est.
Cum enim cernerent his Deos suos oblectari, continuo and ipsi sese ad imitandum
^os contulerunt, virtutis s^^ interesse arbitrantes, praestantiores^ vt ipsi
putabant, imitari. Vnde homicidiis ac parricidiis omnibusque laseiviis dedere
manus. Nam omnis fere civitas omnibus nequitiae sordibus plena est, dum student
deorum suorum moribus similes fieri. Neque inter Idolorum cultores frugi
aliqu^sac pudicus est. Isque solum laudatur, quiomnes impudicitiae suae testes
habet. A love quidem stuprationes puero rum at que adulteria: a Venere autem
fornicationem; a Rea impudicitiam, a Mart caedes, aliaque ab alijs didicerunt,
quae pudicis omnibus in exceratione sunt. Athanasius Contra Gentiles lib. 1.
page 36.37. See Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Julius Fi^micus de
Error^ profanarum Religionum, cap. 13. and Augustine De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap.
7.9.10^ 25. accordingly.
that the proclaiming of the vices of Pagan Idols on the Stage, did much
increase the sins of men. For when as they perceived their Idol-gods to be
delighted with such filthy sins, they presently fell to imitate them.
Insomuch that almost every City was fully fraught with all the filth and
dregs of wickedness, whiles they studied to conform themselves to the
sins and vic^s of their Idols: there being not one chaste or sober man among
all the worshippers of such vicious Idol-gods (as there are now few such among
Players and Play-haunters; those only being appla^ded by them, whose lewdness
was most notoriously known unto all men. If then the personating of the
wickednesses of H^athen Idols, be but a mere stratagem of Satan, to encourage,
to precipitate and allure men to the selfsame sins: If it revives the
execrable memory of those infernal crimes Zech. 13.2. Hosea 2.17.
which should be buried in eternal oblivion: If it work a love, a liking, at
lest-wise a slighting or less hating, of such hellish abominations in the
hearts of men: If it be always attended with the very lively 1 These. 5.22
appearances, or, resemblances of evil, from which Christians should absteins.
If it does Non ad pl^cendum hominibus, sed serviendum daemonibus adhibetur.
August. Ep. 73. Possidonio^ Cyprian de spectaculis, and Chrysostom. homil.
6.7.38. in Matthew. etc.
more advance the Devils service, ( the original Author of Stage Plays, See
Tert. de spectac. c. 26.
as himself, and See the Authors quoted from p. 9. to 16. p. 43.49.50.51. and
Cicero de A^uspicum Responsis Oration. Apul^ius De Mundo. l. p. 24. Peter Martyr
Locorum Com. classi^ 2. c. 12. sect. 15.19. Danaeus Ethicae Christianae l. 2.
c. 8. p. 107. M. Gatiker of the lawful use of Lots, p. 216. accordingly.
others testify,) then recreate the Spectators; which none can contradict,
since Satan gains more souls, more service by them, then Play-frequenters
pleasure: This must, this cannot but enforce all Christians for ever to abandon
Stage Plays, because they are thus pestered with the very grossest impurities
of Devill-Idols, and the wor^t of men, Ephe. 5.3.4.
which should not once be named, (much less then acted) among Christians.

Objection. But here our Actors and Play-haunters, Patrocinia turpitudini suae
fingunt vt etiam honest peccare videantur Lactanctiu^ De Falsa sapientia. l.
3. c. 15.
that they may seem in this case to sin honestly, or rather not to sin at
all; frame these two justifications for the personating, the beholding of these
their Stage-obscenities.

First, that in the personating of the vices of Idol-gods and men, they always
introduce their virtues; to the end that their virtues may be imitated, and
their ^innes eschewed.

Secondly, that these their notorious wickednesses are thus personated, thus
divulged on the Stage to this very purpose, that the beholding of their
filthiness might learn men to Teneros animos aliena approbria saep^
Absterrent vitijs. Hora^e sermonum. ^. 1. Satyr. 4. p. 177.
detest them: therefore the acting of them in this nature must needs be
commendable, not unlawful.

Answer. 1. To the former of these two allegations, I answer, First, that the
virtues of Idol-gods, or wicked men, are seldom brought upon the Stage, but as
they are vshered in by their very grossest sins: for in all our tragical, in
most of our Comicall Enterludes, See p. 62. to 78. Iam non existimetur poema
nisi de vitijs canat^ Ita in poesin tanquamin sentinam qua^dam vitia omnia
confluxerunt ac recepta sunt. Lodovicu^ Vives, De causis corrupt. Artiu^^ lib.
2. p. 81.
sin is the primary, adequate and most proper subject of the Play, virtue, a
Parenthesis only in the by: Sin is the Mistress, Virtue but the Handmaid,
which occasionally sometimes attends it. Vice has the whole, at least the
greatest share in all our Stageplaies; poor Virtue hardly finds a part in
any, most parts in none. The virtues therefore that are acted in our Theaters,
as they do not balance, so they cannot justify nor excuse the vices.

Secondly, Vice often times acts it part alone upon the Stage with great
applause, whereas Virtue seldom comes upon it but accompanied with a cloud of
sundry spredding vices; which as Ad deteriot^ faciles sumus, quia nec dux
potest, n^c comes deesse: e^ res etiam ipsa sine duc^, sine comite procedit.
Non pronum tantum iter est ad vitia sed etiam pra^ceps, Seneca Epist. 97.
they sooner pierce the hearts, and insinuate into the affections and lives of
men then virtues; so they Nihil ae qu^ vt vitium corrumpie, Chrysostom. Hom. in
Psalm. 9. tom. 1. Col. 665.
deprave their minds and manners more, then all the virtues of Heathen men or
Idols can ever rectify them, were they only acted, always magnified on the
Stage. As therefore Eccles. 10.1.
dead Flies corrupt the ointment of the Apothecary, or as poison vitiates
wholesome food; so the contempering of some inferior Virtues with more
transcendent Vices in our Stage Plays, does either turn these Virtues into
Quicquid facit seminarium voluptatis, venenum puta. Hieron. Ep. 10. c. 4.
poison, or else deprive them of their efficacy.

Thirdly, the V^rtues magnified on the Theater, are only those of Devill-gods,
of graceless Pagans, or desperate wicked men, who never had true virtue in
the^. Absit vt sit in aliquo vera virtus, nisi fuerit iustus. Absit autem vt
sit iustus vere nisi vivat ex fide: iustus enim ex fide vivir. Quis porro eorum
qui se Christianos haberi volunt, nisi soli Pelagiani, aut in ipsis tu forte
solus, iustum dixerit infidelem, iu^tum dixerit impium, iustum dixerit diabolo
mancipatum? sit licet ille Fabritius, sit licet Fabius, sit licet Scipio, sit
licet Regulus. Porro si veram iustitiam non habent impii, profecto nec alias
virtutes comites eius, etc. Aug^stine Contr. Iulianum Pelag. l. 4. cap. 3. tom.
7. pars 2. p. 398. vid. ibidem.
No men are truly virtuous, but those who are truly religious: others (as
Scypio, Cato, Fabritius, Regulus, Fabius, Aristides, and the like) may have the
shadows of virtue in the^, not the substance; Manifestissim^ patet, in
impiorum animis nullam habitare virtutem, sed omnia opera eorum immunda esse
atque polluta, habentia sapi^ntiam non spiritualem, sed animalem, non coelestem
sed ter^^^am, non Christianam sed diabolicam, non a patre luminum, sed a
principe tenebrarum, dum p^r ea ipsa quae non haberent nisi dante Deo,
subduntur ei qui primus recessit a Deo. Prosp^r, Contr^ Collatorem. ^ib. c. 28.
which grows not in a Devils, an Idols, a Pagan, or wicked persons, but in a
Verae virtutes nisi in jis quibus vera inest pietas esse non possunt. August.
De Ci^. Dei. l. 19. ^. 4.
real Christians heart, wherein Christ's Spirit dwells. It is the pr^perty of
all true virtue, Virtus est vitium fugere. Horace. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1. p.
236. Virtus malam vitam non admittit. Seneca de vita bea^a. c 7.

Quisquis virtute aliqua p^^lere creditur, tunc veraciter pollet, cum vi^ jis
ex aliqua part non subiacet. Greg^ Mag. Moral l. 22. cap. 1.


to conquer, to expel all Vice; not to cohabit with it, or submit unto it: so
that there can be no true vir^ue seated in such persons hearts, whose virtues
are inferior to, or coexistent with t^eir vices. Nay, all the virtues of those
Divell-Idols, or Heroicke Pagans which Players use to act, Deformes multa bona
vno vitio, and ^o t^ meritoru^ gratiam vna ^ulpa, qua^ causa culpae est
corrumpas. Livius Rom histor. l. 30. sect. 14.
were contaminated, deformed and controlled by their vices, to which they were
inthralled; therefore they are not true, but only Virtutes, sine fide, folia
sunt: Videntur virere, s^d prodesse non possunt. Agitantur vento, quia non
habent fundamentum. Ambrose Enarrat. in Psalm. 1. Tom. 2. p. ^14. G.
bastard virtues, which have scarce the very husk of virtue in them. Since
then their virtues, are in truth no virtues, but mere empty Vmbrae and
imagines virtutu^. Lactantius De falsa Religione c. 20.
shadows of virtue, or rather glittering sins, as the Peccata, and splendida
peccata Aug. Contr. ^ulianum lib. ^. cap 3. and Ennar. in Psalm. ^1. Pros^er.
sentent. ex Augustin^ lib. sent. 106.
Fathers, and Vossij Disputatio 35. De virtutibus Gentilium. D. Prideaux
Lectura 8. De salute Ethnicorum.
some others style them; but their vices gross and real sins which plunge
men's souls in endless misery^ the acting of these feigned virtues (which are
as far from real virtues, as Players are from those whose parts they act)
can never balance, much less excuse, the personating of such execrable vices,
which hell it self can hardly parallel.

Fourthly, the mutilated outside virtues of Divell-gods, or graceless Pagans,
Qui vmbras atque imagines virtutum consectantur, ea ipsa quae vera sunt tenere
non possunt. Lactant. De fa^sa Religione. ^ap. 20.
as they can never make their imitators, or Spectators truly ver^^ous; so they
are no fit patterns for a Christian, who has Christ himself, the Paragon of
all virtue, together with all those Saints and blessed Martyrs, who tread his
footsteps, for his platform. Christians, Plus debet Christi discipulus
praestare quam mundi Philos^phus. Hierom. Epist. 26. cap. 4^
as they must excel all Pagans (much more then Divell-Idol^) in their virtues;
so they have far more transcendent patterns of true virtue for to follow,
then the best of Pagans are. Christ Jesus is their Luke 1.79.
guide, John 14.6.
their way, John 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.21.
their example: Matthew. 19.21.28. Ephesians. 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Ioh. 2.6. Etenim
proterea Christianus es, ideo hoc nomen accepisti, vt Christum imiteris,
ejusquelegibus operum exhibitione pareas. Chrysostom. Adi^^: Iud^os Oration. 5.
tom. 5. Col. 957. D. A Christo dicti estis Christiani. N^n^^ ^a via q^a
Christus ambulavit and vos debetis ambulare? Nonne sicut cove^satur est, and
vos vicatiis eius debetis conversa^i? ^ta plano, nisi forte doctiores eo
fueritis, vel sanctiores. Bern. ad pastores sermo. Co. 1732. G
his virtues, his graces must they imitate; him only must they follow, and
none else but him, or those Phil. 3.17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.7.9 1 Cor. 4.16. and 11.1.
Heb. 6.12.
glorious Saints of his, who walk as he has walked. The supremest virtues of
the most renowned Pagans are to inferior precedents for the meanest
Christians. The very worst of Christians who shall ever enter Heaven Gates,
must transcend the virtues of the best of Pagans: for the Scripture is
peremptory: Mat. 5.20. See Opus impe^fectum in Mat. hom. 11.
That except our righteusnesse exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees (much more then the degenerate copper virtues of Heathen Infidels) we
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. How then can we take those
Heathen virtues for our examples Nec vera virtus, quum semel excidit, curat
reponi det^rioribus. Hor. Carm. l. 3. Ode. 5. p. 76.
which we must far excel? The Copy must surpass the Hand; the Sampler, the
Needleworke which does but imitate it. The rule must needs be more exactly
perfect, then that which is squared or directed by it; else all will be
erroneous. For Christians then, who Isa. 40.31. c. 33.16. Col. 3.1.2. Phil.
3.20.
should soar above all others, to stoop to Pagan virtues, or to allay their
sublimer metal to their Isa. 1.22.
courser temper, is to degenerate into Pagans; to prove worse, yea, less then
Christians. It is all one, as for an expert Artificer to lay aside his skill,
to imitate a Bungler: or for a Schoolmasters to give over teaching, and to
subject himself to the Tutorship of his rudest Scholar. Pagans and
Devill-Idols (whose Parts come frequentest on the Stage,) Ephesians. 2.1.2.3.13. c.
4.17.18.19. 1 Pet. 4.3.4.
are the very worst of creatures; there is no such grace or virtue in them, as
is either seemly, necessary, or essential to a Christian. And shall
Christians then resort to Play Houses, to learn true virtue from such sinkes
of sin; See August. contr. iulianum. Pelag. l. 4. c. 3. Prosper^ contr.
Collatorem. c. 28. Lactantius d^ Falsa Relig. c^ 20.
such Glowormes, shadows or carcasses of virtue, as these Idols, these Pagans
were, whose very virtues led them but to Hell? Doubtless it is but a very
Heathenish, graceless, divellish practice; yea, a very shame and blemish to
Religion thus to do; as if Christ's own example, the examples of his saints,
the precepts of his Word, were not Psa^. 19.7. Psalm. 119.9. 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
sufficient to teach Christians virtue; but that they must resort to
Divell-gods, to Infidels, to Stage Plays for to learn it. The acting
therefore of such counterfeit virtues, for the ends pretended, is no plea to
justify Stageplayes, much less the action of the forenamed Vices.

Fifthly, if there be such Virtues taught and acted in our Plays, as is
surmised, I wonder much why our See Nazianzen ad Seluchum de Recta Educat. page
1063.1064. Chrysost^ hom. 38. in Mat. Gosson his Plays confuted. Action. 1.2.
The third blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, p. 110. to 117.
accordingly.
eminentest Actors, our most assiduous Play-haunters, are more generally, more
desperately vicious then most other m^n, as I shall prove Act. 4. Scene 1.2.
anon? Certainly, if there were any virtue to be learnt from Stageplayes, or
those Pagan virtues that are acted in them, our Players, our Play-hunters would
have been good proficients, not retrogrades, in the school of Virtue, long ere
this; whereas they are now naught else but Graduates, but chief Artists in the
school of Vice. Either therefore there is no good, no virtue to be learnt from
Stage Plays, (as in truth See Cyprian and Tertullian, De specta^. lib.
Lactantius de vero cultu. c. 20. Chrysostom. hom. 6:7. and 38. in Matthew. Salvian de
Gubernatione Dei. Mr. Gosson, Master North-brook, M. Stubs, D. Reinolds in ^n
their Trea^ises against Plays. The third blast of Retrait from Plays, with
sundry other Authors quoted, Act. 6. throughout.
there is not) or else their Vices are far more active, more infectious then
their virtues, or else the Actors, the Spectators of our Plays are past all
grace, all virtue which our Plays can teach them, Diogenes mu^icos in
iusvocabat, quod cum lyrae chordas congrue, aptarent, animi mores inconcinnos
haberent. Diog. Laertius lib. 6. p. 330. I may aptly accomodate it to Players.
since they learn it not.

Sixthly, admit there be some Virtues acted in our Stage Plays, yet there are
far more Vices. Now as Proclivis est malorum aemulatio, and quorum virtutes
assequi nequeas, cito imitaris vitia. Hierom. Epist. 7. c. 3.
men by Nature are more propense to imitate men's vices then their virtues; even
so it fares with Stage Plays. All practice, all take up their vices, none
their virtues: all prove the worser, none the better by them. The Foris popu^us
celeberimo strepitu impietas impura circumsonat, and intus paucis castitas
simulata vix sonat, praebentur propatula pudendis, and secreta laudandis. Decus
late^, and dedecus patet: quod malum geritur, omnes convocat spectatores: quod
bonum dicitur, vi^ aliquos invenit auditores; tanquam honesta erube^cenda sint,
and inhonesta glori^nda. August. De Civit. De^^ lib. 2^ cap. 26.
hurt, the sins, the vices which they hatch and foster, are obvious unto all
men's view; we see, we read them both in the Actors and Spectators lives, who
make a daily progr^sse in the ways of Vice: the good, the virtue which they
teach is yet unknown to the world; we hear, we see it not. Since then our
Stage Plays are so barren in producing virtue, so strangely fruitful in
ingendring Vice; their goodness will not, cannot balance, nor assoile their
ill.

Seventhly, suppose there are some real virtues acted in our Enterludes; yet
who can be so grossly stupid, as to think, to learn any grace or virtue from a
Playhouse? Who Non necesse habes aurum in luto quaerere. Hierom. Epist. 10. c.
^.
ever sought for gold, for pearls in dirt? for a Quis in caeno fontem
requirat? Quis e turbida aqua potum petat? Itaque vbi intemp^rantia est, vbi
luxuria, vbi vitiorum ^olluvies, quis inde sibi hauriendum existimet? Ambros.
De Officijs lib. 2. cap. 12.
Crystal spring in filthy mire; for wholesome water in a noisome kennell? Who
ever resorted to a Pesthouse to look for health, or drunk down poison to
preserve his life? Who ever posted to a tippling Alehouse to seek sobriety; or
to a Stews to learn true Chastity? Delubrum turpi ac flagitioso Veneris
Daemoni dedicatum: Era^ tanquam schola quaedam nequitiae ii^ qui erant libidini
dediti^ qui que nimia licentia corpu^ labefactauerant suum, corruperant que:
scelerati praeterea and nefarij muli^rum c^ngressus, clandestinae falsorum
connubiorum corruptelae infanda acturpia facinora in co delubro vtpote in loco
impuro and faedo admissa ^rant. Eusebius de vita Constantini. lib. 3. cap. 53.
Play Houses, (as the Fathers testify,) are the very Nurseries, Schools and
Marts; the very shops and sinkes of all Vice and wickedness whatsoever: they
are the very Devils temples, Venus her Synagog^es, Vices Oratories, Sins
Palaces, Hels Warehouses, Pollutions thro^e, Religions slaughterhouse,
Virtues Pesthouse; and shall we then flock to them to learn true virtue? Can
Gaull yield Honey, or a Flintstone Milk? can Sin bear Virtue, or Profaneness
Grace? then Plays and Play Houses, (the very See here. page 69.
grand empoysoners of all Grace, all Virtue, yea, the very Specta^ula Diaboli
retia. Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Collum. 59. C.
Devils ^ets to catch men's souls) may make men truly virtuous. Let us not
therefore seek for virtue in a Playhouse where it grows not, as too many
do, for fear we fraught our selves with nothing but a load of Vice, which
will sink our souls for ever to the dephes of Hell.

Lastly, the Church of God, not the Playhouse, is the only School; the
Scriptures, Sermons, devout and pious books; not Plays, not Play-books, are
the only Lectures, the Ministers and Saints of God, or rather Mentes hominum
Deus omnipotens ad virtutes prouehit. Gregor. Mag. Moralium. 29. c. 23.
Incassum proinde quis laborat in acquisitione virtutum si aliunde eas sperandas
putat quam a Domino virtutum: cuius doctrina seminarium prudentiae; cuius
misericordia opus iustitiae; cuius vita speculum temperantiae; cuius mors
insigne est fortitudinis. Bernard super Cantica: Sermo. 22. fol. 130. L.
God himself; not common Actors, not those Divell-Idols, Cyprian and
Tertullian de spectac. lib. August. de Ciuit. Dei l. 2. c. 4. to. 29. l. 6. c.
6.7. Chrysostom. hom. 6. and 7. in Matthew. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei lib. 6. and
Act. 1.2, 3. accordingly.
who rule and work in Stage Plays, the only Tutors of true virtue: True E
coelo descendit, (...): Iuv. Sat. 11.
virtue is a plant that comes from heaven, growing only in the Churches, not
the Stages garden. See Plutar Moral. to. 2. An virtus doceri possit? Virtu^
doceri non potest, neque hominibus per homines parari. Platonis Protagaras. p.
431.
Philosophy and Philosophers could not teach it; and can Plays or Players do
it? O no: It is the prerogative royal of the King of heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
Ier. 31.34. John 5.45. 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Pet. 1 3. See z before.
to teach men virtue; and that not by Stage Plays, or lascivious Poems, Gal.
5.22.22. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
but by his Word and Spirit only, which breathe not in our Theaters: It is
then a Sacrilegij enim vel maximi instar est, humi quaerere, quod in sublimi
debeas invenire. Mi^u^ius Felix. Octauius page 46.
sacrilege, ye^, a madness, to relinquish God, his Church, his Word, his
Ordinances, his Saints (the only fountains of true virtue) as too many do,
to seek out virtue in Plays, in Play Houses, which are no other but the
sinkes of Vice.

Answer. 2 To the second Objection; that Stage Plays do not teach, Sir Thomas
Eliots Book of the Governor. cap. 13. and Haywoods Apology for Actors,
accordingly.
but discover Vices, that so men may learn to hate them, not affect them: I
answer first; that it is Psalm. 51.10. Psalm. 119.37. 2 Timothy 2.25. Converti ad
Deum sine ipso non possumus. Est enim paenitentia vnum de perfectis d^nis
descendentibus a Patre luminum. Greg. Mag. in Psalm. 7. poenitentiales. Fol.
364. Ambrose in Psalm. 118. Octon. 5. ver 37.
God only by his Word and Spirit, who must teach us to abhor all Vice; not
Stage Plays, the very Vitiorum semina sunt, scelerum pabula, mortis iter.
Iohannis. Salisburiensis de Nugis Curialium pr^^mio Agrippa de vanitate
Scientiarum. c. 63.64.
fuel of all sin and lust.

Secondly, if there were any such virtue in Stage Plays, as to alienate men's
affections from the vices which they personate, they would then no doubt, not
only have reclaimed the ancient Play-admiring Pagans and Comedians, but
likewise our modern Play-Poets, Players, and Play-haunters from all those lewd
and filthy Vices which come most frequently on the Stage. But I never yet could
hear or read of any ancient or modern Actor, Composer, or Spectator of any
Theatricall Enterludes, whom Plays recalled from the love, the practice of any
Vices, that were ever acted on the Stage, whereas they have drawn milions for
to imitate them. Therefore there is no such Nunquam virtus quamvis obscura
latet, sed mittit signa. Quisquis dignus fuerit vestigiis illam colliget:
Seneca de tranquil. Animi. cap. 3.
hidden virtue in them. To cause men to abandon Vice: which if there were, it
would have emptied our See page 68, 69, 70.
vicious Play Houses long ere this, and have made our lascivious, adulterous,
amorous Plays, so odious, that none durst approach them, for fear of being
polluted by them.

Thirdly, Stage Plays are so far from working an abhorring, that they
produce, not only a love and liking, but also animitation of those pernicious
vices that are acted in them, Cyprian. and Tertullian de spectac. lib. Clemens
Alexandr. Pae^ dag. lib. 3. c. 11 Lactant. de vero cultu. c. 20. et Divinarum
Instit. Epit. c. 6. Chrysostom. Hom. 6.7. et 38. in Matthew. Nazianzen. Oration 48.
et de Recta Educat. ad Selucum. p. 1063. August. de Ciu. Dei lib. 2. c. 4. to.
17. Salvian de Guber. Dei. lib. 6 See Act. 6. throughout accordingly.
which are commonly set forth with such flexanimous rhetorical pleasing, (or
Sub specie iucunditatis venenum in^undunt. Bernard de Ordine vitae. Col. 1118.
A.
rather poisoning) streines; with such patheticall, lively and sublime
expressions, with such insinuating gestures; with such variety of wit, of art
and eloquence, Quid illi qui vel suos vel alienos amores sunt prosecuti? quanta
peste pueritiae atque adolescentiae animos consauciarunt? Quid enim aliud sunt
cordi adolescentis amatoriae narrationes, quam flamma stupis proxima? ipsae
perse attrahunt et incendunt; de quibus Menander sentit, cuius versiculum
Paulus Apostolus ore suo consecravit. Corrumpunt mores probos collocutiones
improbae. Atqui omnia de libidine, de sauitie, de ininani gloria, de fraudibus
non dicta sunt ruditer, atque impolite, sed exculta, exornata, vt etiam absque
omni rei ipsius oblectamento verba ipsa per se arriderent, atque adblandirentur
Quid vero in illis rebus, quas vltro malitia nostra expetit? quas audire, quas
videre gestit; quas omnibus sensibus vsurpare, ad quas toto impetu fertur? Res
sine verbis invitassent: verba sine rebus ad se pellexissent: dulci veneno,
dulce additum est condimentum; vnde teneris animos et iniquiduis flexibiles
rebus pessimis inficerunt. Ludou. viues. De causis corrupt Artium lib. ^. p
80.81. See Seneca. Epist. 6. Isiodor. hisp. Etymol, l. 18. ^ c. 27. accordingly.
that if ever men did hate them from their hearts before, they cannot affect,
at least approve, or but less detest them now: they being Nequitia facile
imitatores invenit. Philo Iudaeus de special. Legibus p. ^053. Non egemus
praeceptoribus, minis dociles mulorum summus. Petrarcha. de Remed. vtriusque
Fortunae l. 1. Dialog. 68.
prone enough by nature for to practice them, without any allectives to edge
them on. This practice therefore of acting Vices, does only propagate them,
not restrain them.

Fourthly, if Stageplayes had been fit Lectures, Play Houses apt Schools to
instruct men to abandon Vice, the Sea Act. 6. Scene 1. to. 8. and Act. 7.
throughout
Primitive Church, together with sundry Councels, Fathers, and modern
Christian Writers of all sorts, would never have so frequently condemned, so
constantly avoided Stage Plays, as the fruitful Nurseries of all sin and
wickedness; Profane and vicious persons would never flock so fast unto them,
as they use: yea, the very Devil himself, ( whom Diabolum nimis astutum fecit
tam natura subtilis quam longa exercitatio malitiae eius. Bernard ^n
Quadragess. sermon. Coll. 114 115. G. and Col. 379 D.
not only Nature, but likewise long experience has made exceeding politic)
would never have bin so improvident as to See Act. 1.2.
invent, to propagate, so inconsiderate as to multiply, to perpetuate
Stage Plays to his own great prejudice, were they such disswasiues from Vice,
from wickedness, such attractiues unto Virtue, as these plead they are, how
truly let all men judge.

Fifthly, Stageplayes themselves, as the Sea Act. 6. throughout.
sequel will at large demonstrate, are pernicious sin-producing,
Vice-fomenting pleasures, which all godly Christians have condemned: For any
man then to undertake to make men hate Vice by frequenting Stage Plays, is but
Illivitium vitio, peccatum peccato medicantur: nos amore virtutum vitia
sup^ramus. Hieron. Epist. 14. Cauendum est, ne malum malo cures Pachymer^s
histor. lib. 4.
to cure one vice with another, or to prevent a lesser mischief with a
greater; yea, it is in truth naught else, but to make Vice a balm, an antidote
against it self; and Absurdum est putare eum qui ab aliquibus e^ bono malus
fuerit factus, eundem abillis iterum ex malo bonum fieri posse. Dionys.
Hallicar. Antiq. Romans l. 11. sect. 2. p. 1026.
to make ill men good again, with that selfsame thing which made them evil
at the first: a paradox beyond my stupid apprehension.

Sixthly, the acting of foreign obsolete, and long-since forgotten Villainies on
the Stage, is so far from working a detestation of them in the Spectators
minds (who perchance were utterly ignorant of them, till they were acquainted
with them at the Playhouse, and so needed no dehortation from them;) that
Semina paene omnium scelerum a diis suis peccantium turba collegit. Et vt
perditus animus possit aliquid impune committere ex praecedentibus facinorum
exemplis maiore se autoritate defendit, hominibus peccare cupientibus facinorum
via de Deorum monstratur exemplis. Julius ^irmicu^. De Origin pro^anarum
Religionum, c. 13. vid. Ibidem.
it often excites degenerous dunghill spirits, who have nothing in them for to
make them eminent, to reduce them into practice, of purpose to perpetuate their
spurious ill-deserving memories to posterity, at leastwise in some tragic
Interlude. It is Solinus Polyhistor. c. 54. Lucian de Morte Peregrini. Gellius
Noctium A^tic. l. 2. c. 6. Clemens Alexand. Oration Exhortat. ad Gentes ^ol. 7.
Hierom adver. Heluidiu^ c. 8^ Strabo Geogr. l. 14. Munster Cosmogr. l. 5. cap.
5. Alexander ab Alexandro Genialium Dierum l. 3. c. 20. Purchase Pilgrimage
Book. 3. cha. 17. accordingly.
storied of Herostratus; that he set the great and famous Temple of Diana at
Ephesus on fire, for this very end; ut nomen memoria sceleris extenderet; that
the very m^mory of this his villainous exploit might eternize his base obscure
name, and add unto his fame. Iuvenal. Satyr. 1. Salust de Bello Iugurthino p.
7.
Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignum Sivis esse aliquis: is the
only rode, the best, the speediest passage, that sordid desperate obscure
spirits know or take to honor, wealth or fame, especially in declining,
Libertas. scelerum est quae regna invisa tu^tur Sublatusque modus gladijs
Lucan. l. 8. p. 141.
vi^ious, turbulent or discontented times. Wherefore since obsolete Quod later
igno^um est igno^i nulla cupido. Ovid. de Art Amandi l. 3. p. 202.
unknown sins, are always freest from imitation, and more Iners malorum
remedium ignorantia est. Seneca Oedipu^. Actus ^. fol. 104.
^asily avoided then sins divulged, though with shame, disdain or
punishment; whence Plato Legum Dialogus 9. Seneca de Clementia l^b. 1. cap. 23.
wise Lawgivers, have rather chosen, to inact no public Laws against
unnatural rare-committed crimes, then to prohibit them by public Edicts,
under the severest punishments, for fear the public knowledge of them, by
means of known Edicts, should make them more Multo minus audebant liberi
ne^a^ vltimum admittere, quandiu sine lege crimen fuit^ Summa enim prudentia
altissimi viri, and rerum naturae pe^itissimi, maluerunt velut incredibile
sc^lus, and vltra audaciam positum, praeterire, quam dum vindicant, o^tendere
posse fieri. Itaque parricidae cum lege caeperunt, illis facinus paena
monstravit. Seneca Ibidem.
frequent in men's practice; it were Satius erat ista in oblivionem ire, quam ne
quis postea potens disceret. Seneca De Brevit. vitae cap. 13. Iucundius
interdum quaedam nesciri possunt, quam sciri. P^t^an^ Diatrib^ p. ^10.
Intervirtutes habebitural qua nescire. Quintil. ^^stit. Oratoria. l. 1. c. 13.
p. 65.
far more commodious, less dangerous, less pernicious, that those
unparalleled forgotten villainies, whose memory is revived on the Stage, were for
ever drowned in oblivion, then re-imprinted in men's minds by Vice-perpe^uating
Stage Plays: See Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato.
ne exempla fiant quae iam esse facinora destiterunt; least our depraved times
should make those moth-eaten wickednesses, the patterns of their imitation,
which all-devouring antiquity had expunged, out of the much enlarged Catalogue
of modern sins.

Lastly, if Stage Plays do only discover Vices for to make them odious, then
those lascivious Pagans who most delighted in them, should have been
meliorated and mor^alized by them. But the Sea Act. 6. S^ene. 5 accordingly.
best Christian and Pagan Authors unanimously agree: that Theatricall Plays
and Poems were the chief corrupters of their minds and manners, the most
effectual propagators of all kind of vice, See Act. 4. Scene. 1.2.
accordingly.
there being none so vicious and lascivious, as those Pagan Greeks and Romans,
who most frequented Stage Plays. Therefore the acting of such vices does daily
propagate and diffuse them, not decrease them.

Since therefore the subject matter of Stage Plays is thus heathenish, vicious
and profane, consisting of the fabulous histories, ceremonies, vices, names,
and execrable wickednesses of Pagan gods and men, Deutr. 12.30. Psalm. 16.4.
Ephesians. 5.3. Sir Thomas Eliot, in his Governor. Book 1. c. 19. D. Reinolds
Overthrow of Stageplayes. p. 138. The third Blast of Retrait from Plays and
Theaters.
which should not once be named among Christians; we may hence also conclude
them to be sinful, and utterly unlawful unto Christians.

SCENA QVARTA.
FOurthly; the subject matter of our Stage Plays, is for the most part, false
and Poeta cum primum ad scribendum appulit animum, Id sibi negoti credidit
solum dari, populo vt placerent quas fecisse^ fabulas. Terentij Andria,
Prologus. Argument 8.
fabulous; consarcinated of sundry merry, Iudicrous, officious artificial
lies, to delight the ears of carnal Auditors. From whence I form this eight
Argument.

That whose subject matter consists of sundry forged Fables, of artificial,
merry affected lies, must needs be odious and unlawful unto Christians, Omne
genus ^endacij summo operefuge; Nec casu, nec studio loquaris falsum; quia os
quod mentitur occidit animam. Bernard. de Interiori Dom^ cap. 43.
who must abandon lies.

But such is the subject matter of most Comicall, of many Tragical Enterludes.

Therefore they must needs be odious and unlawful unto Christians.

The Minor is evident, not only from experience, and the concurrent suffrages
of Fabulae. Mendacia: fabulosissima quae que in ludos and actus redigeru^t,
etc. August. De Ciu. Dei. l. 1.3, 4. and 6. Clemens Alexand. Oration Exhort. ad
gentes fol. 8. Arnobius lib. 3 4. and 7. advers. Gentes: Iuli^s Fir^icus De
Errore profanarum Religionum. lib. with all the Fathers and Authors quoted in
page 76.
sundry Fathers, and Isocrates Oration ad Nicoclem. p. 46.47. Plutarchi Solon,
and De Audiendis po^tis lib. Diogenes Laertius lib. 1. Solon. Dionysius.
Halicar. Antiq. Romans l. 2. sect. ^. Macrobius De Somno Scipionis lib. 1. cap.
2. p. 20. Horace de Art Poetica. lib.
Pagan Authors, who style Stage Plays, fabulous, artificial, sporting lies,
from whence they take occasion to condemn them: but likewise by the copious
testimony of sundry ancient Fabulae, Figmenta, etc. Terentius. in Andriae,
Enuchi, Adelphi, and Hecyrae Prelogo. Plautus, in Amphitru: and Captiuei
Prologo. Euripides, in Hecubae, Orestis, Phaenissae, Argumento. Sophoclis Ajax
flagellatus, Hecuba, etc. Argumentum. Horace de Art^ Poetica. page 307.308.
accordingly.
Play-Poets, who style their Plays by the very name of Fables, Lies, and
figments. The Mayor needs no large dispute. For since every lie is diametrally
contrary to Romans 3.4. John 1 14. cap. 3.33. cap. 14.1.
the God of Truth: ^ince John 8.44. Acts 5.3.
it proceeds originally from the very Devil, who is a Liar, and the Father of
lies: since it is dir^ctly opposite to the John 15.26. cap. 16.13.
Spirit and John 17.17. 2 Cor. 6.7. Coloss. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Timothy 2.15.
Word of Truth, which enjoyneth every man, (especially the children of God):
Levit. 19.11. Ephesians. 4.25. Zech. 8.16. Zeph. 3.13.
to speak no lies; to put away lying: 1 Timothy 4.7. 2 Timothy 2 16. Titus 3.9.
to refuse profane and Oldwives fables, with all idle fabulous tales and
babblings: Psalm. 31.6. Ephesians. 4.25.
to hate all such who delight in lying vanities; and to speak naught else but
truth; Reu. 21.8. cap. 22.15: Ier. 9.3.5.
because whosoever loves and makes a lie, shall be excluded the new
Jerusalem, and have his portion in that lake which burnet^ with fire and
brimstone for ever: Since Augustine De Mendacio ad Consen^ium: Quaestiones
sup^r Leviticum l. ^. Quaest. 68. and Epistola 19. Ambrose sermo. 44. Basilius
Regulae contract. Reg. 76^ Hieron. Theodoret, Chrysostom, Remigius, Primasius,
Theophylact, Haymo^ Beda, and Anselmus in Ephesians. 4.25. Bernard. De Interiori
Domo cap. 43. and de gratia and libero Arbitr. col. 9.16.
sundry of the Fathers recorded in the margent, have abundantly condemned all
sorts of lies; as well officious, fabulous and sporting, as pernicious: And
since diverse Fabulae qua^um nomen indicat falsi professionem; aut tantum
conciliandae auribus voluptatis auditum mulcent velut Comaediae; hoc totum
fabularum genus quod solum aurium delicias pr^fitetur, esacrario suo in
nutricum cunas sapientiae tractatus elimi^at. Ma^robius De somno Scip. l. 2. c.
2. See Plutarchi Solon^ accordingly. Per se mendaciu^ malum est, and
vituperandu^. A^ist. Ethic. l. ^. cap. 7. Plato ^egum. Dialo. ^. Mentire
servile est, dignumque apud omnes hominesodio, ac ne mediocribus quidem seruis
ignoscendum. Plutar. De L^be^orum Ed^catione lib.
Paga^ Authors have positi^ely c^nsured, all ^udicrous lies and poems composed
only for delight; we cannot but sub^scribe unto the Mayor, as an undoubted
truth, and so by consequence to the Conclusion too. Since therefore
Stage Plays are Mendacium non possumus dicere tunc tantum modo ess^, quando
proximus laeditur: cum enim falsum ab sciente dicitur, proculdubio mendacium
est, sieve illo quisquam, sieve nemo laedatur. August. Quaest super Leuit. l. 3.
quaest. 68. Tom. 4. part. 1. p. 296.
but merry lies; and since Cavete fratres mendacium, quia omnes qui amant
mendacium filij sunt Diaboli; qui non solum mendax est, sed etiam and Pater and
inventor ipsius mendacij: Ambros sermo. 44.
Saint Ambrose informs us; that all those who love a lie, are the children of
the Devil, the Father of lies; let this cause us to detest all fabulous lying
Stageplayes, as Quae autem Poetae de Dijs scripserunt, meras insignesque nugas
continentia; verbi gratia, fabulas inhonestas ac faedas, malorum geniorum
doctrinas, fabulas inquam, tum risu, tum lacrymis dignas: haec omnia tan quam
la^queos and decipulas aversare. Nazienzen. ad Se^e^cum. p. 1063.
the very snares and traps of Satan, ^or fear we prove the Devils offspring,
who has no inheritance but Hell to leave us.

SCENA QVINTA.
Fifthly, the subject matter of Stage Plays is oftimes impious, sacrilegious,
blaspemou^, and that in sundry respects.

First, in that the sacred names of God the Father, Sonn^, and holy Ghost (
which Deutr. 28.58. Psalm. 89.7. Psalm. 96.7.9. Apud enim homines officiosis
religionibus deditos, non ipsi Dij tantum verum etiam nomina debent esse Deorum
veneranda: quantumque est in ipsis qui censentur his nominibus, tantum esse par
est in eorum appellationibus dignitatis. Arno^ius advers Gentes. l. 5. p. 184.
ought not to be mentioned but with reverence and holy fear) are frequently
recited on the Stage, (too profane, too impious a place for such dreadful
holy names to come into) and that in a sacrilegious, blasphemous, ridiculous,
impious sporting manner, to their great dishonor and Ier. 34.16. Isay 48.11.
pollution. Hence was that passionate exclamation of Clemens Alexandrinus
against the Gentiles: O impietas ^ scenam coelum fecistis, and Deus vobis
factus est actus: and quod sanctum est Daemonorum personis in Comaedia
ludificati estis: verum Dei cultum ac religionem Daemonum superstitione
libidino^e and obscaene inquinantes. Orati^ Adhor^, ad Gent^s fol. 8 E^
O impiety: you have made the Theater heaven: you have made God himself an
Act; that which is holy have you also derided under the person of Devils; you
have lustfully and fili^ily polluted Religion and the true worship of God, with
the superstitions of Devils. Hence was it, that Tertullian in his book, De
spectaculis cap. 28. Chrysostom. homily 38. on Matthew: Salvian De Gubernatione
Dei lib. 6. the Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 504. and Binius Tom. 1 pars 1. p.
575, 579.
third Council of Carthage, Canon^ 11. with sundry others, did long since
style all Stage Players, Blasphemi.
Blasphemers: because they did not only Qualis have religio, aut quanta
majestas putanda e^t, quae adoratur in templis, illuditur in theatris? Et qui
haec fecerin^, non poenas violati numinis pendunt, sed honora^ietiam laudatione
discedunt. Lactantius D^ Iustitia. lib. c. 21. Nec alij Dij rideantur in
theatris, quam qui adorantur in templis: nec alijs ludos exhib^atis, quam
quibus victimas immolatis. August. De Civ. Dei li. 6. c. 6. See lib 2. c. 3.
to. 20. Julius Firmicus De Errore profanarum Religio^um. Tertullian^ and
Cyprian De spectaculis. Clemens Alexandr. Orat. Adhort. ad Gentes. Arnobius
Advers. Gentes lib. 3.4.7. Nazienzen ad Selucum. page 1063: Minucius Felix
Octavius. Salvian De Guber. Dei l. 6. Plauti Amphitruo. Prologus. 1. See Scene
3. accord^ngly.
deride, abuse, and personate their own Idol-gods upon the Stage, for which
the Christians taxed them: but likewise See Scene 6. accordingly.
blasphemously profane, satyrically traduce the very sacred names of God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in their public Enterludes; whence the Fathers
laid no less then blasphemy to their charge. A sin to frequent in our
modern Stage Plays, where these dreadful names (to our shame, Plays ruin
be it written) are most desperately profaned, most Athei^tically blasphemed.
Witness our own late religious 3 Iacobi cap. 21.
Statute, of tertio Iacobi chapter 21. Where our Sovereign Lord the King,
together with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in that
Parliament ^ssembled, for the preventing and avoiding ^f the great abuse of the
holy name of God in Stage Plays and Enterludes, which then grew common,
enacted this pious Law (which is Nec quisquam fuerat qui in ea sc^lera
animadve^tebat, propterea quod ex viris grauibus and honestis nemo illuc
aud^bat accedere. Eusebius de vita Constantins, libr. 3. cap. 53.
seldom or never put in execution, because few else but such who delight in
blasphemy, and therefore are unlikely to prove informers against it, resort to
Stage Plays;) That if at any time or times after that Session of Parliament
determined, any person or persons in any Stage Play, Interlude, May Game, or
Pageant should jestingly or profanely speak or use the holy Name of GOD, or
of Christ Jesus, or of the holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, which are not to be
spoken but with fear and reverence^ that for every such offense by him or them
committed, he or they should forfeit Cum enim probrum iacitur in principem
patriae bonum atque vtilem, nonne tanto est indig^ius, quanto a veritate
remotius, and a vita illius alie^us? Quae igitur supplicia sufficient, cum Deo
fit ista tam nefaria, tam insignis iniui^a? August. de Ci^. Dei. l. 2. c. 9.
ten pounds. The one moitie thereof to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors: the other moitie thereof to him that will sue for the same in any
Court of Record in Westminster, wherein no Essoigne or wager of Law shall be
allowed. A sufficient evidence to testify the execrable blasphemy of our
domesticke Enterludes; since, Corn. Tacitus Annal. l. 15 sect. 3.
ex malis moribus optimae oriuntur leges: and emendari quam peceare posterius
est.

Secondly, as these Sacred names, even so the Histories, Texts, and sacred
passages of holy Scripture (which Psalm. 50.16, 17.
should not so much as come within the polluted lips of graceless Actors,
especially M. Perkins Cases of Conscience, lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 4.
in sports, in plac^s of prophannesse) are oft-times most Atheistically,
irreligiously, blasphemously acted, uttered, profaned, derided, mis-applied,
j^sted at, and sported with in Stage Plays. This M. Northbrooke Treatise
against vain plays and enterludes p. 32. M. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p.
102. The 3. Bla^t of Retrait from plays and theaters, p. 79.80.103 104. The
Preface to the Practice of Piety, accordingly.
Authors, this experience largely testify, to the grief of all good
Christians, and if this be not sufficient, we have the express Authority of
an Act of Parliament, even 34. and 34. H. 8. c. 1.
of ^4 and 35 of Henry the 8. chapter 1. which irrefragably confirms this
truth. Now for Christians thus to abuse the Word of God, and Scripture
Histories on the Stage, what is it but the very height of all impiety, which
well deserves Gods heaviest judgments: It is Aristeas, historia, 70. sacrae
scripturae inte^pretum Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. p. 12. F.G.M. Stubs his Anatomy
of Abuses. p. 102. M. Northb^ooke against vain Plays and Enterludes. p. 32.
storied, of Theopompus an historian, and of Theodect^s a Tragaedian; Tha^ God
struck the one of them with madness, the other with blindness for a season:
the one, for inserting a part of Moses sacred writing into his profane story;
the other of them for intermixing some passages and histories of the old
Testament with his lascivious Play-Poems; neither were they restored to their
sight, or senses, till they had particularly repented of this their
wickedness. If then these Pagans, for these their Scripture prophanations did
undergo so sharp, so exemplary a judgment; what a severe punishment may
those Christian Play-Poets, Actors and Spectators look for, who wilfully
profane those sacred Scriptures on the Stage, by which they must be Psalm.
119.9. John 17.17 Gal. 6.16.
sanctified and directed now, and John 12.48. Romans 2.12.16
judged at the last? What a stupendous impiety, a desperate blasphemy and
prophannesse is it, for m^n, for Chri^tians, to turn the most serious Oracles
of Gods sacred Word into a Play, a Jest, a Fable, a Sport, a May Game? Non haec
iocosae convenient lyrae. Quo musa tendis? desine peruicax refer sermones
Deorum, and magna modis tenuare paruis. Horace Car^^. l. 3. Ode. 3. p. 71.
to temper the Psalm. 19.8. P^al. 119.140
purest Scriptures with the most obscene lascivious Play-Poems, that
filthiness or prophannesse can invent? to pollute those sacred histories on
the Theater, See pa. 10. and 49. to. 53.
the very house and Synagogue of the Devil, which the sanctifying Spirit of
God has for ever consecrated and 1 Timothy 3.15^ Ephesians. 3.10.
bequeathed to the Church of God? to make the 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
Sin-slaying, the Lust-mortifying, Psalm. 19.7.
Soule-converting Word of God, the 2 Pet. 1.4.19. Acts 26.6.7. Romans 4.16. c.
9.8.9.
only evidence of our salvation; a mere Pander to men's beastly lusts, their
ribaldrous mirth, their graceless wits, and carnal jollity; yea, a mere
instrument to the very Devil himself See here Act. 1. and p. 47. to. 54. In
ludis theatralibus delectantur Daemones, and vt constat, vir perfectus non
debet intendere ludicris in quibus Daemones delectantur. Alexander Fabriciu^
Destructorium vici^rum, part 4. cap. 29. B. 2.
, who rules in Stage Plays; and so an Prou. 13.13. Romans 2.5.8.9.
obsignation of their just damnation. Doubtless, as the damnablenesse of this
most execrable impiety, (which is next of kin to that Matthew. 12.31.32. Mark
3.28, 29, 30. 1 Timothy 1 20.
unpardonable sin of Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, the 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
Author of the Script^res) transcends my narrow expressions; so the eternal
tormens allotted to it, do surpass men's largest thoughts. And yet it now acts
it is Part so frequently, so pla^sibly on the Stage, that many cease, not only
to apprehend no sinfulness, no danger in it, but also deem it worthy of their
best applause. Alas, with what face or confidence; with what joy or hope can
such hear or read the Scriptures in the Church, who thus actually Et quoniam
ridere nostram fidem consuevistis, atque ipsam credulitatem facetiis
iocularibus lancinare, dicite O festivi, and saturati potu, etc. Arn^b. ad v^r.
Gentes. lib. 2. Bib. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 161. B.
profane them, or hear them thus profaned in the Playhouse? With what
assurance can they call upon the Name of God, of Christ for mercy at the last,
who delightfully resort unto those Theaters, where they ar^ frequently
blasphemed and profaned now? Can any thus abuse, pollute Gods holy Name, or
Word; and yet hope for consolation, for absolution, for salvation from them at
the last? Can any thus blaspheme the Name of God, of Christ, or patiently
endure the audience of such blaspemies as are belched out against them on the
Stage; and yet dare to invocate them in their greatest exigencies? Certainly,
Gal. 6.7.
God will not, Christ will not thu^ be mocked. Let not such blasphemers then as
these Iam. 17. Psalm. 11.6. Romans 2.8.9.
expect any thing from Gods hands, but wrath, and vengeance, the only portion
of their Cup, unless they speedily repent of these their damnable, profane,
blasphemous Stage Plays, which thus abuse the sacred Scriptures, in a
transcendent manner.

Thirdly, as the historical passages of the Old Testament, so the history of
Christ's death, and the celebration of his blessed Sacraments, are often times
profaned in theatricall enterludes, especially by Popish Priests and Jesuits
in foreign parts: See Missale Romanum. Sacerdotale, Pontificiale and
Ceremoniale Roma number. Their several Books. De Missa, and Ritibus Celebrandi
Missam. D. R^inolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p. 161. Doct. Beard of
Antichrist, par. 3. cap. 8. s^ct. 4. B. Jewel, Morney, Su^cliffe, Morton,
White, and others, in their Treatises against the Mass, accordingly.
Who, as they have turned the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood into a
Masse-play; so they have likewise trans-formed their Mass it-selfe, together
with the whole story of Christ's birth, his life, his Passion, and all other
parts of their Ecclesiastical service into Stage Plays. This, not only D.
Reinolds Overthrow of Stage plays. p 161. and De Idolol. Romans^ Ecclesiael. 2.
c. 3. sect. 29. p. 403. Doct. Beard of Antichri^t, part. 3. cap. 8. sect. 4.
and the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. c. 1
Protestant Writers, but even their own Records (where the Index Epurgatorius
has not clipped their tongues) do largely testify, to their shame. AEneas
Silvius, surnamed See Pla^ina, Ana^tatius, Hopperus, Stella, Tritemius and
Antoninus, in vita Pij secundi and AEneae Sylvii perfixed to his Works.
Pope Pius the second: as the Records of himself, Epistol. lib. 1. Epist.
15.23.45, 50. and 92. inter opera sua, Basileae 1551.
that he was much given to Wine, to Ven^ry, Belly-cheere and other beastly
lusts,. Epist. lib. 1. Epist^ 15. page 510.511.
and that he begot a Bastard son on the body of an E^glish woman, whose
chastity he often solicited before he could prevail; in which fact, which son
of his, he much rejoiced, as his own Epistle witnesses: such was his Pius
Papal chastity. So he is not ashamed to publish to the world; that in his
younger years Epist^ 1. Epist. 97. p. 586^ and Epist. 395. p. 869.
he penned the wanton Comaedie of Crisid, with other am^rous Poems: and in his
elder days in honor of Corpus Christi Feast, he caused a Show or Stage Play
to be acted, Commentariorum de Rebus a se gestis. lib. 8. Nonne in spectaculo,
quo festum Corporis Christi se honorasse gloriatur Papa Pius secundus, aul^
regi^ ^^^lestis expressa, memoratur, and sedens in maiestate Deus^ Virginemque
Matrem e sepulchro assump^am aeterno Patri Filius obtulisse dicitur? Ergo and
histrio, personam ac imaginem Dei Patris referens, Deus aeternusque P^ter
appellatur stylo Papali D. Reinolds De Romanae Ecclesiae. Idololatria lib. 2.
c. 3. sect. 29. p. 403
wherein was represented the Court, of the King of Heaven, and God the Father
sitting in Majesty: together with God the Son, (O blasphemy, O prophannesse
beyond all expression) offering up the blessed Virgin his Mother, taken out of
her sepulcher, unto his aeternall Father. What wickedness^, what blasphemy
like to this, as thus to Deifie a Player, and to bring the very Throne, the
Majesty of God himself, yea, the persons of the eternal Father, Son, and
God of glory on the Stage. But peace, it was an vn-erring Pope that did it, and
so perchance it was Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo
virtutes, tenetur Ecclesia credere vitia ess^ virtutes, and virtutes malas,
nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare. Bellar. l. 4. D^ Romans Pontif. c. 5.
Carerius De potest. Pont. l. 1. c. 23. numb. 16. More work for a Mass Priest.
number. 1^. page 14.
no sin at all in him. Honorius Augustodunensis, an Author of some credit
among the Romanists, in his Book, In Bibliotheca Patrum Coloniae, 1618. Tom.
12. pars 1. page 1028.
De Antiquo Ritu Missarum. lib. 1. cap. 83. the title of which chapter is, De
Tragaedijs: to signify to the world, that the Popish Mass is now no other but
a Tragic Play, writes thus, Sciendum, quod hi qui Tragaedias in Theatris
recitabant, actus pugnantium gestibus populo repraesentabant. Sic Tragicus
noster pugnam Christi populo Christiano in Theatro Ecclesiae gestibus suis
r^praesentat, eique victoriam redemptionis suae inculcat. Itaque cum Presbyter
(Orate) dicit, Christum pro nobis in agonia positum exprimit, c^m Apostolos
orare monuit. Persecretum silentium, significat Christum v^lut agnum sine voce
ad victimam ductum. Per manuum expansionem, de^ignat Christi in cruce
extensione^. Per cantu^ praefationis, exprimit clamore^ Christi in cruce
pende^tis, etc. Idem Ibidem.
We must know that those who rehearsed Tragedies on Theaters, did represent
unto the people by their gestures, the acts of fighters. So our Tragedian (thus
has he styled the Mass Priest, how aptly the ensuing words inform us)
represents unto the Christian people by his gestures, the combat of Christ in
the Theater of the Church, and inculcates into them the victory of his
Redemption. Therefore when the Presbyter says, (Pray ye) he acts or
expresses Christ, who was cast into an agony for us, when he admonished his
Apo^tles to pray. By his secret silence, he signifies Christ led to the
slaughter as a Lamb without a voice. By the stretching out of his hands, he
denotes the extension of Christ upon the Cross. By the Song of the Pr^face, be
expresses the cry of Christ, hanging upon the Cross, etc. Lo here a Roman
Mass Priest becomes a Player, and in stead of preaching, of reading, acts
Christ's Passion in the Mass; which this Author styles, a Tragedy. Lodovicus
Vives complains, Atqui mos nunc est, quo tempore sacr^^ c^lebratur Christi
morte sua genus humanum liberantis, ludos nihil prope a scenicis illis
veteribus differentes populo ex^ibere: etiam si aliud non dixero satis turpe
existimabit quisquis audiet, ludos fieri in re maxim seria. Ibi ridetur Judas
quam potest ineptissima jactans, dum Christum prodit. Ibi Discipuli fugiunt
militibus perse quentibu^, nec fine cachinnis acto^rum and spectatorum. Ibi
Petrus auriculam rescindit Malcho, applaudente pullata turba, ceu ita
vindicetur Christi captivitas. Et post paulum, qui tam strenue modo dimicarat,
rogationibus vnius ancillulae territus abnegat magistrum, ridente multitudine
ancillam interrogantem, and exibilante Petrum negantem. Inter tot ludentes,
i^ter tot cachinnos and ineptias solus Christus est serius and severus: cum que
affectus conatur maestos elicere, nescio quo pacto, non ibi tantum, sed etiam
ad sacra frigisacit, magno scelere atque impietate, non tam eorum qui vel
spectant v^lagunt, qu^m sacerdot^m qui eiusmodi ^ieri curant. Lodovicus Vives.
Not^ in Augustinum De Civit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. D See Francis De Croy his
first Confirmity. chap. 19. page 48. and D. Reinolds overthrow of Stage Plays.
p. 161^ accordingly.
that it was the custom of the Priests and Papists in his age, when as the
solemnity of Christ's death was celebrated, to exhibit Plays unto the people,
not much different from those ancient Pagan Ent^rludes; of which practice
(says he) though I say no more, whosoever shall hear, he will repute it
discommendable enough, even in this regard, that Plays should be made in a
thing most serious, There Judas is derided, uttering the most foolish things he
can devise, whiles he betrayeth Christ. There the Disciples fly, the soldiers
pursuing them, and that not without the dirision and laughter, both of the
Actors and Spectators. There Peter cu^s off the ear of Malchus, the ignorant
multitude applauding him, as if by this means the captivity of Christ were
sufficiently revenged. And a little after, he who had fought so valiantly,
being affrighted with the questions of one little Girl, denies his Master, the
multitude deriding in the mean time the Maid that questions him, and hissing
a^ Peter who denies him. Among so many Players, among so many shoutes and
ridiculous fooleries Christ only is serious and grave: and when as he
endeavors to eliciate sorrowful affections; I know not by what means, not
there only, but likewise at the Sacraments and holy Ordinances he waxes cold,
with the great wickedness and impiety, not so much of those who behold or act
these things, as of the Priests, who appoint these things to be done. Lo here
their own Author declaiming against Popish Priests for their frequent acting
of Christ's Passion, in the very selfsame manner, as the Pagans of Old did use
to act the lives and practices of their Devill-gods. A sufficient testimony,
how little Papists really estimate the bitter Passion of our blessed Savior,
since they make a common Play or pastime of it. This passage of Vives has so
offended the histrionicall Mass Priests, that Eodem lib. in Scholiis cap. 27.
Deleantur illa verba. Atqui mo^ nunc est, etc. vsque ad ^inem Annotationis.
Index Librorum Expurgat. 1601. fol. 4.
Gaspar Quiroga in his Index Expurgatorius, commands it to be expunged out of
all new Impressions of Saint Augustine, and the Divines of Lovan, in their
Impression of Saint Augustines Works, Antwerp^ 1575. and in other of their
Editions since that time, have razed it out accordingly, that so they might
still proceed to Act Chri^ts Passion without control. To pass by De vita and
honestate Ecclesiasticorum lib 2. cap. 22.
Ioannes Langhecrucius, a Popish Author, who makes mention of this playing of
Christ's sufferings, and seems for to approve it. As also to pretermit the 1
Ed. 6. c. 1.
Statute of primo Edw. 6. chap. 1. which informs us, That diverse Papists ^ad
then of late marveilou^ly abused, contemptuously depraved, despised and
reviled, the most holy Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, in sundry rimes,
songs, Plays, and Jests; calling it by such vile and unseemely words as
Christian ears do much abhor to hear rehearsed: an uparalleld blasphemy
and prophannesse: The provincial Popish Apud Surium Tom. 4. p. 8^3.854.
Council of Colen under Adolphus, in the year 1549. cap. 17. and 22. not
only impliedly allows the acting of sacred histories, but likewise expressly
Records; Nihil prope tam sanctum quod secularium hominum vanitas non trahat in
abusum. Ecclesia de thesauro corporis Christi qui dum quaereret salutem nostram
in medio po^uli versatus est, and vniversalem Iudaea^ circumambulavit, docens,
and egrotos sana^s, discipulis concomitantibus: quamobrem and sanctorum
reliquias, and imaginies eorum qui vestigia ejus secuti sunt, simul
circumferimus, significantes illos nunc cum ipso regnare and triumphare in
co^lis. Quae memoria debet pijs esse jucunda and laeta. Verum huc saecularis
hominum stultorum vanitas irrepsit, and adhibentur etiam ludi prophani and
scurril^s magno strepitu, ac quasi ad bellum procedendum esset, tympana
pulsantur, and ociosa spectacula eduntur, rebus istis non co^gruentia: quibus
populus delectatus, a rebus quae processione aguntur auocatur. Mandamusid
circo, etc. Ibidem.
That when as the Church carried about the consecrated host of Christ's body
and blood in long processi^ns (the reason of which processions are there at
large expressed) the secular vanity of worldly men did creep into those
processi^ns; in so much, that they joined with them profane and scurrilous
Plays with a great noise; and as if they were going to War, Drums and
Fiffes were struck up, and idle spectacles which suite not with these things
were exhibited: with which the people being delighted, they were wholly
avocated from the things done in procession, Whence this Council commands all
Clergy men to absent themselves from such processions, which were turned into
Plays. Yea, the Popish Apud Bochellum Deercla Ecclesiae. Gal. lib. 6. Tit. 19.
cap. 20.21 23. p. 1028.
Synodus Carnotensis, an. 1526. and Synodus Turvinra. 1583. informs us, That
Catholic Priests, in the days of the first Masses of their new Presbyters,
after their merry Feasts, their great and unhallowed banquets, did go forth in
public to exhibit most gross unchaste Comaedies to the people, and that in
the Feast of Saint Nicholas, I^nocents, and on other Festivals, they did put on
Visars, and act some ridiculous or foolish thing, (and sometimes the Passion of
our Savior, or these of their Sai^ts and Martyrs either in their Churches or
some other place. It is true, that some few Italian Bishops, being ashamed of
this diabolical practice, of the Sea Ormerod his Pagano-Papismus and Polydor
Virgil. De Inventor. Rerum lib. 5. cap. ^. accordingly.
Paganizing Church of Rome, in acting Christ's Passion, did in a Council at
Millaine, under their Archbishop Borrhomaeus, in the year of our Lord, 1566.
decree for their Province; Statuimus vt salvato^is passio deinceps nec in sacro
nec in pro fano loco agatur, etc. Council. Mediolanense: 1. Constitu^. part 1.
cap. De Actionibus and repr^sentationibus sacris quoted by Johannes
Langhecrucius. De vita et honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 22. p. 324. and
by D. Reinolds, in his Overthrow of Stage Plays p. 161.
that the Passion of our Savior should not be hereafter acted in any sacred or
profane place whatsoever, because of the scandal which it did occasion: But
yet to qui^ the credit of their Church which might justly be taxed for
approving this ungodly practice, Turpiora sunt vitia cum virtutum specie
caelantur. Hieronym. Epist. 14.
they put this fair gloss upon this so execrable villainy; that the acting of
Christ's Passion, however it came to be abused, was a custom religiously
practiced and brought in at first: Pie introducta consuetudo repraesentandi
populo venerandam Christi domini passionem, etc.
A most irreligious evasion of ambitious spirits, who would rather audaciously
justify their greatest errors to their greater infamy; Sed qui primas non
potuit habere sapientiae, secundas habeat parts modestiae; ut qui non valuit
omnia impaenitenda dicere, saltem paeniteat quae cognoverit dicenda non fuisse.
Augustini Prologus in Retract. libr. 9.
then ingeniously acknowledge them to their praise. But has his provincial
Council or Apud Bochellum lib. 6 Tit. 19.19. c. 20, 21, 23:
Synodi^s Carnotensis, 1526. and Synod^^s Turonica, 1583. which are much to the
like effect, abolished this abuse out of the Antichristian Church of Rome? No
verily, for the Jesuits themselves are not ashamed to publish to the world,
Epist. ^apanic. 18. Ioannis Firnandis Bongo. Doct. Reinolds Overthrow of
Stage Plays: p. 161. and De Romanae Ecclesiae Idololatria l. 2. c. 3. sect.
29^ p. 403
that in stead of preaching the Word of God^ the fall of Adam and Eve, with
their exile out of Paradise, and the history of our Savior, they acted and
played them among their Indian Proselites. A true Jesuitical practice,
beseeming well this histrionicall infernal Society, Romans 1.25.
who have turned the very truth of God into a lie, and the Isti templ^ sua in
theatr^ vertunt, and sanctum Dei verbum in ludicras fabulas transformant. D^
Reinolds. De Romanae Ec^les. Idololatria. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 29. p 403.
whole service of God into an Interlude. And no wonder is it that Papists and
Jesuits thus turn Christ's Passion into a mere ridiculous Stage Play, (a
practice yet in use among them, especially on Witness the acting of Christ's
Passion at Elie house in Holborne when Gundemore lay there, on Good Friday at
night, at which there were thousands present.
Good Friday:) since Quantum nobis, ac nostro caetui profuerit ^a de Christo
fabula, satis est saeculis omnibus notum. They are the words of this
blasphemous Pope: apud Balaeum. De scriptoribus Britt. Centuria 8. page 636.
Pope Leo the tenth, (such was his unerring pious blasphemy) reputed the whole
history of our Savior, a mere cheating gai^efull Fable; as we may justly
sear these acting Priests and Jesuits do, or else they durst not thus to
play it, to abuse it as we see they do. And as ^hey thus act the sacred
Passion of our blessed Savior, even so ( if Quoted in John S^owes Survey of
London, cap. 16. page 142.
Fitz-stephen Solemus vel more priscorum spectaculum edere populo, recitare
Comaedias, item in templis vita^ divorum ac martyria repraesentare: in quibus
ut cun^tis par sit voluptas, qui recitant, verna culam tantum linguam vsurpant,
etc. De Inventor. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2. page 386. See Francis de Croy, his
first Conformity. Cap. 19. page 48. and Bochellus D^creta Eccles. Gal^ l, 6.
Tit. 19. cap^ 20, 21, 23.
Polydor Virgil, Bochellus, or Francis de Croy, may be credited) they act the
lives, the miracles, the martyrdomes torments and legions of their Saints upon
their solemn Festivals, and that within their Churches in their Mother tongue;
not out of any devotion, but for mirth anb recreation sake, after the manner of
the ancient Pagans. Saint Augustine, writing of the honor (not of the
adoration, a thing not then in use) which the Christians gave the Martyrs in
his age; informs us; Absit, ut eos quanuis Deos habeant, sanctis Martyribus
nostris, quos tamen Deos non habemus, vlla ex part audeant co^parare, Sic enim
non constituimus sacerdotes, nec offerimus sacrificia martyribus nostris quia
incongruum, indebitum, illicitum ^^t, atque vni Deo tantummodo debitum: ut nec
criminibus suis, nec ludis eos turpissimis oblectamus, vbi vel flagitia isti
celebrant Deorum suorum, si cum homines essent talia commiserunt, vel consicta
delectamenta daemonu^ noxioru^, si homines non fuerunt. Aug. De Civ. Dei l. 8.
c. 27.
that they did neither exhilerate them with their crimes; nor yet with filthy
Plays, with which the Gentiles did usually delight their Idol-gods. Yet our
novellizing Romanists, ( who Antiquitatem jactatis, and de Die nove vivitis.
Tert. Apol. Adv. Gentes.
vaunt so much of antiquity, though their whole Religion, (wherein they varry
from us) be but novelty) abandoning the pious practice of these Primitive
Christians, (conscious to themselves no doubt, that many of their late
Canonized Tiburne-Martyrs, were no other, no better then the devil-gods of
Pagans, See Clemens Alexandr. Oration Adhort. ad Gentes. Athanasius contr.
Gentiles I. Tertullian. Apologia advers. Gentes. Tacianus Oration advers.
Graecos. Arnobius Adversus Gentes lib. Lactantius De Origin Erroris lib.
Nazianzen. Oration 47. and 48. Augustine De Civit. D^i. lib. 1, 2, 3, and 4.6.7.
and 8 accordingly.
who were oft-times deified for their notorious villainies, as Popish Saints are
for their matchless treasons;) have not only See Officia beatae Mariae and
sanctorum, in all Popish Portuasses, Missals and Prayer books Bishop. Mortons
Protestant Appeal. lib. 2. cha. 12. John Whites Way to the true Church, sect.
39.
adored them as gods, erecting temples to their names and worship: but likewise
solemnized their anniversary commemorations, by personating in their several
Temples, the blasphemous lying Legends of their lives and miracles, (so fit for
no place as the Stage it self) in some theatricall shows; adoring and
honoring them in no other manner, then the very Pagans did their Devil-gods,
with who^ these ^ell-saints are most aptly See O^merod his Paganopapismus
semblance 1. to. 51. Ludovicus Vives Notae in August. De Civit. Dei l. 8. c.
27. John Bales Acts of English Votaries: in the Praeface, Doct. John Whites Way
to the true Church. sect. 39. Numb. 4.
paralleld. Such honor, such worship give the Papists to our blessed Savior,
to these their idolized Saints, as thus to turn, not only Ad theatrum potius
templa t^ansfert^, in scenis Religionum istarum secreta tradantur, and ut nihil
praetermittat improb^tas, histriones facite sacerdotes. Julius Firmicus De
Errore Profan^rum Religionum. c. 13. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 4. p. 112. See Doct.
Reinolds De Romanae Eccle. Idololatria. l. 2. c. 3. s^ct. 29. p. 403.
their Priests into Players, their Temples, into Theaters; but even their very
miracles, lives, and sufferings into Plays. To leave the Papists and close up
this Scene. It is Nicholaus Cabasila. De vita in Christo. lib. 2. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 14. p. 112^ C.D.E.F^
recorded of one Porph^ry a Pagan Stage Player, that he grew to such an height
of impiety, as he adventured to baptize himself in ^est upon the Stage, of
purpose to make the people laugh at Christian Baptism, and so to bring both it
and Christianity into contempt: and for this purpose he plunged himself into a
vessel of water which he had placed on the Stage, calling aloud upon the
Trinity: at which the Spectators fell into a great laughter. But lo the
goodness of God to this profane miscreant; it pleased God to show such a
demonstration of his power and grace upon him, that this Post quam vero, id quo
per ludum baptizatus est, non Ch^istianus solum illico est redditus, sed ad
ipsorum quo que martyrum societatem aggreg^tus, etc. I^^dem Ibidem.
sporting baptism of his, became a serious lauer of regeneration to him: in so
much that of a graceless Player, he became a gracious Christian, and not long
after, a constant Martyr. The Nicholaus Cabasila. Ibidem.
like I find registered of one Ardalion, another Heathen Actor, who in derision
of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, baptized himself in jest upon the Stage,
and by that means became a Christian; Gods mercy turning this his wickedness
to his eternal good: not any ways to justify Plays or Players, or to
countenance this his audacious prophannesse; but even miraculously to publish
to the world the power of his own holy Ordinaces, which by the cooperation of
his Spirit, are even then able to regenerate those Psalm. 68.18. Acts
2.13.37.38. Acts 9.1^ to. 22.
who most contemn them, when they are used but in scorn. These notable
histories, with the premises, sufficiently evidence, the subject matter of
Stage Plays to be oft-times impious, sacrilegious, blasphemous: from whence I
raise this ninth Argument.

That whose subject matter is impious, sacrilegious, blasphemous, must needs be
sinful and unlawful unto Christians. Witness Levit. 24.11. to 17.2 Kings
19.6.22. Isay 37.6.23. c. 52.5. Matthew. 12.31. Luke 22.65. 1 Timothy 1.20,

But such oft-times, is the subject matter of Stage Plays: witness the
premises.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and unlawful unto Christians.

SCENA SEXTA.
Sixthly, Stage Plays are for the most part satyrically invective against the
persons, callings, offices and professions of men; but more especially against
Religion and Servi Dei sunt quos Diabolus infestat; Christiani sunt, quos
Antichristus impugnat. Neque enim quaerit illos quos j^m suos fecit. Inimicus
and hostis Ecclesiae, quos alienavit ab Ecclesia and Ioras duxit, vt captivos
and victos contemnit: eos pergit lacesse^e in quibus Christum cernit habitare.
Cyprian. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Religious Christians, the chiefest objects of the Devils malice. From whence I
deduce this tenth Play-oppugning Argument.

That whose style, whose subject matter is ordinarily satyricall and invective,
being fraught with bitter scoffs or jests against Religion, Virtue, and
Religious Christians; against the persons, callings, offices, or honest
professions of men; must needs be odious and unlawful unto Christians.

But such is the ordinary style and subject matter of most popular Stage Plays.

Therefore they must needs be odious and unlawful unto Christians.

The Major needs little proof, since God himself injoynes all Christians,
Ephesians. 4.31.32.
to put away all bitterness, anger, wrath, clamor, and evil speaking, with
all maliciousness: to be courteous and tenderhearted one toward another; 1
Pet. 3.9.
not rendering railing for railing; Col. 3.12, ^3, 14.
but forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any one has any
quarrel against another, (much less then when as there are no personal
variances between men) even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven them, The
Scripture requires, Iam. 3.17.18.
that Christians should be patient, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy, and good fruits without grudging or calumny, without hypocrysie
or backbiting, 1 Cor. 5.11 c. 6.10. 2 Pet. 11^
without railing or slanders, especially against Isay 5.20.
godly men, whose lives, whose persons, whose graces should no where be
traduced, much less upon the Stage. Men's persons Genesis 1.26. c. 5.1. c. 9.6.
are the work and image of G^d himself; their honest callings, offices and
employments, the very 1 Cor. 7.20. to 25. Romans 13.1.2.
Ordinances of God: their graces, their holiness (to omit their credit and
good names, Prou. 22.1. Eccles. 7.1.
which are better then precious ointment, yea, more desirable by far than
great riches) the very beams John 1.16. Mal. 4.2.
that flow from the Sun of Righteousness: Wherefore, to personate, deride,
revile, or scoff at all, or any of these, upon the Theater, Prou. 14.11
must needs be sinful; because it not only brings them into contempt and
scorn, but also offers open Prou. 17.5.
indignity to God himself, from whom they issue.

The Minor is abundantly evident. First, by the express testimony of profane
Author^: It is Plato in Socratis Apologia. Diogenes La^rtius lib 2 Socrates
AElian Variae. Hist. lib. 2. c. 13. Theodoret De Activ^ virtute. l. 12^ p. 428.
Plutarchi Plato fol. 343. E. Ludovicus Vives. Notae in August. De Civit. Dei^
l. 2. c. 9.
storied of Aristophanes, that scurrilous carping Comaedian, that he personally
traduced and abused virtuous^ Socrates on the Stage, by the instigation of some
lewd Athenians^ who maligned him for his resplendent virtues; accusing him
both for a trifler, an Atheist, who did neither know nor reverence the gods; of
purpose to bring him into derision with the people. Plutarchi Alcebiades.
Horace Epist. l. 3. Epist. 1. p 282. Suidae Eupolis: Ludovicus Vives Notae in
Au^ August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 8.
Eupolis the Comaedian, did the like to that famous Grecian Worthy,
Alcebiades, for which he commanded him to be drowned in the Sea. Et quibus
occupatio est in proximorum peccata, vt subsannatoribus and Comicis: malediti
enim quodammodo ipsi sunt, and procliues ad enunciandum, etc. Rhetoricae lib.
2. c. 6. p. 136.
Aristotle writes of Comaedians, that they are wholly occupied in surveying, in
deriding the vices of other men, which they proclaim upon the Stage, whence he
ranks them in the number of traducers, and evill^ speakers. Oration de Pace. p.
^21. and ad Nicoclem. p. 46.47.
Isocrates blames the Athenians much, for preferring Comaedians who did nothing
but carpe at them, and blaze abroad their vices to their infamy, before such
who best deserved at their hands. Diogenianus in Symposia. l. 7. Quaest. 8.
Plutarch, reputes it an unbefitting thing, to entertain Players, or their
Comedies at any solemn Feasts; because their virulent invectives, scoffs, and
jests, would occasion sudry quarrels and debates. The Plutarchi Lacornica
Insti^ta.
Lacedamonians banished all Stage Plays, Players, and Play-Poets, out of their
Territories; because they could not endure to hear their laws carped at, or
spoken against in jest or earnest. Tacitus Annal. l. 1. cap. 14 l. 4. c. 3.
Dion. Cassius R^m. histor. l^b. 57. p. 798. Alexander^ ab Alexandro. Genesis
Dierum l 3 cap. 9. Marcus Aurelius cap. 14.
Tiberius exiled all Stage Players out of Italy, by reason of those many
commotions which their insolent personal invective Plays occasioned. To pass
by that famous Plutarchi Pericles.
Gracian P^ricles, who was often times personated and traduced on the Theater:
Hiserias saltationes ridicule suis gestibus imitabantur. ^as per ludibrium
depravantes, vt spectatoribus risum moverent. Ex triumphis autem quia^ guntur
satis liquet hos lusus cavillatorios and satyricos apud Romanos iam indo a
priscis saeculis receptos fuisse. Licet enim ijs qui triumphum prosequuntur
iambos and dicteria ia cere in illustrissimos quosque viros, atque adeo in
ipsos imporatores; quemadmodum Athenis olim ijs qui plaustris vecti pompam
prosequebantur obvios quosque scommatibus impetere licebat. Antiqu. Romanorum
lib. 7. sect. 9. p. 713. See Bulingerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 9.10. and. 58.
accordingly.
Dionysius Ha^^icarnasseus describing the ancient Enterludes of the Romans,
records: that Cavillatorie and satyricall Plays were of old received among the
Romans: in which Plays it was lawful for the Actors to cast Iambickes,
scoffs and floutes upon the most illustrious persons, yea, upon the Emperors
themselves: as it was lawful heretofore among the Athenians, for those who
accompanied their Triumphs and Shows in Wagons, to scoff at any they met
withal, which liberty of ^c^f^ing, (as Quaerere conabar quate lascivia major.
His^oret in ^udisliberiorque Iocus. Sed mihi succurret numen non esse severu^.
Aptaque delicijs munera far Deam, etc. Fastorum. ^ 5. p. 89.
Ovid testifies) was likewise used in the Floralian Stage Plays. So that
invective Plays were common, both with the Romans and Athenians. Dipnosophorum
l. ^. c. 5.6.
Athenaeus Records: That Comaedians abound in personal scoffs, reproaches,
taunts; which are frequent in the Comaedies of Aristophanes: Yea, Eupolis atque
Cratinus, Aristophanesque Poetae, atque alij quorum Comaedia prisca viror^m
est: Si quis erat dignus describi quod malus, aut fur; Quod maechus foret,
siccarius, aut alio qui Famosus; multa cum liberate notabant. Omnes hi metuunt
versus, odere Poetas, Faenum habet in cornu, long fugit, dummodo risum Ex
cutiat sibi, non hic cuiquam parcet amico. Horace Sermonum. lib. 1. Sat. 4.
Horace the Poet, is very copious in describing the personal invectives of
Plays in former times, ^escennia per hunc inventa licentia morem. Versibus
alternis approbria rustica Iudit: Lib^rtasque recurrentes accepta per annos,
Lusit amabiliter donec iam saeuus apertum In rabi^m ver^i caepit, iocus, and
per honestas Ire domus impune minax: doluere cruento Dente laccessiti: fuit
inract is quoque circa Condition super communi quinetiam lex, Paenaque lata;
malo quae nollet, carmine quenquam Describi, vertere modum formidine f^stis^ Ad
been dicendum, delectandum que reducti. Idem Epist. l. 2 Ep^st 1. p. 282. ^ut
immunda crepent ignominio^aque dicta. Successit verus his Comaedia non sine
multa Laud^: sed in vitium libertas excidit, and vim Dignam lege regi: lex est
accepta, chorusque Turpiter obtinuit sublato jure no cendi. Idem. De Art
Poetica p. 304.306. Bullingerus ^e Theatro. l. 1. c. 9. and 58. accordingly.
especially the Fescennia, and the ancient Comedy, which spared neither friends
nor foes; whose personal invectives grew so excessive, so odious and
intolerable, that the Romans inacted a Law against them, to suppress their
vile abuses ^n this kind. This concurrent testimony then of Pagan Authors, is
a sufficient justification of my Minors truth. Secondly, as these heathen
Writers, even so the Fathers, with sundry ancient and modern Authors do
positively affirm the truth of this assumption. Witness Philo Iudaeus, his
punctual testimony, De vit^ Contemplativa; page 1209. Clemens Alexandrinus
Oration Adhortatoria ad Gentes, fol. 8, 9. Tatianus Oration adversus Graecos,
Bibl. Patr^m Tom. 2. p. 180.181. Indo maledicta conuitia sine iustitia, odij
etiam suffragia sine merito amoris. Quicquid optant, quicquid abominantur
extrancum ab illis est: ira and amor apud illis ociosus, and odium iniustum
sine cau^a. Deus cert^ cum causa prohibet odisse, qui inimicos diligi iubet.
Deus etiam cum causa maledicere non sinit, qui maledicentes benedici praecipit.
Sed Circo quid amarius? vbi nec principibus quidem aut (...) vibus suis
parcu^t. Quicquid horum quibus circus furit nus qua^ compe^it sa^ctis, ideo nec
in Circo. Ibid.
Tertullian De spectaculis cap. 15, 16. Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Donato, and de Spectaculis lib. Arnobius adversus Gentes. lib. 4. p. 149.150.
and lib. 7. p. 230. to 242. Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 2. Ambrose De officijs, lib.
1. cap. 23. Chrysostom homil. 38. in Matthew. Nazianzen. Oration 48. p. 792. D.
797. D. Augustine De Civitate Dei lib. 2. cap. 4.5. and 9. and ^ Sancti
Valeriani homilia 6. De otiosis verbis, Bibliotheca Patrum: Tom. 5. pars 3. p.
482.583. Ludovicus Vives, Notae in August. De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4.5.8.9.
Bulli^gerus De Theatro lib. 1. cap. 9.10. and 58. Gosson in his Plays
confuted, Action 2. The third Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, p.
116.117. Doctor John Whites Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 24. 1615. section 11.
(to which I may add^ our own Statutes of 1. Edw. 6. chapter 1. of 2. and 3.
Edw. 6. chap^er 1. of 1. Eliz. chapter 2. which precisely prohibit the
satyricall depravi^g, traducing, or derogation of the Common Prayer-Booke, and
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in any Enterludes, Plays or Rimes, (in
which kind Plays had been formerly peccant) under severe penalties.)
Cavendum est ergo dilectissimi ne scenico sermon alter altorum laedar, and
theatralibus verbis verecundia^ fratri laesae aestimationis incutiat, etc.
Ibidem.
All these, I say, with sundry others which I pretermit, expr^sly tax^, yea,
utterly condemn all Plays, in regard of these their personal invectives
against particular persons, functions, offices, callings, and the like,
concurring fully in my Minors truth.

But to pass by Authorities, our own particular experience, is a thou^and
witnesses to this Assumption. Survay we all our modern Stageplayes with an
impartial eye, Gosson, Play^s confuted Action ^. The third blast of Retrait
from Plays and Theaters. p. 116.117. accordingly^
There is hardly one of them among an hundred, wherein Religion or religious
men, or some particular persons, offic^rs, callings, professions, are not
notoriously, satyrically derided, personated, traduced, defamed, by such Tamdiu
quisquis sua peccata ignorant quam diu curios^ aliena considerat. Qui semetipsum
aspicit, non quaerit quid in alijs frequenter reprehendat, sed in semetipso
quid lugeat. Bernard. De Interiori Domo c. 42.
who neither consider nor bewail their own iniquities, whiles they curiously
survay, and maliciously divulge the faults of others. Not to particularize
those late new scandalous invective Plays, wherein Gundemore, the late Lord
Admirall^ Lord Treas^rer, and others.
sundry persons of place and eminence have been particularly personated,
jeared, abused in a gross and scurrilous manner; the Scena joci mo r^mberioris
habet. Ovid. Fastorem l. 4. p. 81. Aut immunda crepent ignominiosaque dicta.
Horace de Art Poetica p. 304. Nullum invenire Prologum potuisset novus Quem di
ceret, ni^i haberet cui malediceret. Terentij Phormio, Prologus.
frequent scoffs, reproaches, scandals, Satyrs, and disgraceful passages that
are darted out in Stageplayes, against Ministers, Lawyers, Courteours,
Physicians, Merchants, Citizens, Tradesmen of all sorts; against Judges,
Iu^tices, Majors, and such like Officers; but especially against all zealous
practical professors of Religion, Dat veniam co^uis^ vexat censura columbas.
Iuvenal. Satyr. 2.
who seldom escape the Players lash: (by means of which, both Governors,
Government, Religion, and Devotion are brought into contempt^) do abundantly
confirm the Satyricall invectivenesse of Stageplayes. Which vicious quality is
sufficient to make them odious unto Christians.

Objection. If any here object in defense of Stage Plays; See Haywoods
Apology for Actors. The third blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, p.
116, 117.
that they inveigh not against particular persons, offic^rs, or professions;
but only against their vices; which is not only law^ull, but useful, but
commendable.

Answer. To this I answer. First, that the Objection it self is merely false;
since not only Cum nulli hominum generi aut professioni ab improbis isto
sermon parcatur, ab ^mnibus tamen ad spectaculum convenitur. Cyprian de
spectacu^is lib.
Cyprian, and the fore-quoted Authors, but even Players and Play-haunters
themselves can testify, that all sorts of persons, of professors are abus^d
often on the Stage: their virtues, their graces being there more frequently
censured, derided, traduced, then their vices. Secondly, admit the Objection
true; yet for See Gosson Plays con^uted, Action 2. The third blast of R^trait
from Plays, p. 117. Doctor John Whites Sermon at Pa^ls Cross^ March 24. An.
1615. sect. 11 accordingly.
Players to censure, to proclaim men's vices or abuses on the Theater, must
needs be sinful. First, because they have no authenticke commission, either
from God or man to do it. For though Levit 19.17 Prove. 24.24.25. Matthew. 18.15.
Heb. 3.13
every private man may secretly admonish or reprove another for his sins, as
opportunity shall require: yet Matthew. 18.16.17. Romans 13.3.4. Isay 58.1. Romans 14
3.4.2 Tim. 4.2. 1 Timothy 5.20
none must publicly censure sins or sinners, but Magistrates, Ministers, and
such like public persons, who are deputed by God himself to this very office;
upon which no common^ Players must encroach. Secondly, because Players are of
all others, the unmeetest pers^ns to reprove men's vices. Matthew. 7.3.4, 5. Romans
2.3, 21, 22, 23. Accusare viti^ o^ficium est bonorum hominum and ben^volorum.
Quod cum malefici agunt, alienas parts agunt, etc. August. lib. 2. De Ser^mone
Domini in monte, cap. 30. Non amplius possumus increpare cos quia nobis
reguntur, cum ips^ quoque ^adem Febre teneamur, and ipsi egemus medicina, quos
Deus posuit ut alijs mederemur. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 10. Tom. 4. Col. 9^5. C.
Quomodo nos vitam corrigere valeamus alienam, qui negligimus nostram^ Gregor.
Magn. homil. 17. in Evangelia.
He, who will effectually rebuke the sins, the enormities of other men, must
be ^ree from open crimes himself; else his reproves will want authority, and
rather exasperate or encourage the reproved in their sinful courses, then
reclaim them from them. See Act. 4. Scene 1.
Now Players are commonly the most criminous and enormious persons of all
others, Damnant foris quod intus operantur, admittunt libenter quod cum
admiserint, criminantur. Turpis turpes infamat, and evasisse se conscium
credit, qua^i conscientia satis non sit. Idem in publi^^ accusatores, in oculto
rei, in semetipsos pariter censores and nocentes, Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2.
Epist. 2. Donato.
being for the most part deeply guilty of all those vices, those abuses which
they condemn in any: Therefore their reproves are vain and fruitless.
Thirdly, because Players are always peccant in the manner of their reproves.
He, who reprehends another faults in a lawful Christian way, must be sure to
observe these circumstances. First, he must do it Gal. 6.1. 1 Timothy 5.1.2. 2
These. 3.15.
with the spirit of m^^kenesse, of compassion, without wrath or passion.
Secondly, Mat. 10.16. Ephesians. 5.15. Col. 4.5. Prove. 2^.9, 10, 11, 12.
he must do it with discretion, in a decent, and prudent manner; having a due
respect both to the person, time, and place, to the vice or fault reproved.
Thirdly, he must do it Levit. 19.17. Gal. 6.1. 1 Cor. 5 5. 2 Cor. 4.5.5. 2
Cor. 7.8, 9. 2 Timothy 3.16.17. Titus. 1.13. Prove. 25.12. c. 9.89. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
2 Timothy 2 26, 27.
out of conscience, love, and friendship: with an unfeigned desire to reform
the persons, the vices reprehended; Levit. 19.17. Exodus 23.1, 2. Prove. 10.18.
Nulli detrahas, nec in co tesanctum, putes si coeteros ^aceres, Hier. Ep. 4.^,
8.
not to vent his own private spleen, ^r to disgrace the party rebuked.
Fourthly, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. Gal. 2.11, 14, 1 Timothy 5.20. Sime vis corripere
delinquentem, aperte in crepa. Quid enim prodest si alijs mala referas mea? ^i
me nesciente, peccatis meis, imo detractionibus tuis alium vulneres, and cu^
certatim omnibus narres sic singulis loquaris, quasi nulli dixeris alteri? hoc
est, non me emendare, sed vitio tuo satisfacere. Hierom. Epist. 4 c. 10.
he must openly reprove the delinquents to their faces, that so they may take
notice of their vices to reform them: not covertly behind their backs, for
this is mere detraction, not reproof: A publication of men's vices unto others
to their great disgrace; not a discovery of them to themselves for their
amendment. Now our Vice-censuring, Sinne-proclaiming Actors, ( who Dum alienos
errores emendarc nituntur, ostend^nt suos, Hierom. Epist. 28.
commonly discover, but not correct their own enormities, whiles they display
and censure others, Vae illi, qui ^uam ren^it corrigere vitam, and alienam non
desinit detrahere. Bernard. De Interi^ri Dom^. c. 42. Col. 1082. B.
which makes them truly miserable) transgress in all these circumstances.
Their reproves are always satyricall, edged with private malice, or pointed
with revenge: they are never serious, seasonable, private, discreet: Hi temere
judicant de incerti^, and facile reprehendunt, magis amant vituperare and
damnare, quam emendare atque corrigere: q^^d vitium vel superbiae est, vel
impudenti^e. August. lib. 2 de Sermon Dom. in monte cap. 30.
their aim is only men's defamation, not their reformation: sin^e they
proclai^e men's vices unto others, not lay them open to themselves: they dare
not look the delinque^ts in the face, but are always clamouring behind their
backs: their rebukes proceed not from true Christian love, which delights to
cover, not propalate and divulge menssinnes: therefore they must needs be
evil. Fourthly, (as a Doct. John Whi^es Sermon at Paul's Cross, March the 24.
Anno 1615. sect. 11.
reverend worthy of our Church observes) there is nothing more dangerous in a
state, then for the Stage and Poet to deride sin, which by the Bishops and
Pastors of the Church is gravely and severely to be reprooved; because it
causes Magistrates, Ministers, and State^men to lose their reputation, and
sin to be less feared. Lastly, admit that Players had sufficient authority
to censure the vices, the abuses of particular persons, o^ficers, and
professions (which I cannot believe they have, till they can show me an act of
State, or a Commission for it in the Scripture,) yet this is infallible, Exodus
23.1. Psalm. 15.3.
that they ought not to receive or raise an ill report of any: Genes. 21.9. 2 samuel 6.16.20. Psalm. 119^ 136.
to deride or scoff at any man's vices, and Prove. 14.9. cap. 10.23.
so to make a mock of sin, James 4.11.
or to speak evil of any one, as they do: since God himself prohibites it,
since Jude 9.
Michael the Archangel, (whose example all mu^t imitate) disputing with the
Devil about the body of Moses, durst not bring any railing accusation against
him, but said; The Lord rebuke thee: yet our desperate wicked Players ( who
Improbissimi omnium, and maxima paena digni sunt, qui d^ ijs rebusalios
ac^usare audent quibus ipsi constricti tenentur. Iso^rates, Oration d^
Permutatione page 617.
in this are worthy the severest penalty, that ^eing so superlatively vicious
themselves, they dare presume to censure others) to testify to the world, that
they are within the number of these Jude 8.18.
scoffers, and 2. Tim. 3.3.
dispisers of those who are good, which are prophesied of in the latter times;
dare open their black James 3.6.
infernal mouths, in bitter invective Enterludes, against all grace and
goodness; against the very prof^ssion and professors of Religion; against all
qualities, callings and degrees ^f men, scarce glancing lightly at their vices.
Therefore their Plays must needs be inexcusably sinful, even in this respect.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
LAstly, admit the style or subject matter of Stage Plays be no ways such, as
I have ^^^^erto demonstrated it to be; yet at the very best it is Ociosum
verbum est, quod sine vtilitate loquentis dicitur, and audientis: ut si omissis
seri^s de rebus frivolis loquamur, and fabulas narremus antiquas. Hierom. Co^.
in Matthew. l. 2. cap. 12. v. 36.37. See Theophilact. Ibidem.
but idle, frothy, superfluous, unprofitable; as vain, as e^pty, as vanity it
self. From whence I raise this eleventh dispute.

That whose style and subject matter, in its very best acception, is but vain,
but frivolous, and ridiculous, bringing no glory at all to God, nor good to
men; must needs be sinful and unlawful unto Chri^tians.

But such is the style and subject of most Stage Plays, as Hoec etiamsi non
essent simulachris dicata, obeunda christianis fidelibus non essent, quae and
si non haberent crimen, habent in se and maximam, and parum congruent^m
fidelibus, vanitatem, etc. Fugienda itaque sunt ista Christianis fidelibus, ut
jam frequenter diximus tam vanatam pernitiosa sachtilega spectacula; and oculi
nostri sunt, and aures custodiendae. Cyprian. de spectac. lib.
Saint Cyprian excellently writes.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and unlawful unto Christians.

The Major is uncontrollable; since God himself inhibits Christians, Job
15.2.3. Reijce verbum quod non aedificat audientes. Vanusenim sermo cito
polluit mentem, and vanae conscientiae est index. Bernard de In^eriori Domo
cap. 43.
to utter vain knowledge; to reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches
which will do no good, Ierem. 2.5.8. c. 16.19.
to walk in vanity, or things that will not profit; and 1 Samuel 12.21. Nimirum
sapere est abiectis vtile nugis. Horace, Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. p. 292.
to follow after vain things which will not profit, because they are but
vain. Christians Isay 55.2.
must not lay out their money for that which is not bread, and their labor for
that which satisfies not, Eccles. 5.7. and 6.11.12.
^hey must not delight in vanity, or in things that increase, vanity, and make
not man the better; but they must pray with David; Psalm. 119.37.
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: since the Scripture is express;
Psalm. 4.2. Psalm. 10.7. Psalm 12.2. Psalm. 24.3.4. 2 Kings 17.15
that the speaking, loving, or lifting up of the soul to vanity, folly, and
unprofitable things, is an Mores hominis lingua pandit, and qualis sermo
ostenditur, t^lis animus comprobatur; quoniam ex abundantia cordis os loquitur.
Bernard. de interiori Domo. cap 43. Col. 1082.
undoubted character of such wicked men, who shall not ascend into Gods holy
hill; not any property of Gods children: Who as 1 Timothy 4.7.
they must abandon all idle, fabulous, unprofitable discourses; Mat. 2.36.37.
V^nus sermo non eri^ absque iuditio, quia ab omni rectitudinis statu deperiunt
qui per verba vana dilabuntur. Bernard De Interiori Domo c. 43.
Because that for every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account
at the day of judgment: so they must likewise direct even all their actions,
speeches, recreations 1 Cor. 10.31, 32, 33.
to Gods glory; Col. 3.16.17. Jude 20.
the edification of others, and Isay 55.2.3. 1 Sa^. 12.21. 1 Timothy 6.18.19.
their own spiritual good; to which Stage Plays, no ways tend. Therefore
the Major is vnquesti^nable.

For the Minor; Th^^ the style and subject matter of Stage Plays is in its
very best acception, but vain, but frivolous and ridiculous, bringing no glory
at all to God, nor good to men: is most apparent. First, by the concurring
testimony of sundry Fathers, and other learned Writers, Hence Hilarie, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Bruno and others, in their Commentaries and expositions
on the 118. alias the 119. Psalm verse 37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding
vanity: together with John Salisbury, lib. 1. De Nugis Curialium, cap. 8.
Master Gosson, Doctor Reinolds, Master Northbrooke, and others in their
Treatises against Stage Plays; interpret this Averte oculos meos videant
vanitatem: hic notantur illi^ qui diversis spectaculis and ^udis Theatralibus
occupantur, etc. Hilari.
vanity in the Psalmist. of Stage Plays, and such like spectacles, which they
Vtinam hac interproetatione possimus revocare ad diversa Circensium ludo^rum
atque theatralium spectacula fe^tinantes. Vanitas est illa quam cernis.
Pantominum aspicis? vanitas est, etc. Ambros. Enar. in Psalm. 118. Octon. 5.
Tom. 2. p. 430. F.
condeme as vanity. Hence Clemens Alexandrinus writes of plays; Spectacula
verbis obscenis and vanis tem^r^ prosusis plena sunt. P^dagogi l. 3. c. 11.
that they are fraught with obscene and vain speeches, rashly uttered: Hence
Gregory Nazianzen styles Plays; Vit^ vanitates, voluptatum Hydra. Ad Seluchum
Epist. p. 10^3.
the vanities of life, and the hydra of pleasures. Hence Chrysostom writes of
Plays: In Theatro ^isus, ineptitudo, verba multae fatuitatis ac stultitiae
plena, etc. Homil. ^2^ in Acta Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 612. A. homil. 92. ad
populum Antioch^ae. Tom. ^. Col. 3^7. A^
that they are fraught with laughter, wantonness, and words ^ull of folly and
vanity. Hence Anastatius Sianita writes of the Severiani: Vestra dogmata magis
sunt ridicula quam quae in omnibus s^^nicis Orchestris, and Thylemicis ludis
aguntur. In his Viae duae. ^ibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. ^04.
That their positions were more ridiculous, absurd and foolish, then those
things that are acted in any Stage Plays. Hence Bernard writes, Mimos,
fabulatores, scurrilesque cantilenas, and ^udo^um spectacula milites Christi,
tanquam vanitates and insanias falsas respuunt and abominantur. Ad Milites
Templi Sermo. Col. 8^2. L
That the true soldiers of Christ, reject and abominate Players and
Stage Plays, as vanities and false frenzies. Hence John Salisbury styles
Plays, Spectacula and tyrocinia vanitatis. De N^gis Curialjum. l. 1. c. 7.8.
the spectacles and rudiments of vanity. Hence Cyprian, Lactantius, Cyril of
Jerusalem, Augustine, Basil, Salvian, Macarius AEgyptius, and others, See ^2.
formerly quoted, have utterly condemned Stage Plays, as the very pompes and
vanites of this wicked world, which Christians have abjured in their Baptism.
If then we believe these several Fathers, together with Asina^ia. Prologus.
Plautus, De somno Scipionis. l. 1. page 20. and Sa^urnal. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Maecrobius, Floridorum lib. 4.
Apuleius, three Heathen Authors; or Master Gosson, Master Northbrooke, Master
Stub^, and Doctor Reinolds, in their books against Stage Plays: or the third
Blast against Stage Plays and Theaters, together with Caesar Bulingerus De
Theatro, lib. 1. cap. 11. de Ludis p. 141. We must needs acknowledge, both
Plays themselves, together with their style and subject matter, to be mere
idle useless vanities; Since all these repute and style them such.

Secondly, our own experience, will readily subscribe unto it as an undoubted
truth. For what are all our Stage Plays, but the frothy excrements of
superfluous idle brains; which being impregnated with some 2 Pet. 2.18.
Proijcit ampullas and sesquipedalia verba. Horace, De Art Poet^ca. p 300.
swelling words, or high-towring conceited plots of vanity, (which they
secretly adore with highest admiration, as being worthy the most suparlative
Stage-applause,) do travel in pain until they have brought forth their
long-conceived issues on the Theater, which prove but Quid dignum tanto ferit hic
promissor hiatu? Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridicul^s mus. Horac^ De A^te
Po^tic^. p. 300.
ridiculously vain at best? Wha^ are they, but mere miscelanies of
over-studied, well-expressed vanities? Their subject, their action, their
circumstances; what else are they but vanity of vanities, but ridiculous
follies or frensies in the highest degree, unworthy of a Nunquid tibi videtur
sapiens, qui oculos vel aures istis expandit? Ioannes Salisburiensis l. 1. De
Nugis Curialium c. 8.
wise-mans sight, much less his approbation? Their Actors, their ordinary
Spectators, what are they but ridiculous, foolish, vain, fantastic persons,
who delight in nothing more then toys and vanities? Their very fruits, their
ends, what are they else, but either the nourishing, or the increase of sin
and vanity? If we survay the good, the profit which accrues from Stage Plays,
we shall find, that they are good for naught; that they bring no glory at all
to God, no benefit, no comfort unto men; Va^um enim est quod ad nihil vtile
est. Vana illa sunt omnia qua bonum nullum habent finem. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in
Ephesians. Tom. 4. Col. 963. D
therefore they must needs be vain. If we respect Gods glory; where shall we
find God more dishonored, more provoked then in Stage Plays? which had the Sea Act. 1. accordingly.
Devil himself for their author, subject, and composer, who proves sometimes
their Actor too. Where are Gods Name, his Word, his Attributes, his Ministers,
his Saints, his Substitutes, his Children, his Wor^hip, his Graces, more
blasphemed, profaned, traduced, or derided, See the third Blast of Retrait
from Plays and Theaters. The Preface to the Practice of Piety; Salvian de
Gubernatione Dei lib. 6. The School of Abuses; and Scene 5. before.
then in Stage Plays? Where is God more offended, more affronted with swarms
of crying sins, then in the Playhouse? And how can it be otherwise? We know
it was the received opinion of the ancient Pagans; that their Vos persuasum
habetis Theatralibus ludis Deos delectari and a^fici, irasque aliquando
conceptas ^orum satisfactione molli^i. Honorantur his Dij, and si quas ab
hominibus con^inent offensionum memorias illatas, abijciunt, excludunt,
redduntque s^ nobis redintegrata familiaritate fautor^s, etc. Mimis nimirum Dij
gaudent, and illa vis praestans, neque vllis hominum comprehensa natu^is
libentissime commodat audiendis his aures, quorum symplegmatibus plurimis
intermixtos se esse derisionis in materiam no^unt? delectanturut res est
salpictarum sonitu ac plausu factis and dictis turpibus, fascinorum ingentium
rubore. Iam vero si viderint in Foemineas mollitudines enervantes se viros,
vociferari hos frustra, sine causa alios cursitare, amicitiaru^ fide salva
contundere se alios, and crud^s mutilare se caestibus, certare hos spiritu,
buccas vento distendere, votisque inanibus concrepare, manus ad coelum tollunt,
rebuus admirabilibus moti prosiliunt, exclamant, in gratiam cum hominibus
redeunt. Haec si dijs immortalibus oblivionem afferunt simultatum; si ex
Comaedijs, attellanis, mimis ducunt laetissimas voluptates, quid moramini, quid
cesiatis, quin and ipsos dicatis Deos ludere, lascivire, saltare, obscaenas
compingere cantiones, and clunibus fluctuare crispatis? Quid enim differt,
faciantue haec ipsi, an ab alijs fi^ri in amoribus ac delicijs ducant? Arnobius
adversus Gentes. l. 7. p. 232, 234, 236.
Devill-Idols (to whose See Bullingerus De Theatro, lib. 1. c 17.
solemn honor and worship, all Stage Plays were at first devoted) were so
well pleased with these Theatricall Enterludes, that if they did but honor and
adore them with them, they would forthwith pardon, yea, forget their sins
against them, and of enemies, become propitious, kind, and friendly to them.
And can any Christian then conceive such base conceits of God, or Itane, istud
non est Deorum imminuere dignitatem, dica^e and consecrare turpissimas res ijs
quas censor animus respuat, and quarum actores inhonesto^ esse ius vestrum, and
inter capita computa^i indicavit infamia? Arnobius Ibidem. p. 233.
so far derogate from his Majesty, his purity, his Deity, as to deem him
honored or delighted, not grieved, not offended with such Stage Plays See Act
2, accordingly.
wherewith Devill-Idols were attoned? Doubtless, that which the Devil
himself has invented, appropriated to his own honor and advantage, See 1
Cor. 6.14.15.
can never bring any praise or glory unto God: therefore our Stage Plays
cannot do it. If we reflect upon the good they bring to men, alas, what is it?
See here p 68, 69. and Act. 6. Scene 4, 5, 6. Bodinus de Republica l. 6. c 1.
The third Blast of Retrait from Plays, and Master Boltons Discourse of true
happiness, p. 73, 74^ accordingly.
Where do they suck in more poison, more corruption; where do they mere
blunt their virtues, or make greater shipwreck of all their Christian graces,
then a^ Stage Plays, the grand-empoysoners of men's souls? I have known,
heard, and read of thousands, who have wrackt their credits, their estates,
their virtues, yea, their very bodies and souls at Plays, at Play Houses: but
never could I yet hear or read of any who have been meliorated or reclaimed
by them. I have read of sundry pestiserous ^ff^cts, and sinful fruits of
Stage Plays, of which you shall hear at large Act. 6 throughout.
hereafter: but never could I find in all the Fathers, in any mod^rne
Writers, so much as any one necessary virtue, grace or real benefit that has
resulted from them. I have read of See Act. 6. S^^ne 5. and 10 accordingly.
diverse Republics, Emperors, Magistrates, and Authors of all sorts, who have
suppressed Stage Plays, as intolerable evils in a Christian or well-ordered
Commonweal; they being the Seminaries of all kind of vices; the chief
corrupters of men's minds and manners: But never could I meet with any, who
affirmed them to be good or use^ull in a State. Since therefore it is evide^t
by all the premises; that Stage Plays in their best condition, are but Hae
Nugae s^ria ducunt in mala. Horace de Art Poetica p. 312.
mere Nugatorie, ridiculous, superf^uous van ties, which lead^ to serious
evils; and bring no glory at all to God, nor good to men; we may conclude them
to be not only incongruous, but unlawful unto Christians, Qui igitur in
Chri^to est, quomodo pote^t vanitates aspicere, cum Christus in carne sua omnes
mundi hujus crucifixerit vanitates? Ambros Enar. in Psalm. 118. Octon. 5. Tom.
2. page 430. F.
who must not cast their eyes upon the vanities of this wicked world, since
Christ himself has crucified them in his flesh, that we for ever might
abandon them.

You have seen now, Christian Readers, the common style and subject matter of
popular Stage Plays, and I dare confidently aver, that there is scarce one
Stage Play this day acted (our Libenter veter^s spectant fabulas, Nam nunc
nov^e quae prodeunt Comaediae multo sunt nequiores. Plauti Casina, Prologus. p.
166.
modern Plays being far more lewd then those of former times.) whose
subject, parts and pass^ges are not reducible to all, to some, or one at least
of these recited particulars: therefore we must needs pass sentence of
condemnation against them, even in this respect.

ACTVS 4.
SCENA PRIMA.


If we seriously survay the lives, the practices, the conditions of our common
Stage Players, we may truly write of them, as Edricus, faex hominum; d^decus
Anglorum, flagitiosus helluo, versutus nebulo, cui non nobilitas opes
pepererat, s^d ^ingua and audacia comparaverat. Hic dissimulare cautus, fugere
paratus, consilia regis, ut fidelis, venabatur, ut proditor, disseminabat. De
gesti^ Regum Anglorum. l. 2. c. 10. p. 6^.
William of Malmesbury does of Edricke; that they are the very dregs of men;
the shame, the blemish of our English Nation; ungracious helluoes; craf^y
shifting companions, who purchase money, not by their generositie, but by their
tongues and impudency; they being wise to dissemble, apt to counterfeit, prone
to dive into the secrets both of King and State, as faithful subjects; and
more ready to divulge them on the Stage as notorious-Traitors. What Quae quanta
in vllo homine iuventuris illecebra fuit, quanta in illo? qui and alias ipse
amabat ^urpissime; aliorum amori flagitiosisme serviebat: alijs fructus
libidinum, alijs mortem parentum, non modo impellendo; verum etiam adiuuando
pollicibatur. Oration 2. in Catilinam.
Tully records of Catiline; that there was never so great a faculty of
corrupting youth in any man, as in him; he bearing a most lewd affection to
other men's wives himself, and serving likewise as a most wicked Pand^r to the
unchaste desires of others; promising to some the fruit of their lusts, to
others the death of their Parents, not only by instigating, but likewise by
assisting them. Or what a grave historian reports of Vortigernus Rex
Brittanniae, nec manu promptus, nec consilio bonus; imo ad illecebrascarnis
pronus, omniumque fere vitiorum mancipium. Quippe quem sub jugaret avaritia, in
qiuetaret superbia, in quinaret luxuria, etc. William Malmsbury, De Gestis
Regum. Angl. lib 1. cap. 1. page 8.
Vortiger a British King; that he was prone to the enticements of the flesh,
and a bond-slave almost to every vice, etc. May be truly verefied of most
common Actors; who are usually the very filth and offscouring, the very
lewdest, basest, worst and most perniciou^ly vicious of the sons of men; as
all times, all Authors have reputed them. The ancient Pagan Romans, (as Livie
Histor. Romanae l. 7. sect. 3. Valerius Maximus l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4. Cicero.
Oration pro P. Quintio. Gellius. Noct. Attic. l. 14. c. 17. Suetonij Tiberius,
sect. 35. Tacitus Annalium l. 14. sect. 2.3. Macrobi^s Satu^nal l. 2. c. 7.
AEmilius Probus. Excellentium Imperatorum vitae. Praefatio.
histories, as Tertullian de. ^pectac. l. c. 22. Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Mat.
Arnobius. Advers, Gentes l. 7. p. 233. August. De Civ. Deil. 2. c. 13.14.27.29.
Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 7. c. 10. Gratian Distinctio 33.48.86. and Causa 4.
Quaestio 1. Ioannis Saresburiensis^ De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 7.8. Ioannis de
^urgo Pupilla O^ulipars 7. c. 5. O. Tostatus in Mat. Tom. 3. in Mat. 6. Quaest.
38. fol 40. E ^Angelus de Clavasio in Summa Angelica: Titulus. Histrio, and
In^amia. Anselmus Tom 1. p. 356. C.D. Alvarez Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae l.
1. Art. 49. f. 28. l. 2. Art. 28. H. f. 134. Astexanus De Casibus. l. 4. Tit 7.
Art. 4. Agrippa De vanitate scientiaru^ cap 20. Alexander ab Alexandro. Genesis
Dirum. l. 3. c. 9. Caelius Rhodiginus. Antiqu. Lectionum l. 1^. c. 17. Photij
Nomocanonis. Ti^ulus 13. c 21.22. and Theodori Balsami. Comment. Ibid. Lod.
Vives. Comment. in Aug. De Ciu. Deil. 2. c. 13^ a. D. Reinolds Overthrow of
Stageplayes. p. 60. to. 74. Barnabas Bri^^onius, and Ioannis Mariana De
sp^^taculis. l. with sundry others accordingly.
Fathers both relate) accounted Stage Players such infamous, vicious, base,
unworthy persons; as they did by public Edicts, not only deprive them of all
honor and preferment in the Commonweal; but likewise disfranchise and remove
them from their tribe; as degenerating from that Roman stock, and noble
parentage from which they were descended. The ancient De agitato^ibus, sieve
Theatricis, qui fideles sunt, placuit eo^, quandiu agitant, a communione
seperari. Council. Arelatense 2. Ca^. 20. Si Augur aut Pantomimi credere
voluerunt, placuit ut prius artibus suis renunci^nt, et tunc demu^
suscipiantur, ita vt vlterius non revertantur. Quod si facere contrainter^
dictum tentaverint, ^roijciantur ab Ecclesia. Council. Eliberinum. Can. 62.
Constan^inopolitanum. 6. in Trullo. Can. 51 62.71.
Councels, Clemens Romanus Constit Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 28. Cyprian Epist.
lib. 1. Epist. 10. Fucratio; Tertullian, de pudicitia. cap. 7. Chrysostom Hom. 3.
De Davide and Saul.
Fathers and Christians in the Primitive Church, did ipso facto, excommunicate
all Stage Players, till they had utterly renounced, relinquished their
diabolical profession: reputing them the very pollution^ shame, and blemish of
the Church; The very depravers and destroyers of youth; the very instruments of
sin and Satan; yea, such accursed miscreants, as were altogether unworthy,
both of the Society of Christians, and of th^se blessed Sacraments, those holy
Ordinances of the Lord, which are not to be Matthew. 7.6.
given to such unholy dogs, nor cast before such filthy swine as they. Plato,
Aristotle, the Massillienses, with sundry Christian, yea, Pagan States and
Emperors, (as I shall prove S^e Act. 6. Sc^ne 5. and Act. 7. Scene. 6.7.
accordingly.
hereafter) exiled all professed Stage Players out of their Commonweals, as
the Jews and Primitive Christians excluded them from the Church. Needs
therefore must they be extremely vicious, intollerably pernicious (and so by
Quanta confessio est malae rei, cuius actores cum acceptissimi sint, sine nota
non sunt? Tertullian, De spectacu^is cap. 22.
consequence their very S^age-playes to) whom Church and State have thus
jointly vomited out as putred, noisome and infectious members, unfit to live in
either; as Necesse erat histriones perditissimis fuisse moribus, and deploratae
neq^itiae, cum in ea civitate pro civibus non haberentur, cuius erant tam multa
millia hominum flagitiosorum, and facinerosorum cives. N^tae, in August. De
Civi^. De^. lib. 2. c. 13. See Bullingerus de Theatro, l. 1. c. 50. De Scenae
and Orchestrae obscenitate. etc. 51. De Infamia Theatri.
Ludovieus Vives well concludes. What Polycarpe, once replied to Marcion the
H^retique; Cognosco te primogenitu^ Satan^. Irenaus. Contr. haereses l. 3. c.
3. p. 254. Eusebius Ecclesia^t. hi^t. l. 4. c. 14.
I know thee to be the firstborn of Satan; may be fitly appliable to our
Common-Actors; the Arch-agents, In^truments, and Apparitors of their origi^all
Founder and Ioh. 8.44. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. See Act. 1. and 2.
Father, the Devil; their very profession being nothing else, as De Republica.
l. 6. c. 1.
Bodine well observes, but an apprentiship of sin, a way or Trade of
wickedness, which leads down to hell; and their lives (a badge of their
profession) much like the life of Vor^iger, Eius vitae cursus saeuus in
principio, miser in medio, turpis in exitu, asseritu^ Will. Malmib. De Gesti^
Regum Anglorum. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62.
which was tragically vicious in the beginning, miserable in the midst,
filthy in the end. What the conditions, lives, and qualities of Stage Players
have been in former Ages, let Cyprian, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Nicholaus Cabasila, Cornelius Tacitus, Marcus Aurelius, with Ludovicus Vives,
Notae in Augustinum De Civit. Dei. l 2. c. 13. a.
others, testify. The first of these informs us; Histrio qui apud vos
constitutus in eiusdem adhuc artis suae dedecore perseverat, and magister and
doctor non erudiendorum, s^d perdendorum puerorum id quod male didicit,
caeteris quo que insinua^; talis non debet nobiscum communicare. Quod puto ego,
nec maiestati divinae, nec evangelicae disciplinae cong^uere, ut pudor and
honor ecclesiae tam turpi and infami contagione faedetur, etc. Cyprian. Epist.
lib. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio.
That Stageplayers are the Masters, not of teaching, but of destroying youth,
insin^ating that wickednesss into others, which themselves have sinfully
learned. Whence he writes to Eucratius, to excommunicate a Player who trained
up youths for the Stage; affirming, that it could neither stand with the
Majesty of God, nor the Discipline of the Go^pel, that the chastity and honor
of the Church should be defiled with so filthy, so infamous a contagion. The
more than Sodomiticall uncleanness of Players lives, he farther thus
discyphers. O si possis in illa sublimi specula constitutus ocul^s tuos
inserere secretis, recludere cubiculorum obductas fores, and ad conscientiam
luminum penitralia occulta reserare; aspicias ab impudicis geri, quod nec
aspicere possit frons pudica. Videas, quod crimen sit and videre: Videas quod
vitiorum furore gementes gessisse se negant, and gerere festinant: libidinibus
insanis, in viros v^ri proruunt. Fiunt, quae nec ipsi^, nec illis pos^unt
placere, qui faciunt. Mentior nisi ^lios, qui talis est increpat, turpis turpes
infamat, and evasisse se conscium credit, quasi conscientia satis non sit.
^idem in publico accusatores, in occulto rei, in semet ipsos censores parit^r
and nocentes. Damnant fori^, quod intus operantur. Admit^^nt libenter, quod cum
admiserint, criminantur, etc^ Idem Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Do^ato.
O (writes he) that thou could in that sublime watchtower insinuate thine
eyes into these Players secrets; or set open the closed doors of their
bed-chambers, and bring all their innermost hidden Cells unto the consci^nce of
thine eyes; Thou should then see that which is even a very sin to see:
thou might behold that, which these groaning under the burden of their
vices, deny that they have committed, and yet hasten to commit: men rush on men
with outrageous lusts. They do those things which can neither please those who
behold them, nor yet themselves who act them. The same persons are a^cusers in
public, guilty in secret, being both censurers and nocents against themselves:
They condemn that abroad, which they practice at home. They commit that
willingly, which when they have committed, 'they reprehend. I am verily a liar,
if those who are such abuse not others: one filthy person defameth others like
himself; thinking by this means to escape the eensure of those who are privy
to his sin, as if his own conscience were not sufficient both to accuse him
and condemn him. Thus far Saint Cyprian, Nihil turpe ducunt praeter
modestiam. Nam illorum alij quidem turpitudinis administri, artem hanc solam
tenent, ut ob varia petulantiae genera magnopore semet efferant, mimi rerum
ridicularu^ adsueti colaphis and pugnis, qui novaculis pudorem omnem ante ipsos
crines resecuerunt, lasciv^ faeditatis and i^puritatis omnis officina, qui
omnium in oculis, tam perpeti, quam designare omnia, quae cunque nefanda sunt,
artis loco ducunt, etc. Ad Seleucum de Recta Educatione. page 1062 ^
Gregory Nazianzen records of Stage Players; that they repute nothing filthy or
dishonest but modesty; that they are the servants, the furtherers of all
lewdness; this being their only Art and profession, exceedingly to magnify
themselves for several kinds of wantonness; they being imitators and actors
of ridiculous things, accustomed to blows and buffets, who have shaven off as
with a Razor, all their modesty, before ever they had cut their hair, in the
wanton shop of all lewdness and impuritie; accounting it a kind of Art, as
well to ^uffer, as to personate, on the stage all horrible beastly wickednesses
whatsoever, in the open view of all men. And so he proceeds against them
Saint Chrysostom, as he writes of Stage Players; Histriones-fordidi, infames,
etc. propterea mill illi mortibus digni sunt, quoniam quae fugere prorsus
cunctae imperant leges, ^a illi non verentur imitari. Hom. 6, in Matthew. Tom. 2.
Col. 52. C
that they are infamous persons, etc. well worthy of a thousand deaths,
because they personate those villainies, obscenities, adul^eries, which all
laws command men to avoid. So he informs us likewise, Vnde credis nuptiarum
insideatores proficissi? Nonne ab hujusmodi scenis? Vnde qui thalomos aliorum
effodiunt? nonne ab Orchestrailla? hinc etiam seditiones excitantur, hinc
tumultus oriuntur. Qui enim his ^udis aluntur, quique vocem ventris causa
vendunt, qui dicere, facere omnia promptissimi sunt atque in ^o suam operam
collocant, hi maxim solent populum rumoribus inflammare, and tumultum in
civitates immitt^re etc. Hom. 38. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 299. A.B.
that the Players and Play-haunters of his time were most notorious adulterers,
the authors of many tumults and seditions, filling the peoples ears with idle
rumors, and Cities with commotions: that they were ready both to speak, and
act all wickednesses whatsoever, it being their whole profession thus to do;
and that they were far more savage than the most cruel beasts. Saint
Augustine, as he at large informs us; Romani cum artem ludicram scenamque
totam probro ducerent, genus id hominum non modo honoro civium reliquorum
carere, sed etiam tribu moveri notatione censoria voluerunt. Praeclara sane,
and Romany laudibus, annumeranda prudentia. Ecce enim recte quisquis civium
Romanorum esse scenicuseligisset, non solum ei nullus ad honorem dabatur locus,
verum etiam Censoris nota tribum tenere propriam minime si^ebatur. O animum
civitatis laudis avidum, Germaneque Romanum, etc. Romani vero hominibus
scenicis nec plebeam tribum, quanto minus senatoriam curiam de^onestari sinunt.
De Civit. De^. lib. 2. cap. 13. See cap. 14 27. and 29.
that the ancient Romans accounting the art of Stage-playing and the whole
Scene infamous, ordained, that this sort of men should not only want the
honor of other Citizens, but also be disfranchised and thrust ou^ of their
Tribe, by a legal and disgraceful censure, which the Censors were to execute:
because they would not suffer their vulgar sort of people, much less their
Senators to be defamed, disgraced or defiled with Stage Players: which act of
theirs, he styles; An excellent true Roman prudence to be enumerated among the
Romans prayfes. So he likewise gives this ignominious epithet unto Players:
Talia in publicum cantitabantur a nequissimis scenicis. De Civit. Dei. lib. 2.
cap. 4.
Scenici nequissi^i, most wicked Stage Players: intimating thereby, that
Players commonly exceed all others in all kinds of wickedness. Nicholaus
^abasila has published upon record. Nihil enim potest mimo inueniri
sc^lestius. De vita in Christo lib. 2. Biblioth. Patrum Tom. 14 page 112.
That nothing can be found more wicked, more detestable then a Stage Player.
Varijs deinde and saepius inritis praetorum questibus, postremo C^esar de
immodestia histrionum retulit. Multa abijs in publicum seditiose, faeda per
domos tentari. Oscum quendam ludicrum laevissimae apud vulgum oblectationis, eo
flagitiorum ac virium venisse, vt auctoritate Patrum coercendum sit. Pulfi tum
Italia histriones. Annali^^ lib. ^. cap. 3. See lib. 1. cap. 14.
Cornelius Tacitus relates: That in Tiberius his reign, the Roman Actors grew
so immodest, so exorbitant, that they attempted many things seditiously in
public, many things dishonestly in private houses: and that they gre^ at last
to such an height of wickedness, as that after many complaints against them by
the Pretors, they were by Tiberius and the whole Senate exiled out of Italy.
Marcus Aurelius. lib. 1. cap. 14. and lib. 2. Epistle 12. to Lambert.
Marcus Aurelius himself does testify, that the adulteries, rapes, murders,
tumults and other o^t-rages which Stage Players did occasion and commit, were
so excessive; and the minds which they corrupted with their lewdness,
sonumtrous; that he was enforced to banish them out of Italy into Hellespont,
where he commanded Lambert his Deputy, to keep them close at work. We Marcus
Aurelius. lib. 1. cap. 14. Suetonii. Nero sect. 16. Pliny panegyri^. Traiano
dictus p. 45. Alexander ab Alexandro Genialium Dierum lib. 6. cap. 9. See Act.
6. Scene. 5. and Act. 7. Scene 7.
read likewise, that Nero, Traian, with diverse other Roman Emperors, did
quite exile all Stage Players out of their Dominions, because their lives,
their practices wire so vicious, so hurtful and pernicious to the public
good. Such were the lives, the insolences, the exorbitances of Stage Players
in former times. What the lives, the qualities of our own domestique Actors
are, or have been heretofore; 14 Eliz cap. 5. and 35. Eliz. cap. 7.
Two several Acts of Parliament, which adjudge and style them Rogues; together
with two penitent reclaimed Play-Poets of our own, (who were thoroughly
acquainted with their practices and persons too) will at large declare. The
first of these two Play-Poets, who out of conscience renounced his prof^ssion,
and then wrote against the abominations of our Stage Plays, writes thus of
Stage Players: The third Blas^ of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. London
1588. p. 110, to. 118.
As I have had a saying to these versifying Play-makers, so likewise must I
deal with shameless inactors. When I see by them young boys, inclining of
themselves to wickedness, trained up in filthy speeches, unnatural and
unseemely gestures, to be brought up by these Schoolmasters, in bawdry and in
idleness, I cannot choose but with tears and grief of heart lament. O with
what delight can the father behold his son bereft of shamefastness, and
trained up to impudency? How prone are they of themselves and apt to receive
instruction of their lewd teachers, which are the Players the Schoolemasters in
the School of Abuse.
Schoolmasters of sin in the School of abuse? what do they teach them, I
pray you, but to foster mischief in their youth^ that it may always abide
with them, and in their age bring them sooner unto hell? The disposition of
^layers for the most part.
And as for these Stagers themselves, are they not commonly such kind of men
in their conversation, as they are in profession? are they not as variable in
heart as they are in their parts? are they not as good practisers of ba^dery,
as inactors? Live they not in such sort th^mselves, as they give precepts unto
others? Does not their Talis homini est oration, qualis vita. Argumentum est
luxuriae publicae orationis lascivia. Non potest alius esse inge^io, alius
^nimo color. Illo vitiato, hoc quo que afflatur. Seneca Epist. 114.
talk on the Stage, Naturae sequitur s^mina quisque suae.
declare the nature of their disposition? ^doth not every one take that part
which is proper to his kind? Does not the Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat
arat^r, Enumerat miles vuln^ra Pastor ov^s.
Plough-mans tongue walk of his Plough: the Seafaring ma^s of his Mast, Cable
and Sail; the Soldiers of his Ha^nesse, Spear and Shield; and bawdy mates of
bawdy matters? Ask them, if in the laying out of their parts, they choose not
those parts which are most agreeable to their inclination, and that they can
best discharge? And look what every of them does most delight in, that he can
best handle to the contentment of others. If it be a roisting, bawdy, or
lascivious part, wherein are unseemely speeches, and that they make choice of
them as best answering, and proper to their manner of play: may we not say, by
how much the more he exceds in his gesture, he delights himself in his part?
and by so match it is pleasing to his disposition and nature? If (it be his
nature) to be a bawdy Player, and he delight in such filthy and cursed actions,
Object.
shall we not think him in his life to be more disordered, and to abhor
virtue? But they perhaps will say; that such abuses as are handled on the
Stage, others by their examples are warned to beware of such evils to
amendment. Answ.
Indeed if their authority were greater then the words of the Scripture, or
their zeal of more force than of the Preacher, I might easily be persuaded to
think, that men by them might be called to good life. But when I see the Word
of truth proceeding from the heart, and uttered by the mouth of the Reverend
Teachers, to be received See Matth^ 13.1. to 20.
of the most part into the ear, and but of a few rooted in the heart, I cannot
by any means believe, that the words proceeding from a profane Player, and
uttered in scorning sort, enterlaced with filthy, lewd, and ungodly speeches,
have greater force to move men unto virtue, than the words of truth uttered by
the godly Preacher, whose zeal is such as that of Moses, Exodus 3^.32.
who was contented to be rased out of the book of life, and of Paul, Romans 9.3.
who wished to be separated from Christ for the welfare of his brethren. If the
good life of a man be a Facere, maiorem vim habet ad do cendum quam dicere.
Chryso^t. ho^. 19. ad hebraos. Tom. 4. Col. 1608.
better instruction to repentance than the tongue, or word, why do not
Players, I beseech you, leave examples of goodness to their posterity? But
which of them is so zealous, or so tendereth his salvation, that he does am^nd
himself in those points; which as they say, others should take heed of? Are
they not notoriously known to be those men in their life abroad, ^s they are
on the Stage, Roisters, Brawlers, Ill-dealers, Bosters, Lovers, R^ffians? So
that they are always exercised in playing their parts, and practicing
wickedness, making that an Art, to the end they might the better gesture it in
their parts. For who can better play the Ruffian, than a very Ruffian? who
better the L^ve^, than they who make it a common exercise? To conclude, the The
chief end of Plays.
principal end of all their Enterludes, is to feed the world with sights and
fond pastimes; See Marcus Aurelius Epistle 12. to Lambert, accordingly.
to Iuggle in good earnest the money out of other men's purses into their own
hands. What shall I say? They are Players infamous persons.
infamous men, and in Players banished out of Rome, and kept from the Communion
in the Primitive Church.
Rome were thought worthy to be expelled, allbeit there was liberty enough to
take pleasure. In the Primitive Church they were kept out from the communion of
Christians, and never remitted till they had performed public penance. And
thereupon Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio.
Saint Cyprian in a certain Epistle counsels a Bishop, not to receive a
Player into the Pension of the Church, by which they were nourished, till there
was an express act of penance, with protestation to renounce an Art so
infamous. Some have objected; Object.
that by these publike-Playes many forbear to do evil, for fear to be
publicly reprehended; and for that cause they will say it was tolerated in
Rome, wherein Emperors were touched, though they were present. But to such it
may be answered; Answ.
that in disguised Players, given over to all sorts of dissoluteness, is not
found so much as to will to do good, seeing they care for nothing less than
for virtue. And thus much for these Players. Thus this Play-Poet, and sometimes
an Actor too. Master In his Plays confuted. Action 1. and 3. and in his
School of Abuses.
Stephen Gosson, another reclaimed Play-Poet, writes thus of Stage Players.
That they are uncircumcised Philistims, who nourish a canker in their own
souls: ungodly Masters, whose example does rather poison then instruct men.
Wherefore (writes he) sithence you see by the example of the Romans, that
Plays are Ra^s-bane to government of Commonweals, and that Players by the
judgment of them are infamous persons, unworthy of the credit of honest
Citizens, worthy to be removed their Tribe; if not for Religion, yet for shame,
that the Gentiles should judge you at the last day, or that Publicans and
Sins should press into the Kingdom of Heaven before you; withdraw your feet
from Theaters with noble Marius; set down some punishment for Players with the
Roman Censors; show your selves to be Christians, and with wicked Spectators be
not pulled from Discipline to libertie^ from virtue to pleasure, from God to
Mammon: so shall you prevent the scourge by repentance, that is coming toward
you, and fill up the gulf, that the Devil by Plays has dug to swallow
you. Thus he. To him I will annex the testimony of I. G. in his London 1615.
p. 64^65.
Refutation of the Apology for Actors. Therefore (writes he) let all Players
and founders of Plays, as they tender the salvation of their own souls, and
others, leave off tha^ cursed kind of life, and betake themselves to such
honest exercises and godly mysteries as God has commanded in his Word to get
their living withal. For who will call him a wise man that plays the fool
and the vice? Who can call him a good Christian that plays the part of the
Devil, the sworn enemy of Christ? Who can call him a just man that plays
the dissembling hypocrite? Who can call him a straight dealing man, that
plays a cosoners trick? and so of all the rest. The wise man is ashamed to
play the fool; but Players will seem to be such in public view to all the
world: A good Christian hates the Devil, but Players will become artificial
Divils, excellently well. A just man cannot endure hypocrisy, but all the acts
of Players is dissimulation, and the proper name of Player ( witness the
Apology it self) is hypocrite. A true dealing man cannot endure deceit, but
Players get their living by craft and cosenage^ For what greater cheating can
there be, then for money, to render that which is not moneys worth. Of what sort
of men Players be.
Then seeing they are fools, artificial Devils, hypocrites and coseners, most
evident it is that their art is not for Christians to exercise, as being
diabolical, and themselves infamous: such indeed as the Lacedaemonians had,
and we also have great reason to extrude out of our Commonwealth: for they are
idle, vicious, dishonest, malicious, prejudicial and unprofitable to the same.
They are idle, for they can take no pains, they know not how to work, nor in
any lawful calling^ to get their living: but to avoid labor and work, like
brave and noble beggars, they stand to take money of every ^^e that comes to
see them loyter and play. Hence is it that they are vicious, for idleness is
the mother of vice, and they cannot exercise their offices but in vices, and in
treating of and with vicious men. They are dishonest, for they get not to eat
by doing good works, but by speaking filthy, vile, and dishonest words: They
are malicious, for they are accustomed, either for their friends or themselves,
when they love not a man to speak evil of him; and colourably underhand to
mock and flout at any. They are prejudicial and ^nprofitable to the
Commonwealth, for they cosen and mock us with vain words, and we pay them
good money, etc. From all which ancient and modern testimonies, I may not
unfitly write of Stage Players, as Saint Bernard does of the ancient Irish in
Con^ereth in Malachias his time. In vita Sancti Malachiae.
Nusquam adhuc tales expertus fuerat in quantacunque barbary. Nusquam
repererat si^ propteruos ad mores; sic ferales ad ritus; sic ad fidem impios;
ad leges barbaros; ce^vicosos ad disciplinam; spurcos ad vitam, Christiani
nomine, re Pagani. And no wonder is it, that Players are so transcendently
vicious and unchaste, since they are trained up from the^r cradles, in the very
Animus imbutus malis artibus haud facile libidinibus caret. Salustij. Bellum
Cat^linarium p. 32. See Master Gossons School of Abuses, accordingly.
art, the School of Venerie, lewdness and prophannesse; which quickly eats
out Animo per libidines corrupto nih^l honesti inest. Taci^us Annal. l. 1^^
sect. 9.
all their honesty, their modesty, their virtues, and fraughts them full with
vice. Since then it is abundantly evident by the premises, as also by
experience; that common Actors are thus excessively vicious, unchaste,
profane, and His divino iudicio saepius contingit, ut per id quod nequiter
viuunt, and illud perdant quod salubriter credunt. Greg. Magnus. Moral. l. 25.
c. 15.
dissolute in their lives, which draws them on to a dissolute Religion; the
most of our present English Actors (as I am credibly informed) being professed
Papists, as is the Founder of the late erected new Playhouse: the Plays which
issue from them must needs resemble these their Actors, Matthew. 7.17, 18.
the fruit being never better than the tree that bears it; the stream no purer
than the Springs that feed it. From whence I deduce this twelfth Syllogisticall
Argument against Stage Plays.

That whose ordinary Actors and Composers, are for the most part dissolute,
infamous, unchaste, profane, deboyst, and vicious men, must needs be sinful
and unlawful unto Christians, An tu quicquam in istis esse credis boni, quorum
professores tu^pissimos omnium, ac flagitio sis^imos cernis? Non discere
debemus ista, sed dedicisse. Seneca Ep. 88. Malorum magistrorum mala doctrina
est; vel potius, malorum semi^um mala seges. Gregor. Nazianzen. Oration. 38. p.
584.
because no good thing can proceed from such. Witness, Matthew. 7.17, 18. Levit.
5.2.3. Job. 14.4. Eccles. 9.18.

But such are the ordinary Actors and Composers of Stage Plays: witness the
premises.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and unlawful unto Christians: even in
this respect.

SCENA SECVNDA.
SEcondly, as the vitiousnesse of the Actors, even so the evilnesse of the most
assiduous Spectators of Stage Plays, infallibly evidenceth them to be evil.
If we look back to former Ages, we have the express testimony of sundry
Tertul Apo^logia, c. 38.42. De spectaculis. lib. Minutius Felix Octavius. p.
34.123. Theophilus Antiochenus, ad Autolicum. lib. 3. Bibl. Pa^rum. To. 2 p.
170. G.H. Tatianus Oration advers. Graecos. Ibid. p. 180^181. Athenagoras: pro
Christianis legatio. Ibid p. 138.139. Epiphanius. Compend. Doctrina^ etc p. 922.
Fathers and Concilium Carthag. 3. Can. 11. Constantinop. 6. Can. 51.62.
Arelatense 2. Can. 20. Elibertinum. Can. 62. Aphricanum. Can. 12. See Act 7.
Scene 2, 3.
Councels, that all the godly Christians in the Primitive Church, did wholly
withdraw themselves from Stage Plays; that all those Pagans who either acted
or frequented Plays, did immediately upon their conversion to the Christian
faith, and their very first admittance into the Church of Christ, even
publicly renounce all future acting, or resort to Plays: and that none but
Pagans, unchaste, profane, and graceless persons, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide
and Saul. ^ertull De pudicitia. c. 7. Council. Carthag^ 4. Can 88.
who were cast out of the Church by public Censures, did use to flock unto
them. Hence was it that Tertullian writes thus harshly: Amphitheatrum omnium
Daemonum templum est: tot illic immundi spiritus considunt, quot homines capit.
De specta^^ l. To. 2. Operum. p. 393.
So many persons as there are sitting in the Playhouse, so many unclean
spirits are there present: intimating, that all the Play-hunters of his Age,
were little better than incarnate Devils; whence he seriously dehorts all
Christians from Plays. Hence, not only Oration. Adhort. ad Gentes, and Paedag.
l. 3. c. ^1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, De spectaculis l.
Cyprian, De Vero Cult^. c. 20.
Lactantius, Oration 48. and De Recta Educatione ad Selucum. p. 1063.1064.
Nazianzen, Epistola. 18. c. 1. and Coment in Ezekiel l. 6. c. 20.
Hierom, Homil. 3. De Dauide and Saul, hom. 6.7. and 38, in Matthew.
Chrysostom; De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 3. to.14. De Consensu Evangelistarum. l.
1. c. 33. Confess. l. 3. c. 2.14.
Augustine, De Gubernatione Dei lib. 6.
Salvian, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1 c. 7.8.
John Salisburie, the third Council of Carthage, Canon 11.15. with diverse
other See Act. 6. Scene. 3, 4, 5. and Act. 7. Scene 3, 4, 5.
ancient and The second and third blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, M.
Gosson, M. Northbrooke, M. Stubs, D. Reinolds, Ioannes Mariana, in their
Treatises against Stage Plays, with sundry others. See Act. 6. Scene 16.
modern Christian Authors: but even Oration pro Publ. Quinctio Epist. ad Marium
lib. 7. Epist. 1. De Legibus l. 1. and 2.
Tully, Epist. 7.90. and 123.
Seneca, and the lascivious Poet Tristiu^ l. 2. and De Art Amandi l. 1.
Ovid, with sundry other Pagans; do earnestly dissuade men from resorting unto
Plays and Theaters, because none but infamous, vicious, dissolute, unchaste,
profane, and graceless persons ( Iunenal. Satyr. 6.8.15. See Act. 7. Scene 6.
whose company was apt to poison, to corrupt, all such who durst come nigh
them) did frequent them. It is observed by Suetonij Tiberius, Claudius,
Caligula, Tacitus, Annal l. 14. c. 2.3. Dion Cassius, Romans Historiae l. 55. and
59. Herodian. l. 1. Iuvenal. Satyr. 8. Lampridij Heliogabalus p. 200.202. Iulij
Capitolini Verus p. 67.69. Trebellij Pollionis Gallieni Duo p.
309.310.314.315.319. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 446, 447, 449.
sundry Historians, that Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Verus,
Commodus, Gallienus, Carinus, (the most execrably vicious, and unchaste of all
the Roman Emperors) delighted most in Plays and Actors; for which they
deeply tax them: whereas the Haec omnia (writing of Stage Plays) nescio
quantum ad populum gratiae habent, nullius certe momenti sunt apud principes
bonos, Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 449.
better sort of Emperors were not addicted to them; See Marcus Aurelius Ep.
12. to. Lambert. and Act. 6 Scene 5. Act 7. Sc. 7.
but did either banish them their dominions; or else See Act. 6. Sc 2.
deminish or withdraw their public stipends. Suruay we all the Christian, all
the Pagan Antiquities this day extant, we shall find the Sea Act. 6. and 7.
throughout.
very best of Christians, Jews and Pagans of all Ages, all places, not only
wholly absteining from, but likewise censuring and condemning Stage Plays, the
very worst, the dissolutest and unchastest only of them resorting to them with
delight. Vnde credis nuptiatum insidiatores proficissi? nonne ab huiusmodi
scenis? Vnde illos qui thalamos aliorum effodiunt? nonne ab Orchestra illa.
Nonne hinc complures adulteri? etc. Hom. 38. in Math. Tom. 2. Col. 299.
Saint Chrysostom, Sed tu praecipue curuis venare Theatris, Invenies illic
quod ames, quod ludere possis. Quod que semel tangas, quod que tenere veli^. De
Art. Amandi l. 1. p. 160.161.
Ovid, with sundry others inform us, That Adulterers, Whore-masters, Panders,
Bawdes, Whores, and such like effeminate, idle, unchaste, lascivious,
graceless persons, were the most assiduous Play-haunters in their times,
Whence Idem Vero Theatrum, idem and prostibulum; eo quod post ludos exactos
meritrices ibi prosternantur Originum l. 18. c. 42. p. 160.
Isiodor Hispalensis, Enarratio. in Romans 10. fol. 53:
Primasius, Explanatio in Gal. 5. v. 19.
Remigius, Exegesis in Ephesians. 5. v. 3.
Haymo, and Com. in Ephesians. 5. v. 3. Tom. 2. page 285. Se Caswdarus. Variarum.
l. 7. Epist. 10. and Eulengerus De Theatro. l 2. c. 50.51: accordingly.
Anselme write, That the Playhouse and the Stews were one and the same in
ancient times; because after the Plays were ended, the Whores who resorted to
the Play Houses, or were harbored in them, did prostitute themselves upon the
Theater, unto the lust of others, they when all derive the Word fornication; a
fornicibus, seu locis theatralibus; from Brothels and Play Houses, where Whores
were kept and prostituted after the Plays were acted. Such and no other were
Play Houses is Stage-frequenters in former Ages. And are they not now the same?
If we seclude those children, those novices, whose ignorance, childishness,
vanity, folly, or injudiousnesse allure them to plays or such like Gugaes,
Singula de nobis anni praedantur euntes: Eripuere jocos, Venerem, convivia,
ludos, Horace Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. p. 289.
which men of riper years and judgment do contemn; together with some few
sociable ingenuous dispositions, whom the Rogantibus postifera, largiri, blande
and affabile odium est. Seneca De Benefe. l. 2. c. 1^.
pressing importunity of carnal friends, or vehement solicitations of lewd
acquaintance do casually draw to Stage Plays, against the Et sic grandis in
suos pietas, impietas in Deum est. Hierom Epist. 25. c. ^.
secret reluctances of their own gainsaying consciences; AEqualis habitus
illic, similem que videbis Orchestram and populum. Iuuenal. Satyr. 3. p. 21.
what else are the residue (at least the Mayor part) of our assiduous
Play-haunters, See the third blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, and M.
Northbrooke, M. Stubs, M Gosson, in their Treatises against Stage Plays.
Petrarch. De Rened. Vtr. Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30. accordingly.
but Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores, Bawdes, Panders,
Ruffians, Roarers, Drunkards, Prodigals, Cheaters, idle, infamous; base,
profane, and godless persons, who See Act. 6. Scene 12.13.
hate all grace, all goodness, and make a mock of piety? What are they but
the very filth, the dross, the scumme, of the Societies and places where they
live? the very See Act. 6. Scene. 6.
Mothes, the Drones and Cankerwormes of the Commonweal? the Cyprian. Epist.
l. 1. Epist. 10. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide and Saule^ See Act. 6. Scene. 4.5.
shame and blemish of Religion? the most putred, scandalous, noxious, and
degenerate branches both of Church and State, which should be spued out, be
lopped off from both, had they their just demerits? If any Play-haunter deem
this censure over-harsh, his own conscience must subscribe unto it, Praet^r
alia hoc summum ex ^more sui vitium in animo hominis existit, quod iustus sui
ipsius and incorruptus iudex esse nequit: ^aecus est enim rei amatae cognitor
qui amat, ni^i quis assueverit, pulchra potuis in praetio habere atque sectari,
quam cognata quae sint and domestica. Plutarch. De Adulatione and Amicitia
Disc. Tom. 1. p. 174.
if self-love has not blinded it; since he can hardly cull out any who
dis-^ffect or come not unto Stage Plays, so suparlatively vicious, or
unchaste, as those who most frequent them. This, all the fore-quoted Authors
largely testify in their Quotations in the Margent: to whom I shall only add
the suffrage of I.G. in his Refutation of the Apology for Actors. p. 55.56.
But now (says he) to draw to the conclusion of my discourse, I will only
describe briefly, who for the most part they are who run madding unto Plays.
In general the vulgar sort, in whom Cicero pro Planco, says, there is no
reason, counsel or discretion. But to particularize some only among all. The
profane Gallant to feed his pleasure; the City Dames to laugh at their own
shames; the Country Clown^, to tell wonders when he comes home, of the
vanity he has seen; the Bawdes to entice; the Whores and Curtezans to set
themselves to sale; the Cutpurse to steal; the Pick-pocket to filtch; the
knave to be instructed in cosening tricks; Youth to learn amorous conceits;
some for one wicked purpose, some for another; none to any good intent, but all
fruitlessely to spend their time. But among any others, that go to the
Theaters, when shall you see an ancient Citizen, a chaste Ma^ron, a modest
Maid, a grave Senator, a wise Magistrate, a just Judge, a godly Preacher, a
religious man not blinded in ignorance, but making conscience of his ways. You
shall never see any of those at Plays, for they count it shameful and
ignominious, even an Act of reproach that may redound unto them. I shall close
up this with that of Petrarch, Theatro, quo quisquis malus i^rit, redibit
pes^imus: Nam bonis itur illud ignotum est: qui si casu aliquo igna^i adeant,
contagio non car^bunt. De Remedio vtr. fortunae ^. 1. Dialog. 30.
The way to the Playhouse is altogether unknown to good men; to which when
any ill man goes, he returns the worst of any: and if any good men go
thither ignorantly by accident, they shall not want contagion; So infectious,
so vicious is the company that usually resorts to Plays: the very best of them
in their best condition, 2 Timothy 4.5.
being for the most part, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God; having
only an outward form of godliness (and most sca^ce so much) but denying the
power thereof. From all which premises, I shall derive two unanswerable
arguments, ^o prove the unlawfulness of Stage Plays.

The first of them, being the thirteenth in number, may be cast into this form.

That which the very best, the holiest Christians, have always constantly
avoided, condemned as evil; the very worst and most notoriously vicious only
of Christians, of Pagans, of ancient and modern times, affected, applauded,
frequented with pleasure and delight; Quoniam quod apud malosdepraehenditur
dici bonum non potest. Seneca de Vita Beata, c. 24. Etenim malorum ill^
geniorum exercitus non niside malis voluptatem capit. Nazianzen. De Recta
Educatione ad Selucum. ^. 1064.
is certainly evil, and so unlawful unto Christians.

But such is the case of Stage Plays.

Therefore they are certainly evil, and so unlawful unto Christians.

The Minor is evident by the premises, by experience, and by the seventh act
ensuing. The Major is manifest by its own ligh^. For first the Primitive
Christians and godly men, (whose Heb. 13.7. Phil. 3.17.
steps we ought to follow) Psalm. 97.10. Psalm. 101.3. Psa. 119.104.128. Amos
5.15. Gal. 5.17. Prou. 29.27. 2 Timothy 2.22.23.
abhor, reject, condemn naught else but sinful, scandalous p^rnicious
pastimes, (not Christian, laudable or lawful recreations) repugnant to the
Scriptures, ^o the inward principles of grace implanted in their souls; or to
the discipline, purity and honor of the Church, the Saints of God who went
before them; the only rules by which their lives, their judgments, their
affections are directed. Secondly, unregenerate graceless persons, Argumentum
boni est malis displice^e. Seneca de Vita Beata cap. 2^. Nihil nisi grande
aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum. Tertul. Apologia. advers Gentes. cap. 5. See
Psalm. 36.4. Psalm. 34.21. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Amos 5.10. Mich. 3.2. Prove. 29.27
accordingly.
as they commonly hat^ naught else but goodness, so they Prove. 2.13, 14, 15.
c. 10.2^. c. 17.10. c. 21.10. Isay 5.18, 19. Ier. 4.22. Hosea 4.8 Mich. 7.3.
Romans 1.32. 2 Thessalonians. ^.12. Titus 3.3. Hominis mali, malae sunt voluptates.
Euripides. Ephigenia, p. 646.
most really affect, admire, frequent the pleasures, the delights of sin,
which ^re most homogeneous to their lusts, most suitable to their sinful
dispositions. No man can find any true contentment or delight in any thing,
^imilia enim similibus gaudent. Macrobius Saturn. l 7 c. 7. p. 694.
but that which is suitable to his nature; because Simili amicum est si^ile
Arist. Rhetor. l. 1. c. 11. p. 80. Magnam vim ^abet ad coniungendas amicitias
studiorum ac naturae similitudo. Cicero pro Ant. Cluentio Oration. p. 40^. Ad
connectendas amicit^as vel tenacissimum vinculum, morum similitudo. Plin.
Epist. lib. 14. Ep^st. 19. p. ^78. Semper similem ducit Deus ad similem. Homers
Odysseae. lib. 17. p^ 498.
all pleas^re, all complecency whatsoever, arises from simili^ude and
proportion. Now nothing is so connaturall, so consonant to the corruptions of
depraved Stage-haunters as sinful, lustful, or polluted objects. Therefore
Theatricall Enterludes, which wicked men most delight in, and many of them so
adore, as to make Theaters their Chapels, yea, Plays their weekly Sermons;
must needs be sinful and polluted, as their natures are: else they could never
flock unto them daily with delight, to their no small expense. So that this
first Argument is unanswerable.

The second, (in course the fourteeenth) Argument against Plays, from hence,
is this.

Those things to which lewd company, uncha^^e, deboist profane, and
graceless persons, flock by troops, with greediness and delight, is
undoubtedly sinful, yea, utterly unlawful unto Christians.

But such company, such persons as these, (especially Strumpets, Pandors,
Bawdes, Adulterers, Whoremasters, Drunkards, Prodigals,) do flock by troops
to Stage Plays, with greediness and delight.

Therefore they are undoubtedly sinful, yea, utterly unlawful unto Christian:

The Minor is su^ficiently confirmed by the premises; by the third Blast of
Retrait from Plays and Theaters, page 66. and by the suffrage of Nazianzen;
who styles Stage Plays Misera malorum spectacula. De recta Educatione ad
Selucum. p. 1063.
the miserable Spectacles of wicked men. The Major is irrefragable.

First, because the Scriptures enjoined all Christians; 1 Cor. 5.9. 10, 11.
Pro. 1.10. to 17.
not to keep company with wicked men; Prove. 28.7^ Ephesians. 5.11, 12. 2. Cor.
6.14, 15.
not to have concord, fellowship or communion with them, in wicked things
especially: Psalm. 1.1, 2. Pro. 4.14, 15.
not to walk in the counsel of the ungodly, to stand in the way of sinners,
nor sit in the seat of the scornful, 2 Timothy 3.4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Prove. 5.3^
8, 9. Ier. 9.2. Rev. 18.4. Tales habeto socios quor^^ contubernio non
infameris. Heirom. Epist. 2 c. 6.
but wholly to withdraw and turn themselves from every one who walks
disorderly: after the example of David; Psalm 26.4, 5
who hated the assemblies of the ungodly: and Psalm. 101.3, 4, 5, 7.
would not know a wicked person; giving them this resolute farewell: Psalm. 6.8.
Psalm. 119.115 Psalm 129.19.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping.

Secondly, because Christians must Romans 12.12, Col. 2.20. Iam. 4.9.
not conform themselves to the wicked of the world, much less comply with
them in Heb. 11.^4 25.
their unlawful pleasures of sin, which are but for a season; since 1 Pet.
4.1, 2, 3, 4.
Christ has suffered for them in the flesh to this very end, that they should
no longer live the rest of their time to the Quant^ enim hominibus placent,
tant o sunt Deo odibiles. B^rnard. De Ordine Vitae, Col. 1126.^
lu^ts of men, but to the will of God: the time past of their lives, being
sufficient for them to have wrought the will of the Gentiles.

Thirdly, because ill company, are not only an evident 1 These. 5.22.
appearance of evil, which Christians must avoid; but likewise a most Prove.
1.10. to 16. c. 7.5. to the end. 2 Pet. 3.17. Inimica est multorum
conversatione Nemo non aliquid nobis vitium aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut
nescientibus allinit. Vti que quo major est populus cui commissemur, co
periculi plus est. Seneca Epist. 7.
dangerous insinuating, bewitching temptation; a prevalent persuasive
provocation unto evil; and so much the more dangerous; by how much the more
numerous. Lewd companions (especially such as haunt our Theaters) are of a
most Sodales mali, lues and pestis animorum. Hy^sius Epist. Centur. 1. Epist.
78. and C^nt. 3. Epist. 63. Dedit haec contagio labem, and dabit in plures.
Iuv. Satyr. 2.
infectious, leprous, captivating e^snaring quality: they are all of Omnes
quos ^lagitium, egestas, conscius animus exagitabat,, hi Catilinae proximi
familiaresque erant: quod si quis e^iam a culpa vacuus in amicitiam e^us
inciderat, quotidiano vsu atque illecebris, facile par, similisque caeteris
efficiebatut^ ^alu^tij, Bellum Catilinarium. page 12.
Catilines disposition, they will quickly corrupt all those who entertain
their friendship, or intrude into their fellowship; making them as unchaste,
deboyst, and vicious as themselves at last, though they were Saepe malorum
consortia etiam bonos corrumpunt, quan^^ magis eos quiad vitia proni sunt.
Concilium Tole^anum 4. Can. 61.
virtuously disposed at the first; how much more then will they poison and
corrupt all such who are naturally inclined unto vice? To entercommon therefore
with such contagious persons in their Playhouse Conventicles, their
Theatricall Enterludes must needs be ^infull, because it is a strong
allective, a vehement temptation unto sin.

Object. If any here object, that many good Divines, many gracious, prous
Christians resort oft-times to Stage Plays, as well as vicious persons; with
whom men may accompany without any danger: therefore there is no such hazard,
such pravity or infection in Play-haunters society as is suggested.

I Answer, First, that perchance some few exorbitant, scandalou^ histrionicall,
(but far from good) Divines, at leastwise from good Christians, may sometimes
visit Theater^ and public Enterludes, to the scandal of Religion, the blemish
of their function, Pl^rique Sacerdotes and Clerici mal^ vivendo, forma^
caeteris in malum ^xistunt, qui in bonis esse exemplum debuerunt. Isiodor
hispalensis De summo. Bon^ lib. 3. cap. 38.
and ill example of others; for which they should, they ought to receive an
heavy censure, were Ecclesiastical Discipline duly exercised. But I dare
presume there is not one zealous, faithful, concionable, painful Mi^ister
this day living, who dares to grace a Play or Playhouse with his presence:
fince not only See Act. 7. Scene 4.
diverse Fathers: but likewise Council. Laodicenum. Can. 54. Carthag. 3. Can. 11.
Constantinop. 6. in Trullo Can. 24. Veneticu^. Can. 11. Aquisgranense sub. Lud
pio. Can. 8^.100.145. Moguntinum, Can. 10. Agathense. Can. 28.^9 T^ronicum 3.
Can. 7.8. Cabilonense 2. Can. 9. Rhemense. Can. 15. Moguntinum. sub Rabano.
Arch. Can. 13. Pari^iense. sub. Lud. and Lothario. lib. 1. cap. 38. Coloniense.
1536. pars 2. cap. 25. Nicenum. 2. Can. 22. Basili^nse sub Eugenio. Surius. Tom
4 page 223. Moguntinum sub Sebastiano. Anno 1549. cap. 74. Lateran^nse sub
Innocentio 3. Can. 16. Capitula Gr^carum Synodorum. Surius Council. Tom. 2. page
757. Can. 59. Council. Lingonense 1404. Senonense 1525. Carnotense 1526.
Burdigense 1582. Bituriense 1584. Aquense 1588. Turonicum 1582. apud
Bochellium. Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae. lib. 6. Titulus 19.
twenty five several Councels, besides Decreta Eusebij Papae Anno 309. cap. 4.
Surius Council. Tom. 1. page 312. Decreta Innocentij 1. Can 11. lb. p. 529.
Reformatio Cleri Germaniae Ratisponae 1524. cap. 4. Surius Tom. 4. p. 713.
Decreta Odonis Parisiensis, inter Communia praecepta, cap. 13. apud Carranzam
Fol 356. Decreta Pauli quinti apud Ioannem Langhecrucium. De vita and honesta^e
Ecclesiasticorum l 2. c. 21 22. Iustiniani Codex. l. 1. Tit. 4.5.
sundry Canonical Constitutions, have expressly inhibited all sorts of
Clergymen whatsoever, under pain of suspension, and perpetual deprivation,
to be either Actors or Spectactors of any public Stage Play, or to countenance
it by their presence: which I would all scandalous Vbinam hodie^ est clericorum
decor continentiae in gestu^ victu, ^estitu, and risu? In convivijs, tabernis,
ludis, and Theatris vbique vagantes crebrius reperiuntur, quam in locis Deo
dicatis, Onus Ecclesiae c. 23. sect. 1.
Play-haunting Ecclesiastickes (of which there are now too many) would
cordially con^ider; that so they might reform their error, for fear of
degradation, which they well demerit, and good Diocesans may justly inflict for
this their crime.

Secondly, I answer; that perchance some puny new-converted Christian Novices,
being altogether unacquainted with the hurtfulnesse, the wickedness of
Stage Plays, may sometimes be occasionally drawn unto Stage Plays; partly to
bear others company, whose displeasure they might el^e incur: partly through
the importunate, solicitations of lewd acquaintance; partly by the novalty or
subject of the Play it self; partly to Intelligere malum laudabile est, facere
a^tem vituperabile. Nec qui intelligit malum ipsetacit malum, sed qui facit
malum. Opus imperfectum in Matthew. Hom. 24. Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Col. 770 A
acquaint themselves the better with the dangerous consequences and fruits of
Play Houses, that so they may more justly condemn them, more peremptorily
abandon them for future times; yet principally because they are not fully
convinced of their sinfulness. But that many, that See Gosson, plays confuted
The 3 Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, p. 51, 52. accordingly.
any gracious, godly, grown, faithful Christians, who are thoroughly instructed
in the ways of godliness, or in the noxious qualities of Plays, do
constantly, do frequently resort to Play Houses, to Stage Plays, ( especially
out of a love or liking unto Plays themselves) I utterly deny.

First, because 2 Pet. 2.8. Acts 17.16. Gal. 5.17: Psalm. 119.37. See Chrysostom.
Hom. 38. in Mat, Gosson Plays confuted. The third Blast of Retrait from
Plays, Petrarch. De Remedio Vtr. Fortunae^ l. 1 Dialog. 28 30. accordingly.
no truly sanctified Christian (who cannot possibly delight in any known
evil) can ever patiently hea^e, or de^ghtfully behold, the several gross
abominable wickednesses that are daily acted and committed on the Stage, but
his very heart would forthwith boil within him, yea, his eyes gush forth with
tears, out of an holy indignation against them. Secondly because it is Hebr.
11.24, 25. Psalm. 1.1, 2. Psalm. 26.4, 5, 6. Amos 3.3. Quibus mala been sapiunt,
bona illis ignota sunt; and curis nobilioribus sunt insueti, qui vilibus
delectantur. Petrarch^ De Remed^o Vtriusque Fortunae l. 1. Dialog. 28.
impossible, that true godly Christians should take any real pleasure in these
Theatricall Enterludes which wicked men most affect: since the 2 Cor. 6.14, 15,
16, Prove. 29.27.
gracious, the graceless, are as contrary one to the other in their chief
delights, as light and darkness; righteousness and unrighteousness; Christ
and Belial; Believers and Infidels. Thirdly, because See Act. 7. Scene ^, 3, 4^
5.
all godly Christians in the Primitive Church, have wholly abandoned
Stage Plays, as sinful, as us christian pleasures; Therefore all pious
Christians must needs abhor them now; they being Ephesians. ^.1. to 7, Phil,
3.16. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 8, 9, 11. 2 Cor. 4.13.
guided by the self same Word and Spirit as the Primitive Christians were; so
that they Romans 15.5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11^ Phil. 1.27. 2 Cor. 4.13.
cannot choose but have the very selfsame judgment with them in all things,
and so in case of Stage Plays, as well as in other things. Thirdly, admit some
godly Christians do commonly resort to Play Houses, (which I cannot believe)^
yet these are few in number; and those for the most part 1 Cor. 14.20. Has res
homo sapiens videat, quae non alij^ videantur continere aliquid gratiae, quam
infantibus paryulis, and populariter institutis Arnobius advers. Gentes l. 7.
p. 236.
children, not only in spiritual, but even in natural understanding; being 1
Cor. 3.1. Hebr. 5.13.
babes in years, as well as in grace: Yea, they are naught else but 2 Pet.
2.13.14.
blemishes of Religion, and scandals to the Church, to all their fellow Seints,
who See Tertullian and Cyprian De Spectaculis. Lactantius De vero Cultu, cap.
20 Chry^. Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul and Hom. 6, 7, and 38. in Matthew. Salvian
De Gubernatione Dei with all the other Fathers and Authors, in Act. 7
blame, who much condemn them for their Play haunting. The saints who flock
to Stage Plays (if there be any such) are but a despicable, undiscernable
company, unable to draw others unto goodness; where as the graceless wicked
ones who daily visit them, are many in number, contagious in quality, more apt
to poison, to infect all those who dare approach them, than one who is full of
running Plague-sores. Therefore it must of necessity be Tolli Theatra iube, non
tuta licentia Circi est. Ovid. Tristium. lib. 2. p. 135.
dangerous to resort to Stage Plays. We all know by woeful experience, Ad
peertior a faciles sumus, quia nec dux potest, nec comes d^esse; Non pronum
iter tantum est ad vitia, sed etiam praeceps. Seneca Epist. 97.
That man's corrupt nature is far more pendulously propense to vicious, than
to good examples: and that evil things are far more apt to defile that which
is good, than good things^ to rectify that which is evil. Whence it always
comes to pass (as Rerum natura sic est, ut quoties bonus malo conjugitur, non
ex bono malus melioretur, sed ex malo bonus contaminetur: malum enim coinquinat
bonum, bonum autem non coinquinat malum. Iunge Iutum farinae, non farina
sordidat lutum, sed lutum farinam. Chrysostom. Hom. 28. in Matthew. Tom. ^. Col.
782. A
Chrysostom well observes) that as often as good and bad men associate
themselves together, the ill are never meliorated by the good, but the good are
always contaminated, corrupted by the evil: even as when Clay and Meal are
kneaded together, the Clay defiles the Meal, not the Meal refines the Clay.
Saint Paul informs us; a that a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump: King
Solomon; b that one sinner destroys must good; and the sententious Satyrist;
That one scabbed sheep destroys a whole flock, one dandraffe Swine, the
whole heard; one rotten grape the whole cluster: Subducendus est te^er animus
populo, and parum tenax recti. Facile transsitur ad plur^s. Socrati, Oatoni,
and illis excutere me^tem suam dissimilis multitudo pot^isset a deo nemo
nostrum, qui cum maxim concinnamus ingenium ferro imp^tum vitiorum, tam magno
comitatu Venientium potest. Vnum exemplu^ aut avaritiae aut luxuriae multum
mali facit. Convictor delicatu^ paulatim enervat and emollit. Vicinus dives
cupiditatem irritat: malignus comes, quamvis candido and simplici, rabiginem
suam affricuit. Quid i^ accidere his credis in quos public factus est impetus:
Seneca Epist. 7. Malorum hominum consuetudo aliquid vitij pueris affricat^
Plutarch. de Educat. Puerorum. Tom. 1. p. 21.
Much more then will these troops of wicked ones^ who meet at Theaters (which
are able to corrupt the strongest Christian) deprave those few unstable tender
babes in Christ, who intrude into their company; as Seneca well argues in our
present case: It is a good observation of a grave Historian: Notum est illud
pietati tuae, quod in Mario Maximo legisti; meliorem esse Rempublicam, and
prope tutiorem, in qua pri^ceps malus est, ea in qua sunt amici principis mali:
si quidem vinus malus potest a pluribus bonis corrigi; multi autem mali non
possunt ab vno, quamvis bono, vlla ratione superari, and id quidem ab Homulo
ipsi Traiano dictum est, cum ille diceret Domitianum pessimum fuisse, amicos
autem bonos habuisse. AElij Lamprid^ Severus p. 249, 250.
that is far better for a Kingdom, to have a bad King and good Counselors
to advise him, than a good King and bad Counselors: his reason is (and it is
Non tantum valeat in bonum, bonum vnum, quantum duo mala in malum. De praecepto
and Dispensatione, c. 28. Col. 936 A.
Saint Bernards too) because one bad man, may happily be reformed by many good;
but many evil men can by no means be overruled, or rectified, by any one man
be he never so good. I may aptly accomodate this reason to our present purpose
thus. Admit some few good Christians resort sometimes to Stage Plays; yet
since they always meet with far more, far greater troops of lewd,
deboist companio^s there, who (without Gods preventing grace, which
Play-haunters cannot challenge) will certainly corrupt them in a Nullum tempus
ad nocendum angustum est malis. Senecae Mea^a, Act. 2. fol. 146.
moment: it must needs be sinful, be dangerous to resort unto them: since the
fewer good ones, are Vnum vero est pro quo vitari malorum societas debeat, ne
si fortasse corrigi non valent, ad imitationem trahant: and cum ipsi a sua
nequitia non mutentur, eos qui sibi coniunctos fuerint pervertunt. Corrumpunt
enim bonos mores colloquia prava. Itaque infirmi quicunque societatem malorum
declinare debent, ne mala quae frequenter aspiciunt and corrigere non valent,
delectentur imitari. Anselmus in 1 Cor. cap. 6. Tom. 2. page 202. C.
more likely to be vitiated, by the major multitude of wicked ones, whose
wickedness exceeds their goodness; than the wicked ones to be reclaimed by
their goodness, of which they are incapable. Lastly, the presence of some
godly men at Stage Plays, can never make Play-assemblies good, in God or man's
esteem. When good and bad men join together in Religious duti^s; the
goodness of Gal. 1.2. Isay 1 21.
the lesser part denominates the whole, and makes it good in Gods, in m^ns
account: because the end, the cause of this convention, is Gods glory. But when
good and bad confederate themselves together in any delights of sin, 2 Chronicles.
19 ^ c. 20.35, 36, 37. Ezech. 18.24. Reu. 18.4. Psalm. 106.39, 40. Isay 1.4.21.
God looks not on the goodness of the good, but upon the wickedness of good
and bad, condemning all for a Isay 1.4.10, 13, 14. c. 66.3.4. Ier. 7.11. Ezech.
14.13. to 22.
Congregation of evil doers, because the object, the end of these their
conventicles are unlawful. When gracious and graceless persons shall fit
promiscuously together in a Playhouse, beholding some profane lascivious
Interlude with delight; not only God himself, but even Saints and Angels
frown upon them, as a fraternity of evil doers; and a Satanicall unchristian
assembly, (as the Qui congregatu^^ana cum ijs qui spectacula and theatra
co^veniunt, and cum diabolo idem sentiunt, vnus ex ipsis connume^abitur, and
vae habebit. Clem. Romans Constit. Apost^ l. 2. c. 66 Omnes turpitudine rerum
vnum sunt, qui sibi rerum turpiu^ voluntate sociantur. Nam hoc ipso quod
aliquis rem obs^aenam cupit^ dum ad immunda properat immundus est. Salvian. de
G^bern. Dei. l. 6. p. 187 201. Odisse debemus iste conu^ntus and caetus
Ethnicorum. Quid luci cum tenebri^? quid vitae and morti? Quid facies in illo
suffragiorum impiorum aestuario depraehensus vbi nemo te cognoscit Christianum?
Recogita quid de te ^iat in caelo. Dubita^ enim i^lo momento quo in Ecclesia
Diaboli fueris, omnes Angelos prospicere de cae^o, and fingulos denotare, quis
blasphemias dixerit, quis audierit, quis lingua^, quis aures Diabolo adversus
Deum administraverit? Non ergo fugies sedilia hostium Christi, illam cathedram
pestilentiariam, etc. Tertullian. De Spectaculis. cap. 26, 27.
Fathers testify;) because the most of the^ are such, and the end for which they
meet is such. Wherefore, since the whole Conventicle of Play-haunters in Gods,
in Angels, in holy men's esteem, is always evil, notwithstanding the pres^nce
of some few godly ones; these Plays themselves must certainly be execrably
odious to all good Christians, (who Psalm. 26.4, 5 Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17. Vita
malos, cave iniquos, fuge improbos, spern^ ingratos, a te fuga turbas hominum,
maxim ^orum qui ad vitia proni sunt: periculosum est enim vitam cum malis
ducere, and cum his qui prave vivunt so ciari. Isiodor Hispal. De contemp^u
mundi. lib. page 229^ H.
must abandon all lewd companions) even in this respect.

ACTVS 5.
SCENA PRIMA.
Fifthly, Stage-playe^ must needs be abominable, unlawful unto Christians,
both in regard of their manner of Action, and of all those several parts,
concomitants and circumstances that attend them. From whence I raise this
fifteenth Argument. Argument. 15.


That whose manner of action, parts, concomitants, and several circumstances
are sinful; must certainly be Quod enim nec bonum est, nec ben^ fieri potest
(which is the case of Stage Plays) purum proculdubio ma^um est. Bernard.
Epist. 7. Col. 1395. L.
abominable and u^lawfull unto Christians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

But such are the manner of action, parts, concomitants, and several
circumstances of Stage Plays.

Therefore they are certainly abominable and unlaw^ull unto Christians.

The Major needs no confirmation; because such as the form, the parts and
circumstances are, such questionless is the whole. The Minor I shall evidence
by a particular discussion.

First, of the very manner of acting Stage Plays:

Secondly, of the several parts that are usually acted in

Thirdly, of the ordinary apparel wherein Plays are

Fourthly, of the several concomitants or circumstances and vain theatricall
applauses: omitting all other adjuncts, shows, and circumstances of Plays,
which Indocti, stolidique and depugnare parati Si discorde^, equos m^dia inter
carmina poscunt, A^t vrsum, aut pugiles: his nam plebecula gaudet. Verum
equitis quo que iam ingravit ab aure voluptas omnis ad in cer tos oculos, and
gaudia yana. Quatuor aut plures a^laea praemuntur in horas, Dum fugiunt equitu^
turmae, p^ditumque catervae. Mox trahitur manibus regum for^una retortis.
Esseda festinant, pilenta, petordita, naves: Captivum portatur ebur, captiva
corinthus, etc. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. page 283, 284. See Godwins Roman
Antiquities, lib 2. Sect. 3. cap. 2. to 14.
Horace, and some others mention, as not so pertinent to our present purpose.

To begin, with the first branch of the first particular, to wit, the
hypocrisy, faining, or dissimulation that is exercised in acting Stage Plays.
If we seriously consider the very form of acting Plays, we must needs
acknowledge it to be naught else but gross hypocrisy. Tacianus Contr. Graecos
Oration. Cyprian. Epist. lib 2. Epist. 2. Clemens Alexand. Oration Adhort. ad
Gentes. fol. 8, 9. Arnobius. lib. 7. advers. Gentes page 230. to 242.
Lactantius De vero cultu. cap. 20. Tertullian. De Spectac^ lib. Augustine. De
Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 3. to 16. De Sermon Domini in Monte. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew. Salvian. De Gubern. Dei lib. 6. Gellius Noctium
Atticarum. lib. 7. cap. 5. Gosson Plays confuted Action 2. Master Dil^o of the
Deceitfulness of the Heart. cap. 2. p. 21. I. G. in his Refutation of the
Apology for Actors, and sundry others accordingly.
All things are counterfeited, feined, dissembled; nothing really or sincerely
acted. Players are always counterf^iting, representing the persons, habits,
offices, callings parts, conditions, speeches, actions, lives^; the passions,
the affections, the anger, hatred, cruelty, love, revenge, dissentions; yea,
the very See Act. 3. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4.
vices, sins, and lusts; the adulteries, incests, rapes, murders, tyrannies,
thefis, and such like crimes of other men, of other sexes, of other creature^;
yea, oft-times of the Sea Act. 3. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4.
Devil himself, and Pagan Divellgods. They are always Grex agit in Scena
mimum, pater illevocatur, ^ilius hic, nomen divitis ille tenet. Mox vbi
rid^ndas inclusit pagina parts. Vera r^dit facies, dissimulata perit. Pe^roni
Satyricon. p. 41. See Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 49. De Mimis.
Vidistisaepe in S^aen^a tragicos istos ^ctores^ qui vt res postulat ia^ Orontes
sunt, Pri^mi, aut Agamemnones^ idem paulo post Ce^ropem aut E^ect eum agens,
i^ssu Poetae mendicus procedit. Fabula autem finita, exuta v^st^ auro intex^a,
and persona deposita and cothurnis, pauper ac humilis errat, etc. Lucianu in
Necromant.
acting others, not themselves^ they vent notorious lying fables, as undoubted
truths: they put false glosses upon Histories, persons, virtues, vices, all
things that they act, representing them in feined colors: the whole action of
Plays is naught else but feining, but counterfeiting, but palpable hypocrisy
and dissimulation which God, which men abhorr^: therefor it must needs be
sinful.

If any here object: Object.
That the acting of Plays is no hypocrysie, no dissimulation, it being only
done in sport, in imitation, with no sinister intent at all, to hurt, to
cheat, or circumvent men.

I answer; Answ.
First, that admit it be but a mere ^mitation of other men's persons, parts and
vices, yet it must needs be sinful: because the very imitation of wicked men,
of Pagans, of Idols, of Idolaters, especially in their lewdest wickednesses
(the most usual subject of our Enterludes) is without all question evil,
Exodus 23.2. Psalm. 1.1. Pro. 1.15, 16^ c. 5.8, 9. Romans 1.32. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Ier.
10.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.2.15.18. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. See Here. p. 18. to 28.
as the Scriptures plainly teach us. Secondly, I answer, that by the ^eining
used in our Stage Plays, many of our Spectators are deceived, all cheated.
Deceived, with forged fabulous histories instead of truths; with false
represen^ations of true stories: Neque enim est apud eos virtutes coler^ sed
vitia colerare, quodam quasi virtutum minio. Bernard super Cantica Sermo 66.
fol. 161. E.
with palliated vices in lei^ of virtues: with virtues vizarded under the names
of vice; with bad Plays oft-times which all dislike, instead of good, as some
in some respects account them. Cheated, with shadows instead of substance:
with sinful, heathenish, unchristian spectacles, in place of honest
recreations. These Stage-hypocrisies, which at the very best, are pure vanity,
and so not valuable; do cheat many of their hon^sty, their civility, their
chastity, their estates, their reputation, their virtues, their salvation^ See
Marcus Aurelius Epistle 12. to Lambert. The third Blast of Retrait from Plays
p. 115.116. and Act. 6. Scene 1.2. accordingly.
most, of their money^ all, of their time: too dear a price for so fruitless,
so wretchlesse a purchase. Besides, See Act. 6. Scene 17.
they involve men in the guilt of sundry sins, which they little feared or
suspected, to the eternal hazard o^ their souls, which is a great deceit.
Yea, the very end why Players act their Enterludes, is The third Blast of
Retrait Plays and Theaters. p. 116. and Act 6. Scene 2.
only to cheat men's money out of their purses by dishonest means, not giving
quid pro quo: The very groundwork therefore of this objection, is but forged.
Thirdly, admit that no man were cheated, or prejudiced by that counterfeiting,
which accompanies the acting of all Stage Plays; yet the mere acting of the
persons, parts, gestures, offices, actions, passions; especially of the Sexes,
Vices, Anger, Fury, Love, Revenge and Villainies of other men, be it in sport,
in representation only, is hypocri^i^. For what else is hypocrisy in the
proper signification of the word, Hypocritae nomen translatu^ est a specie
e^ru^ qu Spectaculis tecta facie inc^dunt, etc utpopulu^ dum in ^^dis agerent,
fall^rent, modo in specie viri, modo in fo^mafaeminae et reliquis prestigi^^.
Vnde et Mimus hypocrita dictus, quia imitator est and fimilator. Calepine,
Suida^, Cooper, Thomasius, Elio^, R^der, Mi^shaw, and Holioke: in their
Dictionaries in the words. Hypocrita and Hypocrisis. Calius Rh^dig. Antiqu.
Lect. l. 8. c. 8. p. 356. In Ecclesia. vel in omni vita humana, quisquis vult.
videri qu^d non est, hypocrita est. Hypocritae sunt, qui ^egunt sub persona
quod sunt, ^t ostentant in persona quod non sunt. Hypocritarum ergo nomine
simulat^res acceperis August. De Sermon. Dom. in Monte cap. 3. and 30. Tom. 4.
pars 2. p. 637, 669. Hypocrita autem is est, qui aliam pro alia figuram induit:
veluti si pauper quispiam principis sibi personam asciscat, tandiu clarus
apparens. quandiu theatrum a^sidi^. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 6. Tom. 2. Col. 1185.
A. The^phyla^^. E^ar. in Matthew. 6. Ambrose De Elia and ^ejunio. c. 10. Tom. 1.
p. 254. H. Bernard. Super. Cantica. Sermon. 33. Zacharias Chrysopolitanus. In
Vnum ex quat^or. l. 1. ^. 34. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 12. pars 1. p. 45. E.
Chrysologus. Sermo 172. accordingly.
but the acting of another part or person on the Stage: or what else is an
hypoc^ite, in his tru^ etimologie, but a Stage Player, or one who acts another
part: as sundry Authors and Gramarians teach us. Hence that common epithet in
our Latin Authors: Calvin. Iustit. l. 4. c. 19. sect. 18. Se^ Coopers
Dictionarie.
Histrionica hypocrisis: And hence is it, that not only diverse modern Master
Dike of the Decei^fulnesse of man's Heart. The Rich Cabinet, London 1616. page
116, 117.
English and Latin Writers, but likewise Haec vbique in theatris ab hypocritis
splendissi^is vocibus comaedisantur. Irenaus. Co^^. Hareses lib. 2. cap. 19. Ne
obscur^s faciem tuam quemadmodum hypocritae faciun^. Hypocrita, hoc est
histrio, vocatur is, qui in Theatro alienam personam sumit. Vt ^erv^s existens
saepenumero domini, and privatus regis. Sic in ha^ vita ad suos ^ores
orchestras atque theatrum exe^cent ij, qui alia cord gerentes, alia
extrinsecus hominibus prae se f^runt. Basil. De Iejuni^ ^erm. 2. Tom. 1. p.
322. Ideo dixit hypocritas, ^o quod simulationealienam personam induant, sicut
in scena qui tragaedias agunt, pro little dictis quorum personas gerunt motus
suos exercitant vt aut irascantur, aut maereant, v^l exultent. Amb. De El^a and
Ieiun. c. 10. To^. 1. p. 254. H. Chrysostom. Hom. 31. in Mat. ^o^. 2. Col. 170. D^et
E^^r in Mat. ^. Col. 1185. A. Sunt enim hypocritae simulatores, tanquam
pronunciatores personarum alienaru^ sicut in theatri^is fabulis. Non enim qui
agit parts Agamemnonis in tragaedia, verbi gratia, five alicuius alterius, ad
historiam vel ^abulam quae agitur pertinentis, vere ipse est, sed simulat eum,
and hypocrita dicitur. Aug. ^e Sermon. Dom. in Monte l. 2. c. 3. Tom. 4. pars 2.
p. 637. Ergo hypocritarum nomen ex antiquis theatralibus assu^ptum est
disciplinis, quia erant ^im^latores (simulator quippe Graece hypocrita sonare
probatur) qui tanquam oratores in concione fabulose agebant parts personarum
in theatris; and omnia ^orum negotia tragica vel comica, ac si essent ipsi
quorum personas gerebant, monstrabantur. Narrabant enim non suas sed little
historias and continentiam, motus quoque and voces eorum, and vultus,
videntibus ob favor^m vulgi vicissim repraesentabant. Ita sane and illi qui
bona opera ficto laudis officio, non ad Dei, sed ad suam gloriam ostentan^.
Agunt enim parts justorum and personarum eorum, cum sint simulatores, ob
favorem hominum assumant: non quod habeant ju^titiae opera, sed quia simulant
se habere. Alias autem si justa essent non ad se, imo ad Deum, cun^ta quae
faciunt boni referrent Nunc autem quia vt minum secundum tragicam pi^^atem in
the^^ricis, etc. Pas^atiu^ R^tbertus in Mat. Evang. l. 4. Bibl. Pa^rum T^m. 9.
part 2. page 986. A.B.
sundry Fathers here quoted in the Margent, s^ile Stage Players hypocrites;
Hypocrites, Stage Players, as being ^ne and the same in substance: there being
nothing more familiar with them, then to describe an hypocrite by a
Stage Player; and a Stage Player by an hypocrite. If therefore we give any
credit to the Fathers, or Authors here alleged; we must needs acknowledge,
the very acting of Stage Plays to be hypocrisy; and Histrio enim aliter in
animo sent^^, foris autem quod non est mentitur, Tacian^^ Oration contr. Grace^.
Players themselves to be mere hypocrites, ( their very profession being
nothing else, but an artificial hypocrisy,) and so an abominable, and
unchristian exercise. For God, John 3.33. c. 7.28. Romans 3.4.
who is truth it self, Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17.
in whom there is no variableness, no shadow of change Numb. 23.19. Romans 3.4.
Titus 1.2.
no feining, no hypocrisy; as he has given a uniform distinct and proper
being to every creature, Job 14.5. c. 26.10. Psalm. 104.5. to 25.
the bounds of which may not be exceeded: so he requires that the actions of
every creature should be Romans 13.13. Phil. 1.8. c. 4.8. 1 Pet. 2.2^. 1 Cor. 5.8.
honest and sincere, Iam. 3.17. Luke 12.1.
devoyde of all hypocrisy, as all his actions, and their na^ures are. Hence he
enioyes all men at all times, Mat. 23.27.28. 2 Cor. 5.12. Rev. 3.15, 16, 17, 18.
to be such in show, as they are in truth: to seem that o^twardly which they
are inwardly; to act themselves, not others: to Ephesians. 6.6. Phil. 4.8, 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.4. Hebr. 10.30. Iam. 1.22, 25. 1 Pet. 3.11. c. 4.19. 1 Ioh. 3.22.
imitate those men, those graces which his word prescribes them; not those
accurs^d villainies, which wicked men (who are now in hell) have left behind
them. Psalm. 51.6.
God requires truth in the inward parts; in the soul, the affections; yea, in
the habit, speeches, gestures, in the whole inti^e man. Now this counterfeiting
of persons, affections, manners, vices, sexes, and the like, which is
inseparably incident to the acting of Plays; as it transformes the Actors into
what they are not; so it in^useth falsehood into ev^ry part of soul and body,
as Omnis hypocrisis mendacio plena est, and aliud quidem est, and aliud ^ingit.
Christus autem cum sit veritas mendacio adversatur. Qui igitur Christum
discunt, hypocrisin ^ugiunt. Theophylact. Enar. in Luc. 12. p. 158. C.
all hypocrisy does; in causing them to seem that in outward ^ppearance which
they a^e not in truth: therefore it must needs be^ odious to the God of truth;
as well as the common accursed hellish art of face-painting, which the Clemens
Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. l. 2. 10. Tertullian. De Cultu Faeminarum. c. 3. to 9.
and de Velandis virginibus. Tract. Ambrose Hexaemeron lib. 6. c. 8. De
Virginitate lib. 1. Hieron. Epist. 7. c. 2.3. Epist. 8. c. 5. Epist 10. c. 2,
3. August. d^ Doctrina Christian^ l. 4. c. 21. See my Vnlovelinesse of
Love-lockes. page 2.
Fathers, with others much condemn, even from this very ground; because it
sophisticates and perver^s the works of God, in putping a false gloss upon
his creatures. And this the personating of Stage Plays always does, as much,
nay more then it. Neither will this qualify the matter, that this
Stage-hypocrisie is only in merriment. For 1 Samuel 21.13, 14, 15. See D.
Wille^, Calvin, and others, Ibidem.
if David's counterfeiting of himself to be mad before Achish King of Gath, for
the safe-gard of his life; or Genesis cap. 42 and 43. See the Commentators those
chapters.
Iosephes jesting dissimulation with his brethren, were sinful, as good
Divines repute it; Omnis simulatio and omnis duplicitas mendacium est. Ergo non
solum in falsis verbis, sed etiam in simulatis operibus mendacium comprobatur.
Ambrose Sermo 44. T^m. 5. p. 31.
because there was a li^ involved in it. Much more must this wanton acting
hypocrisy be abominably sinful, because it is merely voluntary, there being
no impulsive cause to move men to it. If Romans 3.8.
the damnation of those who do evil, that good may come of it, be just: much
more must their condemnation be righteous, their sin exceeding great, who
commit hypocrisy ( a great, a Dupliciter autem damnatur hypocritae, pro
occult^ iniquitate, pro aperta simulatione. Bernard De Ordine vi^a. Col. 1226.
A Se^ August. de Conflictu vitiorum and virtum. and Isiodor hisp^ l. Sentent.
lib. 3. c. 24. p. 465. accordingly.
double iniquity) on the open Theater, to no other end, but to make others
sinful sport to pass away their precious time. Since then it is evident by
the premises, that the very acting of Stage Plays is hypocrisy, as De
Spectac. lib. c. 23.
Tertullian and De Spectaculis lib.
Cyprian, together with Irenaeus, Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Tatianus, Pascatius Ratbertus, and the other See 2. a, b, c. and d, before.
fore-quoted Author largely teach us: we may hence conclude them to be odious
unto God. Wherefore I shall here close up this Scene, with this sixteenth
Play-condemning Argument.

That, whose very action is but mere hypocrisie^ but gross dissimulation,
must questionless be execrable and unlawful unto Christians; Witness,
Matthew. 23.13, 14, 15.23, 27, 28, 29. c. 24.51. Luke 12.1. Gal. 2.13. 1 Timothy
4.2. Iam. 3.17^ and that excellent passage of of Iam vero ipsum opus personarum
qu^ro an Deo placeat, qui omnem similitudinem vetat fieri, quanto magis
imaginis suae? Non amat falsum auctor veritatis; adultorium est apud cum omne
quod fingitur Proinde vocem, sexus, aetates mentientem; amores, iras, gemitus,
lachrymas adseverantem, non probabit qui omnem hypocri^in damnat. De
Sp^ctaculis c. 23.
Tertullian to our purpose, recited in the Margent.

But such and no other is the very action of Stage Plays: as the precedent
Authors: together with the third blast of Retrait of from Stage Plays and
Theaters, p. 110. to 117. expre^ly testify.

Therefore they must questionless be execrable and unlawful unto Christians,
even in this respect.

SCENA SECVNDA.
SEcondly, as the hypocrisy, even so the lasciviousness of acting
Stage Plays, does draw an inexpiable guilt upon them, as this seventeenth
Argument will demonstrate. Argument. 17.


That whose very action is Quid multa? authores^ omnes cum sacri^ tum profani
spurcitiam scenae exagitant; non modo quod fabulae obscenae in scena agerentur,
sed ^tiam quod motus gestusque essent impudici, atque ad^o prostibula ipsa in
scenam saepe venirent; and scena prostarent. Vnde and obscaenum, ait Varro,
quod non nisi in scena palam dicitur. Buleng. Do Theatro l. 1. c. 50. p. 296.
obscene, lascivious, amorous, and unchaste, must needs be hateful and
unlawful unto Christians.

But such is the very action of Stage Plays.

Therefore they must needs be hateful and unlawful unto Christians.

The Mayor is without all controversy, since God himself enjoynes all
Christians, Titus. 2.12.14. Ephesians 4.17, 18, 19. Romans 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Pet.
1.14.15. c 4.2.3. c. 2.11.12.
to live chastely, soberly, holily, and godly in this present world, as
becomes Saints; Romans 13.13. Ephesians. 4.17.19 1 Pet. 4.3.2 Cor. 12.21. Titers 3.3.
Jude 4.
not walking in lasciviousness, lusts, or wantonness, as the Gentiles, or
other carnal persons do: but 1 Pet. 2.11.12.
absteining from these and all other fleshly lusts which war against the
soule^ Gal. 5.19.
Lasciviousness (together with all amourous wanton gestures, complements and
imbracements which issue from it) is a fruit of the flesh; Mar. 7.20, 21, 22,
23.
an evil that proceeds from within, and so defiles the heart of man from which
it springs. It is a Jude 4. Iam^ 5.5.
sin of which God takes especial notice, and will certainly charge it on
men's consciences at the last. A 2 Cor. 12.21.
sin to be seriously rep^nted of. A sin to which the Ephesians. 4.19. 1 Pet.
4.3. Jude 4.
Gentiles and other wicked men were given over. A sin^e, Isay 3.16. to 26.
for which God threatens to punish the daughters of Zion. A sin which Gal.
5.19.21. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.27.
disinherits and shuts men out of heaven. A sin which sundry Clemens Alexand.
Paedagogi. l. 2. c. 1. to 10. l, 3. c. 3. Ambr. De officijs. l. 1. c. 8 and l.
3. c. 12. Basil. de Vera Virginitate lib. and Ascetica cap. 13. Tertullian de
Velandis Virginibus, De cultu Faeminarum, Cyprian. De ^abi^u Virginum Hierom.
Epist. 7, 8.16. and 23 Bernard, de Modo been vivendi Sermo 9. Gratian
d^stinctio 41. Concilium Valentinum. Can. 15. Concil^ Senonense Decreta Morum.
Can. 25. Calvin, Hooper, Babingeon, Perkins, Elton, Dod, Andrews, Williams,
Lake, and all other Expositors on the seventh Commandment. accordingly.
Fathers have plentifully condemned, as mis-beseeming Christians, whose very
outward gestures and deportment ought to be modest, chaste, and holy, Ephesians.
5.3.4. Phil. 1.27. 1 ^im. 2.10. Titus 2 3. 1 Pet 2.12. c. 31. to 7. Similiter
impud^citiam ^mnem amoliri jubemur: hocigitur modo etiam a Theatro seperamur;
quod est privatum consistorium impudicitiae, vbi nihil probatur quam q^od alibi
non probatur. Ita summa gratia ^jus de spu^citia plutimum concin^ata est, quam
attellanus gesticulatur, quam mimus etia^, per mulieres repraesen^at se^um
p^dori^ ex^erminans, vt ^^cilius domi quam in sc^n^ ^rube^^cant. Quam denique
Pantomimus a pueritia patitur in corpore ut artifex esse possit. Ipsa etiam
prostibula publicae libidinis host^ae in scena proferuntur, plus misera in
presentia faemina^um, quibus solis latebant: perque omnis aetatis, omnis
dignitatis or a transd^cuntur, lo^us, stipes, elogium, etiam quibus opus non
est, praedicatur. Ibid.
as becomes the Gospel of Christ. The Mayor therefore is unquestionable.

The Minor is abundantly ratified; First, by the concurrent testimony of sundry
Fathers and modern Authors, who from hence condemn all Stage Plays, because
the acting of them is obscene, and amorous. Witness Tertullian. Despectaculis
lib. cap. 17. o We are commanded (writes he) to put away all wantonness and
incontinency^ by this means therefore we are divorced from the Theater, the
private consistory of uncleanness, where nothing is approved, but what in all
other places is disapproved. Yea, its greatest praise is for the most part
conci^nated of that lasciviousness, that filthiness which the Stage Player
acts; which the Actor likewise represents by women, who have banished the
modesty of their sex, that so they may more easily blush at home, than ^n the
Stage. Which finally the Patomimus does suffer in his body from his childhood,
that so h^ may be expert in his profession. Yea, the very Stews themselves,
the sacrifices of public lust, are brought forth upon the Stage, they being
more miserable in the presence of women, from whom alone they were concealed;
and before the eyes of every age, of every degree, the place, the hire, the
testimonial are represented, yea, published unto those to whom there is no
need Taceode reliquis, ea que in tenebris and speluncis suis delitescere
decebat, ne diem contaminarent. Erubescat senatus, erubescant ordines omnes,
Ipse ille pudoris sui interempt Fices de gestibus suis ad lucem and populum
expaues centes seme^ anno erubescunt. Quod si nobis omnis impudicitra execranda
est, cur liceat audire, quae loqui non licet? Cum etiam scurtilitatem and omne
varum verbum judicatum a Deo sciamus, cur aeque lic^at videre quod facere
flagitium est? Cur quae ore prolata communicant hominem, ea per oculos, and
aures admissa non videantur hominem communicare: cum spiritui appareant aures
and oculi, nec possit mundus praestari, cuius apparitores inquinantur. Habes
igitur and theatri interdictionem, de interdictione impudicitiae. Ibidem Tom.
2. p. 395.396.
I forbear to mention more, it being meet they should lie obscured in
darkness, in their dungeons, lest they should defile the light. Let the Senate
blush, let all degrees blush at this, since those very murderers of their own
chastity, fearing their actions should be manifested to the people, blush once
a year. Now if all unclearnesse must be execrable to us, why should it be
lawful to hear those things which it is unlawful to speak? for since we may
know that all scurrillity, and every vain word is condemned by God, how can it
be lawful to hear those things which are a wickedness to commit? Why should
those things which defile a man being uttered only with his mouth, not seem
to pollute him, when they pass through his eyes and ears by his consent?
since the eyes and ears, lie open to the soul: neither can he be made or
reputed, clean, whose appariters are defiled. Thou have therefore an
interdiction of the Theater, from the interdiction of uncleanness. Thus
Tertullian. Paedagogi. l. 2. c. 10. l 3. c. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, De spectaculis lib; and Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato.
Cyprian, Adversus Gentes lib. 4. p. 149.150. lib. 7. p. 233.
Arnobius, De Vero Cultu cap. 20. Divinar: Instit. Epitome c. 6.
Lactantius, Oration adversus Graecos.
Tatianus, Catechesis Mystagogica. 1.
Cyril of Jerusalem, Hexa^m. Hom. 4. and De Ebrietate and luxu Oration.
Saint Basil, In dictum Evangelij. Quatenus fecistis, etc.
Gregory Nyssen, declaime much against the lasciviousness, the lewdness which
attends the acting of Plays; especially the Celebrantur ludi illi cum omni
lascivia, convenientes memoriae meretricis. Nam praeter verborum licentiam,
quibus obscaenitas omnis effunditur, exuuntur etiam vestibus populo flagitante
meretrices, quae tunc mimorum funguntur officio, and in conspectu populi vsque
ad satietatem impudicorum luminum cumpudendis moribus detinentur. Lactantius De
falsa Relig. l. 1. c. 20. p. 75. See August. de Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 8. and
Ludovici Viver Nota Ibidem. ^.
Floralian Enterludes, whose transcendent filthiness, was so execrably odious,
as I dare not to relate it. Gregory Nazianzen, considering the filthiness that
accompanies Plays; does from thence style Play Houses, Lasciva faeditatis and
impuritatis omnis officina. De Educatione ad Seleucum p. 1063.
the lascivious shops of all filthiness and impuritie Plays Mimorum
petulantias omni impudicitia and contumelia refertas. Lascivorum hominum
inhonestas disciplinas and indecoras, qui nihil ^urpe ducunt praeter modestiam.
Ibid.
; the petulancies of Players, fraught with all incontinency: the dishonest and
unseemely disciplines of lascivious men, who repute nothing filthy but modesty:
and Players Turpitudinis administri, etc. Ibid.
the servants of filthiness, the counterfeiters of ridiculous things, who are
ready in the open view of all men, to suffer or act all detestable things
whatsoever. Ecclesiast. hist. l. 8. c. 24.
Eusebius Pamphilus from the selfsame ground, calls Stage Players, men of
waton and lewde-gestures, who did wonderfully delight the Spectators, and made
Maximinus the tyrant sport. Saint Chrysostom writes, Cuncta enim quae ibi
fi^at turpissima sunt, verba, vestitus, tonsura, incessus, voces, cantus,
modulationes, oculorum eversiones, ac motus, tibiae, fistulae, and ipsa
fabularum argumenta: omnia (^inquam) turpilascivia, plena sunt: Tantam
lasciviam in audientium atque videntium animos infundunt, vt vno omnes animo
radicitus ementibus modestiam ^^c^lere, and perniciosa voluptate cupiditates
suas implere conari videantur. Hom. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 298. C.D.
That all things which are acted on the Stage, are most filthy and lascivious:
the words, the apparel, the gestures, the tonsure, the music, the glances of
the eyes, the ditties, the pipes, the very arguments of the Plays themselves;
All things, I say, are full of filthy lasciviousness. Whence they infuse so
great lasciviousness into the hearers and spectators minds, that all of them
may seem to endeavor, even with one consent to eradicate all modesty out of
their hearts, and to satisfy their lusts with pernicious pleasure, Saint
Augustine, as he much declaimes against the obscenity of acting of Plays, De
Civit Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to c. ^ 3. l. 4. c. 3.10, 26, 27, 28. l. 6. c. 6.7 l. 7.
c. 26, 27. l 8. c. 5.13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 27.
in sundry places; so he informs us from his own experience; Veniebamus etiam
nos aliquando adolescentes ad spectacula ludibria que sacrilegiorum: ludis
turpissimis qui dijs deabusque exhibebantur, oblectabamur. Caelesti virgini,
and Berecynthiae matri Deorum omninum ante erus Iecticam die solemni lavationis
eius, talia, per publicum cantitabantur a ne quissimis sceticis, qualia non
dico matre^ deoru^, sed matre^ qualiumcunque senatoru^, vel quorum libet
honestoru^ virorum; imo vero qualia nec matrem ipsoru^ scenicorum deceretau^ire
Illam enim turpitudinem obscaenorum dictorum atque factorum scenicos ipsos domi
suae pro^udendi causa coram matribus suis agere puderet, quam pet publicum
agebant coram deorum omnium matre spectante and audiente vtriusque sexus
frequentissima multitudine. Quae si illecta curiositate adesse potuit
circumfusa; saltem offensa castitate debuit abire confusa, Aug. de Civit. Dei.
l. 2. c. 4.5. S^^ l. 7. c. 26, 27.
That on the solemn day of the lotion of Berecynthea, the mother of the Gods,
such things were publicly chanted by most wicked Stage Players; as did not
beseem, I say not, the mother of the Gods to hear; but even the mother of any
of the Senators, or of any honest men; yea, the mothers of the Stage Players
themselves. For humane modesty has such a respect toward parents which
wickedness it self cannot wholly take away. The Players themselves might
blush, to act in private at their own houses for exercise sake before their
own mothers, that filthiness of obscene words and deeds, which they did
publicly act before the mother of the gods, in the sight and hearing of a most
numerous multitude of both sexes: which if ^he being enticed by curiosity could
be circumfusedly present at these Plays, she ought at l^ast to depart ashamed
from them, her chastity being offended with them. Quae sunt sacrilegia si illa
erant sacra? aut quae in quinatio, si illa lavatio? Et ha^c fercula
appellabantur convivium, quo velut suis epulis immunda daemonia pascerentur.
Quis enim non sentiat cu^usmodi spiritus talibus obscaenitatibus delectentur;
nis^ vel nesciens vttum omnino sint vlli immundi spiritus deorum nomine
decipientos: vel talem agens vitam, in qua istos potius q^^m Deum verum, and
optet propitie^ and for^idet iratos? Ibidem See Julius Firmicus de Err^re
profanarum Religion^m cap. 13.
What things are sacrileges, if these were sacrifices? or what is pollution if
this were lotion? And these were called dishes, as if some feast were
cel^brated, wherewith the unclean Devils might be fed, as with their banquets.
For who may not disc^rne what spirits they are which are delighted with such
obsceniti^s? unless ^e be ignorant whether there be at all any unclean
spirits deceiving men under the name of Gods, or unless ^e lead such a life,
in which ^e may rather desire the favor and fear the wrath of these, than the
true God. Thus he. That pious Father Taliasunt quae illic fiunt, vt ^a non
solum dicere, sed ^tiam recordari aliquis sine pollutione non possit. Omnia
quidem tam flagitiosa sunt, vt etiam explicar^ ea quispiam atque eloqui salvo
pudore non valeat, etc De Gubernat. Dei l. 6. p^ 18^, 186.
Salvian, records the obscenity of acting Stage plays to be such, that no
chaste, no modest face could once behold it, no gracious tongue relate it,
without sin or shame. If then we will give any credit to these recited Fathers,
with sundry other here recited in the ensuing Scene. Or to the third Blast of
Retrait from Plays and Theaters; to Master Northbrooke against vaine-Playes
and En^erludes; To Master Gosson his Plays confuted, to Master Stubs in his
Ano^omie of Abuses, p. 101. to 107. To Doctor Reinolds in his Overthrow of
Stage Plays, to Barnabas^ Brissonius, Ioannis Mariana, or Bulengerus, De
Spectaculis and Ludis Sc^nicis l. 1. c. 50, 51, 52. or to Bishop Babington,
Bishop Andrews, Osmund Lak^, Master Perkins, Master Elton, Master Dod, Master
Downham; with sundry others on the seventh Commandment, who concur with the
alleged Fathers in the lacivious filthiness of Play-acting; We must needs
acknowledge the very acting of Stage Plays, to be necessarily obscene, and so
unlawful unto Christians, as they all conclude. Secondly, those several A
man's saltatur Venus, and per affectus omnes meretriciae vilitatis impudica
exprimitur, imitatione bacchari. Saltatur and magna sacris comptacu^
infulismater, and contra decus aetatis illa Pessinuntia Dindymone in bubulci
vnius flagitiosa amplexu fingitur appetitione gestire, etc. Arnobiu^ adve^s.
Gentes l. 4. p. 149, 150. S^^l 7. p. 230. to 242.
^eretricious amorous passages, ditties, parts, and complements which we meet
with both in Aristophanes, Plautus, Terence, Menander, and others.
ancient and modern Play-poems, (which can neither be acted nor uttered
without much obscenity,) will evidently evince the very acting of Plays to be
lascivious. And does not daily experience testify as much? Survay we but a
whiles, those venomous unchaste, incestuo^s kisses, (as the Est autem aliud
osculum incestum veneno plenum. Oscula meretricia: oscula impudicitiae virus
saepe immittunt. Clemens Alexandrinus, Pae^^gogi lib. 3. cap. 11. l 2. c. 16.
Sunt turpia and immunda oscula. Chrysostom Hom^ in Psalm. 140. Tom. 1. Col. 1109.
B. Obscaene osculantur Hom. 13. ^n 2 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 832. D. Summa igitur
cautione communicandum est osculum, vt non aliter quam pia salutatio, vel
potius adoratio quaedam habeatur: quae ^i parum impura cogitatione inquinata
fuerit a vita aeterna nos alienet. Athenagoras pro Christianis Legatio. Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 2 p. 139. A See Doctor Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays p. 12, to
18.
Fathers ^tile them:) those wanton dalliances, those meretricious imbracements,
complements; those enchanting, powerful, overcomming solicitations unto
lewdness; Vanis gestibus ac nutibus mimus risum provocat. Minucius Felix.
Octavius page 1^1.122.
those immodest gestures, speeches, attires, which inseparably accompany the
acting of our Stage Plays; especially where the Bawdes, the Panders, the
Lovers, the Wooers, the Adulterers, the Woman's, or Love-sicke persons parts are
lively represented, (whose Timeo autem n^ forte magnum hoc venenum totum
revelom, velut cujusdam basilisci serpentis faciem, ad perniciem magis
legentium, quam ad correctionem. Polluit enim revera aures magnae hu^us
audaciae blasphema collectio, and haec turpitudinis coacervatio a^ enarratio.
Epiphaniu^ Contr. h^reses lib. 1 Tom^ 2^ Haereses 26. Col. 70. B.
poisonous filthiness, I dare not fully anatomize, for fear it should infect,
not mend the Reader,) must needs at first acknowledge, the very action of our
Stage Plays to be execrably obscene; to be such as none but persons
desparately lewd, unchaste, immodest, can seriously affect, much less approve
or act. Therefore Stage Plays themselves must questionless be abominable unto
Christians, even in this regard:

SCENA TERTIA.
THirdly, as the hypocrisy, and obscenity, even so the eff^minacy of acting
Stage Plays, does manifestly evince them to be evil; as this eighteenth
Argument will demonstrate. Argument. 18.


That whose very action is effeminate, must needs be unlawful unto Christians.

But the very action of Stage Plays i^ effeminate.

Therefore, it musts needs be unlawful unto Christians:

The Major is evident, by the authority of 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5 19 21^ Ephesians.
4.19. Romans 13.13. Isay 14.16, 17.
Scriptures, Fathers, Clemens Alexand. Pa^dag. l 1. c. 10. l 3. c. 2.3. Ambrose
Irena^o. Epist. Tom. 1. p. 233. Sedulius in 1 Cor. 6. with other Fathers here
ensuing.
and other Calvin, Babington, Per^ins, Dod, Williams, Lake, Andrews, and
others on the seventh Commandment. See my Vnlovelinesse of Lovelockes, p. 21,
22.48, 49.
Authors who condemn effeminacie, as an unnatural, odious, shameful sin,
Militem Ch^isti v^rum nihil molle decet. Ambrose E^^r. i^ Psalm. 38. Viris nihil
magis pudori esse oportet, quam si muli^bre aliquid in se habere videantur.
Salvi^n De Guber. Dei l. 6. p. 264.
which not only mis-beseemes all Christians, all persons whatsoever, Nihil est
ne quius aut tu^pius effaeminato viro Cicero Tusc. Quaest. l. 5. Molliter
vivi^, hoc dicu^t, malus est. Seneca. Epist. 8^.
making them vile and detestable unto others, but 1 Cor. 6^9, 10. Gal. 5.19.21.
likewise s^uts men out of heaven, and without repentance damnes their souls.

The Minor is ratified by the concurrent suffrages of sundry Fath^rs, who for
this very cause among diverse others, condemn all Stage Plays. Witness
Clemens Alexandrinus, Padagogi lib. 2. cap. 10. Where he styles Players Fracti,
enervatique saltatores, etc. Ibid.
effeminate enervated dancers, and Padagogi lib. 3. cap. 3. where he writes
thus. Pueri docti abnegare naturam mulieres simulant. O miserandum spectaculum^
O nefandum studium! O quanta est ha^c iniquitas! See ^thanasius Contra Gentes.
p. 10. A B. accordingly.
Now verily the intemperanc^ of life is grown so excessive, in^quity insulting
and sporting it self, that whatsoever is lascivious and unchaste, is diffused
into Cities. ^^yes being taught to deny nature, do counterfeit the female Sex,
etc. O miserable spectacle! O horrible wicked exercise! O how g^e^t is this
iniquity! etc. Witness Philo Iudaeu^. De Vita Contemplativa, p. 1209, 1210.
Those (writes he) who only please with scurrilous jests to recreate men's
minds, Pu^ro^ transferunt in amicarum habitum and ordinem, cu^ summa ae^atis
and sexus injuria, etc. Ibid.
transform yo^thes into the very habit and order of Strumpets, to the great
injury and dishonor of their age and sex: a thing which Moses does much
condemn. Witness Tertullian De Spectaculis, lib. c. 10. p. 17. Together with
Isiodor Hispalensis. Originum lib. 18. cap. 51. Est plane in artibus scenici^
Libe^i and Veneris patrocinium, qu^e privata and propria sunt scenae, de gestu
and corporis fluxu Nam mollitiem Veneri and Libero immolantur, illi per sexum,
illi per fluxum dissoluti, etc. Ibid.
In all scenicall arts (say they) there is plainly the patronage of Bacchus
and Venus which are peculiarly proper to the Stage. From the gesture and
flexure of the body, they sacrifice effeminacy to Venus and Bacchus; the one of
them being effeminate by her sex, the other by his f^nx, etc. Witness Saint
Cyprian, De spectaculis lib. where he writes thus. Huic dedecori condignum
dede^us sup^rinducitur Homo fractus omnibus m^mbris, and vir vltra muliebrem
mollitiem dissolutus, cui ars sit verba manibus expedire, and propter vnum
nescio quem, nec virum, nec faeminam commovetur civitas tota, vt desaltentu^
fabulosae antiquitatum libidines Ibidem.
To this vile shameful deed, another equal wickedness is super-added. A man
enfeebled in all his joints, resolved into a more than womanish effeminacy,
whose art it is to speak with his hands and gestures, comes forth upon the
Stage: and for this one^ I know not whom, neither man nor woman, the whole
City flock together, that so the fabulous lusts of antiquity may be acted.
Yea, Evirantur mares, omnis honor and vigor sexus enervati corporis dedecore
emollitur, plu^que illic placet, quisquis virum magis in faeminam fregerit. In
laudem crescit ex crimine, and co peritior quo turpior ^udicatur, etc. Epist.
l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato.
men (writes he in another place) are unmanned on the Stage: all the honor and
vigor of their sex is effeminated with the shame, the dishonesty of an
unsin^ed body. He who is most womanish and best resembles the female sex, gives
best content. The more criminous, the more applauded is he; and by how much the
more obsene he is, the more skillful is he accounted. What cannot he persuade
who is such a one? etc. And in another Epistle of his, he writes to Eucratius,
to Excommunicate a Player, Magi^ter and Doctor, non erudiendorum sed
perdendorum liberorum, crudiens and docens eontra institutionem Dei quemadmodum
masculus frangatur in faeminam, and sexus art mutetur, and diabolo divinum
plasma maculanti, per corrupti atque enervati corporis delicta, placeatur. Quod
puto ego nec majestati divinae, nec evangelicae disciplinae congruere, vt pudor
and honor eccle^iae tam^urpi et infami contagione faedetur. Nam cum in lege
prohibeantur viri induere vestem muliebrem and maledicti ejusmodi iudicentur;
quanto majoris est criminis, non tantum muliebria vestimenta induere, sed and
gestus quo que turpes and molles and muliebres magisterio impudicae artis
exprimere? Epist. l. 1. Ep^st. 10.
who did train up Boys for the Stage, for that he taught them against the
express instruction of God himself, how a male might be effeminated into a
female, how their sex might be changed by Art, that so the devil who defiles
Gods workmanship, might be pleased by the offenses of ae depraved and
effeminated body. I think it will not stand with the Majesty of God, nor the
discipline of the Gospel, that the modesty and honor of the Church should be
polluted with such a filthy and infamous contagion. For since men are
prohibited in the Law to put on a woman's garment, and such who do it are
adjudged accursed. How much more greater a sin is it, not only to put on
woman's apparel, but likewise to express obscene, effeminate womanish
gestures, by the skill or tutorship of an unchaste Art? The most unchaste
gestures and actions of Stage Players (writes Histrionum que qu^ impudicissimi
motus, quid aliud nisi libidines docent, and instigant? quorum enarvata
corpora, and in muliebrem incessum habitum que mollita, impudicas faeminas in
honestis gestibus mentiuntur. De Vero Cult^ lib. 6. cap. 20. p. 506.
Lactantius) what else do they but teach and provoke lust? whose enervated
bodies, effeminated into an womanish pace and habit, resemble unchaste women by
their dishonest gestures, etc. One being a Youth (writes Homil. 38. in Matthew.
Col. 298. C. Alius cum sit adolescens, comam pone reductam habet, and na^uram
aspectu, vestitu, caeterisque ejusmodi effaeminando ad teneriusculae imaginem
puellae, deducere contendit, etc.
Saint Chrysostom) combs back his hair, and effeminating nature with his
visage, his apparel, his gesture, and the like, strives to represent the
person of a tender virgin: which he condemns as a most abominable effeminate
act: There is another sort of Actors (writes Alia vero natio quaedam est his
ip^is infalicior, qui nimirum gloriam masculorum amittunt, and impudicis
membrorum inflexionibus naturam virilem frangunt, mulieres pariter ac mares
effaemina^i: imo nec viri nec faeminae si recte lo qui vellemus. Nam viri
quidem haud manent: ut autem faeminae fiunt non consequuntur. Quippe quod a
natura sunt, id morum respectu non manent: quod vero improbe esse cupiunt, id
natura non sunt, Quo fit, vt aenigma quodda^ sint luxuriae, vitiorumque
gryphus, inter faeminas viri, interviros faeminae, Number haec potius
praedicationes, inspectiones, iucunditates, an lachrymas atque gemitus
merentur? Nimirum, in his risus regnat, natura vitiatur and adulterina fit,
voluptatum flamma multiplex accenditur, etc. De Recta Educat. ad Selucum. p.
1061.
Nazianzen) more unhappy then these, to wit, those who lose the glory of men,
and by unchaste infections of their members^ effeminate their manly nature,
being both effeminate men and women, yea, being neither men nor women, if we
will speak truly. For they continue not men, and that they should become
women, they attain not. For what they are by nature, that they Ipsi sine
virilibus membris vitam degunt, neque amplius viri esse potentes, neque
mulieres facti. Epiphaniu^ Contr. Haerese^, lib. 3. Tom. 2. Col. 910. C. Hic
ita amputatur virilitas, vt nec convertatur in faeminam, nec vir relinquatur.
Augustine De Civit. Dei l. 7. c^ 24.
continue not, in regard of manners: and that which they wickedly desire to be,
that they are not by nature. By which it comes to pass, that they are
certain riddles of luxury, and intricacies of vices, being men among women,
and women among men. Whether do these things rather deserve applauses,
aspections and mirth, or tears and sighs? Verily laughter reigns in these;
Nature is vitiated and adulterated, and a various flame of pleasures is kindled.

To these I might acumulate the parallel testimony of Viri quo que abdicato
sexu, nec se amplius mares esse ferentes, mulierum naturam affect averunt,
tanquam ita honorifica grata que matri Deorum facturi essent. Omn^s autem in
turpissimis vivunt, and certamen in se suscipere pravitatis videntur, etc.
Ibidem.
Athanasius Contra Gentes Oration p. 10. A. B. of Theophylus Antiochenus ad
Autolicum, lib. 3. of Tatianu^ Oration adversus Graecos. Of Minucius Felix.
Octauius, p. 70. 101.223. Of Augustine De Civitate Dei lib. 2. cap. 3. to 14.
and lib. 7. c. 24. Of Salvian. lib. 6. De Gubernatione Dei. Of Hierom. Epist^
2. cap. 6.7. Non ambulet iuxta te calamistratus procurator, non histrio fractus
in faeminam. Ib^d.
Epist. 9. cap. 5. Epist. 10. c. 4. Epist. 13. c. 2. Epist. 48. c. 2. Epist.
88. cap. 4. Of Eusebius apud Damascenum parallelorum lib. 3. cap. 47. Of
Cassiodorus Variarum, lib. 1. cap. 27.30. lib. 3. cap. 51. and lib. 7. cap. 16.
Of Damascen Parallelorum lib. 3. cap. 47. Of John Salisbury, De Nugis Curialium
lib. 1. cap. 8. together with the concurrent suffrages of Ludovicus Vives De
Causis Corrupt^ Artium lib. 2. p. 82.83. and Notae in Augustinum De Civit. Dei.
lib. 2 cap. 3. to 14. Of Radolphus Gualther Homily 11. in Nahum. 3. p.
214.215. Of Francis Petrarcha De Remedio vtriusque fortunae lib. 1. Diologus
30. Of Agrippa, de Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 20.59^64.71. Of Peter Martyr,
Locorum Communium Classis. 2. cap. 11. sect. 62.66. cap. 12. s^ct. 15.19. and
Commentary on Judges. page 310.311. Of Bodine, De Republica. lib. 6^ cap. ^. Of
Ioannis Mariana, Barnabas Brissonius, and Lib. 1, c. 50.51, 52.
Bulengerus, De T^eatris, spectaculis and ludis scenicis; of the third Blast of
Retrait from Plays and Theaters, page 110, 111, 112. of Master Northbrooke,
Master Stubs, Master Gosson, and Doctor Reinolds in their several Treatises
against Stage Plays. Of Bishop Babington, Master Perkins, Master Dod, Legum
Dialogus 7.
Master Lakes, Master Downeham, and sundry other on the seventh Commandment.
Yea, of Legum Dialogus 7.
Plato, De Legibus lib. Epist. 2.
Cicero, Epistola. 7. and 53.
Senica, Annalium. l. 14. sect. 2.
Tacitus, An melior cum Thaida sustinet, aut cum Vx^r^m Comaedus agit, vel
Dorida multo Cultam palliolo: mulier nemp^ ipsa vid^tur, Non person^ loqui,
vacua and plana omnia dicas, Infra ventriculum, and tenui, distantia rima. Nec
tamen Antiochus, nec ^rit mirabilis illic Aut Stratocles, aut cum molli
Dem^trius haemo. Natio Comaeda est: rides? Iuvenal. Satyr. 3. page 20.
Iuvenall, Epist. 12. to Lambert.
Marcus Aurelius Panegyr. Traiano Dictus p^ 45.
Pliny, and other Pagan Authors; who all with one consent, not only testify,
but likewise positively condemn the gross, the execrable effeminacy which
attends the acting of all Stageplayes; which the very Obscaenis partibus
corporis oculis omnium eam ingerunt turpitudinem, quam ^rubescat videre vel
Cynicus. Ioannes Saresburiensis. De Nugis Curialium, lib. 1. cap. 8.
Cynicke himself would blush for to behold. And must not our own experience
bear witness of the invirillity of Play-acting? May Sed and alius morbus
petulanter erupit in civitates, ^orum qui patrant, and qui patiuntur muliebria,
effaeminati corpore juxta atque animo ne scintillam quidem retinentes generis
masculi, propalam plectentes cincinnos ornantesque and cerussa ^ucoque
oblinentes faciem pingentesque, vnguentis quoque fragrantes ex quisitissimis
Nec pudet eos marem sexum data opera mutare in faeminam. His parcendum non est,
si audimus legem, quae jubet androgynum and sexum suum adulterantem impune
occidi, die ipsa ac hora qua depraehenditur: cum sit probrosus, and familiae
suae patriaeque dedecus, atque adeo totius generis humani, etc. Philo Iudae^s.
De Stecialibas ^egibus. page 1059.
we not daily see our Players metamorphosed into women on the Stage, not only
by putting on the female robes, but likewise the effeminate gestures, speeches,
pace, behavior, attire, delicacy, passions, manners, arts and wiles of the
female sex, yea, of the most petulant, unchaste, insinuating Strumpets, that
either Italy or the world affords? What wantonness, what effeminacy parallel
to that which our men-women actors, in all their feminine, (yea, sometime in
their masculine parts) express upon the Theater? was ever the invirility of
Nero, Heliogabalus, or Sardanapalus, Of which read Suetonij, Nero sect 28^
Justin. Hist. l 1. Athenaeus Dipnos. lib^ 12. cap 12, 13. Diodorus Siculus.
Bibli. hist. lib. 2. sect. 23. Orosius hist. lib. 1. cap 19. Invenal. Satyr. 8.
and AElij Lampridij Heliogabalus.
those Monsters, if not shames of Men and Nature: was ever the effeminate
lewdness of For which see August. De Civ. Dei. l^ 4. c^ 6. Lactantus. De falsa
Relig. c. 20. Alexander al ^le^. l. 6. c. 8. Plutarchi Alexander Calepini Flo^a.
Flora or Thais, comparable unto that which our artificial Stage Players
(trained up to all lasciviousness from their Cradles) continually practice on
the Stage, without blush of face, or sorrow of heart, not only in the open
view of men, but even of that Deus totus est visus. P^in. Not. Hist. l. 1. c^ 7.
all-eyed God, who will one day arraigne them for this their gross
effeminacie? And dare we men, we Christians yet applaud it? See Cyprian.
Epist^ l. 1. Epist. 10. The third Blast of Retrait from ^layes p. 110, 111^
Pity is it to consider, how many ingenuous, witty, comely youths, devoted
unto God in baptism, to whom they owe themselves, their service; are oft-times
by their graceless Parents, even wholly consecrated to the Stage, (the Sea page
50 51, 52.
Devils Chapel, as the Fathers phrase it) where they a^e trained up in the Sea Master Gossons School of Abuse with the Authors quoted. p. 50, 51, 52, 53.
who thus style it.
School of Vice, the Playhouse, (as if their natures were not prone enough to
sin, unless^ they had the help of art to back them) to the very excess of
all effeminacy, to act those womanish, whorish parts, which Pagans would even
blush to personate. And is this a laudable, as many; a Populus Atheniensis
Alcibiadis vitijs semper levissima nomina imponeret ludos and facili^atem
appellans. Plutarchi Alcibiades. So we deal with this vice of Players.
trivial, venial, harmless thing, as most repute it? Is this a light, a
despicable effeminacie, for men, for Christians, thus to adulterate,
emasculate, metamorphose, and debase their noble sex? thus purposely, yea,
affectedly, to vnman, unchristian, uncreate themselves, if I may so speak, and
to make themselves, as it were, neither men nor women, but Monsters, ( a sin as
bad, nay worse than any Se esse adulterio lib^ros exi^timent qui naturam
adulterant? Clemen^ Alexand. Paedagogi^ l. 3. cap. 3.
adultery, offering a kind of viol^nce to Gods own work,) and all to no
other end but this; Manus Deo inferunt, quando illud quod ipse formavit,
reformare and transfigurare contendunt: quia opus Dei est omne quod nascitur;
Diaboli quod cun quemutatur. Cyprian. De Habitu Virginum. lib.
to exhilerate a confluence of unchaste, effeminate, vain companions, or to
become competent Actors on a Stage; See Augustine De Civit. Dei. l. 2. cap.
13.14.29. Macrobius Saturnal lib. 2. cap. 7. and Act. 7. Scene 7. accordingly.
the greatest infamy that could befall an ancient Pagan Roman, or a Christian?
Is this a mean, a pardonable wickedness, to violate the Laws of God, of
Nature? to educate those in the very discipline and school of Satan, Ephesians.
6.4^ Genesis 18.19. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
who should be trained up in the admonition, fear, and nurture of the Lord?
that so they may be more deeply 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. Hebr. 2^15.
enthralled to the Devils bondage all their days, ( since Consuetudo est
altera natura. Theodoret Sermo. 5. De Natura hominis Aristot. De memoria and
Remine scentia lib. Claudian, De Consulatu Mal. Theod. Panyg^r. p. 162. Erasmus
De Puerorum Educatione p. 12. Petrarch. De Remed. Viriusque Fortuna. lib. 1.
Dialog. 24. Galataeus^ de Moribus lib. p. 21. Case Ethicorum lib. 2. cap. 1.
accordigly.
custom is another nature, Ierem. 13.23^
it being as difficult a thing for such who are accustomed to evil, to do
good, as for an Ethiopian to change his skin, or a Leopard his spots,) and be
made more sure partakers with him in his eternal torments at their deaths? O
therefore let us now at last consider with our selves, the execrable effeminacy
which attends the very acting of our Stage Plays; together with the danger
accompanying this sin, (which is no less, without repentance, then the 1
Cor. 6.9^10. Gal. 5.19.20.
eternal loss of heavens;) and then we shall, we cannot but abhor all
Stage Plays, even in this regard.

SCENA QVARTA.
FOurthly, as the gross effeminacie, Argument. 19.
even so the palpable vanity, the ridiculous folly of acting Plays; does
manifest them to be evil; as this nineteenth Play-affronting Argument will
evince.

That whose very action, in its best acception, is but ridiculous folly and
vanity, Rerum enim ridicularum vel ridendatu^ potius actionum imitatores
exigendi sunt a nostra republica. Cum enim verba omnia a cogitatione and
moribus emanent, fieri non potest, vt verba aliqua emittantur ridicula quae non
procedunt a moribus ridiculis. Sermo ^nim est fructus cogitationis. Si ergo qui
risum movent exterminandi sunt a nostra republica, long a^est, vt nobis
permittat risum movere. Ab^urdum enim esset quorum auditores esse prohibitum
est, ^orum inveniri imitatores: multo autem esset absurdius, studere vt ips^
sis ridiculus. Clemens Alexandr^ Paedag. l. 2. c. 5.
must certainly be unseemly, yea, unlawful unto Christians.

But such is the very action of Stage Plays.

Therefore, they must certainly be unseemely, and unlawful unto Christians.

The Major is evident: First, because the Scriptures condemn See Act. 3. Scene
7. Job 7.3. c. 31.5. Prove. 30.8. Eccles. 1.2. c. 7.15. c. 9.9.
all vanity, and Job 4.18. cap. 42.8. Psalm. 38.5. Psalm. 69.5. Prove. 5.23. c.
15.2.14. c 19.3. c. 24.9. Eccles. 1.17. c. 2.3.12^
folly; together with Isay 9.17. Ier. 4.22. c. 5.4.21. Psalm. 5.5. Psalm.
74.18.22. Psalm. 75.4. Psalm. 26.4. Judges 9.4. 2 Chronicles. 13.7. Prove. 12 11. c.
24.9. c. 28^19. Ezech. 13.3. 2 Samuel 13.13. c. 24.10. Lam. 2.14. Mat. 12.36, 37.
^ph. 5.4. 2 Pet. 2.8. Titus 3.9.
all vain, all foolish actions, persons, speeches, words, gestures, as
dangerous, and pernicious evils, Si vanitatis culpa nequaquam caute
compescitur, ab iniquitate protinus men's in cauta devoratur. Greg. Magn^^
Moralium. l. 10. c. 13, 1^, 15. and l 21 c. 6. v^d. Ibid.
which draw men by degrees to greater sins, Hae nugae seria ducun^ in mal^^
H^race de Art Poetica l. p, 312.
to serious mischiefs; commanding men with all Psalm. 85.8.
not to return again to folly, Eccles. 7.25.
there being wickedness and madness in it, See m and n.
to abandon-folly and vanities, which Vane occuparis in his o cor sapiens, quae
vanita^es vanitatum sunt; quia tu his neque ad beatitudinem indiges, nequ^ ad
immortalitatem. Bernar^ De Interiori Domo cap. 25.
promote not the eternal beatitude of their soul^s: Prou. 14.7.
to depart from the presence of a foolish man, when as they perceive not in him
the lips of knowledge. Secondly, because Vanitates vitae mancipant vitijs:
materia sunt de^ictorum, minister culparum, seminarium pecca^orum. Chrysostom.
Quod Adam pr^latus sit omni creatu^^^ sermo. Tom. 1. Col. 444. C.D.
vanity and folly are the very matter, seminaries, and seeds of sin, of
wickedness, there Nihil peius vanitate. A^brose De Abraham. lib. 2. cap. 10.
being nothing worse then they.

The Minor, as it is evident by the concurrent testimony of the fore-quoted
Fathers, Acts 3. Scene 7. so it is such an experimental known truth, that it
were lost labor for to prove it. For what else is the personating of the
Clownes, the Fools, the Fantastickes, the Lovers, the Distracted,
discontented, lascivious, furious, angry persons part, but professed vanity,
or ridiculous affected folly? Yea, what else is the whole action of Plays, but
well personated Pantomi^um aspicis? vanitas est? etc. Ambrose E^ar. in Psalm.
118. Oc^on. 5. He August. De C^vi^. Dei. l. 1. c. 32. styles Plays Licentia
vanitatum.
vanity, artificial folly, or a less Bedlam frenzy? He who shall seriously
survay Quorsum abeant sani? creta an carbone notandi? AEdificare casas,
plostello adjungere mures, Ludere par impar, equitare a^undine longa. Si q^em
delectat barbatum amentia verset. Si puerilius his, delirus and amens, Dictatur
merito. Quid discrepat istis histrio? Horace Sermonum. lib^ 2 Satyr. 3.
the ridiculous, childish, inconfiderate, yea, mad and beastly actions,
gestures, speeches, habits, prankes and fooleries of Actors on the Stage, (if
he be not childish, foolish, or frentique himself) must needs deem all
Stage Players children, fools, or Bedlams; since they act such parts, such
pranks, yea, use such gestures, speeches, raiment, complements, and behavior
in Jest, which none but children, fools, or madmen, do act, or use in
earnest. There is Ille sinistrorsum, hic dex^rorsum abit. Vnus vtrique error,
sed varijs illudit partibus; hoe to Creed modo insanum, nihilo vt sapientior
ille qui de^ides. Ho^ace, Ibidem.
^o difference at all between a fool^, a fantastique, a Bedlam, a Whore, a
Pander, a Cheater, a Tyrant, a Drunkard, a Murderer, a Devil on the Stage
(for his part is oft-times acted) and those who are such in truth, but that the
former are far worse, far more inexcusable than the latter, because they
wilfully make themselves that in sport, to foment Nunc tibicinibus, nunc est
gauuisa Tragaedis, Nutrice pu^lla v^lut filuderet infans^ Horace Epist. l. 2.
Epist. 1. p. 280.
the more then childish folly, of some vain Spectators, which these others
are, perchance from natural necessity, or at least from colorable grounds?
Bernard ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apollog.
Flendas dixerim, an ridendas ineptias? The foolery, the ridiculousnesse of
acting Plays is such, that I know not whether men should more bewail it, or
deride it. Sure I am, though ^ew Spectators can find tears to deplore the
sin^ulnesse, yet most of them can afford laughter to deride the vanity, the
folly of acting Plays. Since therefore Stulta per se sunt ridicula: Ridiculum
est etiam omne quod aperte fingitur. Qu^nt^lian^ Instit. Orator. l. ^. ^. 4. p.
380. Quoniam ludus est inter ^ucunda, and omnis remissio animi, and risus inter
jucunda, necesse est etiam ridicula jucunda esse^ and homines, and orationes,
and opera^ Aristot. Rhet^r. l. 1. c. 11 p. 81. Democritus omnes derid^bat, quia
dicebat omnes insaniri. AElian. Variae Histor. l. 4. c. 20.
vanity and folly are the genuine proper objects of derision, and men's
voluptuous smiles; the laughter Plays occasion, (which is their chie^est end,)
is a sufficient evidence of their excessive folly; and so ground enough for
Christians, for all men to condemn them as vanities, as fooleries, as Si enim
ridiculam figuram suscipere, quemadmodum in pompis videntur nonnulli, in animum
minim^ induxerim^s, quomodo internum hominem magis ridiculam sustinere ^iguram
jure passi fuerimus? Et si personam nostram, non nostra quidem sponte, in magis
ridiculosam un quam converterimus, quomodo in verbis sluduerimus esse and
videri ridiculi, id quod est omnium quae sunt in homine long precio cissimum,
n^mpe rationem ac sermonem ludibrio habentes? Ridiculum est ergo haec exe^cere,
quando quidem nec huiusmodi ridiculorum hominum Oration digna est quae audiatur,
per haec nomina ad turpia facta assu^faciens. Paedagog^ l. 2. c. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and other Fathers do at large declare.

And thus much for the first considerable thing in the manner of acting
Stage Plays.

SCENA QVINTA.
THe second circumstance considerable in the form of acting Plays, is the
several parts and persons sustained in them: which suggests this twentieth
Play-oppugning Argument. Argument. 20.


Those Plays, whose very parts and persons are sinful, yea, abominable, are
certainly unseemely, unlawful unto Christians.

But Iratus senex, edax Parasitus, sycop^anta impu^ens, avarus leno assidu^
agendi sunt mihi, clamore summo, cum labor maxumo. Te^entij Heutontimor,
Prologus: p. 85.
such are the parts, the persons most frequent in all Stage Plays.

Therefore they are certainly unseemely, unlawful unto Christians.

The Mayor is irrefragable, because Parts totum su^m vt constituunt, ita
determinant. Kecker^ System. Log^. l. 1. c. 22. p. 192. Partis and totius eadem
est ratio. Totum sapitnaturam suarum partium. Bed^; Axiomata Philosophica. Tom.
2. Col. 164.
such as the parts are, such is the whole, which is composed of them: If the
parts then be evil, the intiretie that springs out of them must be such.

The Minor I shall evidence by this Induction. In all our Stage Plays, we have
most usually the parts and persons of See Act. 3. Scene 1. and. 3. Cyprian. and
Tertullian de Spectaculis. l. accordingly.
Divel-gods and Goddesses; of Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Venus, Vulcan, Saturn,
Cupid, Neptune, Mercury, Esculapius, Hercules, Pluto, Bacchus, Ceres, Minerva,
Diana, Juno, Proserpina, Flora, Priapus, and others: yea, sometimes the very
part and person of the Sea Ludovicus Vives, Notae in August. De Ciuit. Dei. l.
12. c. 25. C. accordingly.
Devil himself; whose works, whose pompes and vanities all Christians have
renounced in their Baptism: Add we to these, the parts and representations of
Saltantes Satyros imitabitur Alphesibaeus, Virgil. Eclog. 5. p. 14.
Satyrs, Silvanes, Muses, Nymphs, F^ries, Hobgoblins, Fairies, Fates, with
such other heathen vanities, which Christians should not name, much less
resemble; Together with the parts, the persons, Council. Constantinop. 6. Can.
62.65 70.^6. and Act. 3. Scene 1. accordingly.
of Whores, Whoremasters, Adulterers, Bawdes, Panders, Tyrants, Traitors,
Thieves, Murderers, Paricides, Drunkards, Parasites, Prodigals, Hypocrites,
Fools, Ruffians, Wooers, Epicures, Fantastiques, Pennie-Fathers, Usurers,
Scolds, Drabbes, Ravishers, Wantons, Bedlams, Turks, Infidels, and See the
Printed Comaedies and Tragaedies of Aristophanes, Terence, Menander, P^au^us,
Euripides, Sophocles, Seneca, and all our modern Plays: Together with Master
Stubs, Master Northbrooke, Master Gosson, and others in their Treatises against
Plays acco^dingly.
all other desperate wicked persons whatsoever. Vter est in^anior h^r^m? Horace
Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 3. p. 207.
There is sca^c^ one Devil in Hell, hardly a notorious sin or Aspice,
Plautus Quo pacto parts tutetur amantis Ephebi, Vt patris attenti, lenonis vt
insidiosi? Quantus sit Dorsenus edacibu^ in Parasitis, Horace Epist. l. 2. Ep.
1. p. 283.
sinner upon earth, either of modern or ancient times, but has some part or
other in Stage Plays. And can they then be lawful, be tolerable unto
Christians, being consarcinated of such polluted parts and persons as these?
Doubtless, he who will but cordially, but Christianly survay those filthy
Pagan Divel-gods and Goddesses; those outrageous beastly lusts, unparalleld
abominations, and execrable sinners, which have their Acts, their Scenes, their
Parts, in Stage Plays; must necessarily abandon Plays, ( as Nihil ex his quae
spectaculis d^putantur placitum D^o est, aut congruens Dei servis: omnia
propter Diabolum instituta sunt^ and ex Diaboli rebus instructa Tertul. De
spectac. c. 24. Merito malis voluptatibus vestr^s and pompis abstinemus, quorum
and de sacris o^iginem novimus, and vt noxia blandimenta damnamus. Minucius
Felix. Octavius p. 123. Isiodor. hisp. Originum l. 18. c. 51 accordingly.
all ancient Christians did) as pastimes more fit for Devils than for
Christians: else he must needs justify, not only sin and sinners, but even
Hell it selfe^ which abounds not with Amphi^^eatrum enim omnium Daemonum
templum est: tot illic immundi spiritus considun, quot homines ^apit. Tert^l.
De Spectac. T^m. 2 p. 392.
more polluted Devils, and Devill-Idols; with more prodigious Monsters of
impiety, with more stupendous matchless villainies, than the Stage, whose
wickedness oft-times, transcends even that of the infernal Lake. For there,
men only suffer and bewail with tears, the eternal tortures which their
sins occasion: Whereas men in Theaters, are so far from sinne-lamenting
sorrow, that they even delight themselves with the representations of those
wickednesses, which the original Authors of them now deplore in Hell. And is
not this Prove. 10.23. c. 13.9. 2 Pet. 2.12. Supra omn^m autem monstruosi
piaculi execrationem est, scelus s^mmum admi^^ere, and pudorem sc^leris non
hab^re. Sa^vian. De Guber. Dei, l. 7. p. 263.
a desperate matchless madness, for men, for Christians, to sport themselves
with those individual sins upon the Stage, which the parties acted in the
very bitterness of their souls, are condoling now in Hell? To make that their
chiefest earthly pleasure, which is now the damned acted parties greatest
pain, and without repentance may prove theirs too? To raise up damned souls
or Devils out of Hell; with all those horrid sins that sunk them thither, to
no other end but this, to play them on the Stage for laughter-sake: and yet
never cordially to consider the doleful See 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Isay 66.24.
Matthew. 25.41, 46. Revel. 2^.10, 2 Thessalonians 1.7, ^, 9.
condition of the persons, nor seriously to lamen^ the damnablenesse, the
eternal punishment of the sins thus acted in their sight? O that our
Playe^s, our Play-haunters would now seriously consider, that the persons whose
parts, whose sins they act and see, are even then ye^ing in the ^ndesinenter
medi^and^^ aeternae damna^ionis supplicium in quo quicquid paenarum excogitari
potest, q^icquid etia^ n^n potest, s^^per adest: cuius vermis immortalis ignis
exting^^bilis, ^aet^r intol^rabilis est: cuius torrentes in picem covertuntur,
and humus in sulphur, ardebit que in^ sempiternum: cujus lacus fa^guine igneque
permixtus est, and quoscu^ que sus^^pit demergit si^^ul and exurit. Ambr^se
Praecatio 2. Praetar. ad Missam. Tom. 5. p. 168 E.
eternal flames of hell, for these particular sins of theirs, even then
whiles they are playing of these sins, these parts of theirs on the Stage! O
that they would now remember the sighs, the groans, the tears, Romans 2.5, 9.
Mat. 13.42, 50.
the anguish, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, the cries, and shreekes, that
these wickednes^es cause in Hell, whiles they are acting, applauding,
committing and laughing at them in the Playhouse! And this, if there be any
Spark of humanity, of Christianity; any fear of God, of Sin, of Hell,
remaining in them; would soon embitter the most Sugared Stage Plays to their
souls, and engage them to detest them (unless they are marked ou^ for Hell)
for such like torments as these now sustain. Certainly, he can never have a
share in Heaven, that makes a mock, a Play, a Pastime of the Parts, the Sins
of those Devils, Pagans, and flagitious persons who are now in Hell. He who can
thus make Sin, or Hell, or Devils, Qui vult regnar^ cum Christo, non potest
gaudere cum sae culo. Ambrose Sermo 11.
his earthly solace here, shall undoubtedly enjoy no other Heaven but Hell
hereafter. Let the consideration therefore of these parts, these persons
sustained in our Stage Plays, persuade us to renounce them, as See Ioa^nes
Langhecrucius, De Vita and honestate Ecclesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 21, 22.
mis-beseeming Christians to sport themselves withal; From whose hearts they
should rather draw mournful tears, than foolish laughter.

SCENA SEXTA.
men. From whence this twenty one Argument is deducible. Argument 21.


These Plays wherein men act any women's parts in woman's apparel, must needs
be sinful, yea, abominable unto Christians.

But in all, or at least in most Stage Plays whatsoever, men act the parts of
See Athaeneu^ Dipnosoph. lib. 14. cap. 7.
women in woman's apparel.

Therefore they must needs be sinful, yea, abominable unto Christians.

The Minor is a notorious experimental truth which all Players, all
Play-haunters must acknowledge: which Philo Iudaeus de Fortitudine. l. p.
1001.1002 Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 23. Cypri^ De Spect. lib and Epist. l. 1.
Ep. 10. Lactantius Div. Instit. Epi. ca. 6. Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew.
Augustine. Soliloquioru^. l. 2. c. ^6. Is^ior. Hispal^nsis. Originu^. l. 18. c.
48. and Concilium Constantinop. 6. Com. 62. See Scene 3. before.
sundry Fathers, and approved Calvin, Iuni^^, Tostatus, Pellican^^, Cornelius,
a Lapide in Deuteronomy 22. v. 5. D. R^inolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p. 8. to 20.
and 85. to 103. The 3. Blast of Retreit from Plays and Theaters. M.
No^thbrooke, M Gosson, with others hereafter quoted in their Treatises against
Stage Plays.
modern Auth^rs testify.

The Mayor is undeniably confirmed by Deuteronomie 22. verse 5. The Woman shall
not wear that which pertains unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's
garment; for all that do so, are abomination to the Lord thy God. God himself
does here expressly inhibit men to put on woman's apparel, because it is an
abomination to him: therefore it must certainly be unlawful, yea abominable
for Players to put on such apparel to act a woman's part.

If any here object (as D. Gager in D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p.
9.15, 86, 91, 92. D. Gentiles in his Letter to D. Reinolds, Ibid. p.
167.169.170. and Haywood in his Apology for Actors.
some Play-patrons do) that this Scripture extends to those alone, who usually
clothe themselves in woman's array from day to day; or to those Item feminae
vir^lem habitum malo animo gestantes, quo perversam suam expleant voluntatem a
venerando hoc Sacramento arcendae sunt, donec id mali penitus correxerint and
satis^ecerint, Synodus Augustensis 1548. Surius Com. 4. p. 807.
who put it on with a lewd inten^ to circumvent or inamor others: or to
satisfy their lusts: in which case the Synod of Augusta inhibits women, who
put on man's apparel, from the Sacrament, till they have repented: not to such
who only wear it now and then to act a woman's part, or Aquinas prima secundae.
Quaest. 102. Artic. 6.6. and secunda secundae. Quaest. 169. Artic. 2.3.
in case of necessity to save their lives, as some have done.

Answer 1.
To this I answer; First, that sundry common Actors do usually once a day, at
leastwise twice or thrice a week, attire themselves in women's array to act
their female parts; yea, they make a daily practice of it to put on women's
attire, it being inseparably incident to their lewd profession: therefore they
are within the express condemnation of this Scripture, and their own most
favorable gloss upon it, as the objection it self does evidence.

2
Secondly, the very putting on of woman's apparel to act a Play, though it be
but now and then for an hour or two, See D. R^inolds Overthrow of
Stage Plays, p. 8. to 20. and 85. to 103, where this point is excellently
discussed: with all the Fathers, Councels, and Authors quoted in the 6. Answer
following.
is directly condemned by this Scripture: which prohibits, not only the
frequent wearing, but the very putting on of women's apparel, for the words are
not: A man shall not ordinarily or frequently put on a woman's garment, nor yet
wear it now and then to a lewd intent, as the Obiectors Hoc interpraetari
est, an der^stari? August. De Civit. Dei. l. 7. c. 24.
gloss it: but, Neither shall a man put on a woman's garment. The original
word Iilbosch, which signifies to put on: is the very same (as D. Reinolds
Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 101.102. M. Dike of the De^eitfulnesse of man's
heart. c^p. 17. p. 186.
two Worthies of our Church observe) with that of the 1 Samuel 17.38, 39. where
it is written; that SAVL clothed DAVID with his Armor, and put an Helmet of
brass upon his head, etc. If then David in the Scripture phrase, were said to
put on SAVLS Armor, though Ibidem v. 39.
he put it off immediately, because he had it once upon him, though for a
little space; then he who puts on a woman's raiment but to act a part, though it
be but once, is doubtless a putter on of women's apparel, within the very
litterall meaning of this Scripture; and so a ground delinqvent against God:
because the very putting on of a woman's garment, not the frequent or long
wearing of it, is the thing this text condemns, as the word put on imports.

3
Thirdly, the very reason of this precept expressed in the text, will take off
this evasion: The woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: mark the reason. For all that do
so, are abomination to the Lord thy God. That which makes a man an abomination
to the Lord his God, must be such a thing as is sinful and abominable in its
own nature, not in its abuse or circumstances only, as the Sea Deuteronomy. 7.25,
26. c. 11.31 c. 13.14. c. 19.9. c. 18.11, 12. c. 23.17, 18, c. 24.4. c. 27.15.
Prove. 3.32. c. 6 16, 17, 18, 19. c. 11.1, 20. c. 12 22. c. 15.8, 9, 26. c.
16.5, 12. where naught but capital sins only are styled abomination, and so in
other Scriptures.
Scriptures, and Abominatio in Scriptura non est nisi propter mortale peccatum.
Summa Theologiae, pars 2. Quaest. 135. Membr. 2. vid. Ibidem.
Alexander Alesius testify: If a man's putting on of woman's apparel were not
simply evil in it self, the frequent wearing of it, or the putting of it on
to a sinister intent, could not make him an abomination unto God. For the use
Gen 3.7, 21. Math. 6.25, to 31. 1 Timothy 2.9. Revel. 3.18. Ezech. 16.10.
of apparel being to clothe and adorn the body; if the putting on of it were
not unlawful, the frequent putting on of it, being the true use of it, could
not be sinful, and so not abominable; there Heb. 1.13. Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. Omne
quod turpe est, Deo displicet. Iustitia Dei odit and detestatur vit^a, docet
virtutes Remigius Explanat. in R^m. 1.32^ Bibl. Pat^um. T^m. 6. ^ars. 3. p.
813. G.
being nothing odious unto God but sin, and sinful things. Since then this
putting on of woman's apparel is an abomination to the Lord: not only the
frequent wearing of it, or the putting of it on to lewd intents, but even the
bare putting of it on to act a vicious Play, Concedemus ne ergo hoc semel
fieri? Ne quaquam. Quare? Quoniam etsi semel tantum fiat, malum est similiter.
Quamobrem sic quidem oblect^ri, si est quidem malum, ne semel^ quidem fiat. Sin
autem non est malum, semper fiat. Chrysost^ Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col.
357. B.C.
though it be but once, must needs be within the verge of this sacred
inhibition.

Fourthly, this precept; Neither shall a man put on a woman's garment, as it is
a branch of the moral law, having a relation to the 7. See Calvin on the 7.
Commandment, and the Authors hereafter quoted.
Commandment, and to several 1 Cor. 11.5. to 17. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
Scriptures in the New Testament, concerning modesty and decency in apparel:
as good Bp. Babington, M. Perkins, M. Dod, M. Brinsley, M. Downebam^ M. El^on,
M Lake, and others on the 7. Commandment. D. Reinolds Overthrow of
Stage Plays, p. 10. and others hereafter quoted, Answer 6. ensuing.
Divines observe. So it is a universal negative, which by the rules D. Perkins
Cases of Conscience. lib. 2. c. 12.
of Theology binds all men, in all cases, in all places, both Semper and ad
Semper; always, and at all times whatsoever: therefore a man putting on of
women's apparel at any time upon any occasion (yea in case of saving life,
Augustinus Soliloquiorum. l. 2. c. 16. D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays.
p. 14.
as some affirm) but especially to act a Bawdes, a Sorceresses, Whores, or any
other lewd females part upon the Stage; must undoubtedly be within the
express letter of this universal negative text; and so an abomination to the
Lord. Neither will this Q^id te exempta invat pluris de spinibus un^^ Horace
Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2. p. 294.
poor evasion of acting in woman's apparel but now and then, take off its
guilt; For since men's putting on of such array is here prohibited by a negative
precept, which binds at all times, as an abomination to the Lord, and a thing
that is sinful in its own nature; the Quod enim per se malum est, non quod
frequentius fact^m sit, sed quod aliquando factum est, vituper^bile. Bernard De
Modo b^n^ vivendi. lib.
rarity of it can no ways expiate the sinfulness that is in it. Nusquam and
nunquam excus^tur quo^ Deus damnat. Nusquam and nunquam licet quod semper and
ubique non lice^. Tertul. De Spectac. lib. c. 16.
That which is sinful in it self, is no where, no time lawful upon no
occasion. It is Augustine. Quaest. super Levit. l. 3. c. 68 Tom. 4. pars 1. p.
296.297. accordingly.
no justification, no excuse at all for a Murderer, an Adulterer, Swearer,
Lier, Thief, Drunkard, or the like, to plead, that he commits these sins
but seldom upon some special causes, because Gods precepts are so st^ict, that
they 1 John 2.1. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. Luke 1.75. 1 Pet. 4.2. Acts 24.16.
allow no place, no time for any sin. The infrequency, the rareness then of
wearing woman's apparel (suppose it were as rare upon the Stage as now it is
common) adds nothing to its lawfulness, it still continues an abomination to
the Lord.

Fifthly, admit it were lawful for a man to put on womans apparel to save his
life, or to avoid some imminent danger, Statius Achilleid. l. 1.
as Achilles, Gellius 5. Noct. Attic. lib. 6. cap. 10.
Euclis, Matthew Paris. Hist. Angliae. page 160.161. John Bale Acts of English
Votaries, lib. 2. fol 107.
William Bp. of Ely, with See D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 11.89,
90.
some few others, Plutarch. De vi^tuti^us mulierum. Mor. Tom. 1. p. 519.520.
and The Tyrrheneans are recorded to have done, though Soliloquiorum. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
S. Augustine himself makes a Quaere of its lawfulness even in case of life,
and A^bros. Irenaeo. Tom. 1. page 233. D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays.
p. 14.
others determine it to be unlawful, it being a negative moral precept which
admits no qualifications; yet it follows not hence, that therefore it is
lawful for M^n-actors to put on women's array to act a Play: For doubtless if
it be abominable in any case, or in case of daily use, as all acknowledge; it
must necessarily be so in case of acting Plays, which ^ee M. Gossons School
of Abuses.
are but a mere abuse. For first, Plays themselves, at leastwise the
personating of the Bawdes, Adulteresses. Whores, or Sorceresses part, which
savor of naught else but lewdness and effeminacy, are evil: therefore the
Nullus habitus apud nos lici^us est illicito actui ascriptus. Tertullian De
Idololatria. l^^ 18 Tom. 2. p. 462.
very putting on of woman's apparel to act such parts, cannot be good.
Secondly, Plays, and female parts in Plays, admit they be not simply evil,
yet they See Scene 4. accordingly.
are but mere super^luous vanities; or Abuses, as some rightly style them,
there is no necessary use of Plays, of women's parts in Plays, or of acting
female parts in woman's apparel. For men therefore to put on woman's attire
contrary to this sacred precept, to act a lewd lascivious woman's part out of a
mere effeminate, vain, lascivious humor, there being no urgent necessity, no
warrantable occasion so to do, Nemo immundus mundus videri potest. Tunicam si
induas inquinatam per se, poteris ^orsitan illam no^ inquinare per te, sed tu
per illam mundus esse non poteris. Ter^ul. De Idololatria. lib. c. 18. p. 461.
must needs be a great abomination, a most apparent violation of this ample
precept; which being in it self Psalm. 119.96.
exceeding broad, as all Gods precepts are, must always be taken in its utmost
latitude, without any humane restrictions of our own; since God himself (who
can only make exceptions out of his own general rules) has left us no
evasion from it in his Word.

Sixthly, the concurrent testimony of sundry Councels, Si enim diuinae
authoritates nullum dant lo^um, frustra quaerimus qua exoramus. Tenendum est
enim omnino praeceptum Dei, and volunt^s Dei in ijs, quae^ tenendo praeceptum
ejus passi fuerimus aequo animo sequenda. August. De Menda^io ad C^nsentium
cap. 15.
Fathers, and modern Authors, do absolutely condemn men's putting on of woman's
apparel, (and so e conuerso) especially to act a part upon the Stage, as an
abominable, unnatural, effeminate and dishonest thing. Hence the ancient
Council of Eliberis, Canon 57. decreed, Matronae vel earum mariti, vestimenta
sua ad ornandam seculariter pompam non de^t. Et si ^ecerint, triennij tempore
abstineant. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 366.
That Ma^rons, or their Husbands should not lend their clothes to set forth any
sicular Plays or Shows; and if any did it, that they should be excommunicated
for three years space. If then the very lending of women's apparel to act a
Play in, were so great a crime as to demerit 3. years excommunication, what
does a Players personating of a woman's part in such array deserve? The Council
of Gangra in the year of our Lord 324. Can. 13. and 17. decreed; Si qua mulier
propter continentiam, qu^e putatur, habitum mutat, and pro solito m^liebri
amictum virilem sumit, vel c^ines attond^t, quod ei Deus in subjectionis
materiam tribuit, tanquam praeceptum dissolvens obedientiae, an^thema sit.
Surius Council. To^. 1. p. 373. Soz^meni Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 13. Gratianus
Distinctione 30. and Summa Angelica. Tit. Faemi^a.
That if any woman under pretense of chastity, or piety, as was supposed,
should change her habit, and put on man's apparel; or clip and poll her hair
(as our shorn English Viragoes do of late) which God had given her as a badge
of her subjection; she should be ana^hematized, as a dissolver of the pr^cept
of obedience: it being directly contrary to this text of Deuteronomy: The woman
shall not wear that which pertains to the man, etc. and to the 1 Cor. 10.6,
15. It is a shame for a woman to be shaven or shorn: but if she have long
hair, it is a glory unto her, for her hair is given her for a covering.
Indeed I find some precedents of women, who have been peccant in this kind:
As namely, Nonnullae aute^ mulieres pietatis simulatione caput tondere, and
contra quam deceret sexum muliebrem, virilem habitum induere adductae sunt: His
de causis Episcopi finitimi Gangris in unum convenerunt, etc. Sozem. Hist.
Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 13.
some seduced female disciples of Eustatius, who polled their heads, and clad
themselves in man's apparel, under a pretext of piety; for the redress of
whose enormous mannish courses this very Council was assembled. Ambros. De
Virginibus, l. 2. Tom. 4. p. 223.224. See Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 15. c.
13.
A Virgin, of whom S. Ambrose speaks, who clothed her self in man's array to
save her chastity, and so escaped. Plutarchi Plato. p. 344. Marcilius Ficinus
in vita Platonis, and D. R^inolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 90.91.
Laschonia and Axiothea, who resorted unto Plato his School in man's attire.
Plutarchi Amatruus, Tom. 3. Moral. p. 345.346. S^i. Asterij Homilia. An liceat
dimittere uxorem? Bib. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 707. G.
Empona the renowned wife of Julius Sabinus, who polled her hair, and
disguised her self in man's apparel, and so went to Rome, the better to
conceal her Husband, whose life was then endangered. Simon Metaphrastes in
vita Euphrosmes apud Surium. Probat. Sanct. Hist. Tom. 1. Antonini Chronicon.
pars ^. Tit. 15. cap. 13. sect. 9.
Euphrosina, a famous Virgin of Alexandria, who under a pretense of chastity,
did cut her hair, and put on man's array, and so entered into a Monastery, where
she continued thus disguised for 38. years space. The Math^w Pari^ Historiae
Angliae p. 314.
famous Maid of Burgundy, in the year 1225. who polling her head, and
apparelling her self in masculine garments, of purpose to preserve her
virginity, her Father being desirous to bestow her in m^rriage, entered into
religion in a Monastery of the Friars Minorities, where she lived thus
metamorphosed into a Monk, for diverse years. Platina in vita Ioannis 8.
Ioannis Valerian. De Sacerdotum Barbis. See Alexander Cook, his Pope Ione, and
Balaeus De vitis Pontificum.
Pope Ione that masculine Roman Strumpet of known infamy, who transforming her
self into the habit and ton^ure of a man, repaired in this her disguize unto
the University, where she lived many years; and at last she aspired into the
very Popes unerring Throne, by this her masculine habit and tonsure, as a man;
till her unexpected delivery of a base-borne issue in the very midst of her
solemn procession, discried her to be a woman. Anto^ini Chronicon, pars 2.
Tit. 15. c. 13. sect. 4.5, 7, 9, 10. fol. 130.131
A notable Damsel of Corinth, together with Metania and Marina, who under
pretext of vowing virginity, and preserving their chastity, disguised
themselves in man's apparel, and so entered into Monasteries, as professed
Monks, See Synodus Augustensis. An. 1548. Surius Tom. 4. p. 807.
the better to satisfy their lusts among those Gotish shavelings.
Polychronicon. Book vlt. c. 18. fol. 325. Hollinshead. p. 604. Graft^ns
Chronicle. p. 534.547. Speeds History of E^glish Mon^rchy, p. 833.834, 835.
Puell de Dieu, that notable French Virag^, who arrayed her self like a man,
and turned a great Commander^ in the Wars, till at last she was taken prisoner
by the English in the field, attired and armed like a man; for which unnatural
act of hers, she was condemned and burnt at Roan. John Ba^^ his Declaration of
Edmond Bonn^rs Articles, Anno 1554. Artic. 4. fol. 2^.
The Whore apprehended in Suffolk, in King Henry the VIII. his Reign, by M.
Wharton, who being disguised in man's apparel, was taken in the company of
four Popish shaveling Priests, good Curates; who one after another had
bestowed their chastity upon her. All which for this their mannish immodest
attyring themselves in man's accoutrements, incur the execration of this text
and Council. If then a woman's putting on, or wearing of man's apparel, or the
imitation of his tonsure incurres an Anathema by this Councels doom, though
chastity, learning, and devotion were pretended for it: does not a man's
att^ring himself in woman's vestments, of purpose to act an ^ffeminate
lascivious, amorous Strumpets part upon the Stage, much more demerit it, since
there can be no good pretext at all for it? But to come punctually to our
purpose. The 6. general Council of Constantinople, Canon 62. Eas quae nomine
^orum, qui falso apud Graecos dij nominati sunt, vel nomine virorum ac mulierum
fiunt saltationes ac mysteria more antiquo and a vita Ch^istianorum ^lieno,
amandamus and ^xpellimus; statuentes ut nuslus vir deinceps muliebri vest
induatur, vel mulier vest viro conveniente. Sed neque comicas, vel satyricas
vel tragicas personas induant, etc. Surius Council. Tom. 2. page 109.
expressly prohibits and abandons all daunces and mysteries made in the names of
those who were falsely styled gods among the Graecians, or in the name of men or
women, after the ancient manner, far differing from the life of Christians:
ordaining, that no man should from thence-forth put on a woman's garment, nor no
woman a man's apparel; and that ^o man should put on the person or visard of a
Comedian, a Satyrist, or a Tr^gaedian, under pain of deposition, if a
Clergie-man; of excommunication, if a La^cke. This is punctual. Philo, a
learned Jew, records; Tanta porro contentione lex studet exercere confirmareque
animos ad fortitudinem, ut and de vestimentis qualibus utendum sit praecipiat;
diserte interdicens, ne vir sumat muliebria, ne vel ^mbra aut vestigium
effaeminationis sexui masculo inurat aliquam maculam. Semper enim naturam
sequendo observat, quid deceat etiam in rebus minimis, quae infra curam
legislatoris uideri poterant. Cum enim anim^dverteret deformia esse virorum
mulierumque corpora, and utrisque sua esse officia; alteris attributam esse
curam rei domesticae, alteris publicae, and ab ipsa natura non ad eadem factos
negotia, oportereque bonam mentem sequi naturae instituta, utile iudicavit de
his quoque rebus decernere, scilicet de victu amictuque and huiusmodi caeteris;
voluit enim virum his se ut virum decet gerere, praesertim in vestitu: quem cum
die no^tuque circumferat, talis esse debet, ut ^um semper decori honestatisque
admoneat. Sic and mulierem ornans pro dignitate, vetat vestem virilem sumere,
long submonens tum effaeminatos viros, tum plus aequo viriles faeminas. Philo
De Fortitudine. lib page 1001.1002.
That the law does study to exercise and confirm men's minds to fortitude with
so great earnestness, that it also gives precepts what garments must be used,
expressly prohibiting, that the man should not take unto him woman's apparel,
lest the shadow or footsteps of effeminacy, should stamp some blemish on the
masculine sex. For by following nature, he does always observe what is seemly
even in the smallest things, which might seem to be below the care of a
Lawgiver. For when he considered that the bodies of men and women were
deformed, and that both of them had their distinct offices; that to the one of
them the care of domestique businesses was committed to the other the mannaging
of public affairs, and that by nature her self they were not both made for
the same employments, and that a good mind ought to follow the instructions of
nature, he thought it fit to determine of these things also, to wit, of food
and raiment, and other things of this nature: For he would that a man in these
things should so demean himself as a man ought to do, especially in
apparel; which since he carries it about with him night and day, it ought to
be such as may always admonish him both of comeliness and honesty: S^ also
adorning the woman according to her degree, he forbids her to wear a man's
garment; removing far both effeminate men, and women more manly then is fit.
Clemens Alexandrinus, as O quanta est haec iniquitas, etc? Paedag^g. lib. 3. c.
3. Se^. here Scene 3.
he condemns the putting on of woman's apparel as a great iniquity; Quamnam
enim habet rationem, quod lex viro prohibet, ne vestem induat muliebrem? An non
nos vult esse viros, and ne^ corpore, nec factis, nec me^te, nec verbis
effaeminari? Vult enim eu^ esse mas^ulum, qui veritati dat operam in ferendis
laboribus, and pe^pessionibus, in vita and moribus, in sermon and
exercitatione, noctu and interdi^, and sicubi martyrio opus sit quod procedat
per sanguinem. Stromat. l. 2. fol 8^. D. See G^ossa ordinaris and Lyra in Deuteronomy.
22.
so he demands this question; Why the law in this very text of Deuteronomy did
inhibit a man to put on a woman's garment? and he resolves it thus; Because the
law would have us to be men, and not to be effeminate neither in body, nor in
de^ds, nor in mind, nor in words. Which reason does more especially hold in
case of Plays, where our Men-women Actors are most effeminate, both in
apparel, body, words, and works. Tertullian observes: Nullu^ denique cultum a
Deo maledictu^ invenio, nisi muliebrem in viro: Maledictus enim, inquit, omnis
qui muliebribus induitur, etc. De Idolatria. lib. c. 16.
that no kind of raiment as he could find was accursed of God, but women's
apparel worn by men; for God says, Cursed is every man who is clad in woman's
array. Caeterum cum in lege praescribit, maledictu^ esse qui muliebribus
vestitur, quid de pantomimo iudicabit, qui etiam muliebribus curatur? Sane and
ille artifex impunitus ibit? De Spectac. cap. 23.
Therefore (writes he) when as God prescribes in his law, that he is accursed
who is clothed in woman's apparel; what will he judge of the Stage Player,
Clown or Fool in the Play, who is attired in woman's apparel? Shall this
Crafts-master, this cheating Companion, think you, go unpunished? S. C^prian
writes expressly in his Epistle to Everatius; Nam cum in lege prohibeantur viri
induere muliebrem vestem, and maledicti eiusmodi iudicentur, quanto maioris est
criminis, non tantum muliebria indumenta accipere, sed and gestus quoque
turpes, and molles, and muliebres magisterio impudicae artis exprimere? Ibidem.
That men in the law are prohibited to put on a woman's garment, and those who
do it are adjudged accursed: how much greater a crime is it then, not only to
put on woman's apparel, but likewise to express dishonest, effeminate,
womanish gestures, by the tutorship or direction of an unchaste art? Which
passage he particularly applies to Stage Plays. Histrionum quoque ^neruata
corpora, and in muliebrem incessum habitumque mollita, impudicas faeminas in
honestis gestibus me^^iuntur, etc. De Vero Cultu. lib. 6. c. 20. and Divinarum
Inf^it Epi^ cap. 6.
Lactantius, among other things, taxes Players, for putting on womanish
gestures, and apparel, to act the parts of infamous females: having an eye, no
question, to this text of Deutronomy. Epiphanius Contra Haereses. lib. 2. Tom.
2. Haeresis 66. Col. 543. B. informs us: Turpe equidem est virum faeminam
fieri, and in faeminae forma ^sse. Turpissimum autem rursus, mulieres viros
fieri, and viri habitum gestare, Ibidem.
That it is a shameful and dishonest thing for a man to become a woman, and to
appear in the form of a woman. And that it is again a most abominable thing
for women to become men, (as many of haire-clipping modern impudent Viragoes
do) and to wear the apparel of a man. Whence he condemns the Apud Seras
quide^ viri crines implica^t, and domi desident unguentis delibuti, and
effaeminati, ac uxoribus parati. Mulieres vero vice versa, capillum capitis
tondent, virili cingulo se cingunt, and in agro omnia opera proficiunt. Ibid.
lib. 3. Cont. Haereses. Tom. 2. Col. 910. A.B.
Seres for Heretics; among whom the men did use to nourish and plaite their
hair into knots like women, (as our modern Love-locke wearers do) sitting
all the day idly at home, perfumes with ointments, effeminate, and prepared
for their wives; whereas their women on the other side, did cut the hair of
their heads, (as our English Man-women monsters do of late) and gird
themselves about with a man's girdle: both which are condemned by this text of
Deuteronomy: and by the 1 Cor. 11. v. 3. to 15. which I would our modern
Ru^fians, and Mad-dames would consider. Gregory Nazianzen, Oration. 1. ad
Eunomianos, together with Elias, Metropolitan of Crete, in his Commentary on
that Oration; affirm, Intempestiuum quiddam esse ducimus florem hyberno
tempore, vel mulieres habitu virili, vel muliebri viros ornari. Ibidem. page 7.
That it is an unnatural and disorderly thing to see flowers in winter, or
women clothed in man's, or men attired in women's apparel. Praeter naturam
putandum est esse, ideoque ab ordine alienum, florem hiberno tempore conspici,
vel mulieres virilem cultum induere, vel viros muliebrem; quum primum ex his
tempora perturbet, alterum naturae formam non convenientem tribuat, permutato
viri faeminaeque ornatu, and ordine quem ipsis natura praescripsit, confuso.
Ibidem.
For (as Elias comments) the first of these disturbes the times; the other
yields an inconvenient form to nature, the ornament both of the man and woman
being changed, and the order which nature has prescribed to them, being
confounded. Upon which ground they both condemn the Cynicke Maximus, and his
sect, Comas quas prius perverso quodam studio aluerant. Solebant enim Cynici
studiose comam alere, magnaque diligentia p^rficere, ut came prolixam habere^t.
Ibid Oration 19. p. 344.345.
for nourishing and wearing their hair long, out of a perverse affection: as
being an effeminate, and unnatural thing. S. Hierom writes expressly; Peribit
qui in faemineo languore mollitus comam nu^rit, cutem polit, and ad speculum
comitur, quae proprie passio and insania mulierum est. Comment. in Soph. c. 1
Tom. 5. p. 210. P.
That he shall eternally perish, who being effeminated in womannish
feebleness, does nourish his hair, pollish his skin, and trim himself by the
glass, which is the proper passion and madness of women. S. Cyprian records,
In domo regis Diaboli sunt, qui capillis mul^ebribus se in faeminas
transfigu^ant, and dignitatem virilem non sine naturae iniuria dehonestant. De
Ieiunio and Tentatione. Sermo. Tom. 2. p. 287.
That they are in the Devils House and Palace, who with womanish hair
transfigure themselves into women, and disgrace their masculine dignity, not
without the injury of nature. Pulchritudinem tibi a natura, Deo authore
collatam, noli adiecto cultu exornare, sed humiliter eam adversus homines ita
cohibe, capillum comae non nutriens, sed potius illum detondens and adimens, ne
tu pruritu vexatus, and caput lacerationis expers conservans, vel unguentis
perfundens, inducas tibi mulieres, quae hoc modo illaqueant, and illaqueantur.
Fidelis enim cum sis and homo Dei, nou licet tibi nutrire capillum, and in unum
complicare, quod est delicatum and molle, vel discerniculo discriminare, neque
utro intortum calamistris crispare, vel flauum facere, quoniam quidem lex vetat
in Deuteronomio, inquiens; Non facietis vobis rotunditatem ex coma capitis
vestri, neque incisiones. Neque viro licet barbae pilos corrumpere, neque
homines figuram praeter naturam mutare. Non incidetis (inquit lex) superficiem
barbae vestrae. Hoc enim mulieribus decens creator Deus staruit, viris
indecorum esse iudicavit. Tu vero haec facie^s, and ut tibi placeas, legem
violans, in odio eris apud Deum, qui creavit te secundum imaginem suam. Ibid.
Clemens Romanus, Constit. Apost. l. 1. c. 4. Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l.
2. c. 10.3. and l. c. 2.3.11. Philo Iudaeus. De vita Contemplativa. page 1208.
and De Specialibus Legibus. p. 1059. Origin in Job. lib. 1. Tom. 2. Fol. 18. l.
Epiphanius, Contra Haereses, lib. 3. Tom. 2. Haeresis 80. Col. 894.895. and
922. A. Julius Firmicus, De Errore Profanarum Religionum. cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 4. p. 108. Paulinus, Epistola 4. ad Seuerum. Augustine. De Opere
Monachorum. lib. c. 31.32, 33. Tom. 3. p. 1067. B. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, De
Spiritualibus Oblationibus. lib. 2. Tom. 2. p. 534. E. Isichius in Lovit. lib.
4. cap. 13. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7 p 51. C. and lib. 6. c. 19. p. 85. E. Bernard.
Oration ad Milites Templi. cap. 2. and 4. Amalarius Fortunatus. De
Ecclesiasticis Officijs, lib. 3. cap. 2. together with See my Vnlovelinesse of
Love-lockes. p. 12, 13, 14. accordingly.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Sedulius, Primasius, Oecumenius, Beda, Anselme Remigius,
Theophylact, in their Expositions and Commentaries on the 1 Cor. 11.14, 15.
Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man has long hair (in which our
Ruffians glory) it is a shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair, (Of
which See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes. p. 45. to 49.
our English Ladies, who have cast off God and nature, shame and modesty,
religion and subjection, are now ashamed, as being out of fashion) it is a
glory to her; for her hair is given her for a covering:) do See my
Vnlovelinesse of Lovelockes thorowout.
copiously censure and condemn the frizling, nourishing, and wearing of long
effeminate hair, as an unnatural, womanish, irreligious, and unmanly practice
condemned, not only by the Hi comas muliebres producunt. Oportebat aute^
filios sanctae Catholicae matris nostrae Ecclesiae esse reverendos in tonsura,
atque honesto habitu propter extraneos. Alienum enim est a catholica Ecclesia,
and a praedicatione Apostoloru^ coma extensa. Vir enim, inquit, non debet
nutrire comam, quum sit imago ac gloria Dei. Quid vero fit pe^us and
contrarium? Hi barbam quidem formam viri resecant, capillos autem capitis saepe
nutriunt. De barba quidem in constitutionibus Apostolorum dicit divina
Scriptura ac doctrina; Ne corrumpas; hoc est, ne seces pilos ba^^ae, neque
meretricio more ob comam efferaris. Decebat enim Nazeraeos hoc solum propter
figuram, etc. Quare dicit Apostolus, Ipsa natura non docet vos, quod vir quidem
si comam nutrit, ignominia ipsi est? Haec autem ignominia non laudabilis est,
velut illa quae dicit, Turpitudines and ignominias contempsi. Non enim propter
Deum est virtus, etiamsi propter Deum assumpta fuerit, sed propter contentione^
sunt hi mores. Dicunt enim, si quis videtur contentiosus esse, nos talem
consuetudinem non habemus, neque Ecclesiae Dei. Reiecit igitur eos, qui talia
operantur and faciunt, and in contentione sunt a statutis Apostolorum, and ab
Ecclesia Dei. Epiphanius. Cont. Haereses. Haeresis 80. C^l. 894.895.
Law of God and nature, in the 1 Cor. 11.14. Ezech. 44.20. Levit. 19.27. and
21.5. Dan. 4.33. Rev. 9.7, 8. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. Isay 3.24 (which
Scriptures I wou^d our overgrowne Lock-wearers, and frizle-pated men-women
would well consider) But even by this text of Deuteronomy, which inhibits men
to put on a woman's garment, or attire; of which long hair ( the proper 1 Cor.
11.15. and the Fathers and Commentators on it.
ornament of women) as well as woman's raiment is a part. If then the very
nourishing of long effeminate hair be a putting on of woman's apparel within
this Scriptures sense, as the woman's cutting of her hair (as Ambros. Irenaeo.
Tom. 1. p. 233. Clemens Romanus, Constit. Apost. l. 1. c. 4 Marlorat. in 1 Cor.
11.5, 6, 14, 15. Osiander, Pellicanus, Cornelius a Lapide^, Calvin, Iunius,
Amsworth, on Deuteronomy. 22.5. with others hereafter quoted. Hierom. Epist. 12.
Concilium. Gangr. Can. 17. and Gratian. Distinctio 30. Doctor Fulkes
Annotations on the Rh^mish T^stament, on These. 2. cap. 3. sect. ^. D. W^llets
Synopsis Papismi. p. 354.355. Sozomeni Historiae Ecclesiasticae, l. 3. c. 13.
Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 5. pars 2. p. 392. I. Rabanus Ma^rus Glossa ordinaris, and
Lyra in Deuteronomy. 22.
Good Expositors testify) is a wearing of that which pertains to a man, to
whom the clipping of hair is proper, he being in this distinguished from a
woman: and so an abomination in Gods sight, though our men and women in these
licentious times believe the contrary; Much more must a Players putting on of
women's apparel, gesture, speech, and manners to act a Play, be a putting on of
woman's apparel, and so an abomination to the Lord our God, within the very
litterall meaning of this text, if these fore-quoted Fathers may be judged. S.
Ambrose in his Operum, Tom. 1. p. 232.233.
Annotations upon Deuteronomy. cap. 22. dedicated to Irenaeus: Wherein he
examines at large the cause, why the law should prohibit women to wear a man's
garment, and men to put on woman's apparel; will make this point most clear. I
shall recite his words at large. Thou have informed me (writes he) as a son,
that some have demanded of thee, what is the reason, that the law should so
severely call them unclean, who use the garments of another sex, be they men
or women. For thus it is written, The apparel of the man shall not be put upon
the woman, neither shall a man be arrayed in a woman's garment; because every
one who shall do these things, is an abomination to the Lord thy God. Et si
vero discutias, incongruum est quod etiam ipsa abhorret natura. Cur enim homo
non vis videri esse quod natus es? Cur alienam tibi as^umis speciem? Cur
mentiris f^eminam, vel tu faemina virum? Suis unum quemque sexum induit natura
indumentis. Demque diversus usus, diversus color, motus, incessus, diversae
vires, diversa vox est in viro and faemina Sed eti^m in reliqui generis
animantibus alia species leonis, alia leaenae, alia vis, alius sonus: alia
ta^ri, alia vi^ulae, etc. Ibid^m. See Rabanus Maurus, lib. 2. in Deuteronomy. 22.5.
cap. 30. accordingly.
And if thou may truly discuss it; that is incongruous, which even nature
her self abhors. For why being a man, will thou not seem to be that which
thou art borne? Why do thou take unto thy self a different form? Why do
thou feine thy self a woman, or thou woman thy self to be a man? Nature has
clothed every sex with its own garments. Finally, there is a diverse use, a
different color, motion, pa^e, an unequal strength, a different voice in a
man and in a woman. Yea likewise in living creatures of another kind, there is
one form of a Lion, another of a Lioness, yea another strength, another
sound: one of a Bull, another of a Heifer. In Dear also, so much as the sex
does differ, so much does the form, so as thou may distinguish them afar
off. In Birds likewise there may be a proper comparison, in regard of apparel
between them and man. For in them the very induments themselves do by nature
distinguish the sex. The male Peacockes are beautiful; the females are not
adorned with so various a beauty of feathers. The Phesants also have a
different color, which may distinguish the difference of the sex. What
difference is there in Poultry? How shrill is the crowing of the Cock, a
solemn gift to stir up and sing, in the several watches of the night? Number
quid ill^ mutant speciem sua^? Cur nos mutare desideramus? Et quidem Graeco
more influxit ut ^aeminae virilibus quasi succinctioribus tunicis uta^tur. Esto
tamen ut illae imitari videantur melioris sexus naturam: Quid viri inferioris
sexus mentiri speciem volunt? Mendacium and in verbo turpe est; nedum in
habitu. Denique in Templis, ubi mendacium fidei, ibi mendacium naturae. Illic
assumere viros muliebrem vestem, gestumque faemineum, sacrum putatur. Vnde lex
dicit: Quoniam immundus est Domino Deo tuo omnis qui faecerit haec: hoc est,
vir qui stolam muliebrem induerit, etc.
Do these things change their shape^ or habit? Why then do we desire to
change? And verily the custom of the Grecians has flowne in among us, that
women wear short coats, as being shorter then their own. Well, be it so now,
that these may seem to imitate the nature of the better sex; why will men
counterfeit the habit of the inferior sex? A lie even in word is dishonest:
much more in apparel. Finally, in Temples, where there is a counterfeiting of
faith, there is a counterfeiting of nature: For men This was the practice then
of Pagan Priests in their Idols Temples.
there to take unto them woman's apparel, and a womanish behavior, is thought
an holy thing. Whence the Law says: Because every one, who shall do these
things, is an abomination to the Lord thy God: that is, a man who shall put on
a woman's garment. But I suppose, that it speaks this, not so much of clothes,
as of manners, or of our customs and actions, wherein one act may become a
man, another a woman. Whence also the Apostle says, as an interpreter of the
Law, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35.
Let the woman keep silence in the Church: For it is not permitted to them to
speak, but to be in subjection, as the Genesis 3^16.
Law says. But if they will learn any thing, they may ask their Husbands at
home. And to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection: for I suffer not a woman
to teach, nor to domineere over her Husband. Quam deforme autem ^rum facere
opera muliebria? Ergo and pariant, ergo parturiant qui crispant coronam sicut
faeminae. Et tamen illae velantur, isti bellantur. Verum habeant excusationem
qui patrio^ usus sequuntur, sed tamen barbaros, ut Persae, ut Gothi, ut
Armenij. Mayor quid^m est natura quam patria. Quid de alijs dicimus: qui hoc ad
luxuriam derivandum putant, ut calamistratos and torquatos habent in
ministerio: ipsi promissa barba, illos remissa coma? Merito illic non servatur
castimonia, ubi non tenetur sexus dictinctio. In quo evidentia naturae
magisteria sunt, dicente Apostolo, Decet mulierem non velatam, etc. Haec sunt
quae referas requirentibus. Vale. Ibidem.
But how unseemely a thing is it for a man to do womanish works? Therefore
also may they bring forth children, therefore may they ^ravell of childbirth,
who See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, page 49.50. against this effeminate
practice.
crispe their hair like women. And yet those are veiled, these make war. But
they may have an excuse who follow the customs of their Country, which yet are
barbarous, as the Persians, as the Goathes, as the Armenians. Verily nature is
greater then our Country. What do we speak of others, who add this to their
luxury, that they keep in their service men wearing frizled hair, and golden
chains, themselves having long beards, their servants long shag hair?
Deservedly chastity is not there kept, where a distinction of six is not
observed. In which the evidences of nature, are so many tutorships; the Apostle
himself saying: Is it a seemly thing, that a woman pray unto God uncovered?
Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a
shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her, for her
hair is given her for a covering. These are the things which thou may answer
to those who inquire of thee. Farewell. Thus does this Father descant on this
Scripture. S. Augustine resolves us; Ideo credo iure infames intestabilesque
haberi, qui muliebri habitu se ostentant, quos nescio utrum falsas mulieres an
falsos viros melius vocem. Veros tamen Histriones, verosque infames sine
dubitatione possumus vocare. Solilequiorum, lib. 2. cap. 16. Operum, Tom. 1.
page 765.
That those are rightly accounted infamous, and unable to bear witness, who
show themselves in woman's apparel, whom I know not whether I should rather
call, false women, or false men. Yet we may style them true Stage Players, and
true infamous persons without any doubt. And withal he informs us, Et magna
quaestio ^st, utrum patriae liberandae causa, muliebri tunica indutus debeat
hoste^ decipere, hoc ipso quod mulier facta sit, fortasse verior, vir futurus.
Et utru^ sapiens qui aliquo modo certum habeat, necessaria^ fore vitam su^m
rebus hum^nis, m^l^t emori frigore, quam faemineis vestibus, si aliud no^ sit,
amiciri. Sed de hoc, ut dictum est, ^lias videbimus. Prosecto enim cernis,
quantae inquisi^ionis indigeat, qu^renus ist^ progredi d^beant, ne in quasdam
inexcusabiles ^urpitudines decidatur, etc. Ibid^m.
that it is a great Question, whether a man may put on woman's apparel, to
deceive an enemy with it, for the delivery, or safety of his Country, because
in this he becomes a woman, perchance to appear a truer man. And whether a
wise man, who has some kind of assurance that his life will be necessary for
the good of men, would rather die with cold, then clothe himself in woman's
apparel, if he can ge^ no other. But of this (says he) we shall consider more
in another place. For verily thou see how much examination it requires, to
consider how far these things ought to be proceeded in, lest men fall into
certain unexcusable uncleanness. And so he leaves the Question undecided.
Julius Firmicus Maternus, De Errore Profanarum Religionum, lib. c. 4. Bibl.
Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 108.109. writing of the effeminate Sodomiticall Male-Priests
of Venus, Purchase Pilg. Book 1. chap. 15.
who clad themselves in woman's apparel, and were afterward put to death by
Constantine the Great for their unnatural lewdness, as Eusebius ( De Vita
Constantini, lib. 3. cap. 53. and lib. 4. cap. 25.) records: has this notable
passage. The Assyrians, who worship the Air under the name of Venus, have
verily effeminated this Element, being moved I know not with what Veneration.
Whether because the Air is interposed between the Sea and Heaven, do they
worship it with the effeminate voices of their Priests? Di^ mihi, hoccine est
quod in viro faeminam quaerunt, cui aliter servire sacerdotum suorum chorus non
potest, nisi eff^eminent vultum, cutem poliant, and virilem sexum ornatu
muliebri dedecorent, etc? Exornant muliebriter nutritos crines, and delicatis
amicti vestibus vix caput lass^ cervice sustentant. Deinde cum sic se alienos a
viris secerint, adimpleti tibiarum cantu vocant Deam suam, etc. Ibidem.
Tell me, is this the cause that they seek a woman in a man, whom the Quire of
their Priests cannot otherwise serve, unless they effeminate their
countenance, polish their skin, and disgrace their masculine sex with womanish
attire, etc? They effeminately adorn their long nourished hair, and being
clothed in delicate garments, they scarce support their head with their wearied
neck. Afterward, when they have thus estranged themselves from being men,
ravished with the music of Pipes the^ call upon their Goddess, etc. Quod hoc
monstrum est, quodve prodigium? Negant se viros esse, and sunt: Mulieres se
volunt credi^ sed aliud qualiscunque qualitas corporis co^fitetur.
Considerandum e^t etiam, quale si^ nume^, quod si^ impuri corpori^ delectatur
hospitio, quod impudicis adhaeret membris, quod pollu^a corporis co^taminatione
placatur. Erubescite o miseri, supinitare^! alter vos Deus fecit. Cu^ cohors
vester ad T^^bunal iudicantis Dei accesserit, nihil vobiscum afferetis, quod
Deus, qui vos fecit, agnoscat. Abijcite hunc tantae calamitatis ^rrore^, and
studia profanae mentis aliqua^do deserite. Nolite corpus, quod Deus f^cit,
s^elerata Diaboli lege damnare. Ibid.
What Monster, or what Prodigy is this? They deny themselves to be men, and yet
are such: They would be reputed women, but the quality of their body confesses
the contrary. Consider what deity it is which is thus delighted with the
entertainment of an impure body, which adheres to unchaste members, which is
attoned with the filthy pollution of the body. Blush O ye wretches, at your
sottishness: another God has made you! When your company shall appear before
the Tribunal of God who judges, you shall bring nothing along with you, which
God, who has made you, may acknowledge. Cast away this error of so great
calamity, and now at last relinquish the practices of a profane mind. Do not
ye damn that body which God has given you, with the wicked law of the Devil.
So pathetically inveighed he against men's putting on of women's apparel. S.
Chrysostom, as he Homil. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 298. C. See Scene 3. p.
169.
expressly condemns the putting on of woman's array to act a Play; a thing too
common in his days: So in his 26. Homil. in Epist. 1. ad Corinthios, cap. 11.
Tom 4. Col. 453. B.C. (where he recites this Text of Deuteronomy, and notably
censures Apostolus viro coma^ alere semper prohibet. Nam si comam nutriat
ignominia est illi. Non dixit, Si operiatur, sed, Si comam nutriat, etc. Ibid.
Col. 454 B.
men for nourishing, and Turpe est muli^ri tonderi aut radi, etc. Ibidem.
women for cutting, and laying out their hair;) he has this excellent speech.
Signa quidem data sunt and viro and mulieri, illi quidem imperij ac
principatus; huic vero subiectionis: Cum his autem hoc quoque; quod hoc quidem
operto sit capite, ille vero apertum c^put h^beat and nudum. Si haec ergo sunt
signa, ambo peccant, bonum ordinem consundentes, and Dei constitutionem, and
suos limits transgredientes; ille quidem decidens ad hu^us humilitatem and
deiectionem; haec vero in virum insurgens per habitu^ ac figura^. Si enim fas
non est vestem mutare, and neque huic quide^ toga indu^^ illi vero instita, and
muliebri tegumento capitis. Non enim erit, inquit, viri ornatus super mulie^e^,
neque indu^tur vir vest muliebri: multi magis haec non sunt mutanda, etc.
Ibidem.
There are certain signs given both to a man and woman; to him verily of
command and principality; to her truly of subjection: and among these this
also; that the woman should have her head covered; but the man his head
uncovered and bare. If these therefore are signs, both of them sin, when as
they confound this good order, and the constitution of God, and transgress
their limits; he, in falling down to the humility and deiection of the woman;
she, in rising up against the man, by her apparel and shape. For if it be not
lawful for them to interchange their garments, neither for a woman to be clad
in a man's Gown; nor for a man to be attired in a woman's Gown, or Veil; For
he says; Neither shall the ornament of the man be put upon the woman; neither
shall the man be clad in woman's apparel, Deuteronomy. 22.5. much more are not these
things to be changed, etc. To pass by Damascen. Paralellorum. lib. 2. cap. 65.
together with Beda Expositio in Deuteronom. c. 22. Operum. Tom. 4. p. 164^ who
condemn men's putting on of women's apparel from this Text, which they recite:
that elegant Bishop of Marcelles, Salvian, does exceedingly tax the Romans for
permitting men to wear woman's apparel, not only in ordinary converse; but
See lib. 6. De Gubernat. Dei throughout.
even upon the Stage. Quis credere, aut etiam audire possit, convertisse in
muliebrem tolerantiam viros, non usum suu^ tantum atque naturam, sed etiam
vultum, incessum, habitum, and totum penitus, quicquid aut in se^u est aut in
^su viri: adeo versum in diversum omnia erant^ ut cum viris nihil magis pudori
esse oporteat, qua^ si muliebre aliquid in se habere videantur; illic nihil
viris quibusdam turpius videretur, quam ^^ in aliquo viri viderentur. De
Gubernat. Dei, lib. 7. p. 263.264.
Who (writes he) could believe or hear, that men should have turned into a
womanish patience, not only their use and nature; but even their countenance,
pace, habit, and all whatsoever is in the sex, or in the use of a man: all
things were so turned upside down, that whereas nothing ought to be more
shameful to men, then that they should seem to have any womanish thing in
them; there nothing did seem more dishonest to certain men, then that they
should seem to be men in any thing, etc^ Illud vero magis ingemiscendum atque
I^gendum est, quod tale hoc scelus crimen etiam totius reipub. videbatur. Et
universa Romani nominis dignitas, facinoris prodigiosi inurebatur infamia^ Cum
enim muliebrem habitum viri sumerent, and magis quam mulieres gr^dum
frangerent, cum indicia sibi quaedam monstruosae impuritatis innecterent, and
faemineis tegminum illigamentis^ ut capita velarent, atque hoc public in
civitat^ Romana vrbe illic summa ac celeberima; quid aliud quam Romani Imperij
dedecus ^rat, ut in medio Reipublicae sine execrandissimum nephas palam liceret
admit^^, etc? Ibidem^ page 265.266. vid. 267.268.
This therefore is more to be lamented and pitied, that this so great a
wickedness did seem the crime of the whole Commonwealth; and the whole
dignity of the Roman name was branded with the infamy of this prodigious
wickedness. For when men should clothe themselves in woman's apparel, and
become more effeminate then women, and cover their heads with feminine attires,
and this publicly in a Roman City, yea, in the most^ famous and chief City
there; what else was it, but the shame of the Roman Empire, that in the midst
of the Commonweal this most execrable wickedness should be tolerated without
control? Asterius Bishop of Amasea, who flourished about the year of our
Lord, 390. in his Homily, In Festum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705.
C.D. writes thus: Condiscun^ illiberales and inhonestas Scenicorum arts ac
studia, unde mollities ac dissolutio morum. Nonne velato ore in faeminam
degenerat^ ille for^s, ille animo praestans, ille in armi^ suis admirabilis,
hostibus formidabilis? Tunicam ad tales demittit, Zonam pectori circum volvit,
calceamenta muliebria sumit, and, more faeminarum capiti crobilum imponit, quin
etiam cum lana colum circumfert, dextraque filu^ ducit, qua trophaeum ante^
tulit, spiritumque ac vocem in acutiore^ ac muliebrem son^^ extenuat^ Hae
telebritatis huius utilitates: haec hodierni festi publici commoda ac fructus,
etc. O stultitiam! O caecitatem! Ibid.
That in this feast, the people did learn the infamous and dishonest arts and
studies of Stage Players, from whence effeminacy and dissolution of manners did
proceed. Does not that valiant man, that man of courage, who is admirable in
his arms, and formidable to his enemies, degenerate into a woman with his
veiled face? he lets his coat hang down to his ankles, he twists a girdle
about his breast, he puts on women's shoes, and after the manner of women, he
puts a cawle upon his head; moreover, he carries about a distaffe with wool,
and draws out a thread with his right hand, wherewith ^e has formerly borne a
trophie, and he extenuateth his spirit and voice into a shriller and womanish
sound. These are the profits of this solenmnity: these are the commodities and
fruits of this days public feast. O folly! O blindness! etc. So vehement is
this godly Bishop against this unmanly practice, even in case of Stage Plays,
which he much condemnes^ Our learned Countryman, Aleb^vinus, writing, of the
practices of the Pagan Romans on the Kalends of January, now our New-yeeres
day; informs us; that Quidam mu^abant se in species monstruosas, in feraru^que
habitus transformabant. Alij in faemineo gestu mutati, virilem vultum
effaeminabant. Nec immerito, etc. De Divinis Officijs. l. c. 4. Col. 1013.1014.
diverse of them did transform themselves into monstrous shapes, and into the
habit of wild beasts. Others (says he) changed in a feminine gesture, did
effeminate their manly countenance: neither unworth^ly have not they a manly
fort^tude, who have changed themselves into a woman's habit, or have put on a
woman's attire. Now because the whole world was replenished with these and other
miseries, the whole universal Church has appointed a public fast to be kept
on this day (which fast it seems is now forgotten) in as much as the Author of
life should put an end to ^hese calamities: so does he style these effeminate
practices. To these recited Fathers and Councels I might add Aste^anus De
Casibus, lib. 2. Tit^lus 54. Aquinas prima secundae. Quaest. 102. Artic. 6. 6m.
and secunda secundae. Quaest. 169. Artic. 2. 3m. Alexander Alensis. Theologiae
summa. pars 2. Quaest. 135. Memb. 2. page 617.618. Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra,
Tostatus, Pellicanus, Cornelius a Lapide, Rabanus Maurus, Calvin, Iunius,
Dionysius, Carthusianus, Ferus, Osiander, and Ainsworth on Deuteronomy. 22. v. 5.
Bishop Babington, M. Perkins, M. Dod, M. Downham, M Elton, Osmond Lake, M. John
Brinsly, Calvin, Bishop Chatechisticall Doctrine.
Andrews, D. Griffith Williams, D. De Iure Conscientiae. lib. 5. cap. 39. p.
27^. sect. 30.
Ames, with sundry others upon the 7. Commandment. Peter Martyr, Locorum
Communium Classis. 2. cap. 11. sect. 68.79. Bullinger and Marlorat in 1 Cor.
11.6. Gulielmus Parisiensis, De Fide and L^gibus, cap. 13. Danaeus Ethicae
Christianae^ l. 2. c. 14. Polanus Syntagma Theologiae. lib. 10. cap. 26. p.
665. The rich Cabinet, London 1616. p. 116.117, 118. Maphaeus Vegius Laudensis.
De Educatione Liberorum. lib. 5. c. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 882. E. A
short Treatise against Stage Plays by an Anonymous Author, tendered to the
Parliament. Anno 1625. p. 17. W. T. In his Absoloms fall. fol. 9. Stephen
Gosson his Plays confuted. Action 2. The third Blast of Retrait from Plays
and Theaters: M. Northbrook, his Treatise against Vain Plays and Enterludes.
fol. 36. and D. Reinolds, in his Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 8. to 20. and p.
85. to 103. where this point is largely and learnedly debated. All these, with
infinite others in their Treatises against Stage Plays, do utterly condemn
the putting on of woman's apparel, especially out of wantonness to act a Play,
as a violation of this text of Deuteronomy, and an abomination to the Lord our
God: neither was there ever any one Divine that I have met with, who did
contradict this truth; therefore we need not doubt or question it, but submit
unto it without any more disputes.

Lastly, the very reasons alleged against the putting and so a detestable and
shameful act: as not only Irenaeo. Tom. 1. p. 233. Ainsworths Notes on Deuteronomy.
22.5.
Ambrose, and the fore-quoted Christian Authors, but even Non videntur tibi
contra natural vivere, qui co^mutant cum faeminis vestem^ Seneca Epist. 121.
Seneca and O scelus! en ^luxae veniunt in pectora vestes: scinde puer, scinde,
etc. Achill. id lib. 1. See D^ Reinolds. Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 12.13.
Statius, with other Pagans testify. For since nature has made a difference,
not only between the sex, but See Ambrose I^enaeo, Purchas^ Pilgrimage, and
Voyages, Novus Orbis, Munsters Cosmograph. ^^e^us. De Moribus Gentium, Strabo,
Gotardies, L^rius, and all other Historians and Cosmographers.
even betwixt the habit and apparel of men and women, as well among the most
barbarous, as the civilest Nations, in so much that they are visibly
distinguished by the diversity of their raiment one from the other: it must
needs be a violation of the very dictates of nature, for a man to clothe
himself in that apparel which nature and custom have prescribed to another
sex, as mis-becomming his. As 1 Cor. 11.14. See Ambrose, Hi^rom, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Sedulius^ Remigius, Beda, Anselm^, Occumenius, Haymo,
Ibid. and my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, p. 8. to 16.
nature it self does teach men, that it is a shame for them to wear long
hair (though our modern Ruffians glory in it) because it 1 Cor. 11.15. See
Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra, Bulinger, Calvin, Marlorat, and others on the 1 Cor.
11.6. accordingly.
is naturally proper unto women, to whom it is given for a veil, a covering:
so much more does it teach men, that it is a detestable, unnatural, shameful
thing for them, to put on woman's attire to act a Strumpets part. Hence men in
women's, and women in men's apparel have been ever odious. Witness Lampridij
Heliogabalus, Eutropius, Reru^, Romans l. 10. fol. 124.125. Zonaras Annal. Tom.
2. fol. 106^ and 107.
Heliogabalus, Suetonij Nero. ^ect. 26. Zonaras Annal. l. 2. f. 98 b.
Eutropius, l. 9. f. 104. Nero.
Sporus, Justin Hist. l. 1. Athenaeus Dip^. l. 12. c. 12.13. Diodorus Siculus.
Bibl Hist. l. 2. sect. 23. Orosius Hist. l. 1. c. 19. Sleidan, de 4^^.
Imperijs. l. 1. p. 19.
Sardanapalus, Su^tonij Nero. sect. 28. Luvenal. Satyr. 8.
Nero, Caligula, (Suetonij Calig. sect. 52.54. and others; together with the
Eusebius De Vita Constable. l. 3. c. 53. Julius Firmicus, De Errore Prosanarum
Religionum. c. 4. Purchase Pilgrim. Book 4. chapter 7.
Male-priests of Venus, Philo Iudaeus, De Specialibus Legibus. page 1059.1060.
and De Vita Contempl. p. 1209.1210.
the Roman Galli or Cinaedi, the passive Sodomites Purchase Pilg. Book 8. c. 7.
in Florida, Purchase Pilg. Book 9. c. 1.
Gayra, and Purchase Pilg. book 9. c. 11. and Cieza. c. 64.
Peru; who clothing themselves sometimes, not always in woman's apparel (as
did also Matthew Paris, Hist. Angl. p. 160.161. See here p. 18.2.
William Bishop of Ely to his shame,) are for this, recorded to posterity, as
the very monsters of nature, and the shame, the scum of men. Witness the
Purchase Pilg. Book 6. c. 10.
Inkeepers of ^ez at this day, who attyring themselves like women, shaving
their beards, and becoming effeminate in their speech, are so odious to these
very Infidels, (some base villains only excepted who resort unto them,) that
the better sort of people will not so much as speak to them, neither will they
suffer them to come within their Temples. If men in women's apparel be thus
execrable unto Pagans, how much more detestable should they be to Christians,
who are taught not only by the light of nature, but of the 1 Cor. 11.14. Deuteronomy.
22.5. Zeph. 1.8. Romans 1.27.
Gospel too, to hate such beastly male-monsters in the shapes of women? And as
the verdict of human nature condemns men's degenerating into women; so from the
very selfsame grounds, it deeply ce^sures the aspiring of women above the
limits of their female sex, and their metamorphosis into the shapes of men,
either in hair, or apparel. As nature dictates to men, 1 Cor. 11.14.
that it is a shame for them to wear long hair, or woman's raiment, so it
instructs women, that it is a shame, a sin for them, to put on man's
apparel, or to clip or cut their hair their feminine glory (as our Viragoes
do) because it is given them as a natural covering to distinguish them from
men: as the Apostle plainly teaches, in the 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 15. the 1 Timothy
2.9. and Deuteronomy. 22.5. Hence the Council of Gangra Si qua mulier propter diuinu^
cultu^ (ut aestimat, crines attondeat quos ei Deus ad subiectionis materiam
tribuit, vel habitum mutat, and pro solito muliebri amictum virilem sumit,
tanquam praeceptum dissolvens obedientiae, anathema sit. Ibid. Canon. 13.17.
Surius, Tom. 1. p. 373. Gratian Distinctio 30. Sozomeni Hist. lib. 13. cap. 13.
did anathematize those women, as infringers of the law of nature, and of the
precept of subjection, who did either cut their hair, or clothe themselves in
man's apparel, though it were under pre^ence of Religion, as Nicepherus, Eccl.
Hist. l. 17. c. 5. Cent. Mag. Tom. 6. Col. 349. and 808.
Theodora (who lived a penitentiary life in man's apparel for her adultery in a
Monastery for sundry years together) is recorded to have done, and as some
Hierom. Epist. 48. c. 3. Sozomeni. Hist. Ec. l. 3. c. 13. Nicetas advers.
Arrianos. l. 5. Bib. Patrum. Tom. 12. pars 1. page 587. H. Baronius and
Sp^ndanus, An. 57. sect. 27. Pamelius Notae in Cypriani Ep. 62. n. 9. p. 84. a.
preposterous Nonnes in Egypt did: Hence Gratian Distinctio 30. Summa Angelic^.
Tit. Faemina. together with Calvin, Bullinger, Marlorat, Lyra, and Glossa
Ordinaris, with sundry others on 1 Cor. 11.5, 6. and Deuteronomy. 22.5. and Synodus
Turonica, Anno 1583. apud Bochellum. Decreta. Ecclesiae. Gallicanae. lib. 6.
Tit. 9. cap. 1^. (whose word I would our man-women English Gallants would
consider) expressly teach us; Natura inquit, ipsa abhorret muliere^ rasam
cernere: faedum est aspectu, and monstri instar, etc. Calvin. Ibidem.
that even nature herself abhors to see a woman shorn or polled; that a woman
with cut hair is a filthy spectacle, and much like a monster; and Vehemen^er
absurdum apud omnes ^sset si muliet at^onsa com^ prod^^ret in publicum: id ^nim
perinde esset ac si viri in se tr^nsumeret personam, etc. Bulingerus and
Marlo^^t. Ibidem.
that all repute it a very great absurdity for a woman to walk abroad with
shorn hair; for this is all one as if she should take upon her the form or
person of a man, to whom short cut hair is proper, it being natural and comely
to women to nourish their hair, which even God and nature have given them for
a covering, a token of subjection, and a natural badge to distinguish them
from men. Yet notwithstanding, as our English Russians are metamorphosed into
women in their deformed Which frizled hair is condemned by Council.
Constantinop. 6. Can. 96. and Synodus Turonica. 1583. Council. Bituriense 1584.
apud Bochellum.
frizled locks and hair, so our English Gentlewomen, (as if they all
intended, to tu^ne men outright and wear the Breeches, or to become Popish
Nonnes) are now grown so far past shame, past modesty, grace and nature, as
to clip their hair like men with locks and foretops, and to ma^e this Whorish
cut, the very guise and fashion of the times, to the eternal infamy of their
sex, their Nation, and the great scandal of religion. Yea, the unnatural
shameless Papists, bidding as it were professed defiance both to God, to
nature, Moses, and S. Paul, have made this a Baronius and Spo^danus. Annal.
Eccl. Anno 57. sect. 27. Cent. M^gdeb. Cent. 11. Col. 333. l. 30. and Cent. 12.
Col. 974 l. 50. Lyra in 1 Cor. 11.5, 6 Paulus Windeck, De Theologia
Iurisconsultorum. Locus 38. p. 107.^08, 109. Summa Angelic^. Faemin^. The
Rhemists and D. Fulkes Notes on the Rhemish Testament on the 2 These. c. ^.
sect. ^. Pamelius. Notae in Epist. 62. Cyprian^. n 9 p. 84. Historia
Bambergensis. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. f. 141.155, 165 Lupoldus De Zelo Vet.
Princ. Germanoru^. c. 13. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 15. p. 741 b. Acosta Hist. Indiae.
l. 5. c. 15. Purchase Pilg Book 8. c. 12. Mas^aeus Select. Epist ex India. l. 4
p. 170^ Petrus ^luniacensis. Epist. l 3. ad Germanos. Fratres. Epist. 17
Francis De Croy his first Conformity. c. 11 p. 30
solemn Ceremony at the admission of all their Nonnes into their unholy
orders, to poll their heads, and cut their hair, in token that they are now
immediately espoused unto Christ, and so are freed from all subjection to men,
or to their husbands, (as I presume those English women think they are, who cut
their hair.) An unnatural See D. Willets Synopsis Papismi p. 354.355. and D.
Fulkes and M Car^wrights Notes on 2 These 3. sect. 2
unchristian shameful practice, derived (as Baronius and Spondanus An. 57.
sect. 27. ^aulus Windecke, Theologia Iurisconsultoru^. ^ Locus 38. p. 108.
themselves acknowledge) from the Pagan Roman Vestales (a fit pattern of
imitation for all Popish Nonnes) who entering into that idolatrous order did use
to Plin Not Hist l. 5. c. 12. Baronius, S^ondanus, Windeck, and others qua
supra. Martial. Epig l 9. Ep. 18.27.
poll their heads and consecrate their hair to the Goddess Lucina, hanging it
for a monument on a sacred Lote-tree. Well, let the Romanists and their Nonnes
who give a reason for polling their religious Virgins that Lyra on 1 Cor. 11.6
Baronius, Spondanus, Windeck, qua supra.
its a token of their freedom from all subjection to men, etc. (whereas they
should rather plead they are men indeed, not women, and so are not bound to
nourish their hair) much like the reason of those foolish Ruffianly Friars, or
Crinitifratres, whom S. Augustine reproving for wearing long hair against the
Apostles precept. Iam illud si dici potest, qua^ luctuose ridiculu^ est, quod
rursus inveneru^t ad defensione^ crinium suoru^ Viru^ inquiunt, prohibuit
Apostolus habere coma^. Qui autem castraveru^t seipsos propter regnu^, caeloru^
iam non sunt viri. O dementia^ singulare^, etc^ Aug. De Opere Monachoru^. c.
32. Tom. 3. p. 1068. See the Rhemists, D. Fulke, and M. Cartwright, Notes on 2
These. 3. sect. 2.
1 Cor. 11.14. to the scandal of religion, replied, that the Apostle prohibits
men only to wear long hair, and they were no men (as our effeminate hairy
men-monsters hardly are) because they had made themselves Eunuchs for the
Kingdom of Heaven, and so were exempted from the Apostles text, as the Lyra,
Baronius, Spondanus, Windecke, qua supra, and Summa Angelica. Faemina.
Papists say these Nonnes of theirs are, though all other women wha^soever are
included:) or let our English shorn Blowses, think what they will of this
vile practice; yet sure I am that God, that Scripture, Nature, modesty,
Religion and all ingenious persons, who have any sparks of nature in them much
condemn it, as an abominable guise, unfit for any but lewd Adulter^sses and
notorious Whores, (as many See John Ba^^s Acts of English Votaries, Centuria.
Magd. Cent. 12. Col. 107 and 12. Col 66^. The Anatomy of the English Non: at
Lisborne. Onus Ecclesiae. c 22 sect 12.
polled Nonnes and shorne-frizled English Maddames are.) Hence the Tacitus De
Moribus Germanorum. c. 6. Boemus De Moribus Gentiu^. l. 3. c. 12. Munsters
Cosmog. l. 3. c. 13 Alexander ab Alex l. 4. c. 1. Baronius and Spondanus. An.
57. s^ct 27. Capit Regu^ Francoru^ l. 6. c 2. and ^in^ecke qua supra. p. 108.
ancient Germans and Purchase Pilg. l 5. c. 5.9. and l. 9 c. 1. Alex ab ^lex l.
3. c. 5. Apuleius De ^sino au^^o l. 2. and Caelius Rhod Ant Lect. l. 29. c. 18.
others, did use to shame and punish notorious Adulteresses and Whores, by
shauing off their hair, as the most ignominious punishment that could befall
them. Justinian. Codicis. l. 9. Tit 9. Lex 30. Sed. hodie, adultera tonsa,
M^nastico habitu suscepto, etc Ambros. ad Virgine^ Lups^m. c. 8. Tom. 4. p.
216^ B. Zonaras Ann^l. Tom 3. f. 14.1.155, 165 Nic^^h^r. Hist. Eccl. l 17. c 5.
Cent. Mag. Tom. 6 Col. 349 and 808. Capitul Franc. l. 6 c. 2. and Windeck qua
supra
Hence the ancient Roman Emperors did usually punish Adulteresses by cutting
their hair, and then thrusting them into a Monastery, to do penance there,
the true original of this Popish custom. And hence the French Synod under
Pope Zachery, in the year 742. decreed. Similiter velatae and sanctimoniales
si in crimen fornicationis lapsae ^u^r^nt, post tertiam verberationem in
carcerem missae sequentem annum ibi paeni^entiam agant, and radantur omnes
capilli capitis carum Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 40.
That if any Nonnes and holy Virgins did fall into adultery (as many did) they
should be thrice whipped, then cast into prison for an whole year, and have
all the hair of their head shaven quite away; to make them odious for ever
after, yet Romanists glory in this their feminine tonsure of their Nonnes;
Whereas the Counc^ll of Nicetae Thesauri Orthodox l. 5. c 14. Bibl Patrum Tom.
12 pars 1. p. 587 B.
Ariminum under Constantius (as if it had been purposely somoned to convict
the Papists of heresy in this very Ceremony of installing Nonnes) together
with the Council of Can 13.17. Surius Tom 1. p^ 373. Nonnullae autem p^etatis
simul^tione caput tondere and contra quam deceret sexum muliebrem virilem
h^bitum indu^re adductae s^n^. His de causis Episccpi finitimi G^ngris in unum
convenerunt, and istis Ecclesia c^tholica interdicunt, etc Sozomeni. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Gangra, condemned Eustatius for an heretic; Quod mulieres comam detondere
monuisset: for that he had persuaded women out of a pretext of holiness, to
cut their hair, against the very Laws of God and nature. Now as women's
clipping of their hair like men is thus execrable in it self, because
unnatural; so is their putting on of man's apparel, or men of theirs,
especially for merriment. To pass by Baronius and Spondanus, An. 302. sect 5.
Dom^a, who clad her self in man's apparel to avoid the rage of the Tyrant
Maximinian; together with that mirror of conjugall fidelity, Plutarchi
Amatorius. Moral. Tom. 3. page 345.346. Asterij. Homilia. Quod non licet
demittere uxore^, etc. Bibl. P.T. 4 p. 707. G. Petrus Victorius l. 18. Var.
Lect. c. 15.
Empona, who cut her hair, and wore man's apparel lest she should betray her
Husband Julius Sabinus, being discovered, with whom she lived 9 years in a
vault, as Hist. l. 4. c. 15.
Tacitus relates; with some See p 184. and Isiodor Pelusiotes. Epist. l. 2. Ep.
53. See my vnlovelines of Love-locks, p. 44. to 49^
other women formerly mentioned, who have cut their hair and put on man's
apparel for learning, danger, or religion sake, whose practice I cannot
approve, since God and nature both condemn it: I shall only remember two
Stories more, very pertinent to this purpose. The first is of the Argi^ae, or
Plutarchus De Virtutibus. Mulieru^. Tom. 1. Moral. page 516.517.
Grecian women of Argos, who driving Cleomenes King of Sparta from their
besieged City under the conduct of Telesilla, the most of the Argivi being
slain before the siege; in remembrance of this their victory, ordained a feast
on the seventh day of the fourth month, wherein they exercised their,
Hibristica sacra, or contumelious solemnities, in which they clothed women in
man's apparel, and men with women's haire-laces, veiles, and head attires:
(inverting the very course of nature both in the male and female sex:) And
withal that they might seem to contemn and disgrace their Husbands, they
inacted this law (which our English shorn Viragoes might do well to put in
practice) that all married women should put on beards, when ever they should
lie with their Husbands: which puts me in mind, not only of Alexander ab
Alexandro. l. 4. c. 13. fol. 213. Caeliu^ Rhodig. Antiqu. Lect. l. 29. c. 18.
bearded Venus ( to whom men sacrificed in women's, and women in men's apparel,
as Macrobius Saturnaliu^. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Macrobius has recorded) whom they pictured like a man from the girdle upward,
and like a woman only from the girdle downwards, because they deemed her both
a man and a woman: (a lively emblem of our halfe-men-women monsters:) but
likewise of the Winnili or Lombards wives, Paulus Diaconus, De Gestis
Longobardorum. lib. 1. c. 8.
who going to Goddanus with their Husbands to desire of him the victory against
the Vandals with their hair hanging loose below their cheeks in form of a
beard; Goddanus seeing them out of his window, and taking them to be men with
very long beards, demanded^ Qui sunt isti Longobardi? from whence they were
after called, Lombards, quasi Long-beards, as some, or as other Historians have
recorded, because Munsteri Cosmograph. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 229.
their Husbands to increase the number of their Army at their first eruption,
that so they might be more terrible to their enemies, did untie their wives
long hair and fashion it to their faces like a beard, deceiving their enemies
with this Stratagem. which if our English polled females (who may do well to
make them beards of the hair they have shorn from their Locks and Foretops)
will but imitate, they may then seem bearded men in earnest, and fall to
wearing breeches to, (as they have lately taken up men's Tonsure, Locks and
Dublets, Romans 1.26.
if not more:) and so be like these mannish Argivae, ouer-ruling nature and
their Husbands both at once. The second History is that of Plutarch De
Virtutibus Mulierum. Mor. Tom. 1. p. 544.545. Dyonisius. Hallicarnassaeus.
Antiqu. Romanoru^. lib. 7. c. 1 p. 633.634.
Aristodemus the Tyrant, surnamed effeminate, because he wore long womanish
hair, for which the very Barbarians did condemn him. This unnatural Tyrant
endevoring to effeminate the Cumaeans, commanded and taught their Youths to The
like we read in Athenaeus. Dipn. l. 6 c. 6. p. 4^1. of ^no^us the Tyra^t of
Erythrae.
nourish their hair like women, to color it yellow, to curle and embroyder
it, and bind it up in phillets; and to wear painted and embroydered Gowns
and garments until they were past 20. years of age. And withal he compelled
their women to cut their hair round, and to put on m^ns apparel. Which
invertion of the course of nature in both sexes (condemned by Iniurijs quas in
mulie^es, and ingenuos pueros exercebat, omnia sua superant flagitia. Ibidem.
Plutarch, as a tyranny beyond all his other wickednesses) did make him so
execrably odious to the Cumaeans, that they rose up with one accord against him
and slew him, together with all his posterity, as detestable and worthy ruin
both with God and man. It is evident then by all these premises: that the
putting on of woman's apparel, and so e converso; is Habet enim and sexus
institutam speciem habitus, ut in. viris tonsi capilli, in mulieribus
^edu^dantia criniu^, quod maxim virginibus insigne est, qu^ru^ and ornatus
ips^ proprie sic est ut concumulatus in verticem ipsum capitis suo arcem ambitu
crinium contegat. Isi^de^^ Hispalensis. Originum. l. 19. c. 23.
an unnatural, and so a See Purchase his Pilgrim. cap. 5^. accordingly.
shameful, an abominable act: therefore to put it on to act a Play, must needs
be such.

Authors, together with Act 5. Scene 3. abundantly testify: This Plutarch, and
Dionysius Hallicarnasseus in the now recited History of Aristodemus the Cumaean
Tyrant; together with Orosius, Suetonius, Effaeminati corpore atque animo ne
scintlla^ quide^ retinent gene^is masculi protinus plectentes cincinnos
ornantesque: nec pudet eos data opera marem sexu^ mutare in faemina^. Philo De
Specialibus Legibus. p. 1059.1060.
Philo Iudaevs, Diodorus, Siculus, Athenaeus, Justin, Lampridius, Iuvenal,
Eusebius, Purchase, and the Sea page 108.
fore-quoted Historians, who condemn Sardanapolus, Heliogabalus, Nero, Sporus,
the M^le-priests of Venus, the Roman Galli, Cinaedi and others formerly
mentioned for so many Monsters of unparalled effeminacy, for putting on woman's
attire, together with the very grounds of common reason, fully evidence. For
what higher streine of invirility can any Christian name, then for a man to put
on a woman's raiment, gesture, countenance and behavior, to act a Whores, a
Bawdes, or some other lewd, lascivious females part? If this be not effeminacy
in the suparlative degree, I know not yet what effeminacy means. But if it be
effeminate, as See Purchase his Pilg. c. 51.
all must grant, then it must needs be sinful, yea abominable, since 1 Cor.
6.9, 10 Gal. 5.19, 21. Ephesians. 4 19 Militum Christi veru^, nihil molle decet.
^mbros Enar. in Psalm. 38 See Purchase his Pilg. cap. 51.
effeminacy is both an odious and a condemning sin, as both Scriptures and
Fathers do proclaim it.

Thirdly, a man's putting on of woman's apparel, See Bulingerus De Theatro. l 1
c. 50.51, 52.
be it to act a Play, Ambros Irenaeo, Calvin, Babington, on the 7.
Commandment, and all the fore-quoted Authors. p.
is a dishonest, immodest, and unseemely thing, which becomes not Christians or
religion: it is a thing of ill, not good report; a thing not honest, but vile
and filthy in the sight of all men, as the fore-alleaged Authors, and Act 5.
Scene 3. together with every ingenious man's conscience and experience testify.
Therefore it must needs be sinful, as the recited Fathers, and 1 Cor. 11.13,
14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. Phil. 4.6. Ephesians. 4^.17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 13.5. Tit.
2.11^12. Romans 1.28. c. 14.16, 19.
Marginall Texts of Scripture will more fully evidence.

Fourthly, a man's clothing himself in Maids attire, Priests and Pagans,
Macrobius Saturnal. l 3. c. 8. Plutarch De^ Virtutibus Mulierum. l. Julius
Firmicus, De Origin profanarum. Relig. c. 4. Eusebius De Vita Constantius. l.
3. c. 53. Purchase Pilg. l. 4. cap. 7. and his Pilg. chap. 8.
who arrayed themselves in woman's apparel when they sacrificed to their Idols,
and their Venus, and See Act. 1.2, 3^
celebrated Plays unto them; which as In Deuteronomy. c. 22
Lyra, Prima secundae. Quaest. 102. Arti^. 6.6m secunda secundae Quaest. 169.
Artic. 2.3m.
Aquinas, and Summa Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. Memb. 2.
Alensis well observe, was one chief reason, why this Text of Deuteronomy
prohibits, men's putting on of women's apparel, as an abomination to the Lord:
but a manifest approbation and revivall of this their idolatrous practice.
Therefore it must certainly See Act 2. thorowout.
be abominable, and within the very scope and letter of this inviolable
Scripture, even in this regard.

Fifthly, this putting on of woman's raiment, Et haec est tota ratio damnationis,
perversa administratio conditionis a conditis. Tertul. De Sp^ctac. Tom. 2. p.
384.
is a mere abuse of it. The end why God ordained apparel at the first, was
only Genesis 3.21. Rev. 3.18. Prove. 17.26. 2 Chronicles. 28.15. Mat. 25.36, 43. 2 Cor.
5.2.
to cover nakedness; Job. 31.19, 20. c. 24.7, 8. Hag 1.6. Mat. 6.25. to 32.
to fence the body against Rev. 3.17, 18. Ezech. 16.4. to 13, 39, 40. Alexander
Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 6. c. 2 Obsopaeus De Luxu Vestium. The
Homily against Excess in Apparel.
put men in mind of their penury, their mortality, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 5. Romans
13.14. Rev. 3.18. c. 7.9. Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. 1 Pet. 3.3.
their spiritual clothing from Heaven, and the like; and Deuteronomy. 22.5. 1 Pet.
3.3. 1 Timothy ^.9. 1 Cor. 11.9. to 16. and most Expositors on it. Clemens
Alexandrinus Paedag. l. 3. c. 3. Ambros. Irenaeo. Tom. 1. p. ^33.24. H. 8. c.
13.1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 2. with all other Statutes of Apparel, and
Authors who have written of Apparel.
to distinguish one Sex, one Nation, Proprius habitus unicuique est, tam ad
usum quotidianum quam ad honorem and dignitatem. Purpura praetexta and stola,
nativitatis insignia, non potestatis: generis, non honoris; ordinis; non
superstitionis. Tertul. De Idololat. lib. cap. 16.17. See De Pallio. lib.
one dignity, office, calling, profession from another. Now a man's attyring
himself in woman's array, as it serves for neither of these good ends for which
garments were at first ordained; which proves it a mere abuse: so it perverts
one principal use of garments, to difference men from women; by confounding,
interchanging, transforming these two sexes for the present, as long as the
Play or part does last. If therefore men's ordinary wearing of women's garments,
if the put^ing of them on in any other place but in a Playhouse, or the
wearing of them in the streets for an hour or two, and that but seldom; be
within ^he malediction of this text, or an unlawful thing (as our very D.
Gag^r, and D. Gentilis in D. Re^nolds Overth^ow of Stage plays, p^ 9.15, 86,
91, 92, 167, 169^ 170.
Antagonists in this case of Plays, confess) because it transformes the
Ambros. Irenaeo. Tom. 1. p. 233. Que^ si puellaru^ inse^eris choro, Mire
s^gaces falleret hospi^es Discrimen obscuru^ solutis crinibus, ambiguoque
vultu. Horace Carm. lib. 2. Ode 5.
male in outward appearance into the more ignoble female sex, and nullifies
that external difference between them, which it ought to make: Then
questionless men's arraying themselves in woman's vestments to act a part in
Masks, in Plays, or other Enterludes, must needs be much more abominable,
within the meaning of this Scripture: because it not only inverts these Sexes
which God and nature have distinguished: but also abuses apparel, not to any
good or necessary purpose Romans 3.8.
which is evil; but to an unnecessary, lewd, lascivious end, from whence no
good at all proceeds.

Lastly, this putting on of woman's array (especially to act a lascivious,
amorous, whorish, Love-sicke Play upon the Stage, must needs be sinful, yea
abominable; because it not only Merito illic non servatur castimonia, ubi no^
servatur sexus distinctio. Ambros. Irenaeo.
excites many adulterous filthy lusts, both in the Actors and Spectators; and
draws them on both to contemplative and actual lewdness, (as the Aquinas
prima secundae^ Quaest. 102. Artic. 6.6m. secunda secundae Quaest. 169. Artic.
2.3m. Calvin, Babington, Perkins, Downeham, Dod, Elton, Lake, Williams, Ames,
and al others on the 7. Commandment, and on Deuteronomy. 22.5. quoted before. Philo
Iudaeus De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059.1060. De Vita Co^templ. p. 1209.1210.
and D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p. 8. to 23. and 83. to 102
marginall Authors testify) which is evil; but likewise instigates them to
Genesis 38.8. and To. 1.21 Deuteronomy. 23.10.11.
selfe-pollution, ( a sin for which Onan was destroyed:) and to that
unnatural Sodomiticall sin of uncleanesse, Romans 1.24, 26, 27.
to which the reprobate Gentiles were given over; (a sin Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
not once to be named, much less then practiced among Christians;) which is
worse, This the detestable examples of Lampridij Heliogabalus, Eutropius,
Reru^. Romans l. 10. f. 124.125. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 106.107. Grimstons
Imperial Hist. p. 157.159.
Heliogabalus, Ath^naeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 12, 13. Justin. Hist. l. 1. Or^sius
Hist. l. 1. c. 19. Diodorus Siculus. Bibl. Hist. l. 2. sect. 23. Sleida^ de
401. Imperijs, l. 1. p. 17.
Sardanapalus, Suetonij Nero, sect. 28.29. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. f. 98. b.
Eutropius l. 9. Romans Hist. p. 104. Grimstons Imp. Hist. p. 79
Nero and Sporus, Julius ^irmicus, De Errore Profa. Relig. c. 4 Eusebius De
Vita Co^st. l. 3. c. 55. Macrobius Satur. l. 3. c. 8. Purchase Pilg. l. 4. c. 7.
and his Pilg. c. 51.
the Male-Priests of Venus, with the Purchase Pilg. l. 8. c 7.
passive beastly Sodomites in Florida, Purcha^ Pilg. l. 9. c. 1.
Gayra, and Purchase Pilg. l. 9. c. 11. and Ci^^a. c. 64.
Peru, evidence; who went clad in woman's apparel, the better to elliciate,
countenance, act, and color their unnatural execrable uncleanesse, which I
abhor to think off. This the Isti pueros transferunt in amicaru^ habitu^ and
ordine^ cum summa aetatis iniuria, ut amatoribus quidem eorum melius consulent,
etc. Philo De Vita Contempl. l. p. 1210. and De Specialibus Legibus, p.
1059.1060. See Su^tonij Nero, sect. 28. Ath^naeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27. Su^tonij
Tiberius, sect. 43.44. Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Romans l. 7. c. 1.
usual practice of other ancient Incubi, who clothed their Galli, Succubi
Ganymedes and Cynadi in woman's attire, whose virilities they did oft-times
Suetonij Nero, sect. 28. Herodoti Urania. p. 482. I^venal. Satyr. 6. p. 54.55.
Ambros. Hexaem. l. 5. c. 3. Basilius Mag. De Vera Virginitate, Tom. 2. p. 167.
to 173. August^ De Civ. Dei. l. 7. c. 24. Anastasius Siani^a, Quaest. 66. Bibl.
P.T. 6. pars 1. p. 774.775. Philo De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059.1060. and De
Vita Contempl. p. 1209.1210. Sedulius in 1 Cor. c. 6.
dissect, to make them more effeminate, transforming them as near as might be
into women, both in apparel, gesture, speech, behavior. And more especially
Grandiores pueri, loti, nitidi, fucatique ac cincinnatuli, alu^t capillitium
vel omnino intonsi, vel a front tantum praesectis in orbem crinibus. Nunc ^o
gloriantur qui patra^t and qui patiuntur muliebria, effaemina^i corpore iuxta
atque animo, ne scintillam quidem retinentes generis masculi, propalam
plectentes cincinnos ornantesque, etc. Phi^o De Vita Contempl. p. 1208. and De
Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059. See Ambrose Ir^naeo, and Rabanus Maurus, in Deuteronomy.
l. 2. c. 20. Nazienzen Oration 27 p. 460. accordingly. Est apud eos consuetudo
ut pueri usque ad^mp^berem aetatem purpuram, capillorumque nodos auro revinctos
gestent. At^^naeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 6. See lib. 10. c. 6. and l^ 12. c. 19.
Assistunt pueri coma nitentes ex gente barbarica ad hoc usus Electi. Am^rose De
Elia and Ieiuni^. c. 13. Discant a te co-Episcopi tui, comatulos pueros and
comptos adolescentes secum non habere. Bernard De Consideratione. l. 3 c. 6^
Aristodemus iussit mares more virginum comam alere, eamque color ^^avo
inficere, cincinnosque facere, and reticulis capillos religare and pictis atque
talaribus togis indui, palliolis ^enuibus ac mollibus amiciri, and in umbra
degere. Eos autem comitabatur ad ludum saltatorum and tibicinum, puerorum
magistrae mulieres, and ipsae lavabant eos allatis ad balnea pectinibus and
speculis. Tali educatione corrumpens pueros donec annum aetatis vicesimum
implevissent. Sed quum his alijsque multis modis cum contumelia illusisset
Cumae is, and a nullo libidinis genere tempor^sse^, etc. una cum tora stirpe
excisus e^t. Dionys Hallicarn. Antiqu. Romanor. l. 7. c. 1. p. 634. and
Plutarch De Virtu^ibus Muli^rum Alor Tom. 1. p. 544.545. Nero insignes
pinguissima coma adolescentulos and excelle^tissimo cultu pu^^os undique
elegit, qui divisi in factiones pl^usuum genera condiscerent, etc. Suetonij
Nero s^^t. 20. See 28. Cnidiusque Gyges^ Quem si puellarum insereres choro,
Mire sag^ces falleret hospites, Discrimen obscurum solutis crinibus, ambiguoque
vultu Horace Carm. l. 2. Ode 5. Puer quis ex aula capillis. Ad cyathu^
statuetur unctis? Ide^ Carm. l. 1. Ode 29. I, pete unguentum puer and coronas.
Dic and argutae properet Neaerae, Myrrheum nodo cohibere crine^^ Carm. lib. 3.
Ode 14. Spis^a t^ mundum coma, etc. Sparsum adoratis humeru^ capillis. Ibid Ode
19.21. Et quae nunc hum^ris involitant, deciderint comae. Carm. l. 4. Ode 10.
Horret capillis, ut m^rmus, ^speris ^chinus, au^ curre^s aper. Ide^. Epodon, l.
Epod. 5. p. 137. Sed alius ardor aut p^e^iae candid^e. Aut teretis pueri,
longa^ renodantis coma^^ Epod. 11. p. 146. Into^sum pueri dicite Cynthiu^.
Carm. l. 1 Ode 21. Intonsosque agitaret Apollinus aura capillos. Epod. l. Ep
15. p. 149. Que^ tenues decuere togae nitidique capilli. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 14.
p. 260. Tondendu^ cunucho Bromium co^mittere noli. Iuvenal Satyr. 6. p. 55. See
Farnaby. Ibid. Quid iuvat ornato procedere vita capillo? Aut quid Orantea
crines perfundere myrra. Propertius Elegiaru^. l. 1. Eleg. 2. Quid tibi nunc
molles prodest coluis^e capillos? Saepeque mutatas disposuisse comas? Quid fuco
splendente comas redimire? quid illas, Artificis docta subsecuisse manu?
Tibullus Elig. l. 1. Eleg. 8. Vnus de toto peccaverat orb, comaru^ Annulus,
etc. Desine iam Lalage tristes ornare capillos, Tangat and ins^nu^ nulla puella
caput, etc. Martial. Epig. l. 2. Epig 46. Tu iuvenile decus serva, ne pulerior
ille In longa fuerit quam breviore coma^ Hos tibi laudatos dominoru^ voce
capillos. Ille tuus latia misit ab urbe puer: Addidit and nitidu^ sacratis
crinibus orbe^. Q^o faelix facies indice tota fuit. Id^m Epig. l. 9. Epig^ 14.
Consiliu^ formae speculum, dulcesque capillos Pergameo prosunt dona sacratadeo,
Ille puer tanto Domino gratissimus aula, etc. Nec G^nymedeas mallet habere
comas. Ibid. Epig. 13. Noluera^ Polytime tuos violare capillos, etc. positisque
nitebat Crinibus Epig. l. 12. ^pig 68. See l. 14. Epig. 21.23, 24, 134 Exornant
muliebriter nutritos crines, etc. Julius F^rmicus, D. Errore Profan. Rel^g c 4.
Molles sunt, cum quibus virile perficitur scelus, and quoru^ virilia in
pu^ritia castrabantur, etc^ Eide^ Matri magnae contra omnem virorum,
muli^ru^que verecundia^ consecrati sunt, qui usque in extremu^ diem madidis
capillis, and facie dealbata, incessu faemineo per plateas vicosque Carthaginis
a populo, unde turpiter viverent exigebant, Sedulius Collect. in 1 Cor. 6.
Bibl. P.T. 5. pars 1. p. 462. G. See Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l 15. c. 8.9.
at large to this purpose, and my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, p. 5.6, 21, 22.
Seneca. De Brev. Vitae. c. 12. and Controvers^ l. 1. Proaem.
in long unshorne womannish, frizled, lust-provoking hair and Love-lockes,
(grown now too much in fashion with comely Pages, Youths, and lewd effeminate
ruffianly persons; as they were with these unnatural Pagans, I dare not write,
to amorous beastly purposes, Veneris praesidio ferox, pectes caesariem, etc.
tamen heu serus adulteros Crines pulvere collines. Horace. Carm. l. 1. Ode 15.
Non sola comptos arsit adulteri crines. Hor. Carm l. 4 Ode 9. Co^ventu^ tamen
and pactu^ and sponsalia nostra Te^pestate paras, iamque a tonsore magistro
pecteris, etc. Iuvenal Satyr. 6. p. 42. Si nemo tribunal vendit acersecomes, si
nullu^ in coniuge crimen, etc. Ib. Sat. 8. p 79. Sed vitare viros cultu^
formamque professos. Quique suas ponunt in statione comas. Ovid De Art Amandi
l. 3. Alter unguentis aff^uens, cal^mistata coma despiciens conscios
stupratoru^, etc. Cicero Oration pro Sexto. p 547. b. Intonsum caput ambitionem
perversa via sequitur^ etc. Seneca Epist 5. See Epist. 124. De Brev. Vitae. c.
12 and Contr. l. 1. Proem. See Tibullus. El^g. l. 1. Eleg. 8. Porp^rtius Eleg l
1. Eleg 2. Petronij Satyrico^. p. 87 Stobaeus Sermon. 6. Comae studiosius
adulteri sunt. Homerus enim puellaru^ decepto^em comae nitidioris amante^
facit, quasi ad mulieru^ corrupt^lam coma exornaretur. Nullus co^atus qui non
etiam cinaedus and impudicus. Syn^s^us Calvitij Encomium.
to which they are strong allectives, of which they were ancient Symptoms, as
sundry profane and Cael^us Rhodig Antiqu. Lectionum. lib. 15. c. 8. Comas
supervacuas curare vel in saelicium vel iniustorum est: nam quid in talibus
expectendu^ aut suspicandum, ni^i ut lasciuus ille ornatus faeminas
praetereuntes invi^et, aut alienis matrimonijs insidietur? Basil De Legendis
libris Gentilium Orat. See Hier^m. Ep. 8. c. ^0. Ep. 19. c. 5. Ep. 21. c. 12.
Ep 47. c. 3. Clemens Rom A^ost. Constit. l. 1. c. 9. Clem Alexand. Paedag l. 2
c. 10. l. 3 c. 2.3, 11. See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, p. 21.22, 29. to
3^. Purchase his Pilg c. 51 Council. Constantinop 6. Can 9. and 96. Council.
Turonicu^. 1585. and Bituri^nse. 1584. Bo^h^llius. lib. 6. Tit. 9.
Christian Writers testify: Which should cause all chaste ingenious Christians
for ever to detest them, the better to avoid the s^ares, the badges, the
suspicions of incontinency, and this most filthy sin:) the more to extenuate
this their unnatural wickedness, or rather the more freely to embolden, to
allure and provoke them to the undaunted, u^lamented practice of it, by
reducing it as near to natural lewdness as they could devise: since few of
them were so prodigiously impudent, so unmeasurably outrageous at the first, as
desperately to rush upon this unnatural filthiness in its suparlative native
vileness, without some extenuating varnishes cast into it, to charm their
consciences, and inflame their lusts. Yea this the execrable Precedents of
ancient, of modern Play-poets and Players witness, who have been deeply
plunged in this abominable wickedness, which my Ink is not black enough to
discypher. Witness the example of Sophocles, that famous Greek Tragaedian,
whom Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 13. cap. 27. Plutarch, in his Amatorius; Suidas in
the word Sophocles; Caelius Rhodiginus, Antiqu. Lect. lib. 15 cap. 9.10.
Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. c. 63.64. have stigmatized for this sin.
Witness Saint Cyprian, who writes thus of the womanish Pantomimes and Players in
his times. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Libidinibus insanis in viros viri
proruunt, etc. See Act 4. Scene 1. Witness Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Epist. 1.
ad Corinth. Theatra congregant and meretricum choros illic inducentes, and
pueros pat^icos qui iniuria ipsam naturam afficiunt. Quid ergo illos inducis
cynaedos, and exoletos, etc. Yea witness Caligu^a. Suetonij. Calig. sect. 55.
with M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses p. 105. where he a^firmes, that Players
and Play-haunters in their secret conclaves pla^ the Sodomites: together with
This I have heard credibly reported of a Scholar of Bayliol College, and I
doubt not but it may be verified of diverse others.
some modern examples of such, who have been desperately enamored with
Players Boys thus clad in woman's apparel, so far as to solicit them by
words, by Letters, even actually to abuse them. All which give doleful
testimony to this experimental reason, which should make this very putting on
of woman's apparel on Boys, to act a Play, for ever execrable to all chaste
Christian hearts. Hence is it, Calvin, Babington, ^erkins, Elto^, Brinsly, Dod,
Downham, Lake, Ames, and others on the 7. Commandment, D. Reinolds Overthrow,
etc. p 4.10.11.
that sundry learned Divines annex this text of Deuteronomy to the 7.
Commandment, as a morrall precept sounded upon the very Law of nature; because
men's putting on of woman's raiment is a temptation, an inducement not only to
adultery, but to the beastly sin of Sodom, which (says Parum enim vid^batur
si in expugn^nda faemin^ru^ pudicitia maculosus esset ac turpis, nisi etiam
sexui suo iniuriam faceret. Hoc est verum adulteriu^ quod fit contra naturam.
Haec qui fecit, viderimus an maximus, certe optimus non est De Falsa. Relig
lib. 1. cap. 10. page 36.
Lactantius) is most properly called adultery, because it is Cogitandum est
masculo^u^ ad masculos, and faeminarum ad faeminas societatem praeter naturam
esse, and facinus little qui primi ab voluptatis incontinentiam id ausi fuerunt.
Omnes equidem Cretensium de G^nymede fabulam damnamus, velut qui t^lem rationem
in ^a in. nuerint ut cu^ leges a Jove ipsis t^aditae, credantur hanc fabula^
contra Iovem effinxerunt, quo seque^tes Deum, etiam hac voluptate renerentur.
Valeat igitur haec fabula Plato Legum Dialog. 2 p. 791. See Romans 1.26, 27.
unnatural. Yea hence (as Philo Iudaeus De Specialibus Legibus p. 1058.1059,
1060. D Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 11.
some have truly observed) those women who put on men's, and men who put on
women's apparel, are said in this text, not only to be abominable, but even, to
be an abomination, in the abstract, to the Lord their God; because it is an
occasion off, a violent provocation to that monstrous unparalleld sin of
Sodomy, ( Sedulius in 1 Cor 6.
Cuius defecit interpretatio erubuit ratio, conticuit oration:) which the
following Deuteronomy. 23.17, 18.
chapter, with several Levit. 18.22, 23, 24. 1 King. 14.24. Ezech. 16.50.
other Scriptures, expressly style; an abomination to the Lord our God. Since
then it is abundantly evident by all these premises, (and I suppose by many
Players and Play-haunters particular experience) that men's putting on of woman's
apparel ( D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p. 10.11, etc. G^sson his
Plays Confuted. Artion 2.
especially to act a Whores, a Baudes, or Sweet-hearts womanish wanton part
upon the Stage, where all the solicitations, and inescating allectives to
uncleanness do accompany it,) is a preparative, an incendiary, not only to
sundry noisome lusts, to speculative, to practical adultery, whoredom, and
the like: but even to the most abominable unnatural sin of Sodom, Caelius
Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. cap. 8.9. Athenaus Dipnosoph. lib 13. cap. ^7.28.
Plutarchi Amatorius. D. Reinolds and Goss^n, qua h.
to which men's imbred corruption, (as good Authors testify) is over-prone; as
the detestable examples of the flagitious Gen 19.5. Ezech. 16.50. Jude 7.
Sodomites, Levit. 18.22 24. Ephesians. 4.19.
Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 23.17, 18. Judge. 19.22, 24, 25. 1 King. 14.24. 2 King. 23.7.
Jews, Rom 1.24. 16, 27. Ephesians. 4 19.
Gentiles, 1 Cor 6.9.10, 11.
Corinthians, Alvarus Pelag. l. 2. Artic. 2 p. 89. Bp. Babington on the 7.
Commandment Burtons Melancholy, pars 3. sect 2. p 408 Heylins Geog. p. 155.
Italians, Lon^^^rus Turc. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. Busbequi^s Ep 3 p. 134. to 140.
Purchase Pilg l. 3. c. 10.13.
Turks, Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27.28. Caelius Rhod Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c.
9. Heredo^^, Clio, Purchase Pilg. l. 4. c. 7.
Per^ians, Plutarchi, Gryllus, and Amatorius, Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27.
Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 9.
Grecians, Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 5. c. 106. p. 1221. Purchase Pilg. l. 4. c. 13.
Tartars, Purchase Pilg. l. 4 c. 19.
Chinoyes, Plato Legum. Dial. 2. p. 791. Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27. Aristot.
Polit. l. 2. c. 8. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 9.
Cel^ae, Purchase Pilg. l. 5. c. 3.
Peguans, Purchase Pilg. l. 8. c. 7.
Floridians, Philo Iudaeus, De Vita Cont. p. 1208. to 1211. Athenaeus Dipn. l.
13. cap. 27. Caelius Rhod. Ant. Lect. l. 15. c. 8.9. Burtons Melancholy, pars
3. sect. 2. p. 408. 409.
ancient Romans, Purchase Pilg. l. 6. c. 11.
Moors in Barbary, Purchase Pilg. l. 9. c. 1.
Gayrians, Purchase Pilg. l. 9. c. 11.
Peru^ians, Plato Legu^. Dialog. 2. p. 791. Lactantius De falsa Relig. c.
10.11. Julius Firmicus, De Errore Profan. Relig. c. 13.
Jupiter and his Ganymedes, the Julius Firmicus, Ib. c. 4. Sedulius in 1 Cor.
6. Eusebius De Vita Constant. l. 3. c. 53. Purchase Pilg. l. 4. c. 7.
ancient Priests of Venus, Justin Hist. l. 1. Athenaeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 13^14.
Orosius Hist. l. 1. c. 19.
Sardanapalus, Suctonij Nero. sect. 26. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. ^ol. 98. b.
Eutropius l. 9. fol. 104.
Nero and his Sporus, Lampridij and Grimstons, H^liogabalus, B^rtons
Melancholy, pars 3. sect. 2. p. 408.
He^^ogabalus, and See Ath^naeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 5. l. 13. c. 27.28. Plutarchi,
Gryllus and Amatorius, Suetonij Gal^a. sect. 22. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l.
15. c. 8.9. Burtons Melancholy, page 408.409.
many others: yea the frequent Sodomiticall wickednesses of sundry See
Luitprandi^s Hist. l. 6. c. 6.7. Platina in Io^nne 23. Guicciordins Hist^ l. 1
Fasciculus Temporu^, Onus Ecclesiae. c. 20.21.23. Balaeus De Scriptor. Brit.
C^n. 2. p. 605. Acts of English Votaries, l. 1. f. 8. 65, 7^. l. 2. f. 6. 19,
58, 59^ 62, ^17. His Apology^ fol. 5.6, 24. Agrip De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap.
63.64. Alvarus Pelagius, lib. 2. Artic. 2. f. 83. John Whites Way^ b. sect. 59.
numb. 9.10. and Defense of the Way. chap. 5. numb. 2.3. Bp. Mortons Protestants
Appeal, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 36, etc. Master Cooks More work for a
Mass Priest. sect. 32. Burtons Melancholy, p^g. 408.409.
unholy-Popes, Cardinals, Popish Johannes De Casa, Bishop of Beneventum wrote a
Book in defense of Sodomy, where he styles it a sweet sin, proclaiming
with^ll, that he never used any other of this nature, but this only. Burtons
Melancholy. page 408. See Alvarus P^lagius De Planctu Ecclesiae, sect. 2. fol.
83.
Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Friars, Monks, (such are the unchaste fruits of
their vowed and much-admired chastity:) together with the frequent inhibi^ions,
Laws and Edicts against this prodigious villainy in Levit. 18.22, 23, 24. Deuteronomy.
23^ 17, 18. Judge. 19 22, to 27. 1 Kin. 14.^4. 2 King. 23.7. Ezech. 16.5^. Romans
1 24, 26, 27. ^ Cor. 6.9, 11. G^l. 5.19. Ephesians. 2^3. c. 4 19. Jude 7. Col. 3 4.5.
and M. Bysicl^^^ Exposition. lb.
Scriptures, Clemens Romans Constit. Apost. l. 7. c. 3. Council. Eliberinu^. Ca^.
71, Council. Ancyranum. Can. 15. See Alvarus P^lagius, De P^anctu Eccles^ae. l.
2. Artic. 2. fol. 83.
Councels Ath^naeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27 28. Plutarchi Amator^us, Caeli^s Rhodig.
Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 8^9.
Heathen States, and in our English 25. H. 8. c. 6.^8. H. 8. c. 1. and 6.31. H.
8. c. 7.32 H. 8. c. 3.2. and 3. Ed. 6. c. 29.5. Eliz. c. 7.
Statutes, ( which have made it capital, as a late example of a memorable act
of justice on an English Peer can witness) do more then testify; it cannot
but be inexcusably sinful, both in the eyes of God, who literally prohibits
it; and in the sight of natural, much more of Christian men, who cannot but
detest it. And so by consequence the Plays themselves which are acted in such
apparel (as all our Masks and Stage Plays for the most part are) must
questionless be sinful, yea abominable, as men's putting on of woman's
apparel is. Thus all the fore-alleaged Councels, Fathers, Authors, do from
hence conclude, and so must I from all the premises.

If any now object, that it is far better, far more commendable for Boys
to act in woman's attire, then to bring women-Actors on the Stage to personate
female parts; a practice much in use in former times among the Musieres autem
nudo atque operto capite populu^ absque rubore alloquu^tur tantaque prae
meditatione impudentia^ asciscunt, tantamque lasciviam in audientiu^ atque
videntium animos infundunt, ut uno omnes animo radici^us modestia^ e mentibus
evellere, dedecore muliebrem naturam afficere, perniciosa voluptate cupiditates
suas implere conari videantur. Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Mat. Tom. 2. p. 298. C.
Se^ Theophylact. and Occumenius in 1 Timothy 1.9. accordingly. and Chrysostom. Hom.
12. in 1 Cor.
Greeks, and Summa grati^ cius de spurcitia concinnata est, qua^ mimus etiam
per mulieres repraesentat sexum pudoris exterminans, ut facilius domi quam in
s^ena erubes^^nt. Tertul. De Spectac. ^. 17.
Romans; who had their Horace Sermon. l. 1. Satyr. 2. p. 163. v. 2. Mimae, and
quae ludibrio corporis sui quaestu^ faciunt, public habitu earu^ virgiuum quae
Deo dicatae sunt, non utantur. Justin. C^dicis. l. 1. Tit. 7. le^. 5. See
Iustiniani Novel. 104. and 98. and Bulengerus^ De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50.51.
Mimae, their Sceni^ae mulieres, or women-Actors (who were Chrysostom. Hom. 12.
in 1. Ep. ad Cor. Tertul. De Spectaculis. c. 17. Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1.
c. 50.51. Iustiniani Novel. 98. and 104. Cassiodorus variaru^. l. 7. Epist. 10.
all notorious impudent, prostituted Strumpets,) especially i^ their Ovid.
Fastorum. lib. 5. page 189.190. Lactantius De Falsa. Relig. l. 1. c. 10^
Iuvenal. Satyr. ^. Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. c. 50. Ludovicus Vives, No^ae
in August. De Civ. Dei^ lib^ 2^ c^ 8^
Floralian Enterludes; as they have now their female-Players in Italy, and
other foreign parts, and as they had such French-women Actors, in a Play In
Michael, Term, 1629.
not long since per^onated in Blacke-friers Playhouse, to which there was
great resort.

I an^wer first, that the very ground of this objection is false, unless the
objectors can manifest it to be a greater abomination, a more detestable
damning sin, for a woman to act a females part upon the Stage, then for a Boy
to put on a woman's apparel, person and behavior, to act a feminine part;
which the Deuteronomy. 22.5.
Scr^pture expressly prohibits, as an abomination to the Lord our God: or
unless they can prove an irritation, an inducement to Sodomy, to
selfe-pollution (in thought at least if not in act,) a lesser sin, a more
tolerable evil, then Se^ D^ ^mes, De Iure Conscie^tiae. l. 5. c. 39 sent. 30.
p. 171,
mannish impudency, or a temptation to whoredom, and adultery: which none can
evidence.

Secondly, admit men-Actors in women's attire, are not altogether so bad, so
discommendable as women Stage Players; yet since both of them are ^vill, yea
extremely vicious, neither of them necessary, both superfluous as all Plays
and Players a^e; the superabundant sinfulness of the one, can neither justify
t^^ lawfulness, nor extenuate the wickedness of the other. It is no good
argument to say, Adultery is worse then simple Fornication: Sodomy with such
other unnatural wickednesses are far more abominable then adultery:
therefore fornication and adultery are lawful and may still be tolerated, (
as they are in b^^stly ^spe^caeus Comment. in Tit. 1. Agri^pa De Vanitate
Scientiaru^. l. c. 63.64. Adolesce^^ibus impudice abus^ sunt. Heu, heu, intra
s^n^^a^ Ecclesia^ mul^i religiosi and clerici in suis l^tebris and
co^venticulis and la^^i i^m in plaerisque civitatibus maxim in Italia, public
quoda^ modo, netandu^ gymnasiu^ constituunt, and palestra^; in illius ^lagit^j
abominatione se exe^ce^tes, and optimi quique epheborum, in lupanari ponu^tur.
Alvares Pelagiu^ De Planctu Ecclesiae l. 2. Artic. 2. ^ol. 8^ vid. Ibid. See l.
before.
Rome, the very Sink, the Stews and Nursery of all such uncleanness; which
should cause all Christians to detest this Roma quasi gurges flagitioru^.
Epis^. Ch^mn^nsis. Onus Ecclesiae. c. 19 sect. 8. and Carol^s Molinaeus
Senatu^-consulta Franciae contra ab^sus Papar^m. page 251.
Whore, Rev. 17.1, 2.
together with her head, her Pope, her Sed and recentioribus te^po^^bus Sixtus
Ponti^ex Maximus Romae nobile admodu^ lupina^ ex^ruxit, etc. In Italia etia^
Romana scorta in sin^ulas hebdomad^s iu^iu^ pe^dent ^o^tifici, qui ce^sus
annuus nonnu^qua^ vi^inti millia duca^us excedit^ ad^oque Ecclesiae proceru^ id
munus cit ut una ^tia^ cum Ecclesiaru^ proue^t^bus etia^ lenocinioru^ nume^e^t
mercede^, etc. Agrip De Van. Scient. c. 64. and Espencaeus in Tit. 1. p. 67
supreme Pander:) because the transcendent badnesse of the one, does neither
expiate nor extenuate the sinfulness of the other. Yet this is the present
objection in effect^ Female-Actors, are worse then male-Actors arrayed in
woman's apparel; therefore they are tolerable, if not lawful. Whereas this
should rather be the conclusion (with which I will close up this Scene;) both
of them are abominable both intolerable, neither of them laudable or
necessary; therefore both of them to be abandoned, neither of them to be
henceforth tolerated among Christians.

SCENA SEPTIMA.


Those Plays which are usually acted and frequented in over-costly effeminate,
Argument. 22.
strange, meretricious, lust-exciting apparel, are questionless unseemely,
yea unlawful unto Christians.

But our ordinary Theatricall Enterludes, are for the most part acted and
frequented in such apparel.

Therefore they are questionless unseemely, yea unlawful unto Christians.

The Major is warranted not only by Deuteronomy. 22.5. Isay 3.16. to 24. Zeph. 1.8. 2
King. 9.30. Prove. 7.10. Ier. 4.30. Ezech. 23.40, 41. Luke 7.25. 1 Timothy 2.4, 10.
1 Pet. 3.3. which condemn all such apparel, as unbeseeming Christians: But
likewise by Tertullian, De Habitu Muliebri, and De Cultu Faeminarum. lib. Philo
Iudaeus, De Fortitudine, lib. page 1005.1006. and De Mercede Meretricis non
accipienda in ^acrarium. lib p. 1161.1162. By Clemens Alexandrinus Paedag. lib.
2. c. 10.12. and Non est mulieris sed meretricis illud nimium sui ornandi
studium. Ibid c. 2. Mulierem minim^ deceat tortos habere c^ines, and pectus
suum nudare ne sui decoris and officij oblita videatur, etc. Indignum est enim
mulieres Christianas, quas decet cum verecundia and sobrietate ornatus,
pietatem per bona opera profiteri, meretricio more into^tis crinibus nudatis
capi^ibus and pectore, se velu^ nundina^itias populo exponere. Ideo non tan^u^
virgins sed e^iam mulieres intortis crinibus, ac nisi velatis capitibus ac
pectore (po^issimu^ in E^clesi^) incedere prohibemus, etc. Syn^dus Tur^nica. An
1583. Apud Boch^llu^. Decreta Eccle. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 9. c. 11. Vid. Council
Bitur. 1584. Ibid. c. 12.
lib. 3. cap. 1. to 9.11. By Cyprian De Habitu Virginum. lib. By Ambros. De
Instit. Virginis, and De Virginibus. lib. 3. By Basil. Ascetica. cap. 12. and
Comment. in Esaias. c. 3. By Nazienzen Oration 27. p. 460. and Adversus Mulieres
ambitiosius sese ornantes. p. 992, etc. which I would our plaistered pompous
Iezeb^ls would peruse. By Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Hesaiam. lib. 1. c. 3. By
Hierom. Epist. 7. c. 3. Epist. 8. c. 5.10. Epist. 10. c. 2.3. Epist. 16. c. 2.
Epist. 23. and Adversus Iovinianum. c 9. By Chrysostom Hom. 31. in Matthew. and
Hom. 8. in 1 Timothy 2. By Augustine De Doctrina Christiana. l. 4. c. 21. and
Epist. 73. By Fulgentius Epist. 3. ad Probam. By Bernard, De Modo Vivendi Sermo
9. By Primasius, Ambrose, Sedulius, Remigius, Theodoret, Deda, Haymo, Rabanus
Maurus, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Anselme, Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra, Master John
Calvin, Marlorat, Aretius, Danaeus, Mayer, Byfield, and most other
Commentators, on the 1 Timothy 2.9. and on the 1 Pet. 3.3. By Alexander Alensis,
Theologiae Su^ma, pars 4. Quaest. 11. Artic. 2. sect. 4. Alexander Fabritius
Destructorium vitiorum pars 6. c. 2. P. Q. Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu
Ecslesiae. lib. 2. Artic. 76. fol. 250. Lydij Waldensia, pars 2. page 358.
AEneas Sylvius. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 166. Ioannes Fredericus, De Luxu Vestium.
lib. By. Bishop Hooper, Bishop Babington^ Master Calvin, Perkins, Dod, Downbam,
Brinsly, Lake, Elton, Williams, on the 7. Commandment, and sundry other
Divines in their Treatises of Apparel, Pride and Luxury, and in their
Expositions on Isay 3 and the fore-quoted Scriptures; who absolutely censure,
the very ^se and wearing of such apparel (much more the ordinary abuse of it
in lascivious Enterludes) as See My Vnlovelinesse of Love-locks. p. 49. to 58.
being the incendiary of lust, the fomentation of pride, the occasion of
adultery, the Non de integra conscientia venit studium place^di per decore^,
que^ naturaliter invita^ore^ libidinis scimus. Textul. De Cultu Faeminarum.
cap. 2.
badge of incontinency: concluding it, to be altogether unlawful for chaste,
for sober Christians, and fit for none but Strumpets, Orname^toru^ insignia and
leno cinia fucorum, non nisi prostitutis and impudicis faeminis congruit; and
nullarum fere praeciosior cultus est, quaam quarum pudor vilis est. Cyp^ian De
Habitu Virginum. lib.
who are commonly most count in their attires, most gaudy and newfangled in
their clothes. Whence they Laudo ego and admiror veterum Lacedaemoniorum
civitatem, quae solis meretricibus floridas vestes and auru^ mundu^ gestare
permisit, a probis mulieribus mundi studium auferens, quod solis meretricibus
se ornare concederet. Clemens Alexandr. Paedag. l. 2. c. 10. See Athenaeus
Dipnos. lib. 12. cap. 6.
applaud the Lacedaemonians law; that none but common prostituted Strumpets
should wear any costly or glorious apparel; the better to deter all chaste
and sober persons from it. A law which would well befit our Nation, our times,
which See Purcha^ Pilgr. c. 26.27, 51.
Proteus-like are always changing shape and fashion, and like the Moon,
appear from day to day in different forms.

The Minor is evident by experience; which finds an whole Wardrobe of all
gaudy, pompous vestments; a confluence of all whorish, immodest, lust-provoking
attires; a strange variety of all effeminate, lewd, fantastique, outlandish
apish fashions, (or disguises rather) at the Playhouse; sufficient to excite a
very hell of noisome lusts in the most mortified Actors and Spectators bowels:
To this we may add the verdict of the Fathers, who censured the Plays in
their times, even from the quality of the apparel in which they were acted.
Witness Clemens Alexandrinus; who as Paedag. l. 2. c. 10. and l. 3. c. 2.3.11.
he reiects all costly immodest apparel, as fit for no place but the Stews,
or S^age: so he condemns, not only Paedag. l. 2. c. 11.
Plays themselves; but even the Fractis quidem and enervatis his saltatoribus,
qui cynaedicam turpitudine^ mutam in scenam transferunt, vestem cum tanto
dedecore diffluentiu^ despicantibus, quibus exquisitae vestes, fimbriaru^que
dilationes, and curiosi figuraru^ numeri, illiberale^ ac sordida^ syrmatu^
mollitiem indicant. Vestes autem quae sunt floribus similes Bacchicis nugis,
and initioru^ mysterijs relinquendae sunt: deinde vero purpura and vasa
argentea, sunt, ut dicit Comicus, Tragaedis, and non vitae utilia, etc. Paedag.
l. 2. c. 10.
delicacy, the effeminacy, the costlinesse and lust^ulnesse of that apparel
wherein they were acted. Witness Imo in omni spectaculo nullum magis scandalum
occurret, quam ipse ille virorum ac mulierum accuratior cultus, scintillas
libidinum constabellans. De Spectaculis^ cap. ^5.
Tertullian, who writes; That in all Enterludes there is nothing more
scandalous, more pernicious, then the overcurious attire of men and women
(both Actors and Spectators) which did blow up sparks of lust. Witness S.
Chrysostom, who informs us, Cu^cta simpliciter quae ibi fiunt turpissima
sunt, verba, vestitus, etc. omnia inqua^ turpi lascivia plena sunt. Hom. 38. in
Mat^h Tom. 2. ^ol. 298. C.D.
That the apparel used in Play Houses is most lewd, lascivious, filthy;
whence he styles it, Vestitus Satani^us, Satanicall array. Witness De Regno. l.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 1. page 49. F.
Synesius who gives the title of Scenicus ornatus, to gawdie, newfangled,
swaggering apparel, because Players array was such. Witness Theophilact,
Oecumenius, Chrysostom, on the 1 Timothy 2.9. viz. In like manner also, that
women adorn themselves in modest apparel; not with broidered hair, or gold,
or costly attire; (a text which our English Ladies have long since forgotten,
if not rejected, as savoring of Puritanisme and over-strict preciseness;)
where thus they write: That women must come to Church (and I would our frizled,
pouldred, shorn, swaggering Lasses, Vt candida^ae templa ^ubean^ dant opera^
diligenter emaculatis amictae vestibus, mentem vero maculosam in ipsa sacraria
penitissima infer non verentur. P^ilo Iudaus De Cherubin. p. 175. Prope
periculosius est lascivis puellis, ad loca religionis, qu^m in publicum
procedere. Heirom Epist. 8. cap. 10.
who are never gawdier or compter then in Churches, would remember it) Non
intortis crinibus, etc. Venit enim ut oret, non ut tripudiet; Venisti petitura
peccatorum remissionem, at tanquam scenam sis ingressura comica mulier, te
exornas? Theophilact. Ibid. Non intortis crinibus. Non enim in Thea^rum,
inquit, venisti, sed ut peccata tua defleres: non est autem preciositas supplex
habitus, neque lugentis peccata, est ornamenti in te arrogantia. Quod si haec
prohibuit quae divitias tantum ostendunt, multo magis curiosa ac perversa,
veluti sunt insectiones genarum, picturae oculoru^, perfractus incessus,
mere^^icius tuniculae amictus, Zona curiosior, calcei distracti, sive
disscissi. Nam haec omnia, in eo quod dixit, In amictu decenti. O^cumenius
Ibid. Non in tortis crinibus, etc. Amputa omnem e^usmodi simulationem,
circumcide abs te omnem illum scenae atque histrionum gestum. Deus enim non
irridetur. Ista mimis and saltatoribus, and his qui in scena vertantur,
relinquenda sunt: sobriae atque ornatae mulieri, nihil tale congruit. Chrysostom.
Hom. 8. in 1 Timothy 2. Tom. 4. Col. 1348. A. vid. Ibidem.
not with broidered hair, or gold, or costly attire; for they come there, to
pray, not to dance. They come to crave the forgiveness of their sins, and
shall they then adorn themselves like comicall women, as if they were entering
into a Playhouse to act a part? Cut therefore from thee all this
counterfeiting, circumcise from thee all this demeanor of the Stage and
Players: for God is not mocked. These things are to be left to Players and
Dancers, and to those who are conversant in the Playhouse: no such thing is
suitable to a chaste and sober woman. An unanswerable Argument, that lascivious
dresses, and rich immodest, newfangled apparel misbeseeming Christians, were
much in use in Plays and Play Houses. This Ecclesiast. Hist. l 2. c. 27. To^.
2. p. 175. H.
Theodoret, Fl. Vopisci. Carinus p. 449.
Vopiscus, Spectatum veniunt, veniunt ipectentur ut ipsae, etc. De Art Amandi.
lib. 1.
Ovid, Mox traliitur manibus regum fortum retortis, Esseda festina^t, pilenta,
petorrita, naves; Captiuum portatur ebur, captiva Corinthus, Divitiaeque
peregrinae Epist. l 2. Epist. 1. p. 284.
Horace, AEqualis habitus illic, similemq, videbis, Orchestram and populu^: Hic
ultra vires habitus inter: hic aliquid plus quam satis est, etc. Satyr. 3. p.
23.
Iuvenal, with Plutarchus De tarda Dei vindict. lib. Pollux, lib 4 cap. 18.
Sidonius, lib. 2. Epist. 2, Bulingerus, De Theatro, lib. 1. cap. 56. D.
Hackwels Apology, lib. 4. c. 8. sent. 34.
sundry others testify, of which you may read more largely in the third and
sixth Scene of this present Act. All which sufficiently evidence the truth of
the Assumption; and so by consequence of the Conclusion too; which needs no
further proof to back it.

SCENA OCTAVA.
THe fourth thing considerable in the manner of acting Stage Plays, is the
adjuncts, the Co^comitants which usually attend it, the first whereof, is,
lascivious mixed, effeminate Dancing on the Stage, not men with women only, or
rather with Whores or persons more infamous, (for such are all those females in
Nunc autem saltat virgo in co^muni theatro iuvenum impudicoru^, and non tibi
magis videtur infamis qua^ Meretrix? Chrysostom. Hom 12. in 1 Cor. 4. Tom. 4.
Col. 358. C.
Saint Chrysostomes judgment, who dare dance publicly on a Theater;) but even
men with boys in woman's attire, representing the persons of lewd notorious
Strumpets: whence I assume this 23. Argument against our public Enterludes.
Argument 23.


Those Plays which are commonly attended and set forth with lascivious, mixed,
effeminate, amorous dancing; either of men with women, or youths in women's
apparel, are undoubtedly sinful, yea utterly unlawful unto Christians.

But all our popular Stage Plays are commonly thus attended and set forth.

Therefore they are undoubtedly sinful, yea utterly unlawful unto Christians.

The Major is irrefragable, because all mixed effeminate, lascivious, amorous
dancing, ( See D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 12. to 16.136
accordingly.
especially with beautiful women, or boys most exquisitely adorned in an
inescating womanish Dress on the open Stage, where are swarms of lustful
Spectators, whose unchaste unruly lusts are apt to be enflamed with every
wanton gesture, smile or pace, Si fortuiti occursus ijs qui obiter mulierculum
inspexerunt tantum pariunt periculi, qua^to magis fuerit cum de industria
congrediuntur; cum dedi^a opera mulieres in ebrierate atque convivio, omni
lascivo gestu, saltatione, cantu impudico invenes effraenes invitantes
spectantur? Basil. De Ebrietate and Luxu Sermo. Tom. 1 p. 336. An quidquam est
tam pronum ad libidines quam inconditis motibus ea quae vel natura abscondit,
vel disciplina velavit, membrorum operta nudare, ludere oculis, rotare
cervicem, comam spargere? Merito inde iniuriam divinitatis proceditur. Quid
enim verecundiae ibi potest esse, ubi saltatur strepitur, concrepatur? Ambros.
De Virginibus, l. 3. Tom. 4. p. 227. B. See Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew. and
Hom. 12 in 1 Cor. 4. accordingly.
much more with amorous daunces;) is utterly unlawful unto Christians, to
chaste and sober persons; as sundry Councels, Fathers, modern Christian, with
ancient Pagan Authors and Nations have resolved; though it be now so much in
use, in fashion and request among us, that many spend more hours (more days
and nights) in dancing, then in praying, I might add working too. If we survey
the several Councels of former ages, we shall find, Council. Laodicenum. Can.
53. Aphricanum. Can. 27. Agathense Can. 39. Arelatense 3. apud Surium. Council.
Tom. 1. page 727. Veneticum. cap. 11. Ilerdense Can. ult. Toletanum. 3. Can 23.
Antisidorense. Can. 9.40. Cabilonense 1. Can. 19. Constantinopolitanum 6. in
Trullo. Can. 51.62.65. Basiliense Sessio 21. Surius. Tom. 4. page 62. and
Appendix Council. Basil. Ibid. page 223. Council. Senonense, cap. 25. Ibid. page
742.743. Coloniense. Anno Dom. 1535. pars 2. cap. 25. and pars 9. cap. 10.
Ibid. page 786. Synodus Moguntina. Anno Dom. 1540. cap. 60.61. Ibid. p. 870.
Council. Bituriense, 1584. and T^ronicum 1583. Synodus Carnotensis^ 1526. and
Lingonensis, 1404. Concilium Burdigense, 1582. Apud Bochellum. Decreta
Ecclesiae Gallicanae. lib. 6. Tit. 19. and Titulus, 10. cap. 6.7. and 19. We
shall find, I say, these 19. Councels, expressly censuring under the penalty of
excommunication, all mixed, effeminate, lascivious, amorous dancing; See here
page 22. and 36. accordingly.
especially at Marriages, (at which they are now most frequent, though not in
former times, as Vidisti cum qua^ta olim honestate nuptias egerint? Audite qui
satanicas pompas admiramini and statim ab initio nuptiaru^ honestate^ dedecore
afficitis Number tunc tibiae? nu^ tunc cymbala? nu^ ^uncchorcae Diabolicae? Quare
enim dic mihi tantum damnu^ statim ab initio inducis domu^ tua^, and eos qui in
scenis and orchestris opera^ locant vocas, ut cu^ inte^pestivo sumptu virginis
laedas co^tinentiam, and iuvene^ impudentiore^ facias? Satis enim arduu^ erat
absque illis su^^iationibus illa^ aetate^ posse far moderate te^pestatem
affectionu^: cum aute^ and haec accedu^t, tam quae videntur, quam quae
audiuntur, maiusque accenditur incendiu^, and fornax concupiscentiaru^ magis
infla^matur, quomodo non pessum it adolesce^tis anima? Hinc enim omnia per^u^t
and corru^puntur, quiaab initio castitas oppugnatur eoru^ qui inter se
conventuri sunt, and saepe primo die iuvenis oculis videns incontinentibus,
telo diabolico in animo vulneratur, and puella per ea quae audit and videt
captiva fit: and ab eo die postea crescu^t vulnera, maiusque ^it malu^, etc.
Hom. 56 in Genesis 29. Tom. 1. Col. 267. A.B.
Chrysostom well observes;) or on Lords-dayes, and Holy Days, especially in
Churchyards streets, or public places; (a daemnable custom taken from the
Pagans, as Saint Ist^ omnes infaelices and miseri qui saltationes ante ipsas
etia^ sanctoru^ basilicas and in sancto^u^ ipsoru^ festivitatibus choros
ducu^t. Quare unde debuerunt Deum Laudare and mereri, inde sibi damnatione^
acquiru^^^ and sicuti Christiani ad Ecclesia^ veniu^t, ut Pagani tamen de
Ecclesia reverta^tur. Sermon 33. T. 5. p. 23. D.
Ambrose writes:) from the very beholding of which dancing all Clergymen (who
are now too frequent Spectators of, and sometimes Actors in such dances) are
inhibited by these Councels under pain of suspention, lest they should pollute
their eyes, and glut their souls with lust, and so unfit them for all holy
duties. If we peruse the Fathers, (who are all rank Puritans in this point of
Plays and Dancing;) we shall find, not only Philo Iudaeus, De Agricultura.
lib. p. 271. and De Vita Contemplativa. lib. p. 1215.1216. but likewise
Ignatius, Epist. 6. ad Magnesianos. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. page 81. D. Justin
Martyr Explic. Qu^st. a Gentibus Christianis positarum. Quaest. 107. Clemens
Alexandrinus Paedagogi. l. 2. c 4.5. and l. 3. c. 11. Tertullian De
Spectaculis. lib. Tatianus Cont. Graecos Oration. Bibl, Patrum. Tom. 2. page
180. G. Cyprianus De Spectaculis. lib. Arnobius advers. Gentes. Idcirco animas
misit, ut res sancti atque augustissimi nominis symphonicas agerent and
fistulatorias hic arts, etc^ Ibid.
lib. 2. p. 75. lib. 4. p. 149.150. l. 7. p. 230. to 242. Lactantius De Vero
Cultu. l. 6. c. 20. and Div^narum Instit. Epitome. c. 20. Basil. Hexaemeron.
Hom. 1. T. 1. p. 27. and Hom. 4. p. 45. De Ieiunio. Sermo. 2. p. 329. De
Ebr^etate and Lux^ Sermo. p. 332.336. Comment. in Isaiam. cap. 5. Tom. 3. p.
419 420, 421. and, c. 14. p. 468.469. Nazienzen Oration. 48. p. 796.797. Oration.
38. p. 583. and Nicet as Ibid. Oration. adversus Mulieres. p. 994. and ad
Selucum, De Recta Educatione. p. 1063. Ambrose De Paenitentia. lib. 2. c. 6. De
Virginibus. lib. 3. Tom. 4. p. 226.227. De Elia and Ieiunio. Mulieres in
plateis inverecundas sub conspe^tu adolescentulorum intemperantium choros
ducunt, iactantes comam, tr^hentes tunicas, scissae amictus, nudae lacer^os,
plaudentes manibus, saltantes pedibus, personantes vocibus, irritantes in se
iuvenum libidines motu Histrionico, petulanti oculo, dedecoroso ludibrio.
Spectat corona adolescentulu^, and sit miserabile Theatrum. Inter saltantium
ruinas, and spectantium lapsus, caelum impuro contamin^tur aspectu, terra turpi
saltatione polluitur, quae obscaenis cantibus verberatur. Quomodo patienter
loquar, pie praeteriam, convenienter de^leam? Ibidem.
c. 18. Epistolarum, lib. 4. Epist. 30. Sermo 33. and Comment. l. 6. in Luc. 7
v. 32. Tom. 3. p. 47. F. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus Chatechesis Mystagogica 1.
Eusebius Pamphilus, De Praeparatione Evangel. l. 2. c. 2. p. 32. and apud
Damascenum. Parallel. l. 3. c. 47. S. Asterij Oration in Festum Kalendarum.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. page 706. Hierom. Epist. 10. c. 4. and Comment. l. 2. in
Matthew. 14. Tom. 6. p. 28 Epiphanius Contr. Haereses. l. 3. Tom. 2. Compendiaria
Doctrina: etc^ Ecclesiae Catholicae. Col. 922. E. Chrysostom Hom. 56. in
Geneseos. c. 29. Tom. 1. Col. 367. A.B. Hom. in Psalm. 41. Hom. 49. and 74. in
Matthew. Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. 4. Hom^ 42. in Acta. Hom. 10. in Coloss. Hom. 8. in 1 Timothy 2.9. and Hom. 62. ad Pop^lum Antiochiae. Augustine Enarratio in Psalm. 32.
De Rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis Tractatus, and Contra Parmenianum.
Notum est omnibus nugaces and turpes saltationes ab Episcopis solere comp^sci.
Quis unquam meminit ab hominibus, quosin auxilium Episcopi petierunt, cum
Episcopis esse saltatum? Ibidem.
lib. 3. c. 6. Tom. 7. pars 1. p. 88.89. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Hesaiam. l.
1. c. 4. Tom. 1. p. 134. D. and in Ioannis Evang. l. 8. c. 5. p. 595. A. B.
Theodoret, Adversus Graecos I^fideles. lib. 7. Tom. 2. p. 382.383. Socrates
Eccles. Historiae. l. 7. c. 13. Gaudentius Brixiae Episc. De Lection^
Evangelij. Sermo 8. Bibl. P. Tom. 4. p. 8.13. Remigius Explanatio in 1 Cor.
10.7. Bibl. P. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 833. C. Fulgentius, Super Audivit Herodes
Tetrarcha, etc. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 148. Salvian De Gubernatione
Dei. l. 6. Olympiodorus Enar^ in Ecclesiast. c. 3. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. ^1. p.
401. Gregorius Magnus Moralium. l. 13. c. 18. f^l. 78. D. Chrysologus Organa
tragaedia^ persona^t secul^^e^, intra^ besti^, non puella, quaerit amputare,
non saltare; discurrit fera, no^ ^aemina, sp^rgit ^ubas per c^rvicem, non
c^pillos, etc V^^u^ epu^is nostri^ intersit Christus, in facie prandeatur
auctoris, honestate convivij natu^a ipsa, quae nos producit, honoretur, familia
vestra innoce^tiae tripudiet disciplina, luxus absistat, fugetur effusio;
saltatricu^ pestis, lenocinia cantoru^, voluptatu^ fomenta, naufragia menti^^,
cu^ Herodiadis convivijs abscindantur; ut praesens gaudiu^ vestru^, ad
laetitiam perveniat sempiternu^. Ibid.
Sermo 127. Isiodor Hispalensis Originum. lib. 18. c. 48.50. Beda lib. 1. in
Marci Evang. c. 25. Tom. 5. Col. 133.134. and lib. 2. in Lucae Evangelium. c.
7. Tom. 5. Col. 300. Damascen Paralellorum. lib. 1. c. 76. and lib. 3. c. 47.
Christianus Druthmarus Expositio in Matth^um. c. 35. Bibl. Pat^um. Tom. 9. pars
1. p. 901. F. H. Theophylactus. Enarrat. in Matthew. 14. page 34. and in Marc. 6.
page 89. Bernardus, Parabola de Nup^ijs Filij Regis. Col. 1725. A. Edmundus
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Speculum Ecclesiae, c. 11. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13.
p. 359. E. Hippolitus Martyr, De Consumm^tione Mundi and Anti-Christo Oration.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 3. page 17. A. B. Paschaetius R^t^ertus in Matthaei
Evangelium. l. 7. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 9. pars 2. page 1070. C.D.G. Victor
Antiochenus, in Evang. Marci. c. 6. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. page 308. E.
Anselmus, Enarrat. in Matthew. c. 14. Tom. 1. p. 67 H. Raban^s Maurus, Exposit.
in Matthew. l. 5. c. 14. Operum. Tom. 5. p. 87. F. H. We shall find, I say,
these 40. Fathers, and ancient Writers, in these their several Works,
inhibiting, condemning, all amorous, mixed, effeminate, lascivious lust-exciting
Dancing, be it of men, or women, either on the Stage or elsewhere; as a Cave
solu^, ut non derelinquas fidem, ut a fornicationibus fugias, jam fidelis
effectus. Hoc aute^ custodire ita demu^ poteris, si ebrietate^ devitetis and
convivia inhonesta, ubi turpiu^ faeminaru^ colubrini gestus concupiscentiam
movent illicita^, ubi lyra sonat and tibia, ubi omnia postremo genera musicoru^
inter cymbala saltantiu^ concrepant. Infaelices illae domus sunt, quae nihil
discrepant a Theatris. Auferantur quaeso universa ista de medio: sit domus
baptizati and Christiani hominis immunis a choro Diaboli, sit plane humana, sit
hospitalis, orationibus sanctificetur assiduis; Psalmis, hymnis, canticisque
spiritualibus frequentetur, etc. Gaudentius. Brix. qua supra. Bibli. P. Tom. 4.
p. 813. Chorus petulans, insanae saltationes. Faeminae lascivae Dei timoris
oblitae, ignis aeterni minas nihil pendentes, abjecto servituris Christi iugo,
pedibus gestientes, ac oculo petulco, risu ^ascivo, ad saltatione^ insanientes,
iuventutis inte^perantiam in se provocantes; in locis sacris pro maenibus
civitatis choros constituentes, ea profanaverunt ac omnium probriorum officinas
reddiderunt. AErem insuper meretriceis cantibus, terram vero lascive saltando
contaminavere, instar theatri cuiusdam adolescentium catervas sibi
circumsistentes, etc. E^ talibus itaque malis viri ac faeminae communes
constitu^ntes choros maloque Dae^oni miseras tra^entes animas, sese invic^m
libidinum telis confodiun^ atque lacerant. Risus inter se histrionicos, cantus
probrosos, meretricios gestus ad libidinem invitantes exercent^ Rides, di^
mihi, and gaudes inepta stolidaque laetitia, cum lachrymas fundere ac dolere,
ob ea quae admisisti fas est? Moves pedes, and insan^s saltas? Choreas duces
imprudens cum genua ad Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi cul^um flectere
oportear? Quas ego fleam? puellasne coniugij expertes, an vi^is coniunctas? Hae
quide^ amissa virginitate reversae sunt, illae vero pudicitiam viris minime
servaverunt, etc. Prosaltatione itaque genu Deo flectatur, pro tripudio pectus
pulsetur. Basil De Ebri^tate and Luxu Sermon Tom. 1. p. 327.332, 336.
dangerous ince^^iary of lust; an ordinary occasion off, a preparative to much
(...) me, adultery, wanto^nes, and such effeminate lewdness: a Diabolical, at
least a Pagan practice, misbeseeming all chaste, all sober Christians,
especially in their Christian Festivals and Solemnities; from which the
Primitive Christians (as Nec domus limina sertis coronemus, nec oculum
pascamus, nec aurem cantu demulceamus nec choreas agi^emus, etc. Veru^ haec
prophanis, atque ethnicis festis, solennitatibusque relinquimus. Oration 38. p.
583.584, 585. vide Ibid. Ac primum quidem fratres laetemur, non corporis
splendore, non vestium permutationibus at magnificentijs, non commessationibus
and ebrietatibus, quarum fructum impudicitias and cubilia, esse di licistis;
nec floribus plateas coronemus, nec vnguentorum turpitudine mensas, nec
vestibula ornemus, nec visibili lumine splendesc^nt domus, nec tibicinum
concentu plausibusque personent; hic enim Gentilitiae festorum celebrationis
mos est. Nos vero ne his rebus Deum honoremus, hymnos pro tympanis assumamus;
psalmodi^m pro turpibus and flagitiosis cantibus, plausum gra^iarum actionis,
ac canora^ manuum ^ctionem pro plausibus theatricis, gravitatem pro risu,
prudentem sermonem pro ebrietate, decus and honestarem pro delicijs. Quod s^
etiam te ut festum animo laeto celebrantem tripudiare convenit, tripudia ^u
quidem, sed non obscenae Herodiadis tripudium, ex quo Baptistae mors secuta
est; verum Davidis ob arcae requietem saltitantis: quo quidem itineris sancti,
ac Deo granti agilitatem, volubilitatemque mistice designari existimo.
Nazienzen Orotio 48. page 796.797. vid. Ibidem.
Gregory Nazienzen at large informs us) did wholly abandon, not only
Drunkenness, Luxury, Plays, and ribaldry Songs; but even Fiddlers and Dancing
too; as being fit for none but Ethnicke Festivals, and Herodian Banq^ets: which
I would our English Nation would now at last consider: who for the most part
spend the Christmas season, with other solemn Festivals, in amorous, mixed,
voluptuous, unchristian, that I say not, See Calvin, Marlorat, Aqui^as, and
Lyra^ in 1 Cor. 10.7.
Pagan dancing, to Gods^ to Christ's dishonor, Religions scandal, Chastities
shipwreck, Sins advantage, and the eternal ruin of many precious souls,
who like those wicked ones, Job 21.11, 12, 13. do spend their days in
pleasure, music, mirt^, and dancing, and in a moment go down to Hell, to
dance with Devils, with infernal frisking Saltantes Satyros imitabitur
Alphisebaeus. Virgil. E^loga ^. page 14.
Satyrs, in eternal flames. If we will once again turn over the Divines and
Christian Authors of p^^ier times, we shall discover Alexander Alensis, Summa
Theologiae. pars 4. Quaest. 11. Memb. 2. Artic. 11. sect 4. Quaest. 8. page
392.393. Ioaennis De Burgo, Pupilla Oculi. pars 10. c. 5. X. Alexander
Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. Angelus De Clavasio, Summa
Angelica. fol. 44. b. Tit. Chorea-Bonaventure, in lib. 4. Sentent. Distinctio
16. N. 13. Astexanus De Casibus, lib. 2. Tit. 53. Ioannis Langhecrucius De Vita
and Honestate Clericorum lib. 2. c. 21.22. Maffaeus Vegius, Saltationes nullo
modo probamus, quod multoru^ maloru^ fomes and origo sint protervioresque
efficiant adolesce^tes, and corruptiores. Ibid.
De Educatione Liberorum. l. 1. c. 14. and l. 3. c. 7.12. Petrarcha De Remedio
utriusque Fortunae. l. 1 Dialog. 24. Ludovicus Vives, De Eruditione Christianae
Mulieris. c. 13.14. Erasmus, De Contemptu Mundi. lib. c. 7. Agrippa De Vanitate
Scientiarum. c. 18.63, 64, 71. Polidor Virgil. De Inventoribus Rerum. lib. 5.
c. 2. AEneas Syluius. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 166. p. 727. M. Calvin. Sermo 70.79,
and 80. in Job. Peter Martyr, Locorum Communium Classis. 2. c. 11. sect. 63. to
68. and Comment. in Iudicum. lib. c. 21. Flaccus Illyricus, with the other
Century Writers. Centuria 5. Col. 724. M. Gualther in Marc 6. Homil. 51. fol.
74.75. and Hom. 186. in Math fol. 349.350. Martin Bucer, De Regno Christi
Sempiterno. l. 2 c. 54. B^da, Victor Antiochenus, Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra,
Calvin, Pellicanus, Bullinger, Musculus and Marlorat. Exposit. in Matthew. c. 11.
ver. 17. and, c. 14. v^ 6.7 and on Marc. 6. v. 22. Hiperius De Ferijs
Bacchanalibus, Aretius Problematum. Theolog. Tom. 1. Locus. 14. Puteani Comus,
Piscator in Matthew. 11. Observatio 20. page 120. Polanus Syntagma Theologiae
Genevae. 1617. l. 10. c. 25.26. p. 665. and l. 9. c. 35. page 646. Simlerus in
Exodus. lib. cap. ^2. The Waldenses and Albigenses in France, Hungary, and
Bohemia, whose censure of dancing is recorded in Lydij Waldensia. pars 2.
Amores praetereainhonesti, choreae, impudici and libid^ nosi tactus and
amplexus, ^udi etiam cartarum, taxilorum, and id genus alia, unde infinita ac
horrenda mala peccataque iam in Deum, iam etia^ in proximu prosi^iunt,
prohibe^^ur^ sed and vestium illa multiformis ac monst^osa varietas, non
admi^titur. Ibid.
p. 358. and in the History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, London 1624. part
3. Book 2. chap. 9. p. 63.64, 65, 66. To whom I shall add these ensuing
English Authors. Sebastian Brant, his Fol. 114^ 115
Navis Stultifer^, or Ship of Fools. Christopher Fetherston, his Dialogue
against light, lewd, and lascivious Dancing. printed by Thomas Dawson 1582. An
Anonymous Treatise of Dances, printed 1581. showing that they are as it were
accessories or appendaxis, or things annexed unto whoredom. Thomas Lovell, his
Dialogue between Custom and Verity, concer^ing the use and Abuse of Dancing,
in verse. The Church of evil men and women whereof Lucifer is the head,
printed by Richard Pinso^. M. John Northbrooke, his Treatise against
Vaine-playes, Enterludes, and Danceing. fol. 55. to 72. M. Stephen Gosson, his
School^ of Abuses, M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses^ page 133. to 138. (in all
which, the unlawfulness of Dancing is both copiously, learnedly, and purposely
debated; which Treatises our English Dancers may do well to read, for their
fuller satisfaction in this point.) D. Humfryes in his 2. Book of Nobility,
against excess and overmuch magnificence. D. Reinolds, his Overthrow of
Stage Plays. page 13.14^ 17, 130. to 139. Reverend Bishop Babington, M.
Perkins, M. Elton, M. Dod, M. Downham, M. Osmund Lake, M. Brinsly, Bishop
Andrews, D. Griffith Williams, and others on the 7. Commandment. M. John
Downeham, his Christian Warfare, l. 3. c. 21. sect. 5. and on the 7.
Commandment, in his Sum of Divinity; D. Ames, De Iure Conscie^t. l. 5. c.
39. p. 270.271. All these, with Robertus Flolk^t, Le^tio 17^. fol. 133.
Nicolaus De Clemangis. D^ Novis Celebritatibus non Instituendis, page 145. 146,
etc. M. Dik^ of the Deceitfulness of the heart, c. 16. p. 183. M. T^^mas
B^ard^ in his Theater o^ Gods Judgments. Book 2. c. 36. M. Rob^rt Bolton, in
his Directions ^or our Comfortable W^lking with God. page 200. Onus Ecclesiae.
c. ^7. sect. 16.17. etc. 28. sect. 6. Philippus Gluverius, Germaniae Antiquae.
Lugd. Bat. 16^6. lib. 1. cap. ^0 p. 181.182. Antonini Chro^^con. pars. 3. Tit.
18. cap. 5. sect. 4. M. Samuel Byrd, his Treatise of the use of the pleasures
of this present life. cap. 4. ^ol. 38.39. Thomas Beacon, his Catechism^. fol.
341.
sundry others, unanimously condemn all mixed, effeminate, lasc^vious, amorous
dancing, (the epidemicall pastime of our dancing, loytring age) as sinful,
hurtful, unlawful to all chaste, all sober Christians, as the reasons they
allege against it will more plainly evidence. For first, (say Calvin, Martyr,
Gualt^er, Nor^hbrooke, Stubs, with others in their fore quoted places.
they) as there is no allowance, no approved example of any such dancing in the
Scriptures, the Primitive Church, the Fathers, or in the lives and practice of
the Saints of God in former ages, (who as appears by the fore-quoted Councels
and Fathers have always censured and exploded Dancing:) so the 7. Commandment
(as all the now recited Expositors of it jointly suffragate) together with
Exodus 32.18, 19. Judge. 21.21, 23. 1 Samuel 30.16. Job. 21.11, 12. etc. 31. Isa.
3.16. c. 5.12. c. 13.21. Ier. 31.13. Zeph. 1.9. Eccles. 9.4, 8, 9. Math.
14.6.7. Mark 6.12. Romans 13.12, 13. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10^ 11. c. 10.7, 3^, 32. Gal.
5.19, 21. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19. c. 5.3, 4, 11. Phil 4.5, 8. Hebr.
11.24, 25. Iam. 1.13, 14, 15, 27. c. 4.9. c. 5.13^ Col. 2.20, 21, 22. etc. 3.5,
6, 17. 1 These. 5.15, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 2.9 c. 5^6, 13^ 2 Timothy 3.5, 6. Tit. 2.4, 5,
6. c. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. c. 2.9, 11, 12. c. 3.16. c. 4.2, 3, 4.
2 Pet. 2.13, 14, 18, 19. 1 Ioh. 2.6, 15, 16, 17. Jude 3.7, 12, 13, 16, 23. and
Revel. 18.7. do either absolutely in express terms, or else by way of
necessary consequence, condemn such dancing as Idolatrous, Heathenish,
carnal, worldy, sensual, and misbeseeming Christians. Secondly, the very
Devil himself (write they) who danced in the Daughter of Herodias. Math.
14.6.7 (as O co^vivium Diabolicu^! o Satanae Spectaculu^! o iniquu^ tripudium!
in Herodiadis filia Diabolus tripudiavit: ille enim effecit ut ipsa saltans
placeret. Hom. 49. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, Diabolo procurante ludens caepit delectari puella, ad hoc solum
ut possit occidere propheta^, etc Su^^r audivit Herodes Tetrarcha, etc. Sermo.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom 6. pars 1. page 148^ D.
Fulgentius, ^altat per puella^ Diabolus. Enar. in Marc. 6. page 89.
Theophylact. and others write) was the Nullus ibi Diabolica ca^mina praesumat
ca^tare, nec loca, nec saltationes facere; quae Pagani docente Diabolo ad
invenerunt. Council Arelatense 3. Surius. Tom. 1. p. 727. See Chrysostom. Hom. 6^
and 49. in Matthew. Sebastianus Bra^t, his Navis Stultifera. Agrip^a De Vanitate
Scient c. 18. M. Northbrooke against Vaine-playes and Dancing fol. 56. with
sundry others.
original Author of this dancing, Vbi saltus lasciuus, ibi Diabolus cerre ad
est. His tripudijs Diabolus saltat, his a Dremonum ministris homines
decipiuntur, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 49. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 356. C. 358. C. Qui
mimos and saltatores, and mulieres meretrices introducunt in convivia, Daemones
and Diabolum illic vocant, and domos suos implent bellis innumerabilibus.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 4^. Tom. 1. Col. 735^ C. Whence Hom. 56. in Genesis Tom.
1. Col. 367. ^. and Hom. 9 in Colos. Tom. 4. Col. 11 91. ^^he styles Dances,
Choreae Diabolicae; Sattanicae saltationes.
the only instrument who excites men to it; the only person that is present
at it, that is honored, pleased, and delighted with it; (he being ever- more
present and president where such dancing is) as Chrysostom, Comment. in
Isaiam. cap. 14.
Basil, with the other Marginall Authors have plentifully recorded. The
Waldenses and Albigenses in their In the History of the Waldenses and
Albigenses. part 3. Book. ^. c. 9. p^ 63. to 68.
Censure of Dancing, have unanimo^sly professed and published this truth to all
the World; whose words because they are notable and punctual to this purpose,
I shall here transcribe at large, quoting some sayings of the Fathers in the
Margent, to back and evidence what they write. A Dance (as I find their words
in their Treatise against Dancing) is the Devils procession, and be that
enters into a Dance, enters into his possession. The Vbi salta^io, ibi
Diabolus. Holk^^. Lect. 17^ in Lib. Sapient. vid. Ibidem.
Devil is the guide, the middle, and end of the Dance. As many paces as a man
makes in Dancing, so many paces does he make to Hell. A man sins in Dancing
diverse ways; as in his pace, for all his steps are numbered: in his touch, in
his ornaments, in his hearing, sight, speech, and other vanities. And therefore
we will prove, first, by the Scripture, and afterward by diverse other Reasons,
how wicked a thing it is to Dance. The first testimony we will produce, is that
we read in the Gospel, Mark 6. Paratum est convivale theatru^: producitur
lasciva carnifex faemina, quae prophetam non gladio, sed saltatione prosternat.
Molli puella gressu procedit in med^u^, homici diu^ petitura, ut adul^e^o
placitura: ali^nu^ in pedrbus porta^s sanguine^, and sceleris postulatura
mercedem. Sic sal^at ^t placeat sic placet ut occidat^ Pronefas! ut luxir
corporis sui mulier peric^lum petar, capitis alieni. Fulgentius ^ qua.
It pleased Herod so well, that it cost John Baptist his life. Supra. Bibl. P.
Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 148. D. See Chrysologus. Ser. 127.
The second is in Exodus 32. When Moses coming near to the Congregation saw
the Calfe, he cast the Tables from him, and brake them at the foot of the
Mountain, and afterwards^ it cost three and twenty thousand their lives.
Besides, the ornaments which women wear, are as crowns for many victories
which the Devil has gotten against the Children of God. For the Devil has
not only one sword in the Dance, but as many as there are Forma castis da^no
moribus ess^ solet. Multos forma fecit adulteros, cast^^ nullu^. Petrarch. De
Remed. utriusque Fortun^ l. 1. Dial. 2. and 65. l. 2. Dial. 1. See my
Vnlovelinesse of Love-locks. p. 56, 57
beautiful and well-adorned persons in the Dance. For the words of a woman are
a glittering sword. And therefore that place is much to be feared, wherein the
enemy has so many swords, since that one only sword of his may be feared.
Again, the Devil in this place strikes with a sharpened sword: for the women
come not willingly to the Dance, if they be not painted and adorned: the which
painting and ornament, is as a Grindstone upon which the Devil sharpneth his
sword. See Tertullian, De Cultu Faeminaru and Cyprian De habitu Virginu^, and
My Love-lockes. p. 56^ 57. etc.
They that deck and adorn their Daughters, are like those who put dry wood to
the fire, to the end it may burn the better: for such women kindle the fire of
luxury in the hearts of men: as Samsons Foxes fired the Philistines corn; so
these Si tu te sumptuosius comes, and per publicu^ notabiliter incedas oculos
in te iuventutis i^licias, suspiria^ adolescentum post te trahas, concupiscendi
libidine^ nutrias, peccandi fomenta, succendas, ut and ipsa non pereas, alios
tame^ perdas, and velut gladiu^ te and venenu^ videntibus praebeas: excusari
no^ potes quasi mente casta sis ac pudica. Cypr. De Habitu Virginu^. Ipse enim
vel^ aspectus mulieris totum est veneno lerati litum. Vt primu^ vulnus affixit
animae, ac miserae sauciavit impressione sagittae, quanto diuturniore^ conficit
moram, tanto periculosiorem putrilaginem in ea operatur, etc. S. Antiochus.
Homil. 17. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7 p. 167. See Hom 18.19 and 20. accordingly.
women have fire in their faces, in their gestures and actions, their glances
and wanton words, by which they consume the goods of men. Again, the Devil in
the Dance uses the strongest armor that he has, for his Haec est mulieris
Antiqua malitia, quae ^i^cit Adam de Paradisi delicijs: haec coelestes homines
fecit esse terrenos: haec humanum genus misit in infernum. Haec vitam abstulit
mundo propter unius arboris pomum: hoc malu^ homines ducit ad mortem. Hoc malum
fugit Elias Propheta: Haec occidit Ioannem Baptista^: deijcit pueritiam, perdit
inuentutem, illicet and inquietat emortuam ^enecturem. Chrysologus Sermo 127. O
malum summum and acuti ^simu^^ Diaboli telum, mulier! Per mulierem Adam in
Paradiso prostravit, etc. Chrysos^ Hom. 15. and 17. ex varijs Matthiae locis
Tom. 2. Col. 1003.1009. See there excellently to this purpose. and Anciochi.
Hom. 17.18, 19, 20 Bibl Patr. Tom. 7. p. 167.168, 169.
most powerful arms are women; which is made plain unto us, in that the
Devil made choice of the woman to dec^^ve the first man. So did Balaam that
the Children of Israel might be rejected. By a woman he made Samson, David and
Solomon to sin. The Devil tempts men by women three manner of ways; that
is to say, by the touch, by the eye, by the ear. By these three means, he
tempts foolish men to Dancings, by touching their hands, beholding their
beauty, hearing their songs and music. Again, they that dance, break that
promise and agreement, which they have made to God in Baptism, when their
Godfathers promise for them, that they shall renounce the Devil and all his
pomp; for Diaboli pompa cymbala, tibiae, choreae and cantica plena
scortationum, and adulteriorum. Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Acta Apost. Tom. 3. Col.
6 11. C.
dancing is the pomp of the Devil, and he that danceth, maintains his
pomp, and sings his Mass. For the woman that sings in the dance is the
Prioresse of the Devil, and those that answer are Clerks, and the beholders
are the Parishioners, and the music are the Bells, and the Fiddlers, the
Ministers of the Devil. For as when Hogs are strayed, if the Hog heard call
one, all assemble themselves together. So the Devil causes one woman to sing
in the dance, or to play on some instrument, and presently all the Dancers
gather together. Again, in a dance a man breaks the ten Commandemen^s of God.
As first, tho^ shall have to other gods but me, etc. For in dancing a man
serves that person whom he most d^sires to serve; and therefore says S.
Hierom, Pro Deo habet quisque quod colit. Comment. l. 3. in Oscae c. 14.
Every man's god is that he serves and loves best. He sins against the second
Commandment, when he make an Idol of that he loves. Against the third, in
that oaths are frequent amongst Dancers. Against the fourth, Sextum malu^
ludos praedictos co^comitans, est violatio Sabb^ti: namin dominicis diebus and
caeteris solemnitatibus praecipue huiusmodi lusores co^mittant praedicta
peccata and mult^ ^li^. Alexander Fa^ritius. Destructoriu^ Vitierum. pars 4.
cap. 23. Observa diem Sabbati, non carnaliter non Iudaicis delicijs qui ocio
abutuntur ad nequitiam. Melius enim utique tota die foderent quam tota die
salt^rent. August. En^^ in Psalm. 3.2. Ser. 1. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 242. De De^em
Chord. lib. c. 3^ Tom. 9^ pars 1. p. 1149. Sed unu^quisque nostrum Sabbatizet
spiritualiter, meditatione legis gaudeus^ non corpo^is refocillatione and
remissione, opificium Dei admirans, non saltationibus plavsibusque stupidis
gaudens. Ignatius. Epist. 6. ad Magnesianos.
for by dancing the Sabbath day is profaned. Against the fifth, for^ in the
dance, the Parents are oft-times disho^ored, when many bargains are made
without their counsel. Against ^h^ ^ixt. A man kills in dancing; for every one
that stands to please another, he kills the soul as often as he persuades unto
lust. Against the Placuit and salta^rix. Sed quid mirum s^inter dapes largas
and poculorum frequentes procellas puella lasciviens mulceat sensus, inclinet
affectus? Vinum and saltatio duplex incendium voluptatis. Fulgentius. Super
Audivit Herodes Tetrarcha. Se^mo^ Bi^^ Patrum Tom. 6. part 1. p. 148.
seventh, for^ the party that danceth, be he male or female commits adultery
with the party they lust after; Math. 5.28^
For he that looks on a woman, and lusts after her, has already committed
adultery in his heart. Against the eight Commandment, a man sins in dancing,
when he with-draweth the heart of another from God. Against the ninth, when in
dancing he speaks falsely against the truth^ Against the tenth, when women
affect the ornaments of others, and men covet the wives, daughters, and
servants of their neighbors. Again, a man may prove how great an evil
dancing is, by the multitude of sins that accompany those that dance^ for
they dance without measure or number. And therefore faith S. Augustine, the
miserable Dancer knows not, that as many paces as he makes in dancing, so
many leapes he makes to Hell. They sin in their or^aments after a five-fold
manner. First, Fastus inest pulchris, sequiturque superbi^ formam. Ovid
Fastor^m l. 1. Nil non permittit mulier ^ibi, turpe putat nil, Cum virides
gemmas collo circumdedit, and cum Auribus extensis magnos commisit Elenchos.
Iuvenal. Sa^yr. 6 p. 58.
in being proud thereof. Secondly, by i^flaming the hearts of those who behold
them. Thirdly, when they make those ashamed tha^ have not the like ornaments
giving them occasion to cov^^ the like. Fourthly, by making women importunate,
in demanding the like ornaments of their Husbands. And fifthly, wh^^ they cannot
obtain them of their Husbands, they seek to get them elsewhere by sin. They
sin by singing and playing o^ instruments, for their See Antiochus. Hom. 17.
Bibl. P. Tom. 7. p 167. accordingly.
songs bewitch the hearts of those that hear them, with temporal delight;
forgetting God, uttering nothing in their songs but lye^ and vanities. And the
very motion of the body which is used in dancing, g^ves testimony e^ough of
evil. Thus you see, that dancing is the Devils procession, and he that enters
into a dance, enters into the Devils possession. Of dancing the Devil is the
guide, the middle, the end, and he that enters a good and wise man into the
dance, comes forth a corrupt and wicked man. Sarah, that holy woman was none
of these. Thus far the Waldenses and Albigenses, whose words I would the
dancing, wanton, (that I say Colores vero pa^ietibus relinquamus i^que
mulierculis quae ^aeno suo iuvenes inrabiem agunt. Illae sane and impude^ter
saltant and rideant. Greg. Nazienz^n Adversus Mulieres, etc. p. 994. C. Est
me^retticia haec professio atque extremae abominationis argumentu^. Nam
ubipedum strepitus cum carminibus numerosis co^sentit, ibi videlicet omnino and
ma^^^ ipsarum plausus resonat, and omne genus faeditatis, and invitantur
spectatores ad turpitudine^: Cyrillus Alexand in Hesaiam^ l. 1. c. 3. Tom. 1.
p. 1^34. D.
not whorish) Herodiasses, the effeminate sinqua-pace Caranto-frisquing
Gallants of our age, together with our rustique hobling Satyrs, Nymphs, and
dancing Fairies, who spend their strength, Job 21.12, 13.
their time, (especially, the Easter, Whitson, Midsommer, and Christmas season)
in lewd lascivious dancing, would now seriously consider. And this would teach
them, not only to abandon all such dancing themselves, but likewise to
withdraw their children, especially their daughters, from the Dancing-schoole,
(as S. Quid dicitis vos sanctae faeminae ^videtis quid docere, quid etiam
dedocere filias debeatis? Salter, sed adulterae filia^ Quae vero pudica, quae
casta est, filias suas religionem doceat, non saltatione^. Ibi enim intuta
verecundia, illecebra suspecta est, ubi comes deliciaru^ est extrema saltatio.
Ab hac virgins Dei procul esse desidero. Nemo enim ut dixit quidam seculariu^
doctor^ saltat sobrius nisi insaniat. Quod si iuxta sapientiam secul^rem,
saltationis aut temulentia auctor est, aut dementia; quid divinaru^
Scr^pturarum cautum pu^amus exemplis, cum Ioannis praenuncius Christi
saltatricis optione iugulatus, exemplo sit, plus nocuisse saltationis
illecebram, quam sacrilegi fu^oris amentia^. Ambros. De Virginibus. lib. 3.
Tom. 4. p. 226.227.
Ambrose long since advised all holy women, all godly Parents for to do;
admonishing them, to teach their daughters religion, not dancing, (as now Hodie
autem virgins non in virtutibus docentur, sed imbuu^tur superbire, choreas
ducere, inter l^scivos masculos conversare, a quibus palpari and amplecti non
verecundantur, etc. Episcopus Chem^ensis Onus Ecclesia, c. 27. sect. 16.
alas too many do) that so they might keep^ them chaste and honest; leaving
See Ecclus. 9.4^ 8, 9. Feminae in plateis sub conspectu adolescen^ulorum
intemperantium choros inverecundos ducunt, iactantes comam, trahentes tunicas,
plaudentes manibus, saltantes pedibus, personantes vocibus, irritantes inse
iuvenum libidines motu histrionico, petulanti oculo, dedecoroso ludibrio.
Spectat corona adolescentulum, and fit miserabile theatrum, etc. Ambrose^ De
^lia and ^eiunio c. 18.
lust-provoking dancing unto Adulteresses and their Daughters only, as well
beseeming none but such: in whose roundes the Devil for the most part leads,
continues, ends the Dance, as the Waldenses, and fore-quoted Fathers largely
write. Thirdly, they condemn all dancing, as being, not only a common
recreation of lascivious drunken Pagans and Idolaters, in their Festivals and
times of public mirth, as Et ducunt posito duras cratere choreas. Cultaque
diffusis saltat amica comis. Fastorum. l. 3. p. 51. Faemineos thyrso concitat
ille choros Ib. p. 57. Ebrius incinctis philyra conuiua capillis sal^at. Ebrius
ad durum formosae limen amicae Cantat, habens un^tae molli^ serta comae. Idem
Fastoru^. l. 5. p. 89. Hiludunt, hos somnus habet, pars brachia nectit, and
viridem celeri ter pede pulsat humum. Fastoru^. l. 6. p. 106.
Ovid, Nec dulces amores sperne puer, neque tu choreas. Carm. l. 1. Ode 9. Nunc
est bibendum, nunc pede libero pulsanda tellus. Ode 37. p. 39. Cressa ne careat
pulchra dies nota: Neu morem in Salium fit requies pedum. Ibid. Ode 36. Quam
nec far pedem dedecuit choris. Carm. l. 2. Ode 12. Illic bis pueri di^ Numen
cum teneris virginibus tuum laudantes, pede candido. In morem Salium, ter
quatiens humum. Carm. l. 4. Ode 1. p. ^08. Nec meretrix tibicina, cuius Ad
strepitum salias terrae. Epist. l. 1 Epist. 4. p. 260. Et f^stis matrona moveri
iussa diebus^ De Art Po^t. p. 304.
Horace, Forsitan expectes ut Gaditana can^ro Incipiat prurire choro, etc.
Satyr. 11. p. 110. Inde virorum saltatus nigro tibicine. Satyr. 15. p. 138.
Iuvenall, Te lustrare choro sacrum tibi pascere crinem. AE^^dos. l. 7. p. ^57.
L^etiti^ ludisque viae, plausuque fremebant. Omnibus in templis matru^ chorus,
omnibus arae^ Idem l^ 8. p. 292. Vobis picta croco, and fulgenti^ mu^ice
vestes. Desidiae cordi: iuvat indulgere choreis. Idem l. 9. p. 312. Et pedibus
plaudunt choreas and carmina ducunt. Ibid. lib. 6. See Bulingerus, D^ Theatro.
l. ^. c. 52.
Virg^ll, Vbi cymbalum sonat vox, ubi tympana reboant. Tibicen ubi canit Pryx
curvo grave calamo. Vbi capita Maenades, ubi ia^iunt haedari^erae. Vbi facra
sancta acutis ululatibus agitant. Vbi suevi^ illa divae volitare vaga cohors.
Quo nos decet citatis celerare tripudijs. Simul haec comitibus Atys cecinit
nova mulier. Leve tympanum remugit, cava cymbala recrepant, viridem citus adit
Idam properante pede chorus, etc. l. 1. Carm. 63. p. 34.35.
Catullus, Agricola assiduo primu^ satiatus aratro, Can^avit certo rust^^a
verba pede. Agricola and nimio su^^usus Baccho rube^ti Primus inexperta duxit
ab art choros. Vos celeb^e^ cantate Deum; na^ turba iocosa Obs^repit, and
Phrygio tibia curva sono^ Ludite^^am no^ iungit equos, etc. Eleg. l. 2. Eleg.
1. p. 83.84.
Tibullos, Nec minus assiduis Edonis fessa choreis, etc. Eleg. lib. 1. Eleg. 3.
p. 115.
Propertius, Homer, Odysseae. lib. 1. page 8. lib. 8. p. 214. Iliados. l. 18.
p. 694.700. Dionys. H^lli^ar. Antiqu. Romans l. 7. sect. 9. and others cited by
Bulingerus, De Theatro l. 1. c. 52. together with He^iodi Ascraei, Scutum. page
62.64. Arnobius adversus Gentes. lib. 2. page 75. and l. 4. p. 147 Chrysostom,
Hom. 6.49. and 74. in Matthew. Concilium Arelatense. 3. Surius. Tom. 1. p 727.
Council. Aphricanum, Canon 27. Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 62.65. Isiodor.
Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 50. Polydor Virgil. De Inventoribus rerum. l. 5. c.
2. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum, c. 18. and infinite See Mat. 14.6 Mark.
6.22.
others testify: but likewise a part of that solemn worship wherewith they
courted and honored their Devill-Idols, whose Festivals and Solemnities, were
for the most part spent in Plays and Dancing, as our See Council. Toletanum 3.
Can. 23. and Cabilonense 1. Can. 19 Agrippa De Van. Scien. c. 54. De festis.
and Polidor, Virgil, De Invent. rerum. l. 5. c. 2. accordingly.
Christian Holy Days o^t-times are. Witness, Exodus 32.6.19. 1 Samuel 30.16. Job
21.11. Isay 13.21. Mat. 14.6. Mar. 6.22. Council. Aphricanum. Can. 27. Council.
Arelatense 3. Surius Tom. 1. p. 727. Council. Constant. 6. Can. 62. 65.
Augustine, De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 20. Theophylact. Enarrat. in Marc. 6.
Christianus Grammaticus Expositio in Matthew. c. 35. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 9. pars 1.
page 901. F.G.H. Sebastianus Brant, in his Navis Stutifera, Calvin and
Marlorat, in 1 Cor. 10. v. 7. together with Horace, Iuvenal, Ovid, Vergil,
Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Bulinger, Arnobius, Chrysostom, Polydor
Virgil, Agrippa, with others, in their for^-named places, and Archadae
Philoxeni and Timothaei disciplina instructi, cu^ cantibus and choreis annuos
ludos Libero patri faciunt; pueri quidem quos pu^riles vocant: iuvenes, quos
viriles. Omnis denique eoru^ vita in^ huiusmodi cantionibus versatur. Postremo
spectacula ac ^udos in theatris cu^ ca^tibus and choreis singulis quibusque
annis publicis sumptibus adolescentes civibus praebent. Ibidem.
Polybius, Historiae. l. 4. p. 340. Homer Odysseae, l. 8. p. 214. who all
testify as much. Witness their Plutarchi, Numa, Dionysius, Hallicarnas.
Antiqu. Romans lib. 2. sect. 8. and lib. 7. sect. 9. Athaeneus Dipnos. l. 14. c.
11.12. Livie, Hist. Romans l. 1. sect. 10. Virgil. AEneid. l. 4. p. 173.174.
Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 5, c. 3. Alexander ab Alex. Genial. Dierum. l. 4.
c. 17. Agrippa De Vanit. Scient. c. 12. Plato Legum. Dial. 7. p. 881.
Euripedes, Bacchae, Strabo Geogr. l. 10. B^emus, De Moribus Gen^ium. l. 3. c.
18. l. 6. c. 27. Godwins Roman Antiquities. lib^ 2. sect. 2. c. 10.14.
Corybantes, Curetes, Salij, and such like dancing Priests, who on the solemn
festival days of Cybele, Bacchus, Mars, and other Pagan-deities, danced about
the streets and Mark^t place with Cymbales in their hands, in nature of our
Morric^-dances, (which were derived from them) the whole multitude accompanying
them in these their dancing Morrices, with which they honored these their
Devill-Idols. Yea, witness the common practice of most Idolatrous Pagans, who
never honored, saluted, or offered any public sacrifice to their Idols but
with music, songs, and dances; dancing about their Temples and Altars, to
their honor; as Omnis quam chorus and socij comite^tur ova^tes. Et Cererem
clamo^e vocent in ^ecta: neque ante Falce^ maturis quisquam supponat aristis,
Quam Cereri torta redimitus tempora quercu Det motus inco^positos, and carmina
dicat. lib 1. Georg^^. p. 39.40. Nec non Ausonij Troi ag^ns missa coloni,
Versibus incomptis ludunt risuque soluto, Oraque corticibus sumunt horrenda
cavatis. Et te Bacche vocant per carmina laeta tibique Oscilla ex alta
suspendunt mollia pinu. Georg. l. 2. p. 56.57. Aut ante or^ Deum pingues
spaciatur ad Aras, Instauratque diem donis. AEneidos. l. 4 p. 170. Instauratque
choros mistique Altaria circum Cretesque, Dryopesque fremunt, pictique
Agathyrsi. Ibid. p. 177. Euae Bacche fremens, solum te virgin dignum
Vociferans; etenim molles tibi sumere thyrsos, Te Iustrare choro. AEneid l. 7.
p. 257. Pandite^ nunc Helicona deae, cantusque movete. Ibid. p. ^65. Dona
ferunt, cumulantque oneratis lancibus Aras. Tum Salij ad cantus, incensa
Altaria circum Populcis adsunt incincti tempora ramis. Hic iuvenum chorus, ille
senum, qui carmine lauds Herculeas, and facta ferunt. AEneid. l. 8. p. 280.
Laetitia, Iudisque viae, plausuque fremebant. Omnibus in templis matrum chorus;
omnibus Arae. Ante Aras terram caesi stravere iuvenci. Ibid p. 292. See l
before.
Virgil, Ardua iam dudum rosonat tinnitibus Ida, etc. Hoc Curetes habent, hoc
Corybantes opus. Cymbala progaleis, pro scutis tympana pulsant. Tibia dat
Phrygios ut dedit ante modos. Fastorum l. 4. p. 64. Nos quoque tangit honos;
festis gaudemus and aris. Turbaque caelestes ambitiosa sumus. Ebrius incinctis
philyra conviva capillis saltat, etc. Fastorum. lib. 5. p. 88.89. Cantabat
fanis, cantabat tibia ^udis, etc. Quaeritur in scena cava tibia; quaeritur
aris. Fastorum. l. 6. p. 114. See p. 207. See h before.
Ovid, Omnis saltatio, and omnes consentus consecrentur constitutis primum
festivitatibus, supputatione facta in annum quod singulis temporibus and
singulis Dijs ac ipsorum filijs and daemonibus fieri convenit. Postea vero
constituatur, qu^m cantilenam in singulis Deorum sacrificijs canere oporteat,
and quibus choreis sacrificium quod tunc fit, honorare. Et primu^ quidem
aliquas constituere oportet: quae vero constituta^ fuerint, parcis and alijs
omnibus dijs sacrificio f^cto, in communi omnes cives libando consecrare
singulas cantilenas singulis dijs and alijs. Si vero pra^ter has ipsas, quis
al^os Deorum Hymnos aut choreas adducat, sacerdotes utriusque sexus, una cum
legum custodibus, sancte and secundum legem cohibe^nt, etc. In nostris locis
and fere in omnibus, ut in summa dicam civitatibus, hoc fi^ri solet. Quum enim
Magistratus aliquis public sacrificat, postea choreis non unus, sed chororum
multitudo venit, and non procul ab Aris, sed aliqu^ndo iuxta ipsas, omnibus
convitijs sacra perfundun^, and verbis, and rythmis, and luctuosissimis
harmonijs, audientium animos exasperantes: and qui civitat^m quae sacrificavit
ad lachrymas maxim^ concitare potest is victoriae praemia fert. Legum. Dial. 7.
p. 874.875. vid. Ibid.
Plato, Geogr. l 10. Tom. 2. p. 19. and p. 48. to 62.74, 75, 76.
Strabo, De Expeditione Cyri Hist. l. 6. p. 370.371.
Zenophon, Carm. l. 1 Ode 57. and l. 4. Ode 1. p. 108. See i before.
Horace, Satyr. 6. p. 63. to 67. and Satyr. 15. p. 138.
Iuvenal, Lib. 1. Carm. Nuptiale. 63. p. 34.35.
Catullus, El^giarum. l. 2. Eleg. 1. p. 82.83.
^^bullus, Politicoru^ l. 7. c. 17. p 501.502 and l. 8. c. 6.7.
Aristotle, Dipnosoph. l. 14 c. 11.12.
Ath^naeus, Alexander ab Alexandro. Genialium. Dierum. l. 4. c. 13. Caelius
Rhodiginus Antiqu Lectionum l. 5. c. 3. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap.
18. Purchase Pilgr. Book 5. chap. 1. Bulingerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 52.
Euripidis Bacchae, thorowout, and sundry others testify: from which practice,
See Council. Ar^latense 3. Surius Tom. 1. page 727. Council. Aphircanum. Can.
25.27. Tol^tanu^ 3. Can. 23. Cabilonense 1. Can. 19. Constantinop. 6. Can. 62
65. accordingly.
our dancing at Wakes, (a name, an abuse^ derived from the ancient Vigils) or
Church-a^es, and our late crouching and ducking unto new-erected Altars ( a
Ceremony much in use with Idolatrous Ipse tibi ad tu^ templa feram solennia
dona, Et statuam ante Aras aurata fro^te iuvencu^ C^dentem, etc. Virgil.
AEneid. l. 9. page 313. Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores, Iurandasque
tuu^ per nomen ponimus a^as. Horace Epist l. 2. Epist. 1. p. 278. See Iuven^l
Satyr. 12.13. p. 115.119, 12^. Alexander ab Alexan. l. 4. c. 17. Strabo Geogr
l. 10. See My Appendix to Lame Giles his Haultings p. 15.16.
Pagans heretofor^) have been originally derived. Since therefore its evident
by all these testimonies, that dancing had its o^iginall from ^dolatry, and
Idolatrous drunken Pagans, who consecrated dances to their Idols, and went
dancing to their Temples, their Altars, when they sacrificed to them in their
solemn Festivals^ and days of mirth, they hence conclude them, to be
unlawful unto Christians; who must not imitate them in their Idolatrous Pagan
customs, as I have here largely proved, in the first and second Act, on which
you may reflect. Fourthly, dancing, write they, (yea even in Regina saltat; and
quan^o pulchrius salt^vit, tanto pejus Turpe enim est Reginae aliquid indecorum
dextre facere. Theophylact. Enar. (...) Matthew. 14 p. 34. See Chrysostom. Hom.
49. in Matthew.
Queens themselves, and the very greatest persons, who are commonly most
devoted to it) has been always scandalous and of ill report, among the
Saints of God; as the foregoing Councels, Fathers, and Authors plentifully
evidence; who have condemned dancing, See here reason 1.2. and 3.
as a pomp, a vanity of this wicked world; an invention, yea, a work of
Satan; which Christian have renounced in their baptismes a recreation more fit
for ^agans, Whores, and Drunkards, then for Christians: therefore, a Christian,
(who is only Phil. 4.8.
to follow things of good report, and to Romans 12.17. c. 13.13. 1 Cor. 7.35. 2
Cor. 8.21. 1 These. 4.12. 1 Pet. 2.12.
provide things honest in the sight of all men; 1 Cor. 10.32, 33.
not giving any offense or scandal to Gods Church or people;) may not practice
it. Fif^ly, dancing, say they, is not only an En^rvant animos cytharae,
ca^tusque lyraeque. Et vox, and numeris Brachia mota suis. Ovid R^me^io Amoris.
l. 2. p. 230. Vobis picta croco, and fulge^^es murice vestes: Desidiae cordi;
iuvat indulgere choreis. Et tunica manicas, and habent redimicula mitrae. O
vere Phygiae (neque enim Phryges) ite per al^a Dyndima, ubi assuetis bifarem
dat tibia cantum. Tympana vos buxusque vocat. Berecynthia matris Idaeae; sinite
arma viris, and cedite ferro. Virgil l 9. AEneid. p. 313.313^
effeminate recreation, en^eebling the minds, yea, depraving the lives and
manners of men, a su^ficient argument of its unlawfulness: but it likewise
irritates and ingenders noisome lusts, it occasions much dalliance, chambering,
wantonness, whoredom and adultery, both in the Dancers and Spectators. This
daily experience; this all the fore-quoted Authors witness, and among the
rest, De Remedio u^r^usque Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 24^
Petrarcha, and De Vanitate Scientiaru^. c. 18 See M North-brookes Treatise
against Vaine-Pl^yes, and Dancing. f. 65.66, 67.
Agrippa have most lively expressed it. To music (write they) belongs the art
of Dancing, very acceptable to Maidens and Lovers, which they learn with great
care, and without tediousness do prolo^g it until midnight, and with great
diligence they devise to dance with fained gestures, and with measurable pac^s
to the sound of the Cymball, Harp, or Flute, and do as they think very
wisely and subtly, ^he fond^st thing of all other, and but little differing
from madness; which except it were tempered with the sound of instruments, and
as it is said, if vanity did not commend vanity, there should be no sight more
ridiculous, nor yet more out of order th^n dancing; Haec laxamen petulantiae,
amica sceleris, incitamen libidinis, hostis pudicitiae, ac ludus probis omnibus
indignus Saep^ ibi matrona, ut ait Petrarcha, diu servatu^ decus perdidit,
saepe infaelix virguncul^ ibi didicit, quod melius ignorasset, multaru^ ibi
f^^a pe^ijt pudorque. Multae inde do^u^ impud^cae, plures ambiguae redier^,
castior autem nulla: pudicitia^ choreis saepe strata^, semperque impuls^m
opp^gnatamque videmus^ etc. A^rippa. Ibid. See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 4. and 5.
this is a liberty to wantonness, a friend to wickedness, and a provocation
to ^leshly lust, an enemy to chasti^y, and a pastime unworthy of all honest
persons. There oftentimes a Matron has lost her long-preserved honor:
oftentimes the unhappy Maiden has there learned that, whereof she had been
bette^ to be ignorant: there the fame and honesty of infinite women is lost.
Infinite from thence have returned home unch^ste, many with a doubtful mind,
but none chaste in thought and deed. And we have seen that woman-like honesty
in dancing has been thrown down to the ground, and always vehemently
provoked and assaulted. See Macrob^^s Satur. l. 3 c. 14. accordingly.
The ancient Romans, grave men, by reason of their wisdom and ^uthority, did
refuse all dancing, and no honest Matrone was commended among them for dancing.
Itaque saltationem necesse est omnium vitiorum esse postremu^: neque enim
facil^ dictu quae mala pariant colloquia and tactus. Saltatur inconditis
gestibus, and monstroso pedum strepitu, ad molles pulsationes, ad lascivas
cantilenas, ad obscaena carmina, contrectantur matronae and puel^ae impudicis
manibus and basijs, meretricijsque co^plexibus; and quae abscondit natura,
velavit modestia, ipsa lascivia tunc saepenudantur, ludi tegmine obducitur
scelus. Exercitium profecto, non a caelis exortum, sed a malis Daemonibus
excogitatum in inivriam Divinitatis. Agrippa. Ibidem.
Dancing is the vilest vice of all, and truly it cannot easily be said, what
mischiefs the sight and hearing do receive thereby, which afterward be the
causes of communication and embracing. They dance with disordinate gestures,
with monstrous th^mping of the feet, to pleasant sounds, to wanton songs, to
dishonest verses; Maidens and Matrons are there groped with unchaste hands;
yea, kissed and dishonestly embraced: the things which nature has hidden, and
modesty covered, are there oftentimes by means of lasciviousness made naked,
and ribauldry under the color of Pastime is dissembled. An exercise
doubtless, not descended from Heaven (I may add, not leading to Heaven, into
which we must pass through -2 Timothy 3.11, 12. Acts 14.22. 1 These. 34. 2 These.
1.4. Revel. 1.7. cap. 7.14. Acts 20.19, 31. 2 Cor^ 2.4. cap. 6.6. v. 11.27.
many afflictions, tribulations, prayers, tears, fastings; through a Matthew.
7.13, 14.
strait, a narrow, not broad or pleasant way, as Dancing, Stage Plays, and
such Pastimes are:) but by the Devils of Hell devised, to the injury of the
Divinity, when the people of Israel erected a Calfe, in the Desert, who after
they had done sacrifice, begun to eat and drink, and afterward rose up to
sport themselves, and singing, danced in a^round. Thus they: See Reason 3. and
Calvin, Marlorat, and Lyra, in 1 Cor. 10.7. accordingly.
thus all the other fore-quoted Authors. Hence Alexander Fabritius, an ancient
English Writer, styles Dancing, Ludus lascivae vanitatis and voluptatis
cuiusmodi sunt choreae, tripudia, interludia, etc. Destructoriu^ Vitiorum. pars
4. cap. 23. B.
A pastime of lascivious vanity and voluptuousness. And John de Burgo,
Chancellor of Cambridge in King Henry the VI. his Reign, in his Pupilla Oculi.
Partis vltimae. cap. vlt. De Peccatis mortalibus. X. De Ducentibus choreis.
writes, Quod si hoc faci^nt causa incitandi ipsosmet, vel alios ad libidinem,
peccant mortaliter: and etiam si hoc faciant ex consuetudine, sed non corrupta
intention^, non audeo eos excus^re a peccato mortali cum, immergant se periculo
alios provocandi ad libidinem, and ipso facto videntur choreas approbare, and
suo exemplo alijs authoritatem dare similia faciendi. Ibidem.
That those who dance to incite themselves or others unto lust, yea those
likewise who dance out of custom, sin mortally, though they do it not with a
corrupt intent. Neither dare I (says he) to excuse these from a mortal sin,
since by dancing they plung themselves into this ^anger, of provoking others
unto lust, and ipso facto seem to approve of dancing, and by their example
give authority to others to do the like. Upon this very reason our modern
Writers on the Commandement^, See Bp. Babington, Perkins, D^d, Downeham, Lake,
Elton, Brinsly, Williams, Andrews, and Ames, on the 7. Commandment,
accordingly.
make dancing a sin against the 7. Commandment, because it is a common
occasion both of actual and mental adultery; as their forementioned
Authorities at large declare, Therefore it must needs be unlawful unto
Christians, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
among whom adultery, fornication and uncleanesse are not so much as to be
named, much less the manifest occasions of them entertained. Fifthly, dancing
See D. Ames, De Iure Conscientiae. l. 5. c. 39. p. 270.271.
write they, is altogether incompatible with that universal 1 Pet 1.14, 15,
16. 2 Pet. 3.11.
holiness, Ephesians. 5.3.4. 1 Timothy 2.9, 15. c. 3.2 Phil. 4.5.
modesty, 1 Timothy 3.8. Tit. 2.2, 7.
gravity, 1 These. 5.6.8 1 Timothy 2.9, 15. c. 3.2 Tit. 2.2, 6.12. 1 Pet. 1.13. c.
4.7. c. 58
temperance, and sobriety, which God requires in all chaste, all gracious
Christians; it being a recreation, (as Nemo fere saltat sobrius nisi forte
insanit, neque in solitudine neque in convivio honesto and moderato:
intempestivi convivij, amaeni loci, multarum deliciarum comes est extrema
saltatio: quod necesse est omnium viciorum esse postremu^. Oration pro Muraena
Operum. Tom. 1. page 459.
Cicero, Ebrius incinctis philyra conviva capillis, Saltat, and imprudens
utitur art meri. Fastorum. lib. 5. page 89. Et iactant faciles ad sua verba
manus. Et ducunt posito duras cratere choreas, Cultaque diffusa saltat amica
coma. Cum redeunt, titubant, and sunt spectacula vulgi. Fastorum. l. 3. page 51.
Ovid, Ebria famosa saltat lasciva taberna, Ad cubitum, raucos excutiens
calamos. Copa. p. 509.
Virgil, together with De Elia and Ie^^nio. cap 18. De Virginibus l. 3. Tom. 4.
p. 226.227.
Ambrose, De Ebrietate and Luxu Sermo.
Basil, Hom. 49 in Matthew.
Chrysostom, De Remed. utriusque ^ortunae. lib. 1. Dial. 24.
Petrarcha, De Vanit. Scientiarum, cap 18.
Agrippa, Locorum Com. Classis. 2. cap. 11. sect. 63. to 68. and Comment. in
Iudicum. lib. c. 21.
Peter Martyr, Treatise against Vaine-Playes and Dancing. fol. 67.
M. Northbrooke, Anatomy of Abuses. page 125.
M. Stubs, and ( See Ludovicus Vives, De Eruditione Mulieris Christianae. l. 1.
c. 14^ and Sebastianus Brant, Navis Stutifera.
sundry others fore-quoted) testify which none but Redlams, Drunkards, Fools,
or infamous persons use, in their riotous, unseasonable voluptuous feasts and
meetings; which proves it the very worst and last of all vices; it being quite
excluded from all private, honest, civil banquets; yea, wholly abandoned by all
temperate, chaste, and sober persons. Therefore it must needs be unseemely,
unlawful unto Christians. Sixthly, Dancing, (say they) as now it is used, See
Peter Maryr, Gualtber, Calvin, Agrippa, Vives, Erasmus, Petrarcha, The
Waldenses, Brant, Fetherstone, Love^, Nor^hbrooke, and St^bs, in their places
forequoted. p 226.227.
is an occasion of much wantonness, lewdness, and lasciviousness; of much
riot, epicurisme, effeminacy, voluptuousness; of much prodigal expense, much
loss of time, much superfluity, costlinesse, and new-fanglednesse in apparel,
much pride and haughtiness, much impudency and immodesty, especially in the
female sex; whom dancing does of all others least beseem. Besides, it
with-drawes young Gentlemen from their Studies to the Dancing-Schoole, which
ingrosseth all their time; it avocates young Gentlewomen from their Needles,
and such like honest employments, and for the most part makes them idle
Huswives, Hinc itaque apparet qualis fuerit aulae Herodis disciplina^ nam etsi
plerique saltadi lice^tiam tunc ^ibi permitterant, meretriciae tamen lasciviae
turpis nota fuit nubilis puellae saltatio. Certe quicunque habuerunt curam
honestae gravitatis, damnaru^t saltationes praesertim in puella. Verum impura
Herodias Solomen filiam, ne sibi dedecori esset, ad mores suos i^ta formaverat.
Hoc igitur co^veniebat scorti filiae. Calvin and Marlorat. in Matthew. 14 v. 6.
Whores, or Spend-thrifts ever after: It draws men on, and trains them up to
naught but idleness, the nursery of all other vices: it glues men's hearts to
carnal pleasures and delights of sin, and makes them careless of Gods
service, unmindefull of their own^ salvation, or of the day of death and
iudg^ment, which should be always fixed in their most serious meditations. See
Here, Act. 6. Scene 13. thorowout accordingly. and page 231.
More-over, it quite unfits men, and often with-drawes them from the religious
performance of holy duties, many Lords-dayes, most other Holy Days, (set apart
for Gods peculiar worship) being oft-times grossly profaned, if not wholly spent
on lewd lascivious dancing, and such Heathenish pastimes: as the Council of
Affricke, Can. 18. the 4. Council of Carthage, Can. 88. the 3. Council of
Toledo, Canon 23. The 6. Council of Constantinople, Canon 66. The Provincial
Council of Colen. Anno Dom. 1536. pars 9. cap. 9.10. The Provincial Council
of Me^^z. Anno Dom. 1549. cap. 61. Lib. 6. Capit. Caroli Magni. apud Bochelium.
Decr^ta. Eccles. Gal. lib. 4. Tit. 10. cap. 6. Justinian. Codic. l. 3. Tit. 12.
De Ferijs, Lex. 10. De Fest. Ignatius Ep. 6. ad Magnesianos. Clemens Romanus.
Apost. Constit. l. 2. c. 64.65. Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap.
11. Augustine Enarrat in Psalm. 32. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, in Ioannis
Evangelium. l. 8. c. 5. p. 595. S. Asterius in Festum Kalendarum. Oration. Bibl.
Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705.706. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. p. 195.196.
Leo. 1. Sermo in Octava Petri and Pauli. cap. 5. fol. 165. Eusebius, apud
Damascenum^ Parallelorum. l. 3, c. 47. Agrippa De Vanitate Scient^arum. c. 59.
De Festis. Polidor Virgil De Inventoribus rerum. l. 5. c. 2. page 385.386.
Episcopus Chemnensis, O^us Ecclesiae. c. 28. sect. 6. Bonaventure in lib. 4.
Sententiarum. Distinctio 16. Numb. 13. and sundry other of the Schoolmen
t^ere. Alexander Fabritius Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 3. c. 10. and 4. c. 23.
The Walden^es. History of the Waldenses and Albigenses. pars 3. l. 2. c. 9. p.
64. 65, 66. Bp. Latymer in his Sermons. fol. 13. The 3. Blast of Retrait from
Plays and Theaters. page 62. to 68. M. Brinsly in his 3. part of the true
Watch. chap. 11. Abomination 30. page 302. Astexanus De Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53.
Alexander Alensis. Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 11. M. 2. Artic. 11. sect.
4. Quaest. 8. page 392.393. with sundry others complain: who do likewise all
of them unanimously condemn dancing, as an unlawful exercise and pastime,
especially on M. Northbrookes Treatise against Plays and Dancing. fol. 68.
Thomas Lovel, his Dialogue against Dancing.

See John Field his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden. The Treatise
against the use and abuse of Dancing. Anno 1581. to this purpose. Thomas
Beacon, in his Catechism. fol. 341.


Lords-dayes, and Holy Days; which circumstance of time, (as they all
conclude) makes dancing unavoydably sinful and abominable. Which I observe the
rather, to confute the gro^se mistake of some licentious Libertines; who hold
dancing on Lords-dayes, to be no Giles Widows, in his Sermon at Carfolkes in
Oxford, July the 5. 1631. on Psalm. 68. v. 25. wherein he openly and purposely
justified the lawfulness of mixed dancing at Churchales and Maypoles, even upon
the Lord's Day, in the Pulpit, and then confirmed his doctrine by his practice.
unlawful exercise, sport, or pastime, within the pious Statute of 1. Caroli.
cap. 1. within which there is no question, but dancing is included; it being an
exercise which all the fore-quoted Councels, Fathers, and Christian Authors,
have unanimously condemned, as unlawful, especially on the Sabbath, or
Lord's Day, as we style it; which our own Of the Time and place of Prayer. part
1. p. 124.1^5.
Homelies, Queen Eliz. Injunctions. Iniunct. 20. and Canon 13.
and Canons enjoin us to spend, in hearing the Word of God read and taught; in
private and public prayers; in acknowledging our offenses to God, and
amendment of the same; in reconciling our selves charitably to our neighbors
where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion of the Body
and Blood of Christ; in visiting of the poor and sick, using all godly and
sober conversation: informing us withal; The 1. part of the Serm^^ of the Time
and place of Prayer. p. 125.126.
That God has given express charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath day,
they should cease from all weekly and work day labor, to the intent, that
like as God himself wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and blessed
and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quietness and rest from labor; even
so Gods obedient people should use the Sunday holylie, and rest from their
common and daily business, and also give themselves WHOLLY to heavenly
exercises of Gods true religion and service. But alas (quoth the Homely) all
these notwithstanding, it is lamentable to see the wicked boldness of those that
will be counted Gods people, who pass nothing at all of keeping and hallowing
the Sunday. And these people are of two sorts. See Concilium Laodicenu^ Can.
29. Tarracone^se. Can. 4.7. Aurelianense 3. Can. 27. Matisconense 2. Can. 1.
Antisiodorense. Can. 16. Cabilonense 1. Can. 18. Consta^tinopolitanu^ 6. Can.
8. and Canones in Trullo. 89.90 Conciliu^ apud Palatium Vernis. Can. 14.
Foro-Iuliense. Can. 13. Arelatense 4. Can. 16. Turonense 3. Can. 40.
Moguntinum. Anno. 813. Can. 25.37. Synodus Rhemensis. An. 813. Can. 35. Council.
Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 50. lib. 3. cap. 5. and 19. Synodus Aquisgranensis
sub, Lud. Pio. Can. 17.21. Council. Triburiense. Can. 35. Basiliense Sess. 19.
Surius Council. Tom. 4. page 57. Refo^matio Cleri Germaniae. cap. 20. Ibid. p.
714. Synodus Augustensis. An. 1548. Ibid. p. 808. Synodus Moguntina. Anno.
1549. cap. 98. Ibid. p. 879 together with Capitula Caroli Magni, Synodus
Andagau. Synodus Galonis and Simonis Legator. Concilium Bituriense. An. 1584.
and Synodus Paris. 1557. quoted by Bochellus. Decretorum, Ecclesiae Gallic.
lib. 4. Tit. 10. p. 592. to 599. which inhibit all works of Tillage,
Husbandry, all Faires, Markets, Pleas, and other kind of labor, together with
all sports and pastimes on the Lord's Day.
The one sort, if there be business to do, though there be no extreme need,
they must not spare the Sunday: they must ride and iourny on the Sunday, etc.
they must keep Markets and Faires on the Sunday; finally, they use all days
alike, Working-dayes and Holy Days are all one. The other sort is worse: For
although they will not travel nor labor on the Sunday as they do on the
week day, yet they will not rest in holiness, as God commands: but they
rest in ungodliness and filthiness, prancing in their pride; pranking and
pricking, pointing and painting themselves to be gorgeous and gay; they rest in
excess and superfluity, in gluttony and drunkenness like Rats and Swine: they
rest in brawling and railing, in quarrelling and fighting: they rest Under
which Dancing is included: or if not, yet at least it is as unlawful as it, or
any of the particulars here specified; and therefore as much condemned by this
Homely as they.
in wantonness, in toyish talking, in filthy fleshlinesse, so that it does too
evidently appear, that God is more dishonored, and the Devil better served
on the Sunday, then upon all the days in the week besides, And I assure you
the beasts which are commanded to rest on the Sunday, honor God better then
this kind of people: For they offend not God, they break not their
holy days. Wherefore O ye people of God, lay your hands upon your hearts,
repent and amend this grievous and dangerous wickedness, stand in awe of the
Commandment of God himself, be not disobedient to the godly order of Christ's
Church, used and kept from the Apostles time until this day. Fear the
displeasure and just plagues of Almighty God if ye be negligent. Dancing
therefore on the Lord's Day (which no godly Christians in the Primitive Church
did once use for ought we read,) is an unlawful exercise, if our Homelies or
Canons may be judges; therefore an unlawful pastime punishable by the Statute
of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. which intended to suppress dancing on the Lord's Day, as
well as Beare-bayting, Bull-bayting, Enterludes, and Common Plays; which were
not so rife, so common as dancing, when this law was first inacted. Finally,
this dancing as the Sea hoar page 231.
Waldenses teach, does lead men on to the breach of all the ten Commandments,
and to sundry inevitable sins and mischiefs: In all these respects
therefore, they conclude it to be evil, and unbeseeming Christians.
Seventhly, Dancing (as Peter Martyr, Vi^es, Agrippa, Erasmus, Brant, Lovell,
Northbrooke, Stubs, Gualther, and others in their fore-alleaged places
testify) is for the most part attended with many amorous smiles, lascivious
gestures, wanton complements, lustful embracements, loose behavior, In est
and in osculis inanibus dulcis voluptas. Theocrit^ Caprarius. Apud Poetas
minores. p. 22. See Pauli Wan. Sermo 10.
unchaste kisses, meretricious scurrilous Songs and Sonnets, effeminate
music, lust-provoking attire, obscene discourses, ridiculous Love-prankes,
lewd companions; all which are as so many several strong solicitations to
whoredom and uncleanesse, and 1 Cor ^0.7.8 1 Pet. 2.11. Tit. 3.3. Ephesians.
4.17.19.
savor only of sensuallity of raging fleshly lusts, which war against the
soul. Therefore its 1 Pet. 2.11. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 These. 5.23.
wholly to be abandoned of all good Christians. Eighthly, this See Petrarcha,
Calvin, Martyr, Gualther, Erasmus, Vives, Brant, Lovell, Stubs, and
Northbrooke, in their fore-quoted places.
Dancing serves to no necessary use, no profitable, laudable, or pious end at
all; it neither glorifies God, nor benefits men in soul, in body, in estate,
or reputation: it issues only from the imbred pravity, vanity, wantonness,
incontinency, pride, profaneness, or madness of men's depraved natures; and it
serves only Romans 13.14.
to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; whereas Gal.
5.24. c. 6.14. Col. 3.5.
all those who are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof: Therefore it must needs be unlawful unto Christians. Ninthly,
this kind of dancing, as it was never in use among the P^imitiue Christians,
Phil. 3.17, 18. 1 Cor. 4.16. c. 11.1. 1 These. 2 14. 2 These. 3.7 9. Heb. 6.12.
whose footsteps we should tread in: so it is quite out of the road of
Christianity, and salvation. We never read of any Christians that went
dancing into Heaven; though we read of Job 21.11, 12, 13^ Isay 5.12, 13, 14.
Amos 6.1. to 12. See D. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. part 2. c. 36. Edit.
vlt. p. 431, to 436. and Froyssards Chronicle. vol. 4. chapter 193.194.
sundry wicked ones who have gone dancing down to Hell. The way to Heaven is
too steep, too narrow for men to dance in, and keep revell rout: No way is
large or smooth enough for capering Roisters, for iumping, skipping, dancing
Dames, but that Matthew. 7.13.
broad beaten pleasant road that leads to Hell. The gate of Heaven is to
matthew. 7.13. Luke 13.24.
strait, the way to bliss to narrow, for whole roundes, whole troops of
Dancers to march in together: Men never went as yet by multitudes, much less
by Morrice-dancing troops to Heaven: Alas there are Matthew. 7.14.
but few who find that narrow way; they scarce go two together: and those few
what are they? Not dancers, but Isay 49.11. c. 61.2, 3. Zech 12 10, 11, 12.
Joel 2.12. Amos 8.10.
mourners: not laughers, but Ier. 31.9, 15. Numb. 25.6. 2 Samuel 15.30. Job
16.16. Psalm. 6.8. Psalm. 102.9. Joel. 2.12. Ezra 3.12. c. 10.1. Isay 2.13. Ier.
9.1. c. 13.7.
weepers; whose tune is Job 16.20. Psalm. 6.6. and 39.12. and 80.5. and 126.5.
Isay 25.8. Ier. 9.1, 18. Lam. 2.11, 18. Luke 7.33, 44. Acts 20.19, 31. 2 Cor.
2.4. 2 Timothy 1.4.
Lachrymae, whose music, Romans 8.23, 26. 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. Lam. 1.22.
sighs for sin; who know no other Cinqua-pace but this to Heaven, Job 30.28.
Psalm. 38.6. Psalm. 42.9. and 43.2. and 44.22.
to go mourning all the day long for their iniquities; to Isay 38.14. Psalm.
119.136. Ezech. 9.4.
mourn in secr^t like Doves, to chatter like Cranes for their own and others
sins. See Romans 8.35, 36. Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. Acts 14.22. 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11,
12, 13. ^ Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12.
Fasting, prayers, mourning, tears, tribulations, martyrdom were the only
rounds that led all the Saints to Heaven; no other dance but these sad tunes
will bring men to the place of endless joy. These other dances oft-times end
in sin, in hell, in horror, in Heaven never; therefore all Christians should
do well Iam. 3.9, 10. Amos 8.10.
to turn this dancing into mourning, this joy and carnal laughter into
spiritual heaviness, as S. James commands them, that so Psalm. 126.5.6.
sowing thus in tears, they may reap an harvest of eternal joy. Lastly,
Pagans themselves have abundantly condemned Saturnalium. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Macrobius, Epamino^das.
AEmilius Probus, Oration pro Muraena; pro C^ Plancio, and pro Rege De^orato.
Cicero, De Bello Catil. p. 22.23.
Salust, together with Genial. Dierum. l. 2. c. 25.
Alexander ab Alexandro: Antiqu Lect. l. 5. cap. 4.5.
Caelius Rhodiginus, De Vanit. Scient. cap. 18.
Agrippa, Locoru^ Communiu^ Classis. 2. c. 11. sect. 66.67, 68.
Peter Martyr, Hom. 51. in Mark, and Hom. 186. in Matthew.
Gualther, Treatise against Dancing page 67.
Northbrooke, and Anatomy of Abuses. p. 1^5.126.
Master Stubs inform us: that it was an infamous, a dishonorable thing for
men or women, among the ancient Pagan Romans, to have skill in dancing, or to
dance in any feast or public meeting. And yet many Christians now a-dayes
repute this their glory; that they are accurate expert Dancers, which these
ingenuous Pagans deemed their shame. Salust, a grave Roman Historian, lays
this as a brand of infamy on Sempronia, Sempronia docta fuit psallere, saltare
el^gantius quam necesse est probae; quae instrumenta luxuriae sunt. Ei cariora
semper omnia quam decus atque pudici^ia fuit: lubidine sicaccensa, ut saepius
peteret viros quam peteretur. Bellum Catil. page 22.23.
that she was taught to sing and dance more elegantly, then became an honest
woman: which singing and dancing (says he) are the instruments of luxury. And
what did these two two qualities (which we now so much admire) work in this
curious, wel-educated Roman Dame? the Historian tells us: All things were
always dearer to her then reputation and chastity: and she was so enflamed
with lust, that she would o^tner seek after men, then they after her.
Saturnalium. lib. 3. cap. 14. page 458.459.
Macrobius informs us: that not only Skill in dancing was reputed infaemous
and a badge of dishonesty among the Romans: but that notwithstanding it
Nobilium vero filios, and (quod dictu nefas est) filias quoque virgins, inter
studiosa numerasse saltandi^ meditationem, testis est Scipio Africanus. etc.
Ibidem.
the Sons of Noblemen, and (which is a shame to utter) their very Daughters
also being yet Virgins, did reckon dancing among their other serious studies.
Scipio Affricanus AEmilianus, is a witness of this, who in his Oration against
the judiciary law of Tiberius Graccus says thus: Doce^tur praestigias in
honestas: cum cinaedulis and sambuca psalterioque eunt in. laudem histrionu^:
discunt cantare: quae maiores nostri ingenuis probro ducier volueru^t. Eunt,
inquam, in ludum saltatoriu^ inter cinaedos, virgins puerique ingenui. Haec
cum mihi quisquam narrabat, non poteram animum inducere, ea li^beros suos
nobiles homines docere: sed cum ductus sum in ^udum saltatorium, plus medius
fidius in eo Iudo vidi pueris virginibusque quin gentis. In his unum (quo me
reipub. maxim misertum est) puerum bullatu^, petitoris filiu^, non minore^
annis duodecim, cum crotalis saltare: quam sastationem impudicus servulus
honest saltare non posset. Vides quemad modu^ ingemuit Africanus, quod
vidisset cum crot^lis saltantem petitoris filium, etc. Ibidem.
they are taught dishonest iuggling: they go with pretty impudent Dancers,
with a dulcimer and psaltery to the praise of Stage Players: they learn to
sing, which our Ancestors wished should be reputed a disgrace in Gentlemen.
There go, I say, into the Dancing-Schoole among Dancers, both Noble Girls and
Youths. When one related these things to me, I could not persuade my self,
that Noble persons would teach their Children these things: but when I was
brought into the Dancing-Schoole, I saw in good earnest in tha^ School above
five hundred Boys and Girls. Among those (wherein I most of all pitied the
Commonweal) I saw one garnished proud Boy, the Son of one that sued for a
great Office, no less then tweelve years old, dancing with rattles, which
kind^ of dance a lewd foolish serving-boy could not honestly dance. Thou see
(says he) how Africanus mourned, that he had seen the Son of one who sued
for an Office, which the hope and reason of obtaining a Magistracy (at which
time he ought to vindicate himself and his from all reproachful acts) could
not then restrain from doing that, which could not be reputed but dishone^t:
And before he complain^s that most of the Nobility did exercise this
dishonesty. Thus Scipio Africanus and Macrobius judge of dancing. Cicero, that
unparalleld Roman Orator; as he by way of scorn styles Gabinius, Catilines
Consul, a Saltator illic Catilinae Consul. Oration pro C^. Plancio.
Dancer: and withal accuses Verres for his intimate acquaintance with
Apronius a dissolute adulterous, lascivious Pot-companion; In convivio saltabas
nudus. In Verrem. lib. 3.
who danced naked at a drunken feast: which crime of dancing naked he objects
to Cu^ collegae tui domus, ca^tu and cymbalis personaret, cumque ipse nudus in
convivio saltaret in quo ne tu^ quide^ cu^ illu^ saltatoriu^ suu^ versaret
orbe^ fortunae rota^ pertimescebat. Oration in L. Pisonem.
L. Piso. So in his e^^gant Oration for Muraena, he censures Saltatore^ ap.
pellat. L. Mu, raenam Cato maledictu^ est si vere obijcitur, vehementis
accusatoris: sin falso, meledici conviciatoris. Quare cum ista sis auctoritate,
non debes. M. Cato, arripere maledictum ex trivijs aut ex scurrarum aliquo
convitio; neque temere consulem populi Romani saltatorem vocare: sed conspicere
quibus praeterea vitijs affectum esse necesse sit eum, cui vere illud obijci
potest. Nemo enim fere saltat sobrius, nisi forte insanit, etc. Ibidem. p. 459.
Cato, for stiling L. Muraena a Dancer: which if it be truly objected (says
he) it is a reproach of a most vehement accuser: if falsely, of an ill-tongued
rayler. For since thou art o^ so great auth^rity, thou ought not, O Marcus
Cato, to take up a slander out of the stre^t, or from the reproach of any
R^iler, neither yet rashly to call the Consul of the Roman Nation, a Dancer,
but to consider with what other vices he must necessarily be affected, to whom
this may truly be objected. For no man almost does dance sober, unless
peradventure he be mad, neither being alone, neither yet at a moderate and
honest banquet: extreme dancing is always the companion of a disorderly
feast, a pleasant place, and of many voluptuous delights. Thou alleagest this
against me, which must needs be the ex^reme or utmost of all vices; thou
omittest those things, which being removed, this vice can never be at all: no
dishonest banquet, no love, no revellings, no lust, no prodigal expense is
showed: and when these things are not to be found, which have the name of
voluptuousnes and which are vicious: in whom thou can not find luxury it
self; in him do thou think to find the shadow of luxury? And in his
Oration, Pro Deiorato Rege, he thus labors to excuse him from the infamy of
dancing. Quid denique? furcifer quo progreditur? ait, hac laetitia Deioraru^
elatum, vino se obruisse, in co^vivioque nudum saltavisse. Quae crux huic
fugi^tivo potest satis supplicij afferre? Deioratum saltantem quisquam aut
ebrium vidit un quam? omnes sunt in illo regiae virtutes, etc. vide Ibidem.
What finally? whether does this Gallowes-bird proceed? he says that Deioratus
was so transported with mirth, and overcome with wine, that he danced naked in
a feast. What Gallows is sufficient to punish this fugitive? Who ever saw
Deioratus dancing or drunken? all royal virtues are in him, etc. he therefore
who whiles he was yet a child, was so eminently glorious, that he never did
any thing but most severely and gravely, has he in this repute and age of his,
think you, danced? Thou ought rather to have imitated the mann^rs and
disciplin^ of thy Grandfather Castor, then to slander a good and famous man,
with the tongue of a fugitive. But if thou hadest had a Dancer to thy
Grandfather, and not that man from whom patterns of modesty and chastity might
be taken, yet this reproach would not at all be convenient against that age,
which from its youth has fensed it self with the study, not of dancing, but
of well-managing arms and Horses, which several passages, together with that
in the third Book of his Offices: At dares hanc vim M^ Crasso, ut digitorum
percussione, here is posset scriptus esse, qui revera non esset here is; in fo^o
(mihi creed) saltaret. At homo iustus, and quem sentimus virum bonum, nihil
cuiquam quod in se transferat, detrahet, etc. Ibid.
That a just or honest man, would not dance in public, though he might be
heir to M. Crassus, though perchance a dishonest man would do it:
sufficiently testify, that dancing was an infamous thing in men of place and
note, among the Romans: that it was a notorious reproach among them to be
styled, much more to be a Dancer, and that no sober men, but vicious, riotous
Whore-masters and Drunkards only used it, in their Cups and ebrious Feasts. It
is Seneca his lamentable complaint of his times, and we may justly take up the
same of ours, Torpent ecce ingenia desidiosae iuventutis, nec in ullius
honestae rei labor vigilatur. Somnus languorque ac somno a^ languore turpior,
malarum verum industria, invasit animos. Cantandi salta^dique nunc obscaena
studia effaeminatos tenent: and capillu^ frangere, etc. nostrorum adolescentium
specimen est. Emollit^ eneruesque quod nati sunt inuiti manent; expugnatores
alienae pudicitiae, negligentes suae. Controvers. lib. 1. Proaemio. page 967.
that the wits of slothful youth were grown lazy, neither were they
industrious in the study of any honest thing. Sleep, and sloth, and that
which was worse then either sleep or laziness, the diligent pursuit of evil
things, has invaded their minds. The obscene st^dies of singing^ and dancing
(pray mark his epithet) do possess the effeminate: and to frounce and curle
the hair, to become effeminate in speech and body, is the very pattern of our
youth. And now observe what followed here upon:) they are conquerers of others
chastity, negligent of their own. (Again, in his Natural Questions. lib. 7.
cap. 32. he complains; Stat per successores Pyladis and Batilli domus, harum
artium multi discipuli sunt multique doctores Privatim urbe tota sonat
pulpitum: In hoc viri, in hoc faeminae tripudiant. Mares inter se uxoresque
contendunt, uterdet latus illis. Deinde sub persona, cum diu trita frons est,
transitur at ganeam. Ibid. p. 453.
that the house of Pyladis and Batillus (two Dancing-masters and Stage Players)
had successors to continue it: that there were many Scholars and many Masters
of these arts: These Masters teach privately, (or there is a private
Dancing-Schoole) thorowout the City; where both men and women dance: Me^ and
their wives strive between themselves, which of them shall first turn the
side to the Dancing Master. Afterward, when as their modesty, and all their
shame is worn quite away, they pass disguised to a Brothel-house. Lo here
the end, the fruits of dancing, which this Heathen Philosopher much deplores.
To pass by Instrumenta luxuriae, ^ympana atque tripudia. Historiae. l. 30. page
254.
Justin; who styles music and dances, the instruments of Luxury: together
with Fastorum. l. ^ p. 51. l. 5. p. 89. De Remedio Amoris. lib 2. page 230.
Ovid, AEneid. l. 9. p. 312.313. and Copa. p. 509.
Virgil, Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 14. p. 260.
Tibullus, and f Horace; who censure dancing, as an effeminate practice of
drunken, lewd, adulterous men and women, in their luxurious ^easts and
meetings; and withal to omit the Story, of Zenoph. Co^vivium. p. 893. to 900.
Zenophons dancing Trull, who enamored Socrates and the other Spectators, with
her dancing and Player-like action: The Poet Cum tibia lumbos Incitat and cornu
pariter, vinoque feruntur Attonitae, crine^que rotant vlulante Priapo Maenades:
o quantus tunc illis mentibus ardor Concubitus? quae vox saltante libidin^,
etc. Nil ibi per ludum simulabitur, omnia fient Ad veru^; quibus incendi iam
frigidus aevo Laomedontiades, and Nestoris hernia possit. Satyr. 6 p. 53. vid
Ibid. Forsitan expectes ut Gaditana canoro Incipi^t prurire choro, plausuque
probatae Ad terra^ t^emulo descendant clune puellae. Spectant hoc nuptae iuxta
recumbante marito, Quod pudeat narra^se aliquem praesenti^us ipsis.
Irritamentu^ veneris languentis, and acres Divitis ur^icae, major tamen ista
vo^uptas Alterius sexus, magis ille extenditur, and mox Aurib^s atque oculis
concepta urina movetur, etc. Satyr. 11. p. 110. vid. Ibid.
Iuvenal makes dancing, the very badge of an adulteress, the fuel of lust,
the cause of adultery and much prodigal expense; reputing him an unhappy
Husband, who has a dancing Dame to his wife. And if this be true, how many
happy Husbands are there now, when there are so few un-dancing wives? Suetonij
Caligula^ sect. 45.
Su^tonius records this, among other of Caligula his vices, that he was a
Singer and a Dancer: that he was so transported with the pleasure of dancing
and singing, that he could not so much as refrain in public Enterludes, but
he must sing together with the Tragaedian that acted; and openly imitate the
gesture of the Stage Player, either as it were praising or correcting it. He
did likewise dance (says he) in the night sometimes: and upon a time, sending
for three grave men who had been Consuls, into his Palace, in the second watch
of the night, he placed them being in a very great fear, upon a Scaffold: and
then he leaped out suddenly with a great noise of Pipes and Fiddlers clad in a
woman's Gown, and a long coat, and having danced out a dance, he departed.
Histor. lib. 26. quoted by Athenaeus.
Polibius and Dipnosoph. lib. 10. cap. 12. p. 694.695.
Athenaeus, do both much condemn Antiochus surnamed the Illustrious, yet
styled, the mad, by them: for that in his riotous drunken Feasts, he would
sometimes play together with the Actors: and once being veiled quite over, he
was brought in upon the Stage by Players, and laid upon the ground, as if he
were one of them: Afterward opportunity calling him forth, he did caper, he did
dance and jest with the Players, so that all there present were ashamed: To
such miserable things as these, does that stupidity induce men, which is
engendered of drunkenness. The same Dipnos. l. 12. c. 13. p. 841.
Athenaeus, out of Theopompus, does cen^ure Strabo King of the Sydonians, who
exceeded all men in the study of pleasure and delights; for that he made
ass^mblies of Fiddlers, Dancing-women, Lutanists, and sent for many. Leamons,
Whores, or Mistresses out of Pelleponnesus, for many singing women out of
^onia, and for many amorous Girls out of all Greece, some of which he tendered
to those that danced, others of them he usually offered to his friends that sung
as a reward of their combat, etc. which verefies the former position, that
dancing is the occasion of much lewdenesse; and that Dancers for the most part
are adulterous, lecherous people, given up to sensuality, and all kind of
vice. Which is further verified in his Dipnos. l. 4. c. 6. l. 8. c. 12.13. l.
10. c. 9.12. l. 12. c. 6.10.13. l. Amicas saltatrices vobis exposui. Formos^s
primu^ nunc nobis dicere non est Flore^tes saltatrices, quae genua rec^du^t
Mercedi, ac rapiunt onera portantibus illam. Ibidem
13. c. 6.10.31. and l. 14. c. 3.5.11.12. where he shows, that all common
prostituted whores were expert Dancers; and all Dancers whores, adulterers, or
lascivious, deboist Quis tumultus hic? quid hae saltationes? quae petulantia in
Dionysiade^ irrupit tumultuosa scenae? ^bid. p. 984. vid. l. 4. c. 3.17, 33,
34. l. 5. c. 3.4. l. 6. c. 6. l. 10. c. 9.11, 12. l. 11. c. 1.3, 16. l. 12. c.
2.4, 10, 15, 18. l. 13. c. 17. l. 15. cap. 1.8.
Bacchanalian persons, and that so they were reputed among Pagans. Homer,
Odysseae. lib. 14 p. 418. and out of him Sto^aeus, Sermo. 18. fol. 126.
enumerate this among other effects of Wine and drunkenness, Vinum etiam
impellit sapientem valde cantare, and leniter ridere, and s^ltare impellit.
Ibid. Inest vino sacra pars convivij, and splendoris. Inest etiam pars
saltationis. Vinu^ tantae est potentiae, ut ad choreas vel senes ipsos trahet.
Panyasides, and Eriphus Apud Poet. Minores. pars vlt. p. ^78.264.
that they make a wise man to sing and dance. Which proves, that wise men
anciently never danced but when they were drunken, or frantique; which
Euripides his Tragedy styled Bacchae, and Strabo his Geograph. lib. 10. page
48. to 55. will most See likewise Plato. Legum. Dialog. 7. page 881.
plentifully evidence, to those who have leisure to peruse them. True it is
that L^gum Dialog. 6. p. 860.861, and Dialog. 7. p, 880.881, 882, 872, 873, 874.
Plato and Politic. l. 7. c. 17 sect 77. and l. 8. c. 5.6, 7.
Aristotle approve of dancing in the Festivities and Solemnities of their
Idol-Gods, in which they were most in use: which dances as they were very rare,
perchance Cum cantibus and ^hor^is annuos ludos Libe^o patri faciunt, etc.
Poli^ius Hist lib 4. page 340.
once or twice a year; so they were likewise ^lato Legum. Dial. l. 6. p. 860
and Dialog 7. p. 874.881, 882.
certain, appointed by their idolatrous Priests or by the Overseers of their
dances, which dances might not be altered but by public authority by the
Priests and Magist^ates special direction. Neither were they such dances as
Christians can approve. Huiusmodi igi^ur studij gratia etia^ lusus and choreas
adolescentu^ and puellarum constituere oportet, ut and nudi nudas spectent, and
spectenturab illis, cu^ ratione and aetate qu^da^ suos praetextus habente, usq
ad moderatum singulorum pudorem. Legum Dial. 6. p. 860.
For Plato even in these sacred dances dedicated to Idol-Gods, would have
Youths and Girls to dance together naked, that so they might the better
disce^^e one another bea^ty or deformity, and so mi^ht ^o^ be deceived in
their matches and marriages: Which custom of dancing naked, as it seems by In
Verrem. l. 3. Oration in L. Pisonem and Pro Rege Deiorato.
Tully, Dipnos. l. 14. c. 12.
Athenaeus, De Ebri. and Luxu. ^er.
Basil, In his B^cchae.
Euripedes, and others, was much in use in former times in drunken Feasts; in
which Athenaeus Dip^ l. ^2. c. 5.7, 13. Suctonij Tib^ri^^. sect. 42.43.
naked whores or women oft-times attended, the more to enrage the naked Dancers
and the Spectators lusts, to which they were prostitu^ed a^ their pleasure.
Such lascivious, beastly dances as these did these lewd Philosophers, and the Sea AEmilij Probi Epammond s. Polibius. Hist. l. 4. p. 340. Homeri Iliad. l. 18
p. 694 700. Eu^ipidi^ Bacchae. Dyonys. H^llic^r. Antiqu Romans l. 7. sect. 9.
S^rabo Geogr. l. 10. Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 14. c 12.
dru^ken Greeks allow, in the Festivals of their filthy Idols. But for all
other private dances ( such only excepted as were styled Pl^to. Legum. Dialog.
7. page 880.881, 882. Zenoph^n. De Expedit. Cyri Hist. lib. 6 page 370.^71.
Strabo Geogr. lib. 10. Athenaeus Dipnosoph lib. 14. c. 12. Plut^rchi
Symposiacum. 9 Quaest. 15. Alex. ab Alexandro l. 6, c. 19. Caelius Rhodig.
Ant^qu. Lect l. 5. c. 4. and l 18. c. 26. See Buleng^rus De Theatro. lib. 1.
cap. 52.
Pirricall, wherein men vaulted, and danced in their Armor to ^^ew their
activity and strength;) they were evermore infamous among Pagans, as the
precedent Authors and Doctor See his Overthrow of Stage Plays. passim.
Reinolds witness: therefore they should be much more abominable to all
chaste, all modest Christians.

Object. 1.
If any here object in defense of amorous mixed lascivious dancing, (I speak not
of grave single, chaste, and sober measures men with men) which is now so much
Exo. 15.20, 21.
that of Miriam and the Isralitish women after the drowning of the Egyptians,
and their miraculous deliverance from them: that of Judge. 11.39.
Iepthaes Daughters 1 Samuel 18.6, 7.
of the Isralitish women after the slaughter of Goliath and the Philistines: and
that 2 Samuel 6.16. 1 Chronicles. 15.29.
of David, who danced before the Arc with all his might. Secondly, that God
commandes us, Psalm. 149.3. Psalm. 150.4.
to praise him with cymbals and dances: That Solomon writes; Eccles. 3.4.
there is a time to dance; and that Psalm. 30.11. Ier. 31.4, 13. Lam. 5.15.
Matthew. 11.17.
other Scriptures seem to allow of dancing as lawful. Therefore it cannot be
unlawful.

Answer 1.
To these, I answer first; that these Scriptures and examples warrant that kind
of dancing only which is specified, and commended by them; not our
theatricall, our modern common dancing, which See P^ter Martyr, Gualther,
Northbrooke, Stubs, and Lovell, in their forequoted places, where these
Scriptures and objections are more fully answered.
differs from it in many material circumstances, well worth the observation.
For first, these dances which we read of in the Scripture, See Exodus 15.20, 21.
Judge. 11.34. c. 21.21, 23. 1 Samuel 18.6.7. 2 Samuel 6.16. Ier. 31.4. Judith 15.12,
13. Mat. 14.6, 7. Mar. 6.22.
were all single, consisting altogether of men, or of women only: (which kind
of single measures were anciently in use among Zenophon, De Expedit. Cyri. l.
6. p. 370.371. Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 14. c. 12.
the Persians and Greecians, and are yet retained among the Lerius De
Navigatione in Brasiliam. c. 9. Purchase Pilgr. l. 1. c. 1. l. 6. c. 15. l. 8.
c. 14. lib. 9. cap. 2.
Brasilians and others.) Whereas our modern dances are for the most part mixed,
both men and women dancing promiscuously together by selected couples.
Secondly, these dances were no artificial curious Galliards, ligs, or
Carontoes, learned with much pains and practice at a Dancing-Schoole, as ours
are: See Gualther. Hom. 51. in Marc. and Hom. 186. in Matthew. Peter Martyr,
Locoru^ Com. Classis. 2. c. 11. sect. 63. to 68. M. Northbrooke and Stubs, qua
supra. M. John Down^ams Christian Warfare. l. 3. c. 21. sect. 5. See Horace De
Art Poetica^ p. 303. Tibullus Eleg. lib. 2. Eleg. 1, and Virgil Georg, lib^ 2^
page 40.
but simple, plain, unartificiall sober motions. Thirdly, these dances were no
ordinary daily recreations, practiced at every feast or meeting, upon every
Lord's Day, Holi-day, or vacant time; and that upon no other occasion, but for
mirth or laughter sake, to pass away the time, or to satiate men's unruly
lusts, ( the Toll libidinem sustuleris and chorea^. Petrarcha. De Remedio^tr
Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 24.
only props of dancing;) as all our modern dances are. But they were See
Exodus 15.20, 21. Judge. 11 34. c. 21.19, 21, 23, 24. 1 Sam^ 18 6, 7. 2 Samuel
6.16. Judith 15.12, 13.
public extraordinary special dances, taken up by pious Christians to praise
the Lord withal, after some extraordinary great deliverances from, or
victories over their enemies, which scarce happened twice in diverse ages: Whereas
our dances are not such. Fourthly, these dances were not made in any private
House, or Hall; in any Alehouse, Tavern, or Bower near adjoining; much less
at any See Polydor. Virgil. De Iuvent. Reru^. l 5. c. 2. M Stubs Anatomy of
Abuses. p. 109. to 114. against these May-poles and Wakes which some begin to
preach for even in open Pulpit.
May Pole, Wake, or Church-ale; at any Playhouse, Wedding, or Dancing-Schoole,
as ours are: but in the open Exodus 15.20, 21. Judge. 11.34. 1 S^m. 18.6, 7.
Judith 15.12, 13
field, where the victorious General and his Army were to pass; whom they
went out to meet and welcome home with these their dances, Exodus 15.20, 21.
Judges 5. thorowout. 1 Samuel 18.6.7. 2 S^m. 2^. thorowout. Judith c. 15. and 16.
which sounded forth his praises in those Psalms and heavenly Songs, which the
Scripture has recorded. Fifthly, they danced not by couples or in measure as we
use to do, Exodus 15.20, 21. 1 Samuel 18.6, 7. Judith 15.12, 13. compared
together.
but in one entire train or round. Sixthly, they did not wantonly leap, caper,
fling or skip about like Does or Bedlams; nor Isay. 3.16.
mincingly trip it, as our lascivious amorous Dancers do: but they used a Exodus
15.20. 1 Samuel 18.6.7. Judith 15.1^, 13. etc. 1.
modest grave and sober motion, much like to It was like our Lincolnes Inn
singing of Mirth and Solace.
walking or the grave old measures; having timbrels and cymbals in their hands,
and Exodus ^5.20, 21. Judge. 5. 1 Samuel 22. Judith 16. compared with Ephesians
5.19^20. Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. Ier. 31.4, 13.
Psalms (not scurrilous amorous Pastorals) in their mouths, wherewith they
did unfainedly bless and praise the Lord for their obtained victories and
deliverances, and 1 Samuel 18.6, 7.
sound forth the Victors praises. Seventhly, These dances were free from all
lascivious dalliances, from all amorous gestures, gropings, kisses,
complements, love-trickes, and wanton embracements; which abound in all our
modern Dances. Lastly, See a before: and Psalm 149.3. Ps. 150.4. Ps. 30.11.
These dances were like the singing of Te Deum Laudamus, after victories, of
which we have sundry presidents in our English Chronicles.
these dances were wholly devoted to Gods praise and glory; See Theodoret. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 22. and Cent. 4 Col. 412.
they were a holy religious service done to God, proceeding from the
thankfulness of such hearts, as were ravished with Gods more special
m^^cies: Our modern wanton dances have no such pious ends and circumstances,
they proceed not from such hearts, such occasions, such extraordinary favors
of God as these: they differ from them in all th^se several circumstances:
therefore these dances, these examples do no ways justify, but condemn all
ours, which have no affinity nor cognation with them.

Answer 2.
To the second Obje^tion; that Solomon says, Eccles. 3.4.
there I answer first, that by dancing in this, and the other See Psalm. 30.11.
Psalm. 149.3. Psalm. 150.4. Ier. 31.4, 13. Lam. 5.15 Mat. 11 17. Luke 7.31. See
Ambrose, Augustine, Hierom. Beda, Calvin, Lyra, Marl^rat, Gua^ther, Ra^anus
Maurus, Osiand^r, Tostatus, and other Commentators on these texts accordingly.
objected Sc^iptures, is not meant any corporal dancing, or artificial moving
of the feet in measure: but either an inward cheerfulness of heart, and
readiness of spirit in Gods service: or else a spiritual exultation of the
soul in the apprehension of some special favor of God unto it, expressed in
an abundant praising of God in psalms, in hymns and spiritual songs. This
and no other is the dancing intended by Solomon, and commanded in the
Scripture, as In Eccles^. 3.
Olympi^dorus, Hom. 3^. and 49. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, De Paenitentia. l 2. c. 6. Ep. l. 4. Epist. 30. Comment^ l. 6. in
Luc. 7. Tom. 3^ page 47.
Ambrose, In Psalm. 149. and 150.
Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra, In Ps. 30. v. 11.
Calvin, and Peter Martyr^ Gualther, Northbrooke, Stubs, Lovel, Downham, and
others, qua supra
sundry others teach us. Secondly, admit this text be meant of corporal
dancing, yet it intends no other but religious holy dances, in which either men
or women Ephesians. 5.19, ^0 Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. Psalm. 30.11. Psalm. 149.3. Psalm.
150.4. compared with this text of Solomon.
praise the Lord, with Hymns and godly Psalms, singing with a grace in their
hearts to him, who has given them so great an occasion of much holy joy: it
allows no other dances but such, in which the heart is more active then the
feet; in which Gods glory (not carnal iollity) is the utmost end. It gives no
tolleration therefore for our common dances, which have neither holiness for
their quallity, nor piety for their end. Lastly, Solomon says only, that
there is a time to dance: and this time, I am sure, is neither See p. 231.240^
to 244.
Lords-dayes, nor any other solemn ^estivals devoted to Gods service, as the
fore-quoted Councels, Fathers, and modern Authors testify: these are not
times of dancing, but of See p. 241.242, 243.
praying, hearing, reading, meditating, and such like holy duties. All dancing
therefore on such times as these (which are now made the chiefest dancing
seasons) are out of Salomons dispensation. Again, the time of working, of
following our vocations, of performing private family duties of religion; the
times of sleep and rest (I mean the night, See Sen^ca, Epist. 122. and
^thenaeus Dip^. l. 12. cap 6. l. 8. c. 1^. and lib. 15. cap. 1.
which is more often spent in dancing then in praying, or any pious duty) is
none of Salomons times for dancing: it being altogether untimely at these
seasons; Therefore those who spend their working, praying, reading, studying
time ( Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5. See Act. 6. Scene 1.
which God commandes them to r^deeme) in dancing, (which too many make their
work, their life, their trade) dance out of Salomons time and measure; who
gives no allowance to their untimely Rounds. Again, dancing after a man is
tired out with honest labor, is altogether unseasonable: Eccles 5.12.
sle^pe and quiet rest, are a wearied man's best, his fittest recreations: They
that work hard all day, had more need to rest, then dance, all night. And yet
how many are there, who after an hard iourny or a toylsome days work, will
take more pains at night in dancing, then they did in laboring all the day
time? and because they are quite tired out with working, they will yet tire
themselves once again in dancing; and so disable themselves the more for the
works and duties of the ensuing day; whereas every See M. Wheatlies Sermon of
Times redemption, with all those who write of Recreation.
recreation should help, not hinder men in their callings. Hard workers
therefore have little time, at least but little need or reason to turn
Dancers. For others, who can find either little, or no time at all to work,
(which is the epidemicall deplorable gentile fashion Much like to that of
Sodom. Ezech. 16.49. or that in the 1 Cor. 10.7. Isay 5.11, 12. and Amos 6.1.
to 7. See John^ Sar^sburie, De Nugis Curial. lib. 1. cap. 1.4, 5.
of our lazy age,) I am sure Solomon has bounded them out no time to dance:
Eccles. 3. has set down 24. several times at least, for several works, and
but one (if that) for dancing. Those therefore who exempt themselves from these
times of working, can make no title to this dancing season. He that will not
labor, See 2 These. 3.8, 10, 11, 12. See all our English Statutes of Laborers,
and against Rogues and Vagabonds: accordingly.
it is unfit he should play. He that has no working time, it is equal he should
have no dancing time. And yet how many are there now a-dayes who will needs
entitle themselves to this time to dance, though they professedly disclaim all
times to mourn or work? How many are there that work till they freeze, and
yet dance till they sweat? that cannot work or pray one hour in a day for
sloth, and yet can dance nimbly day and night all the week long? that See
Ludovicus Vives, De Erudit. Mulieris Christianae. l. 1 c. 13.14. Master
Northbrooks Treatise against Dancing f 64. b. and Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in Matthew.
Tom. 2. Col. 59. A. accordingly.
cannot walk twenty yards to Church on foot without the help of a Coach; and
yet will dance 40. Galliards or Carantoes five hundred paces long? These
indefatigable dancers, who would rather die then work; and not live then live
well: need only a time to work (which I wish they may find:) not a time to
dance, (which they will be sure to gain) since they dance and play away all
their time: Wherefore since neither Laborers nor Loyterers have any need of
dancing, they have certainly no title, to Salomons time of dancing: and so both
their dancing and arguments are out of season. Since therefore it is infallibly
evident by all these premises, that our theatricall amorous mixed lascivious
dancing, is sinful and unchristian at the least, if So Hi^rom. Eusebius,
Damascene, Fulgentius, Theophy^act, Vives, Calvin, Gualther, Marlorat,
Musculu^, Erasmus, Agrippa, Brant, Northbrooke, Stubs, and others style it,
together with the Waldenses, in their fore-quoted places.
not Heathenish and Diabolical; The Major of my precedent Syllogism must be
granted: which I shall here close up with that notable passage of Alexander
Fabritius, an ancient English though somewhat Popish Author, who writes thus of
Dancing. Chorearum processionibus ingressus ab ingressu caelestis processionis
impediat, and nimiru^ nam, in diebus festis choreas ducentes faciunt contra
omnia sacramenta Ecclesiae. Primo contra Baptismum, in hoc quia frangunt pactum
quod inierunt cum Deo in baptismo, ubi promiserunt se abrenunciare Satanae and
omnibus pompis cius: sed pomposam processione^ Diaboli intrant cum choreas
ducunt. Nam processio Diaboli dicitur chorea, ut dicit, Gu^ielmus Par^siensis.
Alexand. Fabritius. Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 3 c. 10. D. See Hol^ot, Lect.
173. in lib. Sapientiae. cap. 15. fol. 133. accordingly.
The entering into the processions of dances, hinders men from ingresse into the
heavenly procession, and those who dance (especially upon Holy Days) offend
against all the Sacraments of the Church. First, against Baptism, in this,
that they break the Covenant which they have entered into with God in baptism,
where they have promised, that they would renounce the Devil and all his
Pompes; but they enter into the pompous procession of the Devil when they
dance. For See here page 229.230, 232. and Chrysostom. Hom. 15.17, 18 and 23.
ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 2. de Verbis Isaiae. and Hom. in S. Iulianum. Tom. 1.
Edit. Parisijs 1621. per Fronto Ducaeum. p. 613. a.b. Augustine, Epist. 202.
accordingly.
a dance as Gulielmus Parisiensis says, is the Devils procession. Secondly,
dances offend against the Sacrament of Order; For Clergy men who have received
holy Orders, take those orders that they may conveniently celebrate divine
services in the Church of God: but these vanities make divine Service to be
contemned and neglected; for those who ought to be present at Mattens and
Vespers, are oft-times present at these dances. Thirdly, they offend against
the Sacrament of Matrimony; for oft-times in d^nces, by signs of wantonness,
vain songs, and unlawful confabulations, the faith of Matrimony is violated
either in consent or work. Fourthly, they sin against the Sacrament of
Confirmation: for in the Sacrament of confirmation the sign of the Cross is
imprinted on their foreheads, as being bought with the passion of Christ: but
in such dances the sign of the Cross being cast away, they place the sign of
the Devil on their heads. Fifthly, they do against the Sacrament of Penance:
For in the Sacrament of repentance by which they were reconciled unto God, they
promised that they would never hereafter offend in the like kind: but in such
vanities they plainly do the contrary. Sixthly, they offend against the
Sacrament of the Altar, For on Easter Day they receive the Sacrament of the
Altar, And do not our Bacchanalian Christmas-keepers, who spend that sacred
time in revel-rout do the like?
but immediately after they are like to Judas the Traitor: who when he had
eaten at the Lords Table, out of his own Dish, he went out presently after,
and took a band of Soldiers from the Highpriests and Pharisees, and came
against Jesus, as appears John the 18. So these transgressing in the foresaid
manner, come directly against Jesus: for when they are in a dance the
procession of the Devil, they are not with Jesus, as himself says, Luke 11.
he that is not with me is against me. As Kings in Antumne and Summer are wont
to go forth to the Wars, that they may take that from their enemies which
they have gained by their labor in Winter: so the Devil the enemy of mankind
after Easter; yea, on Easter Day it self (we may more truly affirm it on our
Christmas and Whitson Holy Days) gathers together an army of Dancers, that he
may take from the Sons and Servants of Christ who are his enemies, their
spiritual fruits, which they have gathered together in the Lent-time.
Seventhly, they offend against the Sacrament of extreme Unction by which those
who are sick receive spiritual health: but these wretches in their plays and
dances do often lose the heal^h both of their bodies and their souls. After
this, he compares all women-dancers, (especially such as are gorgeously attired
and set out with costly array, with painted faces, with false hair, shaven off
from some dead woman's scull; with bead-tires of Gold, of silver, Pearls, and
precious Stones, contrary to the Apostles precept, ^er hoc enim quod dicit
super capita eoru^ tanquam coronae similes auro, intelligitur vanus ornatus
auri and argenti and preciosorum lapidu^ quibus u^untur saltatrices in
capitibus suis sunt tanquam coronae quas Diabolus posuit supra capita illarum
pro multiplici triumpho quem habuit ipse Diabolus per eas de filijs Dei. Vnde
sicut strenui milites in torneamentis solent in capitibus equorum suorum in
signum victoriae coronas de floribus ponere: sic Diabolus equitans super tales^
mulieres in signum victoriae quod per eas habet contra filios Dei supra capita
illarum tales vanitatis coronas imponit. Ibidem. See Pauli Wan. Sermo 10. de
Custodia Tactus^ accordingly.
which the Devil who rides upon such women has set upon their heads, as so
many crowns of vani^y for those many triumphs over the Sons of God which he
has gained by them,) to those locusts and that smoke which ascended out of the
bottomless pit, Apocalipse the 9. Advising all men out of Ecclesiasticus the
9. not to keep company with a woman that is a Dancer, not yet to hearken to
her voice, lest they chance to perish by her snares: and wishing all Christians
to renounce all dancing, as being thus opposite to all the Sacraments. Thus
much concerning dancing, in probat of my Major, in which I have the more
enlarged my discourse, both in respect of the near affinity that is between
Plays and Dancing; and in regard of the universality of this lewd infamous
exercise, which overspreds our own and other Nations, whose commonnesse has
purchased it: such credit such applause in this effeminate, unchaste lascivious
dissolute age wherein we live; that most repute it a necessary ornament, an
essential commendable quality or virtue, to make up a Gentleman, a
Gentlewoman, who are deemed incompleate, at leastwise rude without it: when as
all the fore-quoted Councels, Fathers, Pagans, and modern Christian Authors,
with See Samuel Byrd, his Treatise of the Pleasures of this present life.
London 1580. c. 4. f. 34.35. Pauli Wan. Sermo. 5. and 7. De Custodia quique
sensuum. A French Treatise against Dancing, Dedicated by the French Ministers
of the Reformed Churches to the King of Navar. Richa^d Price, his destruction
of small vices. London 1581. Gulielmus Parisiensis De Vitijs and Virtutibus.
infinite others, have thus branded, censured it (especially in the female sex
who are now most devoted to it) as Vbi saltatio, ibi Diabolus: in sal^ationibus
exultant Daemones and laetantur Ministri Daemonum. Chrysostom. Hom 49. and 74 in
Math. and Holkot in lib. Sapientiae. Lectio 172.
a Diabolical, infernal, effeminate, unchristian, wicked, unchaste, immodest
heathenish pastime, contrary to all Gods Commandments and Sacraments: and as
the very pomps of Satan which we renounce in Baptism: which me thinks
should now at last rectify our depraved judgments in this point of Dancing,
and reform our lives.

For the Minor, that Stage Plays are commonly attended with mixed effeminate
amorous dancing; it is most apparent; not only by our own modern experience,
but likewise by the copious testimony of sundry Pagan and Christian Writers of
all sorts: as namely, of Spectacula ac ludos in theatris, cum cantibus and
^horeis, singulis quibusque annis civibus praebent. Ibid.
Polibius. Historiae. lib. 4. page 340. Etenim saltatio adscira ad sodalitatem
vulgari quada^ Poetica, societate caelestis illius poeseos amissa, in stultis
and attonitis theatris obtinet tanqua^ tyrannus subiugata sibi quada^ exili
musica: omnem au^em apud prudentes and divinos viros perdidit revera honorem.
Ibid.
Of Livy. Romans Hist. lib. 7. sect. 3. Of Dionysius Hallicarnasseus. Antiqu.
Lect. l. 7. sect. 9. Of Plutarch. Symposiacon. lib 9. Quaest. 15. page 315.316,
317. Of Athenaeus Dipnosophorum. lib. 8. c. 12. p. 695. lib. 14. c. 3^ p.
980.981. c. 7. p. 990. Nam embat^ria cum tibijs ordineque exerce^tes,
saltationibusque students, cu^ publica and cura and sumptu singulis annis in
theatris conspiciuntur, etc. Ibid.
c. 11. p. 999. etc. 12. page Sunt aute^ tres saltationes poesis scenicae,
Tragica, Comica, Satyrica, etc. Ibid.
1005. Of Macrobius Saturnalium. lib. 2. c. 7. Of Horace Saltaret ut Cyclopa
rogatet, etc. Ibid.
Sermonum. l. 1. Satyr. 5. p. 180. and De Art Poetica lib. p. 303.306. Of
Euripides, in his Bacchae Of Ovid, De At tanti tibi sit non indulgere Theatris.
Illic assidue ficti saltantur amores, etc. Ibidem.
Remedio Amoris. l. 2. p. 230. Of Plato. Legum. Dial. 7. Aristotle Poetic. l.
1. c. 1. Suetonij Caligula. c. 54.55. Claudian in Eutropium. lib. 2. Clemens
Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 2. cap 4. fol. Ne fractis quidem and enervatis
his saltatoribus, qui Cynaedica^ turpitudinem mutam in scenam transferu^t. Ibid.
50. and lib. 3. c. 11. Tertullian and Commovetur civitas to^a ut desaltentur
fabulosae antiquitatum lubidines. Ibidem.
Cyprian De Spectac. lib. Arnobius Advers. Gentes. l. 2. p. 75. and l. 4. Amans
saltatur Venus, and per affectus omnes meretriciae vilitatis impudica
exprimitur imitatione bacchari. Saltatur and magna sacris compta cum infulis
matter, etc. Ibid.
p. 149.150. and l. 7. page 230. to 240. Lactantius Histrionici etiam impudici
gestus, libidines quas saltando exprimunt docent. Ibid.
Divinorum Instit. Epit. c. 6. Ambrose, De Paenitentia. lib. 2. cap. 6. Basil
Hexam. Hom. 4. page 45. Nazienzen ad Selucum De Recta Educatione. p. 1063.1064.
Chrysostom. Hom. 6.7. and 38. in Matthew. Quid sunt ad hoc malu^ Mercurij furta,
veneris lascivia, stupra, and turpitudines caeterorum, quae proferremus de
libris, nisi quotidie cantarentur and saltarentur in theatris. Ibid
Augustine, De Civit. Dei. lib. 7. c. 26. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 1. Epist.
20. Salvian De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. Isiodor. Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 48.50.
The 6. Council of Constantinople. Canon 51. (which Omnino prohibet haec sancta
and universalis Synodus eos qui dicunt^r mimos, and little spectac^la, easque
quae in scena fiunt saltationes, etc. Surius. Council. Tom. 2. page 1048.
inhibits all Players, Plays, and Dancing on the Stage, under pain of
excommunication:) and Eusebius apud Damascenum. Parallelorum. lib. 3. c. 47.
where thus he writes. Quid autem cernit qui ad theatra currit? Diabolicos
cantus; mulierculas saltitantes, vel ut rectius loquar, Daemonis intemperijs
agitatas. Quid enim saltatrix facit? Caput quod Paulus perpetuo tegi vult
impudenter aperit; collum invertit; comam huc atque illuc expandit. Haec porro
etiam ab ea fiunt quam Demon obsessam tenet. Tale nimiru^ Herodis quoque
convivlum erat. Herodiadis filia ingressa tripudiavit, ac Ioannis Baptistae
caput amputavit, and subterranea inferni loca haereditatis loco consecuta est.
Quocirca qui choreas and saltationes amant, cum ea portionem habent. Ibidem.
But what does he behold who runs to Theaters? Diabolical Songs; dancing
Girls; or that I may speak more truly, Girls stirred hither and thither
with the furies of the Devil. For what does a Danceresse do? She impudently
uncovers her head, which Paul has commanded to be continually veiled: she
inverts her neck; she tosseth about her hair this way and that way; Even
these things are likewise done by her who is possessed by the Devil. Such
likewise was the feast of Herod: the Daughter of Herodias entering in, danced,
and cut of the head of John the Baptist; and so she obtained the subterraneous
places of Hell instead of an inheritance. Wherefore, those who love rounds and
dances, See Augustine. De Tempore. Sermo. 215. Epist. 202. and De Genesi. ad
Litteram. l. 12. c. 22. against Dancers.
have certainly a portion with her in Hell. A terrible sentence sufficient to
startle all our dancing Dames, and frisquing effeminate Gallants; who make
dancing their only excellency, and supreme delight. To these I could
accumulate, Polydor Virgil. De Inventoribus rerum. l. 3. c. 13. Alexander
Sardis, De Inventoribus rerum. l. 1. p. 42. Caelius Rhodiginus. Antiqu. Lect.
l. 5. c. 4.5. M. Gualther, Hom. 52. in Marc. Alexander ab Alexandro. Genesis
Dierum. l. 6. c. 19. Agrippa De Vanit. Scient. c. 20. M. Gosson, his Plays
Confuted. Action 2. D. Reinolds his Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 12. to 19.
and 130. to 139. Godwin, his Roman Antiquities. l. 2. sect. 3. c. 11^
Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 52. with Oration Edgari Regis. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 13. p. 153.154. Haec mimi cantant and saltant, etc.
sundry other Authors which B^lenger there recites. All which expressly inform
us; See M. Northbrooke, and Mr. Stubs qua supra. Lucian, De Saltatione^
accordingly.
that dancing was always heretofore, and yet continues an unseperable
concomitant, if not a necessary part of Stage Plays. The premises therefore
being thus confirmed, my conclusion from them against Stage Plays must be
granted

SCENA NONA.
THe second unlawful Concomitant of Stage Plays, is amorous, obscene,
lascivious lust-provoking Songs and Poems, which were once so odious in our
Church; that in the Articles to be inquired of in Visitations, set forth in the
first year of Queen ELIZABETH'S Reign, Article 54. Churchwardens were
enjoined to inquire; whether any Minstrels, or any other persons did use to
sing or say any Songs or Ditties that be vile and unclean; which suggests this
24. Play-oppugning Argument to me. Argument 24.


Those Plays which are usually accompaned with amorous Pastoralls, lascivious
ribaldrous Songs and Ditties, Aiunt Philosophi, nihil potentius esse ad
ene^vandum animum qu^m lenocinium melodiae. In huius rei^verum
argumentumaccipe, quod difficile invenitur aliquis levis vocis and gravis vitae
vidi infinitos tam vi^os qua^ faeminas tanto pejoris vitae qu^nto m^lioris
vocis. Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 18. c. 5. sect. 10.
must needs be unlawful, yea abominable unto Christians.

But Stage Plays are usually accompanied with such Pastorals, Songs, and
Ditties as these.

Therefore they must needs be unlawful, yea abominable unto Christians.

The Minor is most aparant. First, by our own modern experience, there being
nothing more frequent, in all our Stage Plays (as all our Play-haunters can
abundantly testify;) then amorous Pastorals, or obscene lascivious Love-songs,
most melodiously cha^ted out upon the Stage between each several Action; both
to supply that Chasme or vacant Interim which the Tyring-house takes up, in
changing the Actors robes, to fit them for some other part in the ensuing
Scene: (a thing in use in Ancient times, as Nunc tibicinibus, nunc est gauvisa
Tragaedis. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. p. 280. Actoris parts chorus officiu^que
virile Defendat: neu quid medios intercinatactus, Quod non proposito conducat
and haereat apt. De Art Poet. page 302.
Horace, Historiae. Romans l 7. sect. 3.
Livy, and Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiq. Romans l. 7. sect. 9. Caelius Rhod.
Antiq. Lect. l. 8 c. 8. Polydor Virgil, De Inventor. rerum. l. 3. cap. 13.
Alexander Sardis, De Rerum Inventor. l. 1. p. 43.44. Bulengerus, De Theatro. l.
1. ^. 52. and l 2. c. 1.9. etc. Godwins Roman Antiqu. l. 2. sect. 3. c. 11.
sundry others have recorded;) as likewise to please the itching ears, if not
to inflame the outrageous lusts of lewd Spectators, who are oft-times ravished
with these ribaldrous pleasing Ditties, and transported by them into a Turci
ventris venereasque voluptates in paradiso somniant. Vxores aiunt fore
selectissimas, etc. Philip. Lonicerus. Tur. Hist. l 2. c. 22. Bellonius
Observationum. l. 3. c. 8. Purchase Pilgr. Book 3. chap. 4. and 5.
Mohammedan Paradise, or ecstasy of uncleanesse. Secondly, as experience, so
sundry ancient and modern Authors fully suffragate to my Minors truth.
Spectaculis corrupti cantus nimiam in animis ingenerant libidinem^ Meretricij
enim cantus, auditorum animis insidentes, nil aliud efficient, quam ut
turpitudinem omnibus persuadeant. Hexameron. Hom. 4. p. 45.
In Stage Plays (writes S. Basil) corrupt Songs ingenerate too much lust in
the minds of men. These Whorish Songs residing in the minds of the hearers,
do naught else but persuade filthiness to all that hear them. Illos Poeta
contumeliosos non laudamus, qui in canticis obscaenis faelicitatem ponu^t. D^
Legendis libris Gentilium. Oration.
Wherefore we commend not those contumelious Poets who place felicity in
obscene S^ngs. In Stage Plays (writes Ibi verba fracta lascivaque: ibi
cantiones meritriciae: ibi voces vehementer ad voluptatem incitantes, etc.
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 510. D. See Hom. 38. in
Matthew. accordingly.
Chrysostom^,) are broken effeminate lascivious words, meretricious songs, and
voices provoking vehemently to voluptuousness; and polluting men's ears far
more then any dirt or filth. What (write Quid autem cernit qui ad Theatra
^urrit? Diabolicos cantus; lascivas quasdam ac prorsus corruptas cantilenas,
quaeque multam libidinem in animis pariant, etc. Eusebius apud Damasc^num
Parallelorum. lib. 3. cap. 47.
Eusebius and Damascen) does he perceive who runs to Theaters? Diabolical
Songs; certain lascivious and altogether corrupt Ditties, which ingenerate
much lust in the minds of the ^earers, etc. To these I might add S.
Augustine. De Civit. Dei. l. 6. c. 6.7 and 26. and l. 12. c. 25. Lactan^ius, De
Vero Cultu, c. 21. Nazienzen ad Selucum, De recta Educatione. p. 1063. And
Oration 28. p. 471^ where he writes thus of his Father. Nec aurem and lingua^^
res divinas partim accipiente^ partim pronunciante^ ethnicis narrationibus
theatricisque cantilenis conspurcari siverit; nihil enim prophani sacrosanctis
hominibus convenire putabat. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. l. 6. Ioannis
Salisburiensis; De Nugis Cu^ialium. l. 1. c. 8. Concilium Parisiense. l. 1. c.
38. together with Athenaeus Dipnosophorum. l. 13. c. 27 The 3. Blast of Retrait
from Plays and Theaters. page 100. Caesar Buleng^rus, De Theatro. l. 2. c. 9.
De Cantu in Scena; where there are sundry Authors quoted to this purpose, which
you may peruse at leisure. Iuvenal. Satyr 6. p. 53. to 57. and Satyr. 11. p.
109.110. Petronius. Satyricon. p. 23.24. Mariana and Brissonius, in their
Books, De Spectaculis. M. Northbrooke, D. Reinolds, M. Gosson, and M. Stubs,
in their fore-quoted Treatises against Stage Plays: and others already
mentioned in See here page 63. to 71.
Act 3. Scene 1. Who all unanimously testify; That Stage Plays are always
fraught with adulterous, obscene, lascivious Songs, and wanton Pastorals, which
add strength and fuel to men's lusts. My Minor therefore must be granted.

The Major is unquestionable; because all ribaldrous, amorous Songs: (which now
are too to rise, not only in Stage Plays, but ever at private Christians
Feasts, and other Taverne-meetings, from which Theodosius ministeria la^civa
psaltriasque commesiationibus adhibere lege prohibuit. E^tropius. Romans Hist. l.
13. p. 173. Aurelius Victor and Grimston in Theodosio. Codex Theodoij. Tit. De
Scen^cis l. 10. and Buleng^rus De Theatro l. 2. c. 9.
Theodosius, Nullo citharae co^vivia cantu, Non puerilas^^va sonant. Claudian
De Laudibus Stiliconis. lib. 2. p. 185.
Stilico, and others excluded all Songs and singing-women; ( the very ornaments
and delights of lascivious banquets, as Cantus saltatatioque haec enim sunt
ornamenta convivij. Odysseae^ l. 1. page 8.
Homer, Halyattes rex terrae Lydiae more atque luxu barbarico praeditus
cumbellu^ Milesijs faceret, concinentes fistulatores and tibicines atque
faeminas etiam tibicinas in exercitu atque in procinctu habuit, lascivientium
delicias conviviorum. Noctium Attic. l. 1. c. 11. p. 26. and Herodoti Clio.
sect. 3.
Gellius, and Omne convivium obscaenis canticis strepit, pudenda dicta
spectantur. Lib. 1. c. 3. See Bulengerus, De Theatro l. 2. c. 9. p. 350 351.
accordingly.
Quintilian style them:) are abundantly condemned as abominable, sinful
pastimes misbeseeming godly Christians. First, by the express verdict of the
Scripture; which as it Iam. 5.13 Ephesians. 5.4, 19^ 20. Col. 3.16, 17. Heb. 13.15.
Isay 38.20 c. 49.13. Ps. 21.13. Ps. 33.^, 3. Ps. 66.2, 4. Ps. 68^4. Ps. 96.1.
Ps. 95.1. Exodus 15.1, 21. 1 Chronicles. 16.9.
inioynes all Christians in their Feasts, their mirth, and private meetings, to
sing Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, of prayer, of praise to God
with a grace and melody in their hearts: a practice, which all the Primitive
^hristians (as the marginall Philo Iudaeus, De Vita Contempl. lib. p 1211. to
1217^ Clemens Alexandrinus Paed^g. l. 2. c. 4. Tertulliani, Apollogia. c. 39.
Dionysius Areopagita Ecclesiast. Heirarch. lib. c. 3. Nazienzen, Oration 37.38,
39, 40. Gregory Nissen, De Vita beati Gregorij Oration. Chrysostom. Hom in
Psalm. 41. Tom. 1. Col. 735. Theodoret, De Evangel. Veritatis Cognitione. l. 8.
and De Martyribus. l. p. 390. F. Tom. 2. Pliny Epist. l. 10. Ep. 97.
Authors witness) observed in their Love Feasts, in all their private and
public meetings: and I would, those modern Christians, who banish these
things from their Feasts and Merriments, as altogether unseasonable,
exhilerating themselves Quis rogo hic error est, quae stultitia? Nunquid
laetari assidue and ridere non possumus, nisi risum nostrum atque laetitiam
scelus esse faciamus, etc? Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. page 192.
with naught but scurrilous beastly Songs, lascivious music, wanton dancing,
and such unchristian mirth; would now again reviue it. So it expressly
prohibits Ephesians. 4.29, 31, cap. 5.4. 1 Cor. 15.33. See Act. 3. Scene 1. page
63. to 66^
all filthy, corrupt, unedifying communication: Ephesians. 5.3.
all fornication and uncleanesse which are not so much as once to be named
among Christians: together with Ephesians. 5.4.
all foolish talking and jesting; all ribaldry and scurrility, either in songs
or jests (which Omnibus enim suffragijs haec lex vincit, ut and in cantilenis
bonis verbis utamur, and ut cantilenae genus undiquaque ex gratiosis verbis
constet. Plato Legum, Dialog. 7. page 874.
Plato, and the Athenians, though Pagans, did prohibit by an unanimous law,)
as odious unto God, pernicious to the manners, minds, and souls of men, and
misbeseeming Christians, Col. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29.
whose words should be always gracious, seasoned with salt, that so they might
administer grace, not poison or corruption, to the heaerers. Ribaldrous amorous
Songs, are so unsuitable for the mouths, the ears of Christians; that Qui
Satanicas cantilenas concinunt, spiritu immundo imbuuntur. Enar. in Eph^s. 5.
page 510. D.
Theophylact plainly tells us, that those who sing such Songs, are po^sessed
with an unclean spirit: and S. Qui enim iocis and seculi cantionibus
delectatur, in tentorio Diaboli est. De Nuptijs filij Regis. Col. 1725. A.
Bernard, that he who is delighted with obscene Jests, and secular Ditties, (as
alas too many are) is in the very pavilion or possession of the Devil. No
wonder therefore if the Scripture condemns such songs as these, as unbefitting
Christians. Secondly, as the Scripture, so sundry ancient and modern Councels
expressly censure, Mors intrat per aures audiendo libenter cantus and
instrumenta musica ad lascivia^ provoca^tia: per ist^ ^nim valde emollitur
animus, and praecipue per cantus mulieru^. Cum enim blanda vox quaeritur sobria
vita deseritur^ Cantus dissolutus me^tem virise^ vulnerat and emollit^ Et ex
hoc co^muniter cantatrices and cantores sunt instabiles and maloru^ moru^, etc.
Ecce hominem vocis blandissimae and vitae pessimae. Pauli Wan^ Sermo 7. de
Custodia Auditus.
such Poems, Songs, and Ditties; as abominable and polluted in themselves,
defiling the mouths, the ears, of those who chaunt, or hear them chaunted:
as allectives unto lewdness, incentives unto lust, Ephe^. 4.29, 30. See
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hierom, Theodoret, Sedulius, Primasius, Remigius,
Anselme, Beda, O^cumenius, Haymo, Theophylact, Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat,
Lyra, and Go^rhan, Ibid. accordingly.
which grieve the holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed up to the day of
redemption, and wholly effeminate the minds of men. Witness Concilium
Arelatense. 3. apud Surium. Council. Tom. 1. page 727. Council. Agathense, Can.
39. Veneticum, Can. 11. Toletanum. 3. Can. 23. Altisiodorense. Can. 9. and 40.
Cabilonense. 1. Can. 19. Senonense. Cap. 25. Surius. Tom. 4. p. 742.743.
Cabilonense. 2. Can. 9. Moguntinum sub Carolo Magno. cap. 10. and 14. Rhemense.
cap. 17. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 38. Moguntinum sub Raebano. Archiepiscopo.
cap. 13. Turonense. 3. cap. 7.8. Coloniense 1536. pars 2. cap. 25. and pars 9.
c. 10 Apud Bochellum. Decreta Ecclesiae. Gal. lib. 6. Tit. 19. cap. 4.16.19.
See Act 7. Scene 3^
Synodus Carnotensis. Anno 1526. Concilium Burdigense. Anno^ 1582. and Synodus
Turonica^ 1583. which 17^ several Councels, inhibite all Christians,
especially Clergymen, both from the use, the hearing, and singing of such Songs
as these, for the precedent reasons. A sufficient inducement to cause all godly
Christians to abandon them, together with all those Plays, those Play Houses
and places where they are in use. Thirdly, as these Scriptures and Councels; so
likewise the Fathers are very copious in censuring such ribaldrous lascivious
songs as these, which if we believe A^rem insuper meretricijs cantibus, and
terram contaminavere, etc. De Elia and I^iunio. c. 18^ and Basil De Ebrietate
and Luxu. Sermo.
S. Ambrose or S. Basil, defile the very earth and air where they are breathed
out. Survey we but Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l. 2. c. 4^ and 6. and Foris
autem impijs modis and amatorijs canticis se oblectant, tibiaru^ cantu, plausu,
temulentia, and quovis caeno ac sorde oppleti. Hoc autem dum cantant and
recantant, ij qui immortalitate^ antea celebrabant, tande^ perniciosissimam
mali male canunt palinodiam; Comedamus and bibamus cras enim morimur. Ij autem
non cras vere sed iam Deo mor^ui sunt, sepelie^tes mortuos suos, hoc est
seipsos in mortem infodientes. Ibid.
l. 3. c. 11. Tertullian and Cyprian, in their Books De Spectaculis. Arnobius
advers. Gentes. lib. 4. and 7. T^tianus, Oration adversus Graecos. Lactantius de
Ver^ Cultu l. 6. c. 21. Basil. Hexaemeron. Hom. 4. De Ebrietate and Luxu. Sermo
2. and De Legendis libris Gentiliu^ Oration. Nazienzen Oration 28.37, 38. and 48.
and Ad Selucum De Recta Educatione. p. 1063. Hierom^ Epist. 2. c. 6. Ep. 9. c.
5. Ep. 10^ c. 4. and Adversus ^ovinianum. l. 2. c. 7 Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus
Chatechesis Mystagogica. 1^ (who makes such See here page ^9. to 53.
songs, the very works and pompes of the Devil, which we renounce in
baptism:) Eusebius apud Damascenum. Parallelorum. l. 3. c. 47. Ambrose, De
Elia and Ieiunio. c. 18 and Sermo 33. Sti. Asterij Homilia in Festum
Kalendarum. Oration. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 4. p. 706. Augustine De Civit. Dei. lib.
6. c. 6.7. De Rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis Tractatus. and De December
Chordis. cap. 4. Tom 9. De Tempore Sermo 225. De Verbis Apostol. Sermo 17.
Hippolitus Martyr, De Consummatione mundi and Antichristo Oration. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 3. p. 16. H. and 17. A.B. Gaudentius Brixiae. Episc. De L^ctione
Evangelij. Sermo 8. Bib^. Patrum. Tom. 4. page 813. C. D. Primasius,
Oecumenius, Theodoret, Sedulius, Remigius, Anselmus, Ha^mo, Rabanus Maurus, and
Theophylact, on Ephesians. 4.29, 30. and on cap. 5.3, 4. Salvianus De Gubernatione
Dei. l. 6. Fulgentius super Audivit Herodes Tetrarcha, etc. Sermo. Chrysologus
Sermo 128. Olympiodorus in Ecclesiast. Enarrat, c. 12. Ca^siodorus V^riarum.
lib. 2. Epist. 40. Bernardus, Scurriles cantilenas tanquam vanitates and
insanias falsas respuunt and abominantur. Ibidem.
Oration ad Milites Templi. cap. 4. Col. 832. L. and De Nuptijs Filij Regis.
Col. 1725. A. Ioannis Salisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 6. and 8.
P^trus Blesensis, Ep. 76. Maphaeus Vegius, De Educat. Lib. l. 3. c. 10.12.
Paulus Wan. Sermo 7. Espencaeus in Tim. 1. Digressionum. l. 1. c. 11. p. 212.
and Gratian De Consecratione Distinctio. 3. we shall find such Songs, such
Poems as these abundantly condemned, as Quare ambularemus delectati canticis
vanis nulli rei profututis, ad tempus dulcibus, in post: u^ amaris? Talibus
enim turpitudinibus cantionu^ animi humani illecti enervantur, and decidu^t, a
virtute, defluentes in turpitudinem: and propter ipsas turpitudines postea
sentiunt dolores, and cum magna amaritudine digeru^t, quod cum dulcedine
temporali biberunt. August De December Chordis. c. 4. Tom 9. pars 1. page 1152.
filthy and unchristian defilements, which contaminate the souls, effeminate
the minds, deprave the manners, of these that hear or sing them, exciting,
enticeing them to lust; to whoredom, adultery, prophanes, wantonness,
scurrility, luxury, drunkenness, excess; alienating their minds from God,
from grace and heavenly things: and Syren-like, with their sweet enchantments
entrap, ensnare, destroy men's souls, proving bitter potions to them at the
last, though they seem sweet and pleasant for the present. Let S. Chrysostom,
that Totum auru^ indicant haec verba Chrysostomu^, cuius e labris doctrinae
sermones melle dulciores emanaru^t, quos qui gustant multa myrrha imple^tur, id
est, laboribus mortificant membra sua super terram. Theodoret Interp in Cantica
Cantic. Tom. 1. page 252.
all-golden Father, as Theodoret styles him, whose lips did drop with Myrre and
Honey, speak here for all the rest, who is somewhat copious in this theme.
Quemadmodu^ ubi quide^ est caenu^ eo porci concurru^t, ubi autem sunt aro^mata
and suffitus illic apes habitant: ita, ubi sunt quide^ meretricia cantica,
illic congregantur Daemones: ubi autem cantica spiritualia, illuc advolat
gratia spiritus, and os sanctificat anima^ etc. Quemadmodu^ enim qui mimos and
saltatores and mulieres meretrices introducu^t in convivia, Daemones and
diabolu^ illuc vocantuta qui vocant David eu^ cythara, intus Christu^ per ipsum
vocant. Illi domu^ sua^ faciunt Theatru^, tu Ecclesiam factuam domu^culam Hom,
in Psalm 41. Tom. 1. Col. 735
Like as Swine (writes he) run thither where there is mire, and as Bees do
live where there are spices and perfumes: so where there are whorish Songs,
there are the Devils gathered together: but where there are spiritual Songs,
thither the grace of the holy Ghost does fly, and the mouth sanctifies the
heart. And as those who bring in Stage Players, and Harlots into their Feasts
(I would those whose practice it is now, would mark his words) do call in
Devils thither, so they who call in David with his Harp (he means his Psalms
of which he speaks) do call in Christ by him. They make their house a
Theater, do thou make thy Cottage a Church. Hoc est mihi in quit perpetuu^
canticu^, etc. Hoc est mihi perpetuu^ munus, Deum laudare, Audiant, qui
Satanicis canticis remollescunt and putrefiunt. Quod non supplicium subibunt,
etc? Hom. in Psalm. 117. Tom. 1. Col. 984. D. See Hom. 6. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom.
5. Col. 62. C. D.
This, says David, is my perpetual Song, this my constant work and office,
to praise the Lord. Let them give ear, who effeminate and putrify themselves
with satanicall Songs. What punishment shall not they undergo; or what
dispensation may be given them, when as he being always employed in praising
his Savior, they are perpetually wallowing themselves in these filthy Duties?
By Qu^ docemur, qua^to supplicio obnoxij sint qui libidinosas and obscaenas
cantilenas proferunt; qui comicas nugas pronunciant, qui mendacia and clamores
in Circe^sibus ludis edunt. Hom. in Psalm. 118. v. 170.171. Tom. 1. Col. 1025. D.
this are we taught, to what great punishment they are obnoxious, who utter
libidinous and obscene songs, who pronounce comicall toys, who vent lies and
clamours in Cirques, etc. Si Theatralibus ludis spretis atque neglectis
ecclesiam peteris, claudicanti pedi incolumitatem reddidisti. Si Diabolicos
cantus despexeris and eorum loco spiritales didiceris ia^ loqueris, cum antea
mutus esses. Hom. 33. in Mat. To^ 2 Col. 262. B.
If then, contemning and forsaking Stageplayes, thou shall hereafter frequent
the Church, thou have then restored health to thy haulting feet: If thou shall
despise diabolical songs, and in stead of them shall learn spiritual
Psalms, thou may now speak, whereas before thou wast but mute. And in
another Homely he writes thus: Nam quemadmodu^ limus and sordes aures corporis
obstruere solent, sic meretricij cantus aures mentis solent magis quam quaevis
sordes obstruere. Vel potius non obstruu^t tantu^, veru^ etiam impuru^ faciu^t
and immundu^: quasi enim stercus immittunt auribus vestris huiusmodi colloquia.
Quod barbarus ille minabatur, dicens; Comedetis stercus vestru^, id etiam multi
non verbo, sed re vobis faciunt, imo vero multo pejus ac faedius. Nam
Fornicatorij cantus multo magis quam stercora sunt abominabiles. Quodque
aegrius ferendu^; non solu^ nulla^ talia audientes molestia^ capitis, veru^
etia^ ridetis atque laetamini. Cu^que vitare ista, abominarique deberetis;
suscipitis atque laudatis. Hom 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 297. C. See Hom. 2.
De Verbis Isaiae. Tom. 1. Col. 1288. A.
As slime and dirt are wont to stop the ears of the body, so meretricious
songs do use to stop the ears of the mind, more then any filth: or rather,
they do not only stop, but likewise contaminate and defile them: for such
songs do as it were cast dirt into the ears. What that Barbarian threatened,
saying; you shall eat your own dung: that verily do many to you now, not in
word, but in deed: yea, that which is far worse and filthier: For adulterous
songs are much more abominable then any dung. And that which is far worse to
be endured. (though it be the very humor and practice of our lascivious
times) you are not only not offended nor grieved at the hearing of such songs,
but you laugh and rejoice: and whereas you ought to avoid and abominate them,
you entertain and applaud them. To conclude: Choreae, cymbala, tibiae, cantica
turpia plena scortationu^ ac adulterioru^, Diaboli pompa, etc. Hom. 42. in
Acta. Tom. 3. Col. 611. C. and Hom. 12 in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 357. A.
Dancing, music, adulterous ribaldry songs (says this Father) which are so
rife and frequent in our marriages (and yet not so frequent then, as they are
now in ours:) are the very Devils pomp and hotch-potch, etc. Quid dixeris de
ipsis canticis quae sunt plena omni impudicitia, and amores pravos, and
concubitus illigitimos ac nefarios, and domorum eversiones and tragaedias,
inducunt innumerabiles, and frequens habe^t nomen amici and amantis, and amicae
and ^ilectae: and quod e^t omniu^ gravissimum, eis adsunt virgins, omni exuto
pudore, and ad spo^sae honore^ vel potius ignominiam; and inter impudicos
adolescentes, incompositis lascivientes and indocore se gerentes cantilenis,
verbisque turpibus, and Satanica consonantia. Et adhuc me rogas, unde
matrimoniorum corruptores^ Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 358. C. See Hom. 21.
ad Pop Antio^h. Tom 5. Col. 162. C.D.
What will thou say of their songs which are fraught with all incontinency?
which bring in dishonest loves, unlawful, nay wicked copulations, the
eversions of houses and i^numerable Tragedies, and have oft-times in them the
name of a Mistress, and a Lover, a Sweetheart and a Beloved. And that which is
worst of all, there are Virgins present at them, who laying aside all shame,
do in the midst of unchaste Yongsters (a practice too common with our
chaunting, dancing blushlesse females now) demean themselves lasciviously and
unseemely: sporting themselves with disorderly songs, obscene discourses,
satanicall music, in honor, or rather to the dishonor of the new married
Spouse. And do thou yet inquire of me, whence adulterers, whence whoredoms,
whence corruptions of marriages should proceed? Lo here the effects of such
scurrilous songs and dances. To which I shall here adde^ the saying of S.
Valerian concerning such songs as these, in his 6. Homely, De Otiosis verbis^
Bibliotheca Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 3. page 482.483. Quotiescunque dulci voce
mulcetur auditus, ad turpe facinus invitatur aspectus. Nemo insidiosis cantibus
credat, nec ad illa libidinosae vo^is incitamenta respiciat; quae cum
oblectant, sae viunt; cum blandiuntur, occidunt. Ibidem.
As often (writes he) as the hearing is soothed with the pleasant voice, so often
the sight is invited to a filthy deed. Let no man trust these treacherous songs,
nor look back to those incitations of a lustful voice; which rage whiles
they delight, and kill when they flatter. Sic freque^ter vidimus blandis
sibilis aves decipi, and hebetes feras in laqueum mortis dulcedine vocis
impel^i. Similis e^t dilectissimi, causa mortalium, quos dulcisoni cantus cura
sollicitat. In ho^ autem proficiunt varietates vocum, and producta sin^
syllabis verba, ut homo aut capiatur, aut capiat. Explicari non potest,
dilectissimi, quam periculosos laqueos exhibeant mimicae ^tudia voluptatis,
etc. Ib^dem.
Thus we often see Birds to be deceived with flattering whistels, and sottish
wild beasts to be drawn into a snare of death by the sweetness of the voice.
Such, my beloved, is the case of mortal men, whom the care of pleasant songs
sollicites. In this only the varieties of voices profit, and words drawn out
at length by warblings without syllables, that a man may be either taken, or
may take. It cannot be expressed, my beloved, what dangerous snares the studies
of mimicall pleasure exhibit. For if any man could search out the secrets of
men's brest^, he should find the hearts of unhappy men to sigh again at every
sound of the Flute. Understand therefore what over-familiar and secret speech
may do between men and women, what near neighborhood, what conferences
mixed with jests, what a palate invited with delight,^ what the desire of gold
exposed to every wickedness of prostitution, if even the inticements of a
dumb voice may charm the fury of another. Refugiendus est igitur error iste,
vocis sonus, qui humanis pectoribus dulcedine sua amaritudinem fecit, and
persuasione quadam melliflui cantus frequenter mortifera aegris venena
commiscuit. In quo loco primu^ obturendae aures sunt, opponentes scutum fidei,
quo facilius omnis lenocinantis vocis excludatur a^ditus. Adhibenda etiam
disciplina, quae oculorum desideria repellat, and tabescentis cordis
incitamenta compescat. Ibidem.
This error therefore of the sound of the voice is to be avoided, which has
wrought bitterness in the hearts of men by its sweetness, and by a certain
persuasion of a mellifluous song, has oft-times ministered deadly poisons to
the sick. In which place the ears are first to be See Thomas Beacon his
Catechism. fol. 355 accordingly.
stopped, by opposing the Buckler of Faith, whereby the hearing of every voice
enticing unto lewdness may more easily be excluded. And discipline also is to
be administered, which may repel the desires of the eyes, and may bridle the
incitations of a consuming heart. To all which passages, I may join that of S.
Augustine, De Tempore Sermo. 215. Ante omnia ubicunque fueritis, sive in domo,
etc. verba turpia and luxuriosa nolite ex ore vestro proferre; sed magis
vicinos and proximos vestros iugiter admonere, ut semper quod bonum est and
honestum loqui studeant, ne forte mal^ loquendo and in sanctis festivitatibus
choros ducendo, cantica luxuriosa and verba proferendo de lingua sua, unde
debuerant Deum laudare, inde sibi vulnera videantur infligere. Isti enim
infaelices and miseri homines qui balationes and saltationes ante ipsas
basilicas sanctorum exercere nec metuu^t nec erubescunt, etsi Christiani ad
Ecclesiam venerint, Pagani de Ecclesia revertuntur; quia ista consuetudo
balandi de Paganorum observatione remansit. Et iam videte qualis est ille
Christianus qui ad Ecclesiam venit orare, and neglecta oratione, sacrilega
verba Paganorum non erubescit ex ore proferre: videte tamen fratres charissimi,
si iustum est, ut ex ore Christianorum ubi corpus Christi ingreditur,
luxuriosum canticum quasi venenum Diaboli proferatur? Ibid. Tom. 9. pars 2.
page 631. See Ambros. Sermo. 33. Tom. 5. page 23.
Before all things, wheresoever you are, whether in a house, or in a iourn^y,
or in a feast, or in a public assembly, utter not ye out of your mouths any
scurrilous or voluptuous words; but rather continually, admonish your
neighbors and friends, that they always study to speak that which is honest
and good, lest perchance by evil speaking, by dancing upon holy Festivals, and
by singing luxurious ribaldry songs, they may seem to inflict wounds upon
themselves, even from whence they ought to have praised God. For these unhappy
and miserable men, who neither fear nor blush to exercise lascivious songs and
dances before the very Temples of the Saints, although they should come
Christians to the Church, yet they return Pagans from the Church, because this
custom of singing and dancing is but a relic of the observation of Pagans.
And now behold what a Christian he is, who comes unto the Church to pray, and
neglecting prayer, is not ashamed to utter the sacrilegious words of Pagans.
Consider dear brethren, whether it be just, that out of that mouth of
Christians where the body of Christ does enter in, a deboist song should be
brought forth, as the very poison of the Devil? Quare ambularemus delectati
vanis ^anticis, nulli rei profuturis, ad tempus dulcibus, in posteru^ amaris?
Talibus enim turpitudinibus cantionu^ animi humani illecti ^nervantur, and
decidant virtute, deflue^tes in turpitudinem and propter ipsas turp^tudines
postea sentiunt dolores, and cum magna amaritudine digerunt, quod cu^ temporasi
dulcedine ^iberunt. De December Chordis. cap. 4. Tom. 9. pars 1. page 1152.
Wherefore (writes he in another place) should we then walk delighted with
vain songs, that are profitable for nothing, being sweet only for a time, but
bitter afterward? For with such scurrilities of songs the intised minds of
men are effaeminated, and fall away from virtue, flowing down into
filthiness, and for these very filthinesses they afterward fe^le pains, and
vomit up that again with great bitterness which they have drunk down with
temporal pleasure, etc. To which I may annex that Apud Henrici Spelmanni
Glossarium. p. 66. Ballare, and Binius Conciliorum. Tom. 3.
Canon of the Roman Synod under Lotharius and Lodovicke: Let the Priests
admonish men and women who meet together at Church on Holy Days, that they
sing no filthy songs, nor lead nor keep any dances: And that Constitution of
Charles and Lodovicke: Capitular. Caroli and Ludou. l. 6. Can. 191. and
Spelmanni Glossarium. p. 67. Ballare.
Let no man dance any filthy Dances or Carantoes, nor sing any dishonest
riotous songs, nor use any such Diabolical sports, either in the streets or in
their houses. By all which you may easily discern, what the Fathers judged of
amorous ribaldrous songs; which should cause all Christians, at leastwise to
condemn them in their judgments; as all these Fathers do; if not to Quare?
quia infixa nobis eius rei aversatio est, qua^ natura damnavit. Seneca. Epist.
79. ^ Legum Dialog^ 7. page 874.
abandon them in their practice. To these Testimonies of the Fathers I might
accumulate, not only Quid illi, qui in audiendis, visendis, componendis
canticis occupati sunt; du^ vocem cuius rectum cursum natura and optimu^ and
simplicissimum fecit, in^^exu modulationis ineptissime torquent? Quorum digiti
a^iquod inter se carmen metientes semper sonant: quoru^ cum ad res serias,
etiam saepe tristes, ad hibiti sunt, exauditur tacita modulatio? Non habent
isti otium, sed iners negotiu^. De Brevit. Vitae. c. 12.
Plato, Enervant animos cytharae, cantusque, lyraeque. Et vox, etc. De Remedio
Amoris. l. 2. p. 230.
Seneca, Grataque faeminis, Imbelli cythara carmina dividis. Carmin. l. 1. Od^.
15. p. 18. See l. 3. Ode. 11. p. 83. and Ode. 15. p. 88. l. 4. Ode. 11^ p. 124.
Epist. l. 1 Epist. 2. p. 240.
Ovid, See Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 54.55, 56. and Satyr. 10. p. 99.
Horace, and other Pagan Authors, who condemn all amorous wanton Pastorals, as
fit for none but Strumpets, and lewd lascivious effeminate persons: but
likewise whole Volumes of modern Authors; there being few Commentators on the
Psalms, upon See Lyra, Gorrhan, Tostatus, Cornelius a Lapide, Estius,
Os^ander, Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat, Zanchius, Arctius, Bullenger, Melangton,
and others. Ibid.
Ephesians. 4.29, 30. etc. 5.3.4. or upon Coll^s 4.6. Few Expositors on the 7. See
Hooper, B^acon, Babington, Dod, ^lton, Perkins, Lake, Williams, ^mes, and
others.
Commandment: few See Peter Martyr, Trelcatius, Mercer, Polanus, and others,
and Ma^heus Vegius, De Liberoru^ Educat. l. 3. c. 7. and 12.
Commonplace Compilers; in their places or Titles, of Singing, Psalms,
Music, Jests, Scurrility, Modesty, Chastity, and the like: Few Writers, The
3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. p. 100. together with Reinolds,
Gosson, Stubs, Bulenger, Brissonius, Mariana, and others.
against Stage Plays; but have particularly condemned these lascivious,
amorous, ribaldrous Songs, (which are now too much in use) Aures vestras
condidi, ut audiretis Scripturas, at vos parastis ea ad cantica Daemonum,
cytharas and ridicula, etc. Hippolitus Martyr. De Consum Mundi Oration. Bibl.
Patru^. Tom 3. p. 16.17.
as Diabolical, unchristian lust-exciting, vice-fomenting, soule-impoysoning
pleasures, which all Christians should eternally abominate, as the very snares
of Hell, Turpes and effaeminati cantus prius rempublicam universam pestifera
tabe inficiunt, quam malum quod afferunt ratione praecaveri potest. Osorius De
Regum. Instit. lib. 4. fol, 123.124.
the very plagues of that Commonweal wherein they are tolerated, and the
very baits of Satan to draw men on to sin, and so to endless destruction.
Since therefore Stage Plays are evermore accompanied, adorned with such
execrable unchristian Pa^torals, Songs and Poems as these, (which I would wish
all Christians, especially such as are most devoted to them, as they tender the
everlasting welfare of their souls, even now for to abandon, See Rev. 18.7 Job
21.12, 13. Isay 5 11, 12. Amos 6^1, 5, 7. Iam. 5.1, 5. Luke 16.25. Temporariam
habent voluptatem, paenam aute^ sempiternam. Chrysostom. Hom. 54. ad P^p.
Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 315. ^. Si luxuriosam egeris vitam hanc, aeternis
incendijs torqueberis in alia, O quam momentania est carnis delectatio? quam
labilis voluptatis hora qua perditur vita aeterna! Quod rogo, emolumentum
affert corpori, quodve tribuit luchrum, id quod tam cito animam ducit ad
tartarum? Ambros. De Vitiorum, Virtutumque Conflictu. Tom. 5. p. 249. B.
for fear these momentary fading pleasures plunge them into many endless
torments.) I must thereupon now conclude, as all the foregoing Fathers and
Authors in the Major do; that they must needs be sinful, and altogether
unlawful unto Christians, as these their attendants are; which need no other
aggravations to condemn them but themselves alone. See Carmina Proverbialia.
Noscitur ex comite qui non cognoscitur ex se, was the ancient Proverb. You
may therefore judge of Stage Plays, by these filthy Songs and Sonnets that
accompany them; which Songs the very Title to our English singing Psalms,
commands all Christians to lay a part, as tending only to the nourishing of
vice, and corrupting of youth, with which I shall close this Scene.

SCENA DECIMA.
THe third unlawful Concomitant of Stage Plays, is as S. Oportet nec oculos
spectaculis, nec vanis praestigiatoru^ oste^tationibus tradere, nec per aures
animaru^ corruptrice^ melodia^ haurire. Hoc enim musicae genus libidinu^
stimulos acuere solet. Tan^a sane melodiae rectae a turpi atque obscaena
differentia est, ut eam quae nunc in usu est non minus fugere debeatis, qua^
rem aliqua^ turpissimam. De Legendis libris Gentili^^. Oration. Tom. 1. page 412.
Basil phraseth it, which Christians ought to fly as a most filthy thing; both
because it works upon their minds, to corrupt them, upon their lusts, to
provoke them to all voluptuousness and uncleanesse whatsoever. From whence
this 25. Argument may be formed. Argument 25.


That which is always accompanied with effeminate lust-provoking Music, is
doubtless inexpedient and unlawful unto Christians.

But Stage Plays are always accompanied with such Music.

Therefore they are doubtless inexpedient and unlawful unto Christians.

The Major is easily confirmed, by prooving effeminate lust-enflaming Music,
unlawful. That Music of it self is lawful, useful, and commendable; no
man, no Christian dares deny, since the Exodus 15.1, etc. Numb. 21.17. Judges
5.3. 2 Samuel 19.35. 1 Chronicles. 6.32. c. 13.8. c. 15^9, 27. c 16.42. 2 Chronicles. 5.13.
c. 9.11. c. 20.21, 22. c 23.13. c. 29 28. c. 35.15. Nehem. 7.1. c. 10.39. c.
11.22, 23. c. 12.45, 46, 47. Psalm. 149. and 150. Eccles. 2.8. Ephesians. 5.19. Col.
3.19.
Scriptures, Clemens Alexand^ Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. Justin Martyr, Explic.
Quaest. a Gentibus positarum. Quaest. 107. Augustinus, Musicae. l. 6. Beda. De
Musica Theorica. lib. and De Musica Quadata. lib. Hierom, Ambrose, Chrysostom.
Basil. Theodoret, Sedulius, Remigius, Rabanus Maurus, Oecumen^us, Theophylact,
on Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. and in lib, Psalmorum. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 2.
Epist. 40. Ioannis Sarisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 6.
Fathers, and generally Platonis Crito. and Legum Dial. 3. p. 591. to 599.
Aristot. Polit. l. 8. c. 3 4, 5, 6, 7. Ovid Fastorum. l. 6. p. 114. and
Tristium. l. 4. Polybius. Historae. l. 4. p. 339.340, 341. Strabo Geogr. l. 10.
p. 48.49. Plutarchi Laconica Instituta. Athenaeus Dipnos. l 14. c. 10.11.
Gellius, Noctium Attic. l. 1. c. 11. Quintil. Instit. Oratoriae. l. 1. c. 16.
Macrobius De Somno Scipionis. l. 2. c. 3. Dioginis Laertij Socrates. AElian,
variae Historiae. l. 2. c. 39. with sundry others.
all Christian, Caelius Rhodiginus^ Antiqu. Lect. l. 9. c. 1. to 10. Alexander
ab Alexandro. l. 2. c. 25. Polydor Virgil, De Invent. rerum. l. 1. cap. 14.15.
Osorius De Instit. Regum. l. 4^ fol. 122. Clerk, De Aulico. lib 1. page 62.63,
64. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 17. Case Polit. lib. 7. cap. 3.5, 6,
7. with others.
all Pagan Authors extant, do with one consent aver it. But that lascivious,
amorous, effeminate, voluptuous Music, (which I only here encounter,) should
be either expedient, or lawful unto Christians, there is none so audacious as
to justify it, since both Scripture, Fathers, modern Christian Writers; yea
and Heathen Nations, States and Authors, have past a doom upon it. If we
revolue the Fathers, we shall find Paedagogi. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Clemens Alexandrinus declaiming thus against it. Those who are seriously
occupied in music, songs and dances, and such like dissolute recreations,
become immodest, insolent, and very far estranged from good discipline, as
those about whom cymbals and dulcimers are sounding, and the instruments of
fraud making a noise. But it mainly behooves us to cut off every filthy
spectacle, every dishonest sound, and to use but a word, every dishonest sense
of intemperance, (which is verily a true privation of sense) that does tickle
or effeminate our eyes or ears, bewaring pleasure: For Fractoru^ cantu^^ and
flebiliu^ Caricae Musae modoru^ varia veneficia intemperanti and pravo Musicae
artificio mores corrumpunt, ad co^messationis affectione^ trahentes, etc. A
forti itaque and nervosa cogitatione nostra vere molles and enervatae harmoniae
amandandae sunt quam longissime, quae improbe flexuum vocis artificio utentes,
ad delicata^ and ignavam vitae agendae rationem deducunt, etc. Ibidem.
the various sorceries of effeminate songs, and of the mournful measures of
the Caricke Muse, corrupt the manners, with intemperate and wicked music,
drawing men to the affection of riotous feasting. The Pipe therefore, the Flute
and such like instruments are to be abandoned from a sober feast, which are
more fit for beasts then men, and for those people who are most estranged from
reason. But modest and chaste harmonies are to be admitted, by removing as
far as may be all so^t effeminate music from our strong and valiant
cogitation, which using a dishon^st art of warbling the voice, do lead to a
delicate and slothf^ll kind of life. Therefore Chromaticall harmonies are to
be left to impudent malapartnesse in wine, to wh^rish music crowned with
flowers, Explicatio Quaestionum a Ge^ribus Christianis positaru^. Quaest. 107.
Justin Martyr, (if the Book be his) writes thus to the selfsame purpose. It
is not unlawful, nor yet altogether unseemely for Boys to sing; but to sing
with in^nimate instruments; to sing with dancing and cymbals; the use of which
kind of instruments, with others fit only for Children, are exploded out of
our Churches, where Therefore they had no other Church-musicke but singing in
his time. Quod nota.
nothing is retained but singing only. S. Hier^m in his 10. Epistle to Furia.
c. 4. writes thus. Comatulos, comptos, atque lascivos, domus tuae tecta non
videant. Cantor pellatur ut noxius. Fidicinas and Psaltrias, and istiusmodi
chorum Diaboli quasi mortifera Syrenaru^ carmina, proturba ex aedibus tuis.
Ibidem.
Let the Singer be thrust out of thine house as noxious: expel out of thy
doors all Fiddlers, Singing-women, with all this quire of the Devil, as the
deadly songs of Sirens. And in his Commentary upon the Ephesians. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Tom. 6. page 188. A. Audiant haec adolescentuli; audiant hi quibus psallendi in
ecclesia officium est; Deo non voce sed cord cantandum: nec in Tragaedorum
more guttur and fauces dulci medicamine colliniendas; ut in Ecclesia theatrales
moduli audiantur and ca^tica: sed in timore in opere in scientia scripturaru^.
Sic cantet servus Christi, ut non vox canentis, sed verba placeant quae
leguntur: ut spiritus malus quae erat in Saul, eijciatur ab his, qui similiter
ab eo possidentur, and non introducatur in eos, qui de Dei domo scenam fecere
populorum. Ibidem.
Let Youths hear these things; let those whose office it is to sing in the
Church hear these things; that we must sing to God with the heart, not with
the voice; neither after the manner of Tragedians are the throat and chops to
be anointed with some pleasant ointment, that theatrical songs and measures may
be heard in the Church; but we must sing in fear, in work, in the knowledge
of the Scriptures. So let the Serva^t of Christ sing, that not the voyc^ of the
Singer, but the words that are read may please: that the evil spirit which was
in Saul may be cast out of those, who are possessed by him in the same manner,
and that he may not be brought into those, who have made a Playhouse of the
House of God. And in his Commentary upon the 6. of Amos. Tom. 5. p. 114. A. he
writes thus. Quibus non sufficit libido gutturis, etc. nisi and tibiarum and
psalterij, and lyrae canticis, aures vestras mulceatis: and quod David fecit ad
cultum Dei, levitarum ordines, and organorum reperiens varietates; vos ad
voluptatem and luxuriam conferatis. Ibidem.
The lust of the palate, and all variety of dainty meats is not sufficient,
for you soothe your ears with the songs of the Pipe, the Psaltery, and the
Harp: and that which David has made for the worship of God, finding out
variety of Organs, and musical instruments, you transfer to pleasure and
luxury. S. Valerian in his 6. Homely, De Otiosis Verbis. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5.
pars 3. page 482.483. writes thus. Invenimus igitur frequenter, ita
impudicitiae viam muniri atque ex hoc fomenta adulterijs ministrari, cum hic
agili plectro tinnientis citharae sonos expedit, ille docili digito laborantis
organi blandimenta componit. Isti sunt laquei, quibus famulantibus, inter
caetera vulnera Diabolus hominum mortes operatur, etc. Ibidem.
We therefore oft-times find a way to be fenced to incontinency, and
fomentations to adulteries to be from hence administered, whiles this man plays
on the sounding Citheren with a nimble quill, and another with a skillful
finger composeth the melodious inticements of the roaring Organs. Th^se are the
snares, by whose assistance, among other wounds the Devil works the deaths
of men, etc. S. Basil in his Commentary upon Esaias 5. Tom. 3. p. 419.420. has
these ensuing passages, against Musicians, Songs, and Dances. Tibicinae and
fidicinae quae tempus floridae aet^tis per flagitia traducu^t: chori insuper
and cantilenae in commune depromptae per improbos virilitatem corporum suis
enerva^t lenocinijs, animosque delinientes illo publico concen^u perfringunt,
and ad co^plexu^ obscenae omnis and illigitimae voluptatis ebrios extimulant.
Aures capiuntur melico concentu, sed qui ad flagitiosam lubricitatem ex^imulet,
etc. Ibid.
Fiddlers and Musicians, who pass the time of their flourishing age in
villainies, together with Dances and songs drawn forth in public by wicked
persons, enervate the virility of men's bodies with their lewd inticements, and
soothing their souls with that public consort, do break through them, and
stir up Drunkards to the embracing of all filthy and unlawful pleasure.
Their ears are taken with the sweet harmony, but such as may prick them on to
a flagitious lubricity, etc. What a miserable Spectacle is it to chaste and
wel-mannered eyes, to see ^ woman, not to follow her needle or dis^affe, but to
sing to a Lute? Castis and been moratis oculis, qua^ miserabile spectaculu^,
^ulierem non tela^ ordiri, aut deducere pensum, sed cantillare ad lyra^? non a
proprio viro cognosci, sed ab alijs publica^ inspectari meritrice^: non
modulari Psalmu^ confessionis, sed cantica concinnere ad libidine^
prolicientia: non supplicare Deo, sed ultro properare ad gehenna^: non ad
Ecclesia^ Dei studiose contendere, sed and secu^ alios inde avocare. Ibid.
not to be known by her own husband, but to be often veiwed by others as a
public whore: not to modulate or sing a Psalm of confession, but to sing
songs enticing unto lust: not to supplicate to God, but willingly to hasten
unto Hell: not to go diligently to the Church of God, but to withdraw others
with her self from thence, etc. Atqui apud te ^acet lyra auro denteque
elephantino interstinct^ and variegata; affixa v^lut sublimi cuipia^ altari,
statua and Idolu^ Daemoniacu^. Et mulier quide^ misera, etc. edocta abs te est,
forte a mercenario, forsan ab co qui eam lenae cuipia^ muli^ri aut prostitutae
tradiderit: mox ubi in proprio corpore omne^ explevit libidine^, praesidet
adolescentulis similium doctrix operum. Quamobrem die iudicij, paena duplex
tibi occurret, nimirum ob ea quae flagitia committis, propter item doctrinam
improb^m qua a Deo abalienasti animam infaelicem, etc. Ibidem.
With thee there lies a Lute interlaced and adorned with Gold or Elephants
tooth, a Demoniacall Statue and Idol, fastened at it were to some high; Altar
and a certain miserable woman, who by reason of the necessity of her servile
condition, should apply her self to her distaffe, is taught of thee, perchance
an hireling, perchance of one who shall delive^ her over to some Bawd or
prostituted Whore; afterward when she has satisfied all the lust in her own
body, she is set over other young Girls, as a Mistress of the like actions.
Wherefore in the day of judgment; a double punishment shall seize upon thee;
both for those wickednesses thou committest when thou art drunk, and likewise
for thy wicked doctrine whereby thou have quite alienated an unhappy soul from
God, etc. Earu^ autem ^r^u^ quae pendent a studio v^nit^ is, c^u su^t
citharistica, saltatoria, ars inflandi tibias, and aliae ejusmodi, mox ut
desijt actio ipsum se declarat opus, idque prorsus iuxta Apostolicam
sententiam; quoru^ finis, inte^itus and perditio. Haec sane dicta sunto
adversum eos qui per immodicam molliciem, totos se dedunt delicijs, praeter
ientaculum prandium and caenam sive continue: aut certe in eos qui diebus
hilaritaris and laetitiae, puta nuptiaru^ aut convivioru^ accuratius conquirunt
and adhibent tibias, citharas and tripudia saltationesque, quando nihil horu^ a
nobis requisitu^ est: quippe qui divina nos docente Scriptura didicimus
indignatione^ promotam esse adversus istiusmodi studia and vitae
conversatione^. Timore igitur impendentiu^ maloru^ flagitiosam hanc vitae
vestrae consuetudinem deinceps permutate in melius. Ibid.
Of those arts which depend upon the studi^ of vanity, whether it be the art of
Music, of Dancing, of sounding ^ipes, or such like, as soon as the action it
self has ceased, the work it self declares it self, and that altogether
according to the Apostles sentence; whose end is destruction and perdition: Let
these things suffice to be spoken against those who through overmuch effeminacy
give themselves wholly over to delights, and that continually; Or else against
those who in the days of mirth or gladness suppose of marriages or feasts,
do more diligently procure Waits, Music, rounds and dancing, when as none
of these is required of us: who have learned by the teaching of the Scripture,
that the wrath of God is bent against all such studies and conversation of
life. Therefore for fear of imminent evil from henceforth amend this wicked
custom of your life. Thus far this Father, who in his Sermon, De Legendis
Libris Gentilium, and De Ebrietate and Luxu, and Hexaemeron, Hom. 4. has other
passages to this purpose. To pass by Chrysostom, who writes; Cymbala, tibiae,
and cantica turpia Diaboli pompa and farrago, etc. Hom 42. in Acta. Tom. 3.
Col. 611. C. and Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom 4. Col. 357. A
that Cymbals, Pipes, and filthy Songs are the very pomps and hodgpotch of the
Devil, together with our ancient learned Countryman A^chuvinus; who reckons
up Pompae illius sunt canora musica, in quibus saepe solvitur and mollitur
Christianus vigor. De Caeremonijs Baptismi Epist. Col. 1158. B.
shrill, wanton amorous music, which does oft-times mollify and effeminate
the vigor of Christians, among those pomps of the Devil, which Christians in
their Baptism do renounce. S. Cyrill of Alexandria a^firmes; Vbi namque
citharae sonus est and tympanorum pulsus, ac tibicinum concentus cum numeroru^
concinnitate and plausibus, ibi omnino est and omne genus faeditatis, eaque
fiunt cl^m ab illis, quae turpe est vel dicere. In Hesaiam. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Tom. 1. page 141. A.
That where there is the sound of the Harp, the beating of Cymbals, the
consort of Fiddlers, with the concinnity of numbers and applauses, there also is
all kind of filthiness; and those things are done of these in private, which
is even unseemely for to utter. Oration. 48 page 796.797 Nec vestibula nostra
tibicinum concentu plausibusque personant, etc. vid. Ibidem.
Gregory Nazienzen records, that the Christians in his time had no dancing, no
idle Songs, or wanton Music in their public feasts and solemnities; but
only Psalms and spiritual Songs with which they praised God. And Epiphanius
in his Compendiaria Doctrina, De fide Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae;
ascertaines us; that the whole Catholic and Apostolic Church, Prohibe^
Theatra and Iudos equestres, and venationem, musicos item, etc. Ibidem. Col.
922. E.
condemned Theaters, Plays and Musicians. Eusebius and Damascen, as they
declaime against wanton Music, songs, and dancing; so they pronounce an Vae
his qui Dominico die cithara ludunt. Citharae dus autem, tanquam Demon, cum
ligno conflictatur. Damascen. Parallelorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. and Eusebius
quoted, Ibidem.
woe against all such who play upon the Harp or Citharen on the Lord's Day;
comparing a Fiddler that plays to Dancers, to a Devil. A harsh comparison,
enough to scare such from their ungodly trade. Saint Augustine in his first
Book, De Musica. from c. 1. to 8. declaimes against all wanton, effeminate,
amorous, Stage-musicke: which was much in use with Play^rs, who were commonly
bad, not good, Musicians in his age: and that Music he most discommends which
wa^ accompanied with Plays Si quis suavissime canens, and pulchre saltans,
velit eo ipso lascivire, cum res severitatem desiderat, non been utique
numerosa modusatione utitur, idest, ea motione quae lam bona, ex eo quia
numerosa est, dici potest male ille, id est incongruenter utitur. Ibid^m. cap.
3. Tom^ 1. ^ag. 445.
or lascivious dancing. The 3. Synod of Turvy under Charles the Great. Canon
7. condemns effeminate Music in these terms: Ab omnibus quaecunque ad
aurium and ad oculorum pertinent illecebras, unde vigor animi emolliri posse
credatur (quod de aliquibus generibus musicorum sentiri potest) Dei sace^dotes
abstinere debent Surius. Tom. 3. page 274.
The Ministers of God ought to abstain from all things which pertain to the
enticements of the ears or eyes, from whence the vigor of the mind may be
thought to be effeminated: which may be imagined of certain kinds of Music,
etc. Which several Authorities are a sufficient testimony of the unlawfulness
of effeminate, amorous, wanton Music. Which as it is discommendable in Feasts
and merry meetings, so much more in Churches. Hence is that notable passage of
AElredus, Abbot of Rivaulx in Yorke-shire, about the year 1160. in his
Speculum Charitatis. lib. 2. cap. 23. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. page 111. De his
nunc sermo sit, qui sub specie religionis negocium voluptatis obpalliant: qui
ea quae antiqui p^tres in typis ruturorum salubriter exercebant, in usum suae
vanitatis usurpant. Vnde quasi, cessantibus iam typys and figuris, unde
Ecclesia tot Organa, tot Cymbala? Ad quid rogo terribilis ille follium flatus,
tonitrui potius fragore^ quam vocis exprimens suavitatem? Ad quid illa vocis
contractio and infractio? Hic succinit, ille discinit, alter supercinit, alter
medias quasdam notas dividit and incidit. Nunc vox stringitur, nunc frangitur,
nunc impingitur, nunc diffusiori sono dilatatur. Aliquando, quod pudet dicere,
in equinos hinnitus cogitur, aliquando virili vigore deposito in faeminiae
vocis gracilitate acuitur: non nunquam artificiosa quadam circu^volutione
torquetur and retorquetur. Videas aliquando hominem aperto ore, quasi
intercluso halitu expirare, non cantare, acridiculosa quadam vocis
interceptione, quasi minitari silentium, nunc agones morientium, vel extasim
patientium imitari. Interim histrionicis quibusdam gestibus totum corpus
agitatur; torquentur labia, rotant oculi, ludunt humeri, and singulas quasque
notas digitorum flexus respondet. Et haec ridiculosa dis^olutio vocatur
religio; and ubi haec frequentius agitantur, ibi Deus honorabilius serviri
clamatur^ Ibidem.
Let me speak now (says he) of those, who under the show of religion do
obpalliate the business of pleasure: which usurp those things for the service
of their vanity, which the ancient Fathers did profitably exercise, in their
types of future things. Whence then I pray, all types and figures now ceasing,
whence has the Church so many Organs and Musical Instruments? To what
purpose, I demand, is that terrible blowing of Belloes, expressing rather the
crackes of Thunder, then the sweetness of a voice? To what purpose serves that
contraction and inflection of the voice? This man sings a base, this a small
mean, another a treble, a fourth divides and cuts assunder, as it were,
certain middle notes. One while the voice is strained, anon it is remitted,
now again it is dashed, and then again it is enlarged with a louder sound.
Sometimes, which is a shame to speak, it is enforced into an horses neighings;
sometimes, the masculine vigor being laid aside, it is sharpened into the
shrilnesse of a woman's voice: now and then it is wrethed, and retorted with a
certain artificial circumvolution. Sometimes thou may see a man with an
open mouth, not to sing; but as it were to breath out his last gasp, by
shutting in his breath, and by a certain ridiculous interception of his voice,
as it were to threaten silence, and now again to imitate the agonies of a
dying man, or the ecstasies of such as suffer. In the mean time the whole body
is stirred up and down with certain histrionical gestures: the lips are
wreathed; the eyes turn round, the shoulders play; and the bending of the
fingers does answer every note. And this ridiculous dissolution is called
religion; and where these things are most frequently done, it is proclaimed
abroad that God is there more honorably served. Stans interea vulgus sonitu^
foll^u^, crepitu^ Cymbalorum, harmonia^ fistularum, tremens attonitusque
miratur: sed lascivas cantantium gesticulationes meretricias vocum
alternationes and infractiones non sine cachinno risuque intuetur; ut eos non
ad oratoriu^ sed ad theatru^, nec ad orandu^ sed ad spectandu^ aestimes
co^venisse: nec timetur illa tremeda maiestas cui assistitur, etc. Sic quod
sancti. Patres institueru^t ut infirmi excitarentur ad affectum pietatis, in
usum assumitur illicitae voluptatis, etc. Ibidem.
In the mean time the common people standing by, trembling and astonished,
admire the sound of the Organs, the noise of the Cymbals and musical
instruments, the harmony of the Pipes and Cornets: but yet look upon the
lascivious gesticulations of the Singers, the meretricious alternations,
interchanges, and infractions of the voices, not without dirision and laughter:
so that a man may think^ that they came, not to an Oratory, or house of prayer,
but to a Theater; not to pray, but to gaze about them: neither is that
dread^ull majesty feared before whom they stand, etc. Thus this Church-singing,
which the holy Fathers have ordained that the weak might be stirred up to
piety, is perverted to the use of unlawful pleasure, etc. Thus this ancient
English Abbot, whom John Saresbury another ancient English Writer, about the
year of our Lord 1140. does second in these words, in his Bibl. Patrum. Tom.
15. page 347.
First Book, De Nugis Curialium. cap. 6. Hic est enim usus Musicae aut solus,
aut praecipuus. Phrygius vero modus, and caetera corruptionis lenocinia sanae
institutionis non habent usum, sed produnt malitiam abutentis. Dolet igitur and
ingemescit species laudabilis disciplinae, se ab alieno vitio deformari, and
quod facies meritricis facta est ei, quae viriles quoque animos accendere
consueverat ad virtutem. Amatoria bucolicorum apud viros graves esse, fuerat
criminis. Nunc vero laudi ducitur, si videas graviores amatoria, quae ab ipsis
dicuntur elegantius, stulticinia, personare. Ipsum quoque cultum religionis
incestat, quod ante conspectum domini, in ipsis penetralibus sanctuarij,
lascivientis vocis luxu, quadam ostentatione sui, muli^ribus modis notularum
articulorumque caesuris, stupentes animulas emollire nituntur; Cum
praecinentium, and succinentium, canentium, and decinentium, intercinentium and
occinentium, praemolles modulationes audieris, Syrenarum concentus credas esse,
non hominum, and de vocum facilitate miraberis, quibus Philomena vel Psit^acus,
aut ^i quid sonorius est, modos suos nequeunt coaequare. Ea siquidem est
ascendendi, descendendique facilitas, ea sectio vel geminatio notularum, ea
replicatio articulorum, singulorumque consolidatio, sic acuta vel acutissima,
gravibus and subgravibus temperantur, ut auribus sui iudicij fere subtrahatur
autoritas and animus quem tantae suavitatis demulsit gratia, auditorum merita
examinare non sufficit, See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 7. Alex. Fabricius. Destructoriu^
Vitiorum. pars 3. cap. 10. accordingly.
Cum h^c quidem modum excesserunt, lumborum pruriginem, quam devotionem mentis,
poterunt ci^ius excitare. Si vero moderationis ^ormula limitantur, animum a
curis redimunt, exterminant temporalium solicitudinem, and quadam
participatione laetitiae, and quietis, and amica exultatione in Deum, mentes
humanas traijciunt ad societatem angelorum. Sed unde hanc moderationis formulam
tenes? Laudate eum in tympano and choro and Organo and chordis, a^t Psalmista:
non aeri tinnienti ad mulcendos ac deliniendos animos accommodatis divinos
cantus committens, veru^ nos admonens, ut excarne nostra tympanu^ efficiamus,
sic nempe ut nullum p^aeposteri affectus motum habeat, verum terrenis membris
mortua and ^xtincta sit. Per choru^ autem, concordiam Ecclesiae concentu^
postulat: Per chordas item sensus nostros intelligit, quorum opera linguae
plectru^ pulsatur. Denique Organu^ quivis nostru^ est, cum Deo mores suos ac
vitam probat atque hominu^ commodis aptus est. Isiodor. Pelusiota. Epist. l. 1.
Epist. 364. Bibl. Patru^. Tom 5 pars 2. p. 510.
Exultabunt, inquit, cumcantavero tibi, labia mea. Si ergo ex abundantia cordis
os tuum laudem Domini moduletur, si spiritu psallis and mente, psallis denique
sapienter, etiam citra articulatae vocis intelligentiam, rectissimam modestiae
regulam tenes, and non tam vocis, quam mentis iubilo aures mulces altissimi,
and indignationem eius prudenter avertis. Qui autem voluptatis aut vanitatis
affectus exprimit, qui vocis gratiam prosti^uit concupiscentijs suit, qui
lenociniorum clientulam musicam facit, ignorant quidem canticum Domini, modis
Babilonijs festivus in terra aliena. Qui nescio quo pacto plus placeant, nisi
quia Nitimur in vetitum Semper, cupimusque negata.
and aquae furtivae dulciores, and panis absconditus suavior est. Et quidem
Phrygius modus, decreto Philosophorum, ab aula Graeciae iampridem missus est,
and caeteri quibus descensus fit in lasciviam and corruption^m. Thus far John
Saresbury. Our learned Countryman Printed at London by John Day, 1563. Cum
Privilegio Regiae Majestatis per septennium.
Thomas Beacon, in his authorized Relics of Rome. cap. 37.38. Of Plain-song,
Prick-song, Descant, and Singing in the Church, Writes thus: That See John
Bales Declaration of Bonners Articles. Artic. 18. fol. 63.64. ^ccordingly.
Platina, Bale, and Barn^s in his life. Volateranus in his Cronicle, and Polydor
Virgil De Inventor. Rerum. l. 6. c. 2. See Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit 2. c.
18.19, 20. fol. 40. to 45. of singing in Churches, what it ought to be, and how
it came in. Claudius Espencaeus, Digressionum. in Tim. lib. 1. cap. 10. page
218.219. Walafridus Strabo, De Rebus Ecclesiasticis. lib. c. 25. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 9. pars 1. page 962.963.
Pope Vitalian being a lusty Singer, and fresh courageous Musician himself,
was the first that brought Prick-song, Descant, and all kind of pleasant
melody into the Church; in the year 653. And because nothing should want to
delight the vain foolish and idle ears of fond fantastical men, he joined
the Organs to the curious Music. Thus was Paul's preaching, and Peter's
praying, turned into vain singing, and childish playing, unto the great loss
of time, and unto the utter undooing of Christian men's souls, which live not
by singing and piping, but by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God. Franciscus Petrarcha, in his Lib. 1. Dialogus. 23. See much more against
wanton, effeminate, amorous music Ibid. and in Espencaeus Digres. in Tim. l.
^ cap 10. accordingly.
Book, De Remedijs utriusque Fortunae (says he) declares: that S. Athanasius
did utterly forbid singing to be used in the Church at Service time, because he
would put away all lightness and vanity, which by the reason of singing does
oftentimes arise in the minds, both of the Singers and of the Hearers. S.
Hierom, reproved not only the lewd fashion of the singing men in his time,
but also their manner of singing: when notwithstanding if the singing used in
his time were compared with that minsed music which now bears chief rule
in Churches, it might seem very grave, modest, and tolerable; and ours so
light, vain, mad, fond, foolish and fantastical, that Hickscorner himself
could not devise a more wanton pastime. Then he recites some passages out of In
Epistola ad Ephe^ios. c. 5
Hierom, In Oratione Dominica.
Cyprian, Lib. de Cain and Abel.
Ambrose, De Catechis. Rudibus. lib. and Confessionu^ l. b. 10. cap. 33.
Augustine, In Registro. pars 5. c. 44. and Moral. lib. 22. cap. 18.
Gregory, Hom. 44. de Joan. and Pauli Festo.
Chrysostom, and In Constitut. Authent. 123.
Justinian, against such curious Prick-song, and melodious singing in Churches,
in which plain ^inging only, which every man may understand, and which is in a
manner nothing else but plain reading, ought to be used. And then he
concludes the Chapter with these Authorities. Rational. Divin. Offic^
Gulielmus Durandus says, that the use of singing was ordained for carnal and
fleshly men, and not for spiritual and godly minded men. De Inventor. Rerum.
lib. 6. cap. 2.
Polidorus Vergilius writes on this manner. How greatly that ordinance of
singing brought into the Church by Pope Damasus and See Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions. Iniunction 49. accordingly.
S. Ambrose began even in those days to be profitable, S. Austen declares
evidently in the Book o^ his Confessions: where he asks forgiveness of God
because he had given more heed, and better ear to the singing, then to the
weighty matter of the holy Words. But n^w adays, says Polydor, it appears
evidently, that it is much less profitable for our Commonwealth, seeing our
Singers mak^ such a chattering charm in the Temples, that nothing can be heard
but the voice: and they that are present (they are present so many as are in
the City) being content with such a noise as delights their ears, care nothing
at all for the virtue, pith, or strength of the words: Vnde eo ventum est, ut
apud vulgus, omnis fere divini cultus ratio in istis cantoribus sita ess^
videa^ur; quos bona pars populi ut audiat in sacras aedes velut in theatru^
concurrit, ^os praetio conducet, eos fovet, eos denique solos domui Dei
orname^to esse existimat, etc. Ibidem.
so that now it is come to this point, that with the common sort of people all
the worshipping of God seems to be set in these singsters, although there is
generally no kind of people more light nor more lewd. And yet the greater
part of the people for to hear them, boing, bleating and yelling, flock into
the Churches as into a common Game-place. They hire them with money, they
cherish and feed them; yea, to be short, they think them alone to be the
precious Jewels and Ornam^nts of Gods house, etc. Wherefore without doubt, it
were better for Religion to cast out of the Churches such chattering and
iangling ^ayes, or else so to appoint them, that when they sing, they should
rather rehearse the songs after the manner of such as read, then follow the
fashion of chattering Charmers: which thing S. Austen in his foresaid Book
does witness, that S. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, did in his Diocese,
and he commends him greatly for it. De Vanitate Scientiaru^ c. 17.
Cornelius Agrippa writes of singing in Churches in this manner, Athanasius
did forbid singing in his Churches because of the vanity thereof: but Ambrose
as one more desirous of Ceremonies and pomp, ordained the use of singing and
making melody in Churches. Austen as a man indifferent betwixt both, in his
Book De Confessionibus, grants that by this means he was in a great
perplexity and doubt concerning this matter. Hodie vero in Ecclesijs tanta
musicae licentia est, ut etia^ una cu^ Mis^ae ipsius canone obscaenae quaeque
cantiunculae, interim in Organis pares vices habeant, ipsaque divina officia,
sacrae and orationu^ praeces conductis magno aere lascivis musicis, no^ ad
audientiu^ intelligentiam, non ad spiritus elevatione^, sed ad fornicariam
prurigine^; no^ humanis vocibus, sed belluinis strepitibus, ca^tillant, du^
hinniant disca^tu^ pueri, mugiunt alij tenore^, alij latr^nt contra punctu^,
alij boant altu^, alij frende^t bassam, faciuntque ut sonoru^ quide^ plurimu^
audiatur, verboru^ and orationis intelligatur nihil, sed auribus pariter and
animo iudicij subtra^itur authoritas. Ibidem.
But now a-dayes Music is grown to such and so great licentiousness, that
even at the ministration of the holy Sacrament, all kind of wanton and lewd
trif^ing Songs, with piping of Organs have their place and course. As for the
Divine Service and Common prayer, it is so chaunted and minsed, and mangled, of
our costly hired, curious, and nice Musitions (not to instruct the audience
withal, nor to stir up men's mind^s unto devotion, but with a whorish harmony
to tickle their ears:) that it may justly seem, not to be a noise made of
men, but rather a bleating of brute beasts; whiles the Coristers ney descant
as it were a sort of Colts; others bellowe a tenor, as it were a company of
Oxen: others bark a counter-point, as it were a Waldenses cantum
Ecclesiasticum and horarum canonicarum Dicunt ^sse latratus canum. Item
aedificia altariu^ and Organorum reprobant Ind^x Erroru^ quibus Waldenses
inf^cti sunt^ Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. page 340. cap. 4.
kennell of Dogs: others rore out a treble like a sort of Bulls: others grunt
out a base as it were a number of Hogs; so that a foul evil favored noise is
made, but as for the words and sentences, and the very matter it self is
nothing understanded at all; but the authority and power of judgment is taken
away, both from the mind and from the ^ares utterly. Anno^. in 1 Corinthians. cap.
14.
Erasmus Roterodamus expresses his mind concerning the curious manner of
singing used in Churches, on this wise, and says, Why does the Church doubt to
follow so worthy an Author (Paul?) yea, how dare it be bold to dissent from
him. What other thing is h^ard in Monasteries, in Colleges, in Temples almost
generally, then a confused noise of voices? But in the time of Paul, there was
no singing but saying only. Singing was with great difficulty received of them
of the latter time; and yet such singing as was none other thing, then a
distinct and plain pronunciation, even such as we have yet among us, when we
sound the Lords prayer in the holy Canon, and the tongue wherein those things
were sung, the common people did then understand, and answered, Amen. But now,
what other thing does the common people hear than voices signifying nothing?
And such for the most part is the pronunciation, that not so much as the words
or voices are heard: only the sound beats the ears. Thus far this worthy
ancient English Professor, Thomas Beacon, and his alleged Authors: to which I
shall add that notable passage to the like purpose, in the Page 131.
second part of the Homely of the Place and time of Prayer. Finally Gods
vengeance has been and is daily prov^ked, because much wicked people pass
nothing to resort to the Church; either for that they are so sore blinded, that
they understand nothing of God or godliness, or else for that they see the
Church altogether scoured of all such gazing sights as their fantasy was
greatly delighted with etc. which seems an unsavory thing to their unsavory
taste, as may appear by this, that a woman said to her neighbor. Alas Gossip,
what shall we now do at Church, since all the Saints are taken away; since all
the goodly sights we were wont to have, are gone; since we cannot hear the
like piping, singing, chaunting, and playing on the Organs ( Pope Agatho was
the first that brought singing and Organ-playing into the Church of England, in
the year of our Lord 679. See John Bale, his Declaration of Bonners Articles.
Artic. 18. fol. 63.64. Bed^, De Gestis Angloru^. l. 4. c. 1. and Gratian
Distinctio 19. accordingly.
brought first into England by Pope Agatho, about the year 679.) that we could
before. But (dearly beloved) we ought greatly to rejoice, and give God
thanks, that our Churches are delivered out of all these things which
displeased God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy House and his place of
Prayer, for the which he has justly destroyed many Nations, etc. Effeminate
wanton accurate music then, by the verdict of these severa^l Authors and of
our own Homelies, is altogether dispeasing unto God, corrupts his worship, and
filthily defiles his holy House, etc. therefore it must needs be evil.
Whereupon Synodus Carnotensis An. 1526. See Surius Conciliorum. Tom. 4. p. 740.
Concilium Senonense. 1528. Can. 17. Concilium Burdigense. 1582. Concilium
Rhemense. 1583. Concilium Bituriense. 1584. Apud Bochellum. Decret. Ecclesiae.
Gal. lib. 1. Tit. 7. cap. 23.24.26.27.28.30. and the Council of Trent it
self, Surius. Tom. 4. page 962.
Sessio. 22. Decretum, De observan^is and evitandis in celebratione Missae;
decreed, Praecipimus, ut in Ecclesijs sint musici cantus distincti, and
discreti, move^tes cor ad devotione^ compunctionemque, porro in Ecclesijs
praetextu musici cantus, non sunt audiendae publicae cantilenae ac lascivae.
Neque enim in tragaedio^u^ modu^ (inquit Hieronimus) guttur and fauces
medicamine sunt leniendae; ne du^ bla^da vox quaeritur, congrua vita
negligatur. Na^ ut cantor minister Deum moribus stimulat, cu^ populu^ vocibus
delecta^: ita lasciuus animus, du^ lascivioribus delectatur modis, eos saepe
audiensemollitur and frangitur Cure^t ergo Sacerdotes and Clerici sic suos
cantus instituere, ut modesta honestaque psallendi gravitate, placidaque and
grata modu^atione, sic audientiu^ aures delinea^t, ut provoc^nt excitentque ad
devotione^, compunctione^ que; non ad lascivia^, cordisue aut animi
titillatione^. Nolumus itaque, quod Organicis instrumentis resonet in Ecclesia,
impudica aut lasciva melodia, sed sonus omnino dulcis, qui nihil praeter Hymnos
divinos, and Cantica spiritualia repraesentet. Council. Senonense Can. 17.
that all impure, lascivious, amorous, secular Songs and Organorum melodia in
Te^plis sic adhibebitur ne lasciviam magis quam devotione^ excitet, etc.
Council. Coloniense. Anno 1536. pa^s 2. cap. 15.
Musicke^ sauouring of levity and folly, should be excluded the Church, because
they did effeminate the lascivious minds of the people, and provoke them unto
lust; not excite or stir them up to devotion and comp^nction, as all Church
Music, ( See Council. Constant. 6. Canon. 75.
which should be grave, and serious) ought to do. If therefore we give any
credit to these recited Authorities; to Osorius, De Regum Institutione. lib. 4.
fol. 120^ to 126. who largely declaimes against amorous delicio^s Songs and
Musicke^ as so many enchaunting Sirens; which draw men on to idleness,
effeminacy, luxury, and a kind of wanton dissoluteness, to the corruption of
their manners, of their minds, and the perdition of their souls: Or to sundry
See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 7. Summa Angelica Cantus.
other Christian Authors which I spare to mention, in their Expositions and
Commentaries on the 7. Commandment: on Esaias 5.11.12. and 24.9. Amos 6.1. to 8.
Job 21.12.13. Exodus 32.18.19. and the Book of Psalm^s; my Major must be
granted. But I pass from these to Pagans. It is storied of the Diodorus. See
Bibl. Hist. l. 1. sect. 81. Polydor Virgil De Invent. rerum. l 1. c. 19.
Agrippa, De Vanit. Scient. c. 17. Alexander ab Alex. l. 2.^.35. Bo^mus De Mor.
Gentium. l. 1. c. 5. p. 46.47. C^lius Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. l. 6. c. 1.
ancient Egyptians; that they condemned M^sicke, not only as unprofitable,
but as no^ious too, because they were persuaded, it would enerva^e the vigor of
men's minds: which caused them to enact a kind of law; that their Children
should for this cause learn no Music. Not to record the singular opinion of
Polyb^us Hist. l. 4. p. 339.3^0. Ath^naeus, Dipnos. l. 14. c. 11. Agrip. De
Van. Scient. cap 17. Po^ydor Virgil. De Invent. l. 1. c. 14. Alexander ab Alex.
l. 2. c. 25.
Ephorus; who writes; that Music was invented only to deceive men; It is
registered of Plutarchi Alcibiades. Alexander ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25. ^. 103. b.
Alcibiades, that he rejected delicious Music as ^nwor^hy any ingenuous
person: Of Plutarchi Apothog. Tom. 1. mor. page 397. Caelius Rhodig. Antiqu^
Lect. lib. 9. cap. 1. Clerk, de Au^ico. lib. 1. and 2. vid. Ibidem.
Ateas, a Scythian King; that when he heard Ismenia an accurate Musician,
playing with great applause and admiration of others; ^e reply^d, that the
neighing of an Horse was much more pleasing and delightful to him: And of
Diog. Laert. lib. 6. page 353.
Diogenes Cinnicus, that he neglected Music as an unprofitable, needless,
useless thing. But these perchance are over-rigorous, and less proper for our
present purpose; I therefore pass to more punctual witn^sses. It is storied
of the Plutarchi Laconica Instituta. page 504.
Lacedaemonians, that though they approved of plain, of grave and modest; yet
they utterly exploded all eff^minate, light, newfangled harmonies; for the
practice of which Terpander and Timotheus, were fined and censured by their
Ephori. Hist. l. 1. p. 342.
Polibius a grave Historian; condemns all amorous, lascivious harmonies,
together with the use of music for effeminate or voluptuous ends. De
Republica Dial. 3. p. 591.597. Legum Dial. 2. p. 800.801, 802.
Plato, though he approves of Music, yet he exiles all loose unmanly,
voluptuous wanton Lydian or Ionicke Harmonies and Musicions; together with all
musical Instruments of many strings; as being a means to effeminate men's
minds, corrupt their manners, abate their courage, consume their time; and to
draw them on to idleness and voluptuous living; with whom Polit. l. 8. ^. 6.
p. 527. etc. 7. p. 533.534, 536.
Aristotle and Socrates concur upon the selfe-sam^ grounds. Instrumenta
luxuriae tympana atque tripudia. Salust. De Bello Cat. page 22. Justin. Hist. l.
30. page 254.
Salust and Justin, have both long since condemned lascivious Music and
Dancing, as the instruments of luxury. Enervant animos cytharae, cantusque
Lyrae que, Et vox, and numeris brachia mota suis, etc. De Remedio Amoris. lib.
2.
Ovid and Pro humanitate, mollicie^; pro te^perantia, intemperantia^; animique
dissolutionem operantur. Dipnos. l. 14. c. 13. p. 1010. See Chrysostom. Hom. 15. and
23. ad Pop. Antiochiae, etc.
Athenaeus, two great Patriots of Music, have notwithstanding censured
effeminate accurate Songs and Harmonies, as emasculating the virility, and
unbending the sinews of men's minds, making them of Courteous, effeminate; of
temperate, intemperate; of valiant, unmanly persons: whence they advise men to
abandon them. Herodoti. Clio. sect. 28. p. 63. Justin. Hist. l. 1. p. 10.11.
When the Lydians had revolted from Cyrus, and taken up Arms against him, King
Cresus advised him this course, to keep them in subjection for future times:
viz. To prohibit them the use of Arms; to cause them to train up their
Children to effeminate Songs and Music: and then, O King, says he, their men
will soon degenerate into women, so that thou need not then to fear any
rebellion; which fell out accordingly. For when as Cyrus had conquered them, he
put this counsel into execution; Et sic gens industria quondam potens, and
manu strenua, e^faeminata mollitie luxuriaque virtutem pristinam perdidit. Et
quos an^e Cyrum invictos bella praestiterant, in luxuriam lapsos, otium ac
desidia superavit. Justin. Ibidem.
by means of which, this industrious mighty warlike Nation, became effeminate
and riotous, and so quite degenerated from their former valor. By which
experimental example, and the fore-alleadged testimonies, it is most apparent;
that effeminate accurate lust-provoking Music, (especially in public
meetings, feasts and Enterludes, where other concurrent circumstances
confederate with it, to poast men on to sinful actions; in which cases the
Isay 5.11.12. Job 21.12, 13. Amos 6.1. to 8. Isay 24.9. Dan. 3.5, 7, 15. Iam.
4.9, 10. c 5.1, 5. 1 These. 5.22. Vbi sunt laeta convivia quid frustra intendunt
vocem? praesens enim praebet voluptate^ per se convivij abu^dantia mortalibus.
Euripidis Medea. page 274.
Scriptures most condemn it:) must undoubtedly be utterly unlawful unto
Christians, in regard of the forenamed lewd effects which issue from it: and
so by consequence must Plays be too, which are either compounded of it, or
attended with it.

For the Minor, that Stage Plays (which have all other inescating
lust-inflaming solicitations accompanying them, that either human pravity, or
Satan's policy can invent) are attended with such lascivious amorous Music,
which is apt to Musica incorpoream anima^ corporaliter mulcet, and solo auditu
ad quod vult deducit: quu^ tenere non praevalet verbo tacito, manibus clamat,
sine ore loquitur, and per insensibilium obsequiu^ praevale^sensuum exercere
dominatum. Cassioderus Variaru^. l 2 c. 40.
captivate men's chastity, and foment their lusts; it is more then evident; not
only by modern experience, (our Play Houses resounding always with such
voluptuous Melody;) but likewise by the suffrage of sundry Paga^ and Christian
Authors, both ancient and modern. Witness Plato, Legum Dialogus 3. page 822.
Aristotle Politic. l. 8. c. 7. p. 532.533. Livy, Romans Hist. lib. 7. sect. 2.
Polybius Hist. lib. 4. p. 340. Dion^sius Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Romans l. 7. sect.
9. Ovid, De Remedio Amoris. lib. 2. and Cantabat fanis, cantabat tibia ludis^
Ibidem.
Pastorum. lib. 3 4.5. Horace, De Art Poetica. lib. p. Tibia non, ut nunc,
aurichalco vincta tubaeque AEmula, sed ^enu^s simplex foramine pauco Adspirare
and ad esse choris erat utilis, atque. Nondu^ spissa nimis complere sedilia
flatu, etc. vid. Ibid.
302.303. Athenaeus Dipnosoph. l. 14. c. 3.5. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. sect. 3.
Suetonij Caligula. sect. 54. and Nero. sect. 20.21.23.25.32. Plutarchus De
Musica. Macrobius Saturnalium. l. 2. c. 7. and l. 3. c. 14. Tertullian, De
Spectaculis, lib. Arnobius adversus Gentes. lib. 4. and 7. Basil Hexaemer. Hom.
4. Nazienzen ad Selucum. page 1063. Clemens Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. and l.
3. c. 11. Cu^cta enim quae ibi fiunt turpissima s^nt; verba, voces, ca^tus,
modulationes, tibiae, fistulae, etc. omnia (inquam) turpi lasciv^a plena sunt.
Ibidem. Tom. 2. Col. 298. D.
Chrysostom. Hom. 38. and 89. in Matthew. Hom. 15.21.22.23. Ad Pop. Antioch.
Augustine, De Musica. l. 1. c. 2. to 8. Hierom. Comment. in Ephesians. l. 3. c. 2.
Tom. 6. p. 188. A. Isi^dor. Hispal^nsis Originum. l. 18. c. 47. Damascen,
Paralellorum. l. 3. cap. 47. with sundry other Fathers and Councels quoted in
the precedent Scene. Alexander ab Alexandro. l. 2. c. 25. Mariana and
Brissonius de Spectaculis. Stephen Gosson, his School of Abuses, and Plays
confuted. Action 2. Godwins Roman Antiquities. Book 2. sect. 3. chap. 11. p.
108.109. Bodinus, De Republica. l. 6. c. 3. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum.
cap. 17. and 20. and above all, Caesar Bulengerus, De Theatro. lib. 2. cap. 1.
to 47. All which, with Se Scene 9. before.
infinite others, largely ratify the truth of this Assumption; that Plays are
always accompanied with most In spectaculis modulatissimi tibiarum concentus
meretriciaeque cantiones audientium animis insidentes, nihil aliud afferunt,
quam u^ omnibus turpiter and obscaene se gerere persuadeant, citharaedorum
scilicet, aut tibicinum pulsus imitantes. Basil. Hexaem. Hom. 4. and Damascen.
Paral. lib. 3. cap. 47.
effeminate, amorous, lust-provoking Music, which depraves men's minds and
manners: therefore both it and the Conclusion resulting from it, must be
granted.

SCENA VNDECIMA.
Argument 26.
may be framed.

That which is always accompanied with Repraehensibilis risus est, si
immodicus, si pueriliter effusus, si muliebriter fractus. Odibilem quoque
homine^ facit risus, aut superbus, aut clarus, aut malignus and furtivus, aut
alienis malis evocatus. Martinus Episc. Dumi^nsis, De 4or. Virtutibus lib.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 2. p. 239. A.
profuse lascivious laughter, with immoderate sinful applauses of Plays and
infamous Actors, which Christians should abhor, must certainly be unlawful
unto Christians.

But Stage Plays are always accompanied with such laughter and applauses.

Therefore they must certainly be unlawful unto Christians.

The Major I shall evidence, by proving such laughter, such applauses to be
sinful. That p^ofuse lascivious laughter, especially such as is occasioned by
Stage Plays, is evil, it is most apparent. First, in regard of the original
efficient cause of it, which is commonly some Oportet aute^ ipsum quoque
subrisu^ doceri and castigari: and si de rebus quidem turpibus fuerit,
^rubescere potius videri, quam subridere, ne videamur per consensum collaetari.
Clemens Alex. Paedag. l. 2^ c. 5.
obscene, lascivious, sinful passage, gesture, speech, or jest, (the Nobis
autem gaudere and ridere non sufficit, nisi cu^ peccato atque insania
gaudeamus: nisi risus noster impuritatibus atque flagitijs misceatur. An forte
infructuosum putemus gaudiu^ simplex, nec delectat ridere sin^ crimine? Quod
rogo hoc malu^, aut quis furor? Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. p. 192. Sine
amore iocisque nil est iucundu^. Horace. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 6.
common object of men's hellish mirth) which should rather provoke the Actors,
the Spectators to penitent sobs, then wanton smiles; to brinish tears, then
carnal solace, which suite not with such sinful objects; as Nu^ haec potius
praedicationes, inspectiones, iucunditates, an lachrymas atque g^mitus
merentur, etc^ Nazienzen ad Selucum. p. 1063.
Nazienzen, Quodque aegrius ferendu^ est, non solu^ nulla^ talia audientes
molestia^ capitis, veru^ etia^ ridetis atque laetamini. Cumque vitari ista
abominarique deberetis, suscipitis atque laudatis. Quas ob res non cachinnis
difflu^re sedentes, sed lachrymis gemere atque dolere oportet. Chrysostom. Hom.
38. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 299. Ne igitur desinatis super hu^usmodi spectacula
gemere, ac saepius remorderi. Hom. 6. in Mat. Col. 53. A.
Chrysostom, and De Risu lib. p. 135. to 145. Marp. 1606.
Antonius Laurentius well observe. It is recorded of Lot, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7.
that he vexed his righteous soul from day to day, in seeing and hearing the
unlawful filthy deeds and conversation of the wicked Sodomites. Of David;
Psalm. 119.136, 158.
that rivers of tears ran down his eyes, because men kept not Gods Law. Of
Jeremiah, Ier. 13.17.
that his heart did bleed in secret, his eyes weep sore and trickle down with
tears, for the iniquities of his people. Of Paul; 2 Cor. 12.21.
that he seriously bewailed the unlamented, unrepented sin of the incestuo^s
Corinthian. Of Ezra, Ezra. cap. 9. thorowout, and cap. 10.1, 2.
that he humbled himself, and rent his clothes, and mourned and wept
exceedingly for the Israelites sin^e in marrying with Idolaters. And of Ezech.
9.4. Propterea par est, ut animo co^traha^tur lugea^t, contabescant, tu^ qui
delinquu^t, tu^ qui non delinquu^t. Illi quide^ propter admissa facinera; hi
vero quia fratres viderunt fuisse immodestos. Ch^ysostom. Kalendis. Oration.
To^. 5 Col. 799. A.
all the faithful of Jerusalem, that they sighed and cried for all the
abominations that were committed in the midst thereof. Yea, God himself
enioynes his servants, Luke 19.41. cap. 23.27, 28. Romans 12.15. 1 Cor. 5.2. c.
13.6. 2 Cor. 7.6. to 12. Phil. 3 18.
to mourn for others sins: Iam. 4.9.
to turn their sinful laughter into heaviness; Isay 5.20. Hab. 2.15.16.
Zeph. 3.11. Prove. 24.16, 17.18. Luke 6.25.
and their carnal joy (arising from lascivious objects) into mourning:
effulminating an everlasting woe, a Genesis 19.22, 25.
dismal curse against all such graceless fools, who Prove. 14.9.
make a mock of sin, or recreate themselves with the iniquities of other
men. That Playhouse laughter then which arises from such filthy scurrilous
objects, must needs be evil, Improbu^ risus ostendit. Seneca. Epist. 52. and
Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew.
discovering nothing but a graceless heart; delighting only in ribaldry, in
uncleanesse; whereas all Christians, Qua^do enim mimi illi atque ridiculi
blasphemia^ ac turpe quid dixeru^t, tunc potissimu^ quique stolidiores
solvuntur in risum: inde applaudentes magis, unde etia^ illos lapidibus
exagitare debuera^t; qui fornace^ ignis horribilis ex hujusmodi voluptate in
suu^ ipsoru^ caput succendu^t. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col^ 52. A
must rejoice in God alone, Phil. 4.5. Isay 29.19. c. 41.16. Joel 2.23. Ps.
97.12. Nonne audistis Paulu^ dicente^; Gaudete in Domino. In Domino dixit, non
in Diabolo. Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Mat. To^. 2. Col. 298. B.
not in the Devil, not in sinful pleasures, Heb. 11.25.
which are but for a season. Secondly, it mu^t needs Quin etiam ipse risus est
co^premendus eique modus and conveniens te^pus adhibendu^ est. Na^ ipse quoque
si quo modo oportet proferatur, praese fert decorem and honestate^: ^in aliter
prodeat, indicat inte^perantiam. Itaque tanqua^ animalia ratione praedita
oportet nos te^perate componere studij nostri acrimoniam, and nimiu^ intensam
veliementiam moderat^ remittentes, non aute^ inconcinne dissolventes. Clem.
Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. Non malu^ est risus, sed malu^ est id quod est
praeter modu^, id quod est inte^pestivu^. Animo nostro insitus est risus, ut
aliquando relaxetur animus, non ut diffudatur. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in Heb. To^. 4.
Col. 1593. C.D. Hom. 15.21. and 23. ad Pop. Antioch. To^. 5. Col. 522. A.B. See
Nazienzen. Sententiae p. 997.
be sinful in regard of its excess, it being altogether boundless beyond the
rules of modesty, temperance, christianity, sobriety, by which it should be
regulated. Nazienzen. ad Selucu^^ p. 1063^ Chrysostom. Hom. 6. and 38. in Matthew. and
42. in Acta. Apost. Salvian, De Gubernat Dei. l. 6. accordingly.
Theatricall laughter knows neither bounds, nor measure; men wholly resign
and let loose the reins of their hearts unto it, glutting, nay tyring their
sides and spirits with it: the Temperandu^ ab immoderato and solutiore risu.
Ridere enim solutius, neutiquam ijs permissum qui sunt germane Christi^ni. S.
Antio^hus. Hom. 95. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7. p. 209. vid. Ibidem.
dissolute profuseness of it therefore m^kes it evil. Thirdly, the Chrysostom.
Ho^. 6. and 38. in M^r. Salvian, de Gubern^t. Dei. l. 6. Antoniu^ Laur^ntiu^,
De Risu. s. accordingly.
end of Playhouse laugh^^r, is only to satiate men's fl^shly lusts with
secular iollity and delights of sin: t^ pamper, to arm the rebellious flesh
against the Spirit: to quench those heavenly joys, and spiritual comforts
which should ravish Christian souls: to Iam. 4.9, 10. c. 5.5. Rev. 18.7 Amos
6.1. to 9. Nullu^ habebit acce^su^ cordis compu^ctio, ubi fuerit immoder^tus
risus ac iocus^ Basil. Com. in Esaia^. c. 5. Bedae. Scincillae, Tom. 7 p. 337.
exile all true repentance, all godly sorrow and sound humiliation for sin,
which are altogether incompatible with these lascivious smiles: Amos 6.3, 4, 5.
Mat. 24.38, 39. Luke 21.34, 35.
to put the evil day far off from men, by stupifying their selfe-condemning
consciences, and lulling them fast a sleep in a most desperate carnal
security. Such is the use, the fruit of this Stage-laughter: it cannot
therefore but be evil. Fourthly, this Ridere and rideri secularibus derelinque
gravitas tua^ persona^ decet. Hierom. Epist. 8 c. 7. Prudentibus viris ^isus
risu dignus est omnis, maxim meritricius. Praestat triste^ moribus esse qua^
lascivu^. Greg. Nazienzen Sententiae. p 1168.
laughter is altogether unseemely, unseasonable unto Christians. Unseemly,
because immoderate: profuse excessive laughter, (especially at the sight or
hearing of a ribaldrous Stage Play,) is altogether Non est nostru^ ergo assidue
ridere, resolvi cachin^is, molliri delicijs, sed ^oru^ potius and earu^ ^uae
spectantur in theatris^ quae in lupanaribus inquinantur. Non est inqua^ hoc
eoru^ qui ad aeternu^ regnu^ vocati sunt; non est spiritualia arma gest^ntium,
quod propriu^ est Diabolo militantiu^. Chrys^st. Hom. 6. in Matthew.
inconsistent with the gravity, modesty, and sobriety of a Christian, whose
affections should be more sublime, more serious and composed, then to be
immoderately tickled with mere lascivious vanities, Clem. Alexand. Paedag. l.
2. c. 5.
or to lash out into excessive cachinnations in the public view of dissolute
graceless persons, who will be hardened and encouraged in their lascivious
courses, by their ill example. Unseasonable; because Fr^tres, non est in hoc
mundo tempus ridendi: Beatitudo enim hic praep^rari potest, possideri non
potest. Ambros. Sermo. 17. Qua^diu sumus in hoc sae^ulo nondu^ est ridendu^, ne
postea ploremus. August. Enar. in Psalm. 51. Tom 8. pars 1. p 605. Nullu^ locu^
hic habere pote^t tempus risus; hoc enim est tempus mundi. Audi Christum
dicente^; Mundus gaude^it, vos autem contristabimini. Tu au^e^ ridis and ludis?
Non est praesens tempus diffusae laetitiae, sed luctus, af^lictionu^ and
ciulatus. Tu autem in dictis urbanis and facetis tempus teris? Est te^pus
belli: and tu ea tractas quae sunt ^oru^ qui ducu^t choros? Ludis deliciaris,
facetaque and urbana dicis, and risu^ moves, remque nihil existimas? Chrysostom.
Ho^. 17. in E^hes. T. 4. Col 987. See Ho^ 1^. in Heb. Col. 1993. accordingly.
this is no place, no time, no world for Christians to laugh or to be merry in:
but to bewail their own and others sins, that so they may escape the
eternal torments of them at the last. Our Savior, whose doctrine no Christian
dares control, has denounced an Lu 6.25 Isay 5.9, 10. Amos 6.1. to 8. Iam.
5.1.5. Rev. 18.6.7, 8.
woe, to all those that laugh, that live in ease, iollity, and carnal
pleasures now, because they shall certainly mourn, and suffer eternal
to^ments for it hereafter; informing all his Children (whose Ps. 16.11. ^ Cor.
2 9 1 Pet 1.4^5.
joys are treasured up in heaven against another day) John 16.33. 2 Timothy 3.12.
that in this world they shall be sure to suffer persecution and affliction,
John 16 20.
to weep, lament, and be sorrowful: and that this world only (who Psalm.
17.14.
have their portion in this life) shall now rejoice; that is, in a carnal
worldly manner: whereupon he advises all his followers, Iam. 4.9, 10.
to turn their secular laughter into mourning, their carnal iollity into
weeping and heaviness; For Christians therefore to make this world a paradise
of all earthly pleasures, to spend their days in Epicurisme, mirth and
iollity, glutting themselves with sinful Spectacles and mirth-provoking
Enterludes, as alas two many do: to be like Perpetuo risu pulmone^ agitare
solebat Democritus. Iuvenal. Satyr. 10. p. 92. AElian Variae Hist l. 4. cap.
30. Seneca. De Tranquil. Animi. cap. 15.
Democritus, always laughing, never weeping, unless it be sometimes against
their wills, and then not for their sins: to be most unlike their blessed
Savio^r, Itaque flentem quidem Christum frequenter inven^as, nunqua^ vero
ridente^, sed nec leviter saltem subride^do gaudentem. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Mat.
T. 2. Col. 50. B.C. Hom. 15. in Heb. To^. 4. Col. 1593.
who was oft-times weeping, never smiling that we read of. Salvian. De
Gubernat. Dei. l. 6.
Quem flevisse legimus risisse non legimus: how can it but be sinful, yea
abominable? Christ Jesus our 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Ioh. 2.6.
pattern, our example, whose steps we all must follow, if ever we expect
salvation from him; Isay 53.3.4. Ps. 38.6. Lam. 1.12. Lu. 19.41^ Ioh. 11.35.
was always mourning, never laughing; (I am sure not at a Stage Play, which
he and his condemn, as worthy tears, not smiles,) and Christus in crucem
actus est propter tua mala: tu autem rides? Impactae sunt illi alapae, and
colaphi and tam multa passus est propter tuam calamitatem, and quae te
comprehenderat tempestatem, tu autem degis in delicijs? Chrysostom. Hom 17. in
Ephesians. Tom. 4. Col. 987.
shall we do nothing but rejoice? The Apostles and Math. 5.3, 4. Luke 6.21.
John 16.20. Acts 20.37^ Phil. 3.18. Romans 12.15. Eccles. 7.2, 4. Psalm. 137.1.
Lam. 1. and 2.
Christians in the Primitive Church, yea all the Saints of God who went before
us, were for the most part weepers, not laughers; deploring among sundry other
evils, See Nazienz^n ad Selucum. p. 1063. Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew. Salvian.
De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. August. Confess. l. 3. c. 1.2. Cy^rian. Epist. l. 2.
Epist 2. Don^to
those execrable abominations which Stage Plays did produce. And shall we be
always laughing^ nay laughing at these filthy Enterludes which they so much
bewailed? Is this to 1 Cor. 11. 1. Phil. 3.17.
imitate Christ or his Apostles: to live like Saints, like Christians, John
15.19. Rev 14.3, 4.
like men redeemed from the world? Is this to 2 Cor. 1 5, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 4 13.
participate with Christ in his afflictions; or to trace the Mat. 7.11, 14.
narrow uncouth way that leads to endl^sse joys? O no! this carnal life of
iollity, prognostics nothing but a voluptuous heart, a Iam 5.5 See. Chrysostom.
Hom. 6 and 38. in Mat. Hom. 17. in Ephesians. Hom 15. in Hebraeos. accordingly.
Godless, Christlesse conversation, which leads men down to Isay 5 9, 10^
Rev. 18.6, 7, 8.
Hell: needs therefore must it be Quid nobis cum fabulis, risu and ioco? Na^
licet interdum hon^st^ ioca suavia sint, tamen ab Ecclesiastica aberrant
regula: quoniam quae in Scripturis sanctis non reperimus, quomodo usu^pare
possumus? Bernard. De Ordine Vitae. Col 1117.
unlawful unto Christians. Fifthly, this profuse Theatricall laughter
Probantque illa dum rident. Lactant. De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 20. Nec solum
iubes, sed e^ia^ exultatione, risu, plausu adiuvas quae geruntur, omnibusque
modis hanc Diabolicam confoves officinam. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Mattb. Col. 52.
B.
does give a public approbation to all the ribaldry and profaneness that is
either personated ^r perpetrated on the Stage, and so makes these laughers
deeply guilty of it. Sixthly, it produces sundry sinful con^equents: as
Chrysostom Hom 6. in Matthew. and Hom^ 62^ ad Pop. Antiochiae. S. Antiochus. Hom.
95. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7. page 209.
cachinnations, clamors, impudency, Risus frequens corrumpit mores, relaxat
quoque nervos rigoris astrictos. August. De Temp Sermo. 97. Tom. 9. pars 2 p.
306. Bernard De Ordine Vitae Col. 1117. A.
effeminacy, incivility, Risus corruption disciplinae, etc. and maxima quis
peccata viderit a nimijs gaudijs provenisse. Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Acta. Apost.
Tom. 3. Col. 611. B.
voluptuousness, looseness and lightness of spirit, impenitency, carnal
security, indisposition to every holy duty, especially to godly sorrow for
sin: therefore it cannot but be evil. Peruse we but the Scriptures; we shall
find See Genesis 18.13, 15. 2 King. 19.21. 2 Chronicles. 30.10. Neh. 2.9. Job 12.4.
Prove. 14.13. Eccles. 2.2. c. 73.6. Iam 4.9, 10. Luke 6.25. Iam. 5.1, 5. Isay
5.9, 10. Amos 6.1. to 7. Ioh. 16.20. Rev. 18.6, 7, 8.
them much condemning this excessive carnal laughter, (especially at vain, at
sinful objects) as misbeseeming Christians. Survey we the Fathers, they are
exceeding copious in this subject. Witness Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l. 2.
c. 5.6. and l 3. c. 11. Arnobius, Advers. Gentes. l. 4, page 149.150.151, l. 7.
page 230. to 242. Basil. De Ebrietate and Luxu Sermo. p. 329.332, 236.
Nazianzen ad Selucum. p. 1063.1064. Sententiae. p. 1168. and 997. Ambros.
Sermo. 17. S. Asterij. Homil. in Festum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom 4. p.
706. Hierom. Epist. 8. c. 7. August. De Verbis Apostoli. Sermo. 9. Tom. 10. p.
376. Confessionu^. l. 2. cap. 9. Enar. in Psalm. 51. Tom. 8. pars 1. page
605.606. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. and 7. Theoph^lact. Enar. in Luke
6. p. 135. Ioannis Climachus, De Discretione Gradus. c. 31. Bibl. Patrum. Tom.
6. pars 2. p. 280. G. Bedae Scintillae. Tom. 7. Col. 335. Risus. Antiochus.
Hom. 95. Quod temperandum sit a solutiore and immoderato Risu. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 7. p. 209. Bernard in Caena Domini. Sermo. 9. De Gradibus Humilitatis.
Col. 961. A. De Ordine Vitae. Col. 1117. A.B. Olympiodorus. Enar. in
Ecclesiasten. cap. 2. and 7. and above all, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 6.38. and 69.
in Matthew. Hom. 17. in Ephesios. and 15. in Hebraeos. and Sit aliquis valde
gaudens, and laetus and effusus, quid turpius? quid hoc stolidius? Ibid.
54.14.15. and 62. ad Pop. Antiochiae. To which I might add, Robertus Holkot.
in Lib. Sapientiae. Lectio. 172. fol. 133. Revelationes Sanctae Brigi^tae. l.
2. c. 29. Nicolaus de Clemangis De Novis Celebritatibus non instituendis. p.
143. to 150. Thomas Gualesius. Lect. 77 in Proverb. Solomonis. fol. 97. Edit.
Ascentijs. 1510. (a notable place) Antonius Laurentius, De Risu. l. 2. Summa
Angelica. Tit. Risus. Rabanus Maurus. Com. in Regulam. S. Benedicti. Oper. Tom.
6. p. 278. E.F. 283. E. 292. d. Alexander Alensis, Summa Theologiae. pars 2.
Quaest. 133. thorowout. and 134. with sundry others which I pretermit: who all
pass sentence against profuse immoderate laughter (especially such as
Stage Plays do occasion) as misbeseeming Christians. If any censure these as
more then puritanically rigid in this point of laughter, let them hearken what
some Pagan Authors have resolved of it, whom none dare tax of Puritanisme.
Atqui nec risus studio teneri oportet. Ferm^ enim ^ffusi risus stud^^m,
vehementem etiam mutationem quaerit. Neque ergo si quis viros memorabiles risu
diffluere faciat admittendum est: multo vero minus si Deos. De Republ. Dialog.
3. p. 586. and Dialog. 10.696.
No man (writes Plato) ought to be affected with the desire of laughter. For
the affectation of profuse laughter seeks a very vehement change. Neither is
it to be endured, that any one should make memorable men to exceed in laughter,
much less the Gods. Neque petula^tem risum ama, neque audacem oratione^ proba:
Nam alteru^ stultitiae ^st, alterum insaniae. Assuefac te ut sis vultu non
^orvo, s^d sev^ro: Nam illud insolentiae, hoc prudentiae attribuitur. Oration ad
Demoni^u^ p 9
Isocrates advises Demonicus; neither to love petulant laughter, neither to
approve of insolent speech; because the one savour^ of folly, the other of
madness: to carry a grave, not an austere countenance; because the one is
attributed to insolency, the other to prudence. Improbu^ risus demo^strat.
Epist. 53.
Seneca, makes immodest laughter, an undoubted character of a wicked man.
Renidere, usquequaque te nollem: N^m risu inepto res ineptior nulla est. Ad
Corneli^^ N^p^tem. lib. Carmen. 40. p. ^1.
Catullus, as wanton a Poet as any, records; That there is nothing more
unseemely then wanton foolish laughter. Ammianus Marcellinus. l. 23. c. 12.
Purc^as Pilgr. Bo. 4. c. 7.
Among the ancient Persians it was utterly unlawful to laugh openly in a loud
or dissolute manner. And if Variae. Historiae. l. 3. c. 35.
AElian may be credited; in the University of Athens it was unlawful for any
to laugh, especially in a profuse ridiculous immodest fashion. The very
Heathens then as is evident by these and See Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 14. c. 2.3.
Th^mas Gualesius. Lect. 77. in Proverb. Salomonis^ Stobaeus. Sermo. 5. fol.
51.59. and Ser. 74. f. 332.
sundry other testimonies, condemned loud excessive laughter. If such laughter
then as this, was altogether unseemely for modest Pagans, must not our Sed
neque apud quo^^ibet ridendu^ est, neque in omni loco, sed neque propter omnia.
Clem. Al^xand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. In risu and iocis spectari debet tempus
breve, nam longius nocet: locus honestus, nam suspectus inficit: modus iustus,
nam profusus laedit: licitum genus, nam iniqu^m vulnerat: utilis finis, nam
malus perv^rtit omnia. Case Ethic. lib. 4 cap. 6. page 288.
public infamous Playhouse cachinnations, be much more unsuitable for sober
Christians? No Christian I presume dares once deny it. Our Stage Plays
therefore which Qui risum moveant long exterminandi sunt a nostra republica:
long abest ut nobis permittat risum movere. Clem. Alex Paedag. l. 2. c. 5.
occasion, which provoke such profuse lascivious laughter, must questionless
be evil: as Ephesians. 5.3.4. with all ancient and modern Commentators on it will
more largely testify.

Secondly, as the laughter, so the public Theatricall Applauses which attend
these Enterludes, are evil. First, because they give a public justification,
not only to Stage Plays and Actors, exploded by the Church of God from age to
age; but Tertul. De Spectac. c. 25. Cyprian De Spectac. lib. Arnebius. Advers.
Gentes. l. 7 p. 230. to 242. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu c. 20. August. De Civit^
Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to 15. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. and 38. in Mat. Salvian. De Gub. Dei. l.
6. accordingly.
even to all the wickedness, the lasciviousness that attends them, to all the
villainy and lewdness that is produced by them. He who upon a Players or
Play-Poets Plaudi^e, gives any public acclamation, any applause unto the Play,
or Actors, 2 Ioh. 10.11. 1 Timothy 5.22. Romans 1.32. See Ambrose, Hierom, Sedu^ius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, Beda, Haymo, Rabanus Maurus, R^mig^us,
O^cumenius, Theophylact, Anselme, and Lyra, Ibidem.
approves both Play and Players, with all their sinful passages^ speeches,
gestures, and pernicious consequents, and says Amen unto them: A Quum ergo
indicium hoc corruptae mentis sit, animaeque immedicabiliter ae grotantis, non
immerito qui peccatum collaudat, long iniquior iudicatus est eo qui delinquit.
Oecumenius in Rom 1.32. Isiodor Hisp. De Summo bono l. 2. c 17.21.
dang^rous fearful sin, which makes men Isay 5.23. Prove. 17.15. c. 24.24.
an abomination to the Lord, and draws down a dismal woe upon their heads:
because it justifies the wickedness of the wicked, calling evil good, and
darkness light; putting bitter for sweet, and vice for virtue, as all
Theatricall Applauses do. Secondly, they Peccatu^ alterius tuu^ fit, cu^ illi
consentis. August. Enar. in Psalm 129. Solae spectaculoru^ impuritates sunt quae
unu^ admodu^ faciunt and aspicientiu^ and agentiu^ crimen. Na^ dum spectantes
hoc co^probant and libenter vident, omnes ea risu atque assensu agunt; ut vere
in eos Apostolicu^ illud peculiariter cadat: quia digni sunt morte non solu^
qui faciu^t ^a, sed etiam qui consentiunt facientibus Salvian De Guber. Dei. l.
6. p. 187.
interest men in the guilt and punishment of all those iniquities, that are
either acted or committed in, or occasioned by these Stage Plays, by giving
public and real approbation to them. Thirdly, they Chrysostom. Hom. 6. and 38.
in Matthew. Tertullian and Cyprian, De Spectac. August. De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 4.
to 15. Salvian, De Guber. Dei. l. 6. Alexander Alensis, Summa Theologiae. pars
2. Quaest. 133. accordingly.
harden, they animate both Play-poets, Players, and Play-haunters in their
ungodly courses, which perchance they would relinquish were they not encouraged
in them by these vain Applauses. Fourthly, if we believe Quale est, illas
manus quas ad Dominu^ extuleris postmodo laudando histrionem fatigare, etc? De
Spectac. c. 25. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul, Hom. vlt. in Psalm. 118.
accordingly.
Tertullian, these Applauses so pollute men's hands, that they can neither lift
them up to God in prayer, nor yet stretch them out to receive the Sacrament in
an holy manner. God requires Christians, 1 Timothy 2 8.
to lift up holy hands to him in prayer: to bring Iam. 4.8. Job 17.9. Ps. 24.4.
Ps. 73.1. Isay 1.16, 17. c. 52.11.
cleansed, washed, pure hands and hearts unto his Sacraments, not tainted with
the filth of any sin. Now Stage-applauses defile men's hands and hearts,
making them so polluted, that they can neither lift them up in holy prayers to
their Levit. 21.8. 1. Pet. 1.16. Hab. 1.13.
holy God ( who can endure no iniquity, nor the Isay 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
touch of any thing that is unclean;) nor yet extend them to embrace Christ's
sacred Body and Blood, without defilement. These Stage-applauses therefore must
needs be sinful in all these respects, as De Spectac. cap. 25.
Tert^llian, De Spectac. l^b.
Cyprian, Ad Selucum. page 1063.
Nazienzen, Neque enim theatrali plausu duci debent. De Praeparat. Evang. l. 12
c. 15.
Eusebius, Hom. 6. and 38. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to 17.
Augustine, De Gub Dei. lib. 6. p. 192.
Salvian, with Gosson, North^rooke, Reinold^, and others, qua supra, in the
Minor.
sundry modern Christian Authors, have already doomed them to our hands.

For the Minor; that Stage^playes are always attended with such laughter and
applauses, it is most apparent. First, by experience, which infallibly informs
men, that Stage Plays have evermore Na^ quae pervincere voces Evaluere sonu^
re^eru^t quem nostra theatra? Garganu^ mugire putes nemus, aut mare Tuscu^,
Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectantut. Horat. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 284. Populus
frequens laetu^ Theatris, ter crepuit sonu^. Idem Carm. l. 2. Ode. 17. Datus in
Theatro cum tibi plausus. Idem Carm l. 1. Ode. 20. See Caesar Bulengerus. De
Theatro. l. 1. c. 60.61.
superabounded with obstreperous wanton cachinnations, acclamations, applauses,
misbeseeming modest persons, much more religious Christians. Secondly, by the
very end of men's pretended resort to Stage Plays: For what other use do our
most rigid Play-patrons ascribe to Stage Plays, Ergo non satis est risu
diducere ri^tu^ Auditoris, and est quaedam tamen hic quoque virtus, etc. Horat.
S^rmo l. 1. Satyr. 10. p. 192. See Ep. l. 2. Ep. 1. and de Art Poet. p
198.202, 203, 204. pe^tatu^ admissi risu^ teneatis amici? Ibid. p. 295. Inest
lepos ludusque in hac Comaedia: Ridicula res est, da^e benign opera^ mihi.
Plauti. A sinaria Prologus. Aures, oculi, animus, ampliter ^ient saturi. Vbi
lepos, ^oci risus, hilari^as atque delectatio, etc. Plauti Ps^udolus. Prologus
See Haywoods Apology for Actors. and here p. 30.31.
but to exhilerate the Spectators, by provoking them to laughter. Or what other
pret^nce have Play-haunters for their resort to Play Houses; (though Illic ab
impijs and facinerosis magistris melius men's perdita and mul^ebris docetur
facinus. Julius Firmicus De ^rrore Profan. R^l^g c. 13.
many of them aim at far more sinester respects) but to pass away the time in
mirth? to laugh till their sides do ache again, at the Clownes behavior, or
some other merry jests and passages; Quod est mul^o dete^imu^, and favor, and
clamor, and plausus adhibetur and risus, cum in co^munem perniciem adulteriu^
tam turpe commitritur in theatris, etc ^^rys^st Hom. 6. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col.
52. B.
or to applaud the Plays, the parts, the Actors which affect them? Thirdly, by
the Plaudite, which is commonly affixed as a period to See Plauti Amphitruo,
Terentij Andria, Eunuchu^, and their other Comedies, which conclude thus.
Plaudite. Clare plaudite. Plausum date, or the like. Don^c Cantor vos Plaudi^e
dicat. Horat. De Art Poet. lib. See Bul^ngerus de Thea^. l. 1. c. 60^61.
most ancient and modern Plays: at the pronunciation of which, the people, i^
they like the Play, are wont to Quaeque sonar pleno vocesque m^nusque theatro.
Plausumque Theatris. Martial. Epigr. Apud Bulengerum, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60.
vid. Ibid. an whole chapter to this purpose.
clap their hands, and give a public acclamation, or Amen, as the practice of
former and present times does manifest. Lastly, by the concurring testimony of
Pagans, Fathers, and modern Christian Authors; who all a^firme, that
Stage Plays not only occasion, but are likewise attended with profuse
exorbitant laughter, acclamations and Bulengerus, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60.
Theatra plaudunt. August D^ Civ. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 8.
applauses; In which regard, the Sea August. De Civ. D^i. lib. 7. cap. 1.6, 7.
Fathers and modern Christian Authors much condemn them. For Pagan
Authorities; if you peruse but Athenaeus. Dipnos. lib. 6. cap. 6. who there
informs us out of Theophrastus, that the Terynthians, who were very studious
of jesting Comedies, were so accustomed to laugh at Plays, that they could not
forbear laughter in their solemn sacrifices, nor their most serious affairs.
Or Plato, De Republ. Dialog. 3. page 586. Aristotle, Politicorum. lib. 8. cap.
7. page 533.534. Ovid, Fastorum. l. 3. and 5. and De Art Amandi. l. 1. Horace,
De Art Poetica. lib. p. 298.302.303. 304. Epist l. 2. Epist. 2. Livy, Romans
Hist. l. 7. sect. 2.3. Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Romans l. 7. sect. 9.
Marcus Aurelius. Epist. 12. to Lambert, Plautus, Asinaria and Amphitruo,
Prologus, and Epilogus. Terentij. Andria and Heutontimorum. Prologus and
Epilog. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. sect. 2.3. Macrobius Saturnalium. l. 2. c. 7.
with sundry other quoted by Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60.61. you shall
find them copious in this theme. For Fathers I shall refer you to Clemens
Alexandrinus. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. and Quod autem verbum impudens non prof^ru^t,
qui risum movent scurrae and histriones? Ibid^m.
lib. 3. c. 11. Tertullian, De Spectac. c. 25. Cyprian, De Spectaculis, and
Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Arnobius, Advers. Gentes. l. 4. p. 149. Vt spectatoribus
vacuis risus possit atque hila^itas excitari, ioculatoribus feriuntur
cavilationibus numina, conclamant and assurgunt theatra, caveae omnes
concrepant fragoribus atque plausibus. Ibid.
150.151. and l. 7. p. 230. to 240. Ba^il. De Ebrietate and Luxu. Sermo. p.
329.332.338. Comment in Isaiam. c. 5. p. 419.420. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. c.
20. Nazienzen ad Selucum, p. 1063.1064. Chrysostom, Hom. 3. De Davide and
Saul. Hom. In Theatro risus movetur, and indecentibus ^achinnis resolvimut.
Domino irasce^te tu ^ides, nec vides quod amplius hinc enim co^moveras. Non est
nostrum ergo assidue ridere, ^esolvi cachinnis, molleri delicijs; sed eorum
potius and earum quae spectantur in Theatris, etc. Nec solum iubes, sed etiam
exultatione, risu, plausu adjuvas quae geruntur. Ibid. Tom. 2. Col. 51.52.
6. 38. and 69. in Matthew. Hom. 42. in Acta Apost. Hom. 15.62. ad Pop.
Antiochi^. Hom. 17. in Ephe^ios. and 15. in Hebraeos. Augustine, De Civit. Dei.
l. 2. c. 4. to 15. and 26. to 30. Quod cum fit a facientibus mimis, digne
ridentur in Theatro: cum vero a nescientibus stultis dignius irridentur in
mundo. Ibidem.
l. 6. c. 1.6. 7.10. l. 8. c. 10. l. 11. c. 8. Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6.
and 7. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 27^ l. 3. Epist. 51. Ioannis
Salisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. and lib. 8. cap. 6.7. Sanctus
Asterius. Hom. in ^estum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705.706. with
others which I pretermit, who fully suffragate to my Minors truth. For modern
Christian Authors, Thomas Gual^sius. Hom. 77. in Proverb. Solomonis. page 97.
who is copious to this purpose. M. Northbro^ke, M. Gosson, M. S^ubs, D.
Reinolds; Brissonius and Mariana, in their Books and several forenamed
Treatises against Stage Plays: The 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and
Theaters. Bulengerus, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60. and 61. De Plausu, Sibilo,
Clamoribus and acclamationibus Theatri: with sundry others formerly quoted to
this purpose. page 30.31. will sufficiently satisfy any that doubt of my
Assumpsions truth. Since then it is evident by all these testimonies, that
Stage Plays do occasion, In Theatro omnia contraria; risus, turpitudo, etc.
Occasio risus, turpitudinis exempla. Illic risus incompositus, gestus
stultitiam and insipientiam prae se ferentes^ omnia illic risum and ridicula.
Insanit tunc natura, praesentes pro hominibus bruta fiunt: and alij quidem ut
equi hinniunt, alij vero ut asini calcitrant^ magna diffusio, magna dissolutio,
nihil maturum, nihil generosum, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Acta. Tom. 3. Col.
611. B. C. 612. A.
do abound with such laughter, such applauses, as I have here evinced to be
evil and misbeseeming Saints, I may well conclude; that Stage Plays even in
this regard, and in respect of all the foregoing particulars, in the precedent
Act, are utterly unlawful unto Christians; which should cause them wholly to
abandon them.

ACTVS 6
SCENA PRIMA.
Hae nugae seria ducunt in mala. Horat. De Art Poet. p. 312.
pernicious effects, and dangerous fruits, which usually, if not necessarily
and perpetually issue from them; the chiefest of which I shall here enumerate
in their order; that so you may more evidently Mat. 7.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 1
These. 5.22.
discern the badnesse of them, by the sundry evils they occasion.

The first of these, is the prodigal mispence of much precious time, which
Ephesians. 5.16. Tunc vere tempus redimimus quando anteactam vita^ quam lasciviendo
perdidimus, flendo reparamus Anselmus in Ephesians. 5. Tom. 2. p. 288.
Christians should husband and redeem to better purposes: From whence this 27.
Argument against Stage Plays may be composed.

That which does always unavoydably produce an intolerable mispence of much
peerless time, Cum majus periculum sit male vivendi quam cito moriendi,
stultus est qui non exigui temporis mercede magnae rei aleam redimi^. Seneca.
Epist. 49.
which should be carefully improved and redeemed, must certainly be sinful,
and so unlawful unto Christians.

But this do See Ovid Tri^tu^. l. 2. f. 160. Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. c. 8.10,
13, 15. Ammianus Marcellinus. l. 28 c. 10. Basilij Hexaem. Hom. 4. accordingly.
Stage Plays; as I shall fully manifest.

Therefore they must certainly be sinfu^l, and so unlawful unto Christians.

The Major all men must subscribe to; because God himself commands us, not
prodigally to waste, but Ephesians. 5.16. Col 4.5. See Ambr^se, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Sedulius, Primasius, Remigius, Beda, Rabanus Maurus,
Oecumenius, Anselme, Theophylact, Lyra, Musculus, Calvin, Aretius, Marlorat
Ibid. and Master Wheatlies Sermon of Times Redemption, accordingly.
wisely to redeem the time, and so much the rather, because the days are
evil. Our time, Job 7.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 89, 47. Eccles. 3.1. to 18. Luke 1.75.
Acts 13.36. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
it is our richest treasure; it is that peerless portion which God himself
has put into our hands; that we might improve it to his glory, to our own and
others good; not sinfully Ezech. 16.49. Job 21.12, 13. Isay 5, 11, 12. Amos
6.1. to 9 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4^ Iam. 4.9, 10. 2 Timothy 3.4. Amoto quaeramus seria
^udo. Horat. Sermo. l. 1. Satyr. 1.
cons^me it upon lascivious childish Enterludes, vanities, or delights of
sin; which bring nothing but Iam. 5.1, 5. Rev. 18.7.
eternal horror to men's souls at last. For men, for Christians then, to cast
this unvaluable Pearl of precious time Mat. 7.6.
to Swine; to Isay 55.2.
disburse this treasure for that which is not bread, this money for that which
satisfies not: to Luke 15.13, 14.
waste this royal patrimony upon voluptuous spectacles, or lewd ridiculous
Pastimes: to trifle it quite away upon the very vainest vanities (as alas Magna
pars vitae elabitur male age^tibus, maxima nihil agentibus. Que^ mihi dabis qui
aliquod praetiu^ tempori ponat? qui diem aestimer? qui intelligat se quotidie
mori? Nemo se iudicet quicqua^ debere qui tempus accepit, cum interim hoc unum
est, quod ne gratas quidem po^est reddere. Seneca Epist. 1.
too many do, who Romans 2.5. to 10. Rev. 18.6, 7.
treasure up nothing but eternal wrath and horror to their souls, against the
day of wrath,) how can it but be sinful? Job. 1.1, 2. Luke 1.75 Romans 14.7, 8.
1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Acts 13, ^6. Phil. 1.21 Gal 2.20.
Our days, yea every hour and minute of our lives, are Gods, not ours: they
are those Mat. 25.15. to 28. Prove. 17.16.
precious talents which God has put into our hands to occupy with them till he
come: to him Romans 14.4, 7, 8, 12, 13. Rev. 2.21, 22.
must we give up our account for the employment of them at the last. And can we
then take Gods time, Gods treasure (allowed 1 Pet 4.2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 6.11, 12.
Quo te caelestis sapientia duceret ires. Hoc opus, hoc studiu^ purvi properemus
and ampli. Si patriae volumus, si nobis vivere cari. Horat. E^ist l. 1. E^ist.
3. ^ag. 243.
only to us for his use, his service, which is abundantly sufficient to
engrosse even al our days, Luke 1.75. c. 2 37. 1 These. 5.16, 17. Psalm. 145.1,
2.
) and spend it wholly upon sin? upon Satan? upon our own Festinat enim
decurrere velox Flosculus angustae miseraeque brevissima vitae Portio, dum
bibimus, dum serta, unguenta, puellas Pos^imus, obrepit non intellecta
senectus. Iuv. Sat. 9. p. 89.
carnal lusts and pleasures? upon lascivious Stage Plays, Games, and Sports?
upon Dicing, Carding, Dancing, Drinking, Whoring, Quibus in solo vivendi causa
palato est. Iuv. Satyr. 11. p. 104. Nulli rei nisi vino and libidini vacant.
Sen^ca De Brev. Vitae. cap. 6^
Feasting? upon idle Visits, Complements and Discourses? upon Meretricious
Paintings, Frizlings, Pouldrings, Attyrings, and the like, (in which many
squonder away their very choicest morning hours, more fit for study and
devotion then such unchristian practices,) as if we had no God to serve, no
callings to follow, no souls to save, Heu vivunt homines tanqua mors nulla
sequatur. Et v^lut infernus fabula vana foret.
no Hell to fear, no Heaven to seek, no Judge to censure us, no day of
Judgment to account in, how we have spent our time? and yet Gloriari otio
iners ambitio est. Senec. Ep. 68.
flatter our selves so grossly, as to presume we have done Alea turpis, Turpe
and adulterium mediocribus, haec tamen illi Omnia cu^ faciant, Hilares
nitidique vocantur. Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. p. 110.
full well, at leastwise not offended, in this profuse mispending of our
Masters stock of time? Alas, how many millions of pounds; how many myriades of
Kingdoms, nay of Worlds (were they but Masters of them) would many thousand
damned spirits, now in torments, or voluptuous distressed persons now lying on
their deathbeds, ready to breathe out their souls at every breath into the
Isay 30.33.
infernal Tophet, give, for the moitie, the tithe, yea the very smallest
quantity of that unvaluable Praecipitat quisque vita^ suam, and futuri
desiderio laborat, praesentiu^ taedio. Seneca De Brev. Vitae. c. 7.
time which they have irrecoverably spent on Plays, and such like sinful
Pastimes; that so they might in time bewail with brinish tears, with dolorous
pangs, and deepest sighs, the Natura humanis ingenijs m^le consuluit, quae
plaerumque non futura sed transacta perpendimus. Qu. Curtiu^. lib. ^. sect. 2.
page 341. Deteriori luto pravus quos edidit auctor, Et nihil aetherij sparlit
p^r membra vigoris. Hi pecudum ritu non impende^tia vitant, Nec res ante
vident, accepta clade quaeruntur, Et sero transacta gemunt. Claudian in
Eutropium lib 2. page 88.
loss of all those hours which they have prodigally spent in Play Houses,
Tavernes, and such life-devouring places, to prevent or else extenuate the
intolerable horror of their eternal pains? And shall we then squander away,
we care not how, those precious hours, which these, which we our selves
perchance hereafter (though now we Re omnium praeciosissima luditur. Quia sub
oculis non venit, ideo vilissima aestimatur, imo vero nullum praetium ejus est.
Annua congiaria homines clarissimi accipiunt, and his aut labor^m, aut operam,
aut diligentiam suam locant. Nemo aestimat tempus; utuntur illo laxius quasi
gratuito. At eosdem aegros vide, si mortis periculum admotum est propius,
medicorum genua tangentes: si metuunt capitale supplicium, omnia sua, ut vivant
paratos impendere. Tanta in illis discordia asfectuum est. Senec^. De Brev.
Vitae. cap. 8.
value them at so low a price, as to play them quite away for naught) would
willingly repurchase at the dearest rate, on vain lascivious Stage Plays,
toys, and childish vanities, as if we were created only to play and follow
sports (which Neque enim ita a natura generati^ sumus ut ad ludum and iocum
facti esse videamur, sed ad severitatem potius, and ad quaeda^ studia graviora
atque majora. De Officij^ l. 1. Op. Tom 2. p. 618. See Senica, De Brev. Vitae.
and Epist. 1.49.58.
Tully and other Pagans quite deny) and yet think to escape unpunished? Those
Plays and Pastimes therefore, which miserably waste and eat out all our
days, which rob us of our precious time (our chief, our Omnia, mi Lucili,
aliena sunt; tempus tantum nostru^ est: In hujus rei unius fugacis ac lubricae
possessione^ natura nos misit, ex qua expellit quicunque vult. Ita fac, mi
Lucili, vindica te tibi, and tempus quod adhuc aut auferebatur aut
surripiebatur, aut excidebat, collige and serva. Seneca Epist. 1.
only treasure,) which we should carefully husband to our good: Which
sacrilegiously defraud our God, our Country, our Souls, our Callings of sundry
vacant hours which should be spent upon them, must needs be evil and
unlawful unto Christians even in this respect.

For the Minor, See D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage Plays p. 20, to 24. The 3.
Blast of Ret^ait from Plays and Theaters. p. 66.67. and the other Fathers,
Councels, and Authors hereafter quoted
that Stage Plays unavoydably produce an intolerable mispence of much
precious time, etc. it is most apparent, if we will but sum up all those
days, those hours which are vainly spent in the composing, conning,
practicing, acting, beholding of every public, or private Stage Play. How many
golden Nil intentatu^ nostri liquere Poetae: Nec minimu^ mervere decus, etc. Si
no^ offenderet unu^quemque Poetaru^ limae labor, and mora: Vos o Po^pilius
sanguis, carmen r^praehe^dite quod non Multa dies and multa litura coercuit
atque Perfectu^ decies no^ castigavit ad ungue^. Bona pars non ungues ponere
curat, Non barba^: secreta petit loca; balnea vitat. Na^sciscetur enim praetiu^
nome^que Poetae, Si tribus Anticyris caput insanabile nunqua^ To^sori Licino
commiserit, etc Horat. De Art Poet p. 306.
days and hours, I might say weeks, nay mon^ths, and I had almost said whole
years, do most Play-poets spend in contriving, penning, polishing their
new-invented Plays, before they ripen them for the Stage? When these their
Plays are brought unto maturity, how many hours, evenings, halfe-dayes,
days, and sometimes weeks, are spent by all the Actors (especially in solemn
academicall Enterludes) in coppying, See Seneca, De Brev. Vitae. c. 12. Non
habent isti otiu^ sed iners negotiu^, Nam de illis nemo dubitabit, quin operose
nihil ag^nt, qui literaru^ inutiliu^ studijs detine^tur. Ibid. c. 13.
in conning, in practicing their parts, before they are ripe for public
action? When this is finished, how many men are vainly occupied for sundry
days (yea sometimes See Pliny, Not. Hist. l. 36. c. 15. Tertul. De Spectac. c,
9.10, 11. Livy, Hist Romans l. 48. Tacitus, Annal. l. 14. Alex. ab Alexandro. l.
5. c. 16. D. Hackwels Apology. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 2.3, 4. accordingly.
years) together, in building Theaters, Stages, Scenes and Scaffolds; in
making theatricall Pageants, Apparitions, Attires, Visars, Garments, with
suchlike Stage-appurtenances, for the more commodious pompous acting and
adorning of these vainglorious Enterludes? When all things requisite for the
public personating of these Plays are thus exactly accommodated, and the day
or nigh approaches when these are to be acted, how many hundreds of Nubilis
haec Virgo, matronaque, virque puerque, Spectat, and ex magna part Senatus
adest. Ovid Tristium. l. 2. p. 160.
all sorts, vainly, if not Si foret in terris rideret Democritus. Spectaret
populu^ Iudis frequentius ipsis; Vt sibi praebentem mimo spectacula plura.
Horat. Epist l. 2. Epist. 1. p. 284.
ridiculously spend whole days, whole afternoones and nights oft-times, in Sic
ruit ad celebres cultissima faemina ludos: Copia iudicium saepe morata meum
est. Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae. Ovid, De Art Amandi. l.
1. p. 160. See Tertullian, De Spectaculis. and Act 5. Scene 7. before.
attyring themselves in their richest robes; in providing seats to hear, Nemo
in spectaculo ineundo prius cogitat, nisi videre and videri. Tertullian, De
Spectaculis cap. 25.
to see, and to be seen of others; or in hearing, in beholding these vain
lascivious Stage Plays, ( which last some Quatuor aut plures aulaea praemuntur
in horas, etc. Horat. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. page 284.
three or four hours at the least, yea sometimes whole See Livy, Romans Hist.
lib. 42. sect. 20. Ludi per december dies Iovi optimo. Max. facti. lib. 31. sect.
51. lib. 39. sect. 46. lib. 23. sect. 30. lib. 25. sect. 2. lib. 40. sect. 52.
Suetonij Julius. sect. 29.
days and weeks together, as did some Roman Plays, and yet seem to short to
many, to whom a Lecture, a Sermon, a Prayer, not half so long, is
over-tedious:) who think themselves Horu^ non ociosa vita dicenda est, sed
desidiosa occupatio. Seneca, De Brevitate Vita. cap. 11.
well employed all the while they are thus wasting this their precious time
(which they scarce know how to spend) upon these idle Spectacles. Nostra aetas
prolapsa ad fabulas and quaevis inania, non modo autes and cor prostituit
vanitati sed oculorum and aurium voluptate suam mulcet desidiam, luxuriam
accendit conquirc^s undique fomenta vitiorum. Ioannes Saresburienses, De Nugis
Curialium lib 1. cap. 8.
Add we to this, that all our common Actors consume not only weeks and
years, but even Histriones totam suam vitam ordinant ad ludendum. Aquinas,
secunda secundae, Quest. 168. Art. 3.
their whole lives, in learning, practicing, or acting Plays, which besides
nights and other seasons, engrosse every afternoon almost thorowout the year,
to their peculiar service; as we see by daily experience here in See Stephen
Gossons School of Abuses. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays. I.G. his
Refutation of the Apology for Actors, and John Field, his Declaration of Gods
Judgment at Paris Garden, etc.
London; where thousands spend the moitie of the day, the week, the year in
Play Houses, at leastwise far more hours, then they employ in holy duties, or
in their lawful callings. If we annex to this, the time that diverse waste in
reading Play-bookes, which some make their chiefest study, preferring them
before the Bible, or all pious Books, on which they seldom seriously cast
their eyes; together with the misspent time which the discourses of Plays,
either seen or read, occasion: and then sum up all this lost, this misspent
time together; we shall soon discern, we must needs acknowledge, Nemo
invenitur qui pecuniam suam dividere velit, vita^ unusquisque quam multis
distribuit. Astricti sunt in continendo patrimonio, simul ad temporis jactura^
ventum est, prosusissimi in eo cujus unius honesta avaritia est. Seneca, De
Brevit. Vitae c. 3.
that there are no such Helluoes, such Canker-wormes, such theevish Devourers
of men's most sacred ( yet Quid necesse habes amittere tempora tanta, perdere
tanta lucra? nihil praeciosius tempore, sed heu nihil hodie vilius aestimatur.
Transeunt dies salutis and nemo recogitat, nemo sibi non reditura momenta
perijsse causatur. Bernardi. Declamationes. Col. 1011. L.M.
undervalued) time, as Stage Plays. Hence Concilium Carthagiense. 4 Can. 88.
Council. Aphricanum. Can. 28. Council. Constantinopolitanum. Can. 66. Clemens
Alexandrinus Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian and Cyprian, De Spectac.
lib. Arnobius. l. 4. and 7. advers. Gentes. with sundry other Councels,
Fathers, Authors See Scene 12. and Act 7. Scene 3. where their words are
recited.
hereafter quoted, complain, that many Lords-dayes, Holy Days, and sacred
Festivals which ought to have been spent in holy exercises of Religion, and
Gods more special service, together with much other precious time which men's
particular callings did require, was spent in acting and beholding
Stage Plays: Hence Philo Iudaeus, De Agricultura. lib. page 271.272. with much
grief laments: Quid enim aliud credimus quotidi^ per totum orbem, tot millia
spectatorum in Theatris contrahere. Homines enim victi spectaculorum and
fabularum cupidine infrenes tum oculis, tum auribus consectantur cytharistas
cytharaedosque. Praeterea saltatoribus caeterisque mimis inhiant propter gestus
motusque effaeminatos: atque ita factiones Theatricas instaurant, securi
caeterarum reru^ privatarum publicarumque, totam vitam in huiusmodi spectaculis
conterentes miseri. Ibidem.
That many thousands of people thorowout the world, be sotted with the delight
of Stage Plays, did with greedy eyes and ears flock together to Theaters, to
behold the effeminate gestures and motions of Stage Players; neglecting in the
mean time the public welfare, and their own private estates, and miserably
wasting their lives in these vain Spectacles. Hence Basil, Hexaemeron. Hom. 4.
informs us: Sunt Civitates non nullae quae multis varijsque praestigiatorum
spect^culis inde a primo diluculo ad ipsum usque caelu^ advesperascens suos
pascunt adspectus, fr^ctosque quosd^m omnino and corruptos cantus n^miam in
animis generantes libidinem frequentissime audientes, non satiantur. Atque
tales populos comp^ures perbeatos esse dicunt, propterea quod foro, mercatura,
artibus, caeterisque negotijs omnino comparandi victus causa subeundis
neglectis atque posthabitis, summo cum orio voluptateque vitae tempus
institutum sibi perducunt, etc. Basil. Hexaem. Hom. 4. Damascen. Parallel lib.
3. cap. 47.
That there are certain Cities, which feed their eyes and ears from morning
to night, with many various Spectacles, and with effeminate amorcus lascivious
Songs and Enterludes, engendring an excess of lusts within their souls, in
hearing of which their ears are never satisfied. And such people as these
(writes he) many call exceeding happy, because neglecting and setting aside the
care of government, merchandise, their trades, and all other employments
whereby they may get their living; they spend the time of life allotted to them
with exceeding idleness and pleasure. Hence Nazienzen, De Recta Educatione ad
Selucum. page 1063.1064. and Chrysostom. Hom. 15.21.23. and 62. Ad Populum
Antioch. Hom. 6.7.38. and 69. in Matthew. and Hom. 42. in Acta Apostolorum;
relate, In Theatro omnia contraria: temporis impendiu^, superflua dierum
consumptio, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Acta Apost. and Hom. 62. ad Pop.
Antioch. Tom. 3. Col. 612. A. and Tom. 5. Col. 347. A.
that in the Playhouse there is a loss of time, a superfluous consumption of
days; Tot^m prorsus diem in tam ridicula atque etiam perniciosa voluptate
consumitis. etc. Hom. 6 in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 52. A.
where men waste whole days in ridiculous and p^rnicious pleasures. And
withal Chryso^t. Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul. Hom. 6. in Matthew. and Ho^. 15.
and 23. ad Populu^ Antioch. See here Scene 4. and 12.
they much complain; that many people leaving the Church did flock by troops
to Play Houses, bestowing that time upon the Devil, which they should have
dedicated unto God; Hence Augustine, Vacare volunt ad ^ugas atque luxurias
suas. Melius enim saceret Iudaeus in agro suo aliquid utile, qua^ tota die in
Theatro seditiosus existeret. Ibid.
De December Chordis. lib. c. 3. and De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 4. to 23. Salvian,
De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Ioannis Evangelium. li^.
8. c. 5. Leo. 1. Sermo in Octava Pauli and Petri. cap. 1. fol. 165. S.
Asterius, Homilia. in Festum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. page 705.706.
Damascen Parallelorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. Ioannis Saresburiensis, De Nugis
Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 7.8. with other Fathers, pass sentence against
Stage Plays, as chief consumers of Octavius Spectaculo plurimas horas,
aliquando totos dies aderat. Suetonij Octavius. s^ct. 45.
much precious time, which should be expended upon better things, as their
words hereafter quoted. Scene 3.4.5. and 12. more fully evidence. Hence diverse
Pagan Authors; as Cicero, ^ro L. Muraena, and pro Sexto Oration. Epist. lib. 7.
ad Marium Epist. 10. and De Legibus l. 1. and 2. Seneca, De Brev. Vitae. cap.
12.13. Epist. 7. and 75. and Quis Philosophia^ aut ullu^ liberale respicit
studium, nisi cum ludi intercalantur, cum aliquis plu^ius intervenit dies quem
perdere licer, etc. Ibid.
Naturalium. Quaest. lib. 7. c. 32. Cornelius Tacitus, Populus si consederet
theatro totos dies ignavia continuaret, etc. Ibid
Annalium. lib. 14. sect. 3. Suetonij Nero. sect. 23. and Caligula. sect. 18.
Marcus Aurelius. Epist. 12. to Lambert. Ammianus Marcellinus. lib. 28. cap. 10.
Horace, De Art Poetica. lib. together with Augustine, De Civit. Dei. l. ^. c.
31.32. Livy, Romans Hist. lib. 48. Epit Valerius Maximus. l. 2. c. 6. Eutropius.
Rerum. Romans l. 4. p. 43^
Scipio Nasica, that famous Roman, have much condemned Stage Plays, because
they waste many precious hours which should be improved to more weighty uses.
Histriones vero locustis conser^t propheta, non modo propter multitudinem, sed
potius propter ignavu^ otium, and quod fruges consumere nati, nihil interea
faci^nt quod honestum sit, vel ad publicam utilitatem aliquid conferat, etc.
Ibidem.
And for this very reason among sundry others, Petrarcha De Remedio Vtr.
Fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Polydor Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. c. 2.
Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 59. M. Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum.
Carolus Sigonius De Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. p. 32. Ioannis Langhecrucius,
De Vita and Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 11.12.21. M. North^rooke, M.
Gosson, M. Stubs, D. Reinolds, Mariana and Brissonius, in their Books and
Treatises against Stage Plays. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and
Theaters. page 66.67. John Field in his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris
Garden. George Whetston, in his Mirror for Magistrates of Cities. page 24.
Bulengerus, De Circo, etc. page 81. to 88. and 167.168. I. G. in his Refutation
of the A^ologie for Actors. A short Trea^ise against Stage Plays. Anno^ 1625.
M. Bolton in his Discourse of true Happiness. page 74.75. To omit all others
which I shall name See Scene 12. and Act 7. Scene 4.5, 6.
hereafter, have censured and rejected Stage Plays, (in the hearing, reading,
and beholding of which, many spend whole days, whole weeks, whole years) as
the over-prodigall devourers of much peerless time, which they most
injuriously steal from God, from men, and from the Commonweal. Since
therefore our lives are Psalm. 39.5, 11. Psalm. 102.11. 1 Cor. 7.29. Iam. 4.14.
Circumcisa and brevis hominis vita longissima Pliny, Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 7.
Vitae hujus principium mortis exordium est, nec prius incipit augeri aetas quam
minui. Cui si aliquid adijcitur spacij temporalis, non ad hoc accedit ut
maneat, sed ad hoc transit ut pereat. Prosper. Aquit. De Vocat Gentium. lib. ^.
cap. 21
exceeding short and momentary, posting away with winged speed; our time so
Nihil praetiosius tempore. Bernardi. Declamat. Col. 1011. L. M.
precious; the duties of our general, our particular callings ( which may
Facito aliquid operis ut semper te Diabolus inveniat occupatum. Operis labor
suscipiatur, non tam propter victus necessitatem, quam propter animae salutem.
Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 5.
not be omitted for fear the Devil find us idle, and so tempt us unto sin)
almost infinite, well able to engrosse even all our vacant hours; the
mispence, the loss of time so Non exiguum detrimentum est vel horae unius. Et
una hora totius vitae portio est. Ambros. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 25.
dangerous, so pernicious: the grand account we 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. 2 These. 1.7,
8, 9.
must shortly render of all the ill-spent minutes of our lives before the Bar
of Gods Tribunal, so certain, so terrible and inevitable, these
time-devouring Stage Plays, which Inde fit ut raro qui se vixisse beatum
Dicat, and exacto contentus tempore vitae Cedat, uti conviva satur, reperire
queamus. Horat. Sermo. lib. 1. Satyr 1.
incroach so far, so desperately, so universally upon the lives of many
(especially in this our great Metrapolis where they are daily acted and
frequented,) must certainly be execrable, sinful, and pernicious unto
Christians, (who should Tempus quippe redimimus quando anteactam vitam quam
lasciviendo perdidimus, flendo reparamus. Greg. Mag. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 28.
redeem their fore-past time which tears, which they have spent in lascivious
carnal iollity) even in regard of this most vile effect, which issues always
from them.

SCENA SECVNDA.
THe second consequent or effect of Stage Plays; is argue in the 28. place;
thus.

That which always necessarily occasions a prodigal vain expense of money or
estate, which should be well employed, is certainly sinful and unlawful unto
Christians.

But this do Stage Plays, and Satiat praeterea and inebria^ histriones mimos,
turpissimosque and vanissimos ioculatores^ tu^ pauperes Ecclesiae fame
discruciati intereant. Agobardus, De Dispensatione and ordine totius rei
Eccl^siast. Bib. ^at. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 603. H
common Actors.

Therefore they are certainly sinful and unlawful unto Christians.

The Major cannot be gainsaid, because prodigally and idle expense of money, is
a sin, as the ^say 55.2, Prove. 21.20. c. 29.3. c. 18.9. c. 19.26. c. 23.10
21. c. 27.7. Lu. 15.13, 14, 19. Romans 13.13^ 14. Gal. 5.21. Ezech. 16.49. Ephesians.
5.18. Phil. 3.18, 19. Iam. 5.5. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.13. Jude 4.12.13.
Rev. 18.6, 9.
Scriptures, Clemens Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 12. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu.
c. 17. Ambros. De Officijs. l. 2. c. 2. Basil. Sermo. 2. in Divites and Avaros.
Nazienz^n. Cygnaeorum. Carm. lib. p. 1056. Theophylact and Beda, in Luc. 15.
Fathers, with sundry Plato De Repub. Dialog. 8. p. 665. Aristot. Ethic. l. 4.
c. 1. Cicero, De Officijs lib 2. Plutarch, De Vitando. AEre alieno. lib.
Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. AEneae Gazaei. Theophrastus apud Philonem Iudaeum. page 1470.
Pagan Authors have determined: and that in two respects. First, because it
abuses, it perverteth Gods good creatures to an unlawful end, by Iam. 4.2, 3.
Luke 15.13, 14, 19.
mispending them upon carnal pleasures, lusts, and vain fantastique humors;
when as they should be employed to Prove. 3 9.
Gods glory, our own and Eccles. 11.1. Luke 19.8. 1 Tim^ 6.17, 18, 19. Psalm.
41 1. Prove. 19.17. Heb. 13.16. Luke 12.33.
others good. Secondly, because it Quid peculator? Ille qui aufert aliena Non
tupeculator, cum ea quae ad dispensandum distribuendumque reciperis, tibi
propria facis? Number qui vestem diripuerit spoliator nominabitur, qui autem nudum
non texerit, modo possit, alterius cujusdam nominis appellatione dignus erit?
Basil, in Divites and Avaros. Sermo. 1.
robs the poor of that bountiful charitable relief, which else they should
receive from that superfluity of wealth which Prodigals consume: The Deuteronomy.
15.7. to 19. Job 31.16. to 23. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 9.1. to 14. Acts
11.29, 30. Cur tu dives, ille pauper? Profecto non ob aliam causam, nisi ut tu
benignitatis ac fidelis administrationis praemium accipias, ille vero
patientiae maximae mercede honoretur. Esurientis est panis quem tu retines;
nudi est vestis quam tu arca custodis; discalceati calceus qui apud te
marcessit; egentis argen^u^ quod tu in terram desodis. Denique tot affers
hominibus iniurias, quot deseris cum ^uvare possis. Dei minister fact^s es,
tuorum dispensator conservorum. Nec puta omnia tuo ventri praeparari: quae in
manibus habes ut aliena existima. Ba^il. Mag. in Divites and Avar^s^ Sermo. 1.
vid. Ibidem.
maine end why God bestows abundance of earthly riches upon some men, more
then others, being only this; that their super-abundant plenty, might supply
the wants of others: not feed their own excessive lusts, as Play-haunters for
the most part do.

The Minor (that Stage Plays always necessarily occasion much prodigal
expense, which might be better employed;) is most apparent, not only by that
of Ovid, Tristium. lib. 2. page 160.
Inspice ludorum sumptus Auguste tuorum; Empta tibi magno talia malta leges.
Quodque minus prodest paena est lucrosa Poetae, Tantaque non parvo crimina
praetor emit; but likewise by the Records and Histories of former ages. It is
storied of the Livy, Romans Hist. l. 40. s^ct. 44.45. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 36. c.
15. August. De Civ. Dei. l 3. c. 19. l. 5 c. 12. and De Co^sensu Evang. l. 1 c.
33. Salvian, De Guber. Dei. l. 6. Tacitus, Annal. l. 14. sect 3. Su^tonij
Tiberius. sect. 35.47. Caligula, sect. 18.21. Nero. sect. 11.12, 20. to 26. and
30 V^spatianus. sect. 19. Petrarch. De Remed. Vtr. Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 30.
Opmeeri. Chronogr. p 186. D. Hackwels Apology. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 3.4.
Romans; that the sums of money they disbursed in erecting Theaters, in
setting forth Stage Plays, and such like public Spectacles, did annually
amount to more then their expenses on their Wars, or Fortifications: in so
much that the charge of them at last grew altogether intolerable, not only to
Rome it self, but to all her Confederates, and foreign Tributary Provinces;
who were much oppressed, much impoverished by reason of the excessive charge of
Plays, and public Shows, Livy. Romans Hist. l. 5. sect. 1. l. 7. sect. 2.3. l.
10 sect. 23. l. 40. sect. 24.25. Salvian. De Gub. Dei^ l. 6^ p. 198.199.
toward which they were Contributors. It is registered of the Plutarch. De
Gloria Atheniensiu^. lib. Thucides. Hist. l. 5. p. 477. Justin. Hist. l. 6.
Caelius. Rhod. Antiqu. Lect. l. 8. c. 9.
Athenians, that their very public Stage Plays, (maintained at the republikes
cost) did so exhaust their common treasure, that at last they left no money in
their Exchequer to rigge their Ships, to set forth their Navy, or to defend
their Country: in so much that their enemies laying hold on this their penury,
prevailed much against them. Whence they were not uniustly taxed by a
Lacedemonian, for Res serias in ludu^ impendentes, and magnarum classium and
exercituu^ co^meatum in Theatru^ prodigentes. Plutarch. De Gloria Atheniensiu^.
lib.
wasting serious things on sports, and lavishing out the provision, the
supplies of great Navies and Armies, upon Plays and Theaters. It is recorded
of diverse Roman Emperors, (as See Suetonij Caligula. sect. 18 21. Nero. sect.
11.12, 20^ to 26. and 30. Vespatianus. sect. 19. Domitianus. sect. 4 Herodian.
Hist. l. 1. Iulij Capitolini Antonius pius. p. 38. Ejusdem Verus. p. 67.68, 69.
and Maximinus and Balbinus. p. 301. Trebellij Pollionis Galieniduo. p. 306.309,
310, 316. Idem. De Ingenuo p. 327. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 447.449.
Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 3. Epist. 50. Ioannis Salisburiensis, De Nugis
Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. and l. 8. c. 7.
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Verus, Maximinus, Balbinus, Carinus, and others) who
are therefore censured by their own Historians; that they spent a great part
of their Revenues upon Plays and common Actors, who received annual Pensions
from them, besides other Boones and Gratuities: which public Stipends and
Donations, Su^^onij Tiberius. sect 35. and 47. Iulij Capit^lini, Mar. Antonius
Philosophus p. 48.57. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 449. AElij L^^pridij S^verus.
p. 228. Opmeeri Chronogr. p. ^86.187. Bu^engerus, De Theatro. l. 1. cap. 30.
Tiberius, Marcus Antonius the Philosopher, Dioclesian, Alexander Severus, with
other Roman Emperors did curtale, or totally withdraw, as over-chargeable to
their Exchequers, which they did much exhaust. Not to relate the prodigal
expenses of the Roman State in general, or of See Cicero, Oration, De Aruspicu^
responsis. p. 524.526, 527 In Pisonem. Oration. p. 600.602. Pro Sextio Cratio.
p. 558.559, 560, 561, 562. Pro L. Muraena. Oration. p. 463. In Catilinam.
Oration. 3. p. 452. Philip. Oration ^ p. 638. De Divinatione. l. 3. page 557.
Livy, Romans Hist. l. 2. sect. 36. D^onysius, Hallicarnas. Antiq. Romans l. 7.
sect. 9. See ^ before, and Ambrose, Ser. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. Bul^ngerus, De
Circis Romany. and cap. l. 1. c. 41.42. p. 163.164, 165. and De Theatro. l. 1.
c. 11. p. 242.243.
some of their Magistrates, or Editors of Plays in particular, who prodigally
spent their whole estate in celebrating Plays to the honor of their Idols, or
to gain the acclamations of the vulgar crew, who were much delighted with
theatricall and gladiatory Enterludes; of which there are sundry precedents,
wherein I might expatiate: I shall relate the sum of all in the words of S.
Augustine, who complains; Eos modo vix feramus, qua^do pro superflua voluptate
plura dona^tur histrionibus, quam tunc legionibus pro extrema salute collata
sunt. De Civ. Dei. l. 3 c. 19^
that even in his time, and before, more was given to Stage Players, for
superfluous pleasure, then was disbursed in the second Punicke war upon the
Roman Legions for the public safety, which was then endangered: with which the
patheticall speech of Salvian, to this purpose, well accords. Tunc enim integra
Romani orbis me^bra florebant, a^gusta esse horrea publica opes fecerant,
cunctaru^ urbiu^ cives divitijs ac delicijs affl^ebant. Vix poterat religionis
auctoritas inter tanta reru^ exuberantia^ moru^ ^enere mensura^. Pascebantur
tunc quide^ passim in locis plurimis auctores turpiu^ voluptatu^, sed plena ac
referta era^t omnia. Nemo reipu^ sumptus cogitabat, nemo dispendia, quia non
sentiebantur expensa. Quaer^bat quoda^modo ipsa Respublica ubi perderet; quod
penitus posset vix recipere; and ideo cumulus divitiaru^, qui iam fere modu^
excesserat, etia^ in res nugatorias redu^dabar. Nunc autem quid dici potest?
Recesserunt a nobis copiae veteres, recesserunt priorum temporum facultates.
Miseri iam sumus, and nec dum nugaces esse cessamus^ Salvian De Gub Dei. l. 6.
p. 201.202.
In former time (says he) when every Part of the Roman Empire flourished, the
Commonweal after a sort, did seek where and how to waste her wealth, having
almost no place to keep it. And therefore heaps of treasure, wel-nigh above
measure, were consumed upon vain Enterludes. But now what can be said? Our old
abundance is departed from us^ gone is the wealth of former times; poor are we
now, and yet we cease not to be vain. Loca enim and habita cula turpitudinum
idcirco adhuc sunt, quia illic impura omnia prius acta sunt: nunc autem ludi^ra
ipsa adeo non aguntur, quia agi iam prae miseria t^mporis atque egestate non
possunt. Et ideo quo^ prius actu^ est, vitiositatis fuit; quod nunc non agitur,
necessitatis. Calamitas enim fisci, and mendicitas Romani aerarij no^ sinit, ut
ubique in res nugatorias perditae profunda^tur expensae. Pereant adhuc
qua^libet multa, and quasi in caenum proijciantur, sed tame^ perire iam tanta
non queunt, quia non sunt tanta quae pereant. Ibidem. p. 198.
Play Houses, the places and habitations of filthiness, are yet standing,
because in them all impure things were formerly acted: but yet now in many
places Plays themselves are not so frequently acted^ because the misery, the
poverty of the time will not permit it. So that it was from men's impiety that
Plays were acted in times past; and it is only from their necessity that they
are not acted now. For the p^verty of the Exchequer, and the beggerlinesse of
the Roman Treasury permit not now, that any prodigal expenses should be every
where lavished out upon such n^gatory trifles. Althought as yet much is still
lost, and cast as it were into the dirt; yet nothing so much can be now
consumed, because there is not much to spend. Nam quantum ad votum nostrae
libidinis atque impurissimae voluptatis, optaremus profecto vel ad hoc tantum
modo plus habere, ut possemus in hoc turpitudinis lutum plura convertere. Et
res probat quanta prodigere vellemus, si opulenti essemus ac splendidi, cum
prodigamus tanta mendici. Ea est enim labes praesentium morum atque perditio,
ut cum iam non habeat paupe^tas quod possit perdere, adhuc tamen ^elit
vitiositas plus perire. Ibidem, page 198.199.
And yet such is our unsatiable desire of most filthy pleasure, that verily, we
could wish that we had more, for this only purpose, that we might convert more
into this mire of filthiness. Yea, the very thing it self shows how much we
would prodigally consume on Stage Plays if we were rich, when as we waste so
much upon them being poor. For this is the blemish and misery of our present
condition, that although through our poverty we cannot, notwithstanding through
our vitiousnesse, we would yet spend more. Which may as truly be predicated of
the English Play-haunters now, as of the Romans then. By all these testimonies
we may evidently discern, how prodigally expensive these Plays and Players
were unto the ancient Romans, both in their wealth and poverty. The expenses in
setting forth pub^^ke Plays and Enterludes being so excessive, that they could
hardly be undergone by any but the Emperor, as De Theatro. l. 1. c. 11. p. 242.
Caesar Bulengerus testifies. And if they were such to the very richest
Commonweals and Monarchs, how much more intollerably expensive, think you,
were they to private persons? Legate hu^c locu^ Julius Messalla, quem ego libere
culpare audeo: ille enim patrimoniu^ suu^ scenicis dedit, haeredibus abnegavit:
matris tunicam dedit mimae, lacerna^ patris, mimo. Flau. Vopisci, Carinus. p.
449 See p 450.
Flavius Vopiscus reports, of Julius Messalla; that he spent his whole
Patrimony upon Stage Players, leaving naught unto his Heirs: and that he gave
his Mothers Coat unto a Woman-Actor, and his Fathers Cloak to a Player, for
which he liberally taxes him. Historiarum. lib. 27.
Nicolaus and Dipnos. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Athenaeus record of Sylla, the Roman Captain, that he was so adicted to
Plays, (he being much enamored with ludicrous sports,) that he gave them many
acres of ground, out of the Republikes revenues. To which I may add that of
Circa a^ios omnes parcissimus ^uit, quod l^xuriae sumptibus aerariu^ minu^rat^
Circensos multos addidit ex ^ibidine potius quam religione, and ut domin^s
factionu^ ditaret. Co^modu^ Antoninus. p. 93.
AElius Lampridius, who writes of Commodus Antoninus; that he deminished his
Treasury by prodigal expenses upon Stage Plays; and that he added many Cirque
plays rather out of lust, then out of religion, that so he might enrich the
Masters of those factions. Gregory Nazienzen informs us; Quapropter manifesto
patet, scenicoru^ and equestriu^ certaminu^ spectaculu^ mera^ animoru^ esse
perniciem, corporu^ pugna^, ac praeter haec certissimu^ facultatum detri^e^tum.
Quot enim familias subito prostravit? Quot homines opulentos coegit ^^bum
mendicare? Quot urbes prius summa inter se amicitia conjunctos, funditus
evertit? Ad Selucu^. De Recta Educat. p. 1063.1064.
that Stage Plays and Horse-races do manifestly impoverish men's estates. How
many Families (writes he) have they suddenly over-turned? how many rich men
have they enforced to beg their bread? how many Cities living peaceably
among themselves, have they u^terly overthrown? Nonne vides quosdam in
Theatris in pancratiastas and mimos, quos spectare quis abominetur, pro brevis
temporis honor ac populi plausu pecuniam prodigentes, etc? In Divites and
Avaros, S^rmo. 1. page 305.
See thou not some men (writes S. Basil) prodigally consuming their money in
Play Houses upon Tumblers and Stage Players, which every one should abhor to
behold, to gain some momentany honor, and a little popular applause? It is
(quoth Et quod nullis possit satisfactionibus expiari, histrionibus,
Pantomimis, exoletis atque irrisoribus numinum dona instituuntur, and munera;
ab officijs ocium publicis immunitas and vacatio cum coronis. Adv^rs. Gente^.
lib. 4. ^ag. 150.
Arnobius) an inexpiable sin, that gifts and stipends are allowed and
appointed unto Stage Players, and worne-out Pantomimes, the deriders of the
gods; that they are exempted from public O^^ices and employments, and crowned
with Garlands. Saint Quid ergo illos inducis cinaedos and exoletos? Neque solum
inducis, sed etiam innumerabilibus and ineffabilibus honoras muneribus: alibi
^os qui talia ^gunt pu^iens, hic autem tanqua^ de republica been meritis, and
pe^unias insumis, and publicis impensis ^os alis. At sunt, inquit, infames. Cur
ergo in eos tam multa impendis? Na^ si sunt infames, opor^et ^os expelli, etc.
Hom 13. in 1 Cor. 4. Tom. 4. Col. 356. C.D. See Hom. 42. in Act. Apost. Hom. 62
ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 17. in Ephesians. and Hom. 6.7. and 38. in Matthew. accordingly.
Chrysostom often complains; that Stage Plays are the occasions of many
prodigal vain expenses: that men did bestow innumerable, yea, unspeakeable
gifts, and consume much money upon Stage Players: that they cherished them at
their owne^ private houses, bestowing that food, that cost upon them, which
should be spent upon Christ's poor members: and that they maintained them
likewise out of the public Treasury, as if they had well deserved of the
Commonweal, which had disfranchised and made them infamous. Saint Prodigum
est popularis favoris gratia, exinanire proprias opes. Quod faciunt qui ludis
Circe^sibus, vel etiam theatralibus, and muneribus gladiatorijs patrimonium
dilapidant suu^ ut vincant superioru^ celebritates; cum to^um illum sit inane
quod agunt. De Officijs. l. 2. c. 21. and Ser. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. E.
Ambrose makes mention of some, whom he censureth for prodigals, who spent
their Patrimonies upon Stage Plays, Cirques, and Sword-playes, out of a
vainglorious humor, to surpass the solemnities of former times, when as all
they did was but vanity. S. Augustine complains, Et per illas moribus
corrumpendis, rapiendo miseris civibus, largiendo scenicis turpibus. Quis
ferret istos, quando pro superflua voluptate plura dona^tur histrionibus, quam
tunc legionibus pro extrema salute collata sunt? De Civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 12. and
l. 3. c. 19. See l. 2. c. 5. to 15.
that the Roman Magistrates, did corrupt the public manners, by spoiling the
miserable Citizens, and by giving unto filthy Stage Players; who received more
gifts for their superfluous Plays, then the ancient Roman Legions had bestowed
on them for their Wars. Pope Leo the first, makes this complaint, of the age
wherein he lived. Pudet dicere, sed necesse est non tacere. Plus impenditur
Daemonijs quam Apostolis, etc. In Octavo Petri and Pauli. Sermo c. 1 f^ 165.
I am ashamed (says he) to speak, and yet there is a necessity that I should
not be silent: there is more now spent upon the Devil at Play Houses, then
there is bestowed on Christ, or his Apostles. Asterius in his Homely against
the feast of the Kalends, informs us, Egregium hoc festum ^^^is alieni causa
ac faenoris, paupertatis occasio, mis^riarium initium. Si pauxillum aliquid
domi conditum in alimenta conjugis atque mis^roru^ liberum, promitur id ac
proijcitur, ac ^edet ille cum suis per festum hoc prae^larum esuriens atque
omniu^ indigus. Bonoru^ ja^tura^ saciunt, taxationisque and vulnerum mercedem,
annonam ac cibaria^ promunt ac prodigunt, cum graui moru^ disciplinaeque damno.
Consules etia^ ipsi fama inclyti ad fastigium reru^ humanaru^ evecti per
vanitatem opes exhauriunt, no^ modo sine fruct^, sed etia^ cu^ pecc^to; dicique
vere potest, quam sublimis coru^ thronus, tam insignem esse dementia^. Cu^enim
capescere permultos solent honores, etc. nunc aute^ praesident. auru^que
congestu^ intra breve te^pus in aurigas, tibicines, mimos, saltatores, spadones
distribu^nt, etc. Ibid. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 4. p. 704.
That Plays are the cause of Debt and Usury; the oc^asion of Poverty, the
beginning of Beggary. If one has but a small stock of money laid up at home
for the sustentation of his Wife and miserable Children, it is here drawn out
and cast away; and he and his sit all this eminent feast, hungry, and indigent
of all things. Men now make havocke of their goods, and prodigally spend them
with the great loss both of manners and discipline. Yea, the very Consuls
themselves, being men of renown, advanced to the very top of humane honors,
exhaust their wealth through vanity, not only without fruit, but likewise with
sin; and it may be truly said; that as sublime as their throne is, so
eminent is their folly. For whereas they are wont to accept of many dignities,
and to obtain most ample royal Leiftenantships; they study to rake as much
wealth out of each of them as they can. Some of them convert the millitary
stipends to their own private lu^re: others of them sell justice and truth for
money: other of them poll the Kings Treasures and revenues, laying up all they
can scrape together on every side, to the offense of God, pretermitting no
unjust, no in^amous or dishonest gain: And now when as they bear rule, in a
very short space they spend the Gold they have thus hourded, upon F^dlers,
Stage^players, Dancers and Eunuchs. And a little after. But At in loculos
evacuas in turpe^ animi relaxatione^, in risum indecoru^ and inconditu, neque
co^sideras quam multas pauperu^ lachrymas dones, per quas opes illae tuae
co^flatae; quam multi in vincula coniecti verberatique fu^rint, aut ad laqueu^
accesserint; ut tibi suppetat quod scenicis hodierno die la^gi^ris, etc. Ibid.
thou (says he) do See Bulengerus, De Theatro lib. 1 cap. 11 page 242.
empty thy Bags, upon the dishonest recreation of thy mind, upon unseemely
and disorderly laughter, never considering how many tears of poor men thou
might relieve, by which thy wealth has been scraped together; how many
have been cast into prison? how many have been whipped and brought to the
Gallows, that thou might have sufficient to give to Stage Players on this
day? To pass by the testimony of Paedagogi. lib. 2. cap. 12. lib. 3. cap 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, De Spectaculis. lib.
Tertullian, and Cyprian in this nature, with sundry Cassiodorus Variarum lib.
5. Epist. 42. and lib. 1. Epist. 30.
other Fathers; I shall close up this with that of John Salisbury, our own
ancient Countryman; Hist^ ionibus ac mimis pecunias, infinitas erogare non
gravabatur, etc. Gratiam suam histrionibus and mimis multi prostituunt, and in
exhibenda malitia little caeca quada^ and contemptibili magnificentia, non tam
mirabiles, quam miserabiles faciu^t sumptus. De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c 7.8.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. page ^48. A.B.
Many (writes he) out of a blind contemptible magnificence, care not to lavish
out infinite sums of money to Stage Players and Actors. Many there are who
prostitute their grace and favor unto Players, and in setting forward their
lewd^esse, out of a blind dishonorable bounty, put themselves not so much to
wonderful, as to miserable expenses: and among others, be sharply tax^th Nero
the Emperor for this very crime. To these I shall add the concurrent
testimony of some few Pagan Authors. See Marcus Aurelius, printed at London
1586. toward the end.
Marcus Aurelius, that worthy Roman Emperor, in his 12. Epistle to Lambert,
has this notable passage, concerning Players and men's expenses on them. Since
fatal destinies have brought me into this world, I have seen nothing more See
Scene 5. ensuing.
unprofitable to the Commonwealth, nor greater folly in them that be light of
conditions, nor a worse invention of Vagabonds, nor a more cold revocation of
mortal folk, then to learn of these Players, triflers and such other
Iuglers. What thing is more See Ioannis Saresburiensis. De Nugis Curialium. l.
1. c. 8. and Act 5. Scene 11. accordingly.
monstrous, then to see wisemen rejoice at the pastime of these vain tri^lers?
What greater mockery can there be in the Capitol, then the foolish saying of a
lester to be praised with great laughter of wise men? What greater slander can
be to Princes Houses, then to have their Gates always open to these fools,
and never open to wise folks? What greater cruelty can there be in any person,
then to give more in one day to a fool, then to his servants in a year, or to
his kin all his life? What greater inconstancy can there be then to want men
to furnish the Garrisons and Frontiers of Illirico, and these trewands to abide
at Rome? What like shame can there be to Rome, Regis enim curiam sequuntur
assidue histriones, aleatores, mimi, balatrones, id genus omne. Petrus
Blesensis. Epist. 14. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 714. B. Ioannis
Saresburiensis De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. Gualther. Hom. 11 in Nahum.
AEneas Sylvius. Epist. 105. p. 604. and ^pist. 166. p. 721. accordingly.
then that the memory shall be left in Italy of the Tumblers, Trewands, Pipers,
Singers of Jests, Taberers, Crowders, Dancers, Mummers, Iesters, and Iuglers,
rather then the renown of Captains, with their Triumphs and Arms? And when
these Captains wandered all about Rome in safety, sounding their lewdness and
gathering of money, the Noble Barons and Captains went from Realm to Realm,
w^sting their money, adventuring their lives, and shedding their blood. In the
uttermost parts of Spain, when War began between the Liberiens and
Gaditaines, and they of Liberie lacked money, These ensuing Histories of the
excessive wealth of Players, together with that of AEsop, his wealth and luxury
in Pliny. Not. Hist. l. 9. c 35. lib. 10. c. 51. and l. 35 c. 12. are an
unanswerable Argument of men's great expenses at Plays which thus enrich the
Players.
two Iuglers and Taberers offered to maintain the War an whole year. And it
followed, that with the goods of two fools many wise men were slain and
overcome. In Ephesus a City of Asia, the famous Temple of Diana was edified
with the confiscation of the goods of such a truant and fool. When Cadmus
edefied the City of Th^bes in Egypt with 50. Gates, the Minstrels gave him
more toward it then all his friends. If the History be true, when Augustus
edefied the walls of Rome, he had more of the trewands that were drowned in
Tiber, th^n of the common Treasure. The first King of Corinth arose by such
villainies. And as I say of this small number, I might say of many other. One
thing is come to my mind^ of the chance of these Trewaends, and that is, Whiles
they be in presence, they make every man laugh at the follies they do and say,
and when they be gone, every man is sorry for his money that they bare away. And
of truth it is a just sentence of the gods, that such as have taken vain
pleasure together, when they are departed to Sp^rne voluptates; nocet empta
dolor voluptas Horat. Epist l. 1. Epist. 2. page 241.
weep for their losses. Thus he. The Poet I^venal reports; lam ^adem summis
pariter minimisque libido est, Vtspectet ludos co^duci^ Ogulnia vestem.
Conducit comites, cella^, cervical, amicas, Nutricem and flavem cui det mandata
puella^. Haec tame^argenti superest quodcunque paterni Levibus athletis, ac
vasa novissima donat, etc^ Prodiga non sentit pereuntem ^aemina censum; At
velut exhausta redivivus pullulat arca, Nummus and e pleno semper tollatur
acervo, Non unqua^ rep^tant quantu^ sibi gaudia constant, etc. Satyr 6. p.
54.55.
that many women by frequenting Stage Plays had beggered their Husbands and
spent their whole estates: and Nam codice saevo Haeredes vetat esse suos, bona
tota feruntur Ad Phialem, tantu^ artificis valet halitus oris. Saty^. 10. p. 99.
that diverse had disinherited their Heirs, and either spent or given away all
their goods and lands to Players: which is seconded by Flavius Vopiscus, in the
life of Carinus. page 449 450. The Poet Horace makes mention of one Vt quondam
Marsaeus amator Originis ille, Qui patriam mimae donat, fundumque laremque
Sermo. l. 1. Satyr. 2. p. 165. See p. 163.
Marsaeus, who gave all his Lands, his Patrimony and Household Stuff to a
Woman-Actor: informing us withal; In cicere atque faba bona tu perdasque
lupinis, Latus ut in Circo spatiere, aut aeneus ut stes, Nudus agris, nudus
nummis, insane paternis? Sermo. l. 2. Satyr^ 3. page 210.
that there were diverse who had spent both their lands and money upon
Stage Plays, and donations to the people in Floralian Enterludes. To these I
might accumulate the several suffrages of modern Christian Authors; as
namely, of Vincentius, in his Speculum Historiale. lib. 29. c. 141. fol. 367. a
pregnant place; of Francis Petrarcha. De Remedio Vtriusque Fortunae. lib. 1.
Dialog. 30. Of Nicolaus De Clemangis, De Novis celebritatibus non instituendis.
page 143. to 160. Of Bodinus, De Republica. lib. 6. c. 1. Of Master
Northbro^ke, against Vain Plays and Enterludes. fol. 28.29. Of Stephen
Gosson, in his School of Abuses, and Plays Confuted. Action 3. The 2. and 3.
Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. Bishop Babingtons Exposition upon
the 8. Commandment. John Field, his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris
Garden. 1583. A short Treatise against Stage Plays. Anno 1625. D. Reinolds,
his Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 143. to 149. Caesar Bulengerus, De Circis
Romany ludisque Circensibus. lib. cap. 41.42. and De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 11.
page 242.243. with infinite others which I pretermit, who all condemn and
censure Stage Plays, in regard of the immoderate sinful vain expenses which
they occasion, to Gods dishonor, the public prejudice, and poor men's
detriment. But for brevity sake, I shall close up all these evidences, with
that of learned and laborious Gualther, who affirms; Sunt hujusmodi homines,
non parva rerumpublicaru^ pestis. Nam and opes publicas quam privatas quam
maxim attenuant, and quod in pauperum subventionem impendi debeat, ipsi suis
artibus paene intercipere consueverunt. Hom. 11. in Nahum. vid. Ibidem. See
Vincentij Speculum Historiale. l. 29. cap. 141. fol. 367. to the same purpose.
that Stage Plays are no small plagues of Commonweals: For they exceedingly
deminish (among other mischiefs which he there enumerates) as well the
public, as men's private wealth^ and they almost wholly intercept by their arts
and sleights, that which ought to be bestowed for the poores relief. Neither
need I seek for further testimonies in so clear a case, since our own
domestique experienc (especially in the Reign of See Halls Chronicle. part 2.
fol. 2. to 11. and 68. to 89. and 155.156, 157. and 212. to 218.
King Henry the VIII. who spent infinite sums of money upon Stage Plays,
Masks, and such like prodigal Shows and Pageants) is a sufficient
confirmation of my Minors truth. Not to mention the over-prodigall
disbursements upon Plays, and Masks of late Miseri iam sumus, and necdu^
nugaces esse cessamus. Cu^que etiam pupillis vel prodigis soleat subvenire
paupertas, simu^que ut destiterint esse divites, desinunt esse vitio^^: nos
tantu^ novum genus pupillorum ac perditorum sumus, in quibus opulentia esse
desij^, sed nequitia perdurat: adeo nos non ut alij homines causas
corrupt^laru^ in illecebris sed in cordibus habemu^, and vitiosi^as nostra,
men's nostra est, and ad eme^dandos nos, no^ faculta^u^ ablatione, sed malaru^
reru^ amore peccemus Salv. De Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 262.
penurious times, which have been wel-nigh as expensive as the Wars, and I
dare say more chargable to many then their souls, on which the most of us
bestow least cost, least time and care. How many hundreds, if not thousands,
are there now among us, (to their condemnation, if not their reformation be it
spoken,) who spend more, daily, weekly, monthly, if not yearly at a
Playhouse to maintain the Devils service and his instruments; then they
disburse in pious uses, in relief of Ministers, Scholars, poor godly
Christians, or maintenance of Gods service, all their life? How many assiduous
Play-haunters are there who contribute more liberally, more frequently to
Play Houses, then to Churches; See John Fields Declaration of Gods Judgment at
Paris Garden, accordingly.
to Stage Plays, then to Lectures^ to Players, then to Preachers; to Actors,
then to S^tius est au^e^ prodesse etia^ malis propter bonos, quam bonis decsse
propter malos. Senec. De Beneficijs. l. 4^ c. 28.
poor men's Boxes? being at far greater cost to promote their own and others
just damnation; then themselves or others are to advance their own or others
salvation. How many are there, who can be at cost to hire a Que^ tulit ad
scen^m ventoso gloria curru Horat. Epist l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 283.
Coach, a Boat, a Barge, to carry them to a Play house every day, where they
must pay dear for their admission, Seats and Boxes; who will hardly be at any
cost to convey themselves to a Sermon once a week, a month, a year,
(especially on a week day) at a Veru^ quid ego de spatio loquar itineris
lo^gioris, cu^ plurimaefaeminaru^ tanta i^m animi mollitudineresolva^tur, ut
nisi advectae mulis, qua^libet exiguo spacio a domibus suis ven^re nequeant ad
videndu^ Dominu^ in praesepi spiritali? Sed ex his qui cer^e ambulandi labo^e^
feru^t, alij theatrales turbas sanctis caetibus anteponunt. ^t barbari quide^
illi priusqua^ Christu^ viderunt, tam longa^ propter ipsum viam exuperaverunt:
tu vero nec posteaqua^ videris, illos probaris imitari. Nam and cum eum
videris, ita eum relinquis, ut post eum curras ad Theatra, ac mimu^ potius
audire ac videre desideres. Atque ut eadem rursus attingam quae antea sum
insectatus: Christum quide^ in spiritali s^um praesep^o derelinquis, properas
vero ^ace^tem, videre in scena meretricem. Hoc autem quibus tandem putamus
dignu^ esse supplicijs? Chrysostom. Hom, 7. in Mat. To^. 2. Col. 59. A.
Church far nearer to them then the Playhouse; where they may have Seats,
have entrance, (yea Prove. 9.2, 3, 5. Cant. 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.
spiritual Cordials, and celestial Dainties to refresh their souls) without
Isay 55.1, 2. Rev. 22.17.
any money or expense? How many are there, who according to their several
qualities See Bulenger^s De Theatro. l. 1. cap. 30.
spend 2. d. 3. d. 4. d. 6. d. 12. d. 18. d. 2. s. and sometimes 4. or 5.
shillings at a Playhouse, day by day, if Coach-hire, Boate-hire, Tobacco,
Wine, Beer, and such like vain expenses which Plays do usully occasion, be
cast into the reckoning; and that in these penurious times, who can hardly
spare, who can never honestly get by their lawful callings, half so much? How
many prodigally consume, not only their charity, apparel, diet, books, and
other necessaries; but even their annual Pensions, Revenues and Estates at
Picke-purse Stage Plays; Parum enim est luxuriae quod naturae satis est.
Seneca. De Vita Beata. cap. 13.
which are more expensive to them, then all their necessary disbursements? If
we sum up all the prodigal vain expenses which Play Houses and Plays
occasion every way, we shall find them almost infinite, wel-nigh incredible,
See Scene 5. afterward.
altogether intolerable in any Christian frugall state; which must needs
abandon Stage Plays as the Sea Scene 5. and Act 7. Scene 7.
Athenians and Romans did at last, even in this rega^d, Qui enim volupta^e
sequitur omnia postponit, nec voluptates sibi emit, sed se voluptatibus vendit.
Seneca, De Vita Beata. c. 14.
that they impoverish and quite ruin many; as the fore-quoted testimonies,
with many domestique experiments daily testify. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. page
450.
Et haec quidem idcirco ego in literas retuli (as Vopiscus writes of Julius
Messalla) quo futuros editores pudor tangeret, ne patrimonia sua, proscriptis
legitimis haeredibus, mimis and balatronibus deputarent.

If any here reply, that they spend not much at Plays, and that their
Playhouse expenses are far from prodigality, what ever some men deem them.

I answer first; that there are few ordinary Stage-haunters of any generous
quality, See Ambrose, Augustine, Basil, Nazienzen, Asterius, Salvian,
Chrysostom, John Saresbury, and others in their fore-quoted places.
but spend excessively at Plays: some waste their Codex Theodosij. l. 15. Tit.
5. and 9. accordingly.
Patrimonies at Play Houses, others the pensions which their friends alot them;
others the money which should satisfy their Creditors, and Cur eget indignus
quisqua^ te divite? quare Templa ruunt antiqua Deum? etc Horat. Sermo l. 2.
Sat. 2. p. 202.
relieve their needy Brethren; or else maintain their Families. Most of them
mispend more there, then they can well spare; all of them more then is well or
lawfully spent. Secondly, he that spends least of all at Plays and
Play Houses, is Vnus utrique Error sed varijs ludit partibus. Horat. Sermon.
lib. 2. Satyr. 3.
as really guilty of prodigality, though not in the same degree, as he that
lavisheth out most of any, because the very giving of money to Players as
Players; that is, for the exercising of their lewd lascivious art, is
prodigality. Witness Tully himself, Prodigi sunt qui ludor^ apparatu pecunias
fundunt. Cicero, De Officijs. l. 2. about the midst.
who defines Prodigals, to be such who spend their money in setting forth
Stage Plays, with which definition, De Remed. Vtri. Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30.
Petrarch does accord. Witness Clemens Alexandrinus, who resolves; that money
spent on Plays and such like vanities, is Interitus no^ sumptus locum obtinet.
Paedag. l. 2. c. 12. and l. 3. c. 11. fol. 53. A.
wastfull prodigality, not honest expense. Witness Saint Ambrose, who
describes prodigality, Prodigu^ est popularis favoris gratia exinanire proprias
opes. Quod faciunt qui ludis Circ^^ibus, vel etiam theatralibus patrimoniu^
dilapidant suum, ut vincant superioru^ celebritates; cum totum illud sit inane
quod agunt. De Offi^ijs. l. 2. c. 21. and Sermo. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. E.
to be a w^sting of wealth upon Pl^yers and Plays for popular applause: whence
he reputes those Prodigals who do so: informing us, withal, Ibi histriones
accipiunt and gladiatores, and perit omne quod perditis datur. Ambr^s. Sermo.
in D^minica 8. post Pentecost^n. Tom. 5. page 44. E. G. Sermo. 8. in the old,
and 64. in the new Impressions of Saint Ambrose Works.
that whatsoever is given to Stage Players, Sword-players, and such like
cast-awayes, is utterly lost, so that men ca^ reap no comfort from it. And
yet, says he, Magistratus in Theatris, mimis, athletis and gladiatoribus,
ali^sque hujusmodi generibus hominum totum paene pat^^monium suum largitur, ac
prodigit, ut unius horae f^vorem vulgi nimirum adquirat, nihil sibi ulterius
profutu^um. Ibidem. Tom. ^. p. 44. E.
diverse Magistrates have prodigally given and consumed almost their whole
Patrimony in Theaters, upon Players, Wrestlers, Fencers, and such kind of men,
that they might purchase to themselves the peoples favo^r but for one hour,
without any further advantage. To pass by Tertullians verdict; His it^que
infructuosos esse magnus est fructus. Apologia, Advers. Gentes. Tom. 2. page
706.
that to be unfruitful unto Players, and such unusefull persons, is great
frugality: and so by cons^quence, that to part with money to them is
prodigality: as Saint Basil, Nazia^zen, Leo, Chrysostom, Asterius, Salvian,
John Sarisbury, Petrarch, Bodinus, Northbrooke, Gualther, Gosson, Doctor
Reinolds, and others, in their foregoing passages testify. Incognitus in
Psalm. 149. and our own famous English Apostle, Dial. l. 3. c. 1. fol. 45. a. b.
John Wickleff^, expressly teach us; that to give to Stage Players is
prodigality: and therefore Wicklef instructs us: Veruntamen magnificus debet
secundum prudentia^ pro talibus casibus sua^ largitione^ provide mensurare,
specialiter non dando histrionibus, vel me^dicis validis, pro vano nomine
acquirendo. Dial^ l. 3. c 1. fol. 45. a.
that a magnificent man ought carefully to measure out his bounty in many cases
according to prudence, especially in not giving to Stage Players, or sturdie
Beggars to purcase a vainglorious name, as the custom of many was to do. S.
Augustine is yet more strict; resolving us; Donare res suas histrionibus vitiu^
est immane, non virtus. Exposit^ in Joan. Tract 100. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 608.
that for a man to bestow his goods or money upon Stage Players, is not only
prodigality and no virtue, but a great heinous vice. Which assertion of his is
both recited and approved by Distinct. 86. fol. 139.
Gratian, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap 8.
John Sarisbury, Secunda secundae. Quaest. 168. Artic. 2.3m.
Aquinas, Su^ma Theologiae^ pars 2. Quaest. 133. memb. 4.
Alexander de Hales, Exposit. in l. 4 Regu^. To^. 7. p. 100. C.D.
Tostatus, In Psalm. 149.
Incognitus, De. Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53.
Astexanus, Exposit. on the 8. Commandment
Bishop Babington, Treatise against Vain Plays and Enterludes. f. 28.29.
Master Nor^hbrooke, Plays Confuted. Act. 2.
Stephen Gosson, and Mariana and Brissonius, De Spectaculis. lib. Su^ma
Rosella. Tit. Histrio.
others, upon these ensuing reasons. First, because the donation of money unto
Stage Players Exanimat lentus spectator. sedulus inflat. Horat. Epist. l. 2.
Ep. 1. p. 283^
does animate, yea maintain them in their diabolical lewd un^hristian
profession, and makes their Vbi enim malos praemia sequu^tur, haud facile
quisqua^ gratuito bonus est. Salustij. Histor. l. 1. p. 200.
reformation desperate. Secondly, because it supports the Synagogues, Lectures,
and lewd instruments of Satan, (the Seminaries of all wickedness) which else
would fall to ruin, there being no contributing Spectators to suport them. If
there were no Play-haunters to behold and cherish Stage Plays, there would
then (as Non ita ille, qui hoc fingit, est delinquens, ut tu qui haec iubes
fieri: neque iubes solu^, sed studes and laetaris and laudas quae fiunt, and
omnino applaudis tali ergasterio daemonioru^. Principiu^ and radix talis
iniquitatis vos estis, maxim qui tribuitis, qui diem universam in his
consumitis. Si enim nullus esset t^lium spectator ac fautor, nec essent quide^
qui dicere illa aut agere curarent. Quando vero vos cernunt and arts proprias,
and ipsa exercendi quotidiani operis loca, and ipsum quem ex his paratis
quaestum and prorsus omnia simul vanissimi illius spectaculi amore deserere,
avidiori and illi intention ad haec rapiuntur, studiu^que his magis impendunt.
Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Mat^ Tom. 2. Col. 51.52. and Alex^ Alensis. Su^ma Theologiae.
pars 2. Quaest. 133. Memb. 4.
Chrysostom truly writes) be no Play-poets, no Players for to pen or act
them: But when Actors see men leave their own callings, trades, and daily
employments, together with the gain arising thence, and all thing else to run
to Stage Plays; this makes them more earnestly to addict themselves to their
trade of acting, and to bestow more diligence in playing: The multitude of
prodigal Spectators, is that which makes so many Play Houses, Plays, and
Actors, which else would quickly vanish: Play-^aunters therefore, (if we
believe Saint See n and z before.
Chrysostom and Alexander Alensis) are the chief original delinquents in the
case of Plays, because their presence at them, their contribution toward them
and their Actors, is the rise from whence they spring. Thirdly, because it
maintains Players in a constant course of theft: For the very profession of a
Stage Player See Act 7. Scene 2.3. and Part 2. Act 2. thorowout.
being unlawful (as Divines agree:) the money they receive for acting (as In 4.
Regum. Tom. 7. p. 100. C. D.
Tostatus, De Ludo Aleae. lib.
Danaeus, In their several Expositions and Treatises on the 8. Commandment.
Bishop Babington, Master Perkins, Elton, Dod, Downham, Lake, and Williams,
with sundry others have resolved) must certainly be theft, because not gotten
by any lawful means. Fourthly, because it Basil. Hom. 1. in Divites and
Avaros. Gualther. ^om. 11. and Ambros. Sermo. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. E G
accordingly.
extenuates, or intercepts men's charity to the poor, who like See Ambros.
Sermo. 64. and Basil. Hom. 1. in Divites and Avaros, accordingly.
empty Bags, are best capable to receive the superfluity of rich men's plenty,
which Players for the most part now engrosse. Fifthly, ^ui histrionibus donant,
dicant mihi, quare donant? hoc in illis amant in quo nequissimi sunt: hoc in
illis pascunt, hoc in illis vestiunt, ipsam nequitiam publicam spectaculis
homin^. Qui donant aliquid histrionibus, quare donant? nu^quid non and ipsa
hominibus donantur? Non tam naturam ibi attendunt operis Dei, sed nequitiam
op^ris humani. Qui histrionibus donant, non hominibus donant, sed arti
nequissimae. Nam si homo tantum esset, and histrio non esset, non e^ donares.
Honoras in ^o vitium, non naturam. August. Enar. in Psalm. 102. Tom. 8. pars 2.
p. 336. See Gratian, Distinct. 88. and Ioa^. Saresburiensis. De Nugis
Curialiu^. l 1. c. 8. accordingly.
because those who give their money to Stage Plays, bestow it on them only
for the exercise of their unchristian art; for their Plays and Action, not
their poverty or desert: they are bountiful to them as Players only, not as
men, as Christians, whose very penury begges an alms. Our Players, though they
are 14. Eliz c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4 and 1. Iac. c. 7.
Rogues and Sturdy-beggers by Statute, are yet so haughty in their minds, See
Gosson, his School of Abuses^ accordingly.
so gorgeously glittering in their hired Brokers Robes; and sometimes so well
lined in the Purse, that they disdain the name of Beggars, though in truth
they are no other, then The 3. Blast of Re^rait from Plays and Theaters. p.
75.76. accordingly.
arrogant saucy Vagrants, who rather challenge as a due, then beg the alms
of Play-haunters: Hence all the coin they get by Playing, is styled by
themselves, not Alms, but Wages: not Charity, but Desert; not bounty, but
reward: and those who part with it deem it so; who gratify them only for
their Playing, not pity them for their poverty; as Augustine, with others well
observe: Now thus to remunerate Stage Plays, pro exercitio sui vitij, as the
Histrionibus dare causa vanae gloriae, vel pro exercitio vitij sui, immane
peccatu^ est. Aquinas, secu^da secundae. Quaest. 168. Art. 2.3m. Alexander
Alens^s, Summa Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 133. Memb. 4. Astexanus, De Casibus.
l. 2. Tit. 53. Gratian. Distinct. 86. fol. 139. August. Tractat 100. in Joan.
Summa Rosella. Histrio. Alvarus Pelagius, De Planct^s Eccl^siae. lib. 2. Artic.
46. fol. 150.
Schoolmen speak; that is, for the very exercise of their unlawful art, is a
vast notorious sin: ( Vincentij Speculum Historiale. lib. 29. cap. 341. fol.
367.
Quoniaem histrionibus dare, est Daemonibus imolare:) which as it Qui donant
histrionibus, quare donant? hoc utique in illis fovent in quo nequissimi sunt.
Nempe qui nequitiam fovet, estne bonus? unde quid faut oribus eorum immineat
colligis; si facientes and consentientes pari paena recolis esse plectendos.
Ioannis Saresburiensis. De Nugis Curialium. lib 1. cap. 8.
makes those who are guilty of it, wicked men; so it binds them over to
eternal punishments without repentance, as all the Marginall Authors do
define. Lastly, because men's contribution to Plays and Players (whose Nihil
demen^ius quam de improbo homine been mereri. Quisquis enim id facit, suo
officio suoque sumptu hostem sibi facit eum, quem neque amicum, neque inimicu^
habere li^uit. Erasmus. De Rat. Cons^r. Epist. page 182.
approbation or applause, no good men should demerit by their bounty to them)
involues them both in the guilt and punishment of all those sins that are
occasioned or committed by them: as Chrysostom^. Hom. 6. in Matthew. Salvian, De
Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. Augustine. En^r. in Psalm. 102. with all the other
fore-quoted Authors largely testify. What th^refor^ Seneca writes in a
parallel case: Pecuniam non dabo quam numeraturam adulterae sciam; ne in
societatem turpis facti, aut co^silij veniam^ Si potero, revocabo; sin mimus
non adjuvabo scelus. De Beneficijs. lib. 2. cap. 14.
I will not give money unto him, whom I know will part with it to an A
dulteresse, lest I should participate of his filthy fact or counsel: If I can,
I will recall him; if not, I will not further him in his wickedness: The same
should be every true Christians resolution in this case of Stage Players: he
should not give his money unto Players; lest he participate both in the guilt
and punishment of their sins; he should do his best to hinder; at leastwise
he should never foster Plays or Players, by contributing to their Boxes, or
resorting to their Theaters, for the forenamed reasons.

Since therefore it is abunndantly evident by the premises; that Stage Plays
are the occasions of much Turpissimu^ genus damni est inconsulta donatio.
Sen^ca. De Ben^ficijs. lib. 4. ^ap. 10.
vain, much sinful prodigal expense: and that the very contributing to
Players Boxes (of which every common Spectator must be always culpable) is not
only apparent prodigality, but a Immane peccatum. See l before.
Giant-like sin, which brings much danger to men's souls: It must needs cause
us to abominate, to abandon Stage Plays, even for this effect, which always
necessarily attends them.

SCENA TERTIA.
THe third effect or fruit of Stage Plays, is the irritation, Argument 29.


That which does ordinarily, if not always defile the eyes, the ears and
souls both of the Actors and Spectators, by ingendring, by exciting
meretricious lustful, lewd, adulterous desires and affections in their
hearts; or by instigating, by preparing, by inducing them to actual
uncleanesse; See Mat. 5.29. 1 These. 5.22. Jude 23.
must needs be abominable and unlawful unto Christians.

But this do Stage Plays, as I shall here make manifest.

Therefore they must needs be abominable and unlawful unto Christians.

The Major is irr^fragable; because all polluting objects, all unchaste
affections, and unruly Concupiscenti^ enim carnis fo^entu^ peccati, ^ena
vitio^u^: (...) ^lagra^tior est, grav^us que praecipitat and infla^mat. Ambr.
l. 4. in Lucae Evang. Tom. 3. p. 34. B. C. Cupiditas fomes and velut quoddam
incentivu^ vitiorum. Bernard. Sermo 1. In Caena Dom. Col. 145. C.
carnal lusts, (which are Mat. 5.27, 28. Romans 7.7. Ephesians. 5.3. 2 Pet. 2.14.
no less then adultery, then uncleanesse it self in Gods account,) do not
only Ier. 4.14. Mat. 5.27, 28. c. 15.18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 2.11. Tit. 1.15.
contaminate, and war against men's souls; but likewise Romans 1.18.
deprive them of Gods favor, Psalm. 66.18. Isay 1.11^ to 19.
disable them to every holy duty, Ephesians. 2.23. 2 Timothy 2.26.
inthrall them unto Satan; Rev. 21.27. Gal. 5.19, 21.
exclude them out of Heaven; and without repentance 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 6.8.
Rev. 21.9. c. 22 15.
plunge them into Hell for all eternity. Since therefore the Scripture calls
upon us; 1 Cor. 7.1.
to cleanse our selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit; Col. 3.5. Romans
8.10, 11.
to mor^ifie our carnal lusts and earthly members: to Gal. 5.24.
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof; the Romans 6.21, 23^
etc. 8.6, 13.
fruit of which is eternal death: 1 Pet. 2.11.
to abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul; and to Romans 13.14.
make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: Since it
expressly informs us; Ephesians. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4. Romans
1.24. to 29.
that none but Idola^rous Heathen Gentiles, in whom the Devil reigns; Romans
8.5 to 14. 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. Tit. 3.3. Jude 8. Amos 6.1. to 7.
none but unregenerate, carnal, graceless persons, who have no part in
Christ, do wallow with delight; do foster, harbor, or take pleasure in such
lusts as these. And that Gal. 5.24. Romans 8.1, 4, 9, 10.
all who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof: Romans 8.7, 8.
because the carnal mind is enmity against God, neither is it, nor can it be
subject to his law: There are none but Whores and Panders, or foul incarnate
Devils, who dare control my Minors truth; which all Christians must subscribe
to; Romans 8.12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
because they are no longer debtors to the flesh, to live after the flesh; but
Romans 14.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 3.23 c. 6.19.20. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 2.20.
sworn Servants and Spouses unto Christ alone, Romans 6.13, 19. c. 21.1.
Nupsisti Christo, illi tradidisti carnem tua^, illi sponsasti maturitatem tuam.
Incede secundum sponsi tui voluntatem. Tertul. De Velandis Virginibus cap. 13.
to whom they have resigned both their souls and bodies, to be at none but his
disposal.

The Minor is notoriously evident, not only by experience; but likewise by the
concurring suffrages of sundry Fathers, Councels, and Authors of all sorts: Who
as they style, See p. 66 67, 68, 69. with the Fathers and Authors there
alleged; who give these Epithites or Styles to Plays and Play-hou^es. See the
2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. D. Sparks, his Rehearsal
Sermon at Pau^s Cross, April 29. 1579. A Treatise of Danc^s, Anno 1581.
Stephen Goss^n, his School of Abuses, accordingly.
Play Houses; The Temples of Venery; the Schools of Bawdry; the De^s of
Lewdness; the Si^kes of Filthiness: and Stage Plays; the Lectures of
Ribaldry; the Meditations of Adultery; the Nurseries of Uncleanness: the
Fomentations of Lechery: the Fuel, the Incendiaries of lust: and the very
Devils Forge or Bellows, to excite and blow up flames of carnal
Concupi^cence, both in the Actors and Spectators hearts: a su^ficient
ratification of our present Assumption. So they likewise positively a^firme,
and copiously testify the truth of this proposition in express words:
Witness Clemens Alexandrinus; who informs us; Quod sanctu^ est Daemonio^u^
personis in Comaedi^ ludificati estis. Desine canticu^ o Homere, non est
pulchrum, docet adulterium. Nos autem ne aures quide^ ^tupris and
fornicationibus inquinare volumus, etc Horum non solum usus, sed etia^ aspectus
and auditus deponendam esse memoriam vobis annuntiamus: scortatae sunt aures
vestrae, fornicati sunt ocu^i, and quod est magis novum, ante complexum vestri
adulteriu^ admiserunt aspectus. Oration. Adhortatoria ad Gentes. p. 8. E.F. and
9. A.
that Comedies and amorous modern Poems teach men adultery: that they defile
men's ears with incests, and fornications: therefore he tells the Gentiles,
that not only the use, the sight and hearing, but likewise the very memory of
Stage Plays, yea of the fabulous Poems, pictures, and representations of their
uncha^te, libidinous Idol-gods, ought utterly to be abolished; because their
ears had committed whoredom, their eyes had played the harlots with them: and
which is more strange, that their very sight had committed adultery before any
actual embracement, by reason of these obscene Pictures^ and filthy
Enterludes. Hence he instructs Christians; Non ducet ergo nos Paedagogus ad
spectacula: nec inconcinne stadia and Theatra pestilen^iae cathedram quis
vo^averit. Magna enim con^usione and iniquitate hi cae^us plaeni sunt, and
occasio conventus causa est turpitudinis, cu^ viri and faeminae permixtim
conveniant alter ad alterius spect^culu^. Hic quoque s^^lestu^ est consiliu^,
quem^dmodu^ adversus iustu^. Dum enim lasciviunt oculi, calescunt appetitiones,
and oculi proximos impudentius respicere assue facti, quod concessum ociu^
habeant, intendunt cupiditates. Prohibeantur ergo spectacula and acromata, quae
nequitia verbisque obscaenis and vanis, temere profusis, plena sunt, etc.
Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11.
that his Paedagoge must not lead them unto Plays or Theaters, which may not
be unfitly called, the Chair of Pestilence: because these Conventicles where
men and women meet promis^uously together to behold one another, are the
occasion of lewdness: here they give, or plot wicked counsel: For while their
eyes are lasciviously occupied, their lusts wax warm, and their eyes being
accustomed to glance more impudently on those who sit next them, having liberty
and leisure granted to them, intend their lusts. These Spectacles therefore
(says he) which are fraught with wickedness, with obscene, and vain
speeches; with the representations of filthy deeds; with impudent and unchaste
discourses which provoke laughter, the Idaeaes of which men carry away with
them to their houses, and there more deeply imprint them in their minds; are
utterly to he prohibited. Witness Tertullian; who records; Tragaediae and
Comaediae scelerum and libidinu^ auctrices, cruentae and lasci^ae, impiae and
prodigae. De Spectae. cap. 18.
that Tragedies and Comedies, are the augmenters of villainies and lusts; being
both cruel and lascivious, impious and prodigal. Oculos and aures
communicant, etc. Ibid. cap. 17.
That they defile men's eyes and ears with uncleanesse: Scintillas libidinum
conflabellant. Ibid. cap. 25.
and blow up the sparkles of their Lusts. Hence he styles the Playhouse:
Sacrarium Veneris: Veneris domus. Ibid. cap. 10.
the Chapel of Venery: the House of Lechery: the Consistoriu^ impudicitiae,
ubi nihil probatur qua^ quod alibi non probatur. Ibid. c. 17.
Consistory of Incontinency: Hence he informs us; Nihil nobis cum impudicitia
Theatri. Apologia Advers. Gentes. c. 38. Non scenae turpetudinibus Christianu^
affici oportet. De habitu Muli^r. c. 5.
that all the Christians in the Primitive Church, had utterly relinquished the
uncleanesse of the Theater. Hence he comforts the close imprisoned Martyrs of
his time with this consideration; Non in loca libidinum publicaru^ oculi
tuiimpingunt: non clamoribus spectaculoru^ vel impudicitia celebra^tium
caederis. Ad Martyrs. lib. c. 2. Sceni^a Faeditas. De Pudicitia. lib. cap. 7.
that by means of their imprisonment; their eyes were kept from the sight of
Theaters, the places of public lust, and lechery. Neither were their ears
o^fended with the clamors or uncleanesse of Stage Players. And hence he
doubles this Assertion. Similiter impudicitiam omnem amoliri iubemut; hoc
igitur modo etiam a Theatro seperam^r, quod est privatum consistorium
impudicitiae, etc. Habes igitur and Theatri interdictionem, de interdictione
impudicitiae. De Spectaculis. cap. 17.
That Stage Plays are absolutely prohibited, by the inhibition of
incontinency. Witness Origin; who instructs us: that Christians must not
lift up their eyes to Spectacula Circi vel Theatri sordidaru^ spectacula
visionum, quibus libidinem, vel alia quaeque vitia amans, inflammetur. In
Epist. Ad Romans c 11. l. 8. Tom 3. f. 103. A.
Stage Plays, the pleasurable delights of polluted eyes (as he there styles
them) lest their lusts should be inflamed by them. What then (writes he in Nam
de ijs quid dic^mus qui cum Gentilium turbis ad spectacula ma^urant, and
co^spectus suos atque auditus impudicis verbis and actibus faedant? Non est
nostru^ pronunciare de talibus. Ipsi enim sentire and videre possunt qua^ sibi
deligerint parte^. Tu ergo qui haec audis, etc. Sancti esto^e quia and ego
sanctus sum Dominus Deus ve^ter; Sapienter intellige quae dicuntur. Vt sis
beatus cu^ feceris ^a. Sepera te ^ terrenis a^tibus, sep^^a te a concupiscentia
mundi: Sepera te and remove ab omni pollutione peccati. Him 11. Super
L^viticum. Tom. 1 ^ol. 84. B.C.
another place) shall we say of these who with the troops of the Gentiles make
haste to Stage Plays, and defile their eyes and ears with unchaste words and
motions? It is not our part ^o pass sentence upon such, for they themselves
may perceive and see what part they have chosen to themselves. Thou therefore
who hear these things. Be ye holy, for I am holy: Wisely understand what is
spoken: separate thy self from terrene actions; separate thy self from the
lusts of the world, and from the contagion of every sin. Witness Saint
Cyprian, who styles Theaters b The Stews of public chastity, and Mastership
of obscaenity: which teach those sins in public, that men may more usually
commit them in private. Quid int^r haec Christianus fidelis facit, cu^ vitia
non licet nec cogitare? quid oblectatur simulachris libidinis, ut in ipsis
deposita verecundia audacior fiat ad crimina? Discit facere dum assues^it
vid^^e. Illas tamen qu^s infaelicitas sua in servitutem prostituit libidinis
publicae, occultent locus, and dedecus suum de latebris consolantur: erubescunt
videri etiam qui pudorem vendi^erunt. A^ istud publicum nostrum omnibus
videntibus geritur, and pr^sti^ut^rum transitur obscaenitas. Quaesitum est
quomodo adulterium ex oculis admittetur. Cyprian D^ S^ectaculis. lib.
What does a faithful Christian (writes he) do amidest these things, who may
not so much as think upon any vice? Why is he delighted with these Images of
lusts; that so having deposited his modesty in them, he may be made more bold
to commit the crimes themselves? He learnes to commit, who accustometh himself
to behold the Theatricall representations of uncleanesse. Those common whores
whose misfortune has prostituted them to the slavery of the public Stews,
conceal the place where their filthiness is committed, taking comfort in
their disgrace from the secrecy of their Cells: Those Adulterers also who have
sold their chastity, are ashamed to be seen in public: But this our public
lewdness is acted in the open view of all men: the obs^aenity of common
Whores is surpassed, and men have found out how they may commit adultery before
the eyes of others. Ita amatur, quicquid no^ licet, etc. Non licet inqua^
adesse Christianis fidelibus, non licet omnino, nec illis quos ad oblectamenta
au^iu^ ad omnes ubique G^aecia instructos suis artibus vanis mit^it, etc.
Fugienda sunt ista Christianis fidelibus, ut iam freque^ter diximus, tam vana,
tam perniciosa, tam sacrilega spectacul^, and oculi nostri fu^t, and aures
custodi^ndae; cito enim in hoc assuescimus quod audimus scelere. Nam cum men's
hominis ad vitia ipsa ducatur, sibi quid faciet si habuerit exemplan^turae,
corporis lubricae? quae sponte cor^uit, quid faciet si fuerit impulsa?
Avocandus est igitur animus ab istis. Cy^rian. Ibid.
Thus whatsoever is prohibited, is affected. Now I say, (I pray observe it well
good Reader,) it is NOT LAVVFVLL FOR FAITHFVLL CHRISTIANS, yea, IT IS
ALTOGETHER VNLAVVFVLL FOR THEM TO BE PRESENT AT THESE PLAYS. These so vain,
so pernicious, so sachrilegious Stage Plays, AS I HAVE NOW OFTEN AFFIRMED,
ARE WHOLY TO BE AVOIDED BY ALL FAITHFVLL CHRISTIANS; because we soon
accustom our selves to the practice of that wickedness, which we hear and
see: For since the mind of man is easily led on to these vices of it self;
what will it do when it is presented with unchaste examples both of body and
nature? she who thus falls of her own accord, what will she do if she be
precipitated? The mind therefore is wholly to be avotated from these
lascivious Enterludes. Add we to this another speech of his to the same
purpose. Converte hinc vultus ad diversi spectaculi no^ minus paenite^da
contagia; in Theatris quoque inspicies quod tibi and dolori sit and pudori.
Cothurnus est tragicus prisca facinora carmine recensere, de paracidis and
incestis horror antiquus, expressa ad imagine^ veritaris action replicatur, ne
seculis tra^seuntibus exole^cat, quod aliquando co^missum est: Admonetur omnis
aetas auditu fieri posse, quod aliqua^do factu^ est, etc. Cyprian Ep. l. 2. Ep.
2. Donato. See here Act 5. Scene 3.
Turn (says he) thine eyes to the no-lesse sinful contagions of a different
show: thou may also behold in Theaters, that which may affect thee both with
grief and shame. It is a Tragedians part, to rela^e ancient wickednesses in
verse: the ancient horror of Paricides and Incestuou^ persons is represented by
him to the life; lest those wickednesses which were committed in former ages,
should grow obsolete in aftertimes. Every age is admonished, that whatever
villainy was actually committed in former times, may be committed still. Those
things are now made examples, which have ceased to be si^nes. Then you may
please to know from Stage Players, what filthiness any man has committed in
secret, or to hear what he might have done. Adulteriu^ discitur du^ videtur;
and lenocina^te ad vitia publicae authoritatis malo, quae pudica forrasse ad
spectaculu^ matrona processerat, revertitur impudica. Adhuc deinde moru^ quanta
labes, quae probrorum fome^nta, quae alimenta vitiorum, histrionibus gestibus
inquin^ri? videre contra faedus iusque nascendi patientiam incestae
turpitudinis elaboratam, etc. Ibidem.
Thus is adultery learned whiles it is beheld, and the evil of public
authority playing the Pander to these vices, she who at first came perchance a
chaste Matron to the Play, returns a Strumpet from the Playhouse. Moreover,
what a great corruption of men's manners, what fomentations of reproachful
actions, what a fuel of vices is it, to be polluted with histrionicall
gestures, to see filthy Incest elaborately acted, against the very covenant and
right of man's nativity? See Act 5. Scene 3. p. 168. where the Latin is recited.
Men are emasculated; all the honor and vigor of their Sex is abated by the
filthiness of an effeminated body; and he there gives best consent, who does
most dissolve himself into a woman: his sin adds to his applause, and he is
reputed the more skillful, by how much the more filthy he is. What then cannot
be persuade who is such a one? he moves the senses, he soothes the affections,
he expugnes the stronger conscience of an upright heart; neither wants there
the authority of flattering reproach, that so destruction may creep upon men
by a more delicate hearing. See Act 3. Scene 3. p. 75.
They represent unchaste Venus, adulterous Mars, yea, their great love, not
more a Prince in dominion, then in vices; burning with his very Thunderbolts
into terrene loves; See Lactantius De falsa Religione. l. 1 c. 11. Tatianus,
and Clemens Alexandr. Oration. Adhor. ad Gentes. Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 9. c.
18. Ovid Metamorph. lib. 10.
sometimes waxing white in the feathers of a Swan; Lactantius, De falsa Relig.
c. 11. Arnobius, Advers. Gentes. lib. 4. Ovid Metamorph. l. 10. Terentij
Eunu^hus. August De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 7.
otherwhiles descending in a golden shoure; Lactantius De falsa Relig. c. 11.
Ovid Metamorph. l. 10. Julius Firmicus, De Errore Profanarum Relig. cap. 13.
anon coming forth attended with Birds to ravish and snach away young Youths,
Quaere iam-nunc an possit esse qui spectat, integer vel pudicus, cum Deos suos
quos venerantur imitantur? O si and possis in illa sublim^ specula constitutus
oculos tuos inserere secretis, recludere cubiculoru^ obductos fores, and ad
conscientia^ luminis penetralia occulta reserare, aspicias ab impudicis geri,
quod nec aspicere possit frons padica, etc. Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. See
Act 5. Scene 3. p. 168.169.
Examine now whether those who behold these Spectacles can be sincere or
chaste, whiles they imitate the gods they worship? Even sins themselves are
made religious to these wretches: O if thou could standing in that sublime
watch-towre insert thine eyes into their secrets, open the closed doors of
their bed-chambers, and bring all their hidden inmost rooms unto the
conscience or the light, thou might see that done by these unchaste persons,
which is a sin to see: thou might see that, which they sighing under the
fury of their vices deny themselves to have done, and yet they hasten for to
do it. See Act 3. Scene 3 p. 92. and Act 4. Scene 3. p 135.136. and 211.
Men rush upon men with mad unruly lusts, etc. A sufficient adequate testimony
of my Minors truth. Add we to these irrefragable Witnesses some others of no
less validity: Tatianus, styles Stage Players, Adulterij promo^or, cinae dorum
doctor, co^demnandorum author. Obscaen^ verba naso resonante effutiunt, and
motus, indecentes moventur, and adulterioru^ in scena Magistros siliae and
silij vestri spectant. Omnes nequitiae nocturnae, and quid obscaene dictu^
demulcere potest auditores, al^a voce promulgantur. Oration Contra Graecos Bibl.
Patrum. To^. 2. p. 180. B.C.
the Promoters of Adultery the Tutors of effeminate Dancers, and Sodomites; the
authors of damnable practices; the teachers of adultery, who utter obscene
words with a loud voyee, and use lascivious motions promulgating all nocturnall
abominations, and uttering all obscenities that might delight the Auditors. Nec
caetera spectacula spectare audemus, ne oculi nostri inquinentur, and aures
nostrae hauriant prophana, quae ibi decantantur, carmina. Nec phas est nobis
audire adulteria Deorum hominuque, etc. Ad Autolycum. l. 3. Bib Patr. Tom. 2. p
170. G.H
Theophylus Antiochenus, writes: That the Christians in his time durst not
behold Stage Plays, lest their eyes should be defiled with the adulteries of
those Devill-gods and men, that were there personated; and lest their ears
should suck in those profane verses that were there recited. To pass by
Advers. Gentes. l. 4. p. 249.250, 251. l. 7. p. 231.232, 233.
Arnobius, who declaimes much against the obscenity of Stage Plays, which did
adulterate the minds, inflame the lusts of the Spectators, by reason of those
lewd adulterous villainies of Idol-gods that were represented in them, which he
at larges discyphers: Lactantius, his Scholar, writes thus of Stage Plays. In
scenis nelcio an sit corruptela vitiosior. Nam and Comicae fabulae de stupris
virginum loquuntur aut amoribus meretricum: and quo magis sunt eloque^tes, qui
flagitia illa finxerunt, eo magis sententiarum elegantia persuadent, and
facilius inhaerent audientium memoriae versus numerosi and ornati. Item
Tragicae historiae subijciunt oculis parricidia and incesta Regum malorum and
cothurnata scelera demonstrant. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. lib. 6. cap. 20.
In Stage Plays also, I know not whether there be a more dangerous corruption.
For Comicall fables treat of the rapes of Virgins, or of the loves of Harlots,
and by how much the more eloquent the Poets are who have feined these
wickednesses, by so much the more do they persuade by their elegant sentences,
and the more easily do their wel-composed and adorned verses stick in the
memory of the Hearers. Likewise Trapicall Histories present unto men's eyes the
Paricides, the Incests of evil Kings, and they demonstrate tragical
wickednesses. Histrionum quoque impudicissimi motus, quid aliud, nisi libidines
docent, and instigant? quorum enervata corpora, and in muliebre^ incessum
habitu^que mollita, impudicas faeminas inhonestis gestibus mentiuntur. Quid de
mimis loquor corruptelaru^ praeferentibus disciplinam? qui docent adulteria,
du^ fingunt, and simulatis erudiunt ad vera? Ibidem.
The most unchaste motions likewise of Stage Players, what else do they but
teach and provoke lusts? whose enervated bodies dissolved into a woman's pace
and habit, personate unchaste women with dishonest gestures. What shall I
speak of mimicall Actors, who carry along with them even in outward show, the
discipline of depraving corruptions? who teach adulteries whiles they feine
them, and by counterfeit representations instruct men how to commit even real
uncleanesses. Quid iuvenes, aut virgins faciant, quu^ haec and fieri sine
pudore, and spect^ri libenter ab omnibus cernunt? Admone^tur utique quid facere
pos^n^, and infla^mantur libidi^e, quae aspectu maxim concitatur: ac se
quisque pro sexu in illis imaginibus praefigurat: probantqu^ illa dum rident,
and ad haerentibus vitijs corruptiores ad cubi^ula revertuntur. Ibidem.
What may young Men, or Virgins do, when as they perceive these things to be
acted without shame, and willingly to be beheld of all? Verily they are
admonished what they may do, and they are inflamed with lust, which is most of
all excited by the sight: and every one according to his Sex does prefigure
himself in these Images; yea, they approve them whiles they laugh at them, and
they return more corrupt to their Chambers by reason of the vices which adhere
unto them. Nec pue^i modo, quos praematuris vitijs imb^^ non opo^tet, sed etiam
senes quos pecc^^e iam non decet in talem vitiorum semitam dilabuntur. Vitanda
ergo spectacula omnia, non solum ne quid vitiorum pectoribus insideat, quae
sedata and paci^ica esse debent, sed ne cujus nos voluptatis consuetudo
delinia^, and a Deo atque a bonis operibus avertat. Ibidem.
And not only Children who ought not to be seasoned with premature vices, but
even old men, for whom it is unseemely now to sin, stray aside into this path
of vices. THEREFORE ALL SPECTACLES AND STAGE PLAYS (I pray observe it well)
ARE WHOLY TO BE AVOIDED, not only lest any vices should harbor in our
hearts, which ought to be calm and quiet; but likewise lest the custom of any
pleasure should delight us, and so TVRNE US FROM GOD AND FROM GOOD WORKS. His
spectaculis and delectantur, and libenter intersunt. Quae, quoniam maxima sunt
irrit^m^nta vitiorum, and ad corrumpendos animos potissime valent, tollenda
sunt nobis: quia non modo ad vitam beatam nihil conferunt, sed etiam no^ent
plurimu^. Ibidem.
Yea these Enterludes with which men are delighted, and at which they are
willingly present; because they are THE GREATEST INSTIGATIONS UNTO VICE, (pray
mark it) AND THE MOST POVVERFVLL INSTRVMENTS TO CORRVPT MEN'S MINDS, ARE
WHOLY TO BE ABOLISHED FROM AMONG US; Since they do not only, not contribute
any thing to an happy life, but likewise do much hurt. In another work of his
he writes thus. Quid scena? number sanctio^? in qua Co^media de stupris and
amoribus; Tragaedia de incestis and parricidijs fabulatur. Histrionici etia^
impudici gestus, quibus infames faeminas imitantur, libidines, quas salt^ndo
exprimunt, docent: An no^ mimu^ corruptela disciplinaru^ est? in quo ^iunt per
imaginem, quae non sunt, ut fiant sine pudore, quae vera sunt. Spectant haec
adolescentes: quorum lubrica aetas, quae fraenari, ac regi debet, ad vitia and
pecca^a his im^ginibus ^ruditur. Fugiend^ igitur omnia spectacula ut tranqu^ll^
mentis statum tenere possimus. Renunciandum noxijs volupta^ibus, ne deliniti
suavitate pestifera, in mortis laqueos incidamus. Placet sola virtus, cujus
merces immortalis est, quum vicerit voluptatem. Lactantius, Divinarum. Instit.
Epitome cap. 6.
What is the Playhouse? is it more holy then these Sw^rd-playes? in which a
Comedy treates of Rapes, and Loves^ a Tragedy of Incests, and Murders.
Moreover unchaste Histrionicall gestures, with which they imitate infamous
Women, do teach those lusts which they express by dancing: And is not then a
Player the corruption of d^scipline, in whom those things that are done are
acted by representation, that so th^se things which are truly real, may be
perpetrated without any shame. Young men behold these things, whose slippery
age, which should be brideled and governed, is instructed to commit sins and
vices by these representations. THEREFORE ALL PLAYS ARE TO BE AVOIDED, THAT
WE MAY enjoy a serene state of mind. THESE NOXIOVS PLEASVRES ARE TO BE
RENOVNCED, lest we being delighted with their pestiferous sweetness, should
fall into the snares of death. Virtue alone, whose reward is immortal, will
then content us, when she has overcome these pleasures. Thus far Lactantius,
most elegantly, most truly. Add we to him Minucius Felix, that eminent
Christian Lawyer, whom Minucius Felix non ignobilis inter causidicos loci fuit.
Huj^s liber, cu^ Octavio titulus est, declarat, quam idonus assertor veritatis
e^^e potuisset, si se totum ad id studium contulisset. De Iustitia lib. 5. cap
1.
Lactantius himself commends: who writes thus of Stage Plays. Comaediae and
Tragaediae vestrae incestis gloriantur, quas vos libent^r and legitis, and
auditis: and sic Deos colitis incestos, cum m^tre, cum fi^ia, cum sorore
conjunctos: merito igitur incestum penes vos saepe depraehenditur semper
admitti^ur. Minucius Felix. Octavius. page 101.
Your Comedies and Tragedies glory in incestuous persons, and yet you
wil^lingly both read and hear them: and so you worship In^^stuous gods, who
have coupled with their own Mothers, Daughters, Sist^rs: Worthily therefore
(such was the fruit of these their Stage Plays) is Incest oft-times
deprehended among you, always is it tolerated and committed. Nos igitur qui
moribus and pudore censemur merito malis voluptatibus, and pompis vestris, and
spectaculis abstinemus: quorum and de sacris originem novimus, and ut noxia
blandimenta damnamus. Na^ in ludis curulibus, quis non horreat populi in se
rixantis insaniam? in gladiatorijs homicidij disciplinam? in scenicis etiam non
minor furor, turpitudo prolixior. Nunc enim mimus, vel exponitadulteria, vel
monstrat. Nunc enervis histrio amorem du^ fingit, infligit. Ide^ Deos vestros,
induendo stupra, suspiria, odia, dedecorat. Idem simulatis doloribus lacrymas
vestras vanis gestibus and ^utibus provocat. Sic homicidiu^ in vero flagitatis,
in mendacio fletis, Ibid. p. 123.124.
We therefore who are valued according to our manners and modesty, deservedly
abstain from your evil pleasures, your shows, and Stage Plays, whom we know
to have taken their original from your Idol-worship, and whose noxious
flattering enticements we condemn. For in your Chariot-playes, who would not
abhor the madness of the people brawling among themselves? the discipline or
art of murder in Sword-playes? in Stage Plays likewise there is no less
fury, more prolix obscenity: For one while the testing Actor, does either
expound adulteries, or personate them. Another while, THE EFFEMINATE
STAGE PLAYER VVHILES HE FEINES LOVE, DOES VIOLENTLY INFLICT IT. The same by
personating wh^redomes, sighs, hatreds, disgraceth your gods: The same w^^h
feined griefs provokes your tears with his vain gestures and nods. Thus you
desire true murder, you bewail feined, etc. Thus he. Saint Basil the Great,
informs us: Spectacula and corrupti can^us nimiam in animis ingenera^tes
libidine^, etc. N^scij sane ludos spectaculis abundantes lascivis, co^munem ac
publicam officinam scelerum esse: modulationes atque concentus meretriciosque
cantus, auditorum animis insidentes, nil ali^d efficere, quam ut turpitudinem
omnibus persuadeant, citharae dorum sonitus imitantes. H^xaemeron. Hom. 4. Tom.
1. page 45. See De Legendis libris Gentilium, Oration. page 408.412. accordingly.
That the very beholding and hearing of Stage Plays ingenders overmuch lust in
the minds of men; That Stage Plays abounding with lascivious Spectacles are
the common Shops of all wickedness: that they stick fast in the minds of the
Auditors: and serve to no other purpose but to persuade all men unto
filthiness. Gregory Nyssen records; Sordida and luxuriosa Spectacula, and in
muris, and in aulis diversae ad luxuriam animae picturae, and in vasis
sculpturae impressae nequitiam praedicant, quibus cogitatio ad cupiditates suas
revocatur, vituperosi spectaculi visione, ad animam usque passionum affectu
perveniente, ne scilicet cupiditatum ardore extinguatur, aut retunda^ur. Vitae
Moseos Enarratio. page 503. See 502.
That lascivious Spectacles; and filthy Pictures engraven or painted either in
Walls, in Halls, or Plate, (to satisfy the luxury of the mind) do proclaim
lewdness: the though^s are recalled to their lusts, by the sight of these
blameworthy Spectacles, whose inflammation pierces even to the affections,
lest verily the heat of men's lusts should be quenched. Quod si recondita,
abditaque hujusmodi, non dico vascula and capsulas (multisenim ea patent, nec
ali^na sunt a turpitudine vitae) sed occulta me^tis and animi perspicere
poteris, iam vero accumulat^ru^ ^anaru^ putredinem reperies faetidam. At
modesti hominis oculus etia^ mundus est, and haec quae ad luxuriam incitant,
spectacula despicit. Ibidem.
If that thou could dive, I say, not into the Vessels and Caskets (for they
are manifest unto many, neither are they different from their filthiness of
life) but into the retired hidden secrets of the mind and soul of a man
delighted with these Spectacles, thou should verily there find a sti^king
rottenness of many accumulated Frogs; that is (as he there expresses
himself in a former passage) of filthy lusts and vices. But even the eye of a
chaste man is clean, and refuses these Spectacles which incite men unto
luxury, or carnal pleasure. Our common Play-haunters and lascivious
Picture-masters therefore, by this Fathers verdict, (whatever they may deem
themselves,) are no chaste, no modest persons; Qui naturam respicit, homines:
qui vitam considerat, non homines, sed ex brutorum genere eos esse putabit:
cujus quidem bruti signa tam in universa domo, quam in singulis invenias
partibus. Ibidem
yea rather beasts, then men; as he there terms them. Gregory Nazienzen,
styles Stage Players; Turpitudinis administri. Ad Seleucum, De Recta
Educatione. pag^ 1063.
the servants of lewdness: Play Houses, Lasciva faeditatis, and impuritatis
omnis officina. Ibidem.
the lascivious shops of all filthiness and impurity: Stage Plays: Lascivorum
hominum inhonestae and indecorae disciplinae, qui nihil turpe ducunt, praeter
modestiam. Nimirum in his natura vitiatur and adulterina ^it, voluptatumque
flamma multiplex accenditur. Ibidem.
the dishonest unseemely instructions of lascivious men, who repute nothing
filthy, but modesty; by which nature is vitiated, and made adulterous, and
several flames of different lusts are kindled. Etiam spurcissimus rebus
Theatra conduntur, ut ne hi morbi clam turpitudinem suam exerceant. Sed
disciplinis improbis and sceleratis praemia proposita sint. Tu autem mihi velim
haec execreris. Noli pupulas ^uas polluere, sed omnes oculorum corruptelas
vitato, ^t pupulae tuae mihi. Virgins cura tua maneant. Ibidem.
Theaters likewise are seasoned with most filthy things; lest that these
diseases should practice their lewdness only in secret; Rewards are promised
to these dishonest, and wicked instructions: But do thou have these things in
execration: Suffer not thy female pupils to be defiled with them; but cause
them to avoid all corruptions of their eyes, that so they may contin^e Virgins
to me, by thy care: Intimating hereby, that resort to Stage Plays, would soon
defloure their Virginity, and make them Strumpets. Saint Hilary informs us,
Immaculatus sit, ac nitidus: ^itque ^i non corpus stupris contaminatum, non
oculi spectaculis theatralibus sordidati, etc. Enarrat^ in Psalm. 14. page 202.
G.
That he who will ascend up in^o the Hill of the Lord must keep himself
unspotted from corruption; his body must not be defiled with whoredom; his
eyes must not be polluted with Stage Plays: which he there couples with
whordome, because they engender unchaste affections in men's hearts, and
oft-times allure them to actual lewdness. Therefore in his Commentary on the
118. alias the 119. Psalm, verse 37. ( Turn away mine eyes from beholding
vanity) he paraphraseth thus: Orat autem and animi and corporis oculos; ^os
scilicet, qui in theatralibus ludis captivi incubant, and obscaenis illis
spectaculorum fabulis, etc. vanitatibus avert^. Ibidem. page 258. E. F.
That the Prophet prays to have bot^ the ey^s of his body and mind turned
away from Stage Plays, and the obscene fables of dishonest Enterludes; which
did formerly occupy and defile them. Cyrill of Jerusalem affirms; Pompa
Diaboli, est in Theatris spectacula, etc. Ne ergo sis curiosus in frequentia
spectaculorum, ubi conspicias mimorum pe^ulantias, omni contumelia and
impudicitia refer^as, etc. Catechesis Mystagogic cap. 1. fol. 175. B.
That Playhouse meetings, and Plays, which are the Devils Pompes, were
fraught with all lewdness, contumely, and incontinency; Whence he persuades
all Christians to avoid them. Saint Ambrose styles Stage Plays Diabolus tibi
effundat spectacula vanitatum; incentiva inserat volup^atum: pete ut dominus
avertat oculos tuos. Avertamus igitur oculos a vanitatibus, atque ludorum
theatralium spectaculis, ne quod oculos viderit, animus concupiscat. In hoc
navigio corporis tui movetur aestus cupiditatum; and non avertis oculus animae
tuae ne videant sentinam libidinum, ne aspiciant mundi hujus stercora. Ambros
Enarrat. in Psalm. 118^ Octon. 5. Tom. 2. page 430. F. 431. B.D.
Spectacles of Vanities, by which the Devil convayes incentives of pleasures
into men's hearts. Let us therefore (says he) turn away our eyes from these
vanities, and Stage Plays, lest our minds should affect that which our eyes
behold, and let us come to God that he would do it for us. In the s^ip of thy
body there is a tempest of lusts raised, and yet thou turnest not away the eyes
of thy soul that they should not see the sink of lusts, nor behold the filth
of this world: Such are Stage Plays in this Fathers repute. S. Hierom in his
Epistle to Salvina, writes thus unto her. Tenera res in faeminis fama
pudicitiae est, quasi flos pulcherrimus c^to ad levem marcessit auram, levique
flatu corru^pitur; maxim ubi aetas consentit ad vitium, and maritalis deest
auctoritas, cujus umbra tutamen uxoris est. Epist. 9. c. 5. To^. 1. p. 28.
The fame of chastity in women is a tender thing; like a most beautiful flower
it is quickly blasted with a small wind, and corrupted with an easy breath:
especially where both age consents to vice, and the authority of an Husband is
wanting, whose shadow is the shelter of the Wife. Non ambulet iuxta te
calamistratus procurator, non histrio fractus in faeminam, non cantoris
Diabolici venenata dulcedo, non iuvenis cultus and nitidus. Nihil artiu^
scenicarum ^ibi iungatur, etc. eo quod incentiva vitiorum omniu^ titi^lant
animos, and quibusdam illecebris ad mortiferas animam voluptates trahunt, etc.
Ibidem. See Epist. 10. cap 4. and Epist. 18. accordingly.
Wherefore let no frizeld-pated Steward, no effeminate Stage Player accompany
thee; let not the venomous sweetness of a Diabolical Singer come near thee,
nor a count and beautiful Youth. Have thou nothing to do with Stage Plays:
because they are the pleasing incendiaries of men's lusts and vices: because
they draw men's souls by their flattering entisements to deadly pleasures,
(which Christians should extinguish with the love of Christ, and curb with
fasting:) and cause them to violate the vow and bond of Chastity, of
Widdowhood, of Virginity. So in his Commentary on Ezechiel. lib. 6. cap 20. he
certifieth us. Sed and nobis quando exitur de AEgypto, iubetur ut offensiones
oculorum nostroru^ ab^jciamus, ne scilicet his delectemur, quibus antea
delectabamur in saeculo: ne simulachris AEgypti polluamur, adinventionibus
scilicet Philosophorum, atque Haereticoru^, quae recte Idola nominantur. A
spectaculis quoque, imo offensionibus AEgypti removeamus oculos, arenae, circi,
Theatrorum, and omnibus, quae animae contaminant puritatem, and per sensus
ingrediuntur ad mentem: impleturque quod scriptum est: Mors intravit per
fenestras vestras. Ibidem. Tom. 4. page 3^9. A.
That we also when as we depart out of Egypt, are commanded to cast away all
those things which offend our eyes, that so we may not be delighted with those
things with which we were formerly affected in the world; to wit, with the
inventions of Philosophers and Heretics, which are rightly styled Idols. We
must likewise remove our eyes from all the Spectacles, yea rather, the offenses
of Egypt, as Sword-playes, Cirque-playes, and Stage Plays; which defile the
purity of the soul; and by the senses gain entrance to the mind: and so that
is fulfilled, which is written; Death has entered by your windows: By this
grave learned Fathers verdict then, it is most evident; that Stage Plays
devirginate unmarried persons, especially beautiful tender Virgins who resort
unto them, (which I would our female Play-haunters; and See Augustine Hom. 21.
^om. 10. page 592.
their Parents would consider:) that they defile their souls with impure
carnal lusts; and so let in eternal death upon them. Saint Augustine brands
all Stage Plays with this stigmaticall Impresse. That they are Ludi scenici
Spectacula turpitudinum. De Civit. Dei. lib 1. cap. 32.
the Sp^ctacles of filthiness: Probitatis and honestatis eversio. Ibid. c. 33.
The overturners of goodness and honesty: Vere Fugalia, sed pudoris and
honestatis. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
The chasers away of all modesty and chastity: Meretriciam pompam hinc
celebrari, etc. Avertebant faciem ab impur^s motibus scenicorum, artem flagitij
videre erubescentes, ne auderent impudicos gestus ore libero cernere, etc.
Frequentans in aperto invitamenta nequitiae, ad possidendos innumerabiles
malos. Ibidem l. 2. c. 26.
Meretricious shows. The unchaste, the filthy gestures of Actors: The art of
mischievous villainies, which even modest Pagans did blush to behold: The
invitations to lewdness, by which the Devil uses to gain innumerable
companies of evil men unto himsefe. Hence he styles Theaters; Theatra, Caveae
turpitudinum; and professiones publicae flagitiosoru^. De Consensu Evan^. l. 1.
c. 33. Tom. 4. pars 1. p. 530.
The Cages of uncleanesse, the public professions of wickedness, of wicked
men: and Stage Plays; Hanc talium numinum placationem petul^ntissimam,
impurissimam, impudentissimam, nequissimam, immundissimam, cujus actores
laudanda Romanae virtutis indoles honor privavit, tribu movit, agnovit turpes,
fecit infames. Hanc inquam pudendam, veraeque religion^ adversandam and
detestandam numinum placationem; has fabulas in Deos illecebrosas atque
criminosas, haec ignominiosa Deorum facta scelerate turpiterque conficta, vel
sceleratius turpiusque commiss^, oculis and auribus publicis civitas to^a
discebat, haec commissa numinibus placere cernebat, and ideo non solum illis
exhibenda, sed sibi quoque imitanda credebat. Idem. De Civit^ Dei. lib. 2. cap.
27.
The most petulant, the most impure, impudent, wicked, unclean; the most
shameful and detestable attonements of filthy Devil-gods; which to true
Religion are most ex^crable: whose Actors the laudable towardnes of Roman
virtue had depriv^d of all honor, disfranchised their tribe, acknowledged as
filthy, made infamous: because the people were instructed, encouraged by the
sight and hearing of St^ge-playes, to imitate, to practice those alluring
criminous fictions; those ignominious facts of Pagan-gods, that were either
wickedly and filthily forged of them, or more wickedly and filthily committed
by them. Hence is it that this godly Father, does Qua supra. De Doctrina
Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 25. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 4^ cap. 1.
Confessionum. lib. 6. cap. 7.8^ and Epist. 202.
often dissuade all Christians from acting, seeing, or frequenting Stage Plays,
and Cirque-playes, because they are but P^nders, but allectives to uncleanesse,
incendiaries and fomentations unto carnal lusts. Hence he speaks thus to
Christian Parents (which I would to God those graceless Parents who either
accompany, send, encourage, or else permit their Children to run to filthy,
lewd, lascivious Stage Plays, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odore^
testa diu. Horace Epist. l. 1. Epist. 2. page 24.
which vitiate, which deprave them ever after, would seriously consider:)
Quotiescuque fratres charissimi aliquos ex filijs vestris ad spectacula vel
furiosa, vel cruenta, vel turpia, quasi ad aliquod bonum opus currere vana
persuasione and pestifero amore cognoscitis, vos qui jam Deo propicio ista, non
solu^ luxuriosa, sed etiam crudelia oblectamenta despicitis, castigare eos, and
abundantius pro eis domino supplicare debetis, quia illos cognoscitis ire in
vanitatem, and in^anias mendaces, and negligere quo vocati sunt. August. Hom.
21. Tom. 10. page 592.
As often, dear Breathren, as you know that any of your Children resor^ either
to furious, bloody, or filthy Enterludes, with a vain perswation, and
pestiferous love^ as if it were to some good work, you who now by the grace of
God contemn, not only these luxurious, but also cruel recreations, and
disports, ought diligently to chastise them, and to pray more abundantly to the
Lord for them, because you know that they run unto vanity, and lying follies,
neglecting that place to which they are called. Qui si forte in ipso Circo
aliqua ex causa expavescant, continuo se signant, and stant illic portantes in
front, unde abscederent si hoc portarent in cord. Omnis enim qui ad aliquod
opus malum currit, si forte pedem impegerit, signat os suum, and n^scit quod
includit potius Daemonem quam excludit. Tunc enim been se signaret, and
Diabolum de cord suo repelleret, si se ab illo opere nefario revocaret. Vnde
iterum atque iterum rogo vos fratres charissimi, ut pro eis totis viribus
supplicetis^ quatenus ad ista damnanda intellectum accipere mereantur, and
affectum ad fugienda, and misericordiam ad agnoscendum. Ibidem.
These if they chance to be affrighted in the Playhouse by any sudden
accident, (I would our Popish Stage-haunters, who think to scare away the
Devil from them by their crossings, would well consider it,) do presently
cross themselves, and they stand there carrying that in their foreheds, from
whence they would depart if they carried it in their hearts. For every one who
runs to any evil work, if he chance but to stumble, does forthwith cross
his face, and knows not, that he does rather include, then exclude the
Devil. For then should he cross himself well, and repel the Devil out of
his heart, if he recalled himsefe from that wicked work. Wherefore I entreat
you, dear Brethren, agai^e and again, that you would supplicate for them with
all your might, that so they may receive understanding to condemn these
damnable things; desire, to avoid them; mercy, to acknowledge them. Loquemur
tamen and ad illos, quos frequenter ab Ecclesiae conventu spectacula voluptuosa
subducant. Rogo vos fratres charissimi, ut quotiescunque eos tale aliquid
facere videritis, ad vicem nostram severissime castigetis. Sit ad eos vox
nostra, memoria vestra: corrigite arguendo, consolamini alloquendo, exemplum
praebete vivendo. Aderit illis qui affuit vobis. Ibid.
We may likewise speak unto those whom voluptuous Stage Plays oft-times draw
from the assemblies of the Church. Notwithstanding I entreat you, dear
Brethren, that as often as you shall see them to do any such thing, you would
in our stead most severely correct them: Let them hear our voice, your
remembrance: correct them by reproving them, comfort them by conferring with
them, give them an ensample by living well: Then he will be present with them,
who has been present with you. Thus Saint Augustine, by whose words you may
easily discover, not only the truth of our present Assumption: but likewise
the sinfulness, the unlawfulness of Plays themselves, Ambae tu^pes, ambaeque
damnabiles. Illa enim de Dijs turpia fingenda seminat, haec favendo metit. Illa
mendacia spargit, haec colligit. Facinora and flagitia numinu^ illa cantat,
haec amat. Illa prodit aut fingit; haec autem attestatur veris, aut oble statur
and falsis. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 6. c. 6.
as also of acting, hearing, seeing and frequenting Stage Plays: Which he
likewise seconds in some other passages: as namely in his 2. Book, De Moribus
Manichaeorum, where he writes thus against them. Postremo in Theatris electos
and aetate, and ut videbantur, moribus graves, cum seen presbytero saepissime
invenimus. Omitto invenes, quos etiam rixantes pro scenicis and aurigis
depraehendere solebamus; quae res mediocri argumento est, quo modo se possint
continere ab occultis, cum eam cupiditat^m superare non possint, quae illos
auditorum suorum oculis sustentat, and prodit erubescentes, atque fugitantes.
Ibid. cap. 19. Tom. 1. p. 1129.
Finally, we have oft-times found in Theaters diverse of their choice men, who
were grave both in age, and as they seemed, even in manners too, with an old
Presbyter. I omit young men whom we were likewise wont to find brawling for
Stage Players and Wagoners: which thing is no small argument after what manner
they can contain themselves from secret adulteries, and villainies, since they
cannot overcome that lust, which may uphold them in the eyes of their Auditors,
and makes them even to blush and run away for shame. In his Book, De
Catechizandis Rudibus. cap. 16. He informs us: Sunt etiam homines qui nec
divites esse quaerunt, nec ad vanas honorum pompas ambiunt pervenire, sed
gaudere and requiescere volunt in popinis, and in fornicationibus and in
Theatris atque spectaculis nugacitatis, quae in magnis civitatibus gratis
habentur. Sed sic etiam ipsi aut consumunt per luxuriam paupertatem suam, and
ab egestate postea in furta and effracturas and aliquando etia^ in latrocinia
prosiliunt, and subito multis and magnis timoribus implentur: and qui in popina
paul^ ante ca^tabant, iam planctus carceris somniant. Studiis autem
spectaculorum fiunt Daemonibus similes, etc. Ibidem Tom. 4. page 340.
That there are certain men who seek not to be rich, nor yet to aspire to the
vain pompes of honors, but desire only to be merry and to rest quietly in
Alehouses, in Brothel-houses, in Theaters, and in the spectacles of vanity,
which are had gratis in great Cities. But these through their luxury consume
their mean estate, and from poverty they fall to Burglaries, Thefts, and
Robberies, and are suddenly filled with many and great fears: and these who a
little before did sing in an Alehouse, now dream of the mourning of a prison.
But by the study and sight of Stage Plays they are made like to Devils, etc.
To pass by his sundry notable passages against Players and Stage Plays, in
his 1.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Books, De Civitate Dei, which I shall touch upon
in some other Scenes: in his 17. Sermon^ De Verbis Apostoli. Tom. 10. page 442.
he writes. That of those things which delight the senses of the body, some are
lawful; others unlawful. Delectant enim ut dixi, oculos and spectacula ista
magna naturae, sed delectant etiam and oculos spectacula Theatrorum. Haec
licita, illa illicita. Psalmus sacer suaviter cantatus delectat auditum, sed
delectant auditum etiam cantica histrionum. Hoc licite, illud illicite. Ibidem.
For these great spectacles of nature, as I have said, delight the eyes; and
the spectacles of Play Houses delight the eyes likewise: these are lawful,
those unlawful. An holy Psalm sung sweetly delights the hearing, and so do
the songs of Stage Players delight the hearing too: This lawfully, the other
unlawfully. So that if this Father may be Judge: the very seeing and hearing of
Stage Plays is unlawful. Hear him but once more for all: De Symbolo ad
Catechumenos. lib. 2. cap. 1.2. Tom. 9. pars 1. page 1393.1394, 1395. There are
two sorts of Weapons with which the Devil fights against men's souls;
pleasures, and fear. Plures tamen noveritis dilectissimi capere adversarium
per voluptatem, quam pe^ ^^morem. Nam quare quotidie muscipulam spectaculorum,
insaniam studiorum ac turpium voluptatum proponit, nisi ut his delectationibus
capiat, quos amiserat, ac laetetur denuo se invenisse quod perdiderat? Quid
nobis opus est ire per multa? Breviter admonendi estis quid spernere and quid
diligere debeatis. Fugi^e dilectissimi spectacula, fugite caveas turpissimas
Diaboli, ne vos vincula teneant maligni. Sed si oblectandus est animus and
spectare delectat, exhibet nobis sancta matter Ecclesia veneranda, haec salubria
spectacula, quae and mentes vestras oblectent sua delectatione, and in vobis
non corrumpant sed custodiant fidem, etc. Ibidem.
Yet beloved, you must know, that the Devil takes more by pleasures, then by
fear. For why does he daily set the Mouse-trap of Stage Plays, the madness
of filthy studies and pleasures, but that he might take those whom he has lost
with these delights, and rejoice that he has found that again which he had
lost? What need we run through many things? You are breefly to be admonished,
what you ought to reject, and what to love. Fly Stage Plays, my best beloved,
^lie (Play Houses) the most filthy Dens of the Devil, lest the Chains of that
wicked one hold you captive. But if the mind be to be exhilerated, and
delights to behold, the holy Mother the Church will exhibit you those venerable
and wholesome spectacles, which will delight your minds with their pleasure,
and will not corrupt^ but keep faith in you. Is any of you a lover of the
Cirque? What does ^e delight in in the Circus? To see the Coachmen striving,
the people breathing out frantique furies, every swift one going before
breaking the horse of his Adversary. This is all the pleasure to shout, because
he has overcome whom the Devil has overcome: to rejoice and insult, that the
adverse part has lost an horse, when as he who is delighted with such a
spectacle, has already lost his soul. See on the other side our holy,
h^lesome, and most sweet spectacles. Behold in the Book of the Acts 3.
Acts of the Apostles, a lame man never walking from his birth, whom Peter has
made running: see one suddenly whole, whom before thou did behold infirm:
and if there be any soundness of mind in thee, if the reason of equity, and
the pleasure of salvation shine forth in thee; see what thou ought to
behold, consider where thou ought to shout: there, where sound horses are
broken in pieces, or here where bruised men are made whole? But if that pomp;
that coulor of the horses, that composition of the Chariots, those ornaments of
the Coachman standing above governing the horses, and desiring to overcome; if
this pomp, as I have said, delight thee; neither has he denied this to thee,
who has commanded thee, to renounce the pompes of the Devil: we also have our
spiritual Horseman the holy Prophet Elijas, who 2 Kings 2.
being set upon a fiery Chariot, has run so much, that he has taken the
very limits, (or won the goal) of Heaven. And if thou desire to see the
adversaries, which even true virtue has overcome^ and whom he by ^^ring has
^ut-gon^, and from whose victory he has received the reward of supernall
greatness; he has cast the Exodus 15.
Chariots of Pharoh and al^ his strength into the Sea: Alius fortas^is Theatri
amat^r admone^dus sit, quid fugiat, and quo delectetur, ac sic voluptatem
spectandi non perdat sed mutet. ^n Theatris labes morum, discere turpi^, audi^e
inhonesta^ videre perniciosa. Sed adiuva^te domino ^a fortiter repel^amus,
singula singu^is comparemus. Illic intuentur spectatores^ propositu^ nescio
quem ^o^fictum de^m Iovem, and ^dulterantem and ton^^tem: (...) respi^ie n^^
^erum Deu^ Christum, c^stitatem docentem, immundiciam destruentem, salubria
praedicantem. Illi^ fingitu^ quod idem Iovis ^unonem habeat sororem and
conjugem: hi^ praedicamus s^nctam Mariam (...) simul ac Virginem: Illic stupor
ingeritur visui, ex usu hominem in fune ambulantem: hic magnum mirac^lum,
Petrum mare pedibus transeuntem. Illic per inimicam (mim^can) turpitudinem
castitas vio^atur: hic per castam S^san^am castumque Joseph libido ^omprimitur,
mors contemnitur, Deus amatur, castitas exaltatur. Chorus illic and cantio
Pantomimi illicit auditum, sed expugnat sa^um affectum: and quid tale nostro
cantico comparandum sit, in quo di^it qui ama^ and canta^, Narraverunt mihi
peccatores delectationes suas, sed non ita ut ^ex t^a domine, Omnia mand^ta tua
veritas? Nam illic universa fingit vanitas, etc. Ibidem.
Another, perchance a lover of the Theater, is to be admonished, what he must
avoyd^ and with what he may be delighted, and so may not lose the desire of
beholding, but change it. In Play-house^ there is a contagion of manners, where
people use to learn filthy things, to hear dishonest things, to s^e
pernicious things? But the Lord assisting we may strongly repel these things
out of our hearts, if we compare one thing with another. There the Spectators
behold I know not what propounded counterfeit god Jove, both committing
adultery, and thundering: here, we may again behold the true God Christ,
teaching chastity, destroying ^ilthinesse, preaching wholesome things. There, it
is feined, that the same Jove may have Juno both for his sister and wi^e: here,
we preach holy Mary a Virgin and a Mother together. There, amazement is struck
into the sight, that a man through use should walk upon a rope: here, a great
miracle, Peter passing over the Sea on his feet. There, chastity is violated
throu^h mimicall fil^hinesse; here by chaste Susanna, and chaste Joseph, lust
is suppressed, death despised, God loved^ chastity exalted. There the quier and
singing of the Stage Player allureth the hearing, but conquereth the wholesome
affection: and what such thing may be compared to our song, in which he who
loves and sings, says, Psalm. 119.
Sinners have rela^ed unto me their delights, but not so as thy Law O Lord all
thy Commandments are truth? For there vanity feineth all things. Does any one
perchance admire the skill of Climebers or Vaulters, to see little Children
playing in the air, expressing diverse Histories? but look upon the plays of
our Infants; In the Genesis 25.
womb of Rebecca two Infaunts s^rive, the elder coming forth, the ^oote of
the other is seized upon by the hand of the younger thrust forth of the womb.
In quoru^ cer^amine m^gn^ sacr^menti ^igura monstr^t^ ^st, ut minor
suppl^ntaret majorem, esquire postmodu^ prima^u^ atque benedictione^ ^uferret. In
quibus parvu^is quasi ludentibus and sacramentu^ u^ dixi, magnum exhibentibus,
and reprobi in Esau demonstrantur Iudaei, and praedestinati in Jacob app^rent
Christiani. Ille enim Jacob unus paruulus sic garr^ens, mul^os in se
praedestina^os etiam parvulos de^e^strabat Infantes; qui ex ^tero m^tris
sus^ipiuntur manibus fidelium; n^^ eos sic excutiunt, ut in aere pende^nt, sed
u^ renat^ in caelo vivan^^ His igitur oblectamentis men's delect^tur, pas^atur
anima Christiana^ han^ so^rietatem retinens mentis, fugiat ebri^tatem Diaboli,
etc. Ibidem.
In whose combat the figure of a great mystery is declared, that the ^onger
should supplant the elder, and should afterward take away the birthright and
blessing from him. In which little ones as it were playing, and exhibiting a
great sacrament, as I have said, both the repr^bate Jews are demonstrated in
Esau, and the predestined Christians appear in Jacob. For that Jacob one
little one so prattling, did also manifest, that many little Infants likewise
were predestined in himself; who are rece^ved out of the Mothers womb, with
the hands of the faithful; neither do they so shake them off, that they may
hang in the air, but that being regenerated they may live in Heaven. The mind
therefore may be recreated, and the Christian soul fed with these delights,
and keeping this sobriety, it may avoid the drunk^nnesse of the Devil. Neither
may the combats of the amphitheater seduce or draw any Christians to them,
unto which verily men run so much the more greedily, by how much the more
slowly they are exhibited. But even there what not dangerous, what not bloody
thing is not iniected into men's eyes? where, as most blessed S. Cyp^ian says,
a noxious will cond^mnes men to wild beasts, without an offense. De
Spectaculis. lib. and Epist. lib. ^. Epist. 2. Donato.
Therefore my beloved, that cruel spectacle may not invite you to behold two
Hunters contending with nine ^ea^es, but let it delight you to see our one
Daniel by prayer overcomming seven Lions. Daniel. 6.
Distinguish combats spiritual lover; see two guilty in will, look upon one
innocent, and full of ^aith: behold th^se for an earthly reward to have offered
their souls to beasts; behold this man crying in prayer, Psalm. 74.
Deliver not to beasts the souls that confess to thee. In that spectacle, he
who sets it forth is sorrowful if the Hunter escape without harm who has
slain him many wild beasts; but in this our combat, there is a fight without
Iron, neither is Daniel hurt, nor the wild beast slain, and yet he is so
overcome, that the King wonders and is changed, and the people fear, and the
enemies despair. O admirable spectacle of ours, truly admirable! in which God
assists, faith impetrates strength, innocence fights, holiness overcome^, and
such a reward is obtained, that both thou and he who shall overcome may receive
it, and he who shall give it loses nothing. Desire these spiritual gifts,
come together cheerfully to the Church to behold these things, and to wait
for them with all security: recall the purpose of your heart from all carnal
lust, commit all your care to be governed by God, that the adversary may fear,
finding nothing of his own in you; and you rejecting him and renouncing his
Pompes, after that your liberty shall be rescued from his snares and
waylayings, lest that wicked one should find you empty, whom we have known
desirous to hold those fast who are not his own; believe faithfully in God the
Father Almighty, etc. By which excellent passage of this judicious Father,
(parallel to which he has another of the same nature, in his Tom. 8. pars 1.
p. 416.417, 418.
E^arration on the 39. Psalm, where he seriously bewailes the vanity and
madness of those who delight in Stage Plays and such like Spectacles, Quem
itaque compraehenda^ istoru^ insanoru^? Bonus Deus omnia potest. Oremus pro
ipsis fratres charissimi, inde crescit numerus sanctorum, de numero qui erat
impiorum. Ibidem.
desiring all Christians to pity their condition and to pray earnestly to God
for their conversion, that so they might see the vanity, and sinfulness of
this world, and Quid ergo facimus fratres? Demissuri eum sumus? sine spectaculo
morietur, non subsistet, non vos sequetur. Quid ergo faciemus? demus pro
spectaculis spectacula. Et quae spectacula datuti sumus Christiano homini quem
volumus ab illis spectaculis revocare, etc? vid. Ibidem.
behold the excellency of these many heavenly Spectacles which he there musters
up at large, on which Christians should fix their eyes and hearts;) it is most
apparent, that Stage Plays in his judgment, are very dangerous, obscene,
pernicious Spectacles, See Augustine. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 5.9, 22, 26,
27. lib. 4. cap. 10.26, 27, 28. lib. 6. cap. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 21, 24, 26, 27,
33. lib. 8. cap. 14.18, 20, 21, 26, 27. where he lively sets out the obscenity
of Stage Plays.
invented by the Devil to conquer and en^rap men's souls; and that no
Christians ought for to behold them, since they have so many other heavenly
Spectacles to contemplate. Which me thinks should cause all Christians to
renounce them. Not to remember Nilus an ancient Abbot, about the year of our
Lord 410. who informs us. Oration. ^. de Luxuria. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 2.
page 969. G.
That he who is conversant in a multitude (especially at Stage Plays) is
affected with daily wounds; for the countenance of women is a Dart anointed
with poison, which wounds the soul and sends in venom, and by how much the
longer it continues by so much the more the wound does putrify. Qui vitare
cupit ^jusmodi vulnera is a publicis Spectaculis ab^^inebit, Neque in
celebritatibus versabitur: Satius est enim, ut domi maneas, qu^m dum putas te
celebritates venerari in manus inimicorum incidere. Ibid.
He w^o desires to avoid these wounds (pray mark it well) will abstain from
public Plays and Spectacles, neither will he be conversant in such
Assemblies. For it i^ better that thou abide at home, then that thou fall into
the hands of the enemy, whiles thou think to honor such Solemnities. Which
comes punctual to our purpose. Nor yet to mention, either Primasius in
Romanos. cap. 10. fol. 53. Or Remigius, Explanatio in Galat. 5.19. Or Mac^rius
AEgytius, Homil. 27. page 212. Or Isiodor Hispalensis. Originum. lib. 18. cap.
27.42. to 69. and De Ecclesiasticis Officijs. lib. 2. cap. 2. Or Haymo and
Anselme. Exeg^sis in Ephe^ios 5.3. who rank Players with Whores, and couple
Play Houses, and Brothel-houses together: (whose words I shall at large recite
in the ensuing Scene.) Which proves, that Plays, and Play Houses in their
opinion are but Panders to men's lusts, yea, the beaten rodes to Fornicentur in
Spectaculis, etc. A^selme. In Phil. 4. Tom. 2. page 306. A.
whoredom, adultery, and unchafte desires. Nor yet to remember Prosper his
verdict, who styles Stage Plays, Mimicae turpitudines. De Gloria Sanctor^
Peroratio. fol. 73.
mimicall uncleanesses; not only in regard of their matter, or manner of
action, but likewise of their lewd unchaste effects: Or Damascen, or Eusebius;
who call the Stage, Ignorantes, orch^stram impudicis spectaculis affluentem,
communem ac publicam libidinis scholam ijs esse; Meretriciasque ibidem
cantiones nihil aliud affer^e, quam ut omnibus turpiter se gerere and obscaene
persuadeant. Damascen. Paralellorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. See Eusebius Ibidem. and
Ecclesiast. Histor^ lib. 8. cap. 24.
the public School of lust; and Plays the instruments which persuade men to
nothing else, but lewd behavior, etc. a pregnant testimony for our present
purpose. Not to record S. Bernard; who calls Non est hic ludus pu^rilis, non
e^t de theatro qui faemineis faedisque anfractibus provocet libidine^; actus
sordidos rep^aese^tet, etc. Epistola. 87. Co^ 1477. A.
Stage Plays, childish sports, provoking lusts with their feminine and filthy
turnings, and representing sordid actions: a punctual evidence for us: Or
Cassiodorus; who styles Stage Plays, Spectaculum ^xp^llans grav^ssimos mores,
^vacuator honestatis, etc. Variarum. lib. 3. ca^. 51.
the expellers of gravity; the exhausters of honesty, etc. Nor yet to register
our own learned Countryman John Saresbury, flourishing about the year of our
Lord 1140. who informs us; That Fomenta viti^rum, tyrocinia vanitatis,
Spe^tacula. De Nugis Curialiu^. l. 1. c 8. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. page 348.
Stage Plays are ^he fomentations of vices, the apprentiships of vanity. Hinc
mimi and tota ioculatoru^ scena procedit. Quorum adeo error invaluit, ut ^
praeclaris domibus non arceantur etiam illi qui obscaenis partibus corporis,
oculis omnium eam ingerunt turpitudine^, quod erubescat videre vel Cynicus.
Quodque magis mirere, nec tunc ei^ciuntur, quando tumultuantes inferius crebro
^onitu aere^ faedant, and turpiter inclusum, turpius produnt. Ibidem
That Stage Players, (whose error had then so prevayled, that they could not be
expelled great m^ns houses) did with their obscene actions, infuse such
filthiness into the eyes of all men, as the Cynicke himself might blush to
see. And that which was more wonderful, neither were they then cast out, when
as the people making a tumult below, defiled the air with their frequent
noise, which being filthily shut in, they more filthily uttered. After which he
breaks out into these passages. Nunquid tibi videtur sapiens qui oculos, vel
aures istis expandit? Iocundum quidem est, and ab honesto non recedit, virum
probum quandoque modesta hilaritate mulceri: sed ignominiosum est, gravitatem
hujuscemodi lascivia frequenter resolvi. Ab istis quoque spectaculis, and
maxim ab obscaenis, honesti viri arcendus est oculus, ne incontinentia ejus,
mentis quoque impudicitiam fateatur. Ibidem.
Can he seem to thee to be a wise man, who opens either his eyes, or ears to
these things? It is verily a pleasant thing, and not dishonest, for an honest
man to be sometimes delighted with honest modest mirth; but it is an
ignominious thing, for gravity to be often recreated with such wantonness.
From these Spectacles therefore, but especially from obscene ones, the eye of
an honest man is to be kept back, lest the incontinency of it, bewray likewise
the uncleanes of his mind. Egregie siquidem Sophoclem Praetorem Collega
Parides arguens, ait: Decet Praetorem Sophoclem, non modo manus, sed and oculos
habere continentes. Averte, inquit, homo, cui de regni maiestate multa
licebant, oculos meos, ne videant vanitatem: sciens utique verum esse quod
alius ingemescit: quia oculus meus depraedatus est animam meam. Ibidem.
Parides the Colleage of Sophocles the Praetor reproving him, says very
excellently; (I would to God all Nobles and Magistrates would remember it) It
becomes Praetor Sophocles, not only to have chaste hands, but eyes. Yea, a man,
to whom much might be lawful in regard of the great Majesty of his Kingdom,
says; Psalm. 119.37.
Turn away mine eyes lest they behold vanity; knowing that to be true which
another lamenteth: because mine eye has preyed upon my soul. To pass by (I
say) these ancient Writers which are punctual; I shall only remember two
Fathers more with whom I will conclude. The first of them, is Golden-tongued
Saint Chrysostom, who writes thus of In theatro, malae cupiditatis inductio,
adulterij meditatio, fornicationis gymnasiu^, turpitudinis exhortatio,
inhonestatis exempla; verba multae fatuita^is ac stulti^iae plena, etc. Ho^il
42. in Acta. Tom. 3. Col. 611. Hom. 62. ad Populum Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 347,
etc. See Homil. 3. De Davide and Sa^de. Homil. in Psalm. 140. Homil. 6.7 and 38.
in Matthew. and Homil. 13. in 1 Corinthians 4. accordingly.
Stage Plays: that they are the introduction of sinful lust; the Meditation
of Adultery; the School of Fornication; the Exhortation of Uncleanness; the
Examples of Dishonesty; the Incendiarus of men^ lustful Affections; the
polluters of their eyes, their ears, their souls: yea the very original
causes of much actual whoredom, filthiness, and adultery; as I shall more
largely prove in the Sea Scene 4.
ensuing Scene out of his own Records, which I shall there recite at large.
The second, is vice-rebuking Salvian, Bishop of Massilia, who thus discyphers
Stage Plays: De solis circorum ac Theatrorum impuritatibus dico. Talia sunt
quae illic fiunt, ut ea non solum dicere, sed etiam recordari aliquis sine
pollu^ione non possit. Alia quippe crimina singulas sibi ferme in nobis
vendicant portiones; ut cogitationes sordidae, animum; ut impudici aspectus,
oculos; ut auditus improbi, aures; ut cum ex his unum aliquod erraverit,
reliqu^ possint carere pec^atis. In Theatris vero nihil horum reatu vacat; quia
and concupiscentijs animus, and auditu aures, and aspectu oculi polluuntur.
Quae quidem omnia tam flagi^osa sunt, ut etiam explicare ea quispiam atque
eloqui salvo pudore non valeat. De Gub^rnati^ne Dei. lib. 6. page 185.186.
Such things are committed at Plays and Theaters, as cannot be thought upon,
much less uttered without sin. For other vices challenge their several
portions within us: as filthy cogitations, the mind; unchaste aspects, the
eyes: wicked speeches, the ears; so that when one of these does offend, the
other may be without fault. But at Theaters, not one of these but sins: for
b^th the mind with lust; and the eyes with shows, and the ears with hearing
are there polluted: all which are so bad, that no man can well report or
declare them with honesty. Quis enim integro verecundiae statu dicere queat
illas rerum turpium imitationes, illas vocu^ ac verborum obscenitates, illas
motuum turpitudines, illas gestuum faeditates? quae qua^ti criminis sint^ vel
hinc intelligi potest, quod and relationem sui interdicunt. Non-nulla quippe
etiam maxima s^elera incolumi honestate refere^tis and nominari and arg^i
possunt, ut homicidiu^, latrocinium, adulterium, sacrilegium, caeteraque in
hunc modu^. Solae impuritates theatroru^ sunt, quae honest non possunt vel
accusari: ita nova in coarguenda harum turpitudinu^ probrositate res evenit
arguenti; ut cum absque dubio honestus sit qui ea accusare velit, honestate
tamen integra ea loqui and accusare non possit. Ibid.
For who without passing the bounds of modesty, can utter those imitations of
dishonest things; those filthy spectacles, those lewd motions; those obscene
gestures that are used there? the extraordinary sinfulness of which may be
gathered even from this, that it is unlawful for to name them. For some
sins, though most heinous, may well and honestly both be named, and blamed
too; as murder, theft, adultery, sacrilege, and such like: only the
impurities of Theaters are such, as may not honestly be, no not so much as
blamed. Such new matter arises against the reprover in finding fault with
their most horrible filthiness; that albeit he be a most perfect honest man
that would speak against it, yet can he not so do, and keep his honesty Alia
quoque omnia mala agentes poll^^^t, non vide^tes, vel audientes. Siqnidem etsi
blasphemu^ quempia^ audias, sachrilegio non pollueris, quia mente dissentis. Et
si intervenias latrocinio, no^ inquinari^ actu, qui abhorris animo. Solae
spectaculoru^ impuritates sunt, quae unu^ admodu^ faciunt, and agentiu^, and
spectantiu^ crime^. Nam cu^ spectantes haec comprobant and libenter vident,
omnes ea visu atque assensu agunt, ut vere in eos Apostolicu^ illud
peculiariter caedat: quia digni sunt morte non solum qui faciunt ^a, sed etiam
qui consentiunt facientibus. Ibid.
Again, all other evils pollute the doers only, not the beholders or the
hearers: for a man may hear a blasphemer and not be partaker of his
sacrilege, in as much as be dissenteth from him in mind. And if one come
while a robbery is doing, he is not actually guilty of it, because he abhors
the fact. Only the filthiness of Plays and Spectacles is such, as makes the
Actors and Spectators guilty alike. For whiles they gladly look on, and so
approve them by beholding them, they all become Actors of them by sight and
assent: so as that of the Apostle may be properly applied to them. How that not
only those who commit such things, are worthy of death, but they also who
favor those that do them. Itaque in illis imaginibus fornicationum omnis
omnino plebs animo fornicatur. Et qui forte ad spectaculum puri venerant, de
theatro adulteri revertuntur. Non enim tunc tantu^modo quando redeunt, sed
etiam quando veniunt, fornicantur. Nam hoc ipso quod aliquis rem obscaenam
cupit dum ad immunda properat, immundus est, etc. Ibid. p. 187.
So that in these representations of whoredom, all the people, do altogether
in mind play the Harlots. And such as happily come chaste to Stage Plays,
return adulterers from the Theater: For they play the fornicators not then
only when they go away, but also when they come to Plays. For as soon as
one lusts after a filthy thing, whiles he hasteneth to that which is
unclean, he becomes unclean. And so he proceeds. It is therefore
abundantly evident by the concurrent punctual testimonies of these 30.
Fathers, whose words I have here transcribed; to whom I might have added,
Constit. Apostol. l. 2. c. 65.66. l. 3. c. 38.
Clemens Romanus, Contra Haereses. l. 1. c. 1. p. 23. l. 2. c. 19. p. 155.
Irenaeus, Contra Haereses. Tom. 3. lib. 2. Compendiaria and vera Doctrina de
fide Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae. Col. 922. E.
Epiphanius, De Agricultura. lib. p. 271. De Vita Mosis. p. 932. De Vita
Contempl. page 1209.1210.
Philo Iudaeus, In Hesaiam. l. 1. c. 3. Tom. 1. page 134. in Iohannis
Evangelium. lib. 8. cap. 5. page 595.
Cyrillus Alexandri^us, De Activa virtute lib. 12. Tom. 2. page 4^8. D.E. De
Martyribus. lib. 8. page 390. E.F.
Theodoret, In Lucae Evangelium. cap. 7. lib. 2. Tom. 5. Col. 300.
Beda, De Ceremonijs Baptismi. Col. 1158.
Alchuvinus, Pro Christianis Legatio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2. page 138.139.
Anexagoras, In Ecclesiasten Enarratio. cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 11. page
405. E.
Olympiodorus, Historiae. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Orosius, De Errore Profanarum Religionum. cap. 13. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. page
111 112.
Julius Firmicus, Distinctio. 33.48. and 86. and Causa. 4. Quaest. 1.
Grattan, with Sancti A^terij Homilia. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. page 706. See Act
7. Scene 4.
others, whom I shall quote hereafter in their more proper Scenes; That
Stage Plays pollute the eyes, the ears, the minds, both of their Actors and
Spectators, by ingendring unchaste, adulterous lewd affections in their
hearts, Vanus sermo cito polluit mentem, and facile agitur quod libenter
auditur. Bernard. De Interiori Dom. Tract. cap. 43.
by their obscene words, and lascivious gestures. That they irritate, inflame,
foment those beastly carnal lusts, which draw them on to actual uncleanesse,
to their eternal ruin: and so by necessary consequence, that they are utterly
unlawful for Christians, to act, to see, to hear, or resort to even in this
regard, as they all from hence conclude. And dare any Play-patron then reject
these grave Authorities, in justifying, in frequenting Stage Plays, as
innoxious, honest, chaste, or useful recreations, after all these Fathers
censures? If any Stage-frequenting^ Play-adoring Christian be so incredulous,
as not to give credit to these alleged Fathers: let him then listen to some
Councels, some modern Christian Authors; some ancient Pagans, who aver the
selfsame truth, whose joint concurrent Authorities he cannot deny. If we cast
our eyes upon Councels; we shall find, these several Councels in several
Countries and ages; to wit, The words and Canons of which Councels are here at
large recited, in Act 7. Scene 3.
Concilium Laodicenum. Can. 54. Eliberinum. Can. 62.67. Arelatense. 1. Can. 4.5
and 2. Can. 20. Carthaginense. 3. Can. 11. and 35. Carthaginense. 4. Can. 86.
and 88. Aphricanum. Can. 27.28, 30. Agathense. Can. 39. in S^rius, but 28. in
Carranza. Vene^ic^m. Can. 11. Constantinopolitanum. 6. in Trullo. Can. 24 51,
62.66. and 71. Turonense. 3. Can. 7.8. Cabilonense. 2. Can. 9. Moguntinum. Anno
Dom. 813. Can. 10.14. Rhemense. Anno. 813. Can. 17. Surius Council. To^. 3. p.
40.
Synodus Francica sub Zacharia Papa. Anno Dom. 742. Aquisgranense Concilium.
sub Ludovico Pio. Canon. 83.100, 145. Council. Parisiense 1. Can. 28. Moguntinum
sub Rabano Archiepiscopo. Can. 13. Synodus 8. Oecumenica. Can. 16. Surius. Tom.
2. page 757.
Capitula Graecarum Synodorum. Can. 59. Concilium Lateranense. 1. Can. 16.
Surius. Tom. 4. p. 6^. and 223.
Council. Basiliense. Sessio. 21. and Appendix ^^usde^ Concilij. Council.
Senonense. Can. 25. Nicaenum. 2. Can. 22. Mediolanense. 1. De Mimis and
Circulatoribus. cap. Council. Carolo Magnum. Can. 5. Coloniense. Anno. 1536.
pars 2. cap. 25. pars 3. cap. 26. pars 9. cap. 10. Synodus Augustensis. Can.
19. Council. Coloniense. sub Adolpho. Anno. 1549. Can. 17. Synodus Moguntina.
Anno. 1549. sub Sebastiano. cap. 61. and 75. together with All these are quoted
by Bochellus, in his Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae. lib. 6. Tit. 19. cap. 11.
and are not registered in the Councels at large.
Concilium Lingonense. Anno. 1404. Senonense. Anno. 1524. Carnotense. Anno.
1526. Burdigense. 1582. Bituriense. 1584. Turonicum. 1583. cap. 23. Senonense.
1585. cap. 13. we shall find, I say, these 37. several Councels, together
with Decreta Eusebij Papae. Anno. 309. Cap. 4. Surius Council. Tom. 1. page 312.
Decreta Innocentij Papae. 1. Can. 11. Ibidem. page 529 Reformatio Cleri
Germaniae Ratisboni. Anno Dom. 1524. cap. 4. Apud Surium. Tom. 4. page 713.
Statuta Synodalia Odonis Parisiensis. inter Communia Precepta. cap. 13. apud
Carranzam. Epit. Council. fol. 356.
sundry other Canonical Constitutions; prohibiting not only Players, under
the penalty of excommunication, from acting; but even all other Christian^
(especially Clergymen) under the selfsame penalty from hearing, seeing, and
frequenting Stage Plays; as for sundry other reasons, so especially for this;
because Stage Plays, would contaminate their eyes, their ears, their minds,
their hearts; effeminate, yea deprave their spirits; exasperate and foment
their lusts; indispose them, disable them to the religious performance of every
holy duty, and usher in by their eyes, and ears, the whole troop of vices,
into their souls. An irrefragable confirmation of our present Assumption. If
we survey again those modern Christian Authors, who have written against
Stage Plays, we shall find them all concurring with us in this truth^ I shall
only recite some few of them, by which you may easily conjecture of the rest
Delector varijs spectaculis: Ra. Circo forsan, and Theatro: quae duo loca bonis
semp^r adversa moribus fuisse notissimum; quo, quisquis malus ierit, redibit
pessimus. Nam bonis iter i^lud ignotum est: qui, s^^^asu aliquo ig^ari adeant,
contagio non carebunt. De R^med. Vtrius^ Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30.
Cirques and Theaters (writes Francis Petrarcha) are the two places which have
been known to be always most opposite to good manners, whether if any bad
man go; he will return much worse: For this iourny (pray observe it) is
altogether unknown to good men; who if they ignorantly chance to go unto them
by any accident, are sure not to want defilement. Libenter ludos scenicos
specto. Ra. Rem, quae nec honest geritur, nec honest cernitur; nec facile
dictu, an ^usor infamior, an spectator; and an s^ena tu^pior, an orchestra;
nisi quod in illam saepe paupertas, in hanc vero semper vanitas tr^hit. Ibidem.
Stage Plays which thou willingly beholdest, are such things, as can neither
be honestly acted, nor honestly seen; neither is it easy to tell, whether the
Actor or the Spectator be more infamous; or whether the Stage be more filthy
then the Scaffold; unless it be, that poverty oft^ times draws m^n into the
one^ but va^ity always into the other. Neque enim patrimoniorum ^actura
gravior quam morum; ubi libido discitur, humanitas dedi^citur. Promde quid de
spectaculis speraretis, iam inde ab exordio, primus Regum ve^trorum Romulus
omen fuit, qui in his ^igidam tetricamque illam Sabinarum pudicitiam
circumvenit, etsi ut^unque matrimonij honor texi^ injuriam. At quam multis hoc
postmodu^, non ad conjugium, sed ad ^tupr^m^ vagamque licentiam fuit via? Ad
summam enim ^oc teneas velim, pudicitiam spectaculis saepe stratam, semper
impulsam. Er ut sileam viros quibus id scelerum furor est, ut pene iam
adulterio glorientur, multarum ibi fama perijt, pudorque: multae inde domum
impudicae, plures ambiguae redi^re; ca^tior a^tem nulla^ Hi spectaculoru^
fructus, hi sunt exitus. Ibidem.
Neither is there a greater co^sumption of Patrimonies at Stage Plays, then of
manners; where lust is learned, humanity forgotten. What you might expect from
Stage Plays, even from the very beginning, the first of your Kings, Romulus,
may give you a guess, who by these circumvented that riged, rough unpleasant
chastity of the Sabin^ Virgins; albeit the honor of matrimony, has in some
sort covered that offense. But to how many since this have Stage Plays been
the way, not to wedlock, but to whoredom, and disorderly liberty? I will that
thou remember this as the sum of all; that chastity has been oft-times
overthrown by Stage Plays, always assaulted. And that I may not speak of
men, the ^ury of whose wickedness is such, that they do now welnigh even
glory in adultery: the good name, and chastity of many women has there
perished: many have thence returned home unchaste, more ambiguous, but not one
more honest: These are the events, these the fruits of Stage Plays: (And are
they then desirable, or true Christian pleasures?) Quis ferro iugulum laetus
exciperit? Quis fervido vulnere plus cruoris effuderit? Quis minus conspecta
morte palluerit? Quid crudelitatis ad scholam ire iuvat? Non egetis
praeceptoribus; nimis dociles malorum estis. Plura per vos domi discitis, qua^
necesse est. Quid si tam promptis ingenijs artifices sceleru^, ac magistra
erro^um, plebs accesserit. Multos, quos mites natura fecerat, saevitia^
spectacula docuere. Men's hominis in vitiu^ pron^, non urgenda utique sed
frenenda est; si sibi linquitur, aegre stabit; si impellitur, praeceps ruet?
Ibidem.
Now who would willingly stretch out his throat to receive the sword that cuts
it? who will pour out more blood out of his bleeding wound? who will become
less fearful at the sight of death? What does it avail you to run to the
School of lust and cruelty? You need no Masters; you are naturally too docible
of evil things. You learn more at home by your selves, then is needful: What
will you learn if these Artificers of wickedness, and the Mistress of
errors, the multitude, should be added to such ready wits? Many, whom nature
had made meek, and chaste, have Stage Plays taught cruelty, and incontinency.
The mind of man which is naturally prone to vices is not therefore to be
instigated, but brideled: if it be left to it self, it will hardly stand; if
it be violently driven forward, it will fall down hedlong. Multum mali auribus
invehitur, sed multo plus oculis: illis, quasi ^enestris bipatentibus, in
animam mors rumpit. Nil potentius in memoriam descendit quam quod visu subit:
facile audita prae^ervolant: conspectarum imagines rerum haerent etiam invitis:
nec tamen nisi volentibus ingerunt, nisi, perraro and ocyus abiturae. Quo
pergis igitur? Quis te rapit impetus? ut ad horam gaudeas, und^ semper doleas;
ut vi^eas semel, quod vidisse millies paeniteat, etc. Ibidem.
Much evil is conveyed into us by the ears, but much more by the eyes: by
them, as by two open windows does death break in upon the soul: Nothing more
powerfully sinkes into the memory, then that which is apprehended by the eye:
things that are only heard do easily pass away; the images of the things we
see stick fast in our minds even against our wills: yet notwithstanding, they
do not offer themselves undesired, but to such who willingly behold them,
unless it be very seldom, and that in ^ transitory manner to pass soon
away. Whether go thou therefore? what impetus or gust does violently dragge
thee? that thou should rejoice but for an hour, in that which thou may
chance eternally to lament: that thou should run to see that once, the very
sight of which thou may a thousand times repent off. Nescio quid hic dulce,
sen non quid potius amarum, aut triste sentitis: nec ullum in vobis majas
insaniae argumentu^ video, qua^ quod quotidic vos ad morte^ miseris
delinimentis illectos, and velut stygio sopore demersos, dulcedo amara, and
delectatio inamaena praecipitat. Vna est enim vobis lex rerum ferme omnium,
quicquid cupitis, quicquid molimini contra vos est. Ibidem.
I know not what pleasant, or rather what not bitter, or sorrowful thing, you
perceive in Stage Plays: neither do I discern any other greater argument of
madness in you, then that I see you daily allured unto death by miserable
entisements, and as if you were drowned in an infernal slumber, a bitter
sweetness, and an unpleasant pleasure, precipitates you. For there is one rule
almost of all things to you; Whatever you desire, whatever you endeaver,
whatever you do, is against your selves. Thus Petrarcha, most elegantly, most
divinely. To him I might add the concurrent suffrages of Alexander Fabritius,
in his Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4. cap. 23. B. Spectacula dulcissima sunt
irritamenta omnis non tam libidinis, quam inhumanitatis. Ibid^m.
Mapheus Vegius, De Educatione Liberorum. lib. 1. cap. 14. and lib. 3. cap. 7.
and 12. Ludovicus Vives in Augustinum De Civitate De^. lib. 1. cap. 31.32, 33.
and lib. 2. cap. 3. to 15, cap. 26.27, 28, 29. and De Causis Corrupt. Artium.
lib. 2. page 81.83. Agippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 20.59, 64 71. Peter
Martyr Locorum Communium Classis. 2. cap. 12. sect. 62.66. cap. 12. sect.
15.19. and Commentary upon Judges p. 220 221. Master Gualther. Hom. 11 in
Nahum. 3. Bodinus De Republica. lib. 6. cap. 1. Johannes De Burgo. Pupilla
Oculi. pars 10. cap. 5. V. Danaeus Ethicae Christianae. lib. 2. cap. 8. Polydor
Virgil, De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2. Franciscus Z^phyrus. Comment in
Tertislliani Apologiam. advers Gentes, P^ter De Prima^day, in his French
Achademy. c. 20. page 205. A stexanus De Casibus. lib. 2. Titulus 5^ lib. 4.
Titulus ^7 Artic. 4. Theodorus Balsamon in Phocij Nom^canonis. Titulus 13. cap.
21. Bochellus, Decreta Ecclesia Gallicanae. lib. 6. Titulus 19. c. 11. Ioannes
Mariana, and Barnabas Brissonius, in their Books, De Spectaculis. together
with Bul^ngerus, De Theatro. lib. 1. c. 50.51. Quid multa? Auctore^ omnes cum
Sacritum pro^^ni spurcitiam S^en^^ exagitant, no^ modo quod fabulae obscenae in
Scena agerentur, sed etia^ quod motus gestusque essent impudici, atque adeo
prostibula ipsa in S^^n^m saepe venirent, and sub Scena prostarent. Vnde and
obscaenu^ ^it Vano, quod non nisi in S^ena pal^m dicitur, etc. vid. Ibidem.
lib. 1. De Theatro. cap. 56. page 296.
where he confesses, that all Authors, both sacred and profane, have
declaimed against the filthiness and lewdness of the Stage, not only because
of the obscenity of their Plays, but likewise because their motions and
gestures also are unchaste, in so much that the very Stews themselves were
oft-times brought upon the Stage, and prosti^uted under it. Whence Varro
writes, that that is obscene which is not spoken openly but only on the Stage
etc. Doctor Reinolds, in his Preface to his 6. Theses, and in his Overthrow of
Stage Plays thorowout. Printed 1599. and now reprinted, 1629. Doctor Sparks,
in his R^hearsall Sermon at Paul's Cross, April 29, 1579. Master Perkins, in
his Treatise of Conscience. c. 3. and on the 7. Commandment. Ma^^er Stubs, in
his Anatomy of Abuses page 101. to 107. Master Northbrooke, in his Treatise
against Vain Plays and Enterludes. page 57. to 77. A Book entitled, The
Church of evil Men and Women, whereof Lucifer is the head^ and the members,
are all dissolute Players, and Sinners. Printed by Richard Pinson in 8o. A
Treatise of Dances, printed in 8o. 1581. wherein it is showed, that Dances are
as it were acc^ssaries, or dependants, or things annexed unto whoredom: where
also by the way is proved; that Plays are joined and k^it together in a rank
with them. The second and third Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. page
1.2, 3, 4, 43, 44, 53, 54, 55, 56, 89, 92, 96 98, to 103. (all pregnant places
to our purpose) printed by Authority. London, 1580. Mast^r Gosson, in his
School of Abuse. Two Books, the one in^i^uled, The Myrror for Magistrates of
C^ties; the other, The Counter-blast to Stage Plays, by an uncertain Author^
John Field, in his Declaration of Gods Judgment showed at Paris Garden.
January the 13. 1587. Printed by Henry Carre, 1588. I. G. in his Refutation of
Haywoods Apology for Actors. Master Thomas Beard, in his Theater of Gods
Judgments. cap. 34. Master Elton, and Master Dod, on the 7. Commandment.
Bishop Ba^ly, in his Preface to the Practice of Piety. Bishop Hall, in his
Epistles. Decad. 6. Epist. 6. I. P. Minister of Feversha^, in his Book
entitled, The Covenant between God and man. Exposition on the 7.
Commandment. Doctor Layton, in his Speculum Bellisacr^. cap. 45. Master
Brinsl^, in his True Watch. part 3. Abomination 19. p. 73.74. Master John
Downham, i^ his Guide to Godliness. lib. 3. cap. 21. sect. 5. and in his Sum
of Divinity. lib. 1. cap. 11. page 203. and Richard Rawledge, in his Scourging
of Tiplers. page 2.3.4. who See Scene 5. and Act 7. Scene 7.
all with one unanimous Vote condemn all Stage Plays, as altogether
abominable unto Christians, from this very reason among sundry others; that
they irritate and foment men's carnal lusts: pollute their souls with
adulterous affections, defile their eyes, their ears, their hearts with
filthiness; and allure, ye precipitate both their Actors and Spectators to all
actual lewdness, and execrable uncleanesses; being as so many Panders,
Bellows, and Firebrands to their vile luscivious desires. But passing by all
these with a brief quotation of their names and works, to which you may
resort, as being too tedious to recite at large; I shall only relate unto you
what 4. other Authors of our own have written, concerning the lewd effects of
Stage Plays. The first of them is reverend Bishop Babington, who writes thus
of Plays. Exposition upon the Commandments. Com. 7. In his Works at large,
p^inted at London 1622. the last part. p. 60. and 67.
These profane and wanton Stage Plays or Enterludes, what an occasion they
are of adultery and uncleanesse by gesture, by speech, by convayances, by
devices to attain to so ungodly desires, the world knows by too much hurt,
by long experience. Vanities they are if we make the best of them, and the
Prophet prays Psalm. 119 37.
to have his eyes turned away by the Lord from beholding such matter. 1 Cor. 15.
Evil words corrupt good manners, and they have abundance. There is in them,
ever many dangerous ^ights, and 1 These. 5.22.
we must abstain from all appearance of evil. They corrupt the eyes with
alluring gestures; the eyes, the heart; and the heart the body, till all be
horrible before the Lord. Histrionicis Gestibus inquinantur omnia (says
Chrysostom.) These Players behavior polluteth all things: And of their Plays
he says; they are the feasts of Satan, the inventions of the Devil, etc.
Councels have decreed very sharply against them, and polluted bodies by these
filthy occasions have on their deathbeds confessed the danger of them,
lamented their own foul and grievous faults, and left their warning for ever
with us to beware of them. But I refer you to them, that upon good knowledge
of the abominations of them, have written largely and well against them. Note
this well, O ye lascivious persons, who harbor Players in your private houses.
If they be dangerous in the day time, more dangerous are they in the night
certainly: if on a Stage, and in open Courts, much more in Chambers and
private houses. For there are many rooms besides that where the Play is; and
peradventure the strangeness of the place, and lack of light to guide them,
causes error in their way, more then good Christians should in their houses
suffer. Thus this right godly Prelate of our Church, who makes Stage Plays a
breach of the 7. Commandment, because they are the frequent occasions both of
contemplative, and actual fornication, and the inducements to it. The second,
is one Master Stephen Gosson, (once a professed Play-poet; yea a great Patron,
and admirer of Plays and Players, In his Anatomy of Abuses; In his Epistles
prefixed to his Plays confuted in five Actions, and so thorowout these Books
of his.
as himself confesses, till God had called him to repentance, and opened his
eyes to see their abominablenesse:) who among other things, writes thus of
Stage Plays. Plays confuted. Action 5.
As I have already discovered the corruption of Plays, by the corruption of
their causes; the Efficient, the Matter, the Form, the End; so will I conclude
the effects, that this poison works among us. The Devil is not ignorant how
mightily these outward Spectacles effeminate and soften the hearts of men; vice
is learned with beholding; sin is tickled, desire pricked, and those
impressions of mind are secretly conveyed over to the gazers, which the
Players counterfeit on the Stage. As long as we know our selves to be flesh
beholding those examples in Theaters that are incident to flesh, we are taught
by other men's examples how to fall. And they that come honest to a Pl^y, may
^^part infected. Lib. 6. cap. ^0.
Lactantius doub^eth, whether any corruption can be greater, th^n that which is
daily bred by Plays, because the expr^ssi^g of vice by imi^atien, brings us by
^he shadow, to the substance of the same. Whereupon he affirms t^^m necessary
to be banished, les^ wickedness be learned, or with the custom of pleasure by
little and little we forget God. What force th^re ^s in the gestures of
Players, may be gathered by the tale of Bacchus and Ariadne, which Convivium
ap^d Xenopho^^is ^p^ra. ^ranco^urti. Graecolat. 1594. page 893. to 900.
Xenophon reports to be ^layed at a banquet, by a Syracusian, his Boy, and
his dancing Tru^^. In came the Syracusian, not unlike to the Prologue o^ our
Plays, discoursing the argument of the fable: then ^ntred Ariadn^, gorgeously
attired like a bride, and sat in the pr^sence of them all: ^ta ^tia^ B^^cho
prod^^nte, tibi^ numerus bacchi^us ca^e^a^ur. Xenophon. Ibi^^m. page 900. B.
after came Bacchus, dancing to the Pipe: Ariadne p^rceiving him, Ac obviam
illa quidem no^ process^t, n^c ad^u^^ex^t, prae se sereb^t tame^ quod vox
conq^^ es^^^^t. Ibid.
though she neither rose to meet^ him, nor stirred from the place to welcome
him, yet she showed by her gesture that she sat upon th^r^es. Po^qu^ vero
Bacchus ^a^ vidisset, hand ^liter saltans quamfieri amicissime posset, in
genibus consedebat. Quumque complexus ^^^^m fuisser, osculatus est. Ea vero
tametsi pudore quodam affectae similis ^sser, amic^ ^amen illum viciffim
amplecteba^ur. Ibid.
When Bacchus beheld her, expressing in his dance the passions of love, he
placed himself somewhat near to her, and embraced her: she with an amorous
kind of fear and strangeness, as though she would thr^st him away with the
little finger, and pull him again with both ^^r hands, somewhat t^^^rously and
doubtfully entertained him. Quod cum convivae cern^rent, passim plausum
excitabant-partim rursus exclamabant. Quum autem Bacchus surgens Ariadnam secum
er^xisset, osculantium iam and complectentiu^ sese gestus erat sp^ct^re. Illi
quu^ ^ever^ Bacchum formosum ^sse c^rnerent, and Ariadnam formosam, eosque non
per iocu^, sed vere se admotis oribus osculari, omnes ^rectis animis
spectab^nt. Audiebant enim Bacchum interrog^ntem ips^m, number se am^r^t, atque
^lla^ hoc i^a con^^rmantem j^r^jur^ndo ut non modo Bacchus, sed omnes ^^iam qui
^dera^t, iur^ssent, rever^ esse mutuum inter puerum and pu^ll^m amorem. Er^^t
c^^im similes qui gestus hos non docti ^ssent, sed facere cuperent id, quod
iamdudu^ expe^vissent. Tandem quum convivae illos sese comple^os c^^nerent,
qu^sique ad ^ubile rendentes; quotquot uxores nec dum duxerant, ductur^s se
jurabant, mariti vero c^nscens^s ^quis ad uxores suas avehebantur, ut ^js
potirentur. Xenophon. Ibidem.
At this the beholders began to shout, when Bacchus rose up, tenderl^ li^ting
Ariadne from her seat; no small store of courtesy passing between them, the
beholders rose up, every man stood on tiptoe, and seemed to h^ver over the
prey: when they swear, the company swear: when they departed to bed, the
company presently was set on fire: they that were married posted home to their
wives: those that were single vowed solemnly to be wedded. (A very notable
History for our present purpose, especially as Xenophon has related it:) As
the stinge of Phalangion spredeth her poison through every vain, when no hurt
is seen, so amorous gesture sticks to the heart when no ^kin is raced.
Therefore Cupid is painted wi^h Bow and Arrows, because it is the property of
lust to wound alo^ffe, which being well weighed; Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. ad
Donatum.
Saint Cyprian had very good cause to complain; that Players are spots to our
manners, nourishers of vice, and corrupters of all things by their gestures.
The godly Father, knowing the practice of Playing to be so evil, and the
inconveniences so monstrous that grew thereby; Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. ad
Eucra^ium.
thinks the Majesty o God to be stained, the honor of his Church defaced, when
Players are admitted to the Table of the Lord. Neither was this the opinion of
Saint Cyprian alone, but of the whole assembly of godly Fathers in the Council.
Arelatense. 2. Canon 10.
Council held under Constantius the Emperor. Great then is the hardness of
our hearts when neither Fathers, nor Councels^ nor God himself strikes us with
any shame of that, which every good man is ashamed to remember. Mine eyes
thoroughly beheld the manner of Theaters when I wrote Plays my self, Note
this: and note it so as to believe it, because the Author resti^ieth it from
his own experience.
and found them to be THE VERY MARKETS OF BAVVDERY; where choice without shame
has been as free, as it is for your money in the Royal Exchange, to take a
short stock or a long; a faling Band, or a French Ruff. The first building of
Theaters was to ravish the Sabines, and that they were continued in whoredom
ever after, Ovid con^esseth in these words: De Art Amandi. lib. 1.
Scilicet ex islo solennia more Theatra,
Nunc quoque formo^is insidiosa manent.
As at the first, so now; Theaters are snares to fair women. And as I ^old you
long ago in my School of abuses; Quod nota.
our Theaters and Play Houses in London are as full of s^cret adultery as they
were in Rome. In Rome it was the fashion of wanton young men, to place
themselves as nigh as they could to the Curtesans, to present them
Pome-granates, to play with their garments, and wait on them home when the
sport was done. Lo the chasti^y, ^he modesty, and Christianity of
Play-haunters, which they boast off. S^e the School of Abuses.
In the Play Houses at London, it is the fashion of Youths to go first into
the Yard, and to carry their eye through every Gallery, then like unto Ravens,
where they spy the Carrion thither they fly, and press as near to the fairest
as they can. In stead of Pome-granats they give them Now they offer them the
Tobacco-pipe which was then unknown.
Pippins, they dally with their Garments to pass the time, Nil opus est
digitis per quos arcana loquaris; Nec tibi p^r nutus accipienda not^ est.
Proximus a domina nulla prohibente s^deto, Iunge tuum lateri, quam potes, usque
latus. Hic tibi quaera^ur socij sermonis origio; Et moveant primos publica
verbason^s, etc Ovid, De A^te Amand^. lib. 1.
they minister talk upon all occasions, and either bring them home to their
houses on small acquaintance, or slip into Tavernes when the Plays are done.
He thinks best of his painted Sheath, and takes himself for a ^olly fellow,
that is noted of most to be busiest with women in all such places. This open
corruption is a prick in the eyes of them that see it, and a thorn in the
sides of the godly when they hear it. This is a poison to the behold^rs, and a
Nursery of idleness to the Players. Thus far Master Goss^r, who in his School
of Abuse, has much more to this purpose. The third of them is Master John
Brinsly, an eminent worthy Divine: who writes thus of Stage Plays. The 3. Part
of the T^^e W^tch. Edit. 2. London. 1623. chap. 11. Abomination. 30. page 302.
But to pass over these also, with all other unlawful flockings and lewd
sports upon the Sabbath, by every of which the work of the Lord is hindered, as
every one must needs acknowledge. What defense can we make for that concourse
that is ordinary to those wanton Plays in such places, even upon that day? In
which are the continual sowings of all Ath^isme, and throwing the very
firebra^ds of all filthy and noisome lusts into the hearts of poor simple
souls the stirring up and blowing the ^oales of concupiscence to kindle and
increase the fire thereof, to break out into an ^ideou^ fl^me until it
Concourse to Plays, and the vileness of them.
burn down to Hell. Ask but your own hearts as in the presence of the Lord,
and you will need no further witness. And how can it be otherwise? how can you
take these fireb^ands of Hell into your bosoms, and not be burnt? The
inevitable danger of frequenters of Plays.
Is not every filthy speech, every whorish gesture, such a firebrand cast by
Satan into the heart of every wanton beholder, as a brand cast into a bundle of
Tow, or into a barrel of Gunpowder, to set all on fire of a sudden? Such are
from under Gods protection.
Thy^ pro^ection is gone whosoever thou art, that adventurest hither, for thou
art out of thy ways. These are not the ways of the Lord, and much less upon
his Sabbath, when thou should be amongst his people, and doing his work,
where his Angels wait for thee, his own presence expects thee. They cannot
think to ^scape.
How then should thou possibly escape when tho^ wilt offer thy heart naked
unto these fiery darts of Satan? how can thou think to be delivered from
that flame in thy soul; that fire in the infernal lake, that river of
brimstone that shall never be consumed nor quenc^ed, when thou will desperately
cast thy self headlong into the midst thereof? how can it be but that such
must needs bring fagots and firebrands to set in the Gates of our Jerusalem?
The fourth of them is M. Robert Bolton, a reverend learned Minister of our
Church, now living; who writes thus of Stage Plays. A Discourse of True
Happin^sse. p. 73.74.
Lastly, let those examine themselves at this mark, who offer themselves to
these sinful occasions, breeders of many strange and fearful mischi^fes, I
mean profane and obscene Plays. Pardon me, beloved, I cannot pass by these
abominable Spectacles without particular indignation. For I have ever esteemed
them (since I had any understanding in the ways of God) the Grand ^mpoysoners
of Grace, ingenuousnesse, and all manly resolution; Greater plagues and
infections to your souls, then the contagious pestilence to your bodies: The
inexpiable stain and dishonor to this famous City. The noisome Worms that
canker and blast the generous and noble Buds of this Land: and do by a sly
and bewitching insinuation, so empoyson all Seeds of Virtue, and so weaken and
emasculate all the operations of the soul, with a profane, if not an
unnatural dissoluteness; Let Innes of Court Gentlemen observe this.
that whereas they are planted in these worthy houses of Law, to be fitted and
enabled for great and honorable actions, for the public good, and the
continuance of the glory and happiness of this Kingdom; they licentiously
dissolve into wicked vanities and pleasures: and all hope of ever doing good
either unto God, the Church, their Country, or own souls, melts as the
Winter Ice, and flows away as unprofi^able waters. These infamous Spectacles
are condemned by all kind of sound learning, both divine and humane.
Distinctions devised for their upholding and defense, may g^ve some shallow and
weak contentment to partial, and sensual affections, possessed with preuidice:
but how shall they be able to satis^ie a conscience sensible of all appearance
of evil? How can they preserve the inclinablenesse of our corrupt nature from
the in^ection of these SCHOOLS OF LEVVDNESSE, AND SINCK^S OF ALL SIN, as,
(to omit Divines, Councels, Fathers, Moralists, because the point is not
directly incident) even a Theatra d^finir^ possimius; turpitudinis vitiorumque
omnium s^n^in^m ac Sch^lam. B^din. De Repub. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Politician calls them. Alas, are not our wretched corruptions raging and fiery
enough, being left to themselves dispersed at their natural liberty; but they
must be united at these accursed Theaters, as in a hollow glass, to set on
fire the whole body of our natural viciousness at once, and to c^rage it
further with lust, fierceness, and effeminatenesse, beyond the compass of
nature? Mark this O Play h^unt^rs, and th^n judge your selves.
Does any man think it possible that the power of saving Grace, or the pure
Spirit of God can reside in his heart, that willingly and with full consent
feeds his inward concupiscence, with such variety of sinful vanities, and lewd
occasions, which the Lord himself has pronounced to be, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
an abomination unto him? how can any man, that ever felt in his heart the love
or fear of so dreadful a Majesty, as the Lord of Heaven and Earth, e^dure to
be present, especially with delight and contentment, at Oaths, Blasthemies,
Obscenities, and the abusing sometimes of the most precious things in the Book
of God, (whereat we should tremble) to most base and scurrill ^ests? Certainly
every Child of God, is of a most noble and heroicke spirit, and therefore is
most impatient of he^ring any wrong, indignity, or dishonor offered to the
Word, Name, or Glory of his Almighty Father, etc. Thus this grave reverend
Divine; in proof of my Assumption. If any man deem all these or any of the
fo^e-quoted Fathers and Councels over-pa^tiall, in the case of Plays, let him
then attend unto some Pagan Authors, who concur in judgment with them. Not
to recite the forementioned Story of the Syracusian with his Boy and Trull,
who acting Bacchus and Ariadne, (as Convivium. page 900. See here a, b, c, d,
e, in the margent.
Xenophon relates it) enflamed the fleshly lusts of all the Spectators in a
strange excessive measure: (a sufficient exp^riment to confirm my Minors
truth:) Aristotle himself records it: Qui in Iudis and scenis his^rionum motus
and actus sp^ctant, qu^mvis numeris ipsis subl^tis atque can^ibus tamen perinde
ut res aguntur, ita moventur and affi^iuntur. Ar. Politic lib. 8. c 5. Numb. 21.
That those who behold the motions, and actions of Players in Stage Plays,
although there b^ neither verse, nor singing in them, are yet notwithstanding
so moved, and affected as the things are acted in them: so that if the things
they act, be filthy or lascivious, the affections, the actions, the desires of
the Spectators must be such: Laudandum igitut etiam illud, ut a rerum
sordidarum and servilium, non solum auditu sed aspectu tene^lus adhuc animus
avertatur. Quare Legisl^tor, u^ si quid aliud; verboru^ certe obscaenitate^ de
civitate penitus exterminabit. Nam turpiter and obscaene loquendi licentiae,
turpiter quoque and obscaene faciendi licentia proxima est, sed imprimis a
tenellis animis, ut ejusmo^i n^hil neque dica^t, neque audi^nt. Quod si quis
eoru^ quae vetita fuerint, quicqua^ vel dicer^, v^l facer^ depraehendacur,
isque ingenuus, neque du^ in sod^litijs accubationis honore^ meritus,
afficiendus erit ignomini^ and virg^s caedendus. Sin aet^sijs castigationibus
major fuerit servili ignominia, servilis hujus peccati causa notandus erit.
Polit. l. 7.6.17. Numb. 76.
This therefore (writes he) is to be commended, that the tender minds of
Children be with-drawen, not only from the hearing, but likewise from the
fight of filthy servile things. Therefore the Lawgiver, if he does any other
thing, ought verily, even utterly to banish all obscenity of speech out of the
City. For the liberty of doing filthily and obscenely, is next to the liberty
of speaking filthily and obscenely: therefore obscenities are especially to be
exterminated from young tender minds, that they neither hear nor speak any
such thing. But if a^y one shall be deprehended either to speak or do any of
the things prohibited, if h^ be a Freeman, and so y^ng as to be liable to
correction, he shall be shamed, and beaten with Rods: But if he be too old to
be thus chastised, he shall be branded with some s^rvile disgrace for this his
flavish offense. Et quoniam ejusmodi quicquam dicere prohibemus, certe etiam
spectacula and tabularu^ and fabularu^ impudicaru^ prohibemus. Quare
Magistratibus adhibenda cura erit, ut neque signis neque fabulis obscaenitas
ull^ aut faeditas ostendatur. Nisi forte apud illos deos, quibus etiam per
leges lascivia illa con^editur, and apud quos sacra facere aetate quide^
provectioribus pro se, pro liberis and conjugibus permittitur. Adolescentulos
autem and Iamborum, and Comaediarum spectatores ^sse lex prohibeat, priusqua^
aetatem attigerint, in qua and cu^ caeteris accubare iam licuerit and ab
omnibus vel ebrietatis vel aliaru^ inde nascentiu^ reru^ inco^modis disciplina
liberos efficiat. Ib. Num^ 77.
And because we prohibit the speech of any such thing, we do likewise verily
inhibit the Spectacles both of unchaste Pictures and Fables. Therefore
Magistrates must take care that no filthiness^ or obscenity be showed neither
in Shows, nor Pictures; Unless it be where there are such gods (and I am sure
our holy God, Haback. 1.13.
who is purer of eyes then to behold iniquity, is not such a one) to whom such
lasciviousness is granted by the Laws, and among whom those who are of riper
years are permitted to offer sacrifices, or to perform religious worship for
themselves, their Chi^dren and Wives. But the Law must prohibit young men to be
Spectators, both of Iambickes, and Come^ies, before they come to their full
age, when as education or discipline shall have made them free, from all the
inconveniences both of drunkenness it self, and of all other things that
issue from it. Neque vero fortassis Theodorus tragaedus in hoc errabat, quod
nollet quenquam vel levissimum actorem ante se agere, qu^si magis his rebus,
quas primas audierint, spectatores capi and oblectari solerent. Hoc enim ipsum
idem in hominum and rerum ips^rum natural, us^mque cadit, ut pr^ma quaeque
gratissima accidant. Qu^propter mala omnia a pueris amovenda sunt, sed imprimis
nequitia omnis, atque l^s^ivia. Ibid^m. Number. 78.
Neither verily did Theodorus the Tragedian perchance c^re in this, that he
would not permit any, no not the slightest Actor, to act before him, because
the Spectators are wont most commonly to be more taken and delighted with those
things which they first hear. For this very thing is incident both to the
nature and use of things themselves, that the first things are most acceptable
and dilightfull. Wherefore all evil things are to be removed from Children,
but especi^lly all lewdness and lasciviousness; which is most rife in
Stage Plays. Thus Aristotle, whose words I would our Magistrates, our Parents
would consider. Xenophon, in^ormes us: Ita de venereis etiam rebus ad valde
iuvenes verba non facimus, ne accidente ad vehementem in eis libidinem
levitate, immodice huic libidinisuae indulgeant De Institutione Cyr^ Historia.
lib. 1. p. 34. D.
that the Persians did never so much as speak of any amorous things to You^hs,
lest levity ^oyning it self to that vehement just which was in them, they
should immodera^ly addict themselves to those their lusts: intimating thereby;
that amorous obscene words; ( much See Xenophontis. Convivium. page 900.
accordingly.
more then lewd lascivious, ribaldrous Stage Plays, in which filthy speeches,
verses, ditties, gestures, shows, and actions are united) are as fire and
fuel to men's lusts; as himself records in his forementioned Story. Plato
relates, De Republica. Di^log 2. p^^. 570.581. D^^log^ 10. p^^ 6^^.69^. (...)
D^ Natu^a p. 7^0. L^gum. Di^log. 2 p. 80^.
that Comicall and Tragical Poems and Poets, effeminate men's minds, corrupt
their judgments, provoke laughter, treat of lecherous things, no^^^^^ (...)
w^ter men's sinful lusts, which should be dried up; givi^g t^em a commanding
power over men, when as they should be subi^ct to them: and for these and such
like reasons he e^clu^^s (...) Po^ts, and Stage Plays out of his
Common-we^lth, as inchauating and bewitching mischie^es, that fo^ent and stir
u^ those corruptions which every man should labor to the utmos^ to avoid.
Cornelius Tacitus ranks Theaters and St^we^ together: assuring us from his
own experience; In^e Gl^s^^re (...) and ^nf^m^^, nec culla moribus cor^up^i^
(...) pl^s libidinum cir^^md^dit, qu^m ill^ col^u^^^s^ Vix ar^i^us honestis
p^dor r^tine^^tur, nedum inter ^ertamina vic^orum, pudicitia, aut ^od^s^^a, ^ut
quic quam probi mo^is re^er^aretur. Ann^lvim. l. 14. s^ct. 2.
that all kinds of w^ckednesses and infamy did issue from them in an apparent
man^^r; and that no ^ilth did yield more plenty of lusts to corrupt manners,
then Plays. Quippe erant qui Cn. quoque Pomp^ium incusatu^ ^ senioribus
f^rrent, quod mansu^a^ The^tri sed^m po^uiss^t ubi populus d^es totos ignavia
continuaret, etc. Ib. sect 3.
Therefore diverse of the Senators and people exclaimed against Pompie, for
building Gall^ries about the Stage, wherein the people might sit the greater
part of the day beholding Stage Plays, which did by little and l^^tle corrupt,
yea utterly abolish and s^bv^^t their Country manners, inducing them to
exercise dishonest loves, and drawing them on to commit that lewdness in the
night, which they lust^ully beh^ld and desired in the day time. This was the
fruit of Stage Plays then, which made this Author to cond^mne them, and many
grave Senators to d^claime against them. Cete^um abolitos p^^latim patrios
mores fund^tos ^verti per ^ccitam l^sciviam, ^t quod usquam corrumpi and
corrumpere que^t, in urbe visatur, d^generentque st^dijs ^xterni^ juve^tus
gymnasia, and otia, and turpes amores exerce^do, etc. Proc^r^s Romani sp^cie
orationum and ca^minu^, scena pollu^ntur, etc. Noct^^ quoque dede^ori adj^ctas,
^e quid tempus pudori relinquatur^ sed caetu promiscuo quod p^rditissimus
q^isque per diem con^upiverit, per tenebras audeat. Ibidem.
Seneca the Philosopher informs us: Tunc enim per voluptatem f^cil^us vi^ia
surrepunt, etc. Epist. 7.
That in Stage Plays vices d^e game a more easy passage i^to our hearts. In
hoc mares, in hoc faeminae tripudiant. Deinde sub persona c^^ diu trita frons
est, transitur ad gan^am; Philosophiae nulla cura est. Natural Quaest. lib. 7.
cap. 32.
And that those men and women wh^ harden their for^-heads by frequenting
Stage Plays, do wholly neglect Philosophy, and pass over to the Stews or
Br^thel h^^se at last; a thing he much lament^, as being the common practice of
his age: Wherefore he Subducendus est popu^o tener animus, and parum tenax
recti. Facile transitur ad plures. Socrati, Catoni and Laelio excutere me^tem
su^m dissimilis multitudo po^uisset: adeo nemo nostrum, qui cum maxim
concinnamus ingenium ^^rre impetum vitiorum ^am magno comitatu venientium
potest. Epist. 7.
advises Lucilius to avoid all Plays, together w^^h the ill company that
frequented them; who were able to corrupt even Socrates, Cato, and Laelius
themselves; much more then those o^ meaner virtue; who are never able to
withstand the violence of these vices (which are accompanied and backed by the
mul^itud^,) even then when they do most arm themselves against them; much
less, when as they are not fi^ted to resist them. To pass by the 12. Epistle
of Marcus Aurelius to Lam^ert, which I shall quote hereafter; even Sed ^u
praecipue ^urvis venare Theatris, Haec loca sunt votis faciliora tuis. Illic
invenies quod ames, quod ludere possis Quodque s^mel tangas, quodque tenere
v^lis, etc. Sic ruit ad c^lebres cultissima saemina Iudos, Copia iudicium saepe
mora^a meum est. Sp^ctatum veniu^t, veniunt specta^tur ut ipsae, Ille locus
casti damna pudoris habet. Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule ludos, Cum iuvit
viduos rapta Sabina vi^os. Romule militibus scisti dar^ commoda solus. Haec
mihi s^ dederis commoda miles cro. Scilicet ex illo solennia more Theatra, Nunc
quoqu^ formosis insidiosa manent. D^ Art Am^ndi. lib. 1.
Ovid himself acknowledges; that Stage Plays are meer^ Bawdes and Pand^rs to
men's lusts; that they were the causes of much wheredome, lewdness and
adultery, even from their very first invention, to the times in which h^ lived;
Therefore in his Art of Loving, he advis^th all amorous, unchaste, lascivious
persons to haunt Theaters, as being the places that were most suitable, most
advantageous to their u^chaste desires, where they should seldom miss their
prey: And aft^r, in his Penetentiary Elegies, for these wanton ^ookes of Love,
See Tristium. lib. 1.2, 3, 4. De Po^to libri. Aldus Pius Ovidij Vita.
for which he was exiled: ^e informs Augustus; Ludi quoque semina praeb^nt
Nequitiae; tolli tota Theatra jube^ P^ccandi causam quam multis saepe dederunt,
Martia cum durum sternit arena solum^ Tollatur Circus; non tuta licentia Cir^i
est. Hi^ sed^^ ignoto iuncta puella vi^o. Cum quaedam sp^tiantur in haec, ut
amator ^odem Conv^nia^: quare porti^us ulla patet? Tristi^m. lib. 2. ^ag. 155.
that Plays are the Seminaries of lewdness, the causes of much sin, much
whor^dome, and adultery in many; wh^re^or^ he advises him to demo^^sh all
Theaters, to abandon all Cirques, and block up all p^ssages to them both, as
being the publik^ Marts where Adulterers and Adulteresses commonly met without
control, to conclude their adulterous bargains, and make up their unchaste
^e^etricious matches. Pirm^m est genus probationis, quod etia^ ab ad^ersario
sum^tur, ut veritas etiam ab ipsis inimicis veritatis probetur. Tertul. De
Trinitate. lib. Tom. 2. p. 262.
A most pregnant ratification of our present Assumption; and a passage worth
the noting, because a most lascivious Poet, (who was as far from Puritanisme
or over-strict Preciseness, as he was from Christianity) has registered it to
Posterity, as an experimental truth: The Poet Horace Vt quo^idam Marsaeus
amator Origenis illi, Qui patria^ mimae donat, fund^mque laremque Nil ^uit mi
(inqui^) cu^ uxoribus unqua^ alienis. Verum est cum mimis, e^t cum
meretricibus; unde Fama mal^m g^avius, etc. Sermo. l. 1. Satyr. 2. p. 165.
does couple Whores and Stage-haunters together, as being equally adulterous,
and unchaste: Moreover he styles Stage Plays, An tua demens Vilibus in ^udis
dictari carmina malis? Ibid. Satyr. 10. p. 195.
base Plays; Quid censes munera terrae? Ludicra quid, plausus, and amici dona
Quiritis? Q. 10 spectanda modo^ etc. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 6. p. 246.
which men ought not to esteem; Spis^is indigna Theatris S^ripta pudet
recitare, and nugis addere pondus. Ibid. Epist. 19. p. 274.
but to account as toys Hae nugae seria ducent in mala. De Art Poet. p. 312.
and trifles, which yet notwithstanding bring men into serious evils, and Non
satis est pulchra esse Poemat^ dulcia sunto, Et quocunque volent, animu^
auditoris agunto. De Art Poetica. p. 298.
by their pleasantness impell the minds of the Auditors to whatever they
please. The Poet Iuvenal tells us in plain te^mes. Cuneis an habent spectacula
totis Quod securus ames, quodque inde expetere possis? Chironomon Laedam nulli
s^ltante Batillo Turcia vesicae non imperat: Appu^a gannit Sicu^ in amplexu:
subitum and miserabile, longu^ Attendit Thymel^, Thymile tunc rustica discit,
etc. Hispula tragaedo Gaudet, an expectat ut Quintilianus ametur? Accipis
uxorem de qua citha^aedus Echion, Aut Glaphyrus fiat pater, Ambrosiusque
choraules. Longa per angustos figamus pulpita viros. Nup^a Senatori comitata
est hyppia ludu^. Ad Pharu^, ^ Nilum, famosaque maenia Lagi, Prodigia and mores
urbes damnante Canopo, etc. Fama^ conte^pserat olim, Cujus apud molleis nimia
est jactura cathedras. Fortem anima^ praestant rebus quas turpiter audent. Sat.
6 p. 43 44, 45.
That a man in his time could not pick forth one chaste woman, which he ^ight
safely love as his wife, out of the whole Play-hou^e: That all w^men (let such
who have beautiful gadding Play-haunting Wives, and Daughters mark it,) who
frequent Stage Plays, or love lascivious mixed dancing, are inco^^nent,
unchaste, and infamous persons, who have for^aited their good names, and bear
ou^ their dishonest actions with their audacious carriage. O quantus tunc illis
mentibus ardor Concubitus? quae vox saltante libidine, quan^us, ^llic meri
veteris per crura madent^a torrens? Lenonum ancillas posita Laufella corona
Provocat, and tollit pendentis praemia copae. Ipsa Medullinae frictu^
cri^santis adorat. Palma^^ inter dominas virtus natalibus aeqvat. Nil ibi per
ludum simulabitur, omnia fient Ad verum; quibus incendi j^m ^^igidus aevo
Laomedontiades, and Nestoris hermia possi^. Tunc prurigo morae impariens, tunc
faemina ^^mplex. Ia^ ^as est, admit viros, dormitat adulter? Illa jubet
su^pto iuvenem properare ^ncullo: Si nihil est servis ni curritur: abstuleris
spem Servorum? ^^niet conduc^us aquarius, etc. Ibidem. page 53.54, 56, 59.
That they are such who burn in unchaste, in filthy lu^ts, and commit ad^ltery
in ^ar^est, (as they did in their solemn feasts of Priapus,) not in sport or
representation only: in so ^uch that they would prostitute themselves to
servants, to hired Wat^r-bearers, and the very basest persons for want of
others, rath^r then not satisfy their beastly raging lusts: Such were the
Play-haunting females in this Poets age; and I fear that ours are but little
better now, as I shall expressly prove in the next ensuing Scene.

You see then, how all the fore-recited Fathers, Councels, modern Christian
Writers, and ancient Pagan Authors give punctual t^stimony to my Minors truth,
which no one A^thor to my knowledge^ whether anci^nt or modern, Christian or
Pagan, did ever yet gainsay: therefore we may resolve upon it without any
further scruple; and thereupon reject, reno^nce all Stage Plays, as the
defilements of men's eyes, men's ears, Hoc maxim hominis interiora corrumpa^,
quod exteriora delectat: Leo, De Ieiunio Pentecostes. Se^. 1. cap. 1. fol. 158.
men's souls: the incendiaries, the fomenters of filthy lusts: the very
Pand^rs^ allurements, and provocations to contemplative, to actual
uncleanesse, whoredom, adultery, and the like, which bring destruction to men's
souls. And indeed, how can they choose but irritate men's lusts and draw them
on to lewd unchaste affections, and meretricious filthy practices. For
Adulteriu^ discitur, dum videtur Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. D^nato. Discit
face^e, dum assu^scit videre^ Idem. De Spectac^lis lib.
when a man shall delightfully behold adulteries, whoredoms, incests, together
with all other obscene abominations, even lively personated, emphatically
expressed before his face; Vocis dulcedines per aurem animam vulnerant: quae
quanto licentius adeunt, tanto difficilius evitantur. Hi^rom. Tom. 1. Epist. 12
c. 3. Corpo^e licet virgo ac mente p^rm^ne^t, oculis, ^uribus, lingua minuit
illa quae hab^bat. Non Decet, non licet praesen^^s ^sse inter verba turpia,
quibus libidinum fomes accenditur, ^ponsa and p^^i^^^iam stupri, ad audaciam
sponsus animatur. Cyprian. De Habitu Virginum page 2^^.
When ^e shall hear these beastly sins appla^ded, varnished and set o^t to
sale with the most elegant expressions; the most rhetorical, patheticall,
flexanimous, encomiums: the most insinuating Love-compl^ments, and amorous
streines of wit, of eloquence, that either the oratory of H^ll, or lust can
reach to: when he shall seriously con^^mplate those N^m ubi pedum strepitus cu^
carminibus numerosis consentit, ibi videlicet omnino and manuu^ ipsaru^ plausus
r^sonat, and omne ge^us faeditatis, and invitan^ur spectatores ad turpitudinem.
Cyril. Alexandrinus. in Hesa^am. lib. 1. cap. 3. Tom. 1. page 134. D.
Histriones libidines quas saltando exprimunt docent, and faciu^t per im^ginem
quae no^ sunt, ut fiant sine pudore quae vera sunt. Lacta^tius Div^narum.
Instit. Epit. cap. 6. See Act 3. Scene 1.
lascivious gestures, dances, complements, embracements: those meretricious
kisses, claspings and da^^ ^^^es: those wanton smiles, those petulant nods,
th^se unchaste s^gnes, those lust-irritating motions which pass between
amorous Love-sicke Actors. When he shall hear such See Act 5. Scene 9.10.
accordingly.
scurrilous Pastorals, such ribaldrous Ditties, such inescating Love-sonnets;
such effeminate, overcomming, heart-resolving Music, which prepare the
Auditors to uncleanesse, and subject them as so many Captives to their enraged
lusts. When both Oculi, sunt in amore duces. Qui videt is peccat, qui non te
viderit ergo Non cupiet, facti crimina lumen habet. Propertius Elegiarum. lib.
2. Eleg. 15. and 31.
his eyes, his ears, affections, heart, and all his senses shall be wholly taken
up, with such amorous, Maximinus Junior tantae pulchritudinis fuit ut passim
amatus sit a procac^oribus saeminis, nonnullae etiam optaverunt de eo
concipere. Iulij Capitolini Maximinus Junior. page 267.
beautiful lust-provoking objects as are able to reviue the most mortified
carnal affections; Carpi^ enim vires paulatim uritque videndo F^emina, nec
nemorum pati^ur meminisse nec herbae. Virgil. Georg. lib. 3. page 68.
to fire, the most frozen benumbed lusts; to overcome the most chaste and
continent heart; (all which concur at once in Stage Plays:) how can it but
engender, not only a spark or two, Quum tu Lydia Telaphi cervicem roseam,
cerea Telaphi Laudas brachia, vae, m^um F^rvens difficili bile tumet i^cur.
Tunc nec men's mihi nec color Certa sede manner, humor and in gen^s surtim
^^bitur arguens. Quam lentis penitus macerer ignibus. Vror, etc. Horace. Carm.
lib. 1. Ode. 13.
but an whole fl^me, an Hell of filthy lusts within his soul; and carry him on
to all uncleanesse even with a full carere? We all know by woeful experience,
that all men (but Non enim adulteria and fornicationes aliunde prove^^u^t quam
ex nimia inventutis licentia. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 18. Homil. 60. Tom. 2. Col.
430. A.
especially young men and women, who are the most assiduous Play-haunters) are
exceeding prone by nature to unchaste adulterous desires, to 1 Pet. 2.11.
fleshly lusts which war against their souls: no sins Castitas igitur
(quia uterque sexus vitio libidinis aegrotat) nisi aliarum virtutum open
fulciatur facile labitur. Bernard^ De Ordine Vitae. Col. 1120. M.
so consonant to their depraved natures as these. Hence is it, See Bernard^.
Meditationes. c. 12.14. O quoties ego ipse in er^mo consti^^tus and in illa
vasta soli^udin^, quae ex^sta solis ardoribus horridum Monachis p^aebeb^^
habitaculu^, putaba^ me Romany interesse delicijs. Sed^ba^ solus quia
amaritudine replet^s e^am: h^rrebant sacco membra d^sormia and squalida cutis
si^^ A^thiop^^^^ car^is obduxerat: quotidie lacrymae, quotidie gemitus: and si
qu^ndo repugnante^ somnus imminens oppressisset, nuda humo vix ossa haerentia
collidebam: de cibis vero and potu taceo, cu^ etiam lang^e^tes Monachi aqua
frigida utantur; and coctum aliquid accipisse luxu^ia sit. Ille igi^ur ego, qui
ob gehennae me^um ^ali me carcere ipse damnavera^ scorpioru^ tantu^ socius and
feraru^, saep^ cho^^s interera^ pu^llarum: pallebant ora jejunijs, and men's
desiderijs aestuabat in frigido corpore^ and ^nte hominem sua iam carne
praemortuu^ s^la libidinu^ incendia bullieban^. Si autem hoc sustin^nt illi qui
exeso corpore, solis cogitationibus oppugnantur; quid patitur puella quae
delicijs fruitur? nempe illud Apostoli: vivens mortua est. Hier^m. Epist. 22.
c. 3.
that those who live the m^st retired lives; who keep the most constant watch
over their own deceitful hearts: who most mortify and keep under their
rebellious carnal lusts by prayer and fasting; by substracting all that
^ewell, that provision which should nourish them: who abstain from all
appearance of evil; from all those lascivious lust-enflaming objects, which
might either steine their souls with unchaste desires, or defile their bodies
with adulterous copulaetions, are oft-tim^^ vexed and assaulted; yea sometimes
vanquished, and foiled (...) their carnal lusts: as the examples of Genesis
19.30. to 38.
Lot, 2 Samuel 3.2.10 18.
David, Rom 7.23, 24, 25. 1 Cor. ^.27. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Saint Paul, See ^
Saint Hierom, and some others ^estifie. And if Qui sponte corru^t, ^uid saciet
si impulsus? Cyprian De Spectaculis. lib.
these men oft-times fall into these lustful passions of their own accord,
even then when as they have kept watch and ward against them, by avoiding all
occasions which might provoke them to them: how much more then must our common
Actors and Play-haunters, who add fire, spurs, and fuel to their enraged,
unbrideled lusts in Stage Plays, be much more conquered and subdued by them.
Si vix qui long ab hujusmodi c^ntibus and spectaculis remo^a est anima
castimoniae hon^statem amplectitur, quomodo continenter vivere pote^it, qui in
his vivit? Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew Tom. 2. Col. 29. S. A.
If he who keeps the farthest distance from lascivious lust-enraging
Stage Plays, can ha^dly keep his affections, his body within the bounds of
chastity; how then can they be chaste in mind, in body, who live and wallow in
them with delight. Alas, how can the weak^st stand, when the strongest fall?
How can the careless be secure, where the most vigilant are surprised? H^w can
unmortified graceless Satis enim ard^um era^, absque illis su^t^ationibus
illu^ aetatem posse far moderate temp^sta^em affectionum^ quum autem and haec
accedunt, t^m q^^e videntur, quam quae aud^^^tur, majusque accenditur
incendium, and fo^n^x concupi centiarum ^^^is ins^am^^^r, quomod^ no^ pessum it
adolesce^tis, anima^ hinc enim omnia pereu^t and corrumpuntur. Chrysostom. Hom. 56.
in Genes. 29. To^. 1. Col. 367. B.
Yongsters continue chaste, untainted, unpolluted, either in thought, in soul,
in body, in the very midst of all the temptations, the defilements of
lust-irritating polluted objects; in the very Stews and Brothel-house of lust;
the very School and Shop of Venery, Lechery, and Lewdness; (for See p. 67.68,
69
so some style the Play-house^) when as the Terra enim carnis nostrae nisi
assiduis fuerit subacta culturis, cito de segni otio spinas tribu^losque
producit, and partu degeneri dabit fructum, no^ horreis inferendum. sed ignibus
concremandum. Custodienda igitur nobis omnium germinum seminumque generositas,
quam ex summi agricolae plantatione concepimus, and vigili solitudine
providendum, ne Dei numera aliqua invidentis inimici fraud violentur, and in
Paradiso virtutum concrescat sylva vitiorum. Leo De Ieiunio Pentecost. Sermo.
4. cap. 3. fol. 161.
most mortified gracious Christians, who have retired themselves wholly from all
carnal objects; who have with-drawne their eyes, their ears, their thoughts
from all lust-fomenting pleasures of sin, have yet been desteined with
unclean affections, in the very midst of holy duties in their private
Closets? Since therefore the very dearest of Gods Saints, Gal. 5.16, 17. Romans
8.12, 13, 14.
who always war against their lusts, are Vincit sanctos dira libido. Senecae
Hyppolitus. Act. 3. Chorus. fol. 87.
oft-times foiled, vexed, or disturbed by them, even then when as there are no
external objects to tempt them: much more then must common Actors and
Play-haunters, Romans 6.12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 20. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. cap. 4.18, 19.
Titus. 3.3.
who yield themselves over as slaves, as vassalls to their untamed carnal
lusts, be steined, conquered, and controlled by them. And here I appeal unto
the consciences of Players, of Play-haunters for proof of this effect. Do not
your own hearts experimentally inform you, that there are many sinful
swarms In omnibus seculis pauciores reperti sunt qui suas cupiditates, quam
qui host^um copias vincerent. Cicero. Epist. lib. 13.
and flames of lust, Succensas agit libido mentes. Senicae Hyppolitus. Act. 2.
fol. 78.
many lewd unchaste affections often kindled in your breasts Si mobilitate
histrionum quispiam delectetur, per oculorum fenestras animae capta libertas
est, and mors intrat per has fenestras. Hierom. advers. Iovinianum. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
by the very acting, sight, and hearing of lascivious Stage Plays? Do not the
wanton gestures; the amorous kisses, complements, and salutes; the meretricious
songs and speeches; the lascivious whorish Actions; the beautiful faces; the
ravishing Music, the flexanimous enticements, the witty obscenities, the
rhetorical passages, the adulterous representations, with all the other
fomentations of uncleanesse in the Playhouse, ( Haec sunt Diaboli ignita
^acula, quae simul and vulnerant, and inflammant. Heirom. Epist. 8. ca^. 16.
which are as so many fiery darts of Satan to wound our souls with lust; as so
many Turpi loquentia and facetiae fornicationis vehiculu^. Theophylact.
Enarrat. in Ephesians. 5. See Chrysostom, Ambrose, Anselme, Primasius, Oce^menius,
Ibidem. and Bishop Babington, Calvin, Perkins, Hooper, Dod, and Elton, on the 7
Commandment, accordingly.
Conduict-pipes, or Chariots to usher concupiscence into our hearts, Vitijs
nostris in animum per oculos via est. Oculi tota nostra luxu^ia: hi nos in
omnia vitia quotidie praecipitant; mirantur, adamant, concupiscunt. Quintilian.
Declamatio. 1. and 2. Pro. Caeco. p. 6. and 23. Omnis sceleris officin^ oculus
est. Hic ignis, incus, mallei, and affectus velut Cyclopes: nulla corporis
part facilius pec^amus. Quid? ipsi oculi cupidines sunt, animumque torrent
sauciant, cruciant. Plae^ique oculis mali mortales sumus. Put^an. Consolatio
Caecitatis. p. 721. to 736. Se^ Basil. De Vera Virginitate. Clem. Alexandr.
Paedag. l. 2. c. 8. Greg Nyssen, De Oratione. Greg. Magnus. Romans 5. in
Evangelia accordingly.
through the doors, the portals of our eyes and ears;) even raise a tempest of
unchaste affections; yea kindle a very hell of lusts within your souls? Do not
they strongly Quid hoc est inquam aliud, quam irritare cupiditates hominum per
se incitatas? Seneca Epist. 110.
instigate and inrage your carn^ll minds adding much fuel unto your lewd
desires? Do not they fraught 2 Pet. 2.13.
your eyes, your ears, your hearts with filthy objects, so that they cannot
cease from sin? Have they not ca^s^d you to look upon Whores and Strumpets,
upon b^autifull comely women with a lustful eye, M^th. 5.28. c. 15.19. Mark.
7.21, 22, 23. Quoti^s concupis^imus, toties fornicamur. Hi^rom, Epist. 4. c. 3.
and so to commit, if not actual, yet contemplative adultery with them in your
hearts, either more or less? If you deny all this, your own consciences,
together with all the fore-recited Fathers, Councels, Christian and Pagan
Authors will presently convince you of a lie. If you acknowledge it; as needs
you must; since your own consciences, with all the premises Confessio
conscientiae vox est. Sen^ca Controvers. lib. 8. Controv. 4.
will force you to confess it; you must certainly join hands, join hearts,
and judgments with me in censuring, in condemning Stage Plays, because they
contaminate and defile both their Actors, their Spectators souls and bodies;
because they thus instigate, nourish, and inflame their inseparable 1 Pet.
2.11. Hic hostis nobiscum inclusus est: Q^ocunque pergimus, nobiscum portamus
inimicum. Quid ergo oleum flammae adij^imus? quid ardenti corpusculo, fomenta
ignium ministramus? Hierom. Epist. 12. cap. 4.
sinful fleshly lusts which war against their souls; Romans 8.13. Gal. 5.24.
Col. 3.5.
which should be mortefied, and subdued; Romans 13.14.
not fostered, not fomented, as they are.

SCENA QVARTA.


Argument 30.
That which is an immediate occasion, furtherance, or fomentation of much
actual adultery, fornication, whoredom, and uncleanesse, must needs be
abominable, and utterly unlawful unto Christians,

But such are Stage Plays, as I shall clearly manifest.

Therefore they must needs be abominable, and utterly unlawful unto Christians.

My Minor must be yielded, Adulterio pecatum nullu^ majus. Chrysost^ Hom. 7.
D^ Paenitentia. To^. 5. Col. 5. p. 743. D.
because adultery, fornication, whoredom, with all other actual uncleanesse,
(how ever men may chance to ^light them as mere trivial, venial sins) are
most damnable soule-murthering abominations. which God, which Christian men
abhor. The sinfulness, the damnablenesse, of these foul crying sins,
(which, alas; are now so frequent in the world, Levit. 19.29. Pudorem rei
rollit multitudo peccantium, and desinit esse probri loco commune mal^dictu^.
Nunquid jam ullus adulterij pudor est, postquam eo ventum est, ut nulla
adulterum habeat, nisi ut adulterum irritet? Tandiu istud timebatur, quamdiu
rarum erat. Nunc argumentu^ est deformitatis pudicitia. Quam invenies tam
miseram, tam sordidam, ut illi satis sit unum adultetorum par? nisi singulis
divisit horas, and non sufficit dies omnibus? nisi ad alium gestata est, apud
alium mansit? Infrunita and antiqua est, quae nescit, matrimonium vocari, unius
adulterium. Horum delictorum jam evanuit pudor, postquam res latius evagata
est. Sen^ca, De Beneficijs. lib. 3. cap. 16.
that the commonnesse of them has made them tolerable, if not commendable and
lawful in the eyes of many, who are so far from being ashamed of, that they
even boast and glory in th^se lascivious wickednesses;) will easily appear by
these particulars: First, they are sins against the express letter of the 7.
Commandment. Exodus 20.14. Deuteronomy. 5.18. Mat. 5.27, 28.
Thou shall not commit adultery: as all ancient, and modern Expositors of this
Commandment testify. Secondly, they are sins, Levit. 20.10. Psalm. 50.18.
Prove. 6.32. Ier. 7.9. c. 23.14. Ezech. 16.32^ Hosea. 4.2, 13, 14. Mat. 5.28.29^
Ephesians. 5.3, 5. Gal. 5.19, 21. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Hebr. 13.4. Rev. 21.8.
abundantly condemned thorowout the Old and New Testament, as abominable and
highly displeasing unto God; whose wrath none can stand under. Thirdly, they
are the very Gal. 5.19.
works and products of the flesh; Mat. 15.19. Mark. 7.21, 22, 23.
issuing always from a polluted heart devoyd of grace. Fourthly, Romans 1.24. to
30. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19, 22. 1 These. 4.4, 5. 1 Cor. 5.1.
they are those execrable sins, those abominable pollutions wherein the
Idolatrous Pagan Gentiles lived, whose lewdness Christians must not imitate.
Fifthly, Job 24.15, 16, 17. Prove. 7.9. to 24. Ephesians. 5.11, 12, 13. Job 20.26, 27.
they are those shameful, Pudet autem non solum eorum, quae, dicta sunt,
pudendorum, sed etiam signoru^, ut non solu^ cum in re venerea versantur, sed
etiam cum adsunt signa ejus rei, and non solum cum faciunt turpia, sed etiam
cum dicunt. Aristot. Rhetor lib. 2. c. 6. p. 137.
desperate filthy works of darkness which the most audacious miscreants are
afraid, yea utterly ashamed to commit in the daytime, in the face and view of
others, out of a selfe-guiltinesse, an inward consciousnesse of their
vileness; Job 24.17. Ianua frangatur, latret canis, undique magno Pulsa domus
strepitu resonet: vel pallida lecto Desiliat mulier: miseram se conscia clamet:
Cruribus haec metuat, doti deprensa, egomet mi. Discincta tunica fugiendum est^
ac pede nudo: Ne nummi pereant, aut pyga, aut denique fama. Deprendi miserum
est. Horace S^rmonum lib 1. Satyr. 2. p. 167. See p. 164.
in the act of which if any are deprehended, they are in the very terrors of
the shadow of death; like men distracted they know not what to do, nor whether
to fly, the very foulness of the fact amazing them, and the least noise
affrighting them. Sixthly, Mat. 15.19, 20. 1 These. 4.4, 5. Romans 1.24 to 30. Rev.
21 8, 17. Genesis 49.4.
they are sins which most abominably pollute the bodies and souls of men,
making them ^dious both in the eyes of God, and men. Seventhly, Genesis 49.4.
Prove. 5.9. cap. 6.31, 33. ^ Sam. 12.^^^ 11, 12. Levit. 21.9. Hosea 1.2. John
8.41.
they are sins which bring abundance of shame, of dishonor upon the persons,
families, and posterities of those who are guilty of them, and even quite
deprive them of their glory: a wound, a dishonor shall they get, and their
reproach shall not be wiped away; as the very wisest of men informs us.
Sixthly, they are sins Hosea 4.11.
which wholly infatuate and steal away men's hearts; so Prove. 7.7.21.22, 23. c.
5.6.
that they are as an Ox that goes to the slaughter; or as a fool who is led
to the correction of the stocks; till a dart shrike through their liver; or as
a Bird that hastneth to the snare, not knowing that it is for his life. Yea
these sins do so besot men, that they can neither consider the danger of
them; nor yet use means for to escape them. Ninthly, Prove. 5.9, 10, 11. c. 6.
25, 26. Job 31.9, 10, 11, 12.
they consume, they putrify, not only the souls, the spirits, but the very
bodies, and estates of men, bringing them even to a morselt of bread. Tenthly,
they ingenerate many filthy Prove. 5.3, 4, 12. Job 31.12. Prove. 12.4.
loathsome diseases, which oft-times so putrify the bodies of lewd adulterous
persons, that they even stink above ground, becoming odious, yea intolerable
to themselves and others: which made S. Chrysostom to affirm, Adulter etia^
vel anre gehennam est omniu^ miserimus, omnia suspicans, vel ad umbram contr^m
scens, ad nullum liberis respiciens oculis, sed omnes pertimesce^s, and qui
s^iunt, and qui nes^iun^, ^^^ros videns gladios, impendentes lictor^s, iudicia,
etc. Homil in Psalm. 7. Tom 1. Col 645. B.
that an adulterer even in this life, before he goes to Hell, is the most
miserable, the most wre^ched of all men. Eleventhly, they are such sins,
Ephesians. 5.3.4.
as are not so much as once to be named (much less then practiced) among
Christians, whom they do not become; those therefore are no true Christians
who take pleasure in them. Twefely, they are such sins, as 1 Cor. 5.9, 10,
11, 13.
exclude men, both from the society of Gods Children here, who are not so much
as to converse, or eat with fornicators, or adulterers: and likewise 1 Cor.
5.1. to the end. 2 Cor. 2.1. to 13. c. 7.8. to 14. Per hoc quoque exemplum ab
Ecclesia maxim expellit ^um qui est fornicatus. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in 1 Cor.
5. See Ambrose, Hi^rom, Theod^ret, Primas^^s, Rhemigius, Theophylact, and
Haymo, Ibidem.
from the Word, the Sacraments, the public Assemblies of the Saints; from
which all Fornicators, Adulterers, Strumpets, and unchaste persons are ipso
facto by the very Law of God, and Council. Ancyranum. Can. 15. and 20. Capit.
Graecarum Synodorum. Can. 76.77.81. Wormatense Council. Can. 44. Nannetense.
Can. 12.13, 14. with sundry others.
man, to be excommunicated; that so they may be delivered up to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, till they shall give some outward actual testimony
of their sincere repentance for these sin^. Thirteenthly, they are such sins,
as make a man exceeding guilty in Gods sight. Prove. 6^27, 28, 29.
A man may as well take fire in his bosom, and his cl^athes not be burnt; or
go upon coals, and his feet not be scorched, as go into his neighbors wife,
and yet be innocent: Whence Solomon informs us; Prove. 23.28.
that a strange woman increases transgressions amongst men. Fourteenthly, they
are sins which often times shorten and cut off the lives of men: Adulterij
comes and fructu^^ caedes. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. Tom. 1. Col. 823. A.
and draw on murder after them: For Prove. 6.26.
as the Ad^itresse will hunt for the precious life of a man: Prove. 6.33, 34, 35.
so jealousy is the rage of a man; therefor he will not spare in the day of
vengeance: he will not regard an^ ransom, neither will he rest content, though
thou give many gifes. These sins were Genesis 34. thorowout.
the cause that the Sons of Jacob slew the Sechemites and spoiled their City,
for ravishing and using their Sister Dinah as an Whore. These Numb. 26.1 4, 5,
7, 8.
were the death of all those Israelites who committed whoredom with the
Daughters of Moab, whom God himself commanded te be slain. Judge. 19.25. to
the end, and cap. 20. and 21. thorowout. Dux malorum faemina, and sc^lerum
artifex obsedit animos, cujus i^cestae stupris fumant tot urbes, bella tot
gentes gerunt, and versa ab imo regna tot populos praemunt. Senecae Hyp^oly^u^.
Act. 2. fol. 78.
These occasioned the war between the Bexiamites and the other Tribes of the
Children of Israel, in which there were threescore and five thousand men and
upwards slain; yea, the whole Tribe of Benjamin where the Levites Concubine
was ravished, (which occasioned this war,) were almost utterly destroyed,
there being 600. men of them only left alive by means of these men-slaying
sins. These sins 2 Samuel 11.2. to 22. 1 Chronicles. 20.1. Psalm. 51.
caused David, to destroy Vriah: 2 Samuel 13. thorowout.
Absalom to murder his Brother Ammon for ravishing his Sister Tamar. These
have See Tacitus Anna^ium. lib. 11 12, 13. John Bale, his Acts of English
Votaries, with the Apology for the same^ thorowout.
been always accompanied with much murder and bloodshed in all ages: these
have caused the Husband, to murder his Wife; the Wife, to poison her Husband:
one Whore-master to murder his Corrivals to the selfsame Strumpet: yea these
have caused unnatural Mothers to murder their own spuri^us Issues, to
conceal their l^wdnesse; as Authors, as our own 21. Iacobi. cap. 27.
accordingly.
Statutes, and experience teach us: therefore they must needs be crying^
because they are bloody sins. Fiftenthly, they are such sins which offer an
high indignity to the whole Trinity. First, to God the Father, 1 Cor. 6.13. 20.
Romans 6.13.19, 20.
not only in taking those bodies that are his, which were made for himself
alone, not for fornication; and giving them up as prof^ssed instruments of
sin, to lust, to lewdness, to Satan, to all uncleanesse: but likewise in
contaminating, oblitterating, and casting dirt, yea sin, upon his 1 Ephesians.
4.24.
most holy Image stamped on them. Secondly, to Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor.
6.15, 16, 17, 20.
in taking those bodies which are his members, purchased with his most precious
blood, that they might be preserved pure and chaste to him; and making them the
members of an Harlot. Thirdly, to God the holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 6.19. cap. 3.16,
17.
in defiling those bodies, which are the Temples of the holy Ghost, which is in
us; who cannot endure any pollution, especially in his Temples, which should be
always holy, as he is holy. Quomodo enim post consuetudinem cu^ scortis in
Ecclesiam venire poteris? quomodo manus quibus scortu^ contrectasti in caelum
extendere audebis, etc? Chrysostom^ De Libello repudij. Sermo. Tom. 4 Col. 594
D.
And who is there so desperately wicked, that dares thus affront the whole
Trinity it self by these cursed filthy sins? Sixteenthly, they are sins of
which men very seldom repent. Prove. 22.14. cap. 23.27.
A Whore ( says Solomon) is a deep Ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow
Pit; (out of which men can hardly recover themselves:) Prove. 2.19. Fornicatio
difficulter elui potest. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. i^ 1 These. cap. 4. Tom. 4. Col. 1239.
None that go into her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of
Life: And who then would engage his soul upon such irrecoverable irrepenitable
sins as these? Seventeenthly, Prove. 7.27.
these sins are the very highway to Hell, the beaten rode to eternal death:
Prove. 5.4.
the end of them is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. Wherefore
Solomon exhorts his Son; Prove. 5.7, 8, 9.
to remove his way far from a strange woman, and not to come nigh the door
of her house; (a place well worthy their observation, who fear not for to run
to Whore-houses,, or to cast themselves upon the temptations, the enticements
of Strumpets, as too many do,) Prove. 2.18, 19. cap. 5.5. cap. 7.27. Fornicatio
est via quae ducit ad Diabolum. Chrysostom. Homilia. 41. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col.
882. B^
For her house inclines unto death, and her paths unto the dead: her feet go
down to death, her steps take hold of hell: her house is the way to hell,
going down to the chambers of death: None that go into her return again,
neither take they hold of the path of Life. Eighteenthly, they are sins
against the very bodies and souls of men. Against the bodies of men; as the
Apostle witnesses. 1 Cor. 6.18. See Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hierom, Theodoret,
Primasius, R^emigius, Beda, Anselme, Haym^, O^cumenius, Theophylact, Sedulius,
and other of the Fathers on this whole chapter.
Flee fornication; every sin that a man does is without the body, but he that
commits fornication sins against his own body: that is, Fornicatio totum
corpus sceleratum and execrandum facit. Ch^^sost. Homil. 18. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4.
Col. 393. B. See Ambros. Enar. in Psalm. 37. Tom. 2. p. 341. 342.
in defiling it; in dishonouring it; in impayring it; in destroying it. Against
the souls of men, as Solomon testifies: Prove. 6.32. Adulter exitium animae
suae conciliat. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Verbis Esaiae. vidi Dominum sedentem. To^.
1. Col. 1294.
Who so (says he) commits adultery with an woman lacks understanding; he
that does it, destroys his own soul. And who would be so inhumanely, so
atheistically desperate, as to destroy both soul and body for ever, to enjoy
the momentany bitter-sweetnesse of these filthy sins? Nineteenthly; they are
sins, Ps. 50.16, 18.
which disable men to perform any holy duty acceptable to God. Sins, Prove.
22.14. Romans ^.24^ to 30.
into which few fall, but such as are abhorred of the Lord, and given up to a
reprobate sense, to work all wickedness even with gre^dinesse. Sins, Job
31.11, 12.
which devour to destruction, and root out all a man's increase. Sins, Job
24.15, 17. and cap. 20.26.
which cause the earth to rise up against men, and the fire not blown to
devo^re them. Sins, Ephesians. 5.3, 4^ 5, 6.
which draw down the temporal, the eternal wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. Genesis 6.1. to 14. Math. 24.38. 2 Pet. 2.5, 10. Libidines diluvium
induxerunt. Berosus. Frag. lib. 3. page 25. Chrysostom. Homil. 22. in Geneses.
These were the sins that destroyed the old worldwith water: Genesis 19.5, 8,
13, 14. Ezech^ 16.49, 50. 2 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Jude 7.8.
which consumed the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire from Heaven; Which
1 Cor. 10.8. Numb. 25.9.
caused three and twenty thousand of the Isralites to fall in one day. These
were the sins, Beyerlinke. Opus Chronographicum Orbis Vniversi. page 110. D.
that caused God, in the year of our Lord, 1583. even in our City of London;
to destroy with ^ire from Heaven two Citizens, the one leaving his Wife, the
other her own Husband, whiles they were in the very act of adultery on the
Lords day; their bodies being left dead, and half burnt up, for a Spectacle of
Gods avenging Justice unto others. These are the sins (but adultery and
incest more especially) Levit. 20.10, 11, 12. to 20. Deuteronomy. 22.21, ^2 John 8.4,
5.
which God himself has commanded to be punished with death, yea with stoning
to death; the most vile and shamefulest death of all others: Yea these are such
sins, that Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeoru^. lib. 3. cap. 20. Philo Iudaeus, De
Specialibus Legibus. lib. 2. page 1053. Boemus, De Mor. Gentium. lib. 2 cap. 4.
Munster. Cosmog^. l. 5. cap. 33. Purchase Pilgr. l. 2. c. 19.
not only the Jews in ancient times; but even mere Pagans from the very
light of nature, did punish with death it self. Hence Boemus. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Drac^ enacted; that the adulterer taken in adultery, might without any danger
to the party, be lawfully killed. Alex. ab Alexandro^ lib. 4. c. 1. Plato
Legum. Dialog. 6.
The selfsame Law was enacted by Solon and Plato. Hence Opmeerus Chronogr.
page 92. Boemus. l. 3. c. 18 Annotationes Godelevaei. in lib. 10. Livij Histor.
Iustiniani. Codex. l. 9. Tit. 9.
Romulus, among those laws which he wrote in brass and placed in the Capitol,
enacted; That the convicted adulteress should be put to death according as her
husband, or his friends should think meet. Which act was afterward confirmed
by the Julian Law. Hence, Zenophon, De Instit. Cyri. lib. 3. Plutarchi Solon^
and Laconica. Instituta. Munster. Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 42.
among the Lacedaemonians, it was lawful for a man to kill him, who was taken
in adultery with his wife. Hence Heraclitus, De Polit.
the Corinthians used to drown those who prostituted themselves to the lust of
others. The Plutarchi Numa. Livy Histor. lib. 2. sect^ 42. Dionys. Hallicarnas.
Antiqu. Romans lib. 2. c. 8. Eutropius Rom^nae. Hist. lib. 1^ and 2. Dion
Cassius. Histor. l. 50.
Vestel Virgins among the Romans b^ing convicted of fornication were buried
alive. Boemus. lib. 2. cap. 11. Munster Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 79.
In ancient Ti^es among the Turks, the adulterer and adulteress were both
stoned to death: and Lonicerus. Turc. Histor. lib. 2. c. 17. lib. 3. c. 8.
Busbequius Epist 3. Purchase Pilgr. lib. 3. cap. 10.
at this day they are both most ignominiously punished. Boemus. lib. 1. cap 11.
Alexand ab Alexandro. lib. 4^ cap. 1. Purchase Pilgr. lib. 3. c. 10.
The Arabians, and Tenedians punish adultery with death, reputing it a far
greater crime, then perjury, or sacrilege; and therefore worthy of a severer
punishment. The Caelius Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. lib. 18 c^p. 15. Boemus. lib. 2.
cap. 6. Purchase Pilgr. lib. 7. cap. 7.
AEthiopians account adultery treason, and therefore they make it capital.
Acosta. Indian Hist. lib. 6. cap. 18.
In Peru whoredom is punished with the death of both parties. Lerius, De
Navigat. in Brasil. cap. 17.
The Brasilians prosecute adultery with capital hatred, in so much that he
whose wife is taken in adultery may lawfully kill her, if he please. Purchase
Pilg. lib. 5. cap. 9.
The Indian Bramanes may lawfully poison their unc^aste wives. Op me^rus.
Chronogr. lib. 6. page 345.
In old Saxony, women who were convicted of adultery, and ravishers of maids
were first hanged, and then burned. Purchase Pilg lib. 5. cap. 2.
In S^a^ adultery is death, the Fathers of the Malefactors, or the next Kinsmen
being the Executioners. Peter Ma^tyr, Indian Histor. Decad. 4. cap 4.
In Palmaria adulterous Priests are punished with cruel death. Peter Martyr^
Indian Histor. Decad. 7. c. 10.
In Hispaniola unchaste Priests are either drowned, or burnt. Peter Martyr,
Indian Histor. Decad. 5. c. 17 Purchase Pilgr. lib. 8. cap. 12. lib. 9. cap 3.
I^ Bantam, Mexico, and China adultery is punished with death. Boemus. lib. 2
cap. 10.
The Tartars taken in adultery are put to present death, for fear of which
they live very chaste. If then the very judicial Law of Moses, together with
these Heathens and Pagan Nations have deemed these sins capital: Qui in
uxores alioru^, interdum and amicorum insaniunt, and in d^mnum proximorum
vivendo familias numerosas adulterare con^ntur, conjug^liaque vota irrita
facere and spem posteritatis abrumpere, ^ab^rant^ insanabili morbo animae,
capite plectendi, ut publici hosts humani generis, ne impune plures domos
contaminant, neve alijs exemplum fiant nequitiae, quae facile imitatores
invenit. Philo, De Specialibus L^gibus. lib. 2. page 1053.
punishing adulterers and adulteresses with death, as being the public enemies
of mankind: needs must these sins be execrable, yea dangerous unto
Christians. Twentiethly, these sins are prejudicial both to the Church and
State, in defileing, polluting, dishonouring, and troubling them with an
unclean, degenerated, spurious, if not accursed offspring, who are no other but
the very Zech. 9.6.
blemishes, shames, and infamy of Church, of State, of nature: which all Laws
disinherit: Deuteronomy. 23.2.
who were not to enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even to their tenth
generation. Lastly, these sins exclude men out of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Gal. 5.19, 21. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Rev. 21.27.
none that die in the guilt of them shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God or
of Christ: They cause God to judge men in a more special manner: Hebr. 13.4.
Who^e-mongers and Adulterer^ God will judge: They bind men over to the great
Assizes at the last day: 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. ^ornicationes and adulteria non
vertuntur in cinerem, sed conscribuntur in judicium futurum. Chrysostom. Hom.
77. in Matthew. ^om. 2. Col. 534. C.
The Lord knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished: but chie^ly them, that walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanesse: And if all this be not enough: they plunge men's souls deep in
Hell for all eternity. Rev. 21.8. Fornicatio inijcit in gehennam. Chrysostom.
Hom^ 18. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 393. C.
For the abominable, and Whore-m^ngers, and all unclean persons, shall have
their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone for ever; which is
the second death. Jude 7.
Even as Sodom and Gomorra, and the Cities about them, in like manner giving
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, for these sins of
theirs. Psalm. 50.18, 22.
O then consider this all ye incontinent, unclean, adulterous persons, who
forget God; Prove. 2.13.
who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk^ in the ways of darkness;
lest he tear you in pieces; lest he Isay 33.14. Isay 66.24.
eternally condemn you to the endless flames of Hell for these your flames of
lust; and there be none to deliver you. Since then it is evident by all these
premises to the hearts, the consciences of all men, that adultery, fornication,
uncleanesse, are such abominable, capital, Quis claret me Tanais? aut quae
Barbaris Maeotis undis pontico incumbens mari? Non ipse toto magnus Oceano
pater, tantum expiarit sceleris. Senecae Hippolytus. Act. 2 fol. 81.
deepe-dyed pernicious sins; those Stage Plays which instigate, or entise
men to them, foment men in them, must needs be execrably sinful; yea utterly
unlawful unto Christians: so that my Major needs no further proof.

For the Minor; that Stage Plays are the immediate occasions, the fomentations
of much actual adultery, whoredom, and unclenesse; it is most apparently
evident: First, from their subject matter: which being for the most part
amorous, scurrilous, or obscene, consisting of adulteries, rapes, incests,
whoredoms, love-prankes, solicitations to incontinency, meretricious
ribaldrous songs and jests, (as I have Act 3. Scene 1. p. 62. to 72. and Act 5.
Scene 9.
already proved;) must needs inflame men's lusts, and draw them on to actual
uncleanesse: Since evil word, 1 Cor. 15.33. See here p. 50. accordingly.
which corrupt good manners, Verba ad opera viam praebe^t. Theophylact.
Enarratio in Ephesians. 5.
are but a way, a passage unto evil deeds; Ne nominentur quidem, scortatio,
obscaenitas, aut immundities: novit enim qui de his rebus fiunt sermones
fomitem and exhortationem fieri ad opera. Vrbanitas, obscaenitas, and
stultiloquium ^omes sunt ad scortationem. Oecumenius. in Ephesians. 5.3.4.
Obscaenus sermo and scurrilitas vehiculum fornicationum, etc. Chrysostom. Hom.
17. in Ephesians. See Ambrose, Hierom, Primasius, Theodoret, Rhemigius, Sedulius,
Anselme, and Haymo, in Ephesians. cap. 5.3^4. accordingly.
a fire, a fuel to adulterous lusts; yea, the very Chariot of whoredom, of
uncleanesse; as the Fathers style them. Hence is it, that De Vanitate
Scientiarum. c. 63. and 64. See Athenaeu^ Dipnos. l. 13. cap. 8. 25.27.
accordingly.
Agrippa reputeth amorous Poets, lascivious Historians, the chiefest Panders in
the world; yea the very original Fathers, Tutors, and chief Promoters of
baudery, and whoredom; because their ribaldrous Poems; their true, their
fabulous Histories of the adulteries, loves, and beastly lewdnesses of
Idol-gods, or lustful men, are but as so many Lectures to instruct; so many
allurements to entice; so many guides to lead, so many arg^me^ts to persuade
men to lechery, and all actual uncleanesse whatsoever. Hence August. De Dece^.
Chordis Philo Iudaeus, De Decalogo^ and De Specialibus Legibus. l. 2. Calvin,
Beac^n, Hooper, Babinton, Perkins, Vrsine, Hyperius, Kn^w^^^bs, Bunny, Solme,
Simlerus, Dod, Brinsly, Elton, Downham, Williams, Flower, Andrew^s, Lake^ and
sundry others.
all ancient, all modern Expositors on the Commandments that ever I have
leene, have reduced scurrility, ribaldry; together with all amorous lascivious
Poems, speeches, jests, Histories, Books, and Stage Plays, to the 7.
Commandment, as being the fire, fuel, f^mentations, occasions of whoredom
and adultery. Yea hence is it, that God himself prohibits, Ephesians. 4.22. c.
5.3, 4, 5, 11, 12. See Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Hierom, Rhemigius,
Primasius, Haymo, Beda, Anselme, Oecumenius, and Sedulius, together with
Calvin, Musculus, Melancton, Are^ius, Marlorat, and all other modern
Commentators, Ibidem. accordingly and Act 3. Scene 2 and 3.
all ^^lthy communications, all corrupt speeches; all foolish talking and
jesting, which are not convenient, together with the very naming of fornication
and all uncleanesse; as unbecomming Saints; because they draw men on to these
shameful works of darkness, with which Christian are to have no fellowship.
If then obscene, adulterous Poems, fables, Histories, Ditties, jests, or
speeches have such an attractive, such a depraving power in them to draw men on
to actual lewdness, See the places of Chrysostom quoted in the ensuing
pages, accordingly.
much more must Stage Plays, (wherein the quintessence, the confluence of all
obscenity is pithily contracted, emphatically expressed, elegantly adorned,
rhetorically pronounced) be more prevalently powerful to draw men on to these
gross lecherous sins. Whence Qui autem in multitudine versatur, assiduis
vulneribus afficitur Mulierum enim aspectus sagitta veneno illita, quae ferit
animum and venenum immittet and quo diutius manet, eo magis vulnus
computrescit. Qui vitare cupit ejusmodi vulnera, is a publicis Spectaculis
abstinebit, neque in celebritatibus versabitur. Satius est enim, ut domi
maneas, qu^m ^um putas te celebri^ates venerari, in manus inimicorum incidere.
S. Nili Abba^is. Orat. 2. De Luxuria. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 2. p. 969. G.
Nilus an ancient Abbot, advises all such who would avoid the wounds of lust,
to abstain from public Stage Plays, and to keep themselves from them, lest
they should fall into their enemies hands, and be drawn ^n to actual
lewdness. Secondly, my Minors truth is most evident, from the very manner of
acting Stage Plays, and those whoredoms, those adulteries personated in them.
He who shall but seriously consider those amorous smiles, and wanton gestures;
See here Act 5. Scene 2.3.
those lascivious complements, those lewd adulterous kisses and enbracements;
those lustful dalliances; those impudent, immodest, panderly passages; those
effeminate, whorish, lust-inflaming solicitations; those several
concurrences, combinations, conspirations, of artificial, studied, and more
then Brothel-house obscenities: Adulterium discitur du^ videtur. Cyprian Epist.
lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Histriones docent adul^eria dum ^ingunt, and
si^ulatis erudiunt ad vera. Fa^^unt per imaginem quae no^ sunt, ut fiant sin^
pudore qua^ vera sunt^ Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. ^. 20. Div Instit. Epit. c.
6. Vtina^ sola risu, ac non etia^ imitatione digna viderentur. Augu^. De Civ.
Dei. l. 2. c. 9.
those real lively representations of the acts of venery, which attend and set
out Stage Plays; must needs acknowledge; that they are the very See here, p.
67.68.
School^s of bauder^; the Tutors, the occasions of real whoredoms, incests,
adulteries, etc. whence they Theatru^ proprie sacrariu^ Veneris est. Itaque
Pompe^us magnus solo Theatro minor, cu^ illum arce^ omniu^ turpitudinu^
extruxisset, veritus qua^doque memoriae suae censoriam animadversionem, Veneris
aedem superposuit, and ad dedicationem edicto populu^ vocans, no^ Theatru^, sed
veneris templu^ nuncupavit; c^i subijciemus, inquit, gradus spectaculoru^, Ita
damnatu^ and damnandu^ opus templi titulo praetexuit, and disciplina^
superstitione de lusit, sed Veneri and Libero convenit. Itaque Theatru^ Veneris
domus est. Ter^ul. De Spectas^ c. 10.
were at the first ^onsecrated to Venus (the Goddess of whoredom and
adultery) the very Roman Theater being styled, THE TEMPLE OF VENUS, as
Tertullian writes: Delubru^ turpi and flagitioso Veneris Daemoni dedicatum,
erat tanquam schola nequitiae ijs qui erant libidini dediti, quique nimia
licentia corpus labefactaveran^ suum, corruperantque Nam quidam molles and
effaeminati viri, non viri revera, pudore prorsus exuto instar mulieru^
turpissima contagione se ipsi inficientes, Daemonem placabant^ Scelerati
praeterea and nefarij mulieru^ congressus, clandestinae falsoru^ connubioru^
corrupte^ae, infanda and turpia facinora in ^o delubro, utpote in loco impuro
and faedo, admi^^a erant. Nec quisquam fuit, qui in haec scelera
animadverteret, propterea quod ex viris gravibus and honestis nemo illuc
audebat accedere. Eusebius, De Vita Constantini lib. 3. cap. 53. See He^^d^^i.
Cli^. sect. 36. Strab^. Geogr. lib. 8. page 750. Athen^us Dipnos. lib. 13. cap.
9. Munst^^. Cosm^gr. lib. 4. cap. 39.
in which whoredom and adultery were freely practiced without control.
Corporis sensus sua facile in animam effundunt. Picturas ergo quae oculos
praestringunt, and mente^ corrumpunt, and ad turpium voluptatum movent
incendia, nullo modo deinceps imprimi jubemus, etc. Council. Constantinop 6.
Can. 100. Surius. Tom. 2. p. 1053.
The 6. Council of Constantinople, Can. 100. the Sy^od^ of Augusta, Anno 1548.
cap. 28. together with Clemens Alexandrinus. Oration Adhort. ad Gentes. fol.
8.9. Gregory Nyssen, in his Vitae Moseos E^arratio. p. 503. Theodoret, Contra
Graecos Infideles. lib. 3. De Angelis Deque Dijs, ac Daemonibus malis. Tom. 2.
page 362.363. Mapheus Vegius, De Liberorum Educatione. lib. 1. cap. 15. with
sundry modern Divines in their Expositions on the 7. Commandment; condemn
all amorous wanton pictures, of Courtesans, and others, (which now are too to
common) as incendiaries to men's unruly lusts, which draw them on to actual
lewdness. Certainly, if these livelesse pictures See Suetonij Tiberius. sect.
43.
are so apt to ingenerate unchaste affections, or to prick men o^ to whoredom
and ad^ltery: much more will these amorous actions, complements, kisses, and
embracements; these lively pictures, these real representations of adultery
and uncleanesse in our Stage Plays, do it. It is storied of Suetonij
Tiberius. sect. 43. See 44.45.
Tiberius, (a monster of more then beastly obscenity,) that as he adorned his
houses with lascivi^us pictures, the better to excite his l^sts; (a practice
much in use with many incontinent persons now of late;) so he O nullo s^elus
credibile in aevo, quodque posteritas neget. S^necae. Thyestes. Act. 4 fol. 45.
caused others to defile one another before his face; ut adspectu deficientes
libidines excitaret; that by this lewd beastly sight he might stir up his
own decayed lusts. The like I find recorded of Aiunt Temirem libidine
reliquos mortales long supera^se. Nam ^dolescentes in conspectu suo mulieres
constuptare jubeba^, sic provocans naturam, ut and ipsa deinde coire pos^et^
^a^^i^ C^al^^^^dyl^. De Rebus Turcicis. lib. 3 fol. 84. B.
Tamerlan the great Scythian Warrier. It is registered likewise of that
man-monster, Mimicis adulteris ea quae solent simulato fieri, effici ad verum
jussit. AElij Lampridij Heliogabalus. page 202. Nefas quod non ulla tellus
barbara commisitunquam, non vagus campis Geta, nec inhospitalis. Taurus aut
sparsus Scythes. Senec^ Hippolytus. Act. 1. fol. 70.
Heliogabalus; that he commanded Stage Players to commit those adulteries upon
the Stage in truth, which they formerly personated but in show; to quicken up
his lusts to whoredom. If then the very beholding of lewd adulterous acts,
were the only incentives these prodigious Whore-masters used to enrage their
wearied, spent, allayed lusts; and to enable them to the actual committing of
these beastly sins; we cannot but from hence conclude; that the personating
of incests, rapes, adulteries, whoredoms, and the like upon the Stage, set out
with all the art that either bawdery, or lechery have as yet achieved. should
Oblectantur simulachris libidinum, ut in ipsis deposita verecundia audaciores
siant ad crimina. Cyprian, De Spectaculi^. lib.
much more instigate if not precipitate men to the selfsame wickednesses, to
which their own depraved natures are too prone.

Thirdly, my Minors truth is fully evident, by the qualities of the Penners,
the Actors, the Spectators of these Stage Plays; who have for the most part,
been notoriously unchaste in all ages: Such were the Play-po^ts, such the
Actors, the Stage-haunters, in See D^ (...) Amandi. li^. 1.
Ovids, D^pnosoph. l. 1^. c. 2^, 27.
Athenaeus, T^citus Annalium. l. 4. c. 3. Dion Cassius Romanae Historiae. lib.
57. Suetonij Tibe^ius. Alexand. ab Alexandro. l. 3. c. 9. See Act 4. Scene 1.2.
accordingly.
Tiberius, Clemen^ Alexandrinus, Tertullians, Cyprians, Lactantius, Basils,
Nazienzens, Hieroms, Augustin^s, Chrysostomes, Salvians, Isiodores, Damascens,
Bernards, Aquinas, Fabricius, Petrarkes, Polydor Virgils, Agrippaes, Gualt^ers
days, and other times, as their fore-quoted testimonies, with sundry others in
the Sea Act 4. Scene 1.2. and Act 6. Scene 3. thorowout accordingly.
precedent Acts abundantly testify. Such were they not long since among us, as
Master Treatise against vain Plays and Enterludes.
Northbrooke, School of Abuses; and Plays Confuted.
Gosson, Exposition on the 7. Commandment.
BB. Babington, Anatomy of Abuses. page 101. to 107.
Master Stubs, with See their places quoted in the precedent Scene.
others of our own domestique modern Authors write; and such are they still.
What our common Play-poets and Actors chastity and demeanor is; what mod^st
Credis aliquis est ex me pius? Senecae Thebais. Act 1. fol. 54.
mortified persons they are, is so well known to all who are acquainted with
their persons or Plays, that I need not defile my paper to proclaim it. What
the most of our assiduous Play-haunters are; how chaste their lives, their
carriages, are, Qualem quisque conscientiam tulerit, talem and judicem habebit.
Isiodor. Hisp. Sententiarum. lib. 3. cap. 30.
their own consciences can best in^orme themselves; experience and Famae rerum
standum est, ubi certam derogat vetustas fidem. Livy Histori^^ lib. 7. page 258.
public fame best testify unto others: Sure I am, there is little chastity or
modesty in their clothes and gestures, Oration vultus animi est. Talis homini
est oration qualis vita. Seneca. Epist. 114.115.
less in their speeches, least in their lives, if public fame or common
experience prove but true. It is too well known to diverse Stage-customers; See
the third Blast of Retreit from Stage Plays. Master Gosson, his School of
Abuses: and here Act 4. Scene 2. accordingly.
that the most notorious Panders, Bawdes, and Strumpets, (the Len^ pernici^s
communis adolescentulum Terentij Adelphi. Act 2 Scene 1. p. 129 Vitae se
tradidit qui lenones, tanqua^ leones vitavit. Cicero ad Herennium. lib. 4.
sect. 30.
^a^e of many a Yongsters body, soul, estate, credit:) the most branded
Adulteresses, Adulterers, Whore-masters, Brothel-house-haunters, and the like,
are the chiefest Admirers, Patrons, Spectators, Supporters of; the most
beneficial Customers and Contributors to our Stage Plays. It is storied of
Alij Lampridij H^liogabalus. p. ^02. See Eutropius, and Zonaras, in vita
Heliogab.
Heliogabalus, that when he erected a public Stews, he sent to the Cirqu^s
and Theaters (the common Isiodor. Hisp. Originu^. l. 18. c. 4^. See 1. k and l.
Marts or Receptacles in those days for whores) to stock and furnish i^.
Certainly, if such a common Brothell or Nunnery of adulterous lecherous
persons were now to be erected, (which God forbid:) the best Storehouse to
furnish it, were our Play Houses, where such See Iustiniani Novella 98. and
105. and Codex. Theodosij lib. 15. cap. 7. Huc intrant faciles emi puellae.
Statius Sylvarum. l. 1. and Bulengerus De Theatro l. 1. c. 50. p. 296.297.
Transacta fabula, argent^ si quis dederit, ut ego suspicor, ultro ibit nuptu^,
non manebit auspices. Plautus Cassinae Prolugus. page 168. Scortum exoletum ne
quis in proscenio sede^t, etc. Plauti Paenul^s Prolog p. 501. Theatra
congregant and meretricu^ choros istic inducentes and pueros pathicos, etc.
Chrysostom Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 356.
lewd creatures harbor, and have most resort, as Justinian, Chrysostom,
Statius, Plautus, and Bulengerus witness^. Since therefore Play-poets, Actors,
Stage-haunters, are See Act 4. Scene 1.2. accordingly.
thus generally adulterous and unchaste; yea commonly more excessive in these
sins then others: Since Adulterers, Whore-masters, Whores, etc. are the
greatest Patriots, applauders, frequenters, upholders of these lascivious
Stage Plays; needs must they pamper and promote their filthy sins and lusts;
if not Scilicet ex illo solemnia more Theatra. Nunc quoque formosis insidiosa
manent. Ovid, De Art Amandi. l. ^ p. 161.162.
engender adultery, and lewdness in their hearts: since such creatures live
not, delight not, but in elements, in pleasure like themselves; Sed tu
praecipue curvis venare theatris; Haec loca sut votis faciliora tuis. Illic
invenies quod ames quod ludere possis. Quodque sem^l tangas, quodque tenere
velis. Ovid. Ibidem.
nor yet spread their n^ts, their bai^es, but in such filthy troubled streams,
where they are Ad multas lupa te^dit oves praedatur ut un un^ Et Iovis in
multas devolat ales aves. Se quoque det populo mulier formosa videnda^: Quem
trahat ^ multis forsitan unus erit. Omnibus illa locis maneat studiosa
placendi. Et curam tota mente decoris agat. Casus ubique valet: s^mper tibi
pendeathamus. Quo minime credis gurgite piscis crit. Ovid. De Art Amandi l. 3.
p. 203.
always sure for to catch their prey, which they seldom miss at
Stage Plays; where See M. Gosson Plays Confuted, Action 3. and the 3. Blast
of Retrait from Plays, accordingly.
many adulterous ma^ches, many Panderly Whorish Brothel-house bargains are
concluded: the common rode from the Playhouse, being either with an
adulteress to a Tavern; or with a Whore to a Bawdy House; where many young
Gallants, to Gods dishonor, and their Parents grief; do even spend their
Patrimonies, wast their bodies, damn their soules^ Math. 16.16.
being far more precious then the world it self. It Idem ver^ Theatrum, idem
and prostibutum, eo quod post ludos exactos meretrices ibi prosternantur.
Isiodor Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 41. H. Rabanus Maurus, De Vniverso. l. 20. c.
36. Vincentius Speculum Doctrinale. l. 11 c. 94. Tertullian De Spectac. c. 10.
Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in Matthew. Tom. 2 Col. 59. B C. and Hom. 8. De Paenit. Tom. 5.
Col. 750^751. Alexand^r Fabritius Destruct. V^tior^ part 4. c. 23. Anselmus and
Haymo. Enar. in Ephesians. 5. v. 3 Bule^gerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50 p. 296.297.
Codex Th^odosij. l. 15. Tit. 5.7.
was the use of ancient times among the Gre^kes and Romans, after their Plays
were ended, for whores to prostitute themselves to the lusts of others, either
on, or under the Theaters where their Plays were acted; the same place being
both a Playhouse, and a Stews: Isiodor. Hisp. Originu^ l. 18. c. 42.
Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50. p. 296.297. Primasius in Romans c. 10. f. 53.
Remigius Explanatio in Gal. 5.19. Haymo and Anselme, in Ephesians. c. 5. v. 3.
accordingly.
whence both the Brothel-house and ^h^ word Fornication, derive their etimology
and original from the Playhouse, where Whores Isiodor. Hisp. Orig. l. 18. c.
42. Iustiniani. Novella 98. and 105. AElij Lampridij Heliogabalus. p. 202.
B^lengerus, De Theatro. l. c. 1.50. p. 296^297, 298. Codex Theodosij. l. 15.
Tit. 5.7.
were harbored and trained up at first, till they were confined to the Stews.
How far this usage yet continues I cannot positively determine; yet this I
have heard by good intelligence; that our common Strumpets and Adulteresses
after our Stage Plays ended, See the 3. Blast of Retrait from Stage Plays,
and BB. Babingions Exposition on the 7. Commandment, accordingly.
are oft-times prostituted near our Play Houses, if not in them: that our
Theaters if they are not Bawdy-houses (as they may easily be, since many
Players, M. Gosson, in his School of Abuses, and Plays Confuted: and the 3.
Blast of Retrait from Plays, write thus. See Act 4. Scene 1.
if reports be true, are common Panders,) yet they are Cosin-germanes, at
Ejusmodi itaque patronos habet ars Lenonia, quique tueantur artem meretriciam,
cui in hu^c usque diem pro^ dolor in Christiana republica locus est, and in
Civitatibus publica Theatra, immunitates and stipendia concessa sunt, etc.
Agrippa, De Vanitate Sci^nt. cap. 64.
leastwise neighbors to them: Witness the Cockpit, and Drury Lane:
Blackfriars Playhouse, and Duke-humfries; the Red-bull, and Turnballstreet:
the Globe, and Bank-side Brothel-houses, with others of this nature: Such is
the virtue of our Plays, our Play Houses, not See Tertul. De Spectac. c. 10.
Isiodor Hisp Originu^. l. 18. c. 42. Lampridij Heliogabalus. page 202. Agrippa
De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 63. and 64 accordingly.
only to instruct, and make, but likewise to draw Panders, Bawdes, Whores, and
Whore-masters to them, supplying them both with Castos se quitur mala
paupertas; vitioque potens regnat adulter. Seneca Hyppolitus. Act. 3. Chorus.
fol. 87.
custom and revenue, as lamentable experience too evidently informs us.
Therefore we need not doubt my Minors truth.

Fourthly, if there be any yet uncredulous of this verity, that memorable act
of Pub. Sempronius Sophus, conjugem repudij nota affecit, nihil aliud quam quod
se ignorante ludos ausam spectare. Ergo dum sic olim faeminis occurritur, men's
earum a delictis aberat. Valerius Maximus. lib. 6. cap. 3. sect. 12. page 237.
Alexander ab Alexandro. Gen Di^rum. lib. 3 cap. 7. Caelius Rhodig. Antiqu.
Lect. lib. 28. cap. 16.
P. Sempronius Sophus, a worthy Roman; who gave his wife a Bill of Divorce, for
no other cause at all, but that she frequented Stage Plays without his
privity, the very sight of which might make her an adulteress and cause her to
defile his bed: which Divorce of his the whole Roman Senate did approve,
(though it were the very first that happened in the Roman State,) as being a
means to keep women chaste: Together with the Constitution of Justinian,
grounded upon this precedent example: Vir dimittere uxorem potest si praeter
voluntatem suam Circenses and Theatricas voluptates captat, ubi scenicae
voluptates sunt, aut ubi ferae cu^ hominibus pugnant. Iustiniani Novelo. 22.
and Novella 117. Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 50. page 297.
That a man may lawfully put away his wife if she resort to Cirques, to Play
houses, or Stage Plays without his privity and consent, because she cannot be
temperate or chaste at home, who desires to be incontinent, unchaste, and to
take pleasure in Play Houses abroad: will put this out of question. For if it be
lawful for a man to put away his wife for resorting unto Stage Plays; because
it is a ready way to make her an adulteress, if not a probable Argument that
she is such a one already, since she dares resort to such lewd suspicious
places: (which I would those who have Play-haunting Wives or Daughters would
consider:) then Stage Plays are doubtless an apparent cause of actual
adultery, and such like filthy sins. But if any man be yet unsatisfied with
these evidences, let him reflect on all the several Fathers, Councels, Authors
in the former Scene, and withal cast his eyes upon some pregna^t witnesses
which I shall here produce; and then he cannot but subscribe unto it even with
full consent. To pass by S. Cyprians testimony, who informs us; Theatra sunt
faediora quo convenis; verecundia illic omnis exuitur, simul cum amictu vestis
honor corporis ac pudor ponitur, denotanda ac contrectanda virginitas
revelatur. Sic ergo Ecclesia frequenter virgins suas plangit, sic ad infames
carum and destandas fabulas ingemiscet: sic flos virginum extinguitur, honor
continentiae ac pudor ponitur, gloria omnis ac dignitas profanatur: sic se
expugnatus inimicus per arts suas inserit, ^ic insidijs per occulta
fallentibus Diabolus obrepit: sic dum ornari cultius, dum libentius evagari
virgins volunt, virgins esse desinunt, furtivo dedecore corruptae, viduae
antequam nuptae, non mariti sed Christi adulterae. Cyprian, De Habitu Virginum
lib. page 242.
that many Virgins by frequenting Play Houses, did blast the flower of their
virginity, make shipwreck of their chastity, and degenerate into common
Strumpets, being Widows before they were Wives, and Mothers before they had
Husbands; whose miserable falls the Church did much lament. An experimental
evidence of this most known truth. My first witness to testify these
adulterous lewd effects of Stage Plays, is Saint Chrysostom, who is
exceeding copious in this Theme: his words and elegant passages against
Plays, (which being dismembered into fractions will lose much of their
elegance, vigor, and persuasive power,) I shall here faithfully transcribe at
large, as being very pertinent to this particular Scene and purpose, though
most pregnant against Stage Plays in the gross, to which we will here apply
them likewise. In his Tom. 1. Operum Parisijs. 1588. Col. 510.511, 512.
3. Homily of David and Saul; the Title of which runs thus. Periculosum esse
adire spectacula, quodque ears adulteros perfectos facit, and hinc socordia,
bellumque nascatur, etc.
That it is dangerous to go to Stage Plays, and that it makes men complete
adulterers, etc. he writes thus of Stage Plays. I verily believe that many of
those who left us yesterday, and departed to the Spectacles of iniquity, are
this day present. I could wish I might apparently know who they are, that so I
might Play-haunters, and Stage Players were always excommunicated, and kept
from the Church, the Word, and Sacraments in the Primitive Church. Well were it
for us if this ancient Discipline were revived now.
excommunicate them the Church; not that they should always continue without,
but that being chastised, they might return again. For as much as Fathers
also oft-times turn their offending children out of doors, and remove them
from their table, not that they might be always exiled thence, but that being
meliorated by this chastisement, they may return again into their Fathers
house with due praise. The same truly do Pastors likewise whiles they
separate the scabbed sheep from the whole, that being eased of their wretched
disease, they may again return safely to the whole, rather then the sick
should fill the whole flock with that their disease. For these reasons we did
desire to know those men: but albeit we are not abl^ to discrie them with our
eyes, yet the Word, the Son of God will know them thoroughly, and their
consciences being checked, he will easily persuade them to return willingly of
their own accord; teaching them that he only is within the Church, who brings
a mind^ worthy this exercise: as on the contrary, he who living corrup^^^ i^ a
partaker of this congregation, although he stand here in pe^s^n, (...) yet cast
out, Play-haunters and wicked men are in truth excommunicated persons, and no
members, no branches of the Church, though they live within the Church.
and is more truly excluded, then those who are so shut out, that it is not
lawful for them to be pa^takers of the Sacrae mensae; so was it styled in S
Chrysostom^s time: not the holy Altar.
holy Table. For they being expelled according to Gods Laws, and continuing
without, are yet of good hope, if so be they will amend their faults. They are
cast out by the Church, that they may return again with a pure conscience.
But those who defile themselves, and being admonished not to enter in before
they shall have purged away the spot contracted by their ^^nnes, are afterward
ashamed to repent, and so make the wound of the^r mind, both sharper and
greater. For it is not so heinous a thing to offend, as after an offense to be
ashamed of the remedy, and not to obey the Ministers who enjoin such things.
But what so great wickedness is there here committed, say they, that men
should be driven from these holy limits? Yea what Irreverent receiving of the
Sacrament, a great, a dangerous sin.
offense can thou find greater then this? when as they have manifestly
defiled themselves with adultery, impudently, after the manner of mad Dogs,
they rush in to this holy Table. If so be you desire to know the kind of the
Adultery occasioned by seeing Stage Plays.
adultery, I will not rehearse my own words to you, but his who is to judge of
the whole life of man: that man says he, Mat. 5 28^
who shall look upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery in his
heart. Quod si mulier spont^ ac forte in foro obvia, and negle^ctius culta
s^penumero intu^ntem curiosius caepit ipso vultus ^spectu: isti qui non
simpl^cite^ neque fortuito, sed studio and tanto studio, ut ecclesiam quoque
contemnant, and hac gratia pergunt illu^, ac totum ibi desidentes diem, in
facies faeminaru^ illarum nobiscum defixos habent oculos, qua front poterint
dicere, quod ^as non viderint ad concupiscendum? ubi verba quoque accedunt
fracta lascivaque, ubi cantio^es meritriciae: ubi voces vehementer ad
voluptatem excitantes; ubi stibio picti oculi, ubi coloribus tinctae genae, ubi
totius corporis habitus fucorum impostura plenus est, aliaque insuper multa
lenocinia ad fallendos inescandosque homines intuentes instructa, etc. Ibidem.
If thon a woman met casually in the street, being but carelessly attyred, has
oft-times taken him who has more curiously beheld her with the very aspect of
her countenance: with what face can those, who not simply, nor casually, but
purposely, (yea with so great affection and desire, that they likewise forsake
the Church, and run to the Playhouse for this very end, and sit there an
whole day together idle, having their eyes fixed on the faces of those noble
women,) say, that they have not looked upon them to lust after them? where
effeminate and lascivious words are likewise added; where there are whorish
songs; where there are voices vehemently exciting unto pleasure, where are
painted eyes, where are colored cheeks; where the attire of the whole body,
is full of deceitful dies and painting, besides many other garnished
enticements to deceive and inescate the beholders: where is the idleness of
the Spectators, very great confusion, with the exhortation to lasciviousness,
arising from thence, both from those who were present at the Plays, as also
from those who afterward relate to others what things they have seen in
Stage Plays. To these are added the allurements of Flutes and Pipes, and such
like music enticing to deceit, effeminating the fortitude of the mind,
preparing the minds of those that ^it there with delight for the traps of
Harlots, and causing them to be more easily ensnared. E^enim si hic ubi Psalmi,
ubi divin^rum verborum enarratio, ubi Dei metus, multaque reverentia,
frequenter seu latro quispiam versutus clam obrepit concupiscentia; quomodo qui
desident in Theatro, qui nihil sani neque audiunt neque vident, qui undique
obsidionem patiuntur per aures, per oculos, possint illam superare
concupiscentiam? Rursum si non possunt, quomodo poterunt unquam ab adulterij
crimine absolvi? Tum qui non liberi sunt ab adulterij crimine, quomodo poterunt
absque paenitentia ad haec sacra vestibula accedere, hujusque praeclari
conventus esse participes, etc. Ibidem.
For if here were there are Psa^mes, where there is preaching of Gods Word,
where there is the fear of God, and much reverence, concupiscence does
oft-times creep in privily like a crafty thief; Note this well.
how can those who sit idle in the Playhouse; who neither see, nor hear any
goodness, whose ears and eyes are bese^ on every side, overcome this
concupiscence? Again, if they cannot overcome it, how can they ever be
absolved from the crime of adultery? Then how can those who are not yet free
from the sin of adultery, come to these sacred Temples without repentance,
and be partakers of this excellent Assembly? Wherefore I do earnestly exhort
and entreat them, that they would first cleanse themselves by confession,
repentanc^, and all other remedies, from the sin they have contr^cted from
Stage Plays, and so they may hear Gods Word. Neither do we here commit a
small sin, as any one may easily discern by examples. O that our Players and
Play-haunters would consider this discourse when they come unto the Sacrament,
or the Church.
For if a servant should put his servile apparel, that is fraught with filth
and many lice, into a cabinet where his Masters rich, his golden robes and
garments are laid up; I pray tell me, would thou easily ^ro^ke such a
contempt? But what if one should cast dung and d^rt into a golden vessel in
which precious ointments have been always usually kept; would thou not
cudgle him who committed this notorious villainy? O that our Players and
Play-haunters, and all who come irreverently to the Sacrament, would carry this
engraven in their minds.
And after all this shall we be so carefully sollicitous of our caskets, and
vessels, of our clothes and unguents, and yet estimate our souls more base
then any of these? Shall we there where the spirit is an oyn^ment powered out,
cast in the Devils pomps? Shall we there lay up the fables of Satan, or songs
that are full of whorish filthiness? Agedum, di^ mihi, quo animo ista feret
De^s? Atqui, non tantum est discrimen inter unguentum and caenum; inter vestes
heriles and serviles, quantum est inter spiritus gratiam, and istam perversam
actionem. Non metuis, non expavescis, dum oculis quibus illic lectum, qui est
in orchestra spectas, ubi detestandae adulterij fabulae p^raguntur, ijsdem hanc
sacram mensam intueris, ubi tremenda peraguntur mysteria? dum ijsdem auribus
audis, and scortum obscaene loquens, and Prophetam Apostolumque ad arcana
Scripturae introducentem? dum eodem cord and lethalia sumis venena, and hanc
hostiam sacram, ac tremendam, etc. Ibidem.
Go too, tell me with what mind can God endure this? D^ubtlesse there is not
so great a difference between ointment and dirt, between the Masters and the
Servants clothes, as there is between the grace of the Spirit, and this
perverse action. Do thou not fear, do thou not tremble, whiles thou
beholdest this holy Table where dreadful mysteries are administered, with the
selfsame eyes that thou did behold the bed on the Stage; where the
detestable fables of adultery are acted? whiles with the same ears thou
hear an adulterer speaking obscenely, and a Prophet and an Apostle leading
thee into the mysteries of the Scripture? whiles with the same heart thou
receivest deadly poison, and this holy and dreadful Sacrament? Are not these
Plays the subversion of life, the corruption, the destruction of marriages,
the cause of wars, of fightings, and brawles in houses? For when thou Lo^
here the adulterous cursed fruits of hearing Stage Plays.
shall return home from these Stage Plays more dissolute, effeminate and
wanton, being made an enemy of all chastity, the sight of thy wife will be
less pleasing to thee, let her be what she will. For being inflamed with that
concupiscence which thou have drunk in at Stage Plays, and being taken with
that new sight which has besotted thee, thou despisest thy sober modest wife,
who is contented with ordinary diet, and upbraidest her with innumerable
reproaches; not because thou find any thing blameworthy in her, but because
thou blushest to confess thy disease, because thou art ashamed to discover
that wound, with which thou have returned home maimed from Stage Plays: Thou
framest other excuses, seeking unjust occasions of displeasure, loathing all
those things that are to be done at home, gaping after that wicked and unclean
concupiscence from which thou have received an wound: and whiles thou carriest
in thine ears a ringing sound of a voice, and with these, the face, the
motion, briefly all those images of whorish lust, thou beholdest nothing of
that thou have at ^ome with pleasure. And what do I speak of a wife or
family, when as afterward, thou will be less willing to visit the very Church
it self, when as thou will hear a Sermon of chastity, and of modesty with
irkesomnesse? Neither are these things which are now spoken to thee, for
instruction, but for accusation; and they will bring thee by little and little
to despair; yea at last thou will suddenly sever thy self from the discipline
administered for the public good of all. Qua propter rogo vos omnes, ut and
ipsi pravas in spectaculis, co^memorationes, vitetis, and alios, ab his
deductos retrahatis. Quicquid enim illic geritur, non est oblectatio, sed
pernicies, sed paena, sed supplicium. Quid prodest illa temporaria voluptas,
du^ hinc perpetuus nascitur dolor, du^que nocte pariter ac die a concupiscentia
stimulatus, omnib^s molestus es and invisus? Excute igitur teipsum, reputans
qualis fias ab Ecclesia rediens, rursus qu^lis a spectaculis, atque hos dies
cum illis conferas: id si feceris nihil opus erit meo sermon: Satis enim
fuerit, hunc diem cu^ illo co^parasse ad ostendendu^ and quam magna sit hinc
utilitas, and quanta sit illinc noxa, etc. Ibidem.
Wherefore I entreat you all, that you would avoid the wicked commemorations in
Stage Plays your selves, and likewise draw back others from them, who have
been led unto them. Nota.
For whatever is there done, is not delight or recreation, but destruction,
but torment, but punishment. What good does this temporary pleasure do, whiles
everlasting torment issu^s from it, and whiles being pricked night and day with
concupiscence, thou art troublesome and hateful unto all? Wherefore rouse up
thy self, and consider what a one thou art made returning from the Church:
again, what a one thou art, coming from Stage Plays, and compare these days
with those: if thou will do thus, there will be no need of my speech. For it
will be sufficient to have compared this day with that, to show what great
profit comes from the one side, and how great hurt from ^he other. These things
I thought good to speak to your charity at this time, neither will I ever
cease to speak. For so we shall both admonish those who are obnoxious to this
disease; and we shall confirm those who are now whole: for this oration will
be profitable to both; to the one that they may desist; to the other, that they
may not fall into it. So in his Tom 1. Col. 821. C. D.
first Homily upon the 50. Psalm, he is very punctual to our purpose. David
(writes he) as he was walking upon the top of his Palace after dinner, saw a
woman washing her self, and the woman was very fair and beautiful to look
upon. Vidit inqua^, atque oculo vulneratus est a^ telum excepit. Audia^t
curiosi^, qui alienas ^ormas contemplantur. Audiant qui insano spectaculorum
studio tenentur. Qui dicunt; Spectamu^ quidem; sed sine detrimento. Quid audio?
David laesus est; and tu non laederis? Ille laesus est; and ego tuae virtuti^
confidere quaeam? Is qui tantam Spiritus gratiam habebat spiculum excepit, and
tu sauciari te negas? Ibidem.
He saw her, I say, and he is wounded in his eye, and receives a dart. Let
curious persons hear this who contemplate the beauty of others. Let those
hear this, who are possessed with the unruly delight or desire of
Stage Plays. Who say: we do in truth behold them; but without detriment. What
hear I? David is hurt? and art not thou hurt? He is wounded; and can I trust
to the strength? He who had so great a measure of the spirit received a dart;
and do thou deny that thou art pierced? Atqui ille scortam non vidit, sed
honestam and pudicam faeminam; idque non in Theatro, sed domi^tu vero in
Theatro cernis, ubi etiam locus ipse animam supplicij ream efficit: nec tantu^
cernis sed etiam audis improba verba, and meretricias atque obscaenas
cantiones, omnique ex part feritur men's ^ua: per aspectum nempe, ob ea quae
vides^ per aurem, ob ea quae audis: per obfactum, ob ea quae oderaris. Et cum
totpraecipitia sint, tot corruptelae, qui credere queam te a ferarum morsibus
immunem esse? Number tu saxum es? number ferru^? Homo es, communi naturae
imbecillitati obnoxious. Igne^ cernis, nec ureris? An hoc istud rationi
consentaneum est? Lucernam in faenum pone; ac tum aude negare, quod faenum
exuratur. Quod porro faenum est, hoc etiam natura nostra est. Ibidem.
And yet he beheld not an harlot, but an honest, chaste woman; and that not in
the Theater, but at home: but thou beholdest an harlot in the Playhouse, where
even the very place it self, makes the soul liable to punishment: neither
do thou only see, but thou likewise hear dishonest words, and
meritricious obscene songs, and thy mind is wounded on every side: to wit, by
the sight, with those things which thou see; by the ear, with those things
which thou hear: by the smell, with those things which thou sm^llest. And
when as there are so many precipices, so many corruptions, how can I believe
thee to be free from the biting^ of wild beasts? Art thou a stone? art thou
iron? Thou art a man subject to the common fra^lty of nature. Do thou behold
the fire, and yet art not burned? Whether is this agreeable to reason? Put a
candle into straw, and then dare thou to deny that the straw will be burnt.
That verily which stubble is, even that is our nature. Let our Play-haunters
then consider this, and give this godly Father an answer to these his pithy
interrogations. The like passage we find in Tom. 2. Col. 144. A. Audiant ista
qui saepius ad Theatrum festinant, seque ibi pene quotidie adulterij
obscaenitate co^maculant, etc
this 17. Homely upon the 5. of Matthew: upon these words, If thy right eye
offend thee pluck it out, etc. Let those (writes he) hear these words who so
often hasten to the Theater, and do there almost daily defile themselves with
the filthiness of adultery. For if the Law command even him who is bound unto
thee by familiarity, if he scandalize thee, to be cut off and cast away; with
what satisfaction now at last can they be defended, who by their conversation
and stay at Play Houses, do daily get the acquaintance of those lewd ones who
were not formerly known to them; and also administer a thousand occasions of
destruction to themselves. Tom. 1. Col. 1030.1031.
Again, in his Homily upon the 118. alias the 119. Psalm. verse. 151.152. he
writes thus. Let none account his life vile, let none cleave fast to vanity.
Math. 6^24.
We cannot serve two Masters; he serves two masters, who goes to Church one
day, and to Stage Plays another day. Such a one has two coats; he is far
from that Coat which cannot be divided, far from the Wedding garment; because,
that is a Wedding garment which has no spot. For he who goes one day to the
Church, another day to Plays, wears a defiled garment. Every Servant standing
with a blemish at his Masters Table, is cast out, and chastised with stripes:
keep your garment pure as you received it in baptism. Let no man defile i^
with his manners, let no man rend so beautiful a vestment with the wickedness
of his heart. You have received such a Garment in baptism as the Angels had
who attended the Lord in his Sepulcher, whose ra^ment was as white as snow; And
you have received such a gift of grace^ keep that you have received. He that
defiles this garment, O that our Actors and Play-haunters would follow this
advice.
let him wash it with tears, let him separate himself from the wicked, let
him confess his sins to God, and having reformed his life, let him not
return as a Dog to his vomit. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
What fellowship has light with darkness, or what part has he that believes
with an Infidel. You who are the Sons of the Church ought not to be depraved
in the vanities of Stage Plays. The O that our Church would say, would do
thus too.
Church will not endure you stink, she cannot be defiled with your entrance;
she mou^nes and sighs to God because she sees her Sons to be such. Psalm.
2.11, 12.
Tremble every day, lest God wax angry, and so you perish from the right way.
Acknowledge the very signs of his displeasure, because the Heaven is made
Brass, and the Earth Iron; The very Elements proclaim the wrath of God. Psalm.
4.2.
O ye Sons of Men how long will you be slow of heart? why do you love
vanity in Stage Plays, and seek after leasing in Stage Players? Know ye that
the Lord has made admirable the soul of all such who depart not out of the
Church. The soul is heard when she cries unto God, whiles she departs not from
God. Be not ye lukewarm lest ye be spued out of the heart of God. He himself
has spoken by his Prophet: Rev. 3.15, 16.
Because thou art neither cold, nor hot, and I would thou were either cold or
hot; but because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my
mouth. We perform our duty who speak true things of the truth. You if you
have entered into the Physicians house, that you might cure your wounds, lament
your wounds. The medicines being laid on, let the corruptions be purged out;
let h^alth increase, that so the Church seeing your ^mendment, may rejoice o^
her Sons; because where sin has abounded, grace has superabounded. In his
Tom. 1. Col. 1111. B.C.
Homily upon the 140. Psalm; (an excellent disswasive from ill company who
keep men from repentance, and harden them in their sins) he has this
passage. Multi capti sunt a fornicatione, and ignem voluptatis accenderunt, du^
secuti sunt convivia, and Theatra habentia multu^ iniquitatis. Ibidem.
Many are captivated of fornication, and have kindled a fire of lust, whiles
they have followed feasts, and Theaters, having much iniquity in them: A
pregnant evidence for our present purpose. In his Tom. 1. Col. 1281. B.C.D. and
1283. C.D. 1284. A.B.
first Homily on Esaias 6.1. I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne high and
lifted up, etc. he descants thus of Play-haunters, and the fruits of
Stage Plays, which I would our Players, and Play-frequenters would consider.
There are among those here present, whom I think are not unknown to your
charity, who contemning God, and accounting the oracles of the Spirit as vulgar
and profane, utter confused word, and carry themselves no better then mad men,
keeping a stir, and turning about with their whole body, demeaning themselves
so, as misbeseemes a Spiritual meeting. O miserable and unhappy wretch! Thou
ought to sing the Angelical glorification or Hymn with trembling and
reverence, and to confess to the Creator with fear, and by this to crave
pardon of thy sins. Tu vero mimorum and saltatorum mores huc inducis, etc
But thou (here comes the fruit of Stage Plays in,) bring in hither the
manners of Players and Dancers; whiles thus evidently throwest about thine
hands, skippests about with thy feet, and whirlests about with thy whole body.
And how comes it to pass that thou fear, that thou tremblest not whiles
thou dare do thus, against such sacred oracles? O that men would consider
this when they enter into the Church, or come unto the Word or Sacraments.
Do not thou think that the Lord himself is here invisibly present, who
measures every ones motion, and takes an account of his conscience? Do thou
not think that, the Angels stand round about his dreadful Table, and compass
it about with r^verence? Verum tu ista non cogitas, quoniam ea quae in Theatris
audiuntur, quaeque spectantur mentemtuam obscurarunt, and ideo quae illic
geruntur in Ecclesiae ritus inducis, etc. Ibidem.
But thou think not of these things. and why? pray mark it: because those
things which thou have heard and seen at Stage Plays have clouded thy mind:
and therefore those things which are done there, thou bring in among the
rites of the Church; therefore thou do utter thy incomposed mind in
insignificant clamors. How then will thou ask pardon for thy sins? how will thou receive the Lord into thy house, when as thou prayest to him so
contemptuously? Thou say, God have mercy upon me; and yet thou declarest
such manners as are contrary to mercy. Thou cryest, save me; and yet expressest
such a gesture, as is a stranger to salvation. Why do thou stretch out thine
hands to pray, which are always tossed up on high, which are wheeled up and
down unseemely, and make a confused noise with their veh^ment clapping and
beating? Are not these things verily, partly the practices of common Bawdes and
Strumpets; partly the examples of those who cry out aloud in Play Houses? How
then do thou dare to mix the sports of Devils, with the Hymns of Angels
praising God? Yea why do thou not fear this speech which there thou
utterest, saying^ Psalm. 2.11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling. Is this to
serve with fear, to be so loud and clamorous, that thou thy self know not
what thou speak with the confused bellowing of thy voice? This verily savors
of contempt, not of fear: of arrogance, not of modesty: this is rather a part
of such who are playing then confessing, etc. The Prophet says, Psalm. 66.1.
Rejoice in the Lord all the earth; make a joyful noise unto God all ye
lands. Neither do we prohibit the voice of praise; but the voice of absurdity,
and confusion, the vain and rash lifting up of the hands into the air, the
tinckling of the feet, unseemely and effeminate songs, which are the proper
sports of those who sit idle in Play Houses, The fruits of Stage Plays.
From thence these pernicious ensamples are brought in among us; from thence
are irreligious and vulgar voices, from thence the absurdity of the hands,
contentious combats, disorderly manners. Nota been.
For nothing does bring the oracles of God into so great contempt, as the
admiration of those Stage Plays and Spectacles which are there proposed. Those
therefore who resort to Stage Plays, are unfit to come to any of Gods holy
ordinances.
Wherefore I have often exhorted you, that not one of those who come hither, and
enjoy the divine doctrine, and are likewise partakers of the dreadful and
mystical Sacrament, should go unto these Stage Plays, nor yet entermixt
these divine mysteries with demoniacall. Notwithstanding some have grown so
mad, that even then when they carry about a show of Religion, and are grown
very white with extreme old age, they run to them notwithstanding, neither
regarding our words, nor respecting their own outward show. But as often as we
inculcate this speech unto them, and exhort them to respect their old age and
religion, how great then is their coldness? how ridiculous their speech? They
say, that these things are an example of the victory and crowns which shall be
in the world to come, and This is the pretense of Play-haunters now. But mark
what answer this Father gives them here.
we reap much profit from thence. What say thou man? This is a rotten
speech, and full of deceit. From whence can thou reap any profit thence?
From innumerable contentions? from the rash oaths of evil speakers? Or from
the abuses, the revilings, the scoffs with which the Spectators besprincle one
another? But from these there is no good reaped; therefore thou altogether
reapest benefit from confused voices, insignificant clamors, as well from him
who is cast down upon the arena, as from those who cast him down, who offer
vio^ence, who are mad or foolish and dissemble before women. But here verily
all the Prophets and teachers do show the very Lord of Angels upon an high and
elevated Throne, and distribute to those who are worthy, rewards and crowns,
but to the unworthy they assign Hell: and even the Lord himself does ratify
this. Besides thou do verily contemn these things, in which there is
likewise terror of conscience, redargution of thy deeds, fear of punishments
and accusations, and inevitable torments. But yet that thou may find a
certain excuse of thy Stage Plays on which thou earnestly gazest, thou
say, thou reapost profit from them by whom thou suffer irrecoverable
loss. I entreat, and beseech again and again, that we excuse not our
excuses in sins: for these are but pretenses and deceites by which we procure
damage to our selves. In his Tom. 2. Col. 50.51, 52, 53.
6. Homily upon Matthew, he writes thus of laughter and Stage Plays. If thou
therefore power out such tears thou becommest a follower of thy Lord: for he
John 11.35.
wept when he raised up Lazarus, and Luke 19.41.
when he looked back upon Jerusalem that was to be sacked. He was likewise
Luke 22.48.
troubled with the treason and destruction of Judas. So verily thou may
oft-times find him weeping, but never laughing, no nor yet so much as slightly
rejoicing with a smile. Truly no Evangelist has made mention of any such
thing. That Acts 20.97. Phil. 3.18.
Paul likewise wept night and day for 3. years together, both others testify
of him, and he likewise of himself: but tha^ ^he ever laughed, neither does he
himself show any where nor any other for him. Yea not one of all the Saints
has ever signified any such thing either of himself or of any other. We read
of none Genesis 18.17. cap. 19.12, 13.
but Sarah only in the Scripture that laughed, (yea she is presently reproved
by the voice of God) and of the Genesis 9.21. to 27.
Son of Noah: but for that laughter, of a Freeman he was made a slave. And
this I speak not to take away laughter altogether, but that I might quite
extingush all dissoluteness of life. Our Christ therefore speaks many things
to us concerning mourning^ Luke 6.21, 2^.
both by blessing those that mourn, and by pronouncing those miserable that
laugh. For we do not come into a Playhouse, that is, where laughter may be
moved; neither do we therefore oft-times meet together, that we should
recreate our selves, with undecent cachinnations; but rather that we might
mourn, and by it inherit a Kingdom to come. For thou verily if thou stand
but in the presence of an earthly King, wilt not dare so much as to smile. But
yet when thou have the Lord of Angels himself present every where, thou
stand not before him with trembling and greatest reverence; but even when he
is angry thou laugh^st, neither do thou consider, that by this thou do more
offend him, then thou did displease him with thy sin. Neither does God so
much detest sinners, as those who are secure after their sins commit^ed. And
are not all our Play-haunters such?
And yet there are some so utterly insensible, and iron-like, that after all
these words they will say: verily I would to God that I might never chance to
weep, but God grant me, that I may rather always play and be merry. What, I
pray, can be found more childish then such a mind? For God never taught or
granted men to play; but the Devil. Hear therefore what Players have
heretofore suffered. Exodus 32.6. 1 Cor. 10.7.
The people, says he, sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Such
were there heretofore in Sodom: such likewise were there at the time of the
Flood: for the Lord says of them, Ezech. 16.49.
That they abounded with pride, with fullness of bread, and with riches. Those
likewise in the time of Noe, 1 Pet. 3.20.
When they saw the Arc building for so many years together, did shun all the
dolor of compunction, and did only civilly serve their flattering Math. 24.38,
39.
mirth, being nothing careful of things to come; and therefore the sudden
punishment of the Flood did drown them all, and there was made a common
shipwreck of the whole world. Wherefore crave not thou that from God which
thou receivest from the Devil. For it is Gods use to give an humbled,
trembling, broken, chaste, penitent, and wounded soul. These verily are the
gifts of God, because we likewise stand most in nee^ of such. For a great
combat hangs over our heads: and we must fight Ephesians. 6.11.
against invisible powers, against spiritual wickednesses; and against such
like Principalities, and Powers; and it is well with us, if giving all
diligence, and watching with all, we may be able to endure their fierce
assaults. But if we laugh and play, fostering with all perpetual idlene^se, we
shall be most easily overcome of our own idlen^sse also, even before the
fight. Wherefore it is not our parts to laugh continually, to let our selves
loose to cachinnations and derisions, to effeminate our selves with delight,
but rather of those men and women Actors who are beheld in Play Houses, who are
defiled in Brothel-houses; of Parasites and flatterers who are made for this
very purpose. This is not, I say, the part of those, who are called to an
eternal Kingdom, and are likewise registered in that celestial Kingdom: this
is not the part of those who carry spiritual armor, which verily is proper
only to the Soldiers of the Devil: The Devil then is the Author and Father
of Plays and Theaters; and dares then any child of God; any one who ^ither
hates or fears the Devil resort unto them?
For he it is who has digested jests and plays into an art, that by these he
might draw the Soldiers of Christ unto himself, and might weaken the nerves of
their virtue. Wherefore he has likewise erected Theaters in Cities, and has
prepared these incentives of laughter and filthy pleasure: and by their
pestilence, he rayseth up the like plague upon the whole City. Which things S.
Paul commands us to fl^e, exhorting, Ephesians. 5.3.
that we should put far from us all foolish speaking and surrility; then
which laughter is far more pernicious, and ^ar^e worse. For when those
Stage Players and ridiculous persons, have uttered any blasphemous and filthy
thing, then especially all the simpler sort are most excessive in their
laughter; applauding them most in that, for which verily they ought to have
cast stones at them, who kindle a furnace of dreadful fire upon their own
heads by this kind of pleasure. Let Play-haunters ponder and remember this.
For those who applaud the utterers of these things, persuade them for to act
them; and therefore for this they deserve rather to undergo the punishment
which is appointed for these things. For if there were no spectator, nor
maintainer of such things, there would certainly be none who would care to act
them. But when they see you to forsake your own callings, yea the very places
of your daily work, and the gain you reap from thence, and all things else,
for love of this vain spectacle, they are then carried to these things with a
more earnest intention, and bestow more study in them. And this I speak, not
to excuse their fault, but that you may learn, that you especially are the
spring and head of this iniquity, who spend the whole day in such ridiculous,
in such pernicious pleasures, proclaiming abroad the honest name of Wedlock,
and the reverend business in it. For he who personates these things does not
sin so much as thou who command them to be done. Neither do thou only
command and call for, but thou do likewise further the things that are acted,
by thy exultation, laughter, applause; and by all manner of means thou
maintainest this Diabolical Shop. Nota been.
With what eyes then can thou now behold thy wife, which thou have there
seen prostrated to so great injury in the person of another? How can thou
refrain from blushing, as often as thou remembrest thy wife, when thou shall
there see the same sex so filthily made common? Neither may thou reply unto
me now, that whatsoever is there done is but a fiction or fained argument, but
not the truth of things. Etenim simulatio ista plurimos adultetos fecit, and
mulcas domos subvertit, etc.
For this very ^eining (which comes home to our purpose) has made very many
adulterers, and overthrows many houses. And therefore it grieves me most,
that this so great an evil, is not believed to be an evi^^; but that which is
far the worst of all, both ^avour, and clamor, and applause, and laughter are
expressed, when so beastly adultery is committed to the public hurt. What then
say thou, is this only feining not a crime? Well therefore are these worthy
of a thousand deaths, because what all laws command men to shun, those things
are these not afraid to imitate. For if adultery it self be evil, doubtless
the imitation of it must be evil. Et nondum dico quantos adulteros faciant,
qui hujusmodi adulteria histrionica simulatione repraesentant; quemadmodu^
e^iam impudentes ho^um spectatores efficiant. Nihil quippe obscaenius illo
oculo, nihilque las^ivius qui spectare talia patienter potest, ne dicam
libenter, etc. Ibidem.
And I do not yet report how many and great adulterers they may make who
personate such adulteries in an histrionicall fiction, and how impudent
likewise they make their spectators. For there is nothing more filthy, nothing
more lascivious then that eye, that can patiently, that I say not willingly,
behold such things. Moreover what a thing is this, that when as thou will not
so much as look upon a naked woman in the street, yea nor yet at home, but if
such a thing fall out by accident thou think it done to iniure thee; that
yet when as thou go up to the Playhouse, that thou may violate the
chastity of both Sexes, and may likewise incestuously defile thine own eyes,
thou believe that no dishonest thing befalls thee? For thou can not say
thus, that she is an harlot that is thus uncovered; because it is nature it
self, and there is the same body of an whore, and of a free woman. For if thou
think that there is no obscenity in such a fight, for what cause when as
thou shall see the same thing in the street, do thou step back again from
thy intended walk, and most severely rebuke that immodesty? unless perchance
thou believe, the same thing not to be alike filthy when we are severed, and
when we sit all together. But this is merely derision and shame, and words
altogether of extreme folly; and it is better for one to besmeare his whole
face with clay and dirt, then with a spectacle of so great filthiness. For
dirt is not so noxious to the eyes, as that unchaste spectacle, and the sight
of a naked Harlot. Hear therefore what nakedness brought upon mankind even
from the beginning, and even by this means fear that filthiness. What then
has made men naked? Genesis 3.6, 7.
disobedience and the counsel of the Devil, so much has this always pleased
him from the beginning. But they verily when they were naked, were yet ashamed;
you repute the same thing worthy praise, according to that of the Apostle, Romans
1.32. Phil. 3.19.
glorying in your shame. Quonam ig^tur ^e pacto deinceps aspiciet uxor a tali
contumelia redeuntem? qu^madmodu^ suscipiet and alloquetur tam indigne naturae
muliebris conditionem sexumque faedantem, atque a tali spectaculo^ captivum
servumque redeuntem mu^ieris fornica^tis, etc?
After what manner therefore can thy wi^e from henceforth behold thee returning
from such a contumely? how can she entertain or speak to one so unworthily
defiling the condition and sex of woman's nature; yea and returning a captive, a
servant of an whorish woman from such a spectacle. If then you grieve when you
hear these things, I confess that I give you, and owe you the greatest
thanks. For who is he that does comfort me, but he who is made sorrowful by
me? Wherefor cease not to mourn for this licentiousness, and often to be
grieved for it. For this grie^e will be made unto you a beginning of conversion
unto better things. Wherefore I have more earnestly pressed my speech, that I
might free you by a more deep incision from their corruption by whom you are
intoxicated, and might revoke you to pure holiness of mind^: which verily,
together with the promised rewards of piety, we may all happen to enjoy by the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost be glory for ever and ever, Amen. In Tom. 2. Col. 59.60, 61.
his 7. Homely upon Matthew; he proceeds thus against Plays, and Play-haunters.
But what do I speak of the space of the long journey of the wise men to see
Christ, when And is it not so with many now who must be coached to the Church
be it never so near them?
as many women are now grown to such an height of effeminacy of mind, that
they cannot so much as come a very little distance from their houses to see the
Lord in a spiritual manger, unless they be carried upon Mules? But of those
also who verily can endure the pain of walking, some prefer the tumult of
worldly business, others Theatricall routs, or Playhouse meetings, before
holy Assemblies. Ver^ly these Barbarians before they had seen Christ, overcame
so great a journey for him; thou verily, no not after thou have seen him, do
like to imitate him. O that our Play-h^unters would but consider this! me
thinks it should even melt their hearts with shame and grief, and cause them
to renounce these Plays, to follow and embrace their blessed Savior.
For even when thou have seen him, thou so relinqu^shest him, that after him
thou runnest to Play Houses, and do rather desire both to hear and to see a
Stage Player, then him: And that I may touch the same things again that I
followed before, thou verily leavest Christ placed in a Spiritual Manger, but
thou hastest to see a Strumpet lying on the Stage. But of what punishments now
at last do we think this worthy? Answer I beseech you; if any one should
promise he would bring thee unto the King, and would show thee him glittering
on every side, and sitting amidest the several ornaments of h^s pomp and
state; do thou think thou should prefer a Stage Play, before this courtly
dignity, though thou expectedst no benefit to accrue unto thee by it? Verily
out of this Table there flows a fountain of spiritual good things, and this
thou presently leaving, runnest to the Theater, that thou may see a swimming
woman, and thou beholdest that sex exposed to the public view: I say, that
thou may see this, thou leavest Christ sitting by the fountain of heavenly
gifts. For even now he sits not only upon Ioh. 4.6, etc.
that one Samaritan Well, but speaks to the whole City. But perchance even
now he speaks only to the Samaritan woman: for even now no man stands by him;
save only that some perchance are present only with their bodies, but others
truly not so much as with their bodies. Notwithstanding be departs not, but
stays, and demands drink of us, not water, but holiness: For Christ
des^ributeth holy things to holy men. For he does not give us water out of this
Well, but living Blood, which albeit it be received to testify the Lords
death, yet to us it is made a cause of life. But thou leavest the fountain of
his blood, and this dreadful cup, and runnest hastily to that diabolical well
that thou may behold It seems by this, that the Grecian Actors, did now and
then to refresh and exhilerate their lascivious Spectators, bring a kind of
Cisterne upon the Stage, wherein naked Whores did swim, and bathe themselves
between their Acts and Scenes: which wicked, impudent, execrable pra^tice,
this holy Father does here sharply and excellently declaime against.
a swimming whore, and suffer a shipwreck of thy soul. For that water is a
certain vast sea of luxury, in which bodies are not drowned, but souls suffer
shipwreck. For she verily being naked sports her self with swimming in the
midest of the waters, but thou looking on her from an high scaffold art plunged
into the depths of lust. For these nets of the Devil, do not so much catch
those who descend into that water, and there roll themselves, as those who sit
above. For these are drowned far more cruelly, Exodus 14.
then that Pharaoh heretofore who was overwhelmed with his Chariots and
Horsemen. Now if were possible by any means for me to show unto you the souls
swimming upon these waters, tru^ly they would appear no otherwise, then those
Egyptian bodies that were tossed in those floods. But this verily ^s far more
dangerous, that this so great destruction they call pleasure, and this filthy
sea of perdition, they style the Euripus of delight; when as verily one may
more easily and safely pass over the AEgaean, and Tyrrhenian sea, then the
horrible dangers of this spectacle. For first of all the Devil does solicit
the hearts of such all night long with an over-anxious expectation, afterward
be represents that which has been so greedily, beheld, where with he does
presently bind and lead them captive. Neither may thou think thy self
free from sins, if thou do not couple with an harlot, when as thou do
commit all this with thy will. For if thou art possessed by this concupiscence,
thou art verily burned with a greater flame. Let this be well observed of the
best of Play-haunters^
But if by beholding these things thou suffrest nothing, notwithstanding, thou
art guilty, in being a scandal unto others; and by thy encouragement of such
pleasures thou thy self confoundest both thine own face, and with thy face
thy soul. But that we may not seem to deal only by way of reproof, we will
now propound the means of reformation. What then is this means of amendment?
I deliver you to your own wives to be instructed, when certainly you ought
rather according to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.3. cap. 14 35.
to be instructors of your wives. But because by sin the order is inverted,
and the body is made the superior, the head the inferior, let it not grieve you
to return to honest things by this way. But if thou art ashamed of the
tutorship of a woman; avoid sin, and thou may quickly ascend into the
chair of a Doctor, which is ordained for thee by God. But as long as thou
shall sin, the Scripture does send thee not only to an woman, but even to
irrational and the basest creatures. Neither does a creature endued with the
honor of reason blush to become a Scholar of the Be and the Ant: neither is
this the fault of the Scripture, but of those who have lost their own
nobleness. Therefore we also will have a care to do thus. And now verily we
assign thee to a woman to be taught: but if thou shall contemn her
admonitions, we will even send thee to the tutorship of unreasonable creatures.
For we will show thee, how many birds and fishes, yea how many kinds of beasts
and creeping things outstrip thee in honesty and chastity. But if thou art
ashamed to be compared to such creatures, return to the ensign of thy own
nobleness, and remembering that vast Sea of Hell, and fiery River, avoid this
pestiferous Fish Pond of the Playhouse. Note this well.
For this is it which does drown its Spectators in that fiery Sea, and which
does kindle the very bottom of that fire. For if he who without these
provocations sees a woman, is yet notwithstanding drawn sometimes to lust
after her, and commits adultery only by lusting; he who not only s^eth, but
likewise earnestly beholds a naked and lascivious women with his whole mind,
how is he not a thousand times made the captive of lust? That great Flood under
Noah did not so extinguish mankind, as these swimmers do altogether suffocate
all their spectators even with much disgrace. For that flood although it
brought in the death of bodies, yet it blotted out the vices of souls, But
this water does the contrary; it works the destruction of souls, the bodies
still continuing in life: Let the Romanists observe this, who claim the
selfsame superiority because of Peter's chair which they falsely challe^ge,
when ^s Peter was first, yea the first Bishop of Antioch.
You verily if that any contention about honor arises, contend with all
ambition, that you ought to have pre-eminence of the whole world; flattering
your selves with this privilege; Acts. 11.26. E^s^bius. Eccl. Him. l. 2. c. 4.
The Disciples were first called Christians at An^i^ch.
that this City did first give the name of Christians to the faithful: but
when you should contend about honesty and chastit^, are you not ashamed lest
you should be overcome of the very basest villages? Yes, say thou. But what
then do you command us to do? To go into desert Mountains, and to become
Monks? And what else do I lament, but that thou think an honest and pure
life belongs only to them? Verily Christ has given common precepts unto all
men. For where he says, Math. 5.28.
If any man look upon a woman to lust after her, he has already committed
adultery with her in his heart: it is not only spoken to a Monk, but likewise
to an Husband. For that Mountain in which Christ taught these things was then
filled almost only with such. Consider therefore that Theater, and avoid their
Diabolical Assemblies, and do not as it were blame my more troublesome
speech. For I prohibit not marriages, nor honest pleasure; but I would have it
to be done with honesty, not with obscenity or sin. I do not therefore bid
the go into Mountains and Deserts, but to be bountiful, and likewise honest
and modest, even while^ thou live in the midest of the City. The Apostle
tells us, 1 Cor. 7.29^30.31
The time is short, it remains therefore that those who have wives be as if
they had none; for the fashion of this world passes away. As if he should say,
I bid you not to dwell in the tops of Mountains, although I desire that
likewise, because Cities imitate the abominations committed in Sodom; but yet
I do by no means force you to it. Contiu^e having an house, wife, children,
only do not make them Spectators of incestuous pleasures, do not thou
introduce the plague of the Theater into thine house. Do thou not hear Paul
saying; 1 Cor. 7.4.
The man has not the power of his body but the woman? Therefore he has also
given common precepts to him. Thou verily if thy wife frequent the Church
becommest a most grievous accuser of her: but thou thy self spending the whole
day in Play Houses do not believe thy self to be worthy of accusation: but
when as thou art so vigilant over thy wiv^s chasty, that thou art not ashamed
to be excessive and immoderate, keeping her oft-times from necessary iourneyes,
yet thou think that all things are very lawful to thy self. But Paul does
not permit this to thee, who likewise gives the same power to the woman. 1
Co^. 7.3.
Let the man, says he, give unto the wife due benevolence. How then is thy
wise honored by thee who is vexed with such an undeserved injury, when as thou
do join thy body which is in her power, to harlots? For thy body is thy
wives. What honor I say do thou give unto her, when as thou bring in
tumults and contentions into thine own house, when as thou utterst such things
in the market place, that whiles thou relatest them at home, thou disgracest
thy wife that hears, and make thy daughter that is present to blush, and
besides others thy own self? For it were much better to keep silence, then
to utter such obscene things, which if thy servants should but speak of, it
were just for thee to cudgle them. Let our Play-haunters consider of this
Quaere.
Answer I pray, what satisfaction can thou give, who beholdest these things
with great delight which are not lawful to be named? and preferrest those
things which are dishonest for to name before all honest and holy Arts? Lest
therefore I should seem more troublesome, I will here end my speech: But if
you persevere in these things, I will launch with a sharper rasor, and make a
more deep incision; neither will I ever rest until I break in pieces that
Diabolical Theater, that the Assembly of the Chuch may be made clean and
pure: So shall we be freed from the present turpitude, and acquire life to come
by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and dominion
with the Father and the holy Ghost for ever and ever. Amen. In his Tom. 2. Col.
297.298, 299, 300.
38. Homily upon Matthew, upon these words; It shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of Judgment then for thee: he falls into this excllent
discourse against Stage Plays and their concomitances. The Sodomites though
they lived most wickedly, yet they sinned before the Law and Grace: but what
pardon are we worthy of, who commit such sins after so diligent a care both
of the Law and Grace? We shut ^ur gates, and stop our ears to the poor; what
say I to the poor, when as we do the same to the Apostles themselves? Yea
therefore to the poor, because we do it to the Apostles. For when as Paul is
read publicly and thou do not regard: when as John thunders and thou do
not hear; will thou hear a poor man who do not hear an Apostle? That our
houses therefore may be open to the poor, and our ears to the Apostles, all
filthiness is to be purged out of the ears of the mind. For as filth and
dirt are wont to stop the ears of the body; so whorish songs, the fables of
this world, the burden of Debtors, the accounts of Creditors and usury, are
wont to stop the ears of the mind more then any filth^ Or rather, they do
not only stop them, but also make them impure and filthy, For such speeches
d^e as it were cast dirt into our ears. That which that Barbarian did
threaten, saying; 2 King. ^8.27
You shall eat your own dung; even that do many now unto you, not in word
only, but in deed; yea verily even far worse and filthier: (For whorish songs
are much more abominable then dung.) And that which is worse to be endured, you
do not only not grieve when as you hear such things, but you likewise laugh
and rejoice. And when as you ought to avoid and abominate these things, you
entertain and applaud them. Therefore if these things be not abominable, do
thou thy self likewise descend upon the Stage, and imitate that thou praysest,
have society and commerce with those who move such laughter: but if thou will
not be coupled in that fellowship, why do thou give so great honor to it? The
very laws of the Gentiles make them to be Players infamous.
infamous: but thou together with the whole City being all called together,
runnest out to them as to Ambassadors, or Generals of the War; that thou
together with all the rest may put dung into thine ears: and thou who
beatest thy servant, if he utter any filthy thing in thy presence, who
permittest not thy Son to do it; who do not suffer these things to be done
at thine own house as being an undoubted filthiness; when as certain servile
abject persons who deserve the Whipping-post shall call thee to hear these
things, do not only not take it ill, but even reioycest, yea applaudest, and
give thanks. And what madness could ever be found greater then this?
Objection.
But say thou, I never spoke nor sung these obscene things, these incentives
of pleasure. Answer.
But what profit is it, if when thou do not utter them, yet thou hear them
willingly? Yea how w^lt thou make this evident that thou do not utter them,
when as thou do willingly hear^ them with laughter, and runnest to receive
them? Tell me I pray ^hee, when as thou hear Blasphemers^ do thou rejoice
and triumph, or rather, do thou tremble and stop thine ears? I doubt not but
thou tremblest; Wherefore? because thou never art wont to blaspeme. Wherefore
do so likewise in filthy speech, if thou will thoroughly persuade us, that thou
do not utter filthy words, then truly will we believe thee when as we shall
see thee not to hear them. For how do thou respect virtue, who art nourished
by hearing these things? how can thou undergo the difficult labors of
chastity, who aboundest with laughter, and art ensnared with a whorish song:
For if the soul which is far remote from these songs, does scarce retain
the honesty of chastity, how can he live chastely who lives in them? Are you
ignorant that we are more prone to vices? When therefore we run unto these
things with have and earnestness, how shall we avoid the furnace of eternal
fire? Have you not heard Paul saying: Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord. He has said, in the Lord, not in the Devil. How
therefore can thou hear Paul, when thou shall perceive that thou have
sinned, when as thou art always as it were made drank with these ridiculous
Spectacles? For that thou came hither now, I wonder not; yea verily I wonder
greatly. For thou came hither as it were simply and perfunctorily: but thou
rushe^ thither daily with all earnestness of mind, with speed, with alacrity:
which appears by this; because that most filthy sin, which by your ^ight and
hearing has been infused into your soul, you carry along with you from the
Theaters to your houses; yea verily you take it, and lay it up in your minds
and thoughts: and those things which are not worthy dete^tation thou
disdainest, but abominable things thou admirest and love. For many returning
from the office of burying, have presently gone into the bath; but those who
come from Mark this O Play haunters.
Play Houses have neither mourned, nor powered out fountains of tears. Yet
truly a carcass has no uncleanesse; but sin does so defile men, that no
fountains, no rivers, but only tears and confession can wash it away. But
there is no man who discernes how great the steines of sin are. For because
we fear not things that are to be feared, therefore we fear those things
which have no cause of fear^ in them. But what is this so great noys^ of
Theater men? what these Diabolical clamors? what this Satanicall apparel? One
being a young man has his hair combed backward, and effeminating nature in his
countenance, apparel, pace, and such like, strives to deduce it to the
similitude of a tender Virgin. Another on the other side being an old man,
having his hair and all modesty shaven off with a rasor, standing by girt, is
ready to speak and to act all things. They had in those days some few women
Actors: which in his 10. Homily upon Matthew, he styles Faminae Theatrales:
Theatricall women: In imitation of these some French-wome^, or Monsters rather
on Michaelmas Term 1629. attempted to act a French Play, at the Playhouse in
Blackfriars: an impudent, shameful, unwomanish, graceless, if not more then
whorish attempt.
Women also with a naked and uncovered head speak to the people without shame,
and usurp impudency to themselves with so great premeditation, and infuse so
great lasciviousness into the minds of the Hearers and Spectators, that all
may seem even with one consent to extirpate all modesty out of their minds,
to disgrace the female nature, and to satiate their lusts wi^h pernicious
pleasure. For all things that are done there are absolutely most obscene, the
words, the apparel, the ^onsure, the pace, the speeches, the songs, the
ditties, the turnings and glances of the eyes, the pipes, the flutes, and the
very argument of the Plays, all things (I say) are full of filthy wantonness.
Say therefore, when will thou withdraw thy self from so great an unclean
desire of fornication which the Devil has infused into thee, and repent.
Those therefore that would have their wives, their daughters, their husbands,
their children chaste, let them keep them from the Playhouse.
For we are not ignorant how many whoredoms are there committed, how many
marriages are there defiled with adulteries; how many men are there most
unnaturally abused; how many young men are there strangely effeminated; all
things there are full of the highest iniquity, all full of prodigies, all full
of impudency. For which things we ought not to sit laughing excessively, but
rather to mourn and grieve even with tears. What therefore will you, may
thou say; shall we shut up all the Playhouse doors, and obeying thee,
overturne all things? Lo here the lewd, the pernicious effects and fruits of
Stage Plays.
What have thou said, shall we overturne? Are not all things now overturned?
For whence do thou believe that the unchaste attempters of marriages proceed?
Come they not from these Play Houses? Whence are those who invade the marriage
beds of others? Are they not from the Stage? Is it not from hence that many men
become most troublesome to their wives, and that women are despised of their
husbands? Are not very many adulterers from hence? Therefore he seems to me to
overturne all things who runs to Play Houses, who brings in a most cruel
tyranny? Objection.
Thou will say, no; to separate wives from their husbands, to ravish children,
to overturne houses: all these are the acts of Tyrants who have seized upon the
Castle, and oppress the City by force: but the things we do are So sa^ our
Players (...) Pl^y^(...) ^ut (...)
approved by the laws, and these Stage Plays have never giv^n occasion to
adulteries. Answer.
Yea verily, who is not already made an adulterer? For if I could call all by
name I would quickly show it thee. How many have harlots led away as captives
from thence? How many have they either withdrawn from their wives, or have not
at all permitted them to come to their lawful bed? Objection.
What therefore, Answer.
say thou, shall we overturne all the laws by which these things are
established. The best way therefore to suppress adultery, whoredom, sedition,
tumults, and all the mischiefs of the Common wealth, is to suppress
Play Houses and Stage Plays.
Yea verily, these Stage Plays being overturned, you shall overthrow, not the
laws, but iniquity, and you shall quite extinguish all the plagues and
mischiefs of the City. For from hence are seditions raised, from hence
tumults do arise. For those who are nourished with these Plays, (who sell
their voices for their bellies sake, who are most ready to speak, to do all
things, and spend all their pains and industry in this,) these are most of all
wont to inflame the people with rumors, and to raise tumults in Cities. For
the idle youth educated in these evils, is more cruel then the very fiercest
beast. Are not many evil doers made and confirmed by these Stage Plays? For
that they may instigate all the people to these things, that they may obtain
their dancing pleasures, that they may corrupt mod^st women mixed with
strumpets^ they come to such a height of wickedness, that they do not so much
as abstain from the bones of dead men. What shall I say, that many spend
infinite sums of money at these Diabolical societies? What shall I say of
lasciviousness? What of other evils? Let our Play-Patrons and Play-haunters
remember this. Objection. Answer.
Consider then that thou art he who do overthrow the whole life of man, when
as thou drawest others to these things; not I, who think, that all these
Plays are to be given over. Thou will say; shall we then pull down^ all the
Play Houses? Would to God they were now pulled down, albeit, that as far as
it appertaeines to us, they long since lie desolate. Notwithstanding I command
you to do none of these things; since the magnificence of the houses may
stand, and the Plays and Dancing altogether cease; which will be more praise
to you then if you should quite overturne all Take at least an example to your
selves from the Barbarians, who want the filthiness of all these Stage Plays.
O let all Christians who resort to Stage Plays remember this for fear Turks
and other Infidels who want, who utte^ly reject all Stage Plays should rise up
in judgment against them at the last.
What excuse then can you bring for your selves, if you who are now registered
in Heaven, you who are the companions and coheires of Angels and Archangels,
should be found far worse then the Barbarians in this thing? especially when
as thou may else where procure to thy self many better comfort. For when
thou will refresh thy mind, thou may go into Gardens, behold running
Rivers, contemplate great Lakes, look upon pleasant Places, hear singing
Grasshoppers, be conversant in the Temples of Martyrs; from whence thou shall
receive best health for thy body, and excellent profit may accrue unto thy
soul, from whence thou may reap singular pleasure, because no less, no
grief, no sorrow follows; thou have a wife, thou do not want children, thou
aboundest in friends, all which are wont sometimes to afford honest delight and
profit. For what is more sweet then children? What more pleasant then a chaste
wife to a moderate and chaste Husband? Verily the Barbarians themselves, when
as they had heard of these Stage Plays, and the unseasonable delight of
fables, are reported to have uttered words most worthy all the instructions of
Philosophy. For they said, that the Romans, as if they had wanted wives and
children, had devised such pleasures as these to themselves. In which words
they did show, that nothing could be more sweet, more pleasant to him who would
live honestly, then a modest wife and children? Objection.
But thou will say, I can show that these Plays h^ve done no hurt to many.
Answer.
Yes verily they do very great hurt in that thou spendest thy time idly and
to no purpose, and in that thou off^rest a scandal unto others. Let the best
of our Play-haunters who think they receive no hurt at all from Stage Plays,
remember this.
For although thou by a certain fortitude of a sublime mind have contracted
no evil from thence, yet because thou have made others who are weaker studious
of Stage plays by thy example, how have thou not contracted evil to thy
self, who have given occasion to others of committing evil? For those who are
there corrupted, as well men as women, will all transfer the crimes and cause
of their corruption upon thy head. For like as if there had not been
spectators, there had not been any to have acted; so because both are the
cause of the sins that are committed, they shall both suffer the fire.
Wherefore all be it by the modesty of thy mind thou have effected, that no
hurt should come unto thee thence, Nota.
which I do not think can be: yet because others have committed many sins
by reason of Plays, thou shall undergo grievous punishments for this; albeit
thou had been much more modest and temperate, if by no means thou had
gone thi^her. Let us not therefore contend unprofitably, nor devise vain
excuses, when as one excuse may suffice us, to fly far from this Babilonish
Stews, to keep far off from this Egyptian Harlot, and if need be, to escape
naked out of her hands: so shall we receive great pleasure, when as we are not
at all pricked with the stings of conscience. So shall we both live soberly in
this life, and obtain future good things, by the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ. In his 74. Homily on Matthew, he has this notable passage to our
purpose. Tom. 2. Col. 514.515.
Many come into the Church to behold more curiously the beauty of women, and
the fairness of young men: O that the Gallants of our times, who are deeply
guilty of this sinae, would but consider this Fathers words.
do thou not theresore wonder that Thunderbolts are not sent forth on every
side, and that all things are not utterly subverted? For these things are most
worthy, not only of Thunderbolts, but also of the punishment of Hell. But God
since he is long-suffring and merciful, does in the mean time keep in his
anger that he may lead thee to repentance. What do thou O man, thou more
diligently seek after the beauty of women in the Church, and do thou not
tremble abusing the Temple of God with so great an indignity? For in the market
place thou blushest, yea thou fear left any one should see thee following a
woman: but in the Church of God, when as God himself speaks unto thee, and
d^ters th^e from these things, thou most of all practisest ^ornication and
adultery in that very time, when as it is thundered out unto thee with a loud
voice, that th^^ should fly from these things, neither do thou tremble,
nor stand amazed. Verum haec ab impudicissimo Theatro didicistis, haec v^l illa
contag^osa p^stis docuit: virus istud p^stiferum, inevitabilis negligentium
laqueus, in^ontinentium voluptuosa p^rditio. Ibidem. Col. 515. A.
But these things thou have learned (I pray observe it well) from the most
unchaste Theater; that most contagious plague, (so styles he the Playhouse)
that pestiferous poison, that unevitable snare of idle careless persons, that
voluptuous perdition of incontinent people, has taught you these things. Such
is the accursed fruit of Stage Plays, not only to make the Playhouse, but
even the very Church of God a kind of Brothell, as he there more largely
proves. Tom. 2. Col. 487.488, 489.
In his 69 Homily upon Matthew: I find this notable discourse. When you are in
fear and troubles you call those ex animo happy, who live a single life in
Mountains and Caves; as I am not ignorant that those have so styled th^se
sometimes, who living in idlen^sse spend both day and night in Theaters and
Play Houses. For albeit these may seem to abound with a thousand pleasures,
albeit rivers of pleasure might be thought to be present with them, yet they
lie for the most part pierced through with many most bitter darts from thence.
For if any man shall be taken with the love of any Nota.
Woman-dancer, verily he shall undergo a torment harder then any Warfare, more
troublesome then any Pilgrimage, and he shall pas^e through more miserable days
then any besieged City, etc. Vbi nunc sunt, qui Diaboli choreis and perditis
cantibus dediti in scaena quotidie sedent? Pudet me certe verba de illis
facere, veruntamen ne^esse mihi ^st propter infirmitatem vestram, etc. Ibid.
Where now are those who sit daily in the Playhouse addicted to the Dances of
the Devil, and to pernicious Songs? Verily I am altogether ashamed to speak
of them, but yet I must needs do it by reason of your infirmity. For even Paul
himself says, Romans 6.
As you have heretofore given up your members to serve uncleanesse, even so now
give up your members as servants of righteousness unto holiness. Wherefore we
will now also make diligent search into the lives of These and no other are the
most constant Play-haunters.
Harlots and corrupt young Men who sit together in the Playhouse, and we will
compare them with the life of these blessed ones, as far as it concerns a
pleasant life. Iucunde namque vivendi gratia negligentiores juvenes scenae
laquijs capiuntur: tantam enim si pe^pendimus, differentiam inveniemus, quantum
si quis canentes Angelos modulationem divinam audiret, and porcos stercore
defossos ac grunnientes. Ore namque illorum Christus, istorum vero Diabolus
loquitur, etc. Ibidem.
For the more negligent young Men, that they may live merrily, are taken with
the snares of the Playhouse: yet if we consider well, we shall find as great
a difference between the one and the other, as if a man should hear Angels
singing an heavenly Song, and Swine buried in the dirt, grunting. For in their
mo^th, Christ, but in these men's mouths, the Devil speaks. The Pipes with
puffed up cheeks and a deformed face send forth an uncertaine^ and
unarticulate voice to these: but by their mouths the Grace of the Holy Spirit,
in stead of a Pipe, a Harp, and a Flute, sounds so sweetly, that it is
impossible for those who are fastened to clay and earthly things, to set so
great pleasure before their eyes. Wherefore I wish that some one of those who
are mad about these things, could be but brought to this Quire of Saints, and
then I needed not to use any more words. And although we relate these things to
earthly men, yet we will somewhat endevor to pull them out of the filth and
dregs. From these songs of Harlots a very fl^me of lust does presently set the
Auditors on fire, and as if the sight and face of a woman were not sufficient
to inflam^ the mind, they have found out the plague of the voice too. B^t by
the singing of our holy m^n, if any such disease does vex the mind, it is
presently extinguished. And not only the voice and face of a woman, but the
The ill ^ruits of costly and gaudy apparel; especially in Play houses Which I
wou^d our st^unting Gallants^ would consider.
apparel does much more trouble the Spectators; so that if any more rude or
abject poor man beholds it, he may be too much grieved at it and oft-times say
thus unto himself, Verily a Whore and a Whore-master, the children of Cooks
and Tailors, and oft-times of Servants, live in so great pleasures: but I a
freeman, and borne of free Parents, who live by honest labor cannot truely^
so much as dreaming be delighted thus; and so he departs disquieted with
grie^e. Which thing hapens not from the sight of Monks, yea the very contrary
always uses to fall out. The good that comes by wearing mean and plain
apparel.
For if he shall behold the sons of rich men, and the Nephews of famous
Ancestors to wear those mean garments, which those who are oppressed with
extreme poverty would not vo^chsafe to ^eare, and shall know that they rejoice
in this very thing; consider with how great comfort he departs, if he be poor,
being thus confirmed: and if ^e be rich, he is eas^ly made more moderate and
better by it. And verily in the Nota.
Theater when a most crafty Harlot walks about with golden ornaments, the
poor are wasted with grief, that their wives have no such thing: and the rich
being troubled with this sight, when they shall see the habit, the countenance,
the voice, the gesture, and other things full of lust, and shall return home
to their houses burning with such dishonest fire, despise their wives as more
deformed: These are other fruit^ of Play-haunting.
Hence chi^ings and brawles, hence discords and wars arise, hence death also
oft-times follows. For those who are taken with this kind of lust, a life
with their wife and children seems bitter to them: thus all things in their
houses are disturbed. No such thing is ever wrought by the quire of Monks, the
wife may receive her husband returning mild from thence, and vord of all
ab^urd^ pleasure^ so that he may seem more ^alme and quiet to her. Ita
thea^ralis hic chorus malorum omniu^, ille vero mon^chorum, bonorum fons and
origo est. Alter ex ovibus lupos facit, alter e lupis in agnos convertit, etc.
Ibidem.
So that this Playhouse quire (pray mark it) is the Fountain, and original
of all evils, but that of Monks of all good things. One of them makes Wolves
of Sheep; the other converteth Wolves into Lambs. But perchance we may seem
as yet to have spoken nothing of pleasure. What therefore is more pleasant then
to live in tranquillity of mind, lamenting nothing, grieving for nothing, and
bewailing-nothing? Notwithstanding let us proceed on further, and let us sea^ch
out the pleasure of both these harmonies and sights, and we shall find the one
remaining only till the evening, so long as the Spectator sits in the
Playhouse, but afterward pricking him worse then any sting; but the other
always flourishing in the minds of the Spectators, etc. A su^ficient
testimony of the accursed bitter sinful fruits of Stage Plays. In his 89.
Homily upon Matthew, he has this short passage. Tom. 2. Col. 601. B.
All those who ascend to Stage Plays or to Harlots houses, are spiritually
lame: how then shall these be able to stand in battle, and not to be cast down
with the crimes of incontinency? In his 2. Homily against the Jews, he writes
thus. Operu^. Tom. 1. Editione. Fronto. Ducaei. Parisij^. 621. Tom. 1. page
463. C. D.
If thou have a servant^ if a wife; thou may keep them at home with great
authority. For if thou permittest them not to go into the Playhouse, how much
more are they to be driven from the Synagogue of the Jews? Here is greater
wickedness then there. Pray mark it well.
That which is done there, is sin; that which is done here, impiety. I speak
not these things to this end that you should suffer them to go into the
Playhouse; for even this is evil: but that driving them from Plays, you
should even much more prohibit them from this. Go too, tell me what th^^
runnest to see there? Whether men playing on the Trumpet? But thou ought
^itting at home, to pour out sighs and tears for them, in that they rebel
against the command of God; and in that they have the Devil dancing in the
midst of them. In his Ibid. Tom. 1. p. 893.894. See Homil. De Sta. Phoca.
Ibidem. p. 8^8. A. B. and Hom. in S. Iulianum. Ibidem. page 613. A B. to the
^ame purpose.
Homily of Saint Barlaam. Do ye not (quoth he) see those who descend from
Play Houses made more effeminate? this verily is the cause, that they
diligently attend to the things ^here done. For when as they shall fix in their
minds the invertions of the eyes, the wreathings of the hands, the turnings of
the feet, and the images of all those shapes which appear in the distortion of
the circumagitated body, they depart from thence. Is it not therefore an
unworthy and shameful thing, that these should take so much care in procuring
the destruction of their souls, and keep a perpetual memory of the things
that are there acted; and that we whom the imitation of these things shall make
equal to Angels, should not bestow an endeavor equal unto theirs, to preserve
those things that are spoken? A good item unto all such Play-haunters, Play^rs
and Play-haunters then in Saint Chrysostomes judgment, are more diligent and
careful to destroy their souls, then others are to save them.
and Christians, who can remember much of a Stage Play, but very little or
nothing of a godly Sermon, which concerns their souls; of which there are now
too many. In his 15. Homily to the people of Anti^ch; he rhetorizeth thus.
Op^rum. Parisijs. 1588. Tom. 5. Col. 118. C. 121.122.
How many Sermons have we bestowed, admonishing many stupid ones that they
would utterly relinquish and abandon Theaters, and the lascivious things
proceeding from thence? and they did not abstain, but always even unto this
day run to the unlawful spectacles of Plays and Dances, and set up a
Diabolical assembly against the fullness of the Church of God, and their
clamors brought from thence with much vehemence, did desturbe the singing of
this place. But behold now we being silent, and speaking nothing of this, they
have of their own accord stopped up the Playhouse, and the Circus is made
unaccessible. And before this many of ours did run unto them: but now all
have fled together from thence unto the Church, and praised our God. See thou
how much gain is made out of fear? For from whence the Devil hoped to have
overthrown our City, (to wit, by the abusing and overturning of Theodosius
his Statue, the occasion of this and the ensuing See Hom. 10. ad Pop.
Antiochiae. to Homil. 25.
Homilies) from thence has he restored and reformed it, etc. Let us therefore
acknowledge the snares, and depart far from them. Let us take notice of the
precipices and not come near them. Observe well this ensuing discourse.
This will be an occasion to you of greatest security, not to avoid sins
only, but even those things also, which may seem to be but indifferent, but
yet may drive us unto sins; as to laugh and to use jesting speeches, seems
truly not to be an apparent sin, but yet it leads men into manifest sin: for
oft-times filthy words arise from laughter, and filthier actions from filthy
speeches. Oft-times from filthy speeches and laughter, raylings and reproaches
arise; from railing and reproaches, blows and wounds; and from strokes and
wounds, murders and manslaughters. If therefore thou will consult well for thy
self, thou will not only avoid dishonest words and deeds, and strokes and
wounds, and manslaughters, but even unseasonable laughter it self, and
scurrilous words, because such things are wont to be the root of these that
ensue. I^a Theatra rursum ascendere, and equorum cert. ^^ina spectara, and
aleas tractare, non videtur multis peccatum esse mani^^stu^, sed infinita vitae
mal^ solet infer. Etenim in Theatris immora^i^ fornicationem, petulantiam and
om^em incontinentiam peperit: and circensium spectatio pugnas, convitia,
flagella, contumelias, iuges inimicities, adduxit: and circa aleas studium,
blasphemias, jacturas, iras, convitia, infinitaque alia his graviora saepe
produxit, etc. Ibidem. Col. 122^ ^.
Again, to ascend up into Theaters, and to behold the combats of Horses, and
to play at Dice, seem not to many to be an apparent sin, but yet they are
wont to bring in infinite evils of life. Lo here the fruits of Plays and
Dicing.
For the abode in Play Houses has brought forth fornication, wantonness, and
all incontinency: (a full evidence of my Minors truth:) and the beholding of
the sights of Cirque-playes, has brought with it reproaches, blows, affronts,
and perpetual enmities: and the study about Dice, has produced blaspemies,
losses, anger, revilings, and infinite other things worse then these. Let us
not therefore only avoid sins, but even those things that seem to be
indifferent, but yet draw us by little and little into these sins. For as he
that goes by a precipice, although he falls not, yet he trembles, and oft-times
he tumbles down being overturned by the very trembling: so he who avoyds not
sins a far off, but walks by them, lives with fear and oft-times falls into
them. For he who curiously beholds the beauties of others, although he commits
not adultery, yet he has lusted, and according to Math. 5.
Christ's sentence, he is made an adulterer: and oft-times from concupiscence it
self, he is really carried into the very sin. Let us therefore withdraw our
selves far from sins. Will thou be modest? not only shun thou adultery,
but even a wanton look. Will thou be far from filthy words? thou must not
only avoid dishonest speeches, but even dissolute laughter and all
concupiscence, etc. Much more then wanton Plays, and wicked Play Houses. In
his Ibid. Tom. 5. Col. 135. C.D. and 137. C. See Ibid. 136. ^.B. An excellent
p^ssage against Romes supremacy^ and of Antioches primacy.
17. Homily to the people of Antioch, he thus discourses. But do those
things which the King has done make thee sorrowful? Verily neither are those
things grievous, but they have even brought much profit. For tell me what
troublesome thing is done, that he has stopped the Playhouse? that he has
made the Circus inaccessible? that he has excluded and overturned those
fountains of wickedness. Would to God it might not be granted, that these
should be ever opened again. O that our Magistrates would consider this! it
would cause them then to suppress all Play Houses. as this good Emperor
Theodosius did.
Hence the works of wickedness have budded forth in the City: hence are
those who carry a crime in their very manners, selling their voices unto
Dancers, betraying their own salvation for three farthings, and confounding
all things, etc. But now our City seems to be like a beautiful, a fair and
modest woman. Fear makes her more meek and honest, and has freed her from
those wicked ones, who have adventured to commit these horrible wickednesses.
Let us not therefore lament with womannish sorrow, for I have heard many saying
in the Market place. Woe unto thee Antioch; what is done unto thee? How art
thou deprived of honor? And when I had heard it, I derided the childish mind
of those who spoke such things. For we ought not to say these things now; but
when thou shall see Dancers, Players, Drinkers, Blaspemers, Swearers,
Forswearers, Liars, then use these words. Woe unto thee City, what is done
unto thee. It appears then by this excellent discourse, that Play Houses are
the Seminaries of all vice and mischief; and that those Cities are truly
miserable wherein they are but tolerated. To pass by his Ibid. Tom. 5. Col.
145. D. 149. A.B.C.
19. Homily to the people of Antioch, where he commends the condition of the
Country husbandmen, because they had no spectacles of iniquity, no
Horse-combates, nor whorish women, etc. where he withal describes the pains
which Tumblers, Players, and Dancers upon the Rope did take to make themselves
expert in their professions; with half which labor men might overcome their
customary sin of swearing. In his Ibid. Tom ^. Col. 162. C.D. and 167. A.
21. Homily to the same people of Antioch: How absurd a thing is it (writes
he) after that mystical voice brought down out of Heaven by a Cherubin; to
defile the ears with whorish songs, and effeminate melodies? Yea how is it not
worthy of extreme punishment to behold Harlots, and to practice adultery with
the same eyes, with which thou beholdest the secret and dreadful mysteries?
and to return again to those pompes of the Devil which thou have renounced
in thy baptism? Now these pompes of Satan which thou renouncest, are Theaters,
and Cirque-playes. And in his Ibid. Tom. 5. Col. 183.184.
23. Homily to the Antiochians, he has this excellent discourse worthy of most
serious observation. Beloved, external dignities are fitly manifested by
extrinsecall signs that are put about them, but ours often to be known by the
soul. For a Christian ought not to be seen only by his office, but likewise
by his newness of life. It is fit a believer should shine forth, not only by
those things which he has received from God. but also by those things which he
himself performs, and to be manifested on all hands by his gesture, by his
countenance, by his habit, by his voice. Now I have spoken these things, not
that we should dispose of our selves to ostentation, but to the profit of the
beholders. And may we not truly put this question to many Christians of our
times; to whom all the ensuing discourse may most fitly be applied.
But now from whence shall I know thee to be a Christ? I find thee on every
side conspicuous by the contraries. For if I would learn who thou art, either
from the place; I see thee abiding in C^rques, in Theaters, and in iniquities:
in the councels of wicked ones, and in the conventicles of desperate hopeless
men. Or from the form of thy countenance; I see thee always laughing
excessively, and dissolute like a reclus^ Harlot, and vile withal: Or from thy
clothes; I see thee no better apparelled, then those who are conversant in the
Playhouse; Or from thy followers; thou leadest about Parasites and Flatterers:
Or from thy words; I hear thee speaking nothing that is savory, or necessary,
or conferring to a Christian life: Or from thy table; hence a greater
accusation will appear. From whence then I pray, shall I know thee to be a
Christian, all thy words and deeds professing the contrary? O that this elegant
rh^toricall streine of this zealous flexanimous Father were but a little
considered of the vicious Christians of our times!
But why do I say a Christian? For thou art not so much as a man, if I can
plainly discern. For when as tho^ kickest like an Ass, and playest the
wanton as a Bull, and neighest after Women like an Horse, and pamperest thy
belly like a Bear, and fattest thy flesh as a Mule, and retainest evil in thy
memory like a Camel, and moreover ravenest as a Wolf, and art angry as a
Serpent, and smitest like a Scorpion, and art crafty like a Fox, and keep
the poison of wickedness as an Aspe or Viper; and impugnest thy Brethren as
that wicked Devil: How shall I be able to number thee among men, when I shall
behold in thee the signs of such a nature? For seeking after the difference of
a Catechumenish, and a Believer, I am afraid that I shall not find the
difference no not of a man and a beast. For what shall I call thee? Wicked men
are far worse ^h^n beasts or ^evils.
A beast? but beasts are held only with one of these vices; but thou carrying
about all of them together, proceedest on to a greater beastliness then they.
Or shall I style thee a Devil? but the Devil serves not the tyranny of the
belly, neither does he love money. Since then thou have greater imperf^ctions
then Men and Devils; how shall we call thee a man? But and if it be not lawful
to call thee a man, how I pray shall we salute thee as a Believer? And that
which is worse, neither being so evilly disposed, do thou think of the
deformity of thy soul, nor yet consider its filthiness: but sitting in a
Barbers shop, And i^ not ^his the vanity and practice of our effeminate ag^.
and triming thy hair; taking a glass, thou diligently examinest the
composition of every hair, and advisest with those that stand by, and with the
Barber himself, whether he has ordered those hairs well that are about thy
forehead. And when as thou art for the most part an old man, thou art not
a^hamed to wax ^ad with youthful vanities. But we behold not, not only the
deformity of our souls; but we do not so much as any whit at all consider
that beastly shape, that Sylla, or Chymaera, according to the Poets Fables,
which we have put on: By all which it is evident, that they who resort to
Plays or Play Houses, have not so much as the least Symptoms of any
Christianity in them; that they are worse then men, then beasts, then Devils:
and careful only to adorn their hair, their bodies, but altogether
careless to correct the gross deformities and pollutions of their souls. In
his Tom. 5. Col. 785. A.
Sermon, De Eleemosyna and Hospitalitate; he acquaints us: That lascivious and
gaudy apparel, which all godly Christians should leave to Danceresses, and
lewd Singing-women; together with filthy and unseemely pleasure, are reputed
comely in Theaters and Stage Plays. A su^ficient evidence of their lewdness.
In his Tom. 3. Col. 611.612.
42. Homily on the Acts, and in his Tom. 5. Col. 347.348.
62. Homily to the people of Antioch, he writes thus of Plays. But what? Will thou that we compare the Prison and the Playhouse together? That verily is a
place of affliction, but this of pleasure. Go to therefore, let us see what
things do happen unto both. There, is much Philosophy: For where there is
sadness, there also is Philosophy. He who before did gape after riches, who
was greatly puffed up, and would scarce suffer an ordinary man to speak unto
him; he is then made humble, fear and sorrow being fallen upon his soul like
a certain fire, and softning its hardness; then he is made sorrowful, then
he feels a worldly change, then he is made strong to all things. Play Houses
^herefo^e in S. Chrysostomes judg^ment are far worse then Prisons, and
Play-haunters more miserable, more unhappy then P^isoners.
But in the Playhouse all things are contrary; laughter, wanton^esse,
uncleanesse, Diabolical pomp and pride, prodigality, expense of time, and
unprofitable wasting of days, the preparation and induction of abs^rd and
filthy lust, the meditation or plotting of adultery, the School of fornication
and intemperance, the exhortation of fil^hiness^, the occasion and matter of
laughter, the examples of lewdness. But it is not so in a prison, where is
humility of mind, exhorta^ion and excitation to Phil^sophy, the contempt of
worldly things, all things trodden under foot and despised: Yea fear sits by as
a Schoolmaster fitting him for all things that he ought to do. But if thou will we will again inquire into these places after another manner, I would
have thee meet with one man coming from a Playhouse, and with another going
out of a Prison: Nota.
thou should behold his soul loathsome, distempered, and truly fettered:
but this man's loosed, prompt, and almost winged. For he returns from the
Playhouse bound with the eyes of the women that are there, carrying bonds
heavier then any iron; to wit, the places, words, and habits that are there.
But he who goes from the Prison being freed by all, will not now think that he
suffers any grievous thing, comparing his case with other men's; he now gives
thanks that he is not bound, he contemnes human things, seeing many rich men
in troubles, and great men there imprisoned for many and great things, yea he
will suffer any unjust thing, so valiant is he. Moreover many examples of that
place will lead him to think of the judgment to come, and he will dread those
places seeing them there already. For as he who is there imprisoned, is meek
to all; so he also before the judgment, before the day to come will be more
favorable to his wife, his children, his servants. But men return not so from
the Theater; for the husband will behold the wife more unpleasantly, h^ will be
more cruel to his servants, he will be more sha^pe to his children. If
Magistrates, i^ Statesmen did but well consider this, they would never toll^rate
them in a Commonwe^lth.
Play Houses cause great evils in Ci^tios, great ones, and neither do we know
by this, how great. In his Tom. 4. Col. 356. C.D.
12. Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians; he condemns the
Heathen Lawgivers for countenancing and ^recting Play Houses, in these ensuing
words. They assemble company to Theaters, bringing in thi^her Meretricum
choros, illic ind^centes and pueros p^thi^os qui injuria ipsam naturam
afficiunt, etc. Such are our common Play-haunters.
Whole qu^ers and troope^ of Harlots, of lecherous Boys, or Ganimedes, who
abuse even nature it self; and they make all the people to sit in a losti^r
place. Thus they recreate the City: thus they crown great Kings whom they
always admire for their Trophies and Victories. O that Kings and Great Men
would consider this! they would not then so highly esteem these base, and
infamous Actors.
But what is more trifling th^n this honor? What is more unpleasant then this
pleasure? Do thou seek then applauders of thy actions out of these? and
will thou, I pray tell me, be commended with Dancers, effeminate persons,
Stage Players, and Whores? And how can this be but extreme madness? For These
are the fruits of Stage Plays.
I would willingly demand of them; Is it an heinous and unseemely thing to
overturne the laws of nature, and to introduce unlawful and wicked
copulations? All will say it is a grievous and unworthy act: Yea they seem
verily to punish likewise this heinous offense. Why then do thou bring in
those Cynaedi, and exolete persons? Neither do thou only bring them in, but
thou l^kewise honor them with innumerable and unspeakable gifts; And where
as thou punishest those who attempt such things in another place, yet here thou
spendest money upon them, and maintainest them at the public charge, as men
deserving well of the Common-w^alth. Objection.
But, say thou, they are infamous. Answer.
Why then do thou train them up? Why do thou honor Kings by infamous
persons? Why do thou kill Cities? Yea why also do thou bestow so much upon
them? For if they are infamous, infamous persons ought to be banished. For why
have thou made them infamous? Whether as one that pray^^st them, or as one who
condemnest them? Verily as one who condemn^st them. Moreover, thou make them
infamous as one who condemnest them: but yet thou runnest to see them, yea and
admirest^ laudest and applaudest them, as those who are of honest fame, and
good repute. In his Tom. 5. Col. 799. A. B. 802. C.
Oration of the Kalends, he writes thus. There is now a war proclaimed against
us, not the A^aleki^es invading us, or other Barbarians making incursions upon
u^, as then they did, but Devils leading their pomp in the Market place. For
those Diabolical pernocta^ions which are this day practiced, those scoffs and
revilings in Plays, those noctur^all Dances, and those Com^dies which should
be hiss^d out, do vanquish our City worse then any enemy: and therefore it is
meet, that both those that thus offend, and those who offend not should be
dei^cted, mourn, and be ashamed; these verily for the wickednesses they have
committed; but those because they have seen their Brethren to have been
immodest. For although you your s^lves do not these things (and O that our
Christian Magistrates who connive at Stage Plays would consider it) yet it is
altogether unworthy of our religion, if you suffer even others for to do them,
whether they be your servants, your friends, or your neighbors. Whom God does
hate, do not thou commend; but he hates every one who lives in iniquity
though he abound in wealth. It is lawful for thee to reprove and correct them
for the glory of God. But how is it lawful to chide for God? O that we had
zeal and grace to do thus n^w, then sin, then sinners would not be so
common, so audacious and shameless as they are.
If thou shall see a drunkard, or a thief, or a servant, or a friend, or any
other that is thy neighbor, either running into a Playhouse, or betraying his
own soul, or swearing, for swearing, or lying, be angry with him, punish him,
reclaim him, correct him; and thou have done all this for God. In his Tom 5.
Col. 147^. B.
6. Oration. That all vices arise from sloth: he writes thus of
Play-haunters. Before the last day, our speech to your charity was purposely
and wholly of the Devil. At which time, some verily, when as we were
discoursing of these things out of this place, did then idly behold the pomp
of the Devil in Play Houses, and did then hear whorish songs; but you did
give your minds to the most pleasant spiritual Doctrine. Who then has made
them thus to err? Who has avocated them from the holy Sheepefold? Let
Play-haunters then consider this.
Verily the Devil has deceived them, but he has not deceived you. Those
therefore who run to Play Houses are deceived and led thither by the Devil,
if this holy Father may be credited. And in his Tom. 5. Col. 750.751.
8. Homily of Repentance, with which I will conclude: he has this memorable
passage against Stage Plays and Play Houses, which should make all Players and
Play-haunters for to tremble; which passage likewise fully proves the Minor of
my former Syllogism. We may undergo the pains of a fast, and yet not obtain
the fruit of a fast. But how? To wit, when we abstain from meat, but not from
sin; when we fast the whole day in want, and then spend what we have saved in
unchaste Play Houses. Stage^playes deprive men of the benefit of all their
fasting and prayers.
Lo the pains of a fast, the fruit of a fast, (much more then of prayer, of
hearing, reading, receiving the Sacrament, and all other holy duties, which I
beseech all Play-haunters to consider) is wholly lost, when as we ascend the
Playhouse of iniquity. My speech is not directed unto you, for I know that you
are free from this accusation. But it is the custom of those who are laden
with grief, when as those are not present who give the occasion of grief, to
rush upon those who are present. For what gain is it to go up to the
Play Houses of wickedness, to enter into the common shop of luxury, and the
public School of incontinency; or to sit in the chair of pestilence? Lo
here an exact character and description of a Playhouse, how can you then but
loath it, when you read this of it?
^or if any one shall call the Playhouse, the chair of pestilence, the
School of incontinence, the shop of luxury, and the Scaffold of all
uncleanesse, he should not offend: that most wicked place being a Babi^onish
Brothell full of many diseases: when thou art driven unto a Playhouse, thou
entrest into a direct Stews. The Devil thus furnishing the City with
infernal flames, does not now put under stalks of hemp besmeared with
Brimstone, nor Marle, nor Flax, nor Pitch, as that Barbarian did; but things
far worse then these; leacherous sights, filthy words, anointed members, and
songs full of all lewdness. That Wh^re-house then, barbarous hands have
burned; but this Whore-house cogitations more foolish then Barbarians have
kindled: this being worse then that, since the fire is worse, which does not
waste the nature of the body, but the good state and disposition of the mind.
And that which is worse, neither those who are burned do perceive it. For if
they did feel it, they would not now send forth such an ^ffuse laughter in
Play Houses. This is the present condition of Players and Play-haunters who are
altogether senseless of their dise^se, their sin.
Therefore this is the very worst evil, when as one is we^kned, and yet
knows not this, that he is diseased: and burning miserably and loathsomely,
does not feel the burning. What profit, tell me, is there then of fasting,
when as thou drivest thy body from lawful nutriment, but yet bring in
wicked nourishment to thy soul? when as thou spendest the day sitting in the
Theater beholding common nature deturpated, deformed, and unchaste women
condemned to adultery, collecting there the evils of every house? For liberty
is there given both to see fornications, and to hear blasphemies, whereby both
by the eyes, and by the ear, a disease may proceed to the very soul it self:
they imitate the calamities and mischances of others from whence the contagion
of filthiness gets into ^ur selves. Tell me therefore, what profit there is of
fasting, the soul being fed with such meats? With what eyes will thou behold
thy wife from these Theaters? with what eyes will thou look upon thy son,
thy servant, thy friend? Verily it must needs be that be that speaks there,
or he that holds his peace, should be conf^unded with shame at the filthiness
that is acted. But thou departest not so from hence: for it is It was therefore
the use of Christians in S. Chrysostomes time to repeat the Sermons they heard
in the Church in their own Families at home, neither was it deemed an offense
or conve^ticle as some profane ones would make it now. (See Caesarius
^re^at^nsis Hom 20. Bibl. Patru^ Tom. 5. p^rs 3. p. 766. F.G.H. an excellent
place for repetition of Sermons.)
lawful for thee with much con^idence to It was therefore the use of
Christians in S. Chrysostomes time to repeat the Sermons they heard in the
Church in their own Families at home, neither was it deemed an offense or
conve^ticle as some profane ones would make it now. (See Caesarius ^re^at^nsis
Hom 20. Bibl. Patru^ Tom. 5. p^rs 3. p. 766. F.G.H. an excellent place for
repetition of Sermons.)
repeat all things at home, Proph^ticall speeches, Apostolical precepts,
Divine laws; to furnish or set to every table of virtue, and to make thy wife
more chaste, thy son more dut^full, thy servant more dear with the same
repetitions; yea and thou shall persuade thy very enemy to lay aside his
hatred. Do thou see how these precepts verily are every where wholesome, but
those sound filthily in every place? What profit therefore of fasting, when as
thou fastest with thy body, but committest adultery with thine eyes? Adultery
is not only that conglutination of body to body, but even an unchaste look.
What benefit is there then when as thou go to the Playhouse from hence? He
therefore that resorts to Stage Plays can never reap any ben^fit from the
Ministry of Gods word: O therefore that men would but consider this!
I correct, the Player corrupts: I administer salves to thy disease, he
ministers the cause of the disease: I extingu^sh the flame of nature, he
kindles the flame of lust. What profit is there, tell me? one edifying, and
another pulling down, what have they profited themselves by their labor?
Therefore let us not be occupied here in vain, but profitably, whereby we may
fruitfully, whereby we may less in vain, whereby we may not unprofitably and
to condemnation meet here, one building, and the other pulling down; le^^ the
multitude of builders be overcome with the easiness of the pulling down. No^.
Truly it is a part of great uncleanesse both for young men and old men to
hasten to the Playhouse. But would to God the evil did extend no further. For
this perchance seems intolerable to an ingenuous man, and worthy to be
punished with the greatest loss, with reproof and shame: but verily this
correction is not at al inflicted so far as to shame. But yet torments and
punishments hang over Play-haunters heads: for it must needs be that those who
sit there should swim in the sin of adultery, not because they are coupled to
women, out because they behold them with unchaste eyes. For with these it must
of necessity be, that every one is surprised in adultery. Neither will I speak
my own word^ to you whereby you may less regard it, but I will explicate the
Divine Law, where there is no place for neglect. What therefore says the
Divine Law? Mat. 5.27, 27
You have heard that it has been said of old; Exodus ^^.^^.
Thou shall not commit adultery: But I say unto you, that whosoever shall look
upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart; Have thou seen adultery comm^tted? have thou seen^ sin finished^ And
that which is worst in adulteries, thou have seen him that is taken in
adultery to be guilty of adultery, not under any humane, but under a Devine
Sentence; hence deadly punishments: For whosoever shall look upon a woman to
lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart. He does
not only ^xtirpate the disease, but likewise the root of the disease: for
unchaste concupiscence i^ the root of adultery, So likewise do Phisicians:
they look diligently not only to diseases, but likewise to the taking away of
their causes: although they see the eye diseased, yet they repress the evil
rewme that is above in the temples. Thus Christ also does. Adultery is an
evil blindness, it is a disease of the eyes, not of the body only, but first
of the soul: Therefore he stops the re^me of uncleanesse from thence by the
fear of the law. Wherefore he not only punishes adultery, but avengeth
concupiscence likewise. He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
already committed adultery with her in his heart. These bare words repeated are
sufficient to purge away all the disease of sin. But pardon us, we cleanse
wounds, and he who purges wounds must apply bitter medicines. But by how much
the more they shall endure my words, by so much the more shall the poison be
purged out. By all these faithfully recited passages of holy Which i^ have thus
quoted at large, because most men want his Works,
Chrysostom, which I would Players and Play-haunters would seriously, would
frequently read over; it is most apparent; that Stage Plays are the immediate
common occasions of much actual lewdness, adultery, and other gross
uncleanesse: which should cause all Christians to abominate them, and to keep
their wives and children from them, as C. Tacitus, De Moribus Germanorum. c. 6
Philippus Gluverius, Antiquae Germaniae. l. 1. cap. 20. page 181.182.
the ancient Pagan Germans did, for fear they should corrupt their chastity
and draw them on to public lewdness. To pass by the concurrent testimonies
of Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Basil, Nazienzen,
Origin, Hierom, Hilary, Augustine, Cyril, Salvi^n, and all the other Fathers,
Counce^s, and Authors^ quoted in the precedent Scene, who give punctual
testimony of this truth, as their words there cited will su^ficiently manifest;
I shall confine my self only to four of our own English Authors for final
confirmation of my Minors verity. The first of them is Who flourished about the
year of our Lord 1429. Balaeus Scriptoru^ Brittaniae Centuria. 7. p. 566. in
the raig^e of King Henry the 6.
Alexander Fabritius, in his Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4. cap. 23. De Ludis
inhonestis, or dishonest Plays. The second kind (writes he) of unlawful
Plays, is the Play of lascivious vanity; such as are Dancing, Enterludes, and
other Theatricall Plays; which are called Plays, from the Theater or
Playhouse which is a public place, where the people has accustomed to meet
together ^o Play; because after such Plays ended Whores are often times
prostituted in such Plays. Et sic tales ludi fornicationis meritricij and
adulterij multo^iens sunt in causa, and ideo in talibus ludis delectantur
Daemones; and ut constat vir perfectus non debet interesse ludicris in quibus
Daemones delectantur, etc. Ibid. See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 7. and 10. accordingly.
And so such Plays are very often the cause of fornication, whoredom and
adultery; and therefore the Devil is delighted in such Plays: and as it
appears, a perfect man ought not to give his mind to such sports with which
the Devil is delighted. And therefore worthily says Saint Augustine: Let him
wil^draw himself from the Spectacles of the world who will obtain the perfect
grace of remiss^on. For Dyna the Daughter of Jacob; of whom it is writt^n in
the 34. of Genesis: when Iocob came into the Land of Canaan, Dinah his Daughter
S. Paul, Titus 2.5. Enioynes women to be chaste ke^pers at hom^^ intimating,
that such women that gad abroad, especially to Play-^ous^s and such like
places, can never be ch^ste Solomon upbraiding an Harlot: Prove. 7 1^, 12. tells
us That her feet abide not in her house^ n^w sh^^i^ without, now in the
streets, and lies in wait at every corner. Which Ovid, De Art Amandi. l. ^.
p. 203 does second, Vn^s es^ vo^^s f^^mosae c^ra puellae. Saep^. vagos ext^a
limina far pedes, etc. So that g^dding women, an^ who^^^ women are
reciprocall^
walked abroad, to wit^ to the spectacles of the world, that she might see the
women of that Country; whom Sychim the Son of the King of that Country
seeing, he was inamored with her, took her and ravished her perforce. But as
Saint Augustine s^ith, if she ^ad conti^^ed at home among her own she had not
been defloar^d by a foreign ravisher. Therefore the soul ought by so much
the more to beware and to restrain it self, because she is not once, but
oft-times r^vished and defloured; let her fear now having had experiment of
that which she ^as ignorant of being yet a V^rgin. Add we to him the
testimony of Master Philip Stubs in his London 1595 page 105.106.
Anatomy of Abuses. Do not Plays (writes he) maintain Bawdry, insinuate
foolery and renew the remembrance of hea^^en Idolatry? The fruits of Theaters
and Plays.
Do they not in^^ce to who^edome and unclean^sse? Nay, are they not rather
plain devo^rers of Ma^denly virginity and chastity? For proof whereof but
mark the flocking and running to Theaters and Curtens, daily and hourly,
night and day, time and tide, to see Plays and Enterludes, where such wa^ton
gestures, such bawdy speeches, such laughing and ^^ee^ing, such kissing and
bussing, such clipping and culling such w^^king and glancing of wanton eyes and
the like is used, as is wonderful to behold. Then these goodly Pageants being
ended, every mate sorts to his mate every one brings another homeward on the
way very friendly, and in their secret conclaves (covertly) they play the
Sodomites, or worse. And these be the fruits of Plays and Enterludes for the
most part. The godly Examples of Plays and Enterludes.
And whereas you say there are good examples to be learned in them: truly so
there are: If you will learn to play the vice, What things are to be learned
at Plays.
to tear, swear, and blasp^ame both Heaven and Earth: if you will learn to
become a Bawd, to be unclean, to devirginate Maids, to def^oure ^onest
Wives, etc. If you will learn to sing and ta^ke of bawdy love and venery, etc.
If you will learn to play the Whore-master, the Glutton, Drunkard, or
Incestuous person: and finally, of you will learn to contemn God and all his
Laws, to care neither for Heaven nor Hell, and to commit all kind of sin
and mischief) you need go to no other Schools; for all these good Exampl^s
you may see painted before your e^es in Enterludes and Plays. Wherefore, that
man who gives money for the maintenance of them, must needs incur the
inevitable sentence of eternal damnation, unless he repent. Thus he. Stephen
Gosson a penitent reclaimed Play-poet ( See his School of Abuse. Epistle to
the Reader, accordingly.
whose eyes did shed many tears of sorrow, whose heart sweat many drops of
blood, when he remembered Stage-playes^ to which he was once addicted) writes
much to this effect. In his School of Abuse. Vid. Ibid. and his Plays
Confuted: See here before, page 360.361, 362, 363.
I will show you (writes he) what I see, and inform you what I read of
Plays. Ovid said, that Romulus built his Theater as a Horse-faire for Whores,
made Triumphs and set up Plays to gather the fair women together, that every
one of his Soldiers might take where he liked a snatch for his share, etc. It
should seem that the abuse of such places was so great, that for any chaste
Liver to haunt them was a black Swan and a white Crow: Dion so straightly
forbids the ancient Families of Rome and Gentlewomen that tender their name
and honor to come to Theaters, and rebukes them so sharply when he takes them
napping, that if they be but once seen there, he judges it sufficient cause
to speak ill of them, and think worse. The shadow of a knave hurts an honest
man; the sent of a Stews an honest Matron, and the show of Theaters a simple
gazer, etc. Cooks do never show more craft in their iunkets to vanquish the
taste, nor Painters in shadows to allure the eye, then Poets in Theaters to
wound the conscience. There set they abroach strange consorts of melody to
tickle the ear; costly apparel to flatter the sight; effeminate gesture, to
ravish the sense; and wanton speech, to whet desire to inordinate lust. These
by the privy entries of the ear slip down into the heart, and with gunshot of
affection gaul the mind where reason and affection should rule the roste,
Domitian suffered playing and dancing so long in Theaters, that Paris led the
shaking of the sheets with Domitia, and Monster the Trenchmoore with Messalina,
etc. In Rome De Art Amandi. l. 1. and 2.
Ovid charge his Pilgrims to creep close to the Saints whom they serve, and
show their double diligence to lift the Gentlewomans robes from the ground, ^or
soyling in the dust: to sweep moa^es from their kirtles, to keep their
fingers in u^e, to lay their hands at their backs for an easy stay; to look
upon those, whom they beheld; to praise that, which they commend; to like every
thing that pleases them: to present them Pomegranets to pick as they sit; and
when all is done to wait on them mannerly to their houses. Lo here the
Panderly practices of our Play Houses.
In our Assemblies at Plays in London, you shall see such heaving and shoving,
such itching and shouldring, to sit by women: such care for their garments,
that they be not trod on: such eyes to their laps that no chips light in them:
such pillowes to their backs, that they take no hurt: such making in their
ears I know not what: such giving them Pippins to pass the time: such playing
at foot Saunt without Cards: such ticking, such toying, such smiling, such
winking, and such manning them home when the sports are ended, that it is a
right Comedy, to mark their behavior, to watch their conceits, as the Cat the
Mouse, and (...) good as a course at the Game it self, to dog them a little
or follow aloo^e by the print of their feet, and so discover by slot where the
Dear takes ^oyle. If this were as well noted, as ill seen; or as openly
punished, as secretly practiced; I have no doubt but the cause would be ^eared
to dry up the effect, and these pretty Rabbets very cunningly ferreted from
their buro^we^. Pray mark this well.
For they that lack customers all the week, either because their haunt is
unknown, or the Constables and Officers of their Parish watch them so
narrowly, that they dare not quea^ch^ to celebrate the Sabbath flock to
Theaters and there keep a general Market of Bawdry. Not that any filthiness
indeed is committed within the compass of that ground, as was done in Rome,
but that every Wanton and his Paramour, every Man and his Mistress, every John
and his Ioane, every K^av^ and his Queen, are there first acquainted and
Play Houses then are the common Marts of Bawdery.
cheapen the merchandise in that place which they pay for elsewhere as they
can agree. I intend not to show you all that I see, nor half that I hear of
these abuses, lest you judge me more wilful to teach, then willing to forbid
them. Thus far this penitent Play-poet from his own experience. The last of
these witnesses with whom I will conclude, is the Anonymous Author of the Book
entitled, Printed by Authority. 1580.
The third Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters; Ibid. page 48.49, 50, 51,
52.
Penned by a Play-poet, and common Play-haunter, who had good experience of the
lewd effects of Stage Plays, which made him to abhor them, and to renounce
his wicked profession, as being incompatible with Christian Religion or his
own salvation, as himself professes in that Treatise, where he writes thus
as follows. Ibid. p^g. 43.44, 45, 56, 57. O that our Magistrates and Statesmen
would but consider this.
Such doubtless is mine opinion of common Plays, that in a Christian
Commonweal they are not sufferable. My reason is, because they are public
enemies to nature and religion; allurements unto sin; corru^te^s of good
manners; the cause of security and carelesnesse^ mere Brothel-houses of
Bawdery; and bring both the Gospel into slander, the Sabbath into contempt,
men's souls into danger; and finally the whole Commonweal into disorder.
Great and ha^nous spe^ches, no doubt, yet not so heinous, as the exercise of
them is odious: biting words; yet not so bitter as the cause requires. It were
ill painting the Devil like an Angel; he must be portraied as he is, that he
may the better be known, Sin has always a fair^ cloak to cover his filthy
body. And therefore he is to be turned out of his case into his naked skin,
that his nasty filthy body, and stinking corruption being perc^ived; he might
come into the hatred and horror of men. For as we are naturally of our selves
evil and corrupt; so are we naturally given to love our selves, and to be
blinded with our own aff^ctions^ insom^ch that what we know to be evil, we
are not ashamed either openly to detend, or slily to cloak. The excuse of
wickedn^sse is but the increase of punishment, and an ill cause defended by
authority, and maintained by learning brings Magistrates into slander, and
learning into contempt. Page 52.53, 54, 55, 56, 57.
Therefore to the end that others should not be deceived with tha^ wherewith my
self was overtaken, I thought it my part to lay open to all men's eyes the
horrible abuse as well of Plays, as of the Inactors, and the disorder of their
auditory; that the ^b^se being perc^ived, every man might reform himself, and
be weaned from their wickedness: or otherwise, that the Magistrates being
info^med might take such good waye^, that the intolerable exercise of Plays
might be utterly put down. For I am verily p^rswad^d, that if they may be
permitted still to make sale of sin, we shall pull on ^ur h^ads Gods
vengeance, and to our Realm bring an ^tter confusion. What I shall speak of
Plays of my own knowledge, I know man be affi^med by hundreds, to whom those
m^tters are as well known as to my self. Fruits of Plays for the Devils own
mouth.
Some Citizens Wives (and I would to God our married Citizens would well
consider it because it concerns them nearly) upon whom the Lord for ensample
to others has l^yd his hands, have ev^n on their death-b^ds with tears
confessed, that they have rec^ived at these Spectacles such filthy in^ections,
as have turned their minds from chaste cogitations, and O that those husbands
who either accompany, or send their wives, their daught^rs unto St^ge-pl^yes,
and yet desire for to keep them ^haste, would remember ^his.
made them of honest women light huswives: (which very thing is likewise
testified by reverend Bishop Babingto^, in his Exposition on the 7.
Commandment; and by Doctor Layton, in his Speculum belli Sacri. c^p 45. and
therefore worthy credit under the hands of these three witnesses:) by them they
have 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
dishonored the V^ss^ls of Holiness, and have brought their Husbands in^o
contempt, their Children into question, their bodies into sickness, and their
souls into the assault of a dangerous state. Such is the nature and
inclination of us a^l, that we run whether affection leads us, and are
withdrawn by company. And therefore as David saith^ 2 Samuel 22. ver. 26.27
Psalm. 18.25, 26.
With the g^dly thou will show thy self godly, with the upright: man thou will
show thy self upright, with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with
the froward thou will show thy self froward. He that touches Pitch will be
d^filed^
The repair of them that are honest to those places of evil res^rt, make^
their own good life to be doubt^d of^ for that the place b^eeds suspicion as
well of good as of bad. For who can see man or woman r^sor^ to an house which
is notoriousl^ wicked^ but will judge them to be of the crew of ^he wicked and
ungodly? Avoid suspect^d pl^ces.
The most honest wi^e, is the soonest assaulted, and has such snares l^id to
en^rap her, as, if God ^ss^st her not, she m^st^^eds be ^^ken. When I gave my
self first to (...) the abuse o^ common ^layes, ^ found my heart so ^ smitten
with s^rr^w ( The best soon^st t^mp^ed.
sin ^^d there so abound, Horrible sins openly committed at Theaters.
and was so op^^ly commi^ted, that I lo^ked when God in justice would have
presently in his wrath h^ve confounded the beholders.) Mark this O ye
favorers, frequenters, and upholders of Plays.
The Theater I found to be an appointed place of Bawdery^ mine own ears have
heard honest women allured with abominable speeches. Sometime I have seen two
knaves at once importunate upon one light huswife, wher^by much quarrel has
grown to the disquieting of many. The servants as it is manifestly to be
proved, have consented to rob their Maste^s to supply the want of their
Harlots: there is the practicing of married wi^es to train them from their
husbands, and places appointed for meeting and conference. When Who can favor
Plays, when the Authors themselves condemn them?
I had taken notice of these abuses, and saw that the Theater was be^ome the
Consultory-house of Satan, I concluded with my self, never to impl^y my pen to
so vile a purpose, nor to be an instrument of gathering the wicked together. It
may seem I am overlavish of spee^h, and that which I have publicly expressed
of others by mine own knowledge might have been dissembled. But I have
learned, that he who dissembles the evil that he knows in other men, is as
guilty before God of the offense, as the offenders themselves. And the Lord
has expressly commanded in Exodus 23. v. 2.
Exodus, that, we should not follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree in
a controversy to decline after many, and overthrow the truth. I cannot
therefore but r^sist such wickednesses, lest I might seem to maintain them.
For he that dissembles ungodliness is a traitor to God. Since therefore that
the cause is Gods, I dare pr^sse forth my self to be an Advocate against Satan
unto the rooting ^ut of sin. Pag^ 64. Every member of man defiled at Plays.
Are not our eyes at Plays, carried away with the pride of vanity? our ^ar^s
abused with amorous, that is, lecherous, abominable and filthy speech? Is not
our tong^e (which is given us only to glorify God withal) there employed to
the blaspheming of Gods holy Name, or the commendation of that is wicked? Are
not our heart^ through the pleasure of the flesh, the delight of the eye, and
the fond motions of the mind withdrawn from the service of the Lord, and the
meditation of his goodness? Page 89.90. to 103.
No zealous heart but m^st needs bleed to see how many Christian souls are
there swall^wed up in the whirlpoole of Devilish impudency. Whosoever shall
visit the Theaters the Chapels of ^atan.
Chapel of Satan, I mean the Theater, shall finds there no want of young
Ruffians, not lack of Harlots utterly past all shame, who press to the
forefront of the Scaffold, to the end to show their impudency, and to be as an
object to all men's eyes. Yea, such is their open shameless be^aviour, as every
man may perceive by their wanton gestures wher^unto they are given: yea they
seem there to be like Brothels of the Stews. The open wickedn^sse of Harlots
at Plays.
For often without respect of the place and company which behold them, they
commit that filthiness openly, which is horrible to be done in secret, as if
whatsoever they did were warranted: for neither reverence, justice, nor any
thing beside can govern them. Alas that Youth should become so devilish and
void of the fear of God. An admonition to Magistrates.
Let Magistrates assure themselves, that without speedy redress all things
will grow so far out of order, that they will be past remedy. Shamefulnesse
and modesty is quite banished from young men: they are utterly shameless,
stubbo^n^, and impudent. It was well said of Calvin, that a man settled in evil
will make but a mock of Religion. He preaches in vain that preaches unto
the deaf. Tell many of these men of the Scripture, they will scoff and turn
it into a jest. Rebuke them for breaking the Sabbath day, they will say you are
a man of the Sabbath, you are very precise, you will allow us nothing: you will
have nothing but the Word of God; you will permit us no recreation, but have
men like Asses, who never rest but when they are eating. Seek to withdraw
these fellows from the Theater unto a Sermon, they will say, By the Preacher
they may be edified, but by the Player both edified and delighted. So that in
them the saying of Saint Paul is ^^rified, where he says, Romans 8.7^
That the wisdom of the flesh is nothing but enmity against God. How small
heed take they of themselves, which suffer their own wicked affections to
withdraw them from God and his Word. We need not voluntarily seek^ our own
destruction. For he that is virtuously disposed shall find lewd persons enough
to withdraw him from well-doing by the promise of pleasure and delightful
pastime, whereunto we are naturally inclined unto the Theaters the Schools of
Satan, and Chapels of ill counsel.
Schoole-house of Satan, and Chapel of ill counsel, where he shall see so
much iniquity and looseness, and so great outrage and scope of sin, that it
is a wonder if he return not either wounded in conscience, or changed in life.
Counsel to Masters.
I would wish therefore all Masters not only to withdraw themselves, but their
Servants also from such wicked assembl^^s^ For it is always wisdom to shun
the occasions of evil. Youth will be withdrawn by company, if they be not
restrained of their liberty. They need not seek out for Schoolmasters, they
can learn evil too fast of themselves, and are pregnant enough at home to
learn unhappiness. Quantum a proposito suo virgo deficit, quando pudica quae
venerat, impudicior discedit? Cyprian, De Habitu Virginum. p. 241.
Many of nature honest and tractable, have been altered by these sh^wes and
spectacles, and become monsterous. Man's mind which of it self is pro^e unto
vice, is not to be pricked forward unto vice, but brideled: if it be left unto
it self, it hardly stands; if it be driven forth, it runs headlong. Flee
far from Babylon, ye that carry the Lords Vessels. Romans 6.3.
For So Much as you are baptized into Christ, it stands you upon to be holy
both of body and mind, and to dedicate your selves to his service, which ye
shall never do, unless you withdraw your selves from the inticements of
vanity, and eschew the occasions of evil; which that ye may the better do,
you are to fasten your eyes upon God, by whom ye are sanctified. Ill examples
to be shuned.
Let not the examples of the wicked be a president unto us, neither let us be
drawn away to evil with the multitude. Custom shall but make us bold in
sin, and the company of scorners make us more impudent of life. It is not
enough for us to excuse our selves by the doings of other men; it will not be
taken for an excuse, although we could allege; that every man does as we do.
For it is no means to acquit us before God, to say that others be no better
then our selves. I would rather wish that the evil conversation of others
might be an occasion to draw us back, lest perhaps we be wrapped in the vices
that reign in all the wicked, and so be partakers of the punishment due to
them. For we are not to walk as men that look only upon the creatures, but
our part is, to se^ God before our ^yes, whose presence we cannot possibly
escape. Motion of the body.
It is marvelous to consider how the gesturing of a Player, which Tully
t^rmeth, the eloquence of the body, is of force to move, and prepare a man to
that which is ill. For such things are disclosed to the eye and to the ear, as
might a great deal better be kept close. Whereby a double offense is
committed; First, by these dissolute Players, which without regard of honesty
are not ashamed to exhibit the filthiest matters they can devise to the sight
of men: Secondly, by the beholders, which vouchsafe to hear and behold such
fil^hy things, to the great loss both of themselves and the time. There
comes much evil in at the ears, but more at the eyes, by these two open
windows death breaks into the soul. Nothing enters in more effectually
into the memory, thin that which comes by seeing: things heard do lightly
pass away, but the tokens of that we have seen, says Petrarch, sticks fast
in us^ whether we will or no. Many Snares of Plays.
have been entangled with the webs of these Spiders, who would gladly have
been at liberty when they could not. The webs are so subtily spun, that there
is no man that is once within them, that can avoid them without danger. None
can come within these snares that may escape untaken, be she Maid, Matron, or
whatsoever^ such sorce have their enchantments of pleasure to draw the
affections of the mind. This inward fight (let married men consider it) has
vanquished the chastity of many women; Lo these are the things, the lessons
that men learn at Stage Plays.
some by taking pity of the deceitful tears of the Stage-lover have been
moved by their complaint to rue on their secret friends, whom they have thought
to have tasted the like torment: some having noted the ensamples how Maidens
restrained from the marriage of those whom their friends have misliked, have
there learned a policy to preve^t their parents, by stealing them away: some
seeing by the ensample of the Stage Player one carried with two much liking of
another man's wife, having noted by what practice she has been assailed and
overtaken, have not failed to put the like in effect in earnest, that was before
shown in jest. The wiliness and craft of the Stage is not yet so great, as is
that without on the Scaffolds; for that they which are evil disposed no sooner
hear any thing spoken that may serve their turn, but they apply it to
themselves. Alas^say they to their familiar by them, Gentlewoman, is it not
pity this passioned Lover should be so martyred? And if he find her inclined
to foolish pity, as commonly such women are, then ^e applies the matter to
himself, and says, that he is likewise carried away with the liking of her:
craving that pity to be extended upon him, as she seemed to show toward the
afflicted amorous Stager. These running headed Lovers are grown so perfect
Scholars by long continuance at this School, that there is almost no word
spoken, but they can make matter of it to serve their turn. They can so surely
discover the conceits of the mind, and so cunningly handle themselves, and are
grown so subtle in working their matters, that neither the jealousy of Juno,
who suspecteth all things; nor the Quid faciet custos cum sint tot in urbe
Theatra? Ovid De Art Amandi. lib. 3. p. 208.
strait keeping of Danaes may debar; nor the watch^ulnesse of Argos with his
hundred eyes espy. Credit me, Fly Theaters you that would be honest.
there can be found no stronger engine to batter the honesty as well of wedded
Wives, as the chastity of Sic dum ornari cultius, dum liberius evagari virgins
volunt, virgins esse desinunt. Cyprian, De Habitu Virginum. Tractatus. page
242.
unmarried Maids and Widows, then are the hearing of common Plays. There,
wanton Wives Fables, and Pastoral songs of love, which they use in their
Comicall disco^rses (all which are taken out of the secret Amory of Venus, and
practicing bawdery,) turn all chastity upside down, and corrupt the good
disposition and manners of youth, insomuch that it is a miracle, if there be
found either any Woman or Maid which with these spectacles of strange lust, is
not oftentimes inflamed even unto fury. The nature of their Comedies are, for
the most part after one manner of nature, like the tragical Comedy of
Calistus, where the Bawdresse Scelestina, inflamed the Maiden Melibeia with her
Sorceries. Do we not use in these discourses to counterfeit Witchcraft,
charmed drinks, and amorous potions, thereby to draw the affections of men,
and to stir them up unto lust, to like even those whom of themselves they
abhor? The ensamples whereof stir up the ignorant multitude to seek by
such unlawful means the love and good will of others. I can tell you of a A
strange Example.
Story of like practice used of late by a jealous Wife to her Husband, whose
heart being, as she thought estranged, otherwise then of custom, did practice
with a Sorceresse to have some powder, which might have force to renew her
Husbands wonted good will toward her: but it had such a virtue in the
operation, that it wel^igh brought him his bane, for his memory thereby was
gone, so that if God had not dealt miraculously with him by reveiling it, it
had cost him his life. The like we read of Lucullus and Lucretius, who by
drinking such amorous confections lost first their wits, and afterward their
lives. The device of carrying and recarrying letters by Landresses, practicing
with Pedlers to transport their tokens by colorable means to sell their
Merchandices, and other kind of policies to beguile Fathers of their
Children, Husbands of their Wives, Gardians of their Wards, and Masters of
their Servants, i^ it not aptly taught in the He means Plays who are not
unfitly so called.
School of abuse? But hush, no more. I am sorry this School is not plucked
down, and the Schoolmasters banished this London.
City. Thus much I will tell them, if they suffer these Brothel-houses to
continue, or do in any wise allow them, the Lord will say unto them as the
Psalmist says. Psalm. 50.18, 21.
If thou saw a Thief thou wentest with him, and had thy part with
adulterers: thou have done these things, and because I held my peace, thou have
believed; wicked man, that I am like unto thee: but I will accuse thee, etc.
Thus far our own Play-poet from his own experience. By these three several
witnesses, to which I might accumulate See Bishop Babing^on, Master Perkins,
Master Dod, Master Elton, Master Brinsly, and most other Expositors on the 7.
Commandment, accordingly.
infinite others, it is most apparent, that Stage Plays are the ordinary
occasions of much actual whoredom, adultery, and such like beastly lewdness;
that they are the common Nurseries, Schools, and Seminaries of Adulterers,
Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores, and such polluted creatures. This
therefore should cause all chaste, all sober Christians to abominate them; all
Protestant States and Churches to abandon them. Balaeus Scriptorum. Brittaniae.
Centturia. 8. page 624. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 64. Espen^aeus,
De Continentia. lib. 3. cap. 4^ Bishop Morton, in his Protestants Appeal. lib.
1. cap. 2. sect. 36. and lib. 5. cap. 9. sect. 5. where many of their own
Authors are brought in condemning them.
We all condemn Pope Sixtus the IV. with the unholy holy Church of Rome, for
erecting and allowing public Stews, which yield above twenty thousand Ducats
of annual revenue to the Pope his filthiness, (for holiness in this respect
I cannot style it,) which sum is cast up among the constant annual revenue
of the Church; whereas God himself Deuteronomy. 23.18. Mich. 1.7.
forbids the hire of an Whore to be cast into the Treasury of his Sanctuary. If
then we all censure the Papists, and that deservedly, for tollerating, for
erecting Stews, where their Priests, their Monks, and Friars, who have vowed
perpetual chastity (such is their hypocritical holiness) may recreate
themselves at pleasure without any breach of vow, their own Bishops enioyning
every of them to pay an annual pension for their Concubines, whether they use
or use them not, because they may use them if they will: Sed and recentioribus
temporibus Sixtus Pontifex maximus Romae nobile admodu^ lupanar extruxit. In
Italia Romana scorta in singulas hebdomadas julium pendet Pontifici, qui census
annuus nonnunquam viginti millia Ducatos excedit, adeoque Ecclesiae proceru^ id
munus est, ut una cum Ecclesiarum proventibus etiam lenociniorum numerent
mercedem. Sic enim ego illos supputantes aliquando audivi. Habet inquientes,
ille duo beneficia, unum curan^um aureorum viginti, alterum prioratum ducatorum
quadraginta, and tres putanas in Burdello, quae reddunt singulis hebdomadibus
julios viginti. Iam vero nihilominus lenones sunt Episcopi illi and officiales,
qui censum pro Concubinatu a Sacerdoribus quotannis extorquent, idque tam
palam, ut apud plebem ipsam in proverbium abirer, illa ^orum Concubinaria
exactio sive lenocinium quo dicunt: habeat vel non habeat, aureum solvet pro
Concubina, and habeat si velit. Sed in regno avaritiae nihil turpitudini
adscribitur quod lucrum pareat. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. ^4.
Espenc^us in Titum. cap. 1. page 67.68. and De Continentia. lib. 3. cap. 4.
shall we our selves erect or tolerate Play Houses, which are no other
Theatrum pudoris publici lupanarium. Cyprian, De Spectaculis. lib. Theatrum
proprie Veneris domus and sacrarium. Tertullian, De Spectaculis. cap. 9.10.
etc. Idem vero Theatrum, idem and prostibulum, eo quod post ludos exactos
meretrices ibi prosternantur. Isi^d^r Hisp. Originum. lib. 18. cap. 42.
Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. See p. 390.
Theatrum publicum incontinentiae gymnasium: Babilonica fornax, etc. Chrysostom.
De Paenitentia Homilia. 8. Tom. 5. Col. 750. C.
but a public St^wes, a professed Brothel-house, as the recited Authors, and
the Fathers style them? God forbid. Our Religion, our God enjoyne us not to do
it, in that they command us: Exodus 20.14. Math. 5.27, 28.
not to commit adultery: 1 Cor. 6.18.
to flee fornication, and uncleanesse; yea, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
not so much as once to name them (much less to act, to countenance, or
propagate them) as becomes Saints. Our Stage Plays therefore must certainly
be sinful, and abominable even in this respect.

SCENA QVINTA.
THe fifth effect of Stage Plays, is the general depravation Argument 31.


That which ordinarily corrupts the minds, and vitiates the manners, both of
the Actors and Spectators, must doubtless be unlawful, yea abominable unto
Christians, if not intolerable in any Christian wel-ordered Commonweal.

But Stage Plays Scil^cet expectes ut r^adat matter hoter honestos, Aut alios
mores quam quos habet? Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 50.
ordinarily corrupt the minds, and vitiate the manners, both of their Actors
and Spectators.

Therefore, they must doubtless be unlawful, yea abominable unto Christians,
intolerable in any Christian wel-ordered Commonweal.

The Major is most apparently evident: First, from the very principals of
reason: Quic quid enim efficit tale, est magis tale. Aristot. Poster. lib. 1.
cap. 2. sect. 14. Keckerman. System. Logic. lib. 1. cap. 19.
For whatever vitiates another thing (especially men's minds and manners) must
needs be corrupt it self, the depravation of the one, Gal. 6.8. Ephesians. 4.22,
29. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Pet. 1.4. Rev. 19.2.
arising m^erely from the pravity of the other: If Stage Plays therefore
corrupt the manners, the minds of others, they cannot but be ill themselves.
Secondly, from the grounds of Theology: which as they enjoyne men 2 Pet. 1.4.
to avoid the corruptions that are in the world through lust: 1 These. 5.22.
to eschew all occasions of evil, Isay 52.11. ^. Cor. 6.14. to 18. Ephesians.
4.29. cap. 5.3, 4, 11.
all scurrilous idle speeches, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 6.7. Prove. 5. 8, 9,
10, 11.
all wicked places, all lewd companions which may defile their souls, their
manners; and Iam. 1.27.
to keep themselves unspotted of the world: So they condemn 1 These. 5.22.
Rev. 19.2. Mat. 6.13. c. 12.33, 35. c. 15.18, 19, 20.
all occa^ions of evil, all dishonest contaminating pleasures of sin which
filthily disteine men's souls. Thirdly^ from the rudiments of civil policy.
For as Plin. Panegyr. Trajano dictus. Zenophon. De Instit. Cyri. Hist. l. 1.2
Osorius De Regum Iustit. lib. 1. Aristot. Polit. lib. 7. Chrysostom. Ho^. 17. Ad
Populu^ Antiochiae. vid. Ibidem.
the happiness, honor, life and safety of every Commonweal consists ^n the
ingenuity, temperance, and true virtuous disposition of the peoples minds and
manners; so the Nulla pestis est ^ajor in Civitate quam moru^ licentia: nulla
lues tetrior quam improbitas. Nam ut delicate viventium corpora laxatis and
dissolutis nervis languida redduntur, discordi^que elementorum corrumpuntur;
ita malis civium moribus inermes ^iunt Civitates, eorumque perfidia magna
vastantur imperia. Case. Polit. l. 1. p. 1.
distemperature, malady, and confusion of it always iss^e, from the exorbitant
obliquity, the uncontroled dissoluteness, and degeneracy of their vicious
lives, See Osorius, De Regum Instit. l. 8. f. 254.255.
which bring certain ruin. Whence the most prudent Princes, and Republiques
in all ages, have See Zenophon. De Instit. Cyri Hist. l 1.2. Plato, De Repub.
Dialog 4. and L^gum Dial. 7. Aristot. Polit. l. 7. c. 15.17. and l. 8. c. 1. to
5. Plutarchi. Laconica Instit. and De Educat. Puerorum. Bodinus, De Repub. l.
6. c. 1. Erasmus, De Educatione Puerorum. AEneas Sylvius, De Liberorum
Educatione. Maphaeus Vegius, De Educatione Puerorum. l. 1.2.
constantly suppressed all such pleasures, as might either empoyson the younger
peoples manners, or pervert their minds. The Major therefore is irrefragable.

The Minor, is an avowed truth, not only ratified by experience, but by the
concurrent testimony of sundry States and Writers in^ all ages, both Pagan and
Christian. To begin with Pagan Authors, States, and Magistrates. The
unparalleld Philosopher Plato, as his De Repub. Dialog. 8. and 10. p. 696.697
Legum Dialog. 2. p. 580.581.
own Works, with Cicero. Tuscul. Quaest. l. 2. p. 449. Plutarchi Plato and.
De Audiendis Poetis. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 18. l. 8. c. 13.14,18,21.
and Ludov. Vives Notae Ibidem. Franciscus Zepherus. Epist. Nuncupat. in
Apologet. Tertulliani. Agrippa, De Vanit. Scient. c. 4. Caelius Rhodig. Ant.
Lect. l. 7. c. 2. Rodolphus Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. M. Northbrooke^ M.
Stubs, D. Reinolds, Gosson, and others in their Treatises against Stage Plays,
etc.
sundry others testify, banished all Stage Players, Play-poets, and Play-poems
out of his Commonweal, as being the chief instruments to effeminate the
minds, to vitiate the manners of the people, (especially the younger sort) and
to withdraw them from the study of vertue^ to the love of vice. Politic. lib.
7. cap. 17. and l. 8. cap. 3.5, 6, 7. See Act. 7. Sce^e 6. and here page 366.
Aristotle, the Oracle of all humane literature, excludes these Stage Plays
out of his Republicke; debarring youths and children from them, as being apt
to poison both their minds and manners, with their gross scurrility and
lascivious shows. Plutarchi Solon. p. 31. Diog^ Laertij. l. 1. Solon. p. 46.
Solon, the wisest of the ancient Grecian Lawgivers, rejected Stage Plays; not
only as lying, but deceitful fictions; which would quickly teach men both to
cheat, to steal, to play the hypocrites and dissemblers, and to circumvent men
in their dealings, to the public prejudice: whence he deemed them unsufferable
mischiefs in a City. Tuscul. Quaest lib. 4. near the end. De Legibus. l. 1.
near the end. and l. 2. near the midst.
Tully, declaimes against all pleasurable effeminate amorous Plays and Poets,
as the contagions of men's minds and manners, through their excessive delicacy:
whence he advises the Romans to abandon them, lest they should effeminate and
corrupt them as they had done the Grecians, and so subvert their Empire. See
Plutarch. De Gloria. Atheniensium. lib. Thucidides Hist. l. 5. p. 477 Justin.
Hist. l. 6.
Seneca informs us, Nihil vero, tam damnosum bonis moribus, quam in aliquo
spe^taculo desidere: Tunc enim per voluptatem facilius viti^ surrepunt. Seneca
Epist. 7.
that there is nothing so pernicious to good manners, as to sit idly at
Stage Plays: for then vices easily creep upon us through pleasure: And
therefore Epist. 90.122, 123 Not. Quaest. lib. 7. cap. 31.32. and Controvers.
lib. 1. Proaemio. See August. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 9.13.
he much bewailes the frequent concourse of the Roman Youth to Plays and
Theaters, as an undoubted symptom of a degerated declining State, then near
to ruin, Plutarchi Solon. Laconica Instituta. De Gloria Atheniensium. De
Audiendis Poetis. lib. and Symposi. lib. 7. Quaest. 8.
Plutarch, an eminent Morali^t and Historian, disapproves all Stage Plays; not
only as lascivious vanities, occasioning much prodigal vain expense to the
Republikes damage; but as contagious evils^ which blast the virtues, mar the
ingenuous education, corrupt the lives and manners of all those who frequent
them, and with all he reports of De Audiendis Poetis. page 26.
Gorgias, that he reputed Tragedies and Stage Plays, mere impostures. Inter
aliarum parva principia rerum, ludorum quoque prima origo ponenda visa est, ur
apparere^. quam absano initio res in hanc opulentis regnis vix tolerabilem
insania^ venerit, etc. Nec tamen ludorum primum initium procurandis
religionibus datum aut religio^e animos, aut corpora morbis levavit, etc.
I^aque cum piaculorum magis conquisitio animos quam corpora morbi afficerent,
etc. Livy Hist. Romans lib. 7. sect. 3.4. ^ran^^furti. 1609. page 255.256.
Livy the gravest Roman Historian, writes of Plays: That they are scarce a
tolerable folly or m^dnesse in wealthy Kingdoms: affirming withall^ that
these Stage Plays which were brought into Rome at first with an intent to
assuage the Plague, and t^ atone their en^aged Devil gods; did far more
infect the minds of the Romans, then the Pestilo^ce did their bodies. Theatra
excogitata cultus Deorum, and hominum delectationis causa, non sin^ aliquo
pacis rubore voluptatem and religionem civili sanguine scenicorum portentorum
gratia macularunt. l. 2 cap. 4. De Spectaculis. sect. 1. Raphelengij. 1612.
page 56.
Valerius Maximus relating the manner and cause of introducing Stage Plays
among the Romans, records; that they were brought in, and devised only for the
worship of their Devill-Idols and the delight of men; and that not without the
blush or shame of peace; the Romans having steined both their pleasures and
religion with civil blood, by means of scenicall Prodigies. So that he
reputed the tollerating of Plays, a blemish to the Roman State, which he there
concludes, to be intolerable mischiefs in a Republike, and grand empoysoners
of men's manners, from the Massilienses example, which he there applaudes.
Plato. Socratis Apolog. p. 12 Diog. La^rtij. lib. 2. Socrates.
Socrates, the very wisest Grecian, by the express resolution of the Delphian
Oracle, Plato and Diogines La^rt. Ibid and AElian. Variae Hist. lib. 2. cap. 13.
condemned all Comedies as pernicious, lascivious, scurrilous, and unseemely
pastimes, to which he refused to resort; which caused Aristophanes, that
carping Comedian, to traduce him on the Stage. Oration Ad Nicoclem. page 46 47.
and De Pace Oration p. 321. Edit. 1613.
Isocrates, that grave Graecia^ Orator, declaimes against all Plays and Actors
as pernicious scurrilous, fabulous, ridiculous, invective, and expensive, not
tolerable in a City. That valiant Roman Neque Histrionem vllu^, neque pluris
pretij coquum, quam villicum habeo, quae mihi lubet confiteri, etc. Apud
Sallusti. Bellum Iugurthinum. page 158.160. Coloniae. 1615.
Marius, in his Oration to the Roman Senate and people; produces this as an
argument both of his wisdom, temperance, valor and virtue, which some
objected to him as a disparagement, that he kept never a Stage Player, nor
costly Cook about him, as other voluptuous, eff^minate dissolute Romans did,
whom he styles, most filthy men. Caius Plinius Secundus in his Idem ergo
populus ille aliquando scenici imperatoris spectator and applausor, nu^c in
Pantomimos quoque adversatur and dam^at ef^^eminatas arts, and indecora seculo
studia. Ibidem. page 38. See page 45.
Pauegyricke to the Emperor Traian, styles Stage Plays; effeminate arts and
studies, altog^ther unbeseeming the world; whence he highly applaudes this
Emperor for banishing them the Roman Empire, whose honor they had blemished,
whose virtues they had cankered, and in his Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 22.
Epistles likewise, he declaimes against them, as intolerable mischiefs in a
Commonweal, for the precedent reasons. Cornelius Tacit^s, an Historian of no
small repute, informs us, Caeteru^ abolitos paulatim patrios mores, funditus
ev^rti per accita^ lasciviam, ut quod usquam corru^pi and corrumpere queat, in
urbe visatur, degeneresque studijs externis iuventus, gymnasia and otia and
turpes amores ex^rcendo, principe and Senatu auctoribus, qui non modo vi^ijs
licentiam permiserint, sed vim adhibeant, etc. Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. vid.
Ibidem.
that the hereditary ancient manners of the Romans were ^y little and little
corrupted and abolished, and their public discipline subverted by
Stage Plays; whence he de^laimes against them as the very plagues, and
^verthrow of the Roman State: Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. and lib. 16. cap. 1.2. vid.
Ibidem.
inveighing much against that Monster Nero, who corrupted the Roman Nation, and
drew them on to all kind of vice^ of luxury and lewdness, by these accursed
Stage Plays, to the public ruin. And not only he, but likewise Histori^e.
l. 5. Edit. Basillae. 1557. p. 444.
Polibius, Romans Hist. l. 57. p. 798. and l. 59. p. 827.828.
Dion Cassius, Historiae. l. 6. p. 79.
Justin, Suet. N^^o. sect. 11.12, 21, 22, 26. Tiberius. sect. 47. Caligula.
sect. 18.21, 54, 55. Cl^ud^u. sect. 6.7, 21^34.
Suetonius, De Gloria Atheniensum. lib.
Plutarch, Historiae. l 1.
Herodian, Ejusdem. Verus p 67.68, 69. and Maximinus and Balbinus. p. 301.
Julius Capitolinus, Ejusdem. Gallieni duo p. 305.306, 309, 310, 314 315, 319.
Trebellius Pollio, Ejus Carinus. p. 447.449, 450.
Flavius Vopiscus, and Iuvenal. S^tyr. 8.
Iuvenal. (to pass by Rerum Romans l. 9 and 10. Tiberius, Caligula, Nero,
H^liogabalus, etc.
E^tropius, Histor. l. 7. c. 7.16. and 37.
Orosius, Annal. Tom. 2. in the lives of Nero, Caligula, and these other
Emperors.
Zonaras, Imper^^ll History, in the lives of these Emperors.
Grimston, Chronogr. in these Emperors lives.
Opmeerus, with other Christian Historians) condemn and censure, Su^dae
Historic^. C^ligula and Ardaburius. Ioannis Sari^berien^is, De Nugis Curialium.
l. 1. c. 7.8. See I.G. his refutation of the Apology for Actors. p 12.13.
Nero, Claudius, Tiberius, Commodus, Heliogabalus, Verus, Balbinus, Maximinus,
Gallienus, Solonius, Carinus, Carinus homo omnium contaminatissimus, adulter,
si^quens corruptor inventutis, enormibus se vitijs and ingenti faeditate
macula^it. Amicos optimos quosque religavit: pessimum quemque elegit aut
tenuit. Mimis, meretricibus, pantomimis, cantoribus atque lenonibus, palatium
implevit, etc. Flav^ Vopisci Carinus. page 446.447.
and other dissolute Roman Emperors; for acting, countenancing and frequenting
Plays; and harboring Stage Players, (with whom they sometimes fraught their
Courts) which did not only exhaust their treasures, and impoverish their
subjects, but even corrupt their discipline, and strangely vitiate and deprave
not only their own, but the very peoples minds and manners, by drawing them
on to all licentious dissoluteness, and excess^ of vice, to the very utter
subversion of their States, See August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 33. and lib. 2.
cap. 2.
as these Authors jointly testify, whose walls could not secure them when as
their virtues, their manners were gone quite to ruin. See Sermon. l. 1. Satyr.
10. p. 192 193, 195. Epist. l. 1. Epist 6 p. 246. Epist. 19^ p. 274. Epist. l.
2 Ep. 1. p. 278. to 285. De Art Poetic. lib. page 298. 299, 302. to 306.
Horace and Iuvenal. in their several Satyricall Poems, together with Gellius
Noctium At^icaru^. lib. 20. cap. 4. inveigh against these Stage Plays,
Players, and Stage-houses, as the occa^ions of much villainy and lewdness; the
corrupters of youth; especially of the female sex, who were made Strumpets by
them; and as the shames, the blemishes of the Cities where they were
permitted. The wanton Poet Ovid; who was far enough, I am sure, from all
Puritanicall preciseness, as men now style it, is even a rank Puritan in
this case of Stage Plays, For after he had informed his bawdy leacherous
companions; Cuneis an habent spectacula totis Quod securus ames, quodque inde
excerpere possis? Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 43.44. See p. 45.53, 54 55, 56, 58.
Populi frons. durior hujus, Qui sedet and spectat triscurria Patriciorum. Res
haud mira tamen citharaedo principe mimus Nobilis: haec ultra quid crit nisi
ludu^; and illic dedecus urbis habes, etc. Ibidem. Satyr. 8. page 82. See
Satyr. 10. p. 94 99 Satyr. 11. p. 106. 110, 111. Satyr. 14. p. 193. Edit.
Londini. 1615.
that Plays and Play Houses were the best places of Mart of unchaste
bargains; the most commodious haunts for amorous Lovers, and Whore-masters;
the most dangerous snares to entrap all beautiful persons, and the only
places for Panders, Whore-masters, Whores and such like beastly Menmonsters to
catch their desired prey; in these lascivious dis^ikes; which notably discry
the intolerable mischiefs both of Plays and Theaters: Ovid, De Art Amandi.
lib. 1. page 160.161. Edit. Operum ^ius in 16. Raphelengij. 1611. pars 3.
Sed tu praecipu^ curvis venare Theatris.
Haec loca sunt votis fertiliora tuis.
Illic iuvenies quod ames, quod ludere possis;
Quodque semel tangas, quodque tenere velis.
Vt redit itque frequens longum formica per agmen
Granifero solitum dum vehit ore cibum, etc.
Sic ruit ad celebres cultissima faemina ludos:
Copia iudicium saepe morata meum est.
Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae:
Ille locus casti damna pudoris habet.
Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule ludos.
Cum iuvit viduos rapta Sabina viros, etc.
In gradibus sedit populus de cespite factis.
Qualibet hirsutas fronde tegente comas.
Recipient oculisque notant sibi quisque puellam,
Quam velit: and tacito pectore multa movent
Dumque rudem praebente modum tibicine Thusco,
Lydius aequat am ter pede pulsat humum, etc.
Protenus exiliunt, animum clamore fatentes,
Virginibus cupidas inijciuntque manus, etc.
Romule militibu scisti dare commoda solis,
Haec mihi si dederi^ commoda, miles er^.
Scilicet ex illo solemnia more Theatra,
Nunc quoque formosis insidiosa manent.


When he had thus, I say, discovered the lewdness of these Stage Plays,
though to a lewd intent, and withal informed Lovers, that it was impossible
for Parents, for Husbands, with all their care and industry to keep their
Wives or Children chaste, as long as there are so many Play Houses suffered in
the City, in these four verses: De Art Amandi^ lib. 3. page 208.
Quid faciet ^ustos? cum sint tot in urbe Theatra:
Cum spectet iunctos illa libenter equos:
Cum sedeat Phariae sacris operata iuvencae:
Quoque sui comites ire vetantur eat.
(A good caveat for Husbands, for Parents, to keep their Wives, their
Daughters from all Plays and Play-houses^) In his Book De Remedio Amoris: he
advises all those who would live chastely, and keep under their unchaste
desires; to withdraw themselves from Stage Plays: to cast away all
Play-bookes, Plays, and amorous Poems, especially Tibullus, and his own
wanton Verses; in these ensuing lines.

De Remedio Amoris. lib. 2. page 230.
At tanti tibi sit non indulgere Theatris,
Dum been de vacuo pectore cedat amor:
Enervant animos cytharae, cantusque lyraeque:
Et vox and numeris brachia m^ta suis,
Illic assidue ficti saltan^ur amantes.
Quid caveas, actor, quid iuvet art docet.
Eloquar invitus: teneros ne tange Poetas:
Summoneo dotes impias esse mea^.
Callimachum fugito; non est inimisus amori:
Et cum Callimacho tu quoabque; ^^e noces.
Carmina quis potnit tuto legisse Tibulli?
Vel tua cuius opus Cynthea sola fuit?
Quis potuit lecto ^urus discedere Gallo?
Et mea nescio quid carmina tale sonant, etc.
And to show his utter detestation of Plays and Play Houses, Quid fi
scripsissem mimos obscena iocantes? Qui semper iuncti crimen amoris habent. In
quibus assidue cultus procedit adulter, Verbaque dat stulto callida nupta viro.
Nec satis incestis temerari vocibus aures. Assuescunt oculi multa puden^a pati.
Cumque fefellit amans aliqua novitate maritum, Plauditur and magno palma favore
datur. Haec tu sp^ctasti, spectandaque saepe dedisti; Scenica vidisti laetus
adulteria. Tristium. l. 2. p. 160.
whose amorous lewdness he at large disciphers: he informs Augustus, that
they are the Seminaries of all wickedness: the frequent occasions of much
sin, much lewdness and adultery unto very many; the places of many
adulterous meetings, and whorish contracts: whereupon he persuades Augustus,
utterly to demolish all Play Houses and Theaters; to danme up all the port^ls
and passages to them; and to suppress all Stage Plays; that so these their
pernicious fr^its might be prevented. All which he thus elegantly expresses.

Tristium. l. 2. page 155.
Vt tamen ho^ fateor: ludi quoque semina praebent
Neq^itiae; tolli tota Theatra iube
Peccandi causam quam multis saepe dederun^:
Ma^tia cum durum sternit arena solum?
Tolla^ur Circu^, no^ tuta licentia Circi est:
Hic sedet ignoto iunct^ puella viro.
Cum quaedam spati^ntur in hac ut amator eodem
Conveniat: quare porticus ulla patet?
Omnia perversas p^ssunt corrumpere mentes.
What could any Puritan (as our profane Play-haunters style them) have said
m^re against Plays then this? and what can any Christian speak le^se against
them, when as a profane lascivious Heathen Poet has written so much? If
therefore we are loath to pass a censure upon Stage Plays, or to abandon
Play Houses for fear we should be as good a^ Puritans; yet let us now at ^ast
renounce them, out of ^hame, lest we prove far worse then Pagans, lest
Horace, lest Iuvenal, and these forenamed Heathen Authors: lest wanton Ovid:
or obscene Porpertius (who thus cries out of Theaters: Elegiarum. l. 2. Eleg.
22. Raphelengij. 1613. p. 148.
O nimis exit^o nata Theatra meo!)
should be more gracious, holy and precise then we; whose holiness Mat.
5.20. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16.
should exceed even that of Scribes and Pharesies, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17. to
32. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
much more then this of wanton Pagan Poets, See before, p. 97.98. Gerardi
Vossij Disputat. 35. De Virtutibus Gentilium. Dr. Prideaux Lectura. 8. De
Salute Ethnicorum. and Beda. See BB. Vshers Gorteschalci Historia. p. 4. Mark
16.16. John 3.18, 36. Romans 14.23. Rev. 20.6, 15. c. 21.27. cap. 22.14, 15.
which carried them no farther then to Hell; what ever some old, some new
Pelagians have dreamed to the contrary. To pass from Pagan Authors, to Heathen
Magistrates, States and Emperors. The Plutarchi Laconica Instituta. Platonis
Laches. p. 390. Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiq. Romans l. 7. c. 9. p. 709.
ancient Lacedaemonians, excluded all Stage Plays out of Sparta, permitting
neither Comidies nor Tragedies to be acted in it, lest their youth should be
corrupted, their Laws derided and brought into contempt. And when as an
Embassad^r of Rhodes demanded o^ a Lacedemonian, what was the occasion of their
laws against Players and Iesters, since they showed pleasure to the people,
and the people lost nothing by it, but laughed at their folly. Plutarchi
Apothegmata. Dial of Princes. l.3^ c. 44. and I. G. his Refutation of the
Apology for Actors. p. 30.
The Lacedemonian replied, that Lycurgus saw, he^rd or read of some great
damage that Pla^ers and Iesters might do^ in the Commonweal, since he had
established so strait a Law against them. But this I know, that we Greeks are
b^tter weeping with our Sages, then the Romans laughing at their Fools. The
Athenians, though Platonis Laches. p 390. AEmilij Probi Praefatio. August. De
Civit. D^i. l. 2. c. 10.11, 12, 13, 14. and l. 4. c. 28.
they much h^noured Actors, Players, and Play-poets at the first; yet growing
wiser by deare-bought experience at the last, Plutarch De Gloria Atheniensium.
lib. Thucidides Histor. l. 5. p. 477. Justin. Histor. l. 6. p 69.
when ^hey had effeminated their minds, exhausted their treasure, the sins
of their Wars, and brought upon them sundry mischiefs; they abandoned all
comicall Stage Plays as pernicious evils, Plutarch^ De Gloria Atheniensium.
lib. Vol^teranus. Comm^n^. l 29. page 323.
enacting this public law against them, that no man should from thence forth
presume to pen or act ^ Comedy; and Chrysostom. Hom. 13^ in 1 Cor. ^. Tom. 4.
Col. 356.
making common Actors thence-forth infamous. The very Heathens Valerius
Maximus. l. 2 c. 4. sect. 7. Alexander ab Alexand. Genalium Dierum l. 6. c. 20.
Agrippa, De Vani^. Scient. c. 20. Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. Thomas
Gualesius. Lect. 77. in Proverb. Salomonis.
Massilienses, were so Puritanically rigid in this case, that they would upon
no terms, no entreaties whatsoever, permit any Stage Plays to be acted
within their City or Territories; for this very reason; lest the beholding of
them should corrupt the minds and manners of their Youth; and draw them on to
commit those vices in earnest, which were acted before them but in jest. The
ancient Pagan Romans, as they reputed all common Actors infamous (as the Livy,
Romans Hist. l. 7. sect. 2.3. Valerius Maximus. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4. AEmilij
Probi Praefatio. Plato Legum Dialog. 7. Cicero Oration pro Publio Quinctio.
Gellius Noctium Attic. l. 20. c. 4. Macrobius Saturnal. l. 2 c. 7. Tacitus
Annal. l. 14. cap. 2.3. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 10. to 1529. and l. 4.
c. 28. with sundry others fore-quoted. p. 133.134. Summa Angelica. Tit.
Infamia. Photij Nomocanonis. Tit. 13. c. 21.22. Theod. Balsomon. Comment. Ibid.
Gratian. Distinctio. 33.48, 86. and Causa. 4. Quaest. 6. Tostatus. Tom. 3. in
Matthew. 6. Quaest. 38. and 67. fol. 40. E. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi. pars
^. c. 5.4. Alvarus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae. l. 1. Artic. 49. A. and l.
2. Artic. 28. Digestorum. l. 3. Tit. 2. De his qui notantur infamia. Corpus
Iuris Civilis. Tom. 1. p. 342. and Budaeus and Gothofredus Ibidem. See p. 133.
before^ and Bu^engerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 51. De Infamia Theatri.
Civilians and our own 14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4.
Statutes now esteem them,) disfranchising them their tribe as unworthy
persons; and disabling them to inherit lands, to give any public testimony
between man and man, or to bear any honor, office or dignity in the
Commonweal, ( Quanta confessio est malae rei cujus auctores cum acceptissimi
sint sine nota non sunt? Tertul. De Spectac. c. 22.
a very great evidence and acknowledgement of the evilnesse of Stage Plays, as
Tertullian and others descant on it; since Players were thus branded with the
note of infamy, even then when Plays themselves were in their first and best
request;) even so Priscae Romanorum leges Theatrae stuprandis moribus orientia
statim destruebant. Tertul. Apologia Advers. Gentes. cap. 6. Tom. 2. page 589.
upon which Franciscus Zephyrus thus paraphraseth. Prisci Romani lasciviam
Theatralem ex lege maxima cura comprimebant, gnari quantum moribus civium
obesset publica illa spectaculorum immodesta licentia. Ibidem. page 591.
Guevara, his Dial of Princes. lib. 3. cap. 44. Augustinus De Civitate Dei. lib.
1. cap. 31.32, 33. and lib. 2. cap. 12.13. and Suetonij Octavius. sect. ^5.
they demolished all their Theaters, together with the Galleries built about
them by a public edict, lest the minds and mann^rs of the people should be
effeminated and defloured by them, to the public prejudice. Ioannes Antonius
Campanus, De Gerendo Magistratu. lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 15. page 819. Joan.
S^risberiensis, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. Ibidem. page 345. and
Plutarchi Themistocles.
Themistocles the famous Athenian General, enacted a Law, that no Magistrates
should resort to Stage Plays, le^t the Commonwealth it self should seem to
loyter and play in them, (Et utinam audiretur a nostris ( writes De Nugis
Curialium. l. 1. c. 4. p. 345. G.
John Sarisbury) ut saltem in provectiori aetate nugis suis republicae seria
anteferrent:) and even before this law of his, it was an ancient custom in
Athens, which was long observed, that not the leas^ admittance into the Theater
should be given unto any but such who should sing and utter honest things; lest
the Magistrates and people there present should be made spectators of dishonest
^asti^es, which might draw them on to vice. Not to speak of the Goths and
other Chyrsostom. Homil. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 299.300. Salvian, De
Gubernat. Dei^ lib. 6. page 195.
Barbarians, who censured and condemned Stage Plays as effeminate and
ridiculous superfluities. Antiqu. Germaniae. l. 1. c. 20 Lugduni Bat. 1616.
page 181.182.
Philippus Gl^verius informs us out of Tacitus, (who writes thus of the German
women. De Moribus Germanorum. sect. 6.7. See 8.
Ergo sep^a pudicitia agunt, nullis spectaculorum illecebris, corrupta:) that
the ancient Pagan Germans knowing with what things the chastity of women was
most corrupted among other Nations, did wholly abandon Stage Plays, with which
they were unacquainted: of the corruption of which spectacles Seneca has
spoken most truly, That there is nothing so prejudicial to good manners as to
sit idly at a Play^ for then vice^ creep more easily upon us through pleasure.
O vocem fatidicam atque Divinam, tantoque sapien^i^ ad doctore dignissimam. Ho^
ille homo Gentilis divino^um praeceptorum quae per Moysen olim aliosque
Propheras Deus aeternus populo suo tradidit, plane iudis. Nos igitur nunc, qui
Christianae disciplinae militiae que dedimus nomina, qua front ludorum
spectacula, non solum excusamus, sed laudamus etiam atque ultro instituimus,
quae san^ eo ^inus erant toleranda quo magis veteris illius gentilisque
modestiae modum excedunt, etc. Ibidem.
O Prophetical and Divine speech most worthy so great a Teacher of Wisdom!
This verily writes this Heathen man, who was al^ogether ignorant of those
divine Precepts which God by Moses and other Prophets has delivered to his
people. We therefore who have now given up our names to Christ's discipline and
warfare, with what face do we now not only excuse our Stage Plays, but
like^ise applaude, and voluntarily instit^te them? which verily are so much the
less to be tolerated, by how much the more they exceed the measure of that
old Heathenish modesty. For now vices do not only steal upon us through the
pleasure of beholding: but they are as it were by force thrust into sincere and
pur^ minds, by examples, by voice, by hand and action: so that I verily
believe, there were never any inventors and Actors of Plays more corruptly
licentious then ours now. But these things are rather foreign, then our own,
for even now the Germans wives are less solicited with Stage Plays then the
wives of other Nations. The ancient and modern Germans then, by this Authors
testimony, abandoned Stage Plays, as the very Seminaries of lewdness, the
occasion of adultery, and the grand empoysoners, especially of all women's
manners; which I would wish all husbands to observe. Scipio Nasica, that
unparalleld Roman General, as Livy, Romans Hist. Epit. l. 48. Augustine. De
Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32, 33. and l. 2. c. 12.13, 27. Cicero De Repub. l 4.
Valerius Maximus. l. 2. c. 4. Velleius Paterculus. Hist. l. 1. p. 16. Appianus.
Hist. lib. 1. Eutropius Rerum Romanorum. Hist. l. 4. fol. 43. Polychronicon. l.
3. c. 34. fol. 131. Genebrandi Chronicon. l. 2. p 302. Bulengerus De Theatro.
l. 1. c. 13. M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abus^s. p. 103. Tertullian, De
Spectaculis. cap. 10. and Apologia Advers. Gentes. cap. 6. cum multis alijs,
who write against Stage Plays.
sundry Authors testify, did by a public decree of the whole Senate demolish
the Roman Theaters, and interdict their Stage Plays, as the very bane and
ruin of the Romans manners, virtues, valor, and the like: as the Seminaries
of all lewdness, effeminacy, idleness, vice and wickedness; and the very
overtures of the Commonweal: whose welfare was altogether inconsistent with
lascivious Plays. Which worthy act of his, is much appla^ded by Livy, Tully,
S. Augustine, and others here quoted in the margent. Pliny, Epist. lib. 4.
Epist. 22. vid. Argumentum Epistolae praefixum.
Trebonius Rufinus, banished all Iusts and Stage Plays out of Vienna, over
which he was Governor, as infectious to their manners: for which when as he
was accused before the Roman Senate by some dissolute Malcontents, because
he did it of his own head, without any direction from the Senate; Iunius
Mauricus, a grave Roman Senator t^^ke part with him, and justified this act of
his, which he not only much applauded, but wished openly withal, that Placuit
agona tolli qui mores Viennensium infecerat, ut noster hic omnium. Nam
Viennen^^um vitia inter ipsos residunt, nostra late vagantur. Vtque in
corporibus sic in imperio, gravissimus est morbus qui a capite diffunditur.
Ibidem.
all Stage Plays were likewise expelled out of Rome, as well as out of Vienna;
For the vices of the Viennians (says he) reside only among themselves, but
the Romans wander far abroad; and as in bodies, so in Empires, that disease
is most grievous which is diff^sed from the head to the inferior members.
Marcus Autelius. cap. 14. and Guevara. l. 3 cap. 44.
Octavius the Nephew of Julius Caesar, as Marcus Aurelius informs us, drove
away all Stage Players and Iesters out of Rome, as insufferable mischiefs in
the State. I read indeed in Suetonij Octaviu^. sect. 43.44, 45.
Suetonius, and Romans Hist. l. 51. page 606.607. and Grim^ton. page 37.
Dion Cassius, that Octavius (whom we usually call Augu^tus Caesar) was at
first very much delighted with Stage Plays, (the means percha^ce of making
him an Suetonij Octavius. sect. 69. See Scene 3. and 4. before.
adulterer) in the beholding of which he spent much time, and now and then
whole days together. I read likewise, Coercionem in Histriones. Magistratibus
in omni tempore and loco lege vetere permissam, ademit, praeterquam ludos and
scenam. Suctonij Octavius. sect. 45.
that he took away the power of punishing and suppressing Stage Players
permitted to the Roman Magistrates at all times and places by the ancient law,
(an infallible evidence that the ancient Roman laws condemned Stage Plays and
Actors;) yet so, as that he reserved the power of punishing Players, and
reforming Stage Plays to himself; by virtue of which power; he first of all
Dion Cassius. Romans Hist. lib. 54. p. 682^ See Act 7. Scene 6.
inhibited all Roman Knights, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen from acting or dancing
on the Stage, prohibited likewise by a former law: Secondly, he commanded one
Stephanio, (some call him Epiphanius,) an excellent Player and Iester (who upon
a Holyday to show this Emperor some pleasure, and hoping to receive a good
reward, went thrice unto his Palace: one time in the attire of a Page, and
another time in the habit of a Roman Matron, and so truly counterfeited
every thing, that it seemed not to be him, but the selfsame person he
represented;) t^ be whipped publik^ly three several times one after another
about the Theater, and then to be banished for this fact of his. And when he
complained that the Emperor commanded Vagabonds to be whipped but once, and he
thrice: Suetonij Octavius sect. 4^ Guevara, his Dial of Princes. lib. 3. cap.
44. page 512. I.G. his Re^utation of the Apology ^or Actors. p. 36.3^
Augustus replied: Once they shall whip thee for the injury thou did to the
Roman Matron whom thou representedst: The second time they shall whip thee for
the presumption thou had, to act it in my presence. The third, for the time
thou have made diverse lose for beholding and hearing thee. For I^sters and
Players deserve not so much punishment for their Jests and Plays, as for the
time which they lose, and cause others to lose. Thirdly, Suetonij Octavius.
s^ct. ^^.
he commanded Hylas an eminent Stage Player, upon a complaint of the Pret^r
against him, to be publicly whipped in the Court of his Palace. Fourthly,
(...), Ibid. Guev^ra, his Dial of Princes. lib. 3. c. 44. page 512. I.G. his
Refutation of the Apology for Actors. page 36.37.
he banished Pilades (some write him Pilas) another Actor out of Rome and
Italy, after he had tasted of the Whipping-post, for pointing at a Spectator
with his finger, who had hissed at him; and so had made him notorious. Which
Pilas, being very popular, and making many friends to Augustus, that he might
not be exiled, Augustus notwithstanding gave sentence of banishment against
him, saying: That Rome has been mighty and puissant enough to make her
enemies stoop, and now she is not able to banish Iesters and Fools; and that
which is worst of all, they have presumption to vex us, and we have not courage
to repr^ve them. Lastly, he Marcus Aurelius. cap. 14. Guevara, Di^l of Princes.
l. 3. cap. 44. p. 512. Suetonius. sect. 45.
banished all the Players and Iesters out of Rome for those intolerable
mischiefs they did occasion. And when as the people earnestly besought him to
recall Pilas from his exile: Dial of Princes. Ibid. See Dion. Cassius. Romans
Hist. l. 54 page 696. and Xiphilinus, in Vita Augusti.
he condiscended to their request with much ado, upon this condition; that
they should give a Master and Tutor to Pilas, that should chastise and correct
him as a Fool: saying, That since Sages take Fools to be their Masters, that
Fools also should have Sages ^or their Masters. All which is a sufficient
evidence, that Augustus deemed Plays and Players, whom he thus whipped and
exiled, intolerable mischiefs in a State. Tacitus Annal. l. 1. c. 14. and lib.
4. c. 3. Dion Cassius. Romans Hist. l. 57. page 798. Marcus Aurelius. c. 14.
Pliny Panegyr. Trajano dictus p. 38. Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 3 c. 9. Genebrardi
Chronicon. page 212.
Tiberius, none of the best Emperors, though he much delighted in Plays at
first; yet at last by reason of those great mischiefs, outrages, misdemeanors,
tumu^ts, quarrels, murders, seditions, that Plays and Players did occasion,
after many joint complaints preferred against them both by the Senate and the
Common People; he was enforced to condemn all Players to the Whipping-post, (a
punishment suitable to such unruly Rogues) and then, to banish them and their
Stage Plays out of Italy, as insufferable evils in a Kingdom. Nero that
vicious Roman Emperor, Suetonij Nero. sect. 23.24, 25. Eutropius Rerum. Romans
lib. 9. Nero. Grimstons Nero. and others.
who was so much besotted with Stage Plays, as sometimes to play the Actor, to
his eternal infamy: Suetonij Nero. sect. 16. Marcus Aurelius. c. 14. Plinius
Secundus Panegyr. Traj^no dictus. page 38. Alexander ab Alexandro. lib. 3. cap.
9.
was at last enforced to expel all Stage Players out of Rome and Italy^
together with their Theatricall Enterludes, for those many unsufferable
villainies and uprores that they did produce. Alexand. ab Alexandro. lib. 3.
cap. 9.
Domitian also did the like upon the same occasion. Yea Julian himself, that
Atheistical Antichristian Apostate, as impious as he was, had thus much
goodness in him, as to prohibit Stage Plays: and Sozomen, Eccles. Hi^tor. l.
5. c. 17. Nicephorus Calistus. Eccles. Historiae. l. 10. cap. 22. p. 581.
Eutrop^us Rerum Romanorum. Hist. l. 11. Iulian^s Aposta^a. p. 150. Centuriae
Magd. To^. 4. Col. 458. Baronius and Spondanus. Annal. Eccles. Anno 362. ^ect.
60.
therefore in an Epistle to Arsatius, the Pagan High priest of Galatia, he
commands him to exhort all the Idol-priests under his Jurisdiction, that they
should not be seen in Play Houses, nor resort to T^eaters; endeavoring to
draw the Pagans to imitate the very discipline and manners of the Christians;
See Act 7. Scene 2.3, 4. and Act 4. Scene 2. Justinian. Codicis. l. 1. Tit. 3^
De Episcopis and Clericis. Lex. 17.18. Corpus Iu^is Civilis. Tom. 4. Col. 77.
and Tit. 4. De Episcopali Audientia. Lex. 40.41. Ibidem. Col. 156.157.
who inhibited both Ministers and people to resort to Plays; though now both
Ministers and people flock unto them, as if they were worse then Pagans. And
if these very worst and dissolutest Heathen Roman Emperors exiled Plays and
Players, as intolerable mischiefs and corruptions, what think ye did their
better Pagan Successors do? You shall hear a true relation what they did. The
Roman Princes that were good (as Dial of Princes. lib. 3. cap 43. to 48. and I.
G. Refutation of the Apology for Actors. page 36, 37.
Guevara, and others witness;) did always cast out Plays and Stage Players,
and those only that were evil called them in. So that one of the tokens to
know a virtuous or vicious Prince in Rome, write Gu^vara and I. G. (how much
more then to know a religious virtuous Christian Prince and Magistrate?) was to
see, whether he maintained Players, Iesters, and Iuglers among the people, yea
or no; which did so effeminate, vitiate and deboist both Magistrates, Prince
and people too, as to precipitate them into all kinds of lewdness, sin and
wickedness, and to prepare them both for invasions and destruction, as
Ammianus Marcellinus. lib. 28. c. 9.10. Augustine. De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. c.
31.32, 33. lib. 2. c. 3. to 17. Guevera, Dial of Princes. lib. 3. c. 43.44, 45,
46, 47. and Carolus Sigonius, De Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. page 32. most
plentifully testify. Hence that worthy Emperor Plinius Secundus Panegyr.
Trajano dictus. p. 38.45. M^rcus Aurelius. c. 14. Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 3. c.
9.
Traian, though a Pagan, ( who Dio in Vita Trajani. Guevara. l. 3. c. 44. p.
552. I.G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors. page 45.
when he was entreated by his Courtiers to hear an active Player, made this
most worthy reply, worthy all Christian Princes imitation: It is not for the
Majesty of a grave and virtuous Prince that in his presence any such vain
thing should be showed; for in such a case himself should be no less noted of
lightness, then the other of folly; and that before Princes no man should be
so hardy as to utter dishonest words, or to act any light representations, and
that those who move Princes to behold such. Enterludes deserve as great a
punishment as those that act them, since none ought to present before Princes
things that may move them to vice, but such things as might move them to
amendment:) partly out of his own voluntary^ disposition, and partly upon the
peoples own request, abandoned all Stage Plays out of Rome, as effeminate
arts, and unbeseeming exercises, which did much dishonor and corrupt the
Roman State: which memorable act of his is thus emblazoned by C. Plinius
Secundus, being then the Roman Consul, in his elegant Panegyricall Oration to
him in the Senate House, in the name of all the Senators. Ibid. page 38. Edit.
Coloniae All obr. 1610.
Perge modo Caesar, and vim effectumque censurae tuum propositum, tui actus
obtineb^^nt, etc. Et quis terror valuisset efficere quod reverentia tua
effecit? Obtinuit aliquis ut spectaculum Pantomimorum populi Romani tolli
pateretur; sed non obtinuit ut vellet: rogatus es tu quod rogebat alius,
caepitque esse beneficium quod necessitas suerat. Neque enim a te minore
concentu ut tolleres Pantomimos, quam a patre tuo, ut restitueret, exactum est.
Vtrumque recte: nam and restitui oportebat, quod sustulerat malus princeps, and
tolli restitutos. In his enim qu^ a malis benefiunt, hic tenendus est modus, ut
apareat, autorem displicuisse, non factum. Idem ergo populus ille aliquando He
means Nero. See p. 44.45. Qui ad postremum tanto se dedecore prostituit, ut
omnia paene Italiae ac Greciae Theatra perlustrans assumpto etiam varij
vesti^us dedecore, cantaret, saltaret in scena citharae dico habitu vel tragae
dico. Eutropius. Reru^ Romans l. 9. p. 104. Or if not him, Caligula, of whom Dion
Cassius. Romans Hist. l. 59. p. 829. writes thus. Caius ab aurigis
gladiatoribusque regebatur; servus histrionu^ and scenicoru^ hominu^, etc.
Principio ipse Spectatorem tantu^ se ac auditorem tantu^ praebuit: procedente
tempore multos imitatus est varijs in rebus, cum multis certavit: nam and
aurigavit, and pugnavit and saltavit, and Tragaedia^ egit, semper haec
tractans. Semel noctu primoribus patru^ quasi ad necessariam deliberationem
vocatis, coram faltavit, etc.
scenici Imperatoris Spectator and applauser, nunc in Pantomimis quoque
adversatur, and damnat effaeminata^ arts, and indecora seculo studia. Ex quo
manifestum est, principum disciplinam capere etiam v^lgus; quum rem, si ab uno
fiat, severissimam fecerint omnes. Macte hac gravitatis gloria Caesar, qua
consecutus e^, ut quod antea vis and Imperium, nunc mores vocarentur.
Castigaverunt vitia sua ipsi qui castigari merebantur, ijdemque emendatores qui
emendandi fuerunt. And a little after. P^^e 45.
Et quis iam locus miserae adulationis manebat (speaking of Nero his times)
quum lauds Imperatorum ludis etiam and commessationibus celebrarentur
saltarenturque, atque in omne ludibrium effaeminatis vocibus, modis, gestibus
frangerentur? Sed illud indignum, quod ^odem tempore in senatu and in scena ab
histrione and a Consule la^dabantur: Nota.
tu procul a tui cultu ludicras arts removisti. Seria ergo te carmina honorque
aetern^^ annalium, non haec brevis and pudenda praedicatio colit: quinetiam
tanto maiore consensu in venerationem tui He means such Theaters where
Orations were made, and the Senators and people met in Council, not such where
Plays were acted. See Bulengerus, De Theatro, lib. 1. cap. 32. and here, Act
8. Scene 1.
Theatr^ ipsa consurgent, quanto magis de te scenae silebunt. A pregnant
evidence how much this Emperor and the whole Roman Senate distasted Plays and
Actors, as the very bane and ruin of the Commonweal. These Stage Plays
creeping into Rome again after this good Emperors decease, in the reign of
Antoninus Pius, qui amavit his^rionum arts, as In his Antoninus Pius. page
37.38.
Julius Capitolinus writes; Iulij Capitolini. M. Anton. Philosophus. page 57.59.
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, who succeeded him; that he might reduce the people
to Philosophy and civility, took away the Gladiators and Players with him
into the Wars, inhibiting all public Plays and meetings under a severe
edict both at Rome and Antioch: Which Edict of his taking no such good success
as he expected: he Marcus Aurelius. cap. 14. and Epistle 12. to Lambert.
Guevara, his Dial of Princes, lib. 3. cap. 44^ 45, 46, 47.
thereupon banished all Stage Players, Tumblers and Iesters out of Italy, and
sent three Ships lading of them to Lambert Governor of Hellespont; commanding
him in his Letter directed to him, to keep these lasie Loyterers hard at
work, that they might no longer mind or practice their foolish Sports:
certifying him withal in this his Letter; that the cause he had banished these
Trewants and loytering Players from Rome, was not for the blood they had shed
(for they had Marcus Aurelius. cap. 14.
occasioned diverse tumults in which many were slain;) but for the hearts they
had perverted: not for the occasion of any who were dead, but because they were
Masters of ^ollies to the living. For without comparision (writes he to
Lambert) it is a Artificum enim scenicoru^ amoremque inhonestum and probrosum
esse Taurus Philosophus docet. A. Gellius Noctium. Attic. l. 20. c. 4. vid.
Ibid.
greater offense to the gods, and more damage to the Commonweal for these
Trewants to take away the wits from the wise folk, then for Murderers to take
away men's lives. Yea there is nothing that our Forefathers did, which
displeases me so much as the sufferance of these ^nthrifty Trewants. In the
year 264. of the foundation of Rome, in a time of an horrible pestilence in
Italy, to rejoice the people was first found out the invention of Theaters by
the advice of these Trewants. It is a shameful thing to hear, that the
pestilence dured but two years, and the rage and folly of these ^nthrifts
dureth four hundred years. Would to the immortal gods that the plague had
ended these few which remain, before this cursed generation had brought such
abominable customs into Rome; for much better had it been for our Mother Rome
that she had wanted Inhabitants, then such Rascals should have come and dwelt
therein. These Master-fooles have been so wily to teach folly, and the Roman
youth so apt to learn, Lo here the spreding leprosy of contaminating
Stage Plays.
that though they be put in Barks, their disciples would lade 3000. Carrackts.
Rome was never overcome by those who were valiant and virtuous, yet that day we
saw it overgone and trodden under foo^ by those ^ooles: the walls of Rome, that
were never touched by the Paenians had that day their lowpes full of armed
Trewants. Rome that triumphed over all Realms, was triumphed upon that day
with Players and Iuglers. I am so abashed in this case, that I know not what to
say or write. Yet one thing comfort me, that sith Rome and Romans uniustly
do rejoice with these fools, ^he and the famous Wisemen justly shall be
chastised for their fools. And in this the gods shall not be dispeased; that
sith Rome laughed at these Trewands and mockeries, one day she shall weep
with these Tumblers and Iuglers, etc. Thus far this Heathen Emperor, who
bot^ by his deeds and words, exterminated Plays and Players out of the Roman
Territories, as the greatest contagions and corruptions of his Empire. Quippe
erant qui Gn. quoque Pompe^um incusatu^ a senioribus ferunt, quod mansur^
Theatri sedem posuisset. Nam antea subitarijs gradibus and scena in tempus
structa, ludos edi solitos^ vel si ve^ustiora repetas, stantem populu^
spectavisse^ si consideret Theatro dies totos ignavia co^tinuaret, etc.
Caeterum abolitos paulatim patrios mores, funditus evert^ per accitam
lasciviam, etc. Annalium. l. 14. c. 3. vid. Ibidem. See The Dial of Princes.
lib. 3. c. 4^3.4^, 47.
Cornelius Taci^us records: That when as Pompie erected his standing Theater at
Rome, he was accused and blamed for it by the Senators; because it would be a
means to make the people sit wh^l^ days together idle in the Theater
beholding Plays; and utterly overthrow their hereditary manners and discipline
by new acquired lasciviousnesse^ So that the whole Roman Senate then reputed
Stage Plays pernicious to their State and manners. And for a conclusion of
this tragic Scene, Martianus, Heraclianus, and Claudius, Gallienum hujusmodi
insidijs appetend^^ esse dixerunt, ut labem improbissimam malis fessa
Republica, a gubernaculis humani generis dimoverent: ne diutius Theatro and
Circo addicta Republica per voluptatum deperirer illecebras. Trebel. Pollio^i^
Gallieni D^^. p. 310.
Trebellius Pollio relates: that Martianus, Heraclianus, and Claudius, three
worthy Romans, conspired together to murder Gallienus the Emperor, (a Idem
Ibid. p. 309.310, 315, 316.
man much besotted and taken up with plays, to which he likewise drew the
Magistrates and people by his lewd example,) as Tacitus. Annal. l. ^5. sect.
9.10.
Flavius and others conspired Nero his murder too for the selfsame cause,
lest the Co^mon-weale being longer addicted to the Cirque and Theater, should
utterly perish through the allurements of pleasures: which murder they
accomplished. All these recited Authorities of Pagan Writers, Emperors, States
and Magistrates, together with Hist. l. 28. c. 10.
Ammianus Marcellinus, a famous Heathen Historian; who reckons up the unworthy
approbation of Cirque-playes, and Stage Plays, in which the people spent their
lives and time, as the very greatest corruption of the Roman State, and the
chiefest character of their depraved manners: against which Plays, and their
Spectators, he has much inveighed: (which me thinks should for ever shame and
silence all such graceless Christians, who dare to plead for Stage Plays,
giving out, that none but some few foolish Puritans did ever yet condemn
them:) infallibly evidence unto all men's consciences; that Stage Plays
desperately vitiate and deprave men's minds and manners, precipitating them
into all vice, all wickedness and lewdness whatsoever; and that they are
unsufferable contaminating pernicious plagues in any Well-ordered State; which
caused these very Pagan Emperors, States and Magistrates thus solemnly to
exile them; and these their Authors to declaime against them.

To pass from these to Christians; we shall find both Christian Princes,
Republikes, Authors, of ancient and modern times, concurring with these former
Pagans in these their doomes of Plays and Actors. It is storied by Antiq.
Iudaeorum. l. 15. c. 11 page 415.416.
Josephus; that when as King Herod would have brought Stage Plays,
Cirque-playes, and other Spectacles into Jerusalem, where he had erected a
beautiful Theather, and Amphitheater, adorned with Caesar's Titles and
Inscriptions; Haec peregrinis quidem spectatoribus plurimum admirationis simul
atq. delectationis afferebant, indigenis vero pror^us ad dissolutionem patriae
disciplinae tendere videbantur, etc. Itaque veriti ne ex hac mutatione
sequeretur magnum aliquod reipublicae detrimen^u^; putaverunt su^ officij
labanti disciplinae publicae vel capitis periculo succurrere, nec pati Herodem
quicquam contra receptos mores inducere, and pro rege hostem agere, etc. Ibidem.
the whole Nation of the jews, (though Foreign Spectators much admired and
delighted in his spectacles) perceiving that these Plays did wholly tend to the
dissolution of their ancient received Country discipline; and fearing that some
great inconvenienc^ to their Commonwealth would follow upon this alteration;
thought it their duty to maintain their public discipline which was now
declining, though it were with the hazard of their lives; and not to suffer
Herod to proceed with these his Spectacles, shutting up their City Gates
against them. Which when Herod perceived, he began to pacifi^ and persuade them
with good words, to admit of these his Plays; which prevayling nothing with
many, he endeavored to introduce these Plays among them perforce: whereupon
ten of the Jews conspired together to murder him whiles he was sitting in the
Theater beholding these his Enterludes; which they had certainly effected, had
not this their conspiracy been casually detected: Of which Herod taking
advantage, accomplished his desire, and so brought these his Theatricall
Enterludes into Jerusalem: by means whereof, says Josephus (pray mark the
dangerous consequence) Quo factum est ut magis and magis discederet a patrijs
ritibus, and peregrinis studijs veterum instituta corrumperet inviolabilia:
quorum tempore permagna facta est bonorum morum in deterius inclinatio, labante
disciplina qua ant^ hac populus solebar contineri in officio, etc. Ibidem.
the Jews departed more and more from their Country rites, and corrupted the
inviolable Institutions of their Ancestors with forraign^ inventions and
delights; so that there was a very great declining and degenerating of their
good manners into worse: the discipline decaying whereby the people were won^
before this time to be kept in order. Such vigorous venom was there in these
Stage Plays, both to subvert their State, and discipline, and corrupt their
manners; the whole Nation of the Jews being thus both real witnesses and
examples to confirm my Minors truth, whom I have here ranked among Christians,
as being then opposite unto Pagans: I now come to real Christians. It is
storied of Constantine the Great, that Sulpitius Severus. Sacrae Historiae.
lib. ^. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 1. p. 305. H. Berengosus Abbas, De
Inventione and laud S. Crucis. l. 2. c. 11. Bibl. Patru^ To^ 7. p. 288. B.
very first and most famous Christian Roman Emperor, (whose name we English
men have special cause to honor, he being See Ioannis Sarisberiensis
Prologus. in l. De Nugis Curialium. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. page 341. D.
Liberavit ille Brittannias servitute, tu etiam nobiles illi^ oriendo fecisti.
Pan^gyr. Constantino dictus. p. 86. See Eutropius. Rerum Romans l. 11. p. 135.
Centuriae Magdeburg. Tom. 4. Col 61. Baronius and Spondanus. Annal. Eccl. Anno
306. sect. 5.7. John Bale Centuria 1. Script. Brit. c. 36. p. 32. Matthew West.
Anno 307. p. 130. Polychronicon. l. 4. c. 25.26. Galfredus Monumetensis. Hist.
Regum B^it. l. 5. c. 6.8. Ponticus Verunnius. Hist. Brit. l. 5. p. 108. Beda
Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Speedes Chronicle. lib. 6. cap. 46^ p. 153. Socrates,
Eccles. Hist lib. 1. cap^ 2. Caxtons Chron. Chronicon Chronicoru^^ Anno 344.
fol. 145.
bor^e, bred, and first crowned King and Emperor here in England, his Mother
Helena being a British woman to:) Zosimus Historiae. lib. 2. Baronius and
Spondanus^ Anno 303. sect. 3.
That he wholly withdrew himself from the Secular Stage Plays of the Gentiles
made in the third year of his Consulship, ^o drive away plagues and diseases:
contemning and rejecting these their E^terludes; at which these Pagan Gentiles
grieved much: After which being established in his Empire, he did by public
Edicts Eusebius, De Vita Constantini. lib. 3. cap. 52.56. and lib. 4^ cap.
23.24, 25. Sozomen. Historiae Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 8. Nicephorus Calist.
Historiae Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 46. Eutropius Rerum Romanorum. lib. 11. page
142. Centuriae Magd. Tom. 4. Col. 76^ Baronius and Spondanus. Anno 32^. sect.
5^. Socrates Historiae Eccles. lib. 1. c. 14. Codicis Theodosij. lib. 15. Tit.
5. to 12. De Gladiatoribus. Bulengerus De Circo, etc. page 87.88.
abolish all the ceremonies, rites, lascivious customs and obscenities of the
Gentiles, and interdicted all gladiatory Plays and Enterludes, as intolerable
pernicious evils. Not to speak of Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 101. a, Nerva^
Nerva, Baronius and Spondanus. Anno 357. sect. 23. lib. 15. Codic. Theodosij
Tit. De Gladiatoribus.
Constantius, Lib. 8. Codic. Theodosij. Tit. De Paen. Baronius and Spondanus.
Anno 365. sect. 5.
Valentinian, Eutropius Rerum Romans l. 13. p. 174^ Baronius and Spondanus. Anno
404. sect. 174.
Honorius, Eutropius Rerum Romans l. 13. page 174.
Arcadius, and See Centur. Magdeburg. Tom. 4. Col. 1528.1530. and Codex.
Theodosij lib. 15. Tit. De Gladiatoribus.
others, who banished and prohibited all Sword playes^ against which See
before, p. 74.75. Cassiodor. Variarum. l. 5. c. 42.
diverse Fathers did declaime as barbarous and unchristian Spectacles, not
tolerable in any civil State^ with which our tumultuous bloody Tragedies have
too near a^finity; I find Theodosius the Great, (who Theodosius rescriptum
dedit adversus psaltrias and fidicenas mulieres Civitatum pestes. Eutropius
Rerum Romans Hist. l. 13. page 173. Baronius and Spondanus. Anno 385. sect^ 9.
See Iustiniani Codex. l. 1. Tit. 7. Lex. 5. Bulengerus De Circo, etc. pag^
87.88.
banished all Women-dancers, Players, and Singers by a public Edic^, as the
plagues of those places and Cities where they were tolerated:) not only
suppressing and inhibiting all Stage Plays and Cirque-playes a^ Antioch, and
stopping up all Cirques and Theaters, as the fountains of all wickedness, and
the Nurseries of all those mischiefs that sprung up in Cities, as Sed a Rege
profecta contristant? Sed nec illa profecto gravia, verum and ipsa multum
attulerunt emolumenti. Quid enim molesti (dic mihi) factum est, quod orchestram
obstruxit, quod Circum inaccessibilem fecit, quod nequitiae fon^es exclusit and
subvertit? Vtinam nec daretur unquam hos aperiri. Hinc nequitiae radices in
Civitate germinaverunt, hinc sunt qui moribus ipsis crimen afferunt, etc.
Propterea tristaris ch^rissime? Imo and propterea gaudere and laetari oporteat
and gratias regi agere, etc. Homil 17. Ad Populum Antiochiae. Tom^ 5. Col. 135.
C. D. Bulengerus De Circo. page 81.82. See here, page 422.423, 424.
Chrysostom at large relates: and I likewise find both him, Valentinian and
Gratian, together with Valens the Emperor, enacting these public laws
against Stage Plays and common Actors, well worthy observation: Codex
Theodosij. lib. 15. Tit. 5. De Spectaculis. Lex. 2.4. page 471.472. and Tit^ 7.
De Scenicis. Lex. 1. page 473. Spondanus Epit. Baronij Anno. 371. sect. 10.
That no Stage Plays should be acted on the Lord's Day; that Stage Players and
Women-act^rs should be quite debarred from the Sacraments as long as they
continued in their playing, and that the Sacrament should not be administered to
them in their extremity, when as they lay upon their deathbeds, though they
de^ired it, unless the^ did first renounce their wicked lewd profession, and
protest solemnly that they would not return unto it again in case they
should recover. Such was their detestation against common Actors, and so by
consequence against Plays themselves, which made their Actors so base, so
execrable, to these Christian Emperors. See here Act 7. Scene 3. page 647.648.
Iustiniani Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 6. De Epis^. and Clericis. Lex. 17.18, 33, 34.
Corpus Iuris Civilis. Tom. 4. Col. 161. Ipsi praedicant ut abrenuncient
adversarij Daemonis cultui, and omnibus pompis ejus, quarum non minima pars,
talia spectacula ^iunt. Ibidem. Lex. 34. page 42. to 61.
Justinian the Emperor, promulgated this pious Edict; That all sorts of
Clergy men, together with all other Christians, should refrain, not only
from Di^e play, and Dicers company, but likewise from the very acting and
beholding of Stage plays and Theatricall Spectacles, because they are not the
least part of those pompes of the Devil which Christians solemnly renounce
when they are baptized. Leo and Anthemius, two worthy Christian Emperors, made
this most pious Edict. Dies festos Majestati a^tissimae dicatos nullis volumus
voluptatibus occupari, nec ullis exactionu^ vexationibus profanari. Dominicu^
itaque ^i^m ita semper honorab^le^ decernimus and venerandu^, ut a cunctis
executionibus excusetur, nulla quemquam urgeat admonitio, nulla fidejussionis
flagitetur exactio, ^aceat apparitio, advocatio delitescat, sit ille dies a
cognitionibus alienus, praeconis horri^a vox sil^scat, resp^^ent a
controversijs litigantes, and habeant saederis intervallum, ad sese simul
veniant adversarij non timentes, subeat animos vicaria paenitudo, pacta
conferant, transactiones loquantur. Nec hujus tamen religiosi diei ocia
relaxantes ob caenis quenquam patimur voluptatibus detineri. Nihil eodem die
sibi vendicet scena Theatralis, aut Circense certamen, aut ferarum lachrymosa
spectacula: e^si in nostrum ortum aut natalem celebranda sole^nitas inciderit,
di^^eratur. Amissionem militiae, proscriptionem patrimonij sustinebit, si quis
unquam hoc die festo spectaculis interesse, vel cujuscunque judicis apparitor
praetextu negocij publici, seu priva^i, haec, quae hac lege ^^atuta sunt,
crediderit temeranda. Datum. Idibus December. Constantinop. Zenone and Martiano
Cos. Justinian, Codicis. lib. 3. Tit. 12. De Ferijs. Lex. 10. Edit. Parisijs
1537. page 124.
All Fea^t-dayes, or Holy days dedicated to the most high God, shall not be
taken up or solemnized with any pastimes or excursions. We therefore decree the
Lord's Day to be always so honorable and venerable, that it shall be exempted
from all Executions, Admonitions, Bayles, Appearances, Arrests, Lawsuites, and
Controversies, which shall all th^n cease; Let all Advocates and Criers then be
silent, let there be then a kind of tr^ce for a space, that so Adversaries may
safely meet together upon it, without fear, and reconcile themselves one to
the other, etc. Neither releasing the employments of this religious Day do we
permit any one to be occupied in obscene pleasures. Let not the Theatricall
Scene, nor the Cirque Combat, or the dol^full Spectacles of wild Beasts,
claim any liberty to themselves on this day: and if any solemnity to be
celebrated, either in respect of our coronation or nativity, shall chance to
happen upon it, let it be put off to some other time. If any person shall ever
hereafter presume to be present at Stage Plays on Viz. on the Lord's Day.
this Holy Day; or if the Apparitor of any Judge under pretext of any public
or private business shall violate those things which are decreed by this law,
he shall undergo the loss of his office, and the sequestration of his
Patrimony. O that this godly Law were now in force with Christians! then Plays
and Pastimes on Lord's Day evenings, would not be so frequent; then those who
had served God at Prayers, and Sermons in the day time, would not so seriously
serve the world, the flesh, the Devil, in Dancing, Dicing, Masks, and
Stage Plays in the night, beginning perchance the Lord's Day (like the Gal.
3.1, 3.
foolish Galathians) in the spirit, but ending it in the flesh, as alas too
many carnal Christians do. Theodoricus, a Christian King of Italy, (whose
praises In his Panegyricus Theadorico dictus. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1.
page 243.
E^nodius Ticinensis, has proclaimed to the world) in his Epistle to Faustus,
transmitted to posterity, by Variarum. l. 3. Epist. 51.
Marcus Aurelius Cassiodorus, hath-passed this Censure upon Stage Plays, and
Cirque-playes: Spectaculum expellens gravissimos mores, invitans levissimas
contentiones, evacuator honestatis, fons irriguus iurgiorum: quod vetustas
quidem habuit sacrum, sed contensiosa posteritas fecit esse ludibrium. Ibidem.
that they expel the gravest manners, invite the most trivial contentions;
that they are the exhausters of honesty, the ever-running fountain of brawles
and quarrels; which antiquity verily reputed sacred, but contentious posterity
has made them a mere ludibrium. Which passage he thus seconds in his Epistle
to Speciosius. Mores autem graves in spectaculis quis requirat? In Circum
nesciunt convenire Catones. Quicquid illic gaudenti populo dicitur injuria non
putatur. Locus est qui defendit excessum. Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1. Epist.
27.
Who can expect grave manners in Stage Plays? Catoes know not how to meet
together at Play Houses. Whatsoever is there spoken to the rejoicing people is
not deemed an injury. It is a place which defends excess. In another Epistle
of his to the Roman Senate, he thus informs them, what great mischiefs these
Stage Plays had procured to the people, who were brought into extreme dangers
by them. Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 30.
Animum nostrum, Patres Conscripti, Reipub. curis calentem, pulsavit saepius
querela populorum, orta quidem ex causis levibus, sed graves eructavit
excessus. Deplorat enim pro spectaculorum voluptate ad discrimina se ultima
pervenisse, etc. And in his Cassiodorus. Variarum. l. 5. Epist. 42.
Epistle to Maximus, of the diverse sorts of Spectacles, which the Consuls
exhibited to the people out of a preposterous custom, to their great expense;
(against Sed hic apt iungendumest, quod ait de Inferis Mantuanus; Quis
sceleru^ comprendere formas possit, etc? Ibid.
the several wickednesses of which Enterludes he there much declaimes) he
closes up that Epistle with this patheticall Epilogue. Heu mundi error
^olendus: si esset ullus aequitatis intuitus, tantae divitiae pro vita
mortalium deberent dari, quantae in mortes hominum videntur effundi. Such was
his Royal Censure of these pestiferous Stage Plays, which bred so many
mischiefs and discords in the world. It it Rodolphus Gualther. Ho^. 11. in
Nahum. fol. 214.215. Theodo^u^ Zuinger. Theatrum Vitae Humanae. Vol. 12. l. 5.
p. 1834.1835. Chronicon Chronicorum^ Augusta. 1497. AEtas 6. fol. 21 ^. a.
registered of Henry, the third Emperor of that name, whom they styled black
and godly; that when as a great company of Stage Players and Actors flocked
together to Ingelheim to his marriage, about the year 1044. he thrust them all
out of the Court and City; and comm^nded that the money which should have
been spent in maintaining, rewarding, and adorning them, should be distributed
among the poor: An example (writes Master Gualther, who relates it) truly
worthy of eternal praise; which if Princes and Magistrates of Commonweals
would this day imitate, there would be less place left to filthy and
sloathfull idleness, then which there is nothing more powerful to corrupt
men's manners: yea wise and prudent men would be then in greater request, and
the poor would be better provided for, who now wander about in every corner to
the great scandal of Christianity: It is storied of The General History of
France. London 1624. page 114.123. Bodinus De Repub lib. 6. cap. 1.
Philip Augustus, the 42. King of France; that he being an enemy to public
dissolutions, and a friend to good order and Justice, enacted public laws
against Players, Iuglers, Plays, and D^cing-houses, which he wholly suppressed,
as pornicious to his Kingdom; banishing all Stage Players out of France by a
public Edict: the true grounds of which worthy act of his Vincentius in his
Lib. 29. c. 41. Edit. Coloniae. Agrip. 1494. Olaus Magnus Historiae. l. 15.
cap. 31.32.
Speculum Historiale, does thus express. Cum antem in Curijs regum vel
principu^ frequens histrionum turba convenire solebat, ut ab eis aurum and
argentum, and equos seu vestes, quas saepe principes mutare solent verba
ioculatoria varij^ adulationibus plena proferendo ab eis extorqueant: vide^s
Rex Philippus haec esse vana, and animae saluti contraria, mente promptissima
Deo promisit; quod omnes vestes suas quamdiu viveret intuitu Dei pauperibus
erogaret; malens nudum Christum in pauperibus vestire; quam adulatoribus vestes
dando peccatum incurrere; See here, p. 324. Iuonis Decreta. pars 11. c. 84.
Olaus Magnus. Hist. l. 15. c. 31.32. Joan. Bertochinus. Repertoriu^. pars^ 2.
p. 664. Histrio. Guillermus Altissiodorensis Summa Aurea. in l. 3. Sentent.
Tract. 7. Quaest. 3. f. 163. and Stephanus Cost^ de Ludo sect. 2. numb. 7.
Tractat. Tractatuum. Tom. 1. p. 157.158. accordingly.
quoniam histrionibus dare (and I would those who spend their money at
Play Houses would well consider it) est Daemonibus imolare. Hoc si quotidie
principes attenderent, nequaquam tot leccatores per mundum discurrerent.
Vidimus autem principes quosdam vestes diu excogitatas, and varijs florum
picturationibus artificiosissime elaboratas vix evolutis septem di^bus, proh
dolor, histrionibus, scilicet, Diaboli ministris (so he styles them) ad primam
vocem dedisse, pro quibus forsan.20. aut 30. vel 40. marcas argenti
impenderent, de quo nimirum preci^ totidem pauperes per totum annum victus
necessaria percipere potuissent. By all these several Acts and Testimonies of
these worthy Christian Princes, it is most apparent; that Stage Plays
insufferably corrupt men's minds and manners, and that they are no ways
tolerable in a Christian State. The selfsame verity we shall find confirmed
by the Fathers. Hence Nec inconcinne stadia and Theatra pestilentiae Cathedram
quis vocaverit, etc. Paedagogi. l. 3. c. 11. See Gentianus Harvetus. Ibidem.
Clemens Alexandrinus, styles Plays and Play-hous^s; the very Chair of
Pestilence, which corrupts men's minds. Hence Tertullian records; Censores
saepius renascentia cum maxim Thatra destruebant, moribus consulentes, quorum
periculum ing^ns de lascivia praevidebant, etc. De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 10.
that the Roman Censors oft-times demolish their re-erected Theaters to prevent
the corruption of the peoples manners, which they foresaw would be much
endangered and corrupted by the lasciviousness of Stage Plays; the lewd
effects of which he at large discovers, stiling the Stage, the very Chair of
Pestilence, and the Gallerie of the enemies of Christ. Hence De Spectaculis.
lib. cap. 16.27. See here, page 154. in the margent.
Cyprian phraseth Stage Plays; Magister and Doctor non erudiendorum, sed
perdendorum liberoru^, etc. Ep^st. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio.
the Masters not of teaching but of corr^pting, of destroying Yo^^h: and
Play Houses, the very Brothels of public chastity; where all vices ar^ ^oth
taught and learned; all modesty exiled, all contin^^^y wreck^d, men's souls and
manners most incurably corrupted to Gods dishonor and the Church^s shame.
Pudoris publici lupana^iu^, etc. De Spectac. l^b and Epist. lib. 2 Epist. 2.
Donato. See Scene 3. and 4. where his words are quote^ at large. p. 331. to 334.
Hence De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 20. Divinarum Instit. Epist. c. 5. See Scene 3.
and 4. before. page 334.335, 336.
Lactantius informs us; that the v^ry hearing and beholding of Stage Plays
exceedingly corrupt all Youth; by depraving their manners, enraging their
unruly lusts, and te^ching them to commit adulteri^^, whiles they behold them
acted: Whereupon he peremptorily concludes; that all Stage Plays are wholly to
be aband^^ed, that so not only no vices might harbor in our breasts, but that
the custom^ of no pleasure might ever overcome us, and so turn us away from
God and from good works. Hence Gregory Nazianzen avers; Spect^culum illud
nihil aliud putari debet, quam pestis atque morbus animorum. N^m urbes
distrahit, etc Quapropter mani^^stopater, illud spectaculu^ meruma^imorum ess^
perniciem. Ad S^lu^um De Recta Educat. p. 1063.1064. vid. Ibidem.
that Stage Plays ought to be reputed nothing else but the very plague and
sickness of men's minds; the several ill eff^cts of which he there reckons up
at large, and thereupon he thus concludes; Wherefore it evidently appears,
that these Stage Plays are naught else but the very destruction of men's
souls: which Censure of his is fully ratified by the concurrent suffrages of
See ^h^ir words quoted before, S^ene 3. and 4.
Tatianus, Oration Advers. Graecos. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 2. page 180.181. Of
Theophilus Antiochenus, Ad Autolichum. lib. 3. Ibidem. page 170. G. H. Of
Minucius Felix. Octavius. page 101.121. Of Arnobius Advers. Gentes. lib. 4.
page 149.150, 151. and lib. 7. page 230. to 242. Of Basil. H^xaemeron. Hom. 4.
Tom. 1. page 45. and De Legendis Libris Gentilium. Oration. page 308.312. Of S.
Asterius, in Festum Kalendarum. Hom. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4 page 706. Of
Gaudentius Brixiae. Episcopus, De Lectione Evangelij. Sermo 8. Ibidem. p. 812.
G. Of S. Hierom. Comment. in Ezechiel. lib. 6. cap 20. Tom. 4. page 389. A. Of
Eusebius and Damascen, Paralellorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. with ^undry others
hereaft^r quoted, who all pass the very selfsame doom upon them. Saint
Chrysostom is exceeding copious in this Theme, as is evident by all his
transcribed passages in the prec^ding Scene. (See here, page 401.402.404^
405.406.415.416.424.431. whence he styles the Theatru Cathedra Pestilentiae,
incontinentiae gymnasiu^; officina luxuriae, impudicitiae orchestra; pessi^us
locus, plurimorumque morborum plena Babilonica fornax, quae non corporis
naturam, sed bona^ animae depopulatur habitudinem, etc. Hom. 8. De Paenitentia.
^om. 5. Col 750. C.D. vid. Ibidem.
Playhouse; the Caire of Pestilence; the Shop of Luxury^ the Scaffold of
Incontinency; the public School of L^wdnesse: a Babilonish Brothell full of
many filthy noisome diseases, which depraves, depopulates, not the nature of
the body, but the good habitude of the soul, Ibid. and Hom. 38. in Matthew. Tom.
2. Col. 299. A. B.
which over-turnes all laws, all modesty, virtue, discipline, Magna
Civitatibus mala ferunt Theatra magna, nec hoc videmus quam magna. Hom. 15. and
62. Ad. Pop. Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 347.
and brings many great mischiefs unto Cities: Whereupon he thus concludes;
His Theatralibus ludis eversis, non leges sed iniquitatem evertetis, and omnem
Civitatis pestem extinguetis. Homil. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 299. B. and
Homil. 69.
that Magistrates by overthrowing Play Houses shall overturne all iniquity, and
utterly extinguish all the plagues, the mischiefs of the State and City.
Saint Augustine, as he informs us in express terms: Si tantummodo boni and
honesti homines in Civitate essent, nec in rebus humanis ludi s^enici esse
debuissent. De Civitate Dei. lib. 4. cap. 1.
That if there had been none but good and honest men in the City of Rome,
that they would never have admitted Stage Plays to have any existence among
humane things, much less in Divine affairs: so De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap.
31.32, 33. lib. 2. c. 2. to 15.22, 27. l. 5. c. 12. l. 8. c. 13.14. and Epist.
202.
^e proves at large out of Heathen Authors, that Stage Plays are most
unsufferable cont^gions and mischiefs in a State, vitiating the minds,
subverting the manners, the discipline of those places where they are but
tolerated. Among other passages to this purpose, he affirms: Illas Theatricas
arts diu virtus Romana non noverat: quae etsi ad oblectamentum voluptatis
humanae quaererentur, and vitio morum irreperent humanorum, di^^^amen ^as sibi
exhiberi petiverunt. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 13. See Ibid. c. 5. to 12.
That the Roman virtue was altogether unacquainted with these Theatricall arts
almost 400. years: which albeit they were sought after to delight the
voluptuousness of men's lusts, and crept in only by reason of the corruption
of men's manners, yet the Idol Heathen gods desired that they might be dedicated
unto them. And then speaking of the first occasion of bringing Stage Plays
into Rome, to assuage the pestilence which afflicted their bodies, they brought
in (says he) another far more grievous and perp^tuall pestilence of their
minds, which he thus elegantly expresses. De Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 32.33. See
Polychronico^. l. 3. c. 34. ^. 131. and Thomas Brad^wardin, De Causa. Dei. lib.
1. page 14.
Dij propter sedandam corporis pestilentiam ludos sibi scenicos exhiberi
iubebant, pontifex autem vester (Scipio) propter animorum cavendam
pestilentiam, ipsam scenam construi prohi^ebat. Si aliqu^ lu^e mentis animum
corpori praeponitis, eligere qu^m ^olatis? Neque enim and illa corporum
pestilentia ideo conquievit, quia populo bellico^^, and solis antea ludis
Circensibus assueto, luderum scenicorum delicata subi^travit insania: sed
astutia spirituum nefandorum praevidens illam pestilentiam iam ^^ne de^ito
cessat^ram, aliam long graviorem, qua plurimum gaudet, ex hac occasion, non
corporibus, sed moribus curav^^ immittere: quae animos miserorum tantis
occaecavit tenebris, ta^ta deformitate faedavit, ut etiam modo quod incredibile
for^itan erit, si a nostris posteris audietur, Romana urbe vasta^a, quos
pestilentia ista possedit, atque inde fugientes, Carthaginem pervenire
potuerunt, in Theatris quo^idie certatim pro histrionibus insanirent. A me^tes,
amentes, quis est hic tant^^, non error, sed f^ror, ut exitium vestrum
plangentibus Orientalibus populis, and maximis Civitatibus in remotissimis
terris^ publicum luctum maeroremque ducentibus, vos Theatra quareretis,
intraretis, i^pleretis, and multo insaniora quam fuerant antea faceretis. In
Theatri^ labes morum, discere turpia, audire inhonesta, videre perniciosa.
August. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. l. 2. c. 2. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 1394.
Hanc animarum labem ac pestem, hanc probitatis and honestatis eversionem (so
he truly styles the Theater) Scipio ille metuebat, quando consirui Theatra
prohibebat, etc. neque enim censebat ille faelicem esse rempub. stantibus
maenibus, ruentibus moribus: sed in vobis plus valuit quod impij Daemones
seduxerunt, quam quod homines providi praecaverunt, etc. It is evident then by
Saint Augustines resolution: that Stage Plays incurably vitiate and
desperately corrupt, if not subvert men's manners; and so bring ruin to that
State that suffers them, Secundisque rebus (and spectaculis) ea mala oriantur
in moribus, quae saevientibus pejora sin^ hostibus. De Civit. Dei. l. 1 c. 30.
vid. Ibid.
the evils which they ingenerate in the peoples manners, being far worse then
the cruellest enemies. Hence he informs us^ Romam quippe cura partam veteru^
auctamque laboribus, faediorem stant^m fecerant qu^m ru^ntem: quandoquidem in
ruina ejus, la^ides and ligna, in istorum autem vita omnia, non murorum, sed
morum menumenta are; ornamenta ceciderunt, cum funestioribus eorum corda
cupiditatibus, quam ignibus tecta ^^^lius urbis arderent. De Civitate Dei. lib.
2. cap. 2. vid. cap. 5. to 15.
that Stage Plays had made Rome, which was gotten with the care, and augmented
by the industry of their Ancest^rs, more filthy whiles it was standing, then
when it was falling unto ruin: since in its ruin, only the stones and
timber, but in the lives of Play-haunters, all the monuments and ornaments not
of walls, but of manners were fallen to the ground; since their hearts burned
with more lamentable polluting lusts, then the houses of the City did with
flames. Yea hence he De Civ. Dei. l. 1. c. 30. to 34. l. ^. thorowout. l. 3. c.
18. lib. 4. c. 1.10, 26, 27, ^8, 31. l. 6. c. 1.^ 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, ^6 27, 33. l.
^.^.5. 13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 26, ^7. and Epist. 202. this being the very end and
drift of all these places.
concludes and prov^s, the Pagan Deities of the Romans to be no gods, but
beastly Devils, and unclean infernal spirits; who were no friends, no
advancers, no protectors of the Romans or of their Commonweal, but professed
en^mies, plagues, and traitors to them both, because they invented, exacted,
countenanced, and delighted in those obscene, lascivious, vitious^
Stage Plays, which defiled the minds, corrupted the lives, ruinated the
manners, and eternally destroyed the souls of men, by precipitating them into
all vice and lewdness whatsoever: which Plays both Plato, Scipio, Cicero, and
the ancient Romans quite abandoned, as the very Pests, the Cankers, ban^ and
overthrow of the Commonweal. Such they, such he reputed them and from thence
he Qui sunt ergo illi qui ludos scenicos amant, eosque divinis rebus adjungi,
and suis honoribus efflagitant exhiberi, quoru^ vis non eos indicat nullos, sed
iste affectus nimirum indicat malos? August. De Civitate Dei lib. 8. c. 13.
vid. Ibidem.
persuades the Romans to di^carde them, together with all their Devill-Idols
who took such pleasure in them. Paulus Orosius, Saint Augus^ines entire friend
and Coetanean, in his excellent History (dedicated to this learned Father,)
relating the original introduction of Stage Plays among the Romans, to
assuage the plague; thus discants on that passage. Historiae, lib. 3. cap. 4.
Edit. Coloniae. 1532. page 120.
A^tores sua^^re pontifices, ut ludi scenicidijs expetentibus adere^^ur: and
ita pro depellenda temporali peste corporum, accersitus est perpetuus morbus
animarum: these Stage Plays being no other in his opinion, but a p^rpetuall
sickness of men's souls, far worse then any p^stilence that could ^ff^^ct
their bodies: What State, what person then would foment such fatal plagues? De
Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. thorowout, w^ll worth the reading, to which I shall
refer you.
Salvian, Bishop of Massilia in France, most elegantly inveigheth against the
horrid obsc^nity of Stage Plays, informing the ancient Romans and others, S^e
Scene 3. and 4. before, where most of his words are transcribed. and Sc^ne 12.
and 19.
that Stage Plays were those insufferable impurities which polluted their
souls, depraved their manners, provoked the Majesty of their God to wrath,
offended their blessed Savior, dishonored their Christian profession, and
drew down Gods Judgments on their State, which was then miserably wasted by
the Goathes and Vandals: and th^reupon he advises them, eternally to abandon
Plays and Theaters (according to their vow in baptism) as the most pernicious
evils, which would bring their souls, their bodies, their Church and State to
utter ruin. Isiodor Pelus^ota, who flourished about the year of our Lord 440.
in his Epistle to Hi^r^, who then swayed the Commonwealth under Theodosius the
Younger, writes thus of Scenicis, vir optime, summu^ hoc studiu^ est, non ut per
ipsoru^ cavillas multi meliores reddantur; (quemadmodu^ ipse dixisti, teipsu^
and eos, qui te ^udiunt, decipiens;) verum ut multi pecce^t. Etenim in
spect^torum improbi^ate faelicitatem s^am co^stitutam habent. Ita ^^t, ut, si
illi meli^res effician^ur, sua his ars p^r^tura sit. Qu^m^ brem, nec unquam eos
qui delinquunt corrig^re in (...) induxer^^t, nec si vel^^t, (...) ^oss^nt.
Mimica enim eor^^ ars n^tura t^^tummodo ad nocendum comp^ra^a est. Epist. l. 3
Epist. 336. Bibl Pa^rum. Tom. 5. pars 2^ 613 A.
Stage Players; that this is their chief end and study, not that many should
be made better by their scoffs, (as some have said, deceiving both themselves,
and those that hear them,) but that many might be drawn to sin. For their
felicity is wholly placed in the lewdness of their Spectators. For so it is,
that if their Spectators should be made better, their very occupation would go
to wrack: wherefore they never so much as think of reforming any who o^fend,
neither if they willed it, could they effect it. For their mimicall art of its
own nature is only ^itted for to hurt men. A passage, which not only answers
that vain See this Objection fo^merly an^wered^ p ^02. to 106.
Objection of Play-patrons (which you see was ancient) that Stage Plays
reform men by reprehending vice: but likewise man^^ests them to be intolerable
mischiefs in any Christian State, since their very end and nature is only to
corrupt and make men worse. Quam vis art^^ l^^ricae honestis moribus ^int^
r^motae and Histrionum vita vaga, videatur effe^ri p^sse lic^^ i^, tame^
^oderat^ix (...) vidi^ ^^tiquit^s, ut in totum non ^^^^uerent, cum and i^sae
ju^^cem sust^^^^^^. Ad^inistra^^^^ enim ^^t sub quad^m disciplina exhibitio
vol^^^ (...). Tene^t (...) ^us, vel umbra^ilis ordo judicij. Temperentur and
haec legum qualit^te ^^g^ci^, quasi hon^st^s imparet inhonestis, and quibusdam
regulis vivant, qui via^ rectae conversationis ignorant. Student enim illi non
tantu^ jucunditati suae, quantum alienae le^itiae: and condition perversa cum
dominatu^ suis corporibus tradunt, servire potius animas compulerunt. Dignu^
fuit ergo moderatore^ suscipere, qui se nesciunt juridica moderatione tractare.
Locus quippe tuus his gregibus hominum veluti quidam tutor est positus. Nam
sicut illi aetates teneras adhibita cautela custodiunt, sic ^ te voluptates
fervidae impensa maturitate frenandae sunt. Age bon^^ institutis quod nimia
prudentia constat invenisse Majores. Leve desideriu^, e^si ve^ecundia non
cohibet, districtio praedicta modificet, etc. Variarum. l. 7. c. 10.
Aurelius Cassiodo^us, describ^n^ the office of the Roman Censor, or Surveyer
of sports, records; that the dissolute lives, and light arts of Stage Players
are remote from honest manners; and that therefore antiquity becoming a
Moderator, did take care to suppress their insolences by appointing Censors
to correct and punish them, that so they might not wholly lash out, when as they
should undergo the censure of a Judge. For the very exhibition of pleasures is
to be administered under a certain discipline. If not a true, yet at leastwise
let a shadowed order of justice keep Stage Plays with in compass. Let even
these businesses be tempered with the qualification of laws, that so honesty
may rule over dishonest persons, and they may live under certain rules, who
know not the way of a right conversation: For these Players seek not so much
their own pleasure as other men's mirth, and by a perverse condition, when as
they deliver the dominion to their bodies, they have compelled their souls to
serve. It is fit therefore that those should receive a Moderator, who know not
to carry themselves with a legal moderation. For the office of a Censor is set
up as a Tutor over these herds of men. For as Tutors keep children of tender
years with diligent care, so vehement pleasures are to be curbed by the
Censor, with great gravity, etc. Which passage, as it proves Stage Plays,
intolerable mischiefs; and Players, disorderly dissolute wicked person, whose
excesses need to be suppressed, even by the opinion of the ancient Pagan
Romans, See Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 53.
who appointed Censors of purpose to correct their gross abuses, See here, p.
37.38, 39, 40, 41.
which yet could never be redressed: so it condemns the excessive lewdness of
our modern Plays and Actors which have no such Surveyers to curb, to censure
their abuses; and withal acquaints us, how pernicious Stage Plays are, both
to men's manners and the public weal: and what reason Christians have for ever
to abandon them; since the very worst of Pagans, See August. De Civit. Dei. l.
1. c. 31.32, 33. l. 2. c. 13.22, 27. l. 3. c. 18 l. 4. c. 1.10, 26, 27, 28. l.
6. c. 5.6, 7, 9, 10, 26, 27, 33. l. 8. c. 5.13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 26, 27. Bodinus
De Repub. l. 6^ c. 1. Polychronicon. l. 1. c. 34. fol. 171. accordingly.
had long since wholly discarded them, for their unsufferable corruptions and
abuses, but to please their Idols, to whom they were devoted; which reason
holds not with us Christians, but ingageth us most against them. To pass by De
Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. and lib. 8. cap. 6.7.
John Saresbury, Destructoriu^ Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. and pars 3. cap. 10.
Alexander Fabritius, Lectio. 172. in lib Sapientiae.
Holkot, Sermon. 5. and 7. De Custodia 5. Sensuum and Auditus.
^aulus Wan, De Educat. Liberorum, l. 1. c. 14. and l. 3. c. 7.12. Bibl.
Patru^. Tom. 15. p. 837 M. 838. A. 847. F. 848. C.D 864 E.F. 865. A.
Mapheus Vegius, De Novis Celebritatibus non Instituendis. p. 143. to 150.
Nicolaus De Clemangis, De Causa Dei. l. 1. c. 1. Corol. 20. p. 14.15.
Thomas Bradwardine, De Remedio Vtriusque Fortu. l. 1. Dialog. 30.
Petrarcha, and See Act 7. Scene 5.
other more ancient Writers, who censure Stage Plays; as the intolerable
depravers of men's minds and manners; the Seminaries of all wickedness, vice,
and lewdness; the corrupters of Youth, the subverters of all good discipline;
the enemies of all virtuous education; and insufferable mischiefs in a State,
which through the eyes and ears usher eternal death into men's souls: To whom
I might accumulate; De Causis Corruptionis Artium. l. 2. p. 81.82, 83. and
Comment. in August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32, 33. and l. 2. c. 2. to 16.
Ludovicus Vives, De Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53. and l. 4. Tit. 17. sect. 4.
Astexanus, De Vanit. Scientiarum. c. 20.59, 64, 71.
Cornelius Agrippa, French Achademy. c. 20. p. 205.
Peter Primauday, Ethicae Christianae. l. 2. c. 8. p. 107.
Danaeus, Locorum Co^munium Classis. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 62.66. c. 12. sect.
15.19. and Comment. on Judges. c. 21.
Peter Martyr, De Vita and Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 20.21.
Ioannes Langhecrucius, Decreta Ecclesiae Gal. l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 11, etc.
Bochellus, De Spectaculis. lib.
Ioannes Mariana, De Spectaculis. lib.
Barnabas Brissonius, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50.51, 52.
Caesar Bulengerus, Annal. Eccles. Anno 404. sect. 1.2, 3. Anno 206. s^ct. 2.
Anno 399. sect. 5. Anno 469. sect. 2
Baronius, Epit. Baronij Annis eisdem.
Spondanus, Centuriae Magd Tom. 3. Col. 141.142. Tom. 4. Col. 458. Tom. 5. Col.
721. Tom. 6. Col. 159.
The Centuriators, with See Act 7. Scene 5.
sundry other Foreign Authors hereafter quoted; who fully suffragate to this
their Censure. I shall only recite the words of 4^ other modern Outlandish
Authors against the intolerable abuses of Stage Plays, and then pass unto our
English Writers: The first of these, is Master Ralph Gualther, a reverend
orthodox Divine, whose laborious learned Works all Protestant Churches highly
honor: who acquaints us: Sunt ejusmodi homines non parva rerum publ. pestis.
Nam libidinum ministri sunt, and bonos mores corrumpunt, etc. Gualther Homil.
11. in Nabum. fol. 214.215.
That Stage Players, the artificers, the ministers of unlawful pleasures, who
are wont to frequent the Courts of great Princes, and the eminentest richest
Cities where there is most hope of gain propounded to them, are not a small
plague of Commonweals: for they are the servitors of lust, they corrupt good
manners, they bring all religion into contempt: they greatly exhaust both the
public and m^ns private treasure, and that which ought to be distributed for
the poores relief, they by their arts have almost intercepted. These the
Prophet compares to Locusts, not only for their multitude^ but rather for See
Gu^vara, his Dial of Princes. l. 3. c. 43. to 47.
their idle sloathfulnesse, and because being borne only for to eat and
drink, they do nothing in the mean time that is honest, or which may any way
advance the public good. Wherefore grave men in all ages have thought fit to
exclude this sort of men from the Commonwealth. This See here page
Plato a man of most acute judgment perceived when as he banished all Poets
out of his Commonwealth, because he knew they would both corrupt men's manners,
and bring the god, into contempt. Neither undeservedly is the old discipline of
the Sea here page 455.456. and Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. c. 6. sect. 7.
Massilienses applaude^, who would admit no Stage Players into their City, ^or
any person^ but such who were skillful in some art or other, whereby they might
honestly maintain themselves To which this also may be added, that the ancient
Divines most sharply condemn both Stage Plays and Spectacles: having a
respect to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
who would not have fornication, filthy discourse, scurrility or any
uncleanesse, so much as to be once named among Christians: commanding all the
followers of Christ, not to abstain from evil only, but likewise 1 These.
5.22.
from all appearance of it. It is therefore a great sign of corrupt and
perverted discipline, that th^se effeminate persons and furtherers of most
^ishonest pleasures, are in great esteem both in the Courts of Princes and in
rich Cities, whiles grave men who excel in council and experience are in the
mean time excluded and contemned, and the poor neglected, etc. Then he
recites the examples of See Eutropius Rerum Romanoru^. l. 11. p. 140. and
Caelius Rhodig. Antiqu. Lect. l. 14. cap. 19.
Licinius, and See here page 471.
Henry the 3. Emperor of that name, who cast all Stage Players out of their
Courts and Cities, as the very Rats and Moathes of the Court and Commonweal.
Examples (writes he) worthy of eternal praise, which if Princes and
Magistrates of the Commonweal would imitate at this day, there would be less
rome left for filthy sloathfull idleness, then which there is nothing more
powerful to corrupt men's manners: yea wise and prudent men would be in more
esteem, and the poor would be better provided for, who now wander up and
down in every corner, to the great scandal of Christianity. But because all
here neglect their duty, God himself will at one time or other find out a
means whereby he will cast out these plagues (so styles he Plays and Players)
not without some public calamity, as the Prophet here threatens to the
Ninivites. Thus he. The second is Opus Chronagraphicum, Orbis Vniversi.
Antwerpia^. 1611. page 186.187.
Petrus Opm^^rus, a grave Historian, who writes thus of Plays. The ancient
Romans did waste too much upon Pleasures and Spectacles, of which they had
four sorts: Stage Plays which served to delight their ears: Cirque-playes,
Gladiators, and Huntings, which served for their eyes: From the first of these,
they learned filthiness and lewdness: from the latter, cruelty and
inhumanity. Neither did any one bring back those manners from these Spectacles
that he brought thither; for a certain rust and canker did spread it self
over them at unawares. Neither do vices more easily or speedily corrupt men's
minds then by these pleasures. The third is In tertiam parte^ divi Thomae
Salamancae. 1589. page 545.546.
Didacus de Tapia, a famous Spanish Hermit; who discussing this question;
Whether the Sacrament might be given to Stage Players? writes thus. Tam acriter
Patres antiqui in perniciosum hoc hominum genus invehuntur, and ^ain fevere
sacri Canones in illos animadvertunt censuris Ecclesiasticis, vehementer ut
suspicor, turpiora esse quae olim in Theatris agebantur, quam quae his
temporibus. Quicquid vero de hoc sit, lasciva sunt quae modo aguntur, turpia
and obscaena, atque religioni christianae valde perniciosa^ Ac proinde
quicunque aliquid sapit in Domino eos tenetur arbitrari publicos pec^catores,
reique publicae pestem tanto graviorem, quanto gravius est animae v^lnu^ quam
corporis, etc. Ibidem.
The ancient Fathers inveigh so bitterly against this pernicious kind of men,
and the holy Canons punish them so severely by Ecclesiastical censures, that I
suspect that those things which were acted in Theaters heretofore, were
filthier then those things that are acted now. But let this be as it will, yet
the things that are played now are lascivious, filthy, and obscene, and very
pernicious to Christian Religion. And therefore whosoever ^asts any sweetness
in the Lord, or is any whit wise toward God, is bound to repute them public
sinners, and so much the more grivous plague of the Commonweal, by how much
the wound of the soul is greater then that of the body. The Council of
Carthage, Saint Cyprian, Chrysostom, and Augustine (whose words he there
recites at large) excommunicate them both from the Society of the Faithful,
and the Sacraments, as the very infamy, plagues, and blemish of the Church,
which could not tolerate them without much infamy and dishonor; since the very
Pagan Roman^s disfranchised them their tribes, and made them infamous. Quod si
homines scenici apud Ethnicos habentur infames, and omni honor privabantur, ut
verissi^e affirmat div^s Augustinus, quid nos tandem Christianos facere
oportet? Certe fugere ac damnare debemus in Iudo ac joco, qu^cquid profusum,
quicquid immodestum, quicquid illiberase, quicquid petulans, quicquid
flagitiosum: quae omnia in Officijs Tullius ipse damnabat. Inveniuntur autem
haec in Theatris. Quod si homines scenici facetijs and acumine dictorum, and
cantus suavitate delectant, and sententijs gravioribus admonent and erudiunt,
and repraesentatione antiquarum rerum atque affectibus recreant, utinam nunquam
ista bona Comaedijs miscuissent. Hoc enim ideo accidit, quod malum tam per se
sit debile ac miserum, ut seipsum tueri non possit nisi juvetur a bono. Malum
enim ^i perfectum fuerit destruit seipsum, ut ait Aristotelis; ac proinde
occultatur sub specie boni, ut detineat ac fallat homines incautos: Sumus enim
natura vehementer propensi ad honestatem. Quamvis autem aliqua bona misceantur
in his ludis, deberemus autem prae oculis semper habere illa praeclara verba
Hi^ronomi ad Letam. Nemo ad lupanar mittit virginem suam quamvis q^aedam ibi
reperiri possi^t de turpi corruptione lugentes: nemo haeredem suum latronum
turbae committit, ut discat audatiam: nemo in perforatam intrat cymbam ut
disc^t vitare naufragium. Nemo ergo ad Theatri locum impurum and infamem, and
contrarium religioni, and modestiae and sobrietati Christianae (locus scilicet
ille Daemonibus familiaris, invisus Deo) debet procedere, ut discat aut gustet
quae ibi dicuntur, sunt enim mixta veneno. Ibidem.
And if these Stage Players are reputed infamous among Heathens, and deprived
of all honor, as Saint Augustine most truly affirms. De Civitate Dei. lib.
1. cap. 31. what ought we Christians now to do? Verily we ought to eschew and
condemn both in Plays and sports, what ever is profuse, what ever is
imm^dest, what ever is unseemely, what ever is wanton, what ever is wicked; all
which even Tully himself condemned ^n his Offices. But all these things are
found in Play Houses: But if that Stage Players delight men with their
pleasures, jests, and wily speeches, and with the sweetness of their songs,
and music; or if they adorn and instruct men with their grave Sentences, and
please them with the representation of ancient things, or with their passions;
(A common objection in the behalf of Stage Plays;) would to God they had
never mixed these good things with their Com^dies: For this only happens
because evil is so weak and miserable by it self, that it cannot defend and
help it self, unless it be helped and assisted by good: For evil, if it be
perfect, de^troyeth it self, as Aristotle says; and therefore it is hid under
the show of good, that it may deteine and deceive incautelous men: for by
nature we are vehemently prone to honesty. But albeit some good things are
mingled in these Plays, yet we always ought to have these excellent words of
Hierom before our eyes, in his Epistle to Laeta. No Man (says he) sends his
Daughter to the Stews, although some Women may there be found bewayling their
filthy corruption: no man commits his Heir to a company of Thieves, that he
may learn audacity; no man enters into a Boat that is full of holes, that he
may learn to avoid shipwreck. Nota been.
No man therefore ought to go to the impure and infamous place of the Theater
which is contrary to religion, to modesty and sobriety, (a place so familiar to
Devils, and so od^ous to God,) that he may learn or taste the things there
acted: for they are intermixed with poison. Such is the venom, the contagion
of Players and Play-haunters, in this Popish Hermites judgment, whose words of
Papist (and I presume no Protestant) dares to question. The fourth is John
Bodine, an eminent Politician, and renowned Statesman, who has passed this
verdict upon Stage Plays. Bodine his Commonwealth. London 1606. Book 6.
chap. 1. page 645.646.
I will (writes he) pass over in silence the abuses which are committed in
suffering of Comedies and Enterludes, the which (pray mark it) is a most
pernicious plague to a Commonweal: for there is nothing does more corrupt the
Citizens good manners, simplicity and natural bounty then Spectacula enim
dulcissima sunt irritamenta omnis, non tam libidinis quam inhumanitatis.
Mapheus V^gi^^, De Educatione Puerorum. lib. 1. cap. 14. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15.
page 8^8. D^
Stage Plays: the which have the more power and effect, for that their words,
accents, gesture, motions and actions, governed with all the art that may be,
and of a most filthy and dishonest subject, leaves a lively impression in their
souls who apply thereunto even all their senses. To conclude, we may well say,
that the Comedians Stage is an apprentiship of all impudency, looseness,
whoredom, cozening, deceit and wickedness. And therefore Politicorum. lib. 7.
cap. 17.
Aristotle does not with out cause say, That they must have a care lest the
subjects went to Comedies: O that our Magistrates would consider it.
he had said better, that they should have pulled down their Theaters, and
shut the Comedians out of the City ga^es. For says Epistola 7.
Seneca. there is nothing more contrary to good manners, then to haunt Plays.
And therefore See the General History of France. page 114. accordingly.
Philip Augustus King of France, did by a public Edict, banish all Players out
of his Realm. If any one will say, that both Greeks and Romans did allow of
Plays: I answer, that it was for a superstition they had unto their gods: but
the wisest have always blamed them. For although a Tragedy has something in
it more stately and heroike, and which does make the hearts of men less
effeminate: yet Plutarchi Solon.
Solon having seen the Tragedy of Thespis played, did much mislike it; and
whereas Thespis excusing himself, said, it was but a Play: No ( replied Solon)
but this Play turns to earnest. Much more had he blamed Comedies, which were
then unknown: and now always they put at the end of every Tragedy (as poison
into meat) a Comedy or Iigge. And although that Comedies were more tolerable
among those that dwell in the Southern parts, being more heavy and melancholy
by nature, and for their natural constancy less subject to change, yet should
they be utterly denied to those that live toward the North, being of a sanguine
complexion, light and inconstant; having in a manner all the force of their
soul in the common and brutall sense: But there is Nullam habet spe^^ salutis
aeger, quem ad intemperantia^ medicus hortatur. Seneca Epist. 129.
no hope to se^ Plays forbidden by the Magistrates, for commonly they are the
first at them. Thus far these Forraigners. To pass by Cantores autem and
scenicos artisi^es tanto in pretio habuerunt ut ejusmodi acrooma^^ atque ocij
liberalis oblectame^ta pluris quam doctos atque disertos homines facerent. Ex
plebe autem alij in tabernis vinarijs pernoctabant, nonnulli velabris
umbraculorum Theatralium seabdebant,, quidem aleis pugnanter contendebant,
omnes ferme totos dies in Theatris ac Circis ludis muneribusque dediti
traducebant, otium ipsum Imperatori solertia comperatum ad voluptatem, non ad
virtutem incitamenta praebentes. Atque hi quidem mores licet posteriores
aliquot Imperatores emendare conati sunt, tamen in dies corruptiores
deteri^oresque effecti sunt quousque tota Italia, quae marcescente ac diuturno
prope languore torpente, barbari Imperium ex omni part debile invaserunt, and
sevissime distraxerunt. D^ Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. fol. 32.
Carolus Sigonius, who enumerates the frequenting, tolerating, and
countenancing of Stage Plays both by Prince and people, as the inevitable
forerunner, and chief occasion both of the destruction and overthrow of the
Roman Empire, by the Goths and Vandals: and Who is very copious to our present
purpose.
^uevara, his Dial of Princes. l. 3. c. 43. to 48. I come now to our own
domestique Plays, to see what our Writers, our Divines, in their daily
Sermons; what our Universities, Magistrates, and our whole State have
determined of them, in confirmation of my Minors truth.

For our Writers. To pass by those of more ancient times, as Beda, Anselme,
Alexander Fabritius, H^lkot, Bradwardi^, Ioannis de Burgo, Alexander de Ales,
Edmundus Cantuariensis, Ioannis Saresberiensis, Petrus Blesensis Math^w Paris,
Polychronicon, Ludovicus Vives, Thomas Waldensis, and Act 7. Scene 5.
others hereafter quoted, who all condemn these Stage Plays as intolerable
corruptions. Master Northbro^ke, an eminent learned Divine, in his excellent
Treatise against Vain Plays and Enterludes, Imprinted by Authority, London
1579^ writes thus of Stage Plays. Fol. 28. vid. Ibidem.
To speak my mind and conscience plainly and in the fear of God, I say,
that Players and Plays are not tolerable nor sufferable in any Commonweal,
especially where ^he Gospel is preached; (which he there proves at large by
sundry testimonies of Fathers, Councels, modern Divines, and others; and by
many arguments,) because they are the occasions of much sin and wickedness,
corrupting both the minds and manners of their Actors and Spectators. The
Author of the third Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, (once The 3.
Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. page 49.50, 51.
a Playerly Play-poet himself, till being pricked in conscience for it, he
renounced his profession) d^livers his experimental resolution of Stage Plays
in these very terms. Ibidem. pag^ 43.44.
Such doubtless is mine opinion of common Plays, that in a Commonweal they
are not sufferable. My reason is, because they are public enemies to virtue
and religion, allurements to sin, corrupters of good manners, mere Brothel
houses of Bawdery, and bring both the Gospel into slander, the Sabbath into
contempt, men's souls into danger, and finally the whole Commonweal into
disorder: all which particulars he there confirms at large. The title of
which Book is very observable: viz. A second and third Blast of Retrait from
Plays and Theaters: the one whereof was sounded by a reverend Bishop, dead
long since; the other by a worshipful and zealous Gentleman now alive: one
showing the filthiness of Plays in times past; the other the abomination of
Theaters in the time present: both expressly proving, that that Commonweal is
nigh unto the curse of God, wherein either Players be made of or Theaters
maintained: Set forth and allowed by Authority. Anno 1580. A pregnant
Authorized evidence of my Minors truth. Master Stephen Gosson, another great
Play-poet before his conversion, (for See his School of Abuse, the Epistle to
the Reader, accordingly.
which he afterw^rds shed many a bitter tear;) in his This is the Title of the
Book.
School of Abuse; containing a pleasant invective against Poets, Pipers,
Players, Iesters, and such like Caterpillars of a Commonwealth, setting up a
^lagge of Defiance against their mischeivous exercise, and overthrowing their
Bulwarks by Profane Writers, Natur^ll Reason, and Common Experience; printed
by Allowance, and Dedicated to Sir Philip Sidney. Anno 1578. And in his Plays
Confuted, Dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham; which Book is thus entitled:
Plays Confuted in five Actions: Proving that they are not to be suffered in a
Christian Commonweal, etc. Imprinted at London, about the year 1581. does
positively affirm, and copiously demonstrate upon unanswerable grounds; That
Stage Plays and common Actors are no ways tolerable in any Christian, or
Well-governed Commonweal; because they occasion much wickedness, lewdness,
and disorder, and exce^dingly corrupt the minds, the manners both of their
Auditors and Spectators: as the Perusers of these Tractates shall more at large
discern. The selfsame Assertion and Conclusion we shall find, in Master
Edition 4. London 1595. p. 101. to 107.
Stubs, his Anatom^ of Abuses: in reverend In his Works. 1622. London. pars 3.
p. 60.
B B. Babington, his Exposition upon the 7. Commandment; in Master John Field,
his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden; published by Authority. Anno
1583. In a Book entitled, The Church of evil m^n and women, etc. printed by
Richard Pinson. Anno 1580. In Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, De
Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brittanicae. Lo^dini 1572. fol. ult. In M. George Whetston,
his Mirror for Magistrates of Cities. London 1586. fol. 24. In Holling shead,
his Chronicle. Anno 1549. page 1028. Numb. 25.30. Col. 2. Anno 1559. Col. 1184.
Anno 1576. Col. 1209. In Doctor John Case, Ethicorum. lib. 4. cap. 8. page
307.308. and Politicorum. lib. 5. cap. 8. page 474.475, 476. where he condemns
all Popular, though he allows of Academicall Stage Plays, as Doctor Gager,
and Doctor Gentiles likewise do. In reverend B B. Halls Epistles, De^ad. 6.
Epist. 6. In the Rich Cabinet. London 1616. page 116.117, 118. In Master Samuel
Purchase, his Pilgrim. cap. 51. page 490. In M. Doctor See the Epi^tle to the 2.
and 3. Blast of Retrait to Plays and Theaters.
Sparks, his Rehearsal Sermon at Paul's Cross, the 29. of April. Anno 1579.
In the Anonymous Treatise of Dances. London 1581. showing, that they are
dependents or things annexed unto whoredom; wherein it is also proved by the
way, that Plays are joined and knit together in a rank with them. In
incomparable Doctor Reinolds, his Overthrow of Stage Plays, printed 1597. and
reprinted at Oxford, 1629. and in his Preface to the University of Oxford
before his 6. Theses. page 45.46. London 1612. In Doctor John White, his Sermon
at Paul's Cross, March 24. 1615. sect. 11. In Dr. Bond of the Sabbath. London
1595. p. 134.135.136.137.138. In I. G. his Refutation of the Apology for
Actors. London 1615. page 13. and 48. to 60. In Master John Brinsly^ his 3. part
of the True Watch chapter 11. Abomination 30. page 302. In Master Osmund Lake,
his Probe Theological upon the Comma^dements. London 1612. page 167. to 272. In
Master William Perkins, his Exposition upon the 7. Commandment, in his Works.
vol. 1. p. 60. D. In his Treatise of Conscience. cap. 3. Tom. 1. page 538. In
his Cases of Conscience. Book 3. chap. 4. sect. 4. Question 2. vol. 2. page
140.141. and in his Commentary on Galathians 3. vol. 2. page 239. In I. P. his
Covenant between God and man: Exposition on the 7. Commandment. In B B.
Baily, his Preface to the Practice of Piety. In Master Dod, Master Cleav^r, M.
El^on. and B B. Andrews, on the 7. Commandment. In Master Thomas Gatiker, of
the Lawful use of Lots. page 216. In Doctor Layton, his Speculum Be^^i Sacri.
cap. 45. In Master John Downh^m, his Sum of Divinity. Book 1. chap. 11. page
203. and in his Guide to Godliness. lib. 3. chap. 21. sect. 5. In Master
Rebert Bolton, his Discourse of True Happiness. page ^3.34. In a Short
Treatise against Stage Plays Dedicated to the Parliament. Anno 1625. In
Richard Rawlidge, his Monster lately found out, etc. London 1628. page 2.3.4.
In Doctor Ames, De Iure Conscientiae. lib. 5. ^^p. 34. page 271. In Master
Richard Brathwait, his English Gentlewoman. London 1631. page 53.54. In Doctor
Thomas Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments. Edition 2. London 1631. Book 2.
chap. 36. page 435.436. who in these their several Writings, unanimously
condemn all Stage Plays, as unsufferable pernicious abominations and
corruptions in a Christian State, which desperately deprave men's minds and
manners, by drawing them on to idleness, wantonness, profaneness, whoredom,
dissoluten^sse, effemi^acy, and all kinke of vice and wickedness whatsoever;
as these their Writings, with See D. Featlies Hand-mayd of Devotio^. Edit. 2.
page 408. Mr. Samuel Ward, his Balm from Gilead. page 82. My Perpetuity, etc.
p. 586.587. My Censure of M. Cosens, his Cozening Devotions. page 90. Lame
Giles, his Haulting. p. 1. and The Historical Narration, annexed to it. page
14.
sundry others will more largely testify; which fully suffragate to my present
Assumption.

That our godly Divines in their zealous daily Sermons, have likewise declaimed
against Stage Plays, both in former and latter times, as these our Writers
do, it is evident, not only by our own daily experience; (there being not
one godly faithful Minister where these Play Houses, Plays and Players are
admitted, but has often cyred out against them in the Pulpit, as the Sea the
Preface to the 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters.
very Schools, the Tutors of Bawdery and Abuse; The nests of the Devil; the
chair of pestilence, the sinkes of all sin, the pompes and sovereign places
of Satan; the poison of men's souls and manners, the plagues and overtures of
the Commonwealth, etc.) but by the testimony of the Prefacer to the 2. and 3.
Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. Anno 1580. who in^ormes us; that in
his time many godly Preachers day by day, in all places of greatest resort, did
deno^nce the vengeance of God to those, be they high or low, that favored
Plays, Theaters, or Players. That in all ages the most excellent men for
learning have condemned them by the force of eloquence and power of Gods Word:
and that many in the principal places of this Land have, and daily, yea openl^
do speak against Plays, Players, and Theaters; as neither warranted by Gods
Word, nor liked of Christians, but disallowed utterly, See here A^^ 7.
thorowout.
by Script^re, by reason, by Doctors, by Bishops, by their very Authors
themselves, yea and by all other good men, as the enemies to godliness, the
corruption of the wel-disposed: and so consequently a spe^iall engine to
subvert all religion, and to overthrow the good State of that Commonweal
wherein they are tolerated. By the suffrage of Master Plays Confuted. Action
4. at the close of it.
Stephen Gosso^. Anno 1581. who acquaints us^ That it is a shame to frequent
Plays, impudency to defend them: it is sin in the Gentiles to set o^t
Plays, in Christians it is a presumptuous sin; because we see better ways
and yet take the worse: we know their corruptions and allow them. All this has
been sufficiently proved by ancient Writers, and daily revealed by learned
Preachers; yet will not my Countrymen leave their Plays, because Plays are
the nourishers of delight. By the express averment of M. In his Mirror for
Magistrates. fol. 2^.
George Whetston. An. 1586. who records: That godly Divines, in p^blike
Sermons, and others in printed Books, have (of late) very sharply invayed
against Stage-playes^ (unproperly called Tragedies, Comedies and Morals) as the
springs of many vices, and the stumbling-blockes of godliness and virtue.
Truly, the use of them on the Sabbath day, and the abuse of them at all times,
with scurrility and unchaste convaiance, ministers matter sufficient for them to
blame, and the Magistrate to reform. To which I might add D. Rainolds,
Overthrow of Stage Plays. Epistle to the Reader, and page 93.94. I. G. his
Apology for Actors, with sundry others who concur in this.

That our two famous Our Universities condemn Stage Plays.
Universities have passed the self same doom of condemnation against
Stage Plays; is most apparent; both by the testimony of M. Stephen Gosso^.
Anno 1581. who upon his own knowledge a^firmes: Plays Confuted. Action 5. at
the beginning.
That many famous men in his time in both our Universities, had made open
outcries of the inconveniences bred by Plays; and that they held this
opinion; That Plays are not to be suffered in a Christian Commonweal: but
(says he) they do not thoroughly prosecute the same, by printing any full
discovery against them, because that ^inding the ears of the hearers stopped
with the deaf Adder, they begin to shak^ the dust of their shoes against
them; and follow the Counsel of God himself; Math. 7.6.
Which bids them, throw no Pearls to Swine. By the testimony of learned D.
Overthrow of Stage Plays p. 151.152, 153.
Rainolds, who a^firmes; that the best and gravest D^vines in the University of
Oxford, Cited by Dr. Rainolds, in his Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 151.152.
condemned Stage Plays by an express Statute made in a full Convocation of
the whole University, in the year of our Lord 1584. whereby the use of all
common Plays was expressly prohibited in the University, lest the Pejora enim
^uvenes facile praecepta audiunt. Seneca Thyestes. Act. 2. fol. 36 Parebit
pravi docilis Roman^ juventus. Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Satyr 2. page 201. Inde
trahunt juvenilia pectora pestem Mortiferam fiuntque ipsae sine front puellae.
Mant. Fast. l. 2. and Dr. Rainolds Epistle Dedicatory to his 6. Theses. p.
45.56.
younger sort (who are prone to imitate all kind^ of vice) being spectators of
so many lewd and evil sports as in them are practiced, should be corrupted by
them: answerable to which the University of Cambridge (as I have been credibly
informed) enacted a public Statute; that no common Actors should be suffered to
play within the Precincts of the Universities Jurisdiction, for fear they
should deprave the Scholars manners. Which Statutes though perchance they are
not always so strictly observed as they ought, yet they are oft-times put in
execution, by such Vice-chancelers, and Proctors as are most conscionably
vigilant and careful in their places. All which being put together,
sufficiently discovers our Universities judgment of common Players and Actors,
what unsufferable mischiefs and corruptions they are. If any here Object; That
our Universities approve of private Stage Plays acted by Scholars in private
Colleges: therefore these Plays are not so intolerably evil in their
opinions. I answer; See D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 151.152, 153.
that our Universities though they tolerate and connive at, yet they give no
public approbation to these private Ent^rlud^s, which are not generally
received into all Colleges, but only practiced in some private houses,
(perchance once in three or four years;) and that by the particular Statutes
of those houses made in times of Popery, which require some Latin Comedies,
for learning-sake only, to be acted now and then: Which Plays, as they are
composed I.G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors. page 17^ whose words I
here recite.
for the most part by idle brains, who affect not b^tter studies; and acted
(as I. G.) informs us, by Gentle-bloods, and lusty Swash-bucklers, who
prefer an ounce of vainglory, oftentati^n and str^tting on the Stage,
before a pound of learning; See BB. Hall^ Epistles. Decad. 6. Epist. 6. and his
Qu^ Vadis sect. 3.4^ 10, 11.
or by such who are sent to the University, not so much to obtain knowledge,
as to keep them from the common riot of Gentlemen in these days; like little
Children whom their Parents send to School, the rather to keep them from
under feet in the streets, which careful Mothers greatly fear: their
spectators for the most part being such as both Poets and Actors are; even such
as reckon no more of their studies, then spend-all Gentlemen of their
cast-suites: D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p. 151.152, 153, 154. See
Langbecrucius, De Vita and Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 2^.22.
accordingly.
So the graver, better, and more studious sort (especially Divines, who by
sundry See here, p^g. 149.150. and Act 7. Scene 3. thorowout.
Councels are prohibited from acting or beholding any public or private
Stage Plays, and therefore dare not to a approach them) condemn them, censure
them, come not a^ them, (especially when they transgress the rules of modesty
and decency as ought times they do:) Neither are these Plays so frequent now
as they have been in former times, by reason of those mischiefs, D. Ra^nolds
Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 24.25.
those expenses of time and money which they occasion, and that affinity they
have with common Stage Plays, which all ages, all Christian, all profane
Authors of note, and these our Universities have solemnly condemned. Descend
we from our Universities to our Magistrates. The Magistrates of the City of
London, as His Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden.
M. John Field records, obtained from Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory, about
the year 1580. that all Heathenish Plays and Enterludes should be banished
upon Sabbath days: and not long after Richard Rawlidge, in his Monster lately
found out and discovered, or the Scourging of Tiplers. London 162^. page 2.3,
4. where this is verbatim related.
many godly Citizens, and wel-disposed Gentlemen of London, considering that
Play Houses and See M. George Whetston, his Myrror for Magistrates of Cities
thorowout, to this pur^ose.
Dicing-houses, were traps for young Gentlemen and others; and perceiving the
many inconveniences, and great damage that would ensue upon the long suffering
of the same, not only to particular persons, but to the whole City; and that
it would also be a great disparagement unto the Governors, and a dishonor to
the government of this honorable City, if they should any longer continue;
acquainted some pious Magistrates therewith, desiring them to take some speedy
course for the suppression of common Play Houses and Dicing-houses within the
City of London and Liberties thereof. Who thereupon made humble suite to
Queen Elizabeth and her Privy Council, and obtained leave from her Majesty to
thrust the Players out of the City, and to pull down all Play Houses and
Dicing-houses within their Liberties: which accordingly was effected: and the
Play Houses in Gracious-street, Bishops-gate-street, that ni^h Paul's, that on
Ludgate Hill, and the White-Friers, were quite put down and suppressed by the
care of these religious Senators. And surely (writes my Author) had all their
Successors followed their worthy steps, sin would not at this day have been
so powerful and reigning as it is. This memorable Act of suppressing
Play Houses by our London Magistrates, by Authority from our virtuous Queen
Elizabeth, and her most Sage Privy Counsel, as intolerable grievances and
annoyances to our chief Christian Metropolis, is an infallible argument, that
they Neque enim censebant isti faelicem esse rempublicam stantibus maenibus,
ruentibus moribus. Ea enim mala quae oriuntur in mor^bus, saevientibus pejora
sunt hostibus. August. De Civit Dei. lib. 1. cap. 30.33.
all reputed them, unsufferable corruptions in a Christian State. Now as these
pious Magistrates demolished Play Houses, and thrust out all Players from
within their Liberties, which now have taken sanctuary in some privileged
places, without their Jurisdiction; so diverse sage and pious Justices of Peace,
and Magistrates in sundry Cities and Counties of our Realm, have from time to
time, punished all wandering Stage Players By Virtue of the Statutes of 14.
Eliz. c. 5. and 39. Eliz. cap. 4. and 1. Iac. cap. 7.
as Rogues, notwithstanding the Master of the Revels, or other men's allowance,
who have no For 14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4 and 1. Jacob. c. 7. give them no
authority at all to license any, and this their license is void, by the
express words of 1. Iaco^i. cap. 7.
legal authority to license vagrant Players: and in cases where they have had
Commissions to act, they have often denied them liberty so to do, within their
Jurisdictions, lest their lascivious, profane, and filthy Plays, should
corrupt the people, and draw them on to vice. All which sufficiently
demonstrates what our Magistrates think of Players and Stage Plays, which our
whole State and Kingdom have condemned, as I shall now make evident, by some
Acts of Parliament. In 4. Henry 4. cap. 27.
4. of Henry the IV. cap. 27. I find this Act of Parliament made. Item, to
eschew many diseases and mischiefs, which has happened before this time in the
Land of Wales, by many Wasters, Rimours, Minstrels, and other Vacabonds; It is
ordained and stablished, that no Master-rimour, Minstrill nor Vacabond be in
any wise sustained in the Land of Wales to make commo^thes nor gathering upon
the people there. Lo here an ancient Statute banishing all Players, Rimours,
and Minstrels out of Wales, as the Authors of many commotions, disorders, and
mischiefs. 3. Henry 8. cap. 9.
In 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. there was this Law enacted against Mummers. For as much
as lately within this Realm, diverse persons have disguised and apparelled
themselves, and covered their faces with Visours or other things, in such
manner as they should not be known: and diverse of them in a company together,
naming themselves Mummers, have come to the dwelling place of diverse men of
honor, and substantial persons, and so departed unknown; whereupon murders,
felony, rape, and other great hurts and inconveniences have afore-time grown,
and hereafter be like to come by the color thereof, if the said disorder
should continue not reformed. Wherefore be it enacted by the King our
Sovereign Lord, etc. that if any persons hereafter disguise or apparel them
with Visours or otherwise upon their faces, and so disguised or apparelled as
Mummers or persons unknown, by reason of their apparel, associate or
accompany them together or apart, and attempt to enter into the house of any
person or persons, or assault or affrayes make upon any person or persons in
the Kings highway, or any other place in form before disguised, that then the
said Mummers, or disguised persons, and every of them shall be arrested by any
of the Kings liege people as suspects or Vacabonds, and be committed to the
Kings Jail, there to be imprisoned by the space of 3. months without bail
or mainprise, and then to make fine to the King by the discretion of the
Justices, by whom they shall be delivered out of prison. And also it is
ordained and enacted by the said Authority, that if any person or persons sell
or keep any Visours or Visour in his house, or in any other place within this
Realm after the feast of Easter next coming, and after this Act proclaimed,
that the said person (that keeps the said Visour or Visours) shall forfeit to
the King our Sovereign Lord for every Visour 22. s. And further shall suffer
imprisonment, and make fine after the discretion of the Justices before whom he
is thereof convicted by examination or by inquisition, after the course of the
Commonlaw. Upon the consideration of which Statute, Vna omnium regionum Anglia
ejusmodi personatas belluas hactenus non vidit, necquidem vult videre; quando
apud Anglos, in re hac prae alijs sapientiores, lex est, ut capitale sit, si
quis personas induerit. De Inventor. rerum. ^. 5 cap. 2. p. 388.
Polydor Virgil writing of Stage Plays and Mummers, records: That only
England of all other Countries did not as yet behold these personated beasts:
neither truly will she see them: since among the English, who in this thing
are far wiser then others; there is this law, that it shall be ca^itall for
any person to put on a Visour or Players habit: Which Statute, as may be
collected from Polydor, (who This Book of his was published, Anno 1499. as
appears by the Epistle Dedicatory.
wrote about some 10. years after it) extends as well to Players as Mumme^s.
In 2. and 3. Philip and Mary. c. 19.
2. and 3. of Philip and Mary. cap. 9. entitled; An Act to avoid diverse
licenses of houses wherein unlawful games be used: upon the humble Petition of
the Commons to the Queen in Parliament, it was inacted; That whereas by reason
of sundry Licenses heretofore granted to diverse persons, as well within the
City of London and the Suburbs of the same, as also in diverse other places of
the Realm, for the having, maintaining, and keeping of Houses, Gardens, and
places for Bowling, Tennise, and Dicing (a game prohibited as unlawful by
sundry other of our Statutes: viz. By 12. Richard 2. c. 6.11. Henry 4. cap. 4.
17. Edward 4. cap. 3.11. Henry 7. cap. 2.19. Henry 7. cap. 12. and 33. Henry 8.
cap. 9. where Dice-play is styled an unlawful, unprofitable, ungracious, and
incommendable game, whereby diverse are utterly undone and impoverished of their
goods, and by means whereof diverse and many murders, robberies, and other
heinous felonies were oftentimes committed in diverse parts of the Realm. See
17. Edw. 4. c. 3. and thereupon it is severely condemned under great mulcts and
punishments; the Dice-players being to forfeit ten pound a piece, and to suffer
two years imprisonment, and such as keep any Dicing-houses to forfeit twenty
pound a piece, and to suffer 3. years imprisonment, etc.) for white and
black, making and marring, and other unlawful games prohibited by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, diverse and many unlawful assemblies,
conventicles, seditions and conspiracies had been daily and secretly practiced
by idle and misruly persons repairing to such places, of the which robberies
and diverse misdemeanors had ensued; that for remedy thereof, all Licenses,
placards or grants made to any person or persons for the keeping of any
Bowlingallies, Dicing-houses, or other unlawful games (in the which number
Stage Plays were included) should be utterly void, and of none effect. By the
34. and 35. Henry 8. cap. 1. 2. and 3. Edward 6. cap. 1.1. Eliz. cap. 2. and 3.
Iacobi. cap. 21.
Statutes of 34. and 35. Henry 8. cap. 1. of 2. and 3. Edward 6. cap. 1.1.
Eliz. cap. 2. and of 3. Iacobi. cap. 21. we have several mulcts and penalties
inflicted upon such, who should recite or interpret Scripture, or revile the
Sacrament or Book of Common Prayer, or any part thereof; or iestingly and
profanely speak or use the Name of God the Faether, or of Christ Jesus, or of
the holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, in any Enterludes, Stage Plays, Rymes or
Pageants. And lest any one should hence infer, that these Statutes (which are
principally intended in private Plays and Enterludes, since they condemn and
suppress all public,) seem to allow of popular Stage Plays, because they
suppress not Plays themselves, but only these their abuses; the 14. Eliz. c.
5.39 Eliz. cap. 4.1. Iacobi. cap. 7. and 1. Caroli. c. 1.
Statutes of 14. Eliz. cap. 5.39. Eliz. cap. 4.1. Iacobi. cap. 7. and 1.
Caroli. cap. 1/ do in express words, condemn all Stage Plays, and common
Enterludes, as unlawful exercises and pastimes; occasioning many great
inconveniences, quarrels, blood-sheds, and disorders, to Gods dishonor, and
the public prejudice: For the better suppression of which, the 14. Eliz. c. 5.
and 39. Eliz. c. 4.
Statutes of 14. Eliz. cap. 5. and 39. Eliz. cap. 4. have branded, have
adjudged all common Players of Enterludes, all idle persons using any unlawful
games, all Players and wandering Minstrels, for Rogues, for Vacabonds and Sturdy
Beggars; subiecting them to such pains and punishments as other wandering
Rogues and Vacabonds are to undergo; unless they should belong to some Baron
or other honorable person of greater degree, and be authorized by them to play
under their hand and Seal of Arms: which license of theirs exempted them
only from the punishment, not from the infamy, or style of Rogues and
Vacabonds: which Statutes, not so effectually suppressing these Plays and
Enterludes as was expected, by reason of the liberty that Barons and other
Noblemen had to license Players of Enterludes belonging to them to act their
Plays, the 1. Iacobi. c. 7.
Statute of 1. Iacobi. c. 7. to remedy this mischief, has declared and
enacted: that from thenceforth no authority given or to be given or made by any
Baron of this Realm, or any other honorable Personage of greater degree unto
any Interlude Players, Minstrels, Iuglers, Bearward, or any other idle person
or persons whatsoever, using any unlawful games or Plays, to play or act,
should be available to free or discharge the said persons or any of them, from
the pains and punishments of Rogues, of Vacabonds and Sturdy-beggers in the
said Statutes (viz. 14. Eliz. cap. 5. and 39. Eliz. cap. 4.) mentioned; but
that they shall be taken within the offense and punishments of the same
Statutes, and of this Statute of 1. Iacobi. cap. 7. So that now at this day, by
these several Acts of Parliament yet in force, (resolved and concluded upon
after long mature deliberation by our whole State and Kingdom,) all common
Stage Plays, are solemnly adjudged to be unlawful and pernicious Exercises,
not sufferable in our State: and all common Stage Players, by whomsoever
licensed; to be but Vacabonds, Rogues, and Sturdy-beggers; who ought to suffer
Viz. They may be sent to the house of Correction; imprisoned, set in Stocks
and whipped, etc. and if they still persist in Playing after these corrections;
they may be burned with an hot burning Iron of the breadth of an English
shilling, with a great Roman R. in the left shoulder, which letter shall there
remain as a perpetual mark of a Rogue, etc. as these several Statutes more
largely show: and if this will not reform them; they may be banished, and
after that if they return again and persist incorrigible, be executed as
Felons.
such pains and punishments in every degree, as are appointed to be inflicted
upon all other Vacabonds, Rogues, and Sturdy-beggers, by the forenamed
Statutes. So that all Magistrates may now justly punish them as Rogues and
Vacabonds, wherever they go, (yea they ought both in law and conscience for
to do it, since these several Statutes thus enforce them to it)
notwithstanding any License which they can procure, since the express words of
the Statute of 1. Iacobi. cap. 7. has made all Licenses unavaylable to free
them from such punishments. It is most apparently evident then by all these
promises; that not only Pagan Writers, Emperors, States, and Magistrates;
together with the Primitive Christians, Fathers, and Christian Writers of
Foreign parts; but even our own domestique Writers, Preachers, Universities,
Magistrates, and our whole State it self in open Parliament, both in ancient,
modern, and present times, have abandoned, censured, condemned Stage Plays
and common Actors, as the Spectacula quoniam maxima sunt irritamenta vitiorum,
and ad corrumpendos animos potentissime valent, tollenda sunt nobis, etc.
Lactantius De Vero Cultu^ cap. 20.
very pests, the corruptions of men's minds and manners; the Seminaries of all
vice, all lewdness, wickedness, and disorder: and intolerable mischiefs in
any civil or well-disciplined Commonweal: therefore my Minors truth is past
all doubt, we cannot but readily subscribe unto it; and so by consequence to
the conclusion too, without any more dispute. How then can we tolerate, or
connive at, much less applaude, frequent, or justify these pernicious
depraving Enterludes, which we have all thus condemned as intolerable evils?
Our own Writers, Preachers, Universities, Magistrates; yea, our whole Realm
and State in Parliament (to whose Chescun home est party al Act de Parliament.
39. Edward 3.7. Br. Parliament. 26.4. Henry 7.10. b. 21. Henry 7, 1. b. 3.
Edward 4.2 a. 21. Edw. 4.45. Plowdon. f. 59. a. and 396. b. cum pluribus alijs.
Acts we all are parties, as our Law-bookes teach us) have thus publicly
branded, censuraed them, as extremely evill^ how can, how dare we then foment
them, plead for them or resort unto them, as exceeding good? Let us, O let us
not be worser then these Heathen, nor wiser then these Christian fore-recited
foreign, and dom^stique Authors, Fathers, Ministers, Magistrates, Princes,
Emperors, States and Kingdoms, who have thus abandoned, suppressed Plays and
Players for the forenamed mischiefs which they did occasion: but as we cannot
but approve, applaud their censure in our judgeme^ts, so let us submit unto
them in our practice; renouncing, abominating all filthy Stage Plays from
henceforth and for ever, as the very poison, the corruption of our minds and
manners, which they will strangely vitiate, as all these conclude, and the
examples both of the ancient Greeks and Romans witness. And no wonder is it,
that Stage Plays should thus deprave the Actors, the Spectators minds and
manners^ Pejora juvenes facile praecepta audiunt. Senec^. Thyestes. Act 2. fol.
36. a Cito flores periunt; cito viol^s and ^ilium and crocu^ pestilens aura
corru^pit. Hierom Epist 7. c. 5. Imberbis invenis tandem custode remo^o, Gaudet
equis, canibusque, and aprici gramine campi; Cereus in vitium flecti,
monitoribus asper; Vtilium tardus provisor, prodigus aeris: Sublimis,
cupidusque, and amata relinquere pernix Horace De Ar^e Poet. p. 301.
especially those of the younger sort, who in regard both of their tender
years, their want of judgment, of experience; the strength, the vigor of
their lusts, and their natural inclination unto evil, are more easily
c^rrupted. For if 1 Cor. 15.33. Scab^e animus laborat, plenusque est malorum
succoru^ ex pravis colloquijs. Justin Martyr, ad Zenam and Screnum Epistola.
Verba enim ad opera viam praebent. Theophylact and Chrysostom in Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
evil words corrupt good manners, as the Apostle teaches: there is plenty of
these in all our Stage Plays, See Act 3. Scene 1. accordingly.
which are little b^tter then mere b^wd^ry and sc^rrility: If sinful, lewd
companions: if the society of Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores,
Ru^^ians, Panders, Bawdes or such like leprous creatures, can deprave men, See
Act 4. Scene 1.2. accordingly.
as all profess they will; Atque horu vitiorum spectator^s sedeat homines
impij atque mali. Nazianzen ad Seluchum. p. 1063. B. and here Act 4. Scene 1.2.
accordingly.
what others shall we meet at Theaters, but such lewd filth^ persons? If
pestilen^, wicked, vicious Loca non contaminant perse, sed quae in locis ^iunt,
a quibus loca ipsa co^taminari altercati sumus. Tertul. D^ Spectac. lib. cap 8.
places will infect men's minds or manners; What place so dangerous, so
leprous, so contagio^s, as the Playhouse? which the Fathers style, Thea^rum
P^st^le^^^ae Cathedra^ Clemens Alexand. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. Chrysostom.
Hom. 8. De Paenitentia. Tom. 5. S^l. 750. C. D. See here, page, 67.68.
a Chair of Pestilence. If adulterous, lasc^vious Spectacles ^re apt to
poison, to contaminate the eyes, the souls, the l^ve^, the manners of the
Spectator^, Job 31.1, 7^ Prove. 23.33. Isay 33.15. See Act 3^ Scene 1. Act 6.
Scene ^.4. accordingly.
as they are: what Shows, what Spectacles so lewd, so obscene, as those that
are daily represented on the Stage? If any, if every of these will severally
corrupt men, in company, in places where there is little danger, as too often
they do; much more will they deprave men Et si non prosint singula, juncta
juvant.
when they are all combined, as they are in Stage Plays; Habent scelerum
quicquid possedimus omnes. Claudia^ in Rufinum. l. 1. page 414. See here, p.
67^ 68, 69. accordingly.
where all the several scattered corruptions that usually adulterate men's
minds and manners of themselves alone, unite their forces; their contagio^s
into one. But what need I press any further reasons to prove this cursed
effect of Stage Plays, when as our own visible experience abundantly confirms
it? For alas, whence is all that prodigious desperate dissoluteness,
profaneness, wickedness, drunkenness, impudence, lewdness, and disorder^
that gross uncleanesse, that exorbitant obliquity, that stupendous degeneracy
in life, apparel, speech, gesture, See my Vnlovelinesse of Lovelockes. and Act.
5. Scene 6.
hair, complements, and the entire man? Whence all those several armies of
corruptions, of vices, which infect our Nation? Whence all those several
beastly, diabolical, audacious, crying, daring sins of our Nunc eo
gloriantur and qui patrant, and qui patiuntur muliebria, effae minati corpore
juxta atque animo, ne scintillam quidem retinent generis masculini, protinus
plectentes cincinnos ornantesque, and cerussa fucoque oblinentes faciem
pingentesque, unguentis quoque fragrantes exquisitissimis, Nam and hac utuntur
illecebra, exercitati omnibus formae lenocinijs, nec pudet eos marem data opera
mutare in faeminam. His parcendum non est, si audimus legem, quae jubet
androginum and sexum suum adultera^tem impun^ occ^di die ipsa ac hora qu^
deprae henditur, cum sit probrosus, patriaeque suae and familiae dedecus, atque
adeo totius humanae generis. Philo Iud^us, De Specialibu^ Legibus. page
1059.1060.
femalized gotish males, or Quem praestare potest mulier galeata (de^onsa)
pud'orem Quae ^ugit a sexu? vires amat^ haec tamen ipsa vir nollet fieri: nam
quantula nostra voluptas, etc^ Iuv^nal Sa^yr. 6. page 50.51. See 56.
mannish females, who out-stare the very Laws of God, of Man, of Nature, and
send up daily challenges for vengeance to the God of Heaven; Whence all those
common Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores, Bawdes, Panders,
Ru^^ians, Rorers, Swearers, Duellers, Cheaters, Fashion-mongers, Fantastiques,
Libertines, Scoffers, Romans 1.30.
haters of God, of grace, of holiness; 2 Timothy 3.3.
Despisers and slanderers of all religious men; the Enemies of all modesty and
common civility; with such other lawless, godless persons, who now swarm so
thick of late in the streets of our Metropolis; professing themselves openly
to be the very Thus Polycarpus said to Marcion the Heretic. Agnosco te
primogenitu^ Satanae. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. ^4. Irenaeus Contra
Haereses. l. 3. c. 3. p. 254.
firstborn of Satan, the very factors, and heirs apparent of Hell; in that
Isay 3.9.
they proclaim their sin as Sodom in the open view of all men, without the
smallest blush, and glory in those infernal filthy practices which should even
Psalm 119.28. Nahum. 2.10.
melt their souls with sorrow, and Isay 1.29. c. 31.19. Psalm. 44.15. Ier.
3.25. c. 31.19. Ezech. 16.54, 63. c. 36.32. Dan. 9.7, 8.
confound their Faces with the deepest shame; See Chrysostom. Ho^il. 38. in
Matthew. accordingly.
Are not they all original from Plays? From Play Houses? have they not all
their birth, their growth, their aliment, their complement, their intention,
their support from these? Are not these the Nurseries, the Fountains whence
they spring? the food by which they live, they grow, and multiply? the means
by which they root and spread themselves? Certainly he is stark blind that
cannot; he most perversely wilful that will not see it; so apparent is it to
the eyes, the consciences of all men who pri^ into the cau^es of these gross
diso^ders. Since therefore the dangerous leprosy, the Sea August. De Ci^it.
Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.33. and lib. 2. cap. 4. to 14. and cap. 27.29.
p^stiferous contagio^ of mind-corrupting, manner-depraving Stage Plays is so
irrefragably confirmed by reason^ by experience, by all the fore-quoted
Au^hori^i^s, both Pagan and Christian^ foreign and domestique; I may safely,
I may confidently conclude on all the premis^s, ( and I hope ere long, to see
Animum nostrum, Patres conscripti, Reipub. curis calentem, pulsavit saepius
querela populorum, orta qui^em ^x causis levibus, sed graves eructavit
excessus. Deplorat enim pro spectacul^^um volup ate ad discriminis se ultima
pervenisse: ut legum ratione calcata, desp^r^te p^rs^quere^ur inno^ios servilis
furor armatus: and quodillis humanitas ^ostra le^^^ae ca^sa pr^stitit, in
tristitiam audacia nec plectenda convertit. Quod nos clementiae nostrae solita
provisione compriminus, ne paulatim ^inendo graviorem vi^dicar^ coga^ur
offensam. Benigni quippe principis est, non tam delicta vel^e punire quam
tol^ere: ne ^ut acriter vindicando aestimetur nimius, at leviter agendo putetu^
improvidus. Theodoricus Rex. apud Casstodorum Variarum. lib. 1. Epist. 30.
our Gracious Sovereign, or Church, our State, our P^rliament, our Counsel;
yea all our Magistrates^ Ministers, People, even really concurring with me in
this right Christian Assertion;) That Stage Plays deprave the minds,
adulterate the manners both of their Actors and Spectators; and that therefore
they are altogether unlawful, abominable unto Christians; Semper enim scelera
dum non resecantur, increscunt, and in augmentum facinorum prosilitur, quoties
secur^ impunitate peccatur. Chrysostom. De Absolon persequente Patr^m David
Sermo. Tom. 1.
not tolerable in any Christian well-ordered Commonweal: Which should cause
us all in general, each of us in particular, as we either tender the public
or our own private welfare, for ever to abandon, suppress, renounce all
Stage Plays. Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 3.
Crudelitas ista, p^etas est: This cruelty will be at least our piety, if not
our safety, in these dangerous wicked times, that cry for naught but wrath and
vengeance, which are likely 1 These. 2.16.
for to come upon us to the uttermost, (as they did of old upon the Sea Scene
19.
Jews, the Greeks and Romans,) for our resort to Stage Plays and our other
sins, unless our speedy repentance, and Gods great mercy ward them off.

SCENA SEXTA.
THe sixth pestiferous effect of Stage Plays, is sloth Vitanda est improba
Siren Desidia. Horace Sermon l. ^. Satyr. 3. page 204.
two dangerous enchanting Sirens: From whence this 32. Argument will arise.

That which is the constant cause^ the common spring and nursery of much sloth
and idlenesse^ must needs be sinful and pernicious unto Christians intolerable
in any Commonweal. See 1. Edward 6 cap. ^.3. Edw. 6. cap. 16.5. Edw. 6. c. 2.
and all our Statutes against R^gues and Vacabonds, accordingly.

But Stage plays are the constant occasions, the common springs and nurseries
of much sloth and idleness; witness the Torpent ecce ingenia desidiosae
iuventutis, nec in ullius rei honestae labor vigi^atur. Somnas l^nguo^que, ^c
somno and l^nguo^e turpi^r, mala^um rerum industria, inu^sit animos. Cantandi
saltandique obscaena studia nunc e^f^eminaros tenent; and capillum fr^ngere,
and ad muliebres bl^nd^^as voce^ extenua^e, moll^tie corporis certatecum
faeminis, and immundissimis se excolere munditijs, nostroru^ ^dolescentiu^
^pecimen est. Quisaequalium v^strorum^ quid dicam, satis ingeniosus, satis
studiosus, immo quis satis vi^ est? S^ne^^ Cont. l. ^ ^^oaemio. p. 967.
present condi^ion of our English Youth, who flock to Theaters, whom Seneca
has long since discyphered in the Romans.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and pernicious unto Christians,
intolerable in any Commonweal.

The Major verily must be granted to me: First, because sloth and idleness are
sins against the Gen^ 3.19. Exodus 20.9 c. 23.12. Deuteronomy. 5.13. Psalm. 128.2.
Prove. 10.16. c. 19.15. c. 31.27. Eccles. 10.18. Exech. 16.49. Prove. 21.25. 2.
These. 3.8. to 13. Mat. 20.3, 6. 1 Timothy 5.13.
express command of God. Secondly, because Mollit viros otium and rubiginem
obducit. Seneca Controvers. l. 2. Contr. 2. p. 1032. Naturae bonitatem socordia
corrumpit. Plutarch De Liberorum Instit. p. 3. Vita in otio deposita non
corpora modo sed and animos labefacit; ac ut aquae latentes sub umbra a^ non
fluentes putrescunt: it^ in vita motuum expertes facultates hominibus insitae
consenescunt and p^reunt. Plutarch De Occulte Viuendo Tom. 2. p. 117.118. Vt
enim ferru^ usu ac exercitatione splendescit, diuturno autem si^usqualet and
rubigine paulatim exeditur atque conficitur: similiter humana men's officijs
viro dignis acuitur, otio autem hebescit, and quasi squalore obducto
corrumpitur. Est enim otium, ^entitudo and inertia tacitum quoddam venenum quo
paulatim omnes virtutes infectae languescunt, lauds intereunt, and arts omnes
praeclarae in oblivionem adducuntur. Osorius De Regum Instit. fol. 11. and 110.
Add quod ingenium longo rubigine laesum Torpe^, and est multo quam fuit ante
minus. Fertilis assiduo si non renovetur aratro, Nil nisi cum spinis gramen
habebit ager. Cernis ut ignavum corrumpunt otia corpus? Vt capiant vitium ni
moveantur aquae? Ovid Tristium. l. 5. El^g. 12. p. 212. and De Ponto. l. 1.
Eleg. 6. ^ag. 227.
they are the very rust and canker of men's mi^des, men's parts, men's bodies,
men^ souls. Thirdly, because Otium continet omnium flagitiorum seminarium.
Mentem enim hebetat, animum corrumpit, hominis praestantiam labefactat,
rationem de st^tu deijcit, and libidinem in animi dominatu constituit. Otio and
securitate frang^^tur vires, languescit industria, hebescit ingenium, vitia
crescunt, scelera prorumpunt, animi status opprimitur, flagitiorum omnium
bellum inexpiabile concilatur. Osorius, De Regum Instit. fol. 213.232.
they are the occasion, the fountain of most other sins; as Fac monitis
fugias otia prima meis. Haec, ut ames, faciunt: haec, ut fecere tuentur: haec
sunt iucundi causa cibusque mali. Otia si toslas periere Cupidinis arcus,
Conte^ptaeque jacent and sine luce faces. Quam platanus ^ivo gaudet, quam
populus un^a. Et quam limosa canna palustris humo. Tam Venus otia amat: qui
finem quaeris amoris, Cedit amor rebus: res age, tutus eris. Languor and
immodici sub nullo vindice somni, Aleaque and multo tempora quassa mero,
Eripiant omnes animo sine vulnere vires. Aff^uit incau^is desidiosus amor.
Desidiam puer ille sequi solet; odit agentes, D^ vacuae menti, quo teneatur,
opus. Quaeritur AEgistus quare sit factus adulter; In promptu causa est;
desidiosus erat. Ovid. De Remedio Amoris. lib. 1. p. 215.216. Est enim meretric
us animus instabilis semper ac fluctuat multumque ocio diffluit, unde major
existit ad voluptates propensio. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Hesaiam. lib. 1. cap.
9. Tom. 1. page 134. C.
adultery, whoredom, drunkenness, theft, voluptuousness, pride in apparel,
lasciviousness, vain discourse, and a world of other sins which would never
be committed; to which the In delitijs est omnis otiosus. Facito aliquid operis
ut semper te Diabolus inveniat occupatum Operis labor suscipiatur, no^ tam
propter victus necessitatem, quam propter animae salute^. Hierom. Epist. 4.
cap. 3.
Devil could not tempt men, were they employed in their lawful callings.
Fourthly, because the Ezech. 16.49, 50.
very curse and wrath of God; togetherwith Prove. 10.4. c. 19.15. c. 20.13.
Eccles. 10.18.
penury, vanity, misery, and destruction attend these sins. Fifthly, because
these sins See Euphormi^ Satyricon. p. 308.309.310 Osorius De Regum Instit.
fol. 11.15^100, 167, 168, 213, 234, 236, 248. Aristot. Polit. l. 8. c. 3. p
508.509. Zenophon, De Instit. Cyri Historia p 30. Plutarch. De Occulte Vivendo.
lib. accord^ngly
are most dangerous, most pernicious, prejudicial and destructive to a State,
of all others; both because they indispose men too, and keep them off from
their honest callings, from all public employments and services for the
public good: because they occasion dearth and poverty, robbing the
Commonwealth of the benefit of men's industry, and painful labour^ and
likewise because they are the Seminaries, Nurseries, and fuel of all other
vices and corruptions, that either weaken, trouble, disorder, or Ot^^m simul
arts beatas and reges perdidit. C^tullus. p. 25 Galli olim in b^llis
floruerunt, mox s^gniti^ cum otio intrans virtutem pariter ac liber^atem
amiserunt. Cor. Tacitus ^u^ij Agric. Vita sect. 4. p. 637. Nihil est quod
facilius posset rempubli^^m ever e^e qu^^ nob^l^um (...) Persaru^ imperium
armis p^rtum long^ (...) delevi^ Romanum impe^ium quo nullum unquam in terris
majus exti^it, (...) securitas ^verti^. Regnum Hispaniae florentissimu^ o^^um
olim ^or^ (...) and dissip^^^. Os^rius, De Regum Ins^it lib. 7. c. 8. p. 234.248
subvert a Republike, (as idleness and luxury have subverted many,) as all
Politicians do affirm: who censure and exclude all idle persons, as the
Negligens ac (...) delicijs vi^^^ ^u^^s ign^vis maxim similis est. Plato Legum
Dialog. 10. pap 9 6. ^pes fucos ar^ent quod neque ceras ^aciunt nec cellas
extrudunt^ nec melle compl^nt, sed ipsum mel apium labor and sedulit^te
collectum intemperanter ^bsumunt. Sic omnes desides and ignavi, qui tanqua^
fuci nullam ^eipub. operam navant om^es tamen re^pub. opes liguriunt, e regni
f^nibus eliminandi sunt. Osorius De Regum Instit. l 6^ fol 167.168.
very Caterpillars, Drones, and Canker-wormes of the Commonweals wherein they
live; inacting sundry Laws against them, as the laws of Osorius, De Regum
Instit. l 7. fol. 233.
Draco, (who made idlen^sse a capital crime:) together with the laws of the
Osorius. Ibid.
Egyptians, of Plutarchi and Diogenis La^rtij, Solon. p. 43.
Solon, AElian Variae Hist. l. 4. c. 1.
of Sardoa, and AElian. lib. 9. cap. 25.
Pesistratus do abundantly testify. The causes therefore of such pernicious
State-subverting sins as these, which have brought destruction to sundry
great Republikes, as they Ezech. 16.49, 50.
long since drew down fire and brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom; must needs be
as dangerous, as intolerable as these sins themselves: and so my Major (if
either Divinity or Policy may be credited) must be entirely condiscended to.

For the Minor; That Stage Plays are the constant occasions, the common
Seminaries and Nurseries of much lasinesse, and idleness; (as our reverend
Archbishop Ludis mimis ac jocis quibus molliores animi a rebus gerendis
abducuntur ne juvenis quidem se recrea^i permisit. De Antiquitate Ecclesiae
Brittanicae. fol. 445.
Matthew Parker witnesses,) it is most apparent. First, by their ordinary
Actors and Frequenters; Chrysostom. Homil. 38. in Matthew. Cleme^s Alexandrinus.
Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian, and Cyprian, De Spectaculis. libri.
Gualther. Ho^. 11. in Nahum. M. Northbrooke, M. Gosson, Master Stubs, and the
third Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, accordingly.
who are commonly such idle Drones, as live either altogether without any
honest calling; their whole life being but an Apprentiship of idleness, or a
continued Play; (as if they were borne for no other purpose Nos numerus sumus,
and fruges consumere nati Horace. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 2. page 240.
but to eat, to drink, to sleep, to play, and waste their time:) or else
such who are altogether negligent, slothful, indiligent in their callings: BB.
Hall. Epist. Decad. 6. Epist. 6.
such who make Paul's their Westminster; a Playhouse, an ordinary or
Dancing-schoole, their Study: ^ Play-booke their Littleton, their Bible: and
loytering, Ludis mimis ac jocis quibus molliores animi a rebus gerendis
abducuntur ne juvenis quidem se recrea^i permisit. De Antiquitate Ecclesiae
Brittanicae. fol. 445.
if not the courting of some Whore or Mistress, the greatest part of their
profession; as too too many do in this voluptuous age: wherein diverse of our
male, more of our female sex, BB. Hall Ibidem. Tibi plectra moventur: Te tenet
in tepido mollis amica sinu. Et si quis quaerat, quare pugnare recusas; Pugna
nocet; citharae, noxque, venusque juvant. Tutius est jacuisse toro, tenuisse
puellam; Theiciam digitis increpuisse lyram. Quam manibus clypeos and acutae
cuspidis hastam, Er gaseam pressa sustinuiss^ coma^ Ovid. Epist. 3. page 12.
rep^te it a blemish to their honor, a disparagement to their gentility to be
honesty employed in any lawful vocation that might either benefit themselves
or others, or advance the public good. Secondly, by the very end and use of
Stage Plays, to which men seldom resort, but to pass away their idle hours,
which they know not how to spend for want of other employments. Alas say our
idle Drones one to another, (as if they had no God to serve, no Bibles to read,
no Sermons to hear, no Churches, no Studies, no Closets to resort to, no
graces to purchase, no lusts to conquer, Vbicumque fueris intra te^metipsum
ora: si long fueris ab oratorio, noli quaerere locum, quoniam tu ipse locus
es. Si fueris in lecto aut in alio loco, ora, and ibi est templum. Frequenter
orandum, and flexo corpore men's est erigenda ad Deu^. Sicut enim nullum est
momentum quo homo non utatur vel f^uatur Dei bonitate and misericordia: sic
nullum debet esse momentum, quo eum praesentem non habeat in memoria. Om^e
tempus in quo de Deo non^cogitas hoc te computes perdidisse. Be^nardi
Meditationes c. 6. Col. 1056.
no Prayers to make, no spiritual instructions to learn, no holy duties to
perform, no works of grace to finish, no degrees of grace to acquire, no
friends to admonish, no families to instruct, no sick to visit, no dejected
spirits to comfort, no graceless persons to reprove, no heavenly mysteries to
contemplate, no spiritual doubts to satisfy, no callings to follow, no Heaven
to desire, no Hell to fear,) we know not how to spend or pass away these
afternoones, we have nothing at all to do; come therefore let us go to such
or such a Playhouse, Iocosi ferme ac ridiculi sunt plaerique omnes mortaliu^,
neque illis est cordi studiosum vitae genus intensaeque gravitatis, sed fluxum
potius ac remissium. Ex quo fit ut perquam facile^dominetur eis malignissimus
Demon. Theodoret. De Sacrificijs l. 7. Tom. 2. p. 382. vid. Ibid.
and there we will merrily pass the time, feeding our eyes, our ears with
those Stage-delights which shall there present themselves unto us. Stage Plays
serve for nothing else, but either to draw men on by degrees to idleness, or
to foster, to foment them in it: Wherefore they are rightly called Plays, from
playing; because they teach men only to play away their time withdrawing them
from their Studies, their Vocations, unto idleness, and a kind of lasie life.
Thirdly, by daily experience: For what persons are there more slothful, idle,
unprofitable, unserviceable to themselves or others; less studious, less
diligent and laborious in their lawful callings, then common Actors and Atque
duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem and Circenses. Iuvenal. Satyr. 10. page 94^
Play-haunters? who have many of them no other employment at all, but only
this, to Act, or see a Stage Play; or to dice, to card, to dance, to adorn and
paint themselves, oft-times Ornamentorum insignia and lenocinia fucorum, ^on
nisi prostitutis and impudicis faeminis congruit, and nullaru^ faere
praeciosior cultus est, quam quarum pudo^ vilis est. Cypri^n, De Habitu
Virginum. Non est mulieris sed meretricis illud nimium sui ornandi studium^
Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 2.
for public if not for private sale. Stage Plays either Cyprian, De
Spectaculis. lib. See S^ene 3.4. and 5. before.
find or make men idle: they either occasion, or foment their sloth: they
either cause people to live without callings; or at least withdraw them from
them, to give their after-noones attendance on themselves. Hence is it, Ab
omnibus ad Spectaculu^ convenitur. Propter unum nescio q^em, vel virum, vel
faeminam commovetur tota Civitas, ut desal^entur fabulosae antiquita^um
libidines. Cyprian, De Spe^taculis. lib. See Basil. Hexaem. Hom. 4. Tom 1. p.
45. Chrysostom. Homil. 38 in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 297. ^ertul. De Spectac. c.
21.22. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6.
Nazianzen De Recta Educatione ad Selucum. p. 1063.1064. The 3. Bl^st of Retrait
from Plays and Theaters. page 56.76.77. M. Gosson, M. Stubs, M. Northbro^ke,
in their Books against Stage Plays, accordingly.
that the Scholar is often with-drawne from his School, the Student from his
Study; the Mechanicke from his Trade; the Master from his Fam^ly; the Lady and
Gentlewoman from her Closet or Needle; the Mistress from her house; the Husband
from his Wife; the Wife from her Husband; the Servant from his Masters
business; the Apprentice from his Shop; the Courtier from his attendance: the
Officer from his Office; Yea sometime, the very See here Act 4. Scene 2. and p.
484.
Magistrate from his Government, the Minister from his Pulpit; See here Act 6.
Scene 12.
the Parishioner from his Church, his Lecture; the whole City from their
callings, to a Playhouse, to act, to see or hear a lewd lascivious
Interlude; the very best part whereof, Aver^e oculos meos ne videant vanitatem.
Rogat propheta ne oculis vagatur per Theatra nimirum and chorearum spectacula,
quae quidem vanitate^ redolent, ac fructu and utilitate carent. Chrysostom Hom.
11. in Psalm. 118. Tom. 1. Col. 998. A.
is pure vanity, if not sinful folly. Satyr. 11. p. 111.
Totam ^odie Romaem Circus capit; was the Poet Iuvenals complaint of old; and I
fear it might be ours now: Such prevalency is there in these bewitching
Stage Plays to draw men on to sloth, to idleness; Humanus animus otio
languescens facillime corrumpitur. Clerk De Au^ito. lib 4^ p. 227. Ignavia
magnorum saepe ingeniorum pestis. Vt lignum occulta teredo consumit, sic animum
paulatim delinit and ex^dit ignavus hic affectus. Lipsius. Epist. C^nturia. 2.
Epist. 34. page 152.
the very bane, the poison, and destruction of men's peerless souls: which
the very Philip. Lonicerus. Historiae Turcicae. l. 2. c. 20. p. 54.
Turks enumerate among the number of their seven deadly sins. Lastly, my
Minors truth, as it is evident by experience, so likewise is it ratified by the
concurrent suffrage of sundry Fathers and modern Authors, and by our See 14.
Eliz. cap. 5.39. Eliz. cap. 4.1. Iacobi. cap. 7. and 1. Caroli. cap. 1.
own Acts of Parliament, who for this very cause among sundry other condemn,
reject and censure Stage Plays as unlawful pastimes, because they are the
^ccasions, the fomentations of much sloth and idleness. Hence Philo Iudaeus,
De Vita Moses. page 932. and De Agricultura. lib. page 271. Clemens Romanus.
Apost. Co^stit. lib. 2. cap. 65 66. Clemens Alexandrinus Paedag. lib. 3. cap.
11. Tertullian and Cyprian, in their several Books, De Spectaculis. Arnobius
Adversus Gentes. lib. 5. p. 149.150. lib. 6. and 7. p 230. to 242. Lactantius.
lib. 6. De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. Tatiani Assyrij Contra Grae^os Oration. Bibl.
Patrum. Tom. 2. page 180. Basil. Hexaemeron. Sunt civi^^tes nonnullae, quae
multis varijsque praestigiatorum spectaculis, inde a primo diluculo ad ipsum
usque caelum advesperascens, suos pascunt aspectus, fractosque quosdam omnino
and corruptos cantus^ frequentissime audientes non satiantur: at^ tal^s populos
complures beatos esse di^unt, prop^^rea quod foro^ mer^^^ura, a^tibus,
ca^t^risque n^go^^js comparandi victus causa subeundis, neglectis atque
posthabitis, summo cum ocio voluptateque vitae tempus institutum sibi
perducunt, etc. Ibidem.
Hom. 4. Tom. 1. page 45. Gregory Nazianzen, De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum.
page 1063.1064. S. Asterij Homilia in Pestum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patr^m. Tom. 4.
page 706. Chrysostom. Hom. ^. De Davide and Saul. Hom. 6.7.38. and 69. in Matthew.
and Hom. 8. De Paenitentia. Augustine. De Civitate Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32. lib. 2.
cap. 4. to 15. Salvianus. l. 6. De Gubernatione Dei. Damascen. Paralellorum.
lib. 3. cap. 47. Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1. Epist. 27. and 30. Ioannes
Saresberi^nsis, Nostra aet^s prolapsa ad fabulas and quaevis inania, non modo
cor et aures prostit^it vanitati, s^d oculorum and aurium voluptate, suam
mulcet desidiam, luxuriam accendit, conquirens undique fomenta vitiorum, etc.
Vitanda est, inquit, Ethnicus, ^mprob^ Syr^^ desidia. At eam nostris prorogant
histriones. Ibidem.
De Nugis Curiahum. lib. 1. cap. 8. Petrarcha De Remedio Vtriusque Fortunae.
lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Rodolphus Gualther. Homil. 11. in Nahum. Bodin his
Commonwealth. l^ 6. cap. 1. Ioannes Mariana, and Barnabas Brissonius, in their
Books, De Spectaculis. Bulengerus, De Circo. cap. 47. De Theatro. lib. 1. cap.
50.51. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. page 56.76. and 77.
Master Gosson, in his School of Abuses, and in his Plays Con^uted. Master
Stubs, in his Anatomy of Abuses. page 104. to 107. Master Northbro^ke, in his
Treatise against Vain Plays and Enterludes. f. 28. to 38. D. Rae^iolds, in
his Overthrow of Stage Plays. Master Robert Bolton, in his Discourse of True
Happiness. page 73.74. I. G. in his Refutation of Haywoods Apology for
Actors: (to omit all other Christian and Ovid, De Art Amandi. lib. 1. page
160.161. and De Remedio Amoris. lib. 1. page 215.216. Non tamen otium tale
quaerendum est, quale in lusionibus consumitur, sic enim vitae nostrae ludus
finis esset necessario, quod falsum and absurdum est, etc. Aristot. Poli^. lib.
8. cap. 3. page 508. See lib. 7. cap. 17. and Marcus Aureli^^. Epistle 12. to
Lambert, who are very copiou^ in this point. Seneca. Controvers. lib. 1.
Proaemio. page 967. Tacitus Annalium. l. 14. c. 2.3. and l. 16. c. 1. Valerius
Maximus. l. 2. c^ 6. s. 7. Bulengerus De Circo Romano. Ludisque Circensibus.
cap. 44.
Heathen Authors, which I might here enumerate:) do all concur in censuring
Stage Plays in regard of this effect. Since therefore the Major, and Minor are
thus apparently true, the Conclusion from them must be granted, by all who
either regard the public, or their own private good.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Argument 33.


That which is an immediate occasion of, an ordinary temptation unto luxury,
drunkenness, and excess, is utterly unlawful unto Christians: intolerable in
any Commonweal.

But such are Stage Plays: as Quis enim non luxuriosum ac nequam putet eum,
qui scenicas arts domi habeat? Atqui nihil refert, utrumne luxuriam solus
domi, an cum populo exerceas in Theatro. Lactan^ius, De Vero Cultu. cap. 21.
page 508.
Lactantius, Hinc enim erat, and ex hac providentissima patriae charitate
veniebat, quod idem ipse vester Pontifex Maximus Nasica, a Senatu temporis
illius quod saepe dicendum est electus, sine ulla Sententiarum discrepantia vir
optimus, caveam Theatri Senatum construere molientem, ab hac dispositione and
cupiditate compescuit: persuasitque oratione gravissima ne Graecam luxuriam
viribus patriae moribus paterentur obrepere, and ad virtutem labefactanda^,
enervanda^que Roma^am peregrinae consentire nequitiae: tantu^que authoritate
valuit, ut ejus verbis commota senatoria providen^ia etiam subsellia quibus, ad
horam congestis in ludorum spectaculo jam uti Civitas caeperat, deinceps
pro^ibere^ apponi. August. D^ Civit. Dei. lib. 1. ^. 31. See c. 32.33.
Augustine, Scipio Nasica, and the ensuing Authors testify.

Therefore they are utterly unlawful unto Christians, intolerable in any
Commonweal.

The Major is evident by the 1 Pet. 4.3.4. which informs us, That the time
past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when
we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings,
and abominable idolatries; wherein they think it strange that you run not with
them into the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you: who shall give an
account to him who is ready to judge both quick and dead. By Titus 2.11.12.
The grace of God which brings salvation, has appeared unto all men; teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
right^ously, and godly in this present world. By Ephesians. 5.18. And be not drunk
with wine wherein is excess. By Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves lest at
any time your hearts be overch^rged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares
of this world, and that day come upon you at unawares: by sundry such like
Scriptures to this purpose which I have formerly quoted in Healthes Sickness.
another Treatise: And likewise by the Nihil est tam mortiferum ingenij^ quam
luxuria: Luxuriosus adolescens peccat, luxuriosus senex insanit. Seneca.
Controvers. l^ 1. Pro^^^. p. 967. and lib. 2. Con^r. 4. p. 1054.
dangerous quality of these effeminating soule-destroying sins, Saevior armis
Luxuria incu^bit victumque ulciscitur orbem. Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 52.
which are more pernicious to a Commonweal, then pestilence or war it
self; Luxuries perdulce malum quae dedita semper C^rporis arbitrijs hebetat
caligin^ sensus, Membraque Circaeis effaeminat acrius herbis. Blanda quidem
vultu, sed qua non tetrior ulla Interius; fucata genas and amicta dolosis
Illecebris, torvos auro circumlinit Hydros. Illa voluptatum multos innexuit
hamis. Claudian De Laudib^^ Stiliconis. lib. 2^ page 185. here page 167.
m^re fatal to men's souls and bodies, then any Circean charm.

The Minor is most apparent: First, from the original invention, and
dedication of Stage Plays; which were first of all devised by a company of
drunken Grecians in honor of their Devil-Idoll Bacchus ( the God of wine, of
drunkenness, and all excess;) to whom Plays, and Play Houses were
consecrated at the first; as Athenaeus Dipnosoph. lib. 2. cap. 1. Plutarchi
Romanae Quaest. Quaest. 107. Tertullian De Spectaculis. cap. 10. Cyprian De
Spectaculis Lactantius De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. ^0. Eusebius, De Praep. Evang.
l. 2. c. 11. Polydor Virgil. De Inventoribus Rerum. l. 1. c. 10. AEneae Silvij
Historia. De Asia Minori. c. 7^. p. 371^ See Buleng^rus De Theatro. l. 1. c^ 1.
Historians and Fathers certify us: Whence Tertullian styles the Theater,
Itaque Theatru^ Veneris, Liberi quoque domus e^t. Na^ and alios lu^os scen^cos
Liberali^ proprie voc^bant, praeter qu^^ Libero devotos, quod sunt Dionysia
penes Graecos, etiam a Libero institutos. Nihil jam de ^^usa vocabuli: quum rei
causa idololatria sit. Nam and cum promiscue Ludi Liberalia vocarentur honorem
Liberi patris manifest sonabant. Libero enim a rusticis primo ^iebant ob
beneficium quod ei adscribunt pro demonstrata gratia vini. Et est plane in
artibus scenicis Lib^ri and Veneris patrociniu^, quae privata and propria sunt
scenae. De gestu and corporis flexu, mollitiem Veneri and Libero immolant: illi
per sexum, illi per fluxum, disolutis. Tertul. De Spectac c. 5. to 11.
Isiodorus Originum lib. 1 cap 51. vid. Ibidem.
the house or temple of Bacchus; because Stage Plays (which were formerly
styled Liberalia) were as Nonnulli prae^ere^ Satyros Baccho a^jungunt, qui in
saltationibus, and ludis tragicis risus, jocique oblectamenta Deo. c^ean^.
D^nique ut Musae liberalis disciplinae bonis illum juvant and demulcent, ita
Satyri ^udicris, and ad risum compositis gestibus and actionibus, vitam
Dionysio beatam Gratijsque delibutam reddant^ Quin thymelicos etiam ludos hic
instituit, Theatra exhibuit, and Musicorum acroamatum Scholas instituit.
Diodorus Siculus. Bibl Hist. l. 4. sect. 5. page 203.204. Isiodor Hisp. Orig.
l. 18. c. 51.
Diodorus Siculus, Isiodor Hispalensis, and others record, instituted by, and
consecrated unto Bacchus, the Idol, the author of all intemperance. If
therefore their very inception were thus from drunkenness, and excess; their
progress questionless must be such. Secondly, it is evident from the
testimony, the experience of former ages; who not only Livy Rom Hist. l. 7.
sect. 3.4. Valerius M^ximus. l. 2. c. 4. Plutarch. De Gloria Atheniensium lib.
Cicero De Republica. l. 4. Corn^lius Tacitus. Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. Marcus
Aurelius. Epist. 12. to Lambert. Elij Lamprid^j Heliogobalus. Tertul. and
Cyprian. De Spectac. l. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. Arnobius Advers.
Gentes. l. 7. p. 230. to 242. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Basil. Hexaem.
l. 4. Nazianzen. ad Seleucu^. p. 1063.1064. Chrysostom. Hom. 6.7. and 38. in
Matthew. Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. August. De Civit. Dei. ^ 1. c. 32.33. l. 2. c.
3. to 30. Salvian. l. 6. De Guber. Dei. S. Asterij. Homilia in Fest.
Kalendaru^. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4 p. 706. Ioannes Saresberiensis. De Nugis
Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. D Hackwell, in his Apology. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 2.3, 4.
enumerate Stage Plays among the exc^sses, the luxury both of the Greckes and
Romans, as the Fathers and Authors in the margent testifie^ but likewise make
them the chief occasions of it. Hence Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. and Hom. 42.
in Acta.
Chrysostom and Ad Seleucu^ De Recta Educat. p. 1063.1064.
Nazianzen style the Playhouse; The School of intemperance, deboistnesse,
luxury, and excess. Hence De Guber. Dei. l. 6.
Salvian ioynes the Stage Plays, epicuri^me and drunkenness of the Romans,
and those of Trevers, both together; making one the effect, the companion of
the other. It is noted by Suetonij Caligula and Nero Lampridij Heliogabalus.
Trebellij Polionis Gallieni Duo Tacitus Annal. l. 14. c. 3. Dion Cassius. Romans
Hist. l. 59. Herodian Hist. l. 1. See here Scene 5. and Act 7. Scene 6. and
Zonaras, Eutropius, and the Imperial History in these Empero^s lives.
Historians, that Caligula, Heliogobalus, Nero, Commodus, Gallienus, and other
Roman Emperors who delighted most in Stage Plays, were the most deboist,
luxurious, dissolute, ebrious, of all others: an infallible demonstration; that
Stage Plays are the occasion, fuel, and attendants of these sins.
Plutarch. De Gloria Atheniensium. lib. and Sympos. l. 7. Quaest. 8. Basil De
Ebrietate and Luxu Sermo.
It was the custom of the Pagan Greeks and Romans, in all their drunken
riotous Feasts, (as it is now the usage of too many Christians) to exhilerate
themselves with Stage Plays, of purpose to draw men on to drunkenness,
luxury, and more gross intemperance: Whence the B^nius Council. Tom. 1. pars 1.
p. 232. Surius Council. Tom 1. p. 458. and Gratiau D^st^nct. 5.
Council of Laodicea. Can. 53.54. and the Council of Aquisgrane under Jews
the godly, prohibited Stage Plays at Christians marriage-Feasts; and enjoined
all Ministers not to be present at them, but to arise and depart from such
feasts before the Players entered; that so they might prevent that riot, that
excess which these theatricall Enterludes might occasion. All which, together
with that of Plutarch, who relates, Scenici artisices^ B^ccho Sacri. Romanae
Quaest Quaest. 107. p. 600.
that all Stage Players were consecrated unto Bacchus as well as these their
Stage Plays, is a plenary ratification of my Minors truth, to which our own
experience must subscribe. See ^he third Blast of Retrait from Plays and
Theaters, accordingly.
For who more luxu^ious, ebrious, riotous or deboist, then our assiduous Actors
and Play-haunters? Who greater Tavern, Alehouse, Tobacco-shop, Hot-water
house haunters, etc? who greater, stouter drinkers, health-quaffers, Epicures,
or good-fellowes, then they? What walk more usual then from a Playhouse to a
Tavern, to an Alehouse, a Tobacco-shop, or Hot-water Brothel-house; or from
these unto a Playhouse? where the Pot, the Can, the Tobacco-pipe are always
walking till the Play be ended; from whence they return to these their former
haunts. Many are the These are the vulgar, these the sublimer meetings of the
more gentile rank.
Alehouse, more the Bacchanalian Taverne-meetings that are appointed,
concluded at the Playhouse, from which much drunkennes^e, and excess arise:
yea the Playhouse is the common Randevouze where most such riotous Tavern
conventicles are either motioned, plotted, or resolved on, as our Play-haunters
themselves confess. And is there not reason, why it should be so? Are not
drunkenness, ioviality, epicurisme, luxury, and profuseness, most
rhetorically applauded, most elegantly adorned in our Stage Plays with the
sublimest Encomiums, the most insinuating Panegyrickes, the most amiable Titles
that either art or eloquence can invent? and does not this add spurs and
fuel to many Yongsters lusts? who to purchase the empty title. Haec tame^
illi Omnia cum faciant hilares nitidique vocantur. Iuv^n^l. Satyr. 11.
Habebitur aliquando ebrie^ati honos and plurimum vini cepisse, virtus erit.
Senec^ De Beneficijs. l. 1. cap. 10.
of brave, generous, liberal, and right ioviall Sparks, whom Players most
applaud, do prodigally Divitiarum and pecuniae fructu^ non alium puta^t quam
profusionem. Sordidos and deparcos ipsi putant quibus ratio impensarum
constaret. Suetonij Nero. sect. 30.
consume their Patrimonies, their Pensions, their time in Tavernes, Ordinaries,
Tobacco-shops, etc. in ebrious luxurious meetings, to their own undoing, their
friends and Parents grief. Alas, the pitiful complaints of sundry parents,
together with the testimony of our own grave English BB. Hall Epist. Decad. 6.
Epist. 6. Master Bolton in his Discourse of True Happiness. p. 73.74. The 3.
Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. I.G. in his Refutation of the
Apology for Actors. page 39. and D. R^inold^ Overthrow of Stage Plays.
Authors, prove this to be too true: Therefore we must needs abominate and
reject all popular Stage Plays, in respect of these their cursed fruits.

SCENA OCTAVA.
Argument 34.


That which banisheth all modesty, al shamefacenesse, and makes both Actors and
Spectators impudently shameless in committing sin, is questionless
abominable and unlawful unto Christians.

But this do Stage Plays, and Ille locus casti damna pudoris h^bet. Ovid, De
Art^ Amandi. lib. 1. page 160.
Play Houses.

Therefore they are questionless abominable and unlawful unto Christians.

My Major is irrefragable: First, because See Lockma^^. Sermo. 56. Z.
modesty and shamefastness are such graces, such virtues, 1 Timothy 2.9, 15 c.
3.2. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5. 2 These. 3.14. 1 Pet. 3.10. Psalm. 44.15. Psalm. 69.7. Ezra
7.6.
as God himself requires of us in his Word; and which the very Platonis
Protagoras. p. 438. Epist. lib. page 990. Lacedaemonij verecundiam esse Deum
quenda^ volunt. Zenophontis Convivium. p. 898. D. Modestiae fama neque summis
mortaliu^ spernenda ^st, and a dijs aestimatur. Tacitus Annal. l. 15. c. 1. p.
301.
Heathen much extol. They are the Pudor est quasi vitij purpurcus splendour and
color virtutis. Case. Polit. l. 5. c. 9. p. 710.
chiefest ornaments, virtues, guides, supports, and stay of Youth; the Mothers,
Modestia reliquarum virtutu^ par^ns est and ipsa proles: radix and altrix
virtutis est, and verae famae. Lipsius. Epist. Cent 3. Epist. 10. Cent 1. ad
Belgas. Epist. 4. Cent. Miscel. Epist. 17.
the conservers of all other Christian, or morrall virtues; the Pudor and
justitia ornamenta and vincula Civitatum. Platonis Protagoras page 438. Pudor
satis validum vinculum legis. Livy. Romans Hist. lib. 25.
only curbs that restrain men from all sin, all lewdness and dishonest^
whatsoever: where these are once removed, Amisso pudore totum dignitatis
studium and honestatis extinguitur. Osorius, De Regum Instit lib. 4. fol. 111.
the whole practice of honesty and virtue will be quite extinguished. He who
has lost these virtues, Ego illum perijsse puto cui perijt pudo^. Putean. De
Laconismo. Diatriba. p. 423.
is no better then a castaway: He who is past all shame, is certainly past
all grace, past all recovery, all amendment. That therefore which banisheth
these two Chrysostom. Hom. 33. in Haebraeos. Tom. 4. Col. 1676. C. Pudor bonus
magister officij. Qui metuit, reprimitur, non emendatur: quem pudet facere in
naturam vertit Ambros. Com. lib. 7. in Evang Lucae c. 17. Tom. 3. p. 84. D.
restrayning, vice-suppressing virtues, in which not only Magna sanctis cura
est verecu^diae. Ambros. Com. l. 2. in Luc. Tom. 3. p. 8. D.
Christianity, but even Vbi non est pudor, nec cu^a juris, ^anctitas, pietas,
fides, instabile regnum est. Senecae Thyestes. Act 2. fol. 34.
all common honesty, civility, and the public safety do subsist, must needs
be abominable. Secondly, because impudency and shamelessness, especially in
committing sin, is almost Ier. 3.3. cap. 6.15. cap. 8.12. Prove. 7.13. Ezech.
2.4. cap. 3.7. Ier. ^.12. and cap. 5.3.
the very highest degree of sin; yea they provoke God more to anger, and draw
a deeper guilt, a more multiplied condemnation upon men, then the sin it
self which they thus perpetrate. They are infallible symptoms of a cauterized
conscience, an obdurate heart, Impudentia and frontositas cum obdurverit, ut
non pa^eat, non horr^at, non contremiscat, ea ^am demum desperatio est.
B^rnardi Declamationes. Col. 1002. D.
a reprobate sense; of a man given wholly over unto sin and Satan: yea they
are very dangerous presages of a man bound over to eternal destruction. My
Major therefore must be granted.

The Minor is as evident as the morning Sun. First, by the concurrent
testimony of sundry Fathers, and modern Christian Authors. De Spectaculis.
lib. cap. 17.
Tertullian reputes Stage Plays, the banishers, the murderers of all modesty
and shamefastness: S. Cyprian informs us; Theatra sunt faediora quo convenis:
Verecundia illic omnis exuitur: simul cum amictu vestis honor corporis ac pudor
ponitur. De Habitu Virginum. page 242.
that all modesty is put off at Theaters; which he styles, Pudoris publici
lupanariu^, De Spectac. lib.
the very Brothell of public modesty: in which the most shameful
representations of lust are acted; ut in ipsis deposita verecundia, audaciores
fiant ad crimina. ^iunt per imaginem quae non sunt, ut fiant sine pudore quae
vera sunt. Divinarum Instit. Epit^ c. 6.
Lactantius records; that those things are acted in Stage Plays by
representation which are not; that so the very things themselves may be
committed by the Spectators without any shame. Quid juvenenes aut virgins
faciant quu^ haec and fieri sine pudore, and spectari libenter ab omnibus
cernunt? De Vero Cultu. c. 20.
What (says he) will Youths and Virgins do when they shall see these things
acted, and willingly beheld of all without any blush? doubtless they will grow
exceeding impudent and shameless in committing the very sins there acted. De
Recta Educat. ad Seleucum. p. 1063.
Gregory Nazianzen and Homil. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 298. C.D
Chrysostom, write, That all Stage Players are impudent shameless persons;
who as they repute nothing vile but modesty; so they utterly extirpate all
shamefastness, all modesty out of the minds and foreheads of the Spectators.
S. Augustine, in his Book See lib. 1. c. 31.33. l. 2. cap. 6. to 10. c. 25. to
29.
De Civitate Dei, a^firmes the very selfsame thing; whence he styles these
Stage Plays: Animorum labes ac pestis: probitatis and honestatis eversio. De
Civitate Dei. lib. 1. cap. 33.
The very pestilence and contagion of men's minds; the overthrow of virtue and
honesty: Vere Fugalia, sed pudoris and honestatis. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2.
cap. 6.
the true Fugalia of shamefastness and modesty: Damascen in his Parallels
informs us out of Nazianzen; Fluxam atque caducam formae venustatem ^is
relinquebat quae Theatra and trivia consectantur, quibus pudori and probro est
^rubescere. Parallel. lib. 2. cap. 65. page 145.
that Play-haunters, and women who resort to Theaters, account it a repr^ach
unto them, to blush: so impudently brawny arae their faces. The same do other
Fathers; together with De Remedi^ Vtriusque Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 30.
Petrarcha, Fastorum. lib. 2. cap. De Carnispriu, etc
Mant^a^, De Vanitate Scient. cap. 20.59, 64, 71.
Agrippa, Comment. in August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.3^, 33. and l. 2. c.
4. to 29.
Lodovicus Vives, School of Abuse, and Plays Confuted.
M. Gosson, Against vain Plays and Enterludes. Anatomy of Abuses.
M. Northbrooke, r M. Stubs; The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters,
Praefatio ad 6. Theses.
D. Rainolds, with sundry others affirm: therefore we need not doubt its
verity. Secondly, our own present experience will evidently manifest the
Minors truth. For who are there more impudently audacious; more shamelesly
wicked; more ready to hear, to see, to speak, to act, to execute the most
execrable obscenities, the most gross impieties without any blush, Apud hos
tota impudicitia vocatur urbanitas: libidinoso ore in gu^nibus inhaerescunt:
homines malae linguae etiamsi tacerent; quos prius taedescit impudicitiae suae,
quam pudescit. Pro nefas, id in se pessimi facinoris admittunt quod nec aetas
potest pati mollior, nec cogi servius durior. Haec and hujusmodi propudia nobis
non licet nec audire: etiam pluribus turpe defendere est. Ea enim de castis
fingitis and pudi^is quae fieri non crederimus, nisi de vobis probatetis Minut.
Felix. Octavi^s. page 94.95.
then our common Actors and Play-haunters? What Spectacles, what places do
more steel the faces, or crust the foreheads both of men and women, then
Plays and Play Houses? Those who at first, could neither see, nor hear, (much
less utter or act) any obscene or vicious thing without some shame of face, or
check of conscience, before their resort to Plays and Theaters; become so
strangely impudent, so brazen-faced in a very little space by frequenting
Stage Plays, that they cannot only confidently behold and hear, but likewise
utter and commit any filthiness, or wickedness whatsoever, in the very open
view of men, without any blush at all; even as Pelulantiam, libidin^m, luxuriam
sensim quidem primo and occulte, velut inve^ili errore exercuit: sed ut tunc
quoque dubium nemini foret; naturae illa vitia non aetatis esse. Su^t^nij Nero.
sect. 26.
Nero did. The stupendous whorish unparalleld impudency of our present age; Of
our effeminate Cujus manantia sle^u Ora puellares faciunt incerta capilli.
Iuvenal. Satyr. 15. page 140.
overgrowne Yongsters, and blasphemous Ruffians, See Master Adams, his White
Devil, and Black Saint.
who breath out nothing but oaths, obscenities, and desperate execrations
against the God of Heaven, rending the very flesh and bones, piercing the very
heart and soul, blasph^ming the very Name and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
at every word they utter: Of our impudent, brazen-faced See Hic Mulier, and My
Vnloveli^esse of Love locks.
M^n-woman Monsters, who have banished all shows of modesty, of shamefastness
from their sex; carrying the very characters of impudency, not only in their
blushlesse looks; but likewise in their lascivious gestures, their audatious
deportment, their obscene discourses, their whorish attires, their immodest
fashions and complements, their painted faces; their Non sunt delicta sed
monstra. Tertul. De Pudicitia. lib. p. 471.
prodigious shorn, frizled locks and foretops, which outstare the very 1 Cor.
11.5. to 16. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 P^t. 3.4, 5.
Laws of God, of Man, of Nature, (so unnaturely, and more then Prove. 7.13. Ier
3.3. c. 6.15. Impudentia efficit meretrices. Chrysostom. Homilia 15. in
Hebraos. Tom. 4. Col. 1592. C.
whorishly impudent, are many of our females lately grown;) Whence is it,
comes it but from Plays and Theaters? which have diffused this cursed disease
of shameless impudency, well-nigh thorowout the Kingdom: Nam quis peccandi
finem posuit sibi, quando recepit Ejectum semel attrita de front ruborem?
Iuvenal. Satyr. 13. page 124.
And hence is it, that we are all lately grown so immoderately excessive in
committing sin, because Plays and Play-haunters have scrued us up to such a
pitch of impudency, that we are quite past all shame. Neither is it strange,
that Plays and Play Houses should make the modestest and most ingenious
Spectators shameless, if not senseless of any sin. For first the Tertullian
De Spectac. cap. 17. Cyprian, De Specta^. lib. and Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Donato. Chrysostom Homilia 38. in Matthew. and Nazianzen, De Recta Educatione ad
Seleucum. page 1063. accordingly.
Actors of them ^re certainly past all shame, if not all grace. Secondly, See
Act 4. Scene 1.^. accordingly. See Iuvenal Satyr. 6. page 54. Iamque eadem
fummis pariter minimisque libido est, etc. and Satyra 11. page 110.
the greater part of common Play-haunters are a^dacious Panders, Whores,
Adulterers, Whore-masters, and the like, who are as blushlesse as Friar Bacons
Brazen-head, or as he who acts the Devil in the Play. Thirdly, the very words,
the parts, the speeches, gestures, complements, and representions in
Stage Plays, See Act 3. Scene 1. and 3.
are so obscene, lascivious, lewd, and beastly, that the very hearing and
beholding of them were enough to banish all modesty out of the hearts and
countenances of the most ingenious Spectators, or at least to drive them from
the Playhouse: For as Aristotle well observes; Pudet non solum eorum quae
dicta sunt pud^ndorum, sed etiam signo^um: and non solum cum in re venerea
versantur, sed etia^ cum adsunt signa ejus rei, and non solum cum faciunt
^urpia, sed etiam cum dicunt. Aristot. Rh^t^r. lib. 2 cap. 6 page 137.
Men are not only ashamed of those shameful things that are so called, but
likewise of the signs of them: not only when they are conversant in any
lecherous thing, but likewise when the representations of that thing are
present: and not only when as they do filthy things, but likewise when they
speak them: So that modesty and shamefacenesse do not only re^traine men
from speaking and doing; but likewise from hearing and beholding any scurrilous
or immodest thing. Al^ae^ Carmina apud Pindarum. page 405. Aristot. Rhetor.
lib. 1. cap. 9. page 60.
Alc^us a modest Heathen, being about to utter some obscenity, was so overcome
of modesty, that he brake out into these memorable words Volo aliquid dicere
sed me prohibet pudor.
I would have spoken some thing, but modesty prohibites me. AElian Variae
Historiae. lib. 14. cap. 18.
It is storied of Archy^as And shall not these two Pagans rise up in judgment
against scurrilous Christians and condemn them?
another Pagan, that ^is modesty was such, as ^e would not so much as utter a
scurrilous word; and being upon an occasion necessitated to speak some
unbeseeming thing, he could not be induced to relate it upon any terms, but
wrote it on the wall, and then pointed to others to read it. Yea Natural. Hist.
l. 8. c. 5.
Pliny records, that the bashfulnesse and modesty of brute Elephants is such:
Vt pudore nunquam nisi in abdito co^unt: that they never couple but in some
s^cret place not obvious to m^ns view. Certainly, if modesty had such
prevalency in these bruites and Pagans, to deter them both from obscene
discourses, and venereous actions, especially in public: our Stage Plays
which are fraught with many ribaldrous passages, many witty obscenities, many
filthy gestures, many feined, Heliogabalus mimicis histrionibus ea quae solent
simulate fieri effici ad verum jussit. Lampridij Heliogabalus. page 202.
if not real representations of Incests, Rapes, Adulteries, and the like, must
either utterly abolish all modesty out of the Actors and Spectators eyes and
ears; or else quite chase them from the Playhouse; whose lewdness and
unchastity is such, See Tertullian De Spectaculis. cap. 17. Cyprian De
Spe^taculis. lib. and the 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Enterludes.
that it is capable of none but shameless and immodest Customers. So that I
may well conclude with Tacitus; Annalium. lib. 14. cap. 2.
That shamefastness, chastity, or any other honest quality, which are hardly
retained in honest arts, can never possibly be preserved amids so many
confluences and combats of vices as accompany Plays and Theaters. Suetonius
De Claris Rhetoribus. lib. Cicero De Oratore. lib. 3. and Genebrardi Chron.
lib. 2. page 314.
And hereupon L. Crassus, and Cn. Domitius prohibited Plays and Play Houses,
by a public Edict, quod his corroboraretur impudentia, because they made their
Spectators more impudent. The propositions therefore being thus infallibly
confirmed by the premises, the Conclusion from them must be granted,

SCENA NONA.
Docent dum fingunt, and simulatis erudiunt ad vera. Lactan^. D^ Vero Cultu.
cap. 20.
teach men how to cheat, to steal; to plot and execute any villainy: how to
conceal it, to evade it being executed; men learning, yea practicing that in
earnest, which they act or see acted but in sport. De Instit. Cyri. Histor.
lib. 1. page 34. and Master G^sson, in his Plays confuted. Act 2.
Zenophon makes mention of a Persian Schoolmasters, who instructed his
Scholars both to do^ justice and injustice; not to lie, and to lie: not to
deceive and to deceive: not to caluminate and calumniate, not to forestall any
benefit that might accrue to others, and to forestall it: He did likewise
distinguish which of these ought to be practiced upon enemies, which upon
friends: And then proceeding further, he taught that it was just to deceive
their friends if it were for their good; and to steal the goods of their
friends if it were for their good: This Schoolmasters likewise exercised his
Scholars to practice these instructions in jest among themselves: by which
means it came to pass, that some of his Scholars who had a natural
ingenuity wittily to deceive, to cheat and steal from others; began at last
not only to cozen and steal from strangers, but likewise to cheat and r^b
their friends. Whereupon the Persians were enforced to make a law to prevent
this mischife (which law is yet in use) that Children should ever after be
taught plainly, and to speak and deal truly, as men teach their Servants:
and not to steal, to lie, or use deceits. As it fared with this Persian
Schoolmasters, and his Scholars; so it fares with Players and their lewd
Spectators: those cheates, those fallacies, thefts and robberies, those rapes
of Wards, of Virgins from their Gardians, their Parents, which they act in
sport upon the Stage, the Spectators oft-times practice in earnest upon others
off the Theater. Cyrian De Sectaculis. lib.
Discunt facere dum assuescunt videre. This Solon knew full well, Plutarchi and
Diogenis Laertij Solon. See Bodine De Republ. lib. 6. cap. 1.
who when he beheld Thespis acting a Tragedy, wherein there were many lies and
cheates: he demanded of him after the Tragedy ended; whether he were not
ashamed to lie and cheat so egregiously before so great a multitude? To which
Thespis replied; that there was no hurt in it, for all he had uttered or acted
was but a Play, it was all in sport, nothing in earnest: which answer Solon
hearing, stroke his staff upon the ground with indignation, making this reply:
If we commend or approve this Play of yours, we shall shortly find it in our
bargains: intimating that this his lying and cozenage which he acted in jest,
would quickly turn to earnest: so prone, so docible are men to learn any
evil that Players act. Saint Augustine had a hint of this: whence he styles
Stage Plays, Probitatis and honestatis eversio. De Civ. Dei. l. 2 cap. 33. See
lib. 2. c. 6.
the very overthrow of honesty and upright dealing. For the theft that Plays
occasion, I shall give but two or three instances. It is storied by Suetonius
in the life of Sect. 16.
Nero; that he put down Chariot-playes and Stage Plays, in which men by an
inveterate liberty did use to cheat and steal in jest, because this jesting
turned to earnest at the last. Tacitus. Annal. l. 4. cap. 3. Marcus Aurelius.
c. 14. Dion Cassius. Romans Hist. l. 57. and Alexander ab Alexandro. Genialiu^
Dierum. l. 3. c. 9.
Tiberius did the lik^, banishing all Players out of Italy upon the self same
ground. Upon this very reason was our own Statute of 3. Henry 8. cap. 9.
against Mummers, made; because those thefts and robberies which they acted in
sport, proved robberies and felonies in good earnest at the last, and were the
occasions of much mischief. The Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays
and Theaters informs us. Page 56.97, 102.
That many servants have learnt at Stage Plays (as it may be manifestly
proved) to rob and cheat their Masters, to supply the wants of their Harlots.
That many have there learned a policy to prevent Parents of the not marrying
of their Daughters to such whom they have disliked, by stealing them away. And
that men are taught policies in this School of Abuse, how to beguile Parents
of their Children, Husbands of their Wives, Gardians of their Wards, and
Masters of their Servants: To which School of Abuses, and Plays Confuted.
Action 2.
Master Gosson and Master Stubs, Master Northbrooke, Doctor Rainolds, and I. G.
in their Books against Stage Plays.
others do subscribe. Wherefore from all these premises I may now safely frame
this 35. Argument against Stage Plays, with which I shall conclude this Scene.

That which occasions much theft, much treachery, cozenage and deceit, must
needs be unlawful unto Christians, unsufferable in a Commonweal. Witness
Ephesians. 4.25.28. 1 These. 4.6. and Case Ethicorum. lib. 4. cap. 7.

But all these do Stage Plays occasion, as is evident by the premises. See
Act 3.4.5.

Therefore they must needs be unlawful unto Christians, unsufferable in a
Commonweal.

SCENA DECIMA.
Theatris convenit tumultu^. Chrysos^om. Hom. 3^. ad Pop. An^ioch. Tom. 5. Col.
245. B.
tumults, murders, and the like; as is evident by sundry testimonies and
examples. Hence was it, Ignoscent nobis Tragici poetae, ignoscent, etiam illis
qui propemodum ut nos rempublicam gerunt, quod ipsos in rempub. non admittimus,
utpote tyrannidis laudatores Alias namque Civitates circumvagantes and turbas
colligentes, and pulchras and magnas, and veresimiles voces mercede
conducentes, respublicas ad tyrannides and populares principatus trahent. De
Republ. Dial. 8. page 672.673.
that Plato banished all Tragedies out of his Commonweal, because they would
draw men on to tyranny and cruelty, by acting, by applauding them, and breed
quarrels and commotions among the people. Hence Epist. 7. ad Lucilium.
Seneca and Sympos. l. 7. Quaest. 8.
Plutarch, dislike of Stage Plays, because they enrage the minds of the
Spectators, breeding oft-times many tumuls, quarrels and contentions among
them. Hence Horace writes expressly: Ludus enim genuit trepidum certamen and
iram: Ira truces inimicitias, and funebre bellum. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 19. p. 275.
that Plays engender contention and anger; anger cruel enmity and doleful
war. Hence we find it recorded of AElian Variae Historiae. l. 13. c. 18.
Dionysius, Suetonij and Eutropii Claudius, and Caligula. Dion Cassius. Romans
Hist. l. 57. and 59. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3.
Nero, Caligula, and other bloody tyrants; that they delighted much in
Tragedies and Stage Plays; as being suitable to their tyrannical
dispositions. Hence Tragaediae and Comaediae sceleru^ and libidinu^ auctrices,
cruentae and lascivae, impiae and prodigae. De Spectac. c. 17.18.
Tertullian; De Spectac. lib. and Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2.
Cyprian and Paedagogi. l. 3. c. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus; declaime against Tragedies and Comedies as the
augmentors of wickedness and lust; as bloody wanton, impious and prodigal
pastimes which occasion sundry tumults and seditions. Gregory Nazianzen
informs us: Spectaculum illud urbes distrahit, plebem ad seditiones concitat;
pugnas docet, linguam maledica^ acuit, amorem civium dissecat, familias inter
se co^mittit, in furorem adigit juvenes, inimicitias accendit, etc. Quot enim
familias subito prostravit? Quot urbes prius summa inter se benevolentia
conjunctas, funditus evertit? Nimiru^ seditio quasi pubescens plebis manus
potentu^ caedibus inqui^avit, gladio viduavit urbes, extinctis viris, ign^
ferroque Civitates absu^psit, caedibus caedes coercens atque puniens, and
mactationes m^ctationibus. Quis igitur haec intueri sustineat si sapiat? cum
mera sit heic praestigiarum concertatio, seditio caedem pariens, and Civitatum
morbus. De Recta Educatione ad Selucum. page 1063.1064.
That Plays and Enterludes disturb Cities, raise up sedition among the
people, teach men how to quarrel, sharpen ill-speaking tongues, cut asunder
the love of the Citizens, set families at variance between themselves, drive
young men into fury, kindle quarrels and contentions, etc. Whence he styles
them; A sedition producing murder, and a disease of Citti^s. Hom. 3.6, 7. and
8. in Matthew. Hom. 3. de Davide and Saul. Hom. 42. in Acta. Hom. 62. ad Pop.
Antioch. and Oration 7. See here, p. 415.416, 396, 397, and 421.
Saint Chrysostom records from his own experience. That Players and
Play-haunters were the only men who did fill the City with contentions,
quarrels, seditions, tumults: that Plays did breed debate between man and
wife; and that Players and Play-haunters by acting and seeing Plays became
more barbarous then the most savage beasts, insomuch that they spared not the
bones of the dead. Theodoricus King of Italy, styles Stage Plays, Invitatio
contentionum, and fons irriguus iurgiorum. Cassiod^rus Variaru^. l. 3. Epist.
51.
The invitation of contentions, the perennious fountain of brawles and
quarrels, Variarum. l. ^. Epist. 32.
and the frequent occasion of seditions and tumults. Such Authors of misrule,
quarrels, seditions and contentions were Plays in ancient times, of which
there are diverse pregnant examples. We all know, Plutarchi Romulus. Livy Romans
Hist. l. 1. sect. 9, l. 2. sect. 37. and the Authors formerly quoted in page
30. r.
that the rape of the Sabine Virgins was occasio^ed by a Play; which produced a
long and bloody war between the Romans and Sabines. Livy Romans Hist. lib. 2.
sect. 37.38, 39.
The fierce and cruel war between the Volsci and the Romans was likewise
occasioned by a Play; the Consuls upon the speech of Attius Tullus, excluding
the Volsci from their Plays, and commanding them to depart their City, for
fear of some sudden tumult that might arise between the Romans and them, or
some unexpected surprisall of their City whiles the whole City were bu^ied
about their Plays. Tacitus Annal. lib. 1. c. 14. lib. 4^ cap. 3.
In Tiberius his Reign, there were so many tumuls, murders, uprores,
quarrels, and open insolences committed at Play Houses, occasioned by Plays,
and Actors; (One Centurian, with diverse Soldiers and common people being
slain; and a Captain of the Pretorean band with sundry others being likewise
wounded at a Play) that Tiberius was enforced to banish all Stage Players out
of Italy: In the time of Suetonij Nero. sect. 16. and 26.
Nero, there were so many seditions, quarrels, commotions, and misdemeanors in
the Roman Theater, that Nero himself (who had often an hand in them) suppressed
all Plays, all Stage players by a solemn Edict, though he much delighted in
them. In the Reign of Marcus Aurelius. cap. 14. and Epistle 12. to Lambert.
Marcus Aurelius, there was a very great tumult and sedition occasioned by
Stage Plays, in which much blood was shed, there being many slain and
wounded: upon which occasion this Heathen Emperor, banished all Stage Players
for ever from Rome, and sent them into Hellispo^t to Lambert the Governor,
with a command to compel them to labor, to chastise them if they were idle,
and not to suffer them to use their accustomed toys. De Circo Romano. and
Ludis Circensibus. cap. 47. De Factionibus.
Caesar Bulengerus informs us; that under Hypatius and Bellisarius, there were
at least 35. thousand men slain in a commotion and tumult raised at a
Cirque-play. In the time of Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 20. and 30. l.
3. Epist. 51. and l. 7. Epist. 10.
Theodoricus King of Italy, there were so many tumults, quarrels, and
commotions raised at Stage Plays; that he was enforced upon the complaint of
the people, to write to the Senate, and other of his Officers, to suppress
their insolences, and to punish the mutinies, the commotions caused by them:
At last being not able to reform their disorders, he gave order wholly to
suppress them. And from these several disorders and quarrels came these
common phrases; See Philo Iudaeus, De Agricultura. lib. p. 271. Suetonij Nero.
sect. 16. and 26. Josephus Antiq. Iudaeorum. l. 19. c^ 3. Cassiodorus Variarum.
l. 3. Epist. 51. Bulengerus De Circo, etc. cap. 47. and De Theatro. l. 1. c.
33. and Lipsius De Amphitheatro. cap. 3.4.
Seditiones and factiones Pantomimorum, and seditiones theatri, bella
Theatricorum, etc. which we read of in sundry Authors; and in Saint Augustine,
De Catechizandis Rudibus. lib. Tom. 4. pars 2. page 340.341. and HRabanus
Maurus, De Sacris Ordinibus. lib. 1. Tom. 6. page 63. A. B. where the sundry
tumults, quarrels, and other mischiefs that Stage Plays and Cirque-playes
occasion, are pithily discribed. But these are all ancient foreign
testimonies and examples, may some say: are there any such modern domestique
presidents to be found? Yes v^rily. Witness the Statute of 4. Henry 4. cap.
27. in the Statutes at large, and Rastall Wales. sect. 30.
4. Henry 4. cap. 27. which recites; that diverse diseases and mischiefs (to
wit commotions, murders, and rebellions) had happened before this time in the
Land of Wales, by many Wasters, Who were then the Players and Actors that
wa^dred about the Country.
Rimours, Minstrels, and other Vacabonds: for the eschewing of which; it was
ordained and established by this Statute; That no Master Rimour, Minstrell, nor
Vacabond, should be in any wise sustained in the Land of Wales, to make
commo^thes or gathering upon the people there. Witness the 3. Henry 8. cap. 9.
Statute of 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. against Mummers, (all one with Stage Players:)
which recites. That lately within this Realm, diverse persons had disguised and
apparelled them, and covered their faces with Visours or other things in such
manner as they should not be known, and that diverse of them in a company
together, naming themselves Mummers had come in to the dwelling place of diverse
men of honor, and other substantial persons, and so departed unknown,
whereupon murders, fellonies, rapes, and other great hurts and inconveniences
had aforetime grown, and hereafter were like to come by the color thereof, if
the said disorder should continue not reformed; for the prevention of which
mischief, it was enacted; that all Mummers or persons, that should hereafter
thus apparel or disguise themselves, or wear, or sell, or keep any visor in
their houses should be imprisoned for 3. months space, without bail or
mainprise, and make a fine and ransom to the King. Yea witness the great
rebellion of Robert Ket, in 3. of Edward the 6. which as Alexander Nevill his
History of Kets stirs. Hollingshead. p. 1028. Numb. ^0. and 30. b. See John
Stow, his Survey of London. cap. 16. where there is mention of sundry tumults
occasioned by Plays and such like pastimes. and Centuriae Magdeburg. Cent. 13.
Col. 772^ where you shall see diverse tumults raised, and much blood shed, by
reason of Plays and Dances.
Hollingshead with others record; was plotted and contrived at, and partly
occasioned by a meeting at a Stage Play, at Wimonham, to which the Country
people resorting, they were by the instigation of one John Flowerdew, first
encouraged to pull down the Enclosures, and then to rebel. The Statutes of
14. Eliz. cap. 5. of 39. Eliz. c. 4. and 1. Iacobi. cap. 7. which make common
Players of Enterludes, Rogues and Vacabonds, subiecting them to a severe
punishment for their lawde manner of life; do likewise recite: 14. Eliz. c. 5.
That by means of these common Interlude Players, and such other Rogues,
Vacabonds, and Sturdy-beggers, there daily happened in the Realm of England and
Wales, many horrible murders, thefts, and other great outrages, to the high
displeasure of Almighty God, and to the great anoy of the Commonweal: which
these Statutes endeavor to suppress. Not to mention either Petrarch. De
Remedio Vtriusque Fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. or the Author of the 3. Blast
of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, who informs us; Page 57.
That he has sometimes seen two Knaves at once importunate upon one light
Huswife, whereby much quarrel has grown to the disquieting of many: Nor yet
to recite the late Statute of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. which informs us: that many
quarrels, blood-sheds, and other great inconveniences have grown by the resort
and concourse of people going out of their own parishes to Beare-bayting,
Bull-bayting, Enterludes, Common-playes, and such disordered and unlawful
exercises and pastimes: (a sufficient confirmation of my Minors truth.) Our
own experience can sufficiently inform us; that Plays and Play Houses are
the frequent causes of many murders, duels, quarrels, debates, occasioned,
sometimes by reason of some difference about a box, a seat, or place upon the
Stage: sometimes, by intruding to boldly into some females company: sometimes,
by reason of some amorous, scurrilous or disgraceful words that are uttered
of, or to some female Spectators; sometimes, by reason of some speeches or
passages of the Play particularly applied to some persons present or absent:
sometimes, by reason of some Husbands, Whore-masters, or corrivals Caecus est
ignis stimulatus ^ra, nec regi curat, patiturve fraenos, haud timet mortem,
cupit in ipsos ire obvios enses. Seneca Medea. Act. 3. Chorus. fol. 152. ^.
jealousy, or affront, whose Wife, whose Whore, or Mistress being there in
person, is perchance solicited, abused, or jeared at in his presence:
sometimes by reason of the Apprentises resort to Play Houses, especially on
Shrove-tuesday; sometimes by means of other accidents and occasions. Many have
been the murders, more the quarrels, the duels that have grown from our
Stage Plays, whose large encomiums of rash valor, duels, fortitude,
generosity, impaciency, homicides, tyranny and revenge, do so exasperate men's
raging passions, and make them so impatient of the very smallest injury, that
nothing can satisfy, can expiate it but the offenders blood. Hence is it that
some Players, some Play-haunters now living, not satified with the murder of
one, have embrued their barbarous unchristian hands Madet orbis mutuo sanguine,
and homicidium cum admittunt singuli, crimen est, virtus vocatur ^^m public
geritur. Impunitatem sceleribus acquirit non innocentiae ratio, sed saevitiae
magnitudo. Vt quis potest occidere peritia est, ars est, usus est. Scelus non
tantum geritur, sed docetur. Quid potest inhumanius, quid acerbius dici?
disciplina est, ut perimere quis possit; and gloria est, quod peremit. Cyprian.
Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. See Onus Ecclesiae. c. 28. sect. 7.8. which we
may well apply to our ^imes.
in the blood of two, of three, if not of four several men; and so far are
they from ruing the odiousness of these their bloody deeds, that they glory in
the number of their murders as the very trophies of their valor. Pity is it,
that such savage homicides who rest not with the first man's death, Quid putas
futuram anima^ homicidae? aliquod credo pecus lanienae and macello destinatum,
ut perinde juguletur, quia and ipsa jugulaverit; Tanta est apud homines
homicidij vindicta, qua^ta ipsa quae vindicatur natura: Quis non praeferat
saeculi junstitia^, quam and Apostolus no^ frustra gladio armatam co^testatur,
quae pro homine saeviendo religiosa est. Tertul. De Anima. advers. Py^hag. cap.
page 350.
should ever live to slay a second, much less a third: Yea pity is it that
such Plays, such Spectacles should be suffered, whih thus animate men on to
quarrels, duels, contentions, injuries, impaciency, bloodshed, and most
unchristian revenge. As therefore See here, Act 3. Scene 2. page 74.75. where
the Fathers and Authors to this purpose are quoted, to which I may add
Prudentius. Contra Symmachum. lib. 1. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 612. B.C. and l.
2. p. 923. F.G and Hymnus 6. p. 880. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 5. Epist. 42.
Seneca. De Brev. Vitae. c. 13.14. Isiodor Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 27.41.
Op^^cerus. Chronog. p. 186. Baronius and Spondanus. Annal. Ecclesiast. Anno 59.
sect. 8. Anno 325. sect. 52. Anno 365. sect. 5. and Anno 404. sect. 2.
Gotfridus Viterbiensis. Chron. pars 16. Anno Dom. 390. See Bulengerus De Circo.
lib.
the Fathers, Christians, with some Pagan Authors, did generally condemn; and
good Christian Emperors utterly take away all bloody Sword-playes,
Cirque-playes, Chariot-playes, and such like barbarous inhumane Spectacles; by
reason of the murders, bloodshed, quarrels, contentions, tumults, debates,
and such like savage unchristian effects which they occasioned; so likewise may
we now suppress, condemn, and quite abolish Stage Plays upon the selfsame
grounds, as the forequoted Authors and Pagan Emperors have done before us.
Wherefore I shall briefly close up this Scene with this 36. Play-confounding
Argument.

That which is an ordinary occasion of much cruelty, quarrelsomenesse,
impaciency, fierceness, implacablenesse, and revenge: of many tumults,
seditions, quarrels, murders, injuries, brawles, and such like barbarous
unchristian effects, See Act. 3. Sce^e 2. p. 72.73, 74. where this proposition
is fully proved.
must needs be sinful and unlawful unto Christians, (who should be men of
peace, of meekness, willing to suffer, to pass by, if not to pardon wrongs:)
intolerable in any Christian or peaceable Commonweal.

But such are Stage Plays, as is manifest by the premises.

Therefore they must needs be sinful, unlawful unto Christians; intolerable
in any Christian or peaceable Commonweal.

SCENA VNDECIMA.
THe 11. fruit of popular Stage Plays, is this; that Ephesians. 4.29. cap. 5.3.4.
Psalm. 45.2.
which are odious unto God, yea execrable to all chaste, all modest Christians.
Stage Plays See Act 3. Scene 1. and Act 7. Scene 3.4.
are the Lectures, the Marts, the common treasuries of all ribaldry,
scurrility, profaneness; which furnish their Actors, their Auditors with such
plentiful variety of corrupt, irreligious, atheistical, unchristian and
graceless discourses, which they communicate to others upon all occasions,
that they scarce ever speak of holy things. This Ovid himself confesses;
informing us; Illic and canrant quicquid dedicere theatris. Inde joci veteres
obscaenaque verba canuntur. Nec res hac Veneri gratior ulla fuit. Ovid
Fastorum. l. 3 p 51.55
that men sing those ribaldrous songs, and utter those amorous verses,
discourses at home, which they have learned at the Playhouse. What Seneca
writes of the words of flatterers and lewd companions, I may well apply to
Actors. Horu^ sermo multum nocet. Nam etiam si non statim ofsicit, semina in
animo relinquit, sequiturque nos etiam cum ab illis discesserimus,
resurrecturu^ postea malu^. Quemadmodu^ qui audierunt symphoniam ferunt secum
in auribus modulationem, ac dulcedinem cantus, quae cogitationes impedit, nec
ad seria patitur intendi: sed adulatorum and prava laudantium sermo diutius
haeret quam auditur: nec facile est, ^nimo dul^em sonu^ excutere, prosequitur
and durat, and ex interuallo recurrit. Ideo claudendae sunt aures malis
vocibus, and quidem primis; nam cum initium secerunt, admissaeque sunt, plus
audent. Seneca Epist. 123.
Their speeches do much hurt. For if they do men no present harm, yet they
leave the seeds of evil in their minds, and an evil afterward to arise,
follows them even then when as they are departed from them. For as those who
hear some pleasant consort carry away with them the sweetness of the song in
their ears, which hinders their thoughts, and suffers them not to be intent
upon serious things: so the obscenities of Stage Players ( Discit enim citius,
meminitque libentius illud Quod quis deridet, qua^ quod probat and veneretur.
Horace. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 286. See here, page 424.
which men are aptest to remember, as most agreeable to their lusts, where as
they are extraordinary forgetful of all the good they hear) stick longer by
men then whiles they hear them. Neither is it an easy matter to shake their
pleasant sound out of their minds: for it follows them, it stays with them,
and recoiles back again into their minds and tongues after some little
space. Therefore the ears are to be kept shut against such evil speeches, and
that verily against the very first: for when they have made a beginning and
gotten entrance, they will make a further attempt. De Vero Cultu. c. 20.21.
Lactantius, Homil. De David. and Saul Tom. 1. Col. 510. D. See here p. 424.
Chrysostom, Paedagogi. lib 3. cap. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Exposition on the 7. Commandment. page 67.
BB. Babington inform us; That Play-haunters carry away with them the Idaeaes
and similitudes of the lewd representations they behold in Stage Plays, which
sink deep into their minds; that they suck in the venom of Stage Plays
with great delight, and practice the speeches, the convayances of love, which
there they see and learn: And having once polluted their speech with the
language of the Theater; (for I will never, writes BB. Babington, call it
polishing,) they are never better then when they have company to bestow their
tales, and Stage-greetings upon: And for this reason among others, they dislike
of Stage Plays. As these recited Authors, so our own experience can
suffragate to the truth of this effect: For who so vain, so frothie, so
profane, so atheistical, blasphemous, lascivious, scurrilous; who less holy,
gracious, or edifying in their ordinary discourses, then Players and
Play-haunters? See The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters; and Master
Gosson, his School of Abuses, and Plays Confuted: to this purpose.
whose tongues are tipped with oaths, execrations, ribaldry, lascivious tales,
amorous songs, wanton histories, unseemely jests, adulterous insinuations,
invective taunts and scoffs against holiness, sobriety, chastity, modesty,
grace, and goodness; with the very language of the Stews, of Atheists, of
Pagans, not of Christians. Seldom shall you hear from such men's mouths any
religious discourses, any conference of God, of Christ, of the Scriptures, of
grace, of glory, of practical divinity, of sin, of faith, of repentance, of the
means or signs of grace and salvation, any praising or blessing of God for
his mercy to us in his Son; any bewayling of their own sinful conditions,
or of their slavery under sin: any exhortation unto goodness; any
dissuations from any sin; or the like; Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 71.24 Psalm.
77.11, 12. Psalm. 105.1, 2. Psalm. 119.13, 16.27. Psalm. 145.10, 11, 12. Psalm.
9.11. Psalm. 22.22, 31. Psalm. 66.16, 17. Psalm. 2^.7.
the principal things that Christians should confer off: Their tongues are
so accustomed to the theames, the flattering Eloquence, and phrases of the
Theater; so taken up with the relations of the things they hear or see at
Stage Plays; that they cannot relish the Isay 19.18.
language of Canaan, the dialect of Heaven, Assueti enim dulcibus and politis,
siv^ orationibus, sive carminibus divinarum litterarum simplicem communemque
sermonem pro sordido, aspernantur. Id enim quaerunt quod sensum demulceat.
Lactantius De Vero Cultu. cap. 21. Itaque, miser ego lecturus Tullium,
jejunabam, post noctium crebras vigilias, post l^chrymas, quas mihi
praeteritorum recordatio peccatorum ex imis visceribus eruebat; Plautus
sumebatur in manus, si quando in memetipsum reversus, Prophetas legere
caepissem, sermo horrebat incultus. Hi^rom. Epist. 22. cap. 13.
nor brook the Scripture phrase, (whose plainness they deride and scorn:)
much less can they spare any vacant time to habituate their unholy lips, to
season their Ier. 9.25, 26.
uncircumcised hearts and ears, with holy conference. It is Gods own command
to Christians: Ephesians. 4.29, 31.
That they should put away all vain, all evil speaking: that no corrupt
communication should proceed out of their mouths, but that which is good to
the use of edifying, that it may administer grace to the hearers: Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
That fornication and all uncleanesse should not be so much as once named among
them, as becomes Saints: Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks. Col. 4.6.
That their speech should be always gracious seasoned with salt: Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7,
8, 9. c. 11.18, 19.20.
And that his Words and his Commandments should be always in their hearts; to
teach them diligently unto their Children: to talk of them (not of Playhouse
passages, or such vain fruitless trifles) when they sit in their houses, and
when they walk by the way, and when they lie down, and when they rise up:
that they should bind them for a sign upon their hands, and that they should
be as frontlets between their eyes: and that they should write them upon the
posts of their house, and upon their gates; that so they might Psalm. 1.1, ^.
meditate and discourse of them day and night upon all occasions. But alas our
Stage Plays incorporate themselves so firmly, Persuadet enim quicquid suave
e^t, and animo penitus dum delectat, infidet. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. cap.
21.
and sink so deep into our Actors and Play-h^^nters minds, that they quite
invert these sacred precepts; suppressing those heavenly Christian conferences
which they command; reviving and advancing those vain lascivious discourses
which they prohibit. This the fore-quoted Authors; this present experience
testify. Wherefore I shall end this Scene with this short Syllogism, being a
37. Argument against Stage Plays. Argument 37.


Those things which banish all holy conferences, all pious discourses out of
their Actors and Spectators mouths, and furnish them with all variety of idle,
vain, unprofitable, lascivious, scurrilous, profane, atheistical,
irreligious phrases, Playhouse conferences, and Stage-discourses, must
questionless be unlawful, yea abominable unto Christians: as the alleged
Scriptures testify.

But this do Stage Plays; as the premises and experience manifest.

Therefore they must questionless be unlawful, yea abominable unto
Christians.

SCENA DVODECIMA.
See Molanus Hist. S. Imagi^um. l. 4. c. 18.
Word, the worship, yea all the ordinances of God into contempt; making them
vain and ineffectuall to their souls.

prayer, Dum enim auditum ad indebitos sermones effundun^^ aures intenta^ non
porrigun^ ad divina. Council. Lateranens^ sub. Innocentio 3. cap. 17.
hearing, and reading of Gods Word, receiving the Sacraments, and the like.
This sundry Fathers fully testify: and I would to God all Christians would
well weigh their words which much concern their souls in the very maine of
Christianity, to wit, Gods worship, and their vow in baptism. Tertullian
informs us; De Spectac^lis. c. 17. and page 396.397, 398.
That Stage Plays defile the eyes, the ^ares, the soule^ of the Spectators,
and make them to appear polluted in Gods sight. That none of the things
deputed unto Stage Plays are pleasing unto God, or beseeming the servants of
God, because they were all instituted for the D^vill, and furnished out of the
De^ils treasury^ for every thing that is not of God, or displeasing unto God is
of the Devil: Quot adhuc modis perorabimus, nihil ex his quae spectaculis
deputantur, placitu^ Deo esse aut congruens Dei servis, quod Domino placitum
non sit, ^i omnia propter Diabolum instituta, and ex Diaboli rebus instructa
monstrabimus: nihil enim no^ Diaboli est, quicquid Dei non est vel Deo
displicet: hoc erit pompa Diaboli adversus qua^ in signaculo fidei ejeramus.
Quod autem ejeramus neque facto, neque dicto, neque visu, neque aspectu
participare debe^us. Caeteru^ nonne ejeramus and rescindimus signac^lu^,
rescindendo testationem ejus? Nunquid ergo superest u^ ab ipsis Ethnicis
respo^sum flagitemus, an liceat Christianis spectaculo uti? Atquin hinc vel
maxim intelligunt factum Christianum, de repudio spectaculorum^ Itaque negat
manifest qui per quod agnoscitur, tollit. Quid autem sp^i superest in
hujusmodi homine? nemo in castra hostium transit, nisi projectis armis suis,
nisi destitutis signis and Sacramentis principis sui, ni^i pactus simul perire?
Ibid. c. 24.
Stage Plays they are the pomp of the Devil, against which we have protested
in the seal of our faith: That therefore which we renounce, we ought not to
participate of neither in deed, nor word, nor sight, now view. And do we not
then reno^nce and tear off the seal again, in cutting off the testimonial
of it? Shall we then desire an answer from the very Heathens themselves? Shall
they resolve us, whether it be lawful for Christians to use Stage Plays? But
verily they most of all discern a man to be a Christian, even from this
renouncing of Stage Plays: he therefore does manifestly deny himself to be a
Christian, who takes away this badge by which he should be known to be a
Christian. Now what hope is there remaining in such a one? No man has revolted
unto the enemies Tents, unless he first cast away his arms, unless he has
first forsaken the colors and allegiance of his Princ^, unless he has
covenanted to perish together with them. An ille recogitabit eo tempore de Deo,
positus illic ubi nihil est de Deo? pudicitiam ediscet, attonitus in mimos? Sed
tragaed o vociferante, ex^lamationes ille alicujus prophetae retracta^it? Inter
effaeminationis modos psalmu^ secu^ co^miniscetur? and cu^ athletae agent, ille
dicturus est, repercutiendum non efse? poterit and de misericordia moveri
defixus in morsus ursorum and spongias retiatiorum? Av^rtat Deus a suis tantam
voluptatis exitiosae cupiditatem. Ibidem. cap. 25.
Will ^e think earnestly of God at that time, who is placed where there is
nothing at all of God? will he thoroughly learn chastity who admires
Stage Plays? will he call to mind the exclamations^ of some prophet, whiles
the Tragedians are crying out? will he m^ditate of a Psalm, who ^its amidest
effeminating measures? or can he be moved with compassion, who is wholly intent
upon the biting of Bears, and the spunges of retiaries? God turn away from
all his so great a desire of pernicious pleasure. Quale est enim de ecclesia
Dei ad Diaboli Ecclesiam tendere? de caelo (quod aiunt) in caenum? illas manus
quas ad dominum extuleris, postmodum laudando histrionem fatigare? ex ore quo
Amen in sanctum protuleris, gladiatori testimonium reddere? (...) alij omnino
dicere nisi Deo Christo? Cur igitur non ejusmodi etiam Daemonijs penetrabiles
fiant? Nemo enim potest duobus dominis servire. Quid luci cum tenebris? quid
vitae and morti? Ibidem. cap. 26.
For what a desperate wicked thing is it, for a man to go out of the Church of
God, into the Chapel of the Devil? out of Heaven (as they say) into the mire
and clay? those hands which thou have lifted up unto the Lord in prayer, to
weary afterward in applauding a Stage Player? out out of the same mouth with
which thou have uttered Amen, to the holy one, to give testimony to a
Sword-player? or to say, ((...),) for ever and ever, to any one but to God
Christ? Why then may not such become liable to the possession of D^vils, etc?
For no man can serve two Masters. What has light to do with darkness? What
relation has life to death? Odisse debemus istos conventus and caetus
Ethnico^um, vel quod illic nomen Dei blasph^matur, inde tentationes emittantur.
Quid facies in illo suffragiorum impiorum aestuario depraehensus, non quasi
aliquid illic pati possis ab hominibus, nemo te cognoscit Chri^tianum, sed
recogita quid de te fiat in caelo. Dubitas enim illo momento quo in Diaboli
ecclesia ^ueris, omnes Angelos prospicere d^ caelo, and singulos deuotare, quis
blasphemiam dixe^it, quis audierit, quis linguam, quis aures Diabolo adversus
Deum administraverit? Non ergo sugies sedilia hosti^m Christi, illam cathedram
pe^tilentiariam, ipsum que aerem qui desuper incubat, scelestis vocibus
con^tupra^um? Ibidem. cap. 27.
we ought to hate these assemblies of Pagans, even because the Name of God is
there bla^phemed, and because diverse temptations are sent out from thence. How
will thou do being deprehended at unawares in that overflowing of impious
suffrages; not as though thou should there suffer any thing from men; for no
man knows thee to be a Christian; but consider seriously, what may be done
concerning thee in Heaven. For do^t thou do^bt but that in the very moment when
as thou art in the church of the Devil, all the Angels look down from
Heaven, and take special notice of every one there present; observing who he
is that speaks blasphemy, who that hears i^, who it is that lends his tongue,
his ears to the Devil, against God? Will thou not therefore fly these seats
o^ the enemies of Christ, this pestilentiall chair, and that very air which
hangs over it, adulterated with wicked words and sounds, etc? Thus he: whose
words sufficiently testify, that Stage Plays indispose men to all religious
duties; because they defile their eyes, their ears, their hands, their souls,
they being the Sea here, page 42. to 61. and 561. to 567.
pompes, the inventions of the Devil which are incompatible with Christianity:
because they tear of the very seal and cognizance of their Christianity: and
wholly inthrall them to the Devils vassalage. Saint Cyprian writes thus of
Stage Plays to the selfsame purpose. Quid Scriptura interdixit? Prohibuit
enim spectari, quod prohibet geri. Omnia inqua^, ista spectaculorum genera
damnavit, quando idololatriam sustulit ludoru^ omniu^ matrem; unde haec
vanitatis and levitatis mon^^ra venerunt. Quod enim spectaculum sinc idolo?
quis ludus sine sacrificio? quod certamen non consecratu^ mortuo? Quid inter
haec Christianus fidelis facit? si idololatriam fugit, quid loq^itur? Qui jam
sanctus sit, de rebus criminosis voluptatem capit? Quid contra Deum
superstitiones probat, quas amat, dum spectat? Caeterum sciat haec omnia
daemoniorum inventa esse, non Dei. Cyprian De Specta^ulis. lib. Edit. Pamelij.
page 243.244.
What has the Scripture interdicted? V^rily it has prohibited that to be
behold, which it inhibiteth to be acted. I say, it has condemned all these
kinds of spectacles when as it has taken away Idolatry the mother of all
Plays, from whence these Monsters of vanity and le^ity have proceeded. For
what spectacle is there without an Idol? what Play without a sacrifice, etc?
What does a faithful Christian make among these? if he flies Idolatry, why
does he speak it? he who is now holy, can he r^^p^ pleasure from criminous
things? Why approves he super^t^tions against God, which he affects whiles
that he beholds them? But let him know, that all these are the inventions of
Devils, not of God. Impudenter in Ecclesia Daemonia exorcizat, quorum
voluptates in spectaculis laudat: and cum semel illi renunciando, recisa sit
res omnis in Baptismate, dum post Christum ad Diaboli spectaculum vadit,
Christo tanquam Diabolo^renunciat. Idololatria, ut jam dixi, ludorum omnium
matter est; quae ut ad se Christianos fideles veniant, blanditur illis per
oculorum and aurium voluptatem, etc. Ibidem.
He impudently exorcizeth Devils in the Church, whose pleasures ^e applaudes in
Stage Plays: and when as by renouncing him once, every thing of his was pared
off in Baptism; whiles that after Christ (I pray observe it all you Christians
who resort to Stage Plays) he resorteth to the spectacles of the Devil, he
renounceth Christ as if he were a Devil. Idolatry, as I have already said, is
the Mother of all Plays, which that it may allure faithful Christians to it,
flatters them with the pleasure of the eyes and ears. Romulus did first of all
consecrate Cirque-playes to Consus, as to the God of Counsel, for the Sabines
that were to be ravished. But other Stage Plays were procured at the intreati^
of the people, when as a famine and pestilence had seized upon the City, and
these were afterward dedicated to Ceres, to Bacchus, and to other Idols and
dead men. Th^se Grecian combats, either in songs, in musical Instruments, in
voices, or in strength, Praesides suos habent varia Daemonia. Et quicquid est
aliud quod spectantium aut oculos movet, aut delinit aures; si cum origin sua,
and institione quaeratur, causam praefert aut Idolum, aut Daemonium, aut
mortuum. Ita Diabolus artifex, quia Idololatriam per se nudam sciebat horreri,
spectaculis miscuit, ut per voluptatem posset amari. Ibidem.
have diverse Devils for their Presidents: and what ever else there is, which
either affects the eyes, or pleases the ears of the beholders, if its
orignall or instituters be sought after, has either a^ Idol, a Devil, or a
dead man for the Father of it. Thus the c^nning Devil, because he knew that
naked Idolatry by it self would be aborred, has mixed it with Stage Plays
and spectacles, that so through pleasure it might be beloved. What need I
prosecute this any further? Parts Christiani si perroges, nes^it; aut
infaelicior si scit: quem si rursum perrogem, quo ad illud spectaculum itinere
pervenerit; confitebitur per lupanarium, per prostitutar^m nuda corpora, per
publicam libidinem, per p^blicum dedecus; per vulgarem lasciviam, per communem
omnium contumeliam. Cui ut non obijciam quod fortasse commisit, vidit tamen
quod committendum non fuit, and oculos ad Idololatriae spectaculum per
libidinem duxit: ausus secum Spiritum sanctum in lupanarium ducere si
potuisset: qui festinans ad spectaculum, dimissus, and adhuc gerens secum ut
assolet, Eucharistiam, inter corpora obscaena meretricum tulit, plus
damnationis meritus de spectaculi voluptate. Fugienda sunt ista Christianis
fidelibus, ut jam frequenter diximus, tam vana, tam perniciosa, tam sacrilega
spectacula: and oculi nostri sunt and aures custodiendae, etc. Ibid.
If thou ask a Play-haunter, what are the parts of a Christian, he knows
not, or else he is so much the more unhappy, that he knows: If I should
again demand of him, by what way he came to that spectacle; he will confess
through the Brothel-house, through the naked bodies of prostituted Harl^ts, For
Play Houses anciently were common Bro^hels, or else they had the Stews
adjoining to them. See here page 390.
through the common Stews, through public shame, through vulgar
lascivio^snesse, through the common reproach of all. To whom that I may not
object, that which perchance he has committed, yet he has seen that which
was not to be committed, and has led his eyes though lust to the spectacles of
Idolatry: daring, if he had bee^e able, to carry the Holy Ghost along with him
into a Brothel-house; who hastening to a Stage Play, as soon as he is dismissed
the Church, and whiles he carries the Eucharist about him, as he has wont to
do^; has brought it among the obscene bodies of Whores; deserving more
damnation from the pleasure of the spectacle. These so vain, so pernicious, so
sacrilegious Plays and spectacles are to be avoided of all Christians, as we
have already oft-times said; and both our eyes and ears are to be kept from
them, etc. If then the Scripture prohibites the acting, the seeing of
Stage Plays; as being the invention of the Devil; the parts, the issues of
Idolatry: If those who resort to Plays renounce Christ Jesus himself, as if
he were a Devil; if they do as much as in them lies, even carry the holy
Ghost himself; and the very Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood into a
Playhouse; and so profane them in the highest manner, as this Father
testifies: no wonder is it, if Plays unqualifie men for holy duties. Isiodor
Hi^palensis, and HRabanus Maurus, discoursing of Cirques, of Theaters, of
Cirque-playes, and Stage Plays, write thus of them: Vnde animadvertere debes
Christian, quod Circum numina immunda possideant. Quapropter alienus erit ^ibi
locus que^ plurimi Sathanae spiritus occupaverunt. Totum enim illius Diabolus
and angeli ejus replent. Isiodor Hisp. Originum lib. 18. c. 41.
that unclean Deities possess them. Therefore O Christian, let this be a
strange place to thee, which many spirits of Satan have taken possession of.
For the Devil and his Angels have filled it all up. Haec quippe spectacula
crudelitatis and inspectio vanitatum, non solum hominu^ vitijs, sed Daemonu^
jussis instituta sunt. Proinde nihil esse debet Christiano cum Circensi
insania, cum impudicitia Theatri, cum atrocitate arenae, cum luxuria ludi. Deum
enim nega^, qui talia praesumit; fidei Christianae praevaricator effectus, qui
id denuo appetit quod in lavachro jampridem renunciavit, id est Diabolo,
pompis, and operibus ejus. Ibid. c. 59. and. HRabanus Maurus^ De Vniverso. lib.
20. cap. 38. Operum. Tom. 1. page 251. A.
For the spectacles of cruelty, and the inspection of vanity were not ordained
only by the vices of men, but likewise by the commands of Devils. Therefore ^
Christian ought to have nothing to do with the madness of the Circus, with
the uncleanesse of the Theater, with the cruelty of the Amphitheater, with the
barbarousnesse of the Arena, with the luxury of the Play. For he denies God (a
terrible sentence worthy all Players, all Play-haunters saddest considerations)
who presumes to act or see such things: being made a Prevaricator of the
Christian faith, who again desires that which he has long since renounced in
his baptism; tha^ is, the Devil, his pompes, and works. And is such a
desperate Play-haunter, think you, fit or able to serve, to please the Lord,
or to perform any holy duty to him in a holy manner? Olympiodorus in his
Enarration upon the 4. of Ecclesiastes, Keep thy feet when as thou entrest
into the house of God, is pregnant to our purpose. Keep thy f^ete, etc. That
is, says he; Ne instrumentis eisdem quibus in bono utimur, abutamur in malo:
quasi dicat: Ne quaeso pedibus eisdem quibus templu^ Dei frequentas, theatrales
adito ^udos, and obscaena spectacula. De aliis quoque humani corporis membris
idem intellige faciendum. Et profecto qui impolluto pede subcunt Ecclesiam Dei,
debent ab impijs ^ocis and profanis se penitus, ut Deo contrar^js, continere.
Olympi^dorus, Enar. in Eccles. cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 11. page 405. E.
Let us not abuse to evil, those very instruments which we use in good: as if
he should say; Do not, I beseech thee, go to Stage Plays and obscene
Spectacles with the same feet wherewith thou frequentest the Temple of God.
Understand that the same likewise is to be done of the other members of the
body. And truly those who will go to the Church of God with an undefiled
foot, ought altogether to withold themselves from wicked and profane
places, as being contrary unto God. Therefore those who frequent Play Houses
can never serve God as they ought if this Father may be credited. S. Augustine
writing against Stage Plays, and those Devill-Idols that were both honored
and delighted with them, informs us: that Christians in his time, had utterly
abandoned all Stage Plays; Nihil enim eis turpe ac flagitiosum spectandum
imitandumque proponitur, ubi very Dei aut praecepta insinuantur, a^t miracula
narrantur, aut do^a lauda^tur, aut b^neficia postulantur. De Civi^^^^ D^i. lib.
2. cap. 28.
and that no filthy, no wicked thing was propounded to be s^ene or imitated,
where either the precepts of the true God were insinuated, or his miracles
declared, or his gifts praised, or his benefits craved. Nisi forte hinc sint
tempora mala qui^ per omnes pene Civitates cadunt Theatra, caveae turpitudinum,
and publicae professiones ^lagitiosoru^. Vnde enim cadunt nisi inopia rerum,
quarum lascivo and sacrilego usu constructa sunt. Nonn^ Cicero ^orum cum
Roscium quendam laudaret histrionem ita peritum dixit, ut solus esset dignus
qui in scenam deberet intrare: ita virum bonum, ut solus esset dignus, qui eo
non deberet accedere? quid aliud apertis^^me ^stendens^ nisi^illam s^enam esse
tam turpem, ut ta^to minus ibi esse homo debeat, quanto fuerit majus vir bonus:
and tamen dij eorum tali dedecore placab^ntur, quale a viris bonis removendum
esse censebat. Augustine. De Consensu Evangelistarum lib. 1. cap. 33. Tom.
4.530^531.
That when Christianity cam^ up, the Play Houses almost through all Cities fell
down; they being the very dens of filthiness, and the public professions of
wicked persons: whereupon the Pagans complained, that the Christian times were
evil times: And whence is it, (writes he) that the Play Houses fall down, but
through want o^ those things by whose lascivious and sacrilegious use they are
supported? Did not their Cicero when as he commended one Roscius a
Stage Player, say, that he was so skillful, that he only was worthy to come
upon the Stage: that he was so good a man, that he only was worthy not to come
upon it? showing most plainly nothing else; but that the Stage is so filthy,
that by so much the less a man ought to be there, by how much the more he is a
good man: and yet their gods were attoned with such dishonesty^ as he thought
ought fit to be removed from good ^en. But most punctual is that in his lib.
4. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. cap. 1. Tom. 9. pars 1. page 1427.1428. where he
writes thus. See here, page 49.50. in the margent.
Thou art deprehended and detected O Christian when as thou do one thing,
and pro^essest another: being faithful in name, and showing the contrary in
deed; not keeping the faith of thy promise: one whiles entering into the Church
to pour out prayers, and a very little while after coming into a Playhouse
to cry out dishonestly with Staye-players. What have thou to do with the
pompes of the Devil which thou have renounced? Why do you halt with both
^oof^s? If God be God, follow him: if the world be God, follow it. If God be
chosen, let him be served according to his will: if the world be chosen, to
what end is the heart feined, as it were fitted for God? Quid tibi cum pompis
Diaboli amator Christi? Noli te ^allere, vidit enim tales Deus, nec inter suos
deputat professores^ quos cernit viae suae desertores. Ibidem.
What ^ast thou to do with the pompes of the Devil, who professest thy self
a lover of Christ? Do not deceive thy self, for God hates such persons,
neither does he repute those among his professors, whom he sees to be the
forsakers of his way. All which is a sufficient evidence, that Stage Plays
wholly indispose men to the true worship of God. Salvian Bishop of Marselles, is
very copious in this theme. De Gubernatione Dei. l. 6. Edit. Parifijs. 1598.
page 187, etc. his words are very emphaticall in Latin; which because the Book
it self is common, I will forbear to transcribe.
We say (writes he) God has forsaken us, when in very deed we forsake God.
For, suppose we, that the Lord will respect us, not deserving his favor? let
us see if he can. Lo infinite thousands of Christians daily abide at the
shows of unseemely things. Can God then favor such kind of persons? Can God
cast his gracious countenance upon such as rage in Cirques, and commit adultery
in Theaters? Or is this our meaning, or d^e we think it meet, that for as
much as God sees us in Cirques and Theaters, that what things we see he
beholds; and what filthiness we behold, he sees it also for company? For
one of these must needs be: for if he vouchsafe to look upon us, it follows,
that he must behold all these things where we are: or if, which is most true,
he turn away his eyes from these things, O that our Play-haunters would
consider this.
he must likewise turn away his countenance from us who are there. And the
case standing thus, yet nevertheless, we do these things which I have said,
and that without c^a^ing. Or think we that God has his Theaters and Cirques,
as had the gods of the Gentiles. For thus did they in old teme, because they
were persuaded that their Idols delighted in them: but how is it that we do
so, who are And if our God detest them, why should we th^n affect them, who
profess our selves to be his Children?
certain that our God detesteth them? Or verily if we know that these
abominations do please God, I will not gainsay but we may resort unto them
continually. But if it be in our conscience, that God abhors, that he
detesteth; that God is offended as the Devil is fed by Theaters; Mark this O
Pl^y-haunters.
how say we that we worship God in the Church, who always serve the Devil in
the obscenity of Plays, and that wittingly and willingly, out of deliberation
and set purpose? And what hope I pray you, shall we have with God, who not
ignorantly, or at unawares offend him; but after the example of those Giants
heretofore, whom we read to have attempted Heaven with their mad endeavors,
and as it were to have marched forwards against the clouds? So we through the
injuries which all the world over we continually commit, do as it were appugne
Heaven with a common consent. Let those then who celebrate Christ's Nativity,
Resurrection or Ascension with Stage Plays, and such like Enterludes remember
this, and confess their Error.
To Christ therefore, O monstrous madness! even to Christ do we offer Cirques
and Stage Plays; yea and even then especially when as we receive any goodness
from his hands, when any prosperity is bestowed upon us by him, or when as God
has given us any victory over our enemies? And what else by this do we show
our selves to do, but even to be like the man who is injurious to the person
who has done him good; who rayles upon him that speaks him fair, or strikes
him over the face with a sword that kisseth him. For I ask the great and rich
men of this world, of what offense is that servant guilty which wishes ill to
a good and gracious Master; which rayleth on him that deserves well, and
renders dispitefull words for his good received? without controversy all men
will judge him a most heinous offender, who renders evil for good to him, to
whom indeed he might not render evil for evil. O let us then remember this,
and be both grieved at it and ashamed of it.
Thus verily do even we who are called Christians, we stir up a merciful
God against us by our uncleanesse; we offend a gracious God by our filthiness,
and we wound a loving God by our wickedness. To Christ therefore, O monstrous
madness! even to Christ do we offer Cirquers and Stage Players; to Christ do
we render for his benefits the filthiness of Th^^ters; even to Christ do we
sacrifice the oblation of most base sports. As though our Savior, who for us
became man, had taught us thus to do: As though he had preached this either by
himself, or by his Apostles: As though that for this end he had taken upon him
the shame of man's nativity, and the contumelious beginnings of an earthly
generation: As though for this end he had layen in a manger, at what time
notwithstanding the very Angels ministered unto him: As if for this purpose he
would be swadled in rags of cloth, who did govern Heaven in his cloutes: As
though for this end he had hung upon the Cross, at whose hanging the whole
world was astonished: 2 Cor. ^.9.
Who for your sakes ( says the Apostle) when he was rich, became poor, that
ye through his poverty might be made rich. Phil. 2.6.
And being (says he) in the form of God he humbled himself to the death,
even the death of the Cross. Even this did Christ teach us when he suffered
these things for our sakes. Well do we requite his passion, who receiving
through his death redemption, lead a most filthy life. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto all men, says
blessed Paul, and teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the mighty God and of our
Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify us a peculiar people to himself zealous of good
works. Where be they who do these things, for which the Apostle says, that
Christ came? where be they who fly desires of this world? where be they which
live godly and righteously, that look for this blessed hope by well doing; and
leading a pure life; showing thereby that they look and long for the Kingdom
of God: where be such? Tit. 2.14.
Our Lord Jesus Christ came ( says he) that he might purify us a pecular
people to himself, zealous of good works. Where is that pure people? that
peculiar people; that good people; that people of holiness? 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ (says the Scripture) suffered for us, leaving us an ensample, that we
should follow his steps: And we follow the steps of our Savior in Cirques, and
in Theaters; as if our Savior had left us such an example, whom we read to
have wept, but that he laughed we never read. And both these for our sakes:
because weeping is a pricking of the heart, laughter a corruption of manners.
Therefore says he; L^k. 6.25, 21.
Woe to you that laugh, for ye shall wail and weep. And, blessed are ye
that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Let our ioviall Roarers, Epicures and
Christmas-keepers consider this.
But it is not enough for us to laugh and be merry, unless we rejoice with
sin and madness, unless our laughter be tempered with filthiness, and
mixed with impiety. What error I say is this, or what folly? Cannot we daily be
merry and laugh, unless we make our laughter and mirth to be wickedness? Or
else think we simple mirth to be nothing worth? and can we not laugh except we
sin? What a mischief is this, or what fury? Let us laugh I pray you and be
merry so we sin not. What foolishness, nay madness is it, to think mirth
and joy nothing worth, unless God be injured thereby? yea injured, and that
most hainously. O that all Players and Play-haunters would consider this.
For in Stage Plays there is a certain Apostasy from the faith, and a deadly
declining from our belief and the heavenly Sacraments, etc. as in page 51.52.
before. And what else is it but to fall into destruction, to foregoe the
beginning of life? For where the foundation of the Creed is overthrown, life
it self is destroyed. Then again we must needs return unto that which we
have often said: What such thing is there among the Barbarians and Turks
delight not in these accursed Stage Plays, why then should. Chritians do it?
Barbarians? Where be any Stages or Theaters among them? where is the
wickedness of diverse impurities, to wit, the destruction of our hope and
salvation? Which Plays notwithstanding if they being Pagans did use, they
should err with less offense to God: because albeit such doing were a
defiling of the sight, yet were it not a violation of the Sacrament. But now
what can we say for our selves? we hold the Creed, and yet overturne it: we
confess the duty of salvation, and yet deny it too. And therefore where is our
Christianity? who as it seems have received the Sacrament of salvation to no
other purpose, but that afterward we might more hainously offend. We prefer
pastimes before the Church: we despise the Lords Table and honor Theaters: in
a word, we love all things, reverence all things, God alone seems vile unto
us in comparison of all other things, etc. By which large discourse of this
pious Father, it is most apparent: That Stage Plays overturne men's faith and
religion; annihilate their baptism; estrange their hearts and affections from
Gods service, and wholly indispose them to his worship. Gregory Nyssen informs
us: De Oratione. lib. page 9.
That God neither hears nor regards the prayers of those qui in Theatris
faustas acclamationes affectant, etc. who affect applauses^ in Theaters, and
delight in Stage Plays. Gregory Nazianzen, demanding this question, Ad quos
entem de divinis rebus agendum fit? nimirumad ^os, quibus res cordi est, and
qui came non nugatorie velut^ quiddam de multis, voluptis and little quae infra
ventrem sunt occupationes, tractant. Oration. 1. ad Eunomianos page 6.
unto what manner of persons he should discourse of divine things? makes this
reply; that it must be to those who would lay them serio^sly to heart; and not
to such who handle them slightly, as one thing only of many for pleasure and
contentment s^ke, after ^irque-pla^es, after Stage Plays, after songs, after
gluttony and carnal copulation: Intimating unto us; that those who delight in
Stage Plays and such like Spectacles are altogether unfit to hear Gods Word,
or seriously to perform any holy duty; their minds being so preposessed with
Plays and thoughts of vanity, after their return from Play Houses, that they
can never bend them to pious exercises in that diligent manner as they ought.
And therefore he records of the Citizens of Constantinople, who delighted much
in Stage Plays: ^dq^e in ea Civitate, quam vix etiam multa virtutis exempla
servare possint: ut quae sicut ci^cos and Theatra, ita divina quoque mysteria
pro ludo habeat. Oration. 31. in Laudem Athena^ij page 525.
That as they reputed Cirques and Stage Plays, so they likewise esteemed the
divine mysteries themselves, to be but a pastime. Saint Chrysostom in his
forequoted Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511.512. Hom. in Psalm. 118.
D. 150.151. Ibid. Tom. 1. Col. 1030.1031. Hom. 1. De Verbis Isaiae. Vide
dominu^ sedentem, etc. Ibidem. Col. 1281.1283, 1284. Hom. 38. in Matthew. Tom.
297.298.
Homilies, is exceeding copious in this theme; where he informs us; that
Stage Plays so pollute the eyes, the ears, the hearts of the Actors and
Spectators, that they make them altogether unfit to approach into Gods holy
presence, or to tread within the porch, the doors of his holy Temple, much
more unfit to participate of his most sacred Body and Blood, (which must not be
lodged in a polluted soul) or to hear his pure Word; which ears defiled, or
rather putrified and stopped up with filthy Stage Plays, can never seriously
attend too. His See here, Scene 4.
fore-alleadged words to this purpose, are so emphaticall and flexanimous, that
they might even move an heart of Adamant, and cause the most obdurat
Stage-haunters for to tremble. If we add to this, See here, Act 4. Scene 1.
page 134. and Act 7. Scene 2.3. where I have quoted several Councels and
Fathers to prove it. See Gratian De Consecratione. Distinct. 2. near the end.
the constant practice of the Primitive Church, who excommunicated all
Stage Players and Play-haunters both from the Word, the Sacraments and all
Christian society as altogether unworthy to participate of either; refusing to
admit of any Actors or others into the Church till they quite abandoned, not
only the acting, but the very sight and hearing of Stage Plays, and openly
promised and professed, never to return unto them more: Or if we again
consider; See Apostolorum Canones. Can. 17.18. Gratian. Distinctio. 33.34, 48.
Ioannes De Burgo Pupilla Oculi^ pars 7. c. 5. D. Alvarus Pelagius. De Planctu
Ecclesiae. l. 2. Artic. 28. H. fol. 134. Ans^lmus in 1. Tim. c. 3. Tom. 2. p.
356. C.D.
that Stage Players, with those who married Woman-actors were utterly ^ncapable
of any Ecclesiastical Orders, and perpetually disabled to administer either
the Word or Sacraments to Gods people, by reason of that inexpiable steine
which the very acting of Stage Plays had engrained on them: We must needs
acknowledge, that the acting and beholding of Stage Plays indispose men to
Gods service, and unfit them for his holy ordinances: else why should the
Church excommunicate or exclude these persons, or thus disable them in so
strict a manner? Moreover those See here, Act 4. Scene 2. page 150. and Act 7.
Scene 3. thorowout.
sundry Councels and Authors, See here, Scene 17.18. and 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Nihil
turpius aut deformius anima vitijs obnoxia. Chrysostom. Hom. 22 ad Pop. A^tioch.
Tom. 5. Col. 108. C.
which debar all Clergy men from the acting and beholding of Stage Plays,
either in public or private, lest their eyes, their ears and hearts, set
apart, and consecrated to Gods holy mysteries, should be defiled by them, and
so indispose them to discharge their ministerial function; are a most pregnant
evidence of this irr^fragable truth; that Stage Plays disable men from the
right performance of all holy duties. And no wonder. For first they disteine
the soul with the f^^^h, and involue it in the guilt of diverse sins; which
makes it odious in the eyes of God; Hab 1.13.
Who as he can endure no iniquity; so he Psalm 66.18. John 9.31. Isay 1.4. to 26.
regards no worship, no duties of piety, no prayers that proceed from polluted
hearts. God will be worshipped only in the Psalm. 96.9.
beauties of holiness; with 1 Timothy 2.8. Heb. 10.22.
clean hands and pure hearts: Whence he commands all his, 2 Cor. 7.1.
to cleanse themselves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in his fear: Ier. 4.14 Isay 1.16.
to wash their heart from wickedness that they may be saved: Isay 52.11. 2
Cor. 6.17.
and not so much as to touch any unclean thing, that so he may receive them.
God will be Levit. 10.3.
sanctified of all those that come near him; he will have them 1 Pet. 1.15,
16. Levit^ 11.44.
to be holy in all manner of conversation, even as he is holy, that so they 1
Pet. 2.5, 9.
may be a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices of prayer and
praise, acceptable unto him through Jesus Christ; whose 1 Ioh. 1.7.9. Rev. 1.5,
6. Heb. 9.14.
blood does cleanse them from all their sins, Ephesians. 5.26.27. Col. 1.14, 21,
22.
presenting them pure and holy in his Fathers sight without spot or bleemish.
Now Stage Plays, See Scene 3.4. thorowout. Act 3. Scene 1.2, 3. and Act 7.
Scene 2.3.
as I have formerly proved, See Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei lib. 6. here, Scene
3.4. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul. and Hom. 38. and 69. in Matthew.
universally defile the very bodies and souls of men, overspredding them with
a leprosy of sundry sins, (which they either ingenerate or infuse into their
souls, (which Isay 59.2, 3. Lam. 3.43, 44.
eclipse Gods grace and favor from them, Isay 1.15. Prove. 1.28. Ier. 14.12.
stopping up his ears against all their prayers, and Isay 1.11, 12, 13. Prove.
15.8. c. 21.27. c. 28.9.
sending up an unsavory stink into his sacred nostrels: therefore they must of
necessity disable them to all holy duties. Secondly, it is impossible for
Matthew. 6.24. I^m. 1.4. 1 Ioh. 2.15, 16. Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8.
any man to serve two different Masters both together, to serve God and Mammon,
Christ and the Devil: God in the Church, the Devil in the Playhouse: Christ
in the morning, the Devil in the evening. He who serves Satan all the week in
the Stage or Playhouse, can never worship Christ upon the Lords day in the
Temple. Alas, there was never yet such 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. O seculu^ nequam,
quod solos tuos sic soles bear amicos ut Dei facias inimicos. Bernard^ Epist.
107.
fellowship between Christ and Beliall, between the renounced pompes and
vanities of Satan, and the humility of our super-celestiall Savior, that men
might serve and follow them both together. Now See Act 2. Chorus. page 42. to
60. here, fol. 522.523. and Act 7. Scene 2.
Stage Plays are the very Devils own peculiar pompes, Play Houses his
Synagogues; Players, his professed Masse-^riests and Choristers; Play-haunters
his devoted servants, as Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 24.25. See here, page
10.11.
himself professes, and Nam de ijs quid dicamus, qui cum gentilium turbis ad
spectacula maturant, and conspectus suos a^que auditus impudicis and verbis and
actibus faedant: non est nostrum pronunciare de talibus. Ipsi enim sentire and
videre possunt quam sibi delegerint partem. Hom. 11. Super. Levit. Tom. 1. fol.
83. B. Et revera si vincamur and post haec verba peccamus, si post Ecclesiam
rursum in Circum, and ad equorum cursus, and ad conventus Gentilium eamus, quid
aliud fit, quam superatos nos possider. Idem. Hom. 8. In Isaiam. Tom. 2. fol.
108. H.
Origin, with others, largely prove: Those therefore who thus serve the Devil
in Plays and Play Houses; its impossible for them to serve the Lord sincerely
in prayers and Churches. Thirdly, 1 Cor. 10.21
No man can drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; nor yet partake
of the Lords Table, and of the table of Devils: But Stage Plays, See Act 1.2.
accordingly.
are the cup and table of Devils; the very Devils meat; his drink; Et haec
fercula apellabantur quasi celebraretur conviviu^, quo velut suis epulis
immunda Daemonia pascerentur. August. De Civ. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4. See here,
page 46.47 and Theophylact^ in Act. c. 17 p. 804
those dishes and repasts wherewith he was solemnly feasted by his idolatrous
worshippers, in his own Idoll-temples. It is not possible therefore for any
Christian to feed his eyes, his ears with these diabolical banqvets, and yet
worthily to participate of Christ's Body and Blood, the spiritual Sweet-meates
of a Christian soul. Fourthly, the very acting and beholding of Stage Plays
draws down a selfe-condemning guiltiness, and so by consequent Chrysostom.
Hom in Psalm. 118. and Hom. 1. De Verbis Isaiae. vidi Dominum sedentem, etc.
here, Scene 4.
a certain secret terror of appearing in Gods presence on men's souls. There
is scarce a man of any grace or ingenuity, but would even blush and fear to be
de^rehended by any good man at a Playhouse: Yea the very Plutarchi Cato.
Seneca. Epist. 97. Valerius Maximus. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 2. Ludov. Vives Notae.
in August. De Civit. Dei. l 2. c. 8.
Heathen Romans stood so much in awe of Cato his vice-condemning presence:
that they durst not call for their ^loralian Enterludes whiles he was near the
Theater. And will not the consideration of Gods all-seeing presence, think
ye, strike much more fear into the Sea Tertul. De Spectaculis c. ^7. and
here, fol. 524. b.
hearts and consciences of such who are deprehended by him at lewd lascivious
Stage Plays, then any Christians, any Catoes eye or face, could strike into
these Heathen Romans; which have no such soule-confounding Majesty in them as
is in the very smallest frown of God? If therefore those who resort to
Stage Plays by reason of their selfe-convincing consciences, Heb. 4.16.
can never approach with boldness to Gods Throne of Grace; its certain they
cannot serve or worship him as they ought. Fifthly, he who perjures himself in
the highest degree, breaking that very origall covenant which he made to God at
first in Baptism, and afterward ratified at every receiving of the Sacrament,
can See Act 2. Chorus^ p. 42. to 61. and Act 7. Scene 2.
never questionless serve the Lord in any acceptable pious manner: the
performance of this vow and covenant (at leastwise in the desire the endeavor
of his soul) being that alone which makes him a Christian; and so a man
capable of serving God. See Ibid. page 42. to 61. and Act 7. Scene 2. page 561,
etc.
But he who acts or resorts to Stage Plays, violates that very original
covenant which he made to God at first in baptism, and a^terwards reconfirmed
at every receiving of the Sacrament; as I have elsewhere largely proved:
therefore he can never serve the Lord in any acceptable or gracious manner,
according to his will. And alas what Christian is there, who would frequent or
harbor any such sinful pleasures, as will quite disable him to serve his God,
to please his blessed Savior, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Christi sanguis terrarum orbis
est praetium; Christus emit ecclesiam, hoc eam omnem adornavit. Chrysostom Hom.
60. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 341. D.
who has bought him even at the dearest rate? What contentment can a man take
in any thing; in all the riches, honors, pleasures, contentments of this
world, whiles Quicquid nobis adest praeter Deum nostrum non est dulce. Nolumus
omnia quae dedit, si non dat seipsum qui omnia dedit. August. in Psalm. 85. page
66.
his soul can draw no comfort, no heavenly refreshment from his God? Better
can the inferior world subsist without the light and influence of the Sun,
or the body of a man without the heart, then the soul of any Christian without
the satisfactory Animae vita, Dei cultus, ac vita eo cultu digna. Chrysostom. De
Orando Deo. lib. 1. Tom. 5. Col. 592. A.
soule-inlivening presence of his God, his Savior, which is never found but in
Isay 57.15. Non enim temere in ster^ore Deus habitat, sed in caenaculo scopis
mundato. Chrysostom Hom. 22. ad Pop. An^^och. Tom. 5. Col. 170. C.
those broken humble spirits, who se^ve him in syncerity, and tremble at his
Word. As therefore we ever desire to please, to serve our blessed God according
to his will; or to enjoy the heart-ravishing consolations of his most blisfull
presence; let us presently abandon Stage Plays; which as they hinder us in the
service, so they utterly deprive us of the face and favor of our God, which
are Psalm. 4.6, 7. Psalm. 65.4. Psalm. 6^.3, 4.
able to make us more then happy in the midst of all our deepest miseries.
The pleasures, the refreshments that men reap from Stage Plays, as they shut
out better contents, so they Heb. 11.25.
abide no longer then the Plays are acting, (and sometimes scarce so long) and
then they oft-times leave a sting behind them, which gauls and pricks the
soul for ever after. If then that love of Christ which 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Tit.
3.3, 4, 5.
constrained holy Paul, to bid adue to all carnal pleasures, will not enforce
us to say thus to Stage Plays: as David sometimes did to his lewd companions;
Psalm. 6.8. and Psalm. 119.115.
Depart from me ye wicked, ye workers (ye producers) of iniquity, for I will
keep the Commandments of my God; yet let the comfort that Gods service will
bring unto our souls, and this consideration joined with it; that we Anima
nisi prius dedicerit terrena contemnere, caelestia mirari non poterit: and
eco^tra, donec re^rena miratur necess^rio caelestia spernit ac despicit. Chrysostom.
De Compunctione Cordis. lib. 2. Col. 501. B.
cannot serve God with any s^ncerity of heart, as long as we delight in cursed
Stage Plays, now at last enforce us to bid this farewell to them, that so we
may be enabled to please that holy blessed God, who created, redeemed us at
first, and has evermore preserved us since, Luke 1.74, 75. Romans 14.7, 8. 1
Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15.
that we might do him service.

Secondly, as Stage Plays indispose men to, so they likewise withdraw and keep
them from Gods service, See Nicholaus De Clemangijs. De Novis Celebritatibus
non Instituendis. l. p. 143. to 160. and Ioannis Lang. hecrucius De Vita and
Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 11.12.
especially on Lords-dayes, Holy Days, and solemn Festivals; which should be
wholly and only consecrated to his more special worship; and spent in duties
of devotion, in lawding and blessing him for his more special favour^. And
does not our own experience bear witness to this truth? Are not our
Play Houses oft-times more crowded, more coached and frequented then many of
our Churches? and are they not full oft-times, when our Churches are but empty?
Are there not many hundreds serving the Devil daily in our Theaters, even then
when as they should be serving God in his Temples? Do not more commonly resort
to Plays, then Lectures, which is ill? yea do not too too many neglect to
come to Sermons, that they may run to Stage Plays, which is worse? See 5.
and 6. Edward 6. c. 3.
Indeed our See the Exhortation in the Book of Common Prayer, as the end of
public and priv^te baptism. See Canon 45. which enjoyneth every benef^ced
Minister that is a Preacher to preach once a Sunday at least, either in his
own or some other adjoining parish.
Church of England (out of the great respect it yields to Preaching, and the
absolute necessity of it to salvation) enioynes Godfathers and Godmothers, to
call upon their God-children, to hear Sermons; (which some profane ones now
begin to loath and speak against, as if we had too much preaching:) that so
they may the better forsake the Devil and all his works, mortify all their
unholy corrupt affections, and daily proceed in all virtue and godliness of
living. Yea the Saints of God in ancient times, were quickening and calling upon
one another in this manner: ^al. 95.1, 2, 6.
O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise unto the Rock^
of our Salvation. Let us come before his presence with Thankesgiving, and make
a joyful noise unto him with Psalms, etc. O come let us worship and fall
down and kneel before the Lord our maker? Psalm. 96.1, 2, 3, 8, 9. See Psalm.
97.1. Psalm 99.9. Psalm. 100.1, 2.
O sing unto the Lord a new Song, sing unto the Lord all the earth. Sing unto
the Lord; bless his Name; show forth his salvation from day to day. Declare
his goodness among the Heathen, his wonders among all people. Give unto the
Lord (O ye Kindreds of the people;) give unto the Lord glory and strength.
Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name; bring an Offering and come into
his Courts. O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, fear before him all
the earth: Isay 2.3, 5. Psalm. 122.1.
Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the house of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths, etc. But now alas in stead of calling upon one another to hear
Sermons, and of these encouragements to go up to the house of the Lord to
bless and praise his Name (which is now no better then a brand of Puriranisme)
we hear naught else among many who profess themselves Christians; but, come
let us go and see a Stage Play: let us hear such or such an Actor; or resort
^o such and such a Playhouse: (and I would I might not say unto such a Whore
or Whore-house;) where we will laugh and be merry, and pass away the
afternoon: As for any resort to such or such a Lecture, Church, or pious
Preacher; its a thing they seldom think, much l^sse discourse of. Alas, that
any who prosesse themselves Christians should be thus strangly, (that I say not
atheistically) infatuated, as to forsake the most sacred Oracles, the
soule-saving Word, the most blessed Sacraments, house and presence of their
God; to run to Plays and Play Houses, the abominable See Act 1.2. and p.
10.52, 67, 68
Spectacles, Lectures, Pompes, and Syn^gogues of the Devil: as thus Prove.
2.13, 14.
to leave the pather of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;
rejoicing to do evil, and delighting in the frowardness of the wicked; even
then when as they should solace their very souls in God. Yet this is the most
desperate deplorable condition of many hundred profane ones in this age of
light; who admire who respect the very basest Stage Players, more then the
devoutest gravest Preachers; and would rather hear the most lascivious Comedy,
then the best soule-searching Sermon: their very practice proclaiming as much
unto the world (if not their words;) they being oftener weekly in the
Playhouse then in the Church; reading over three Play-bookes at the least, for
every Sermon, for every Book or Chapter in the Bible. O that the execrable
sinfulness of this prodigious profanesse would now at last awake us! then
those who think a Stage Play once a day (at leastwise three aweeke) too
little, a Sermon once or twice a week, a month, too much; would change their
tune for shame; thinking one Play a year to much, See Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum ex authoritate Regis. Henrici 8. and Edwardi 6. Londini 1571.
Tit. De Divinis Officijs c. 4^6, 9, 10, 12. fol. 43.44, 45. which appoints two
Sermons a day in Cities on Lords^dayes and Holi-dayes. See Canons 1604. Canon
45. which enjoynes all licensed Preachers to preach one Sermon every Sunday at
the least.
one Sermon a week, a month to little for Christians, concluding in the words
of that blessed Martyr of our Church, John Hooper Bishop of Gloucester (who
constantly Master Fox, Book of Martyrs. Edit. 1610. page 1366. Col. 11. Line
77.78.
preached in his O that our Bishops and Ministers would do thus now.
Dioces most times twice, or at leastwise once every day thorowout the week
without fail) in the Imprinted by John Day Anno 1550.
Confession and protestation of his Faith, Dedicated to King Edward the sixth,
and the whole House of Parliament, in the year of our Lord, 1550. where we
writes thus. What Realm soever will avoid the evil of Sedition and contempt
of Godly Laws, let them provide the Word of God, to be diligently and truly
preached^ and taught unto the Subjects and Members thereof. Let such now who
cry down preaching, Lectures and Lecturers, as the cause of Sedition, consider
^his.
The lack of it is the cause of sedition and trouble, as Solomon says; Prove.
29.18.
Where Prophecy wants, the people are dissipated. Wherefore I cannot a little
wonder at the opinion and doctrine of such, as say, a Sermon Let ^asie
Ministers, and careless Christians, who cry down Lecture, and cry up
Stage Plays, note this well.
ONCE IN A WEEK, IN A MONTH, OR IN A QVARTER OF A YEAR, is sufficient for
the people. Truly it is injuriously and evil spoken against the glory of God
and the salvation of the people. But se^^ng they will not be in the whole as
good unto God as before they have been unto the Devil, neither so glad to
remove false doctrine from the people, and to continue them in the true; where
as they did before occupy the most part of the forenoone, the most part of the
afternoon, yea and a great part of the night, to keep the estimation and
continuance of dangerous and vain superstitions, were it much now to occupy
ONE HOVRE IN THE MORNING, AND AN OTHER HOVRE TOWARD NIGHT, to occupy the
people with true and earnest prayer unto God in Christ's Blood, and in preaching
the true Doctrine of Christ, that they might know and continue in the true
Religion, and faithful confidence of Christ Jesus? Fifteen Masses in a Church
daily were not too many for the Priests of Baal; and SHOULD ONE SERMON EVERY
DAY BE Let all our Prelates and Ministers consider well of this.
TOO MVCH FOR A GODLY BISHOP, AND EVANGELICALL PREACHER? I wonder how it can be
too much opened unto the people? If any man say, labor is lost, and men's
business lies undone by that means. Surely it is ungodly spoken: for those
that bear the people in hand of such a thing, knows right well, that there
was neither labors, cares, needs, necessity, nor any things else, that
heretofore could keep them from hearing of Mass, though it had been said at
4. a clock in the morning. Therefore as far as I see, people were content to
lose more labor, and spent more time then to go to the Devil, then now to
come to God: (as our common Players and Play-haunters do.) But my faith is,
that both Master and Servant shall fin^ gain thereby at the years end; THOUGH
THEY HEAR MORNING SERMON, AND MORNING PRAYERS EVERY DAY OF THE WEEK. Thus
far this reverend Bishop, whose words and practice I would the Sea the
Historical Narratio^, etc. printed. An. 1631. The Copy of an answer to a
Letter, etc. Imprinted by stealth in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign:
without any Authors or Printers name unto it; was answered verbatim by Robert
Crowly, and printed by Authority. Anno 1566. which shows the shamelessness of
him who durst now lately in his new Narration to publish it as the received
Opinion of the Church of England: it being penned by one Champ^eis, who if John
Veron may be credited, in his Apology in Defense of his Treatise of
Predestination, was both a Papist and a Pelagian too.
gross and shameless perverters of his doctrine in the points now
controverted, (he being a professed Anti-Arminian, and Anti-Pelagian, and that
in terminis, as his See his Confession and Protestation of the Christian Faith,
Dedicated to Edward the 6. and the whole Parliament. Anno 1550. His Comfortable
Exposition upon certain Psalms. London 1580. fol. 22.23, 24, 29, 46, 55, 56^
57, 60, 63, 64, 65, 78 105. and his Articles upon the Creed. London 1581.
Article 3. to 15, 17, 20, 21, 25, 29, 30, 33, 36, 38, 39, 40, 42. to 52, 55,
62, 67, 78, 91, 93, 94, 97, 98. where he concludes point-blanke against the
Arminian Tenets which some men cast upon him.
printed Works most positively demonstrate, however some pervert them:)
together with our constant Play-haunters would now seriously consider:
especially in these our days; wherein Stage Plays almost cry down Sermons,
and Play-books find so quick a sale, that (if Stationers do not misinforme
me) there are at least a dozen Play-bookes vented for one printed Sermon: so
that I may safely affirm, that Stage Plays exceedingly withdraw and keep men
from Gods service: especially on Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, and solemn
Festivals, Hanc ob rem maximus ille Moses aequum c^nsuit ut omnes ascripti ejus
Civitati, jus naturae sequentes celebrarent hunc diem (Sabbatum) otio festisque
hilaritatibus, intermissis laboribus and opificijs quaestu^rijs nego^i^sque
victu^ paranubus ablegata etia^ tantisper ceu per inducias solicitudine anxia,
ut vacarent non ludicris (sicut quidam) ridendisque spectaculis mimorum
saltatoruque, quae insanum vulgus amat perdite, etc. sed soli philosophiae
verae, etc^ Philo Iudaeus. l. 3. De Vita Mos^s p. 932.
set apart for better purposes: which experimental truth is so visible to the
eyes, the consciences of all men, that it needs no further proof. If any man
be so uncredulous as not to believe experience, let him then attend to sundry
Councels, Fathers, and other modern Authors, who affirm: that Stage Plays
withdraw men from the Church, and keep them from Gods service, especially on
Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, and solemn Festivals which were set apart for pious
exercises. For Councels, See the 4. Council of Carthage, Canon 88. with sundry
others here recited. Act 7. Scene 3. For Fathers, Clemens Romanus, in the 2.
Book of Apostolical Constitutions. cap. 64.65. complains; Tu vero relicto
fidelium caetu, Dei Ecclesia ac legibus ad Graecorum ludos curris, and ad
Theatra properas; expetens unus ex venientibus eo numerari, and parti^eps fieri
audi^ionum turpium, ne dicam abominabilium: nec audisti Hieremiam dicentem.
Domine, non sedi in concilio ludentium, sed timui a conspectu manus tuae ^neque
Job, dicentem^ similia. Ibid. Surius Council. Tom. 1. page 68.
That many leaving the Congregation of the Faithful, with the Church and Laws
of God, did run to the Plays of the Grecians, and hasten unto Theaters,
desiring to be numbered among those who resorted thither and to be made
partakers of filthy, that I say not abominable words and spectacles: neither
do they hear the Prophet Jeremy, saying: Ier 15.17.
Lord I have not sat in the assembly of Players or Mockers, but I was afraid
at the sight of thy hand: nor Job 31.1, 5, 7. an excellent place.
Job, who speaks the like words, etc. Clemens Alexandrinus, in his 3. Book of
the Paedag^ge. cap. 11. fol. 52.53. complains; That diverse after they are
departed from the Church, laying aside that divine inspiration which was in it,
assimulate themselves to the company in which they are; or rather laying aside
the false and counterfeit visour of gravity, they are found to be such, as they
were before unknown to be: and when as they have reverenced that Word which
was spoken of God, they leave it where they heard it, running unto Play Houses,
the chair of pestilence; and delighting themselves abroad with wicked
measures and amorous songs; being filled with the noise of pipes, with clapping
of hands, with drunkenness, with all kind of filth and dirt. Hoc autem dum
cantant and recantantij qui immortalitatem antea celebrabant, tandem
perniciosissimam mali male canunt p^linodiam; Comedamus, and bibamus, cras enim
morimur. Ii autem, non cras vere, sed jam Deo mortui sunt, sepelientes suos
mortuos, hoc est, seipsos in mortem infodientes, etc. Ibidem.
But whiles they chaunt and rechaunt this; those who before did celebrate and
extol immortality, do at last wickedly sing, that most pernicious palinody;
Let us eat and drindke, for to morrow we shall die. But they not to morrow,
but even now already are truly dead to God, burying their dead, that is,
interring themselves in death, etc. A dreadful speech, which I would our
Dancers, Play-haunters, and voluptuous persons would lay near their hearts.
Saint Augustine informs us; Loqu^mur tamen and ad illos, quos frequenter ab
Ecclesiae conventu spectacula voluptuosa subducunt, etc. August. Hom. 21. Tom.
10. p. 592. See Enar. in Psalm. 80. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 3.4, 8, 13, 18.
That voluptuous Plays and Spectacles oft-times withdraw men from the
Assemblies of the Church: and Hanc, inquam, pudendam, veraeque religioni
adversandam and detestandam talium numinum placationem, has fabulas in Deos
illecebrosas atque criminosas, haec ignominiosa Deorum facta scelerate
turpiterque conficta, sed sceleratius turpiusque commissa oculis and ^uribus
publicis Civitas tota disce^at, etc. De Civitate Dei. l. 2. c. 27.
that the whole City of Rome did with public eyes and ears, learn^ those
alluring criminous fables, and those ignominious deeds which were wickedly and
filthily fained of their Idol-gods, and more filthily, more wickedly committed
by them, neglecting in the mean time better things. Saint Chrysostom in Hom.
3. De Davide and Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511.512. Hom. De Verbis Isaiae. Vidi
Dominum sedentem, etc. Tom. 1. Col. 1281. to 1284. Hom. in Psalm. 118. v.
151.152. Tom. 1. Col. 1030.1931. and Hom. 7. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 58.59. and
Hom 15. and 21. Ad Pop. Antioch.
sundry of his Homilies complains: That men did oft-time leave the Church and
run to Plays; preferring Stage-play-meetings before the Church Assemblies,
and choosing rather to see an Harlot or Player in the Theater, then the Body and
Blood of Christ himself in the Church. Pope Leo the first laments. Majorem
obtinent insana spectacula frequentiam, qua^ bea^a martyria. Sermo in Octav^
Petri and Pa^li. cap. 5. fol. 165.
That Stage Plays, and unruly Spectacles were more frequented then the blessed
solemnities of the Martyrs. Saint Asterius, in his Homily against the Feast of
the Kalends, complains: Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705. D. E.
That many preferring their vain Stage Plays, pleasures, and employments,
absented themselves from the Church, and holy Sermons on Festivals and
Holi-dayes, and on the Feast of Kalends. Sed proh dolor, quamplurimi inter
Christianos hanc Iudaeorum amentiam and improbitatem imitantur, qui diebus
festis, aut ludis illiberalibus, crapula, choreis, aut alijs mundi vanitatibus
dediti, quum Deo diligentius obsequium exhibere, quum templa Dei frequentare,
orationibus insistere, atque Ecclesiastico interesse officio deberent, tunc
maxim Deum suis dissolutissimis moribus irritant. Idne est o Christiani,
celebrare diem festum, indulgere ventri, and inconcessis voluptatibus habenas
laxare? Si prohibetur die festo opus, quod manu exerceatur ad vitae
necessitatem, ut integrius divinis rebus vacare possitis, nonne potiori jure
prohibita sunt ea, quae non nisi cum peccato committi po^^unt, and gravi
offensione Dei? Diebus ad exercenda opera servilia concessis, unusquisque suo
intentus est operi, and abstinet a crapula, ludis and vanitatibus. Diebus autem
festis passim currunt ad caupona^, ^d ludos spectacula and choreas, in
irrisionem divini nominis, and diei praevaricationem: quum tamen eo gravius sit
peccatum, quo sanctiori tempore committatur: Resipiscant igitur^ and id
zi^anium, quod inimicus homo superseminavit in agro Domini prorsus extirpare^
and a se evellere laborent. Cyril. Alex. in Joan. Evang. l. ^. c. 5 p. 595.
Alas for grief (writes Cyril Archbishop of Alexandria) very many among us
Christians imitate this madness and dishonesty of the Jews: who upon
Holi-dayes and solemn Festivals giving themselves over to dishonest Plays, to
drunkenness, to dancing, or other vanities of the world; when as they ought to
serve God more diligently, to frequent the Churches of God more earnestly, to
be instant in prayers, and to be present at Ecclesiastical duties, do then
most of all provoke God with their most dissolute manners. Is this O Christians
to celebrate an holy day, to pamper the belly, and to let loose the reins to
unlawful pleasures? If work be prohibited on Holi-days, which must be used
for the necessary sustenance of life; that so you may the more entirely devote
your selves to heavenly things; are not those things then much more forbidden
which cannot be committed without sin and great offen^e to God? On days
that are allowed for servile work, every one is intent upon his own
business; and he abstaines from drunkenness, pastimes, and vanities. But on
Holi-dayes (lo here the true genious picture of our present age) men every
where run to the Alehouse, to Plays, to Enterludes, and dances, to the very
derision of Gods Name, and the prevarication of the day: where as in truth the
sin is so much the more heinous, by how much the more holy the time is in
which it is committed. Let them therefore repent, and labor utterly to
extirpate and pull up this tare, which the envious man has sown in the Field
of the Lord. John Damascen out of Eusebius informs us. Qui Domini metu
praediti sun^, dominicu^ diem expecta^t, u^ Deo praeces adhibeant, ^c co^pore
and sanguine Domini fruantur. Inertes autem and socordes Dominicum diem
^xpectant, ut ab opere feriati, vitijs opera^dent. Quod autem non mentiar, res
ip^ae fidem faciant. Alio die in medium prodi and neminem invenies. Die
Dominico egredere, atque alios cithara canentes, alios applaudentes and
^altantes, alios sedentes, ac proximos maledictis insectantes, alios denique
luctantes reperies. Praeco ad Ecclesiam vocat? and omnes segnitie torpent, ac
moras nectunt. Cithara aut tuba personuit? and omnes tanquam alis instru^ti
currunt. Damascen. Parallelorum. l. 3. c. 47 p. 208.
That those who are endued with the fear of God, long for the Lords day, that
so they may pray unto God, and be made partakers of the Body and Blood of the
Lord. But sluggish lasie persons look for the Lords day, for no other end but
that being loosed from their work, they may give themselves over to their
vices. Now that I lie not, the very things themselves do make it credulous.
Walk forth upon any other day, and thou shall find no man idle or playing.
Go forth upon the Lords day, and thou mai^t find, some playing upon and
singing to the Harp: others shouting and dancing; others sitting, and reviling
their neighbors, others wrestling. Does the Preacher call to the Church? all
of them grow lasie, and make delays. Do the Harp or Trumpet sound? all of
them presently run as if they were winged. Ecclesiae spectacula cernimus,
Dominum Christum in mens^ recumbentem prospicimus, Seraphinos te^ sanctum
Hymnum canentes, Evangelicas voces, Spiri^us sancti praesentiam, Prophetas
resonantes, Angelorum Hymnum, Alleluia, omnia spiritual^a omnia salute digna,
omnia caeleste regnu^ conciliantia. Quid autem cernit qui a^ ^heatra currit?
Diabolicos cantus, mulier^^las saltitantes, vel, ut rectius loquar, Daemonis
intemperijs agitat^s. Quid enim saltatriae facit? Caput, quod Paulus perpetuo
tegi jussi^, impudenter aperit: collum invertit: coma^ huc atque illuc
expandit. Haec porro etiam ab ea ^iunt, quam Demon obsessam tenet. Citharaedus
aute^ tanquam^ Demon, cu^ ligno conflictatur. Tale nimirum Herodis quoque
convivium erat. Herodiadis filia ingressa, tripudiavit, ac Ioannis Baptistae
caput amputavit, and subterranea inferni loca haereditatis loco co^secuta est.
Quocirca qui choreas and saltationes amant, cum ea portionem habent. Vae his
qui Dominico di^ cythara ludunt, aut operantur. Ad mercenarioru^ and servorum
requietem hic dies concessus est. Haec enim Dies, inquit ille, quam fecit
Dominus: exultemus and laetemur in ea, etc. Idem. Ibidem.
We behold the Spectacles of the Church; we see the Lord Christ lying on the
Table, the Ceraphyns singing a thrice holy song, the words of the Gospel; the
presence of the holy Ghost, the Prophets ecchoing, the Angels singing,
Alleluia, all things spiritual, all things worthy salvation, all things
procuring the Kingdom of Heaven. These things hears he that enters into the
Church. But what sees he who runs to Play Houses? Diabolical songs, dancing
Wenches, or that I may speak more truly, Girls tossed up and down with the
furies of the Devil: (A good description of our dancing females.) For what
does this Dancer^sse? She most impudently uncovers her head, which Paul has
commanded to be always covered: She turns about her neck the wrong way; She
througheth about her hair hither and thither; Even these things verily are
done by her whom the Devil has possessed. But the Fiddler, like a Devil,
conflicteth with wooden instruments. Such verily was the feast of Herod. The
Daughter of Herodias entered in and danced, and cut of the head of John Baptist,
and obtained the subterraneous places of Hell for her inheritance. Therefore
those who love Charantoes and Dances, have their portion with her. Woe unto
those who play upon the Harp on the Lords day, or do any servile work. This
day was allotted for the rest of servants and hirelings: For this says he, is
the day of the Lord, let us rejoice and be glad therein, etc. Salvian is yet
more punctual to our purpose: hear but his words for all the other Fathers,
Nos Ecclesijs Dei ludi^ra anteponimus; nos Altaria spernimus, and Theatra
honoramus. Omnia denique amamus, omnia colimus, solus nobis in comparatione
omnium Deus vilis est^ Denique praeteralia quaeid probant, indicat hoc etiam
haec res ipsa qua^ dico. Si quando enim venerit, quod scilicet saepe evenit, ^t
eodem die, and festivitas ecclesiastica, and ludi publici agantur, quaero ^b
omnium conscientia, quis locus majores Christianorum virorum copias habet?
caveane ludi publici, an Atrium Dei? and Templum magis omnes sectentur, an
Theatrum? Dicta Evangeliorum magis di^igant, an thymelico^um: verba vitae, an
verba mortis? Verba Christi, an verba mimi? Non ^st dubium quin illud n^gis
amemus, quod anteponimus. Omni onim ferarium ludicroru^ die, si quae libet
Ecclesiae festa fuerint, non solu^ ad Ecclesiam non veniunt, qui Christianos se
esse dicunt: ^ed si qui nescij forte venerint, dum in ipsa Ecclesiasunt, si
ludos agi audiunt, Ecclesiam ^erelinquunt. Spernitur Dei templum ut concurratur
ad Theatrum; Ecclesia vacuatur, Circ^s impletur. Christu^ in Altario
demittimus, ut adulterantes vi^u impurissimo oculos ludicrorum turpium
fornicatione pascamus Salvian De^ Guber. Dei. l. 6. p. 195.196.
We prefer (says he) pastimes before the Curch of God: We despise the Lords
Table, and honor Theaters. Finally, besides other things which prove the same,
this which I now say manifests it to be true. For if it fall out (as often it
does,) that at one and the same time an Holi-day be kept, and common Plays
proclaimed; I demand of every man's conscience, which place has greater troops
of Christians? whether the Yard of the public Playhouse, or the Court of Gods
house; and whether men flock to most; to the Temple, or to the Theater?
Whether do they most affect, the sayings of the Evangelists, or of
Stage Players? the words of life, or the words of death? the words of Christ,
or the words of a fool in a Play? Doubtless we love that most which we
prefer. For if the Church keep any feast on that day when there are solemn
Plays; those, who say they are Christians, do not only not come to the
Church, but if any not thinking of the Plays come casually thither, if they
hear whiles they are in the very Church, that there are Plays acting abrod,
they leave the Church, and repair to them. The Temple of God is despised to
run unto Theaters: the Church is emptied, the Playhouse filled: We leave
Christ upon the Table, to feed our adulterous eyes with the impure and unchaste
sight of most filthy Enterludes. Denique cujus^ibet civitatis incolae Ravennam
aut Romam venerint, pars sunt Romanae plebis in Circo, pars sunt Ravennatis in
Theatro. Ac per hoc nemo se loco aut absentia excusatum putet. Omnes
turpitudine rerum unum sunt, qui sibi rerum turpium voluntate sociantur. Et
blandimur tamen nobis de probitate morum, blandimur nobis de turpitudinum
raritate. Ibid. p. 201.
What stranger soever either comes to Ravenna, or to Rome; shall find a part
of the Romans at Stage Plays, and a part of the Ravenians at Theat^rs. And
although any be either absent or distant by place, yet is he not excused
thereby: for as many as are joined together in likeness of affection, are
guilty alike of the same wickedness that either does commit. Yet for all this,
we flatter our selves of our good behavior, and of the rareness of our
impurity, etc. Thus far these Fathers De Inventoribus Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2.
page 384.385.
Polydor Virgil complains. That in his time holy days were most acceptable to
youth for no other reason, but that they had then leisure to lead about dances;
especially among the Italians, who after the custom of the ancient Pagans, did
usually exhibit Spectacles and Plays unto the people; reciting Comedies, and
personating the lives and martyrdomes of the Saints in Churches; in which that
all might receive equal delight, they acted them in their Mother Tongue. Thus
was it heretofore among the ancient Romans, who on their solemn Festivals
recited the Poems of Poets in open Theaters, and made diverse Spectacles of
beasts and Sword-players in Amphitheaters; with sundry other Plays thorowout
the City, with which the people were delighted. De Vanitate Scientiarum. c.
59. De Festis.
Agrippa complains, and so likewise does In his Sermons. fol. 1^.
BB. Latimer our renowned Martyr, and Onus Ecclesiae. c. 28. sect. 6. In festis
pro divino cultu institutis visitamus taberna and choreas seu tripudia,
spectacula and aliter circa illicita occupamur, exercitia spiritualia penitus
detestantes, etc. Ibidem. See cap. 27. sect. 7. and 17.
Episcopus Chemnensis: That that waster of equity, that subverter of all order
and decency, that author of all evil things, the Devil, endeavoring daily to
pull down what ever the holy Ghost does build up, has always quite
demolished this fortification: The greatest part of Christian people so
spending the holy rest of Holy Days, not in meeting together to pray, or hear
Gods Word, nor yet to perform those other duties for which they were first
ordained; but wasting it in all kind of corruptions of good manners, and of
Christian doctrine, in Dances, in Comedies, in Stage Plays, in ribaldrous
Songs, in sports, in drunken meetings, in spectacles, in all kind of worldly
and carnal works contrary to the Spirit and holiness: And as Tertullian
says of the solemnity of the Caesar's or Roman Emperors; they are wont then
to perform a notable piece of service, to make Bonefires and Dances in the
streets, to feast from house to house, to turn the whole City into the form
of a Tavern, to force wine down their throats, to run earnestly to
misdemeanors, to impudencies, to irritations, and enticements of lust: thus is
the public joy expressed by a public shame: so may it be said of our
Festivals. Are we not therefore worthily to be condemned who thus celebrate
the solemnities of Christ and of his Saints? Not to remember the Statute of 17
Edward 4. cap. 3. which informs us, that the Holi-dayes and Su^dayes were
spent in Dice-play, Kayles, Bowls, and such other unlawful ungracious and
incommendable Games. Nor to recite the words of the authorized Part. 2. Book
of Homilies. page 126.
Homily of the time and place of Prayer: which complains: That it too
evidently appears that God is more dishonored, and the Devil better served
on the Sunday, then upon all the days of the week besides. Nor yet to recite
the lamentable complaint of De Vita and Honest^te Ecclesiasticorum lib. 2. cap.
11. thorowout.
Ioannis Langhecrucius: That Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes in his time were for
the most part spent in drunkenness, dancing, wantonness, Stage Plays, and
the like: in so much that the very Singing-men and Choristers of the Church
(such was their blindness and madness) did spend and honor the sacred
feast day of the Virgin Martyr Caecilia, not in sackcloth and fastings; but in
gluttony, in drunkenness, in dancing, in lascivious and unchaste songs; being
then more prone to all lasc^vious wickedness, then to the reformation of their
lusts, or to fasting and prayer: Atque hunc fere in modum omnes artifices ac
opifices aliquem sanctoru^ in patronu^ sibi deligerunt colendum. Ita ut
hujusmodi cultu ac ritu ad ethnicismu^ seu atheismu^ relabi videamur. Ibidem.
p. 252.
And that almost all Artificers and T^ades-men had chosen some one Saint or
other to be a Patron to them, which Saints they worshipped in a deboist
Bacchanalian manner: so that by this kind of worship and custom, men seemed
to have relapsed to Heathennisme or Atheism. I shall truly transcribe a
notable passage out of Nicholaus de Clemangis to the like effect; in his
Treatise: In his Works. Lugduni Bat. 1613. p. 143. to 150.
De Novis celebritatibus non instituendis: where he writes thus: Every one may
perceive with what devotion Christian people do at this day celebrate their
Festivals and Holi-dayes. They seldom come to Church, they most seldom hear
the Mass, and that for the most part but by piece-meale, etc. Yea they leave
the Church, and run away. One goes to a Farm, another to his worldly
affairs: a great company resorts to faires, which now are never kept in a
public and solemn manner but on the most eminent Festivals: Quosdam histrio
delectat, nonnullos Theatra occupan^, plurimos pila tenet, permultos alea, etc.
Ibidem. page 143.
the Stage Player delights some, Play Houses take up others; Tennis-courts
many, Dice very many. Festivals are celebrated by the richer sort with great
gawdinesse of apparel; and provision of banquets: but between rich clothes
and pompous feasts, the conscience lies unadorned in uncleanesse. The outward
house is cleansed with beasoms, the floores are swept, green boughs are
placed at the door, the ground is strowed with herbs and flowers, Omnia
nitent exteriora, sed miser interior homo illius minime particeps exultationis,
in suis interim spurcitijs contabescit, quantoque inter vana gaudia effusior
est laetitia, tanto ingentioribus urgetur aerumnis, majoribusque peccatoru^
sanciatur aculeis. Ibidem.
all outward things are clean and trim: but the miserable inward man not
partaking of this exultation, pines away in the mean time in his filthinesses,
and by how much more excessive the laughter is in the midst of vain
delights, by so much the more is it afflicted with greater sorrows, and
wounded with sharper pricks of sins. But to omit these: let us see what the
profane vulgar does in the mean time, and the youth in our times corrupted
with luxury. I have fitly said, the profane vulgar, according to the thing
which is done; because then doub^lesse they are far from the Temple; and as
they ar^ far from the Temple, so likewise far from home And are not our
Holi-daies spent thus too?
For Holi-dayes are not celebrated by them in the Temple, nor in their houses;
all the solemnities of their celebration are in Tavernes and Alehouses, They
resort thither almost at Sunne-rising, and oft-times they abide there until
midnight; they swear, forswear, blaspheme God, and curse all his Saints, they
roar, they wrestle, they wrangle: they sing, they rage, they shrecke, they
make a tumult, and seem to be as mad as Bedlams. They strive who shall
overcome one another in drinking: they drink merrily one to other; they
earnestly provoke and stir up one another to drink: And when as they have
glutted themselves, and are drunk, then they rise up to play, etc. What shall
I relate the vanities of public Plays and spectacles upon Holi-dayes: The
crosse-wayes sound again with dances? the Vilages and streets, yea the whole
City rebound with the voices of Singers, the shoutes, the clamours of Dancers,
the confused sound of the Harp, the Tabre^, the Psaltery, and all other
musical Harmonies. There mind^^ being moved with the fla^^eries of laughter,
the thumping of the feet, the glances of the eye, the gropings of the hands,
and with the alluring sweetness of Verses and Harpes, These are the f^uits of
Plays and dancing.
Wax effeminate, become vain, and grow hot to luxury and incontinency. There
the consultations of whoredoms and adulteries are handled; oportunities are
taken, places, times, and conditions are appointed. And because the day is not
sufficient for their lewdness, Girls and espoused Women are there oft-times
voluntarily or against their wills ravished in the darkness of the night. I
know places, yea famous Cities, in which on Holi-dayes and Lords-daies it is
lawful for Maids in a public manner to run abroad to their Lovers, yea to
their Panders, which promised liberty they diligently study to preserve without
control, and speedily as soon as ever the hour of dinner is past, they
earnestly call themselves together, and march in troops to their corrupters
with incredible wantonness and malepartnesse. We see in Wakes or Festivities
of Country Villages, Lo here the effects of Revels, Wakes, Morrices,
Whitson-ales, and May-poles, which some so much approve and plead for.
how Harlots come from all quarters out of the neighbor Towns and Cities,
and Country Youths flocking thither by troops, who perhaps were free from
such uncleanesse all the year, casting away the bridle of modesty in the
solemnity of their Patron (the Saint to whose honor their Church is dedicated)
publicly commit adultery. There Youth has first cast off its Chastity; there
young men are polluted, there Children are corrupted, and they learn the
experiment of a most impure contagion. There they continually provoke and
invite one another to that most filthy pleasure, and he that will not follow
the rest to destruction is accounted a But we style such a one a Puritan.
wretch, a sluggard, an unprofitable person, good for nothing. And would they
not think so of our Bacchanalian riotous Grand-Christmasses too? to which all
these passages may be well applied.
What Heathen skillful of sacrilegious Feastivals (if he should happen to be
present) would not rather believe that the Floralia of Venus, or the feasts of
Bacchus were kept, then the solemnities of any Saint; when as he should there
behold such uncleanesses as were wont to be acted in the Festivals of those
Idols. Neither does the filthy obscenity only of Bacchus and Venus seem to
be exercised there, but likewise of Mars and Bellona too. For it is ^^w a
common fame, that it is an unseemely Holi-day which is not sprinkled with
fighting and effusion of blood. Neither is it strange if that Mars be made a
companion of Bacchus and Venus. For minds provoked with wine and lust are wont
to be easily provoked to fight; Whence Venus Martia was fained by the Poets to
be coupled with a cunning and insoluble knot. And may we not apply this to our
disorderly Christmasses?
What, is the Patron of the Village to be worshipped by the Inhabitants on his
birthday in such a manner, that so he might be propitious to them all the
year? What Noble or great man would not be displeased that his birthday
should be defiled with such a pollution? Who may not see, how much honester,
how much better it were to observe no Holi-dayes, then to keep them in this
manner? Whose heart is so estranged from reason, so devious from the truth
through perverse error, that he may not understand it to be less evil to go
to plow, or to dig, to sow, or do other Country works on the solemnities of
the Saints, then not to honor, but to profane their solemn Festivals with
such horrible obscenities? And yet if any one oppressed with never so great
penury of necessaries for his family be found to have done any thing in his
Field or Vineyard, he is cited, severely punished, reprehended, condemned as
guilty of violating an Holi-day. But he who shall commit these worser things
condemned by the Laws and Commandments of God, shall want both punishment,
and an accuser. And why is this, but because there is no man who will take
revenge on those who transgress the Precepts of the Lord? They have their
Officials (whose office Officialis Episcopi, ministerium damnatissimae
villicationis. Credo huiusmodi Officiales non ab officio, nomine, sed ab
officio verbo, mutasse vocabulum: nam genus hoc hominum, quod dicunt offici
perdi. Tota Officialis intentio est, ut ad opus Episcopi suae jurisdictioni
commissas miserimas oves quasi vice illius tondeat, emungat, excoriet. Isti
enim sunt Episcoporu^ sanguisugae evomentes alienum sanguinem quam biberunt.
Quia testimonio Scripturae, divitias quas congregavit impius evomet: and de
faucibus illius extrahet eas Deus. Isti sunt quasi s^ongia in manu prementis,
quasi quae dam colatoria divitias suis dominis influentes, and execrandis
acquisitionibus nihil sibi praeter peccati sordem and faeculentiam retinentes,
Quod enim aggregant per oppressione^ pauperum, Episcopis quidem ad delicias
cedit, Officialibus ad tormentum. Sic vos non vobis, mellisi^atis apes. Sic vos
non vobis accumulatis opes. I^ti sunt secretiora illa ostiola, per quae
ministri Belis sacrificia quae super mensam ponebantur a Rege, clanculum
asportabant. Sic Episcopus quasi longa manu bona aliena deripit, and notam
criminis a se removens, suis Officialibus culpae and infamiae discrimen
impingit. Ideo quasi sub umbra Episcopi, and obte^tu justitiae palliatae
subditos exprimunt, Ecclesias gravant redditus alienos violenter invadunt,
oculos habent ad munera, pupillae and viduae non intendunt, etc. Officium
Officialium, hodie est, jura confundere, suscitare lites, transactiones
rescindere, innectere dilationes, supprimere veritatem, fovere mendacium,
quaestum sequi, aequitatem vendere, inh^are exactionibus, versutias concinnare.
Isti sunt, qui hospites suos gravant superflua evectione, and multitudine
clientelae. Q^aerunt d^licatos and superfluos cibos^ cum scriptum sit,
comedentes and bibentes quae apud illos sunt. De alieno enim prodigi, de
proprio sunt avari, verborum insidiatores and aucupes syllabarum tendunt
laqueos and pedicas in capturam pecuniae, jura int^rpraetantur ad libitum, and
ea pro voluntate sua, nunc abdicunt, nunc admittunt: been dicta depravant,
prudenter allegata pervertunt, rumpunt faedera, nutriunt dissimulationes,
fornicationes dissimulant, matrimonia distrahunt, adulteria fovent, penetrant
domus, and mulieres oneratas peccatis captivas ducunt; diffamant innoxios, and
nocen^es absoluunt. Et ut multa sub verborum paucitate concludam, dum omnia
venaliter agunt filij avaritiae, servi mammonae, se Diabolo venales exponunt.
Si mihi credis, imo si credis in Deum, relinque maturius Officialis officium,
ministerium damna^ionis, rotam malorum, and spiritum vertiginis, qui te ad
inania circumvoluit. Miserere animae tuae placens Deo, cui placere non potes
cum isto perditionis officio^ Petrus Blesensis. Epist. 25. ad Offi^ialem
Episcopi Ca^notensis. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 12. pars 2. page 724.725, vid. Ibidem.
Petrus Blesensis has excellently characterized) they have Archdeacons, they
have Promoters, they have Apparitors, who enforce their Episcopal Edicts to be
kept with most grievous penalties. They run through the Dioces, they craftily
examine and enquire, if any Vine-dresser or Husbandman has wrought or carried
any thing upon an Holi-day: an^ if it shall appear that he has done any such
thing, he is accused and punished, not so often according to the quality of the
offense, as at the will of the Judge. But yet Christ has none or very few
Proctors who cause his Commandments to be kept, etc. Enarratio in Psalm. 3^.
Saint Augustine says; that he would rather go to Plow on the Lord's Day,
then Dance: not that it is lawful then to go to Plow, or that he that goes
to Plow should be pardoned, but because he who danceth offends more
grievously: because dancing it self is oft-times a sin, and oft-times
enforces men to occasions of worser sins. Consider what he would have said
of those other things, which now are commonly done upon our Holi-dayes. And yet
notwithstanding, if any one goes to Plow on the Lord's Day, he is not only
most severely punished, but he is welnigh reputed an Infidel: but he who
danceth excellently, not only has no reproof, but he is likewise plausibly
received with applause and gratulation even by the Censors themselves, etc. Now
what a thing is it for men to entangle themselves in greater villainies, on
those days that are appointed for reconciliation and remission of sins, and
on which men wholly cease from terrene actions, that they may give themselves to
the contemplation of Heavenly things with a pure heart? What confidence can
such have of the suffrage of the Saints, who defile their Holidayes with most
foolish vanities, most impure pollutions^ most wicked debacchations, and
sacrilegious execrations? Verily they deserve to have them, not most pious
furtherers, but most deadly accusers. O that Christians would consider this,
especially those who abuse the Feast of our Saviors Nativity.
For what greater injury can be done to a Saint, then to dishonor his
birthday, wherein he was carried into Heaven and Paradise, with such
uncleanesses? and with every such sacrilegious custom wherewith Devils were
wont to be attoned by their superstitious worshippers? What do we think the
ancient holy Fathers would say, who appointed the solemnities of the Saints to
be observed in the Church for the foresaid ends, if they were now alive, and
should see those vanities and counterfeit fooleries that are done upon them? I
doubt not but they would take care of the souls that are like to perish,
neither would they suffer such things on the holy days of the Saints as were
not permitted to be done in the Bacchanalia themselves. Either therefore, they
would recall the people by the censure of discipline from such most unworthy
obscenities, or would compel them to celebrate Festivals with due honesty; or
if they could not break the force of pernicious custom, they would rather
abolish the feasts themselves, lest they should be an occasion of so great
wickednesses; which as it seems to agree with the safety of souls, according
to the variety of manners and times, are either to be discharged from
observance, or else more stricktly to be tied to an honest observance, lest
they should do far more hurt by being ill observed, then well omitted, etc.
By all which di^course of this learned Author, (who has much more to the
selfsame purpose, which suites punctually with the practice of our present
times) we may easily discern, how Stage Plays and dancing avocate and
withold men from Gods worship, especially on Lords-dayes, and the most
solemn Christian Festivals, which of all other times are most abused, to the
eternal ruin of many thousand Christians souls. To pass by Bucer in Psalm.
92. Master Gualther. Hom. 88. in Acta Apostolorum. cap. 13. Master John Calvin,
on Deuteronomy. 5. Sermo. 34. Doctor Bownde, of th Sabbath. London 1595. p. 135.136,
283, 284. Master Beacon, Hooper, Babington, Brinsly, Perkins, Dod, Lake,
Downham, Andrews, Williams, Ames, and most other Writers upon the 4.
Commandment, and the Sabbath: who make the selfsame complaint, that the
Lord's Day, and Holi-dayes are profaned and oft-times spent in Stage Plays,
Dancing, Drinking, Masks, and Pastimes. Which complaint I find likewise
seconded by learned De Praeceptis Decalogi. c 7. Operum Parisijs. 1606. pars 2.
Col. 264. and Sermo. Domin. 3. Adventus. pars 4. Col 332.333, 334.
John Gerson, Speculu^ Morale. lib. 3. Distinct. 6. pars 9. fol. 251.252.
Vincentius Bellovecensis, and Concio. 6. De Dominic^. 3. Adventus and Concio.
19. De Dominica. 1. Quinquages. Operum. Coloniae Agrip. 1617. Tom. 6. Col.
60.61, 204, 205.
Cardinal Bellarmine himself; who as they condemn all Stage Plays,
Enterludes, Masks, with all mixed lascivious amorous dancing, (against which
Vincentius and Bellarmine have largely written) at all times, so especially on
Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, and solemn Festivals, on which they are most
execrable. The Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters is
very copious in this point. Page 62. to 78.
God (writes he) has given us an express Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11. Works which
God requires on the Sabbath.
Commandment, that we should not violate the Sabbath day, and prescribed an
order how it should be sanctified, namely in holiness, by calling into mind
the spiritual rest, hearing the Word of God, and ceasing from worldly
business. Whereupon Isaiah the Prophet, showing how the Sabbath should be
observed, says, Isay 58.13, 14. Dominico die a labor terreno cessandum est,
atque omnimodo orationibus insistendum, ut si quid negligentiae per sex dies
agi^ur, per diem resurrectionis Dominicae praecibus expie^^r. Greg. Magnu^.
Epist. lib. 11. Indict. 6. cap. 3. fol. 452^ F.
If thou tu^ne away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine
Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it as glorious to the
Lord: and shall honor him^ not doing thing own ways, not seeking thine own
will, nor speaking a vain word; then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I
will cause thee to mount upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with
the heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has spo^en it. How
the Sabbath day it consumed.
Here we see how the Lord requires that this day should be observed, and what
rest he looks for at our hands. But, alas, how do we follow the order
which the Lord has set down? See here, page 242.
Is not the Sabbath of all other days most abused? which of us on that day is
not carried whether his affections leads him, unto all d^ssolutenesse of life?
How often do we use on that day unreverend speech? which of us has his heart
occupied in the fear of God? who is not led away to the beholding of those
Spectacles, the sight wher^of can bring but con^usion to our bodies and souls?
Are not our eyes ( At Playe^ every member of man is def^led.
there) carried away with the pride of vanity? our ears abused with amorous,
that is, lecherous, filthy, and abominable speech? Is not our tongue which was
given us only to glorify God with all, there employed to the blas^eming of
Gods holy Name, or the commendation of that is wicked? Are not our hearts
through the pleasure of the flesh, the delight of the eye, and the fond motions
of the mind, withdrawn from the service of the Lord, and meditation of his
goodness? So that albeit it is a shame to say it, yet dovbtlesse whosoever
will mark with what multitudes these idle pl^ces are replenished, and how
empty the Lords Sanctuary is of his people, may well perceive what devotion we
have. We may well s^y we are the servants of the Lord, but the slender service
we do him, and the small regard we have of his Commandments, declares our
want of love toward him. John 14.^5.
For if ye love me (says Christ) keep my Commandments. We may well be
Hir^l^ngs, but we are none of his Household Wherefore abuse not the Sabbath
day, my Brethren: leave not the Temple of the Lord: sit not still in the
quagm^re of your own lusts: but put to your strength to help your selves
before your own weight sincke you down to Hell. Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeem the time for the days are evil. Alas what folly is it in you, to
purchase with a penny damnation to your selves? why seek you after sin as
after a banquet? None delight in common Spectacles but such as would be
Spectacles.
None delight in those Spectacles, but such as would be made Spectacles.
Account not of their dross: their treasures are too base to be laid up in the
rich Coafers of your mind. Repentance is farthest from you when you are
nearest to such May-games. All of you for the most part do lose your time, or
rather wilfully cast the same away, contemning that as nothing which is so
precious as your lives cannot redeem. Time would not be lost.
I would to God you would bestow the time you consume in these vanities, in
seeking after virtue and glory. For to speak truly, whatsoever is not
converted to the use wherefore it was ordained, may be said to be lost. End of
man's creation.
For to this end was man borne, and had the benefit of time given him, that he
might honor, serve, and love his Creator, and think upon his goodness. For
whatsoever is done without this, is doubtless cast away. Oh, how can you then
excuse your selves for the loss of time! do you imagine that your careless
life shall never be brought into question? Think ye the words of Saint Paul
the Apostle were spoken in vain, when he says, 2 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, whether it be good or evil.
When that account shall be taken, I fear me your reckoning will be to seek,
etc, Page 76.77, 78^
By such infamous persons as Players much time is lost, and many days of
honest travel are turned into vain exercises; Youth corrupted, the Sabbath
profaned, etc. Why the Emperor Traian ordain^d but 22. Holy days thorowout
the year.
It was ordained in Rome by the Emperor Trajan, that the Romans should
observe but 22 Holi-dayes thorowout the whole year. For he thought without
doubt, that the gods were more served on such days as the Romans did labor,
then on such days as they rested; because the vices were more then which they
did commit, then the sacrifices they did offer. God worst served on the Sabbath
days.
And trust me I am of that opinion, that the Lord is never so ill served as on
the Holi-dayes. For then Hell breaks loose. Then we permit Youth to have
their swinge; and when they are out of the sight of their Masters, such
government have they of themselves, that what by ill company they meet
withal, and ill examples they learn at Plays, I fear me, I fear me their
hearts are more allienated from virtue in two hours, then again may well be
amended in a whole year. Thus he; yea and thus M. In his School of Abuses:
and Plays Con^uted.
Gosson, M. Treatise against Vain Plays and Enterludes.
Northbrooke, M. Anatomy of Abuses. p. 101. to 107.
Stubs, M. Third part of the True Watch. cap. 11. Abomination. 30. p. 302.
Brinsly, and others too tedious to transcribe, together with the express
words of the Statute of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. which informs us; That the holy
keeping of the Lord's Day in very many places of this Realm has been and now
is profaned and neglected, by a disorderly sort of people, in exercising and
frequenting Beare-bayting, Bul-bayting, Enterludes, common Plays, and other
unlawful exercises and pastimes, neglecting Divine Service both in their own
Parishes, and elsewhere. All which concurrent testimonies are a su^ficient
confirmation of this experimental truth; that Stage Plays avocate, withold,
and keep men from Gods worship, house and ordinances, especially on Festivals,
Holi-dayes, and those solemn times which should be more peculiarly devoted to
his service. And no wonder that it should be so: First, because the vulgar
people, (who are commonly inamored with childish pleasures, and pompous
vanities,) are exceedingly delighted with Enterludes and Stage Plays; as
Populus ac vulgus imperitorum ludis magnopere delectantur; sunt enim populi ac
multitudinis comitia. Populo ludorum magnificentia voluptati est, Ludis
delectamur and capimur. Lex haec quae ad ludos pertinet est omniu^ gratissima.
Delectant homines mihi creed ludi. Id autem spectaculi genus erat, quod omni
frequentia, atque omni genere hominum celebratur; quo multitudo maxim
delectatur. Oration pro Muraena. p. 463. B.C. and Oration pro ^. Sextio. p. 561.
A.
Tully, Vt primum positis nugari Graecia bellis Caepit, and in vitium fortuna
labier aequa, Nunc athletarum studijs mire arsit aequorum. Nunc tibicinibus,
nunc est gavisa tragaedis, Sub nutrice puella velut si luderet infans. Epist.
lib. 2. Epist. 1. page 280. His nam plebecula gaudet. Verum equitis quoque jam
migravit ab aure voluptas Omnis ad incertos oculos and gaudia vana, etc. Nam
quae pervincere voces Evaluere sonum referunt quem nostra Theatra? Garganum
mugire putes nemus, aut mare Tuscum, Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectantur.
Ibidem. page 283.284.
Horace, Nam qui dabat olim Imperium, fasces, ^egiones, omnia, nunc se
Contin^t, atque duas tantu^ res anxius opta^, Panem, and Circenses. Iuvenal.
Satyr. 10 p. 94. Maestit^a est, carvisse anno Circensibus uno. Satyr. 11. page
106. Ac mihi pace Imme^sae nimiaeque licet si dicere plebis, Totam hodie Rom^m
Circus capit, and fragor au^em Porcutit. Ibidem. pag^ 111.
Iuvenal, P^pulo votu^ est talia convenire. Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1.
Epist. 51.
Theodoricus, De Art Amandi. lib. 1.
Ovid, with Terentij Eunuchus. Marcus Aurelius. Epistle 12. to Lambert August.
De Ci^. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32. l. 2. c. 4. to 29. M. Northbrooke, and M. Stubs,
qua supra.
sundry others testify: they are, as the Apostle speaks; 2 Timothy 3.4.
Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: Gods presence, Sacraments,
Temple, Word, and service are not so grateful, so delightful to them, as
these: No wonder therefore if they neglect the one, (which are but a Mat.
11.29.30.
yoke, a Mal. 1.13.
wearisomnesse, a 1 Ioh. 5.3.
pain, a burden to them,) to enjoy the sinful plea^ures of the other, which
are suitable to their vain voluptuous humor. Secondly, because these
Stage Play pleasures are the very chiefest baits, the strongest, the most
prevailing Engines which the Devil has, to withdraw men's hearts from God:
They were so in former ages, as De Spectac. lib.
Tertullian, De Spectac lib.
Cyprian, Hom. 6. and 7. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, De Vero Cultu. c. 20.21.
Lactantius, De Civit. Dei. l. ^^ c. 32. l. 2. c. 3. to 19. De Symbolo ad
Catechumenos l. 2. c. 1.
Augustine, and De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6.
Salvian teach us; no wonder therefore if they be so now.

Thirdly, as Stage Plays thus withdraw men from Gods-service; so they bring
the Word, the ordinances, the worship, Ministers, and sincere service of God
into contempt and scorn. Witness Saint Chrysostom, who expressly avers it.
Nulla res enim aeque eloquia Dei in contemptum adducit, ut spectaculorum quae
in Theatris proponuntur, admiratio. H^mil. De Verbis Isaiae. Vidi Dominum. Tom.
1. Col. 1283. C. vid. Ibidem. and Oration. 7. Tom. 5. Col. 1484. B.
That nothing brings the Oracles and Ordinances of God into so great contempt,
as the admiration and beholding of Stage Plays. Hence De Vero Cultu. c. 21.
Lactantius, and Epist. 22. c. 3. See Scene 3. and 11.
Hierom inform us; That those who are accustomed to rhetorical Stage Plays,
to sweet polished Orations and Poems, despise the plain common phrase and
humble style of the S^riptures, as base and sordid; seeking after that which
may delight their senses. Hence Gregory Nazianzen informs us; Oration. 39. p.
605. Quoniam autem sermon Theatrum repurgavimus, etc.
That Stage Plays make men unfit to hear Gods Word, and cause them to
contemn it. And Sicut Circos and Theatra, ita divina quoque mysteria pro ludo
habent. Oration. 31. I^ Laudem Athanasij. page 525.
that the Inhabitants of Constantinople who delighted much in Stage Plays;
accounted the Divine Mysteries and Oracles of God, but a mere sport, as they
reputed their Stage Plays and Cirque-playes: implying thereby that
Play-haunters for the most part, contemn Gods Word, his ordinances, and all
spiritual things; as mere toys and trifles. This truth is likewise
confirmed, by Confessioni^. lib. 3. cap. 1.2.
Saint Augustine, De Gubernatione Dei. l. 6. qua Supra.
Salvian, with other Fathers and Councels, in the two precedent clauses: by
Rodolphus Gualther, one of the eminentest Divines that the reformed Churches
have bred, who records: Omnem religionem in contemptum adducunt. Homilia 11. in
N^hum.
That Stage Plays, and common Actors bring all Religion into contempt; and
that Plato banished them out of his Commonweal for this reason among others;
because they would breed a contempt of the Gods. By the Author of the 3. Blast
of Retrait from Plays and Theaters; by M. Gosson, Master Northbrooke, and M.
Stubs, in their Treatises against Plays; by Master Brinsly, in the third part
of his True Watch. cap. 11. Abomination 30 page 302. and D. John White, in his
Sermon at Paul's Cross 1615. sect. 11.
by sundry others too tedious to recite. And does not our own experience
suffragate to this truth? Alas who more vilify Gods ordinances; or more slight
his Word, his Ministers, his Servants, See Act 4. Scene 1^2.
then Players and Play-haunters? who so atheistically irreligious, so
graceless, so godless, so negligent of all holy duties, so little acquainted
or inamored with Gods Word, his worship, his service; as they? Whence is it,
that men and women are lately grown so cold, so heartlesse in religion; so
remiss, so careless in all religious duties; so regardlesse of Gods Word, his
Sacraments, his service: so lukewarm, yea so frozen in their love to God, his
Saints, his Ordin^nces? it is not from their late extraordinary resort to
Plays and Play Houses, which is now more frequent then in former times? For my
own part I can impute it originally to naught else but it. Sure I am that
religion is no where more scorned and jested at, that religious men are never
more traduced, then on the ^am etiam ad scena^ usque pro dijmus, quod
propemodu^ ^^chrymis refero, and cum perditissimis obscaenissunisque ridemur,
nec ullu^ tam j^cundum est spectacu^u^, quam Christianus comicis cavillis
suggillatus. Nazianzen Oration 21. p. 412.
Stage: that there are no such Seminaries of See M. Brinsl^ his true Watch.
part 3. chap. 11. Abomination 30. page 302.
atheism, irreligiousnesse, blasphemy, idolatry, Heathenisme and profaneness,
as Plays and Play Houses: This the Authors in the Sea Act 3. Scene 3. and 5.
accordingly.
precedent Acts do fully testify: It is more then probable therefore, that
they are the primary fundamental causes of this most desperate lewd effect.

Chrysostom is punctual to this purpose: Ecce jejunij labor and jejunij
fructus nusqua^ est, cum iniquitatis Theatra conscendimus, etc. Quae utilitas
cum illuc hinc abis? ego corrigo, ille corrumpit: ego medicinas morbo adhibeo,
ille cau^am morbi ministrat: ego naturae flamam extinguo, ille libidinis
flammam accendit. Quae utilitas, dic mihi? unus aedificans, and unus destruens
quid sibi labor proficer^nt? De Paenitentia. Hom. 8. Tom. 5. Col. 750.751.
We lose (says he) all the labor, all the fruit of our fasting whiles we
resort to Stage Plays: yea we reap no benefit at all from the Word of God.
What profit reap you whiles you go from hence to the Theater? I reprove you;
the Player corrupts you: I apply medicines to your disease; he ministers the
fuel and occasion of the disease^ I extinguish the fire of nature; he
kindles a flame of lust: I build up, and he pulls down: Yea he plainly
informs us, Hom. 3 De Davide and Saul Hom. De Verbis Isaiae. Vidi Dominum,
etc. and Hom. 38. in Matthew.
that neither the Sacrament, nor any other of Gods ordinances will do men any
good, so long as they resort to Stage Plays. Saint Augustine informs us of
himself: Confessionum. l. 3. c. 1.2.
That as long as he delighted in Stage Plays (which did nourish irritate and
foment his lusts) Talis vita mea, nunquid vita ^rat Deus meus? Ibid.
God was not then his life, and that his life was not a life, but a death. Nam
quare quotidie muscipulam spectaculorum, insaniam stadiorum ac turpiu^
voluptatum proponit, nisi ut his delectationibus capiat, quos amiserat, ac
laetetur denuo se invenisse quod perdiderat? Fugite dilectissimi spectacula,
fugite caveas turpissimas Diaboli, ne vos vincula teneant maligni. August De
Symbolo ad Catechum. lib. 2. cap. 1. Tom. 9. pars 1. page 1393.1394. vid.
Ibidem.
For Stage Plays (writes he) are the very baits, the snares, the dens, and
chains of the Devil, wherewith he takes and reintraps the souls of those
whom he has formerly left. Fly therefore Stage Plays, O beloved, the
filthiest dens of the Devil, lest the bands of that malignant one hold you
captive. Cohibeat se a spectaculis mundi qui perfectam vult consequi gratiam
remissionis. De Vera and falsa Paenitentia. lib. c. 25.
Whosoever he be that will obtain perfect remission of his sins, let him
keep and withdraw himself from these spectacles of the world: which l^st
sentence of his is approved both by Secunda secundae. Quaest. 108. Artic. 2.
and 3.
Aquinas himself, and by Destructoriu^ Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. sect. 2.
Alexander Fabricius, for good Divinity: If then Players and Play-haunters be
thus spiritually dead; if they are in the very chains of the Devil; and
incapable of the full remission of their sins, as long as they delight in
Stage Plays, or resort unto them, as this Father writes; needs must Gods holy
Ordinances be altogether unprofi^able to their souls whiles they resort to
Plays. A plaster never heales, as long as there is an Arrows head, or poison
in the wound: Stage Plays are an Arrows head, See p. 39. y. accordingly.
a venomous poison to the souls of men; they are cankers to their graces, See
Act 3. Scene 1. thorowout. and Act 7. Scene ^.4.
mere fire and fuel to their lusts: no wonder then if Gods Ordinances never
cure their sou^es, whiles they resort to Stage Plays. It was the Theodoret
Contra Graecos Infideles. De Martyribus lib. 8. Tom. 2. p. 390. Council.
Arelatense 1. Can. 4.5. and Arelatense 2. Can. 20. Elibertinum. Can. 62.
Constantinopol. 6. Can. 62. Primasius. Comment. in Romanos. f. 53. Antonini
Chronicon. pars 2. Tit. 15. c. 10. sect. 13. fol. ^32.
use of Players and Play-haunting Pagans in the Primitive Church, as soon as
ever they were converted to the Christian Faith; to renounce and utterly
abandon Stage Plays; as altogether incompatible with their Christian
profession; and making all the means of grace ineffectuall to their souls.
Doubtless the very ^e^fesame course must be taken now. He that would thrive
in grace and holiness; he that would have the Word, the Sacraments, fasting,
prayer, or any other of Gods ordinances effectual to his soul, must bid an
eternal farewell unto Stage Plays. Thus did M. Stephen ^osson, and the Author
of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters.
two eminent Play-poets and Play-haunters of our own; upon their very first
conversion unto God, as Master Gosson, in his School of Abuses, and in his
Plays Confuted: The Epistles to it, and Action 1. The 3. Blast of Retrait from
Plays and Theaters. page 49. to 54.
themselves record; they abandoned Plays and Play-making, as inconsistent with
salvation, with Christianity, with the grace, the service, the ordinances of
God: resolving never to return unto them more; but to their powers to oppugn
them, as formerly they had admired, composed and frequented them, which they
did accordingly in The School of Abuse. Plays Confuted in 5. Actions. The 3.
Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters.
several printed Books: Wherefore from all these several premises thus
confirmed by reason, by authority, I may safely frame this 38. Syllogism
against Stage Plays.

That which unfits and indisposeth men to the acceptable holy performance of
all religious duties: that which either with-drawes, or keeps men from Gods
service at times of greatest holiness and devotion, and brings the Word, the
worship, with all the ordinances of God into contempt; making them vain and
ineffectuall to men's souls; must needs be sinful, and utterly unlawful unto
Christians. See Hebr. 12.1. Iam. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. accordingly.

But Neque enim offerri poterit. Deo oculus scortationi serviens, nec pedes
Theatra visitantes, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Romans 12. v. 1. Tom. 4. Col.
195. C. Heri in amphitheatro, hodie in Ecclesia: Vespere in Circo, mane in
altario; dudum fautor histrionum, nunc virginum consecrator. Hierom. Epist. 83.
Oc^ano. c. 4. p. 208.
this do Stage Plays, as is evident by the premises.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and utterly unlawful unto Christians.

SCENA DECIMA-TERTIA.
the practical power of grace and holiness; against all pious and religious
men. This De Vero Cultu. c. 20. and 21.
Lactantius, this Hom. 38. in Matthew. and Hom. De Verbis Is^iae. Vidi Dominum,
etc.
Chrysostom, De Civ. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Augustine, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. page 195.196.
Salvian, Homilia 11. in Nahum.
M. Gualther, The Ibidem.
Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, Treatise against
Vain Plays and Enterludes.
M. Northbrooke, Anatomy of Abuses. p. 101. to 107.
M. Stubs, with sundry M. Gosson, his School of Abuses, and Plays Confuted. A
Mirror for Magistrates of Cities. See here, Act 3. Scene 6. thorowout
accordingly.
others expressly testify. Yea this our own experience must subscribe too. For
who more bitter, more virulent, more implacable adversaries to the power of
godliness, to those who excel in grace, in piety: who such deriders, haters,
Vt improbos metuunt quos optimos sentire potuerunt. Minucius Felix. Octav. p.
39.
slanderers, despisers of purity, of sincerity, of devout and holy Christians,
as Nam tibicinae, mimi, praestigiatores, balatrones jocis tantum placent
scurrilibus ad exhilerandos animos. Philo Iudaeus, D^ Vita Contempl. p. 1209.
Players and Play-haunters? None abhor, revile, traduce, deride or scorn
them more then they. And no wonder: for Saint Paul foretold it long ago; 2 Timothy 3.3, 4, 5.
That such who are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God (as Players and
Play-patrons for the most part are) are always despisers of those that are
good, having only a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.
Lactantius has given the true reason of it. Veritas ideo semper invisa est,
quod is qui peccat, vult habere liberum peccandi locum, nec aliter se putat
malefactorum voluptate securius persrui posse, quam si nemo sit cui delicta non
placeant. Ergo tanquam scelerum and malitiae suae testes extirpare funditus
nituntur ac tollere, gravesque sibi putant, tanquam vita eorum coarguatur. Cur
enim sunt aliqui intempestive boni, qui corruptis moribus publicis convicium
been vivendo faciant? Cur non omnes sunt aeque mali, rapaces, impudici,
adulteri, periuri, cupidi, fraudulenti? quin potius auferantur, quibus coram
male vivere pudet, qui peccantinm frontem, etsi non verbis, quia tacent, tamen
ipso vitae genere dissimili feriunt and verberant. Castigate enim videtur
quicunque dissentit. Lactantius. De Iustitia. lib. 5. cap. 9. page 382.
Everyone (says he) that sins desire elbow room, he would have free liberty
to sin without control; neither can he take any full delight in evil,
unless there be none to disapprove his wicked courses. Therefore he desires
to root out all good men, who are offensive and displeasing to him, because
they are not only witnesses of his evil deeds, but likewise reprove and shame
them by their different holy lives, though they never speak of them with their
tongues Their very holy lives are a reproach, a scandal to their dissolute
manners: therefore they slander and abhor them. S. Augustine oft-times informs
us; Non a^dias degeneres tuos Christo Christianisque detrahentes, and
accusantes velut tempora mala; cum quaerant tempora in quibus non sit quieta
vita, sed secura nequitia. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 29. De Consensu^
Evangelist l. 1. c. 33.
That the degenerous voluptuous Pagans, did detract from Christ and Christians,
accusing, yea declaiming against the Christian times, as evil; because they
sought not after such times in which their lives might be quiet, but rather in
which their wickedness might be secure; in which they might securely enjoy
their wicked Stage Plays, their sinful lusts, and worldly pleasures, without
any reprehension or restraint. This do our Paganizing Actors and Play-haunters
now; they hate, revile and slander, all zealous, practical Christians, under
Sincerum cupimus vas incrustare. Probus quis nobiscum vivit? multum est
dimissus homo; Illi tardo cognome^ pinguis damus. Hic fugit omnes insidias,
nullique malo latus obdit apertum? (Quu^ genus hoc inter vitae versetur ubi
acris Invi. dia atque vigent ubi crimina) pro been sano, Ac non incauto, fictum
astutumque vocamus. Simplicior si quis, ut forte legentem, Aut tacitum
impellat, quovis sermon molestus: Communi sensu plane caret, inquimus, etc.
Horace. Sermo. lib. 1. Sa^yr. 3. page 169.170.
the Terms of Puritanes, Prescitians, Novellers, Factionists, Hebr. 3.2.
Holy-breathren, Men of the Spirit, Bible-beares, Sermon-haunters, Hypocrites,
Holy-sisters, and a world of such like ignominious, disgraceful terms,
(though some of them in themselves are honorable, having the holy Ghost
himself for their Author, how ever profane Atheistical persons turn them
into very mottoes of disgrace:) They abhor the very appearances of all grace
and holiness, as diametrally opposite to their ungodly courses, to their
profane, lascivious, ribaldrous Enterludes, which all the Saints of God have
evermore condemned. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
They think it strange that holy men run not with them into the same excess
of riot, into the selfsame pleasures and delights of sin, in which they
plunge themselves: therefore speak they evil of them; Expedit enim vobis
neminem videri bonum, quasi aliena virtus exprobratio delictorum vestrorum sit.
Inviti splendida cum sordibus uestris confertis, nec intelligitis quanto id
vestro detrimento audeatis. Nam si illi qui virtutem sequuntur, amari,
libidinosi, ambitiosique sunt; quid vos estis, quibus ipsum ^omen virtutis odio
est, etc? Sen^ca De Vita B^ata. cap. 19.
therefore they reproach, traduce, contemn, detest, oppugn them with the very
height of spleen, of malice; as being an eyesore, yea a life-sore to them, as
present experience can inform us. Hence therefore I argue in the 39. place.
Argument 39.


That which ingenders in the hearts of its Actors and Spectators, an inward
hatred, an undervaluing disesteeme, a violent antipathy, a virulent enmity,
against the practical power of grace and holiness; against all holy,
gracious, godly Christians; must needs be sinful and abominable unto
Christians. Witness the 1 John 3.10. to 20. Phil. 4.8, 9. and infinite other
Scriptures.

But this do See Philo Iudaeus in Flaccum. lib. p. 1305 1306. Quasi in Theatro
exsibilabamur, subsannabamur, and irridebamur supra modum. Philo De ^egatione
ad Caiu^ page 1399. See here, page 541.
Stage Plays, as is evident by the premises, by experience, and by Act 8.
Scene 7.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and abominable unto Christians.

SCENA DECIMA-QVARTA.
THe 14. fruit of Stage Plays is this: That they inamor Voluptas enim
insatiabilis est, and utentibus majorem fame^ creat. Hi^rom. Comm^nt. lib. 1.
in Osee.
the more he delights in sin, in vanity, scurrility, lewdness; in Pagan
Rites and Ceremonies; the more is he obdurated and confirmed in his vicious
wicked courses; the more is he indisposed to repentance: Plays are the Gluten
est delictorum, and viscus toxicatu^ quo Diabolus aucupatur. Cyprian De
Singularitate Clericoru^. Tom. 2. p. 209.
Birdlime, the enchaunting 2 Timothy 2.26.
snares of Satan, with which he Voluptas esca malorum, quia homines ea tanquam
pisces hamo-capiuntur: Rationi inimica est, p^rstringit mentis oculos, nec
ullum habet cum virtute commercium. Cic^ro De Senectute. lib. page 652.
captivates and intangles souls through pleasure and delight: they are his
chiefest instruments to expel all godly sorrow from men's hearts, to stupifie,
to cauterize their consciences; to banish the very fear and thoughts of sin
out of their minds; to remove the sense, the sting of conscience and iniquity
far from their souls: to lull their hearts asleep in deep security; See Isay
5.11.12. Ezech. 12.27. Amo^ 6.1. to 9.
to chase away far from them all thoughts of Hell, of death, of damnation, of
the day of judgment; to forestall all helps, all preparatives, all means,
all motives to repentance, and to withold men from it. Alas, how can he loath
sin in the street, Nisi oderimus malum bonum amare non possumus. Hierom.
Epist. 4. cap. 6.
who delights in it in the Playhouse? How can he mourn for it in his Closet;
who sports himself with it in the Theater? How can he weep for it in secret,
See Ch^ysostome Hom. 6. in Matthew. excellently to this purpose. Here, page
402.403, 404.
who thus laughes at it in public? How can he look upon it with detestation
in himself, who makes it his recreation when it is acted by others? How can he
renounce, abhor, condemn it at home; who thus applaudes, affects, admires it
abroad? Certainly, he can never make sin his greatest grief, who makes the
r^presentations of it his chiefest mirth: He can never make ribaldry, adultery,
whoredom, incest, and the like, the everlasting objects of his hatred, who
makes the hearing, the seeing, the acting, the lively representations and
pictures of them, the daily objects of his chief delight. Every true penitent
must be sensible of sin; Psalm. 38.3, 4, 5. Matthew. 11.^9, 31. Ier. 2 19. Romans
7.21, 23, 24.
he m^^^ feel the sting, the venom of it, Job 40.4. c. 42 6. Isay 6.5. cap.
64.6.
see the filth of it, Ezra. 9.^, 7. c. 10.1. Psalm. 38.18. Ezech. 7 16. Romans
7.24.
bewail the guilt of it, 1 These. 5.2^. Jude 23.
hate the very appearances and resemblances of it; fly Matthew. 6.13. Prove. 5.7,
8, 9.
all the occasions of it, all the allurements to it, yea Job. 31.1, 7. Isay
33.15. 2 Pet. 2.8.
utterly abhor the very sight and hearing of it, as a most execrable, horrid,
and accursed thing. And can Players, can Play-haunters then, Job 21.11, 12, 13.
Iam. 5.5.
who spend their days in mirth, in carnal iollity, in laughing, in rejoicing,
in ribaldrous songs, in scurrilous jests, in amorous Poems, in wanton Comedies;
in lewd discourses, in adulterous representations, wallowing in the very mire
of sensuality, voluptuousness, and such like beastly sins, without the least
remorse, be near to true repentance, or to the ways, the preparatives that
lead and bring men to it? O no! A penitent heart, an humbled soul, a
circumcised ear, an eye that weeps in truth for sin, Isay 33.15. 2 Pet.
2.8. Psalm. 101.3. Psalm. 15.4. Videas quod nec aspicere possit fronspudica.
Cy^rian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato.
is altogether impatient of such objects, such Enterludes, and delights as
these. Witness the pactise of the Pagan converts in the Primitive times,
Theodoret. Contra Graecos Infideles. De Martyribus l. 8. Tom. 2. p. 390.
Council. Ar^latense. 1. Can. 4.5. and 2. Can. 20. Elibertinum. Can. 62. and
Constant. 6. Can. 62.
who immediately upon their baptism, and sincere repentance did utterly
renounce all Stage Plays as accursed Pleasures, not daring to return unto
them again: Witness all Christian converts of latter times, who have done the
like. Thus did Saint Augustine heretofore, as Confessionu^. l. 3. c. 1.2. and
l. 4. c. 1. and 14.
himself confesses; thus did Anatomy of Abuses, and Plays Confu^ed:
accordingly.
M. Gosson and the Ib^dem. page 49. to 54.
Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Stage Plays of late; as themselves
record: before their repentance and conversion they composed, they admired
Stage Plays; immediately upon their repentance and reformation they utterly
abandoned them, and wrote against them: Thus likewise did Confessionu^. lib. 6.
cap. 7^8.
Alipius, Saint Augustines convert, as himself relates: See Ch^ysostom. Hom.
38. in Matthew. Tertullian, De Spectaculis. c. 24. See here, Act 8. Scene 2.3, 4.
accordingly.
thus all that heartily and sincerely turn to God have ever done: their
repentance drew them first from Plays and Play Houses, and then bent their
hearts, their judgments, their tongues, if not their pens against them: Thus
was it with the wanton Poet Ovid; Toll^ Theatra jube, non tuta licentia Circi
est, etc. Tristium. lib. 2. compared with his 1. Book, De Art Amandi.
his very moral Heathenish repentance, made him to detest and write against
those Plays and Play Houses, which formerly he commended: And will not then
true Christian Evangelicall repentance much more reclaim men from, embitter
their hearts, their tongues, and pens against these Heathenish, Hellish, and
polluted pleasures? undoub^edly it will, as appears by all the Play^
contemning Councels, Fathers, and other Christian Authors here recited, and See
Act. 7. Scene 2.3, 4. and 5.
by the concurrent suffrage of the devoutest Christians in all ages, who have
constantly condemned and declaimed against Stage Plays, as the very See Act 6.
Scene 5. thorowout.
greatest corruptions that can befall a Church or Christian State. The farther
men are from Plays and Play Houses, the nearer are they (says an The 3. Blast
of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. page 66.
Author) to true repentance: the nearer to them, the further are they from this
soule-saving grace. Hereupon some Fathers well observe, Et necesse erat primum
ut domus in celebri esset urbis loco, ad quem facile conveniretur: deinde ab
omni importunitate vacua esset, ac ampla, quae plurimos caperet aud^entiu^; nec
proxima spectaculorum locis, ne turpi vicina detestabilis Anse^me in Epist. ad
P^ilemonem. verse. 22. Tom 2. p. 396. B. Et quia ubicunque Apostol^serat
multitudo ad ^um confluebat, necesse erat ut magnam domu^ haberet, and quae
remota esset a Circo, a Theatr^, and a Spectaculo, ubi lascivi discurrentes,
turpia quaeque sectabantur. Haymo Exegesis ad Philemonem and Remigij Episcopi
Rhemensis Explanatio in Epist. ad Philemonem. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 3. p.
992. C.
that Saint Paul writing to Philemon to provide an house or lodging for him,
(Philemon, verse. 22.) would have such an house as was not near the Theater or
place of public Enterludes, whither lascivious persons running did follow all
filthy things, lest its filthy vicinage should make it detestable. Certainly
if it were not meet for an eminent Apostle to dwell near to Plays or
Play Houses, for fear their lewd vicinity should make his habitation
detestable to Christian Auditors who resorted to it: much more unseemely is it
for a penitent Christian (who must abstain not only from evil it self, 1
These. 5.22.
but likewise from all the appearancies of it) to resort to Plays and
Play Houses themselves, which are far more noxious, more contagious then the
houses near adjacent to them. As he therefore, who would obtain the perfect
grace of remission, must withdraw himself from the Spectacles and Enterludes
of the world; if Saint De Vera and falsa Paenitentia. lib. cap. 15.
Augustine, Secunda secundae. Quaest. 108. Artic. 2.3.
Aquinas, or our own Countryman Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4 c. 23. sect. 2.
Alexander Fabricius write true Doctrine; so he that would attain the grace
of true repentance must wholly See Isay 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
sequester himself from Plays and Play Houses, which are altogether
incompatible with true repentance, and both hindering men from it, and
indisposing them to it, to the eternal loss, the irrecoverable perdition of
their dear^st souls. Wherefore I shall epitomize this Scene into this 39.
Play-refuting Argument. Argument 39.


That which inamors men with sin and vanity; which hardens them in their
sins, detaines them in their wicked courses, and indisposeth them to true
repentance; must needs be utterly unlawful, and execrable unto Christians:
Witness, Psalm. 101.3. Psalm. 119.37. Romans 24.5.

But this do Stage Plays, as the premises demonstrate.

Therefore they must needs be utterly unlawful, and execrable unto Christians.

SCENA DECIMA-QVINTA.
THe 15. consequent or effect of Stage Plays is; that Cantus and carmina
Poetaru^, and comaedorum, mimorumque urbanitates and strophae per aures
introientes, virilitatem mentis effaeminant. Hierom. Advers. Iovinianum. lib.
2. cap. 7. Carmina Poetarum, Comaediarum and Tragaediarum actus, mimorum
urbanitates and strophas and quicquid hujusmodi per aurem incedit, virilitatem
mentis effaeminant. Ioannis Salisburiensis. De Nugis Curialium. lib. 8. cap. 6.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. page 463. D.
enervating and resolving the virility and vigor of their minds, to their own
private and the public prejudice. This Plato De Republica Dialog. 3. page 597.
Clemens Alexandrinus Paedagogi. lib, 2. cap. 4. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian De
Spectaculis. cap. 17. Cyprian De Spectaculis. lib. and Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Donato. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu cap. 20. and Divinarum Instit. Epist. cap. 6.
Hierom. Adversus Iovinianum. lib. 2. cap. 7. Nazianzen. De Recta Educatione ad
Selucum. page 1063. See Scene 4. before.
Chrysostom Homil. 6. and 38. in Matthew. and Oration 7. formerly quoted.
Augustine De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.33. Salvian. De Gubernatione Dei.
lib. 6. Ioannes Salisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. and lib. 8.
cap. 6. Saxo-Grammaticus. Danicae Hist. lib. 6. page 103. The 3. Blast of
Retrait from Plays and Enterludes. M. Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. Bodinus De
Republica. lib. 6. c. 1, Ludovicus Vives, De Causis Corruptionis Artium. l. 2.
c. 81.82, 83. M. Robert Boulton, in his Discourse of True Happiness. page
73.74. with sundry Authors formerly quoted in the 5. Scene of this preseent
Act: and Act 5. Scene 3.6. expressly testify. See Ammianus Marcellinus. Hi^t.
l. 28. cap. 9.10. Sigonius. De Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. page 32. and Act 6.
Scene 5. thorowout.
These effeminated the Grecians, the Romans heretofore, resolving their valor
into sloth and laziness, and so making them a booty to their enemies, which
made the Massilienses and Scipio Africanus to suppress them. And if this
evidence is not sufficient, our own experience can sufficiently manifest this
truth. For whence is it that many of our Gentry are lately Converterant in
muliebrem tol^ran^iam viri, non usum tantum atque naturam, sed etiam vultum,
incessum, habitum, and totum penitus quicquid aut in ^exu est; aut in usu viri:
adeo versa sunt in diversum omnia, ut cum viris nihil magis pudori esse
oporteat, quam si muliebre aliquid in se habere videantur, nunc nihil turpius
viris quibusdam videtur, quam si in aliquo viri viderentur. Salvi^n. De
Gubernatione Dei. lib. 7. page 263.264.
degenerated into a more then Sardanapalian effeminacy; that they are now so
fantastique in their apparel, so womannish in their frizled Periwigs,
Love-lockes, and long effeminate pouldred pounced hair; so mimicall in their
gestures; so effeminate in their lives; so Player-like in their deportment; so
amorous in their speeches; so lascivious in their embracements; so unmanly,
degenerous and un-English (if I may so speak) in their whole conversation; is
it not principally from their resort to Plays, to Masks, and such like
antique, apish Pastimes, the very Schools to train them up in all effeminacy,
and fantastique folly? undoubtedly it is. Wherefore I shall briefly conclude
this Scene with this 40. Play-oppugning Syllogism.

That which effeminates men's minds, men's manners, and makes them womannish
both in their minds, their bodies, speeches, habites, and their whole
deportment: must needs be abominable unto Christians, intolerable in a
Commonweal. Witness Act 5. Scene 3. and Act 7. Scene 5. before.

But this do Nonne illos qui a Theatris descendunt, videtis molliores
effectos? id vero in causa est, quod i^s, quae ibi fiunt studiose attend^nt.
Chrysostom. Hom. De S. Barlaam. Tom. 1. Edit. Paris^^s. ^621. page 893. D.
Stage Plays; as is evident by the premises; and by Act 5. Scene 3. and Act 6.
Scene 5.

Therefore they must needs be abominable unto Christians, intolerable in a
Commonweal.

SCENA DECIMA-SEXTA.
THe 16. pernicious fruit of Stage Plays is, the incorporating Grex totus in
agris Vnius scabie ^adi^, etc. Iuvenal. Satyr. 2. N^l tam noce^ homini quam
m^^a societas. Eusebius, De M^rte Hieron. ad Damasum ^pistola. This Mahomet
himself knew: Therefore in his Alcaron, Azoara. 21. p. 76. he writes thus:
Nolite vos male geremibus associare, and^.
which oft-times proves the utter ruin of their souls, their bodies, credits
and estates. How many Gentlemen are there now living, who by frequenting
Stage Plays, have got such intimate See Act 4. Scene 1.2.
acquaintance with Adulterers, Whore-masters, Adulteresses, Panders, Whores,
Bawdes, Parasites, Rookes, Cheaters, Drunkards, Ruffians, Rorers, Duellers,
Quarrellers, Fantastiques, Idle-bees, Fashion-mungers, Stage Players, Pursers,
and the like pernicious creatures, that they have never been able to shake
them off again, till they have been plunged over head and ears in sin and
villainy, till they have wasted their bodies, their estates, their credits, and
lost themselves past all recovery? How many are there now in England that even
in this respect have cause Quis te r^pit impetus? ut ad horam gaudeas unde
semper doleas; ut videas semel, quod vidisse millies paenit^at. Petrarch. De
Remedio Vtriusque Fortunae. lib. 1. Dial. 30.
to rue the day that ever they beheld a Stage Play? How many tender careful
Parents are there who may with watery eyes and bleeding hearts cry out, that
Stage Plays have been the utter overthrow of their beloved Children, by
ensnaring them in the bonds of dissolute, graceless, prodigal, unchaste
companions, the chiefest instruments to make men wicked; and irrecoverably
deboist? Quaeritur quidem quae res malos principes facit. Iam primum nimia
licentia, deinde rerum copia; amici prae^erea improbi, satellites detesta^di,
eunuchi avarissimi, aulici vel stulti vel detestabiles, and (quod negari non
po^est) ^erum publicaru^ ignorantia. Nihil est difficilius quam been imperare.
Colligunt enim se quatuor vel quinque atque unum consiliu^ ad decipiendu^
imperatorem capiunt; dicunt quid probandum sit. Imperator qui domi clausus est,
vera non novit; cogitur hoc tantum scire quod illi loquuntur; facit judices
quos fieri non oportet, amovet a republica quos debeat obtinere. Quid multa? ut
Diocletianus ipse dicebat, Bonus, cautus, optimus venditur: Imperator.
Vopiscus. Ibidem. page 392.
Flavius Vopiscus, in the life of Divus Aurelianus, inquiring into the several
causes that make Princes evil; reckons wicked friends, and detestable or
foolish Courtiers and companions as the chief of all the rest: intimating,
that nothing is more contagious, more pernicious then evil company: of whom we
may truly say as Seneca does of an over-indulgent friend. De Beneficijs. lib.
2. c. 14.
Ille amando me occidit; that they kill men whiles they love them. It is
storied of Carinus homo omnium contaminatissimus; amicos optimos quosque
religavit; pessimum quemque elegit aut tenuit. Mimis, meretricibus, pantomimis,
cantoribus, atque lenonibus, palatium implevit. Hominibus improbis plurimum
detulit, ^osque ad convivium semper vocavit. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. page
446.447.
Carinus the most defiled of men; that when he came to the Empire he
abandoned all his best friends, retaining and choosing none but the very worst
of all for his companions: Whereupon he filled his Court with Stage Players,
Harlots, Iesters, Singers, Bawdes; and committed most of his affairs to
wickedmen, whom he always invited to his Feasts. This and no other do our
common Play-haunters; they abandon all religious, modest, sober, chaste, and
studious acquaintance: they fill their houses, their chambers with Poets,
Stage Players, Whore-masters, Panders, Iesters, Drunkards, Whores, Bawdes,
Rookes, Sycophants, who hang like Burres, like Dum juvat and vultu ridet
fortuna sereno, Indelibatas cuncta sequuntur ^pes: At simul intonuit fugiunt,
nec noscitur ulli Agminibus comitum qui modo tectus erat. Ovid. Tristiu^. lib.
1. Eleg. 4. page 140.
Horsleeches upon them, till they have sucked them dry, and then they vanish.
These are their only counselors, companions, guests, and bosom friends, who
prove at last their deadliest enemies. This therefore should lesson all good
Christians to refrain from Stage Plays, for fear they incorporate them into
evil company, who will draw them by degrees to any wickedness. Confessionu^.
lib. 6. cap. 8. Se^ cap. 7.
S. Augustine relates a memorable Story of one Alipius, a dear friend and
convert of his, whom he himself had dissuaded from frequenting Theaters and
Cirque-playes; who. Cum enim aversaretur, and detestaretur talia; quidam ejus
amici and condiscipuli, cum forte de prandio redeuntibus obvius esset,
recusante^ vehementer and resistentem familiari violentia duxerunt in
Amphitheatrum crudeliu^ and funestorum ludorum di^bus, haec dicentem: Si corpus
meum in illum locum trahitis, nunquid and animum and oculos meos in illa
spectacula potestis intendere? Adero itaque ut absens, ac sic, and vos and illa
superabo. Quibus auditis, illi nihilo secius eum adduxerunt secum id ipsum
forte explora^e cu^ientes, utrum posset efficere. Quo ubi ventum est, and
sedibus quibus po^uerunt, locati sunt, servebant omnia immanissimis
voluptatibus. Ille clausis foribus oculorum, interdixit animo ne in tanta mala
procederet atque utinam and aures obturavis^et. Ibid^m
being solicited by his friends and fellow Scholars, who met him as they
returned from dinner, to go along with them to a Sword-play, did at first
earnestly refuse and withstand them; and being at last drawn along by them to
the Amphitheater with a familiar violence, he told them by the way, that
though they should drag his body to that place, and set it there, yet they
should never seriously fix his mind or eyes upon these Spectacles; I therefore
(said he) will be absent whiles I am present, and so I will overcome both you
and them. Notwithstanding these words they drew him along with them to the
Amphitheater, perchance to try him, whether he could do as he has said.
Where when they were come, and every man had placed himself in such a seat as
he could get, all things growing hot with most cruel pleasures; Alipius
shutting his eyelids, forbade his mind, that it should not proceed on into so
great evils: and I would to God (writes Saint Augustine) he had likewise
stopped his ears. For when as a great shout of all the people, occasioned by
some Nam quodam pugnae casu, cum clamo^ ingens totius populi vehementer cum
pulsasset, curiositate victus, and quasi paratus, quicquid illud esset, etiam
visum contemnere and vincere, aperuit oculos, and p^rc^ssus est graviori
vulnere in a^ima, quam ille in corpore, quem cern^re concupivit, ceciditque
miserabilius quam ille, quo cadente factus est clamor; qui per ejus aures
in^ravit, and reseravit ejus lumina ut esset qua feriretur and deij^eretur,
a^dax adhuc potius, quam fortis animus, and eo infirmior quo de se
praesumpserat, qui debuit de ^e^ Ibidem.
accident of the fight had vehemently beaten his ears, being overcome with
curiosity, and withal being as it were prepared to contemn and overcome the
sight whatever it were, he opened his eyes; and forthwith he was smitten
with a more grievous wound in his soul, then he whom he desired to see was
in his body, and he fell more miserably then he, whose fall occasioned the
shout, which entered through his ears, and opened his eyes, that so there might
be some thing whereby his bold, rather then as yet valiant mind (and so much
the more weak, by how much he had the more presumed of himself, who ought to
have relied on God,) might be smitten and cast down. Vt enim vidit illum
sanguinem, imm^nitatem simul ebibit, and non se avertit, sed fixit asp^ctum,
and hauriebat furias, and nesciebat, and delectabatur s^ele^e certaminis and
cruenta voluptate inebriebatur. Et non erat jam ille qui venerat, sed unus de
turba ad quam venerat, and ver^s eorum socius a quibus adductus era^. Quid
plura? Spectavit, clamavit, exarsit, abstulit inde secu^ insaniam, qua
stimularetur redire, non tantum cum illis a quibus prius abstractus est, sed
etiam prae illis, and alios trahens. Et inde tamen manu validissima and
misericordissima eruisti eum tu, and docuisti non sui habere, sed tui fiduciam,
sed long postea. Ibidem.
For as soon as he saw that blood, he drank in cruelty together with it, and
did not turn away himself, but fixed his eyes, and drew in fury; he knew not
the danger, and yet was delighted with the wickedness of the combat, and was
drunken with the bloody pleasure. And now he was not the same man that he
came thither, but one of the company to which he was come, and a true
companion of the^rs by whom he was brought thither. What shall I say more? He
beheld, he shouted, he grew outrageous, he carried away madness with him
from thence, whereby he was excited to r^turne thither again, not only with
those by whom he was first drawn away, but likewise before them, and drawing
along others with him. And yet thou O Lord have plucked him ^hence with a most
powerful and merciful hand, and have taught him not to have any confidence in
himself, but in thee; but this a long time after. From this experimental
Story thus related by S. Augustine, which comes punctually to our purpose, we
may learn many good instructions: First, that lewd companions are very
importunate sollicitors to draw others to Plays, and Play Houses, (as Panders,
Whore-masters, and Yongsters now are, to draw young Gentlewomen and others whom
they would make their prey) that so they may corrupt and lead them on to
greater evils with more facility. Secondly, that the best remedy to avoid their
importunate solicitations, Facilius est initia illorum prohibere qua^ impetum
regere. Sene^a. Epist. 85. vid. Ibidem.
is peremptorily to withstand them, and not to yield one inch unto them.
Thirdly, that it is Quis unqua^ mortaliu^ juxta vipera^ securos somnos capit?
quae etsi non percutiat, certe sollicitar. Securius est perire non posse, qua^
juxta periculu^ non perisse. Hierom. Epist. 47. cap. 1.2.
exceeding dangerous for good Christians, especially for new converted Novices,
to be drawn by any importunities or persuasions of friends or lewd
companions, to a Playhouse, though it be against their wills and judgments,
though they go thither with a prejudicate opinion against Plays, and with a
peremptory resolution not to mind them, much less to be overcome or tempted
by them, as this Alipius did. Fourthly, that the beholding of one lascivious
Stage Play, though with prejudice, disaffection, and an absolute resolution
against it, is able to corrupt and vitiate the very best spectators that resort
unto it: how much more then will it deprave those lewd Play-haunters who
flock unto it with delight, and are almost daily in the Playhouse? Fifthly,
that the sight of one only Stage Play, though with a prepossessed opinion
against it, Quippe ex volunta^e perversa facta est libido, and dum servitur
libidini facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetud^ni non resistitur facta est
necessitas. Augustine. Confess. l. 8. c. 5.
will draw men onto frequent, applaud, and admire others. Sixthly, that those
who are once corrupted by seeing Stage Plays, I^ti igitur posteaquam
simplicitatem substantiae suae onusti and immersi vitijs perdiderunt, ad
solatium calamitatis suae, non desinunt perditi jam perdere, and depravati
errorem pravitatis intundere. Minucius Felix. Octavius. p. 85.
are industrious to seduce, and draw others to them; Quanto autem non nasci
melius ^uit, quam numerari inter publico malo natos? Seneca De Cl^menti^. lib.
1. cap. 18.
whereas it were far better for such men not to have been borne, then to be
thus enrolled among the number of those, who are borne for the public hurt of
others. Seventhly, that those who are misled by Stage Plays, though they be
civil, or religious men, Facilis descensus averni, Sed revocare gradum
superasque evadere ad auras, Hoc opus, hic labor est. Virgil. lib. 6. AE^^idos.
page 222.
are seldom speedily reclaimed from them; and that only by the strong arm
and powerful hand of God, not by any strength or goodness of their own.
Lastly, Master Brinsly, in his True Watch^ part. 3. cap. 11. Abomination 30.
page 302. accordingly.
that God commonly with-drawes his preventing and perfecting grace, from such
who run to Stage Plays, so that sin and Satan may easily surprise them.
All which are naturally deduced from this History of Alipius; and should teach
young Gentlemen and others, as they tender their own safety, and the eternal
welfare of their own and others souls; Moses^ seniori ^opulo porcis vesci
prohibuit; significans, non oportere eos qui Deum invocant, cum impuris versari
hominibus, qui porcorum instar corporalibus voluptatibus, obscaenisque cibis,
and impudicis titillationibus prurientes, damnosa Veneris voluptate
perfunduntur. Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11.
to avoid the company o^ Play-haunters, yea peremptorily to withstand the very
temptations and allurements unto Stage Plays, and never to come near a
Playhouse, though it be with strongest prejudice, vigilance and resolution
against the corruptions, vices, abominations that attend it. How dangerous ill
company are, especially a^ Play Houses where the most are such; how apt they
are to insinuate into others by this vice of Stage Plays, I have at large
declared in a former Scene, (viz. Act. 4. Scene 1.2. I shall therefore close
this Scene with this 41. Play^encountring Argument.

That which intangles men in, incorporates them into the company, the
acquaintance, of dissolute, lecherous, deboist, profane, ungodly, vicious
persons, who lead them to destruction, Malus enim pessimum prae omnibus malis
homo. Vnaquae que bestia habet proprium malum; homo autem in se malus, omnia
habet in se mala: sic pejor est Diabolo. Chrysostom. Homil. 43. in Matthew. and
A^exand^r Fabritius. Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 5. cap. 19.
must needs be sinful, unlawful, abominable unto Christians, intolerable in
any Christian State. Witness, Act. 4. Scene. 2.

But this do Stage Plays; as the premises, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 7.17. and 38.
in Matthew. and Act. 4. Scene 1.2. do largely testify.

Therefore they must needs be sinful, unlawful, abominable unto Christians,
intolerable in any Christian State.

SCENA DECIMA-SEPTIMA.
THe 17. effect of Stage Plays is, that they draw men on to See here, page 27.
and Act 3. Scene 3. p. 75. to 84.
Atheism, Heathenisme, and gross Idolatry This is evident by Clemens Romanus.
Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. By Tertullian De Spectaculis^ ^ap. 22.
where he affirms, That many by communicating with the Devil in Stage Plays,
have fallen quite away from God. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. and 21. and
Cyprian and Tertullian. De Spectaculis. lib. By Augustine De Civitate Dei. lib.
2. cap. 6. to 29. De Rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis. Tract. Tom^ 9. pars
1. page 1447.1448. By Minucius Felix. Octavius. page 70. By Chrysostom. Hom. 6.7.
and 38. in Matthew. Salvian. De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. By Master Brinsly, in
his True Watch. cap. 11. Abomination 30. page 302. where he writes; that
Stage Plays sow the seeds of Atheism in men's hearts: and that Stage Players
are the Trumpeters of Satan, who call men from God and his House unto the
Theaters, from his heavenly Majesty, to his sworn enemy, and by sundry others,
who expressly testify; that Stage Plays, (which See here, Act. 3. Scene 3.
accordingly.
are commonly stuffed with the names, the histories, persons, fables, rites,
ceremonies, villainies, incests, rapes, applauses, oaths, imprecations, and
invocations of Pagan Idols; See here, Act. 3. Scene.
with atheisticall^ blasphemous, profane, and wicked scoffs and jests; with
abuses of Scripture phrases, and bitter invectives against piety, and religion;
that matter to engender athei^me, Idolatry, and Heathenisme both in the Actors,
Auditors, and Spectators of them) are a ready way to draw men on to Atheism,
Paganism, Idolatry, and all profaneness, which are there acted and applauded.
Yea Diabolus enim est ille, qui etia^ in artem jocos ludosque digessit, ut per
haec ad se traheret milites Christi virtutisque ^orum nervos fa^eret molliores,
etc. Hom. 6. in Matthew Tom. 2. Col. 51. D.
Chrysostom, Diabolus artifex quia idololatriam per se nudam sci^bat horreri,
spectaculis miscuit ut per voluptatem posset amari, etc. De Spectaculis. lib.
Cyprian, Lactan^ius, Tertullian, and Augustine, in their forequoted places
affirm: That the Devil himself invented Stage Plays for this very end, that
he might withdraw men from God unto Idolatry: and by these pleasures writes
^ocosi ferme ac ridiculi sunt plaerique mortalium, neque illis est^ cord^
studiosum vitae genus, sed fluxum po^^us ac remissum. Ex quo ^it, ut perquam
facile illis dominetur malignissimus Demon, neque enim eos horta^atur ad
rectam illam viam augustamque capessenda^, salebrosam, difficilem and acclivem;
sed ad alteram quae prona, inclinata, levis atque expedita est; haud enim
illis^ unqua^ temperantiae, justitiaeque ullam habere rationem praecepit, sed
confidenter atque impun^ cunctis flagitijs libidinibusque incumbere, omne demu^
scelus impudenter audere permisit. Hinc haud difficulter quam plurimos in
servitutem adduxit, fugientes enim laboriosam virtutem, legisque divinae
difficultatem evitantes^ ad eum scilicet transfugerunt, qui factu facilia
eademque jucundissima imperavit, etc. De Sacrificijs. l. 7. Tom. 2. p. 382. C.
Theodoret, which suite well with the pleasurable, sloathfull, and voluptuous
disposition of men, who are most of them addicted to pastimes, to a remiss and
idle life, the most malignant Devil very easily domineeres over men, and has
drawn very many into bondage; who flying laborious virtue, and avoiding the
difficulty of Gods Law, have revolted unto him, who has commanded things easy
and most pleasant to be done. Stage Plays and Play-poems as the Sea here, p.
80. l. and August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1.2, 3, 4 and 6. thorowout.
Fathers jointly testify; were the chief occasioners, propagators and
fomenters of Atheism, Heathenisme, Idolatry, and all dissolute profaneness
heretofore: See Act 2. thorowout, with the several Authors there recorded^ and
Cicero De Aruspicum Responsis Oration. p. 524. to 528. In Catilinam. Oration 3^
p. 452. accordingly.
they being wholly consecrated to Idols, and celebrated to their honor in their
solemn Festivals, and anniversary commemorations, as the very principal part
of their irreligious worship, and idolatrous adoration. And do they not
produce the selfsame dangerous effects and issues still? Alas whence is all
that practical Sunt qui fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt, Et nullo credunt
mundum rectore moveri, Natura voluente vicis and lucis, and anni. Atque ideo
intrepido quaecunque altaria tangant. Tam facile and pronu^ est superos
conte^dere testes, Si mortalis ide^ nemo sciat^ Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. p. 119.
Atheism, Paganism, and profaneness; whence all those Heathenish vanities,
customs, ceremonies, habits, speeches, blasphemies, Per solis radios,
Tarpeiaque fulmina juvat, Et Martis framia^, and Cirrhae^ spicula vatis. Per
calamos venatricis ^h^retramque^ puellae, Perque tuum pater AEgaei Neptune
tridentem: Addit and Hercul^os arcus, hastamque Minervae, Quicquid habent
telorum armamentaria coeli. Iuv^nal. Ibidem.
execrations, Idolatries, superstitions, and the like; whence that open Mal.
1.6, 7. Solus Deus in comparatione omnium nobis vilis est. Salvian De Guber.
Dei. lib. 6. page 195.
neglect and contempt, that Titus 1.16. 2 Pet. 2.1.
denying of God in works, in actions; that ordinary Ephesians. 2.12.
living without God in the world; those secret whisperings in many Players, and
Play-haunters Psalm. 10.4. Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 53.7.
hearts, that there is no God at all, at least Psalm. 73.11.
no God to take notice, or vengeance of their sins; whence all the real
atheism and profaneness that we see in Players and Play-haunters lives: is it
not principally from Plays and Enterludes; wherein, not only Nunquid Priapo
mimi, non etiam Sacerdotes enormia pudenda fecerunt? An aliter stat adorandus
in locis sacris, quam procedit ridendus in Theatris? Number Saturnus senex, Apollo
ephe^us, ita persona sunt histrionum, ut non sint statuae delubrorum, etc?
A^gust. De Civita^e D^i. lib. ^. cap. 7. See lib. 2. cap. 3. to 29. lib. 4.
cap. ^7.28.
the Pagan Deities, but likewise the very God of Heaven and Earth, together
with his Word, his Saints, his service are See Act 3. Scene 5. and I. ^. his
Refu^ation of the Apology for Actors. page 28.54, 55.
derided? Undoubtedly it is. Never is there greater Atheism, or more open
desperate profaneness, more notorious contempt of God, his Word, his worship,
his fear, his service, then in such places, such times, wherein Stage Plays
most abound. In Stage Plays (as Master Brinsly well observes) there is a
continual sowing of all Atheism in the hearts of poor sim^le souls; they
are the very Nurseries of Atheism, of Paganism, of Idolatry and profaneness,
as the experience of all ages testifies: Wherefore I shall conclude against
them which this 42. Syllogism.

That which ingenders Atheism, Paganism, Idolatry, and all profaneness in
Actors and Spectators, must of necessity be altogether abominable and
unlawful unto Christians.

But this do Stage Plays; witness the premises, and premised Authors.

Therefore they must of necessity be altogether abominable and unlawful unto
Christians. True Watch 3. part. cap. 11. Abomination 30. page 392.


SCENA DECIMA-OCTAVA.
See here, Act 2. and Act. 3. Scene 3. thorowout, accordingly. and Augustine
Epist. 202.
in honoring, applauding, invocating, naming, representing, adjuring, and
extolling Pagan Idol-gods, and Goddesses, by the name of God, and in reviving
their infernal ceremonies, rites and worship: and in propagating Atheism and
Idolatry. Of the second Commandment, See here, Act 1. Scene 1. Act 2. and Act
3. Scene 3. Josephus Iudaeoru^ Antiqu. l. 15. c. 11. Philo Iudaeus, Decalogo.
lib. Cyprian and Tertullian De Spectaculis. Augustine. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 4
to 13. l. 6. c. 7. Bullingerus De Circo. lib. cap. 38 p. 153. accordingly
in making the Images, pictures, shapes and statues; in representing the
persons, vices, ceremonies and customs of those Pagan Deities: and in relating
their histories, pedegrees, acts and monuments. Of the third Commandment, See
3. ^acobi. cap. 21 and Act 3. Scene 5. accordingly.
in profaning and blaspheming the Name of God by cursed oaths and horrid
execrations, which are frequent in our Enterludes; by traducing and profaning
the holy Name and Word of God, by inserting them into Stage Plays, and making
them no better then a sport or May Game: See Act 3. Scene 3. p. 77. to 87.
by swearing by the names of Idol-gods^ whereas Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c.
15. Nicephorus Epist. Eccl^s. Hist. l. 3. c. 35.
Polycarpus would not so much as swear by the fortune of Caesar, though by
doing it he might have saved his life; by deriding the sincere worship and
service of God, and by taking all Gods Names, his attributes, his Ordinances in
vain. Of the fourth Commandment, See 1. Caroli. cap. 1. The 3. Blast of
Retrait from Plays and Theaters. M. Brinsl^, 3. part of the True Watch. c. 11.
Abomination 30. page 392. and Act 7. Scene 12. accordingly.
in profaning the Lord's Day in a notorious manner, See Act 7. Scene 1.5. and
6^ accordingly.
and in drawing men on to idleness on those other days in which God commands
them for to labor. Of the fifth Commandment, Act 3. Scene accordingly.
In dishonouring, reproaching, controlling and traducing Princes, Magistrates,
Judges, Ministers, and others, who are the Fathers, the Mothers of Church and
Commonweal. Of the sixth Commandment, Act 7. Scene 10. Act 3. Scene 2. etc.
accordingly.
in occasioning and commending murders, quarrels, duels; tyranny, cruelty: in
murdering the good names of other men; in teaching plots to poison, murder,
betray, and ruin others: and in murdering infinite souls of men and women
whom Stage Plays cause to perish. Of the seventh Commandment: See Act 3.
Scene 7. Act 7. Scene 3.4. and Act 5. Scene accordingly.
in ingendring, fomenting, exciting unchaste affections in the Actors and
Spectators, in drawing them on to fornication, whoredom, adultery, and all
other actual uncl^a^esse which Christians should abhor to name or think of:
and in making them ribaldrous, effeminate, wanton, lascivious in apparel,
speech, gesture, hair, etc. and fit for any filthiness or lewdness
whatsoever. Of the eight Commandment, Act 7. Scene 9. accordingly.
in teaching men how to cheat and cozen others: how to steal away Wards from
their Gardians, and Daughters from their Parents: In picking other men's purses,
by receiving money for the exercise of these unlawful, these ungodly Plays,
which God never authorized as a means to procure gain withal; the taking of
which money is plain theft, as Augustinus. Tract. 100. in Io^n. Gratian.
Distinct. 86. Tostatus in 4. R^gu^. Tom. 7. page 100. C.D. B B. Babington, M.
Dod, and others on the 8. Commandment. Alvarez Pelagius De Planctu Ecclesiae.
l. 2. Artic. 40. A.B.C. 150.
Divines expressly teach: Act 7. Scene 2. accordingly. and Josephus Antiqu^
Iudaeorum. l. 16. c. 9.
and in occasioning much prodigal and vain expense. Of the ninth
Commandment, Act 3. Scene accordingly.
in slandering, misreporting, and personally traducing particular persons and
professions on the Stage; and in laying false aspersions, with terms of
ignominy and scorn upon the Saints and service of God. Of the tenth
Commandemen^; In causing Children and young Prodigals to desire the death of
their more rigid Parents, that so they might enjoy, and prodigally waste their
Patrimonies, and Portions, on their lusts and pleasures: and in causing men to
cove^ the Pomp, the State, the po^sessions, Act 3. Scene 1. and Act 7. Scene
3.4^ accordingly.
the wives, the servants, the goods of other men, as Players, Whores, and
others who resort to Stage Plays learn to do. Stage Plays in these and
sundry other regards forementioned by S. Chrysostom, and others in the
precedent Scene occasion the breach of all the ten Commandments, and so plunge
their Composers, Actors, Spectators over head and ears in sin, involving
them in the guilt of all the evils that are occasioned and produced by them.
This D. L. Speculum Belli Sacri cap. 45. The Mirror for Magistrates of Cities.
The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters. See here, page 231.232.
Authors, this the premises and experience testify: Wherefore I shall hence
deduce this 43. invincible Argument against Stage Plays.

That which commonly occasions an apparent violation of all the ten
Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.1. to 20. c. 27.1.26. Matthew 5.18. to 42. Ioh. 14.15, 21.
Iam. 2.9, 10, 11.
must needs be sinful and utterly unlawful unto Christians, intolerable in
any wel-ordered Commonweal: No Christian can deny it.

But this do Stage Plays: witness the premises. See page 231.232. before.

Therefore they must needs be sinful and utterly unlawful unto Christians^
intolerable in any wel-ordered Commonweal.

SCENA DECIMA-NONA.
Pliny. Not. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 3. Opm^^rus Chronogr. page 121. Calepini
AEschylus.
AEschylus, (the first inventor of Tragedies, as Post hunc personae pallaeque
repertor honestae AEschylus, and modicis instravit pulpita tignis Et docui^
magnumque loqui, nitique cothurno. De Art Poetica. p. 305.306
Horace, Instit. Orator. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Quintilian, Tertullian, and Opmeeri Chronogr. page 131.
others write:) that his brains were dashed out with the fall of a Torteis,
which an Eagle soaring over him let fall upon his bald-pate, while he was
sitting meditating on his Plays in the open air; a sudden unparalleld and
right tragical judgment, upon the very first inventor of tragic Enterludes.
Gellius Noctiu^ Attic. l. 15. cap. 20. Suidae Euripides. Opmeeri Chronogr. p.
125. Calepine and. Holioke. Euripides.
Euripides, the famous Greek Tragedian, as he was returning in the night time
from Archelaus his Palace, where he supped, to his own lodging, was torn in
pieces by Dogs, (some write, by women) set on, as was supposed, by Arridaeus a
Poet, who maligned him: A fearful death: Pausanias in Attic. l. 1. Tertullian
De Anim^. l. 1. Opmeeri Chronogr. page 125. Chronicon Chron. AEtas 5. fol. 78.
Sophocles, the very Prince of tragic Poets, being pronounced victor by one
casting voice in a poetical combat between him and others; died suddenly on
the Stage of overmuch joy; his victory proving no other but his own fatal
Tragaedy: the like we read of Gellius. Noct. Artic. l. 3. cap. 15.
Philippides another famous Greek Comedian, who died suddenly in the selfsame
manner, upon the same occasion. Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeoru^. l. 12. c. 2.
Aristeas. Hist. 70. Scripturae sacrae Interpretum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. p. 12.
Eusebius De Praeparatione Evang. l. 8. c. 1. M. Northbrocke against Vain
Plays and Enterludes. f. 32. and M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses. p. 102. Coc.
Sabellicus. AEnead. 4.5.8 p 641. George Alley, his Poor Man's Library. part 1.
Theodectes a Play-poet, was smitten of God with blindness for inserting some
passages of the Old Testament into one of his Tragedies. Menander, an ancient
Greek Comedian, Suidae Menander.
and insanus mulierum amator, as Suidas styles him, Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 133.
was suddenly drowned, whiles he was swimming in the Pyraeean Haven. Opmeeri
Chronogr. p. 145.
Terence the eminentest Latin Comedian, was drowned and swallowed up of the
Sea, about the 35. year of his age, as he was returning out of Greece with
108. of Menand^rs Comedies which he had translated. Chronicon Chronicorum.
AEtas. 5. fol. 93.
Plautus, an elegant comicall Latin Poet, when as he had scraped together a
great mass of money by his Stage Plays, lost all of it by merchandise; and
then returned back to Rome, he was enforced to grind at a Bakers Mill to get
his living, and so died miserably. Suidae Antiphanes.
Antiphanes the composer of 355. Comedies, died suddenly, being casually
struck with a Pear. Plutarchi Alcibiades. Horace. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 1.
Ludovicus Vives. Notae in l. 2. c. 8. August. De Civit. Dei. See here, page 121.
Eupolis the Poet, for inveighing against A^cibiades in his Comedy, called
Baptis, was apprehended by him, and then drowned in the Sea: Such were the
sudden and untimely ends of all these ancient Play-poets, which should serve as
a caveat to our modern (of which some have likewise come to desperate ends) to
deter them from their ungodly profession. But I pass from these to
Stage Plays: And here I find Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 2. c. 27. See D. Rainolds
Conference with Heart. c. 8. Divis. 4. p. 515.
Theodoret relating a notable Story of a common Actor; who coming to play a
part upon the Theater, in a vestment of cloth of gold, given by Constantine the
Emperor to Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, to wear at times of baptism,
(which vestment this Player had purchased of Cyril who succeeded Macarius;) he
fell down suddenly on the Stage as he was acting in it, and died. Witness
Sherly, slain suddenly by Sir Edward Bishop, whiles he was drunk; as most
report.
I read likewise in Nature. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 33.
Pliny, of one M. Ofilius Hilarus, an eminent Actor of Comedies, that after he
had acted his part with great applause upon his birthday, and was vaunting and
discoursing of this his acting at supper, he fell down suddenly dead at the
table, whiles he was thus boasting and looking on that vizard and person which
he had then sustained. De Gestis Regum Anglorum. l. ^. p. 67.
William of Malmesbury a grave English Historian, upon the concurrent
testimonies of Pope Leo, Petrus Damianus, and Aquitanicus, relates this
memorable History; That a certain Stage Player who got his living by acting,
lodging about the year of our Lord. 1012. in the house of two old women who
were Witches, situated by the highway near to Rome, was by their Sorceries
metamorphosed into the shape of an Ass; and being thus transformed, he became
so tractable that (like another Banks his dancing Horse, or the Sybaritae in
tantum delitiarum studium devenerunt ut equos etiam ad ^ib^am in symposijs
tripudiare a^^ne^ecerint. Sic Cardiani equos in Symposijs ad tibias saltare
docuerunt, etc. Athe^^us Dipnos. lib. 12. cap. 6. vid. Ibidem.
dancing Horses of the Sybarites and Cardians) he would readily turn and move
which way soever these Witches commanded him; which being bruited abroad he
became very gainefull to these his Hoastesses, the people flocking by troops
from all places near adjoining, to behold the rare feats of this Mimicall
Ass, who struck the Spectators with great admiration of his strange gestures.
The fame of this Asses rare qualities being thus bruited abroad, induced a rich
man who dwelt nigh to purchase this Ass at a great price of these two Witches;
who informed their Chapman, that if he would have his Ass to practice his
histrionicall tricks at all times, he must be sure to keep him from water;
which he did for a long space, exhilarating both himself and his guests with
this playing Ass: who after a while being not so stricktly looked to as at
first^ brake loose at last, and running to a pond of water that was next,
bathed and tumbled himself therein for a while, till at length he came to his
humane shape. The Asse-keeper in the mean time missing the Ass, runs forth
to seek him, and meeting him in his humane form, inquires of him whether he
saw the Ass? to which he replied, that he was the Ass, and with all related
to him the whole Story of this his metamorphosis: the Asse-keeper wondering at
it reports it to his Master; and he declares it to Pope Leo; who conventing the
two old women for it, they both acknowledged the premises to be true^ which I
here submit to the Readers faith. If this be but an Ovids Metamorphosis, or an
Apuleius his Golden Ass; we may laugh at the conceit, and so pass it by: but
if it be a truth, as the Historian confidently affirms it, we may deem it a
just judgment of God upon this Actor, who for his acting of other men's parts
in jest, was thus enforced to play the Asses part in earnest. Notae in August.
De Civit. De^. lib. 12. cap. 25. C.
Ludovicus Vives reports from men of credit, that in a certain City of
Brabant, where they used to make annual Plays to their Saints, upon the day
that their great Church was founded, as they do in other places of that
Country; some taking then upon them the vizars and persons of Saints, others of
Devils for to act these Plays; o^e of these Actors who played the Devils part
being enamored with a Girl which he espied at the Play, went dancing to his
house, and there taking his wife as he was in his Players robes and vizard, he
cast her upon a bed, saying, that he would beget a Devil of her; and so he
lay with her: his wife upon this conceived, and the infant which she brought
forth, as soon as ever it was borne, began to dance up and down, being shaped
as men use to paint the Devil. Lo the justice of God upon this person, that
he who acted the Devils part should thus beget a Devil.

Of Gods judgments upon Play-haunters, we have sundry precedents, worthy our
most serious observation; some of particular persons only, others of whole
multitudes together. For Gods judgments on particular persons only. We read
of Diodorus Siculus. Bibl. Hist. l. 16. sect. 93.94, 95. page 806. to 810.
Supplementu^ Qu. Curtius. l 1. p. 17. Justin. Hist. l 9. p. 99. O^osius. Hist.
l. 3. c. 14. Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 3. c. 18.19. Antonini Chron. Tit. 4. c.
p. 2. sect. 2.3. cu^ multis alijs, and Sir Walter Rawleighes History of the
World. lib. 4. pars 1. sect. 8. p. 138.
Philip King of Macedonia, Father to Alexander the Great; that as he delighted
much in Stage Plays, so he was slain by Pausanias as he was sitting in the
Theater at a Play; The like we find Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeoru^. l. 19. c. 1.
Suet^nij Caligula. (...). ^8. Suidae Historica. Caius Caligula. Zonaras
Annalium. Tom. 2. fol. 96. Dion Cassius. Romans Hist. lib. 59. page 854.
recorded of Caius Caligula; who being much devoted to Stage Plays, (which he
would sometimes act himself in woman's apparel to his inexpiable shame) was
murdered by Cherea, whiles he was beholding the Noble-mens Children which he
sent for out of Asia, acting a Play upon the Stage. A just judgment of God
upon these two dissolute Princes, who made these wicked Plays their chief
delight. It is storied of Josephus Antiquitatum I^daeorum. lib. 19. cap. 7.
Eusebius Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 9. but 10. in the English. Nicephorus
Ecclesiasticae Historiae. lib. 2. cap. 13. Op^eerus Chronogr. page 209.
Baronius and Spondanus. Anno 46. sect. 2. and Acts ^^.20. to 24.
Herod Agrippa, that in the third year of his Lieutenantship he went to
Caesarea Stratonis where he published Spectacles and Stage Plays in the honor
of Caesar, and ordained a solemn Feast Day for his prosperous affairs, unto
which all the chief men of worth and great Officers of that Province resorted:
on the second day of these Plays and Spectacles, he came to the Theater in a
silver robe wonderfully wrought, which by the reflection of the Sunbeames
ye^lded so gorgeous a glistering to the eye, that the shining thereof seemed
terrible and intolerable to the beholders; whereupon some flatterers (it is
likeliest that some Players or Play-poets were the chief of them) deifying him
as a God, and he rebuking them not; a little after looking about him, he
beheld an Josephus writes it was an Owl.
Angel, hanging over his head, who smote him with an extreme pain in his
bowels whiles he was thus sitting in the Theater, so that he was carried
desperately sick to his Palace, where being tormented for the space of five
days with bitter gnawing of his bowels, he ended his life most miserably,
being eaten up of worms. Which divine judgment, though it miraculously seized
on him for his ambition, in that he rebuked not these ^latterers, and gave not
God the glory; yet since this Tyrant, ( Chronicon Chron. AEtas. 6. fol. 107.
Agrippa Magnus^
who had built a Theater and Amphitheater in Jerusalem after the Roman manner,
to advance Idolatry and Paganism, and suppress Religion;) was thus smitten by
Gods Angel in the Theater it self, where he sat beholding these Plays and
Spectacles which he had then provided for Caesar's honor, and the peoples
recreation, whose deifying acclamations were the cause of this his fearful
death; and since these Stage Plays were the chief occasion of drawing both
himself and the people into the Theater; we may justly behold him as a ^ad
fatal Spectacle of Gods avenging judgment, as well for his instituting and
beholding Stage Plays, and erecting public Theaters, as for his proud
ambition. Not to speak of Josephus An^^qu. Iudaeoru^. lib. 15. cap. 11. here,
p. 466.
Herod the great, whom the Jews conspired to murder in the Theater which he
had built at Jerusalem whiles he was beholding Stage Plays, for that he had
brought in Stage Plays into Jerusalem contrary to Moses Law and the
discipline of the Jewish Nation. Nor yet to mention the Emperor Nero, whose
acting and beholding of Plays was one chief occasion that stirred up Qui
interroga^us a Nerone, quibus causis ad oblivionem sacramenti processis^et:
Oderamte, inquit, nec quisqu^m tibi militum fidelior fuit dum amari meruisti,
odisse caepi post quam parricida matris and uxoris, auriga, histrio and
incendiarius extitisti. Tacitus. Annal^ lib. 15. sect. 10. page 360.
Subrius Flavius, with others, to conspire his death. Historiae. lib. 1. page
31. and 51. to 67.
Herodian informs us, that Commodus his excessive delight in Actors,
Gladiators, Plays and Enterludes, and his unworthy coming on the Stage in
person to play the Actor and Gladiator before the people, ( from which base
shameful act his friends, together with Martia his best beloved Concubine, did
earnestly dissuade him, ne Romanum Imperium contumelia a^ticeret, etc.) was the
original ground of his untimely death; he being poisoned by his Martia, whom
he resolved to murder, for this her good advice: and See his Gallieni duo.
page 316. and here, page 485.
Trebellius Pollicarpus records, that Gallienus the Emperor, was murdered by
Martianus, Heraclianus, and Claudius, for this very cause, lest by his lewd
example in frequenting Stage Plays, and favoring Stage Players, with which
he had filled his Palace, he should bring both himself and the Republike unto
utter ruin: These several Kings and Emperors Stage-delights being thus the
just oecasions of their untimely deaths. A sufficient Item for all Christian
Princes for ever to abandon Plays and Actors as fatal and pernicious evils
both to their own persons, and their subjects too. To pass from Kings and
Emperors to some of meaner quality, De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 26.
Tertullian, a Father of good credit among Scholars, informs us; That a
certain Christian woman in his time going to a Playhouse to see a Stage Play,
returned thence possessed with a Devil (as too too many now a days do; at
leastwise in a spiritual sense,) which unclean spirit being afterward
rebuked in an exorcisme, that he durst assaul^ a Christian woman; replied, that
he had done constantly and most iustly^ in meo enim eam inveni, for I have
found her in my own Jurisdiction. If therefore you will neither believe the
Act 1. Scene 1. and Act 2. Chorus.
forequoted Fathers and Authors, that the Playhouse is the Devils Chapel;
yet now believe the very Devil himself who claims it for his own, together
with all such persons who frequent it. The same De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 26.
Father relates; that another Christian woman who went to see a Tragedy, had
the very same night a linen sheet presented to her in a dream; the Tragedian
himself being likewise named to her, with an exprobration for this act of
hers; after which she lived not above five days: To which two examples (writes
he) Quo utique and ali^ documenta cesserunt do his, qui cum Diabolo apud
Spectacula co^municando a Domino exciderunt. Ibid.
I might add some fearful precedents of others, who by communicating with
the Devil at Stage Plays, have fallen quite away from God. A dreadful
Apostasy and judgment indeed. To these two former precedents, I shall annex
the parallel example of a See M. Brathwait, his English Gentlewoman. London
1631 page 53.54. this Author being then present at her departure.
late English Gentlewoman of good rank; who daily bestowing the expense of her
best hours upon the Stage, and at last falling into a dangerous sickness of
which she died, her friends in her extremi^y sent for a Minister to comfort,
counsel, and prepare her for her end, who coming to instruct her, and
advising her to repent, and call upon God for mercy, she made him no reply at
all; but cried out Hieronimo, Hieronimo; O let me see Hieronimo acted;
(calling out for a Play, in stead of crying unto God for mercy,) and Percussus
quisque ante rapitur, quam ad lamenta paenitentiae convertatur. Pensate ergo,
qualis ad conspectum districti judicis perveni^, ^^i non vacat flere quod
^ecit. Greg. Mag. Epist. l^b. 11 cap. 3. ^ol. 452. b.
so closed her dying eyes. O tragical, O fearful death! answerable to her
former wicked life? Not to relate the various tragical ends of many, who in my
remembrance at London, have been slain in Play Houses, or upon quarrels there
commenced: Nor yet to recite the sudden fearful burning even to the ground,
both of the Globe and Fortune Play Houses, no man perceiving how these fires
came: together with the visible apparition of the Devil on the Stage at the
Belsavage Playhouse, in Queen Elizabeth's days, (to the great amazement both
of the Actors and Spectators) whiles they were there profanely playing the
History of Faustus (the truth of which I have heard from many now alive, who
well remember it,) there being some distracted with that fearful sight; I
shall confine my self only to such printed examples of Gods judgments upon
many Players and Play-haunters together, which I find scattered here and there
in sundry Authors. To begin first at home. I read in Anno 8. Eliz. 1567. page
1209. b.
Hollingshead, that in the eighth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, there were
three Scholars at Oxford slain outright, and diverse others hurt and mained,
with the unexpected fall of a wall, whiles ^hey were beholding a Stage Play: M.
Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses. p. 135. I.G. his Refutation of the Apology for
Actors. page 43.44.
About the year 1582. many people being assembled together at the Theaters in
London to see the bawdy Enterludes and other fooleries there practiced, God
caused the earth on a sudden mightily to shake and tremble, as though all would
have fallen to the ground: where at the people sore amazed, many of them leapt
down from the top of the Turrets, Pinacles and Towers, where they stood, to
the ground, whereby some had their legs broken, some their arms, some their
backs, some were hurt one where^ some another where, and many sore crushed and
bruised; but not any but they went away sore afraid, and wounded in conscience.
And yet (writes my Author) can neither the one nor the other, fray men from
these devilish exercises, until the Lord consume them all in his wrath: The
Lord of his mercy open the eyes of the Magistrates to pluck down these places
of abuse that God may be honored, and their consciences discharged. M. John
Field, his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden^ London 1583. Henry
Cave, his Narration of the fall of Paris Garden. London 1588. M. Stubs, his
Anatomy of Abuses. p. 134.135. D. Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments. Edit.
3. London 1631. l. 1. c. 35. p. 212. and the Preface to the Practice of Pi^ty.
I. G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors. pag^ 43.
Upon the 13. of January, Anno 1583. being the Lord's Day, an infinite number of
people, men, women, and children, resorted unto Paris Garden to see
Beare-bayting, Plays, and other pastimes, and being altogether mounted aloft
upon their Scaffolds and Galleries, and in the midst of all their iollity and
pastime, all the whole building (not one stick so much as standing) fell down
miraculously to the ground with much horror and confusion: In the fall of it
five men and two women were slain outright, and above one hundred and fifty
persons more, sore wounded and bruised, whereof many died shortly after; some
of them having their brains dashed out, some their heads all to quasht, some
their legs broken, some their arms, some their backs, some one hurt, some
another; there being nothing heard there but woeful shreekes and cries which
did even pierce the skies; children bewayling there the death and hurts of
their Parents, Parents of their Children; Wives of their Husbands, and Husbands
of their Wives; so that every way from four of the clock in the afternoon
till nine at night, especially over Londonbridge, many were carried in chaires,
and led betwixt their friends, and so brought home to their houses with
sorrowful heavy hearts, like lame Cripples. A just, though terrible judgment
of God upon these Play-haunters and prophaners of his holy day: the M. John
Field^ in his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden.
original relator of which, does thus conclude: And therefore for a
conclusion, I beseech all Magistrates by the mercies of God in Jesus Christ,
that by this occasion and example, they take good heed to look to the people
committed to their charge, that they take order, especially on the Sabbath
days, that no Citizen or Citizens servants have liberty to repair to any of
those abused places, and that they keep their straggling wantons in, that they
may be better occupied. And as they have with good commendation so far
prevailed, that upon Sabbath days these Heathenish Enterludes and Plays are
banished, so it will please them to follow the matter still, that they may be
utterly rid and taken away, For surely it is to be feared, besides the
destruction of body and soul that many are brought unto by frequenting the
Theater and Curtin^ that one day these places will likewise be cast down by
God himself, and draw with them an huge heap of such contemners and profane
persons to be killed and spoiled in their bodies. Neither was he a false
prophet altogether. D. Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments. l. ^. cap. 35.
page 212.
For in the year of our Lord, 1607. at a Town in Bedford-shire called Risley,
the fl^ore of a chamber wherein many were gathered together to see a Stage Play
on the Sabbath day, fell down; by means whereof diverse were sore hurt, and
some killed. If these domestique examples, together with that of Diogenes
Laertius. lib. 1. page 33.
Thales the Philosopher, who was smothered and pressed to death at a Play will
not move us; let us cast our eyes upon some foreign Tragedies of this nature.
I read in Lib. 3. c. 4.44. page 889.
Munster his Cosmography, that about the year of our Lord, 1380. Lodovicke a
Marquis of Nisina, a man not very religious, was made Archbishop of
Magdeburge; who thereupon invited many Gentlemen, and others, together with
their Wives and Daughters into a Town called Calven, to feast and make merry
with him; who came accordingly: The Bishop for their better entertainment
provided the Towne-hall for them to dance in (they being much addicted to
dancing and singing) and to act other vanities: and whiles they were busily
turning, dancing, and playing, and every one danced merrily at the hands of
their Ladies, the house being oppressed with the great weight, began to sink,
giving a great crack before. The Archbishop taking the Lady who stood next
him by the hand, hastened to go down the stairs with the first: and as soon
as he begun to go down, the stony stairs being loose before fell down, and
miserably crushed to death the Archbishop and his consort, with diverse others.
It is storied by Book 4. chap. 192.193. fol. 243.244, See the General History
of France. p. 231. and D. Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments. lib. 2. c. 37.
page 435.436. accordingly.
Froyssart in his Chronicle, and by some others since, that in the Reign of
Charles the sixth, in the year of our Lord; 1392. at a marriage made in the
Kings Court at the hostle of Saint Paul's in Paris, between Sir Yvan of Foiz,
Bastard Son to the Earl of Foiz, and one of the Queen of Erance her
Gentlewomen, the Tuesday before Candlemas day: A Squire of Normandy called
Hogrymen of Gensay, provided for a Play or Mummery against night^ for which
purpose he had devised 6. Coats made of Linen cloth covered with Pitch, and
thereon cloth and flax like hair, and had them ready in a Chamber: The King
himself put on one of these Coats; the Earl of Iovy, a young lusty Knight,
another; Sir Charles of Poytiers, the third; Sir Yvan of Foiz another; the Son
of the Lord Lanthorillet had on the fifth, and the Squire himself put on the
sixth. Being thus apparelled and sowed fast on these Coats, which made them
soon like wild wode-houses; the King upon the advice of Sir Yvan of Foiz,
commanded an Usher of his Chamber to enjoin all the Torch-bearers in the Hall
where the Ladies were dancing to stand close to the wall, and not to come near
the wode-houses for fear of setting them on fire, which he did accordingly.
Soon after the Duke of Orleance, who knew nothing of the Mummery or the Kings
command, entered into the Hall with four Knights and six Torches, to behold
the dancing, and begun himself to dance. Therewith the King and the five other
Masquers came in, in these their disguises, five of them being fastened one to
the other, the King only being loose, who went before and led the device. When
they entered the Hall, every one took so great heed to them that they forgate
the Torches. The King departing from his company went to the Ladies to sport
with them, as youth required, and came to the Duchess of Berry who took hold
of him to know what he was, but he would not show his name. The Duke of
Orleance running to the other five to discover who they were, put one of the
Torches his servants held so near the flax, that he set one of the Coats on
fire, and so each of them set fire on the other, so that they were all in a
bright flame; the fire taking hold of the living Coats and their shirts began
to scorch their bodies so that they began to bren and to cry out for help. The
fire was so great that none durst come near them, and those that did, brent
their hands by reason of the heat of the pitch. One of them called
Manthorillet fled into the Botry and cast himself into a vessel of water
where they rynsed pots, and so saved his life by quenching the fire, but yet
he was sore hurt. The Countess o^ Berry with her long loose Gown covered the
King and so saved him from the fire: two of the other were burnt to death in
the place: the Bastard of Foiz and the Earl of Iovy were carried to their
lodgings, and there died within two days after in great pain and misery. Thus
was this Comedy turned into a doleful Tragedy. The French History. p. 231^
The King though he escaped was much distracted in mind (and his servants
distressed with grief) at this unhappy accident, so that he could not sleep
quiet that night. Froyssarts Chronicle. Book 4. chap. 192.193. fol. 244.
The next day these news being spread abroad in the City, and every man
marveling at it: some said, how God had sent that token for an ensample, and
that it was wisdom for the King to regard it, and to withdraw himself from
such young idle wantonnesse^ which he had used overmuch being a King. All Lords
and Ladies through the Realm of France and elsewhere, that heard of this chance
had great marvai^e thereof. Pope Boniface being at Rome with his Cardinals
rejoiced at it, and said, that it was a token sent from God to to the Realm of
France, which had taken part against him. Sure I am it was a just judgment of
God, to teach Kings and great men, and not to be Actors or Spectators of
vanity, but wholly to lay aside such foolish Masks and Enterludes. I.G. his
Refutation of the Apology for Actors. page 38. A short Treatise against
Stage Plays, printed, 1625. and Dedicated to the Parliament. page 28.
At Lions in France, in the month of August, in the year 1607. whiles the
Jesuits were acting a profane Play of Christ's coming to Judgment at the
last day, to the disgrace of true Religion, the Lord from Heaven continued
thunder and lightnings for two hours space together, slew twelve of the Actors
and Spectators presently, and amazed all the rest with great terror and fear.
To pass from France to Rome, Suetonius records, that in Julius Caesar his
time, there resorted such a multitude of people to Rome to behold his
Stage Plays and Spectacles, that most of the strangers were forced to lodge in
the Villages adjoining in Tents: there was oft-times very many people trod and
crushed to death at these Plays by reason of the multitude, and among them two
Senators: so tragical and fatal were these Enterludes. Romans Histor. lib. 37.
p. 101.
Dion Cassius records; that in Pompey his time. a Theater in Rome built for the
acting of Syrian Enterludes was overturned with a sudden tempest, to the death
and destruction of many persons. To pass by the memorable example of Gods
avenging Justice upon the Sea Judge. 16.23. to 31. and Arias Montanus. Comment.
in lib. Iudicum. c. 16. Antwerpia 1592. p. 568. to 580. See Lyra, Tostatus,
Peter Ma^tyr. Ibidem.
Philistines and their Lords, many thousands of them being crushed to death
with the fall of their Dagons Temple, which Samson pulled down upon their
heads whiles they were there feasting, dancing, and acting Plays before their
Idol Dagon, and beholding Samson playing, dancing, and making sport before
them like a Clown in a Play, they calling him out of the prison to that
purpose. From whence Ibidem. page 570.571, 572.
Arias Montanus well observes, that it was the custom of the Philistines and
other Idolaters, to court their Idols with dances and Stage Plays on their
sol^mne Festivals; their temples being built in such a manner, that people
might conveniently behold the dances and Stage Plays that were acted in them:
and thereupon he justly taxes Vulgo ut gratificentur principes varia ac
pleru^que humanitati dissentanea, vel ed^nt ipsi, vel edenda permittunt
spectacula. Hinc olim Theatra caedibus ac sanguine plena; hinc nostro tempore
nostrisque moribus impura, and ab omni art semota, scenarum and comaediaru^
licentia, and gladiatorum caede funestiora crudelioraque taurorum ac belluarum
munera quae dat retinentibus ac detestatis superorum animis dicata
consecrataque versantur. vid. Ibid.
Christian Princes, for exhibiting Plays and such like impure, unchristian
spectacles to the people, and tolerating them in their Kingdoms, they being
unsuitable and pernicious unto Christian manners, and altogether unlawful unto
Christians as originally consecrated unto Idols; the very acting and beholding
of them being odious unto God, as this his judgment on the Philistines proves.
Annalium. l. 4. c. 10. p. 165.166.
Cornelius Tacitus, and Historiae. lib. 7. cap. 4.
Paulus Orosius, (and out of them Eutropius R^rum Romans l. 7. Tiberius.
Petrarch. De Remed. Vtriusque Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30. Bodinus Methodo
Historiae. c. 7. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays, etc. page 124. D.
Hackwels Apology l. 4. c. 4. sect. 9. Edit. 1. p. 320. A short Treatise
against Stage-playes^ page 26. with sundry others. Coc. Sabellicus. Ennead. 7.
lib. 1. page 191.
sundry others) relate; that about the eighth year of Tiberius his Reign,
there were by the just judgment of God, at least Sonorites Tacitus, others
only above 20000. which may both stand well together, since 50000. is above
20000.
fifty thousand persons slain and pressed to death at once, with the fall of a
Theater at Fidena in Italy, (which Theater was built by one Atilius,) whiles
they were there beholding Sword-playes, and such like Theatricall Enterludes;
the dolefulness of which bloody Tragedy and judgment (seconded with a
devouring fire, which almost burnt up that City) is at large described by
Tacitus. Ioannes Aventinus in his excellent Annals, has registered two
memorable Examples for our present purpose. Aventinus Annalium Bojorum. lib. 7.
page 530.
The first of them happened at Pisonium, a City of Bavaria; about the year of
our Lord, 1200. where diverse people assembling together from all quarters to
behold Enterludes and Cirque-playes, above three hundred of them were there
slame outright with thunder and hayle from Heaven: The latter of them Idem
Annal. Bojorum. lib. 7. page 668. and 581. Romae quintadecimo Call. Octobris
pons Tiberinus corruit aquis, obru^i interire quingenti sexaginta homines, qui
eo secularibus ludis, quos Nicolaus contra decret^ Constantiensis S^natus
aperuerat, confluxerant.
fell out in Rome it self upon the 15. day of October, in the year of our
Lord 1450 when Pope Nicholas the first, solemnized his famous Iubily with
secular Plays: at which time, five hundred and fifty persons coming to Rome
to see these secular Enterludes, which this Pope brought in contrary to the
decrees of the Council of Constance, were drowned and washed to death in the
River Tiber, the Bridge upon which they were being overturned with the waters,
To these I shall add one Tragical Story more which In Vita Beati Gregorij.
page 312.313. Edit. Basil^ae. 1571.
Gregory Nyssen, in the life of Gregory the worker of miracles, has registered
to posterity. The Citizens of Caesarea, and well might all the people of that
Province accustomed to meet together at Caesarea once a year, upon a public
solemn Festival which they dedicated to a certain Devill-Idol, which that
Country worshipped; at which feast they See Act 1. Scene 1.2. and Act 2^ Est
enim ludus turpis and inhonestus qui in se deformitatem importat, and tales
fecerunt Gentiles coram dijs suis in Theatris and templis: and illa est
simpliciter inhibitus Christianis. Holkot. Lectio. 173. in lib. Sapientiae.
fol. 133.
always celebrated some public Stage Plays to the honor of this their
Idol, and to delight the people: It fortuned that the whole Country and City
assembled thus together after their wonted manner, when Saint Gregory was newly
made Minister of that City: and being thus assembled they presently flocked to
the Theater; Eorum qui concurrerant Theatrum plenum ^rat, and eorum qui
postremo affluxerant multitudo subsel^ijs undique superf^ndebatur, atque
omnibus ad spectacula atque acroamata orchestram intueri cupientibus: plena
^cena tumul^us and trepidationis, irrita praestigiatoribus, mirabil^umque
spectaculorum artificibus oste^^atio erat, tumultu sese mutuo constipantium non
modo oblectationem sunsicae impediente, sed ne circulatoribus quidem and
praestigiatoribus suas arts ostentanti tempus erat, etc. Greg. Nyssen. Ibidem.
which being filled with those who first hasted thither, those who came after
climbed up by troops upon the Scaffolds that were built about it. At last the
crowde of the people; who were very desirous to behold these Enterludes, grew
so great, that they left no room at all upon the Stage, either for the Players
or Musicians to act their parts; whereupon the whole multitude cried out to
that Devil whose festival they then solemnized, with one united voice; O
Jupiter make us room; Which Saint Gregory over-hearing, he presently sends
one who stood by to the Theater, to tell the people that that they should
forthwith have more room and ease then they desired. Hac autem ab eo voce
tanquam tristi quadam sententia prolata pestilen^ia frequentem ferias agentium,
and ludos celebrantium conventum excipit, ac sta^im tripudiantium choris
lamentatio miscebatur adeo ut in luctus and calamitates eis voluptates
converterentur, quum pro plausibus and cantu tibiarum, aliae super alias
naeniae cantusque lugubres urbem passim invasissent, etc. Ibidem.
No sooner was this message delivered to them, l^ke a doleful sentence passed
against them, but a devouring pestilence suddenly seized upon that great
assembly, which were there sporting and beholding Plays, and presently a
lamentation was mingled with their dancing, in so much that their pleasures
were turned into sorrows and calamities; and funeral doleful Elegies one
upon another were heard thorowo^t the City in stead of acclamations and
music: Cum enim semel morbus homines invasisset, opinione citius propagabatur
atque serp^bat, ignis in modum domos depascens, adeo ut aedes quidem sacrae,
quae spe sanationis atque remed^j confugiebant, ijs, qui morbo peribant
repletae: fontes vero, aquae ductus, s^aturiginesque ac pu^e^ ^oru^, quos
atr^citate morbi sitis^ exurebat, referti essent, etc. multi item ultro
transirent ad sepulchra eo quod superstites s^p^l^^ndis mor^uis non amplius
suffice^ent. Ibidem.
For as soon this pestilent disease had seized upon men, opinion and conceit
did propagate it the faster, it consuming whole houses at once, like a fire: in
so much that flying from their houses to their Temples for succor and
recovery, their very temples were even filled up with the carcases of such who
there fell down dead of this disease: whose extremity was such, that all the
Cisternes, Fountains and pits of water near the City were covered with the
dead corpse of such who resorted to them for to quench their thirst; in so much
that many went voluntarily to their graves to die there, because the living
were not sufficient to bury the dead. Neither did this pestilence surprise men
suddenly, but a certain Ghost or Spirit came first unto these houses over
which destruction hovered, and then certain perdition followed after. At last
when the people came to know the cause of this their sickness, they renounced
their former Idolatrous sacrifices, rites and Enterludes, and resorting with
their whole families to Saint Gregory, they entreated him both to instruct them
and to pray unto God for them, that so they might escape this pestilence. By
which means they all abandoning their Idol-worship were drawn to the
profession of Christ's Name: part of them being led as it were by the hand unto
the truth by the disease that was then upon them; others of them embracing the
faith of Christ, as a defensative to secure them from the plague; Adeo illis
hominibus sanitate morbus^ validior erat. Qui enim in sanitate ad approbationem
mysterij rationibus infirmi essent, corporali^ morbo ad fidem convaluerunt.
Ibidem.
their sickness being more effectual to convert them then their health. For
those who were so weak in their health that they could not be won by
reasons to approve the truth, were made whole in faith, by this their corporal
disease. Lo here a man-eating pestilence sent by God from Heaven upon these
Pagan Play-haunters; Answerable to which I find another Story in Plutarch, who
relates; Pestis Roma grassata omnes ad unum scenae administros extinxit.
Plutarchi. Question^s Romanae. Quaest 107. page 600.
that in the Consulship of Caius Sulpitius, and Licinius Solon, the great
plague then reigning in Rome, devoured not only sundry Play-haunters, but even
all the Stage Players then in Rome, so that there was not so much as one of
them left alive: A just judgment of God upon these pestiferous miscreants. And
may we not then suspect, that their toleration of, and our great resort to
Stage Plays, has been a great occasion of those devouring Plagues, which
formerly and now of late have seized, not only upon London and her Suburbs,
(where diverse public standing Play Houses are every day frequented,) but on
other Towns and Cities too, where straggling wandering Players (though 14 Eliz.
c. 5.39. Eliz. cap 4.
Rogues by Statute) do oft-times act their parts? Sure I am that Saint De Civ.
Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.
Augustine, Historiae. lib. 3. cap 4.
Orosius, and Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. and others forequoted. at p. 67.68.
and Act 6. Scene 5. Hermannus Schedell. Chronicon Chronicorum. AEtas 5. fol. 83.
others truly style Stage Plays; the very plague and pestilence of men's
minds and manners; and that Paedagogi. lib 3. cap. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, De Spectaculis. lib. c. 27.
Tertullian, and S. Hom. 8. de Paenitentia. and Hom. 6.7. and 38. in Matthew. See
before p. 67.68. and Act 6. Scene 5.
Chrysostom, call the Playhouse; the ^ery sea^e and chair of pestilence; no
wonder therefore if they produce a plague in those Kingdoms, and the Cities
which permit them. Indeed the Sea before, p. 17.18.
ancient Pagan Romans when as Rome was exceedingly pestred with the plague;
sent into Tuscany for Stage Players, to assuage its rage: but both Nec tamen
ludorum primum initium procurandis religionibus datu^, aut religione animos,
aut corpora morbis levavit, etc. Livy. Hist. l. 7. sect. 2.3.
Livy, Dij propter sedandam corporum pestilentia^^ ludos sibi scenicos exhiberi
jubebant. Pontife^ autem vester Scipio propter onimorum cavendam pestilentia^,
ipsam scenam constr^i prohibebat. Neque enim and illa corporum pestilentia ideo
conquievit, quia pop^lo bellicoso, and s^lis antea ludis Circensibus assueto,
ludoru^ scenicorum delicata subintravit insania, sed astutia spirituu^
nefandoru^ praevidens illa^ pestilen^iam jam ^ine debito cessaturam, aliam
long graviorem qua plurimu^ gaude^, ex hac occasion, non corpori^us sed
moribus curavit immittere: quae animos miserorum tantis occae ^avit tenebris,
^anta deformitate faedavit, ut etiam modo, quod incredible forsitan erit, si a
nostris posteris audietur, Romana urbe vastata quos pestile^tia ista possedit,
a^que inde fugientes, Carthaginem pervenire potuerunt, in Theatris quotidie pro
histrionibus insani^^nt. De Civit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 33.
Augustine, and Histor. lib. 3. cap^ 4. Se^ here, Act 6. Scene 5.
Orosius assure us; that they were so far from mitigating this plague which
^eised on men's bodies, which they did rather aggravat^; that in stead of it,
they brought in among them, a far more pernicious and perpetual pestilence of
their souls and manners (to wit, their wicked pestiferous Stage Plays) which
they could not shake off. In the first year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
Hollinshead Anno 1559. p. 1184. n. 50.
all Stage-plages were prohibited by public proclamation from the 7. of April
till Allhallontide, of purpose to cease that plague which was then begun; and
so in all great sicknesses since that time, all public Enterludes have been
suppressed for the selfsame reason. If then the inhibiting of public
Stage Plays has been such a common an^idote to assuage those fearful
Plagues, which God in justice has inflicted on us; we may then conclude from
the rule of contraries, that our resort to ribaldry Stage Plays (which God
without all question, as appears by all the new recited judgments, See
Salvian De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. accordingly. and Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De
Davide and Saul. and Hom. 6. and 38. in Matthew.
cannot but abhor,) is a grand occasion both of the engendring and
propagating these late, these present plagues which yet we feel, and suffer.
As therefore we would fly and fear this dreadful fatal sickness, which
has a long time hovered over our heads, and has almost quite depopulated some
particular places of this Kingdom (and God knows how soon, how fast it may
increase to sweep us all away) let us henceforth cast out these our lewd
pestiferous Enterludes, and raze down these our Leprous Play Houses, which may
involue us in the selfsame miseries, that these Caesarians here sustained, to
our utter ruin. But if all these former examples will not deter us from
these Spectacles, let us consider what general National judgments they have
often procured. To pass by Gods judgments upon Theatra, Et Circum cum plebe sua
madidasque popinas. Quicquid agunt homines Sodomorum, incendia justis Ignibus
involuunt and Christo judice damnant. Haec fugisse semel satis est, non
respicit ultra^ Lot noster, etc. Prudentius. Hamertigenia. Bibl. Patrum. Tom.
4. page 907. D.
Sodom for her Cirques and Theaters, as Prudentius poetically expresses it;
who affirms with all that Christians after their conversion, return back no
more to Plays and Theaters. The excessive expenses of the Athenians on their
Stage Plays (if De Gloria Atheniensium. lib. and Justin. Hist. lib. 6. page 79.
Plutarch or Justin may be credited,) was the very overthrow and destruction of
their State, and the occasion of their bondage to the Macedonians. Necsatis
haec culpa est, ^tiam mimis and scurrilibus^ ludicris sanctissimoru^ personae
interponuntur Deorum. Et ut spectatoribus vacuis risus possit atque hilaritas
excitari, joculatoribus feriuntur cavillationibus numina, conclamant and
assurgunt. Theatra, caveae omnes concrepant fragoribus atque plausibus, etc. Et
audetis post ista mirari, unde oriantur haec mala, quibus inundatur and
premitur sine ulla intermissione mortalitas? Advers. Gentes. l. 4. p. 150. vid.
Ibid.
Arnobius informs the Gentiles, against whom he wrote; that all the evils, the
miseries with which mortality was overwhelmed and oppressed from day to day,
without intermission, originally sprang from Stage Plays, with which these
Heathen Gentiles were besotted. Saint Augustine De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c.
31.32.33. and l. 2. c. 4. to the end of that Book.
at large demonstrates; that the bringing in, and tolerating of Stage Plays,
which vitiates the minds and manners of the Romans, was the principal cause
of the very ruin of their Commonweal and of all those fat all miseries which
befell them. Whereupon he breaks out into this patheticall exclamation.
Amentes, amentes, quis est hic tantus non error, s^d furor, ut exitium vestrum,
sicut audivimus, plangentibus Orientalibus populis, and maximis Civitatibus in
remotissimis terris, publicum ^^ctu^ maeroremque ducentibus, vo^ Theatra
quaereretis, intraretis, impleretis, and multo insaniora quam fuerant antea
faceretis? hanc animorum labem ac pestem, hanc probitatis and honestatis
eversionem vobis Scipio ille metuebat, quando constitui Theatra prohibebat,
etc. neque enim censebat ille faelice^ esse rem pub. stantibus, maenibus,
ruentibus moribus: Sed in vobis v^luit quod Daemones impij seduxerunt quam quod
homines providi praecaverunt. Hinc est, quod mala quae facitis, vobis imputari
non vultis; mala vero quae patimini, Christianis temporibus imputatis. Neque
enim in vestra securitate pacatam rempub. sed luxuriam quaeritis impunitam; qui
depravati rebus prosperis, nec corrigi potuistis adversis. De Civit. Dei. lib.
1. cap. 33.
O fools! O mad men! what is this your extreme I say not error, but frenzy,
that when as all the Eastern Nations, as we have heard, and the very greatest
Cities in the remotest Countries do publicly grieve and sorrow for your
destruction; that you should run after Theaters^ enter into them, fill them,
and make them much more unruly and outrageous then before? This plague and
pestilence of men's minds; this overthrow of honesty and goodness did worthy
Scipio fear would befall you, when he prohibited Theaters to be erected; when
he discerned that you might be easily corrupted and overturned with prosperity;
when as he would not have you secure from fear of enemies: neither did he
think the Commonweal could be happy, when as the walls of it only stood,
but the manners fell to ruin. But in you that has more prevailed which wicked
Devils have seducingly suggested, then that which provident men have labored
to prevent. Hence is it, that the evils, which you do, you will not have them
to be imputed to you; and the evils, which you suffer, you impute only to the
Christian times. Neither in your security do you seek for a peaceable
Commonwealth, but an unpunished luxury, who being depraved with prosperity,
cannot yet be amended by adversity. Saint Chrysostom, as he records; Magna
Civita^ibus mala ferunt Theatra magna. Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom. 5. Col.
347. B.
that Stage Plays had brought great mischiefs upon Cities, both in respect of
sin and punishment; so he with all relates: Vel ipsa signa agnoscite, quia
aereum factum est caelum, and terra ferrea. Iracundiam Dei ipsa elementa
loquuntur. Fil^ hominum quousque graves cord? ut quid deligitis vanitatem in
spectaculis, and quaeritis mendacium in histrionibus. H^milia ult. in Psalm.
118. Tom. 1. Col. 1031. A.
That the very Heavens were made. Brass, and the earth Iron; that the very
elements themselves did proclaim Gods wrath against men for their
Stage Plays. How long therefore O sons of men will ye be slow of heart? Why
(writes he) do ye love vanity in Enterludes, and seek after lies in
Stage Players? Holy Salvian writes expressly; That the very sacking of Rome, the
destruction of all Italy, the spoiling of Ravenna, Trevers, Marseilles,
Agrippina, Moguntia, and a great part of France and Spain by the Goathes and
Vandals, was but a just judgment of God in^licted on them for their
frequenting and maintaining Plays and Theaters; whose execrable filthiness,
whose inconsistency with Christianity, and whose odiousness in Gods eyesight,
he most eligantly discyphers. If we observe all the passages of the Roman
History, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. and 7. thorowout.
we shall easily discover that the Roman Commonweal had never so bad
Emperors and Magistrates, and the greatest plagues that can befall a people,
that it was never so ill governed, never so much disordered and corrupted: and
that the Sea for this purpose: Arnobius Contra Gentes. l 4. and 7. August. De
Civit. Dei. lib. 1.2. and 4. Salvian, De Gub. Dei. l. 6.7. Orosius. Hist. l. 7.
c. 5.6, 7, 8. Tacitus Annal. lib. 14. c. 1.2, 3. Herodian Historia. l. 1.
Suetonij. Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero. AElij Lampridij H^li^gabasus
and Commodus. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. Eutropius Rerum Romans lib. 8.9. Dion
Cassius. Romans Hist. lib. 57.59, 60. Grimstons Imperial History. Tiberius,
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Heliogabalus, Comodus, and Carinus. Zonaras Annaliu^.
Tom. 2. with sundry others^
Romans themselves and their Allies were never so strangely oppressed,
afflicted, dissipated and consumed, with all kind of plagues and judgments;
with pestilences, civil dissentions, tyranny, foreign invasions, exactions,
mundations, earthquakes, fires, and the like, as in the reigns of Tiberius,
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Heliogabalus, Commodus, Carinus, and these other
flagitious Histrionicall Emperors in whose reigns both Plays and Players
were in most request, as well with Prince as people, whose sins were
nourished and intended by them; and so by consequence Gods judgments on them
too. When ever their Plays and Theaters went up, their manners, virtues,
prosperity and Commonwealth went down, and all Gods judgments fell upon
them, as their Historians declare at large. When See Josephus Antiq. Iudaeorum.
l. 15. c. 11.12, 13. and l. 16. c. 9.
Herod brought in Plays among the Jews, then went their manners, their State,
their whole Nation unto wrecke, and See 2. Maccabees. c. 4. v. 9.10.18.
Gods judgments seized on them more fatally then before. To come nearer to our
times: De Remed. Vtriusque Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 30.
Franciscus Petrarcha, Against Vain Plays and Euterludes. fol. 32.36.
M. Northbrooke, Anatomy of Abuses. p. 102.106, 107^
M. Stubs, and Master Gosson, his School of Abuses. I. G^ his Refutation of
the Apology for Actors. A short Treatise against Stage Plays. page 26.27, 28.
with sundry others. Gualther^ Hom. 11. in Nahum.
others certify us: That Stage Plays draw down Gods vengeance not only on
their Actors and Spectators (for which they recite some precedents;) but
likewise on those States and Cities which allow them. Master Brinsly, a
reverend Divine, informs us: The True Watch. part 3. chap. 11. Abomina^ion 30.
page 302^
That such who frequent Play Houses, must needs bring faggots and firebrands to
set in the gates of our Jerusalem. The very Title of the second and third
Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, published by Authority in the year
of our Lord, 1^80.) instructs us; That that Commonweal is nigh unto the curse
of God, wherein either Players be made of, or Theaters maintained: And the
Author of the third of these Blasts, being once a Play-poet, writes; Ibidem.
page 55.56.
That sin did so abound at Stage Plays, and was there so openly committed,
that when he gave himself first to observe the abuse of common Plays, he
looked, when God in justice should presently in his wrath have confounded the
beholders. Ibidem. p. 53. So writes Master Gualther too, in his 11. Homily upon
Nahum.
And I am verily persuaded (says he) that if Players may be still permitted
to make sale of sin, we shall pull on our heads Gods vengeance, and to our
Realm bring an utter confusion. And no wonder that it should be so: For Deus
etsi quaedam longanimiter tolerat, quaedam tam^n etiam in hac vita flagellat:
and hic nonnunquam ferire inchoat, quos aeterna damnatione cons^mmat. Gregor.
Magnus. Moral. lib. 36. cap. 18.
where ever sin goes before, Gods wrath and vengeance will certainly follow
after; where all wickedness and profaneness super-abound, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
Ier. 7.20. Ezech. 21.30.31, 32.
Gods Judgments cannot but abound at last. Now Plays and Play Houses, (as the
precedent Scenes do manifest,) are the fruitful nurseries, and fomenters of
all wickedness, all lewdness whatsoever: they likewise Hebr. 3.13. See Act 7.
Scene 14.
harden men's hearts through the deceitfulness of sin, and undispose them to
repentance; they so ripen and prepare men for Gods judgments, Sopor quippe
insunditur ut perditio subsequatur. Cum enim completis iniquitatibus suis quis
meretur ut pereat, providentia ab eo tollitur ne periturus evadat. Salvian, De
Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. page 234.
that they have neither providence to foresee, nor any spiritual wisdom to
prevent them: no wonder therefore if Gods judgments seize upon them to their
just destruction, Matthew. 24.38, 39, 49, 50, 51. 1 These 5.2, 3, 4. Luke 12.19,
20. Dan. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Amos 6.1. to 9.
even in the ruff of all their carnal iolity and fearelesse security. You
have now seen a short survay of Gods tragical judgments upon Play-poets,
Players, Play-haunters, and those States and Cities wherein they are tolerated
and approved, together with the reason of it, which must needs stand firm, as
long as God is just to punish sin. These few examples therefore of Gods
judgments (which 1 Cor. 10.5, to 12. Praebentur cunctis exempla cum fuerint
quibusdam irrogata supplicia. Cyprian De Sing. Cl^ricorum Tom. 2. page 202.
should be warnings unto all) should lesson all Play-poets, to give over their
composing; all common Actors, to renounce the acting; all voluptuous
Play-haunters, to abandon the sight and hearing, of all Theatricall Enterludes;
all Christian Princes, Cities, States and Magistrates ( Potestas quippe maxima
and potentissima quae inhibere maximum scelus potest, quasi probat debere
fieri, si sciens patitur perpetrari: In cujus enim manu est ut prohibeat, juber
agi si non prohibe^ admitti. Salvian. De ^ubernatione Dei. l. 7. p. 266.
Facientis culpam proculdubio habet, qui quod potest corrigere,
negligitemenda^e: Et negligere cum possis per^urbare perversos, nihil est aliud
quam fovere. Gratian. Distinctio 86.
whose connivency at any evils that they might suppress, does make them
deeply guilty of them) for ever to exile all Plays, and demolish all
Play Houses whatsoever; for fear they pull Gods judgments down upon them, as
they have done on others. Alas, why should any Christian Play-poet, Player, or
Spectator; any Christian State or City where Plays have public countenance,
be so desperately secure, as to conceit; that though Plays have brought Gods
judgments upon others, Vt sit magna, tamen certe lenta ira Deoru^ est. Si
curant igitur cunctos punire nocentes, Quando ad me venient? sed and exorabile
numen Fortasse experior, solet his ignos^ere: multi Co^mittunt eadem diverso
crimina fato. Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, Hic diadema. Sic animum dirae
trepidum formidine culpae Confirmant. Iuvinal. Satyr. 13. p. 120.
yet they shall escape unpunished, his wrath shall never seize on them: what
ground, what warrant is there for any such unchristian surmise? Is not Gods
avenging justice toward sin and sinners, still the same? and are not
Stage Plays, Play-poets, Actors, Play-haunters, and those places where they
are tolerated, as execrably vicious, as sinful, as odious now to God as ever?
Is Oportet ut una paena teneat obnoxios quos similis error invenerit
implicatos. Council. Tol^tanum. 4. Ca^^ 74.
not the selfsame punishment always due unto the selfsame sins and
sinners? and is not the selfsame sin as sinful, as peccable; Criminosior
enim culpa est ubi honestior status: si honorosior est persona peccantis,
peccati quoque major invidia. Itaque nos qui Christiani catholici esse dicimur,
si simile aliquid Barbaroru^ impunitatibus facimus gravius erramus. Atrocius
enim sub sancti nominis professione peccamus: ubi sublimior est praerogativa
major est culpa. Salvian. De Guber. Dei. l. 4. p. 125.126, 130.
yea more execrable, more damnable in Christians, then in Pagans? God has most
severely punished Pagan, yea and Christian Play-poets, Stage Players,
Play-haunters, and such States as tolerated them, for Stage Plays heretofore,
as the forequoted examples testify; and shall he not much more avenge
himself on such like Christians for their Stage Plays now? And yet alas, Haec
semper est incredulitas humanae duritiae, ut non solu^ audiendo sed etiam
videndo non credat alteros interijsse, nisi and seipsam viderit interire: nec
socioru^ mortibus quatitur, dum illos immeritos aut invalidos opinatur, etc.
Cyprian. D^ Sing^lar. Clericoru^. Tom. 2. p. 202.
such is the infidelity such the security of men's obdurate hearts, that not
only when they hear, but likewise when they visibly behold Gods vengeance
seizing upon others, for composing, acting, frequenting, countenancing these
vain delights of sin; yet they really believe not, either that these have
perished, or that themselves shall perish for the selfsame things, unless
they likewise see themselves destroyed too: neither are they any whit affected
with the sudden fearful deaths of others, till such a death has seized on
themselves. O therefore now at last (as we tender our own private or the
public safety,) Aliorum vulnus nostra sit cautio. Hierom. Epist. 10. cap 4.
let other men's wounds be our cautions; let these men's deaths, prove our life;
let their judgments be our medicines. Metuite quantum po^estis ejusmodi casus
exi^^^; and in ista subversione labentiu^ vos experimenta perterreant. Nimium
praeceps est qui transire contendit, ubi aliu^ conspexerit cecidisse: and
vehementer infrenis est, cui non incutitur timor alio pereunte. Amator ver^ est
salutis suae, qui evita^ alienae mortis incursum: Et ipse est providus, qui
solicitus fit cladib^s caeterorum: sicut Solomon approbat, dicens; Astutus
videns malum puniri, vehementer erudietur: Et ^terum: Cadentibus impijs justi
vehementer terrebuntur. Cyprian. De Singularitate Clericorum. Tom. 2. page 199.
He (says Saint Cyprian) is too audacious, who strives to pass over there,
where he has seen another to have fallen: he is outragiously unruly who is
not struck with fear when he sees another perish in that course which he is
running. He only is a lover of his own safety, who takes warning by another
death: And he only is a provident man, who is made solicitous by the ruins of
other men: which Solomon approves, saying, The prudent seeing the evil man
punished, is greatly instructed: And again, When wicked men fall, the just
will be much affrighted. Adversa est confidentia, quae periculis vitam suam,
pro certo commendat. Et lubrica spes est quae inter fomenta peccati salvari se
spetat. Incerta victoria est, inter hostilia arma pugnare. Et impossib^lis
liberatio est, flammis circundari, nec ardere, etc. Cyprian. Ibid.
It is an adverse hurtful confidence, which certainly commits its life to
dangers, as to a certain things And that is but a slippery hope, which
presumes it shall be safe amids the fomentations of sin. It is an uncertain
victory to fight amidest the enemies weapons; and it is an impossible
deliverance to be compassed about with flames, and not to burn. Wherefore let
not a peradventure, that we may escape Gods judgments, though we still resort
to Stage Plays; overpoyse, a peradventure, that they may seize upon us, as
they have done on others. Neither let Gods long-suffring toward Play-poets,
Players, Play-haunters, and such Republikes as approve them, ( Romans 2.4.
which in truth should lead them to repentance;) make all or any of them or us
secure against the fear of his avenging hand. Divina severitas ^o ^niquu^
acrius punit, quo diutius pertulit. Gr^g. Magnus. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 1. Non
contemnas, quod j^m non ^odie in opera peccantium vindicat Christus. Qua^ta
enim p^tientia sust^net, tanta severit^te restituet. Chrys^stom. De Militia
Christiana H^^^l. Tom. 5. Col. 633. C.
For the longer Gods judgments are delayed, the greater will they be at last.
M^jor (...) enim paena dilata qu^m subita: molestius supplicium quod praemisso
terrore differtur: gravior paen^, quae ad hoc t^rdat, ut diutius feriat. Subita
enim cito percutiunt, dilata faenera^am paenam restituunt. Chrysostom. ex Varijs
in Matthew. locis. Hom. 24. Tom 2. Col. 1040. C.
That punishment is most troublesome, which is deferred with a foregoing
terror: that torment is more grievous, more intolerable which is delayed for
this only purpose, that it may strike the longer, the deeper: For sudden evils
quickly strike us through; whereas delayed judgments bring a multiplied, and
usurious punishment with them. Wherefore the Quanto tardaverit Dominus, tanto
sit solicitior servus. Quanto diutius supervenit Christus, tanto sit paratior
Christianus. Non est providus servus, quem imparatu^ invenerit Dominus.
Chrysostom. Ibid.
longer the Lord has deferred to punish, by so much the more solicitous let
the servant be: by how much the longer Christ is ere he come, the more prepared
let a Christian be. He is no provident servant, whom his Lord when he comes
shall find unprepared. God has a long time spared many Play-poets, Players,
Play-haunters, States and Cities where Plays are harbored, though some of
these have smarted for them: he has mercifully forborne many such of us at
home; and though he has a long time Hebr. 12.5. to 12.
chastised us as a Father, yet he has not as yet wholly consumed us, as an
avenging Judge; but how soon he is likely to do it, if we repent not
speedily, we may all conjecture: O therefore let not the long suffering of our
gracious God, Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13.
harden any of us in the love, the exercise or approbation of these ungodly
Enterludes, or of any other Hebr. 11.25. Deliciae temporariam habent
voluptatem, paenam autem sempiternam. Chrysostom. Hom. 54. ad Pop. Antioch.
pleasures of sin which are but for a season: But let these judgments of
God, which Plays have brought on Pagans, on Christians heretofore, and for
ought Par paena perditionis constringat, quo^ in pernitie prava societas
copulat. Concilium Toletanum. 4. Can. 74. Surius. Tom. 2. Can. 737.
we know upon our selves, be now at last a warning-peale to us, with speed,
with care and conscience to abandon them: and thus to syllogize against them in
the 44. place, Argument 44.
with which I shall close up this Scene.

That which draws down Gods judgments, wrath and vengeance, both upon the
Composers, Actors, and Spectators of it; and likewise upon those Magistrates,
States, and Cities, which foster and approve it: must needs be sinful, ( Isay
1.2. to 9. cap. 3.1. to 12. cap. 5.24. to 30. cap. 9.18, 19. Ier. 2.13. to 20.
cap. 4.17, 18. Isay 50.1. Psalm. 107.17. Lam. 3.33, 34, 39.
since God never inflicts his judgments but for sin) yea altogether to be
avoided of all good Christians, and not tolerable in any Christian Commonweal.

But this do Stage Plays; as the premises demonstrate.

Therefore they must needs be sinful, yea altogether to be avoided of all good
Christians; and intolerable in any Christian Commonweal.

SCENA VICESSIMA.
THe last effect of Stage Plays, which arises as a Quomodo enim cu^ Christo
and Angelis ejus regnabunt in caelis, qui cum Diabolo and ministris ejus
societatem habent in terris? Quomodo gaudebunt in convivio perenni sanctorum,
qui non respuunt convivia nefanda Paganorum? Aut quomodo in luce perpetua
possunt lauds Deo dicere cum Angelis, qui hic Diabolo exhibent funestos ludos
in idolis? HRabanus Maurus. Homil. Contra Paganicos Errores. Tom. 5.
they eternally damn men's souls. A fruit, a consequent with a witness, which
should cause all Players, all Play-poets, all Play-haunters to look about
them. And this must needs be so: Romans 6.23.
For, if the wages of sin be death; Hebr. 2.2. Eccles. 12.14. Matthew. 12.36,
37.
and if every unrepented, unlamented, idle, vain, or sinful action, word and
thought, shall rec^ive a just recompense of reward: If 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal
5.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 5.4, 5, 6.
the unrighteous, the adulterous and unchaste, shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God and of Christ: If Psalm. 9.17.
the wicked shall be turned into Hell and all the people that forget God, then
c^rtainely the wages of Stage Plays, (which See Act 3. thorowout.
abound with many idle sinful speeches, actions, and representations, directly
sinful in sundry different respects, as I have manif^sted by the premises; and
therefore cannot but exclude their unrighteous, adulterous, unchaste Actors and
Spectators out of Heaven, and tumble them headlong into Hell for all eternity,
unl^sse they prevent this danger by sincere repentance) must be eternal death.
Stage Plays, (as not only the best, Ovid. Tristium. l. 1. and the Pagan
Emperors, States and Authors quoted here, in Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, and 6.
but even the worst of men confess,) are the Sea here, Act 3. Scene 1. and Act
6. Scene 5. accordingly.
very sinkes, the seminaries, food, and treasures of all wickedness and
lewdness whatsoever: they are the very Chrysostom. Hom. 6. and 7. in Matthew.
See here, Act. 1.2. and Chorus: and Act 6. Scene 12. accordingly.
baits, the snares, the engines, the sweet Syrenean enchantments of the
Devil, with which he sweetly allures men to destruction; by which he
insinuates all kind of viceousnesse into their souls; and steals away their
hearts from God and heavenly things: See Act 6. Scene 3, 4, 5, 6, 12. and 19.
accordingly.
they are the principal instruments to entice, to enthrall men unto sin, to
enamor men with sin; to detain men under the commanding power of sin; and
to keep ^^em off from all true contrition for sin: Needs therefore must they
drown their Actors, their Composers and Spectators in everlasting perdition
both of soul and body, if they repent not of, and utterly renounce them as
they have vowed in their baptism. Hence is that memorable passage of
Hippolitus an ancient Martyr, in his Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 3. page 16.17.
Oration, De Consummatione mundi and Antichristo, about the year of our Lord,
220. where he informs us; that Christ shall say thus to Play-haunters and
wicked men, at the last day: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you
not: you are become the workmen of another Master, that is, of the Devil.
Possess with him darkness and fire, which is not put out, and the worm that
sleeps not, and gnashing of teeth, etc. Aures vestras condidi ut audiretis
Scrip^uras; at vos parastis eas a^ cantica Daemonum, cytharas and ridicula.
Oculos vestros creavi, ut prospiceretis lumen praeceptorum meorum, eaque
exequeremini: at vos exercistuis stupra and impudicitias, and ad reliquam
immundiciam istos aperuistis. Os vestrum composui ad glorificandum and
laudandum Deum, and Psalmos cantionesque spiritales pronunciandas lectionisque
continuam meditationem, etc. Pedes vestros ordinavi ut ambularetis in
praeparatione Evangelij pacis, tum in Ecclesijs, tum in domibus sanctoru^
meor^m^at vos docuist^s currere ad adulteria, stupra, spectacula, saltationes^
in sublime jactationes. Iam solutus conventus publi^us, spectaculu^ desijt
mundi hujus, praeterij^ species and deceptio illius. Discedite a me, etc.
Ibidem.
For I have made your ears that you should hear the Scriptures; but you have
prepared them for the songs of Devils, for harpes and ridiculous things. I have
created your eyes that you might behold the light of my precepts and thoroughly
perform them; but you have called for whoredoms and uncleanesses, and have
opened them to all other filthiness: I have made your mouths to glorify and
praise the Lord, to sing Psalms and spiritual Songs, and to utter the
continual meditation of what you read: but you have applied it to railing, to
swearing, to blaspemies, whiles you did sit and backbite your neighbors. I
have formed your hands that you should stretch them out to prayers and
supplications; but you have reached them forth to rapines, murders, and
mutual slaughters. I have ordain^d your feet, that you should walk in the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, both in Churches and in the houses of my
Saints; but you have taught them to run to adulteries, whoredoms,
Stage Plays, dances, vaultings. Now the public assembly is dissolved; the
spectacle of this world is ended; the fashion and deceit of it is passed away,
etc. Depart therefore into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And then alas poor wretches, what will become of them when as Christ
shall thus upbraide and charge them with their resort to Plays and
Play Houses, and their employing both of their eyes, their ears, their hands,
their feet, their minds and times about them, at the last? Perish they must,
and that irrecoverably, for all eternity. This sundry Fathers testify.
Professio Iudorum, altera via est mundi, quae ducit ad Diabolum, generalem viam
perditionis. Chrysost^m Hom 41. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 882 B.
The profession and following of Stage Plays (writes Chrysostom) is a way of
the world which leads unto the Devil, the general way of perdition: Therefore
he exhorts his Hom. 7. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 60. B. See here, pag^ 46. H.
Auditors, to avoid the pestiferous Fish Pond of the Theater; for this is that,
which drownes its Spectators in the fiery Sea of Hell, and kindles the very
bottom of its fire. Hom. 27. page 212. See here, page 45. Z.
Macarius AEgyptius writes expressly: that those who are delighted with
Spectacles and Stage Plays, shall never enter into Heaven without repentance,
pain, and fighting, because the way to Heaven is narrow and full of
affliction. Saint Cyprian, and Tertullian in their Books, De Spectaculis.
Lactantius De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Clemens Romanus Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap.
66. Augustine De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 29. and Pl^ce^ne tandem vitam
aeternam peti aut sperari a dijs poeticis, Theatricis, ludicris, scenicis?
Absit; imo avertat Deus verus tam immanem sacrilegamque demetiam. Nunquid ab
ijs Dijs quibus haec placent, and quos haec placant, cum eorum illic crimina
frequentantur vita aeterna poscenda est? Nemo, ut arbitror, usque ad tantum
praecipitium furio^ssimae impietatis insanit. Nec fabulosa igitur nec civili
theologia sempiternam unquam adipiscitur vitam: Illa enim de dijs turpia
^^nge^do festinat, haec favendo metit, etc. Ambae turpes, ambaeque damnabiles.
Hin^cine vita aeterna sperabitur unde ista brevis temporalisque polsuitur? An
vero vitam polluit consortium nefariorum hominum si se inserunt affectionibus
and assentionibus nostris, and vitam non polluit s^cietas Daemonum qui coluntur
criminibus suis? Si veris, quam mala^ si falsis, quam male. Ibidem.
lib. 6. cap. 6. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 2. cap. 1.2. and l. 4. cap.
1. Confessionum. lib. 3. cap. 1.2. and lib. 6. cap. 7.8. Salvian. De
Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. write as much: Yea Se^ Act 7. Scene 2^
all those Fathers and Councels which excommunicated Players and Play-haunters
from the Church, till they had repented, renounced the acting, the beholding of
all Theatricall Enterludes, affirm the same, since those can never be deemed
worthy the society of the Saints in Heaven, who are not fit to communicate with
the Saints on earth. Certainly Matthew 16.19. Ioh. 20.23.
that which the Church does lawfully bind on earth is bound in Heaven; those
therefore who are justly excluded out of, condemned by the militant Church, See
Act 7. Scene 2.
as Players and Play-haunters ought to be, are excluded likewise out of Heaven,
are condemned in Heaven, unless they do repent. This all the modern
Christian Authors, together with M. Gosson, and the Author of the 3. Blast of
Retrait from Plays.
two penitent relenting Play-poets of our own who have See here, Act 7. Scene
5.
written against Stage Plays, do likewise jointly testify: And indeed they
should all have written in vain against these Enterludes, did they not bring
perdition to men's souls. There are but three things that have moved all the
Fathers, Councels, and Christian Authors which I shall here recite, to write
against Stage Plays so frequently, so abundantly as they have done. See Act
1.2. and Chorus. Act 3. Scene. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 12, 14, 17, 18.
The first is the dishonor, the injury that Stage Plays do to God: See Act
6. Scene 5.6.
The second the prejudices, mischiefs, and inconveniences they bring upon the
Church and State: See Act 6. Scene 3.4, 17, 18, 19.
The third, the guilt, the sins, the damnation they procure to men's souls:
the last of which is a necessary consequence from the former, which are merely
false, if this be not true. Since therefore it is evident by the Confession of
all these Fathers, Counsels and Christian Writers, who have censured
Stage Plays: See Act 6. Scene 12. and Act 7. Scene 2.
by excommunicating Players and Play-haunters in the Primitive Church till
their sincere repentance; by all the foregoing Acts and Scenes; and by the
practice of Players, Play-poets, Play-haunters of ancient, of modern times, (
Act 6. Scene 12. and 14. accordingly.
who always upon their true co^version and repentance have utterly discarded,
and renounced Plays and Play Houses) that Stage Plays without sincere
repentance damn men's souls: Let this Act 7. Scene 2.
teach all Players, Play-poets, and Play-haunters whatsoever, as they tender
the eternal welfare of their souls and bodies; as they desire to avoid Isay
33.14. Psalm. 16. Psalm. 90.11. Isay 2.20, 21. Joel 2.11. Mal. 3.2.
the unsupportable wrath of God, the Habet nunc consilium omnis iniquus
praesentia appetere, aeterna deserere, injusta agere, justa deridere: sed cum
judex justorum injustorumque venerit, suo unusquisque impius consilio
praecipitatur, quia per hoc quod hic appetere pravis cogitation^bus elegit, in
aeterni supplic^j tenebras mergitur. Greg. ^agnus. Moral. lib. 4. cap. 4.
everlasting torments of Hell; and to participate of the eternal joys of
Heaven, even seriously to Vnusquisque ergo nostrum ad paenitentiae lamenta
confugiat, dum f^ere ante p^rcussionem vacat^ Revo^^mus ante oculos mentis
quicquid errando ^ommisimus, and quod nequiter ^gimus, ^^en^o puniamus, Greg
Mag. Epistolarum. lib. 11. cap. 2. fol. 452. B.
bewail, and cordially to repent their former penning, acting, and beholding
of all forepast Stage plays and for ever to abandon all such Enterludes for
time to come, as the certain contrivers, the infallible consummators of their
just damnation, unless they seriously repent. Yea let this lesson all them
when ever they are tempted to Plays or Play Houses by any lewd companions, by
Satan, or by they own sinful lusts, to answer these temptations, with this
45. Play-confounding Argument, Argument 45.
from which there is no evasion.

Those things which without sincere repentance bring eternal destruction and
damnation on men's souls and bodies, must needs be sinful, abominable, and
eternally execrable unto Christians.

But this do Stage Plays; as all the premises testify.

Therefore they must needs be sinful, abominable, and eternally execrable unto
Christians.

Damnation, Romans 6.23. John 3 18. Mark 16.16. 2 These. 2.12. Matthew. 25.41, 42,
43.
as it is a fru^t of sin, so it is that which every man should labor to
avoid, though it were with the loss of his very dearest members, much more of
his unprofitable and sinful pleasures, Iam. 5.1, 5. Rev. 18.6, 7. Prove. 14.12,
13. Luke 6.25. Qui nunc male se in voluptatibus dilatat, eum post in supplicijs
paena co^ngust^t. Qui hic in volup^ate laetatus est, illic perpetua ulti^ne
laet^tur. Gregor. Magnus. Mo^al. lib. 14. cap. 4
which always end in grief. Our Savior Christ himself has given us this
advice, Matthew. 5.29, 30. cap. 18.8. Mark. 9.47.48 See Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in
Matthew. and Opus imperfectum in M^tth. Homil. 12.
that if our right hand, or our right eye offend us, we should cut off the one,
and pluck out the other: for it is profitable for us, that one of our members
should perish, rathe^ then that our whole bodies and souls should be cast into
Hell; where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched: If a man to
avoid damnation must thus offer Mortem morte dissolvere, occisione occisionem
dispargere, tormentis tormenta distutere, supplicijs supplicia evaporare, vitam
auferendo confer; carnem saedendo juvare, animam eripiendo servare;
perversitas quam putas ratio est, quod saevitiam existimas gratia est. Errorem
operis fructus excusat. Tertul. Adversus Gnosticos. Tom. 2. page 425.426.
violence to, and even with indignation cut off, pull out, and cast away, his
right hand, his right eye, the usefullest, the profitablest, the dearest,
be^t-beloved of all his other members; should he not much more abandon,
abominate these unprofitable, expensive, and pernicious Stage Plays, that so
he might escape it? Alas, who would be so desperately prodigal of his own
salvation; who would so vilify, so undervalue Heaven, or his own immortal
Soul, ( Matthew. 16.26. See Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matthew.
the loss of which cannot be recompensed with the gain of all the world,) as
to set to hazard, to forfeit them for a Stage Play? and yet how many thousands
daily do it? O that such men would consider but a while, See Gregor. Mag.
Moral. li^ 15. cap. 14 M^tth. 25.41.
what damnation, what eternal, eternal damnation, accompanied Dn. 12.2.
Matthew. 18.8. cap. 25.41, 46. Ma^k. 9.48. Ioh. 3.36. c. 5.29. Isay 66.24.
with the everlasting wrath and vengeance of an Almighty provoked Isay 13.11.
Exodus 3.4.7. Nahum. 1.3.
sinne-revenging God, is! this certainly would cause them, as it should cause
us all, for ever to detest these sugered soppes of Satan, which without sincere
repentance prove naught else but eternal Prove 5 4. Ier. 2.19. 2 Samuel 2.26.
Dulcia se in bilem ver^unt, etc
bitterness both to soul and body. Mark. 16 16. John 3.18, 36. Propterea de
gehenna jugiter audiamus, ut ex huius minis and tumore multum emolumenti
capiamus Nam si Deus peccantes in eam dejecturas hujus min^s non praemisisset,
in eam multi cecidis^^nt. Si nunc enim timore animas nostras concutiente sunt
aliqui tam facile peccantes, ta^quam nec ips^ sit: si nihil horum dictum
fuisset, neque intentatum quid mali non fecissemus? ^^r^s^st. Ad Pop. Antioch.
Hom. 55. Tom. 5 Col. 318. A
Damnation is in truth the only argument to rouse voluptuous and secure
persons, who lie rotting in the dregs of sinful pleasures: O that the
terror, and alarm of it would now at last awaken those miserable graceless
Play-poets, Actors, Play-haunt^rs, who lie sleeping in the very brinke of Hell,
without any suspicion or fear of danger; that so it might cause them with care
and conscience perp^tually to divorce themselves from Stage Plays; which as
See Act 1. 2. and Cho^us.
they had their original beginning, growth, and progress from the Devil; so
they Job ^1.11, 1^, 13. Isay 5.11, 12, 13. Iam 5.1, 5. Rev. 18.7. Chrysostom.
Hom. 6. and 7. in Matthew.
always have their end in Hell, damnation, and eternal torments with the
Devil, unless Gods infinite mercy, and men's true repentance interpose. A
su^ficient motive to withdraw all men, all Christians from them: and with that
holy Father Saint Augustine in his most pious Confessions (where he
Confessionum. lib. 3. c. 1.2. and 14. l. 4. c. 1.2. l. 6. c. 7.8.
often bewailes with tears his running unto Stage Plays before his true
conversion) for ever to renounce them.

CHORUS.
YOu have seen now Christian Readers, the several bitter fruits, and
pernicious effects of Stage Plays, most copiously anatomized in the precedent
Act: and certainly Matthew 7.16.17, 18, 19, 20.
if ever any tree were discovered to be evil by its evil fruits, then
Stage Plays, (whose variety of evil products surmounts all others) must be as
bad, if not far worse, then any. The fruits of Stage Plays (as is evident by
the premises) are bad in respect of God, whom they sundry ways dishonor: bad,
in regard of Church and State, whom they exceedingly prejudice and corrupt; See
Act 6. thorowout.
bad in regard of the Composers. Actors, Spectators, and upholders of them,
whose sins they multiply, whose manners they corrupt, whose time they wast,
whose minds they effeminate and deprave, whose hearts they harden, whose
souls they contaminate, whose repentance they anticipate or defer, whose
lusts they foster, whose damnation they hasten, whose everlasting torments they
accumulate, and without repentance really procure. As therefore we tender the
honor, love, and worship of our gracious God; the happiness, the welfare of
our Church and State, the purity, tranqnility, salvation of our own poor
souls, of the souls of our brethren, our posterity^ which succeed us: Let us
henceforth pass in irrepealable sentence of condemnation against all popular
Stage Plays, and bid an everlasting farewell to them; Citius ad precem judex
flectitur, si a pravitate sua petitor corrigatur. Imminente ergo t^ntae
animadversionis gladio nos importunis flectibus insi^tamus. Qui simul omnes
peccavimus, simul omnes mala quae fecimus, deploremus; ut districtus Iudex dum
culpas nostras nos punire considerat, ipse a sententiae propositae damnationis
parcat. Greg. Magnus. Epist ex Registro. lib. 11. cap. 3. Indict. 6. fol. 252.
C.D.
that so we may avoid these several cursed fruits, and dangerous con^equences
which they always constantly produce, together with all these imminent plagues
and judgments which now without your speedy repentance they are likely to pull
down on us, both to our temporal and eternal ruin.

ACTVS 7.
SCENA PRIMA.
HAving thus at large related the various The Canonical and Apocryphal
Scripture condemns Stage Plays.
as I hope will satisfy the judgment, the conscience of every impartial
Reader; I come now to a particular summary enumeration of those Authorities,
that concur together with me in condemning Plays and Enterludes, which I
shall marshall into seven distinct Squadrons.

The first Squadron consists of such texts of holy Scripture, as are produced
by the Fathers and latter Writers against Stage Plays: some of them oppugning
them in one kind, some in another. If we survey the original Authors,
Patriots, Frequenters, Actors; together with the primary use of these
theatricall Enterludes; See Act. 1, 2 and 3. Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. and Act. 4.
Scene 1, 2.
which were at first invented, acted, fostered, frequented by Divel-Idols,
Pagans, Idolaters, lascivious dissolute graceless persons; and devoted wholly
to Idolatry, Idols, Devils, and the lusts of carnal wicked worldly men: we
shall find these several Scriptures that oppugn them, condemn them: See
Act. 1, 2, 3. Where these Scriptures are quoted and applied at large.
viz. Levit: 18.30. Deutr: 7.2.3, 4, 16, 25, 26. c: 12.3, 29, 30. c: 20.16, 17,
18. Josh: 7.12. c: 11.12. Judges 2.2. Numb: 33.52. Psalm: 16.4. Ier: 10 1, 2, 3.
Acts 15.20.29. Rom: 12.2. c: 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor: 8.1. to 11. c: 10.7, 20, 21.
2 Cor: 6.14, 15, 16. Ephesians: 2.2, 3. c: 4.17. to 25. c: 5.3, 4, 11. Col: 2, 8,
20, 21, 22. Titus 2.13, 14. c: 3.3. 1 Pet: 4.2, 3. and 1.14, 15, 18. Iam: 1.21,
26, 27. c: 4.7, 8 9, 10. c: 5.1, 5. 2 Pet: 2.7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 19, 20, 22. 1
Ioh: 2.15, 16. c: 3.8. c: 5.21. Jude 4.7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 18, 23. Rev: 2.20. c:
21.8, 27, c: 22.11.15. All which, though they condemn not Stage-pla^es in
precise terms, Plane nusquam invenimus ita aperte prohibitum in sacris
Scripturis; non in Circum ibis, non in Theatrum^ quemadmodum non occides, non
maechaberis, attamen occulte prohibentur: in Ps: 1. v. 1, etc nam specialiter
quaedam prolata generaliter sapiunt. Tertul: De Spectaculi^ lib: cap: 3, 4:
Vide ibidem.
( which no Canonical Scripture does:) yet they positively prohibit and
censure them under the names, of Idolatry: things consecrated unto Idols: the
Cup and Table of Devils: the monuments, relics, ceremonies, customs, rites,
delights, of Idols and Idolaters: the way and fashion of the Heathen: the will
of the Gentiles: the things, the course, and custom of the world: carnal
worldly lusts and pleasures: the lusts of our former ignorance, and our vain
conversation received by tradition from our Fathers: revellings, banquettings,
and abominable idolatries: the rudiments, traditions, ordinances, sports and
customs of the world, of worldly sensual men: the works, the will, the lusts
of the Devil, etc. See Tertul. de Spectac c 3. to 25. Cyprian de Spectaculis
^ib. Chrysostom. H 6, 7, 38, and 69, in Matthew. With the modern Writers, Act. 1,
2, 3. and Act. 6. Scene 5.
under which these Stage Plays are as really, as absolutely comprised as any
part is under the whole, or any Species under its proper Genus. Hence Saint
Cyprian peremptorily concludes, Scriptura, inquam, omnia ista spectaculorum
genera damnavit, quando idololatriam sustulit ludorum omnium matrem^ unde haec
vanitatis et levitatis monstra venerunt. Cyprian. De Spectacu^is lib: Edit,
Pamelij Coloni^ Agrip. 1617, p. 243, 244. Vide Ibid.
That the Scripture has everlastingly condemned all sorts of Spectacles and
Stage Plays, even then when it took away Idolatry the Mother of all plays,
from whence all these monsters of vanity, of lewdness have proceeded. Which
assertion of his is seconded by De Spectaculis lib. c. 3. to 1.2. De Corona
militis lib. and de Idololatria lib.
Tertullian, De Vero Cultu l. 6, c 20.
Lactantius, Catechesis My^tagogica 1.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, Hom. 6, 7, 38, and 69 in Matthew. Hom. 15, 21, and 62, ad
Pop: Antiochiae; and Hom. 8^ de Poenitentia.
Chrysostom, De Civit. Dei, l. 2, c. 3^ to ^5, 28, 29. De Symbolo ad
Catechumenos, l. 2, c. 1, 2. and l. 4, c. 1.
Augustine, De Gubernatione Dei lib. 6.
Salvian, with See Act. 1, 2, 3, and Chorus.
others of ancient and modern times, who doom all Stage Plays from these
very Scriptures. If we consider the nature, the materials, the circumstances,
the concomitants, the effects, the fruits and ends of Stage Plays; together
with the manner, the circumstances of their Action; the quality of the persons
that act, or else frequent them: all which I have at large displayed in the Sea
Act. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, throughout.
foregoing Acts: (where See Act. 3, 5, and 6.
their obscenity, vanity, effeminacy, lasciviousness, prodigality^ and lewd
pernicious consequences are laid open to the full:) we shall soon discover,
that not only the seventh com^andement, (as Bp. Babington, Perkins, Dod,
Elton, Downham, Brinsly, Lake, Williams, Bp. Andrews, and others, quoted Act,
6, Scene 3^ 4 and 5.
most modern Expositors of it witness;) but even, Exodus 32.6.19. c. 23.13.
Deutr. 22.5. Josh. 23.7. Job 21.11, 12, 13. Numb. 15.39. Psalm. 16.4. Psalm.
101.3. to the end. Psalm. 1.1. Psalm. 24.3, 4. Isay 3.16, 17. cap. 5.12. cap.
33.15, 16. cap. 55.2, 7. cap. 58.3. Hosea 2.17. Ecclesiastes 2.2. cap. 7.4, 5,
6. c. 11.9. Prove. 12.11. c. 14.9 c. 21.17. Amos 6.1. to 11. Zech. 13.2. Matthew.
12.36, 37. Romans 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 5.7. to 12. c. 6.8, 9. Gal. 5.16. to 26.
Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 4. c. 4.29, 31. c. 5.1. to 18. Luke 1.74, 75. 2 Cor. 12.21.
Phil. 3.17, 18, 19, 20. Col. 3.1. to 11. c. 4.5, 6. 1 These. 5.15. to 24. 2
These. 3.6, 11, 14. 1 Timothy 4.7. c. 5.6. 2 Timothy 3.4. Hebr. 11.25. 1 Pet. 1.13,
14, 18. c. 2.11, 12. Gal. 6.8.14. 1 Ioh. 2.5, 15, 16, 17: with infinite other
Scriptures, condemn all Stage Plays in regard of their subject matter,
circumstances, fruits and manner of Action, etc. as I have more particularly
demonstrated in the precedent Scenes. Hence Tertullian positively informs us,
Similiter impudicitiam omnem amoliri iubemur: hoc etiam modo a Theatro
seperamur, quod est privatum consistorium impudicitiae, etc. Habes igitur et
Theatri interdictionem de interdictione impudicitiae. De Spectac. lib. cap. 17.
That the Scripture has interdicted all Plays and Enterludes under the
prohibitions of lewdness and lasciviousness: and that De Spectaculis lib.
cap. 3^ 4, 14.17, and 23.
those texts of Scripture which condemn all worldly concupiscence, all idle
words, all scurrility, all foolish filthy talking and jecting: all standing in
the way of sinners, and sitting in the seat of the scornful: See here, Act.
5, Scene 1, p. 160.
together with hypocrisy and dissimulation; the making of any Idols image or
likeness, and See Act. 5, Scene 6, p. 187.
the putting on of women's apparel by men: do expressly inhibit and condemn
both Plays themselves, resort to Play Houses, and the very acting and
beholding of all theatricall Enterludes. If we peruse In their Enarrations and
Commentaries on Psalm. 118. Octona 5, v. 37, and Cyrillus Hierusol. Catechesis
Mystagogica 1. See Act 3, Scene 7, p. 128, 129.
St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Cyril of Jerusalem, St Augustine, and
others, we shall find them encountering Stage Plays with that of Psalm 119.
v. ^7. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in thy word.
If we reflect on See Act 6, Scene 3, 4, 5^ where their words are quoted: and
Act 7, Scene 4, ^.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Nazianzen, Basil, Hierom, Salvian, Lectio.
77. in Proverb. Salomonis.
Thomas Gualesius, Gualther, Petrarcha, Lectio 172. in Lib. Sapientiae.
Holkot, Bishop Babington, Mr. Northbrooke, Dr. Reinolds, Mr. Stubs, and all
the rest which I have formerly quoted in the 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Scenes of the
foregoing Act; we shall see them battering down Plays and Play Houses, with
the seventh commandment: Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Deutr. 22.5. Prove. 14.9. c. 21.17.
Eccles. 2.2. c. 7^ 3, 4, 5. Romans 13.13, 14, 15. 1 These. 5.22. 1 Ioh. 2.14, 15:
and all the forequoted Scriptures: which (if all their judgments may be
credited) do either directly, or by way of consequence, conclude all
Stage Plays to be sinful, yea utterly unlawful unto Christians. If we add
Apochryphall Scriptures unto these Canonical, we shall find such express
authority against Stage Plays, as must needs put all their Patriots, their
Actors and Spectators to eternal silence: For in the Sea Rabanus Maurus and
Lyra on this chapter; and Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 12. c. 6.
first Book of the Maccabees, c. 1. v. 11, 12, 13, 14: we read thus: That in
the days of Antiochus Epiphanes there went out of Israel wicked men, who
persuaded many, saying; Let us go and make a covenant with the Heathen that
are round about us, for See Ier. 44.17.25.
since we departed from them we have had much sorrow: so this device pleased
them well. Then certain of the people were so forward therein, that they went
to the King, who gave them license to do after the Which was prohibited
expressly, by Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32. and condemned, by 2 Kings 17.15. to 20. 2 Chronicles. 32.2. and 36.14. Psalm. 106.35. Ier. 10.2. Ezekiel. 11.12. c. 23.30, 31. c.
25.8.
ordinances of the Heathen: Whereupon they built a place of exercise at
Jerusalem, according to the customs of the Heathen, and made themselves
uncircumcised, and f^rsooke the holy covenant, and joined themselves to the
Heathen, and were sold to do mischief. Which story is thus further See
likewise the 2. of Maccabees, c. 6. v. 7, 8, ^.
amplified, and more particularly related in the 2. of the Maccabees. cap. 4.
v. 7. to 18. Where we read; That Iesus^ who styled himself Jason, and
symoniacally purchased the High Priesthood of Antiochus Epiphanes, promised to
assign this wicked King 150 talents of silver, if he might have license to set
him up a place of Exercise, Antiq. Iudae. orum l. 11. c. 6.
Josephus styles it, (...), and the Latin translations render it Gymnasium,
which as In their D^ctionaries, Gymnasium, and Gymnica ars.
Calepine, Holioke, and before them both, Originum l. 18. c. 16. to 25. and l.
15. cap. 2.
Isiodor Hilpalensis, witness; signifies, a public place, where vaulting,
wrestling, running, dancing, throwing of the stone, and all kind of See
Clemens Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 65, 66. Cyprian de Specta^ulis lib. Chrysostom.
Hom. 6, 7, 38, and 69. in Matthew. and Hom. 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 62. ad Pop.
Antiochiae accordingly.
Plays and Enterludes were practiced:) for the training up of the Jewish youth
in the fashions of the Heathen, Which when the King had granted, and he had
gotten into his hand the rule, he forthwith brought his own Nation to the
Greekish fashion: and putting down the governments that were according to the
Law, he brought up new customs against the Law: For he built gladly a place
of Exercise (in See e, and f, before.
nature of a Theater, where Plays and sports were acted) under the Tower it
self; and brought the young men under his subjection. Now such was the height
of Greek fashions and increase of heathenish manners through the exceeding
profanesse of Jesus, that ungodly wretch; that the Priests had no more courage
to serve any more at the Altar, but despising the Temple, and neglecting the
sacrifices, hastened to be partakers of the unlawful allowance in the place of
Exercise, after the game of Discus called them forth: See Isiodor. Hilpalensis
Originum, l. 18. cap. 16. to 25. Caelius Rhodiginus Antiq. Lectionum l. 13. c.
17. Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 3. c. 21. Adrianus Turnebus Adversariorum l. 7.
c. 9.
(which one kind of Exercise is put for all the Grecian Plays and Pastimes)
not setting up the honors of their Fathers, but liking the glory of the
Graecians (who See Plutarch De Gloria Atheniensium. Cyprian de Spectaculis.
Tatianus Oration adversus Graecos. August. De Civit. Dei lib. 2. cap. 10, 11,
13, 14. and lib. 4. cap. 28.
were much devoted unto Stage Plays) best of all. By reason whereof sore
calamity came upon them; for they had them to be their enemies and avengers,
whose customs they followed so earnestly, and unto whom they desired to be
like in all things: for it is not a light thing to do wickedly against the Law
of God: Which Apochryphall passage, Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. l. 1. p. 22.
to 34. Andradius de Libris Canonicis lib. 3.
the Papists allowing to be Canonical Scripture, and Dr. Reinolds, Whitaker,
Danaeus, Willet and others, De Libris Apochryphis et Canone Script.
Controversiae. Bp. Mortons Protestants Appeal lib. 3. cap. 2. Dr. Field Of the
Church, Book 4. cap. 22, 23, 24.
Protestants approving to be an undoubted story, though not canonical Text,
infallibly assures us; See Act. 1. Scene 2. p. 17. Horace de Art Poetica.
Dionysius Hallicarn. Antiqu. Romans l. 7. sect. 9. and 2 Mac. 6^7, 8, 9.
First, that these Plays and Enterludes had their original from the
Idolatrous dissolute Pagan Greeks; and that they were the exercises,
ordinances and customs of the Heathen. Secondly, that they were never in use
among the Jews till this wicked Iasons time, See Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum
lib. 12. cap. 6.
who is the first we read of that erected a Theater or place of exercise for
these and such like pastimes in Jerusalem, about 174 years before our Saviors
Nativitie; where Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 15. c. 11. See cap. 13. and lib.
16. cap. 9.
Herod likewise set up a Theater and Amphitheatre for stage plays,
sword-playes, cirque-playes, and such other Roman sports, about some 25 years
before our Saviors birth; till which times the Jews were utterly unacquainted
with these heathenish spectacles. Thirdly, that those who brought in these
Plays among the Jews, were 1 Mac. 1.11, 15.
desperate wicked men, who made themselves uncircumcised, forsook the holy
covenant, and joined themselves to the Heathen, being sold to do mischief.
Fourthly, that the 2 Mac. 4.8.10. to 16.
bringing in of these Plays withdrew the Jews from God, and from his Law, to
open, yea, professed Paganism and Idolatry: Fifthly, that these Plays are 1
Mac. 1.15. and 2 Mac. 4.11, 14, 17.
directly against the holy covenant, and good Law of God, and that those who
practice or approve them do wickedly against Gods Law. Lastly, that 2 Mac.
4.15, 16, 17. and 1 Mac. 1, 2, 20, to 64.
the introducing of Stage Plays was the cause of Gods bringing in of sore
calamity upon the Jews, and of those sundry judgments and afflictions which
they suffered. If we add to this the apocryphal Constit. Apostol. l. 2. c.
65, 66 and l. 8. c. 38.
Constitutions of the Apostles, recorded by Clemens Romanus; we shall find
them expressly condemning and prohibiting Stage Plays, with all those Grecian
Enterludes which Jason introduced; commanding all Christians to withdraw
themselves from them yea wholly to renounce them as the very inventions and
pompes of the Devil: nay we shall see Clemens Romanus Constitutionum
Apostolicarum lib. 8. cap. 38. apud Surium Council. Tom. ^. p. 120. the Title of
which 38 chapter is this; Canones Varij Pauli Apostoli. See Scene 3. toward
the end.
St. Paul himself, expressly excommunicating and casting out of the Church, all
Stage Players, and Play-haunters, whether male or female, till they shall
utterly renounce their profession, and take their everlasting farewell of
Stage Plays. It is evident then by all these Canonical and Apochryphal
Scriptures, and by the Apostles constitutions; that Stage Plays are directly
contrary to, and condemned by the very sacred ^aw and word of God; which
administers unto us this 46. Play-condemning argument, against which there can
be no averment, from which there can be no evasion.

That which is fully and really condemned by sundry sacred texts both of
canonical and apochryphall Scripture, Deuteronomy. 27.26 2 Kings 17.15. Deutr. 12.30,
31, 32. Rom^ 14^ 23.
must certainly be sinful, and altogether unlawful unto Christians, who Exodus
15.26. Genesis 39.9. Levit. 18.5. Deutr. ^.6.4^. c. 5.1. c. 6.2. c. 7.12. Dan.
3.12. to 19. Josh. 24.15.
must never allow, or practice that which the very word of God condemns.

But Stage Plays are fully and really condemned by sundry sacred texts both of
canonical and apochryphall Scripture; as is undeniably evident by the premises.

Therefore they must certainly be sinful, and altogether unlawful unto
Christians:

Who if for no other reason, yet for this alone, should now at last De quibus
apertissime divina Scriptura sanxit, non differenda sententia est, sed potius
exequenda. Council. Aquisgra^ense sub ^udo vico Pi^ Can. 61.
without more delays, renounce, suppress all Stage Plays, which the sacred
Scripture (the very Romans 10.8.17. Luke 24.25.
ground and object of our faith, the Psalm. 119.9. Gal. 6.16.
very rule, the square both of our lives and thoughts) has thus condemned.

SCENA SECVNDA.
THe second Squadron of Play-oppugning Authorities, is the venerable hoary
resolution of the whole The whole primitive Church both before and under the
Law and Gospel condemned Stage Plays.
Players, and Play-haunters, as no true member of the holy Catholic Church
shall be ever able to gainsay. That the whole Church of God under the Law (
consisting Deuteronomy: 14.2. c. 16.18. Psalm: 147.19, 20. Romans 3^ 1.2.
only of Jews and Jewish Proselites) abominated and rejected Stage Plays, it
is most apparent by these ensuing reasons. First, because we find no mention
at all of any such Plays or Enterludes in any canonical Scripture, or ancient
Jewish Authors, nor any intimation that the Jews approved them. Secondly,
because Stage Plays (as Antiq. Iudaeorum l. 12, c. 6, l. 15, c. 11, 13, and l.
16, c. 9.
Josephus, and the 1 Mac. 1. v. 12, 13, 14. 2 Mac. 4. v. 7. to 18.
Books of Maccabees inform us; were most directly opposite both to the Jewish
laws, their government, manners, rites and customs: For first the Jews (and
so all Christians) were expressly enjoined by Gods Law, Exodus 20.^. Levit. 26.1.
Deuteronomy. 4.15. to 26. c. 5.8. c. 16.22. Psalm. ^7.7. 1 Ioh. 5.21. See the Homelies
against the peril of Idolatry.
to make no image, likeness or representation of any Idol, nor Exodus 2^.13.
See Act. 3. Scene 3. p. 77, 78.
yet to make mention of any Idols name. See Tertullian and Cyprian de
Spectaculis. Diodorus Siculus Bibl. Hist. l. 16. s. 93. Josephus Antiqu.
Iudaeorum l. 15. c. 11. and Bulengerus de Circo, etc. cap. ^8.
Now Stage Plays were always fraught with the pictures, images,
representations, and names of Pagan idols, which the Sea Exodus 23.24. c. 34. ^.
Levit. 26.30. Deuteronomy. 7.5. 2 Kings 10.26, 27. c. 11.18. c. 18.4. c. 23.14, 24. 2 Chronicles. ^^.1. c. 33.22. c. 34.3. to 8.
Jews could never brook: and thereupon they Josephus Antiqu. ^udaeorum l. 15.
c 11.
withstood Herod when he would have brought his Stage Plays into Jerusalem,
because of the images, visours and pictures that attended them. Secondly, the Sea Act. 1. Scene 1, 2. Ier. 10.1, 2, 3. and the Scriptures quoted page 18, 19.
Jews were commanded to abandon all monuments, rites and relics of Idols and
Idolatry: all customs, fashions, vanities, exercises and pastimes of the
Heathen round about them; whose ways and customs they were not for to learn,
much less to practice. Now See Act. 1, 2.
Stage Plays were the very monuments, rites and relics of Idolatry, of Pagan
Divell-Idols: the customs, fashions, vanities, exercises, ways and pastimes
of the Heathen Greeks and Romans, who bordered on them, and subdued them; as
Antiq. Iudaeorum l. 12. c. 6. and l. 15. c. 11. 13.
Josephus, De Agricultura lib.
Philo Iudaeus^ the 2 Mac. 4. v. 7. to 16.
Books of Maccabees, and others witness: therefore the Jewish Church must of
necessity condemn them, never practice them. Thirdly, because the Author of
the Sea 1 Mac. 1. and 2 Mac. c. 4. and 6.
Books of Macabees informs us; that wicked Jason, and his profane
confederates were the first that brought in these Plays and Grecian Exercises
among the Jews, who never practiced them before; which Plays though diverse of
the Priests and people embraced, apostatizing wholly from their religion and
Gods worship; yet the Jewish Church, with all those Jews who clave close to
their religion did utterly abandon and condemn them, as directly contrary to
the holy covenant and Law of God. Fourthly, Josephus, that famous Jewish
Historian, as Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 12. cap. 6.
he condemns Jason for this fact of his: so he informs us likewise,
Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 15. c. ^1. See Act. 6. S^^ne 5.
that when as Herod would have introduced Stage Plays, Sword-playes and such
like Roman Spectacles into Jerusalem, where he had built a stately Theater and
Amphith^atre for the exercise of those theatricall Enterludes; of purpose (as
it seemed) to draw the Jews to Paganism, and overturne their ancient
discipline; to which end he likewise erected another Theater at Antiqu.
Iudaeo^um l. 15. c. 13. and l. 16. cap. 9.
Caesarea Stratonis: the whole Jewish Nation, and the gravest wisest men among
them, were much offended with it; and thereupon withstood these Plays of his,
as See Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 15. c. 11.
being contrary to their laws, their received discipline and customs;
pernicious to their manners, prejudicial to their Republike, opposite to their
Religion, and offensive to their God: Which Plays when Herod resolved to bring
in by force whether the Jews would or no, there were cer^aine^ Jews
confederated together to murder him in the Theater it self, out of the
detestation which they bure to Plays, of purpose to prevent those mischievous
consequ^ncies which these Sta^e-playes would occasion both to their religion,
discipline, state, and Country manners, which they were bound in honor, yea in
conscience to maintain, though it were with the hazard of their lives.
Fifthly, Philo, a very learned Jew, who flourished in the Apostles times, under
Caius the Emperor, (a man whom Antiq. Iudae. orum lib. 18. cap. 18.
Josephus, Ecclesiasticae Hist. l. 2. c. 4, 5.
Eusebius, De Scriptoribus. Ecclesiasticis lib. Philo.
Hierom, Contra Faustum Manichaeum l. 12. c. 2.
Augustine, and Trithemius, Possevine, and others.
others highly magnify:) as he expressly De Agricultura lib. Opera. Basileae
1558. Tom. 1. p. 271, 272. and de Iudice lib. Tom. 2 p. 976. See Act. 6. Scene
1. and 3
condemns Stage Plays, as voluptuous, petulant, nugatory, vain and hurtful
Pastimes, in which many thousands of wretched people did miserably spend their
time nay waste their lives, neglecting in the mean while both the public and
their own private affairs: So he records withal, Hanc ob rem ille maximus
Moses equum censuit, ut omnes ascripti eius civitati ius naturae sequentes,
celebrarent hunc diem mundi natalem, otio, festisque hilarita tibus,
intermissis laboribus et opificiis quaestuariis, negotiisque victum
comparantibus, ablegata etiam tantisper, seu per inducias solitudine anxia; ut
vacarent, non ludicris (sicut quidam) ridendisque spectaculis mimorum,
saltatorumque, quae insanus vulgus amat perdite, et per praecipuos sensus,
visum auditumque captivat animam suapte ingenio liberam ac dominamised soli
verae philosophiae, quae constat ex his tribus, consiliis, dictis, factisque in
unam speciem coaptatis, ut quaesita fruantur faelicitate. De Vitae Mosis
Enarratio. lib. 3. Tom. 2^ p. 932.
That Moses thought it meet, that all his Citizens, following the law of
nature, should celebrate the seventh day (being the birthday of the, world) in
rest, and festival recreations; laying aside all works, all gainful callings
and secular employments, that so they might wholly apply themselves, not to
sports and pleasures, (as some do) nor yet t^ the ridiculous sights of
Stage Plays and dances, which the unruly vulgar loves excessively, captivating
their very soul by the two chiefest senses, sight and hearing^ which of it
self is free and sovereign: but that they might solely addict themselves to
true philosophy, and to Gods worship and service. And withal he certifieth us,
De Vita Contemplativa lib. Tom. 2. page 1208. to 1226.
That the Jews in their solemn feasts and meetings abandoned all
drunkenness, voluptuousness, effeminacy and excess; together with all
Stage Players, Fidlers^ Tumblers, Iesters, (which the Graecians used in their
festivals:) who did only exhilerate men's minds with scurrilous sports and
jests: using no other mirth or music, but Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs, wherein they sounded out Gods praises. All which sufficiently manifests,
that the whole Church of the Jews condemned Stage Plays. Sixthly, St.
Chrysostom in his 56. Homily upon Genesis, discoursing of the marriage of
Jacob to Labans daughter, (even being before the Law was given) informs us:
Vidisti cum quanta olim honestate nuptias egerint? Audite qui Satanicas pompas
admiramini, et statim ab initio nuptiarum honestate^ dedecore afficitis. Number
tunc tibiae? number tunc cymbala? number tunc choreae diabolicae? Quare enim (dic
mihi) tantum statim ab initio damnum inducis in domum tuam, et eos qui in
scenis et orchestris operam locant, vocas, ut cum intempestivo sumptu virginis
laedas continentiam, et iuvenem impudentiorem facias, etc. Tom. 1. Col. 367. B.
Vid. Ibid.
That the Saints of God in those times had no Musicians, no diabolical dancing
at their marriages; that they sent for no Players from the Playhouse to their
houses, to corrupt the chastity of the married Virgin with their unseasonable
expense, and to make her more impudent and incontinent ever after: a custom
too frequent in his and our times, which this godly Father much condemns.
Seventhly, Origin, (who Homil. 11. in Levit. Hom. 8. in Isaiam, and Hom. 2. in
Hieremiam. See Act. 6. Seen 3. Siquidem Moses illa universa sustulerit, quae
hominum generi nihil conducerent: Susceperit vero duntaxat et foverit, quae
utilia sorent et omnibus profitura; ita ut nec certamina essent apud Iudaeos
hos instituta qualia apud Gentiles, in quibus nudi homines decertarent, vel ex
equis contenderent, prostituerenturque omnium libidinibus faeminae, ut per
impudicitiam naturae illuderetur. Sed illud profecto erat apud Iudaeos
praecipuum, ut vel a teneris unguibus excedere naturam omnem, et superare
sensibilem discertat, et nulla eius in part residere Deum existimare, ut quem
in supernis et extra corpora conquirebant, etc. Ori^en c^ntra Celsum ^. 5. Tom.
1. sol. 67. C. Vid. Ibid.
much inveighes against Plays, against Players and Play-haunters, as the very
brood and bondslaves of the Devil, who have no part at all in Christ or in
his Church) records: That Mo^es took away all such things as conduced not to
the benefit of mankind; embracing and cherishing those things only which
might be useful and profitable unto all men: whence he permitted and
instituted no such Plays and gymnicall Exercises as the Gentiles used, in
which naked men wrestled together, or contended with one another on horseback,
or in which women were prostituted to the lusts of all men, that so they might
delude nature by their lewdness. But this verily was principally intended
among the Jews, that from their very cradles they might learn to transcend
all nature, to overcome what ever was sensible, and to believe, that God
resided not in any part of sensible nature, whom they did seek only in things
above, and without all bodies. Lastly, Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bathe,
about the year of our Lord, 1160. speaking of that holy man Job; informs us:
Porro beatus ille Job plenissime nomen et officium liberalitatis implebat, qui
nihil indulgens ebrietati et crapulae, nec sequens huius vitae vanitates et
insanias falsas, se totum pauperum necessitatibus impendeb^t. Non alebat
leones, ursos, aut simias; non confluebant ad e^m histriones, dulcorarii,
fabularum aut nugarum inanium concentores, sed ex pura liberalitatis
cons^ientia, dicebat; humerus meus a iunctura sua cadat, et brachium meum cum
ossibus avellatur, si negavi pauperibus quod volebant, si oculos viduae
expectare feci, etc. O quam melioret per omnia commendabiliorest, maesta,
honesta et sobria haec liberalitas, quae ad vitam aeternam fructificat, quam
illa quae subvertit animam, rationem hebetat, corpus destruit, and aedificatad
gehennam. Petrus Blesensit Epist. 85. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 769.
That he nourished no lions, bears or apes; that no Stage Players, no singers
of fables and vain idle toys resorted to him; that he gave not himself to
the pleasures and vanities of this life, upon which many spend their estates;
but that he bestowed his revenues in the charitable relieving of the poor.
All which being laid together, is an undeniable proof; that the whole
primitive Church and Saints of God both before and under the Law, did utterly
abandon and condemn all Stage Plays, Players, and such other Spectacles as
sinful and pernicious; not giving the least allowance to them. And shall we
Christians under the Gospel, be worse than these were under the Law, and so
make our Hebr. 2.2, 3. etc. 10.28, 29.
condemnation far more terrible, our sin more out of measure sinful? God
forbid.

That the whole primitive Church under the Gospel has reprobated, abandoned
and condemned Stage Plays, is more than evident. First, by the express
testimony of Epiphanius, Bishop of Constans, in Cyprus, a learned ancient
Father: who in his Compendiary Sum of the faith and doctrine of the Catholic
and Apostolic Church, informs us, in positive terms: Haec sancta Catholica
et Apostolica Ecclesia reprobat omnes scortationes, et adulteria, et
petulantiam. et idololatriam, et caedem, et omnem iniquitatem, etc. Prohibet
theatra et ludos equestres, venationem, musicos item, etc. Contra H^reses l. 3.
Tom. 2. near the end. Edi^. Luteri^e Paris. 1612. Col. 922, 923.
That the Catholic and Apostolical Church does reprobate and forbid all
Theaters, Stage Plays, Cirque-playes, and such like heathenish spectacles: An
evidence so full, so pregnant, that we need no other. Secondly, by the suffrage
of Tertullian^ who in his Apology for the Christians against the Gentiles;
writes thus in the name and person of all the primitive Christians of his age:
AEque Spectaculis vestris in tantum renunciamus in quantum originibus little,
quas scimus de superstitione conceptas. Nihil nobis dictu, visu, auditu cum
in^^nia Circi, cum impudicitia theatri, cum Xysti vanitate; Spectaculis non
convenimus. Apologia Advers. Gentes c. 38. and 42. Operum. Tom. 2. Parisiis
1566. p. 690, 704
We renounce your Spectacles and Stage Plays, as far forth as we reject
their originalls; which we know to have had their conception from superstition.
We have nothing at all to do with the fury of the Circus: with the dishonesty
or lewdnes of the Theater, with the cruelty of the Arena: with the vanity of
the Xystus or Wrestling place, we come not at all unto your Plays. Lo here a
professed public Protestation of all the primitive Christians, against these
Plays and Spectacles which we so much admire; whose detestation of Plays was
so notoriously known to the Pagans, that Tertullian in his Book, De
Spectaculis, affirms: Numquid ergo superest ut ab ipsis ethnicis responsum
flagitemus? Illi iam nobis renuncient, an liceat Christianis spectaculo uti?
Atquin hinc vel maxim intelligunt factum Christianum, de repudio
spectaculorum. Itaque negat manifest qui per quod cognoscitur tollit. De
Spectac. cap: 24. Tom. 2. p. 400.
That the Heathen Gentiles did most of all discern men to be Christians by
this, that they abandoned and renounced Stage Plays. And shall this which was
the eminentest badge of a Christian, heretofore, be nothing else but the
ignominious brand of a Puritan, now? Certainly its a strong argument, that
those whom the world now brands for Puritans, are in truth no other but the
sincerest Christians; and that those who style them so (especially for
condemning or renouncing Stage Plays) are little better, (I had almost said as
bad, nay worse) than Pagans: since he manifestly denies himself to be a
Christian, who takes away this special mark by which he is known to be a
Christian; as the same Tertullian there inferres. Thirdly, this truth is
evident by Theophilus Patriarch of Antiochia about the year of our Lord 170:
Who in the person of all the Christians of that age, writes thus unto
Autolycus: Monomachias nobis spectare interdictum est, ne videlicet participes
huiusmodi caedium reddamur. Nec caetera spectacula spectare audemus, ne oculi
nostri inquinentur, et aures nostrae hauriant profana, quae ibi decantantur
carmina. Neque dum Thyestis tragica facinora commemorat etc. Nec fas nobis est
audire adulteria Deorum hominumque, quae suavi verborum modulantur mercede,
etc. Theophilus Antiochenu^ ad Autolicum l. 3. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. p. 170. G.H.
We are all prohibited to behold sword-playes, lest we should be made
partakers of such murders. Neither dare we behold those other Plays and
Spectacles, lest our eyes should be defiled, and our ears should draw in those
profane verses that are there uttered: neither dare we so much as to hear
Thyestis whiles he commemorates tragical villainies, etc. Neither is it
lawful for us to hear the adulteries of the Gods and men, which they modulate
with a sweet strain of words, being allured unto it by rewards. Far be it,
far be it, I say, from Christians, with whom temperance and modesty flourish,
and chastity bears sway, that we should so much as think, much less behold
or act such villainies as these. What fuller, what plainer declaration against
Stage Plays can we desire than this? Fourthly, Athenagoras, the famous
Christian Philosopher, in his Apology or Embassy for the Christians, to M.
Aurelius Antoninus, and Aurelius Commodus, two Roman Emperors, about the year
of our Lord 180; writes thus in the behalf of the Christians of that age:
Alieno ab his Spectaculis animo sumus. At^enag^ras, pro Ch^^stianis Legatio.
Bibl. Pa^rum. Tom. 2. p. 170. G. H.
We utterly disaffect and condemn your gladiatory Spectacles, Plays and
Enterludes. Fifthly, Minutius Felix, that famous Christian Lawyer, who
flourished about 200 years after Christ, in his incomparable Dialogue, styled
Ostavius, in the defense of the Christians; brings in Vos vero suspe^si interim
ac solliciti honestis voluptatibus abstinetis, non Spectacula ^isitis, non
pompis interestis. Minucius Felix Octavius Oxoniae 1627. p. 34.
Caelicius a Pagan, taxing the Christians, for that they resorted not to
Stage Plays, neither were they present at public shows: to which Octavius,
in the behalf of all the Christians gives this reply: Nos igitur qui moribus
et pudor^ censemur, merito malis volup atibus vestris et pompis vestris et
spectaculis abstinemus, quorum et de sacris originem novimu^, et noxia
bland^menta damnamus. I^i^em. ^. 123. Vid. Ibid.
We therefore who are valued by our manners and chastity, deservedly withdraw
our selves from your evil pleasures, Plays and spectacles, whose original we
know to have proceeded from idolatry, and which we condemn as pernicious
allurements unto sin. Sixthly, St. Cyprian, that godly Martyr, Bishop of
Carthage, about the year of our Lord 250. informs Epis^olarum lib. 1. Epist.
10: Edit. Erasmi Antwerpiae 1541. Tom. 1. page 56, 57. See Act. 5. Scene 3.
page 168, 169. Where his words are quoted at large.
Gucratius, in an Epistle purposely written to him to this end; that it would
not stand with the Majesty of God, nor the discipline of the Gospel, that the
chastity and honor of the Church should be contaminated with so filthy a
contagion, as to permit a Stage Player, either to act his Plays, or to train
up others for the Stage, though he had given over acting himself. A pregnant
evidence, in what terms of opposition the primitive Church and Christians
stood wi^h Stage Players, and their filthy Enterludes, which they could upon no
terms brook. Seventhly, Hoc etiam placuit, ut filii Episcoporum vel
Ciericorum, spectacula secularia non exhibeant, sed nec spectent, quandoquid^m
ab spectaculo et omnes Laici prohibeantur. Sem^er enim Ch^^stianis omnibus hoc
interd^ctum est, ut ubi blasphemi sunt^ non accedant. Conc^l. Carthag. 3. Can.
11^ ^pud Suri^^^ Council. Tom. 1. p. 504. Cintur. Magd. Tom. 4. cap. 6. Col. 458.
the 3. Council of Carthage, about the year of our Lord 394. Can. 11. which
prohibits the sons of Bishops and Clergy men from exhibiting and beholding
Stage Plays; informs us; that all Christians had been always inhibited from
resorting to such places where Players and blasphemers came. If all Christians
then have always been prohibited from resor^ing unto Stage Plays, as this
ancient Council affirms; it is cer^aine, the primitive Church and Christians
did evermore condemn them: and can we yet approve, applaud, frequent them now?
Eighthly, St. Chrysostom, about 400 years after Christ, in his 15. Homely to
the people of Antioch; and in his 38. Homely upon Matthew, writes: Sed nunc
tac^ntibus nobis, et nihil de hoc dicentibus, sponte Orchestram obstruxerunt,
et Circu^ inaccessibil^s factus est. Et ante hac nostrorum multi ad il^os
currebant: nunc autem illinc omnes ad Ecclesiam confugerunt, et nostrum laudant
Deum. Homil. 15^ a^ P^^. A^tioch. Tom. 5. Col. 118. C.
That all the Christians of Antioch in the time of their fear and danger, had
of their own accord shut up the Playhouse doors, and stopped up all passages
to the Circus running hastily with zeal and earnestness to the Church to
praise the Lord, in stead of resorting to the Theaters; Diruemus ig^tur omnium
loca ludorum ^ inqui^s, Vtinam iam diruta essent, quamvis quantum ad nos
attinet, iampridem desolata iacent. Chrysostom. Homil. 38. in Matt^. Tom. 2.
Col. 299. C.
which as to us, and all good Christians, (in whose person he speaks) lie
desolate and ruinated long ago. Ninthly, Saint Augustine about the year of
our Lord 410. records: That when the Deinde quod de faelicitatis rerum
humanarum d^minutione^ per Christiana tempora conqueruntur, si libro^
Philosophorum legant, ea reprehendentium quae nunc eis etiam recusantibus et
murmurantibus subtrahuntur, tum vero magnam laudem reperient temporum
Christianorum. Quid enim eis minuitur faelicitatis, nisi quod pessime
luxurioseque abutebanturin magnam Creatoris iniuriam? Nisi forte hinc sint
tempora, mala, quia per omnes paen^ Civitates cadunt theatra, cavcae
^^rp^tudinum et publicae professiones flagitioso^u^ etc De Consenl^
Evangelist^ris l. 1^ c. ^3^ To ^ pars. 1. p^ 530.
Gospel was spread abroad in the world, Stage Plays and Play Houses, the very
caves of filthiness, and professions of wicked persons, went to ruin almost
in every City, as inconsistent with it; whence the Gentiles complained of the
times of Christianity, as evil and unhappy seasons. An apparent demonstration,
that the truth and power of Religion, the true Church and servants of Christ
were as opposite to Stage Plays, to Theaters in the primitive times, as the 1.
Sam. 5.2, 3^4.
Arc to Dagon, 2 Cor. 6.15^
Christ to B^lial: and shall we now yoke them both together? Lastly, St.
Bernard, about the year of our Lord 1130. instructs us: Milites Christi scacos
era^eas detestan^ur, abhorrent venationem. nec ludricra illa avium rapina (ut
assol^t) delectantur. Mimos et Magos, et fahula^ores, scurrilesque canu^lenas,
aut ludorum spectacula, tanquam vani^ales et i^sani as fal^as respuunt et
abominantur. Capil^o^ ^ondent, scientes ^uxta Apostolum, ig^^miniam esse viro
si comam nutrie^t. Ber^ard. ad Mi^^^es Templ^ Sermo. ^ap. 4. Opera An^wer^^
616. Co^ 832. L^M.
That all the faithful soldiers of Jesus Christ abominate and reject all
dicing, all stage players, south-sayers, tellers of fables, all scurrilous
songs and stage plays, as vanities, and false frensies. Neither delight they
in the ravenous sport of hauking. They cut their hair and wear it short,
knowing according to the Apostle, that it is a shame for a man to nourish his
hair. All which concurring testimonies infallibly clear this undoubted truth:
That the whole primitive Church and all godly Christians that lived in it, have
unanimously, constantly and professedly with greatest detestation, abominated,
renounced and condemned Stage Plays. For the further manifestation of which; I
shall desire you to consider but these particulars more. First, that the
Scriptures both Canonical and Apochryphall, together with the Apostles, the
Whole Nation of the Jews, the Sain^s and Church of God both before and under
the Law, rejected and abandoned Stage Plays, as I have largely proved in the
precedent Scene: therefore the primitive Church and Christians under the
Gospel, could not but censure and oppugn them too. Secondly, the most, the
chiefest Fathers and Councels in the primitive Church have abundantly,
unanimously, professedly condemned Stage Plays, in the highest strain of
opposition; as the premises, and two next ensuing Scenes will manifest: the
primitive Church and Christians therefore did undoubtedly condemn, reject
them; whose judgment remains upon record to all posterity in the laborious
writings of these Fathers, and in the Canons of these most famous Councels.
Thirdly, the primitive Church under the Gospel, as sundry Concilium Eliberinum
Can. 62. Arelatense 1. Can. 4. and 5. Arelatense 2. Can. 20. Constantinop. 6.
Ca^. 62. Carthaginense 4. Can. 88.
Councels, Clemens Romanus Consti^. Apostolic. l. 8. c. 38. Tertul. De
Pudicitia cap. 7. Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio: Chrysostom: Hom. 3.
De David. et Saul
Fathers, and Ioannis Sarisberiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 8. Gratian.
Distinctio 33. and 48. and de Consecratione Distinctio ^. Alexander De Hales
Summa Theologiae, pars 4. Quaest. 17. Artic. 2. sect. 4. p 394. Aluarus
Pelagius, de Planctu Eccles. lib. 1. Artic. 49. Astexanus d^ Casibus l. 4. Tit.
7. Artic. 4. Ioannis de Burgo Pupilla Oculi pars 4. c. 8. I. Phocius
Monocanonis Tit. 1^. c. 11, 22. Summa Angelica Histrio. Tostatusin Matthew. Tom.
3. fol. 40. E. Centur. Magd. Tom. ^. Col. 142. Baronius and Spondanus Anno
Christi 206. sect. 2. and 371. sect. 10. Dr. Reinolds, Mr. Northbrook, and Mr.
Gosson in their Treatises against Stage Plays. Bul^ngerus de Theatro l. 1. c.
51. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters p. 116. with sundry
others. Se^ Act. 4. Scen. 1. p. 133, 134.
others testify, excommunicated all Stage Players, all Play-haunters;
thrusting them out both from the Church, the Sacraments, and all Christians
society, as ^oysome, putred, contagious, unworthy graceless persons, till they
had utterly abjured Stage Plays, and solemnly protested to return unto them
no more: this therefore is infallible, that they rejected Stage Plays.
Fourthly, If any Pagan who was a professed Stage Player or Play-haunter,
desired to turn Christian, he was first to renounce his art of Stage-playing,
and to abandon all resort to Plays, before he could be baptized or admitted
into the Church, as the Concil^ Eliberinum Can. 62. Theodoret Contra G^aeco^
Infideles lib. 8. De Martyribus Tom. 2. p. 390. Primasius Comment^ in Epist. ad
Romans c. 10. fol. 53. Antomni Chronicon. pars 2. Tit. 15. c. 10. sect. 13. fol.
132. Baronius and Spondanus Anno Christi 371. sect. 10. Codex Theodo^^i l. 15.
Tit. 7. Lex. ^. See here Act. 6. Scene 12. and 14.
marginall authorities fully evidence: This therefore is an unfallible
evidence, that the prim^tive Church and Christians abominated Stage Plays.
Lastly, every Christian that was baptized in the primitive Church, did solemnly
renounce See Baronius and Spondanus Annal. Eccles. Anno Christi 206. sect. 2.4.
all Stage Plays, dancing, with such like sports and spectacles, as the very
works and pompes of the Devil, under which all Stage Plays, Spectacles and
dancing are included, as Clemens Romanus, Tertullian, Cyrill of Jerusalem, St.
Augustine, Chrysostom, Salvian, Isiodor Hilpalensis, HRabanus Maurus, and
other Fathers expressly testify, in their Act. 2. Chorus: page 49. to 57. and
Act. 6. Scene 12.
forequoted places: to which I shall here annexe some other testimonies to make
the point more plain; that Stage Plays, and dancing are those very pompes of
the Devil, which Christians in the primitive Church, (and We now as well as
they) renounce in baptism, however we most perjuriously reassume them, against
our sacred vows. St. Cyprian in his Book De Spectaculis, is most punctual to
this purpose; where thus he writes: Impudenter in Ecclesia daemonia exorcizat,
quorum voluptates in Spectaculis laudat: et cum ^emel illi renuncians, recisa
sit res omnis in baptismate; dum post Christum ad Diaboli Spectaculum vadit,
Christo tanquam diabolo renunciat. De Spectaculis lib. Edit. Pamelij Coloniae
Agrip. 1617. p. 244.
He impudently exorciseth the Devil in the Church, whose pleasures he commends
in Stage Plays; and when as by renouncing him once in baptism, all his pomp
and furniture is lopped off; whiles that after this profession of Christ he
goes to the spectacles of the Devil, he renounceth even Christ himself as a
Devil. Which dreadful sentence, together with that of Originum l. 18. c. 41.
See Act. 6. Scene 12
Isiodor Hispalensis formerly quoted: ( That he who after baptism agrees
either to act or see a Stage Play, denies God, and becomes a praevaricator of
the Christian faith; since he again desires that which he had long since
renounced in his baptism; to wit, the Devil, his Pompes and Works: which is
likewise seconded by HRabanus Maurus de Vniverso l. 20. c. 38) me thinks
should shake the very heart and reins of every Play-haunter, and make his very
soul to weep even tears of blood. Justinian, that godly Christian Emperor,
Episcopi et Clerici vel hi qui modo recens initiati sunt et adorandis mysteriis
dignati, praedicant, ut renuncient adversarii daemonis cultui et omnibus pompis
eius, quarum non minima pars Spectacula sunt: Corpus Iuris Civilis. Lugduni
1604. Tom. 4. fol. 162. Vid. Ibidem.
Codicis lib. 1. Tit. 4. De Episcopali Audientia, Lex 35. expressly informs us:
That Stage Plays, Cirque-playes, Dicing, and such like Spectacles are not the
least part of that worship, of those pompes of the Devil which Christians
renounce in baptism, when they are first initiated and admitted to the sacred
Mysteries: whence he prohibits all Christians, especially all Clergy men,
either to act, or behold such Enterl^des and Spectacles as these, or Polluere
etia^ suas manus, et oculos, et aures sic damnatis et proh^biti^ ludi^ etc
Ibidem.
to pollute their hands, their eyes and ears with such damned and prohibited
Plays. St. Chrysostom, as in sundry places before quoted; so in his 21.
Homely to the people of Antioch, and his 69. Homely upon Matthew, he styles
stage plays, cirque-playes, and dancing, the Devils Pompes and Lectures: his
words in the first of these places are remarkable. Vocis illius recorderis,
quam dum sacris initiareris, emisisti^ Abrenuncio tibi Satanae, and Pompae
tu^e, and cultui-tuo: Circa Margari, tarum enim cultum insania, est Pompa
Satanica. A^rum enim c^pisti, non ut corpus vincias, s^d ut pauperes solvas,
etenutrias. Dic igitur continue, Abrenuncio tibi Satana. Nihil hac tutius voce,
si ipsam per opera exhibeamus. Haec enim vox confaederatio cum Domino est. Et
sicut nos servos ementes, ipsos qui venduntur, primo in^errogamus, an nobis
servire velint: ita facit et Christus. quando debet te in servitutem capere,
prius interrogat an velis illum crudelem tyrannum dimittere, et immitem, et ad
foedera suscipit: non enim coactum est ipsius imperium, etc. Homil. 21. ad
Populum Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 166. C. D.
Remember (says he) this speech which thou have uttered when as thou wast
baptized, I renounce thee Satan, thy Pompes, and thy service: say always, I
renounce thee Satan. Nothing will be safer than this speech, if we express it
by our works. For this speech is a confederation with the Lord. And as we when
we buy servants, demand of them first, whether they will serve us yea or no:
even so does Christ, when as he ought to receive thy service, he first demands
of thee, whether thou will first forsake that merciless and cruel tyrant, and
then he receives thee into covenant: for his dominion is not forced. And though
he has redeemed us wretched and ungrateful servants with such a price, the
greatness whereof the reason and mind of man is not able to comprehend; even
with his own most precious blood: Et post haec omnia, non testes a nobis, non
chirographa exigit, sed sola contentus est voce: et si dicas ex cord,
Abrenuncio tibi Satana, et pompae tuae, totum recepit. Hoc igitur dicamus,
Abrenuncio tibi Satana, tanquam in illa die huius vocis rationem reddituri, et
ipsam custodiamus, ut salvum tunc reddamus depositum. Pompa vero Satanica sunt,
theatra, circenses, et omne peccatum, et dierum observatio, et praesagia, et
omina etc. Ibidem Col. 167.
yet after all this he exacts no witnesses nor writings from us, but is
contended with a word alone: and if thou say from thy heart; I renounce thee
Satan, and thy pomp, he has received all he does require. Let us say this, I
renounce thee Satan: and let us keep this promise, as those who are to give an
account of it at the last day, that we may then restore the pledge safe. Now
the Devils pomp, are theaters, stage plays, cirque-playes, costly and
gorgeous apparel, praesages, omens, and every sin. To preserve thee
therefore from these pompes, and every other sin: Sine verbo hoc nunquam in
forum prodeas, sed cum es ianuae vestibula transgressurus, hoc prius loquere
verbu^, Abrenuncio tibi Satana, et coniungor tibi Christ. Ne unquam absque hac
voce exeas; haec erit tibi bacculus, haec arm^tura, haec turris inexpugnabilis;
sic ut non tantum homo occurrens, uerum nec ipse Diabolus te quicquam laedere
poterit, cum his te cernens armis ubique apparentem. Ibidem Col. 167 D. 168. A.
when thou art going out of thy door, utter this speech first; I renounce thee
Satan, and I am united to thee o Christ: Never go thou abroad without this
speech: this will be a staff, this will be armor and an impregnable tower to
thee, so that neither man nor Devil shall be able to hurt thee, when they
shall see thee appearing every where furnished with these weapons. St.
Augustine, as in his Act. 2. Chorus p. ^9, 50.
fore-alledged place, so in his second Book De Symbolo ad Catechumenos, cap.
1^ and 2. He informs us: Si te pompa illa, figura ea^ equorum, compositio
ornatus et aurigae superstantis, equos regentis, vincere cupientis etc. Si haec
te, ut dixi, pompa delectat, nec hanc tibi denegavit, qui pompis Diaboli
renuncia^e praecepit; habemus et nos spiritualem nostiam aurigam etc. Fugite
dilectissimi Spectacula, fugite caveas ^urpissimas Diaboli ne vos vincula
teneant m^ligni. Ibid. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 139, 1394.
That stage plays, cirque-playes, and such like spectacles, are the pompes of
the Devil, which God has enjoined us to renounce: Fly stage plays therefore
(says he) o my beloved, avoid these most filthy dens of the Devil, lest the
snares of the wicked one hold you captive. Alchuvinus, a famous English
Divine, flourishing about the year of our Lord 790. in his Epistle, De
Caeremonijs Baptismi, writing of that renouncing which we make in baptism;
wherein we renounce the Devil with all his workes^ and all his pompes;
informs us: Novissime, et omnibus pompis e^us. Quae sunt, inanis iactantia,
canora musica, in quibus saepe solvitur et mollitur Christianus vigor,
spectacula turpia, vel super^^ua et reliqua. Ibidem, Opera Lu^^tia. Paris.
1617. Col. 1558.
That these pompes of the Devil, are vain boasting, loud-sounding Music, in
which Christian vigor is ofttimes remitted and effeminated, filthy
Stage Plays, with all superfluous things. De Sacramentalibus praecibus et
Ritibus Baptismi, Tit. 5. cap. 49. sect. 7. Operum. Tom. 3. Venetiis 1571. fol.
94. vid. ibid. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Thomas Waldensis, a famous Popish English Writer, assures us: that the pompes
of the Devil which we renounce in baptism, before we are united to the
fabric of the Church, are unlawful desires, which defile, but not adorn the
soul; as the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, with the ambition or
ostentation of the world, belonging to the lust of the eyes; as vain
Stage Plays, foolish pride, and the pleasures of this evil world. To these I
might add Quoted by Alexander Fabritius Destruct. vitiorum pars 3. c. 10.
Gulielmus Parisiensis, Destruct. vitiorum pars 3. c. 10. See Act. 5. Scene 8.
p. 256, 257.
Alexander Fabritius, the History of the Waldenses, p. 2. cap. 9. p. 25. See
Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 230.
Waldenses, Pompis Diaboli renunciant, quae sunt spectacula, ludi, choreae,
ornatus vestium vel aliarum rerum, et quaeque superflua. De Antiquo Ritu
Missarum l. 3 c. 58. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. pars 3. p. 1069. E.
Honorius Augustodunensis, with See Act. 6. Scene 12.
sundry other modern Authors, who make Stage Plays, dancing, and such other
spectacles, to be the chiefest pompes of the Devil which we renounce in
baptism: but I shall conclude with that of Baronius and Spondanus his
Epitomizer, who inform us: Quin etiam in solenni illo tempore baptismi solita
ab omnibus fie^^ renunciatione, Spectaculis quoque abrenunciare fideles moris
fuisse in Ecclesia Gallicana, Salvianus testatur; et alibi sub Pompis Diaboli
quibus renunciari mos est, inclusa censita fuisse Spectacula, Cyrillus docet,
et OMNES ALII interpraetantur. Baronius and Spondanus: Annal. Ec^les. Anno
Christi 206. ^ect. 2. and 4.
That among the primitive Christians in the solemn time of baptism, when as
they all made public renunciations; it was the custom of the French Church,
for Christians particularly to renounce all Stageplayes, as Salvian testifies:
and under the pompes of the Devil, which it was then (and now) the custom for
Christians at their baptism to renounce; St. Cyrill teaches us in another
place, that all Stage Plays were esteemed to be comprised, and so ALL OTHERS
DO INTERPRET. So that by the resolution both of the primitive Church and
Fathers, and of ALL OTHER INTERPRETERS SINCE, if Baronius or Spondanus may be
credited: Stage Plays are the very Pompes of the Devil which we most
solemnly abjure and protest against in our baptism, upon our very first
admittance into the Church of Christ. And certainly they must needs be so. For
if Pompa, in its genuine interpretation, signify naught else (as In their
Dictionaries, in the Word, Pompa.
Calepine, Eliot, Holioke, and other Distionaries teach us) but Spectaculum, to
wit, a Spectacle, Stage Play, or glorious gaudy show; in which sense this word
is often times used, both by Paedagog. l. 2. c. 10. and l. 3. c. 11
Clemens Alexandrinus, De Spectaculib.
Cyprian, Advers. Gentes lib. 7.
Arnobius, De Corona Militis c. 3. and 11. and de Spectaculis lib.
Lactantius, De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum.
M^nucius Felix, De Corona Militis c. 3. and 11. and de Spectaculis lib.
Tertullian, De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum.
Nazienzen, Hom. 3. de Davide et Saul. Hom. 7.38, and 69. in Matthew. Hom. 42.
in Acta Hom. 15.21. ad Pop. Antioch. and Oration 6. Tom. 5. Col. 1471. B.
Chrysostom, De Symbolo ad. Catechumenos, l. 2. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 1.
Augustine, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6.
Salvian, De Aureo Asino l. 10. p. 282.
Apuleius, Contra Symmachu^ l. 1. and 2.
Prudentius, and Isiodor. Hisp. Originum l. 18. c. 41. Minutius Felix Octavius
p. 34. 123.
other ancient Christian Writers; and likewise by De re Equestri lib.
Zenophon, Epist. In Verrem l. 3. Ad Atticum l. 13. Ep. 28. 43.
Cicero, Controvers. l. 1. Praefatio.
Seneca, Hist. Romans l. 22. 30.
Livie, Antiqu. Romans l. ^. and l. 7. sect. 9.
Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, Fastorum l. 4. p. 64. and Amorum l. 3. Eleg. 2.
Ovid, De Gloria Atheniensium lib.
Plutarch, Julius s. 37
Suetonius, Miles Gloriosus et Mostellaria.
Plautus, Dipnosoph. l. 5. c. 4. and 11.
Athenaeus, Bibl. Hist l. 16.
Diodorus Siculus, Saturnalium l. 1. c. 6.
Macrobius, Historiae l. 1. and 3.
Herodian, with diverse other Lucan Pharsal. lib. 1.
Heathen Authors, to which many See Bulengerus De Triumphis lib. c. 24, 25,
26. De Ludis Circensibus, cap. 39. G^dwins Roman Antiquities, l. 2. sect. 3.
^ap 2. p. 85. See Josephus Antiqu Iudaeorum l. 7. c. 16. and here page 89.
Concilium Eliberinum Can. 57.
modern Writers might be added: who comprehend all Plays and Spectacles,
under the name of Pompes: And if Stage Plays were originally invented by, and
consecrated unto Devils, on whose festivalls they were always solemnly acted
in greatest pomp and state; as all these Authors, and the Act. 1^ 2. and
Chorus Ibidem.
premises largely testify: then questionless the very Pompes of the Devil
which we renounce in baptism, can be no other but Stage Plays, with such
other Spectacles, Shows and Pastimes, which the idolatrous Pagans used in the
solemnities and worship of their Devil Gods: and so the primitive Church and
Christians always took them. If then the primitive Church, and Saints of God,
(who to show their greater detestation to Stage Plays, Apostolorum Canones,
Can. 17. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. ^3. Gratian Distinctio. 34. See here Scene
3. toward the end.
disabled all those who did but marry women-Actors or Play-haunters, from
taking holy Orders, or any Ecclesiastical preferments whatsoever) thus
solemnly abominated and renounced Stage Plays in their Baptism, as the
Saltantium virorum choris Diabolus adest in medio; adest enim a meretriciis
cantilenis, a verbis obscaenis, a diabolica pompa vocatus. At tu omni huiusmodi
pompae nuntium remisisti, teque Christi cultui mancipasti die illo quo sacris
mysteriis dignus habitus es. Recordare itaque verborum illorum pacti conventi,
et ne illud violes, cave. Chrysostom. Hom. in S. Iulianum, Tom 1. Edit. Front^.
Ducai, Parisii^ 1621. p. 613.
very Pompes and pastimes of the Devil; it is most undeniably certain, that
they reprobated and condemned Stage Plays in the very highest degree. And to
put this out of all further question; we have the Centuriae Magd. Cent. 3. cap.
6. De Disciplina et moribus, Col. 141, 142. Cent. 4. cap. 6. Col. 458. and cap.
9. Col. 837. Cent. 5. c. 6. Col. 721. and Cent. 6. c. 6. Col. 359.
Century-Writers, in the behalf of Protestants, and Annal. Ecclesiast. Anno
Christi 206. sect. 2.4. Anno 399. sect. 5. Anno 469. sect. 2. and Anno 371.
sect. 10.
Cardinal Baronius and Spondanus, in the behoof of the Papists, upon the
serious perusal of all the several records, and Writers of the primitive
Church, proclaiming this as an indubitable truth; That all the Christians,
Fathers and Councels in the primitive Church, have wholly abandoned, yea
utterly condemned Stage Plays, as diabolical, heathenish. unchristian
Spectacles; excommunicating all Players, all Play-haunters both from the
Church, the Sacraments, and the society of Christians, till they had abjured,
renounced these lewd accursed Enterludes, which they did most detest. And shall
we then who A Christo Christiani sunt cognominati. Non se autem glorietur
Christianum, qui^ nomen habet, et facta non habet. Vbi autem nomen sequutum
fuerit opus, certis^ime ille est Christianus, quia se factis ostendit
Christianum, ambulans sicut et ipse ambulavit, a quo et nomen traxit. Isiodor
Hispal. Originum l. 7. c. 14.
profess our selves the undoubted progeny, followers, successors of the
primitive Churches, Saints and Christians, so far degenerate from their
piety, purity, zeal and Christian discipline; as not only to tolerate, but
even patronize, admire, honor Players, Play-Poets, Theaters, Stage-playes^
which they so severely censured, so diligently suppressed? and which is worse,
to hate, abominate, revile, condemn, and ignominiously traduce all such for
See the 3. Epistle to my Perpetuity, The Epistle to the Reader before Healths
Sickness; and Healths Sickness, Edit. 2. p. 79, 80.
Puritans, Praecisians, Humorists, Cynnicks, Novellers, Factionists, and I know
not what besides; Nihil nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum est. Et
argumentum recti est malis displicere. Seneca, De Vi^a beata, cap. 24.
(an apparent argument of their grace and goodness when such vicious persons
thus revile them) who either write or speak against them, or out of piety and
conscience resort not daily to them? Alas, where is our Christianity, our
piety, our godly discipline; where is our claim, our title, our conformity to
the primitive Church: where our affinity, our cognation to the primitive
Christians, whose children, successors and disciples we profess our selves,
whiles that we thus tolerate, harbor, justify these Diabolical Pompes and
Spectacles, which they so seriously renounced as extremely opposite to, as
inconsisted with the very practice and profession of a Christian, and thus
Nonnulli pessime loquuntur de optime meritis. Seneca De Be^^fi^ijs lib. 2. cap.
24.
causlesly revile all those who speak or write against them? When we shall all
appear before the dreadful tribunal of our most holy Savior, as 2 Cor. 5.10.
Iam. 5.8, 9. Jude 14, 15.
we shall do ^re long: and when we shall there behold those blessed
Patriarchs, Apostles, Fathers, Bishops, Saints and holy Martyrs in the
prim^tive Church, who have so zealously anathematized, renounced Stage Plays,
as the very Pompes of the Devil, which they and we have solemnly abjured in
our baptism; passing an eternal doom of condemnation on us for our
perfidious resort unto them, against our sacred vow; alas, See Hyppolitus De
Consummatione mundi Oration. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 3. f. 17. A. D.
what can we plead to justify, to extenuate this our fact, or to entitle our
selves to the triumphant Church in heaven, whose discipline we thus reject on
earth? Can we allege for our selves, that we are pious Christians, when as
our daily Play-house-haunting Christiani esse dicuntur, et non sunt, qui per
flagitia et turpitudines suas no men religionis infamant, qui, ut scriptum est,
ore fatentur se nosse D^um, factis autem neg^nt; per quos, ut legimus, via
veritatis blasphetur, et sacrosanctum Domini Dei nomen sacrilegorum hominum
maledictione violatur. Et ideo hoc ipso Christiani deteriores sunt, qui
meliores esse deberent. Non enim probant quod fatentur, et impugnant
professionem suam moribus suis; magis enim damnabilis est malitia, quam titulus
bonitatis accusat; et rea^us est impii pium nomen. Salvian De Gubern. Dei, lib.
3. p. 139, 140, 142.
proclaims us worse than Pagans? or can we plead we are members of the holy
Catholic Church of Christ, when as our frequent presence at Plays, at
Play Houses, and the diametrall contrariety of our lives, our actions to all
the primitive Christians, proves us the very limbs, the bondslaves of the
Devil? Certainly we must needs stand silenced, amazed, confounded, condemned
then, for justifying, for frequenting Stage Plays now, against the unanimous
execration, vote and sentence of the whole primitive Church and Saints of God,
both under the Law and Gospel: who as they Cor. 6.2, 3. Jude 14.15.
shall judge and doom us at the last, so they must needs abominate and
condemn us now. O therefore let no Christian now be so impiously shameless,
so peevishly absurd, as to apologize for Plays or Players, (by pen, by tongue
or practice,) as tolerable, as useful among Christians; or ignorantly, much
less Malitia ita infecit corda multorum, ut cum superatos damnatosque se esse
sentiant, tamen venen^ mentium non amittant, et quod solum possunt nos oderint,
per quos putant se libertatem haereseos docendi perdidisse. Hierom. Epist. 79.
maliciously (out of an implacable detestation to all grace, all goodness) to
condemn all such for At nos virtutes ipsas invertimus atque sincerum cupimus
^as incrustare: Probus quis nobiscum vivit? multum est dimissus homo, etc.
Horace Sermon. l. 1. Satyr. ^. p. 169, 170.
Puritans, Novellers, or factious Malcontents; the common voice and clamor
of our dissolute graceless times, wherein many turn professed Atheists, or
incarnate Devils, to avoid the jealousy of Expedit vobis neminem videri bonum^
quasi ali^na virtus exprobatio delictorum vestrorum sit. I^viti splendida cum
sordibus vestris confer^is, nec intelligitis quanto id vestro detrimento
audeatis. Nam ^i illi qui virtutem sequuntur, avari, libidinosi, ambitiosique
sunt, quid vos estis, quibu^ ipsum nome^ virtutis odio est? Seneca De Vita
bea^a cap. 24.
being reputed Puritans: But since the whole Catholic Church both before and
under the Law and Gospel, with all the primitive Christians, Fathers,
Councels, of all Nations, all places, have thus unanimously proclaimed an
everlasting professed hostility, and passed such a final doom and execration
against Players and Stage Plays; let this eternally convince our conscience,
close up our mouths, alter our resolutions, reform our Play-haunting lives,
and cause us readily to subscribe to this 47. Play-confounding Argument,
against which there can be no resistance, with which I shall conclude this
Scene.

That which the whole Church of God, both before and under the Law and Gospel,
together with all the Jews and faithful Saints before, and primitive
Christians in and since our Saviors time, have professedly abominated,
rejected, condemned in the very highest degree, even as the very works and
Pomps of the Devil, must undovbtedly be extremely sinful and utterly
unlawful unto Christians: as is evident by 1 Cor. 10.32. Phil. 4.8. ^om.
12.16, 17. 1 Cor. 1.10. cap. 14.23, 24, 25, 32: with sundry other Scriptures.

But the whole primitive Ea Ecclesijs displicent, quae omnibus bonis non
placent. Hierom. Epist. ^. cap. 2.
Church of God, both before and under the Law and Gospel, together with all
the Jews and faithful Saints before, and primitive Christians in and since
our Saviors time, have professedly abominated, rejected, condemned
Stage Plays in the very highest degree, even as the very works and pompes of
the Devil; as is evident by the premises.

Therefore they must undoubtedly be extremely sinful and utterly unlawful
unto Christians.

Let us therefore henceforth Prove. 2.20. Hebr. 6.12.
walk in the way of these good men, and keep the paths of the righteous:
becoming followers of these blessed primitive Christians, as well in
renouncing Stage Plays as in points of faith.

SCENA TERTIA.
54 Councels and Synods, togethe^ with sundry Canonical Constitutions against
Players, Play^haun^ters and Stage-playes^
general, national, provincial Councels and Synodes, both of the West and
Eastern Churches: of diverse Ecclesiastical and imperial Constitutions, which
either expressly or by way of necessary consequence prohibit Stage Plays;
excommunicating and censuring all Stage-pla^ers, all Play-haunters; and
inhibiting all manner of Christians, (especially Clergy men) to act any
theatricall Enterludes, or to be present at them, under severe penalties. To
begin with Councels and Synods; I shall here enumerate them in their Order,
according to their several antiquities, without any variation from their
Latin names, which I shall still retain for greater certainty, since I find
them variously englished: setting down their several Canons both in Latin
and English for the Readers better satisfaction; inserting likewise here and
there some other Canons not altogether impertinent to this Discourse.

The first Council against Stage Plays, Players and Concilium Eliberinum in
Spain, about the year of our Lord 305, consisting of 19. Bishops: Where I
find these three subsequent Canons most pertinent to our purpose: viz^ Canon:
57.62.67.

Apud Laurentium Surium. Council. Tom. 1. Coloniae Agrip. 1567. p. 366, 367.
Binius Council. Tom. 1. N^colinus Council. Tom 1. Petrus Crab. Council. Tom. 1.
Coloniae Agrip. 1551. p. 285. and C^rranza Su^ma Council. Paris^is 1624. fol.
37, 38. Centuriae Mag. Ce^t. 4. cap. 9. Col. 700.
Canon: 57. Matronae, vel earum mariti, vestimenta sua ad ornandam seculariter
pompam non dent. Et si fecerint, triennij tempore abstineant.

Canon: 62. Si Augur aut Pantomimi credere voluerunt, placuit, ut prius artibus
suis renuncient, et tunc demum suscipiantur, ita ut ulterius non revertantur.
Quod si facere contra interdictum tentaverint, projiciantur ab Ecclesia.

Canon: 67. Prohibendum, ne qua ^idelis vel catechumena, aut Comicos, aut viros
scenicos habeat; quaecumque haec fecerit, a communione a^ceatur.

Can: 57. Matrons, or their husbands may not give (or lend) their garments, to
adorn any secular Plays or shows: If they do, let the^ be excommunicated
for 3 years.

Can: 62. If any Southsayer or Stage Player will believe, we ordain, that they
first renounce their Arts, and then after a while they may be received, so that
they return unto them no more. But if they shall attempt to do contrary to
this injunction, let them be cast out by the Church.

Can: 67. We prohibit, that no believing woman or catechumenist entertain or
marry any Comedians or stage players; who ever shall do it, let her be
excommunicated.

A sufficient evidence, how execrably detestable all Stage Players and
Play-patrons, together with their Stage Plays were unto the primitive Church
and Christians, who would neither admit them into the Church, nor permit them
to continue in the Church being admitted, till they had utterly renounced
Stage Plays; the very lending of clo^hes to act Stage Plays in, and the very
marrying with, or harboring of a Stage Player incurring three years
excommunication both from the Church, the Sacraments, and the very society of
Christians.

Concilium Arelatense 1. held under Constantine the Great, in the City of
Narbo in France, about the year of Christ 314, consisting of 600 Bishops, as
Eodemque te^pore et illud sacratissimum Concilium apud Areleten, sexcentorum
Episcoporum colligitur. Adonis Chronicon. AEtas. 6. Bibl. Pa^r. Tom. 9. pars 2.
p. 280. G. See Baronius and Spondanus Ann^ C^risti 314. sect. 5.
Ado Viennensis informs us: where I find this Canon against Stage Players,
entitled De his qui convenient in Theatris: and so by consequence against
Stage Plays too.

Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 368. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 28.1 C^rranza fol. 39. Centur.
Magd. 4 Col. 70^.
Canon: 5. De Thea tricis, et ipsos placuit, qu^mdiu agunt, a communione
separari.

Can: 5. Concerning stage players, we have thought meet to excommunicate them,
as long as they continue to act.

Concilium Arelatense 2. about the year of our Lord 325. at which there were
present some See Surius ^^. 1. p. 375, 376.
38 Bishops, and some 50 Elders and Deacons: where this Canon was promulgated.

Surius Tom. 1 p. 375, 377. Crab. Tom. 1. p. ^94. Ca^^anza. fol. 44. Cent.
M^gd. 4. Col. 705. Biniu^ Council. Tom. ^. pars 1. p. 565.
Canon: 20. De agitatoribus sive theatricis, qui fideles sunt, placuit, eos,
quamdiu agu^t, a communione separari.

Can: 20. Concerning Actors or Stage Players, who are Christians, we decree
them to be excommunicated as long as they persevere to Play.

The fourth, is, Concilium Laodicenum, in Phrygia about the year of our See
Centur. Magd. Tom. 4. Col. 933. Baronius and Spondanus Anno Christi 314. sect.
12, 13.
Lord 364. as some a^^irme, others placing it sooner, others later; at which
most of the Bishops in Asia were present: where I meet with these two Canons,
against Dancing and Stage Plays.

Surius Tom. 1. p. 458. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 380 Binius Tom. 1. pars 1. p. 247.
Carranza. fol. 5^^ Centur. Magd. 4. Col. 8^7. Gratian. De Cons^^ratione
Distinctio 5.
Can: 53. Non oportet Christianos ad nuptias euntes vel balare vel saltare; sed
cast cae^are vel prandere, sicut competit Christianis.

Can: 53. Christians going to weddings ought neithe^ wantonly to sing, nor yet
to dance; but to suppe or dine soberly as becomes Christians.

Which Canon extending principally to dancing, is ratified and revived by
Suriu^ Council. Tom. ^. p. 358.
Concilium Ilerdense Can. ult: which has this title: Vt in Christianorum
nuptijs non saltetur.

Canon: 54. Non oportet Ministros Altaris, vel quoslibet Clericos spectaculis
aliquibus quae aut in nuptijs, aut in scenis exhibentur, interesse: sed
antequam thylemici ingrediantur, surgere eos, et de convivio abire.

Can: 54. Ministers of the Altar, or any other Clergy men, ought not to be
present at any stage plays that are acted either at marriages or in
play houses: but before the Players or F^dlers enter, they ought to arise, and
depart from the feast.

Which latter Canon though it extends only to Clergy men in words, yet the
equity of it reaches indifferently to all Christians, as the former Canon does
in positive terms.

The fifth, is, Concilium Hipponense, Anno 393. wherethere See Surius Tom. 1.
p. 510. and Centuri^^ Magd. 4. Col. 871, 872.
two Canons made against Stage Plays and Actors; to wit, Canon: 13. and 35.
being the very same with the 11. and 35. Canons of the 3. Council of Carthage
next ensuing, to which I shall refer you: wherein all the Canons of this
Council of Hippo were abbreviated and confirmed.

The sixth is, Concilium Carthaginense in Africa, Centuriae Magd. 4. Col. 866.
Baronius et Spondanus Anno Christi 397. sect. 14, 15. Prosperi Chronicon Anno
399.
Lord 397, or 399: consisting of 44 Bishops, of which St. Augustine, then
Bishop of Hippo, was one: where these two Canons were composed out of the 13.
and 35. Canons of the forementioned Council of Hippo.

Su^ius Tom. 1. p. 504, 505. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 428, 429. Binius Tom. 1. pars 1.
p. 575. Carranza. fol. 66. Centut. Magd. 4. Col. 867, 869. Gratian. De
Consecrat. Distinct. 2.
Canon^ 11. Vt filij Episcoporum vel Clericorum, spectacula secularia non
exhibeant, sed nec spectent, quando quidem ab spectaculo et omnes Laici
prohihibeantur. Semper enim Christianis omnibus hoc interdictum est, ut ubi
blasphemi sunt, non accedant.

See Codex Theodosiil. 15. Tit. 7. Lex. 1.
Canon: 35. Vt scenicis atque histrionibus, caeterisque huiusmodi personis vel
apostaticis, conversis vel reversis ad Dominum gratia vel reconciliatio non
negetur.

Can: 11. That the sons of Bishops and Clergy men shall neither exhibit, nor
yet so much as behold any secular Enterludes, since that even all Laymen are
prohibited from stage plays. For this has always been straightly forbidden
all Christians, that they come not where blasphemers are.

Can: 35. That grace or reconciliation shall not be denied to Stage Players and
Actors, and such like persons, or to apostates, who shall convert, and return
again to the Lord.

Which Canon admits Stage Players into the Church upon their conversion and
renouncing of their ungodly profession, but not before.

Concilium Carthaginense 4. Centur. M^g. ^^ Col. 873.
Anno Christi 4^1^ at which 214 Bishops were present: Which as it makes all
flattering, all scurrilous Clergy men, who delight in filthy jests, or sing or
dance publicly at any feasts, liable to a final degradation: (See Can: 56.60
62,); So it provides thus against Plays, and Play-haunting.

Surius Tom. 1. p. ^15. Petr. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 44. Carranza fol. 73. Gratian.
De Consecrat. Did. 5. and De Consecrat. Did. 1. Centur Magd. 4. Col. 878.
Canon: 86. Neophyti a ^autioribus epulis et spectaculis abstineant.

Canon: 88. Qui die solenni, praetermisso ^olenni Ecclesiae conventu, ad
spectacula vadit, excommunicetur.

Can: 86. Those who are newly baptized or converted to the faith ought to
abstain from costlier feasts and stage-plaies.

Can: 88. He who upon any solemn feast day, omitting the solemn assembly of
the Church, resorts to stage plays, let him be excommunicated.

Stage Plays then in this Councels judgment are no meet pastimes for any
solemn Christian festivals.

The eighth, is, Concilium Africanum, Anno Christi Surius Tom. 1 p. 587, 588.
Bishops subscribed their names, St. Augustine being one of that great number:
where I find these several Canons to our purpose.

Surius Tom. 1. p. 574, 577, 587. Gratian. De Consecrat. Did. 2. Crab. Tom. 1.
p. 503, 506, 507.
Can: 12. Vt Scenicis atque Histrionibus ( id est conversis vel ^eversis ad
Dominum) caeterisque hujusmodi personis, reconciliatio non-negetur.

Canon: 27. ^llud etiam petendum, ut quae contra praecepta divina convivia
multis in locis exercentur quae ab errore gentili attracta sunt, vetari talia
jubeant, et de civitatibus, et de possessionibus, imposita paena, prohiberi:
maxim, cum etiam in natalibus beatissimorum martyrum per nonnullas civitates,
et in ipsis locis sacris talia co^mittere non reformident. Quibus diebus etiam
(quod pudoris est dicere) saltationes sceleratissimas per vicos atque plateas
exercent, ut matronalis honor et in^^merabilium faeminatu^ pudor, devote
venientium ad sacratissimum diem, injurijs lascivie^tibus appetatur, ut etiam
ipsius sanctae religionis pene fugiatur accessus.

Canon: 28. Necnon et illud petendum, ut spectacula theatrorum caeterorumque
ludorum die Dominico, vel Therefore they are no fit Christmas pastimes.
caeteris Christianae religionis diebus celeberrimis amoveantur; maxim quia
sancti Paschae octavarum die, Nota.
populi ad Circum magis quam ad Ecclesia^ convenient; et debere transferri
devotionis eorum dies si quando occurrent: nec oportere etiam quenquam
Christianorum, cogi ad haec spectacula: maxim, quia in his exercendis QVAE
CONTRA PRAECEPTA DEI SVNT, nulla persecutionis necessitas a quoquam adhibenda
est: sed (uti oportet) homo in libera voluntate subsistat sibi concessa.
Cooperatorum enim maxim periculum considerandu^ est, QVI CONTRA PRAECEPTA DEI
MAGNO TERRORE COGVNTVR AD HAEC SPECTACVLA CONVENIRE.

Can: 12. That reconciliatiation shall not be denied to Stage Players and
common Actours, and such like persons; in case they repent and abandon their
former professions.

Can: 27. That also is to be desired, that those feasts which are used in many
places contrary to Gods precepts, which were drawn from the error of the
Gentiles, should be prohihited by command, and excluded out of cities and
villages: especially, since in some cities men fear not to keep them even on
the birth-dayes of the most blessed Martyrs, and that in the very Churches. On
which days also (which is a shame to speak) they use most wicked dances
through the villages and streets, so that the matronall honor, and the
chastity, the modesty of innumerable women devoutly coming to the most holy
day, is assaulted with lascivious injuries in such manner, that even the very
access to the holy exercises of religion is almost discontinued and chased
away.

Can: 28. And this also is to be requested, that Stage Plays and such other
Plays and Spectacles should be wholly abandoned and laid aside on the LORDS
day, and other solemn Christian festivalls, especially because on the Easter
holy days people run more to the Cirque or Theater, than to the Church;
laying aside all their holy day devotion, when these Spectacles come in their
way: Neither ought any Christian to be compelled to these Enterludes or
Stage Plays: chiefly, because in practicing these things Nota.
WHICH ARE AGAINST THE COMMANDMENTS OF GOD, no necessity of persecution or
violence ought to be used by any man: but every man (as he ought) may abide in
that freedom of will which is granted to him. For the danger of the co-actours
ought principally to be considered, WHO AGAINST THE PRECEPTS OF GOD ARE
COMPELLED TO COME UNTO THESE STAGE PLAYS.

Stage Plays therefore by this whole Councels resolution, are no fit sports
for Lords-dayes and holy days: yea they, and the re^ort unto them, ^re
directly contrary to the commandments of God, and exceeding dangerous to those
men's souls, who allure or enforce any others to them.

Canon: 30. Et de his etiam petendum, ut si quis ex qualibet ludicra art ad
Christianitatis gratiam venire voluerit, ac liber ab illa Which manifests the
lewdness of their profession.
macula permanere, See Codex Theodos^ l. 15. Tit. 7.
non eum liceat a quoquam iterum ad eadem exercenda reduci vel cogi.

Canon: 96. Item placuit, ut omnes Which shows the infamy and baseness of
Stage Players.
infamiae maculis adspersi, id est, histriones ac turpitudinibus subjecti
personae, ad accusationem non admittantur, nisi in propriis causis.

Can: 30. And this also is to be desired, that if any man of any ludicrous are
whatsoever will come and turn a Christian, and continue free from that
pollution; that he ought not to be reduced or compelled by any man to
practice the same arts again.

Can: 96. Also, it is decreed, that all infamous persons, that is to say,
Stage Players and persons inthralled to filthiness or lewdness, shall not be
admitted to accuse any person, but in their proper causes.

The ninth, is Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 570. Grantian. Causa ^. Quaest 1. etc.
6. ^rab. Tom. 1. p. 499.
Concilium Carthaginense 7 of 38 Bishops, Canon 2. whereby all Stage Players
are declared to be infamous persons, and unable to bear any testimony. Which
Canon is verbatim the same with the 96 Canon of the Council of Afric here
recited, to which shall here refer you.

The tenth, is, Concilium Agathense, in France, Baronius and Spondanus Anno
506. sect. 1.
Anno Domini 506. there being 35 Bishops present at it: where this Canon was
promulgated.

Surius Tom. 1. p. 713. Gratian. Distinct. 34. Centur. Magd. 5. Col. 929. Crab.
Tom. 1. p. 617, 618.
Canon: 39. Presbyteri, Diacones, Subdiacones, etiam alienarum nuptiarum
evitent convivia: Ne^ his caetibus immisceantur ubi amatoria cantantur et
turpia, aut obscaeni motus corporum choreis et saltationibus efferuntur, ne
auditus et obtutus sacris mysterijs deputati, turpium spectaculorum atque
verboru^ contagione polluantur.

Can: 39. Presbyters, Deacons and Subdeacons, ought to avoid the marriage
feasts of other persons: Neither may they be present in these assemblies where
amorous and filthy things are sung, or where obscene motions of the body are
expressed in rounds or dances: lest the hearing and sight deputed unto the holy
mysteries should be defiled with the contagion of filthy Spectacles (or
Stage Plays,) and words.

Which Councell^ as it prohibits Clergy men from beholding Plays or dancing:
so it also inhibits See Can. 41.55.70.
them from drunkenness: from keeping either hawks or hounds: and from all
scurrilous mirth or jesting, under pain of excommunication and suspension.

Concilium Arelatense 3. in the year of our Savior 524. subscribed by 15
Bishops; where Ludi funebres, or funeral Plays (which Livie Romans Hist. l. 21.
sect. 21. Tertullian de Spectac. lib. Bulengerus de Venatione Gir^i lib. cap.
6. p. 401.
were frequent among the ancient Romans) are thus condemned; the reason of
which condemnation trencheth upon Stage Plays.

(...) Tom. ^. p. 727. Crab. Tom. 1 p. 632.
Laici, qui excubias funeris observant, cum timore et tremore, et reverentia hoc
faciant. See Council. Toletanum 3. Canon 22. Surius Tom. 2. p. 675. to the same
purpos^.
Nullus ibi diabolica carmina presumat cantare, nec joca, nec saltationes
facere, quae Pagani docente Diabolo adinvenerunt. Quis enim nesciat diabolicum
esse, et non solum a Christiana religione alienum, sed etiam humanae naturae
esse contrarium, ibi laetari, cantare, inebriari, et cachinnis ora dissolvi, et
omni pietate et affectu charitatis postposito, quasi de fraterna morte
exultare, ubi luctus et planctus slebilibus vocibus debuerat resonare, pro
amissione chari fratris, etc. Ideo talis inepta laetitia, et pestifera cantica
ex authoritate interdicta sunt. Si quis autem cantare desiderat, Kyrie eleison
cantet: si autem aliter, omnino taceat. Si autem tacere non vult, in crastino a
Presbytero taliter coerceatur, ut alij timeant.

Lay men who observe funeral watches, let them do it with fear and
trembling, and reverence. Let no man presume to sing there any diabolical
songs, nor to make any Pastimes, Plays or dances, which the Pagans have
invented by the Devils tutorship. For who knows not that it is diabolical,
and not only far from Christian religion, but even contrary to humane
nature, to rejoice, to sing, to be drunk, and to laugh excessively there, and
laying aside all piety, and affection of love, as it were to be glad of his
brothers death, even there where as sorrow and mourning with doleful sounds
ought to be heard for the loss of a dear brother, etc. Therefore such foolish
mirth, and pestiferous songs ought to be prohibited by authority. And if any
man desire to sing, let him sing, Lord have mercy upon me: but if he would
sing otherwise, let him hold his peace. But if he will not be silent, let him
the next day be so chastised by the Presbyter, that others may fear.

The twelfth is, Concilium Veneticum, about the year Crab. Tom. 1. p. 948.
Su^ius Tom. 2. p. 277. Centur. Magd. 5. Col. 93^.
wherein the forementioned 39 Canon of Concilium Agathense, (see page 578.) is
verbatim recited, and ratified, as the 11. Canon of this Council.

The thirteenth, is, Concilium Toletanum 3. in Spain, 617. subscribed by 72
Bishops, where I find this Canon registered, which though it principally aims
at dancing and filthy rib^ldry songs, yet it necessarily condemns
Stage Plays too, which consist of scurrilous songs and dancing, as I have See
Act. 5. Scene 8, 9.
largely proved in the premises.

Surius Tom. 2. p. 676. Centur. Magd. 6. Col^ 604.
Canon: 23. Exterminanda omnino est irreligiosa consuetudo, quam vulgus per
sa^ctorum solennitates agere consuevit. Populi, qui debent officia divina
attendere, saltationibus et turpious invigilant can^icis, non solum sibi
nocentes, sed et religiosorum ossicijs. Hoc etenim ut ab omni Hispania
depellatur, sacerdotum et judicum a concilio sancto curae co^mittitur.

Can: 23. That irreligious custom is altogether to be abandoned, which the
common people have used upon the festivals of the Saints: The people who ought
to attend divine offices, addict themselves wholly to dancing and filthy songs,
not only doing hurt to themselves, but to the offices of religious persons.
That this custom may be driven out of all Spain, it is committed to the care
of the Ministers and Judges by this sacred Council.

Which Surius Tom. 2 p. 676. Centur. Magd. 6. Col. 604, 605.
Canon was ratified by the public Edict of King Reccaredus, who punished the
breach of it in rich men, with the l^sse of the moity of their estates; and the
violation of it in the paorer sort, with perpetual exile.

Concilium Antisiodorense, in France, Anno 614. subscribed by 45 Bishops,
Abbots and Presbyters: wherein there are these several Canons applicable to
our present theme: the first of which expressly condemns the Pagan o^iginall
of Plays; the second the acting of them in Churches, See Polydor Virgil de
Invent. Rerum l. 5 c. 2. and Act. 3. Scene 5. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l.
4. Tit. 1. c. 45.
which the Papists used: the third, the acting or beholding of them by Cl^rgie
men.

Surius Tom. 2. p. 715, 716. Carranza. fol. 150, 151, 152.
Canon: 1. Non licet Kalendis Ianuarij vecola aut See Synodus Turonica 2. apud
Bochellum vide August. de Homil. in Festu^ Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 7.
c. 7. and 8.
cervolo facere, vel Fortasse Cervula. De quo Tempore Sermon. 215. and H.
Spelmanni Glossarium Ceruula. See Asterii Kalen^arum. and Alchuvinus De Divinis
Officiis l. ^. Here. p. 197, 198.
strenas diabolicas observare: sed in ipsa die sic omnia officia tribuantur,
sicut et reliquis diebus.

Canon: 9. Non licet in Ecclesia choros secularium vel puellarum cantica
exercere, nec convivia praeparare; quia scriptum est, Domus mea domus orationis
vocabitur.

Carranza makes it Canon 38.
Canon: 40. Non licet Presbytero inter epulas cantare vel saltare.

Can: 1. It is not lawful in the Kalends of January to make any bonefires or
filthy Plays; or to observe any diabolical New-yeares gifts: but let all
offices be so performed on this day, as they are upon other days.

Can. 9. It is not lawful for Quires of secular men or girls, to sing songs,
or provide banquets in the Church: for it is written, My house shall be called
an house of prayer.

Can. 40. It is not lawful for an Elder to sing or dance at feasts.

The fifteenth, is, Surius Tom. 2. p. 756, 757.
Capitula Graecarum Synodorum, Martin Bishop of Bracara, Anno Dom: 610. in
which we have these two Canons.

Canon: 59. Non licet sacerdotibus vel clericis aliqua spectacula in nuptijs,
vel in co^vivijs spectare, sed oporteat antequam ingrediuntur ipsa spectacula
surgere et redire inde.

Canon: 73. Non liceat iniquas observationes agere Kalendarum, et ocijs vacare
gentilibus^ neque Atenim Christianus nec ianuam suam laureis infamabit si norit
etia^ quantos deos etiam ostiis diabolus affinxerit. Ianum a ianua etc. Tertul.
de Corona m^litis l. ^11, 12. Tom. 1. p 759. Gratian Causa 26. Quaest. 7. and
August. De Rectit. Cathol. Tract. accordingly. and here Act. 8. Scene 3.
lauro aut viriditate arborum cingere domos: Omnis enim haec observatio
Paganismi est.

Can. 59. It is not lawful for Ministers or Clergy men to behold any
Stage Plays at marriages or feasts, but they ought to rise and return from
thence before the Stage Plays enter.

Can. 73. It is not lawful to keep the wicked observations of Kalends, nor to
observe the festivals of the Gentiles; nor yet to begirt or adorn houses with
laurel or green ^oughes: For all this practice savours of Paganism.

Which latter Canon comes home to Stage Plays, who had their original from
Paganism, as I have Act. 1. and 2.
largely proved, as well as this condemned custom.

The sixteenth Play-condemning Council, is, the sixth Baronius and Spondanus
Anno Christi 680. sect. 4.
Anno Domini 680. which Council consisting of 289 Bishops, is confessed both
by Centur. Mag. 7. Col. 414. Dr. Crakenthorp his Vigilius Dormitans. London
1631. cap. 19. sect. 19. p. 305.
Protestants, and Baronius and Spondanus Anno Christi 680. sect. 1. See Surius,
Binius, Crab, Niccolinus, Carranza, and Merlin accordingly in their Collections
of Councels.
Papists^ to be oecumenicall; and so the Canons of it (especially in point of
discipline) oblige all Christians to renounce all Stage Plays, all
Stage Players, which they have much condemned, as these ensuing Canons witness.

Surius Tom. 2 p. 1044. Carranza fol. 191.
Canon: 24. Ne cui liceat eorum, qui in sacerdo^ali ordine enumerantur, vel
monachorum, in equoru^ curriculis subsistere, vel scenicos ludos sustinere. Sed
etsi quis Clericus ad nuptias vocetur, quando ad deceptione^ comparata ludicra
ingressa fuerint, surgat et discedat, Patrum nostrorum sic jubente doctrina. Si
quis autem ejus rei convictus fuerit, vel cesset, vel deponatur.

Surius Tom. 4 p. 1048. Carranza fol. 194.
Can: 51. is most express in point. Nota been.
Omnino prohibet haec sancta, et universalis Synodus eos qui dicuntur Mimos et
eorum spectacula: deinde venationum quoque spectationes, easque quae ^iunt in
scena, saltationes perfici. Si quis autem praesentem Canonem contempserit, et
se alicui eorum quae sunt vetita dederit; si sit quidem Clericus, deponatur; si
vero Laicus, segregetu^.

Surius Tom. 4. p. 1049. Carranza. fol. 195.
Canon: 61. Eos quoque sexennij canoni subjici oportet, qui ursos, vel ejusmodi
animalia ad ludum et simpliciorum noxum circumferunt; ac fortunam, ac fatu^, et
genealogia^, et quorundam ejusmodi verborum multitudinem ex fallaciae
imposturaeque nugis proferunt; eosque qui impraecatores, remediorumque
amuletorumque praebitores et vates appellantur. Eos autem qui in ijs
persistunt, et non ab ejusmodi perniciosis gentilibusque studijs aversantur et
aufugiunt, Ecclesia omnino exturbandos decrevimus, sicut et ^acri Canones
dicunt. 2 Cor. 6.
Quae enim est luci cum tenebris communicatio, ut ait Apostolus? vel quae
templ^ Dei cum Idolis consentio? vel quae fideli cu^ infideli pars est? ^quae
aute^ Christo cum Belial concordia et consentio?

Surius Tom. 2. p. 1049. Carranza fol. 195.
Canon: 62. Kalendas quae dicuntur, et vot^ brumalia quae vocantur, et qui in
primo Martij mensis die fitconventus, ex fidelium civitate omnino tolli
volumus: sed et publicas mulieru^ saltationes, multam noxam, exitiumque
afferentes: quin etiam eas, quae nomine eorum qui falso apud Graecos dij
nominati sunt, vel nomine viroru^ ac mulierum fiunt saltationes ac mysteria
more antiquo et a vita Christianorum alieno, amandamus et expellimus:
statuentes ut Deuteronomy. 22.5. Se^ here Act. 5. Scene 6. throughout. Hin^ ^harondas
etiam legem posuit, contra signorum ordinumque in bellis desertores, aut arma
pro patriae tutela om^ino de^^ectantes: ut id genus viri muliebri vestitu
amicti triduum in foro desiderent: quae con^titutio cum leges alibi sancitas
humanitate praestat, tum dissimulan^er probri magnitudine e^usmodi ingenio
praeditos ab effaeminata mollitie deterret. Siquidem morte^ expetere long
praestat, quam tantum ignominiae dedecus in patria experiri. Diod^ru^^ Siculu^
Bibl. Hist l. 12. sect. 15. p. 420. Which shows how execrably infamous men's
wearing of women's apparel was among the very heathen, and shall it not be much
more odious among Christians?
nullus deinceps mulieb^i vest ind^atur, vel mulier vest viro conveniente.
Sed neque comicas, vel satyricas vel tragicas personas induat, neque execrandi
Bacchi nomen, uvam in torcularibus exprimentes, invocent; neque vinum in dolijs
effundentes, risum moveant, ignorantia vel vanitate ea quae a daemonis
impostura procedunt exercentes. Eos ergo qui deinceps aliquid eorum, quae
scripta sunt, aggredietur, uti ad horu^ cognitione^ pervenerint, si sint quidem
Clerici, deponi jubemus; si vero Laici, segregari.

Surius Tom. 2 p. 1049. See before p. 22. Carranza fol. 96.
Canon: 65. Qui in Nov^lunijs a quibusdam ante suas o^ficinas et domos
accenduntur rogos, supra quos etiam antiqua quadam con^uetudine ^alire inepte
et delire solent, jubemus deinceps cessare. Quisquis ergo tale quid fecerit; si
sit Clericus, deponatur; sin autem Laicus, segregetur. In 4 Kings 21.5, 6, etc.
^on^fires ther^f^re had their original from this idolatrou^ custom as this
general Council has defined; therefore all Christians should avoid them.
quarto enim Libro Regu^ scriptu^ est, Et edificavit Manasses altar universae
militiae caeli in duobus ^trijs domus Dei, et filios suos traduxit per ignem,
etc. et ambulavit in eo ut faceret malum coram Domino, ut eum ad iram
provoca^et.

Canon: 66. A sancta Christi Dei nostri resurrectionis die usque ad novum
Dominicum, tota septimana in Ecclesijs vaca^e fideles iugiter oportet psalmis
et hymnis et spiritualibus canticis in Christo gaudentes, festumque
celebrantes^ Lay men therefore ought to read the scriptures by this general
Councels resolution. See Canon 68.95. and Apostolorum Canones C^n. 84. Clemens
Constit. Apostol. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, 8.2. c. 61. Council. Laodicenum Can 10, 59.
Carthag. ^. Can. 47 and 4. Can. 98, 99. Arausicanum 1. Can. 18. Tarraconense
Can. 13. Valentinum Can. 1. Nicenu^ 2. Can. 2.10. Cabilonense ^. Can. 54 59,
66, 67. Aqui^granense Can. 123. Toletanu^ 3. Can. 7. and Leo Epist. Decret. Ep.
10. c. 1. accordingly.
et divinarum Scripturarum lectioni mentem adhibentes, et sanctis mysterijs
jucunde et laute fruentes. Sic enim cu^ Christo exaltabimur, et una resurgemus.
Nequaquam ergo praedictis diebus, equorum cursus, vel aliquod publicu^ fiat
spectaculu^. Which if this Council may be credited, are no fit sports for holy
times.

Canon: 71. Eos qui docentur leges civiles Graecis moribus uti non oportet; et
neque in theatrum induci, nec eas quae dicuntur cylistras peragere etc. Si quis
autem deinceps hoc facere ausus fuerit, segregetur.

Surius Tom. 2 p. ^053. Carranza fol. 196.
Canon: 100. Prove. 4.
Oculi tui recta aspiciant, et omni custodia serva cor tuum, jubet sapientia.
Corporis enim sens^s sua facile in animam effundunt. See Synodus Augustenfis
Anno 1548. cap. 28. the 2. part of the homely against the Peril of Idolatry,
p. 72, 73. Bernard. ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apologia. AElredus Speculum charita^is
c. 52. Bibl. Patr. Tom 13. p. 84. and Speculum charitatis l. 2. c. 24. Ibid. p.
111. Mapheus Vegius De Educatione libe^orum lib. 1. c. 14.
Picturas ergo quae oculos praestringunt, et mentem corrumpunt, et ad turpium
voluptatum movent incendia, nullo modo deinceps imprimi jubemus. Si quis autem
hoc facere aggressus fuerit, deponatur.

Can. 24. It shall not be lawful for any who are in the order of Priests or
Monks, to be present at horse-races, or to act, or see a part in
Stage-plaies. But if any Clergy man be called to marriages, when these
deceitful sports shall enter, let him arise and depart, the doctrine of our
Fathers so commanding. If any be convicted of this thing, either let him give
over, or let him be deposed. See page 575, 576, 578, 581, accordingly.

Can. 51. is most punctual. This sacred and universal Synod does utterly
prohibit those who are called Stage Players and their Enterludes; together with
the Spectacles of huntings, and those dances that are made upon the Stage. And
if any shall contemn this present Canon, and shall give himself to any of
these things that are prohibited; if he be a Clergy man, let him be deposed;
but if a Layman, let him be excommunicated.

Can. 61. Those also ought to be subject to six years excommunication, who
carry about See John Fields Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden: and
Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses page 133, 134, 135. against Beare-baiting.
bears or such like creatures for sport, to the hurt of simple people; or tell
fortunes or fates, and genealogies, and utter a multitude of such like words
out of the toys of fallacy and imposture: and those also who are styled
charmers, givers of remedies and amulets, and prophets. And those who persist
in these things, and are not turned from such pernicious and heathenish
practices, or do not shun them; we decree, that they shall wholly be
thrust out of the Church, even as the holy Canons affirm. For what communion
has light with darkness, as the Apostle says? or what agreement has the
temple of God with Idols? or what part has a believer with an infidel? or what
concord or agreement is there between Christ and Belial?

Can. 62. Those things that are called Kalends, and those that are named winter
wishes, and that meeting which is made upon the first day of March, we will
shall be wholly taken away out of the City of the faithful: as also we
wholly forbid and expel the public dancing of women bringing much hurt and
destruction: and likewise those dances and mysteries that are made in the name
of those, who are falsely named Gods among the Graecians, or in the name of men
and women, after the ancient manner, far differing from the life of
Christians: ordaining that no man shall henceforth be clothed in woman's
apparel, nor no woman in man's array. Neither may any one put on comicall^
satyricall or tragical vizards in Enterludes, neither may they invocate the
name of execrable Bacchus, when as they press their grapes in winepresses;
neither pouring out wine in tubbes, may they provoke laughter, exercising those
things through ignorance or vanity which proceed from the imposture of the
Devil. Those therefore who hereafter shall attempt any of these things that are
written, after they shall come to the knowledge of them; if they be Clergy men,
we command them to be deposed; and if Lay men, to be excommunicated.

Can. 65. Those bonefires that are kindled by certain people on New moons
before their shops and houses, over which also they use ridiculously and
foolishly to leap by a certain ancient custom, we command them from
henceforth to cease. Whoever therefore shall do any such thing; if he be a
Clergy man, let him be deposed^ if a Lay man, let him be excommunicated. For in
the fourth Book of the Kings, it is thus written, And Manasses built an altar
to all the host of heaven, in the two courts of the Lords house, and made his
children to pass through the fire, etc. and walked in it that he might do
evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to wrath.

Can^ 66. From the holy day of Christ our God his resurrection to the new Lords
day, the faithful ( or Christians) ought to spend the whole week in their
Churches, rejoicing without intermission in Christ, in celebrating that feast
with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs ( not with dancing, stage plays,
dice, tables, or such like revel-rout) addicting their minds to the Lay men
therefore ought to read the scriptures by this general Councels resolution. See
Canon 68.95. and Apostolorum Canones C^n. 84. Clemens Constit. Apos^ol. l. 1.
c. 5, 6, 7, 8.2. c. 61. Council. Laodicenum Can 10, 59. Carthag. ^. Can. 47 and
4. Can. 98, 99. Arausicanum 1. Can. 18. Tarraconense Can. 13. Valentinum Can.
1. Nicenu^ 2. Can. 2.10. Cabilonese ^. Can. 54 59, 66, 67. Aqui^granense Can.
123. Toletanu^ 3. Can. 7. and Leo Epist. Decret. Ep. 10. c. 1. accordingly.
reading of the holy Scriptures, and cheerfully and richly enjoying the holy
Sacraments. For thus we shall be exalted with Christ, and rise together with
him. By no means therefore on the foresaid days let there be any horse-race,
or any public show or stage-playe made.

Can: 71. Those who are taught civil laws, ought not to use Greek manners or
customs; neither ought they to be brought into the theater, or to practice any
plays called Cylistrae. If any man shall presume to do the contrary, let him
be excommunicated.

Can: 100. Let thine eyes behold right things, and keep thine heart with
diligence, is the command of wisdom. For the senses of the body do easily
infuse their objects into the soul. Therefore we command, that such pictures
as dazell the eyes, corrupt the mind, and stir up flames of filthy lusts, be
not henceforth made or printed upon any terms. And if any shall attempt to
do it, let him be deposed.

Some of these recited Canons, as Canon 61, 65 and 100. condemn all
Bearehards, Bearebaiting, Bonefires, and filthy pictures, (which Talia etiam
Spectacula et tabularum et fabularum prohibemus. Quare Magistratibus adhibenda
cura est ut ne que signis neque tabulis obscaenitas ulla aut faeditas
o^ten^atur. Polis. l. 7. ^. 17.
Aristotle himself condemns:) yet withal they oppugn Stage Plays, ex
obliquo, there being between them and Plays so great analogy, that the
censure of one is the condemnation of the other. But the other Canons are so
punctual, so express against them, that there can be no evasion from them.

The seventeenth Synodicall authority against Stage Plays, Synodus Francica,
under Pope Zachary Ann^ Dom. 742. which runs thus.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 40. See Ioannis Sarisberienfis De Nugis Curialium lib. 1.
cap. 4. against hunting and hauking. Ambrose Ser. 41. Tom. 5. p. 29. in Psalm.
118. Octon. 8. Tom. 2. p. 446. a. b. Bonifacii Epist. 105. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 8.
p. 111. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 56. and 61. Gratian. Distinctio 2. HRabanus
Maurus Tom. 5. p. 605.
Illas venationes et silvaticas vagationes cu^ canibus omnibus servis Dei
(speaking of Clergy men) interdicimus. Similiter ut accipitres vel falcones
non habeant. Decrevimus quoque ut secundum Canones unusquisque Episcopus in sua
parochia solicitudinem adhibeat, adjuvante Graphione, qui defensor Ecclesiae
est, ut populus Dei Carranza. fol. 204. b. Can. 5. reads it Paginas, but
corruptly; which Synodus Su^ssionensis thus expounds; Populus Christianus
Paganis^mum non faciat.
Paganias non faciat, sed ut omnes spurciti^as gentilitatis abjiciat et
respuat, sive prophana sacrificia mortuorum, sive sortilegos vel divinos, etc.
sive hostias immolatitias, quas stulti homines juxta Ecclesias ritu paganico
faciunt, sub nomine sanctorum martyrum vel confessoru^, Deu^ et suos sanctos ad
iracundiam et vindictae gravitate^ provocantes. Sive illos sacrilegos ignes
quos Nedfri vocant, sive omnes quaecumque sunt Paganoru^ observationes,
diligenter prohibeant.

We prohibit those huntings and silvaticall wanderings abroad with bounds to all
the servants of God, and likewise that they keep neither hau^es nor falcons.
We decree also that according to the Canons. every Bishop in his parish shall
take care; the Graphio or Curate, who is defender of the Church, assisting him,
that the people of God make no Pagan feasts or Enterludes, but that they reject
and abominate all the uncleanness of gentilisme, whether profane sacrifices
of the dead, or fortune tellers, or diviners, etc. or immolated sacrifices,
which foolish men make near unto Churches, after the Pagan manner, provoking
God and his Saints to wrath, and vengeance. And that they diligently inhibit
those sacrilegious fires which they call Ne^fri (or bone^ires) and all other
observations of the Pagans whatsoever. Which Canon is likewise ratified in
Surius Tom. 3. p. 41.
Synodo Suessionensi, sub Childerico Rege, about the self same year wherein
this Synod was held.

Synodus Nicaena 2. Anno Dom. 785. or 787. in which there were Surius Tom. 3
Council. p. 48, 49. Baronius and Spondanus Anno Christ 787. sect. 1.
present 350. or 377. Bishops^ as some record: which Council (commonly reputed
the 7. oecumenicall or universal Council) determines thus of Stage Plays.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 196. Carranza. fol. 54. Can. 5.
Canon: 22. Deo quidem universum dedicare et non proprijs voluntatibus servire
res magna est. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Sive enim editis, sive bibitis, inquit divinus Apostolus, omnia in Dei gloriam
facite etc. Cu^vis ergo homini necesse est comedere u^ vivat, et quibus est
vita quidem matrimonij, e^ liberoru^, et laici constitutionis, immixtim
comedere viros et mulieres est ab omni reprehensione alienum, simodo ei qui dat
nutrimentu^ gratias agunt; non cu^ scenicis quibusda^ studijs, sive sata^icis
canticis et citharaedicis ac meretricijs vocibus, quos prophetica execratio
prosequitur sic dice^s: Esaias 5.11, 12
Vae qui cu^ cythara et psalterio vinu^ bibunt, Domini aute^ oper^ non
recipient, et opera manui^ ejus non consideran^. Et sicubi tales fuerint inter
Christianos, corrigantur.

Can: 22. Verily to dedicate all to God, and not to serve our own wills, is a
great matter: For whether ye eat or drink (says the divine Apostle) or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the praise and glory of God, etc. It is necessary
therefore for every man to eat that he may live; and those who live a married
life, and have children, and are of a lay-condition, for them to eat men and
women together is far from all reproof, if so be they give thanks to him
who gives food; not with Stage Plays, or certain theatricall practices, or
with satanicall songs, or citheredicall and meretricious tunes which the
prophetical execration pursues in these words: Woe unto them who drink wine
with the harp and viol, but they regard not the work of the Lord, and the
operation of his hands they consider not. And if there be any such as these
among Christians, let them be severely punished.

Which Canon teaches us, First, that Stage Plays and ribaldry songs or
music, are no fit pastimes for Christians to praise the Lord withal on
festival and solemn seasons. Which condemns the atheistical, if not
diabolical practice of those heathen Christians, who use them most at such
times as these. Secondly, that they are directly contrary to the Scripture, and
utterly unlawful, not only to Ministers, but to lay men too. Thirdly, that
those Christians who frequent or use them, ought to be ^everely punished, by
the express resolution of this whole general Council, in which all Christian
Churches, were present by their Delegates.

The nineteenth is, Synodus Turonensis 3. under Charles the Great, Anno Christi
813. which determines thus of Stage Players and their Enterludes, that all
Christians should avoid them, as the ensuing Canons testify.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 274. See Capit. Caroli Magni Apud Bochellum Decreta Eccles.
Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 39. p. 549. and Tit. 10. c. 6. p. 593. where he
prohibits all enterludes, dancing, filthy and debolst songs, and diabolical
Plays in the streets, in houses, or in any other places under pain of
excommunication, because they were but relics of Paganism.
Canon: 7. Ab omnibus quaecu^q: ad auriu^ et ad oculo^^ pertinent illicebras,
unde vigor animi emolliri posse credatur (quod de aliquibus generibus
musicorum, aliisque nonnullis rebus sentiri potes^) Dei sacerdotes abstinere
debent: quia per auriu^ oculoru^que illicebras vitioru^ turba ad anima^ ingred^
solet. Histrionum quoque turpiu^, et obscaenorum insolentias jocorum, et ipsi
omnino effugere, caeterisque effugienda praedicare debent.

Canon: 8. See Council. Wormatiense, Anno 868. Can. 17. Surius Tom. 3. p. 523.
accordingly. Where this penalty is added. Quod si quis harum personarum hac
fue^it voluptate detentus, Episcopus tribus mensibus se a communione suspendat,
presbyter duobus mensibus, diaconus uno mense ab omni officio et communione
abstineat.
Sacerdotibus non expedit, secularibus et turpibus quibuslibet interesse jocis:
venationes quoque ferarum vel avium minime sectentur.

Can: 7. The Ministers of God ought to abstain from all allurements
whatsoever, belonging either to the ears or eyes, from whence the vigor of
the mind may be thought to be effeminated, (which may be conceived of certain
kinds of music, and some other things:) because through the intisements of
the eyes and ears, the troop of vices is wont to enter into the soul. They
ought likewise wholly to eschew the insolences of filthy Stage Players, and of
obscene jests, and also to preach to others, that they ought to be avoided.

Can: 8. It is not expedient that Ministers should be present at any secular
and dishonest Plays or sports; neither may they follow the hunting either of
wild beasts or birds.

Synodus Cabilonensis 2. under Charles the Great, Anno Christi 813. which
defines thus of Players and Stage Plays; that not only Clergy men, but even
all manner of Christians ought wholly to abandon them: Witness this Canon
which is almost the same with the last recited.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 279.
Can: 9. Ab omnibus oculorum auriumque illecebris sacerdotes abstinere debent,
et See Council. Matisconense 2. Anno 588. Agathense Anno 420. Nanetense 1264.
Andegaue^se 1265. Lingonense 1404. Carnotense 15^6. Senonense 1524. and Aquense
1585. Apud Bochellum Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 18. De Clerico Venatore p.
1024, 1025, accordingly.
canum, accipitrum, falconu^, vel caeteraru^ hujusmodi reru^ curam parvi
pendere; et histrionum sive scurronum, et turpium, seu obscaenorum jocorum
insolentiam, non solum ipsi respuant, verum etiam fidelibus respuenda
percenseant.

Can: 9. Ministers ought to abstain from all wanton entisements of the eyes
and ears, and to neglect or disregard the care of dogs, hawks, falcons, and
such other things: and not only they themselves ought to contemn the
insolency of Stage Players, Iesters, and of filthy or obscene jests and
pastimes, but likewise to believe and teach, that they ought to be rejected of
all faithful Christians.

Concilium Moguntiacum under the same Emperor Anno 813. where I find this
Canon.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 287, 288.
Canon: 14. Ministri autem Altaris Domini, vel monachi, nobis placuit ut a
negotijs secularibus omnino abstineant. Multa s^nt secularia negotia etc.
videlicet, conductores aut procuratores esse secularium reru^: turpis verbi vel
facti Such are all the Fools or Clownes in Stage Plays.
joculatorem esse, vel jocum seculare diligere, aleas amare, See Council.
Coloniense Anno 1536. pars 1. cap. 26.
ornamentu^ inconveniens proposito suo quaerere, in delicijs vivere velle,
gulam et ebrietate^ sequi; canes et aves sequi ad venandum. Ecce talia et his
similia ( under which all Stage plays are included) ministris altaris Domini,
et monachis omnino co^tradicimus, de quibus dicit Apostolus. Nemo militans Deo,
implicat se negotijs secularibus.

Can: 14. We decree that the Ministers of the Lords Altar and Monks shall
altogether abstain from secular affairs. Now there are many secular
businesses; as to be hirers or sollicitors of secular affairs; to be a jester
or actour of filthy words or deeds; or to love a secularjest; to affect
dicing; to seek after such attire or ornaments which are inconvenient for his
degree, to desire to live in pleasures, to follow hounds and hawks a hunting.
Lo these and such like things ( which include all Stage Plays, dancing, and
scurrilous songs and music) we altogether forbid the Ministers of the Lords
Altar, and Monks: of whom the Apostle says thus. 2 Timothy 2.^.
No man that warreth to the Lord intangleth himself in secular affairs.

The 22. is Synodus Rhemensis, under the same Emperor Anno Christi 813.
concurring with the former.

Surius Tom. 3 p. 292.
Canon: 17. Vt Episcopi et Abbates ante se joca turpia facere non permittant,
sed Luke 14.12, 13, 14, 21. 1 Cor. 13.3. Job 29.12, 16. c. 31^16. to 20.
pauperes et indigentes ad mensam secum habeant^ ( which many of them now Iam.
2.2, 3, 5, 6.
disdain to speak to, much less to eat with, though Christ Luke 14.12, 13,
14, 21. 1 Cor. 13.3. Job 29.12, 16. c. 31^16. to 20.
commands it) et lectio divina ibi personet, et sumant cibu^ cu^ benedictione
et laud Domini secundum Apostolum; 1 Cor. 10.31.
Sive manducatis, sive bibitis^ omnia in laudem Dei facit^.

Can: 17. We decree, that Bishops and Abbots permit no secular Plays or jests
to be made before them; but let them have the poor and needy with them at
their tables: ( which some now scorn as a disparagement to their greatness:)
let the reading of the Scripture sound forth there, and let them eat their
meat blessing and lauding the Lord, according to the Apostles rule; Whether
ye eat or drink, do all to the praise and glory of God.

Concilium Aquisgranense, under Lewis the godly, Anno Christi 816. which
concludes thus of Plays, and prohibits all Clergy men especially, from
resorting to them.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 327.
Canon: 83. Quod non oporteat Sacerdotes aut Clericos quibuscunque spectaculis
in scenis aut in nuptijs interesse: sed antequa^ thylemici ingrediantur,
exurgere eos co^venit, aut inde discedere.

Canon: 100. Isiodorus de Officiis l. 2. ^. 2. Surius Ibid. p. 333.
Clericis igitur lege patru^ cavetur, ut a vulgari vita seclusi, a mundan^s
voluptatibus sese abstineant. Non spectaculis, non pompis intersint.

Surius Tom. 3 p. 357.
Canon: 145. Clerici contubernia faeminarum nullatenus appetant; non vanis
oculis, aut petulanti tumidoque gestu, ac dissolutis renibus incedant: non
spectaculis, no^ pom^pis secularibus intersint: non aleae, non quibuslibet
venationibus inserviant: See Council. Coloniense Anno 1536. pars 1. cap. 26.
Council. Mediolanense 1. apud Binium Tom. 4. Council. p. 891, 892. and those
other Councels quoted in my Answer to Mr. Cozens his Cozening Devotions: p. 71,
72. against the excess and pride of Clergy men in their apparel. See Synodus
Mogunt. c. 24.
nequaquam praeciosis delectentur vestibus etc. and yet few now so richly, so
sprucely apparelled as these, who should be patterns of humility and sobriety
to others.

Can: 86. Ministers and Clergy men ought not to be present at any Spectacles
or Stage Plays either in Play Houses or at marriages: but before the Fiddlers
or Players enter, they ought to rise up and depart thence.

Can: 100. It is provided for Clergy men by the law of the Fathers, that being
secluded from a vulgar life, they withdraw themselves from worldly pleasures.
They may not be present at Stage Plays or shows.

Can: 145. Clergy men may by no means desire the company of women; they may
not walk with vain eyes, or with a wanton or proud gesture, or dissolute
reins: they may not be present at worldly Spectacles or Enterludes: they may
not give themselves to dice, or any kind of hunting: they ought not to delight
in costly apparel etc. as now too many of them do, who are more like to
Courtiers or Knights in their beavers, sattins, silks or velvets, then to
Ministers.

The 24. is, Concilium Parisiense, under Lewis and Lothorius, Anno 829. to the
like effect as the former.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 380.
Canon: 38. Cum ab omnibus Christianis, juxta Apostoli documentum, Ephesians. 5.
stultiloquium et scurrilitas sit cavenda, multo magis a sacerdotibus Domini,
qui alijs exemplum et condimentum salutis esse debent, caveri oportet. Haec
quippe a sanctis viris penitus sunt propellenda, quibus magis convenit lugere,
quam ad scurrilitates et stultiloquia, et histrionum obscaenas jocationes et
caeteras vanitates, quae animam Christianam a rigore suae rectitudinis emollire
solent, in cachinnos ora dissolvere. Neque enim decet aut fas est oculos
sacerdotum Domini spectaculis faedari, aut mentem quibuslibet scurrilitatibus,
aut turpiloquijs ad inania rapi. Ait quippe Dominus in Evangelio: Omne verbum
ociosum, quod loquuti fuerint homines, reddent de eo rationem in die judicij.
Paulus ad Ephesos, Ephesians. 4.
Omnis, inquit, sermo malus ex ore vestro non procedat, sed si quis, bonus ad
aedificationem fidei, ut det gratiam audientibus, et nolite contristare
Spiritum sanctum, in quo signati estis in die redemptionis. Et non post multa,
Ephesians. 5.
Fornicatio autem, inquit, et omnis immunditia, aut avaritia, nec nominetur in
vobis, sicut decet sanctis; aut turpitudo, aut stultiloquium, aut scurrilitas,
quae ad rem non pertinent; sed magis gratiarum actio. Et Esaias: Esaias. 5.12.
Cy^hara et lyra, et tympanum, et tibia, et vinum in convivijs vestris, et opus
Domini non respicitis, nec opera manuum ejus consideratis. Sunt et alia hujusce
rei innumera exempla, quae prospecta et diligenter animadversa, non solum
sacerdotibus, verum etia^ caeteris fidelibus magno terrore sint necesse est; ne
dum his contra fas se subdu^t, animae suae salute^ negligant. Proinde nobis
omnibus in common visu^ fuit, ut si qui sacerdotum hactenus his vanitatibus
usi fuerint, ab his deinceps Domino adjuvante, prorsus se cavere debere
meminerint.

Can. 38. Since that foolish talking and scurrility, according to the Apostles
instruction, ought to be avoided of all Christians, much more ought it to be
eschued by the Ministers of the Lord, who ought to be an example, and condiment
of salvation unto others. For these things are utterly to be abandoned by holy
men, whom it better becomes to mourn, than to laugh immoderately at
scurrilities and foolish speeches, and at the obscene jests of Stage Players
and other vanities, which are wont to soften a Christian soul from the rigor
of its rectitude and uprightness. Neither is it seemly or lawful, that the
eyes of the Lords Ministers should be defiled with Stage Plays, or their
minds carried away with any scurrilities or filthy speeches. For the Lord
^aith in the Gospel: Matthew. 12.
Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account of it in the
day of judgment. Paul to the Ephesians, says: Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the edification of faith,
that it may administer grace to the hearers, and grieve not the holy Spirit by
which ye are sealed to the day of redemption. And not much after, he says: But
fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be named among
you, as becomes Saints; neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, or
scurrility, which are not convenient; but rather giving of thanks. And Esaias:
The harp, and the violl, and the tabret and pipe, and wine are in their
feasts, but they regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation
of his hands. There are other innumerable examples of this matter, which being
seen and diligently considered, must needs bring great terror, not only to
Ministers, but also to other Christians; lest whiles they subject themselves to
these things against right, they neglect the salvation of their souls.
Wherefore it has seemed good to us all in common, that if any Ministers have
hitherto us^d any of these vanities, that from henceforth they remember, that
they ought wholly to abstain from these things.

So that not only Clergy men, but even all Christians are prohibited from
Stage Plays, under peril of the loss and hazard of their souls, by this
Council, which has doomed Stage Plays to be scurrilous, filthy and unlawful
pleasures, contrary to Gods word, which defile both the eyes, the ears and
souls of the spectators.

The 25. is Synodus Moguntina, sub Rabano Archiepiscopo, 847. where I find
this Canon against Clergy men's resort to Plays.

Surius Tom. 3 p. 425.
Canon: 13. Providendum necessario est, ut Clerici a See Linwood Prove. Constit.
lib. 3. Tit. De Immunitate Ecclesiae, f. 194, 195. Ioannis de Ato^. Othoboni^
Constitutiones Ne Clerici Iurisdictionem exerceant; fol. 69, 70, 71.
secularibus negotijs omnino abstineant etc. Multa autem sunt secularia
negotia: turpis verbi vel facti joculatore^ esse, vel jocum seculare diligere,
aleas amare etc. ( as before in Council: Mogunt: can. 21.) Quae omnia Ministris
Altaris interdicimus; hortantes eos ante se joca secularia vel turpia fieri non
permittere etc.

Can: 13. It is necessarily to be provided, that Clergy men wholly abstain
from secular affairs etc. But there are many secular businesses: as to be a
jester or actor of any filthy word or deed (as is the Clown in Stage Plays) to
love a secular jest, to affect dice-play etc. All which we interdict to
Ministers of the Altar; exhorting them not to suffer any worldly or filthy
jests or plays to be made before them etc. as in Synodo Rhemensi before^ Can.
22.

The 26. is Surius Tom. 3. p. 529. Baronius Anno 869 sect. 11.
Synodus Constantipolitana 8. Anno 867, or 870 as others place it, consisting
of 373 Bishops; which is commonly styled, the 8 general Council; wherein the
personating of a Bishop (and so by consequence of other persons) is thus
severely prohibited.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 5^6. See Council. Basiliense here, number. 32.
Canon: 16. Colligere licet, solenne fuisse in aulis principum statis quibusdam
diebus, componere alique^ laicum insignibus Episcopalibus, qui et tonsura et
caeteris ornamentis See Guagninus, Rerum Polonicarum, To^. 2. p. 263, 264.
personatu^ Episcopu^ ageret; et creasse etia^ ridiculu^ Patriarcha^, quo se
oblectarent. Quae omnia ut in dedecus Ecclesiae accersita, prohibentur sub
gravibus censuris.

Can: 16. We may collect, that it has been a solemn custom in Princes
Courts on some set daye^, to attire some Lay man in Episcopal robes, who both
in tonsure and other ornaments should act a Bishops part; and likewise to
create a ridiculous Patriarch, with whom they might sport themselves. All which
things as brought in to the disgrace of the Church, are prohibited under
grievous censures.

Concilium Nanetense, about the year 890: where I find this Canon.

Gratian. Distinctio 44.
Nullus Presbyterorum quando ad anniversarium diem 30. aut 7. vel 3. alicujus
defuncti^ aut quacunque vocatione ad collectam convenerit se inebriare
nullatenus presuma^; nec praecatus That is, by the love of any Saint whose
health was drunk at such feasts and meeting^. See Aug. De Tempore Sermo 231,
232 Ioannis de Ato^ Constitutiones Concilii Oxoniensis Anno 1212. and Edmundi
Cant. Archiepi^copi bound up at the end of Linwood, fol. 124, 143. Ioannes
Langhecrucius De Vita and Honest^Eccle^iast. l. 2. c. 11. p. 250. Ioannes
Fredericus de Ritu Bibendi ad S^nitatem. l. 1. c. 7. and my Healths Sickness, p.
32, 36, 37. See here Council. 28. and 38.
amore sanctorum vel ipsius animae bibere, aut alios ad bibendum cogere, vel se
aliena praecatione ingurgitare, nec plausus et risus inconditos et fabulas
inanes ibi refer aut cantare praesumat; aut turpia joca vel urso, vel
tornatricibus ante se fieri patiatur: nec larvas daemonum ante se fieri
consentiat: quia hoc diabolicum est, et sacris Canonibus prohibitum.

No Minister when he shall come to the 30. or 7. or 3. anniversary day of any
dead person, or be invited to a gathering, may by no means presume to make
himself drunk; neither may he presume being entreated by the love of the
Saints, or of his own soul, to drink, or to cause others to drink, or to
glut himself upon any others request, nor yet to use applauses or rude
laughter. or there to relate or sing any vain fables; neither may he suffer
foolish Plays or pastimes to be made before him with bears or tumblers:
neither may he agree, that any vizards or shapes of Devils be carried before
him: because this is diabolical, and prohibited by sacred Canons.

The whole scope of which Canon, is only to inhibit Clergy men from drinking,
pledging or enforcing Healthes, upon any occasion or entreaty whatsoever; and
to debar them from beholding Plays and Enterludes, especially such where any
Devils had their parts or representations.

The 28. is Concilium Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. Anno Christi 1215. Surius
Tom. 3. p. 734. Carranza fol. 238.
consisting of 2 Patriarchs, 70 Archbishops, 412 Bishops, 800 Abbots and
Priors; where these ensuing Canons were promulgated, which I wish all Clergy
men would remember.

Surius Tom. 3. p. 742 Carranza fol. 241. Ioannis de Burgo Pupilla Oculi pars
7. c. 10 C.D.
Canon: 15, 16. A crapula et ebrietate omnes Clerici diligenter abstineant,
unde vinum sibi temperent, et se vino; nec ad bibendum quispiam incitetur, cum
ebrietas et mentis inducat exilium, et libidinis provocet incentivum. Vnde
illum abusum decrevimus penitus abolendum, quo in quibusdam partibus ad This
drinking of H^althes i^ likewise condemned by St. Edmond Archbishop of
Canterbury, Anno Dom. 1240. in these very very terms. See Ioannis de Aton
Constitutiones Provinciales, bound up at the end of Lindwood fol. 143.
accordingly. See Council. Oxon. Anno 1212. cap. ne fiant scotteli si^e
potationes communes. Ibid. f. 124. b. Ioannes Langhecrucius de Vita et Honest.
Ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 11. p. 25 c. and My Healthes Sickness; together with
Concilium Coloniense 1536. pars 2. cap. 24. and pars 5. c. 6. Surius Tom. 4. p.
761, 771, accordingly.
potus aequales suo modo se obligant potatores, et ille judicio talium plus
laudatur, qui plures inebriat et calices faecundiores exhaurit. Si quis autem
super his culpabilem se exhibuerit, nisi a superiore commonitus satisfecerit
competenter, a beneficio vel officio suspendatur. Venationem et aucupationem
universis Clericis interdicimus, unde nec canes nec aves ad aucupandum habere
praesumant. Clerici officia vel commercia secularia non exerceant, maxim in
honesta. Mimis, joculatoribus, et histrionibus non intendant, et tabernas
prorsus evitent, nisi forte causa necessitatis in itinere constituti. Ad aleas
vel taxillos non ludant, nec hujusmodi ludis intersint. This Council and Canon
was received in England.

Can: 15, 16. Let all Clergy men diligently abstain from surfeiting and
drunkenness; to which end let them keep wine from themselves, and themselves
from wine; neither let any one be provoked to drink, since drunkenness
banisheth wit, and provokes lust: whence we decree that abuse to be utterly
abolished. whereby drinkers in certain parts do bind one another to drink
healthes (or equal cups) after their manner, and he in the judgment of
such is most applauded, who makes most drunk, and quaffes off most cups. And
if any offend in these things, unless he shall give competent satisfaction
being admonished by his superior, let him be suspended from his benefice or
office. We prohibit hunting and hauking to all Clergy men, whence they may not
presume to keep either dogs or hawks to hawk with. Clergy men may not manage
secular offices or affairs, especially such as are dishonest. Let them not
addict themselves to tumblers, jesters, and Stage Players, and let them wholly
avoid tavernes, unles perchance in case of necessity, when they are in a
journey. Let them not play at dice or tables, nor yet be present at such Plays.

Concilium apud Castrum Gonterij Anno 1231. which decrees in this manner.

Bochellus Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib. 8. Tit. 70. c. 6. and Henrici
Spelmanni Glossarium^ Goliardus. See the same Canon in effect made by
Willielmus Parisiensis, apud Bochellum Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 14. c.
22. and in Sexti Decretalia l. 3. Tit. De Vita et Honest Clericorum. Ioannis De
Burgo Pupilla Oculi pars 7. c. 10 P.
Statuimus, quod Clerici ribaldi, maxim qui Goliardi vulgo dicuntur et
nuncupantur, per Episcopos et alios Ecclesiae Praelatos praecipiantur tondi,
vel etiam radi, ita quod non remaneat in eis clericalis tonsura: ita tame^,
quod ista sine scandalo et periculo fiant. A just censure upon such disorderly
Clergy men, who were not ashamed to turn Rimers, Iesters and common Actors or
Tumblers, as many of the Popish Clergy did.

We decree, that scurrilous or riming Clergy men, especially those who are
usually called Goliardi (that is jesters and Stage Players, as the marginall
Authors expound it) may by Bishops and other Prelates of the Church, be
commanded to be polled, and likewise shaven, so that their clericall tonsure
may not remain upon them: provided notwithstanding, that these things be done
without scandal or danger.

To pass by Synodus Pictaviensis, Anno 1377. which See Bochellus Decreta
^ccles. Gall. lib. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 49. p. 551
condemns the dancing of young men and maids together, as the occasion of
much luxury, wantonness, fornication, lewdness, and sundry other
misdemeanors: The 30. Council against the acting and beholding of
Stage Plays, is Synodus Lingonensis Anno 1404. Where I meet with this Canon.

Bochellus Decreta Ecclesiae Gall. l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 1. p. 1025.
Prohibemus clericis et viris ecclesiasticis, potissime in sacris ordinibus
constitutis, et maxim sacerdotibus et curatis, ne omnino ludant ad taxillos,
ad aleas, neque ad chartas, neque ad stophum, neque ad lucta^, neque ad jactum
lapidis, ad saltum, ad choreas, neque ad clip^um, neque cum fistula, vel alijs
musicalibus instrumentis, quibus cum ore seu bucha luditur. Non ludant etiam ad
bolas, ad cursum vel currendum in campo pro lucro, vel pro vino, ad jaculandum,
vel gladiandum, neque ludant ad quillas, vel torneamenta, seujostas. Summopere
caveant, ne intersint neque ludant in ludo quod dicitur A Play in nature of a
Mummerie Ma^que or Stage Play.
chareuari, in quo utuntur larvis in figura daemonum, et horrenda ibidem
committuntur: quem ludum non solu^ Clericis, sed generaliter omnibus subditis
prohibemus sub excommunicationis paena, et december librarum nobis applicandarum:
neque etia^ in ludis illis inhonestis quae solent fieri in aliquibus Ecclesijs
in festo Which we call Innocents day.
Fatuorum, quod faciunt in Our modern Christmas Plays and Pastimes sprung
from these Popish Enterludes and disorder^.
festivitatibus Natalis Domini. Non ludant etia^ ad ludum scatoru^, nisi forsan
raro: quia quamvis sit ludus honestus, et proveniat ex subtilitate ingenij,
tamen magnam et inutile^ requirit occupationem, et prolixitatem temporis.

We prohibit Clergy men and Ecclesiastical persons, especially those in holy
orders, and most of all Priests and Curates, that they play not at all at
tables, at dice, nor at cards, neither at whirling, nor at wrestling, nor at
throwing of the stone, at leaping, at dancing, neither at the buckler, neither
with a pipe or other musical instruments, which are played upon with the mouth
or cheeks. Likewise they may not play at bowls, at running in the field for
money or wine, at darting, or sword-playing, neither may they play at quintins,
at torneies, or justs. Let them diligently beware, that they be not present at,
nor yet play in the play that is called Chare^ari, in which they use vizards in
the shape of devils, and horrible things are there committed: which Play we
prohibit not only Clergy men, but generally all our subjects under pain of
excommunication, and of ten pounds to be paid unto our use: nor yet in those
dishonest Plays which are wont to be made in some Churches in the Feast of
Innocents, which they make in the Festivalls of our Saviors Nativity. Moreover
they may not play at Chesse, unless it be very rarely: for albeit it be an
honest play, and proceeds from the subtilty of wit, yet it requires great and
unprofitable study, and much prolixity of time.

Which Canon regulates the sports and pastimes of irregular Clergy men,
prohibiting them from Stage Plays, among other Plays.

Synodus Trecensis, sub Ioanne Lesguisier Episcopo, Anno 1427.

Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 122. p. 562.
Curati et Ecclesiarum rectores prohibeant suis parochiauis ex part nostri, ne
in suis Ecclesijs, vel earum cimiterijs, ludos publicos, choreas vel alia
hujusmodi de caetero exerceant etc.

Let Curates and rectours of Churches prohibit their Parishioners on our
behalf, that they suffer no public Enterludes, dances, or such like things,
to be henceforth exercised or acted in their Churches or Churchyards.

The 32. is, Concilium Basiliense, Anno 1431. Sessio Cap. De Spectaculis in
Ecclesia non faciendis: which decrees thus.

Surius Tom. 4. p. 62. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 63. Carranza fol. 255, 256.
Turpem illum abusum in quibusdam frequentatum Ecclesijs, quo See Polydor
Virgil. De Invent. rerum l. 5. c. 2. accordingly.
certis anni celebritatibus nonnulli cum mitra, baculo et vestibus
pontificalibus, more Episcoporum benedicunt: alij ut reges, ac duces induti,
quod festum fatuorum, vel innocentium seu pueroru^ in quibusdam regionibus
nuncupatur: alij larvales vel theatrales jocos: alij choros et tripudia marum
ac mulierum facientes, homines ad spectacula et cachinnationesmovent: haec
sancta Synodus detestans, statuit ac jubet tam ordinarijs, quam Ecclesiarum
decanis et rectoribus, sub poena suspensionis omnium proventuum
Ecclesiasticorum trium mensium spatio, ne haec et similia ludibria in Ecclesia,
quae domus orationis esse debet, ac etiam in ca^miterio exerceri amplius
permittant, transgresso resque per censuram Ecclesiasticam, aliaque juris
remedia punire non negligant.

This sacred Synod detesting that foul abuse frequent in certain Churches,
in which on certain festivals of the year, certain persons with a miter,
staff, and pontifical robes, bless men after the manner of Bishops: others
being clothed like Kings and Dukes, which is called the feast of fools, of
innocents, or of children in certain Countries: others practicing vizarded and
theatricall sports; others making trains and dances of men and women, move men
to spectacles and cachinnations: has appointed and commanded as well
ordinaries, as deanes and rectors of Churches, under pain of suspension of all
their Ecclesiastical revenues for three months space, that they suffer not
these and such like Plays and pastimes to be any more exercised in the Church,
which ought to be the house of prayer, nor yet in the Churchyard, and that
they neglect not to punish the offenders by Ecclesiastical censures, and other
remedies of law.

And in the Appendix of the same Council I find this Constitution.

Surius Tom. 4. p. 223. and Crab. Tom. 3. p. 226, 227.
In via quilibet incedens pudicis oculis, cum modestia et gravitate, ad loca
minus honesta non vadat, nec ad spectacula publica, choreas, ludos, hastiludia,
torneamenta, et alia hujusmodi. Nemo ludat, aut familiares suos ad taxillos,
vel alios ludos inhonestos ludere patiatur.

Every one walking in the way with chaste eyes, with modesty and gravity may not
go to dishonest places, nor yet to public spectacles, dances, Plays,
tiltings, jests, and such like sports. Let none play, nor yet suffer his
familiars to play at dice, or tables, or other dishonest games.

Concilium Toletanum, sub Sixto quarto, Anno 1473. where I find these
Constitutions.

Binius Council. Tom. 4. p. 521, 522.
Quia tempore quo sacrorum Canonum decretis nuptiarum celebratio interdicitur
et carnalis copula prohibetur; nonnullos laicos nubere et carnaliter
commisceri, ac proinde convivia publica, strepitus, ac choreas facere; (a thing
much in use among the Russians, who at their weddings spend almost the whole
night in Convivae utriusque sexus saltando et ludendo, clamando et ridendo
bonam noctis obscurae partem consumu^t etc. Vulgus interim ducendis choreis
occupatur etc. In nuptiis et aliis solennitatibus persaepe ad manuum
complosarum fragorem choreas du^unt. Guagninus Rerum Pollonicarum Tom. 2. ^.
400.408.
dancing, which practice the Sea here p. 22, 38, 22.
Church of God has always disallowed:) et cu^ histrionibus ac joculatoribus
solenniter celebrare, et ad Ecclesias sic incedere plerunque contingit. Nos
perniciosa^ hujusmodi co^suetudine^ divellere cupientes, sacro approbante
Concilio, commixtiones hujusmodi, strepitus, choreas, joculationes etc. fieri
de caetero prohibemus etc.

Ab Ecclesia etc. turpitudo quaeque merito est abolenda. Quia vero quaedam tam
in Metropolitanis qua^ in Cathedralibus et alijs Ecclesijs nostrae provinciae
consuetudo inolevit, ut videlicet in festis Here we may see whence our
disorderly Christmas keeping had its derivation.
Nativitatis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, et sanctorum Stephani, Ioannis,
Innocentium, alijsque certis diebus festivis, etiam in solennitatibus Missarum
novarum dum divina aguntur, ludi theatrales, larvae, monstra, spectacula,
necno^ quamplurima inhonesta et diversa figmenta in Ecclesijs introducuntur,
tumultuationes quoque et turpia carmina, et derisorij sermones dicuntur, adeo
quod divinum officiu^ impediunt, et populum reddunt indevotu^. Nos hanc
corruptelam sacro approbante Concilio, revocantes, hujusmodi larvas, ludos,
monstra, spectacula, figmenta, et tumultuationes fieri; carmina quoque turpia
et sermones illicitos dici tam in Metropolitanis qua^ in Cathedralibus,
caeterisque nostrae provinciae Ecclesijs, dum divina celebrantur, praesentiu^
serie omnino prohibemus: ^tatuentes nihilominus ut Clerici qui praemissa
ludibria, et inhonesta figmenta officijs divinis immiscuerint, aut immisceri
permiserint, si in praefatis Metropolitanis seu Cathedralibus Ecclesijs
beneficiati extiterint, eo ipso per mens^m por^ionibus suis mulctentur: si vero
in parochialibus fuerint beneficiati, triginta; et si beneficiati non fuerint,
quindece^ regaliu^ poenam incurrant, fabricis Ecclesiaru^ et testi Synodali
aequaliter applicandam. Per hoc tamen honestas repraesentationes et devotas
quae populum ad devotione^ movent, tam in praefatis diebus, qua^ in alijs non
intendimus prohibere.

Because in the time wherein by the Decrees of holy Canons, the solemnizing of
marriages and carnal copulation are prohibited; it falls out for the most part
that some lay men marry, and use carnal copulation, and thereupon make
public feasts, tumults, and dances; (prohibited at marriages by sundry
forerecited Councils:) and solemnly celebrate their nuptials with
Stage Players, and so for the most part walk unto the Churches. We desiring
to abolish this pernicious custom, the holy Council approving it, prohibit
such commixtures, tumults, dances, Plays etc. to be hereafter made etc. So
that Stage-plaies, Masks, Mummeries and dances, are altogether unlawful at
Marriages, by this Councels verdict.

All filthiness is worthily to be abandoned from the Church. But because as
well in Metropolitan as in Cathedral and other Churches of our Diocese there
has a custom grown, that even in the feasts of our Lord Jesus Christ's
Nativity, and of St. Stephen, John, Innocents, and other certain holy days,
yea in the solemnities of new Masses whiles divine things are doing,
Stageplayes, mummeries, monsters, spectacles, as also very many dishonest and
various fictions are brought into the Churches, as also tumults, and filthy
songs, and scoffing speeches are uttered, so that they hinder divine service,
and make the people undevout. We repealing this corruption by the approbation
of this holy Council, do by the contents of these presents, utterly prohibit
these disguised Plays, monsters, spectacles, fictions, and tumults to be made,
and likewise all filthy verses and unlawful speeches to be uttered, as well in
Metropolitan as in Cathedral and other Churches of our province, whiles divine
things are celebrating: ordaining nevertheless that Clergy men who shall
intermixe the foresaid Plays and dishonest figments with divine offices, or
suffer them to be intermixed, if they shall be beneficed in the said
Metropolitan or Collegiate Churches, shall for this cause and this offense
forfeit their pentions for a month: but if they are beneficed in Parish
Churches, they shall incur the penalty of thirty; and if they are not
beneficed, of fifteen royalls, to be equally bestowed upon the fabrickes of
Churches and the Chapter house. But yet by this we intend not to prohibit
honest and devout representations which stir up the people to devotion either
on the foresaid days or others.

Which last clause extends not to authorize any public or private
Stage Plays, either on the stage or else where, but only to those
representations of our Saviors passion, or the Legends and Martyrdomes of such
Saints as the Priests did use to personate in their Churches on festival and
solemn days: Which shows and representations were afterward particularly
prohibited, condemned by the Councels of Millaine, Mogunce, and others, before
and after recorded, though the Sea Ioannis Mo^anus Historia SS. Imaginum l. 4.
c. 18 p. 424, 425. and Act. 3. Scene 5. p. 112. t^ 11^. Polydor Vi^gil. De
Inven^. ^erum l. ^. c. ^. and Lud. Vives Notae in August. De Ci^i^. ^^il. 8. c.
27. d.
Papists still retain them, to their eternal in^amie.

The 34. is, Synodus Senonensis, Anno 1524. in which

Boch^llus De^ cr^ta ^c^l^s. Gall. l. 4. Tit. ^. cap. 41, 42. p. 584, 585.
Quoniam refrigescente nunc Christicolarum devotione, intelleximus ex nimia
festorum multiplicatione populum ocio et vaniloquio illis diebus deditum,
ebrietatibus, commessationibus ludis et lascivijs, mag^s quam rei divinae,
orationibus et contemplationibus vacare etc. Moneant itaque Ecclesiarum
rectores suos parochianos, ut illis diebus easdem Ecclesias fr^quentent,
orationibus insistant, Deum et Sanctos quo^um solennia aguntur, pia mente et
devoto affectu venerentur et colant: verbum Domini, seu Nota.
praedicationes vigilanter et attente audiant. Cessent his diebus, ludi,
choreae, commessationes, ebrietates, vaniloquia, lasciviae, ab omni vitio
abstineatur, etc. Which are no fit holyday exercises, and recreations, if this
Council err not

Bochellus Decreta Ecclesiae Gall. l. 6. Tit. 29. c. 2. p. 1025.
Non solum omnem alearum, taxillorum et sortis ludum, aut interesse dictis,
interdictum Clericis esse constitutionis Concilij generalis denunciamus, prout
eisdem autoritate dicti Concilij interdicimus, sed et turpes plausus,
cachinnos, risus inconditos, larvales et theatrales jocos, et tripudia, et his
similia ludibria, nec non omnem alium ludum per quem Ecclesiae honestas
inquinari potest praedictis Clericis prohibemus. Non immisceantur caetibus ubi
amatoria cantantur et turpia; ubi ob^scaeni motus corporis choreis et saltibus
efferuntur: ne Clerici qui sacris mysterijs deputati sunt, turpium
spectaculorum atque verborum contagione polluantur.

Because the devotion of Christians now waxing cold, we have understood through
the multiplication of holidays, that the people given to idleness and vain
discourse do in these days addict themselves more to drunkenness,
surfeiting, Plays and wantonness, than to divine things, prayers, and
cont^mplations, etc. Therefore let the rectors of Churches admonish their
Parishioners, that on those days they frequent their Churches, and be instant
in prayers: that they reverence and worship God, and the Saints, whose
sol^mnities are observed, with a pious mind, and devout affection: that they
vigilantly and attentively hear the word of the Lord, and preaching. Let
Plays, dances, surfeiting, drunkenness, idle discourses, lasciviousness cease
on these days, and let there be an abstinence from all vice etc.

We denounce not only all Plays of dice, tables, and lot, or to be present at
them, to be inhibited Clergy men by the constitution of a general Council, as
we forbid them by the authority of the said Council; but we likewise prohibit
the aforesaid Clergy men all unseemely applauses, cachinnations, uncivil
laughter, disguised and theatricall Plays, and dances, with all such
ridiculous Enterludes, and likewise all other Pastimes by which the honesty of
the Church may be defiled. They may not mix themselves with such assemblies
where amorous and filthy things are sung: where obscene motions of the body are
expressed in dances and galliards: lest Clergy men who are devoted to holy
mysteries, should be polluted with the contagion of filthy Spectacles and
words.

Which reason extends as well to the Laity as the Clergy: since filthy
Spectacles and words are as apt to pollute the one as the other. And dare any
Clergy men then after such express inhibitions resort to Play Houses, or
behold or practice any of these interdicted games and sports?

The 35. is Synodus Ratisponae Anno 1524. entitled, Reformatio Cleri
Germaniae: where we read thus.

Surius Tom. 4 p. 713.
Canon: 4. Insuper tabernas publicas Cleri evitent, nisi eas peregre
proficiscentes ingredi oporteat, (which our English Queen Eliliz. Injunctions
Iniunct. 7. Canons. 1603. Can. 75. See my Heal^hes Sickness, p. 33.
Canons have seconded:) et tam in ibi, quam domo et alibi a crapula et
ebrietate, omnique ludo a jure prohibito, blasphemijs, rixis ac alijs
quibuscunque excessibus et offensionibus penitus abstineant. Choreas,
Spectacula et convivia publica evitent, ne ob luxum petulantiamque eorum nomen
Ecclesiasticum male audiat.

Can: 4. Moreover Clergy men must avoid all public tavernes, ( which too many
of them now frequent) unless they are enforced to enter them when they
travel: and as well there, as at home and elsewhere they ought wholly to
abstain from surfeiting and drunkenness, and from every Play prohibited by
law, from blasphemies, brawles, and all other excesses and offenses whatsoever.
Let them shun dances, Stage Plays and public feasts, lest for their luxury
and wantonness the Ecclesiastical name be ill reported of.

The 36. is, Synodus Carnotensis, Anno 1526. Where

Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 4 Tit. 7. c. 43, 44, 46. p. 586.
Ces^ent diebus festis, judicia, causarum cognitiones, venditiones, mercatus,
commessationes, ebrietates, ludi, et nundinae. Contra facientes, citentur coram
nobis aut Officiali nostro etc. In festo Sancti Nicholai, Catherinae,
innocentium, aut alio quovis die prae^extu recreationis, ne Scholastici,
Clerici, Sacerdotesve stultum aliquid aut ridiculum faciant in Ecclesia, aut ab
alijs fieri permittant. Denique ab Ecclesia ejiciantur vestes fatuorum personas
scenicas agentium.

Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 10. cap. 6, 7. p. 975.
Quia solent in plerisque locis nostrae Diaecesis deferri baculi ipsarum
confratriarum, praecedentibus mimis et lusoribus cum tympanis, quod maxim
dedecet honorem Dei et Sanctorum: non enim debent ante eorum imagines baculis
confratriarum infixas praecedere instrumenta illa musica ad choream et tripudia
potius quam ad devotionem audientes excitantia. Idcirco prohibemus districte,
ne posthac tales baculi deferantur public per vicos histrionico ritu, et
modulatione musica choreis accommodata etc.

Quoniam in confratrijs primum recte constitutis, et postea in det^rius
prolapsis, multa conspiciuntur committi, ab honestate et Christianae mentis
religione penitus aliena; ut illis congruum adhibeamus remedium, imprimis
ordinamus; Ne in ipsarum confrat^iarum congregationibus fiant dissoluta
convivia, compotationes ad ebrietatem inducentes, choreae, tripudia, et caetera
id genus, ad Bacchanalia magis quam ad Christianam religionem spectantia. Quod
nota.

Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 3, 4, 20, 21.
Interdicimus, ne Clerici public aut in privato exercea^t ludos turpes aut
ludibriosos unde scandalu^ oriri, et ministeriu^ ecclesiasticum vituperari
possit, pro loco et tempore, cau^a et personis quibus, propter quam, et cum
quibus hujusmodi ludos exerceri contingeret. A ludo autem alearum, taxillorum,
et similium quae in sort pendent sic abstineant, ut neque etiam alijs
ludentibus fautores aut testes sint, intersint.

Districte prohibemus, ne sacerdotes choreis publicis, tr^pudiationibus,
saltationibu^ve sese commisceant; ne turpes, amatorias^ aut lascivas decantent
cantilenas, aut cantantibus faveant aut intersint. 1 Cor. 15.33.
Corrumpunt siquidem bonos mores colloquia prava. Denique non sint vagi oculis,
non dicaces, non joculatores, non histriones; ea enim omnia indecora, ijs
praecipue quibus animarum cura co^missa est.

Sacerdotes qui in diebus primarum Missarum novorum Presbyterorum, post
festivas epulas et grandia convivia commessationesque Such was the prophanes
and irregularity of the Roman Clergy.
exeunt in publicum ad exhibendas populo et plebeculae comaedias, maxim
crassas et impudicas, et choreas in plateis, committunt sine dubio in legem
Ecclesiae et Apostolorum dogma. Quare qui tales fuerunt, si perseveraverint,
sciant se condignam punitionem et correctionem non evasuros. Item prohibemus
sacerdotibus ne in festo Sancti Nicholai, Innocentium, aut alio quovis die
stultum aliquod aut ridiculum in Ecclesijs aut alio quocunque loco publico
faciant fierive permittant, larvati aut quocunque tempore, aut quovis in loco
incedant.

On holy days let matters of judicature, hearing of causes, sales,
merchandice, lux^ry, drunkenness, Plays, and faires cease. Those who do
contrary, let them be cited before us or our official etc. In the feast of St
Nicholas, Katherine, Innocents, or any other day, let not Scholars, Clergy
me^, or Priests, under pretense of recreation, act any foolish or ridiculous
thing in the Church, or permit others to do it. Finally let the clothes of
those who act the scenicall persons of Innocents or fools, be cast out of the
Church.

Because the staves of the fraternities themselves are wont to be carried about
in most places of our Diocese with Stage Players, Fiddlers and tymbrels going
before them, which does most of all unbeseeme the honor of God and the Saints:
for those musical instruments stirring up the auditors rather to Carantoes and
dancing than to devotion, ought not to precede their images fastened in the
staves of the fraternities. Therefore we strictly prohibit, that after this
such staves be not carried about publicly through villages after an
histri^nical manner, or with musical melody fitted to dances etc.

Because in fraternities rightly ordained at the first, and afterward
declining unto worse, many things are seen to be committed altogether
different from honesty, and the religion of a Christian mind: that we may
apply a fitting remedy to them, we first of all ordain; That in the
assemblies of the fraternities themselves, no dissolute feasts be made, no
compo^ations (or Healthes) conducing to drunkenness, no dances, galliards^ and
other things of this nature, belonging rather to the feasts of Bacch^s, than to
Christian religion.

We prohibit, that Clergy men use no dishonest nor ludicro^s Plays either in
public or private whence scandal may arise, and the ecclesiastical ministry
be disgraced, according to the place and time, the occasion and persons, in
which, for which, and with which such Plays shall happen to be used. Let them
so abstain from the play of dice, of tables, and the like which depend on
chance, that they be not so much as present among the^ that play, either as
countenancers, or witnesses.

We strictly forbid, that Ministers intermixe not themselves in public
morrices, dances or carantoes: that they sing no ribaldry, amorous or
lascivious songs, nor yet favor, or keep company with those that sing them:
For evil communications corrupt good manners. Finally, let them not be roving
with their eyes, no talkers, no jesters, no stage players, for all these things
are unseemely especially to those to whom the cure of souls is committed.

Priests who in the days of the first Masses of new Presbyters, after merry
banquets and great feasts and entertainments go forth in public to exhibit
most gross and unchaste Comaedies and dances in the streets to the common
people, offend without doubt against the law of the Church, and the
Apostolical decree. Wherefore those who have been such, if they shall
p^rsevere, let them know, that they shall not escape condign punishment and
correction. Also we inhibit Ministers, that they neither act nor suffer to be
acted any foolish or ridiculous thing, either on the feasts of St. Nicholas,
Innocents, or on any other day, neither in Churches, nor in any other public
place: and that they disguise not themselves at any time in any public or
private place.

The 37. is, Concilium Sen^nense, Anno 1528. where Inter Decreta morum, we have
these two Canons.

Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 740, 742, 743. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 757, 760. Binius
Tom. ^. p. 681, 683.
Canon: 16. Cum aute^ deceat domum Dei sanctitudo etc. Prohibemus idcirco, ne
histriones aut mimi intrent Ecclesiam, ad pulsandum tympana, cythara, aut alio
quovis instrumento musicali: neque in Ecclesia aut juxta Ecclesiam suis pul^ent
instrumentis: prohibemus insuper, ne fiat deinceps festu^ fatuorum aut
innocentiu^, neque erigatur decanatus patellae.

Canon: 25. Clerici neque in publico ludant pyla, aut alijs ludis, maxim cum
laicis. A ludo al^arum aliisque qui a sort pendent abstineant, neque ludentium
fautores, spectatores aut testes existant. Non se admisceant choreis publicis,
tripudiationibus aut saltationibus: non turpes amatorias aut lascivas deprom^nt
cantilenas, seu cantantibus faveant aut adsint. Nec in scenam velut histriones
prodeant, non comaedias vernaculas agant, non spectaculum corporis sui faciant
in publico privatove loco. Quae omnia, cum omnibus sacerdotibus sunt indecora,
et ordini clericali multum detrahentia, tum illis praecipue quibus animarum
cura est commissa.

Can: 16. And since holiness becomes the house of God: therefore we
prohibit, that no stage players or tumblers shall enter into the Church to
strike up any tabret, harp or other musical instrument; neither shall they
play upon their instruments in or near the Church: moreover we prohibit that
the fea^t of fools or Innocents be not from henceforth observed, neither may
the deanery of the platter be erected.

Can. 25. Clergy men may not play publicly at ball or other plays, especially
with lay men: they shall abstain from dice-play, and all other games that
depend on chance; neither may they be cherishers, witnesses or spectators of
such as play: They shall not intermixe themselves in public morrices,
galliards and dances: they shall not sing any filthy amorous or lascivious
songs, nor yet favor or b^ present with those that sing them. They may not
Therefore they may not act academicall Enterludes in Colleges.
come forth upon the stage as Actors, nor act Comaedies in their mother tongue:
they shall make no spectacle of their body in any public or private place. All
which, as they are unseemely to all Ministers, and much derogatory from the
clericall order, so especially to those to whom the cure of souls is committed.

Concilium Coloniense, Anno 1536. where we have these canonical Injunctions
following.

Surius Tom. 4. p. 761. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 780.
Pars 2. cap. 25, 26. Vivere quidem de Altario sacerdoti licet, luxuriari non
permittitur. A crapula itaque et ebrietate, a See Council. 27, and 28 before.
compotationibus illis ad haustus aequales, a luxu, ab alea, ab immoderatis
sumptibus et commessationibus, Concilium generale Clericos revocat universos,
sequutum veteris testamenti institutum, quo Levit. 10.9.
ministri templi vino et cicera prohibebantur, ne ebrietate gravarentur corda
eorum, et ut sensus eorum semper vigeret et esset tenuis. Et Apostolus ait:
Ephesians. 5.1^.
Nolite inebriari vino in quo est luxuria, sed impleamini spiritu sancto. Et
iterum: Romans 13.13.
Non in commes^ationibus et ebrietatibus etc. O^im tanta honestas desiderabatur
in Clerico, ut ne See Council. 4; 5, 6, 10, 15^ 16, before accordingly.
nuptialibus quidem convivijs ipsis interesse liceret, non immisceri
spectaculis ac caetibus ubi amatoria cantantur, aut obscaeni motus corporis,
choreis aut saltationibus efferuntur; ne auditus et intuitus sacris mysterijs
deputatus, turpium spectaculorum atque verborum contagione pollueretur. Quid si
videret Ecclesia illa prisca Clericos nostri temporis tabernarios^ Dolentes
referimus quod non ^olum quidam minores Clerici, verum etiam aliqui ^cclesiarum
Praelati, circa commessationes superfluas et confabulationes illicitas ut
deinceps taceamus, fere medium noctis expendunt^ et somno residuum
relinquentes, vix ad divinum concentum auium excitantur, transcurrendo undique
contin^ata syncopa matutinu^ etc. Council. Lateran. sub Innocentio 3. cap. 17.
Surius Tom. 3. p. 742.
tabernisque (quasi domos non haberent) noctu diuque alligatos? quam
execraretur hoc facinus? Posthac ergo non solum nullus ex clero sordidissimum
cauponem aut tabernarium agat, sed See Concilium Laodicenu^ Can. 24. Aphricanum
Can. 7. Agathense Can. ^1. Veneticum Can. 13. Turonense 1. Can. 2.
Constantinop. 6. Can. 9. Turonicum 3. Can. 21.46. Cabilonense 2. Can. 10.44.
Moguntinum Can. 46. Rhemense Can. 18.26. accordingly; besides others here
quoted. See Ioannes Langhecrucius, De Vita et Honest. Clericorum l. 2. c. 6. to
20.
ne in tabernas quidem, nisi necessitatis causa divertat: alioquin poenae
canonicae imminent illi qui ordini suo hanc ignominiosam notam inurere
tentaverit.

Crab. Tom. 3. p. 785. Surius Tom. 4. p. 786.
Pars 3. c. 26. which has this title, Theatrales ludos non inferendos te^plis.
Olim theatrales quoque ludi et larvarum ludibria inferebantur See Council. 31,
32, 33, 36, ^7 before.
templis, pessimo quidem exemplo, adeo ut provisione canonica, qua hic
deterrimus abusus aboleretur, opus fuerit: quem ex nostris diaecesibus jam, ut
speramus, ejectum gaudemus.

Surius Tom. 4. p. 771.
Pars 5. cap. 6. Denique procul absint parochi ab omni luxu: 1 Timothy ^.2, 3
Sobrium enim vult parochum Paulus, nec multo vino deditum, ac vino potius ad
necessitatem, quam ad voluptatem utentem. Nesciat ergo parochi domus
commessationes crapulosas; execretur See Council. 27, and 28 before.
co^potationes illas, ad aequales haustus obligatorias, (which our own
Prohibitionem scotalliarum, seu scotallarum, eta. liarum potationum convivii
pro salute animarum et corporum, introductam provida approbatio. ne
prosequentes, rectoribus, vicariis et capellanis parochialibu^ praecipimus sub
obedientiae debito firmi^er iungendo, quod parochianis crebra ex^hortatione,
diligenter indicant, ne prohibitionis huius temorarii violatores. Alioquin quos
in hac part culpabiles invenerint ab ingressu Ecclesiae et Sacramenti in
communicatione ^amdiu su^pensos esse denuncient donec aliis cessantibus ad
penitentiarium nostrum accesserint etc. Communes autem pota^iones declaramus,
quoties virorum multitudo quae numerum denarium excesserit, eisd^m domiciliis^
potationis gratia immoratur. Communes potationes quas scotallas mutato nomine
charitatis appellant, detestantes huiusmodi potationum au^hores, et public
convenientes ad easde^ e^co^municatos percipimus public et solenniter
denunciari, don^c super hoc sa^isfecerint competenter, et absolutionis
beneficium meruerint obtinere. Ioannis de Aton Cons^it. Provinciales Con^i^^
Oxoniensis A^no 1222^ bound up at the end of Linwood, fol. 124. h.
English Council at Oxford Anno 1222. does solemnly censure and condemn, under
pain of excommunication.) Turpissimum putet nisi causa necessitatis intrare
tabernam, quasi domum non habeat ad ede^dum et bibendum. Breviter, vitet omnia
quae pastoralem authoritatem aut dedecorant, aut imminuunt, etc.

Crab. Tom. 3. p. 806. Surius Tom. 4. p. 786.
Pars 9. c. 9, 10. Diligenter quoque populus admonendus est cur feriae, et
potissimum dies Dominicus, qui a temporibus Apostolorum in Ecclesia semper
celebris fuit, instituta sint: nempe, ut in unum omnes pariter convenirent, ad
audiendum verbum Domini, ad audiendum quoque sacrum et communicandum. Breviter,
ad vacandum Deo soli; ut dies illa tantum orationibus, hymnis, psalmis, et
canticis spiritualibus transigatur. Hoccine est sanctificare Sabbatum.
Quamobrem cupimus hisce diebus prohiberi nundinas, claudi cauponas, vitari
commessationes, ebrietates, lusus improbos, choreas plenas insanijs, colloquia
prava, cantilenas turpes: breviter, omnem luxu^. Na^ hisce, et (quae haec fere
semper consequuntur) blasphemijs et perjurijs, nomen Domini profanatur, et
sabbatum (quod nos admonet, ut quiescamus perverse agere, et benefacere
discamus) contaminatur.

Part. 2. cap. 25, 26. It is lawful for a Priest to live of the Altar, but to
be riotous is not permitted. Therefore a general Council recalls all Clergy
men from surfeiting and drunkenness, and from drinking of healths, from riot,
from dice, from immoderate expenses and feasts, following the institution of
the old Testament, wherein the Ministers of the temple were prohibited wine
and strong drink, lest their hearts should be overcome with drunkenness, that
so their sense might be always vigorous and thin. And the Apostle says: Be
ye not drunken with wine wherein is excess, but be ye filled with the holy
Ghost. And again: Not in rioting and drunkenness etc. Heretofore so great
honesty was required in the Clergy, that it was not lawful for them to be
present at marriage-feasts, nor to intermixe themselves in Stage Plays and
assemblies where amorous poems were sung, or obscene motions of the body
expressed either in dances or galliards; lest the hearing and sight deputed to
sacred mysteries should be polluted with the contagion of filthy spectacles and
words. What if that ancient Church should behold the taverne-haunting Clergy
men of our times; who (as if they had no houses) are tied to Tavernes both
night and day? how would she detest this wickedness? From henceforth therefore,
let no Clergy man not only keep no tavern or base victualling house, but let
him not so much as turn aside into tavernes^ but in case of necessity:
otherwise canonical punishments hang over his head who shall attempt to stamp
such a brand of infamy upon his order.

Part 3. c. 26. That Stage Plays are not to be brought into the Church.
Heretofore Stage Plays and Mummeries were brought into Churches by a most lewd
example, so that there needed a canonical provision, by which this most vile
abuse might be abolished; which we rejoice, that now, as we hope, it is cast
out of our dioces.

Part 5. cap. 6. Finally let parish priests be far from all luxury: For Paul
will have a parish priest to be sober, not given to much wine, and using wine
rather for necessity than for pleasure. Let a Bishops or Ministers house
therefore know no riotous feasts; let it abominate all drinking of Healths,
binding men to pledge them by equal cups, (which healthes an ancient English
Council at Oxford, Anno 1222. has long since solemnly condemned under pain
of excommunication) Let him repute it a most dishonest thing to enter into a
tavern, unles it be in case of necessity; as if he had no house to eat and
drink in. Briefly, let him avoid all things which either disgrace or diminish
his pastoral authority.

Part 9. c. 9, 10. The people also is diligently to be admonished, why holy
days, and especially the Lords day, which has been always famous in the
Church from the Apostles times, were instituted: to wit, that all might equally
come together to hear the word of the Lord, and likewise to hear and receive
the holy Sacrament. Briefly, that they might apply their minds to God alone;
and that they might be spent only in prayers, hymns, psalms, and spiritual
songs. For this is to sanctify the Sabbath. Wherefore we desire, that on
these days all Plays should be prohibited, all victualling houses shut up,
all riot, drunkenness, dishonest Plays, dances fraught with frensies, wicked
discourses, filthy songs: briefly, all luxury to be avoided. For by these
things, and that (which for the most part follows them) by blasphemies and
perjuries, the name of the Lord is profaned, and the Sabbath (which admonishes
us that we should cease to do ill, and learn to do good) is polluted.

So that if we believe this Council, Stage Plays, dancing, feasting, and
drinking, are See Ioannes Langhecrucius De Vita et Honest. Ecclesiasticorum l.
2. c. 11. and 12. accordingly.
no fit holy day or Lord's Day exercises, which should be wholly consecrated to
Gods service.

Synodus Heidelsheimensis, Anno 1539. which does thus express its resolution
in our case.

Crab. Council. Tom. 3. p. 832.
Canon: 14. Item ut Clericorum, maxim beneficiatorum, vita sit exemplaris et
accepta, universis Clericis beneficiatis in sacris, et nostra diaecesi
constitutis, constitutione praesenti districtius inhibemus, ne ludis taxillorum
aut alijs levitatibus, ac choreis, hastiludijs, torneamentis, et alijs
spectaculis publicis et prohibitis intersint, aut talia exerceant prout poenas
condignas in contra facientes facti exigente qualitate, authoritate nostra
infligendas, voluerint evitare etc. Vid. Ibidem.

Can: 14. Moreover that the life of Clergy men, especially of such who are
beneficed, may be exemplary and acceptable: we strictly inhibit all beneficed
Clergy men, which are in orders within our diocese, by this present Canon,
that they be not present at any games at tables, or at any other vanities,
dances, tiltings, torneies, or other public prohibited spectacles, and that
they practice not any of these themselves, as they will avoid condign
punishments against the offenders, the quality of the fact requiring it, to be
inflicted by our authority.

Concilium Treverense, Anno 1549. which in Cap: De Moderandis Ferijs, decrees
as follows.

Surius Tom. 4. p. 886. See Bochel^us Decre^a Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 4. Tit.
7. and 11. throughout to the same purpose.
Et si quis sive Clericus, sive laicus in praenominatis celebribus festis,
compotationibus, choreis, ludis, aut id genus lascivijs et levitatibus, temere
aut contumaciter sese dederit aut immiscuerit, ab Officialibus nostris
arbitrario pro modo delicti, etiam brachij secularis auxilio (si opus erit)
invocato, puniri mandamus.

And if any whether a Clerk or lay man in the forenamed eminent festivalls
shall rashly or contemptuously give himself to drunkenness, dances, Plays,
or such like lasciviousness and lightness, or shall intermixe himself with
them, we command that he be punished by our Officials as they shall think fit,
according to the measure of his offense, calling in likewise (if need be) the
assistance of the secular power.

Which shows how unseasonable Dancing, Stage Plays, and such other sports and
pastimes are, on Lords-dayes, holy days, and other Christian festivals, set
apart only and wholly for Gods worship and service, not for such vanities and
Plays as these; as our own 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3.27. H. 6. cap. 5. 1. Car.
cap. 1. See her^ p. 241, 242, 243.
Statutes, as well as these recited Councels teach us.

The 41. is Synodus Augustensis, Anno 1549. which

Surius Tom. 4 p. 807.
Cap. 19. Item ne hoc praecellens Sacramentum aliqua afficiatur injuria et
contemptu, ex sanctorum Patrum decreto et institutione etiam infames omnes ab
ejus perceptione prohibendi sunt. Praestigiatores, incantatores, public rei,
et scurrae, et qui ludis vaca^t jure pontificio prohibitis: itidemque scortae
et ^enones, ij, inquam, omnes ab Altaris Sacramento removendi sunt, donec vita
sua improba penitus abdicata irrogatam sibi poenitentiae mulctam persolverint.
Item ijs annumerandi sunt, qui alearum lusui perpetuo vacant, See Ioannis
Sarisberiensis De Nugis Curialium lib. 1. cap. 5. Gratian. Distinctio 35.
Alexander Al^nsis pars 4. Quaest. 11. Memb. 2. Artic. 2. sect. 4. p. 391, 392.
Mr. Northbrooks Treatise against Dice-play.
quibus non est porrigendum venerabile sacramentum, donec inde abstineant. Which
accords well with Surius Tom. 1. p. 367. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 286. Carranza fol. 39.
Concilium Eliberinum, Canon 79. Si quis fidelis alea, id est, tabula luserit,
placuit, eum abstinere: et si emendatus cessaverit, post annum poterit
communione reconciliari. And with the 6. general, Council of Constantinople,
1 Can. 50. Surius Tom. 2. p. 1048. Carra^za fol. 194.
Nullum omniu^ sive Clericum, sive, Laicum, ab hoc deinceps tempore alea ludere
decrevimus. Si quis autem hoc deinceps facere ab hoc tempore aggressus fuerit,
si sit quidem Clericus, deponatur, si Laicus, segregetur.

Cap. 13. Also lest this most excellent Sacrament should suffer any injury or
contempt, even by the decree and ordinance of the holy Fathers, all infamous
persons are prohibited from receiving it. Iuglers, inchanters, public
offenders, jesters, and those who addict themselves to Plays prohibited by the
Canon Law (as Stage Plays are) as also whores and panders, all these are to be
put from the Sacrament of the Altar, until their wicked life being wholly
abandoned they shall have satisfied that mulct of penance that is imposed on
them. To these also are those to be added who perpetually give themselves to
Dice-play, to whom the venerable sacrament is not to be administered until they
abstain from dicing. Which accords well with the Council of Eliberis: Canon
79. If any believer (or Christian) shall play at dice, or tables, we ordain,
that he shall be excommunicated: and if being reformed, he shall give it over,
after a years space, he may be reconciled and admitted to the Sacrament. And
with the 6. Council of Constantinople Can. 50. We decree, that none of all the
Clergy or Laity; shall from this time forwards play at dice. And if any one
from henceforth shall hereafter attempt to do it; if he be a Clergy man, let
him be deposed; if a Lay man, let him be excommunicated.

Which Counsels I would our common Dice-players and gamesters would seriously
consider.

The 42. is, Concilium Coloniense, Anno. 1549. where

Cap: 17. Percepimus Comaediaru^ actores quosdam, non scena et theatris
contentos transire etiam ad monasteria monialium, ubi gestibus prophanis,
amatoribus et secularijs commoveant virginibus voluptatem. Quae spectacula,
etiamsi de rebus sacris et pijs exhiberentur, parum tamen boni, mali vero
plurimum relinquere in sanctimonialium mentibus possunt, gestus externos
spectantibus et mirantibus, caeterum verba non intelligentibus. Ideo prohibemus
et vetamus posthac, vel comaedias admitti in virginum monasteria, vel virgins
comaedias spectare.

Cap. 17. Surius Tom. 4. p. 852. Binius Tom. 4. p. 765.
We have understood that certain Actors of Comedies not contented with the
stage and theaters, have entered into Nonneries, where they make the Nons merry
with their profane, amorous and secular gestures. Which Stage Plays, Nota.
although they consisted of sacred and pious subjects, can yet notwithstanding
leave little good, but much hurt in the minds of holy virgins who behold and
admire the external gestures only, but understand not the words. Therefore we
prohibit and forbid, that from henceforth no comaedies shall be admitted into
the Monasteries of Nonnes, neither shall Virgins be spectators of comedies.

An unanswerable evidence of the desperate venomous corruption of Stageplayes.
For if comaedies even of religious and holy subjects, void of all scurrility,
would with their very gestures and action contaminate the minds, and inflame
the lusts of So the Papists repute them, though many of them have been and yet
are notorious strumpets. See Bales, Acts of English Votaries. Onus Ecclesiae,
cap. 22. sect. 12. and the Anatomy of the English Nonnery at Lisborne,
accordingly.
devoted mortified Nons themselves, and the most chaste virgin spectators, much
more will amarous wanton Comedies corrupt all other actors and spectators, and
kindle a very flame of noisome lusts within their breasts.

The 43. is, Synodus Moguntina, Anno 1549. which

Surius Tom. 4. p. 870, 874.
Cap. 60, 61. Dum a novitijs sacerdotibus hujus sacri primitiae celebrantur,
serio mandamus, choreas et seculares pompas omittendas etc. Sed et sanctorum
celebritates in diem dominicam incidentes censemus submovendas, et in feriam
aliquam praecedentem vel subsequentem transferendas, quo sanctorum omnium
Domino sua conservetur solennitas etc. Et quo Dei gloria in observatione divini
cultus magis illustretur, et fidelium devotio minus impediatur; diebus
dominicis et festivatatibus celebrioribus, mercimonia, tripudia, saltationes,
quas damnat Concilium See Council. 13, 33, here.
Toletanum, et prophana spectacula, decernimus non permittenda: simul etiam
ludicra quaedam a pietate aliena, et theatris, quam Templis aptiora, censemus
in Ecclesijs non admittenda.

Cap. 74. Clerici insuper tabernas publicas evitent nisi cas peregre
proficiscentes ingredi oporteat et tam inibi quam domi et alibi a crapula et
ebrietatibus omnique ludo a jure prohibito, blasphemiis, rixis, et alijs
quibuscunque excessibus et offensionibus, penitus abstineant. Choreas,
spectaculaque et convivia publica vitent, ne ob luxum petulantiamque eorum
nomen Ecclesiasticum male audiat.

Cap: 60, 61. We seriously command, that whiles the first fruits of this
sacrifice are celebrated by new-ordained Priests, dances and all secular shows
be wholly omitted etc. We likewise decree, that those solemnities of the
Saints which happen upon the Lords day, shall be removed and transferred to
some precedent or subsequent holy day, whereby due solemnity may be prese^ved
to the Lord of all Saints etc. And that the glory of God may be more
illustrated in the observatio^ of divine worship, and the devotion of the
faithful may be less hindered; we decree that on Lords-dayes and more eminent
festivals, merchandises, dances, morrices and profane dances, which the
Council of Toledo condemns, are not to be tolerated: and we likewise resolve,
that certain Plays that are far from piety, and more fit for Theaters than
Temples, are not to be admitted in Churches.

Cap. 74. Moreover Clergy men must avoid all public tavernes, unles it be upon
occasion whiles they are traveling; and as well there as at home and elsewhere
they must wholly abstain from surfeiting and drunkenness, and every Play
prohibited by law (as all Stage Plays are) from blasphemies, brawles, and all
other excesses and offenses whatsoever. They must shun dances, stage plays,
and public feasts, lest the Ecclesiastical name be ill reported of for their
luxury and wanto^nes

The former part of which Canon prohibits Clergy men from wearing costly
apparel, silks and velvets, which sundry other See Council. Carthag. 4. Ca^.
15.45. Aquisgranense Can. 45. Matisconense ^. Can. 5. and 2. Can. 13.15.
Constantinop. 6. Can. 27. Foro^iuliense Can. 6, 7. Turonense 3. Can. 4, 5, 7,
8. Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. Can. 16, 17, 19. and sub Leone 10. S^ss. 9. De
Cardinalibus. Lond^nense apud Matthew. Paris. Hist. p. 457. Mediolanense 1. apud
Binium, Tom. 4. p. 891, 892. Nicaenum 2. Can. 16. Valentinum Can. 13.
Cabilonense 2. Can. 4. Tridentinum Sess. 22. Decretum De Reformatione cap.
Concilii Basiliens. Appendix. Surius Tom. 4. p. 222, 223. See Ioannis
Langhecrucius De Vita et Honestate Clericorum lib. 2. c. 2, 3,. and Bochellus
Decretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib. 6. Tit. 17. De Vestibus et Ornatu
Clericorum p. 1016. etc. where sundry other Councels are cited to this purpose.
Councels have condemned in Bishops, Ministers, and all other Clergy men, who
should be patterns of humility and frugality, not of luxury, pride, and
worldly pomp to others, as many silken and satyn Divines now are.

The 44. is, Concilium Parisiense, Anno 1557. where I

Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 4. Tit. 7. cap. 33, 36. p. 583.
See HRabanus Maurus Homilia In Domi^ici^ diebus, Operum Tom. 5. p. 604, 605,
accordingly.
Caeteros dies festos Dominicis Ecclesia addidit, ut beneficiorum a Deo et
sanctis ejus nobis collatorum memores essemus, sanctorum exempla sectaremur
etc. orationi vacaremus, non autem ocio et ludis etc. Moneant autem Ecclesiarum
Rectores subditos suos ut praedictis diebus festis in templum conveniant,
illudque frequentent pieac religiose audituri quae in ijs sacra aguntur. Nota.
Conciones attente audiant, Deum pia mente et religioso affectu venerentur et
colant. His autem diebus, ut dictum est, cessent ludi, choreae, ebrietates,
vaniloquia, et quaecunque divinam possunt offendere majestatem etc.

Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 6. Tit. 10 c. ^. p. 974. See
Council. 36. before.
Fraternitates eas quae ad commessationes et ebrietates ut plu^imum fiunt,
reprobamus. Insuper baculorum cum imaginibus conductum ad domos la^corum, cum
turba sacerdotum, mulierum, et mimorum, districte sub poena excommunicationis,
et emendae arbitrariae inhibemus, et praecipue clericis, ne talibus sese
immisceant, aut asiensum quovis modo praestent.

The Church has added other holy days to Lords-dayes, that we might be
mindful of the benefits bestowed upon us by God and his Saints, that we
might follow the examples of the Saints, that we might devote our selves to
prayer, not to idleness and Plays. Therefore let Rectors of Churches admonish
their Parishioners, that on the foresaid feast days they come together into
the Church, and that they frequent it piously and religiously, to hear those
holy things that are done in them. Let the^ attentively hear sermons, let them
reverence and worship God with a pious mind and religious affection. And on
these days, as it is said, let plays, dances, drunke^nes, vain discourses,
and what ever may offend Gods majesty, cease etc.

We reject those fraternities which are for the most part made for rioting and
drunkenness. Moreover we strictly inhibit under pain of excommunication, and
an arbitrary mulct, the carrying about of staves with images to the houses of
lay men with a company of Priests, of women and Stage Players: and specially
we prohibtt Clergy men, that they join not themselves with such assemblies,
nor yet assent unto them by any means.

Concilium Tridentinum, which the Sea Surius, Binius, and Carranza, Andradius
Defen^. Concilii Tridentini, and Bellarm. De Concil^is.
Papists boast to be oecumenicall, though See Bishop Jewels Epistle concerning
the Council of Trent, History of the Council of Trent, Edit. 2. p. 811. etc.
Dr. Crakentho^p His Vigilius Dormitans, c. 19. sect. 32. to 40.
Protestants gainsay it. Which Council, Sessio 24. Anno Dom: 1563. Decretu^ de
Reformatione Can. 12. decrees as follows.

Concilium Tridentinum Sessio 24. Su^ius Tom. ^. page 979.
Omnes vero Clerici per se, et non per substitutos compellantur obire o^ficia
etc. Ab illicitisque venationibus, aucupijs, choreis, tabernis, lusibusque
abstineant, atque ea, morum integritate polleant, ut merito Ecclesiae Senatus
dici possint.

Let all Clergy men be compelled to discharge their duties or cures by
themselves, not by their substitutes. Let them abstain from hunting, ha^king,
dances, tavernes and Plays; and let them excel in that integrity of manners,
that they may be deservedly called, the Senate of the Church.

So much pretended goodness at least was there in this Trent Council, as to
prohibit all Clergy men's resor^ to tavernes, dances, Plays, and such like
sports: and to enjoyne them even in proper person for to feed their flocks,
and not by proxy; Non-residence being such a^ odious crime in those Bishops,
Pastors and Ministers who have the cure of souls; that this very See Sessio 6.
De Reformatione Can. 1, 2. Sessi^ 7. De Reformat. c. 2, 3. Sessio 14. De
Reformat. Can. 8, 9. and Sessio 23. De Reformat. Can. 1. and 16.
Trent Co^ncell, together with some Concilium Nicaenum 1. Can. 15, 16.
Eliberinum Can. 19. Arelatense 1. Can. 2.22. and 2. Can. Can. 13. Antiochenum
Can. 3, 17, 21, 22, Sardicense Can. 1, 2, 3, 15, 20. Constantipolitanum 1. Can.
2. and 6. Can. 8. Carthaginense 3. Can. 37, 38, and 4. Can. 14, 20, 27. and 5.
Can. 5. and. 6. Can. 15, 16. Aphricanum Can. 38. Agatense Can. 64.
Chalcedonense Can. 3, 10, 20, 23, 25. Surius Tom. 2. p. 198, 201, 204, 205. and
Actio 10. p. 177. Veneticum Can. 14. Ibid. p. 277. Tarraconense Can. 7. Ibid.
p. 291. Londinensesub Ottone, Matthew. Paris. Hist. Angliae p. 436. Turonense 1.
Can. 11. and 3. Can. 4. Toletanum 2. Can. 2. and 11. Can. 2. Aur^lianense 2.
Can. 1^. and 3. Can. 11. Bracarense 3. Can. 8. Apud Palatium Vernis Can. ^^.
Nicaenum 2. Can. 10, 15. Ar^latense 4. Can. 3, 10. Cabilonense 2. Can. 52, 54.
Aquisgra^ense Anno 816. Can. 45, 50, 71, 87. and Sub Ludovico Pio Anno 833.
Can. 11, 16. Parisiense l. 1. ^. 21, 36. Meldense Cap. 28, 29, 36, 50.
Valentinu^ Cap. 14, 16. Capit. Graecarum Synodorum Cap. 1. Can. 5, 6, 11, 12,
and 34. Surius Tom. 2. p. 753, 754, 756. Concilium Arim^ne^se Cap. 40. Surius
Tom. 1. p. 437. a. Mediolanense apud Binium Tom. 4. p. 8^4. Synodus
Heldesheimensis Anno 1539. apud Crab. Tom. 3. p. 833. Council. Lingonen^e Anno
1404. Nanetense A^no 1264. Apud Salmurum 1278. Pictaviense 1387. Lingonense
Anno 1431, and 1455, and. 1537. Andegavense 1269. Carnotense 1536. Pari^iense
1557. Ebroicense 1576. Burdigense 1582. Rhemense 1583. Turonense 1583. Aquense
1585. and Tholosanum 1590. Apud Bochellum Decret. Ecclesiae Gall. lib. 5. Tit.
10. De Pastorum Residentia. Vid. Ibidem.
54 others, and sundry Apostolorum Canones Can. 13, 14, 15, 37, 57. Epist.
Damasi Papae 1. Apud Surium Tom. 1. p. 466, 467. L^o Epist. Decretalium, Epist.
^ 2. c. 8. Decreta Hilarij Papae, c. 2, 3, 5. Surius Tom. 2. p. 283, 284.
Decreta Ioannis 3. cap. 3. Ibid. p. 656, 657. Decreta Pelagii 2. Ibid. p. 663,
664.21. Capit. Adrianae Papae. Surius Tom. 3. p. 256. Decreta Eugenii-Papae
cap. 11. Ibid. p. 358. Nicholai 1 Rescripta, Tit. 10. cap. 5, 6, 7. Linwood
Constit. Provinc. l. 3. Tit. de Clericis Nonresidentibus, fol. 96, 97. Othoboni
Constitutiones Apud Joan. de Aton De Residentia Vicariorum, fol. 74. De
Residentia Archiepis. et Episc. fol. 92. and de Institutionibus fol 98. to 113.
Summa Angelica: Clericus: sect. 7. Summa Rosella Tit. Residentia. Ioannis de
Burgo Pupilla Oculi, pars 9. c. 4. cum infinitis aliis
Canonical Constitutions, have solemnly condemned it, as our own Canons and
Writers do.

Concilium Mediolanense 1. Anno 1560. where I find these following
Constitutions.

Binius Tom. 4 p. 883. Langhe^rucius de Vita ^t Honestate Clericorum l. 2. c.
22. p. 322, 323.
Et quoniam pie introducta consuetudo repraesentandi populo venerandam Christi
Domini passionem, et gloriosa martyrum certamina, aliorumque sanctorum res
gestas, hominum perversitate eo deducta est, ut multis offensioni, multis etiam
risui et despectui sit; ideo statuimus, ut deinceps Salvatoris passio nec in
sacro, nec in prophano loco agatur, sed docte et graviter eatenus a
concionatoribus exponatur, ut qui sunt uberes concionum fructus, pietatem et
lachrymas commoveant auditoribus, quod adjuvabit proposita crucifixi Salvatoris
imago, caeterique pij actus externi quos Ecclesiae probatos esse Episcopus
judicabit. Item sanctorum martyria et actiones, ne ne agantur, sed ita pie
narrentur, ut auditores ad eorum imitationem, venerationem et invocationem
excitentur.

Binius Tom. 4. p. 884.
Cap. De Festorum dieru^ cultu. Ijs etia^ diebus studebunt Episcopi, ne
personati homines incedant; ne ludi equestres, certamina, aut alia ludicra aut
inania spectacula adhibeantur. Choreae, saltationes in urbibus, suburbijs,
opidis, vicis, aut usquam omnino ne patiantur.

Binius Ibid. p. 893.
Cap. De armis, ludis, spectaculis, et ejusmodi a Clerico vitandis. Clerici
personati non incedant: choreas publicas vel privatas non agant. A venatione
abstinebunt, fabulis, comaediis, hastiludijs^ alijsque prophanis et inanibus
spectaculis non intererunt; ne aures et oculi sacris officijs addicti, ludicris
et impuris actionibus sermombusque distracti polluantur. Clericalis ordinis
hominibus omni genere saltationis et ludi praesertim ve^o aleae ^t tesserarum
ac talorum interdicimus. Nec solum ludere vetamus, sed eos ludorum spectatores
esse noluimus, aut quenquam ludentem in aedibus suis permittere.

Binius Ibid. p. 906, 907.
Cap De Histrionibus et Aleatoribus. De his etiam Principes et Magistratus
commonendos esse duximus, ut histriones et mimos, caeterosque circulatores et
ejus generis perditos homines e suis finibus ejiciant, et in caupones et alios
quicunque eos receperint acriter animadvertant. Et quoniam usu compertum est,
ex aleae ludo saepe furta, rapinae, frauds, blasphemias, aliaque id generis
flagitia proficisci, prohibea^t taxilis aut alea ludi, et graviter in publicos
aleatores, et in eos qui hujusmodi ludis intersint, quive domum ad recipiendos
^udentes expo^itam habent animadvertant. Maxim vero efficiant, ut bonis
artibus instituendis vel renovandis, otia, quantu^ fieri poterit, e civitatibus
tollantur.

And because the piously introduced custom of representing to the people the
venerable passion of Christ the Lord, and the glorious combats of martyrs and
acts of other Saints, is brought to such a pass by the perverseness of men,
that it is an offense to many, and likewise a matter of much No^.
derision and contempt to many: we therefore decree, that from henceforth the
passion of our Savior be no more acted neither in any sacred or profane place,
but that it be learnedly and gravely declared by the preachers in such sort, as
that they may stir up piety and tears in the auditors, (which are the most
profitable fruits of sermons) which the picture of our crucified Savior set
before them, and other external pious actions which the Bishop shall judge to
be approved by the Church, will help to further. Likewise let not the
martyrdomes and actions of the Saints be played, but so piously related, that
the auditors may be excited to their imitation, veneration, and invocation.

Cap. Of the observation of holy days. On these days the Bishops shall
endeavor, that no man go disguised; that no Cirque-playes, combats, or other
pastimes or vain spectacles be exhibited. Let no morrice-dances be suffered in
Cities, suburbs, towns, villages, or in any other place whatsoever.

Cap. Of weapons, plays, spectacles, and such like to be shunned by Clergy
men. Clergy men may not disguize themselves, or put on a vizard; they may not
lead any public or private dances. They shall abstain from hunting, tables,
comaedies, and tiltings, neither shall they be present at other profane or
ridiculous spectacles; lest the eyes and ears devoted to sacred offices being
distracted, should be polluted with impure actions and speeches. We prohibit
Clergy men all kind of dancing, and of play, but especially of dice and
tables. Neither do we only forbid them to play, but we will not so much as
have them spectators of plays, or to admit any one to play in their houses.

And were not these rank Puritans think ye?

Chapter. Of Stage Players and Dicers. Of these also we have thought good to
admonish Princes and Magistrates, that they banish out o^ their territories all
Stage Players, tumblers, juglers, jesters, and other castawayes of this kind,
and that they severely punish victuallers and all others whatsoever who shall
receive them. And because it is found by experience, that See St. Cyprian de
Ludo Aleae, Paris de Puteo de Ludo. Baptista Caccilialupus de Ludo. Stephanus
Costa de Ludo in Tractat. Tractatuum. Lugduni Anno 1543. p. 157. to 170.
Ioannis Sarisberiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 5. Lyrae Praeceptorium in
octavo Praecepto. Alexander Fabricius Destructorium Vitiorum pars 4. c. 23
Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. Artic. 28. fol. 133. B. Danaeus
De Ludo Aleae, lib. Alexander Alensis Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 11.
Memb. 2. sect. 4. p. 39^, 392. Mapheus Vegius de Educatione Liberorum l. 3. c.
7. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 864. F.G. and l. 1. c. 14. p. 848. C. Roger
Hutchinson his Image of God and man. Epistle Dedicatory. Sir Thomas Eliot:
Governor. l. 1. c. 26. Agrippa de Vanitate Sci^ntiarum, Cap. 14. Mr. George
Whetston his Enemy of Unthriftiness or mirror for all Magistrates, fol. 23.
to 30. Media Villa pars 4. In Sentent. Distinctio 15. Artic. 57. Quaest. 8.
fol. 225, 226. M^. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, page 129. to 134. Mr.
Northbrooke his Treati^e against dice-play. Mr. Samuel Byrd his Treatise of the
pleasu^es of this present life. Epistle to the Reader. and cap. 1, 2, 3.
Richard Rice his destruction of small Vices^ Ioannis Langhecrucius de Vita et
Honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 19. and l. 3. c. ^. Summa Angelica, and
Summa Rosella. Tit. Ludus et Alea. Bp. Babington, Beacon, Perkins, Lake, Dod,
Elton, Downham, Williams, Ames, and others upon the 8. Commandment Dr Humphrey
of Nobili^y lib. 3. Mr. Thomas Gataker of the Right u^e of Lots, and his
defense of that Treati^e, ^. Rawlidge his scourging of typlers, p. 1. to 6.
Tostatus Tom. 10. in part 3. Ma^th 6. Quaes^. 51. to 57. and 67. Olaus Magnu^
H^^toriae l. ^. c. 12, 1^. p 572, 573. Marianus Socinus Senensis super part. ^.
lib. 5. Decretalium de Excessibus Praelatorum cap 11. ^. 73. to 80. Lessius de
Ius^itia et ^urel. 2 c. 26. p. 313. to 318. with infinite others who have
written against dice-play. Vincentius Speculum doctrinale l^ 11. c. 97.
robberies, thefts, frauds, blasphemies, and other wickednesses of this kind,
do often proceed from dice-play, See Constitutiones Carolinae Rubr. 30, 31.
Andreas Fricius de Republica Emendenda. l. 1. c. 17. p. 62, 63, accordingly.
let them forbid all playing at tables and dice, and severely punish all common
dicers, and those who are present at such games, or keep houses to receive
such gamesters. But let them chiefly endeavor to effect, that idleness may as
much as may be quite banished out of Cities by instituting or renewing good
arts.

If therefore all Stage Players, tumblers, and common dicers are thus to be
banished and cast out of the common wealth, and all those to be severely
punished who entertain or harbor them, their Plays must certainly be
execrable, intolerable, which make their persons such.

The 47. is Synodus Ebroicensis Anno 1576. where

Bochellus decre^orum Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. ^. Tit. 7. c. 52. p. 587, 588.
Dies festos secundum Scripturas instituit Deus in monumentu^ ac memoria^
suoru^ beneficioru^, ut ea homo agnosceret, et de ipsis gratias ageret, etc.
quoni^m festa a creatione mundi fuerunt introducta, ut animus cum corpore
cessaret a saeculo, et avocaretur a solicitudinibus et laboribus hujus mundi,
occuparetur vero in Dei obsequio, recognoscendis ejus beneficijs et gratijs
referendis. Arbi^ramur vero nu^lo secu^o gravius nec frequentius peccari contra
festorum sancta^ et legitima^ observatione^ quam in nostro; quandoquide^ plures
ipsa insumu^t voluptatibus huju^ seculi sectandis, in tabernis, ganeis, lusibus
illiciris, ac alijs vanis atque etiam viciosis actionibus etc. Bochellus ibid.
Tit. 1. cap ^4. p. 545.
Ecclesiae hostiarij ergo diebus festis observe^t et note^t, qui de presbyteris
et parochia^is abfuerint ab Ecclesijs; et inquirant, qua de causa defecerint;
an interea cauponis et ^^sibus tempus insumant etc.

God according to the Scriptures has appointed holy days for a monument and
remembrance of his benefits, that men might acknowledge them, and give thanks
for them, etc. because feasts were introduced from the beginning of the world,
that the mind with the body might cease from the world, and might be avocated
from the cares and labors of this world, but yet occupied in the service of
God, in recognizing his benefits, and rendering thanks. But we think verily,
that in no age men offended more grievously and frequently against the holy and
lawful observation of festivalls, than in ours; since many consume them in
following the pleasures of this world, in tavernes, in brothels, in unlawful
Plays, and in other vain, yea, and vicious actions, etc. Let therefore the
doore-keepers of the Church upon holy days observe and note which of the
Presbyters and Parishioners shall be absent from the Churches Offices, and
inquire for what cause they were absent; whether they spend the time in
Alehouses or in Plays etc.

Synodus Rothomagi, Anno 1581. which decrees thus as follows.

Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 6. p. 544.
Curatis Ecclesia^u^ praecipimus, ne sinant in Caemeterijs choreas duci, aut
alios lusus et infanias fieri, sed potius ea quae luctus et mortis memoriam
inducunt.

Bochellus Ibid. Tit. 7. cap. 26, 27, 30. p. 581, 582.
Novimus et experimur a^tutias Diaboli ad derogandum cultui Dei, et ad suu^
substituendu^ in illius locum. In nostris enim diaecesibus per omnia festa
solennia Apostolorum et aliorum sanctoru^, ad augendu^ sacrilegiu^, impudica
atque obscaena ludicra in his admiscet, ut totu^ homin^m perdat in sabbatho
^ibique subjiciat. Dies vero Dominicos videbatur a nu^dinis eximere, sed eos
no^ dissimili ratione foedavit ac prophanavit, etc. Eleemosynam enim vertit in
crapulas, orationem in choreas, et concionem in scurrilitate^. Ad has festoru^
prophanationes mundandas etc. praecipimus Curatis ut paratu^ habea^t
concionatore, qui verbu^ Dei praedicet bis in die (pray mark it) ^i fieri
possit, ut contineatur populus in pi^tate, mane scilicet et a prandio.
Co^messationes, ebrietates, sumptus, lites, lusus improbos et inhonestos,
choreas plenas insanijs, cantilenas turpes; breviter omne^ luxu^ et lascivia^
atque omne^ festoru^ prophanationem damnamus et reprobamus.

We command the Curates of Churches, that they suffer no dances, or other
Plays or fooleries to be made in Church yards, but those things rather which
may put men in mind of sorrow and death.

We have known and tried the subtleties of the Devil to derogate from Gods
worship, and to substitute his own in its room. For in our Diocese through
all solemn feasts of the Apostles and other Saints, to augment sacrilege, he
admixeth unchaste and obscene Plays in these, that he may destroy the whole
man upon the Sabbath, and subject him to himself. But he thought good to exempt
Lords-dayes from faires, yet he has defiled and profaned them with a like
sacrilege: for he turns alms into riot, prayer into dances, and Sermons
into scurrility. To cleanse these prophanations of holy days etc. we command
Curates that they provide a Preacher, which may preach the word of God If then
Papists thus p^ovide for two Sermons every Lords day and holy day to keep the
people from Plays and sin^ull Past^mes: shall Protestants think one sermon
every Lord's Day enough? Certainly Mr. Bucer was of another minde^ for, says
he, Dominicis di^bus in singulis parochi^^ ad minimum duae, si non tres
habentur conciones. Bucer in Mat^h. 12.8.11. and Dr. B^nd of the Sabbath p.
^68. See Bp. Hooper^ passage to this purpose, Act. 6. Scene 12.
twice in a day (pray mark it) if it be possible, that the people may be kept
exercised in piety both morning and evening, even from dinner. We condemn and
reprobate rioting, drunkenness, prodigality, contentions, wicked and dishonest
plays, dances fraught with fooleries, filthy songs; briefly all luxury,
lasciviousness, and all profanation of holy days, under pain of
excommunication. Vide Ibidem.

So abominable, so unlawful are dances, Plays and amorous Pastorals on
Lords-dayes, holy days and all solemn festivals devoted to Gods service.

Concilium Burdigense, Anno 1582. Which as it complains that Lords-dayes and
holy days were much profaned with Plays, Pastimes, drunkenness and other
villainies in these words.

Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Gal^licanae l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 21. p. 580, 581.
Tamersi Dominici festique dies ad hoc unum instituti sunt, ut fideles
Christiani ab Dominicus dies ideo Dominicus appellatur, ut in eo a terrenis
operibus, vel mundi illicebris ab^stinentes, tantum divinis cultibus serviamus.
Alchuvinu^ de Divinis Officijs cap. 27. Col. 1072.
externis operibus abstinentes, liberius et majori cum pietate divino cultui
vacarent etc. Nihilominus nostris temporibus praepostere fieri solet, ut tam
solennes et religiosi dies non solum in illicitis et secularibus negotijs
procurandis, verum etiam in luxu, lascivia, jocis et ludis vetitis,
compotationibus caeterisque flagitijs exercendis toti transigantur. Which
abuses it enjoynes Magistrates and Officials to suppress: So it decrees thus.
Bochellus Decretoram Ecclesiae G^llicanae l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 7. p. 1026.
Clerici nunquam personati incedant, neque comaedias, fabulas, choreas, vel
aliquid aliud ludicrum ex ijs quae ab histrionibus exhibentur, agant vel
spectent, ne visus et obtutus sacris mysterijs dicati turpium spectaculorum
contagione polluantur. Ab alea, tesseris, chartis, et quovis alio vetito et
indecoro ludo cu^ privatim, tu^ public penitus abstineant. Co^messationibus et
minus honestis convivijs nunqua^ intersint. Forum, mer^catus andronas fug a^t;
nec tabernas et diversoria nisi longioris itineris necessitate unquam
ingrediantur etc.

Although Lords-dayes and holy days were instituted for this only purpose,
that faithful Christians abstaining from external works, might more freely
and with greater piety addict themselves to Gods worship etc. Notwithstanding
it is preposterously usual in our times, that even religious days are wholly
spent not only in following unlawful and secular affairs, but even in riot,
lasciviousnes, prohibited sports and plays, compotations and other execrable
wickednesses. Which abuses it enjoynes Magistrates and Officials to censure and
prohibit: So it decrees thus. Clergy men may never put on vizards or go
disguized, neither may they act or behold comedies, fables, dances, or any
other of those Plays that are exhibited by Stage Players, lest the sight and
hearing dedicated to sacred mysteries should be polluted with the contagion of
filthy spectacles. Let them wholly abstain as well in private as in public
from dice, tables, cards, or every other prohibited and unseemely play. Let
them be never present at riotous and dishonest feasts: let them avoid places of
judicature, markets, and places of resort; neither let them ever enter into
tavernes and innes, but being necessitated by some long journey.

The 50. is, Concilium Rhemense, Anno 1583. Which

Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 28, 29. p. 582.
Diebus Dominicis et Festis in suas Paraeseas populus conveniat, et Missae,
concioni, et vesperijs intersit. Ijsdem diebus nemo lusibus aut choreis det
operam, maxim dum divinum celebratur officiu^, monebiturque ab Ordinario vel
paraeco Magistratus ut id nequaqua^ fieri permittat. Ludos theatrales etiam
praetextu consuetudinis exhiberi solitos, et puerilia caeteraque ludicra,
quibus Ecclesiae inquinatur hone^tas et sanctitas in Our Christmas Enterludes
and Pastimes then had their original from these Popish Enterludes.
Christi et Sanctorum festivitatibus omnino prohibemus; contra nitentes autem
poenis coerceri volumus a superioribus.

Let the people meet together in their parish Churches on Lords days and holy
days, and let them be present at Mass, at Sermon and Vespers. Let no man give
him self on these days to Plays or dances, especially whiles divine service
is celebrating, and the Magistrate shall be admonished by the Ordinary or
Parish Priest, that he by no means suffer these things to be done. We
utterly prohibit Stage Plays and other childish pastimes accustomed to be
presented under pretext of custom, with which the honesty and sanctity of the
Church is defiled in the festivalls of Christ, and of the Saints: those that
do contrary, we will shall be punished by their superiors.

Synodus Turonensis, Anno 1583. which is somewhat observable.

Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 40. p. 548.
Cum juxta divi Pauli praeceptum, qui Christi funt sobrietatem semper sectari
debeant, diebus Dominicis praesertim et alijs festis, commessationes, convivia
publica, tripudia, saltationes, strepitus et choreas fieri, vaenatu et aucupatu
tempus terere, in hospitijs seu cauponis alijs qua^ peregrinis cibaria et vinum
ministrari, ludos palmarios et alios (maxim dum sacra conficiantur, laudesque
Deo decantantur) aperiri: comaedias, ludos scenicos vel theatrales, et alia
ejus generis irreligiosa spectacula agi, sub anathematis poena prohibet haec
Synodus: praecipitqu^ omnibus et singulis Paraeciarum rectoribus eos apud
Episcopum defer, qui huic decreto non pa^uerint, ut illius ordinatione
nominatim excommunicati denuncientur et publicentur: * valde etenim est
absurdu^ fideles, ijs diebus qui propitiando Deo sunt destinati, fallacibus
illis Sathanae blanditijs illectos a divinis officijs, religiosis
supplicationibus concionibusque sacris abduci.

Since according to the precept of St. Paul, those who are Christ's ought
always to follow sobriety, especially on Lords days and other festivalls:
this Synod prohibits under pain of excommunication (on the foresaid days
especially) all r^oting, public feasts, galliards, dances, clamours and
Morrices to be made, to spend time in hunting and hauking; to serve wine or
victuals in Innes or victualling houses to any but to strangers; any prizes or
other plays to be showed, (especially whiles divine things are performed, and
praises sung to God:) any comedies, Stage Plays, and other irreligious
spectacles of this kind (so it styles them) to be acted: and it enjoyneth all
and singular Rectors of parishes to cite those before the Bishop who shall not
obey this decree, that in his name they may be denounced and proclaimed
excommunicated: for it is very absurd, that Christians, on those days that are
destinated to appease Gods anger, allured with those deceitful inticements of
Satan, should be drawn away from divine Offices, religious supplications, and
holy Sermons.

So that by this Synodes express resolution, Stage Plays are irreligious
spectacles, and the deceitful inticements of Satan, to withdraw men's hearts
from God, and from his service; which should cause all Christians to abominate
them.

The 52. is, Concilium Bituriense, Anno 1584. where

Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 10. c. 19. p. 977.
Pro^^betur populus prophana sodalitia et commessationes, choreas, tripudia,
larvas et theatrales ludos diebus Dominicis et festis exercere; pompas
instrumentorum musicorum et tympanorum in gestationibus imaginu^ per vias et
compita exhibere; a caupona abstineant, et nihil nisi quod pietate^ redoleat
exerceant. Imitentur Christiani totis hisce diebus sanctos illos quorum
memoriam colant per opera charitatis.

Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Ti^. 19 c. 8. and 24 p^ 1026, 1028.
Clerici nunquam personati sint: a comaedijs, Mimis, chorcis, et saltationibus
agendis atque spectandis abstineant. Aleas, tesseras, chartas, omnes ludos
vetitos, co^messationes, ac inverecunda convivia, mercatus et nundinationes,
tabernas ac diversoria praeterqua^ in itinere devitent etc. Hortatur etiam haec
Synodus Christianos omnes ut pro Christiani nominis honor et dignitate se
gerant, tripudia et saltationes, publicos ludos, mimos, larvas, et aleas,
qua^tu^ fieri poterit, devitent.

The people are prohibited to exercise profane assemblies, and riotous feasts,
dances, morrices, disguises and Stage Plays on Lords days and holy days: to
exhibit shows or pompes of musical instruments and tabers in the processions
of images through the streets and cross ways: let them abstain from the
Alehouse, and practice nothing but that which may savor of piety. Let
Christians all these days imitate by the works of charity, those Saints
whose memory they observe.

Let Clergy men never put on vizards: let them abstain from acting and
beholding comaedies, Stage Plays, morrices and dances. Let them shun dice,
tables, cards, all prohibited Plays, riotous and immodest feasts, markets,
faires, tavernes and Innes, but only when they travel. This Synod does
likewise exhort all Christians, that they carry themselves for the honor and
credit of Christianity, and that they avoid and shun Masks and dances,
public Plays, Iesters, Stage Players, vizards and dice, as much as may be.
Which stands not with the honor of Christianity.

Which Council extending unto all Christians as well as to Clergy men, and
exhorting them as much as may be, to abstain from all dancing, dicing,
Stage Plays, Mummeries, Stage Players and the like, even for the honor of
religion, is an unanswerable evidence, that these sports, these Enterludes are
altogether unseemely and unlawful unto Christians.

Synodus Aquensis, Anno 1585. which decrees thus.

Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 45. p. 586.
Cessent in die sanctorum Innocentium ludibria omnia et pueriles ac theatrales
lusus.

Bochellus ibid. Tit. 1. c. 3. p. 563. See Codex Theodosii l. 15. Tit. 7.
Nullus etiam vestibus religiosorum hominu^ aut mulierum utatur ad larvas, vel
scurrilia, sub poena exco^municationis ipso facto incurrenda.

Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 19. cap 6. and 13. p. 1026, 1027.
Sacerdotes ne pagellis, aut alea, aliove hujusmodi ludo ludant, aut ^udentes
spectent. Ne personati unquam incedant, neve comaediarum aut chorearum aut
profani ullius spectaculi actores sint vel spectatores. Tabernas ne frequentent
adeantve nisi itineris causa. A comessationibus aut minus honestis convivijs
abstineant omnino: nec dicterijs aut mordacibus utantur salibus, neve sacrae
Scripturae verbis ad profanos sermones abutantur.

Let all pastimes, all childish and theatricall Enterludes on the day of the
holy Innocents, cease.

Let none likewise use the garments of religious men or women for Masks and
scurrilous Plays, under pain of excommunication to be ipso facto incurred.

Ministers may not play at cards or dice, or any other such like play, or look
upon those that play. They may not walk disguized, neither may they be actours
or spectatours of comaedies or dances, or of any profane Play. Let them not
frequent or go to tavernes, but by reason of travel. Let them wholly abstain
from riotous and dishonest feasts: neither let them use scoffs or biting
jests, nor yet abuse the words of holy Scripture to profane discourses. A good
pious Canon, which I wish all Ministers would observe.

The 54. and last printed Council with which I will Concilium Tholosanum, Anno
1590. which concludes in this manner.

Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 1^ cap. 98. p. 560.
Ludis, spectaculis, histrionumque circulationibus, Ecclesiam caemiteriumque
deinceps patere prohibemus.

Ibid. lib. 5. Tit. 1^. cap. 47. p. 812.
Et quonia^ Sacerdotu^ vitia ut apparere maxim et primo conspectu occurrere,
majori denique dedecore haberi, imo et quae in alijs levia, in illis gravissima
censeri consueverunt, ijs tripudia, ludos publicos, aliaque omnia, quibus
reliquos homines damnoso aliquo scandalo offendere possent, omnino interdicimus
et prohibemus.

We prohibit the Church and Churchyard from henceforth to stand open to
Plays, to Spectacles, and the jests of Stage Players.

And because the vices of Ministers are wont most of all to appear and to come
in ure at the first sight, and to be accounted more shameful, yea and those
things that are reputed slight things in others, are deemed most heinous in
them; we wholly interdict and prohibit them dances, public Plays, and all
other things, by which they may offend any other men by any hurtful scandal.

National Protestant Synod at Rochell, Anno Dom. 1571. Where these two Canons
were unanimously composed by all the Protestants in France.

These Canons I have in a French Manuscript, entitled; Le Discipline
Ecclesiastique Des Egglises reformees du Roi aume de France
All Congregations shall be admonished by their Ministers seriously to
repr^hend and suppress all Dances, Mummeries and Enterludes. And it shall not
be lawful for any Christians to act, or to be present at any Comedies,
Tragedies, Plays, Enterludes, or any other such sports, either in public, or
in private chambers. Considering, THAT THEY HAVE ALVVAYES BEEN OPPOSED,
CONDEMNED AND SVPPRESSED IN AND BY THE CHVRCH. AS BRINGING ALONG WITH THEM THE
CORRVPTION OF GOOD MANNERS, especially when as the holy Scripture is profaned;
which is not delivered to be acted or played, but only to be preached.

Dancing-masters, or those who make any dancing-meetings, after they have been
often admonished to desist, ought to be excommunicated for this their pertinacy
and rebellion.

By which it is most apparent; that Stage Plays, Dan^es and Mummeries, have
been evermore condemned in and by the Church of God, as the corruptions of
men's manners, and unlawful Pastimes. Whence the Sea Andreas Fric^us De Repub.
Emendanda l. 1. c. 23. p. 90. Lydii Waldensis pars 2. p. 358. here p. 226, 228,
to 233, accordingly.
French Protestants (as I am informed by those who have lived among them) do
wholly abandon Stage Plays and Dancing, as Antea namque et Reginae in
conviviis virorum saltabant, sicut filiam Herodiadis fecisse legimus, nunc vero
vix famula dignatur hoc facere. Chrysostom. Hom. de Spir^^^ Tom. 3. ^^l. 7^7. A.
unchristian and sinful pastimes; neither will they suffer their sons or
daughters to dance, or to resort unto a dancing-schoole, as the French Papists
do, who delight and glory in nothing more than dancing, to which they are
naturally addicted; whereas effeminate, amorous dancing either of men or women
together, or of men in the presence of women, or of women in the sight of men,
has been always an allurement to lewdness, a grand occasion of much
whoredom and uncleanness, a recreation fit for none but whores adulteresses,
etc. as Aspectibus meretriciis, and verborum l^nocinio, ^altationibus etiam ac
lascivis gestibus, ^uvenum partem non contemnendam pell^ciunt, per^rahunque in
stupri ^oci^tatem etc. De F^r^^^dine lib. p. 1006.
Philo Iudaeus, Hom. 56. in Genesis^ and Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. c. 4.
Chrysostom, Colo^^s vero parietibus relinquamus, i^sque mul^e^^uli^ quae
caeno suo ^uvenes in rabiemagunt. ^llae sane et impudenter saltent et rideant.
Adver^us Mulie^es ^. 994.
Nazienzen, De ^^rietate et luxu Sermo. See here p. 224, 225.
Basil, Speculum Morale cap. 3. Disti^ctio 6. pars 9. p. 251, 252.
Vincentius, In Matthew. c. 14.
Hugo Cardinalis, and Concio 6. and 19. Operum Tom. 6. Coloniae Agrippinae
1617. Col. 60, 61, 204, 205.
Bellarmine himself, with sundry other Fathers and Authors formerly quoted
Act. 5. Scene 8. most plentifully testify.

By all these 55 several Councels and Synodes, in diverse ages and Countries (3
or 4 of which are conf^ssed to be Viz. Concilium Constantipolitanum 6. Synodus
Nicaena 2. Council. Constantinop. 8. Council. Lateranense sub Innocentio 3.
oecumenicall and universal, to which all the Christian Churches in these
known parts of the world subscribed by their selected Bishops and proxies,) it
is most apparent, ( to pass by dicing, carding, dancing, health-drinking,
bonefires, New-yeares gifts, scurrilous songs, and other recited particulars
concerning Clergy men, which they have condemned:) First, that the profession
of a Stage Player is altogether unchristian, abominable and unlawful: and that
all common Actors and Stage Players ought to stand excommunicated ipso facto,
both from the Church, the Sacraments and all Christian society, till they have
utterly renounced, and quite given over their infamous, execrable lewd
profession, which is no ways tolerable among Christians. And if the very
profession of a Stage Player be so execrable by these Councels resolution,
much more abominably execrable must Stage Plays be, which make it so.
Secondly, that all Christian Princes and Magistrates ought to suppress all
Stage Plays, all common Actors, and to banish them their territories and
dominions; severely punishing all such persons who dare to harbor or protect
them. Thirdly, that Stage Plays are diabolical, heathenish, unchristian
polluted spectacles, which defile the eyes, the ears, the souls; corrupt the
manners, inflame the lusts of those who act, who see or hear them acted,
disabling them likewise to, See Act. 6. Scene 12.
and withdrawing them from See Act. 3. Scen. 5. and Ioannis Molanus Hist. SS.
Imaginum l. 4. c. 18.
practice yet in use among the profane sacrilegious Papists and Jesuits,) is
altogether to be abandoned, and condemned. Seventhly, that dancing,

If any here demand of me, how the beginning and ending of Lords days and holy
days (on which these Stage Plays and Pastimes are more specially prohibited)
should be accounted? I answer; that the Lords day (notwithstanding some
Wolphius Chronol. ^. 2. c. 1 Dr. Bond Of the Sabbath, ^. 2. p. 46. and others
who have since followed their mistake.
late reverend opinions to the contrary) has always anciently been reputed
to begin at saturday evening, (not at midnight, or daybreaking, as some now
teach,) and so to continue to the evening following. At the time of the
creation, it is most apparent, that the day began at evening: For, the Genesis
1.5, 8, 17 19, 23, 31. In Genesi nox no^ praecedentis di^i est, sed
subsequentis; id est, principium futuri, non finis praeteriti. Hierom. in Ion^m
c^p. 2. Tom. 5. p. 1^7. G.
evening and the morning were the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth,
(and so by consequent the seventh) day: in ratification of which original law
of nature for the beginning and ending of days, the Lord himself above two
thousand years after, commanded the Israelites to celebrate their Sabbath from
evening to evening. Levit. 23.32. From even to even shall you celebrate your
Sabbath. By virtue of which precept, the Sea Exodus 16.2, 23, to 30. etc.
27.10, 11. Josephus Contra Appionem l. 1. p. 833. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Genes.
Tom. 1. Col. 26. B. and Hom. 82. in Matthew. I^m. 2. Col. 559. B. Hierom Com. in
Ionam cap. 2 Tom. 5. p. 137^ G. Josephus Sca^^ger de Emendatio^e Temporum l. 2.
De Anno ludaeorum novitio, p. 119. and l. 6. p. ^32, 533. Godwin his Jewish
Antiquities, l. 3. c. 3. p. 121. and Ainsworth hi^ Annotations on Genesis c. 1.
v. 5.
Jews did always begin and keep their Sabbaths, and solemn festivalls from
evening to evening, till our Saviors passion, and this present day. Neither
did our Saviors resurrection on the first day of the week, alter the
beginning and end of that day, nor yet of the Sabbath, which we now keep upon
it: For if the first day on which our Savior rose again took its beginning
only from the time of his resurrection (as some affirm;) then our Savior
could not possibly be Mat^h. 12.40. c. 16.21. Luke 24.6. Acts 10.40. 1 Cor.
15.4. and our Creed.
three days in the grave, nor yet be truly said, to rise again the third day
according to the Scriptures: the night in which our Savior rose, being
according to this computation, a part of the seventh day, and no part of the
first, of which the Hierom. Co^ in Ionam c. 2. Tom. 5. p. 137. G. and Com. in
Mat^h. 1^. v. 46. Augustine. Quaest. Super Evangelia l. 1. Quaest. 6. and 7.
Gregory Nyssen De Resurrect. Christi Oration 1. p. 145. Theophilus Antiochenus
Com. in M^tth. l. 1. Bib^. Patrum Tom. 2. p. 152. Anastatius Sianita Quaest.
152, 153. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 794, 795. Theophylact. Com. in Matthew.
c. 12. v. 40. See Marlorat Musculus, Lyra, Gorran, Calvin, Bucer, Arctius, and
others in Matthew. 12. v. 40 and 16. v. 21. accordingly.
Fathers and all other Expositors have always made it parcel, to justify the
truth of our Saviors resurrection on the third day. And whereas some object,
that it is absurd, that our Christian sabbath should begin before the hour of
our Saviors resurrection, which is the ground of it; for th^s were to put the
effect before the cause, and to make the sabbath precede Christ's resurrection,
which was the cause of its commencement. I answer first; that Christ's
resurrection did not sanctify only the first hour, but the first day on
which he rose: therefore the antecedent part of the first day, (which was past
before his resurrection) as well as the subsequent: For as Christians celebrate
the day of our Saviors passion, even from the very morning, though our Savior
suffered not till toward evening: and as the Israelites by Gods own
appointment, were to begin their Passover, Exodus 12.6.
the evening of the foureteenth day, not at midnight; though the Angel slew
not the firstborn of Egypt, nor yet passed over the Israelites till Exodus
12.29.
midnight: And as all Christians keep holy the mornings of those days wherein
they receive any public deliverances, as well as the evening, though the
deliverances perchance were not till noone, or after. And as if our Savior
should have risen at two of the clock in the afternoon, ( about which Luke
24.13, 29. etc. compa^ed together.
time he first showed himself to his Disciples) yet no man would have argued;
that therefore the sabbath must not begin before that hour, (and so be kept
from noone to noone) because we observe not the hour, but the entire day: So
our Christian sabbath by the selfsame reason, must be still kept from evening
to evening, though our Savior rose not till the morning; because we observe
not the hour, the minute, but the entire day whereon he rose again, as it is
certain he did, Matthew. 16.21. compared with cap. 28.1.6. Mark 16.1, 2. John
20.1. Luk 24.1.6. Acts 10.49. 1 Cor. 15.4.
by several Scriptures,) then his resurrection did not change the beginning of
the day, it being begun before: (else this day should have two beginnings, and
so it was begun before it began, and after it began, which is a contradiction:)
and if it altered not the beginning of the first day, then by what authority is
it changed now? Neither can it be here replied, that the first day has one
beginning, and the Sabbath or Lords day another: for as it is said of the
seventh day: Exodus 16.25, 26. c. 20.8, 10, 12. Deuteronomy. 5.12, 14.
that the seventh day is the sabbath, and the sabbath the seventh day: so it
may be truly said; that the 1 Cor. 16.2 Rev. 1.6. compared with Matthew. 28.1
Mark 16.1. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.
Lords day is the first day of the week, and the first day of the week the
Lords day, they having both the selfsame limits. Thirdly, no Scripture
informs us, that our Saviors viz: that the cause should precede the effect,
warranted by no Scripture,) prove any thing at all. Indeed if any had
celebrated the first day as a sabbath, before our Savior had risen, the reason
had been good: but since our Savior was risen again before the first day was
ever kept holy; and since his resurrection on it was the Sea Justin Martyr,
Apologia 2. pro Christianis. Aug^stine de Tempore p. 251. Dr. Bond Of the
Sabbath, and all Commentaries on the 4. Commandment, and others who have
written of the Sabbath, accordingly.
cause why Christians subsequently observed the whole day, not the very minute
or hour on which he rose, or that part only of the day which remained after
he was risen; the reason is of no weight at all: For if our Saviors
resurrection should not extend to consecrate that part of the first day which
preceded it, because the effect should not go before the cause: a man might by
the selfsame reason argue; that our Saviors passion did not relate a part
ante, to save those believers who died before, but only a part post, to
redeem such only who departed after his incarnation: which were blasphemy for
to think; since our Savior was virtually and in destination (though not
actually) Rev. 13.8.
a lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Now that the Christian sabbath
or Lords day begins at even, and so ought to be sanctified from even to even,
not from morning to morning, or from midnight to midnight; (which
ecclesiastical beginning of days we never find in Scripture, or in any
Ecclesiastical Writers;) it is most apparent: First, because we read of no
other beginning speech, but a day of rest, it is most natural and proper it
should then begin when as God and man begin their rest; and leave off their
labor; not when as they begin their work: Genesis 2.1, 2, 3 Exodus 20.8. to 13.
but God began his rest at the end of the sixth day, not on the morning or
midnight of the seventh day: and men begin their Noctem enim ad quietem
corporis datam esse cognoscimus, non ad muneris alicuius vel operis functionem,
quae somno et oblivione tra^scurritur. Ambrosi^ Hex^eni. l. 1. c. 10.
rest at evening, not at midnight or morning: Witness Psalm. 104.22, 23. The
Sun arises, and man goes forth to his work and to his labor unto the
evening: and John 9.4. I must work the works of him that sent me whiles it is
called to day: the night comes when no man can work: therefore it is most
consonant to reason and nature that it should begin at evening. Thirdly, this
beginning of the Concilium Constantinop. 6. Can. 90. and Aquisgranense sub
Ludovico Pio Can. 130. Polydor Virgil. De Inventoribus rerum l. 6. c. 4.
Ioannes Langhecrueius De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 11.14.
Vigils and Evening Saturday service in ancient times, that Christians laying
aside all secular employments, and resorting then unto Gods public worship,
might (after the manner of the Jews, who Luke 23.54. John^ 19.42.
had their preparation of the sabbath) the better prepare themselves for the
sacred duties of the Lords day. And hence perchance it is that we have seldom
any Plays or Masks at Court upon saturday nights. not from morning to
morning; as is evidenced (not only by the assemblies of the primitive
Christians, who met together Christiani sol^ti ^rant ^tato die ante lucem
convenire, carmenque Christo, quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Pliniu^ Secundu^
Epist. l. 10. Epist. 97. Which meetings Tertullian styles, Nocturnae
convocationes. Ad V^orem l. 2. c. 3. And others. An^el^cani ca^u^.
before day-breake upon the Lords day to praise their Lord and Savior Christ,)
but by sundry Councels, Fathers, and Imperial Constitutions. To begin with
Councels. Survey we Concilium Tarraconense Can. 7. Surius Council. Tom. 2. p.
292. Matisconense 2. Can. 2. Ib. p. 683. Toletanum 4. Can. 8. Ib. p. 729.
Constantinop. 6. Can. 90. Ib. p. 1052. Foro-juliense Can. 13. Surius Tom. 3. p.
266. Turonicum 3. sub Carolo Magno Can. 40. Ib. p. 272. And Apud Radulphum
Tungrensem De Canonum Observantia Propositio 15. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 11. p. 44^.
F. G. and Tom^ 14. p. 242.
Concilium apud Compendium, Apud Alexandr: Alesium, Summa Theolog. pars 3.
Quaest 32. Artic. 2. p. 245. Apud Alchuvini Opera Col. 1893.
Synodus Francfordiana Anno Dom. 793. cap. 22. Apud Bochellum Decret. Ecclesiae
Gallicanae l. 4. Tit. 7. cap. 14. p. 578. and ^it 10. c. 12. p. 595. See cap.
6. Ibid.
Concilium Moguntinum Anno 813. apud Iuonis Decreta, pars 4. c. 16. Synodus
Galonis et Simonis Legatoris An. 1212. and Synodus Andegavensis An. 1282. All
these expressly decree. Vt dies Dominicus a vespera usque ad vesperam servetur.
Omnesdies Dominicos a vespera in vesperam omni veneratione decernimus
observari, et ab omni illic^to opere abstinere. Nec aliquis a vespera dici
Sabbathi, usque ad vespera^ diei Dominicae ad molendina aquar^, nec ad aliqua
alia molere audeat etc. So that by the express resolution of all these
several Councels, whereof one is oecumenicall: the Lords day ought to be kept
only from evening to evening; and so to begin and end at evening. If we peruse
the Fathers; we shall find Observemus ergo diem dominicam fratres, and
sanctifi^cemus illam sicut antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbato, dicente
Legislatore; A vespere usque ad vesperam celebrabitis Sabbata vestra. Videamus
ne otium nostrum vanum sit, sed a vespera dici Sabbati usque in vesperam dici
do^inicae sequestratia rurali opere et ab omni negotio, solo divino cultui
vacemus. De Tempore Serm^ 251. See Quaestiones super Evangelia, l. 1. Quaest.
6, 7.
St. Augustine, enjoining Christians to celebrate the Lords day from evening to
evening, as the Jews did celebrate their sabbath. And that the Lords day and
our Christian sabbath begins at evening, not at morning or midnight, it is the
direct and punctual verdict of Dionysius Alexandrinus Epist. 1. Bibl. Patrum
Tom. 3. p. 81. A. to H. Of Theophilus Antiochenus Comment. in Evangelia, l. 1.
Bib. Patr. Tom. 2. p. 153. C, D. Of Gregory Nysse^ Oration 1. and 2. De
Resurrect. Christi p. 145, 146, 151^ 152. Of Hiero^. Com. in Iona^ c. 2. To^.
5. p. 137. E. and Co^. in Mat. 12. v. 40. To^. 6. p. 22, 23. of Leo Epist.
Decret. Epist. 81. c. 1. HRabanus Maurus Homil. De Dominicis Diebus: Operum
Tom. 5. p. 605. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Genes: Tom. 1. Col: 26 B. and Hom: 82. in
Matthew: Tom: 2. Col: 559. B. Theophylus Alexandrinus Epist: Paschalis 3. Bibl:
Patrum Tom: 4. p: 723. G. Cassianus de Incarnatione Domini lib: 5 Bibl: Patr:
Tom: 5. pars 2. p: 81. F, G. Anastatius Sianita Propterea enim Scriptura
tenebras ponit ante lucem, quoniam prius eramus in errore, deinde tra^sivimus
ad lucem. Propterea prior est vespera, deinde dies. Hinc lege est constitutum,
ut inciperetur a uespera, dominica; quoniam a morte obscura processimus ad
lucem resurrectionis. Ibid.
Anagogicarum Contemplationum Hexaem. l. 2. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 6^ pars 1 p. 634.
E. Nos dominicam a vespera Sabbati auspicamur. Ibid.
Quaestionum lib: Quaest: 87. Ibid: p: 778. Quaest: Quemlibet diem a vespera
computare, et cum praecedente nocte, ceu u^um copu^are solemus. Sic e^im et
Moses etc. vacationem a laboribus in Sabbato ita descripsit, ut et praeceden^e
nocte et sequenti die otium agerent. Testes do Iudaeos qui usque in hodiernum
diem id observant; quippe qui non illam noctem, quae Sabbatum subsequitur, sed
illam quae antegreditur cessatione ab operibus quiet colurit. Et nos in
observatione diei dominici, praecedentem noctem, tanquam cum die copula tam, et
non sequentem noctem veneramu^. Ibid. A most full testimony.
152, 153. Ibid: p: 794, 795. Theophylact. in Matthew: 12. v: 40. and 28. v. 1.
Anselmus in Matthew: 12. Tom. 1. p: 60, 61. and in cap: 28.1. p: 116. Eusebius
Gallicanus de Symbolo Hom: 2. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 5. pars^ 1. p: 554. G, H.
Paschatius Rhadbertus in Matthew: l: 12. Bib. Pat: Tom: 9. pars 2. p: 1230. Haymo
Halberstattensis Homil. in Die Paschatis, p. 7, 8. Radulphus Tungrensis De
Canonum observantia lib: Propositio 23. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 11. p: 455. F, G. and
Propositio 15. Ibid: p: 445. F, G. and Tom: 14. p: 242. B. C. Amalarius
Fortunatus De Ecclesiasticis Officijs l: 1. c: 11. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 9. pars 1.
p: 311. F. Honorius Augustodunensis De Imagine Mundi lib. 1. cap: 27. Bibl:
Patr: Tom: 12. pars 1. p: 947. H. and De Antiquo ritu Miss: lib: 1. c: 191. p:
1047. F. Christianus Grammaticus Expositio in Matthew: Bibl: Patr: Tom: 9. pars
1. p: 941. D, E. Zacharias Chrysopolitanus in unum ex quatuor lib. 4. c. 173.
Bibl: Patr: Tom: 12. pars 1. p: 203, 204. To which I may add Gregorius 9.
Decretal. l. 2. Tit. 9. De Ferijs cap. 2. p. 595. Summa Angelica. Tit. Dies.
sect. 1. and Constitutiones Symonis Islepe Archiepisc. Cantuariensis, apud
Gulielmum Lindwood. Constit. Provinciales l. 2. Tit. de Ferijs fol. 74. B. and
Joan. Aton. fol 148. a. where he decrees thus. In primis sacru^ diem dominicum
ab hora diei Sabbati vespertina inchoandum etc. to which the forequoted
Authors suffragate. Lastly, Book of Martyrs, Edit. 1610. p. 715.
King Edgar and Canutus enacted by their Laws, That the Sunday should be kept
holy from saturday at noone till monday in the morning. And Charles the Great,
Capit. lib. 6. enacted: A vespera usque ad vespe^am dies Dominic^s servetur.
^^hellu^ Decre^. E^cl^^. Gal. l. ^. Ti^. ^ c. 59. p. 589. A v^^pera diei
S^bba^i usque ad vesperam diei d^minici ^equestrati a rurali opere, et om^i
negotio, so^o divino cultui vacemus HRa^^nus Maurus Homiliae in Dominicis
di^bu^. ope^um Tom. 5. p. 605. A.
that the Lords day should be kept holy from evening to evening. By all which
testimonies and reasons it is most apparent, that Lords days and holy days
begin at evening, and so ought to be celebrated and kept holy from evening to
evening. Therefore all dancing, dicing, carding, masks, stageplaies, (together
with all ordinary employments of men's callings) upon saturday nights, are
altogether unlawful by the verdict of the forequoted Councels; because the
Lords day (as all these ancient Authorities and reasons, against all new
opinions prove,) is even then begun. Neither will it hereupon follow, that we
may dance, dice, see Masks or Plays on Lord's Day nights (as too many do,)
because the Lords day is then ended; since these Councels prohibit them
altogether at all times whatsoever. But put case they were lawful at other
times, yet it were unseasonable to practice the^ on Lords day nights: For this
were but to Gal. 3.32.
begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh; to conclude holy days and duties
with profane exercises; and See Tertullian De Spectaculis c. 25, 26. and Here
Act. 6. Scene 12. accordingly.
immediately after the service of God to serve the Devil, and to commit our
selves to his protection. We must therefore know, that though the Lords day
end at evening, yet there are then evening-duties still remaining, answerable
to the works of the precedent day: as the Psalm. ^, 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, 6. Acts
17.11. 1 John 4.1.
repetition, meditation, and trial of those heavenly instructions which we
have heard or read in the daytime; Ephesians. 3.14. to 21. Phil. 1.9, 10. 1 Timothy
2.1.8.
prayer to God for a blessing upon all those holy ordinances of which we have
been made partakers: Hebr. 12.15.
thanksgiving to him for his manifold mercies: Ephesians. 5.19, 20. Col 3.15.
singing of psalms and hymns and spiritual songs: Col. 3.15. Deuteronomy 6.5, 6, 7.
Ephesians. 5.4.
instruction and examination of our children, servants and families: Psalm. 4.4.
Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5.
examination of our own hearts, estates, and ways by the touchstone of Gods
word: together with a Psalm. 4^8. Psalm. 31.5. Luke 23.46. 1 Pet. 4.19.
serious commendation of our souls and bodies into the hands of God by prayer
and well-doing, when as we are lying down to our rest. All which most serious
necessary duties, with which we should close up every day and night, Quis scit
an adiiciant hodi. ernae crastina summae Tempora dii superi? Hora^. Carm. l. 4.
Ode 9. Nemo in crastinum sui certus. Seneca Epist. 92. Nemo tam divos habuit
faventes crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri. Seneca, Thyestes Act. 3.
(it being for ought we know the utmost period of our lives,) will out all
dancing, dicing, Masks and Stage Plays, which are incompatible with these
holy duties, and altogether unseasonable for the night, which God made for
Psalm. 104.23. Psalm. 127.2. Prove. 3.24. 2 The^s. 5.8. See Chrysostom. Oration
habita Kalendis.
sleep and rest; not for these dishonest works of darkness in which too many
spend whole nights, who never employed one half night (or day) in prayer, as
their Luke 6.12.
Savior, and Psalm. 6.6. Ps. 16.7. Ps. ^2.8. Ps. 776. Ps. 91.1 Ps. 119.62.
King David did. Since therefore we never read of any faithful Saints of God
in former times who practiced dancing, dicing, Masks or Enterludes on Lords
day nights, ( no See Act. 5. Scene 8.
nor yet on any other days or nights for ought appears by any Author,) though
they have often times spent whole days and nights in prayer: let us not take up
this godless practice now, which will keep us off from God and better things.
But let us rather follow See page 644.
Edgars and Canutus Laws, keeping the Sunday holy from saturday evening, till
monday morning; spending the Sea Psalm. 92.1, 2. Isay 58.13. See here page 242.
and 5. and 6. Ed. 6.^.3.
whole day and night in See Psalm. 92 1, 2. Ps. 134.1, 2.
prayer and praises unto God, and in such holy actions, as we would be content,
that Matthew. 24.46.
Christ and death should find us doing. No man I am sure would be willing,
that Christ, that death, or the day of judgment should deprehend him See
Matthew. 24 38, 39. 1 Samuel 3^.16, 17. Ioh. 21.11, 12, 13.
whiles he is dancing, drinking, gaming, Masquing, acting, or beholding
Stage Plays: yea who would not tremble to be taken away suddenly at such
sports as these, especially on a Sunday night, when every man's conscience
secretly informs him that they are unexpedient, unseasonable, if not unlawful
too? Let us therefore always end the Lords day, yea every weekday too with such
holy exercises, in which we would Pul^hra res est consummare vitam ante mortem,
deinde expectare securus reliquam temporis sui partem. Seneca Epist. 22.
willingly end our days: then need we not be ashamed for to live nor fear to
die. Lastly^ it is evidently resolved by the foregoing Councels^ that the very
beholding and acting of Stage Plays either in public or private, is
altogether unlawful unto Christians, and more especially to Clergy men, (who
now are not ashamed to Yea sometimes to act them too in our V^iversities.
frequent them, against the express resolution of all these Councels:) who are
neither to behold nor countenance any dancing, dicing, carding, table-playing,
much less any public or Therefore no Academicall Stage Plays.
private Stage Plays; the very acting or beholding of which subjects them both
to suspension and degradation; as the recited Canons witness to the full:
which I wish all Ministers would now at last remember.

If any man here object: Object.
that many of the alleged Councels prohibit Clergy men only from acting and
beholding Stage Plays; therefore Lay men may safely personate and frequent
them still.

To this I answer. Answ.
First that most of these Councels expressly inhibit as well Lay men as Clergy
men both from acting and beholding Stage Plays: therefore the objection is but
idle. Secondly, the very reason alleged by these Councels, why Clergy men
should abstain from Stage-play^s: to wit; lest their eyes and ears deputed
unto holy mysteries should be defiled by them etc. See Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in
Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 15. D. and Hom. 7. in Mat. here, p. 410 411, where he proves
that Laymen as well as Monks and Ministers ought to abstain from Stage plays.
extends as well to the Laity as the Clergy; since every Lay Christian is as
apt to be defiled by Plays, and 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Pet. ^.11.
ought to be as holy in all manner of conversation, as Clergy men. Every Lay
Christian is, or ought to be a 1 Pet. ^.5, 9. Rev. 1.6. Hebr. 13.15, 16. Exo.
19.6. Isay 61.6. and 65.21. Nonne et Laici Sacerdotes sumus? Scriptum est, Nos
Sacerdotes Deo et Patri suo fecit. Differentiam inter Ordinem et plebem
constituit Ecclesiae authoritas. Sed et ubi tres, Ecclesia est, licet Laici
T^rtullian. Exhor^atio ad Castitatem cap. 5.
spiritual Priest, to offer up spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise to
God both morning and evening, and at all other seasons: whence God himself
enjoynes even Lay men as well as others; 2 Cor. 7.1.
to cleanse themselves from all pollution of flesh and spirit perfecting
holiness in the fear of God; Iam. 1.27.
to keep themselves unspotted of the world; 1 Pet. 2.11.
to abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul; and Levit.
11.44. c. ^9.2. c. 20.7. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
to be holy even as God is holy. There is the selfsame holiness required both
of the Laity and Clergy; both of them ought to be alike spiritual Priests to
God (at leastwise in respect of Genesis 18.19. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. 1 Timothy 2.8. Hebr.
3.13. Col. 3.16, 17. Ephesians. 4.29, c. 5.17, 19, 20. etc. 6.4.
family duties, and private exercises of piety and devotions:) if therefore
Stage Plays unsanctifie or pollute the one, and indispose them to Gods
service, needs must they See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4. and 12 accordingly.
defile the other too: and so they are equally unlawful to both by these
Councels verdict. Lastly, though many of these Councels prohibit only Clergy
men from acting or beholding Stage-plaies; partly because their See The
Difference between the Ecclesiastical Power and Regal Englished by Henry Lord
Stafford; and dedicated to the Duke of Sommerset; printed cum Privilegio; and
Dr. Crakenthorp Of the Popes Temporal Monarchy accordingly.
Canons bound none but Clergy men, not the Laity, until they were received:
and partly, because the reformation of the Clergy ( whose See Council. 54.
resort to Stage Plays did seduce the Laity,) was the ^peediest means to
reclaim all Laics: yet they intended not to give any liberty to Lay men, to
haunt Plays or theaters; for as they inhibit Ministers themselves from Plays,
so they See Council. 19.23, 31, 34, 36, 38, 44, 47, 50, and 55, accordingly.
charge them likewise both by preaching, by ecclesiastical censures, and all
other means, to withdraw their parishioner and all others from them. So that
the objection is meerelie frivolous; and I may safely conclude, that these 55
recited Councels have censured and condemned all kind of Stage-plaies,
together with their Actors and spectatours. And dare then any Clergy man,
any Lay man or Christian whatsoever after all these pious Constitutions, these
deliberate resolutions of above a double Grand-Iurie of oecumenicall,
national, provincial Synodes and Councels, of all times, all ages of the
Church; after the solemn verdict of above 5000 reverend Bishops and Prelates,
(who were present at these Councels, and subscribed them with their hands,)
once open his eyes to see, his ears to hear, his purse to cheerish, his mouth
to justify Plays or Plaiers? I hope there is none will be so desperately
shameless, so graceless as to do it now, though they did it out of ignorance
heretofore.

To these forenamed Councels I shall accumulate some Canonical Play-condemning
Constitutions to the same effect, according to their several antiquities.

The first of them (if we believe Clemens Romanus)

Apostolorum Canones apud S^rium Council. Tom. 1. p. 23. Gratian. Distinctio 34.
Carranza fol. 2. Can. 18. See Binius and Crab Tom. 1. Conciliorum, Apostolorum
Canones, Can. 17.
Can. 17. Qui accepit meretricem, vel mimam seu scenicam, non potest esse
Presbyter, vel Episcopus, vel Diaconus, vel omnino in numero sacerdotali

He who has married a strumpet, or a woman-actor or stageresse, cannot be an
Elder. a Bishop, or Deacon, nor yet in the number of the Clergy.

If then the marrying with a woman-actor or Stage-hauntresse ( who were
commonly See here Act. 5. Scen. 6. p. 214 215. Act. 6. Scene 3, 4. Dr. Reinolds
Overthrow of Stage Plays, p. 70. and Codex Theodos^ lib. 15. Tit. 7.
accordingly. Whence Scenica mulier, or mima, is used for a whore. See Nazienzen
Oration 28. p. 472. Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in Matthew. 12. Col. 79. D.
notorious prostituted strumpets in ancient times,) disables men from bearing
any ecclesiastical function, by the Apostles own verdict; how execrable must
Stage-plaies themselves and Plaiers be? The same Apostles in their
Constitutions (recorded by the selfsame Clemens,) will inform us: where thus
they write.

Constitutio^num Apostol. l. 2. c. 65. apud Surium Council. Tom. 1. p. 68, 69.
David dixit, Psalm. 26.5.
Odi Ecclesiam malignantium, et cum iniqua gerentibus non ingrediare. Et
rursus. Psalm. 1.1, 2.
Beatus vir qui non ambulavit in consilio impiorum, et in via peccatorum non
sterit, et in cathedra pestilentium non sedit, sed in lege Domini voluntas
ejus, et in lege ejus meditatibur die ac nocte. Tu vero relicto fidelium caetu,
Dei Ecclesijs ac legibus, respicis speluncas latronum, sancta ducens quae
nefaria esse voluit: non solumque id facis, sed e^iam ad Graecorum ludos
curris, et ad Theatra properas, expetens unus ex venientibus eo numerari, et
particeps fieri auditionum turpium, ne dicam abominabilium: nec audisti
Hieremiam dicentem: Ier. 15.17.
Domine, non sedi in consilio ludentium, sed timui a conspectu manus tuae:
neque Job dicentem similia: Job 31.
Si vero et cum risoribus ambulavi aliquando, appendor enim in statera justa.
Quid vero cupis Graecos sermones percipere hominum mortuorum, aff^atu Diaboli
tradentium ^a, quae mortem afferunt, fidem evertunt, ad deorum multitudinem
credendam inducunt eos, qui ad illos attentionem adhibent? Vos ergo divinis
legibus invigilantes, vitae hujus necessitatibus putate eas praestantiores,
majoremque ijs honorem deferentes, convenite ad Ecclesiam Domini, Acts 24.
quam acquisivit sang^ine Christi dilecti, Col. 1.
primogeniti omnis creaturae. Ea est enim altissimi filia, quae parturit nos
per verbum gratiae, et Col. 1.
formavit in nobis Christum, cujus participes facti, Ephesians. 5.
sacra membra existitis et dilecta, non ^abentia maculam neque rugam, neque
aliquid hujusmodi sed tanquam sancti et irrepraebensibiles in fide, perfecti
estis in ipso, secundum imaginem ejus qui creavit vos. Cavete igitur, ne
conventus celebretis cum ijs qui pereunt, quae est Synagoga Gentium ad
deceptione^ et interitum. 2 Cor. 6.
Nulla est enim Dei ^ocieta^ cum Diabolo: Nam qui congregatur una cum ijs, qui
cum Diabolo idem sentiunt, unus ex ipsis conn merabitur, e^vae habebi^. Fugite
quoque indecora spectacula, theatra (inquam) et Graecorum ludos etc. Propterea
enim oportet fidelem fugere impiorum caetus, Graecorum et ludaeorum, ne ubi una
cum ijs degimus, animis nostris laqueos paremus: et ne ubi in eorum festis
versamur, quae in honorem daemonum celebrantur, cum ijs habeamus societate^
impietatis. Vitandi quoque sunt illorum mercatus, et qui in ijs fiunt ludi.
Vitate igitur omnem idolorum pompam, speciem, mercatum, convivia, gladiatores,
denique omnia daemoniaca spectacula.

David has said, I have hated the congregation of evil doers, and have not
kept company with those who do wicked things. And again. Blessed is the man,
who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked, and has not stood in the
way of sinners, and has not sat in the seat of contagious persons, but his
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law will he meditate day and
night. But thou leaving the assembly of the faithful, the Church and laws of
God, regardest the dens of thieves, accounting those things holy, which he
reputeth wicked: and thou do not that only, but thou runnest likewise to
the Grecian Plays, and hastests to theaters, desiring to be reputed among
those who resort thither, and to be made a partaker of filthy, that I say not
abominable hearings: neither has^ thou heard Jeremy saying: O Lord, I have not
sat in the assembly of Players, but I have feared because of thy hand: nor yet
Job, uttering the like: And if I have at any time walked with scoffers, for I
am weighed in a jus^ balance. But why desire tho^ to hear the Greek
speeches of dead men, delivering those things by the instinct of the Devil
which bring in death, overturne faith, induce those to believe a multitude of
gods, who give attention to those things? But you waiting upon the divine
laws, esteem them more excellent than the necessaries of this life, and
giving them greater honor, come together to the Church of the Lord, which he
has purch^sed with the blood of his beloved Christ, the firstborn of every
creature. For she is the daughter of the most high, who has begotten ^s by the
word of grace, and has formed Christ in us, of whom being made partakers, you
become holy and beloved members, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, but as holy and unblameable in faith, you are perfect in him, according
to the image of him who has created you. Beware therefore that you celebrate
no meetings with those that perish, which is the Synagogue of the Gentiles, to
deceit and destruction. For God has no fellowshippe with the Devil; for he
who is assembled together with those, who think the same with the Devil,
shall be accounted one of them, and shall have woe. Fly likewise (I say) the
unseemely Spectacles and Theaters of the Gr^cians. For therefore ought a
Christian to shun the assemblies of wicked men, of Greeks and Jews, lest where
we live together with them, we provide snares for our souls, and lest whiles
we are conversant in their feasts, which are celebrated to the honor of
Devils, we become partakers with them of impiety. Their markets likewise are
to be eschued, and the Plays that are made in them. Shun therefore all the
pomp, the show, the market, the feasts, the Gladiators of Idols, and finally
all daemoniacall Plays and Spectacles.

Than which Apostolical Constitutions, there can be nothing more express and
punctual against Stage Plays.

To these Play-censuring Canons of all the Apostles together, I shall add
these Constitutions of St. Paul in particular, registered by the selfsame
Clement of Rome, in these very words.

Clemens Romanus Constit. Apost. l, 8 c. 38. Canones Vari^ Pauli Apostoli, p.
120.
Scenicus si accedat, sive vir sit sive mulier, auriga, gladiator, cursor
stadij, ludius, Olympius choraules, cytharedus, lyristes, saltator, caupo, vel
desistar, vel rej^ciatur. Which Canon extends to Actors only, not to
Spectators.

Theatralibus ludis qui dat opera^, venationibus, equorum cursibus, ac
certaminibus; vel desistat, vel rejiciatur. Graecos mores qui sequitur, vel
mutet se vel rejiciatur.

If a Stage Player, be it man or woman, a Chariotor, gladiator, race-runner, a
fencer, a practiser of the Olympian games, a flute-player, a fiddler, a harper,
a dancer^ an alehouse-keeper, come to turn Christian; either ^et him ^ive over
these professions, or else be rejected.

He who gives himself to Stageplaies, He means hunting of and combating with
wild beasts in Amphitheaters, which was sti^led, Venatio. See Tertullian. De
Spectac. lib. and Lypsius de Amphitheatro, and Bulengerus De Venatione Circi
lib. accordingly.
huntings, horse-races, or prizes; either let him desist, or let him be cast
out of the Church. He who follows Greeke^ fashions, let him reform himself,
or be rejected.

Which extends to Actors and Spectators too. So that if the very Apostles
themselves, or St. Paul may be umpires; the very acting and beholding of
Stage Plays is unlawful unto Christians of all sorts; as these their Canons
and Constitutions largely prove.

Pope Eusebius, about the year of our Lord 369.

Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 312. Iuo Decre^orum pars 13. c. 75. Buchard^s l. 14
Decretorum cap. 7. Ioannes Langhecrucius de Vita ^t Honestate Ecclesiasticorum
l. 2. c. 16. p. 284.
Oportet Episcopu^ moderatis epulis contentum esse, suosque convivas ad
comedendum et bibendum non urgere, quin^ potius sobrie^atis praebere exemplum.
Removeantur ab ejus convivio cuncta turpitudinis augmenta, non ludicra
spectacula, non acroamatum vaniloquia, non fatuorum stultiloquia, non
scurrilium ^admittantur praestigia: ( A full clause against these stageplayes:)
Adsint peregrini et pauperes et debiles, qui de sacerdotali mensa Christum
benedicentes, benedictionem percipiant. Recitetur sacra lectio, subsequatur
vivae vocis exhortatio, ut non tantum corporali cibo, immo verbi spiritualis
alimento, convivantes se refectos gratulentur, ut in omnibus honorificetur Deus
per Iesum Christum.

A Bishop ought to be content with moderate feasts, and not to urge his guests
to eat or drink, but rather to give them an example of sobriety^ Let all
dugmentations of filthiness be removed from his feast^ and let no ludicrous
Stage Plays, no vain reci^all of comicall verses, no foolish speeches of
fools, nor legerdemaines of jesters be admitted. Let strangers, let poor and
feeble persons be present, who blessing Christ for the sacerdotall table, may
receive a blessing. Let the Scripture be there recited, and let the exhortation
of the living voice follow it, that the guests may rejoice that they are fed
not only with corporal food, but likewise with the food of the spiritual
word, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ^ our Lord.
Such should Bishops, such Ministers feasts and entertainments be, though now
grown out of use with many.

The 3. is the Decree of Pope Innocent the first, Anno 408. Capit. 1. sect. 11.

Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 529. and Gratian. Distinctio 51.
Praeterea, frequenter quidam ex fratribus nostris, curiales, vel quibuslibet
publicis functionibus occupatos, clericos facere contendunt, quibus postea
major tristitia etc. Constat enim eos in ipsis munijs etiam voluptates
exhibere, quas a diabolo inventas esse non est dubiu^; et ludoru^ vel
Stageplayes and such like spectacles were styled Munera, because they were
freely bestowed by the Magistrates on the people as a boon or gift. See Codex
Theodosii l. 15. Tit. 5, 6, 7.
muneru^ apparatibus aut praeesse, aut interesse etc.

Moreover certain of our brethren strive to make Courtiers, or those who are
employed in certain public functions, Clergy men, from whom greater sorrow
arises afterward. For it appears that in their very offices themselves they
exhibit pleasures, which without doubt were invented by the Devil, and are
either chief overseers or spectators of Plays and public spectacles.

Stage Plays therefore by this Popes verdict (for of them he speaks) are the
very inventions of the Devil.

D^cretall of Pope Sextus, where we read as follows.

Ioannis de Wankel. Brevi. arium Sexti. l. 3. Tit. 1. De Vita et Honestate
Clericorum fol. 88. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi, pars 7. c. 10. P.
Clerici qui non modicum dignitati clericalis ordinis detrahunt, et se
joculatores seu Goliardos aut buffones faciunt, si per annum ignominiosam artem
illam exercuerint, ipso jure, si minori tempore, et non desistunt post tertiam
monitionem, carent omni privilegio clericali.

Clergy men who do not a little detract from the dignity of the clericall
order, and make themselves jesters, So Wankel, Spelman, and others interpret
the word Goliardos: so does Gulielmus Parisiensis De Vitiis et Vir^tibus c. 6.
p. 262.
Stage Players or Buffones, if they shall exercise that ignominious art for a
years space, or for a lesser time, if they desist not after the third
admonition, are ipso jure deprived of all clericall privilege.

The 5 is the Constitution of Pope Clement the 5. An. 1310, which as it Ioannis
De Wankel Clementinarum Conclusiones, Tit. De Statu Monachorum fol. 60, 61, 62.
prohibits Clergy men and Monks; so it likewise decrees:

Ibidem.
Ne moniales aut comatis aut cornutis utantur crinibus, aut choreis, ludis, aut
secularibus innersint festis.

That Nonnes shall not use broydered or horned hair, nor yet be present at
dances, Plays, or secular feasts.

The 6. is the Synodall Decrees of Odo Parisiensis, about the year of our Lord
1200. which ordain;

Carranz^ fol. (...) Eccl(...). Ti^. 19. c. 5^17, 18.
Ne sacerdotes in ^uis domibus habeant scachos, et aleas, omnino prohibetur.

Prohibetur penitus universis sacerdotibus ludere cu^ decijs, et interesse
spectaculis, vel See Ioannis Nyder. Expositio Praecepto. ru^ Dec^logi,
Praeceptum 6. cap. 3. fol. 124.
ch^reis assistere, et intra^e tabernas, causa potandi, aut discurrere per
vicos aut plateas, et ne habeant vestes inordina^as o^nino prohibetur

It is wholly prohibited Clergy men, tha^ they keep^ no checker-men, or tables
and dice in their ho^ses.

All Clergy men are ^tterly prohibited to play a^ dice, to be^ present at
Stage Plays, or stand by dancers, or to enter into (...) to drink, or to
run through villages or streets, or to

The 7. is the Constitution of Pope Pi^s the 5. Anno Dom. 1566. which runs
thus.

P^i 5. Constitut. An. 1566 and Joan. Langhecrucius De Vita et Honest.
Ecclesiastic. l. 2. c. 21. p. 318.
Vt Clericiquos propter Christum spectaculu^ fieri oporteat mundo, Angelis, et
hominibus^ maxim debeant ab ijs spectaculis, quae Christum non ^apiunt,
abstinere; et ne comaedias, fabulas, choreas, hastiludia, aut ludicrum, et
profanum ullum spectaculi genus agant vel spectent. Ne talis, tef^eris,
pagellis pictis, e^ omnino alea, aut ullo praeterea vetito a^t indecoro ludi
genere ludant, neve hujusmodi ludi spectatores sint. Ne comessa^ionibus aut
minus honestis convivijs intersint, cauponasque aut tabernas ne ingrediantur,
ni^i longioris itineris causa ne cuiquam propinent, aut provocati ad bibendum
respondeant, sed sobrie et cast ex doctrina Apostol^ vivant. Which
Constitution was framed out of the Here p. 623.
fore-recited Decree of the Council of Trent, of which this Pope (writes
Langhecrucius,) was a most diligent observer and practiser.

That Clergy men who ought to be made a spectacle to the world, to Angels and
to men Christ, ought chiefly to abstain from those spectacles, which savor
not of Christ; neither may they act or behold Comedies, Plays, dances, ^usts,
or any profane sport or spectacle. Let them not play at tables, dice, cards,
or any game at dice: (which games even Schiscitantibus deschachis talis et
aleis, et huiusmodi, dic peccatum maximum esse huiusmodi ludum Mahumetis
Alcoran, prin^ed 1550. Azoara. 3. p. 17. Viri boni, aleas vel ^eacos, cum no^
sint res li^i^ae, sed Di^boli machina, per quae inter homine^ inimicitiam et
abhorritionem iniicere, et ^os ab orationibus et invocatione Dei retrahere
maxim nititur, praetermittite. Ibid. Az^^^a. 3. p. 43.
Mahomet him self has condemned and prohibited his followers in his Alcoran,
as the greatest sins, and the Devil engine, to breed discords among men, and
to withdraw them from prayer and Gods service:) nor at any other prohibited or
unseemely kind of play; n^i^h^r may they be spectators of such plays or
games. They may not be present at riotous or dishonest feasts, neither shall
they enter into any ^avernes or alehouses unles it be by reason of some long
journey. Let them not drink (or begin an health) to any one; nor yet pledge
others when they are provoked to drink; but let them live soberly and chastely
according to the Apostles doctrine.

And is it not then a shame for Protestant Ministers to frequent, to use these
Plays, these games and sports, or to practice these abuses, which Popes, and
Papists thus condemn, at leastwise by their public Decrees, though they still
approve them by their practice?

To these Canonical, I shall here annexe these Imperial Constitutions
following; which inhibit all Clergy men under severe penalties, yea and other
Christians too, from dancing, dicing, acting or beholding Stage Plays, and
such like Spectacles as these.

Justinian himself, directed to Epiphanius the Patriarke^ in these words.

Justinian. Codicis lib. 1. Tit. 6. De Episcopis et Clericis. Le^. 34. Corpus
Iuris Civilis Tom. 4. Col. 161, 162.
Vehementer credimus quod Sacerdotu^ puritas et decus, et ad Dominu^ Deu^ et
Salvatore^ nostrum Iesum Christum fervor, et ab ipsis missae perpetuae praeces,
multam propitiatione^ nostrae reipub: et incrementu^ praebent, per quas datur
nobis et barbaros subjugare, et dominum fieri eorum quae antea non obtinuimus;
et quanto plus rebus illorum accedit honestatis et decoris, tanto magis et
nostram remp. augeri credimus. Si enim hi praetulerint vitam honestam et
undique irreprehensibilem, et reliquum populum instruerint, ut is ad honestatem
illorum respiciens multis peccatis abstineat, plane est, quod inde et animae
omnibus m^liores erunt, et facile nobis tribuetur a maximo Deo et Salvatore
nostro Jesus Christo clementia conveniens. Haec igitur nobis speculantibus,
nunciatum est, praeter communem rerum fide^, quosdam ex reverendissimis
diaconis itemque presbyteris, (nam eo amplius dicere erubescimus, Deo
amantissimos nempe Episcopos,) quosdam, inquam, ex his non vereri, alios quidem
per se, aleas seu tesseras contrectare, et adeo pudicum, ATQVE ETIAM IDIOTIS A
NOBIS FREQVENTER INTERDICTVM SPECTACVLVM participare: alios vero talem ludum
non accusare, sed vel communicare facientibus, au^ sedere spectatores actus
indecori, et spectare quidem cum aviditate omnimoda, res omnium rerum
importunissimas, ^ermones vero audire blasphemos, quos in talibus necesse est
fieri, polluere etiam suas manus, et oculos, et aures SIC DAMNATIS ET
PROHIBITIS LVDIS; alios vero neque obscure et latenter, aut equorum
certaminibus se immiscere, aut etiam invitare aliquos super equoru^
profligatione aut victoria, vel per seipsos vel per alios quosdam^ Et quia no^
dece^ter talia luda^t, aut SCENICORVM aut thylemicoru^ SPECTATORES FIVNT
LVDORVM, aut earum quae in theatris certantium ferarum pugnae fiunt,
quemadmodum ipsi vel his qui modo et recens initiati sunt, et adorandis
mysterijs dignati^ ipsi praedicant, ut ABR^NVNCIENT ADVERSARII DAEMONIS CVLTVI,
ET OMNIBVS^POMPIS EIVS, QVARVM NON MINIMA PARS TALIA SPECTACVLA SVNT. Saepe
quidem istis talia custodiri praedicamus: videntes autem de his factam nobis
relatione^ in necessitatem incidimus ad praesentem veniendi legem, tum propter
nostrum super religione studium, tum etiam propter sacerdotij ipsius simul et
communis reipub: utilitatem. Et sancimus, neminem neque diaconum, neque
presbyterum, et multo magis neque Episcopum, (quod quidem et incredibile forte
videri possit,) ut quoru^ in ordinationibus praeces ad Dominum mittuntur
Christum Deum nostrum, et invocatio sancti et adorandi sit Spiritus, et eorum
capitibus aut manibus imponuntur sanctissima eorum quae apud nos sunt
mysteriorum, ut scilicet ipsis omnia sensoria instrumenta pura fiant et
consecrentur Deo. Neminem igitur horum audere de caetero et post divinam
nostram legem aut cubicare, (id est tesseris seu aleis ludere,) quocunque aleae
genere aut ludo, aut ita ludentibus communicare aut conversari, aut recreari,
aut una cum ijs agere, aut eis testimoniu^ perhibere, aut interesse PLEBEI^S
HVIVSMODI SPECTACVLIS quae prius diximus, aut quid eorum quae in his
prohibe^tur facere, sed OMNI AD ^LLA PARTICIPIO IN POSTERVM ABSTINERE etc. Si
vero quis de caetero tale quid faciens deprehensus fuerit etc. et convictus
feurit diaconus et presbyter vel aleator esse, vel alea^orum particeps, aut
talibus assidens vanitatibus, vel praedictis interesse spectaculis; aut etia^
forte aliquis Deo amabilium Episcoporum (quod quide^ neque eventurum esse
confidimus,) prorsus tales cujusda^ participes esse spectaculi, aut cum
aleatoribus una sedere, et disponere, aut pacisci, aut sponsiones ^acere, de
caetero ausus fuerit, And was not this Emperor a rank Puritan think you, for
making such a severe Law as this against these scandalous irregular Clergy men.
eum a sacra ^eperari liturgia jubemus, ac imponi ipsi canonica^ poenam, et
definiri tempus infra quod conveniat metrapolitanu^ suu^ jej^^ijs et
supplicationibus utentem magnum propitiari Deum super tali transgressione: et
si per definitu^ tempus maneat lachrymis et poenitentia et jejunio et ad
Dominum Deum oratione, remissionem delicti exorans, con^estim ei cui subjectum
est hoc diligenter cognito, et solicit requisito, commune^ quidem pro ipso
orationem fieri curabit, et cum om^i diligentia injunget ipsi ut postea a tali
sacerdotij d^decoratione abstinear; e^ si putaverit ipsum sufficiente^ ad
poeni^e^tiam venisse, tum sacerdotali eum restituere dignetur clementiae. Si
vero et post excommunicatione^ inventus fucrit, neque vera poenitentia usus, et
alias etiam aspernatus ^am rem et manifest ab adversario (diabolo) mente
ine^^atus, ipsum quidem sacerdos sub quo degit, sacris eximat catalogis, omnino
eum deponens: ille autem non amplius ullo modo licentiam habeat ad sacerdotalem
venire gradum etc.

We verily believe that the purity and honor of Ministers, and their zeal to
our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ, and their perpetual prayers, afford
much reconciliation and increase to our Republike; by which there is power
given to us, both to subdue the barbarians, and to be made Lord of those things
which before we have not obtained, and by how much the more honesty and
comeliness accrues to their affairs, we believe that our commonweal shall
be so much the more increased. For if these shall live an honest, and every
way unblameable life, and shall instruct the residue of the people, that they
beholding their honesty may abstain from many sins, it is manifest, that
from thence even all men's souls will be the better, and convenient mercy shall
be easily granted to us by our great God and Savior Jesus Christ. We therefore
contemplating these things, it is told us, beyond the common truth of things,
that certain of the most reverend Deacons and Presbyters, (for we are more
ashamed to say, that even Bishops who are best beloved of God,) I say, that
some of these, are not afraid, some of them by themselves, to play at tables or
dice, and to participate of so shameful a SPECTACLE, WHICH WE HAVE OFTEN
PROHIBITED EVEN LAYMEN THEMSELVES: that others verily blame not this play, but
either communicate with those who use it, or si^ spectators of this unseemely
act, beholding even with all greediness the most inconvenient foolish thing of
any, and hearing blasphemous^ speeches which must necessarily be uttered in
such^ sports, Stage Plays therefore and the heholding of Dicers, and
Dice-play^ pollute men's eyes, their ears, their hands and ^oules.
polluting even their hands, their eyes and ears with such CONDEMNED AND
PROHIBITED PLAYS: that others trully, not obscurely and covertly, intermingle
themselves in Cirque-playes and horse-races, or else bett with others upon the
discomfiting and victory of horses, either by^themselves or some others. And
because they cannot conveniently use such Plays, they become SPECTATORS OF
STAGE PLAYS and Enterludes, or of those combats of wild beasts that are made
in theaters; albeit they themselves do preach even to those that are even now
but newly admitted to and made partakers of the sacred mysteries, Stage Plays
therefore are the very pomps of the Devil, which we renounce ^n baptism.
that they should RENOVNCE THE WORSHIP OF THE DEVIL THEIR ADVERSARY, AND ALL
HIS POMPES, OF WHICH SVCH SPECTACLES OR STAGEPLAYES ARE NOT THE LEAST PART.
Truly we have ofttimes proclaimed that such things should be observed by them:
but seeing there is a relation of these things made unto us, we are fallen into
a necessity of coming to the present law, both in respect of our care for
religion, as also for the public benefit of the ministry it self, and of the
Republike. And we decree, that no Deacon nor Presbyter, and much more no
Bishop, (which truly may chance to seem incredible,) as in whose ordinations
prayers are sent up to our Lord God Jesus Christ, and the holy and adored
Spirit is invocated, and the most holy mysteries that are among us are imposed
on their heads or hands, that so al their sensitive instruments may be made
pure and consecrated unto God. Let Clergy men mark this well.
Let none of them therefore hereafter presume after our divine law, either to
play at tables or dice, or at any kind of dice-play, or game, or to
communicate or converse, or to be recreated with those who play thus, or to
play together with them, or to bear witness to them, or to be present at such
PLEBEIAN SPECTACLES AND STAGE PLAYS which we have spoken of before, or to do
any of those things that are here prohibited, but to ABSTAIN HEREAFTER FROM
ALL PARTICIPATION WITH THEM. And if any one shall henceforth be deprehended
doing any such thing, and if any Deacon or Presbyter shall be convicted to be
either a dicer, or a partner with dicers, or one that sits by such vanities,
or to be present at the foresaid Enterludes: or if perchance any one of the
Bishops beloved of God (which Yet some perchance there are who have
Stage Plays acted before them now and then to their ^hame, and the ill example
of others, and that on Lord's Day nigh^s too.
truly we trust will never happen,) shall henceforth presume to be a partaker
of any spectacle or play, or to sit together with dicers, and to direct, or
bargain, or ^ett, we command him to be sequestered from the sacred liturgy,
and canonical punishment to be inflicted on him, and a convenient time to be
appointed within which he may resort to his Metropolitan with fasting and
supplications, to appease the great God for this his offense: and if during the
appointed time he shall continue imploring the remission of his fault with The
solemnnesse and seriousness of this repentance before his read^mission into
the Ministry, shows the heinousness of that Ministers or Bishops offense,
who either plays or betts at dice, or looks on dicers, or resorts to
Stageplayes.
tears, repentance, and fasting, and prayer to his God; this being speedily
made known to who^ he is subject, and diligently examined by him, he shall
provide a common prayer to be made for him, and with all diligence shall
enjoyne him, that he shall afterward abstain from such a disgrace of the
ministry; and if he shall think that he has sufficiently repented, let him
vouchsafe to restore him to his ministerial function. But if even after his
excommunication he shall be found not to have truly repented, and
contemptuously to return to the same thing again being manifestly seduced in
his mind by the Devil; let the Bishop or Minister under whom he lives strike
him out of the sacred catalogues, and altogether depose him and let him by no
means obtain any future license to come into the Ministerial order.

Which Constitution shows how execrable a thing it is, for Clergy men
especially, to resort to Stageplayes.

To this worthy Constitution or Law of his, I shall annexe two others, worthy
our observation.

Justinian Codicis l. 5. Tit. 17 De Repudiis etc. Lex. 8. f. 169 a. Lypsius De
Amphitheatro, c. 3. p. 17.
Virnullo modouxorem expellat, nisi adulteram etc. nisi circensibus vel
theatralibus ludis, vel arenarum spectaculis, in ipsis locis in quibus haec
adsolent celebrari, se prohibente gaudentem.

Iustiniani Novella 22. and 117, Bulengerus, De Theatro l. 1. c. 50. p. 297.
here p. 391
Vir dimittere uxorem potest, si ^raeter voluntatem suam circenses et
theatricas voluptates captet, ubi scenici ludi sunt, aut ubi ferae cum
hominibus pugnant.

A man may by no means put away his wife, unless she be an adulteress, etc.
or unles she resort to Cirque-playes, or Stage-plaies, or Sword-plaies, in
those very places where they are wont to be celebrated, contrary to his command.

A man may put away his wife, if without his leave she run to Cirque-playes,
and theatrical Enterludes, to play houses, (or places where are Stage-plaies,)
or where beasts fight with men.

Which laws of his, authorizing men to put away their wives, (as See here p.
391.
Sempronius Sophus did) if they resort to Plays, to Play Houses, or other
spectacles without their license, Bulengerus de Theatro l. 1. c. 5. p. 297. and
here p. 389, 390, 391.
(because it is an apparent evidence of their lewdness, and a means to make
them common prostituted whores, few else resorting unto Plays but such;) is an
impregnable evidence of the lewdness, the unlawfulness, the infamy of acting
and frequenting Stage Plays, and of the intolerable mischievous qualities of
Plays themselves which thus strangely vitiate their Spectators: and withal
should cause all husbands, all parents, to keep their wives and daughters from
Plays and Theaters, (the Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum cap. 63, 64. and here
page 435. to 444, 452, 453. accordingly.
very marts, the instructions of baudery and adultery), if they would preserve
them chaste; to which Adulterers, Woers and others often entice them, that so they
may more easily overcome their chastity, and make them pliable to their lusts,
See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. accordingly.
which they are always sure to accomplish, if they can once but draw them to
resort; as ancient, that I say not modern experience, can too well witness.

The second, are the imperial Constitutions of Honorius and Theodosius, which
run thus.

Justinian. Codicis lib. 1. Tit. 6. De Episcopis et Clericis Lex. 17. Edi^.
Parisii^ 1537. fol. 16.
Placuit nostrae clementiae ut nihil conjuncti Clerici cum publicis actionibus
vel ad Curiam pertinentibus habeant. Praeterea ijs qui Parabolani vocantur,
neque ad quodlibet publicum spectaculu^, neque ad Curiae locum, neque ad
judicium accedendi licentiam permittimus etc. Interdicimus sanctissimis
Episcopis et presbyteris, diaconis et subdiaconis, et lectoribus, et omnibus
alijs cujuslibet ordinis venerabilis collegij aut schematis constitutis, ad
tabulas ludere aut alijs ludentibus participes esse, aut inspectores fieri, aut
ad quodlibet spectaculu^ spectandi gratia venire. Si quis aute^ ex his in hoc
deliquerit, jubemus hunc tribus annis a venerabili ministerio prohiberi, et in
monasteriu^ redigi: sed in medio tempore si se poenitente^ ostenderit, liceat
sacerdoti sub quo constitutus est tempus minuere, et hunc priori rursus
ministerio reddere.

It pleases our grace that Clergy men intermeddle not with public actions or
things belonging to the Court. Besides, we permit not those who are called
That is, such Ministers as were appointed to cure the bodies of those who were
weak and sick. See Justinian. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 6. Lex. 18. accordingly.
Parabolani, to have leave to come to any public Spectacle or Stageplay, nor
yet to the Court, or place of judgment. We prohibit the most sacred Bishops,
and Presbyters, Deacons and Subdeacons, and all others of the venerable
college, or livery, to play at tables, or to be partners with others that
play, or spectators of them, or to come to any spectacle or stageplay of
purpose ^o behold it. If any of these shall offend in this, we command him to
be suspended the venerable ministry for three years, and to be thrust into a
Monastery: But if in the middle of this time he shall show himself penitent,
it shall be lawful for the Minister under whom he is placed to shorten the
time, and to restore him to his former ministry.

To which I may add these ensuing Imperial Constitutions of Gratianus,
Valentinianus, and Theodosius.

Codicis Theodosiani lib. 15 Tit. 5. De Spectaculis, Lex 2. Parisiis 1598. p.
471.
Nullus solis die populo spectaculum praebeat, nec divinam venerationem confecta
solennitate confundat.

Ibidem Lex. 5 p. 432. See Valentinianus, Theodo^ius, and Arcadius. Justinian.
Codicis lib. 3. Tit. 12. De ^eriis Lex. 7. accordingly.
Dominico quae est septimanae totius primus dies et natale, atque Epiphaniorum
Christi, Paschae etiam atque quinquagesimae diebus omni Theatrorum atque
Circensium voluptate per universas urbes earundem populis denegata, totae
Christianorum ac fidelium mentes Dei cultibus occupantur. Si qui etiam nunc vel
ludaei impietatis amentia, vel stolidae paganitatis errore atque insania
detinentur, aliud esse supplicationum noverint tempus, aliud voluptatis. Acne
quis existimet in honorem numinis nostri veluti majo ri quadam imperialis
officij necessitate compelli, et nisi divina religione contempta spectaculis
opera^ daret, subeundum forsitan fibi nostrae serennitatis offensam, si minus
circa nos devotionis ostenderit quat qua^ solebat, nemo ambigat, Kings then are
most honored, when as God is best served by their subjects and Courtiers.
quod tunc maxim mansuetudini nostrae ab humano genere defertur, cum
virtutibus Dei omnipotentis potentis ac meritis universis obsequium orbis
impenditur.

Let no man exhibit any Stage Play or Spectacle to the people on the Sunday,
nor confound Gods worship with any acted Interlude.

On the Lords day which is the first day and birthday of the whole week, and on
the feast-dayes of the Epiphany of Christ, of Easter also and of Whitsontide,
all the pleasure of Stage Plays and Cirque-playes, being denied the people
throughout all their Cities, the whole minds of Christians and believers
shall be busied in the worship of God. And if any now are deceived either with
the folly of Jewish impiety, or with the error and frenzy of foolish
paganism; let them know, Therefore Lords day nights are no fit times for
Masks or Stage Plays.
that there is one time of supplications, another of pleasures. And l^st any
one should think himself as it were compelled out of honor to our Majesty
with a certain greater necessity of imperial duty, and that perchance he
shall undergo the displeasure of our grace, unless contemning divine
religion, he shall addict himself to Stage Plays, or if he shall show less
devotion toward us in this kind than he was wont: let no man doubt, that
then most of all is attributed to our clemency by mankind, when as the
obedience and service of the world is bestowed on the virtues and universal
merits of the omnipotent God.

The last is that of Julian the Apostata, who in his Arsacius, the Arch-Pagan
Priest of Galatia, writes thus by way of injunction, of purpose to draw the
Pagans to the discipline of the Christians.

Zozomeni Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 17. Nicephorus Callisius Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c.
22. Eutropius Rerum Romans Histor l. 11. p. 150. Centur. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. Col.
458. Baronius and Spondanus Annal. Eccles. Anno 362. sect. 60.
Deinde sacerdotem quemque cohortare, ne in theatro conspiciatur; ne apud
caupones potet; neve arti cuiquam aut operae pudendae aut ignominiosae praesit.
Et morem quidem gerentes persequere, rebels vero a te repelle.

Moreover exhort every Priest that he be not seen in the theater; that he
drink not at alehouses; and that he practice or survey no ignominious, no
shameful art or work. And honor those who are obedient, but repel the
rebellious from thee.

So much show of ingenuity was there even in this grand Apostate, as to doom
Stage Plays unfit Spectacles, Playhouses and Alehouses undecent places for
Pagan Priests, how much more then for Christian Ministers.

To all which Councels and Constitutions of this nature, I shall add Gratian:
Distinctio 33, 48. and Causa 21. Quaest. 3, 4. I^onis Decreta pars 5. cap: 373.
and pars 11. c: 76.78, 79. Panormitan: Tit: De Vita et Honestate Cleric^rum,
and De Clerici Officio. Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu Ecclesiae, lib: 2. Artic:
28. fol: 133. Isiodor Hispalensis De Officijs Ecclesiasticis l: 2. c: 2.
HRabanus Maurus De Sacris Ordinibus lib: 1. Operum Tom: 6. p: 63. A, B
Alexander Fabricius Destructorium Vitiorum l: pars 4. c: 23. Ioannis De Wankel
Glossa in Breviarium Sexti lib: 3. Tit: 1. De Vita et Honestate Clericorum.
Operum Tom. 2. page 717.
Innocentius 3. Decretalium Constit: lib: 3. Tit: 1. De Vita et Honestate
Clericorum. Episcopus Chemnensis, Onus Ecclesiae, cap: 23. sect: 1, etc.
Ioannis de Athon, Othoboni Constitutiones, fol: 78, 79, 80. and Constitutiones
Concilij Oxoniensis, fol: 122, 123, 124. Lindwood Provincialium Constitutionum,
l: 3. Tit: De Vita et Honestate Clericorum fol: 87, 88. Summa Rosella, Tit:
Clericus, sect: 2. and Chorea Summa Angelica, Tit: Chorea: and Clericus, sect,
4, 9, 11. Claudius Espencaeus Digressionum in Epist: ad Timothaeum lib^ 2. cap:
14, 15. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi, pars 7. c: 10^ Buchardus Decretorum l:
14. c: 7. Dionysius Richelius De Vita Canon: et Ecclesiast: Artic: 9.
Clichthouius, De Vita et Moribus Sacerdotum, cap: 17. Bochellus D^cretorum
Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib: 6. Tit: 18, and 19. Ioannis Langhecrucius, De Vita et
Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, l: 2. cap: 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21,
22. and l: 3. c. 3, 4. With sundry other Canonists and Casuists in their
Treatises, De Ecclesiasticis Officijs, and De Vita and Honestate Clericorum:
who all unanimously conclude, (as the fore-quoted Councels and Constitutions
do;) That it is utterly unlawful for any Clergy men whatsoever, (who should
be 1 Timothy 4.12. See Ambrose, Remigius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact,
Anselme, Beda, HRabanus Maurus, Primasius, Haymo Sedulius, Lyra, Calvin,
Marlorat, Aretius, with others Ibidem, accordingly; and Concilium Mediolanense,
apud Binium, Tom. 4. p. 891, 892.
patterns of piety, temperance and humility to others:) not only to hunt, to
hawk, to drink or pledge any healthes; to make any riotous feasts, to wear
any See my Survey of Mr. Cozens his cozening Devoti^ns, p. 72. and the Epistle
Dedicatory to the Archbishops and Bishops etc. before my Anti-Arminianisme.
velvets, silks, or costly apparel, to intermeddle with secular affairs etc.
to dance, to play at dice or tables, or at any unlawful games, or to look
upon any others who are dancing or playing: but likewise to be actors, hearers,
or spectators of any Enterludes, Stage Plays, or other such Spectacles
whatsoever either in public or private; for the premised reasons. All which
concurring Authorities, (seconded by the Canons and Constitutions of our own
Church of England; Witness, Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, ex Authoritate
Regis Henrici 8. et Edovardi 6. Londini 1571. Tit. De Ecclesiastica, et
ministris ejus, cap. 4 f. 48. Where we thus read. Presbyteri non sint
compo^ores, non aleatores, non aucupes, non venatores, non sycophanti, non
otiosi, etc. and Ibid: fol^ 48. cap. 13. f. 50. Caveat Episcopus ne otiosos,
vanos, impudicos aut aleatores nutriat, etc. Together with Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions, Injunct: 7. Canons Anno 1571. fol: 4.8.13. and Canons 1603. Can:
73, 74. Which thus decree: I would all inconformable Ministers in manners would
remember it.
That Ministers shall not give themselves to drinking or riot, spending their
time idly by day or by night, playing at cards, or tables, or any other
unlawful game; but at all times convenient they shall hear or read somewhat
out of the holy Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some other honest
study or exercise, always doing the things which shall appertain to
honesty, and endeavoring to profit the Church of God, having always in
mind, that they ought to excel all others in purity of life, and should b^
examples to the people to live well and christianly; under pain of
ecclesiastical censures to be inflicted on them with severity, according to
the qualities of their offenses:) should now at last persuade all Christians,
(especially all Clergy men, for whom there is no evasion,) for ever to
renounce, not only the acting, the composing, but likewise the very sight and
hearing of all public and private Stageplayes, which so many Councels,
Canonical and Imperial Constitutions, have thus unanimously censured, even
from age to age. Wherefore I shall here close up this Scene (and I hope the
mouths of all Play-patrons whatsoever) with this 48. Play-confounding
Argument, incapable (I suppose) of any answer.

That which 55 several Oecumenicall, National, Argum. 48.
Provincial Synodes and Councels in several successive ages of the Church:
together with sundry Apostolical, Canonical, and Imperial Constitutions,
have severely inhibited, suppressed, anathematized, condemned under pain of
excommunication, and the like; must undoubtedly be execrable, unseemely,
unlawful unto Chri^tians, unsufferable in any Christian Church or State.

But 55 s^verall Oecumenicall, National, and Provincial Synodes and Councels,
in several successive ages of the Church; together with sundry Apostolical,
Canonical and Imperial, Constitutions, have severely inhibited, suppressed,
anathematized, condemned Stageplayes, together with their Actors and
Spectators, under pain of excommunication, and the like: as all the premises
witness.

Therefore they must undoubtedly be execrable, unseemely, unlawful unto
Christians, unsufferable in any Christian Church and State.

The premises no Christian can or dares control, against so many apparent
evidences: the Conclusion therefore must stand inviolable, maugre all that
Players or Play-haunters can object against it.

SCENA QVARTA.
The ancient Fathers of the Church against Stage Plays.
from our Saviors time till the year 1200, who have professedly encountered,
censured, condemned Stage Plays, in their incomparably excellent writings, a
Catalogue of whose names and works I shall here present you withal, together
with a note of those impressions which I follow; omitting the recital of their
words at large; partly to avoid prolixity; partly, because I have already
recorded their most eminent passages against Stage Plays and Players in
several See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5, 12. Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 5. Scene 1. to
12.
precedent Acts and Scenes, on which you may cast your eyes. To begin with
these ancient Fathers and Authors according to their several Antiquities,
which I would wish the learned to peruse, for their own better satisfaction in
this point. The 1. Philo Iudaeus Hec flourish^^ Anno Ch^^^ti 50.
of them, is Philo Iudaeus, an eminent learned Jew, if not a Christian^ whom
St. Hi^rom highly applaudes, inserting him into ^is Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers. De Agricultura lib: in his works Basiliae 1558. p.
271, 272. De Vita Mosis lib: 3. p: 932. De Fortitudine lib: p: 1001, 1002,
1005, 1006. De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059, 1060. De Monarchia lib: p: 1099.
De Vita Contemplativa, p: 1205, to 1216. In Flaccum^ l: p: 1305, 1306. De
Legatione ad Caium, p: 1342. to 1354, and 1399. De Decalogo, p: 1037. and De
Iudice, p: 967. The 2. Clemens Romanus, Anno Christi 70.
is, Clemens Romanus, Constitutionum Apostolicarum lib: 2. cap: 64, 65, 66. and
lib: 8. c: 38. Apud Laur: Surium Conciliorum Tom: 1. Coloniae Agrip. 1567. p.
68, 69, and 120. The 3. Iosephus^ Anno 90.
is that famou^ Jewish Historian Flavius Josephus, whom St. Hierom inserts into
his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers. Antiquitatum Iudaeorum lib: 15. c:
11. l: 16. c: 9. and l: 1^. c. 7. in his works in Latin, Francofurti 1617. p.
415, 416, 434. The 4. Athenago^as Anno 150.
is Athenagoras, that eminent Christian Philosopher, Pro Christianis Legatio,
Bibl. Patrum. Coloniae Agrip. 1618. Tom. 2. p. 139. A, B, C, D. The 5.
Theophilus Antiochenus, Anno 175.
is Theophilus Antiochenus, Patriarch of the famous City of Antioch, Ad
Autolicum, lib: 3. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 2. p: 170. G, H. The 6. Tatianus, Anno 180.
is Tatianus Assyrius, Contra Graecos Oration: Bibl: Patr: Tom: 2. p: 180, 181.
The 7. Irenaeus Lugd. Anno 180.
is Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, Contra Haereses lib: 1. cap: 1. and lib: 2. cap:
19. in his works; Basiliae 1571. p. 23, and 155. The 8. Clemens Alexandrinus,
Anno 200.
is Clemens Alexandrinus, Oration Adhortatoria ad Graecos, in his Latin works;
Basiliae 1556. fol. 8, 9. Paedagogi, l: 2. c: 5, 6, 7, 10. lib. 3. c. 2, 3, 11.
fol. 52, 53. and Stromatum lib: 7. fol: 153. The 9. Tertullian, Anno 200.
is Tertullian, who has profess^dly written an whole Book against
Stage Plays, viz: De Spectaculis lib: in his Works; Parisijs 1566. Tom: 2. p:
382, to 404. Adversus Gentes Apologia, cap: See Edit. Iunii Franech. 1597.
where the chapters are thus distinguished.
6, 38, and 42. Ibid: p: 589, 591, 626, 627, 682, 704^ 706. Ad Martyrs l: cap:
2. Ibid: p: 17. De Idololatria lib: c: 5. and 18. a book work the reading. De
Pudiciti^, lib: c: 7. and De Corona Militis lib: c: 5. to 13. Tom: 1. p: 750.
to 760. The 10. Hyppolytu^ Anno 220.
is Hyppolitus, an eminent Martyr, De Consummatione Mundi et Antichristi
Oration Bibl. Patrum Tom. 3. p. 16, 17. The 11. Origin, Anno 230.
is Origin, Super Leviticum, Homil: 11. in his works, Parisijs in aedibus
Ascentianis, Anno 1519. Tom. 1. fol. 83. B, C. In Esaiam, Hom: 8. Tom. 2. fol.
108. H. In Hieremiam, Hom: 2. Ibid. fol. 112. I. In Epist: ad Romanos, l: 8.
Tom. 3. fol. 203. and Contra Celsum, l: 5. Tom. 4 fol. 67. C. The 12. Minutius
Felix, Anno 230.
is Minutius Felix, a famous Christian Lawyer, in his Octavius, Oxoniae 1627.
p. 34, 70, 100, 101, 123, 124. The 13. Cyprian, Anno 250.
is St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, Epistolarum l. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio. and
lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Edit. Erasmi, Antwerpiae, 1541. Tom. 1. p. 56, 57,
72, 73. De Habitu Virginum p. 242. and De Spectaculis lib. professedly written
against Stageplayes. Edit. Pamelij Coloniae Agrip. 1617. Tom. 3. p. 243, 244,
245. The 14. Zeno Vero^nensis, Anno 260.
is Zeno Veronensis Episcopus, De Iejunio Sermo. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 127. C.
and De Spiritu et Corpore Sermo, Ibid. p. 128. D. The 15. Arnobius, Anno 290.
is Arnobius Disputat. adversus G^ntes, lib. 2. Antwerpiae 1582. p. 75. l. 3.
p. 114. l. 4. p. 149, 150, 151. l. 5. p. 182. and l. 7. p. 230, to 242. The 16.
Lactantius, Anno 300.
is Lactantius Firmilianus, lib. 6. De Vero Cultu cap. 20, 21. in his Works
Lugduni 1615. p. 502. to 509. Divinarum Institutionum, Epitome, cap. 6, p. 737,
738. See De Iustitia, l, 5. c. 21. p. 422, 423. etc. 10. p. 388. and De Falsa
Religione, l. 1. c. 20. p. 75. The 17. Eusebius Caesariensis, Anno 330.
is Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, De Praeparatione Evangelica, l. 2. c. 2. p.
33. l. 4. c. 11. Operu^ Parisijs 1582. Tom. 1. p. 85, 86. De Demonstratione
Evangelica lib. 5. p. 382. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 1. c. 9. l. 7. c. 24. Tom. 2.
p. 153, 154. and l. 8. c. 16. p. 169. and Apud Damascenum Parallelorum, l. 3.
c. 47. p. 208. The 18. Julius Firmicus, Anno 350.
is Julius Firmicus Maternus, De errore Profanarum Religionum lib. cap. 13.
Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 111, 112. The 19. Hila^ius Pict^viensis, Anno 360.
is Hilary, Bishop of Poiters, Enarratio in Psalm. 19. in his Works, Coloniae.
Agrip. 1617. p. 202. G. and in Psalm. 118. lib. Ibid. p. 258, E, F. The 20.
Macarius Egyptius, Anno 370.
is Macarius AEgyptius, Homilia 27. in his Works, Parisijs 1559. p. 212. and
Homil. 40. p. 264. The 21. Cyrillus Hierosolomytanus, An. 370.
is Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, Archbishop of Jerusalem, Catechesis
Mystagogica 1. Parisijs 1564. fol. 175, 176. The 22. Asterius, Anno 370.
is Asterius, Bishop of Amasia, Oration in Festum Kalendarum, Bibl. Patr. Tom.
4. p. 705, 706. The 23. St. Ambrose Anno 370.
is St. Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, De Officijs l. 1. c. 23. and l. 2. c. 21.
Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1616. Tom. 4. p. 9. A, B. 28. F. De Poenitentia, l. 2.
c. 6. Ibid. p. 193. F. De Elia et Iejunio, cap. 18. Tom. 1. p. 257, 258. etc.
21. p. 259. C, D. Enarratio in Psalm. 118. Octon. 5. Tom. 2. p. 430, 431.
Annotationes in Deuteronomy. 22. Irenaeo, Tom. 1. p. 232, 233. Sermo 11. Tom. 5. p. 8.
and Sermo 64. p. 44. A, E, G. The 24. St. Basil, Anno 370.
is St. Basil the Great, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, the native Country
of George the Arrian, Bishop of Alexandria; who was borne in Cappadocia, as is
most apparent: First, by Ariani Gregorium utpote in sua ipsorum doctrina
stabilienda tardum et negligentem etc. inde transtulerunt, inque eius locum
substituerunt ( Georgios os ^o men^ genos en Kappadokes:) Which Joan.
Christophorsonus renders, Georgium genere Cappadocem,) qui ab illis maxim
aestimabatur, tum quod in rebus agendis promptus ac diligens, tum quod eiusdem
cum ipsis opinionis perstudiosus esset. Eccles. Hist. l 3. c. 6.
Zozomen, ( Georgion us ek Kappadok^as ormato etc.) Which Christophorsonus, and
Suffradus Petrus render, Georgium itaque accerserunt, qui et ex Cappadocia
oriundus; (and Meridith Hanmer in his English translation out of the Greek
Copy, reads, Georgius borne in Cappadocia;) et opinione et religione quam illi
tuebantur imbutus suit. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 10.
Socrates Scholasticus, Interea A^iani Gregorium etc. Episcopatu movent: et
Georgium quendam Cappadocem genere, (as Ioannis Langus translates it) qui circa
panem viliorem et furfur aetatem egerat succiduaeque adeo suillae promus condus
fuerat, quod in religione tuendo industrius esset pro eo in Alexandrino sede
collocarun^. Eccles. Hist. l. 9. c. 7.
and Nicephorus Callistus, who all expressly testify in positive terms, (as
their words in the margent evidence,) that George the Arrian was a Cappadocian
borne. Secondly, by the testimony of Athanasius, Contra Arianos Oration, where
(as Nannius translates it,) he writes thus. Edit. Lat. Petri Nannii. Paris^is
1608. p. 57. D. Edit. Graec. Lat. 1611. Tom. 1. p. 117.
Eaque de causa ((...),) Georgiu^ Cappadocem quendam redimerunt: (which
referres only to his Country;) Sed nec ille aliquo in numero aut praecio
habendus est. Dico enim eum istis in locis, non ut Christianum se, sed ut
idololatram gessisse eundemque moribus et instituto carnificem esse: which
relates to his lewd conditions. Again in his Epistle, Ad solitariam vitam
agentes; he has this passage. Page 238. A. Lat^ Gr. and Lat. Tom. 1. p. 666.
Nunc autem denuo (...), Georgium quendam Cappadocem, (an apparent designation
of his Country,) aerarij Constantinopoli questorem et depeculatorem omnium,
atque ex crimine profugum Alexandriam specie militari et authoritate ducis in
Episcopatum immittit. And in his Epistle, Ad ubique Orthodoxos, (...), etc.
Which Petrus Nannius renders thus: Page 170. b. Lat. Edit. Gr. Lat. p. 727. D.
Quibus declarabat Georgium Cappadocem natione, successorem mihi datum,
satellitium stipatoribusque Comitis in cathedram inducendum: and that properly
enough. So that if Athanastus (who had cause to know the birth and life of this
Arrian George, who both persecuted and deposed him) may be judge, this George,
without question, was a Cappadocian borne. Thirdly, it is evident by the
unavoidable suffrage of Gregory Nazianzen, the Countryman, if not the
coaetanian of this Arrian George: who in his Oration 31. in laudem Athanasij,
writes thus. (...), etc. which not only Bilius, but Edit. Basiliae 1571. p.
527, 528.
Ioannes Lewenclavius too, (who well understood the signification of the word
(...)) Latin thus. Monstrosus quida^ Cappadox ex ultimis terrae nostrae
finibus oriundus, malus genere, animo pejor, etc, Which words, monstrosus
quida^ Cappadox, ex ultimis terrae nostrae finibus oriundus: Gregorius
Presbyter De Vita Gregorii Nazianzeni Oration. Gregorii Nazianz. Monodia in
Basilii Magni Vitam. Isiodor. Pelusiota l. 1. Epist. 158. Munster Cosmogr. l.
5. c. 14. Purchase Pilgr. l. 3. c. 15. Vincentius Specul^m Hist. l. 14. c. 88.
Opmeeri Chronog. p. 288.
(Gregory Nazianzen being a Cappadocian borne;) coupled with this foregoing
passage: Atque hic mihi charissimum solum, patriam, inquam, meam omni crimine
solutam velim; Non enim patriae, sed ijs qui libera animi voluntate eum (viz.
George the Arrian) elegerint improbitas assignanda est. Illa enim sacra, et
apud omnes pietatis laud clara et illustris; at hi Ecclesia parente indigna.
Porro in vinca quoque spinam nasci audistis, etc. (Wherein he excuses his
native Country, Cappadocia, from all blame; that George the Arrian was borne
and made a Bishop in it; since thorns may grow in vineyards, and those who
chose him for their Bishop, not his native Country were to blame:) and
seconded with this ensuing gradation; malus genere, (which referres to his
parentage, he being a Cappadocian borne, whose wickedness and lewdness, as
is confessed, grew into a proverb:) animo pejor, which relates to his
conditions: are an unanswerable evidence, that George the Arrian was a
Cappadocian borne. Hence See Nazianz. Opera Lat. Basiliae 1571. p. 535. Scholia
13.
Billius in his Scholia upon this Oration, long before Dr. Rainolds wrote any
thing of this subject, concludes peremptorily; That George the Arrian was a
Cappadocian borne; Cappadox enim erat (says he) Georgius Arrianus
infestissimus Athanasij hostis. Quatenus autem Cappadox erat, inquit Theologus,
videam mihi, et patriam communem cum eo habere, nonnihil etiam ad insidias
adversus Athanasium structas confer. Hence Flaccus Illyricus, Johannes
Wigandus, Matthaeus Iudex, and Basilius Faber, in their Famous Magdeburgian
Ecclesiastical Centuries, ( For the 4. Century was published, Anno 1560. and
Dr. Rainolds de Idololatria etc. Anno 1596.
36 years before Dr. Rainolds,) relating the life and death of George the
Arrian, expressly affirm from this of Nazianzen, That George the Arrian was a
Cappadocian borne. For thus they write: Centur. 4. Col. 1358.
Georgius natione Cappadox, ex sordido et vili vitae genere, ad Episcopatum,
seu tyrannidem potius, Alexandriam pervenit. Yea both Annal. Eccles. Anno 341.
sect. 5. and 356. sect. 10, 11. Spondanus sect. 3.
Baronius and Spondanus from this passage of Nazianzen, and those of
Athanasius, affirm; That this Arrian George was a Cappadocian borne, and the
Countryman of Nazianzen: For writing of Gregory, and this Arrian George:
Concordant vero (say they) omnino patria, cum utrumque fuisse Cappadocem
veteres scriptores tradant, quoting Nazianzen and Athanasius in the margent.
Whence they style this George, Georgius Cappadox, quem quidem malum genere,
animo pejorem, moribus pessimum fuisse, Gregorius Nazianzenus ipsius Gentilis
docet, dum ejus scelera recenset. If then we believe either the forenamed
Historians, or Athanasius, Nazianzen, Billius, the Century-writers, Baronius or
Spondanus, who are most express in point, this George the Arrian was
undoubtedly a native Cappadocian. Lastly, that passage of Cassiodorus in his
Lib. 4. cap. 14.
Tripartita Historia, where he styles this George, Cappadocem hominem Arianae
vesaniae: that more punctual testimony of Chronolog. Biblioth. Patrum Coloniae
Agrip. 1618. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 15. H.
Nicephorus Constantinopolitanus, who reckoning up the names of the Bishops of
Alexandria, whereof he makes this George the 22. styles him, Georgius Cappadox:
(by which title he distinguishes him, not only from Athanasii Apologia,
secunda: p. 203.207. Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 24. and l. 2. c. 26
Centur. Magd. 4. Col. 708, 750 758, 819. The History of St. George, p. 110,
111, 115.
George the Arrian Bishop of Laodicea, but from Nicephorus Constant. Chron.
Bibl. Patr. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 16.
George the 50 Bishop of Alexandria, who succeeded him: perchance the same
George whom Photius mentions, Biblioth. cap. 96. The History of St. George, p.
113.
as the author of a book concerning Chrysostom:) together with Edit.
Athanasii, Lat. Parisiis 1608. p. 161. and 238. in the margent.
Nannius, Edit. Nazianzeni 1571. p. 528, 535.
Billius, the Centur. Mag. 4. Col. 104, ^55, 1050.
Centuriators, Annal. Ecclesiast. Anno 356. sect. 3.
Baronius, Spondanus, Praefatio in Sancti Hilarii Fragmenta, in Hilarii Oper.
Coloniae Agrip. 1617. p. 121.
Nicolaus Faber, and the several Index-compilers of Athanasius, Nazianzen,
Nicephorus, Zozomen, Socrates Scholasticus, the Centuries, Baronius, Spondanus,
Bibliotheca Patrum, and others, who all style him, Georgius Cappadox, as being
a Cappadocian borne; yield us an infallible testimony in Dr. Rainolds his
behalf; that George the Arrian Bishop (a thing not questioned heretofore by
any,) was by birth a Cappadocian. Neither will those two objections to the
contrary, so much as once eclipse this shining truth: To wit, History of St.
George, p. 103, 104, 105.
that Homo, or Monstrum Cappadox, is a proverbiall speech, denoting, not the
Country, but the lewd conditions of this Arrian George, and that Ammianus
Marcellinus, who lived about those times, affirms for certain in express
terms, that George of Alexandria was borne at Epiphania in the Province of
Cilicia. For first, though Homo Cappadox be sometimes a proverbiall speech,
being applied to a notorious wicked wretch, who is no Cappadocian borne, (where
it must of necessity be proverbial, because it cannot be litterall); yet it is
never so, when as it is spoken of any native Cappadocian, where it may have a
proper litterall construction: which is the case of George the Arrian, whom all
Writers hitherto, till some of late, have conceived to be a Cappadocian borne.
But admit, that Homo, or Monstrum Cappadox, were a mere Adagie, or a
periphrasis of a desperate graceless wicked miscreant; (which is unlikely in
our case, since Patria mea ( Cappadocia) sacra est, et apud omnes pietatis
laud clara et illustris. Oration 31. in laudem Athanasii p. 527.
Permultaministrat veneranda haec patria mea Cappadocla, non minus bona iuvenum
n^trix quam equorum. Oration 31. in Laud^ Ba^ilii p. 494.
Nazianzen, and Altera ^ur^um Cappadocum pars est quam optima, ex qua illi
extiterunt qui vitae suae ac praeceptionum luce orbis terrae ^inibus
praeluxeru^t. Epist. Lib. ^. Epist. 158. Pris^o Cappadoc^. B^bl. P^tr. Tom. 5
pars 2. p. 493.
Isiodor Pelusiota inform us; that about this George his time the ancient
infamy of the Cappadocians lewdness was quite abolished, Cappadocia being
then become not only sacred, but even famous and illustrious both for piety,
learning, education of youth and learned pious men, who were as so many lights
of holy life and doctrine unto all the world:) Yet no one testimony can be
produced by the objectors, to prove, that Georgius Cappadox, or Cappadox
coupled with any other proper name, is used only proverbially, for a man of
wicked, lewd or vile conditions; not for a Cappadocian borne. For as Anglicus,
Scotus, Brito, Iudaeus, and such like national styles, annexed unto proper
names, (as Thomas Anglicus, Ioannes Duns Scotus, Herveus Brito, Philo Iudaeus,
etc.) denominate only the native Country, not the moral conditions, virtues
or vices of men: so Cappadox, united to Georgius, or any other proper name,
demonstrates only the native soil, not the notorious wickedness of the
person: else Philagrius, whom Oration 31. p. 531.
Nazianzen styles, Philagrius Cappadox clarus et illustris; (which were an
apparent contradiction if Cappadox were nothing but a lewd companion;) else all
the pious Cappadocian Bishops in the first Nicene Councels, who are styled
Centur. Mag. 4. Col. 618. l. 5. See Acts 2. v. 9. Eusebius De Vita
Constantinil. 3. c. 8.
Cappadoces; else Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 28^.
Eustochius Cappadox, as I find him named; else Whom Vincentius Le^^nensis
cap. 41. and Opmeer^s, Chronogr. page 288. style, illa, or, duo Cappadociae
lumina.
St. Basil, and famous Gregory Nazianzen, who are called Cassiodorus, Histor.
Tripartita, lib. 6. cap. 37. Nicephorus Calli^tus, Hi^t. Eccles. lib. 10. cap.
^^.
Cappadoces, Socrates Scholast. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 18. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5.
pars 2. p. 314. Spondanus Epit. Baronii Anno 354. sect. 5.
Basilius Cappadox, and Nicephorus and Cassiodor qua (i) supra. See Centur.
M^gd. 4. passim
Gregorius Cappadox: yea and Georgius Cappadox, the Sea Vincentius Speculum
Hist. l. 12. c. 131 The History of St. George, and Mr Seldens Titles of Honor,
part 2. c 5. p. 794, to 819.
Sainted Martyr too, (whom Purchase Pilgrimage l. 3. c. 13. Dr. Featly his
Handmaid of Devotion, p. 413. with sundry others quoted in the History of St.
George, part 1. c. 3, 4.
some make the same with George the Arrian; See Ibid.
others, and among them Chronogr p. 309.
Opmeerus, De Retione Studii Theologiae, l. 3. c. 7.
Hyperius, Quoted by Molanus, Hist. SS. Imaginum. Antwerpiae 1617. l. 3. c. 14.
p. 277, 278.
Georgius Stigelius, and Ioannes AEmilius, In his Pilgrimage l. 3. c. 13.
Mr. Samuel Purchase, In his Hymn of St. George, on St. George his day.
Mr. George Withers, and famous In his Postils, set out by Dr. Christopher
Pezelius, entitled; Philippi Melancthonis viri summi et incomparabilis, et
totius Germaniae olim praeceptoris, explicationum in Academia Witembergensi
traditarum super textus Evangeliorum Dominicalium etc. pars 3. printed Hanouiae
apud Antonium etc. Explicatio in Evangelium in Festo Sanctae Margaretae,
(supposed to be rescued from the Dragon by St. George;) page 417. the Gospel
on that day, (2^. Iulii) being Matthew. 13. Regnum coelorum similis est
Margaritae etc. where he discourses thus. Hac septimana fuit usitatum
celebrari festum diem Margaretae. Non volo recitare fabulas quae sunt notae,
undecunque sunt ortae, sive ab Appollinari, sive ab aliis. Apollinaris
composuit huiusmodi poemata, id est Comaedias et Tragaedias, tunc, cu^ Iulianus
prohibuit doceri Christianoru^ liberos in scholis ethnicis, nolebat enim ^os
eloquentia et litteris instrui, ut Christiana doctrina facilius opprimeretur,
etc. (Which declares the original of the fable of St. George: and then he
propounds this question; Quid significat Georgos? which he thus resolves,
(there being this direction in the margent, Fabula Georgii allegorica, to
ascertaine the reader that he reputes it but an allegorical fable:) Significat
agricola^ colentem terram, et est imago boni et sapientis Princip^^. Cultura
terrae est conservatio disciplinae etc. Scribitur Georgius defendisse
Margaritam, id est, Ecclesiam, ve^ Iustitiam, pulchram puellam, quam voluit
devorare Draco, id est Diabolus et tyranni, ut nunc etiam fieri videtis. In
Anglia exercetur ho^ribilis saevitia contra homines pios. V^inam Deus excitet
Georgios, qui defendant illos contra Dracones. Postea obversis nona eulis
includitur in dolium, et sic inclusus deiicitur ex ardua monte; id est, necesse
est illum Principem, qui curam Ecclesiae suscipit et tuetur iustitiam multa
pati, venire in pericula et odia. Sed prorepit incolumis, id est, custodi^^
divinitus, etc. Vid. Ibidem.
Philip Melancthon too, what ever some aver against it, as his words I have
quoted in the margent witness:) a mere symbolical or allegorical fiction;
either of pious Magistrates, the Princes of Gods husbandry, who fight against
the Dragon, rescuing the Virgin the Church from his assaults, or defending and
maintaining discipline and justice, against all tyrants and oppressors: or, of
our Lord and Savior Christ, the true John 15.1. Isay 5.1. to 8. Matthew. 12.33,
34. 1 Cor. 3.9.
(...) of his Church, who has long since Genesis 3.15.
bruised the head, Isay 51.9.
wounded the body, and Rev. 12.7. to 12.
vanquished the power of the great Serpent the Devil, (whom the Scripture
styles Psalm. 91.13. Psalm. 74.13. Isay 51.9. Rev. 12.3, 4, 7, 9, 13, cap. 13.2,
4, 11. c. 16.13. c. 20.2.
the Dragon,) and Psalm. 91.13. Romans 16.20. P^al. 110.1, 2. Col. 2.14, 15. Hebr.
2.7, 8, 14. Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
trampled him under his feet, like a victorious conqueror; rescuing the Rev.
12.1. to 16. 2 Timothy 2.26. Hebr. 2.14, 15.
Woman, his beloved Church, (whom he styles his Margarit^ Mal. 3.17. Rev.
21.10. to 22.
his ^ewell) from his infernal power, as ^he Scriptures plainly teach us; all
which the emblematicall picture of S. George does lively represent:) must all
be now unsaincted, and stigmatized for naught else, but despera^e notorious
castawayes, as this their proverbiall appellation of Cappadox proclaims them,
if the objection prove once true; since this title ( Cappadox) is appropiated
to them all, yea even to Who is styled Georgius Cap^padox, by Vincentius
Speculum Historiale, l. 12. c. 131. f. 157. Chronico^ Chronicorum AEtas 6. f.
140. Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 309. The History of St. George p. 183. to 190, 284,
287, 312.
George the Saint, as well as to George the Arri^^; he being principally known
and conceived to be a Cappadocian borne, by this addition, Cappadox: which if
it be merely national in George the Martyr, and others fore-recited, must
necessarily be so in George the Arrian; there being no reason to make it
proverbiall in the one, and literal or national only in the other. Secondly,
for the objected authority of Lib. 22. cap. 11. not cap. 27.
Ammianus Marcellinus, which is misquoted in the chapter: I answer, first, that
he was only an heathen Writer, and not so well acquainted either with the
birth or life of George the Arrian, as Athanasius his competitor, as Nazianzen
his Countrey^man, and the forequoted Ecclesiastical historians were; who all
affirm him to be a Cappadocian borne: his single testimony then ought not to
be preferred before all theirs; no more than the testimony of See the History
of St. George, page 133, 134^
Friar Anselme, or Sir Walter Raleigh, who record, that George the Martyr, was
borne in Syria, (not in Cappadocia,) in St. George his castle five miles from
Ptolemais; is to be credited before theirs, who a^firme him born in Cappadocia.
Secondly, his witness is not certain, but dubious, grounded only upon a flying
report of others, not upon his own knowledge. It is but, In Fulloni^, in
Fullio, or infulio (no man knows which) (...) VT F^RE^ATV^, apud Epiphaniam
Cilici^ oppidum: And shall we believe a FEREBATVR, a mere uncertain rumor,
taken up by an Heathen, before the express Authorities of sundry eminent
Christians. Thirdly, admit the most that may be, that this George was borne in
Cili^; yet it no ^ore follows from thence, that George the Arria^ was no^ a
Cappadocian borne; than that one borne in St. George his Parish in Burford in
the County of Gloucester, is no Englishman borne. For as Gloucestershire is a
County of England, and so he that is borne in it, may be truly called an
Englishman borne; so this Cilicia in which George the Arrian was reported to
be borne, was, for ought it appears, a Praefecture or Province of Cappadocia;
and therefore t^^ugh he had there his birth, yet we may truly style him a^
appadocian borne. That this Cilicia wa^ but a Province of Cappadocia, it is
somewhat probable by the testimony of Strabo, no infamous Munsteri Cosmogr. l.
5. c. 14. and Purchase Pilgr. l. 3. c. 15.
Cappadocian: of AEnea^ Sylvi^s, and Volat^r^nus, who inform us: Strabo Geog.
l. 12. Tom. 2. Lugduni 1559. p. 166, 167, 168. and AEneas Sylvius, Histor. De
Asia Minori cap. 43, 46, 49. in his Works, Basileae 15^1 page 325, 327.
Volate^anus Geogr. l. 10 f. 102. See Mercator and Ptolomy accordingly.
That Cappadocia was divided by the Persians into two Kingdoms, viz:
Cappadocia M^jor, toward Taurus, which they properly styled Cappadocia; and
Pontus, which some have called Cappadocia too: and That this Caeppadocia Major
under King Archelaus and his predecessors, was parted into 10 Praefectures, 5
of them situated toward the hill Taurus; to wit, Praetura Melitina, Cataonia,
CILICIA, (which Cap. 6. p. 327.
AEneas Sylvius styles, Cilicia Strategia) Tyanensis and Isauriensis; the other
5 entitled, Lavinasena, Sargasena, Sarauna, Chamanena, and Rhimnena: to which
the Romans added an eleventh Praefecture out of Cilici^, namely the region of
Castabalis and Cydrista unto Derba, the seat of Antipater the pirate, the
eleventh Praefe^ture before Archelaus, who annexed likewise Cilici^ Tr^chea,
and the whole country that practiced piracie unto Cappadocia. If then Cilicia
were but a Province of Cappadocia, and an eleventh Province out of Cilicia,
together with Cilicia Trachea were added unto Cappadocia by the Romans and
Archelaus: we may as safely conclude, that George the Arrian was a Cappadocian
though borne in Cilicia, a part or Province of Cappadocia, as that St. George
his Advocate is an Englishman, though born in Gloucester shire. But admit
Cilicia, where this George was borne, were no part of Cappadocia, because it
may be objected, that See P^olomie and Mercator. Epiphania, and Pliny Hist. l.
5. c. 27.
Epiphania was situated in the Province of Cilicia, and not in this Cilicia:
to which I may reply out of Volateran, Geogr: l: 11. f: 110. that there were
three Cities of that name, and one of them perchance in this Cilicia; yet the
Country of Cilicia it self (admitting he had his nativity there,) Strabo
Geogr. lib. 12. p. 166 Plini^ Not. Hist. l. 5. c 24, 25. and l. 6. c. 8. AEneas
Sylvius Hist. De Asia Minori c. 40, 41. etc. Pu^chas Pilgr. l. 3. c. 15.
borders on the south of Cappadocia. As therefore History of St. George, p.
150, 151, 152.
some affirm, that St. George may without any contradiction be said to have
both Lydda and Rama for the Stage of his suffering, because they are both
conterminous and adjacent, by which devise they have Ibid. page 150, 151, 152.
and the like is used in the fable of Dacianus, p. 175. to 179.
endeavored to reconcile some jarring Authors: So by the selfsame reason,
George the Arrian might be reported, to be borne in Cilicia, as Ammianus
writes, though in truth he were borne in Cappadocia, as the precedent Authors
witness; by reason of the near vicinity of these two Countries. All which
being laid together, will sufficiently justify the true, though late oppugned
position of our deceased famous Dr. Rainolds, (whose Printed 1599 and since
reprinted, 1629.
Overthrow of Stage Plays, has thus occasioned me even here to quit his
credit in this case of George the Arrian, which might else be questioned in the
case of Stage Plays:) De Idololatria Romans Eccl. l. ^. c. ^. sect. 22.
That George the Arrian was a Cappadocian borne, as Nazianzen, Oration 30. p.
494.
was the Mother of St. Basil: to whose Play-condemning passages I now proceed:
as namely his Quoted also by Damascen Paralellorum l. 3. c. 47.
Hexaemeron Hom: 4. Operum Basileae 1565. Tom: 1. p: 45. Hom: in Psalm: 1. p^
218. Sermo 1. in Divites et Avaros, p: 305. De Ebri^tate et Luxu Sermo, p: 329,
333, 336. De Legendi^ Libris Gentilium Oration, p: 408, 412. Ascetica. Tom^ 2 p^
180. and Comment: in cap: 14. Esaiae, Tom: 3, p: 469. The 25. Gregory
Nazianzen, Anno 370.
is Gregory Nazianzen, that eloquent and famous Cappadocian, Bishop of
Constantinople, Gregorius et Basilius nisi una anima in duobus corporibus.
Greg. Nazianz. Oration 30. p. 499.
St. Basils most entire friend, Oration 1. in his Works, Basiliae 1571. p. 6.
Oration 28. De. Funere Patris, p: 472. Oration 31 p^ 525. B. Oration 38, p^ 583,
584, 585. Oration 47, p. 772. Oration 48, p. 796, 797. Adversus Mulieres
ambitiosius sese ornantes, p: 994. Ad Seleucum, De Recta Educatione, p: 1062,
1063, 1064. a notable place. and Sententiae, p: 1168. The 26. Gregory Nyssen
Anno 380.
is Gregory Nyssen, De Oratione lib: Opera, Basileae, 1571; p: 9. De
Resurrectione Christi, Oration 3, p: 160. De Vita Beat^ Gregori^ Miraculorum
Opificis, p: 312, 313. and Vitae Moseos Enarratio, p: 502, 503, 525. The 27.
Prudentius, Anno 380.
is Aurelius Prudentius, that eminent Christian Poet, who much declaimes
against Stage Plays, Cirque-playes, Sword-playes, and dancing: in his
Psychomachia: Bibl: Patr: Tom 4, p: 851, F. Hymnus 6, p: 880. and
Hamartigeneia, p: 904, A, B, D, G, E, p: 907, D. Contra Symmachum, lib: 1, p:
910, D, E^ 912, B, C, and l: 2, p: 922, E, F, G. The 28. Gaudentius Brixius,
Anno 386.
is Gaudentius, Bishop of Brixia, De Lectione Evangelij Sermo 8. Bibl. Patrum
Tom: 4, p. 813, C. The 29. Epiphanius Anno 390.
is Epiphanius Bishop of Constans, in his Compendiaria vera Doctrina, de fide
Catholicae et Apostolicae Ecclesiae: in his works, Lutetiae Paris. 1612. Col:
922, E. The 30. St. Hierom, Anno 390.
is that learned Father St. Hierom, Epistola 2. ad Nepotianum^ cap: 6, 7.
Operu^ Antwerpiae 1579, Tom: ^ p: 5. Epist: 9, ad Salvinam, cap: 5, p: 28,
Epist: 10, ad Furiam, cap: 4 p: 31. Epist: 13, ad Paulinum, cap: 2, p: 39.
Epist: 18, ad Marcellam, cap: 1, p: 53. Epist: 48, cap: 2. p: 102. Epist: 88,
Tom: 2, p: 314. Adversus Iovinianum, lib: 2, cap: 7, Tom: 2, p: 167.
Commentariorum in Ezechiel: lib: 6, cap: 20^ Tom: 4, p: 389, H. The 31.
Sedulius, Anno 396.
is Caelius Sedulius, Collectanea in Epist: ad Ephesios, cap: 5. Bibl. Patrum
Tom: 5, pars 1, p: 506, E. The 32. St Chryso^stome, Anno 400.
is Golden-tongued St. Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, who is most
abundant and divinely rhetorical See here p. 392. to 433. where his words are
recited at large.
against Stage Plays, Play-haunting, Players, and dancing: Homilia 2. Adversus
Iudaeos: Edit: Fronto Ducaei Parisis 1621, Tom. 1. p. 463. C, D. Homil: in S.
Iulianum, See here p. 392 to 433.
Ibid. p. 615, A, B. Homil. de S. Phoca, p. 878, A, B. Hom. De S. Martyr
Barlaam, p. 893, D, 894, A. Homil. 56, in Geneseos 29, Tom. 1. Edit. Lat.
Parisijs 1588, Col. 367, 368. Hom. 3. De Davide et Saul, Col. 510, 511, 512.
Homil. in Psalm. 41, Col. 734, 735. Hom. in Psalm. 46, Col. 777, B. Homil. in
Psalm. 50, Col. 821, C, D. Homil. in Psalm. 118, v. 37; 151, and 152, Col. 998,
a, 1030, 1031. Hom: in Psalm: 140, Col: 1110, 1111. Hom: 1, de Verbis Esai^,
Vidi Dominum sedentem etc. Col. 1281, 1282, 1283, 1284. and Hom. 2, Col. 1287,
1288. Hom. 2, 6, 7, 10, 17, 21, 38, 49, 69, 74, and 89, in Mat: Tom. 2, Col.
15, 16, 50, 51, 52, 53, 58, 59^ 60, 79, B, D, 144, A, 175, A, 297, 298, 299,
300, 356, 358, 359^ 360, 487, 488, 489, 514, 515, 601. Ho^. 31, in Ioa^: Evang.
Tom. 3. Col. 130, Ho^. 29, and 42, in Acta Apost. Col. 544, A, 611, 612. Ho^.
12, in 1 Ep. ad Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 356, 357, 358, 359. Hom. 17, in Ephesians. 5,
Col. 986, 987, 988. Ho^. 9, in Epist. ad Coloss. Col. 1191. Hom. 15, 17, 18,
19, 21, 23, 38, 39, 54, 62, and 66. Ad Populum Antiochiae, Tom. 5, Col. 118, C,
122, B, C. 135, C, D. 137, B, C. 144, D. 145, A, D. 146, A. 149, A, B, C. 166,
167, 168, 183, 184, 186, 245, B. 250, D. 311, 312, 343, 346, 361, D. Ad
Neophitos Homilia, Col. 619, B, C. De Poenitentia Hom: 8, Col. 750, 751. De
Ele^mosyna et Hospitalitate Sermo, Col. 785, A. Kalendis habita Oration, Col.
799, 800. Oration sexta, 1471, 1472. Oration 7, Col. 1481, 1482. Oration 5 in
Saltationem Herodiadis, Col. 1815, 1816; and in sundry other forequoted places:
See Act: 6, Scene 4, p. 392. etc. The 33. St. Augugustine, Anno 410.
is St. Augustine, that famous Bishop of Hippo: Confessionum l. 1, c. 10,
Operum Lugduni 1563, Tom. 1, p. 99, l. 3, c. 1, 2, p. 116, 117. l. 4, c. 1, 2.
p. 128, 129. l. 6, c, 7, 8, p. 165, to 169. See here page 341. to 349.
Musicae, lib. 1, c. 2, 3, 5, 6. p. 443, 445, 451, 452. De Moribus
Manichaeorum, l. 2, c. 19. p. 1129, 1130. Epistola 202, Tom. 2, p. 953, 954. De
Doctrina Christiana, l. 1, c. 25, Tom. 3, p. 41. De Consensu Evangelistarum, l.
1, c. 33, Tom. 4, pars 1, p. 530, 531. De Chatechizandis rudibus lib. c. 16,
Tom. 4, pars 2, p. 340, 341. De vera et falsa Poenitentia, lib. c. 15, p. 520.
De Civitate Dei Tom: 5, lib. 1, c. 30, 31, 32, 33. l: 2, c. 2, to 15, 26, 27,
29. l. 3, c. 18, 19. l. 4, c. 1, 10, 26, 27, 28, 31. l. 5, c. 12, l. 6, c. 1,
5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 21, 24, 26, 27, 33, l. 8, c. 5, 13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 26, 27, l.
12, c. 25. Enarratio in Psalm. 39, Tom. 8^ pars 1, p. 416, to 420. in Psalm. 102,
pars 2. p. 336. Tractatus 100. in Evang. Ioannis, Tom. 9. pars 1, p. 608. De
Symbolo ad Catechumenos, l. 2, c. 11, p. 1393, 1394, and l, 4, c. 1, p. 1427,
1428. De Verbis Apostoli, Sermo 17, Tom. 10, p. 442, 443, and Homilia 21, p.
592^ 593. with other forecited places, Act. 6, Scene 3, p. 341, etc. The 34.
Nilus Abbas, Anno 410.
is Nilus Abbas, Oration 2, de Luxuria, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, pars 2, p. 969, G.
The 35. Orosius, Anno 410.
is Paulus Orosius, a Spanish Presbyter, Historiarum lib. 3, c. 4, Coloniae
1542, p. 120. The 36. Synesius, Anno 410.
is Synesius, Bishop of Cyrene, De Regno lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5. pars 1, p.
51, G. The 37. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Anno 430.
is Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, In Hesaiam l. 1, cap. 4^ Operum Parisijs 1605,
Tom. 1, p. 134, D. in Ioannis Evangelium, lib. 8, c. 5, p 595, A, B. The 38.
Theodoret, Anno 430.
is Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, De Sacrificijs, l. 7. Operum Coloniae Agrip.
1617, Tom. 2, p. 382. De Martyribus lib. 8, p. 390, E, F. De Activa Virtute, p.
408, D. The 39. Prosper Aquit. Anno 440.
is Prosper Aquitanicus, Bishop of Rhegium, De Gloria Sanctorum Peroratio,
Opera D^aci 1577, fol. 73. The 40. Sozomenus Anno 440.
is Hermias Sozomenus Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 5, cap. 15, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5,
pars 2^ p. 420, E. The 41. Isiodor Pelusiota, Anno 440.
is Isiodor Pelusio^a, Epist. l. 1, Epist. 62, 63, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, pars 2,
p. 483, F, and l. 3, Epist. 336, page: 613, A. The 42. Primasius, Anno 450.
is Primasius, Bishop of Vtica, Comment. in Epist. ad Romanos, c. 10, Parisijs
1543, fol. 53. The 43. Leo 1. Anno 450.
is Pope Leo the first, In Octava Petri et Pauli Sermo, Opera Antwerpiae 1583
fol. 165. The 44. S^lvian, Anno 460.
is Salvian, the famous vice-tormenting Bishop of Massilia or Marcelles, in
France, De Gubernatione Dei, lib 6, Opera Parisijs 1608, p. 182, to 224. The
45. Olympiodorus, Anno 500.
is Olympiodorus, Enarratio in Ecclesiasten, cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 11, p.
405, E. The 46. Cassiodo^us Anno 5^0.
is Aurelius Cassiodorus, Variarum, lib. 1, Epist. 27, 30, 32, in his works
Aureliae Alobragum, 1609, p. 55, 58, lib. 3, Epist. 51, p. 221 222, 224, lib^
5, Epist: 42, p. 369, 370, 371, 372, lib. 7, Epist. 10, p. 458, 459. The 47.
Fulgentius, Anno 520.
is Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspens in Africa, Mythologiarum, lib. 1, Opera
Basileae, 1617, p. 820, l. 2, p. 861. and Super audivit Herodes Tetrarcha etc.
Sermo, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6, pars 1, p. 148. D, E, F. The 48. Gregorius 1 Anno
590.
is Pope Gregory the first, Moralium l. 15, c. 18. Opera Parisijs 1533, fol.
89, E. l. 13, c. 18. fol. 78, D. l. 21, c. 2, f. 124, I, K. and Epist: l. 9,
Epist. 48, fol. 443, K. The 49. Isiodor Hispalensis, Anno 630.
is Isiodor, Bishop of Hispalis, Originum lib. 18, cap. 16, to 60^ Opera,
Coloniae Agrip. 1617, p. 158, 159, 160, 165^ de Officijs Ecclesiasticis, l. 1,
cap. 40, and l. 2, c. 2, p. 400, C. and 401, D, E. The 50. Anas^asius Sianita,
Anno 640.
is Anastasius Sianita, Patriarch of Antioch, in his Viae duae, Bibl. Patrum
Tom. 6, pars 1, p. 604, B. The 51. Valerian, Anno 650.
is Valerian, Bishop of Cemela, Homil. 1, de Bono Disciplinae, Bibl. Patrum
Tom. 5, pars 3, p. 477, C, D. Homil. 6, de Otiosis verbis, p. 482, G, H. 483,
A. Hom. 10^ de Parasitis, p. 487, F, G. The 52. Beda, Anno 720.
is our Venerable Beda, In Lucae Evangelium, c. 7, l. 2, Operum Coloniae Agrip.
1612, Tom. 5, Col. 300. The 53. Damascen, Anno 740.
is Ioannis Damascenus, Parallelorum, lib. 1, cap. 76, Opera Parisijs 1619, p^
63, 64. and lib. 3, cap. 47, p. 208. The 54. Alchuvinus Anno 790.
is our famous Countryman Alchuvinus, Tutor to CHARLES the Great: de
Caeremonijs Baptismi Epistola in his Works, Lutetiae Paris. 1617, Col: 1158,
B. and de Divinis Officijs lib: cap: 4, Col: 1013, 1014. The 55. Agobardus Anno
840.
is Agobardus, Bishop of Lions: De Dispensatione, Ministerio, etc. Bibl.
Patrum^ Tom. 9, pars 1, p. 603, H. 604, A. The 56. Paschatius Ra^bertus,
is Paschatius Ratbertus, in Matthew: Evangelium l. 4, Bibl: Patrum Tom. 9, pars
2, p. 986, A^ B. The 57. HRabanus Maurus, Anno 840.
is HRabanus Maurus: De sacri^ Ordinibus lib: 1, Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1626,
Tom. 6, p. 63, A, B, C. De Vniverso lib: 20, cap: 16, to 38, Tom: 1. p: 248, to
252. in De^teronomium l: 2, c: 29, Tom: 2, p: 437. The 58. Haymo, Anno 840.
is Haymo, Bishop of Halberstat, Comment: in Isaiam, cap: 56, Coloniae 1531 page
473. and Comment: in Ephesians: 5, v: 3. The 59. Remigius, Anno 850.
is Remigius, Bishop of Rheemes, Explanatio in Epist: ad Galatas, c. 5, v: 19,
Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, p. 756, G: and in Ephesians: 5, v. 3, p: 970, A, B. The 60.
Bruno, Anno 1040.
is Bruno, Bishop of Herbipolis, Expositio in Psalm: 118, v: 37. Bibl. Patrum
Tom. 11, p. 221, B. The 61. Theophylact, Anno 1070.
is Theophylact, Archbishop of the Bulgarians, Enarrat: in Marc: cap: 6, in his
Works Basiliae 1570, p: 89. Enar: in Ephesians: c: 5, p. 509, in 1 Timothy: 2, p: 573,
584. The 62. ^uo Carnotensis, Anno 1100.
is Iuo Carnotensis Episcopus, Decreta^ Lovanij 1561, pars 1, c: 207, pars 2,
c: 31, pars ^, c: 77, pars 4, cap: 8, 162, 166, 167. pars 5, cap: 370. pars 7,
cap: 110. pars 11, cap: 7, 16, 64, 76, to 85. The 63. Anselme, Anno 1110.
is Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury, Comment: in Epist: ad Ephe^^os, l. 5, v:
3^ Tom: 2. Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1612, p: 285, C, D. in Epist: ad Philip: c.
4, p: 306, A. in 1 Timothy: c: 3^ p: 356, C. The 64. Honorius Augusto ^unensis,
Anno 1120.
is Honorius Augustodunensis, De Antiquo ritu Missarum, lib: 3, cap: 58. Bibl.
Patrum Tom: 12, pars 1, p: 1069, E. where he styles dancing and Stage Plays,
the very pompes of the Devil which we renounce in Baptism. The 65. Bernard,
Anno 1130.
is elegant St. Bernard, Abbot of Clarevale, Oration ad Milites Templi, cap: 4.
Opera Antwerpiae, 1616, Col: 832, L, M. and Epist: 87, Col: 1477, A. The 66.
Ranulphus Cirstrensis, An. 1140.
is Ranulphus Cirstrensis, in his Polychronicon, London, 1527. Book 3, cap:
34, fol: 131. The 67. Ioannes Saresberiensis Anno 1140.
is our famous Countryman John Saresbery, Episcopus Carnotensis in France: De
Nugis Curialiu^, l. 1, c. 4, 5, 7, 8. and l. 8, c: 6, 7. Bibl. Patr. To^. 15,
p. 358, 463, 466. The 68. Petrus Blesensis, Anno 1160.
is Petrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Bathe, Ep: 14. Bibl. Patr. Tom 12. pars 2,
p: 714, B. Epist: 76, p: 761, E. Epist: 85, p: 769, E. The 69. A^lredus, Anno
1160.
is AElredus, Abbot of Rivaulx, in Yorkshire, Anno 1160. in his Speculum
Charitatis, lib: 1, cap: 26, p: 95, G. lib. 2, c. 23, p: 111, G, H. l: 3, c:
12, p: 118, A. and his Fragmentum, containing the memorable exhortation of King
Edgar to his Bishops and Abbots, Ibidem p. 144, A. The 70. Gratian, Anno 1170.
is Gratian. Distinctio 33, 34, 48^ and 86. Edit^ Parisijs 1531, fol^ 56, 58,
78, 130, 139, 140. and Causa 4, Quaest: 1, f. 260. and de Consecratione
Distinctio 2, fol: 663. The 71. Innocen^tius, 3. Anno 1200.
is Pope Innocent the 3. Decretal: Constitutionum, lib. 3, Tit. 1, Constit. 3.
Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1606, Tom. 2, p: 713, 714. These 7^ eminent ancient
Fathers and Writers in these their recited works, to which I might add
Justinian that famous Christian Emperor, in his See Act. 7, Scene 3. p. 656,
to 662.
forequoted ^awes and works, have constantly even from our Saviors death till
the year 1200. abundantly oppugned, censured and condemned, not only
Sword-playes, Cirque-playes, and Amphitheatricall bloody Spectacles; but even
See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5, 12.
Stage Plays themselves, as diabolical, heathenish, sinful, lewd, ungodly
Spectacles, See Act. 6, Scene 5.
not sufferable among Christians; condemning withal, not only the acting, but
even the beholding of such lascivious, filthy and contagious Enterludes, the
seminaries of all those prodigious execrable wicked effects, which I have more
fully anatomized in the Sea Act. 3, 4, 4, 5, 6, through out.
p^ecedent Acts. And if all these worthy ancient Fathers did thus abominate,
oppugn the Stag^-playes, Actors and Play-haunters of their times; o how would
they censure and abhor the scurrilous, obscene, blasphemous, impious Plays
and Players of our age, See Act. 6. Scene 7. p. 132. and page 38.
which are far more execrable, profane and lewd than the very worst in
former days? From these authorities therefore thus recited, I shall frame this
49. invincible Argument against Stage plays.

That which 71 several Fathers and eminent ancient Writers of the Church have
constantly, Argum. 49.
professedly condemned, as sinful, and abominable in these their recited
works; Quicquid enim omnes, vel plures, uno ^odemque sensu, manifest,
frequenter, perse^veranter, velut quodam sibi consentiente Magistrorum Concilio
accipiendo, tenendo tradendo firmaverint, id pro indubitato, certo, ratoque
habeatur. Vencentius Lerinen^is con^ra H^reses, cap. 39.
must certainly be desperately sinful, unseemely unlawful unto Christians,
intolerable in any Christian Commonweal.

But these 71 several Fathers and eminent ancient Writers of the Church, have
thus constantly^ professedly condemned Stage Plays and Stage Players, in these
their recited works.

Therefore they must certainly be desperately sinful, unseemely, unlawful
unto Christians, intolerable in any Christian Commonweal.

The Minor is evident by the premises: the Major I dare challenge the most
impudent Player, or Play-patron to deny. For what man, what Christian is there
so peremptorily audacious, so unchristianly immodest, so Errat enim is qui a
via quam Patrum electio monstravit aberrat. Hosmisdae Papae Epist. ad
Poss^ssorem. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 375.
erroniously schismatic, as to control, and quite reject, the unanimous
resolutions of so many reverend, pious, incomparably learned Fathers? whose
Play-condemning censures, seconded by the definitive sentence of the whole
primitive Church both under the Law and Gospel; not only challenge our
reverend respect, See Deuteronomy. 4.32. c. 32.7. Job 8.8, 9, 10. c. 15. 17, 18. cr.
^.16. Ezra 4.15. Psalm. 44.1. Ps. 78.^. Prove. 1.8, 9. c. 4.1, 2. c. 13.1. c.
22.28 c. 23.22. c. 2.20. 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. Heb. 12.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. Heb. 6.12.
See John Whites Way to the true Church. Digress. 47. sect. 4. to 9.
but our subscription too. We are all exceeding ready in matters of faith, to
give credit to Councels, to the renowned Fathers, and ancient Writers,
especially where all, or many of them concur: and shall we then reject and
undervalue them here in the case of Stage Plays, in which they all accord,
without the least dissent? Never (I dare positively affirm it) did Fathers,
Councels, and Writers of all sorts, all ages, more plentifully, more
unanimously accord in passing sentence against any abuse or wickedness
whatsoever, then in censuring, in condemning Stage Plays, as the precedent and
subsequent Scenes will evidence: and shall we then desert them where they all
concord? Could Players, Play-haunters or lewd lascivious persons, find out but
one Council, one Father or two, to countenance Stage Plays, dancing, dicing,
Health-quaffing, face-painting, Love-lockes, or their strange fantastique
habits and disguises; they would so Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile
cr^^dunt. S^neca. Hercules Furens Act. 2.
hug it, so adore it, that neither the laws of God or man, the authorities
of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, the concurring resolutions of all other
Fathers, Councels or Writers to the contrary should be able to convince them
that these things are evil: Est et haec perve^^^tas hominum, salataria
excu^ere, exitiosa susci^pere, periculosa quaeque medicamenta vitare, mori
denique citius quam curari desiderant. Tertull. adversus Gnosticos Tom. 2 ^.
425. Isti nec rationibus convincuntur, quia no^ intelligunt, nec authoritatibus
corriguntur, quia non ^ecipiunt^ nec flectent^^ suasionibus quia subversi ^unt,
probatum est, mori magis ^ligunt quam converti. Be^n. Super Cantica Sermo 66.
fol. 160. C.
so pertinaciously do men adhere not only to their opinions, but their errors
too, who justify or foment their vices in the least degree. And shall not then
the uncontrolled authority of all the precedent Christian Councels and Fathers,
be much more prevalent to withdraw them from pernicious Stage Plays, with
other often condemned vanities, which have not so much as one Father, one
Council to defend them? shall men believe, (yea sometimes prefer) the
Fathers before the Scriptures, where they seem to give any countenance to
their errors or superstitions; and yet reject them, where they all unanimously
condemn their sinful pleasures? O let us not so far undervalue these their
pious judicious, unanimous resolutions against Stageplayes and Actors, as still
to magnify, frequent, or patronize them in despite of all these their
determinations; Phil. 3.16. Romans 15.5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.16. 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil.
1.27. c. 2.2. 1 Pet. 3, 8
but let us join hearts, and hands, and pens, and judgments, yea and our
practice with them; passing the very selfsame doom on Players, on
Stage Plays, as they all have done before us; for fear their pious
resolutions prove so many unavoidable endictments of condemnation against us at
the last. We all profess our selves inheritors of these Fathers faith; let us
not then be ashamed to inherit the purity, piety, discipline, and devotion of
their lives. See Act. 7. Scene 2.
It was one great part of their discipline, to censure; one badge of their
Christianity, their piety, to abandon Stage Plays, Players and Play-haunters;
let it be one piece of our Ecclesiastical, if not civil discipline, and
devotion, to do the like. And Hebr. 12.1.
since we are compassed about with so great a cloud of Play-condemning
Authorities, let us now at last resolve, to lay away every weight, and the sin,
(these sinful stigmatized Stage Plays) which do so easily beset us; Prove.
4.1. and 13.1.
Let us hearken to the instruction of these pious Fathers, and attend unto
their doctrine: not Prove. 22.28.
removing those Play-exiling Land-markes which they have set us: that so
imitating them in their piety, we may at last participate with them in their
glory.

SCENA QVINTA.
THE fifth Squadron of Play-oppugning Authorities, 150 Modern Christian
Writers have condemned Stage Plays.
as well Papists as Protestants, from the year of our Lord 1200, to this
present time, a Catalogue of whose names and works I shall here present unto
you, according to their several antiquities, together with the Impressions
which I follow. The 1. Guillermus, Altisiodorensis Anno Dom. 1206.
of them is Guillermus Altisiodorensis; Summa Aurea in lib. Sententiarum,
Parisijs 1500, 1: 3, Tractat: 7, Quaest: 3, fol: 163. where he concludes thus.
Qui dat histrionibus immolat daemonibus etc. The 2. Saxo Grammati^us, Anno 1220.
is Saxo Grammaticus, Historiae Danicae l. 6. Francofurti 1576, p. 103. The 3.
Will. Malmesburiensis, 1230.
is Willielmus Malmesburiensis, De Gestis Regum Anglorum, l. 2, c. 10,
Francofurti 16^1, p. 67, 68. The 4. Gulielmus Parisiensis, Anno 1240.
is Gulielmus Parisiensis, De Legibus, c. 13, Opera Venetijs 1591, p. 42, 43.
and De Vitijs et Virtutibus, lib. c. 6, p. 262. The 5. Alexander Alensis, Anno
1240.
is Alexander Alensis, the famous English Schooleman, Summa Theologiae,
Coloniae Agrip. 1622, pars 4, Quaest. 11, Artic. 2, sect. 4, p. 391, 392, 393.
The 6. Edmundus Cantuariensis, Anno 1240.
is Edmundus Cantuariensis, Archbishop of Canterbury, Speculum Ecclesiae, cap.
11. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 13, p. 359, E. The 7. Vincentius Beluacensis, Anno 1250.
is Vincentius Beluacensis, Speculum Doctrinale, Venetijs 1591, lib. 11, c. 93,
to 98, fol. 194 etc. Speculum Morale l. 3, pars 8, Distinctio 4, and pars 9,
Distinctio 6, fol. 244, 251, 252, and Speculum Historiale Venetijs 1494, l. 29,
c. 41, fol. 367, where he has excellent large Discourses, both against dicing,
dancing, Cirque-playes and Stage Plays, well worth the Readers observation.
The 8. Matthaeus Parisiensis, Anno 1250.
is Matthaeus Parisiensis, our famous English Historian, Hist. Angliae, Tiguri
1589, p. 209, 210, 803, 823. The 9. Aquinas, Anno 1260.
is Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, Duaci 1614, 2a 2ae. Quaest: 168, Artic:
2, 3, Quaest: 169, Artic: 2, 3m, and 1a 2ae Quaest: 102, Artic: 6, 6m, page:
288, 289, 291. The 10. Bonaventura, Anno 1262.
is Bonaventura, that famous popish Cardinal, In Sententias lib: 4, Distinct:
16, Dub: 13: Operum Moguntiae, 1609 Tom: 5, p: 196. The 11. Suidas, Anno 1270.
is Suidas, Historica, Basiliae 1581, p: 127. Ardaburius Caius, sec p: 193. The
12. Ricardus, de Media Villa, Anno 1290.
is Ricardus de Media Villa, Super lib. 4, Sententiarum Brixiae 1591.
Distinctio 16, Artic: 3, Quaest: 1, p: 232. The 13. Nic. De Lyra, Auno 1320.
is Nicolaus de Lyra, in Deuteronomy: 22, v: 5, Duaci 1617, Tom: 1, p: 1595. in Amos
6, Tom: 4, p: 1879 in 1 Timothy: c^ 2, Tom: 6, p: 698. See him on cap: 16, Iudicum,
and in cap: 14, Matthew: and c: 6, Marc. The 14. Alvarus Pelagius, Anno 1330.
is Alvarus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae, Lugduni 1517, l: 1, Artic: 49, f:
28, lib^ 2, Artic: 28, fol. 134, and Artic. 46, fol. 150 The 15. Thomas
Gualensis, Anno 1330.
is Thomas Gualensis, alias Wallis, a learned English Writer, Lectio 77, in
Proverb. Solomonis, AEdibus Ascentianis, 1510, fol: 97: an excellent full place
against Stage Plays: and Summa Collationum ad omne genus hominum, pars 1,
Distinctio 14, cap^ 7. quoted by Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum
lib: pars 4, c. 23. The 16. Astexanus, Anno 1330.
is Astexanus, De Casibus etc. Nurembergae 1482, lib. 2, Tit. 53. and l. 4,
Tit. 17. Artic. 4. The 17. Thomas Bradwardin, Anno 1340.
is that profound English Doctor, Thomas Bradwardin, Archbishop of Canterbury,
De Causa Dei, lib. 1^ cap. 1, Corolla 20, Opera Londini 1618, p. 14, 15. The
18. Robertus Holkot, Anno 1350.
is Robertus Holkot, a famous English Schooleman, Lectio 172, super lib.
Sapientiae, Basileae 1506, fol. 132.133. The 19. Franciscus Petrarcha, Anno
1370.
is Franciscus Petrarcha, De Remedio utriusque Fortunae, lib. 1, Dialogus 24,
25, to 31, printed 1613. p. 95, to 130. where we have an excellent Discourse
against dicing, dancing and Stage Plays. The 20. Ioannis Wickliffe^ An. 1380.
is Ioannis Wickliffe, our famous English Apostle, Dialogorum l. 3, c. 1, fol:
45, Edit. 1545. The 21. Ioannnis de Burgo, An. 1390.
is Ioannis de Burgo, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge; P^pilla
Oculi, Parisijs 1521, pars 4, cap. 8, 1. pars 7, cap. 5, O. and pars 10, cap.
5, V.X. The 22. Nicolaus Cabasila, Anno 1400.
is Nicolaus Cabasila, De Vita in Christo l. 2, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 14, p. 114,
C, D, E, F. The 23. Ioannis Gerson, Anno 1410.
is Ioannis Gerson, the learned Chancellor of Paris, De Praeceptis Decalogi,
cap. 7, Operum Parisijs 1606, pars 2, Col. 264, and Sermo Dominicae 3,
Adventus; Operum pars 4, Col: 332, 333, 334. The 24. Alexander Fabritius, An.
1426.
is Alexander Fabritius, a learned Englishman, Destructorium Vitiorum,
Lutetiae 1516, pars 3, c. 10, C, D. pars 4, cap: 23. De Ludis inhonestis; an
excellent place against Dancing, Dicing and Stage Plays; where he quotes one
Walerannus and Walensis against these pastimes, whose works there cited are
not at this day extant. The 25. Thomas Waldensis, Anno 1430.
is Thomas Waldensis, a learned English Writer, John Wickliffes professed
Antagonist, Tit. 5, De Baptismi Sacrament. c. 49, sect. 7, Operum Venetijs,
1571, Tom. 3, p. 96, B, See here Act. 7, Scene 2. The 26. To^tatus Abulen^is,
Anno 1430.
is Tostatus Abulensis, that Voluminous Writer, Comment. in Deuteronomy. 22, Quaestio
2, Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1613, Tom. 3, pars 2, p. 199, B, C. In lib. 4. Regum,
Quaestio 44, Tom. 7, pars 2, f 100, C, D. and in Matthew. cap. 6, Quaestio 38,
and 67, Tom. 10, pars 3, fol. 40, E, etc. The 27. Ricardus Panpolitanus, Anno
1430.
is Ricardus Panpolitanus, a famous English Hermit, In Verba Salomonis;
Adolescentulae dilexerunt te nimis etc. Bibl. Patrum Tom: 15, p. 838, A, where
he thus writes; Sed quidem ut pueri vadunt ad ludos, ad spectacula, ad multas
alias vanitates: quamvis tamen Deum semper praeponunt, quasi Deum amare
nescirent: where he styles Stage Plays, vanities, those who resort unto them,
childish persons, who know not how to love God as they ought. The 28. Ni^olaus
De Clemangis, Anno 1230.
is Nicolaus de Clemangis, De Novis Celebritatibus non instituendis, Tract.
Oper Lugduni Batt. 1613, p. 143, to 160. De Lapsu et Reparatione Iustitiae,
cap. 15, p. 54. and Epist. 28, 54, p 102, 103, 104, 148, 149. where he
excellently declaimes against Dancing, Stage Plays, and other wanton
effeminate exercises and disorders in his time; and De Corrupto Ecclesiae
Statu, c. 2, sect. 3, p. 5, c. 4, p. 7, c. 15, sect. 3, p. 15, c. 18, sect. 1,
p. 18, where he censures the luxury and exorbitances of the Clergy, especially
for their dancing, dicing, resort to P^ayes, and their esteem of Players. The
29. Panormitanus, An^o 14^0.
is Panormitanus, that industrious Abbot, 5. Decretalium, De Clerico Venatore,
Tit-24, Lugduni 1580, fol, 187; and in sundry other places. The 30. Antoninu^^
Anno 1444.
is Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence, Chronicorum, pars 2, Tit. 15; c. 10.
sect. 13, Edit. Lugduni 1543, fol. 132; and pars 3, Tit. 18, c. 5, sect. 4,
fol. 19. The 31. AEneas Sylvius, Anno 1450.
is AEneas Sylvi^s, afterward Pope Pius the 2, Epist. l. 1, Epist. 166, Opera
Basileae 1551, p. 721, 722, 723. and De Liberorum Educatione, p. 968. The 32.
Mapheus Vegius, Anno 1450.
is Mapheus Vegius, De Educatione Liberorum l. 1^ c 14, and l. 3, c. 7, 12,
Bibl. Patrum Tom. 15, p. 835, E, F, 865, H^ 847, F, and. 848^ C, D. The 33.
Ioannis Antonius, Anno 1540.
is Ioannis Antonius, Bishop of Champaigne, De Gerendo Magistratu, lib. Bibl.
Patrum Tom. 15, p. 809, B, C. The 34. Paulus Wan, Anno 1460.
is Paulus Wan, Quadragesimale, Hagenau, 1501, Sermo 5, De Custodia quinque
Sensuum, Sermo 7, De Custodia Auditus; and Sermo 10, De Custodia Tactus. The
35. Michael Lochmair, Anno 1470.
is Michael Lochmair, Sermo 21^ Hagenaw 1550, Y, Z; Sermo 33, F, G, H; Sermo
38, K; Sermo 62, L; Sermo 65, Z; and 106, F The 36. Ang^lus De Clavasio, Anno
1480.
is Angelus De Clavasio, Summa Angelica, Nurembergae 1498, Tit. Chorea,
Histrio, Infamia, Ludus. The 37. Baptista Tro^omala, Anno 1490.
is Baptista Trouomala, Summa Rosella, Venetijs 1495, Tit. Chorea and Histrio.
The 38. Raphael Volateranus, Anno 1500.
is Raphael Volateranus, Commentariorum lib. 29, cap: De Celebritate
Conviviorum et Ludorum, Edit: Parisijs 1511, p: 312, 313. The 39. Ioannis de
Wankel, Anno 1506.
is Ioannis De Wankel, Glossa in Breviarum Sexti, lib^ 3, Tit: 1, De Vita et
Honestate Clericorum, Parisis 1509. fol: 88. The 40. Ioannis Nyder, Anno 1506.
is Ioannis Nyder, Expositio super Praecepta Decalogi, Parisiiis 1507,
Praeceptum 6^ cap: 2, 3, fol: 123, 124. The 41. Alexander ab Alexandro, Anno
1510.
is Alexander ab Alexandro, Genialium Dierum lib: 3, c: 9, Hanouiae 1610, fol:
135, 136, and l: 5, c: 8, fol. 280, 281. The 42. Lodovicu^ Vives, Anno 1510.
is Lodovicus Vives, Notae in Augustinum, De Civitate Dei l. 1, c. 30, to 34,
and l. 2, c. 2, to 16, etc. l. 8, c. 37; and De Causis Corruptionis Artium,
lib. 2, Edit: 1612, p. 81, 83. The 43. Polydor Virgil, Anno 1510.
is Polydorus Virgilius, De Inventoribus Reru^, 1604, l. 5, c. 1, 2, p. 380, to
389. and l. 3, c. 13, p. 251, 257. The 44. Ioannis Aventinus, Anno 1520.
is Ioannis Aventinus, Annalium Boiorum, Basileae 1590, lib 7, page 536, and
668. The 45. Episcopus Chemnensis, Anno 1530.
is Episcopus Chemnensis, Onus Ecclesiae, 1531, c. 23, sect. 1, fol. 43, cap.
27, sect. 15, 16, 17, 18, fol. 53, and cap. 28, sect. 6, fol. 54. The 46.
Coccius Sabellicus, Anno 1538.
is Marc: Antonius Coccius Sabellicus AEneadis 2, l. 9, Basileae 1538, p. 299,
l. 4, p. 200. AEneadis 4, l. 1, p. 482, l. 3, p. 508. AEneadis 5, lib. 4, p.
730, 748, lib. 7, p. 799. AEneadis 7, l. 2, p. 201, 203, lib. 1, p. 191: where
he shows at large, how Stage Plays were originally devoted to the Roman
Idol-Gods, who exacted them at their hands to their great expense. The 47.
Stephanus Costa, Anno 1540.
is Stephanus Costa, De Ludo Tractatus, number. 3, 4, 9, 12, 14, to 25. in
Tractat. Tractatuum, Parisijs 1545, pars^ 1, f. 156, 157, 158, 159, 160. The
48. Nicolaus Ploue, Anno 1540.
is Nicolaus Ploue, De Sacramentis, Ibid. Tractat. Tractatuum, pars 8, p. 51,
sect. 3. The 49. Mr. John Calvin, Anno 1540.
is reverend Mr. John Calvin, Sermo 126, in Deuteronomy. 22, 5. Epistola Facillo,
Operum Genevae 1607^ Tom. 6, pars 2, Col. 93, 94. See Sermo 70, 79, and 80, in
lib. Job. The 50. Cornelius Agrippa, Anno 1546.
is Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum, cap. 20, 59, 63, 64,
and 71. Coloniae 1581. The 51. Radulphus Gualther, Anno 1548.
is learned and laborius Radolphus Gualter, Ho^. 11. in Nahum 3. f. 214, 215.
See Ho^. 186. in Mat. fol. 349, 350. and Ho^. 51, in Marci Evangeliu^, fol. 74,
75. The 52. Martin Bucer, Anno 1550
is judicious Martin Bucer, De Regno Christi Sempiterno, lib. 2. cap. 54. where
he condemns all popular Stage Plays, though he seems to allow of academicall
with some restrictions. The 53. Peter Martyr, Anno 1550
is acute and learned Peter Martyr, Locorum Communium, Classis 2, cap. 11,
sect. 62, 66 c. 12, sect 15, 19^ and Commentary upon Judges in the English
translation, p. 214, 215. The 54. Olaus Magnus, Anno 1550.
is Olaus Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsalis, Historia, Basileae 1567, lib. 15, c.
10, 11, 12, 13, 31, to 35: which he notably censures all amo^ous lascivious
ribaldry dances, pictures, songs and music, together with Stage Plays and
common Actors; taxing all such Princes and Great ones, who harbor these lewd
Players in their Courts or territories, or tolerate their Enterludes among the
vulgar. The 55. Petrus Crab, Anno 1550.
is Petrus Crab, in his several forealledged Councels: See Scene 3, in the
margent. The 56. Franciscus Ioverius, Anno 1554.
is Frranciscus Ioverius, Sanctiones Ecclesiasticae tam Synodicae quam
Pontificiae, Parisijs 1555, Classis 1^ fol: 611: 156, Classis 2, fol. 5, 6, and
27. The 57. Henry Stalbridge, Anno 1556.
is Henry Stalbridge: his Exhortatory Epistle to his dearly beloved Country of
Engl^nd, against the pompous Popish Bishops thereof: as yet the true members of
their filthy Father, the great Antichrist of Rome: printed at Basil 1556, fol.
18, where he writes thus. So long as minstrels and Players of Enterludes played
lies, and sung bawdy songs, blasphemed God, and corrupted men's consciences, the
Popish Prelates never blamed them, but were well content, etc. The 58. Andreas
Frisius, Anno 1558.
is Andreas Frisius, De Republica Emendanda, Basileae 1559, l. 1, c. 6, p. 23,
cap. 17, p. 62, 63, cap. 7, p. 25, 26, cap, 23, p. 90, and lib. 2, cap. 11, p.
132: where he condemns all Stage Plays, dancing, dicing, and scurrilous songs
and Enterludes as unsufferable evils in any Christian well-ordered Commonweal.
The 59. Matthew Parker, Anno 1560.
is reverend Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, De Antiquitate Ecclesiae
Brittanicae, 1572, page 445. The 60. Thomas Beacon, Anno 1560.
is pious and learned Thomas Beacon, his Catechism, in his Works, London
1564, part 10, fol. 341, 355, 361, 366, 400, 486. where he condemns, not only
as Dicers, Card-players and Gamesters, but even Stage Plays too, as thieves;
severely censuring Dancing^ Stage Plays, Enterludes, scurrilous songs and
Play-bookes, as the fomentations of lewdness, the occasions of adultery, and
things altogether misbeseeming Christians, especially on the Lords day, which
they most execrably profane. The 61. Theodorus Balsamon, Anno 1560.
is Theodorus Balsamon, Canones Apostolorum et Conciliorum, Paris: 1620, p.
217, to 224^ 284, to 288, 422, 423 658, 659. The 62. Claudius Espencaeus, Anno
1560.
is Claudius Espencaeus, in Epist: 1, ad Timotheum, Lutetiae 1561, c. 2, p. 44,
H: c. 4, p. 88, G: c. 5, p. 101, A: and Digressionum l. 2, c. 14, p. 202, 203.
The 63. Bartholmeus Carranza, Anno 1560.
is Bartholmeus Carranza, Summa Conciliorum, Parisijs 1624, in the places
forequoted, Scene 3. The 64. Franciscus Zephyrus, Anno 1561.
is Franciscus Zephyrus, Epistola Nuncupatoria in Apolog. Tertulliani adversus
Gentes, apud Tertulliani Opera 1566, Tom. 2, p. 550, to 555: and Commentar: in
Tertul: Apologiam, Ibid: p. 591, 626, 627. The 65. George Alley, An. 1562
is learned George Alley, Bishop of Exeter, and Divinity Lecturer at Paul's, in
the second year of Queen ELIZABETH'S reign, In his Poor Man's Library, London
1571, part 1, fol. 13, 39, and fol. 46, 47: where he notably declaimes against
Play-bookes, and Stage Plays, as the fomentation, the fire and fuel of men's
lusts, the occasion of adultery, and other intolerable evils among Christians
or Pagans. The 66. Laurentius Surius, Anno 1566.
is Laurentius Surius, in his forequoted Councels Coloniae Agrip. 1567. See
Scene 3. The 67. Caelius Rhodiginus, Anno 1566.
is Caelius Rhodiginus, Antiquarum Lectionum, 1599, l. 8, c. 7, 8. Col. 353,
354. The 68. John Bodine, An. 1566.
is John Bodine, his Commonweal, l. 6, c. 1, London 1606, p. 644, 645. See
here p^ 483^ 484. The 69, Flacius Il. lyricus, Anno 1566.
70, Ioannis Wigandus.
71, Matthaeus Iudex.
72, Basilius Faber.
are Flacius Illyricus, Ioannis Wigandus, Mattheus Iudex, and Basilius Faber:
in their Centuriae Ecclesiasticae, 1564, etc. Centuria ^^, Col. 266, 279, 280.
Centur. 3, Col. 141, 142. Cent. 4, Col. 458, 857. Cent. 5, Col. 721, 1509, and
Cent. 9, Col. 259, 260. The 73. Theodorus Zuinger, Anno 1570.
is Theodorus Zuinger. Theatrum vitae humanae, Basileae 1570, vol. 12, l. 5, p.
1834, 1835. The 74. Ioannis Bertochinus, Anno 1574.
is Ioannis Bertochinus, Repertorium Basileae 1574, pars 2, page 669. Histrio.
The 75. Petrus de Primaudaye, Anno 1576.
is Petrus de Primaudaye, in his French Academy, London 1618, cap. 20, p. 205,
where he censures Stage Plays as unsufferable mischiefs. The 76. Antonius de
Brutio, Anno 1558.
is Antonius de Brutio, Super lib. 3, Decretalium, Venetijs 1578, Tom. 5, cap.
12. De Vita et Honestate Clericorum, fol. 4, 8. The 77. ^osias Simlerus, An.
1580.
is Ioanni^ Simlerus, in Exodum, cap. 32, Tiguri 1584, p. 156. The 78. Andreas
Hyperius, An. 1580
is Andreas Hyperius, De Ferijs Bacchanalibus. Basileae 1580. The 79. Gilbertus
Genebrardus, 1580.
is Guilbertus Genebrardus, Chronicon, Lugduni 1609, lib. 2, p. 212, and 314.
The 80. Paulo Lanceletto, Anno 1580.
is Paulo Lanceletto, Institutiones Iuris Canonici, lib. 2, Tit. De
Eucharistia, Lovanij 1578. p. 269, 270. The 81. Petrus Berchorius, Anno 1583.
is Petrus Berchorius, Dictionarij sive Repertorij Moralis, Venetijs 1583, pars
2, Tit. Ludere, p. 428: and De Episcopis in Tractatu Tractatuum, pars 4, fol.
25, number. 101. The 82. Lambertus Danaeus, Anno 1583.
is Lambertus Danaeus, De Ludo Aleas, cap. 5, et Ethicae Christianae, l. 2, c.
8, in his Opusc. Theolog. Genevae 1583, p. 107. The 83. Ioannes Langhecrucius
Anno 1588.
is Ioannes Langhecrucius, De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, Duaci 1588,
lib. 2, c. 11, 12, 20, 21. where he copiously censures Plays and Play-haunters
out of Lactantius, Cyprian with other Fathers and Councels. The 84. Didacus De
Tapia, Anno 1589.
is Didacus De Tapia, in Tertiam partem divi Thomae, Salamancae. 1589, p. 545,
546. See here p. 483, 484. The 85. Petrus Opmeerus, Anno 1590.
is Petrus Opmeerus, Opus Chronographicum Orbis Vniversi, Antwerpiae 1611, p.
186, 185. See here p. 481. The 86. Barnabas Brissonius, Anno 1590.
is, Barnabas Brissonius, Commentarius De Spectaculis in Cod. Theodosij,
Honoviae 1600, p. 208, to 210, where he largely discourses against
Stage Plays, producing sundry passages out of Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius,
Chrysostom, and other Fathers, to testify their unlawfulness, and lewd
mischievous effects. The 87. Ioannes Mariana, An^ 1590.
is Ioannis Mariana, Tractatus 7, Coloniae Agrip. 1609. Tractatus de
Spectaculis, professedly written against Stage Plays, where he proves their
unsufferable naughtiness, and unlawfulness both by Councels, Fathers, and
Heathen Authors. The 88. Petrus Faber, An. 1590.
is Petrus Faber, Agonistarum lib. Lugd. 1590, where he professedly censures
Stage Plays, and such like Enterludes. The 89. Greg. Tholosanus, Anno 1590^
is Petrus Gregorius Thosolanus, Syntagma Iuris Vniversi, Franec. 1599, lib.
39, cap. 5. The 90. Arias Montanus, 1590.
is learned Arias Montanus, De Varia Republica, Sive Commentaria in lib.
Iudicum, Antwerpiae 1592, cap. 16, p. 568, to 575. The 91. Iustus Lipsius, An.
1590.
is Iustus Lipsius, De Gladiatoribus lib: and De Amphitheatro lib: Antwerpiae
1584. where he not only describes at large the forms and several fabrickes
of Theaters, Scenes and Amphitheaters, together with the detestablenesse of
Sword-playes and such like Amphitheatricall spectacles, but likewise inveigheth
against stage plays too. The 92. Rodolphus Hospinianus, Anno 1593.
is Rodolphus Hospinianus, De Origin Festorum, Tiguri 1593, cap: 22. fol. 118,
119, 151, 152, 153. The 93. Carolus Sigonius, Anno 1593.
is Carolus Sigonius, Historia de Occidentali Imperio, France 1593. lib. 1, p.
32. See here p. 482. The 94. Erasmus Marbachius, 1597.
is Erasmus Marbachius, Comment. in Deutr. 22. v. 5. Argentorati 1597. p. 217,
218. The 95. Laurentius Bochellus, An. 1598.
is Laurentius Bochellus, Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, Parisijs 1599. lib. 6.
tit. 19. and in sundry other places already quoted. Scene 3. in the margent.
The 96. Ant. Guevara, An. 1600.
is Don Antonio de Guevara, his Dial of Princes, Book 3. cap. 43. to 48.
London 1616. p. 509. to 522. where the intollera^le mischiefs that Players and
Plays occasion are anatomized to the full, and their unlawfulness manifested
by the testimony of heathen Authors. The 97. Baronius, Anno 1600.
is that laborius Roman Historian Cardenall Baronius, Annals Ecclesiasticae,
Coloniae Agrip. 1609. Anno 120. sect. 30. Anno 179. sect. 47. Anno 201. sect.
34. Anno 206. sect. 4. and in sundry other places. The 98. Bellarmine, Anno
1600.
is that famous Popish Cardinal Robertus Bellarminus, Concio 6. De Dominica 3.
Adventus, et Concio 9. de Dominica Quinquagesimae, Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1617.
tom. 6. Col. 60, 61, 204, 205. where he censures stage plays and dancing as
unlawful unchristian Pastimes, especially on Lords-dayes and holy days. The
99. Thomas Zerula, Anno 1600
is Thomas Zerula, Bishop of Beneventum, Praxis Episcopalis. Venetijs 1599.
pars 1. tit. Ludus fol. 141. The 100^ Onuphrius, Anno 1600.
is Onuphrius Paniunius Veronensis, De Ludis Circensibus. Venetijs 1600. lib.
1. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4. et lib. 2. p. 120. to 136. where he at large relates the
idolatrous heathenish Original of Cirque-playes and Stage Plays, which he
there professedly condemns, quoting St. Cyprian, and Tertullian, De
Spectaculis, against them, which books are there verbatim transcribed. The
101. Paulus Windecke, Anno 1604.
is Paulus Windecke, Theologia Iurisconsultorum, lib. 1. Locus 38. Coloniae
Agrip. 1604. p. 110, 111. The 102. Bulengerus, An. 1606.
is Julius Caesar Bulengerus, De Cuco et Ludis Circensibus, De Venatione Circi,
and de Theatro etc. Opusculorum Tom. 2. Lugduni 1621. p: 71. to 90. De Theatro
lib. 1. throughout, especially cap. 50, and 51, De Scenae et Orchestrae
obscenitate, and de Infamia Theatri: in which books, he not only at large
relates the Original of Cirque-playes, Sword-playes and Stage Plays, together
with the several forms and parts of Theaters, Scenes and Stage Plays, with
the several sorts of Actors, and all other Stage-appurtenances, it being the
best discourse in this nature that I have hitherto seen; but he likewise
peremptorily censures Stage Plays (against which he produces sundry Fathers,
Councels and Authorities) as intolerable polluted Spectacles, which misbeseeme
all Christians. The 103. Francis de Croy, Anno 1606.
is Francis De Croy, his First Conformity, printed in English, London 1620,
cap: 19, 20. The 104. Severinus Binius, Anno 1606.
is Severinus Binius, in his forealledged Councels. See Scene 3. in the
margent. The 105. Gentianus Hervetus, Anno 1610.
is Gentianus Hervetus, Comment. in Clement. Alexandrini lib. 3, Paedagogi cap:
11. Parisijs 1612. The 106. Amandus Polanus, Anno 161^.
is Amandus Polanus, Syntagma Theologiae, Genevae 1617, l: 10, c: 25, 26. and
lib. 9, c. 35, p. 665, 666. The 107. Henricus Spondanus, Anno 1614.
is Henricus Spondanus, Epitome Baronij, Moguntiae 1614, Anno Christi 206,
sect. 2, p: 194, Anno 371, sect. 10, p: 393, Anno 399. sect. 5, 9, p. 445, Anno
469. sect: 2 p: 549, Anno 404. sect. 1, 2, p. 458. See Anno 59. sect: 8 p. 108,
Anno 325. sect: 52, p: 296, Anno 327, sect: 23, p: 351, and Anno 365, sect. 5,
p: 383. where he proves that Stage Plays were evermore condemned by the
Fathers and primitive Christians, as the very Devils Pompes. The 108. Philippus
Gluverius, An. 1616.
is Philippus Gluverius, Germaniae Antiquae, Lugduni Batt. 1616. lib^ 1, c: 20,
p: 181, 182. See here page: 457, 458^ The 109. Dr. Ames, Anno 1630.
is Gulielmus Am^^ius, de ^ure Conscientiae, 1630, lib. 5^ c. 34. p. 271. The
110. Dr. Thomas Beard, An. 1631.
is Dr. Thomas Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments, Edition 2, London 1631.
Book 2, c: 36, p: 435 4^6. These 110. Dr. Thomas Beard, An. 1631.
foreign and domestique ^uthours of all sorts, as well Papists as
Protestants. Historians, Statists, Civilians, Morralists, Canonists, as
Divines. To which I might add Mr. John Northbrooke, his English Treatise
against Plays and Enterludes, London 1579. Mr. Stephen Gosson, his School of
Abuses, London 1578. and his Plays confuted in five Actions, London 1580. The
2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters, London 1580. the latter of
them penned by a penitent reclaimed Play-Poet. The Church of evil men and
women, whereof Lucifer is the head, and Players and Playhaunters the members,
etc. written by a nameles Author, and printed by Richard Pinson. Mr. John
Field HIS DECLARATION OF GODS IVDGEMENT AT PARIS GARDEN, January 13. 1583,
London 1588. Mr. Philip Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses, Edition 4. London 1595,
p. 101, to 107. Dr. John Rainolds, his Overthrow of Stage Plays, printed 1599,
and reimprinted, Oxford 1629. I. G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors,
London 1615. A short Treatise against Stage Plays, printed 1625. and dedicated
to the Parliament: (all English Treatises professedly written against
Stage Plays by English men, and published by authority, which I would desire
our Players, our Play-haunters to peruse at leisure:) Mr. Osmund Lake, his
Probe Theological upon the Commandments, London 1612, p. 167, to 272. and
those 30 other forequoted English Writers, (page 485, 486, 487, 488.) whose
names and works I pretermit: all which being put together, amount to 150 in
the total sum. These 150 modern Christian famous Writers, I say, with See
Hermannus Schedell Chronicon Chron. AEtas 5, fol. 83. Iacobus Spielegius
Lexicon Iuris Civi^is, and Ioannis Calvini, Lexicon Iuridicum: Tit. Histriones
and Ludus, Pardulphus Prateus Lexicon Iuris Civilis et Canonici, et Hieronimus
Verrutius, Lexicon Vtriusque Iuris. Tit. Ludus, and Mai^ma: who there condemn
both Stage Players and Stage Plays. With Budaeus, Gothefredus, and others
hereafter quoted, Part. 2. Act. 2.
sundry others who^ I pretermit; have in their recited works, by a constant
uninterrupted succession from the year of our Lord 1200, to this present,
unanimously oppugned and condemned Stage Plays, (together with all See Act. 5.
Scene 8. and Act. 6. Scene 3, 4.
mixed effeminate, lascivious, amorous Dancing, the epedemicall corruption of
our present age,) as most pernicious, execrable, lewd, unchristian, heathenish
Spe^tacles, not sufferable in any Christian Church or State; branding all See
Act. 4. S^ene 1. Act. 6. Scene 12, 20. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3.
Stage Players for graceless, lewd infamous miscreants, who ought to be
excommunicated ipso facto both from the Church, the Sacraments, and all
Christian society, till they have wholly renounced their diabolical vile
profession, and given public testimony to the world, both of their reformation
and sincere repentance. And as all these recited W^iters, even so our own
Magistrates, our Universities, and all our faithful Ministers, both in their
public Sermons, and private discourses, together with all godly zealous
Christians from age to age, have passed the very selfsame doom and verdict
against Plays and Players, as I have Act. 6. Scene ^ p. 489, to 498. Act. 7.
Scene 2, 3, 7. See the Epistle before D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays,
and I. G. his Resutation of the Apology for Actors accordingly.
elsewhere largely proved, and our own experience can su^ficiently testify.
If then all these Protestant and Popish Authors, Magistrates, Ministers and
godly Christians, both at home and abroad, have successively from age to age,
from year to year, thus publicly, thus professedly condemned Stage Plays,
both by their words and writings, as most pernicious evils; and that not
coldly or slightly, but with the very height of zeal and earnestness; dare
any Christian now be so perversely obstinate, so singularly wilful, so
desperately audacious, as still to magnify, frequent, or patronize them?
Never, I dare confidently aver, was any one thing whatsoever (except only
some gross notorious sin against the express law of God and nature) so
universally, abundantly, professedly condemned by Councels, Fathers, Christian
and profane Emperors, Princes, Magistrates, States, and Writers of all sorts,
all ages, all places whatsoever, as Stage Plays, against which the Sea Cyprian
and Tertullian, De Spectaculis lib. Salvian de G^berna^. Dei lib. 6. Augustine
De Civit. Dei lib. 1, 2. and others in their forequoted places.
Fathers of old, and many Christians of late have written whole Treatises,
Books and Volumes with such affection and acumen, that we shall never find
them more sharp and piercing^ more vehement, elegant, and divinely
rhetorical, than in their Impressions against Stage Plays, wherein they far
transcend themselves. Yea such has been the harmonious unanimity of Writers
in condemning Stage Plays, and Actors, that I never met with any Christian or
Heathen Author ( Lodge only and Haywood, two E^glish Players excepted) that
durst publicly plead in any printed work for popular Plays and Actors. It
is true, that these two Players Lodge and Haywood, the first of them in his
Play of Plays, the latter in his Apology for Actors, thrust out in print by
stealth, perceiving Play Houses, Plays and Actors to grow into disgrace by
reason of sundry pious Books that had been written against them, by Mr.
Northbrooke, Mr. Gosson, Mr. Stubs, Dr. Rainolds, and others forerecited;
undertook the patronage of Plays and Players (as Acts 19.24, 25, etc.
Demetrius and his silver-smithes did the defense of their great Diana and her
silver shrines) for their own private ends, it being the craft by which they
got their wealth and living. But their ridiculous Player-like Pleas, ^avouring
of naught but paganism, ignorance and folly, were no sooner published by
connivance, but they were presently so soledly refuted, (the first of them, by
Mr. Stephen Gosson, a penitent Play-Poet, in his Plays confuted in 5 Actions;
the latter by I: G: in his Refutation of the Apology for Actors, London 1615.
both published by authority:) that they durst not, yea they could not since
reply unto them, there being so much against Plays and Players in all
writers, all ages, so little (and that little as good as nothing) for them,
that it is not only bootelesse, but impious and absurd, for any to endeavor
their defense, which See Dr. Rainolds his Overthrow of Stage plays, where his
words are ci^ed and answered.
Dr. Gager, In his two Epistles to Dr. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays, p.
264. etc.
Dr. Gentiles, and Ethicorum, l. 2. c. 8. and Polit. l. 5. cap. 8.
Dr. Case, who writ something in behalf of academicall Stage Plays only, (in
which argument they were likewise so utterly foiled and overthrown by that
ornament of our Church and Nation, In his Overthrow of stage plays.
Dr. Rainolds, as they were glad to yield the wasters to him, to See the
Epistle before Dr. Rainolds his Overthrow of Stage Plays accordingly.
change their opinions, and set down with loss;) durst never undertake; they
all condemning popular Plays and Plaiers, even in their Apologies for private
academicall Enterludes. Let therefore the numerous concurring resolutions of
all these learned eminent approved Authors, whose single opinions we highly
estimate in most other things, Homini mente praedito pauci sapientes, multis
insipientibus magis sunt vere^di. Platonis Sym^posium, p. 291.
overballance the prejudicate erroneous inconsiderate private and subitane
Opinions of all ignorant novices, or lascivious injudicious Players or
Play-haunters whatsoever, who are so prepossessed, so besotted with the love of
these most sinful pleasures, that they are altogether unable to judge rightly
of them: And let us choose rather to judge aright of Plays and Plaiers, with
all these worthy Sages, than to err with novices, children, fools, or lewd
ones, who for want of grace and rectified judgments, are Hebr. 5.14.
unable to discern between good and evil; contracting the sum of all our
present Resolves into this 50 Play-refelling Syllogism.

That which above ^50 modern Protestant and Popish Writers of all sorts, of
our own and other Nations; Argum. 50.
together with many learned godly Ministers and private Christians have
professedly written, preached, declaimed against from time to time, with an
unanimous consent, without any public opposition or control; must certainly
be execrable, unseemely, unlawful unto Christians^ Witness, Matthew 23.2, 3.
Luke 10.16. 1 Corinthians. 10.32, 33. Hebr. 13.17. 2 Cor. 7.15. c. 9.13. Ephesians. 5.
21. cap. 6.1, 2. 1 Pet. 5.5.

But above 150 modern Protestant and Popish Writers of all sorts as well
domestique as foreign, together with many learned godly Ministers and private
Christians, have professedly written, preached, declaimed against Stage Plays
from time to time, (even from Anno 1200, till now;) and that with a most
unanimous consent, without any public opposition or control: Witness the
premises.

Therefore, they must certainly be execrable, useemely, unlawful unto
Christians.

SCENA SEXTA.
Heathen Writers and Philosophers against Stage Plays and Actors.
will be ready to censure all the fore-alledged Fathers and modern
Christistian Authors, for Insani sapiens, nomen fert aequus iniqui, ultra qua^
satis est virtutem si petat ipsam. Horatius Epist. l. 1. Epist. 6
Puritans or Precisians, and so blow away all these their authorities at one
breath, the very title of a Puritan (as of old the Non ideo bonus Caius et
prudens Lucius quia Christianus: Vt quisque nomine Christiani emendatur
offendit. Tertulliani Apologia advers. Gentes cap. 2, 3.
name of a Christian) being sufficient to dash, to blast them all. I shall
therefore in the next place control the 1 Pet. 2.16.
madness of these Antipuritan Play-proctors with a squadron of such
Play-condemning Pagan Philosophers, Orators, Historians and Poets, as the very
Devil himself dares not brand for Puritans, though perchance some desperate
Players or Play-haunters will, against all sense and reason, because they are
better than themselves. I shall begin with Heathen Philosophers, Orators,
Morralists, and then proceed to Historians and Poets, whose names and works I
shall only quote for the most part, with those Editions which I follow;
because I have recited most of their words at large, Act. 6. Scene 3. and 5. p.
365. to 371. and 440. to 450. and Act. 5. Scen. 8. p. 245. to 252. on which you
may cast back your eyes. The first Play-condemning Heathen Philosopher is
Socrates, the very wisest Heathen, by the express verdict of the Delphian
Oracle, (witness Plato his Socratis Apologia, Socrates, Anno Mundi, 3590. aut
eo circiter.
p. 12. and Diogenis Laertij, Socrates:) who condemned Comedies and
Stage Plays, as pernicious, lascivious vanities; refusing to resort to
Aristophanes his Comedies; and persuading the Athenians with all the Graecians
to abandon Comicall Play-Poets, which they did accordingly: for which see,
Plato his Socratis Apologia, p. 22. Diogenis Laertij Socrates: AElian Variae
Historiae, l. 2, c. 13. Volateranus Commentariorum lib: 29. fol: 113. and
Plutarch: De Gloria Atheniensium, lib: p: 514. The 2. Isocrates, Anno 3630.
is Isocrates, that famous Orator, Oration ad Nicoclem, Editione Crispini 1613.
p. 45, 46, 47. and Oration De Pace, p. 321. The 3. Plato, Anno 3632.
is that incomparable Philosopher Plato, who banished all Players and
Play-Poets with their Stage Plays out of his Commonweal. De Republica,
Dialog. 2. Opera Lat. Basileae 1561. p. 580, 581. Dialog. 3. p. 585, 586, etc.
Dialog. 10. p. 696, 697. Legum: Dialog. 2. p. 800, 801, 802. Dialog. 3. p. 822.
Dialog. 7. p. 870, to 877. See Augustine De Civit. Dei, l: 2, c: 14, l: 8, c:
13: 14. Cicero Tusc Quaest: l: 2, p: 449: and here p: 448, accordingly. The 4.
Aristotle, 3640.
is Aristotle, the most eminent of all Plato his scholars, and the Coryphaeus
of all Heathen Philosophers: Politicorum lib: 7, c: 7, and l: 8, c: 3, 5, 6,
and 7. Francofurti 1601. Rhetoricae l: 2, c: 6, p: 136, 137. Hanouiae 1606: and
Problematum l: 3, quoted by Gellius, Noctium Attic: l: 20, c: 4. The 5.
Gorgias, An. 3660.
is Gorgias, whose censure of Plays and Tragedies for mere impostures etc. is
recorded by Plutarch, De Audiendis Poetis lib: p: 26. The 6. Cicero, An. 3904.
is M: Tullius Cicero, the Prince of Roman Orators, Oration pro Pub: Quinctio,
in his works Aureliae Alobrogum, 1608, tom: 1, p: 225. Epist: lib: 7, ad
Marium. Epist. 1, tom. 2, p: 53. Tusculanarum Quaest: l: 2, page: 449, and lib:
4, page 472, 473. De Legibus lib. 1. page 593. and lib. 2. p. 598. B, C. and De
Republica lib. 4. quoted by St. Augustine De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 9. The 7.
Seneca, An. 4020.
is Lu: Annaeus Seneca, the divinest and most absolute heathen Morralist,
Epist. 7.90, 122, 123. Opera Coloniae Alobr. 1614. p. 154, 155, 377, etc. 505.
and Naturalium Quaest. l. 7. c. 31, 32. p. 952, 953. De Vita Beata, c. 12, 13,
14. p. 636, 637. De Brevitate Vitae c. 12. p. 707, 708. and Controversiarum l.
1. Proaemium p. 966, 967. The 8. Aulus Gellius, An. 4050.
is Aulus Gellius, Noctium Atticarum l. 20. c. 4. Edit. 1592. p. 644, 645. The
9. Plinius Secundus, An. 4070.
is C. Plinius Secundus, Naturalis Historiae l. 36. c. 15. Coloniae Alobr.
1616. p. 404. and l. 10. c. 51. p. 500. Epistolarum lib. 4. Epistola 22.
Coloniae Alobr. 1610. p. 185, 186, 187. and Panegyric: Trajano dictus, p. 38,
45. See here page 462, 463. The 10. Macrobius, An. 4100.
is Macrobius Ambrosius Aurelianus, De Somno Scipionis, lib. 1. Edit. 1607. p.
20. Saturnaliorum l. 2. c. 1. and 7. p. 386, 387, 408. to 412, and l. 3. cap.
14. p. 456. to 460. The 11. M. Aurelius An. 4150.
is Marcus Aurelius Antonius, that worthy Roman Emperor and Philosopher, in his
Epistle to Lambert: Epist. 12. in the Book entitled M: Aurelius; where it is
recorded: and in Guevara his Dial of Princes, l. 3. c. 45, 46, 47. See here p.
318, 319, 463, 464. The 12. Athenaeus, An. 4150.
is Athenaeus, Dipnosophistarum l. 2. c. 1. Edit. Basileae, 1556. p. p. 67. l.
6. c. 1. p. 364. l. 4. c. 17. p. 249, 250. l. 5. c. 4. p. 314, to 319. l. 11.
c. 3. p. 734. See l. 12. c. 7, 8, 9, 10. etc. 13. p. 841. etc. 18, 19, 20. l.
13. c. 27. and l. 14. c. 7. to 14. The 13. Diodorus Siculus, An. 3902.
is Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae Historiae, l. 4. sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Hanoviae 1611. p. 202. to 206. The 14. Dionysius Hallicarnasseus An. 3904.
is Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, Antiqu. Romanorum l. 2. sect. 3. Edit. 1590. p.
137, 138. c. 5. p. 151, 152. and l. 7. sect. 1. p. 634. See lib. 2. c. 8. p.
195, 196, 197. and l. 7. sect. 9. p. 700. to 707. where he describes at large,
how the Romans and Graecians spent their holy days in dances and Stage Plays,
which they dedicated to their Idols, as a special part of their worship and
service; which Idols had their Salij, Curetes, Ludiones, Histriones, their
dancing Stage-playing Priests devoted to their service: their Circenses and
THEATRALES POMPAE et Spectacula (Ib. p. 197, 709, 712, 714, 715.) as this
Author often times styles them; an infallible evidence, that Stage Plays are
the very See here p. 42 to 61, and 561, to 568.
Pomps of the Devil: which Plays says this Author (p. 709) were antiquated
and abolished by the Lacedaemonians, though some other Greeks and the ancient
Romans out of a superstition to their Idols who exacted them at their hands,
did still retain them. The 15. Salustius, An. 3906.
is C. Cris^ius Salustius, an ancient Roman Historian, In his Bellum
Ca^ilinarium, Opera: Coloniae Agrip. 1615. p. 22, 23. and Bellum Iugurthinum,
p. 159. The 16. Valerius Maximus, An. 3990.
is Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. cap. 4. and cap. 6. sect. 7. Raphelengij 1612. p.
56, 57, 58, 59, 60. and l. 6. c. 3. sect. 12. p. 237. The 17. Titus Livius, An.
4020.
is Titus Livius Patavinus, that exce^lent Roman Historian, Historiae l. 7.
sect. 2, 3. Francofurti 1600. p. 255, 256. The 18. Corn. Tacitus, An. 4070.
is Cornelius Tacitus, Annalium l. 1. sect. 14. Edit. 1614. p. 44, 45. l. 4.
sect. 3. p. 139, 140. l. 14. sect. 2, 3. p, 301. to 305. l. 15. sect^ 11. p.
360. l. 16. sect. 1. p. 366, 367. Historiae l. 2. sect. 22. p. 481, 482. De
Moribus Germanorum, l. sect. 6. p. 615. and De Oratoribus Dialogus, sect. 14,
15, 16. p^ 679, 681, 682. which Dialogue though fathered upon him by some, is
yet attributed and that truly to Quintilian, (a 19. Quinctilian, 4050.
Heathen Author) by most: where, as he complains of the effeminacie and
lasciviousness of Orators language in these words. ( Neque ^nim oratorius,
immo hercule ne virilis quidem cultus est quo plerique temporum nostrorum
actores ita utuntur ut lascivia verborum, et levi^ate sententiarum, et licentia
compositionis, histrionales modo exprimant, quodque vix auditu fas esse debeat,
laudis et gloriae et ingenij loco plerique jactani, cantari saltarique
commentarios suos. Vnde oritur illa faeda et praepostera, sed tamen frequens
quibusdam exclamatio, ut oratores nostri temere dicere, histriones diserte
saltare dicuntur, etc.) So he informs us whence this evil and the decay of
eloquence and all other arts did spring; and that was from the ill education,
the idleness of youth, and their resort to Stage Plays: which he thus notably
expresses. Quis enim ignorant et eloquentiam et caeteras arts descivisse ab
ista veteri gloria, non inopia hominum, sed desidia juventutis, et negligentia
parentum, et inscientia praecipientium, et oblivione moris antiqui? quae mala
primum in urbe nata, mox per Italiam fusa, jam in provincias manant etc. Iam
primum suus cuique filius ex casta parente natus, non in cella emptae nutricis,
sed gremio ac sinu See Genesis 21.^ Exodus 2.8, 9. 1 Samuel 1.23. 1 Kings 3.21. Isay
49.15. ^am. 4.3, 4. 1 Timothy 5.10. Luke 11.27. Plutarch De Puerorum Educati^ne l.
p. 4, 5. Gellius Noctium Atti^caru^, l. 12, c. 1, p. 368, etc. Macrobius
Saturnalior. l. 5, c. 11, p. 545. Aristotle Polit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 44. Henricus
Stephanus Horodoti Apologia p. 46. Case Polit. l. 7. c. 17. p. 689. to 696.
with infinite others, that all women who have milk ought to nurse their own
children; because God has given them breasts for that purpose; because all
other creatures that have milk give suck unto their own: because it is a
sign of unnaturalness and want of love to their children, not to do it;
because many children miscarry by reason of nurses negligence; because else
they are apt to degenerate, and to savor of the qualities they suck in with
their milk, because they are a part of themselves which they nourish in their
womb, therefore they should nourish it out of it too.
matris educabatur, cujus praecipua laus er at, tueri domum et inservire
liberis. Eligebatur autem aliqua major natu propinqua cujus probatis
spectatisque moribus omnes cujusquam familiae soboles committeretur, coram qua
noque dicere fas erat quod turpe dictu, neque facere quod inhonestum f^ctu
videretur. Ac non studia, modo curasque sed remissiones etiam lususque
puerorum, sanctitate quadam ac verecundi^ temperabat etc. At nunc natus infans
delegatur Graeculae alicui ancillae, cui adjungitur unus aut alter ex omnibus
servis plerumque vilissimus, nec cuiq^am serio ministerio accomodatus, horum
fabulis et erroribus teneri statim et rudes animi imbuuntur. Nec quisquam in
tota domo pensi habet quid coram infanti domino, aut dicat aut faciat; quando
etiam ipsi parents nec probitati neque modestiae parvulos assuefaciant, sed
lasciviae et libertati per quae paulatim impudentia irrepit, et sui alienique
contemptus. Iam vero propria et peculiaria hujus urbis vitia paene in utero
matris concipi mihi videntur; HISTRIONALIS FAVOR, et gladiatorum eq^orumque
studia; quibus occupatus et obsessus animus QVANTVLVM LOCI BONIS ARTIBVS
RELINQVIT! quotum quemque inveneris qui domi quicquam aliud loquatur? quos
alios adolescentulorum sermones excipimus, si quando auditoria intravimus? etc.
A passage very applicable to our present times. So that Stage Plays and such
like sports in Quintilians judgment, are the depravers of youth, the
ingenderers of vice and idleness; the overthrow of all good arts; they so
prepossessing men's minds and tongues, that their thoughts and speeches are of
naught but Plays and Enterludes. The 20. Plutarchus, ^n. 4070.
is Plutarchus Chaeronensis, that eminent Philosopher and Historian, De
Audiendis Poetis, lib. Moral. Tom. 1. Basileae 1572. p. 26. Laconica
Apothegmata, p. 461, 462, 475, 486, 487. Laconica Instituta, p. 504, 505, 506.
Romanae Quaestiones, Quaest. 98, 107. p. 593, 600. De Homero lib. p. 151. De
Gloria Atheniensium lib. p. 514, 515, 516. Symposiacon l. 7 Quaest. 8. p. 262,
263. and Plutarchi Romulus, Francofurti 1580. p. 29. Pericles p. 51. and Solon.
p. 31. The 21. Emiliu^ Probus, An. 4072.
is AEmilius Probus, Excellentium Imperatorum Vitae, Praefatio, bound up with
Plutarches Lives, p. 356. where he affirms, that the acting of Plays was
ever reputed infamous, base, dishonest among the Romans.. The 22. Suetonius,
An. 4080.
is C. Suetonius Tranquillus. See his ^ulius, sect^ 39. Octavius, sect. 44,
45.68. 71, Tiberius sect^ 43, 44, 47. Caligula, sect. 18, 19, 20, 21, 52, 54,
55, 57, 58. Claudius, sect. 6, 12, 21, 28, 34. Nero, sect. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21,
22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 32, 54. Vaspatianus, sect. 19. and Titus, sect. 7, 8,
9. where he declares his dislike of Stage Plays, taxing those vicious
Emperors who either act^d, frequented, or supported them, and applauding such
who did suppress them. The 23. Diogenes Laertius, An. 4100.
is Diogines Laertius, De Vita Philosophorum, lib. 1. Solon. p. 46. The 24.
AElianus, An. 4100.
is AElianus, Variae Historiae, l. 2. c. 13. Edit. 1599. p. 33. to 39. where
he brings in Socrates declaiming against Comedians, as satyricall, invective,
injurous persons, who savor of naught that is good or profitable. The 25. Dion
Cassius, An. 4200.
is Dion Cassius, Romanae Historiae, Lugduni 1559. l. 42. p. 312.313, 325. l.
49. p. 553. l. 50. p. 558.560. and p. 575, 576. where he objects this to
Antony, Quod Cleopatra ludos cum eo curabat: and withal he brings in Caesar,
encouraging his soldiers thus against him, even from his dancing and
effeminacie. Nemo Antonium Consulem aut Imperatorem fuisse, sed Gymnasiarcham
existimet. Neque metuere quisquam debet. ne is aliquod momentum bello sit
allaturus, etc. Fieri enim non potest ut is qui regio luxui molli^ieique
muliebri indulget viro aliquid dignum vey consulat vel agat. Est enim necesse
omnino ut quibus unusquisque vitae ra^ionibus utitur, earum similis reddatur.
Etenim si quis vestrum Dancing therefore, esp^cially the learning to dance, was
reputed an effeminate, ignominious and sordid thing among the ancient Romans,
and all dancers were esteemed effeminate amorous persons. See Herodian Hist. l.
5. p. 267. to 275. and here p. 245. to 250.
RIDICVLE SALTARE, ac choream Bacchi ducere opus habeat, omnino is ab Antonio
superabi^ur ea in re: NAM SALTARE HIC DIDICIT: sin pugna et armis opus est,
quid tandem in eo timendum est? So lib. 51. p. 606, 607. lib. 54. p. 682. he
whers;tt; us of Augustus: Ac quoniam equites et faminae illustres adhuc in
Orchestra saltabant, prohibuit ne non modo patriciorum liberi (id enim jam ante
cautum erat) sed etiam nepotes eorum, quique equestris essent ordinis, amplius
id facerent^ A manifest proof, how ignominious a thing it was reputed among
the ancient Romans, for men or women of quality to masque or dance in public
or to act a masque or play upon a Stage. See p. 696, 697, 703, 704, 710. and
lib. 57. p. 798. where he records this to Tiberius his honor, that he banished
Stage Players out of Rome: Histriones Tiberius Roma exturbavit, The
unlawfullnes and abuses of Plays and Actors^
ARTEQVE EA INTERDIXIT, quod et mulieres ignominia afficerent, et turbas
darent. Lib. 59. p. 827. he writes thus in disparagement of Caligula. Nunc
statim revocatis histrionibus (whom Tiberius had banished and suppressed) equis
gladiatoribusque et alijs huiusmodi rebus, The prodigality and expense of
Plays.
immodice pecuniam impendens, et thesauros maximos brevissimo tempore exhausit
(a notable president of the prodigality and expense of Stage Plays) et
demonstravit priora quoque ista non judicio sed prodigalitate a se facta
fuisse, etc. and page 629, 630. he thus branded Caligula for favoring
Players, and acting Plays and Masks himself. Caius ab aurigis
gladiatoribusque regebatur, servus histrionum et scenicorum hominum.
Tragaedorum ea aetate principem, semper et in publico secum^ habuit, deinde
seor^im ipse, seorsim histriones, omnia ea quae hujusmodi homines potentiam
nacti agere ausint, peregerunt: quae ad eam rem pertinebant, ipse
perniciosissime quacunque occasion suppeditavit ac constituit, coegitque etiam
praetores ac Consules ut ea pararent: itaque Plays therefore were not every
day acted in Rome in this most vlcious Princes days, as they are of later
times.
fere quotidie fabula aliqua acta fuit. Principio ipse spectatorem tantum se,
ac auditorem praebuit, ac studio suo quasi unus e turba hominum, aut favit
cuidam, aut r^st^tit, ita ut aliquando adversarijs iratus ad spectaculum non
venerit. Procedente tempore multos imitatus est varijs in rebus, cum multis
certavit; nam et aurigavit, et pugnavit et It is infamous in this Authors
judgment for Empe^ors or persons of quality to dance upon a Stage or Act a
Play.
saltavit, et Tragaediam egit, semper haec tractans: semel noctu primoribus
patrum quasi ad necessaria^ deliberationem vocatis, coram saltavit. Which
Suetonius thus expresses. Caligula, sect. 54, 55.
Sed and aliorum generum arts studiosissime and diversissime exercuit. Thrax
and auriga, idem cantor atque saltator. Batuebat pugnatorijs armis; aurigabat
extructo plurifariam Circo. Cantandi ac saltandi voluptate ita efferebatur, ut
neque publicis quidem spectaculis temperaret, quo minus and pronuncianti
tragaedo concineret, et gestum histrionis quasi laudans vel corrigens
palameffingeret: nec alia de causa videtur ea die qua pertij, pervigilium
indixisse, quam ut initium in scenam prodeundi licentia temporis auspicaretur.
Saltabat autem nonnunquam etiam noctis; and quondam tres consulares secunda
vigilia in palatium accitos, multaque and extrema metuentes super pulpitum
collocavit, deinde repent magno tibiarum and scabellorum crepitu, cum palla
tunicaque talari prosiluit, ac desaltato cantico abijt. Quorum vero studio
teneretur, omnibus ad insaniam favit. Mnesterem pantomimum etiam inter
spectacula osculabatur, et si quis saltante eo leviter obstreperet, detrahi
jussum manu sua flagellabat, etc. A good caveat for all Pagan, all Christian
Princes and Magistrates, to beware of being besotted with Plays, or Actors, as
this prodigious Pagan Emperor and Nero, Antigonus, Commodus, with others.
others were to their eternal infamy. The 26. Justin, An. 4110.
is Justin. H^storiae lib. 6. Spirae 1610. page 79. who writs thus of the
miserable effects of Stage Plays among the Athenians after Epaminondas his
decease. Hujus morte etiam Atheniensium virtus intercidit. Siquidem amisso,
quem aemulari consueverant, in segnitiem torporemque resoluti, non ut olim in
classem, exercitusque, sed in dies festos, The prodigality of Stage Plays.
APPARATVSQVE LUDORVM^ redditus publicos effundunt: and cum actoribus
nobilissimis, poetisque theatra celebrant, frequentius scenam quam castra
visentes. Versificatores oratoresque meliores quam duces laudentes. QVIBVS
REBVS EFFECTVM EST (pray mark the fatal consequence) ut inter otia Graecorum
sordidum and obscurum antea Macedonum nomen emergeret: Et Philippus obses
triennio Thebis habitus Epaminondae and Pelopidarum virtutibus eruditus, regnum
Macedoniae, Greciae and Asiae cervicibus, veluti jugum servitutis imponeret. So
that the Athenians and Graecians Stage-expences, and their delight in
Stage Plays, Play-poets and Actors, corrupted their manners, emasculated their
prowess, and so brought them into subjection unto those, who formerly had
been captives unto them; as it brought the Romans into bondage to the Goths
and Vandals: a^ Salvian De Gubernation^ Dei, l. 6. and Carolus Sigonius, De
occidentali Imperio, l. 1. f. 32. inform us. See Atque ita omnia magnitudine
nominis ac maiestatis obli^us nocte in stupris, dies in convivijs consumit.
Adduntur instrumenta luxuriaetymp^na, and tripudia: nec iam spectator, Rex sed
magister nequitiae, nervorum oblectamenta modutur.
Justin, lib. 30. p. 254 to the same purpose, where he taxes Ptolomie for
dancing, singing, and playing. The 27. Herodian, An. 4230.
is Herodianus, Historiae lib. 1. Ingolstadij 1608. p. 29.31.55. to 74. and l.
5. p. 267. to 282. Where he exceedingly censureth Commodus and Antoninus the
first, for delighting in Stage Plays, Sword-playes, Actors, Gladiators, and
playing the Gladiator himself, to his perpetual infamy and the peoples
grief, contrary to his imperial dignity, and the earnest entreaty of his
friends^ which by consequence proved the occasion of his untimely death: the
latter for his dancing and delight in Stage Plays. The 28, Julius Capitolinns,
An. 4300.
29, Trebellius Pollio, Ann. 4300.
30, AElius Lampridius, An. 4300.
31. Flavius Vopiscus, An. 4300.
are Julius Capitolinus, Trebellius Pollio, AElius Lampridius, and Flavius
Vopiscus; in their fore-quoted places: Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 451. in the margent;
where they condemn Heliogabalus, Commodus, Verus, Carinus, the Galieni, and
other Roman Emperors, for fostering Plays and Players, on whom they spent much
treasure and time; whereby they corrupted their own, and likewise the peoples
minds and manners to their eternal infamy. The 32. Ammianus Marcellinus, An.
4370.
is Amianus Marcellinus, Hist. l. 28. c. 9, 10. London 1609. p. 340, 341, 342.
Where he first declaimes against the Senators and Roman Gentry, for their
play-haunting and dice-play; then against the sloth, the vanity and lewd
behavior of the common people, who flocked thick and threefold to the base
sports of the Theater, where the Actors were sure to be hissed by them off the
stage if they had not with some money bought the favor of the abject
multitude; which there did naught but clamor, shout, and raise up tumults. The
33, Ovid, An. 3950.
34, Horace, An. 3950.
35, Iuvenal, An. 4020.
36, Propertius, An. 4024.
are Ovid, Horace, Iuvenal, and Propertius: 4 famous Heathen Poets, who in
their several forequoted places, Act. 6. Scene 3. and 5. p. 369, 370.371, 452,
453, 454. condemn all Stage Plays and Actors, as intolerable mischiefs in a
state: and as the occasions of much adultery, villainy, lewdness, prodigality,
and the like; as their forequoted testimonies more largely prove, to which I
shall refer you. To these I might add C. Velleius Paterculus, Paterculus.
Hist. l. 1. Francofurti, 1602. p. 16. Taurus, Taurus.
the Philosopher, apud Gellium, Noctium Attic. l. 20. c. 4. who there labors
to withdraw his scholar from Stagelayes, with a speech of Aristotle. Together
with Macro the Philosopher, Macro.
tutor to Caius Caligula; whom he dissuaded from Plays and Players: as Philo
Iudaeus, De Legatione ad Caium, p. 1342. records: and that passage of Plautus,
Plautus.
in his Captivei Prologus, Raphelengij 1609. p. 105. where he writes thus.
Profecto expedit fabulae huic operam dare: Non pertractate facta est, neque
idem ut caeterae: Nequ^ spurcidici in sunt versus immemorabiles. Hic neque
periurus leno est, nec meretrix mala etc. An infallible evidence that most
Stage Plays are fraught with ribaldry; with bawdes, with whores and panders
parts; and that such Plays are lewd and vile, not fit for Pagan (much less
for Christian) Auditors, as this passage intimates. If then all these 40
several Pagan Writers, Philosophers, Historians, Poets of chiefest note, (which
none but Atheists, or men more desperately wicked, dare tax for Puritans) have
thus censured Plays and Players, as intolerable mischievous evils, even in a
heathen Commonweal; taxing all such for vicious unworthy persons, who
countenance or applaud them; can any Christian be so far past shame, past
grace, or hopes of goodness, as once to patronize them? Alas, with what
countenance or forehead can any Christian plead for Plays or Actors as
tolerable among Christians, which not only Plato, Seneca and Tully, but even
Ovid and Propertius too have long since doomed, as unfit for Pagans? With what
assurance can any one style himself a Plus enim ^ebet Christi discipulus
praestare, quam mundi philosophus. Hierom. Epist. 26. c. 4.
Christian, who in this case of Plays, of Actors, and such like branded
evils, comes short of all these Pagans? If therefore there be any sparks of
ingenuity, modesty, grace or goodness remaining yet in Christians, whereby
they may manifest to themselves and others, that they are, if not far better,
yet at least as good as all these Pagans: let them now at last declare it in
abandoning, in suppressing Plays and Actors, which they have long since
stigmatized as lewd pernicious evils. Alas what an intolerable eclipse and
blemish will it be to the honor, purity, power and holiness of Christian
religion? Et putamus nos salvos esse, quando omne impuritatis scelus, omnis
impudicitiae turpitudo, a Christianis admittitur a barbaris vindicatur? hic
nunc illos quaero qui meliores nos putant esse quam barbaros, impudicitiam nos
diligimus, Ethnici execrantur: puritatem nos fugimus, illi amant: fornicatio
apud illos crimen atque discrimen est, apud nos decus. Et putamus nos ante Deum
posse consistere? Salvian. De Guber. Dei l. 6. p. 237.
what a desperate hazard unto all our souls, Si non praestat fides quod
exhibuit infidelitas? If Christians should fall short of Pagans in condemning
Plays and Actors, and prove Hierom. Ep. 3. c. 4.
far worse than they, as too too many do? As therefore we desire to satisfy
our own consciences and others, or to secure our souls, that we are real
Christians as well in truth as appellation, let us now at leastwise equal, if
not transcend these Pagans in anathematizing and renouncing Stage Plays,
according to our vow in baptism, which Pagans never made, who have no such
strong professed solemn engagements against Plays, as we, See here p. 41. to
61. and 561. to 567.
who have our baptismall covenant to bind us, the concurring examples of all
the Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, before.
forementioned primitive Christians, Fathers, Councels, and modern Christian
Writers, to induce us to it. And if any out of ignorance, perverseness or
profaneness, have deemed it overmuch praecisenesse heretofore, to imitate the
piety of the forequoted primitive or modern Christians from age to age, in
censuring, in renouncing Stage Plays, as execrable, lewd, infamous spectacles,
unfit for Christians: let them not now degenerate so far beneath themselves,
as to prove worse than Pagans in this case of Plays, Professio enim religionis
non aufert debitum, sed auge^: quia adsumptio religiosi nominis, sponsio est
devotionis: ac per hoc tanto plus quispiam debet opere, quanto plus promiserit
professione. Sal^ian. ad Eccl^^^am Catholicam l. 2. p. 382.
whom they should far excel: but rather subscribe to this 51 Play-refelling
Argument; which will certainly condemn and shame them, if it convince them
not; with which I shall close up this Scene.

That which 40 Heathen Writers, Philosophers, Argum. 51.
Historians, Orators and Poets of chiefest note, have unanimously censured,
condemned from the very principles and remainders of corrupt nature, and their
own experimental knowledge of its lewd pernicious effects; must doubtless be
sinful and altogeth^r abominable unto Christians: Witness, Romans 2.14, 15, to
29. Ier. 2.10 11. c. 18.13, 14.

But these 40 recited Heathen Writers, Philosophers, Historians, Orators, and
Poets of chiefest note, have unanimously censured and condemned Stage Plays,
from the very principles and remainders of corrupt nature, and their own
experimental knowledge of their many lewd pernicious effects: Witness the
premises, and Act. 6. Scene 3. and 5.

Therefore they must doubtless be sinful, and altogether abominable unto
Christians.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
THe seventh Squadron is composed of sundry Pagan See Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 455.
to 458 and the Authors there quoted.
ancient Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Grecians, Romans, Germans, Massilienses,
Goathes and Vandals: If upon Heathen Magistrates, Emperors, or Princes, we
shall see See Act. 6. Scene 5^ p. 448, 449, 458, to 466.
Licurgus, Solon, Plato, Socrates, Themistocles, Scipio Nassica, Trebonius
Rufinus, Iunins Mauricus, together with Augustus Caesar, Tiberius, Nero,
Trajan, Marcus Aurelius, Domitia^, Iulia^, and the whole Roman Senate,
excluding, suppressing, condemning Plays and Actors, as the occasions of much
vic^ and lewdness; the fomenters of whoredom, effeminacie, idleness, etc.
the corrupters of the peoples minds and manners; the authors of many tumults,
discords, disorders; the causes of much prodigality, of many intolerable
mischiefs in a state: as I have more largly manifested, Act. 6. Scen. 3.4, 5.
to 20. on which you may reflect. If we look on Christian States or Nations,
we shall discer^e the Sea Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 467. and Act. 7. Scene 2. p.
552. to 557
whole State and Nation of the Jews both before and since Christ's time,
together with See Act. 7. Scene 2. p. 552. to 574.
all the primitive Christians, the Sea here Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 220.228. to
232. and Act 7. Scene 3. p. 636. and Andreas Fricius De Republica Emendanda,
lib. 1. c. 17. and 21. p. 90.
Waldenses, Albigenses, and French Protestants; the Cities of Geneva, Tigure,
Basil, and the Sea Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 485. to 498.
whole State of England in sundry Acts of Parliament, condemning, suppressing
Plays and Players, as most profane unchristian Spectacles, not tolerable in
any Christian Republike: Witness Act. 6. Scene 3^ 4, 5, 12. and Act. 7. Scene
2, 3, 4, 5. on which you may cast your eyes. If we desire any precedents of
Christian Emperors, Princes, Magistrates; we have not only the examples of
Noah, Melchizedeck, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Ioshuah, David,
Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, with other godly Patriarchs, Kings and Princes,
recorded in the Scriptures for our Christian imitation; who were so far from
ch^rishing from approving Enterludes, Mummeries, Masks or Stage Plays,
either in their Palaces, Courts or Kingdoms (as too many Princes since have
done) that we never read in Scripture, nor in any other Story whatsoever, that
they were so much as once experimentally acquainted with them; See here p 466,
467. and 552. to 557. accordingly.
the whole Jewish Nation (some few Apostates only excepted) oppugning them
from time to time (and so by consequence th^se Patriarchs, Magistrates and
Princes too.) as opposite to their religion, manners, laws and government, as
I have elsewhere largely proved: (Which me thinks should somewhat move all
Christian Princes and Governors to abandon Stagep^aies now, since they can
find no King, no pious person in all the Bible, that ever harbored or beheld
them heretofore:) But likewise the patterns of See Act. 6. Scene 5 p. 468. to
472. and Act. 7. Scene 3. p. 656. to 664.
Constantine, Theodosius, Leo, Anthemius, Justinian, Valentinian, Valens,
Gratian, See Bochellus Decreta Ecclesiae G^ll. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 39. and Tit.
10^ c. 6. p. 549, 593.
Charles the Great, Theodoricus, Henry, the 3. Emperor of that name, Philip
Augustus King of France; our famous See Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 489. to 493.
Queen Elizabeth, and her Counsel, with our London Magistrates, and
Universities in her reign, who all suppressed, inhibited Stage Plays,
Sword-playes, and Actors, as unsufferable mischiefs in any Christian State or
City. To these I might add Fredericus Lindebrogus, Codex Legum Antiquarum p.
1163.
Lodovicus the Emperor, who by his public Edicts (agreeing verbatim with the
the 7. and 8. forequoted Canons of Synodus Turon^nsis 3. p. 589, 590.)
inhibited all Ministers all Clergy men from Stage Plays, hunting, hauking etc.
Together with See Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 7. cap. 22, 25. p. 581.
Charles the 9. and Henry 3. of France, (who by their solemn Laws and Edicts
prohibited all Stage Plays, all dancing on Lords-dayes, or other solemn
annual festivals, under pain of imprison^ment, and other penalties to be
inflicted by the Magistrates;) and our own most gracious Sovereign Lord, King
CHARLES; who together with the whole Court of Parliament, in the first year of
his Highness Reign, enacted this most pious Play-condemning Law, (entitled, 1
Car. cap. 1.
An Act for publishing of diverse abuses committed on the Lords day, called
Sunday.) Forasmuch as there is nothing more acceptable to God, than the true
and sincere worship of him, according to his holy will, and that the Sea 5. and
6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. Which enioyns men to spend the Lords day only and wholly in
hearing and reading of Gods word, in prayer and praises unto God, and such
other religious duties.
holy keeping of the Lords day, is a principal part of the true service of
God, which in very many places of this Realm has been, and now is profaned
and neglected by a disorderly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting
Bearebaiting, Bull-baiting, ENTERLVDES, COMMON PLAYS, and Which includes
Dancing, Dicing, Bowling, Cards, and all other games and sports, which are
unlawful on this day. See all the forequoted Councels, Canons, and Imperial
Constistutions, Act. 7. Scene 3. and Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 240. to 244. and Dr.
Featly his Handmaid of Devotion Edit. 2. p. 498. accordingly.
other unlawful exercises and pastimes, upon the Lords day. And for that many
quarrels, bloodsheds, and other great inconveniences have grown by the resort
and concourse of people going out of their own parishes to such disordered and
unlawful exercises and pastimes, neglecting Devine service both in their own
parishes and elsewhere. Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That from and after 40 days next
after the end of this Session of Parliament assembled, there shall be no
meetings, assemblies or concourse of people out of This clause extends to all
who go out of their parishes to unlawful sports or pastimes.
their own parishes on the Lords day within this Realm of England, or any the
Dominions thereof for any sports or pastimes whatsoever: nor any Bull-baiting,
Beare-baiting, ENTERLVDES, COMMON PLAYS, or other unlawful exercises or
pastimes used by any person or persons This clause extends to all who use any
unlawful sports or pastimes within their own parishes.
within their own parishes: and that every person or persons offending in any
the premises shall forfeit for every offense 3 shillings 4 pence: the same to
be employed and converted to the use of the poor of the Parish where such
offenses shall be committed. And that any one Justice of the peace of the
County^ or the chief Officer or Officers of any City, Borough or Town
Corporate where such offense shall be committed, upon his or their view, or
confession of the party, or proof of any one or more witness by oath, which
the said Justice or chief Officer or Officers by virtue of this act shall have
authority to minister, shall find any person offending in the premises; the
said Justice or chief Officer or Officers, shall give warrant under his or
their hand and seal to the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish or
Parishes where such offense shall be committed, to levy the said penalty so
to be assessed, by way of distress and sale of the goods of every such
offender, rendering to the said offenders the overplus of the money raised of
the said goods so to be sold. And in default of such distress, that the party
offending be se^ publicly in the stocks by the space of three hours. Which
Act, being to continue unto the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament, only: was since recontinued by the Statute of 3. Caroli cap. 4. and
so it remains still in force: So that if it were as diligently executed, as
it was piously enacted, it would suppress many great abuses (both within the
letter and intent, which is very large) that are yet continuing among us to
Gods dishonor, and good Christians grief in too many places of our Kingdom;
which our Justices, our inferior Magistrates might soon reform, would they
but set themselves seriously about it, as some here and there have done. If
then all these Pagan, these Christian Nations, Republickes, Emperors, Princes,
Magistrates, have thus abandoned, censured, suppressed Plays and Players, from
time to time, as most intolerable pernicious evi^s in any State or City, how
can, how dare we now to justify the^, as harmless, commendable, or useful
recreations? What, are we wiser, are we better than all these Pagan Sages; than
all these judicious Christian Worthies, who have thus abandoned, suppressed
Plays and Actors, out of a long experimental knowledge of their many vicious
lewd effects? Or are we ashamed to be like our ancestors in judgment, in
opinion, as we are in tonsure, complement, habit and attire in this age of
Novelties, which Omnia debitum ordinem deserunt, hoc est luxuriae proprium,
ga^dere perversis, nec tantum discedere a recto sed quam longissime abire. Res
sordida est, trita ac vulgari via viver^. Talis horum contraria omnibus non
regio sed vita est. Causa tamen praecipua mihi videtur huius morbi vitae
communis fastidiu^. Quomodo cultu se a caeteris distinguunt, quomodo elegantia
caenaru^, mundiciis vehiculorum, sic volunt etiam seperare temporum
dispositione: nolunt solita pe^care, quibus peccandi praemium infamia est.
Seneca Epist. 122.
likes of nothing that is old or common, (though Illud melius et verius quod
antiquius. Tertullian De Praescript: adversu^ Hare^icos lib. et Vincentius
Lerin^nsis adversus proph^nas H^reticorum no^itates.
such things commonly are the best of all,) that we thus undervalue the
resolutions of all former ages in this ca^e of Plays and Players, preferring
our own wits and lusts before them O let us ashamed now at last to
countenance, to plead for that, which the very best, the wisest Heathen, yea
Christian Nations, States and Magistrates of all sorts, have thus branded and
cast out as lewd, as vicious, as abominable in the very highest degree; and let
us now submit our judgments, our practice, lusts and foolish fancies to their
deliberate mature experimental censures, abominating, condemning Plays and
Players, if not exiling them our Cities coasts and Country, as all these have
done: arming our selves with peremptory resolutions against all future
Stage Plays, with this 52 Play-oppugning Syllogism, with which I shall
terminate this Scene.

Argum. 52.
That which the ancient Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Graecians, Romans, Germans,
Massilienses, Barbarians, Goths and Vandals^ the whole Jewish Nation of old;
diverse Christian Countries, and Cities since: together with many Pagan, many
Christian Republickes, Magistrates, Emperors, Princes in several ages and
places, have censured, abandoned, rejected, suppressed, as a most pernicious
evil, as a very seminary of all vice and wickedness; must certainly be
sinful, execrable, and altogether unlawful unto Christians: Witness, Romans
13.6. c. 13.1. to 8. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

But such is the case and condition of Stage Plays: as the premises, and Act.
6. Scene 5. etc. most plentifully evidence.

Therefore they must certainly be sinful, execrable, and altogether unlawful
unto Christians.

CHORUS.
YOU have seen now Courteous Readers 7 several Squadrons of unanswerable
Authorities encountering Stage Plays and Actors, and giving them such an
onset, as I hope will put them with their Patrons quite to route, so that they
shall never be able to make head again; their forces being so weak, so few,
that they cannot bring one Council, one Father, one ancient, one modern
Christian or Pagan Writer of any note into the field, to maintain their cause,
against this army-royall of Play-condemning Authorities, which I have here
mustered up against them. It is not their long since conquered and confuted His
Play of Plays.
Lodge or His Apology for Actors.
Haywood (two scribbling hackney Players, their only professed printed
Play-Champions that I know of,) who can withstand their all-conquering troops;
which either several, or united, are impregnable; able to overpower to
vanquish all the forces, that the whole world can raise against them. Let it
therefore be your wisdom now at last to take the best, the strongest side, not
only in quality, but in number too. Stage Plays and Actors, (as the foregoing
Scenes declare;) have bin oppugned, condemned in all ages, all places, by all
sorts of men; Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, Christians and
Pagans; Emperors, Magistrates, people, Writers of all sorts, have bent, not
only their hearts and judgments, but their very hands, their tongues, their
pens and power against them: Yea those who are dead and rotten long ago, still
fight against them in their surviving works: Philippus Lonicerus, Turcicae^
Historiae, l. 1. f. 34. b.
(Licet ossa jacent, calamus bella gerit:) and they will one day rise up in
judgment (as they do now in arms) against us, if we submit not to them. Let
us, O let us not therefore be any longer beso ^e, befooled with these lewd
stigmatized Plays or Actors, as we have been in former times; but since all
Ages, all Nations, (yea those who loved them best and most at first, to wit,
the Sea Act. 6. Scene 5.
Greeks and Romans) together with all primitive and modern pious Christians,
Fathers, Councels, Writers, have thus unanimously, successively condemned,
renounced them, let us abominate and reject them too. It was the branded
infamy of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.
that they pleased not God, and were contrary to all men: and will it not be
ours too, if all these Authorities will not sway us? If Scriptures, Councels,
Fathers; if Christian, if Pagan Writers, Nations, Cities, Republickes,
Emperors, Magistrates, Kings, and Edicts thus severed, thus united, will not
stir, nor draw us from our Stage Plays, Play Houses and Actors, what then can
we conclude of our selves but this; Romans 1.24. to 29.2. These. 2.11, 12.
that God has given us over to an impenitent heart, a reprobate sense, a
cauterized conscience, if not to strong delusions, to believe, to affect these
lying Plays and Fables; that we all might be damned, who will not believe the
truth, which all these Witnesses have confirmed; but take pleasure in
unrighteousness, in ungodly Plays and Actors, See Act. 6. Scene 19, 20.
which lead their followers to destruction, and without repentance plunge them
into hell for ever, amids those filthy Devils, whose disavowed pompes and
works, they deem their chiefest pleasures. Let us therefore earnestly pray to
God, to open our ears, that we may hear: to incline our hearts that we may
believe, what all these testify and aver of Stage Plays; that so now at
last we may take our final farewell of them, See Act. 6. Scene 12. and 20.
as all true penitent Christians have done before us, and never return unto
them more, to Gods dishonor, the Republickes damage, or our own eternal
ruin; concluding from henceforth of all Stage Plays, all amphitheatricall
Spectacles, as Prudentius, that worthy Christian Poet, did many hundred years
ago: Prudentius Contra Symmachum l. 1. Bib. Pat. Tom. 4. p. 612. B. and
Lipsius de Amphitheatro lib. c. 20.
Heu! quid vesani sibi vult ars impia ludi?
Hae sunt deliciae IOVIS INFERNALIS; in istis
Arbiter obscuri placidus requiescit Averni.
And then we need no more, no other arguments to dissuade us from resort to
Stage Plays, when we shall thus adjudge them, the chiefest delights of the
infernal Devil Jove, who rests well pleased, well delighted with them, as too
many carnal Christians do; who will one day rue it, when it is too late, if
they now repent it not in time.

ACTVS 8.
SCENA PRIMA.
HAving thus at large evinced the unlawfulness of Stage Plays by Reasons, by
Authorities; I come now to refute those miserable Apologies, those vain
pretenses, or Ad excusandas excusationes in peccatis ista praetendu^t. Christus
autem non art illuditur. Hierom. Epist. 4. c. 9.
excuses rather, which their Advocates oppose in their defense; the most of
which are already answered to my hands. Apologies for Stage Plays are of great
antiquity. Tertullian in his book De Spectaculis, cap. 1, 2, 3. and 8. brings
in the Pagan Romans, (whose Tanta est enim vis voluptatum, ut et ignorantiam
protelet in occasionem, et conscientiam corrumpat in diffimulationem, aut
utrumque. Tertull. De Spectac. c. 1.
consciences the pleasures of these enchanting Enterludes had bribed)
apologizing for their Plays with great Quam sapiens argumentatrix sibi vid^tur
ignorantia humana, praesertim cum aliquid eiusmodi de gaudiis et de fructibus
saeculi metuet amittere. Tertul. Ibid.
acuteness; the fear of losing these their secular pleasures adding a kind
of sharpness to their wits. I find St. Cyprian complaining, Nam et eousque
enervatus est Ecclesiasticae disciplinae vigor, et ita omni languore vitiorum,
praecipitatur in peius, ut iam non vitiis excusatio sed authoritas detur:
quonia^ non desunt vitiorum assertores blandi et indulgentes patroni qui
praestant vitiis authoritatem; et quod est deterius, censuram Scripturarum
coelestium in advocationem criminum et spectaculorum convertunt etc. Cyprian de
Spectac. lib.
that the vigor of Ecclesiastical discipline was so far enervated in his
age, and so precipitated into worse in all dissoluteness of vice; that vices
were not only excused, but authorized; there wanting not such flattering
Advocates and indulgent Patrons of naughtiness who gave authority unto vices;
and which was worse, converted the very censure of the heavenly Scriptures into
a justification of crimes and Stage Plays; producing some texts of Scripture
in defense of Plays, as well as reasons; which this Father at large refells.
The like Play-apologies of voluptuous Pagans, I read recorded in Advers.
Gentes l. 7. p. 232. to 240.
Arnobius, Hom. 38. in Matthew. and Hom. 3. De Davide et Saul.
Chrysostom, De Consensu Evangelistaru^, l. 1. c. 23. De Civit. Dei l. 2. c.
29. and l. 6. c. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Augustine, and De Gubernatione Dei l. 6.
Salvian; who answer them to the full. And as these Pagans of old, so some who
would be deemed Christians now, (as namely one Thomas Lodge, a Play-poet, in
his Play of Plays, and one Thomas Haywood a Player, i^ his Apology for
Actors,) have lately pleaded as hard for Stage Plays, as ever Acts 19.24. to
29.
Demetrius did for his great Diana:) whose several allegations in the behalf
of Plays are soledly refelled; by Mr. Stephen Gosson, in his Plays confuted:
by the Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Plays and Theaters; by Mr. John
Northbrooke, in his Treatise against vain Plays and Enterludes; by Dr.
Rainolds, in his Overthrow of Stage Plays: by I: G: in his Refutation of the
Apology for Actors, (which you may peruse at leisure) and by sundry others See
Act 7. Scene 5.
forerecited, whom I spare to mention. The Players, the Play-patrons of our
present age, as their cause is worse, so Nulli enim peccatori de est impu^ens
praetextus etc. Sed hi quidem sunt praetextu^ qui nihil hab^nt rationis, n^c se
^ilo iure possunt defendere. Chrysostom. Hom in Psalm. 140. T^m 1. Col. 1110. C^ D.
their Pleas for Plays are no other, no better than those of former times,
which need no other replies then what these Fathers, these Authors have
returned: yet since their answers are now grown obsolete, and our Quid dicam
de iis nescio, qui cum semel aberraverint constanter in stul^itia perseverant,
et vanis vana defendunt; nisi quod eos interdum puto aut ioci causa
philosophari^ aut prudentes et scios m^n^acia defendenda suscipere, quasi ut
ingenia sua in malis rebus exerceant vel ostende^t. Lactantius De Falsa
Sapientia. l. 3. ^. 24.
Play-Advocates persevering in their former folly, proceed to justify one
vanity, one falsehood with another, disputing much for the lawful use of
Stage Plays (perchance to exercise or declare their wits in the unhappy
patronage of evil things:) I shall therefore address my self to give a
satisfactory answer to all their chief Play-propugning Objections, that so I
may pu^ them to perpetual silence.

Objection 1.
The first, if not the best Argument in defense of Stage Plays, may be cast
into this form.

That which is not prohibited, but rather approved and commended by the
Scripture, cannot be sinful nor unlawful unto Christians.

But Stage Plays are not prohibited, but rather approved and commended by the
Scripture.

Therefore they cannot be sinful nor unlawful unto Christi^ns.

The Major being unquestionable, the Minor may be thus confirmed. Acts 19.29,
31. there is mention made of the Theater at Ephesus, Theatrum est locus
semicirculi figuram habe^s, in quo stantes populi ludos scenicos intus
inspiciebant, unde a Spectaculo Graece Theatri nomen accepit. Bed^ in Acta
Apost. c. 19. To^. 5 Col. 658. and De Nominibus locorum in Actis Apost. Ibid.
Col. 672.
a place wherein Plays were acted: and in the 1 Cor. 4.9. St. Paul writes of
himself and of the other Christians in this age: We are made a Theater or
Spectacle unto the world, unto Angels, and to men. To which may be added the 1
Kings 13.8. 2 Kings 16.14.15 17. etc. 2.11, 12. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. and See
Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, Remigius, Beda,
Haymo, Anselme, Oecumenius, Theophylact, HRabanus Maurus, Lyra, Tostatus,
Gorrhan, Aretius, Musculus, Calvin, Marlorat, and others Ibidem, some of which
take it literally, that St. Paul did actually fight with beasts in the Theater
at Ephesus.
15.22. Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14. which mention horses, chariots, races, duels,
combats: alluding to the Olympian games, the Roman Circus, Sword-playes, and
other amphitheatricall Spectacles, which these Scriptures seem to justify;
and so by consequence Stage Plays too, which are in the selfsame predicament.

To this I answer first; Answ. 1.
though Stage Plays are not expressly condemned in the Scripture by name, yet
they are in other general terms (as well as Apostasy, Atheism, Act. 7.
Scen. 1.
already proved: So that both the Major and Minor are false. Secondly, I
answer, that the reason why Stage Plays are not by name condemned in the
Scripture is, because the penmen of it being Jews, were unacquainted with
Stage Plays, Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeo^u^ l. 15. c. 11. See Act. 7. Scene 2. p.
548. to 558.
which the Jews would not admit, as being opposite to their religion, and
pernicious to their State: wherefore they condemn them only under those
general terms, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. c. 4 17. to 25. 1 Cor^ 10.20, 21,
22. Tit. ^.3. Romans 12.^. c. 13.12, 13, 14. 1 John 2.15, 16. See Act. 7. Scene 1^
of Idolatry, sacrifices of Idols, vanities of the Gentiles, rudiments and
customs of the world, etc. under which they are fully comprised. Thirdly,
though the Scriptures inhibit not Stage Plays by name, yet St. Paul himself
in his Constitutions, (if Clemens Romanus may be credited) has condemned
Plays and Players in express terms, Ego Paulus minimus Apostolorum haec
dispono vobis Episcopis et Presbyteris. Scenicus si accedat sive vir sit sive
mulier, auriga, gladiator, cursor stadii, ludius, Olympius, choraules,
cytharaedus, lyristes, faltator, caupo, desistat vel reiiciatur. Theatralibus
ludis qui dat operam, vel desistat, vel reiiciatur. Clemens Romans Constit.
Apost. l. 8. c. 38.
decreeing, that all Players and Play-haunters should desist from Stage Plays,
or else be cast out of the Church; and the Constit. Apo. stol. l. 2. c. 65, 66^
other Apostles also decreed the like: yea the Sea Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5.
whole primitive Church in several general and National Councels, the
ancient Fathers in their renowned writings, and the holiest Christians Si ad
boni incitamentum divina praecepta deessent, prolege nobis sanctorum exempla
sufficerent. Isi^dor. Hispal. De Summo bono l 7. c. 11.
from age to age, have given sentence against them as unlawful Spectacles,
which the word of God inhibits as misbeseeming Christians: this therefore is
sufficient to disprove the Minor. Fourthly, the Scriptures here produced as
approving Stageplayes, do no ways countenance, but oppugn them. For first,
that Theater mentioned Acts 19.29.31. was not a Theater on which Plays were
acted, but a S^e Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 13. Philo Iudaeus in Flaccum
lib. p. 1305, 1306, 1312. Coc. Sabellicus, AEnead. 4. lib. 8. page 636. C.
accordingly.
place of public meeting, where malefactors were punished, Orations made to
the people, and the Magistrates and people usually met together to consult of
public affairs: A place much like the Praetorium, into which our Savior was
brought, Matthew: 27.27. or like to Areopagus or M^rs hill in A^hens, where Paul
made an Oration to the Athenians: Acts 17.19, 22. That this was such a Theater,
is evident: First, because such places of public concourse and consultation,
where speeches were made, and malefactors sometimes executed, were styled
Theaters: witness Et Atticis quo que Quibus theatrum curiae praebet vicem, Vna
est Athenis atque i^ omni Graecia, ad consulendum publici seeds loci. (...)
Sa^i^ntum p. 86.
Ausonius, Florido. ^um l. 1. p. 302.
Apuleius, Pro Flacco Oration.
Cicero, Tunc Antiochensiu^ Theatro^ ingressus, ubi illis consultare mos est.
Historiae, l. 24. sect. p. 474.
Tacitus, Pars maxima super Theatrum ^ir^aque, assueti et ante spectaculis
concionum consistunt. Romans Hist. l. 24. sect. 39. v. 542.
Livie, Apud Nonni^m: and apud Bulengerum, De Theatro l. 1. c. 32.
Philost^atus, Ibidem.
Varro, Ibidem.
Philo, Oration 32.
Chrysostom, Dion, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 1. p. 60. D.
Synesius, Iuvenal, Appianus, and Bulengerus De Theatro, l. 1. c. 32. where
this very text is quoted. Hence Eccles. Histor. l. 8. c. 24.
Eusebius and Eccles. Hist. l. 3 c. 19.
Nicephorus, write, that Ignatius with other Martyrs were tortured and put to
death in the Theater: yea hence Historiae l. 7. c. 30.
Orosius, (and out of him Annals Eccles. Anno^ 363. sect. 4.
Baronius and Spondanus) record; that Iu^ian the Apostate, commanded a Theater
to be built of the materials that were brought to re^disie the temple at
Jerusalem, in which Theater after his return from Persia he intended to cast
the Bishops, Monks; and other Christian inhabitants of that place to beasts
which should tear them in pieces; ut scilicet ibi esset Christianorum
carnificina, unde eoru^ religio videretur esse progressa. Secondly, the very
words and circumstances of the text a^^ure that all the people rushed with one
accord into the Theater, v. 29. as into a place of common counsel. Secondly,
that cause of this their concourse was, to prevent the decay of their craft of
making silver shrines, and to maintain the honor of their great Goddess
Diana: v. 27. Thirdly, Paul would have entered into the Theater to have made an
Oration unto the people, from which his friends dissuaded him: v. 30, 31.
Fourthly, that the assembly there verse 32. Fifthly, that they caught Gai^s and
Aris^archus, verse 29. Sixthly, that they drew Alexander out of the multitude,
v. 37. Seventhly, the Town-clerke made there a solemn speech to the people,
admonishing them to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly against Paul's
companions, whom they had brought into the Theater, since they were neither
robbers of Churches, nor yet blasphemers of their Goddess: informing Demetrius
and his fellow craftsmen, that if they had a matter against any man, the
Court-dayes were kept, and there were deputies before whom they might implead
one another: and if they inquired any thing concerning other matters, it should
be determined in a lawful assembly: v, 35. to 41. All which concurring
particulars infallibly prove, that this Theater See Theophylact, Lyra, and
others Ibidem, and Socrates Scholasticus Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 13. H^abanus
Maurus, De Vniverso l. 20 c. 16. and 36. Tom. 1. p. 248, 250.
was only a place of public counsel, justice and execution; not a Theater
whereon Plays were acted: therefore it gives no color of approbation to
Plays or Play Houses, no more than the Courts of Justice at Westminster argue,
that the Plays and Play Houses about London are lawful. But admit this
Theater were a place for Stage Plays, yet it affords no justification at all
to Plays or Play Houses. For the assembly in the Theater, which this Scripture
mentions, was Acts 19.29. to 41.
but a tumultuous concourse of Idolaters, without any lawful authority: and
that not to act or see a Stage Play, but to defend their Goddess Diana, and
their idolatrous trade of making her silver shrines, by which they got their
living: to persecute St. Paul and his companions, whom they accused as
malefactors, and to withstand the preaching of the Gospel, which would
suppress their trade and their Diana both together. This unlawful assembly
therefore, which both the Scripture, their own Acts 19.35. to 41.
Towne-clerke, and themselves condemned, is no justification

Secondly, that text of 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made (...), which the Fathers and
most Latin Authors render, Spectaculum; and our English Translations, a
Spectacle, or gazing-stocke: makes naught for Stage Plays. For what if the
Apostles were made a Theater or Spectacle to the world, to Angels and to men:
(that is, as Ambrose, Hierom, Sedulius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius,
Occumenius, Beda, Theophylact, in 1 Cor. 4.9. and Chrysostom. Hom. ad Neophy^os,
Tom. 5. Col. 619. C, D.
some Fathers interpret it; The whole world of men and Angels good and bad,
beheld the miseries, the afflictions they endured for Christ and his Gospel,
not only in one corner, but in all the quarters of the world. Or as Ambrose,
Remigius, Beda, Anselme in 1 Cor. 4.9.
others of them paraphrase it: They were made a wonderment, a laughing-stocke
to unclean spirits, and to the wicked of the world, who rejoiced at their
miseries, their torments, being glad to see them drawn to the place of
execution called [ Theatrum] a Theater, where the innocent Martyrs for the most
part suffered in the view of all the people, as our Traitors usually suffer on
a Stage or scaffold, erected for that purpose: both which expositions Beda,
Anselme, HRabanus Maurus, Lyra, and others, in 1 Cor. 4.9.
some good Interpreters have conjoined:) yet this no ways justifies but
oppugnes our Stage Plays. For first, the Apostles did not make themselves a
voluntary Spectacle, as all Players do; but they were made Spectacles by
others. Secondly, they were no Spectacles of lasciviousness, vanity, folly,
mirth, or wickedness, as Plays and Plaiers are; but of grace, of faith, of
piety, Hebr. 11. v. 7. to the end, etc. 12.1, 2, 3.
patience, constancy, martyrdom, and the like, which Plays and Plaiers are
not. Thirdly, they were Spectacles of Gods own institution, they being 1 Cor.
4.19. Acts 4.27, 28. Phil. 1.29.
appointed, called, destinated to their sufferings by God himself; whereas
Plays and Actors are Spectacles not of Gods, but of the very See Act. 1. Scene
1, 2, 3. and Chorus.
Devils own invention and appointment. Fourthly, they were memorable public
Spectacles of admiration, of Acts 13.7. 1 Cor. 11.1. 1 Pet. 2.20, 21.
imitation, both to the world, to Angels, and to men: Plays, Players and
Play-haunters were yet never such. Fifthly, they were real, not hypocritical,
histrionicall personated Spectacles, consisting of representations only, as
all Plays and Actors are. Sixthly, they were Spectacles 1 Cor. 4.9. Romans 8.36.
Psalm. 44.22. See Chrysostom. ad Neophytos, Tom. 5. Col. 619, B, C.
appointed only unto death, not to laughter: Spectacles of passion, of
compassion, not of mirth and pleasure: Spectacles only at a stake, appointed
unto martyrdom; not on a stage, to stir up laughter: Spectacles they were,
which the very See Tertullian, Exhortatio ad Martyrs, and Cyprian de Duplici
Martyrio.
Angels and Saints applauded, not condemned; which Devils and wicked men
derided, persecuted, not applauded: Spectacles, which were Cyprian Epist. l. 1.
Epist. 3, 4. l. 2. Epist. 6. l. 3. Epist. 5. and 25. and l. 4. Ep. 2. and 6.
the crown, the honor, not the reproach, and Cyprian Ep. l. 1. Ep. 10.
Eucratio.
infamy of Christianity, as Plays and Players are: therefore they give no
color, no approbation to our Playhouse Spectacles with which they have no
Analogy, but this alone; that as the chief agents in the Apostles and Martyrs
tortures, were desperate wicked men, envenomed, enraged with bitter rancor
against all grace, all goodness; even See Act. 4. Scene 1. throughout.
such are the common Actors and Abetters of our theatricall Enterludes. All the
argument then that our Play-patrons can collect from hence, is from the
allusion which the Apostle has to Theaters, to Spectacles; which being an
allusion only to the spectacle of a Martyr, at the stake; or of a malefactor
at the place of execution, as all Expositors accord; not to a Play or Interlude
on a Stage, subverts their very foundation, and takes them off from this their
hold, in which they had most repose. But admit, it were an allusion to a
Playhouse Theater, yet as thieves can never justify their stealing, nor
u^urers their usurie to be lawful, because the Scripture says, Matthew. 24.43
44. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2 2 Pet. 3.10. Rev. 3.3. and 16.15.
that Christ, that the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night: and
Matthew. 25.27
that he will require his own with usurie: no more can our Play-champions
conclude from hence, that Stage Plays are warrantable or lawful among
Christians, because St. Paul by way of similitude, writes thus of himself and
his fellow-Apostles: We are made a Theater or Spectacle to the world, unto
Angels, and to men. These two maine Scriptures being thus fully vindicated from
our Play-proctors wrestings, the other will fall away of themselves: there
being no analogy at all between a race and a Stage Play: an horse or chariot
for war, and a Comedy for sport. I shall therefore answer them all together
in St. Cyprians words. Hoc in loco dixe^im, long melius fuisse istis nullas
literas nosse, quam sic literas legere. Verba enim et exempla quae ad
exhortationem Evangelicae virtutis posita sunt, ad vitiorum patrocinia
transferuntur, quoniam non ut spectarentur ista scripta sunt, sed ut animis
nostris instan^tia mayor excitaretur in rebus profuturis, du^ tanta est apud
Ethnicos in r^bus no^profuturis. Argumentu^ est ergo exci^tandae virtu^is, non
permissio sive libertas spectandi Gentilis erroris; ut per hanc animus plus
accendatur ad evangelicam virtutem propter divina praemia, cum per omnium
laborum et dolorum calamitatem concedatur pervenire ad terrena compendia.
Cyprian de Spectaculis lib.
In this place I may say, that it had been better for these Objectors never to
have known the Scriptures, than thus to read and wrest them. For these words
and examples which are laid down as exhortations to evangelicall virtue, are
translated into apologies for vice; For these things are written, not that they
should be gazed upon, but that a more earnest vehemence should be stirred up in
our minds in profitable things, whiles there is so great a diligence in
Ethnickes in unprofitable things. It is an argument therefore of exciting
virtue, not a permission or liberty of beholding the Gentiles error; that by
this the mind may be more enflamed to evangelicall virtue by divine rewards,
when as men must pass through the misery of all toils and griefs, before
they can come to terrene emoluments. Nam quod Elias auriga est Israelis, non
patrocinatur spectandi^ Circensibus, in nullo enim is Circo cucurrit. Et quod
David in conspectu Dei choros egit, nihil adiuvat in Theatro sedentes
Christianos fideles. Nulla e^nim obscaenis motibus membra distorquens,
desultavit Graecae libidinis fabula^: era, cythara ^t ^ybiae Deum cecinerunt,
non Idolum. Non igitur praescribitur ut spectentur ill^cita: diabolo artifice
ex sanctis in illicita mutata sunt. Praescribat igi^ur istis pudor, etiamsi non
possunt sacrae literae. Non pudet, non pudet inquam, fideles homines, et
Christiani sibi nominis auctori^a^em vendicantes, superstitiones vanas
Gentilium cum spectaculis mixtas de scripturis coelestibus vindicare, et
auctoritate^ idololatriae confer? Na^ quando id quod in honor alicuius idoli
ab Ethnicis agitur, a fidelibus Christianis in spectaculo frequentatur, et
idololatria gentilis asseritur, et in contumeliam Dei religio vera calcatur.
Ibidem.
That Elias is the horseman or charioter of Israel, it yields no patronage to
the beholding of Cirque-playes, for he never ran in any Circus: That David
danced in the sight of God, it no ways availes nor justifies the sitting of
faithful Christians in the Theater: for by distorting none of his members with
obscene motions, he has ended the dance, and put a period to the Play of
Grecian lust. His Lute, his trumpets, flutes and harpes have resounded Gods
praises, not an Idols. It is not therefore hence determined, that unlawful
things may be looked on: those lawful things by the Devils cunning being now
changed from holy into unholy things. Let shame therefore instruct or restrain
these men, although the holy Scriptures cannot do it. For is it not a shame,
is it not a shame I say, for faithful men, who challenge to themselves the
name of Christians, to justify the vain superstitions of the Gentiles
intermixed with their Stage Plays, out of the sacred Scriptures, and to give
authority to Idolatry? For when that which is done by Ethnickes to the honor
of any Idol is frequented by Christians in a Stage Play, both heathen idolatry
is maintained, and in contumely of God, true religion is trod under foot. This
is St. Cyprians answer to the objected Scriptures, and with it I rest.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Objection 2.
THe second Objection in defense of Plays is this: See Haywoods Apology for
Actors.
That they are innoxious, pleasant, honest and laudable recreations, which the
ancient Greeks and Romans not only tolerated but applauded: therefore they
are tolerable among Christians.

Not no answer this objection with that exclamation of Commentariorum lib. 29.
fol. 113.
Volateranus in this very case of Plays: Sed quid nunc de faece hujus saeculi
dicam? quum virtutem ac gloriam veterum imitari nullo pacto valeamus, vitia
tamen omni studio imitamur. Iam scena ubique renovata est, ubique com^dias
specta^ uterque sexus, quodque long impudentius, ipsi Sacerdotes et praesules,
quorum erat officium omnino prohibere. Multo igitur severiores in hac part
Graeci, qui omnes suos comicos jamdiu aboluerunt, propter unum Aristophanem,
quamvis moribus mi^ime officeret. I answer first; Answer 1.
that Plays are no harmless, honest or laudable recreations, as all the
premised Authorities, and this whole treatise prove at large: this objection
therefore is but a begging of the cause in question. See Act. 6. Scene 5. and
Act. 7. Scen. 6, 7. Bodinus De Repub. l. 6. c. 1. and Guevara his Dial of
Princes, l. 3. c. 43. to 48.
at last after long experience of those intolerable mischiefs which they
occasioned, enforced by dear bought repentance, they banished them their
Commonweales and Territories by public solemn Edicts, as inconsistent with
their safety. And although some vicious histrionicall Roman Emperors, as Nero,
Caligula, Heliogabalus, Commodus, and others, reduced Plays and Plaiers, yet
the gravest Roman Emperors, Senators, Philosophers did still oppose and reexile
them as the seminaries of all vice and lewdness, and intoll^rable mischiefs
in the Commonweal: as I have See Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, 5, 6. and Act. 7. Scen.
6, 7.
largely proved. Wherefore we should rather imitate the best, the wisest Pagan
Greeks and Romans in abandoning, than the worst or lewdest in retaining
Stage Plays. Secondly, De Repub. l. 6. cap. 1. Guevara, Dial of Princes, l.
3. c. 43. p. 509. He^odian Hist. l. 1. p. 29, 31.
Bodine and Guevara observe) was not for any good or laudable quality in them,
but only out of superstition and idolatrous devotion to their Idol-gods, See
Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. and Godwins Roman Antiquities, l. 2. sect. 3. c. 1. to
11.
who exacted solemn Stage Plays from them as the most pompous if not serious
part of their idolatrous worship: which Plays (says Guevara) were dedicated
to them by the divine sufferance of the living God, who would that their
Idol-gods being but laughing-stockes should be served, honored and feasted by
jeastures, mockes and Plays. The truth of this is evident, not only by that
of Politicorum lib. 7. c. 17. sect. 77. p. 501, 502.
Aristotle; who prohibiting the sight of all unchaste fabulous Plays or
pictures, and advising the Magistrates to suppress them; comes in with this
exception: Nisi forte apud illos Deos, quibus etiam per leges lascivia illa
conceditur, et apud quos sacra facere aetate quidem provectioribus pro se, pro
liberis et conjugibus permittitur: by Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, Antiqu. Romans
l. 2. c. 5. and 7. c. 9. by Ci^ero in Verr^^, Act. 6. Oration de Aruspicum
Responsis, p. 524, 526, 527. Oration 3. in Catilinam, p. 452. b. Where he
informs us, that Stage Plays were exacted by, and dedicated to the Roman
Gods, who were honored and attoned by them: by Thucidides Historiae, lib. 3.
p. 291. Polybius Historiae l^ 4, p. 340. C. and Diodorus Siculus Bibl. Hist. l.
4. sect. 5^6, 7. p. 202. to 206. with sundry other Pagans: and by Act. 1. Scen.
1, 2, 3. See. Herodian Hist. l. 1. p. 29, 31, 55, to 74. and l. 5. p. 267 to
282.
St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei lib. 2. c. 4. to 15. and l. 4. c. 20 27.
HRaban^s Maurus l. 2. c. 10. with others Act. 1. Scen. 1, 2, 3. See. Herodian
Hist. l. 1. p. 29, 31, 55, to 74. and l. 5. p. 267 to 282.
formerly quoted; but by that also which Historiae Romans l. 9. sect. 30. and
lib. 7. s^ 2, 3. Valerius Max. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4.
Livy and Fastorum l. 6 p. 114.
Ovid have recorded of the Romans: who when as all the Fiddlers and Players
departed from Rome to Tibur in one discontented company, because the Censors
prohibited them to eat in the Temple of Jove, as they had accustomed: the
Senate out of their care to religion (there being no man left in Rome to sing
and play before their sacrifices) sent ambassadors after them to Tibur,
requesting the Tiburtines to do their best endeavor to persuade them to
return to Rome: upon which embassy the Tiburtines sent for these companions
into their Senate house, where they first persuaded them to go back to Rome;
but their entreaties not prevailing, they concluded to make them drunk with
wine, Vino (cuius avidum ferme genus est) sopiunt etc. L^vie Ibidem.
(of which they were very greedy) and then to put them into carts being drunk,
and so to carry them back to Rome; which they did accordingly. Where upon
their return, the Senate to obtain their good will, restored them to their
former privileges, and withal aut^orized them to go freely about the City,
and to act their solemn Stage Plays every year. Upon which See
Polychronicon, l. 3. c. 34. fol. 131. Volateranus, Comment. l. 29. f. 312 313.
I. G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 21, 22. Prudentius Contra
Symmachum l. 1.2. and Bib. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 910. etc.
Valerius Maximus descants thus: Personarum usus pudorem circumventae
temulentiae causam habet. Idolatry therefore, and the L. 2. c. 5. sec. 4.
pleasing of Idol-Gods being the chief, if not the only cause why these Pagan
Greeks and Romans allowed Plays or Players; their example grounded on this
reason, See 1 Cor. 8. c. 10, 20. to 32. 2 Cor. 6.14. to 18. 1 Ioh. 5.21. See
Act. 1. Scen. 1, 2, 3.
should rather engage all Christians eternally to detest them, than any ways
to approve them. Thirdly, admit that Stage-plaies were in high estimation among
these lascivious vicious Pagans, yet they were See Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7.
evermore execrable among Christians, who have constantly abandoned them from
age to age. It is therefore a great dishonor, a shame, if not a sin for
Christians (who 1 Ioh. 2.6. Rev. 14.4. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Phil. 3.17. Heb. 13.7 1
Cor. 11.1.
should follow the footsteps of their blessed Savior only, and those who
walk as he has walked; Levit. 18.13. Deu^r. 12.29, 30. Matthew. 6, 7, 8, 31,
32. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19. Col. 2.20. 1 Pet. 4^1, 2, 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.4, 5
See Act. 1. Scene ^.
abandoning all the fashions, ways and customs of lewd idolatrous Pagans:) to
swerve from Christ and primitive Christians as not worthy the following, in
this case of Plays; and to make the worst^ the most lascivious heathens, the
quides and patterns of their actions. Alas, where is our Christianity, our
piety, our obedience or our love to Christ, if we choose rather to imitate the
very vices of the lewdest Pagans than the graces, the holiness of the best
Christians? It was the brand, the infamy of the Jewish Nation; Psalm. 106.35. 2 Chronicles. 36.14.
that they were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works: and shall
it not be much more ignoble and sinful for us Christians, to justify the
lawfulness of Stage Plays from the bare examples of these wicked Pagans? O
let it be Mich. 1.10. 2 Samuel 1.20.
never be heard in Gath, nor published in Askelon, that any Christians should
grow so atheistically profane, so stupendiously impious, as to prefer the
lewd examples of the deboisest heathens, before the unparalleld patterns of
their most holy Savior, and the best of Christians: (alas, what need we run to
such precedents of impiety, when as we have better examples nearer hand?) but
since all Christian, yea^ See Act. 6. Scen. 5. and Act. 7. Scene 6, 7
the very best of Pagan Greeks and Romans have utterly condemned and exploded
Stage Plays, the very See Act. 4. Scene 1, 2, 3.
worst of Greeks and Romans only approving them by their practice, and that
to sinister ends: let us rather imitate the best, the wisest of them in
abandoning, than the very worst of them in patronizing, in applauding
Stage Plays; for fear we renounce our Christianity, and prove far worse
than the very worst of Pagans ever were.

SCENA TERTIA.
THe third Objection in the behalf of Plays is this; Objection 3.
See Haywoods Apology for Actors, where this Objection is made.
that they are not only commendable but necessary in a Commonweal; and that
in three respects: First, for the solemn entertainment and recreation of
foreign Ambassadors, States and Princes: Secondly, for the solemnizing of
festivals and triumphs: Thirdly for the exhileration and necessary recreation
of the people. Therefore they ought to be countenanced, continued, not
suppressed.

Answ. 1.
To this I shall first reply; that Stage Plays are so far from being
commendable or necessary in a Co^monweale, that they are the very greatest
mischiefs which can befall it: See Act. 6. Scene 5. and Act. 7. Scene 6, 7.
whence the wisest States and Magistrates have been so far from tollerating,
that they have quite discarded them as inconsistent with the public welfare.
So that the very ground of this objection fails, and then the particulars
cannot stand, which I shall now examine. For the first of them; that
Stage Plays are necessary for the solemn entertainment of Ambassadors, and
foreign States; though I will not take upon me to define what entertainment
will befit such personages; yet with all humble submission to better judgments,
I conceive, that common Stage Plays (to which every cobbler, tinker, whore, and
base mechanicke may resort from day to day, See Act. 4. Scene 2.
as many of them do) are no meet sports or entertainments for Non ^adem
vulgusque decent et lumina rerum. Ovid, ad Li^iam pars 1. p. 323.
Christian Princes, States, and Potentates; whose piety, majesty, gravitie
are so transcendent, that they cannot but disdain the sight, the presence of
such ridiculous, infamous, scurrilous, childish Spectacles, as common
Stage Plays are, which savor neither of state, nor royalty, but of most
abject baseness, though too many great ones (I know not out of what re^pects)
have vouchsafed to honor them (or John Sarisbury, De Nugis Curialium, l. 1. c.
7, 8. Bodinus De Repub. l. 6. c. 1. Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. p.
356. accordingly.
rather dishonored themselves) with their presence. For my own part it is
beyond my Creed to believe, that Christian Monarchs, Peers, or foreign
Ambassadors, who are (at leastwise should be) men of Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13,
14.
highest dignity, of Princeps par omnibus, sed in caeteris mayor quo melior.
Plin. sec. Pa^eg^r. Traiano dictus, p. 18.
eminentest piety, severest gravity, deepest wisdom, sublimest spirit, and
most sober, Facere recte cives suos princeps optimus faciendo docet, et cum
imperio maximus sit, exemplo mayor est. V^lleius Pater^. Romans Hist. l. ^ p.
134. Vita Princis censura est, eaque perpe^ua: ad hanc dirigimur, ad hanc
convertimur: nec tam imperio nobis opus est quam exemplo, quippe infidelis
recti magister est metu^. Melius homines exemplis docentur; quae in primis hoc
in se boni habent, quod approbant quae praecipiunt fieri posse. Plin. Panegyr.
Traiano dict. p. 38.
exemplary conversation, without any mixture of levitie, vanity, or childish
folly, (the least tincture of which in men of supreme rank, (though it be but
in their Nihil est in Rege ferendum ne ludo quide^ quod non aptum atque decorum
sit. Osorius De Regum Instit. lib. 2. f. 35.
sports) is Alia est conditio ^orum qui in turba quam non excedunt latent:
quorum et virtutes ut appareant diu luctantur, et vitia tenebras habent: vestra
facta dictaque rumor excipit, et ideo nulli magis timendum est qualem famam
habeant, quam qui qualemcunque habue^int magnam habituri sint. Senc^a de
Clemential. 1, c. 8. See Plin. Paneg. Traiano dict. p. 72.
no small deformity, no mean eclipse unto their fame) should so far
degenerate, or Summae enim magnitudinis servit^s est non posse fieri minorem.
Seneca De Clementia l. 1. c. 8.
descend below themselves, as to admit of common Plays or Actors, (the Sea
Act. 4. Scene 1. and Act. 6. and 7. throughout.
most infamous, scurrilous, ignoble pleasures and persons that the world
affords) into their royal presence. We know that See Act. 7, Scene 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.
many Christian, many Pagan States and Emperors, have long since sentenced,
exiled Plays and Players, and that the whole Church of God, with all faithful
Christians from age to age have execrated and cast them out, as the very
greatest grievances, shames and cankerwormes both of Church and State: We know,
that 4 H. 4, c. 27. 3 H. 8, c. 9, 34, and 35 H. 8, c. 2. 1 Ed. 6, c. 1.14 Eliz.
c. 5.39 Eliz. c. 4.3 Iacobi c. 21. and 1 Caroli c. 1.
many public Acts of Parliaments, even of this our Realm, have branded
Players with the very name, the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and
condemned Stage Plays as unlawful Pastimes. And can any one then be so
brainsicke, so shameless to affirm, that these anathematized heathenish
Spectacles, these stigmatized varlets, (which all times, all Christians, all
men of gravity and wisdom have disdained as the most lewd infamous persons,
are fit to entertain the noblest Princes, or to appear before them in their
royal Palaces, at times of greatest state? Certainly as Aquila magnas
praedas, non muscas; leo lupos, non mures capit. Case Polit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 136.
Eagles scorn to stoop at flies, or as magnanimous lions disdain to chase a
mouse; even so those generous Christian Monarchs, who have cast out Plays and
Actors as intolerable mischiefs in their meanest Cities; will AEquum quidem
est ut quam quis in alios legem statuit, ^andem etiam ipse non gravatim sub^at.
Diodorus Sic. Bibl. Hist. l. 13. sect. 30, page 494.
never so far grace them, as to deem them worthy to approach their Courts,
as necessary ornaments and attendants, on days of most solemnity. It was King
David's godly protestation; Psalm. 101.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
that he would set no wicked thing before his eyes; that the work of those who
turned aside should not cleave unto him: That a froward heart should depart
from him, and that he would not know a wicked person: who so privily slandereth
his neighbor, him (says he) will I cut off: him that has an high look and a
proud heart, I will not suffer: he that works deceit shall not dwell in my
house; he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight, etc. Certainly,
there is never a true Christian Prince or Potentate this day living, but is,
but must, or ought to be of David's mind, 1 Samuel 13, 14. Acts 13, 22.
he being a man after Gods own heart: therefore he can never suffer
Stage-plaies, which are wicked, lewd and heathenish Pastimes; or common Actors,
(who are See Act. 4, Scene 1, 2.
perverse, yea froward, wicked, proud, deceitful, slanderous, lying persons in
the highest degree) to come into his presence, or harbor in his palace. Prove.
20.8, 26 See Romans 13.3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
A King that sits in the throne of judgment (says the wisest King)
scatters all evil with his eyes: yea, See Gualther, Hom. 11, in Nahum, p.
214, 215.
A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them, Prove.
20.8, and 26. Needs therefore must a just, a prudent Christian Prince, abandon
Plays and Players from before his eyes, the one being the Act 6, Scene 5.
greatest evils to a State: the other, the Sea Act. 4 Scene 1.
very worst and most infamous men. It is true indeed, See Suetonii Caligula,
sect. 18, 19, 20, 52, 54, 55. Nero, sect. 12, 13, 20, 23, 25, 26, 30, 32. Philo
Iudaeus De Legatione ad Caiu^, p. 1342, ^o 1351 and the Authors forequoted, p.
144.
that some dissolute Roman Emperors, as before: and those other quoted in the
margent, p. 144, letter ^. See Plinius Secundus Panegyr. Traiano dict. p. 38,
and 45. where he much inveighes against them.
Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, Carinus, and others, have been much enamoured
with Plays and Actors: but this was only the blot, the infamy of these
shames of Monarchy, as De Legatione ad Caium, page 1342, to 1358.
Philo Iudaeus, Epistle 12, to Lambert.
Marcus Aurelius, Satyr. 8.
Iuvenal, De Nugis Curialium l. 1, c. 7, 8.
John Sarisbery, and their Suetonius qua
own Historians witness: who have recorded it only for their greater shame:
Iuvenal. Satyr. 8. John Sarisbury De Nugis Curialium, l. 1, c. 7. Polychronicon
l. 4, c. 9.
Res haud mira tamen cytharaedo Principe mimus, Nobilis etc. being the sole
encomium, that they have lest behind them for it. Their examples therefore can
be no good argument to second this objection, especially since See Act. 6.
Scene 5. and Act. 7. Scene 7. and P^in. Panegyr. Traiano dict. p. 38, 45.
the best Roman Senators, Monarchs, both Pagan and Christian have exiled
Stage Players, and suppressed Plays, as even Nero himself (who See Johan.
Sa^isbur. De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 7. and Suetonii Nero, sect. 20. to 31.
was most devoted to them, and most honored Players) was Suetoni^ Nero, sect.
16. Marcus Aurelius cap. 14. Plinius Secundus, Panegyr. Traiano dict. p. 38,
45. Alexander ab Alexandro l. 6. c. 9.
at last enforced to do, by reason of those intolerable oft-complained
mischiefs which they did occasion. I confess, that many Christian Writers
both of ancient and modern times, and among sundry others whom I spare to
mention, See-Vincentius Speculum Historiale l. 29. c. 41. See here p. 471, 472.
Vincentius, Historiae lib. 15. cap. 31, 34.
Olaus Magnus, Hinc enim mimi, salii, balat^ones, aemiliani, gladiatores,
palestritae, gignadii, praestigiatores, malefici quoque multi, et tota
ioculatorum scena procedit. Quorum adeo error invaluit, ut a praeclaris domibus
non arceantur, etiam illi qui obscaenis partibus corporis, oculis ^mnium eam
ingerunt turpitudinem, quam ^rubescat videre vel Cynicus. Quodque magis mirere,
nec tunc eiiciuntur, quando tumultuantes inferius crebro sonitu aerem faedant,
et turpiter inclusum, turpius produnt. Nun quid tibi videtur sapiens qui oculos
vel aures istis expandit? De Nugis Curialium, l. 1. c. 8. s^e^. 4. and 7.
John Sarisbery, and Regis n^curiam sequuntur assidue, histriones
candidatrices, aleatores, dulcora^ii, caupones, nebulatores, mimi, balatrones,
id genus omne. Epist. 14. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 714. B. See Epist.
85. p. 769. E.
Peter de Bloyes, ^rchdeacon of Bath (two ancient English Writers; Magna
peccandi facultas sequitur principatum: adest irritamentum gulae, copia vini,
et lautae gloria mensae; assunt corruptores, adulatores, ioculatores,
histriones, qui a^cem adolescentiae undique nituntur expugnare. Quod si tempus
disserendi daretur, monstrarem, omnes homines stultos esse qui vitam habentes
aliam in qua possint honest vivere, in curi^s principum se praecipitant. Ideo
vos tantum moneo, ut agrum hunc histriones et adulatores, ac alios nebulones
metere sinatis, quinigrum in candida vertunt; nullus enim vi^is bonis apud
principes locu^, nulla emolumenta laborum etc. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 105. p.
604. and Epist. 166. p. 711. See p. 723, 726, 727.
AEnaeas Sylvius (afterward Pope Pius the 2) and Mr. Comprehenduntur ergo hoc
titulo molles et delicatuli, omnesque voluptarum illicitarum ministri sive
artifices, quales sunt mimi, ludiones, circulatores, cantores, cytharaedi,
parasiti, lenones, et his omnibus deterioribus eunuchi, spardones, atque
cynaedi. Solent tales regum magnorum aulas, et urbes celebriores frequentare,
eo quod in illis quaestum uber^ im^^ sibi propositum videant etc. Hom. 11. in
Nahum page 214, 21^. See here page 479, 480, 481.
Radolphus Gualther, have publicly complained and bewailed in their writings;
that Stage Players, Tomblers, Fiddlers, Singers, Iesters, and such like idle
persons, have followed Princes Courts, and haunted great men's houses; that they
have there found access and harbor, when as experienced, virtuous,
well-deserving men, have been excluded, contemned, and sent away without
reward; these caterpillars and pests of the commonweal, not only anticipating
in the mean while their charity to the poor, their bounty to men to best
desert, but even exhausting their treasures, depraving their manners, fomenting
their uices to the public prejudice, and their own eternal perdition: But
this they censure as their shame, their folly and oversight, not their praise;
as did St. Chrysostom long ago, whose words I would these Objectors would
observe: Vis enim alia audire quae eorum ostendant dementiam? Quaenam autem
sunt illa? Theatra congregant, et meretr^cum choros illic inducentes, et pueros
scortantes, et qui iniuria ipsam afficiunt naturam; totum populum in loco
superiore faciunt con sidere. Sic civitatem recreantes; sic magnos reges, quos
semper propter trophaea et victorias admi^rantur, coronantes. Atqui quid est
hoc honor frigidius? Quid voluptate illa iniucundius? Ex his ergo quaeris
factorum tuorum la^datores? et cum saltatoribus, mollibu^ et mimis, et
meretricibus, vis dic quaeso, lauda^i? Et quomodo haec non fuerint extremae
dementiae? At sunt, inquis, infames. Cur ergo per infames reges honoras? Cur
civitates enecas? Cur autem in eos tam multa impendis? Nam si sunt infames,
infames oportet expelli: na^ cur eos fecisti infames? etc. Hom. 13. in 1 Cor.
4. Tom. 4. Col. 356. B, C, D.
Will thou hear again (says he) some other things which show the folly and
madness of these wise Lawgivers? They gather together Players and Theaters,
and bring in thither troops of harlots, of adulterous youths etc. making all
the people to sit on scaffolds over them: Thus recreate they the City; thus
do they crown great Kings, whose victorious trophies they admire. But alas
what is more cold than this honor? What more unpleasant than this pleasure?
Do thou then seek applauders of thy actions among these? Tell me, I pray
thee, will thou be praised with dancers, with effeminate persons,
Stage Players, whores? And how can this be but the very extremity of folly and
frenzy? But thou will say, these are infamous persons. Why then do thou
honor Kings, why do thou murder Cities by such who are infamous? Why
do thou bestow so much upon them? For if they are infamous, they ought to be
cast out, etc. It is therefore no less then madness, then extremest folly in
St. Chrysostomes judgment, to honor, to Court Kings or great ones with Plays
or common Actors: and a far greater frenzy is it for such to foster, to
applaud them, and to be praised by them; Praetereo Histriones a^que
ioculatores, et totius vulgi lauds, quas v^r prudens pro nihilo reputabit:
quia nulla est vera laus, nisi a veris proveniat laudatis. AEneas Syluius
Epist. l. 1 Epist. 166. page 723. See Plin. Paneger. Traia^no dictus p. 45.
because no true praise can proceed from any, but such who really deserve
applause themselves. Add we to him the verdict of laborious Gualther, Magnum
ergo corruptae et eversae disciplinae argumentum est, quod hodie in regum auli^
et civitatibus opulentis, mimi, ^udiones, molliculi, et voluptatum
inhonestissimarum ministri summo in pretio habentur, exclusis interim et
contemptis viris gravibus, qui consilio valent, et qui mu^tiplici rerum
experientia instructi sunt; ut interim de pauperibus et egenis nihil dicam
quibus principum aulas ne inspicere qui^em licet, et quibus per urbes
opulentiores vix transitus conceditur. Hom. 11. in Nah^m p. 224, 225.
who reputes it an argument of corrupted, of everted discipline, that at this
day Players, Iesters, effeminate persons, and furtherers of most dishonest
pleasures are in great request in Princes Courts and in great cities, etc.
which he there proves at large. To him I shall annex that notable passage of
Olaus Magnus to the like purpose, well worth all Princes, all Players and
Play-haunters most serious consideration: in his Historiae l. 15. c. 31. De
Histrionibus et Mimis. Where he writes thus. So styles he the profession of a
Stage Player.
Nemo miretur quod hac etiam pessima occupatione repl^t^ sit haec chartula
pusilla, nempe talibus hominum generibus, quorum nume^us est infinitus, et
tantae reputationis in curijs et mensis sublimium Dominorum, ut fere vel nullum
vel exiguum credatur adesse solatium praeter unicum hoc quod emanat ab
infamibus his Protomimis. Refert Trebellius, Galien^m. See here p. 465.
Galerum in tantum dilexisse scurras et parasitos, et id genus infamiae
hominum, ut poneret eos in secunda sua mensa. Si consilium Suetonii Octavius,
sect. 45. See here p. 459, 460.
Suetonij locus habuisset, tales mimi publico spectaculo virgis et flagris
caesi, remotiusque effugati fuissent: quod et Vincentius in speculo. Historiae
lib. 29. c. 41. de rege Galliae Philippo attestatur; quem asserit dixisse,
Histrionibus dare est daemonibus immolari, etc. And cap. 34. De abjecta
commendatione Mimorum, et utili laud prudentium: where he thus expresses
himself. Sed nec ignotum universis relinquitur, QVANTA IGNOMINIA PRINCIPIEVS
SIT, aut laudis cupidis a talibus commendari, The profession and end of
Stage Players, what it is.
quorum praecipua professio est infamibus colludere, turpibusque colloquijs
bonos mores corrumpere, eosque effaeminatos efficere, a^ libidinosos reddere et
luxuriosos; praeterea comaediarum more adulteria et stupra representare vel
concinnere, unde spectandi enascatar voluptas et consuetudo, ac turpissima
quaeque faciendi licentia perniciosa, et denique ad omnium virorum gravium
obmutescere rationem et censuram. Cujus rei testis est illa Plutarchi Cato.
Massiliensis meretrix, quae in actu publico prostans vestemque deducens, gravi
Catone vis^ descendere in Spectaculum, a gestu se statim continuit, et alijs
mirantibus, ait, severum virum adesse: qua quidem voce ostendit, long pluris
esse Aliquis vir bonus nobis eligendus est, ac semper ante oculos habendus, ut
sic tanquam illo spectante vivamus, et omnia tanquam illo vidente faciamus: nec
immerito. Magna enim pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis assistat.
Senec^ Epis^. 11. Vid. Ibid.
gravissimi viri aspectum, quam totius populi applausum. Quocirca, etsi cuncti,
maxim principes laudari appetant, TAMEN INTIME CAVEANT, ne id procurant vel
admittant fieri AB HISTRIONIBVS ET PROTOMIMIS NISI SIMILES ILLIS AESTIMARI ET
FORSAN ESSE VOLVNT. Vera enim laus haberi debet, quae a laudato viro
proficiscitur, quia a tali viro emanat qui virtute praeditus cum laud venit.
Sed haec peramplius verior esse judicatur, quae ex recte factis et justis
meritis, multitudinis etiam laud ^oncurrente procedit^: alioquin nihil aliud
nisi popularem auram aut scurrarum fucum captant: quo nihil instabilius aut
detestabilius inveniri potest. Igitur attendendum erit unicuique, Nota been.
MAXIM PRINCIPI in sublimiori dignitate constituto, ne sic scurrarum, mimorum,
histrionum, protomimorum brevi tempore delectetur spectaculis, uti immemor
salutis, perdito tempore, honor, laud, et bone nomine in uno momento rapiatur
ad aeterna tormenta, quae ab immundis spiritibus forsitan in umbra et forma
histrionum apparentebus et flagellantibus importunius sustinebit; sentietque
perpetuo flendum esse cum diabolis, sicuti in momentanea vita inconsiderate
risit cum stultis. Exclamandum hic merito foret contra quosdam alti nominis
viros, in sublimitate constitos, qui pro summa voluptate ducunt, scurras videre
et a^dire, nudas mulierum See here p. 387.
picturas intueri, et ijs delectari, atque alijs praebere videndas; quasi
propria caro, mundus, et daemonia non sufficerent ad infatuandum hominem,
creatum ad imaginem Dei, ni et studiose in suam irreparabilem damnationem
excitarent tot importunatissimos hosts, ignorantes verbum beati Gregorij,
dicentis; Talem te ostendis in cord diligere, qualem imaginem ante te geris in
oculis, etc. All which recited premises, together with that memorable See here
p. 462.
forementioned worthy speech of the Emperor Trajan to a Courtier, who
entreated him to hear an active Player: and that private advice of Macro, unto
Caius the Emperor; Philo Iudaeus, De Legatione ad Caiu^, p. 1341, 1342, 1343.
insane spectantem saltatores ita ut una gesticularetur, aut ad mimorum
scurrilia dicteria non subridentem, sed cachinnantem pueriliter etc. who
whispered thus into his ear, ne quis audiret alius, blande admonens: Non decet
te alijs audiendo spectandoque et usu caeterorum sensuum esse similem, sed
tantum debes in ratione vivendi excellere, quanto eminentiorem te fortuna
constituit: absurdum enim fuerit terrae marisque principem, cantibus, cavillis,
et hujusmodi ludis succumbere: oportet illum semper et ubique meminisse
majestatis imperatoriae, tanquam pastorem gregi praepositum, et undicunque
dictis factisque in melius proficiscere: (a good lesson for this scandalous,
ignoble, dissolute Emperor, who was not only a spectator, an applauder, but
sometimes Dion Cassius, Romans Hist. l. 59. p. 829. and here p. 462.
an actor too of Masks and Stage Plays to his eternal shame:) are
sufficient to disprove this crack-brain'd frentique Objection of an infamous
Player; That Stage Plays are necessary pastimes for the recreation, the
solemn entertainment of Christian Princes, States, Ambassadors, Nobles; whose
majesty, whose greatness cannot but disdain such base infamous spectacles, which
make their See Act. 4. Scene 1. and Act. 7. Scene 3.
Actors and Spectators infamous. Certainly he who shall read the Marcus
Aurelius Epist. 12. Guevara, Dial of Princes, l. 3. c. 45. to 48.
Epistle of Marcus Aurelius, unto Lambert; the Pag^ 38.45. here p. 462, 463
Panegyricke of C. Plinius Secundus, to the ^mperor Trajan: the answer of
Plutarchi Lacon. Apothegmata p. 462.
Agesilaus, to Callipides the expert tragic Player; (who saluting this royal
King, and thrusting himself into his presence, expecting and hoping that this
noble Prince would have taken some special notice of him, and spoken kindly to
him; and then perceiving that he slighted him, demanded of him; Do thou not
know me o King, and have thou not heard whom I am? who looking upon him,
returned him no other reply but this, Art not thou Callipides the Player?
intimating, that Kings should wholly contemn such lewd infamous persons as not
worthy their least respect:) or Guevara his Dial of Princes, lib. 3. c. 43. to
48. and Act. 6. Scene 5. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 6. will presently adjudge all
Stage Plays, all Actors, unworthy a Pagan, how much more then a Christian
Emperors, Kings or Princes royal presence; who have far more honorable,
majestique, heroicke sports and exercises to refresh themselves withal: as
tilting Barriers, Iusts, and such like martial feats, (the Sea Munsteri
Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 453. Halls Chronicle, part 2. fol. 5, 6, 7, 155, 156. and 75.
to 85.
ancient solemn festival entertainments of Kings and Nobles, wherein our
warlike Matthew Paris, p. 802, 819. Thomas Walfing^am, Hist. Angl. p. 112.
Halls Chronicle, part 2. f. 76. to 85.
English Nation have far excelled others;) with an hundred such like laudable
exercises, ^avouring both of royalty, valor, and activity; which if they were
now revived instead of effeminate, amorous, wanton See Act. 5. Scene 8.
dances, Enterludes, Masks and Stage Plays, See Act. 6. throughout.
effeminacy, idleness, adultery, whoredom, ribaldry and such other lewdness
would not be so frequent in the world as now they are. But admit this idle
surmise as true as it is fabulous, it then administers a pregnant argument
against all common Stage Plays: for if Stage Plays be meet ornaments for
Princes palaces at times of greatest state and royallest entertainment, great
reason is there to suppress their daily acting, and to appropriate them to
such times, such places, such purposes as these, Vsu enim praeciosa degenerant,
quorum autem difficilis possessio, eorum grata perfunctio. Ambr. De Elia et
Ieiunio, c 9 Natural est potius nova quam magna mirari. Ita enim compositi
sumus, ut nos quotidiana si admiratione digna sunt, transeant; contra minimarum
quoque rerum si insolitae prodie^unt spectaculum dulce fiat. Seneca Naturalium
Qu^st. l. 7. c. 1.
for fear their assiduity, their co^monnes should make the Ne Numidiae quidem
reges vituperandi, qui more gentis suae nulli^ mortalium osculum ferebant.
Quicquid enim in excelso fastigio positu^ est, humili ^t trita consuetudine quo
^it venerabilius, vacuu^ esse convenit. Valor. Max. l. 2. c. 6. s. 17.
despitably base and altogether unmeet for such sublime occasions.
Extraordinary royal occasions, persons, entertainments will not suite with
common prostituted Enterludes, which every tinker, cobbler, footboy, whore or
rascal may resort to at their pleasure, as they do unto our Stage Plays;
which as they are every man's for his penny, so they are every days Pastime
too, at every roguish Playhouse. And are such common hacknie Enterludes,
think you, fit for high-dayes, for Princes Courts and presence? If therefore
you will exalt these sordid Stage Plays to such sublime employments as you
here pretend, you must now shut up our standing Play Houses, and sequester all
Stage Plays from the vulgar crew, appropriating them only to some certain
solemn public festivities, and times of royal entertainment, (as the Sea
Act. 2. Dionys. Hallicarnass. Antiq. Romans l. 7. sect. 9. Dion Cassius, Romans
Hist. l. 59. p. 829. Polybius Hist. lib. 4. p. 340. Guevara, Dial of Princes,
l. 3. c. 43, 44 Arias Montanus in Iudicum l. c. 16. p. 567. to 575.
ancient Greeks and Romans did; who had no constant (much less any private)
Enterludes acted day by day, but only public Stage Plays, at times of
public triumph, or on the great solemn Feast-dayes of their Idol-gods, to
whom they were devoted:) that so their Omne rarum praeciosum: gaudeo itaque de
illis posse esse, qui quanto rariores, tanto apparebunt esse gloriosiores.
Bern. Ep. 1. f. 178. A. Ardentiu^ appetitur quicquid est rarius. Hierom.
advers. Vigilantium cap. 4. Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Iuvenal Satyr.
11. p. 111.
raritie may ennoble them to such royal services as are pretended, when as
their Hoc stabunt, hoc sunt imitandi quos n^que pulcher Hermogenes unquam
legit, neque Simius iste. Nil praeter Calvum, et doctus cantare Catullum. Haec
ego ludo, Quae neque in aede sonant, certantia iudice Tarpa, Nec redeant ^^erum
atque iterum spectanda theatris. Horat. Ser. l. ^. Sat. 10. p. 19^.
assiduous commonnesse has now made the^ and their Actors base; too base (I
dare say) for any Princes presence, when as they deem themselves highly
honored, with the very meanest varlets.

To the second clause of this Objection, That Stage Plays are necessary for
the true solemnizing of our Saviors Nativitie, and other such solemn
Christian Festivalls; it is so diametrally opposite unto truth, above 40
several Councels, besides Fathers and other Christian Writers professedly
contradicting it, (See Act. 6. Scene 12. and Act. 7. Scene 3.) that I cannot so
much as name it but with highest indignation. Alas into what atheistical
heathenish times are we now relapsed, into what a stupendous height of more
than Pagan impiety are we now degenerated, when as Stage Plays (the very See
Act 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. and Chorus.
chiefest pompes and ornaments of the most execrable pagan Idols festivities)
are thought the necessary appendants of our most Qualis haec religio, aut
quanta maiestas putanda est, quae adoratur in templis, illuditur in theatris?
Et qui haec fecerint, non paenas violati nu^minispendunt, sed honorati etiam
laudatique discedunt. Lactan^. De Ius^itia l. 5. c. 16.
holy Christian solemnities? when as we cannot sanctify a Lord's Day, observe a
fifth of November, or any other day of public thanksgiving to our gracious God,
nor yet celebrate an Easter, a Pentecost, or such like solemn Feasts, (much
less a Christmasse, as we phrase it) in a plausible pious sort, (as too many
Non imitandi nobis sunt qui sub Christiano nomine Gentilem vita^ agunt, et
aliud professione, aliud conversatione testantur. Hierom. Epist. 14. c. 2.
paganizing Christians now conceit) without drinking, roaring, healthing,
dicing, carding, dancing, Masks and Stage Plays? which better become the
sacrifices of Bacchus, than the resurrection, the incarnation of our most
blessed Savior, Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p. 130. Mr. Samuel Bird his
Dialogue, of the use of the pleasures of this present life. London 1580. p. 15.
to 31. and Nicolaus de Clemangis, De Novis celebritatibus non instituendis, p.
143 ^o 154.
which are most execrably profaned, most unchristianly dishonored with these
Bacchanalian pastimes. What pious Christian heart bleedes not with tears of
blood, when he beholds the sacred Nativitie of his spotless Savior,
transformed into a festivitie of the foulest Devils? when he shall see his
blessed Jesus, Matthew. 9.13. Tit. 2 14.
who came to redeem, to call men from their sins, and Hebr. 10.29. c. ^.6.
Re^. 1.7.
to purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works;
entertained, honored, courted, served like a Devil, yea rather Hebr. 10.29.
c. ^.6. Re^. 1.7.
crucified and nailed to his cross again, with naught else but desperate
notorious sinnes^ by an unchristian crew of Christians, (I might say Nomine
Christiani^ re Pagani. Bernard in Vita Sancti Malachia.
Pagans, o^ John 8 44. Ephesians. 2.2.1 ^ohn 3.8.
incarnate Devils) who during all the sacred time of his Nativity, when they
should be most holy, are more especially and that professedly too^ a most
impure people, zea^ous of nothing but of Stage Plays, dicing, dancing^
healthing, riot^ng, and such evil works, as would make the very See Salvian
De Gubern. Dei, l. 4. p. 136, 137, 138. and my Healths Sickness, p. 21.
lewdest Pagans to blush for shame. Propterea igitur publici hosts Chri^^iani
quia imperatoribus neque vanos, neque mentientes, neque ^eme^arios honores
dica^t, qui a verae religionis homines etiam solennia ^orum conscientia potius
qua^ lascivia celebrant. Grande scilicet officium socos et thoros in publicum
educere, vicatim epulari, civitatem tabernae habi^tu obole^acere, vino lutum
cogere, ^atervatim cursitare ad iniurias, ad impudentias, ad libidinis
illecebras? Siccine exprimitur publicum ga^dium per publicum dedecus? Haeccine
solennes diesprincipum decent, quae alios dies non decent? Qui observant
disciplinam de Caesaris respectu, ii eam propter Caesarem deserunt, et malorum
licentia pietas erit; occasio luxuriae religio deputabitur? O nos merito
damnandos! cur enim vota et gaudia Caesarum expungimus? ^ur dielaeto nos
laureis posts adumbramus? nec lucernis di^m infringimus? Honesta res est
solennitate publica exigente inducere domui tuae habitum alicuius novi
lupanaris. Tertul. Apologia adversus Gent^s, cap. 30, 31. Tom. 2. page 682.
Which may be most aptly applied to our Christmas^e^.
Is this the honor, the entertainment, the gratitude, the holy service, the
welcome we render to our Savior, for his Nativity, his incarnation or his
passion, to court him thus with heathenish Plays or hellish pastimes, as if he
were no other, no better than a Pagan Idol or infernal Devil, who were always
w^rshipped, courted with such solemn Enterludes? Are 2 Cor. 6.15, 16.
Christ and Belial (think we) reconciled? or is there no difference between
our Saviors Nativity, and a Divel-Idols birthday, that we thus commemorate
them in the selfsame manner? For how did the Sea here Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3.
and Act. 5. Scene 8. and Holkot Lectio 172. in Lib. Sapientiae, fol. 133.
idol^trous Gentiles honor, or please their Jupiter, Venus, Flora, Apollo,
Berecynthea, Bac^hus, and such like Divel-gods upon their gaudiest feast-dayes,
but with healthing, dancing, Masks and Stage Plays; the very works and
pompes of Satan, invented for, appropriated to these Idols service, as I have
largely proved? and how do we Christians spend or celebrate for the most part,
the Nativity of our Savior, but with such heathenish sports as these, which
Turks and Infidels would abhor to practice? Quis unquam crederet u^que in
hanc contumeliam Dei progressuram esse humanae bupidita^is audaciam, ut id
ipsum in quo Christo in^u^iam faciunt, dicunt ^e ob Christi nomen esse
facturos. O inaestimabile sacinus et prodigio^um^ Salvian De Gubern. Dei l. 4.
p. 134.
O wickedness, O profaneness beyond all expression! even thus to abuse our
Saviors solemn birth-time, as to make it a patronage for all kind of sin!
Were we to celebrate the very foulest Idol-Divels birthday (as John 8.44.
Ephesians. 2.^.
many wretches do in deeds, whiles they solemnize Christ's in show) how could
we please or honor him more, than to court him with lascivious Masks or
Stage Plays, (an See Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3.
invention of and for himself, which he has often exacted from his worshippers
upon his solemn festivals:) or to give him the very selfsame welcome that
most men give to Christ, in the feast of his Nativity; when the Devil has
commonly more professed public service done him, than all the year beside?
For may I not truly write of our English Cities, and Country villages in the
Christmas season, as Salvian did of Rome: De Gubern^ Dei l. 7. p. 258, 259.
Video quasi scaturientem vitijs civitatem; video urbem omnium iniquitatum
generi servientem, plenam quidem turbis, sed magis turpitudinibus: plenam
divitijs, sed magis vitijs: vincentes se invicem homines nequitia flagitiorum
suorum, alios impuritate certantes, alios vino languidos, alios cruditate
distentos, hos sertis redimitos, illos unguento oblitos, cunctos vano luxus
marcore perditos, sed pene omnes una errorum morte prostratos: non omnes quidem
vinolentia temulentos, sed omnes tamen peccatis ebrios. Populos putares non
sani status, non sui sensus, non animo incolumes, non gradu, quasi in morem
baccharum crapulae catervatim inservientes etc. Those who are temperate and
abstemious at all other times, prove Epicures and drunkards then. Those who
make conscience to Ephesians. 5.16.
redeem all other seasons, deem it a Fiunt etiam nunc et delicta religiosa.
Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2. Donato.
point of Christianity to mispend all this, Exodus 32^6. 1 Cor. 10.7.
eating, drinking, and rising up to play, whole days and nights together.
Those who are civil at other seasons, will be now deboist; and such who were
but soberly dissolute before (if I may so speak) will be now stark mad,
forgetting not only their Savior but themselves. Those who repute it a shame
to be unruly disorderly any other part of the year; think it an honor to be
outragiously disordered and distempered now, Detrimentum iam dies senti^. Sunt
qui officia lucis noctisque pervertunt, nec ante diducunt oculos hesterna
graves crapula, quam appetere nox caepit. Qualis illorum conditio dicitur, quo^
natura (ut ait Virgi^ius) pedibus nostris subditos e contrario posuit, Nosque
ubi primus equis oriens, afflavit anhelis, Illis sera rubens accendit lumina
vesper. Ta^is horum contraria omnibus non regio sed vita est. Sunt quidam in
eadem urbe Antipodes, qui nec orientem solemn unquam viderunt, nec occidentem.
Hos ^u exis^imas scire quemad modum vivendum est, qui nesciunt quando? Et hi
mortem timent, in qua^ se vivi condiderunt? tam iufausti ominis quam nocturnae
cives sunt. Licet in vino unguentoque tenebras suas exigant, licet epulis, et
in multa quidem fercula distentis, totum perversae vigiliae tempus diducant,
non convivantur, sed iusta sibi faciunt. Mortuis certe interdiu parentantur,
etc. Seneca Ep. 122. Vid. Ibidem.
turning day into night, and night into day, against the course of nature, like
Seneca his Antipodes, setting no bounds to any lust. That which is not
tolerable at other times seems laudable unto most men now: that which were it
done at any other season could not but be condemned as an execrable sin,
becomes now a virtue, at least a venial crime. In a word, those who make a
kind of conscience of drinking, amarous dancing, healthing, dicing, idleness,
Stage Plays, and of every sin at other times^ Nunc facilius invenias reos
malor^m omnium, quam non omnium: facilius maiorum criminum quam minorum: id
est, facilius qui et maiora crimina cum minoribus, quam qui minora tantum sine
maioribus perpetrant. In hanc enim morum probrositatem prope omnis
Ecclesiastica plebs redacta est; ut in cuncto populo Christiano genus
quodammodo sanctitatis sit, minus esse vitiosum etc. Salvian De Gu^e^. Dei l.
3. p. 86.
deem it a part of their piety to make no bones of these, of any deboistnesse
or profaneness now: those who are constant in religious familie-duties, now
discontinue them; those who remembered their Savior and sins before, now
qui^e forget them: those who seemed Saints before, turn Devils incarnate now:
those who were reasonable men before, are metamorphosed into beasts or monsters
now: those who were formerly good at least in outward show, do now turn bad;
and all who were bad before, prove now ten^times worse; and all under this
pretense of solemnizing Christ's Nativitie, as if he were delighted only with
their sins. Thus do we even crucify our blessed Savior in his very cradle,
and like that [ v] Tyrant Herod, seek to take away his life, as soon as he is
born, whiles we thus impiously celebrate and profane his birth, and eve^
pierce him through with these gross disorders which are now too frequent among
many Christians. Should Turks and Indels behold our Bacchanalia^ Christmas
extravagancies, would they not think our Savior to be a glutton, an Epicure,
a wine-bibber, a Devil, a friend of publicanes and sinners, as the Luke 7.34.
Matthew. 9.3, 4. John 7.20.
Jews once styled him; yea a very Bacchus^ a God of all dissoluteness,
drunkenness and disorder, since his Nativitie is thus solemnized by his
followers, who are never so dissolutely, so exorbitantly deboist in all kinds,
as in this his festival? Would they not take up that speech in Salvian. De
Gubernatione Dei l. 4. p. 137, 138.
Ecce quales sunt qui Christum colunt? falsum plane illud est quod aiunt se
bona discere, quod jactant se sanctae legis praecepta retinere. Si enim bona
discerent, boni essent. Talis profecto secta est, quales et sectatores: hoc
sunt absque dubio quod docentur. Apparet itaque Prophetas quos habent
impuritatem docere, et Apostolos quos legunt nefaria sensisse, et Evangelia
quibus imbuuntur haec quae ipsi faciunt praedicare. Postremo sancta a
Christianis fierent, si Christus sancta docuisset. AEstimari itaque de
cultoribus suis potest ille qui colitur. Quomodo enim bonus magister est, cujus
tam malos videmus esse discipulos? Ex ipso enim Christiani sunt, ipsum audiunt,
ipsum legunt: promptum est omnibus Christi intelligere doctrinam. Vide
Christianos quid agant, et evidenter potest de ipso Christo sciri quid doceat.
Would they not condemn our God, our Savior, our religion, and loath both
them, and us? qui ita agimus ac vivimus, ut hoc ipsum quod Christianus populus
esse dicitur, opprobrium Christi esse videatur; Salvian Ibidem p. 136, 137, 134.
as the same Father speaks. O inaestimabile facinus et prodigiosum! Quid non
ausae sint improbae mentes, in the Christmas season? Armant se ad peccandum per
Christi nomen; auctorem quodammodo sui scele^is Deum faciunt: et cum
interdictor ac vindex malorum omnium Christus sit, dicunt se scelus quod agunt
agere pro Christo. Such are our graceless unchristian Christmas lives: who
when as our Savior daily cries unto us: Matthew. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven: we on the contrary live so in the
Christmas season, (that I speak not of other times) that the sons of men,
that Infidels and Pagans may openly behold our evil works, and blasphem^ ou^
Father^ our most blessed Savior, who is now grieving in heaven, whiles we are
thus dishonouring his Nativitie here on earth. And should not our hearts then
smi^e us, should not shame confound us all for this our heinous sin? for this
our indignity to our blessed Lord and Savior, who never finds worse
entertainmen^ in the world than in the feast of his Nativity, when he expects
the best? O let us now at length remember, that our holy Savior was borne into
the world for this very purpose, Matthew. 9.13. Titus 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
to redeem and call us from (not to) those sins and sinful pleasures; 1
John 3.5, 8.
to destroy out of us (not to erect within us) those very works and pompes of
Satan, which now we more especially practice at his sacred birthtide: as if he
were borne to no other purpose, but to set hell loose, to give a liberty to all
kind of wickedness, and to prove a mere broker (for such a one men then make
him) to the very Devil. Did we but seriously consider and believe, that our
Savior Christ was for this end borne into the world; Tit. 2.14. 1 John 1.7.9.
Rev. 1.5. Heb. 9.14.
that he might purify and wash ^s both from the guilt, and power of all our
sins in his most precious blood: Ephesians. 5.26, 27. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11.
that he might sanctify and cleanse us with the washing of water by the word
from all iniquity, and present us to himself a glorious Church without any
spot or wrinkle: Tit. 2.12, 13.
that he might teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present evil world, expecting every day
his second coming: Tit. 2.14. 1 John 3.8.
that he might quite destroy out of us the works of the Devil, purge us from
all iniquity, and purify us unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good
works: Luke 1.74, 75.
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
lives, Phil. 2.15.
shining as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation: 1 Pet.
4.1, 2, 3.
that we should henceforth cease from sin, and no longer live the rest of our
time in the lusts of the flesh to the will of men, but to the will of God: 1
Pet. 1.15, 16.
that we might be holy in all manner of conversation and godliness, even as
he is holy, especially at holy s^asons: 2 Cor. 5.15.
that we should not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him who died for
us and rose again: Romans 14.7, 8.
that whether we live we might live unto him, or whether we die we might die
unto him, and that living and dying we might be his; 1 Cor. 6.20.
glorifying him both in our souls and bodies which are his. And did we withal
remember, that this our blessed Savior 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. and Romans 1.7.
has called us, not to uncleanness, but unto holiness: that he has likewise
enjoined us, Romans 13.12, 13.
to cast off all the works of darkness, and to put on the armor of light: to
walk honestly as in the day; not in chambering and wantonness, not in rioting
and drunkenness, Titus 3.3.
not in diverse lusts and pleasures, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. etc. 4.16, 17, 18.
according to the course of this wicked world, according to the power of the
Prince of the air, which now works in the children of disobedience. That he
has seriously charged us, Ephesians. 4.17. to 30.
That we walk not from henceforth as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of
their minds, who having their understandings darkened, and being alienated from
the life of God, and past all feeling, have given themselves over unto all
lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness. That we put off
concerning our former conversation the old man which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts; and that we put on the new man which after God is created
in holiness and true righteousness. Luke 21.34.
That we take heed unto our selves, lest at any time (how much more at times of
greatest devotion) our hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
that day come upon us at unawares. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.5. 1 Pet. 2.11.
That we crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, and abstain
from fleshly lusts which war against our souls, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
since the time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of
the Gentiles; when as we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquettings, and abominabl^ idolatries: Romans 12.1, 2.
That we give up our souls and bodies as an holy and living sacrifice unto
God; not fashioning our selves to the course of this present evil world, Iam.
1 27.
but keeping our selves unspotted from it: Ephesians. 5.15, 16. Romans 13.14.
walking circumspectly as in the day, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the
time because the days are evil; and making no provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Did we (I say) but seriously ponder and unfainedly
believe all this, it would soon Iam. 4 9. and 5.1, 5.
turn our dissolute Christmas laughing, into mourning; our bacchanalian
jollities into sinlamenting Elegies; our riotous grand-Christmasses into such
pious Christian duties, as would both honor our Saviors birthday, and make
it welcome to our souls. Let us therefore cordially meditate on all these
sacred Scriptures, on the ends of our Saviors blessed incarnation, (which was,
Titus 2.12, 13. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. 1 Pet. 1.15.18. 1 John 3.8, 9.
to redeem us from all these our sins and sinful pleasures; to crucify our
lusts, to regenerate and sanctify our depraved natures, to make us holy even
as he is holy, and to conform us to himself in all things:) and then this
inveterate heathenish Pudorem rei tollit multitudo peccantium, et desinet esse
probri loco commune maledictum. Sen^c. De Beneficijs l. 3. c. 16. Consensere
iura peccatis et caepit esse licitum quod publicu^ est. Cyprian. Epist. l. 2.
Epist. 2. Donato.
common custom of profaning Christ's Nativitie with all kind of
lasciviousness, wickedness and delights of sin, (which should be ^pent in
honoring, blessing and praising of our gracious God for all his mercies to us
in his Son: in Psalms, in hymns and spiritual songs; in holy and heavenly
contemplations of all the benefits we receive by our Saviors blessed
incarnation, in charitable relieving of Christ's poor members, and mutual
amity one toward another:) will become most execrable to your pious souls.
The damnablenesse of which much applauded unruly Christmas keeping that you may
more evidently discern, I shall for learning and religions sake discover
whence it sprang; and that was, originally from the Pagan Saturnalia, from
whence Popery has borrowed and transmitted it unto us at the second hand.

The ancient Pagan Romans, upon the Seneca Epist. 18. Horatius Sermon. l. 2.
Satyr. 7. page 226. and Bond Ibidem. Polydor Virgil de Inventoribus Rerum, lib.
2. c. 14. See Lypsius De Amphithea^ro, Saturnalibus etc. Dion Cassius Romans
Hist. lib. 59 page 830 Herodian, Historiae lib. 1. page 59.
Ides of December, Macrobius Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 273.
consecrated to Saturn, and their Goddess Vesta, (not in the Month of
January, as Saturnalium, lib. 1. cap. 10.
Macrobius misreports) accustomed to keep their Saturnalia, or annual Feast
of Saturn for 7 days together, which they spent in feasting, drinking,
dancing, Plays and Enterludes: at the end of which they celebrated their Ovid.
Fastorum lib. 1. p. 2. to 10. Suetonii Tiberius sect^ 34. Asterius Homil. in
Festum Kalendarum. Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 3. cap. 16.
Festum Kalendarum, on the first of January, (now our New-yeares day) to the
honor of their Idol Ianus, which they likewise solemnized with Stageplayes,
Mummeries, Masks, dancing, feasting, drinking, and in sending mutual
New-yeares gifts one to another, for diverse days together. See Suetonii
Octavius sect. 71.75.
In these their Saturnalia and feasts of Ianus, all servants were set at
lihertie, and became checke-mates with their masters, with whom they sat at
table: Macrobius Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7. and 10. Polydor Virgil. De Invent.
Rerum lib. 5. cap. 2 and the ensuing Authors^ Holkot, Lectio 166 167. in lib.
Sapientiae. Hospinian^ De Origin Festorum lib. Francis De Croy his first
Conformity, cap. 19.
every man then wandered about without control, and took his fill of pleasure,
giving himself over to all kind of luxury, epicurisme, deboistnesse,
disorder, pride and wantonness; to pastimes, Enterludes, Mummeries,
Stage Plays, dan-cing, drunkenness, and those very disorders that accompany
our grand unruly Christmasses: which Saturnalia and Festivalls the ensuing
Authors thus describe. Servicum Saturnalia caenant (writes Non posse suaviter
vivi secundum Epicuri decreta. Commentar. Moral. Tom. 2. p. 202.
Plutarch) aut Liberalia, in agro vagantes celebrant, ululatio eorum et
tumultus far non possis prae gaudio et imperitia rerum pulcrarum, talia
agentium et loquen^^um: Quid desides? quin bibimus et capimus cibos?
Sunt haec miselle, in promptu: cur tibiinvides?
Vocem statim hi dedere: tum Bacchi liquor
Infunditur; et corona aliqui^ ornat caput.
Laurique pulcram ad frondem turpiter canit,
Inducia Phaebo, januamque alius domus:
Pulsam operiens, excludit caram conjugem, etc.


Saturnalibus tota servis licentia permittitur: ludi per urbem in compitis
agitantur (writes Saturnalium l. 1. cap. 7.
Macrobius:) Maxima pars Grai^m Saturno, et maxima Athenae
Conficiunt sacra, quae Cronia esse iterantur ab illis.
Cumque diem celebrant, per agros urbesque fere omnes
Exercent Epulis laeti, famulosque procuraut
Quisque suos^ nostrique itidem, et mos traditur illinc
Iste, ut cum dominis famuli epulentur ibedeus, etc.
Parallel to which is of Epistola 18.
Seneca: Decemb^r est mensis quo maxim Civitas desudat: jus lu^^uriae public
datum est: ingenti apparatu sonant omnia, tanquam quicquam inter Saturnalia
nunc intersit, et dies rerum agendarum. Adeo nihil interest, ut non videatur
mihi errasse qui dixit, olim mensem Decembrem esse, nunc annum, etc. And that
of Horace: Sermonum l. 2. Satyr. 7. p. 227.
Age liberate Decembri --
(Quando ita majores voluerunt) utere: narra, etc.
Carminum, l. 1. Ode 37.
Nunc est bibendu^, nunc pede libero pulsanda tellus;
Nunc saliaribus ornare pulvinar Deorum, tempus etc.
That the ancient Romans (yea and the Graecians too) in times of Paganism)
did spend their Saturnalia, See H^spinian De Origin Festorum; and the Authors
here quoted in the margent, page 225, 226, 233, 234, 235, 236. Robertus Holkot
Lectio 166, 167, in lib. Sapientiae.
Feriae, and other solemn Festivals in dancing, drinking, feasting Mummeries,
Masks and Enterludes, the Poet Virgil, Ovid, Tibullus, Philo Iudaeus, with
Fuitautem priscis temporibus in Delo frequens Ionu^ ac accolarum in insulis
circumiacentibus habitantium conventus; nam cum uxoribus et liberis ad
spectacula conveniebant, ut nunc Jones ad ludos in Dianae Ephesiae honorem
institutos confluere solent. Et civitates ^o saltatoru^ choros mittebant, etc.
Thucidides Historiae lib. 3. page 291. Vid. Ibidem.
sundry others, will plentifully informs us.

The first of these describes it thus.

Virgil. Georgicorum lib. 2. page 56, 57.
Veteres ineunt proscenia ludi
Praemiaque ingentes pagos et compita cir^um
Thesai^ posuere, eatque inter pocula laeti,
Mollibus in pratis unctos saliere per utres.
Necnon Ausonij Troia gens missa coloni
Versibus incompt^s ludunt, risuque soluto;
Oraque corticibus sumunt horrenda cavatis,
Et te Bacche vocant per carmina laeti, tibique
Oscilla ex alta suspendunt mollia pinu.
The second, thus.

Ovid Fastorum lib 3. p. 51. See here page 225, 226, 234, 235, in the margent.
Plebs venit ac virides passim disjecta per herbas
Potat, et accumbat cum pare quisque sua.
Sub jove pars durat: pauci tentoria ponunt,
Sunt quibus e ramis frondea facta casa est.
Sole tamen vinoque calent; annosque praecantur
Quot sumunt cyathos, ad numerumque bibunt.
Invenies illic qui Nestoris ebibat annos;
Quae sit per calices facta Sibylla suos.
Illic et cantant qui^quid dedicere theatris,
Et jactant faciles ad sua verba manus.
Et ducunt posito duras cratere choreas,
Cultaque diffus^s saltat amica comis.
Cum redeunt, titubant, et sunt spectacula vulgi
Et fortunatos obvia turba vocat, etc.
Fastorum, l. 3 p. 57.
Rusticus ad ludos populus veniebat in urbem
Sed dis, non studijs, ille dabatur honos.
Luce sua ludos unvae commentor habebat
Quos cum taedifera nunc habet ille dea, etc.
Fastorum, l. 4. p. 64.
Ibunt semi-mares, et inania tympana tundent^
AEraque tinnitus are repulsa dabunt.
Scena sonat, ludique vocant, spectate Quirites
Et fora mart suo litigiosa vacent.
Annuimus votis; Consul nunc consule ludos, etc.
Tristium l. 2. p. 159.
Talia luduntur fumoso mense Decembri
Quae jam non ulli composuisse nocet.
The third, thus. Tibullus, lib. 2. Eleg. 1. p. 82.
Nunc mihi nunc fumo veteris proferre falernum
Consulis et Chio solvere vincla cado.
Vina diem celebrent, non fes^a luce madere
Est rubor; errantes et male far pedes.
Sed been Messallam sua quisque ad pocula dicat;
Numen et absentis singula verba sonant, etc.
Agricola assiduo primum satiatus aratro
Cantavit certo rustica verba pede.
Agricola et nimio suffusus Baccho rubenti
Primus inexperto duxit ab art choros etc.
Whom De Cherubin. lib sol. 174, 175.
Philo Iudaeus (writing of the Romans festivals) does second in this manner. In
omni festo nostro e^ celebritate quae miramur, sunt haec: securitas, remissio,
ebrietas, potatio, ^o^messationes, deliciae, oblectamenta, patentes januae,
pernoctationes, indecentes voluptates, insolentiae, exercitiu^ inte^perantiae,
insipientiae meditatio, studia turpitudinis, honestatis pernicies, Gentiles
idololatrici, in^aniae plenas vigilias habebant. Sic in sacrificiis Bacchi et
Cybeles matris Deorum festivitatibus, lusibus et luxuriis vacantes totam noctem
turpitertransibant^ quos arguit Apostolus ad Ephesios 5. Nolite com^unicare
operibus infructu^osis tenebra^^um, sed magis^^edarguit^. Quae autem i^ occulto
fiunt ab ipsis turpe est dicere. Propter huiusmodi faed^tates subtraxit
Ecclesia mul^as vigilias quae solebant ab omnibus populis celebrari de nocte et
solennitatibus sanctorum: Holcot. Lectio in 166. in ^ap. 14. Sapienti^, fol.
152. See Augustine. ^nar. in Psalm. 80.
nocturnae excitationes ad cupiditates inexplebil^s; somnus diurnus quando
vigilandi tempus est, naturae ordinis perversio; tunc virtus ridetur ut noxia,
vitium tanq^am utile rapitur: tunc in contemptu sunt quae oportet facere, quae
vero non oportet in precio. Tunc philosophia, et omnis eruditio, divinae animae
divina revera simulachra, tenent silentium: ac istae arts quae suis lenocinijs
ventri, et his quae sub ventre sunt, voluptatem conciliant, ostendunt suam
facundiam. Haec sunt festa istorum qui se faelices dicunt: quorum ^urpitudo
quamdiu inter privatos parietes locaque prophana continetur, minus peccare mihi
videntur: ubi vero torrentis in morem populans omnia, vel in sacratissima
templa irrumpit, quicquid in his sanctum est sternit continuo, facie^s prophana
sacrificia, victimas absque litatione, praeces irritas, prophana enim mysteria
simul et orgya, pietatem sanctitatemque fucatam et adulterinam, castitatem
impuram, veritatem falsatam, cultum Dei superstitiosum. Ad haec quidem corpora
abluuntur lavacris et purificationibus, affectiones vero animae quibus vita
sordidatur, nec volunt, nec curant eluere. Et ut candidati templa sub^ant dant
operam, diligenter emaculatis vestibus amicti; mentem vero maculosissi^am in
ipsa sacraria penitissima infer non verentur. A most accurate Character, both
of our unruly Christmasses, and such Christmas-men. If we now parallel our
grand disorderly Christmasses, with these Roman Saturnals and heathen
Festivals; or our New-yeares day (a chief part of Christmas) with their
Festivity of Ianus, Herodian Historiae l. 1. p. 59. Asterius Hom. in Fes^um
Kalenda^um. Ovid Fastorum lib. 1. Lockmai^ Sermo 21. Holcot Lectio 167 in lib.
Sapien^iae. Alcu^inus, De Divinis Officis lib. cap. 4.
which was spent in Mummeries, Stage Plays, dancing, and such like Enterludes,
Idibus Ianuariis tibicines festum diem agere multa licentia et las^ivia,
muli^rique habitu per urbem vadere solebant. Alexander ab Alexandro l. 3. c.
18. fol. 154. See here p. 197, 198, accordingly.
wherein Fiddlers and others acted lascivious effeminate parts, and went about
their Towns and Cities in women's apparel: whence Hae Kalendae Ianuarii
secundum Oentilium dementiam, potius dicendae sunt cavendae, quam Kalendae. Nam
imperiti homines velut Deum colentes, diem ipsum multis spurcitiis sacraverunt.
Quidam mutabant se in speci^s monstrosas, in ferarumque habitus transformabant.
Al^^ in faemineo gestu muta^i, virilem v^liu^ effaeminabant aliqui fanaticis
anguriis profanabantur, perstrepeban^ sal^ando pedibus, tripudiando plausibus:
et quod his turpius est nefas, nexis inter se utriusque sexus chori, inops
an^mi, fu^ens vino turba misc^tur. Diabolicas etiam strenas, et ab aliis
accipiebant, et ipsi aliis tradeba^t. Necno^ etia^ mensulas plenas ad
manducandum tota nocte paratos hab^b^t, crede^tes quod Kal^ndae Ianuarii p^r
totum annum praestare posse^t. Et quia his atque aliis miseriis mundus
universus ^epletus erat, statuit universalis Ecclesia i^iunium publicum in isto
die fieri, quatenus istis calamitatibus auctor vitae finem imponeret, etc
Al^hu^^^us D^ Diui^is Officijs cap. 4. Col. 1013 1014. ^s^odor Hisp. De
Officijs Ecclesiasticis l. 1. c. 40. p. 400. C. ^o^nnis ^a^ghecrucius De Vita
et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 13. Ambrose Sermo 11.
the whole Catholic Church (as Alchuvinus, with others write) appointed a
solemn public fast upon this our New-yeares day, (which fast it seems is now
forgotten) to bewail those heathenish Enterludes, sports, and lewd idolatrous
practices which had been used on it: prohibiting all Christians under pain of
excommunication, from observing the Kalends or first of January (which we now
call New-yeares day) as holy, and from sending abroad New-yeares gifts upon it,
(a custom now too frequent;) it being a mere relic of Paganism and
idolatry, derived from the heathen Romans feast of two-faced Ianus; and a
practice so execrable unto Christians, that not only the whole Catholic
Church; but even the 4 famous Councels, Council. Altifiod. Can. 1. Surius Tom.
2. p. 715. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 8. See here p. 580,
581.
Altisiodorum, viz. Quoniam cognovimus nonnullos inveniri sequipedes erroris
antiqui, qui Kalendas Ianuarii colunt, cum Ianus homo Gentilis fuerit rex
quidem, sed Deus esse non potuit. Quisquis ergo unum Deum Patrem regnantem cum
^ilio suo et Spiritu Sancto credit certe hic non potest integer Christianus
d^ci qui aliquid de Gentilitate custodit. Contestamur illam solicitudinem tam
pastores quam presbyteros gerere, ut quoscum que in hac fatuitare viderint, eos
ab Ecclesia sancta auctoritate repellant, nec participare sancto Altario
permittant qui Gentilium observationes custodiunt: Quid enim daemonibus cum
Christo commune, cum magis sumendo iudicium delicta videatur addere quam
purgare? Synodus Turonica 2. Can. 23. Surius Council. Tom. 2 p. 647. Bochellus
Decreta Eccl. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 7. cap. 7. and Tit 12. c. 6.
Towers; Capit. Graecarum Synodorum, here p. 581. and Council. Constantinop: 6.
here p. 583. together with Sermo 11.
St. Ambrose^ De Rectitudine Catholicae conversationis, Tom. 9. p. 1448.
Augustine, Homil^ in ^^stum Kalendarum. See here p. 197, 316, 317.
Ast^rius, De Officiis Eccl. lib. 15. c. 60.
HRabanus Maurus, De Officus Ecclesiast. cap. 4. See Y before.
Alchuvinus, Causa 26. Quaest: 27.
Gratian, Decretalium, pars 11. cap. 16, 17.
Iuo Carnotensis^ De Ecclesiast. Officiis l. 1. c. 40. See Y before.
Isiodor Hispalensis, Si quis Kalendas Ianuarii ritu Paganorum colere, vel
aliquid plus novi facere propter novum annum, aut mensas cum lampadibus ^el
epulis in domibus praeparare, et per vicos et plateas ^antores et choros ducere
praesumpserit, anathema sit. Gratian Causa 26. Quaest. 27.
Pope ^achary, Non licet iniquas observationes agere Kalendarum et ociis
vacare: neque lauro au^ vi^^ditate arborum cingere domos. Omnis enim haec
observatio Paganorum est. Ibi^.
Pope Martin, Oration in Fe^tum Kalend. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. Col. 798, 799.
Saint Chrysostom, Sermo 21. Y, Z.
Michael Lochmair, De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum^ l. 2. c. 13.
Ioannes Langhecrucius, Decreta Ecclesiae Gall. lib. 4. Tit. 7. c. 7, 8. and
Tit. 12. c. 6.
Bochellus, De Ludo Tractatus. In Tractatu Tractatuum, Pa^i^iis 1545. Tom. 1.
fol. 157, 158.
Stephanus Costa, His first Conformity cap. 20.
Francis de Croy, De Inventoribus Rerum, l. 5. c. 2.
Polydor Virgil, Rationale Divinorum Officiorum l. 6. c. 15.
Durandus, with See here page 24.
sundry other, have positively prohibited the solemnization of New-yeares day,
and and the sending abroad of New-yeares gifts, under an anathema and
excommunication, as unbeseeming Christians, who should eternally abolish, not
propagate, revive, or recontinue this pagan festival, and heathenish
ceremony, which our God abhors. If we compare (I say) our Bacchanalian
Christmasses and New-yeares tides, with these Saturnalia and feasts of Ianus,
we shall find such near affinity between them both in regard of time, (they
being both in the end of December, and on the first of January:) and in their
manner of solemnizing; (both of them being spent in revelling, epicurisme,
wantonness, idleness, dancing, drinking, Stage Plays, Masks, and carnal
pomp and jollity:) that we must needs conclude the one to be but the very
Paria sunt unius sementis germina, et quod latebat in radicibus manifestatur in
fructibus. Prosper-Contra Collatorem, c. 41.
ape or issue of the other. Hence De Inventoribus Rerum, l. 5. c. 2.
Polydor Virgil a^firmes in express terms; that our Christmas Lords of
misrule, ( which custom, says he, is chiefly observed in England,) together
with dancing, Masks, Mummeries, Stage Plays, and such other Christmas
disorders now in use with Christians, were derived from these Roman Saturnalia,
and Bacchanalian festivals; which should cause all pious Christians eternally
to abominate them. If any here demand, by whom these Saturnalia, these
disorderly Christmasses and Stageplayes were first brought in among the
Christians? I answer, that the paganizing Priests and Monks of popish (the Sea
Ormerod his Paganopapismus, and Francis de Croy his first Conformity.
same with heathen Rome) were the chief Agents in this work: who as they
borrowed their Feast of Durandus, Rationale, Divin: Offic. l. 7. c. 34. Beda
Ecclesiast. Histor. l. 2. c. 4. Pla^ina, Onuphrius, Luitprandius, Fasciculus
Temporum, Balaeus et Barns in vita Bonifacii quar^^i; Thomas Beacons Relics
of Rome, cap. 59. Polydor Virgil, De Inventoribus Rerum, lib. 6. cap. 8.
Petrus, de Natal. l. to. c. 1. Francis de Croy his first Conformity chap. 19.
Volateranus Comment. l. 12. f. 127. accordingly.
All Saints, from the heathen festival Pantheon; and the feast of the
Michaelis Lochmair Sermo 32. Thomas Beacon his Romes Relics, cap. 48, 59.
Equidem quod negari non potest, ceremoniae ardentium cereorum quos hodie
Christiani eo die qui purificatae Mariae dicatus est, ex more circumferimus, a
Februalibus Romanorum sacris originem sumpsere. Pertinaci paganismo imitatione
subventum est, quem rei in totum sublatio potius irritasset. Rhenanus Annot. in
lib. 5. Tertul. adversus Marcion. p. 478. Francis de Croy his first Conformity,
cap. 17, 25. Polydor Virgil. de Invent. Rerum, l. 5. c. 1. Iacobus de Voragine
Sermo 82. De Sa^ctis; Innocentius, 3. Sermo in Fes^o Purificationis. Baronius
Martyriologium in Febr. 2.
Purification of the Virgin Mary, (which they have christened with the name of
Candlemasse) from the festival of the Goddess Februa, the mother of Mars;
Polydor Virgil de Invent. Rerum, lib. 5. cap. 1.
to whom the Pagan Romans offered burning tapers, as the Papists in imitation
of them now offer to the Virgin Mary on this day at evening: (answerable to
which, are their ordinary Aras Saturnias non mactando viros sed accensis
luminibus excolunt. Inde mos per Saturnalia missitandis Cereis caepit. Macro^.
Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 276.
burning Tapers on their idolized Altars, borrowed from See here page 22, 23.
Illic accendunt geminas pro lampade pinus, Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque
taeda datur. Ovid Fast. lib. 4. page 71. Accipiunt fragili simulachra nitentia
cera, Et matutinis operatur festa lucernis. Iuuenal. Satyr. 12. page 115. Tunc
Salii ad cantus incensa altaria circum etc. Virgil. AEn^id. lib. 8. page 230.
See Francis de Croy his first Conformity, cap. 25. and Ormerod his
Pagano-papismus.
Satur^e and those other Idol-Gods whose Accendunt lumina velut in tenebris
agenti. Lactan^ius, De Vero Cul^u, cap. 2.
blindness stood in need of those burning torches which the Pagans placed on
their Altars; they Psalm. 105.5. and 135.16.
having eyes and yet not seeing: though our Savior Christ (the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness, Luke 2.78, 79. John 1.8, 9.
the light that lightens every one that comes into the world, James 1.17.
Ephesians. 1.18.
the Father and author of all light, Revel. 21.23. cap. 22.5.
the light of the heavenly Jerusalem it self, which needs neither Sun nor
Moon, because he is the light thereof, and the 1 John 1.5, 6, 7.
light it self wherein is no darkness,) needs no such Tapers, as Vel si
coeleste lumen quod dicimus solemn, contemplari velint, iam sentient quod non
indigeat lucernis eorum Deus, qui ipse in usum hominis tam candidam lucem
dedit. Number igitur mentis suae compos putandus est, qui auctori et datori
luminis candelarum aut cerarum lumen offe^t pro munere? De V^ro Cultu lib. 6.
cap. 2.
Lactantius tells us^) So they have deduced (not the celebration of our
Saviors Nativity in a Christian manner, which was ancient) but the riotous
solemnizing of this sacred festival, from these Pagan Saturnalia; which having
Cum scriptum sit, Non nominabis nomen Domini Dei tui in vanu^ in reverentia
Christi decidit, ut inter caeteras seculi vanitates nihil iam paene vanius quam
Christi nomen esse videtur. Denique ad hoc res cecidit, ut cum per Christi
nome^ iuraverint, pu^ant se scelera etiam religiose esse facturos. Saluian. De
Guber. Dei l. 4. p. 131, 132.
baptized or new gilded over with this glorious pompous title, of
CHRIST-MASSE, (a name I am sure of their own imposing, not known to the
ancient Fathers, as the MASS therein imports:) they transmitted it as a most
sacred Relic or Tradition to dissolute posterity: who are so far besotted
with its bacchanalian pastimes, Enterludes, and other heathenish disorders,
that they have both lost their Savior and themselves, whiles they thus
celebrate his Nativitie; which in regard of those See Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of
Abuses, p. 130. Mr. Samuel Byrd his use of the pleasures of this present life,
p. 15. to 31.
infernal prophanesses, of that licentious liberty of sinning which men now
take unto themselves more than at other seasons, may more truly be styled
DIVELS-MASSE, or SATVRNES-MASSE (for such Guagninus Rerum Polonicarum, Tom. 2.
page 171.
too many make it) than Christ-masse; there being far more affinity between
the Devil, Saturn, Mass, and riotous Christmas-keeping, than between Christ
and them: who as he See Morney Sutcliffe and others of the Mass: and Bishop
Morton his Institution of the Sacrament, l. 7, 8.
never approved idolatrous sacrilegious pompous Masses, which rob him of his
honor, worship, and all-sufficient sacrifice once for all: so he cannot but
abhor these bachananalia^ paga^ Christmasses, which deprive him of his service,
praises, love, and proclaim him an open patron of those notorious sinful
Christmas practices which he does most abhor. When these disorderly
extravagant kind of Christmasses crept first into the Church, I cannot
certainly determine, yet this I do conjecture. After that Pope See Beda
Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 2. c. 4. with the Authors at b. before.
Boniface, and Gregorius Mag Epistolarum ex Registro lib. 9. Epist. 71.
Pope Gregory the first, under pretense of drawing men from Paganism to
Christianity, had changed diverse of the Sea Durandus Rational. Divin. Offic. l.
7. c. 34. Polydor Virgil. de Inventoribus re^um l. 5. c. 1, 2. Thomas Beacon
his Romes Relics, cap. 59.^ Francis de Croy his first Conformity, c. 19, 20,
25, 26. Hospinian de Origin Festorum, Ormerod his Pagano-papismus, ^um
pluribus aliis.
Pagan Festivalls into Christian: as Pantheon into All Saints; Februalia,
Lupercalia, Proserpinalia and Palilia, into the Feast of Candlemasse;
Quirinalia, into Innocents; the Feast of the Kalends of January, into our
Saviors Circumcision or New-yeares day; these Saturnalia into our Saviors
Nativitie; and the like: (contrary to the judgment of Sermo 11.
St. Ambrose, De Civit. Dei l. 8. cap. 27. and Confessionum l. 6. c. 2.
St. Augustine, the Canon 27.28. See here p. 18. to 25. Beat Rhenanus, Annot.
in l. 5. Tertul. contr. Marcionem p. 478. Polydor Virgil de Invent^ Rerum l. 5.
c. 1, 2.
whole Council of Affricke, and Rhenanus and Polydor Virgil Ibidem. Francis de
Croy his first Conformity, cap. 19, 20, to 28. and Ormerod his Pagano-papi^mus.
others, who wished all Pagan Festivals not changed into Christian, but quite
abolished, the better to avoid all heathenish customs:) it came to pass, that
the observation of these Pagan Festivalls, ( whose names they only changed)
Hospinian, Francis de Croy, Ormerod, Rhenanus, with others qua b.
brought in all Pagan rites and ceremonies that the idolatrous heathens used,
(as drunkenness, health-quaffing, wantonness, luxury, dancing^ dicing,
Stage Plays, Masks with all other Ethnicke sports) into the Church of God;
(she being never defiled with these profane abominations, till these Pagan
holy days were metamorphosed into Christian;) which by reason of men's natural
pronesse unto evil, did soon transform^ all Christian Festiualls into Pagan,
as good Authors witness: partly through the Sea Exodus 32. 6. 1 Cor. 10.7. See
here page 77. to 82. Polydor Virgil. de Inventoribus Rerum lib. 5. cap. 1. 2.
Nicolaus de Clemangis, D^ Novis Celebrit^ibus non instituendis ^ractatus, page
143. to 159. accordingly.
p^oples strong propensity to carnal pleasures, to heathenish rites and
ceremonies to which they naturally adhere; but principally through the Sea
Francis de Croy his first Conformity, cap. 19.20. Turco-papismus, Londini 1604.
lib. 1. cap. 17. Episcopus Chemnenfis, Onus Ecclesiae, cap. 20, 21, 22, 23.
Geffry Chaucher his Plow-mans Tale, Pierce Plowman his Creed, Bernardi ad
Gulielmu^ Abbatem Apologia, and Concio ad Cl^rum in Concilio Rhemens^. Ioannis
Wickliffe Dialogogorum lib. 4. cap. 3^. to 39. Ioannes Aventinus Annalium
Boiorum lib. 6 and 7. John Bale his Acts of English Votaries and Clemangis de
Corrupto Ecclesiae statu, Tract.
int^llerable luxury and voluptuousness of the Popish Clergy; whose
excessive ^ndowments power, pride and lordly pompe^ drew them on by little and
little to that stupendio^s Epicurisme and dissoluteness of life, that to stop
the peoples mouths, and to palliate, if not authorize these their luxurious
courses, they not only stuffed their See Calendarium et Martyriologium
Romanum, HRabani Mauri et Baronii Martyriologia, Nicolaus Clemangis de Novis
Celebritatibus non instituendis accordingly.
Kalenders with new-invented Festivals and Saints days; but likewise See Act.
7. Scene 3. Nicolaus Clemangis De Novis Celebritatibus non instituendis,
Polydor Virgil de Invent. rerum l. 5. c. 2. Lodovicus Vive^ Commen^. in August.
De Civit. Dei lib. 8. c. 27.
countenanced all Pagan sports and customs on them, exhibiting public
banquets, Enterludes, Mummeries, Dances, and merriments to the people; who
being bribed with their belly-cheare, and soothed with their pleapleasures,
Populi plaudunt non consultoribus utilitatum suarum, sed largitoribus
voluptatum. August. De Civi^. Dei lib. 2. cap. 20.
applauded them for the present, and then fell to Cum enim maiores ipsi
voluptati deserviunt, minoribus lasciviae fraena laxantur. Quis enim sub
disciplinae se constrictione contineat, quando et ipsi qui ius constrictionis
accipiunt sese voluptatibus relaxant? Greg. Magnus Moral. lib. 2. cap. 16.
imitate them for the future; till at last Perniciosius de Republica merentur
vitiosi rectores, quod non solum vitia concipiunt ipsi, sed ea infundunt i^
civitatem: neque solum obsunt, quod illi ipsi corrumpunt, ^ed e^iam quod
corrumpuntur, plusque exemplo quam peccato nocent. Cicero De Legibus lib. 3.
all Christendom was over-runne, yea all life, all power of Christianity
quite eaten out with these Pagan Christmas pastimes and delights of sin. That
the Popish Clergy (whose extravagancies and most intolerable luxury in this
kind, Synodus Turonensis sub Car. Mag. Can. 5. to 10. Surius Tom. 3. page 274.
Synod. Cabilonense 2. Can. 9, 10. Ibid. p. 279. Moguntina Anno 813. cap. 10.
and 36. page 289, 290. Council. Aquis^ranense Can. 100. p. 333. Parisiense l. ^.
c. 19, 21, 37, 38, 46. and lib. ^. cap. 18. Rhemense Anno 813. cap. 17, 18.
Moguntinum sub HRabano cap. 13. Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. cap. 15, 17.
Coloniense sub Radolpho cap. 17. with s^ndry others. See Act. 7. Scene 3.
many Councels and Bernard ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apologia, De Consideratione
lib. 3, 4. Ad Clerum et ad Pastores Sermo, Col. ^276. etc. In Cantica Sermo 77.
Declamationes, et Epist. 42.78. Gregorius Magnus Hom. 17. in Evangelia, and
Pastoralium lib. Guildas in Ecclesiasticum ordinem acris Correptio. Bibl. Patr.
Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 682, etc. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 7, 18, 23, 42, 56, 61, 76,
85, 102, 152. and Compendium in Job c. 1. A^lredus Sermo 1^. and 12. in cap.
13. Isaiae. S. Brigittae Revelationes l. 4. c. 132. to 136. l. 6. c. 15, 17,
19. Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. Artic. 2. and 28. Robertus
Holkot Lect. 182. super Lib. Sapientiae. E. fol. 167. Episcopus Chemnensis Onus
Ecclesiae lib. cap. 21, 22, 23. Nicolaus Clemangis, Epist. 23, 15, 28, 75, 77,
85, 102, 133. and De Corrupto Ecclesiae statu lib. throughout. Espencaeus in 1 Timothy 2, 3. in Titum cap. 1, 2. and De Continentia l. 3. c. 4. Ioannes Aventinus
Annalium Boiorum l. 7. and 8. Guicciardine Histor. l. ^, 11, 12, 21, 22, 3^.
Fabian Histor. part 6. cap. 170. John Bale his Acts of English Votaries:
Turco-papismus l. 1. c. 17. Platina de Vita Pontificum, Matthew Paris,
Theodo^icus a Niem: cum infinitis aliis.
Authors have declaimed against at larg) were the chiefest instruments of
ushering in these Pagan Christmasses, together with Stage Plays, dances, and
such like bacchanalian practices into the Church of Christ, it is most
apparent, not only by those See Act. 7. Scene 3.
Councels and Authors which cry out against them, for their strange
unparalleld excesses in all these kinds; and by that elegant oration of King
Edgar to our English Praelates, worthy to be registered in golden Characters,
where he thus displayes the Epicurian lives of the Clergy in his reign:
Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 13. p. 153, 154. Mr. Fox Book of Martyrs, Edit. 1610.
page 153. Henry Lord Stafford, in his Book of the true difference between
regal power and Ecclesiastical, London 1550. fol. 84, 85, 86. where it is
englished; and Mr. Seldom in his Eadmeri spicilegium p. 161.
Taceo, quod Clericis nec est corona patens, nec tonsura conveniens; quod in
vest lascivia, insolentia in gestu, in verbis turpitudo, interioris hominis
loquuntur insaniam. Praetera in divinis officijs quanta negligentia, cum sacris
vigilijs vix interesse dignentur, cum ad sacra Missarum solennia ad ludendum
vel ad ridendum magis quam ad psallendum congregari videantur. Dicam, dicam
quod boni lugent, mali rident, dicam dolens (si tamen dici potest) quomodo
diffluant in commessationibus, in ebrietatibus, in cubilibus, in impudicitijs,
ut jam domus Clericorum putentur prostibula meretri^um, et conciliabula
histrionum. Ibi alea, ibi saltus et cantus, ibi usque in medium noctis spatium
protractae in clamore et horrore vigiliae: (the chief ingredients of our
exorbitant Christmasses.) Sic, sic patromonia regum, eleemosynae pauperum, imo
(quod magis est) illius pretiosi sanguinis pretium profligatur. Ad hoc igitur
exhauserunt thesauros suos patres nostri, ad hoc fiscus Regius, distractis
redditibus multis, detumuit, ad hoc Ecclesijs Christi agros et possessiones
Regalis munificentia contulit, ut delicijs Clericorum meretrices ornantur,
luxuriosa convivia praeparentur, canes et aves et talia ludicra comparentur?
Hoc milites clamant, plebs submurmurat, mimi cantant et saltant, et vos
negligitis! vos parcitis! vos dissimulatis! etc. But likewise by sundry See
Act. 7. Scene 3. throughout.
forequoted Councels, and canonical Constitutions; by which it appears most
evidently; that diverse of the Popish Clergy were common Iesters, Actors,
Dicers, Dancers, Epicures, Drunkards, Health-quaffers; that they both acted and
caused Plays and Enterludes to be personated both in Churches and elsewhere,
especially on the feasts of Innocent^, New-yeares day, and the Christmas
holy days; the commonnesse of which abuses, was the only cause of those
several Canons and Constitutions to suppress them, on which you may reflect.
Hence Aven^ine records Annalium Boiorum l. 7. p. 582.
of Pope Boniface the 8. that he made and brought in secular sports and
Enterludes, endeavoring to reduce the golden age: and of Ibidem p. 668.
Pope Nicholas the 5. that he instituted secular Plays at Rome, contrary to
the Council of Constans; and that 560 persons were crushed to death, and
drowned with the fall of the Tiberine bridge, who flocked to Rome to behold
those Enterludes. Hence De Inventoribus Rerum l. 5. c. 2.
Polydor Virgil, Notae in Augustinum De Civit. Dei l. 8. c. 27.
Lodovicus Vives, De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 11, 12, 20,
21, 22.
Ioannes Langhecrucius, and De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 11,
12, 20, 21, 22.
Didacus de Tapia, cry out against the popish Clergy, for acting and
representing to the people, the passion of our Savior, the Histories of Job,
Mary Magdalen, John the Baptist, and other sacred Stories; together with the
lives and legions of their Saints; and for erecting Theaters for this purpose
in their Churches, on which their Priests and Monks, together with common
Enterlude-Players, and other Laickes did personate these their Plays. Which
gross profaneness though thus In tertiam partem Divi Thomae Salamancae 1589.
Artic. 8. p 546. See here Act. 3. Scene 5, 6.
declaimed against by many of their own Authors, and condemned by their
Conncels, See Act. ^. Scene 5. and Act. 7. Scene 3. throughout.
is yet still in use among them, as not only Qua (x)
Didacus de Tapia, and others who much lament it, but even daily experience,
and the Jesuits practice, together with John Molanus, Divinity-professor of
Lovan, witness: who in his Historia SS. Imaginum and Picturarum Antwerpiae
1617. lib. 4. cap. 18. De Ludis qui speciem quandam Imaginum haben^, in
quibusdam anni solennitatibus, p. 424, 425, 426, 427. out of Lib. de Imaginibus
c. 17.
Conradus Bruno, and Wilh^lmus Lindanus In Apologe^ico ad Germanos Tom. 3. cap.
55.
Lindanus, writes thus in justification of these their Enterludes. Now even
Stage Plays have a certain shape of Images, and often times move the pious
affections of Christians, more than prayer it self. And after this manner
truly Stage plays and shows are wont to be exhibited on certain times of the
year, the certain pictures of certain Evangelicall histories being annexed
to them. Of which sort is this, that on Palm Sunday children having brought in
the picture of our Savior, sitting upon an Ass, sing praise to the Lord, cast
bows of trees on the ground, and spread their garments on the way. And that
likewise upon Easter Eve, when as the presbyter after midnight receiving the
image of the crucifixe out of the sepulcher, goes round about the Church, and
beats the doors of it that are shut, saying, Psalm. 24.7, 9, 10.
Lift up your gates ye princes, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting gates,
that the King of glory may come in: and he who watches in the gates demanding,
Who is this King of glory? the Presbyter answers again, The Lord strong and
mighty in battle; the Lord of hoasts he is the King of glory. Likewise, that
on the day of the resurrection of our Lord in the morning after morning
prayers, Angels in white garments, sitting upon the sepulcher, ask the women
coming thither and weeping, saying; Whom seek ye women in this tum^lt,
weeping? Luke 24.4, 5, ^, 7.
he is not here whom ye seek: but go ye quickly, and tell his Disciples; Come
and see the place where the Lord lay. And that on the same day the image of our
Lord, bearing an ensign of Victory, is carried about in public procession,
and placed upon the altar to be gazed upon by the people. Likewise that of
Ascension day in the sight of all the people, the Image of the Lord is pulled
up in the midst of the Church, and showed to be taken up into heaven. In the
mean time about the Image are little winged images of Angels, carrying burning
tapers in their hands, and fluttering up and down, and a Pr^est singing; John
20.17.
I ascend unto my Father and your Father; and the Clergy singing after him, and
unto my God and your God: with this solemn hymn, Now is a solemn etc. and
this Responsory: Mark 16.15, 16.
Go ye into the world etc. And that upon White sunday, the image of a dove is
let down from above in the midst of the Church, and presently a fire falls
down together with it with some sound, much like the noise of guns, the Priest
singing, John 20.22.
Receive ye the holy Ghost etc. and the Clergy rechanting; Acts. 2.1.
There appeared cloven tongues to the Apostles, etc. By all which and other
such like spectacles, and those especially which represent the passion of our
Lord, nothing else is done, but that the sacred histories may be represented by
these exhibited Spectacles and Enterludes to those who by reason of their
ignorance cannot read them. And these things hi^herto out of Conradus Bruno in
his Book of Images, cap. 17. Thou have the like defense of these shows and
Enterludes in Tom. 3. cap. 55.
William Lindane the reverend Bishop of R^remond in his Apology to the
Germans, where among other things he says: For what other are these Spectacles
and Plays than the living histories of Laymen? with which the humane
affection is much more efficaciously moved, than if they should read the same
in private, or hear the^ publicly read by others etc. Thus he. O the
desperate madness, the unparalleld profanes of these audacious Popish Priests
and Papists, who dare turn the whole history of our Saviors life, death,
Nativitie, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and the very gif^ of the holy
Ghost descending in cloven tongues, into a mere profane ridiculous
Stage Play; (as even their own See here page 122, 123.
impious Pope Pius the 2. most profanely did^) contrary to the Sea Act. 3.
Scene 5. throughout; and Act. 7. Scene 3. Yea contrary to the Decree of
Theodosius the Emperor, who made this Edict. Nullus penitus oportet Spectacula
solennia orbis aeternae populo exhibere. Co^ex Theodosij lib. 15. Ti^. 5. Lex.
4. How much less then of our Savior Christ?
forequoted resolutions of sundry Councels and Fathers, who would have these
things only preached to the people, not acted, not represented in a show or
Stage Play. No wonder then if such turn the sacred solemnity of our Saviors
Incarnation into a Pagan Saturnal, or Bacchanalian feast; who thus transform
his humiliation, his exaltation, yea his whole work of our redemption into a
childish Play. But let these Playerlike Priests and Friars, who justify this
profaneness, which every Christian heart that has any spark of grace must
needs abominate, attend unto their learned Spanish Hermit, Didacus de Tapia,
who reads this Lecture both to them and us. Iam vero illud ut in scenis vita
Job, Francisci, conversio Magdalenae, etc. representantur, om^ino est
intollerabile Cum enim theatro^u^ mo^ prophanus sit, minus malum est (ut
siferendus est,) repraesentarentur prophana, sancta vero non nisi sancte
tractanda sunt etc. ^am vero ut theatrum, lo^cus scilicet ille daemonibus
familiaris, invisus Deo, in me^dio ipso corpore Ecclesiae coram altari maiori
et sanctissimo sacramento statuatur, ille solus ferat, qui ob peccata sua
nondum cernit ac sentit, quam haec adversa et pugnantia sint cu^ Dei
sanctitate. In tertiam parte^ diui Thom^, Artic. 8. Qu^stio. Vtrum Sacramentum
davi possit histrionibu^? page 546. Vid Ibidem.
That this verily is altogether intolerable, that the life of Job, of St.
Francis, of Mary Magdalen, (how much more then of Christ himself) should be
acted on the Stage. For since the very manner and custom of Play Houses is
profane, it is less evil (if it were tolerable) that profane things only
should be acted, and that holy things be handled only in a holy manner etc.
But now that a Theater, A PLACE SO FAMILIAR TO DEVILS, AND SO ODIOVS UNTO GOD^
(pray mark it) should be set up in the very midst of the body of the Church,
before the high Altar and the most holy Sacrament, for Plays to be acted on
it, he only can brook it, who by reason of his sins has not yet known or
felt, HOW CROSS AND OPPOSITE THESE THINGS ARE TO THE HOLINESS OF GOD. It is
evident then by all these premises, that our riotous, ludicrous and voluptuous
Christmasses, (together with Stage Plays, dancing, Masks and such like Pagan
sports) See Polydor Virgil De Invent. Re^rum lib. 5. cap. 1, 2. Francis De Croy
his first Conformity, cap. 19, 20, 60, 62. Mr. Samuel Byrd his Dialogue of the
use of the pleasures of this present life, page 15. to 33. Nicolaus ^^ema^gis
De Novis Celebritatibus non Instituendis; and Hospinian De Origin Festorum
accordingly.
had their original from Pagan, their revivall and continuance from Popish
Rome, who long since transmitted them over into England: For if Angliae
Historia, Basileae 1570 p. 215.
Polydor Virgil may be credited, even in the 13. year of Henry the second,
Anno Dom. 1270. it was the custom of the English to spend their Christmas time
in Plays, in Masks, in most magnificent and pompous Spectacles, and to
addict themselves to pleasures, dancing, dicing, and other unlawful prohibited
games, which See 13. H. 7. c. 2.19. H. 7. c. 12.33. H. 8. c. 11.
then were tolerated and permitted; contrary to the usage of most other
Nations, who used such Plays and wanton pastimes not in the Christmas season,
but a little before their Lent, about the time of Shrovetide. What therefore
Salvian writes of Sodomie and public stews, (from See Taxa Camerae, Agrippa
De Vanitate Scientiarum, cap. 64. Espencaeus De Continentia lib. 3. c. 4. and
in Titum cap. 1. p. 67, 68, 69.
which the Popes Exchequer receives no small revenue) De Gubern. Dei l. ^. p.
268.
Haec ergo impuritas in Romany et ante Christi Evangelium esse caepit: et quod
est gravius, nec post Evangelium cessavit: the same may I say of Stage Plays
and unruly Christmas-keeping: they had their first original from heathen Rome
(I mean from their Saturnalia, Bacchanalia, Floralia etc.) before the Gospel
preached to her; and they See Ioannis Langhecrucius De Vita et Honestate
Ec^lesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 7. to 25. accordingly.
have been since revived, continued, propagated by Antichristian Rome, even
since the Gospel preached: which should cause all pious Protestant Christians
eternally to abandon them, conforming themselves to the most ancient practice
of the primitive Christians, who celebrated this festival of our Saviors
Nativitie in a far different manner. For when as the Luke 2.8, 9, 10^ 11.
Angel of the Lord appeared to the shepherds, abiding in the fields, (not
feasting and playing in their houses) and keeping Vigilent itaque nato Domino
Pastores supra gregem ovium ^^ua^um, significent eius di^pensatione m^nifesta
vigilaturos in Ec^clesia Pastores animarum castarum: quibus dicatur; Pa^cite
qui in vobis est gregem Dei. ^ene autem vigilantibus pastoribus Angelus
apparet, ^osque Dei claritas circumfulget, quia illi prae caeteris videre
sublimia merentur, qui fidelibus gregibus praeesse sciunt; dumque ipsi pie
super gregem vigilant, divina supereos gratia largius coruscat. Beda Expos^t^
in Luc. c. 2. See Ambrose Sermo 7. Tom. 5. p. 5. F.
watch over their flocks (not dancing, dicing, carding, drinking or keeping
Christmas rout) by night; and said unto them; fear not: for behold I bring
unto you tidings of great joy which shall be to all people: for to you is borne
this day in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord: What
Christmas mirth and solace was there made, but this which St. Luke has
recorded for our everlasting imitation? Luke 2. v. 13, 14. Digna plane ac iusta
sententia quae in Na^ivitate Christi, et Deo honorem repraesentat in caelis, et
hominibus pacem prae^entat in^terris. Ambrose Si^^o 9. p. 6. F.
Suddenly (says he) there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising God and saying; Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace,
good will toward men. This is the only Christmas solemnity which the holy
Ghost, which Christ himself, the whole multitude of the heavenly host, and
the very best of Christians have commended to us from heaven; this I am sure is
the Ita ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse dominicum et verum quod sit prius
traditum; id autem extran^um et falsum quod sit posterius immissum. Ter^ul. De
Praescript. ad. ^^rs. Haer^^icos, c. 11 p. 178. Potiora sunt ad instruendam
animam priora quam postera. Teri^^. de Testimonio Anim^, c. 5.
ancientest and the best pattern of Christmas-keeping, that we read of; why
then should we be unwilling or ashamed for to imitate it? When our Savior was
borne into the world at first, we hear of no feasting, drinking, healthing,
roaroaring, carding, dicing, Stage Plays, Mummeries, Masks or heathenish
Christmas pastimes; alas these precise puritanicall Angels, Saints and
shepherds (as some I fear account them) knew no such pompous pagan Christmas
Courtships or solemnities, which the Devil and his accursed instruments have
since appropriated to his most blessed Nativitie. See Ambrose Sermo 7. and 9.
Here we have nothing but Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will
toward men: this is the Angels, the shepherds only Christmas Caroll: which
the Virgin Mary in the former chapter, has prefaced with this celestial hymn
of praise. Luke 1.46, 47.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior: and Zacharias seconded with this heavenly sonnet: Luke 1.68, 69
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people: And has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his
servant David. This was the only sport and mer^iment, these the soule-ravishing
Ditties, with which men and Angels celebrated the very first Christmas that was
kept on earth; yea this is the Rev. 4.8^ 9, 10, 11. c. ^.12, 13, 14. c. 7^ 9,
to 13.
only Christmas solemnity that the blessed Saints and Angels now observe in
heaven: why then should we so earnestly contend for any other? If we reflect
upon the Christians in Apologia advers. Gentes, c. 39, 40.
Tertullians, Paedagogil. 2 c^ 3, 4, 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus, De Vita Con^templa^iva lib. page 1210. to 1215.
Philo Iudaeus, Octavius p. 102.
Minucius Felix, Epist. l. 10. e^. 97.
Pliny the seconds, Contra Gentiles T^m. 5. Col^ 877.
Chrysostomes, and De Martyribus l. 8. Tom. 2. p 390. ^.
Theodorets times: we shall find them See my Healthes Sickness, Edit 2. p. 5^
9, 22. and Ioanni Langhecrucius De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c.
7 to 25. Ioannes F^edericus De Ritu bibendi ad Sanit^tem lib. 1. cap. 2, 3.
banishing all gluttony, drunkenness, health-quaffing, intemperance, dancing,
dicing, Stage Plays, fiddlers, jesters, baudie songs and lewd discourses from
their feasts, and Christian Festivals; which they celebrated in this manner.
Coimus in caetum et congregatione^, ut Deum quasi manu facta praecationibus
ambiamus orantes. Haec vis Deo grata est. Coimus ad divina^um litterarum
co^memoratione^, si quid praesentium temporu^ qualitas aut praemonere cogit,
aut recognoscere. Certe fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam
figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus inculcationibus densamus; ibidem
etiam exhortationes, castigationes, et censura divina: nam et iudica^ur magno
cum pondere, etapud certos de Dei conspectu: summumq, futuri iudicii
praeiudicium est si quis ita deliquerit; ut a communione orationis, et
conven^us, et omnis sancti commercii relegetur. Apolog. advers. Gent. cap. 38,
39. page 692.
First of all they assembled themselves together into one company, that so
they might as it were assault and besiege God with their united prayers: Caena
nostra de nomine rationem suam ostendit, vocatur enim Agape, id quod penes
Graecos dilectio est, etc. Nihil vilitatis, nihil immodestiae admittitur: non
prius discumbitur quam oration ad Deum praeguste^ur: editur quantum esurientes
caplunt, b^bitur quantum pudicis est utile: ita saturantur ut qui meminerint
etiam per noctem adorandum Deum sibi esse: ita fabulantur, ut qui sciant
Dominum audire. Post aquam manualem ac lumina ut quisque de Scrip^uris sanctis
vel de proprio ingenio potest, provocaturin medium Deo canere: hinc proba^ur
quomodo biberit. AEque oration convivium dirimit; inde disceditur non in
catervas caesionum, neque in classes discursationum, nec in eruptiones
lascivarum, sed ad eandem curam modestiae et pudicit^ae, ut qui non tam caenam
caenaverint quam disciplinam. Ibidem cap. 39. ^ag. 696.
after that they did feed their faith, erect their hope, settle their
confidence, inculcate their discipline with the Scriptures and holy
conferences, and with the often inculcations of divine precepts, using withal
exhortations, corrections and ecclesiastical censures: after which they kept
their Agape, or feasts of Love, wherein no immodesty was admitted; at which
feasts they never sat down to eat, till they had first praemised a solemn
prayer unto God: and then falling to their meat, they did eat no more than
would satisfy their hunger, and drink no more than was fit for chaste persons:
satiating themselves so, as that they remembered they were to worship God in the
night: discoursing like such as those who knew that God overheard them. After
the basin and ewer and lights are brought in, every one as he was able, was
provoked to sing a psalm unto God out of the holy Scriptures, or out of his
own invention: and by this it was manifested how he had drunk. And as prayer
began, so it likewise concluded their feasts; after which every one departed,
not into the routs of roaring swashbucklers, nor ^et into the company of
riotous ramblers, nor into the lashings out of lascivious persons; but to the
same care of modesty and chastity, like those who had not so much repasted a
supper as discipline. Yea such was the puritanicall rigidnesse of the primitive
Christians on the solemn birth-dayes and Inaugurations of the Roman Emperors,
when as other men kept revel-rout, feasting and drinking from parish to parish,
making the whole City to smell like a tavern, kindling bonefires in every
street, and running by troops to Plays, to impudent prankes, to the
enticements of lust etc. accounting their licentious deboistnesse at such
seasons their chiefest piety and devotion, (as our Grand Christmas keepers now
do:) that they would neither shadow nor adorn their doors with laurel; nor
diminish the daylight with bonefires and torches, nor yet drink, nor dance,
nor run to Play Houses, which they wholly abandoned; but kept themselves
temperate, sober, chaste and pious; Propterea igitur publici hosts Christiani,
quia Imperatoribus neque vanos neque mentientes, neque temerarios ho^nores
dicant; quia verae religionis homines solennitates eorum conscientia potius
quam lascivia celebraut. O nos merito damnandos! Cur enim vota et gaudia
Caesarum cas^i et sobrii et prob^i expungimus? cur die laeto non laureis posts
adumbramus^ nec lucernis diem in^ringimus? Honesta res est solennita^e publica
exigente, inducere domui ^uae habitum alicuius novi lupanaris etc. Ibidem p.
68^.
celebrating their solemnities, rather with conscience and devotion than
lasciviousness; whence they were reputed public enemies, as Tertullian, De
Vita Contemplativa p. 111. etc.
Philo Iudaeus, and Paedagogi l. 2. c. 4.
Clemens Alexandrinus most plentifully inform us. Hence Theodoret writes, Pro
Pandiis etiam Diasiisque ac Dionysiis hoc est Iovis Liberique patris
solennitatibus, Petro, Paulo, Thomae, Sergio, Ma^cello, Leontio, Antonino,
Mauritio, aliisque sanctis Mar^^ribus solennitates populari epulo peraguntur.
Proque i^la vete^i Pompa, pro turpi obscaenitate atque impudentia fiunt
modestae, castae, ac tempe^an^iae plenae fes^iuitates, non illae quidem mero
delibutae, non commessationibus leves, non cachinnis solutae; sed divinis
canticis personantes, sacrisque sermonibus audiend is intentae. In quibus ad
Deum praeces non sine sanctis lachrymis ac suspiriis Deo summittuntur.
The^do^e^ de Martyribus, l. 8. Tom. 2. p. 390. F.
That the Christians of his time, in stead of solemnizing the festivals of love
and Bacchus, did celebrate the festivities of Peter, Paul, Th^mas, Sergius,
Marcellus, Leontius, Antoninus, and other holy Martyrs; and that in stead of
that ancient pomp, that filthy obscenity and impudency that the Pagans used on
their festivals, the Christians instituted holy days full of modesty, chastity
and temperance: not such as were moistened with wine, lascivious with riotous
feasts, dissolute with shoutes and laughter; but such as resounded with divine
songs, as were spent in hearing holy Sermons, on which prayers were humbly
powered out to God not without tears and sigh^s. Thus did the primitive
Christians spend their solemn holy days; and so should we do too, as our
own Statute of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 3. expressly enjoynes us. How the primitive
Christians celebrated the Nativitie of our Savior in particular, and in what
manner we also ought to solemnize it, let Gregory Nazianzen in his 38 Oration
upon our Saviors Nativity, now at last inform us; where thus he writes: Page
58^, 584, 585. Natalis Chri^ti dies quomodo celebrandus. Vide Nicetae Comment.
Ibidem.
Hoc festum nostrum est, (treating of our Saviors Nativitie) Hoc hodierno die
celebramus, Dei nimirum ad homines accessum, ut ad Deum proficiscamur, aut, ut
aptiori verbo ut ^r, revertamur, abjectoque veteri homine novum induamus; et
quemadmodum in veteri Adamo mortui sumus, ita in Christo vivamus, una cum eo
nascentes, una crucifixi, una sepulti, una resurgentes. Praeclara enim
vicissitudo atque conversio mihi sentien^a est, ut quemadmodum ex secundioribus
rebus adversae natae sunt, sic contra ex adversis ad laeta prosperaque redeam.
Vbi enim abundavit peccatum, superabundavit gratia: et si gustus condemnavit,
quanto magis Christi passio justificavit? Quocirca non ostentorie, sed divine;
non mundi ritu, sed supra mundi ritum; non res nostras sed nostri, vel ut
rectius loquar, Domini; non ea quae infirmitatis sunt, sed quae curationis; non
ea quae creationis, sed ea quae recreationis instaurationisque celebremus. Id
autem hac demum ratione consequemur, si nec domus limina sertis coronemus, Yet
how d^ametrally opposite is our pra^ctise now to this advice.
nec choreas agetemus, nec vicos ornemus, nec oculum pascamus, nec aurem cantu
demulcea^us, nec lenocinijs gustum titillemus, nec olfactum effaeminemus, nec
tactui obsequamur, promptis inquam illis ad vitium vijs, peccatique januis, nec
teneris et circumfluentibus vestibus emolliamur, quarum ut quaeque pulcherrima,
ita maxim inutilis jacet, nec gemmarum splendori^^s nec auri fulgoribus, nec
colorum artificijs nativam pulchritudinem ementientibus, atque adversus
imaginem divinam excogitatis, Romans 13.
nec commessationibus et ebrietatibus, quas cubilia et lasciviae comitantur,
quandoquidem malorum magistrorum mala doctrina est, vel potius malorum seminum
mala seges. Nec thoros altos servamus, ventri delicias sternentes: nec vina
generosa, coquorum lenocinia, liquorum profusas magnificentias in precio
habeamus. Nec terra et mare charum nobis ac preciosum stercus offerant: hoc
enim nomine deli^ias ornare soleo. Nec alius alium intemperantia superare
contendamus. Mihi enim intemperantia est quicquid superfluum est, usibusque
necessarijs superest, idque esurientibus alijs atque inopia laborantibus; ijs
inquam, qui ex eodem luto et temperatione creati sunt. Verum haec prophanis
atque ethnico fastui solennitatibusque relinquamus: qui cum ijs deorum nomen
tribuant, qui sacrificiorum nidore oblectantur, congruentur profecto eos
helluando colunt, mali utique m^lorum daemonum et fictores et sacerdotes et
cultores. At nos a quibus Verbum adoratur, verborum delicijs (si quid tamen
delicijs dandum est) indulgeamus, atque ex lege divina et narrationibus, cum
alijs, tum ijs praesertim, quibus praesentis festi mysteria explicantur,
voluptatem capiamus. Ita enim commodae, minimaeque ab eo, a quo convocati
sumus, alienae deliciae nostrae fuerint. Which thus he seconds, in his 48
Oration against Julian. Page 796, 797 and Vincent^i Speculum Historiale l. 1^.
cap. 94. Festa Christianoru^ quomodo celebranda.
Ac primum quidem fratres laetemur non corporis splendore, non vestium
permutationibus et magnificentijs, non Romans 13.
commessationib^s et ebrietatibus, quarum fructum cubilia et impudicitias esse
didicistis: nec floribus plateas coronemus, nec unguentorum turpitudine mensas,
nec vestibula ornemus, nec visibili lumine splendescat domus, nec tibicinum
concentu plausibusque personent: hic enim Gentilitiae festorum celebrationis
mos est. Nos vero ne his rebus Deum honoremus, ne praesens tempus indignis
rebus attollamus; verum animae puritate, et mentis bilaritate, et lucernis
totum Ecclesiae corpus illustrantibus, hoc est divinis speculationibus ^t
sententijs super sacrosanctum candelabrum erectis, et excitatis, orbique
universo praelucentibus. Parvum meo quidem judicio ac tenue, si cum hoc
comparetur, lumen illud omne est, quod homines festos dies celebrantes privatim
publiceque accendunt, etc. Hymnos pro tympan^s assumamus, psalmodiam pro
turpibus et flagitiosis cantibus, plausum gratiarum actionis et canoram manuum
actionem pro plausibus theatricis, gravitatem pro risu, prudente^ sermonem pro
ebrietate, decus et honestatem pro delicijs. Quod si etiam te ut festum laeto
animo celebrantem, tripudiare convenit; tripudia tu quidem, sed non obscenae
Matthew. 14.
Herodiadis tripudium, ex quo Baptistae caput secuta est, verum 2 Regum 6.
Davidis ob arcae requietem saltitantis, quo quidem itineris sancti ac Deo
grati agilitatem volubilitatemque mystice designari existimo. These are the
Christmas exercises, this the only Christmas-keeping, that the primitive
Christians used, all and this godly Bishop calls for. To pass by that
excellent passage of Salvian, against our Christmas Enterludes, which fully
meets with the Objectors frenzy: * Christo ergo o amentia monstruosa, Christo
Circenses offerimus et Mimos, tunc et hoc maxim, cum ab eo aliquid boni
capimus, cum prosperitatis aliquid ab eo attribuitur, aut victoria de hostibus
a divinitate donatur? Et quid aliud hac re facere videmur, quam si quis homini
beneficium largienti injuriosus sit, aut blandientem convitijs caedat, aut
osculantis vultum mucrone transigat, etc. which I have formerly englished. As
also to pretermit De Nativita^te Christi Sermo, Tom. 2. p. 250.
St. Cyprian, De Tempore Sermo 1. to 36.
St. Augustine, De Nativitate Domini Sermones 10. Operum fol. 28. to 53.
Leo, In Natali Domini Sermon. Col. 62, 63, to 66.
Bernard, with Chrysostom De Beato Philogonio Oration Tom. 2. Col. 834, 835,
836^ B^da Homiliae Hyemales^ In Na^ali. Domini Tom. 7. Col. 298. to 310.
HRabanus Ho^mil. 1, 2, 4, 5. Operum Tom. 5. p. 581, 582, 583. De Institutione
Clericorum l. 2. c. 31. Tom. 6. p. 21. with diverse others.
sundry other Fathers, who have written of our Saviors Nativitie, how it ought
to be celebrated with the greatest holiness, sobriety, and chiefest devotion;
I shall relate the sum of all their Minds in the words of St. Ambrose, who
is somewhat copious in this theame^ Sermo 2. Dominica 1. Adventus, he writes
thus. Operu^ Tom. 5. p. 2.
Hoc tempus, fratres charissimi, non immerito Domini adventus vocatur, nec sine
causa sancti Patr^s adventum Domini celebrare caeperunt, et sermones de his
diebus ad populum habuerunt, id namque ideo instituerunt, ut se unusquisque
fidelis praepararet et emendaret, quo digne Dei ac Domini sui Telesphorus Papa
apud Romanos natalis Domini celebrationis primus author legitur extitisse.
HRabanus Ma^rus De Institut. Clericorum l. 2. c. 31. Operum Tom. 6. p. 21. ^.
Nativitatem celebrare valeret. Nam si aliquis vestrum seniorem suum in ejus
domum suscepturus, ab omnibus sordibus et immundis rebus ipsam domum mundaret,
et quaeque honesta et necessaria essent, secundum suam possibilitatem
praepararet; et hoc facit mortalis suscepturus mortalem; quanto magis se
mundare debet creatura, ut suo creatori apparenti in carne non displiceat: Ille
justus venit ad nos peccatores, ut ex peccatoribus faceret justos: pius venit
ad impios, ut nos faceret pios: humilis venit ad superbos, ut ex superbis
faceret humiles. Quid plura? ille natura bonus venit ad homines qui erant pleni
omnibus malis. Quapropter hortamur vos, ut his di^bus abundantius eleemosynas
faciatis; ad Ecclesiam frequentius conveniatis, confessionem pec^atorum
vestrorum purissime faciatis, et ab omni immunditia vos studiosissime
contineatis. Odium nihilominus, iram, et indignationem, clamorem et
blasphemiam, superbiam atque jactantiam cum omni carnali delectatione procul a
vobis repellatis: ut cum dies Dominicae Nativitatis advenerit, salubriter ipsum
celebrare possitis. Et sicut multi sunt soliciti de carnalibus divitijs, et de
preciosis vestimentis, ut honorabiliores caeteris videantur in illa die; ita
vos solicitiores estote de spiritualibus divitijs et vestimentis: quia sicut
anima melior est carne, ita deliciae spiritales meliores sunt quam carnales. Et
multo melius est animam ornare virtutibus, quam corpus preciosis induere
vestibus. Haec admonitio Fratres, idcirco ad vos facta est, ut qui boni sunt
per hanc sint meliores; et qui malos se esse recolunt, certissime convertantur;
ut pariter in die Dominicae Nativitatis laetari spiritaliter merea^tur. Which
he thus prosecuts in his 4. Ser. Dominica 2. Adventus. Op^rum To^. 5. p. 3. A,
B. Which Homily I^ find ve^batim i^ HRabanus Maurus his Works, Homilia 1.
ante Natalem Domini^ Operum Colon. Agrip. 1626. Tom. 5. p. 580, 581.
Laetitia quanta sit, quantusque concursus, cum Imperatoris mundi istius
natalis celebrandus est, been nostis quemadmodum duces eius et principes omnes
militantes accurate sericis vestibus accincti, operosis cingulis auro fulgente
pretiosis ambiant solito nitidius in conspectu regis incedere. Credunt enim
maius esse Imperatoris gaudium, si viderit majorem suae apparationis ornatum;
tantoque illum laetum futurum, quanto ipsi fuerint in ejus festivitate devoti;
ut quia Imperator tanquam homo corda non conspicit, affectum eorum circa se
probet vel habitum contuendo, ita fit ut splendidius se accuret quisquis regem
fidelius diligit. Deinde quia in die Natalis sui sciunt eum largum futurum ac
donaturum plura vel ministris suis, vel ijs qui in domo ejus abjecti putantur
et viles, tanta prius thesauros ejus replere divitiarum varietate festinant, ut
in quantum prorogare voluerit, in tantum prorogatio copiosa non desit, et ante
voluntas donandi deficiat, quam substantia largiendi. Haec autem ideo solicit
faciunt, quia majorem sibi remunerationem pro hac solicitudine sperant futuram.
Si ergo fratres saeculi istius homines propter praesentis honoris gloriam
terreni regis sui natalem diem tanta apparitione suscipiunt, qua nos
accuratione aeterni regis nostri Jesus Christi Natalem suscipere debemus? qui
pro devotione nostra non nobis temporalem largietur gloriam, sed aeternam; nec
terreni honoris administrationem dabit quae successore finitur, sed caelestis
imperij dignitat^^, quae non habet successore^. Qualis aute^ nostra remuneratio
sit futura, dicit Propheta. Isay 66. 1 Cor. 2.
Quae oculus non vidit, nec auris audivit, ne^ in cor hominis ascendit, quae
praeparavit Deus diligentibus ^e. Quibus indumentis nos exornari oportet? Quod
autem diximus nos, hoc est animas nostras: quia rex noster Christus non tam
^itorem vestium, quam animarum requirit affectum, nec inspicit ornamenta
corporum, sed considerat corda meritorum: nec fragilis cinguli praecingentis
lumbos operositatem miratur, sed fortis castimoniae restringentis libidinem ad
pudicitiaem plus miratur. Ambiamus ergo inveniri apud ipsum probati fide,
compti misericordia, moribus accurati; et qui fidelius Christum diligit,
nitidius se mandatorum ejus observatione componat: ut vere nos in se credere
videat, cum ita in ejus solennitate fulgemus, et magis laetus sit, quo nos
perspexerit puriores. Atque ideo ante complures dies castificemus corda nostra,
mundemus conscientiam, purificemus spiritum, et nitidi ac sine macula
immaculati Domini suscipiamus adventum: ut cujus nativitas per immaculatam
virginem constitit, ejus Natalis per immaculatos servulos procuretur. Quisquis
enim in illo die sordidus fuerit ac pollutus, Natalem Christi ortumque non
curat: intersit licet Dominicae festivitati corpore, mente tamen longius a
Servatore separatur. Nec societatem habere poterunt immundus et sanctus, avarus
et misericors, corruptus ac virgo; nisi quod magis ingerendo se indignus
offensione^ contrahit cu^ minime se cognoscit. Dum enim vult officiosus esse,
injuriosus existit: sicut ille in Matthew. 22.
Evangelio, qui in caetu sanctoru^ invita^us ad nuptias venire ausus est vestem
non habens nuptialem: et cum alius niteret justitia, alius luceret fide, alius
castitate fulgeret, ille solus conscientiae faeditate pollutus, cunctis
splendentibus deformi horrore sordebat. Et quanto plus simul discumbentium
beatorum candeb at sanctitas, tanto magis peccatorum illius apparebat
improbitas, qui poterat minus displicuisse forsitan, si in consortium justor^m
minime se dedisset. Igitur fratres suscepturi Natalem Domini, ab omni nos
delictorum faece purgemus, repleamus thes^^rum ejus diversorum numerum donis,
ut in die sancta sit unde peregrini accipiant, reficia^tur viduae, pauperes
vestiantur, etc. Sermo 5. D^minica 3. Adventus, p. 3. G.
Supervenientem festivitatem ejus omni ambitione retinere debemus: Retinere,
inquam, ut si dies solennitatis transeat, apud nos sanctificationis ejus
beatitudo permaneat. Haec enim gratia Natalis est Domini Salvatoris, ut in
futuru^ ad Nota.
praedestinatos transeat, in praeteritum remaneat ad devotos. Oportet ergo esse
nos sanctitate pur^s, mundos pudicitia, ^itidos honestate, ut quo diem fest^
advenire propinquius cernimus, e^ accuratius i^cedamus. Si enim mulierculae
solent aliquas ferias suscepturae, maculas vestium suaru^^ aqua diluere: cur
non magis nos accepturi Na^alem Domini, ma^ulas ^nimar^ nostrarum fletibus
abl^amus? Sermo 7. in Die Natalis Domini p. 5. H. ^. A.
Vnusquisque ergo quicquid in se reprehensibile recognoscit, in hac die in q^a
Filius Dei nascitur, corrigat: id est, qui fuit adulter, voveat Deo castitatem:
qui avarus, largitatem: qui ebriosus, sobrietatem; qui superbus, humilitatem:
qui detractor, charitatem voveat et reddat: secundum illu^ Psalmi versiculum:
Psalm. 75.
Vovete, et re^dite Domino Deo vestro. Nos fideliter voveam^s, ille dabit
possibilitatem solvendi. Valde quippe ^onestum est fratres, ut nullus sit qui
non ^odie domino aliquid offerat. Regibus vel amicis susceptis munera damus, et
creatori omnium ad nos venienti nihil dabimus? Nihil enim a nobis magis
requirit, quam nosmetipsos. Offeramus igitur ^i nos ipsos, quatenus et a
praesentibus malis, et ab aeternis cruciatibus, ipsius ineffabili pietate
liberati, in caelestis regn^ beatitudine suscepti perpetuo valeamus gaudere.
And Sermo 6. Dominica quarta Adventus: he proceeds thus. Page 4. E, F, ^
Propria divinitate fratres dilectissimi, jam adveniunt dies, in quibus Natalem
Domini Servatoris cum gaudio desideramus celebrare, et ideo rogo et admoneo, ut
quantum possumus cum Dei adjutorio laboremus, quatenus in illo die cum sincera
et pura conscientia, et mundo corde^ et casto corpore, ad altar Domini
possimus accedere, et corpus, vel etiam sanguinem ejus non ad judicium, sed ad
remedium animae nostrae mereamur accipere. In Christi enim corpore vita nostra
consistit, sicut et ipse Dominus noster dixit^ Joan. 6.
Nisi manducaveritis carne^ Filii hominis et biberitis ejus sanguinem, non
habetis vitam in vobis. Mutet ergo vita^, qui vult accipere vita^. Na^ si non
mutat vita^, ad judicium accipiet vitam, et magi^ ex ipsa corrumpitur, quam
sanetur; magis occiditur, quam vivificetur. Sic e^im dixit Apostolus: 1. Cor.
11.
Qui manducat corpus Domini, et bibit sanguinem ejus indigne, judicium sibi
manducat et bibit. Et ideo licet omni tempore bonis operibus ornatos ac
splendidos esse conveniat, praecipu^ tamen in die Natalis Domini, sicut in
Evangelio ipse dixit, Matthew. 5.
ut lucere debeant opera nostra coram hominibus. Considerate quaeso fratres,
quando aliquis homo potens aut nobilis n^talem aut suum aut filij sui celebrare
desiderat, quanto studio ante plures dies quicquid in domo suo sordidum viderit
ordinat emundare, quicquid ineptum et incongruum projicit, quicquid utile et
necessarium praecipit exhibere: domus etiam si obscura fuerit, dealbatur, et
diversis respersa floribus adornatur: pavimenta autem a scopis mundantur,
quicquid etiam ad laetitiam animi, et corporis delicias pertinet omni
sollicitudine providetur. Vt quid ista fratres charissimi nisi ut dies
natalicius cum gaudio celebretur hominis morituri? Si ergo tanta praeparas in
natalicio tuo, aut filij tui; quanta praeparare debes suscepturus Natalem
Domini tui? Si talia praeparas morituro, qualia praeparare debes aeterno?
Quicquid ergo non vis inveniri in domo tua, quantum potes labora ut non
inveniat Deus in anima tua. Certe si Rex terrenus aut quivis potens
paterfamilias ad suum natalicium te invitasset, qualibus vestimentis studeres
ornatus incedere? quam novis vel nitidis, quam splendidis, quo nec vetustas,
nec vilitas, nec aliqua faeditas oculos invitantis offenderet? Tali ergo
studio, in quantum praevales Christo auxiliante contend, ut diversis virtutum
ornamentis animam tuam compositam, simplicitatis gemmis, et sobrietatis
floribus adornatam, ad solennitatem regis aeterni, id est, ad Natalem Domini
Salvatoris, cum secura conscientia procedas, castitate nitida, charitate
splendida, eleemosynis candida. Christus enim Dominus noster si te ita
compositum ejus natalitium celebrare cognoverit, ipse per se venire, et animam
tuam non solum visitare, sed etiam in ea requiescere, et in perpetuum in illa
dignabitur habitare, sicut scriptum est: 2 Cor. 6.
Et inhabitabo in illis et inambulabo inter eos: Et iterum, Apoc. 3.
Ecce sto ad ostium et pulso; si quis surrexerit et aperuerit mihi, intrabo ad
illum, et caenabo cum illo, et ille mecum. Qu^m faelix est illa anima qui vitam
suam ita Deo auxiliante studuerit gubernare, ut Christum hospitem in^abi^atorem
mercatur excipere. Sicut e contrario quam infaelix est illa conscientia, toto
lachrymarum font lugenda, quae se i^a malis operibus cru^ntavit, ut in ^a non
Christus requiescere, sed diabolus incipiat dominari. Talis enim anima si
medicamentum paenitentiae non cito subvenerit, a luce relinquetur, a tenebris
occupabitur, vacuabitur dulcedine, replebitur amar^tudine; a morte invadetur, a
vitae repudiabitur. Ideo etiam ab omni inquinamento ante Christi Nat^lem mult^s
diebus abstinere debemus. Quotiescunque Fratres aut Natalem Domini, aut
reliquas solennitates celebrare disponitis, Let our Christmas health quaffers
consider this.
ebrietatem ant^ omnia fugite, iracundiae quasi bestiae crudelissimae
repugnate, odium velut venenum mortiferum de cord vestro rep^llite, et tanta
in vobis sit charitas, quae non solum ad amicos, sed etiam usque ad ipsos
perveniat inimicos, etc. And in ^is Sermo 11. in Die Circumcisionis Domini
nostri Jesus Christi; as if he had purposely written against our modern
Christmas disorders; he concludes thus. Page 7^ H. and ^. A, ^.
Est mihi adversus plerosque vestrum fratres, querela non modica, de his
loquor, quinobiscum Natalem Domini celebrantes, Gentilium se ferijs dediderunt,
et post illud caeleste conviviu^ superstitionis sibi prandium paraverunt; ut
qui ante laete laetificati fuerant sanctitate, inebriarentur postea vanitate;
ignorantes, quod qui vult regnare cum Christo, no^ possit gaudere cum saeculo:
et qui vult invenire justitiam, debet declinare luxuriam. Alia est enim ratio
vitae aeternae, alia desperatio lasciviae temporalis. Ad illam virtute
ascenditur, ad istam perditione descenditur. Atque ideo qui vult esse divinorum
particeps, non debet esse socius idoloru^. Note this well.
Idoli enim portio est inebriare vino mentem, ventrem cibo distendere,
saltationibus membra torquere, et ita pravis actionibus occupari, ut cogaris
ignorare quod Deus est. Vnde sanctus Apostolus haec praevidens dicit: 2 Cor. 6.
Quae portio justitiae cum iniquitate? aut quae societas luci cum tenebris? aut
quae pars fidelis cum infideli? qui autem consensus templo Dei cum idolis? Ergo
si nos sumus templum Dei, cur in templo Dei colitur festivitas idolorum? Cur
ubi Christus habitat, qui est abstinentia, temperantia, castitas, inducitur
commessatio, ebrietas atque lascivia? Dicit Salvator, Matthew. 6.
Nemo potest duobus Dominis servire; hoc est, Deo et Mammonae. Quomodo igitur
potestis religiose Epiphaniam Domini procurare, qui jam Kalendas quantum in
vobis est, devotissime celebrastis? Ianus enim homo fuit unius conditor
civitatis, quae Ianiculum nuncupatur, in cujus honorem a gentibus Kalendae sunt
Ianuariae nuncupatae: unde qui Kalendas Ianuarias colit, peccat, quoniam homini
mortuo defert divinitatis obsequium. Inde est quod ait Apostolus: Gal. 4.
Dies observatis, et menses, et tempora, et annos, timeo ne sine causa
laboravero in vobis. Observavit enim diem et mensem qui his diebus aut
jejunavit, aut ad Ecclesiam non processit. Observavit diem qui hesterno die non
processit ad Ecclesiam, processit ad campum. Ergo Fratres omni studio Gentilium
festivitatem et f^rias declinemus, ut quando illi epulantur et laet^ sunt, tunc
nos simus sobrij a^que jejuni, quo intelligant laetitiam suam nostra
abstinentia condemnari. Augustine Ena^. in Psalm. 81. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 18.
Illi habeant mare in theatro nos habeamus portum in Christo. If then our
Saviors Nativitie ought thus to be celebrated by us; if all Nullus vestrum se
inebri^t, quia ebrius insano fimilimus est. Nolite in no^minibus bibendo nomina
vestra delere de coelo: sunt quidem multi, quod peius est, qui non solum
seipsos ineb^i^nt, sed etiam alios cogunt, et adiurant, ut amplius quam expedit
bibant, etc. Ille Chri^stianus qualis est, qui etsi locum invenerit ad vomitum
usque bibet et posteaquam se in^briaverit, furget velut phreneticus et insanus,
diabolico more balare et saltare, verba turpia et amatoria, vel luxutiosa
can^are, etc. HR^banus Maurus, Homilia in Dominicis Di^bus. and De Bonorum
Christianorum ^t Malorum Moribus. Operum Tom. 5. ^. 605. D. 607. ^.
drunkenness, epicurisme, health-quaffing, dancing, dicing, Enterludes,
Plays, lascivio^snesse, pride and pagan customs must now be laid aside; if
all kind of sin and wickedness whatsoever must now be banished our bodies,
souls, and houses; if our souls must now especially be cleansed by repentance
from all their spiritual fil^hinesse, adorned, beautified with every Christian
grace, and made such holy spiritual Temples, that Psalm. 24.7, 8, 9, 10.
Christ the King of glory may come and dwell within them: if naught but 1 Pet.
1.14, 15 16. 2 Pet. 3.3.
holiness, temperance, sobriety and devotion must now be found within us, yea,
if fasting and abstinence must now be practiced, as all these Fathers teach us,
let us now at last for very shame abandon all those bacchanalian infernal
Christmas disorders, Enterludes, sports and pastimes which now overspread the
world, as See Mr. Samuel Bird his Dialogue of the use of the pleasures of this
present life, p. 15. to 31.
diametrally contrary not only to Christians, but to our Saviors Nativitie,
which they most desperately dishonor and profane. And if there be any such
deboist ones left among us (as alas there are too too many every where) who
will still support and plead for these abominable Christmas excesses, not
only in despite of God, of Christ, of Angels, Fathers, See Act. 7. Scene 3.
Councels, and godly Christians who condemn the^, but even of our own pious
Statute, viz. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. Which expressly enjoynes men^ All
Stage Plays and dancing therefore, together with carding and dicing are
unlawful sports and pastimes by thi^ very Statute, and so punishable by the
Statute of 1 Car. cap. 1. See here p. 240. to 244. accordingly.
even in the Christmas holy days, as well as others; to cease from all other
kind of labor, and to apply themselves Ambrose Ser. 11.
ONLY AND WHOLLY to la^d and praise the Lord, to resort and hear Gods word, to
come to the holy Communion, to hear, to learn and to remember almighty Gods
great benefits, his manifold mereies, his inestimable gracious goodness so
plentifully powered upon all his creatures, and that of his infinite and
unspeakable goodness, without any man's desert: and in remembrance hereof to
render him most high and hearty thanks, with prayers and supplications, for
the relief of all their daily necessities; because these holy days are
separated from all profane uses, and sanctified and hallowed, dedicated and
appointed no^ to any Saint or creature, but only unto God and his true
worship. (Which Statute excludes all Stage-plaies Masks, See the Statute of
21 Iacobi, for the keeping of the Lords day; Which names dancing, and passed
the Lower house.
dancing, dicing, and such other Christmas outrages from this sacred festival;
it being separated from all profane uses, and only and wholly devoted to Gods
worship, and the forenamed duties of religion, which are inconsistent with
them:) If there be any such, I say, as these within our Church, I only wish
them banished into Nelewki in Moscovia, every Christmas; where if we believe In
Nelewki oppido, quod cognomen ab infundendis poculis habet, omnibus extraneis
militibus et advenis satellibusque principis, inebriandi vario potus genere,
facultas conc^s^a est, quod Moschovitis gravi sub poena prohibetur; exceptis
aliquot diebus in anno, videlicet tempore Nativitatis et resurrectionis
Dominicae, pro festo Pe^tecostes, et in quibusdam solennioribus fe^tis divorum,
praecipue vero Nicolai, quem di^vino fere cultu prosequuntur, et beatae
virginis Mariae, Petri et Iohannis festis: interea vero velut vinculis emissi,
Bacchum et non festum illius divi (cuius diem tunc temporis celebrant)
advenisse gratulantur, et sacris nondum peractis, vel ut sues vario potus
genere obruti, temulenti, ^briique identidem vociferantes, seque velut obsessi,
mu^uo caedendes, et contumeliis var^is afficientes vagan^ur. Si autem huic
genti quotidie, inebriandi facultas concessa esse^^ ^ese m^tuis caedibus
funditus exterminarent etc. Guagninus, Rerum Polonicarum Tom. 2. f. 171.
Guagninus, all Moschovites are prohibited to health, to be drunk, or to keep
revelrout, except only in the Christmas, Easter, Whitsontide, and certain
other solemn feasts of Saints, especially of St. Nicholas their Patron, and
the festivities of the Virgin Mary, Peter and John; on which like men let out
of prison, they honor Bacchus more than God, or these their Saints; healthing
and quaffing down sundry sorts of liquors so long, till they are as drunk as
swine, and then they fall to roaring, shouting, quarrelling, abusing, and from
thence to wounding, stabbing and murdering one another; Insomuch that if this
drunkenness and disorder were permitted every day, they would utterly destroy
one another with mutual slaughters. This is the Moschovites Christmas-keeping,
who have liberty granted them to be drunk all Christmas, yea these are their
drunken fatal ends, which if our Christmas roaring boys affect, they may do
well to keep their Christmas commons with these beastly drunken swine, where
strangers have liberty to be drunk, to carouze and health even all Christmas,
and at all times else. But let all who have any sparks of sobriety, temperance
or grace within them, abominate these unchristian Christmas extravagancies; 1
Pet. 1.17.
passing all the time of their sojourning here in fear, concluding with that
speech of holy Peter; 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4
The time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, and to have walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine and
riot, revellings, banquettings, abominable idolatries; bacchanalian Christmas
pastime^ and disorders: And thereupon resolving, 1 Cor. 5.7.
to purge out all this old leaven, (of dancing, dicing, healthing, Plays and
riot) that so they may be a new lump, because Christ their Passover is now
sacrificed for them: casting away all these works of darkness, and putting on
the armor of light: walking honestly as in the day, (especially in the days
of Christ's Nativitie) Romans 13.12, 13, 14.
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, strife and
envying, ( no nor See Ambrose, Sermo 11. and here Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5.
yet in dancing, dicing, carding, Stageplayes, Mu^meries, Masks, and such
like heathenish practices, which are altogether unsuitable for Christians,
especially at such sacred times as these, as sundry See Act. 7. Scene 3.
forequoted Councels have resolved:) but putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, (who
about this time put on our nature, as we must now put on his grace, his
holiness) and making no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof:
So shall we celebrate our Saviors Nativity, and all other Christian
Festivals, with which Stage Plays are altogether inconsistent, both to our
Saviors honor, our own present comfort, and our eternal future joy.

For the third part of the Objection: that Stage Plays

I answer first; Answ. 1.
that there are many other far better, easier and cheaper recreations void of
all offense, with which the people may seasonably delight themselves: therefore
they need not these lewd superfluous costly Enterludes to sport themselves
withal. Secondly, we See Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew. here p. 416.417.
Philippus Gluverius Antiquae Germaniae, l. 1. c. 20. page 181, 182. and here p.
552, 553. accordingly.
many Nations in the world, who never knew what Stage Plays meant; yea there
are sundry shires and Cities in our Kingdom, where Players (who for the most
part harbor about London, where they have only constant standing Play Houses)
never come to make them sport; and yet they never complain for want of
pleasures, or these unnecessary Stage-delights: The most, the best of men live
happily, live comfortably without them; yea See here Act. 6. Scene 5, 7, 8, 9,
10, and 19. accordingly.
far more pleasantly than those who most frequent them. Therefore they are no
such necessary pastimes, but that they may well be spared. See here Act. 6.
Scene 19.
times of pestilence, and in Lent till now of late) can well subsist without
them, finding out far better recreations to solace themselves withal, and to
pass away their idle hours: therefore they are See Act. 4. Scene 2. Act. 5.
Scene 11. page 291. and Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
they hate them, abhor them, they see naught else in Plays but filthiness,
wickedness, and that which grieves their righteous souls: therefore their
souls can take no pleasure in them. Lewd people? Alas, their Magistratus enim
non tantum id agere debet ut ipse bonus sit, sed et hoc efficere ut alii mali
esse desistant. S^lvian De Gub^r. Dei l. 7. p. 269.
lewdness should be crossed, checked, suppressed, not countenanced, not
fomented with this food of vice: yea these should rather be afflicted, nay
terrified with Gods judgments, hell, and the serious contemplation of their
own forlorn sinful estates, which might lead them on to sin-lamenting
sorrow and sincere repentance; then soothed, then delighted with these
momentany pleasures of sin, which do but Hebr. 3.13.
crust their consciences, obdurate their impenitent hearts, and Job 21.11, 12
13. Amos 6.1. to 9. Iam. 5.5.
post them on to hell with more security and greater speed. Good men need not
these infernal delights to make them worse; ill men need to want them that
they may grow better; See Chrysostom Hom. 8. De Poenitentia, here p. 431, 432.
and Act. 6. Scen. 12. and 20.
for whiles they diligently frequent them, they are altogether hopeless of
becoming good: therefore it is necessary only that all should want them, but
no necessity at all See Act. 6. Scene 5. and Act ^. Scene 6, 7.
all the wisest Heathen Emperors, States, Philosophers, have deemed them so
unnecessary, so intollerably pernicious, that they have wholly abandoned them
as good for nothing but to corrupt the peoples minds and manners: See Act. 6.
Scene 3, 4, 5. and Act. 7. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, accordingly.
yea all the primitive Christians, the primitive Church both under the Law and
Gospel; together with sundry Councels, Fathers, Christian Emperors, Kings and
Writers have excluded them Church and State as unlawful, unsufferable to
remain in either, as recreations no ways fit for Christians, especially on
festivals and holy seasons; on which no man ever thought them useful but
Haywood the Player, in his Apology for Actors, the only book I know in
defense of Popular Stage Plays, and that God wot a poor one, which is very
well refuted by I.G. in his reply unto it.
one poor scribbling hackney Stage Player, for his own advantage, who was
likely to be undone if Plays should once miscarry. Wherefore I may safely
conclude with the unanimous suffrage of all the forequoted Authorities: that
Stage Plays are no whit useful or necessary to recreate or delight the
people, who may live well without them; but cannot live well with them, as I
have more largely proved Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. and 19, 20. on which you may
reflect.

SCENA QVARTA.
THE fourth Objection for the lawfulness of Plays is this: See Haywoods
Apology for Actors.
That they are ancient, Object. 4.
and of long continuance, that they are tolerated still among us; that many,
yea most frequent them, approve them in their judgments; therefore they are
certainly lawful.

To this I answer first; Answ. 1.
That the long continuance and antiquity of Stageplayes is no good argument of
their goodness. The Rev. 12.9. 1 John 3.8.
Devil and Romans 5.12, 13, 14.
sin are of greater antiquity and continuance than Stage Plays; yet their
antiquity makes neither of them good: yea both of them are therefore the 1 Cor.
5.7, 8. Rev. 12.9.
worse, because they are so ancient; and so are Plays. Ill things the elder
they are the worse. Secondly, though Plays are ancient, yet their Daemonum
sunt, non hominum secularia spectacula. Chrysostom. Hom. 31. in Joan. Tom. 3.
Col. 130. D. See Act. 1, 2. and Chorus. Polychronicon l. 3. chap. 34. I. G. his
Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 19, 20, 21, 22. Peter Martyr, Locorum
Communium Classis 2. c. 12. sect. 15, 19. ^anaeus Ethicae Christianae l. 2. c.
8. p. 107. Mr. Gataker of the Lawful use of Lots, p. 216. HRabanus Maurus De
Vniverso l. ^0. c. 16. to 39. Isiodor Hispalensis Originum l. 18. c. 16. to 60.
Vincentius Spe^ulum Doctrinale, l. 11. c. 93, 94, 95, 96. with sundry other
forequoted Authors, accordingly.
original is known what it was, it was from their Father the Devil, and
idolatrous Pagans: and that which had so bad a beginning, will hardly contract
any real goodness by any effluxe of time. Thirdly, though they were ancient
and of long continuance among heathen Greeks and Romans, yet they are but of
punic standing among Christians, See Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5. and Act. 6.
Scene 3, 4, 5.
the primitive Church and Christians wholly abandoning and never admitting
them, as I have largely proved. Fourthly, though they have long continued, yet
their persciption has been often interrupted, and themselves suppressed as well
by Pagans as Christians: yea See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. and Act. 7. throughout.
the very best and chiefest of Pagans, of Christians have always constantly
oppugned them from their very infancy till this present, as most pernicious
evils, as I have largely proved. Their antiquity therefore is only an
argument of their long-continued, long-oppugned lewdness, no proof at all of
their present goodness.

Answ. 2.
Secondly I answer. That their tolleration is a strong evidence of their
mischievous naughtiness: since good and profitable things are always
approved, established, and naught but See Romans 9.22. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Pet. 3.20.
Luke 13.7, 8.
ill things tolerated or connived at, which are to be removed: But admit they
are thus tolerated, yet their tolleration makes them not good or lawful in
themselves. We know, that See Stat. De Merton, c. 5.11 H. 7. cap. 8.37 H. 8. c.
9.5 and 6 Ed. 6. c. 20.13 Eliz. cap 8.21 Iac. cap. 7.
usury is permitted by the laws and State; yet See Bp. Downams Lectures on the
15. Psalm. Bishop Jewel in his Exposition upon 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 6. p. 110, to
146. with infinite others who have written of Usury.
it remains a sin still: We know, that many wicked men and notorious
malefactors are tolerated for a time; and that not only by men, but Romans
9.22. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Pet. 3.10. Ezech. 20. throughout.
even by God himself, who is patient and long-suffering toward sinners: and
yet they are not therefore good, but bad men still; and Romans 2.4, 5. Eccl. 8 9,
10, 11.
so much the worse, by how much the longer they are forborne. The tolleration
therefore of Stage Plays will not evince their goodness: the rather, because
though they are connived at de facto, yet S^e Act. 6. Scene 5, 3, 4. and Act. 7
Scen. 5.7
they are long since condemned de jure by our Laws, our Statutes, our
Magistrates, and Writers, as unlawful pastimes: their tolleration therefore is
no better an evidence of their lawfulness, than a reprive or pardon of a
condemned traitors innocence: which are only arguments of a Princes l^nity,
but infallible testimonies of the traitors guilt. That Plays, that Players are
suffered still, (as too many other condemned sins and mischiefs are) it is
only the Sea M. Northbrookes Treatise against vain Plays and Enterludes,
fol. 36. M. John Field his Declaration of Gods Judgment at Paris Garden: and
I.G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors. Bodinus De Republica lib. 6.
cap. 1. Gualther Hom. 11. in Nahum accordingly.
fault of Magistrates, who may, who should suppress them, not of our Laws,
which are most severe against them.

Thirdly, for the Multitudo peccantium, peccandi licentiam subministrat. Hi^rom
Epist. 12. ^. 3.
multitude of Play-haunters, and Play-approvers, I answer; first, that it is no
argument of their goodness, but of their badnesse rather; since Vulgus enim ex
veritate pauca, ex opinione multa iudicat; et omnium opinlonum errore duci
sole^- Cicero pro Qu. Roscio Oration, p. 245. and Consolati^ p. 542.
multitude, for the most part is an infallible sign of the worser, not of the
better part; of the Matthew. 7.^.13, 14. See Hierom Epist. 14. cap. 2, 3.
broad way If multitude were an argument of goodness, See my An^i^
Arminianisme, Edition 2. page 12^, 129, 130, 131.
then Pagans and Mahometans should be as good, nay better than Christians;
Papists, better than Protestants^ drunkards and wicked men, better than sober
and good men, because they are more in number than they: yea then the world the
flesh and the Devil should be good, yea as good or better than God himself,
because more follow them, serve them, than ther^ follow God. The multitude
therefore of Play-haunters, of Play-patrons is no convincing evidence of their
goodness. Secondly, we must not judge of the lawfulness of unlawfu^l things
by the most, but by the Prove. 2.20. c. 4.1, 2, 4. Exo. 23.2. Non turbam
sequantur errantem qui se di^cipulos veritatis confitentur. Hierom. Epist. 14.
c. 2.
best of men: now the best, the wisest of men, as I See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5.
and Act. 7. Scene 1. to 7.
have largely proved, have always condemned Stage Plays, no matter therefore
what the multitudes judgment or practice is, Exodus 23.2. Inter causas enim
malorum nostrorum est, quod vivimus ad exempla, nec ratione componimur, sed
consuetudine abducimur^ Quod si pauci fecerint, nol^emus imi^ari; cum plure^
facere caeperint, quasi honestius sit quia frequentius sequimur: et recti apud
n^s locum tenet error ubi publicus factus ^st. Sen^ca Epist. 123.
whom we must not follow to do evil. Thirdly, Christians are not to walk or
judge by examples, but by precepts; the Psalm. 119.9. Gal. 6.16. 2 Pet. 1.19.
word of God, not the actions or lives of men, must be the only rule both of
their practice and their judgments too. Now the Scripture, (yea the Sea Act.
7. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
whole Church of God from age to age) have passed sentence against
Stage Plays, as unlawful pastimes: no matter therefore what the world
esteems them. Fourthly, for those who approve of Stage Plays or resort unto
them, what are they? Children, youngsters, ignorant injudicious persons who
know not how to distinguish between good and evil, judgeing only of the
goodness of things by sense, by pleasure, See Act 4. Scene 2. accordingly.
by the opinion and practice of others, See (y) before.
or as they are swayed by their u^ruly lusts, not by right reason or the word
of God: or else they are graceless, dissolute, profane, lascivious, godless
persons, (as See Act. 4. Scene 1, 2.
most Players, Play-haunters, and Play-proctors are) who Isay 5.20.
call good evil, and evil good: who Isay 3.9. Phil. ^.19 See my Healths
Sickness, Edition 2. Epistle to the Reader; and page 79, 80, 81, 82.
accordingly.
count sin their honor, sobriety, modesty, and true piety, their shame: See
Romans 1.21. to 32. Acts 24.13. c. 28.22. 1 Cor. ^.14. cap. 4.13. 2 Thessalonians 2.11,
12. 2 Timothy 3.^, 3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.12, 13, 17, 18. Romans 3.10. to 19. Isay 5.20.
judging amiss of God, of grace, of holiness, of all kind of goodness and
good men: no matter therefore, what these judge of Stage Plays, who thus
misjudge of all things. Let us therefore judge of Stage Plays John 7.24.
with righteous judgment, as God, as Christians, as the prim^tive Church^ as
Councels, Fathers, and the best, the wisest of Christian, of Pagan Emperors,
Magistrates, Republickes, Philosophers, and Writers of all sorts have See Act.
6. Scene 3, 4, 5. and Act. 7. throughout.
already determined of them to our hands; and then we must certainly condemn
them, as most intolerable and unchristian pleasures; as all these have done.

SCENA QVINTA.
THE fifth Allegation in the behalf of Stage Plays is this: Object. 5.
That there is much good history, many grave sentences, much good council;
much poetry, eloquence, oratory, invention, wit, and learning in them.
Therefore they must certainly be very good and commendable recreations.

To this I answer first: Answ. 1.
that it is true, there is in many Stage Plays many commendable parts of
history, poetry, invention, rhetoric, art, wit, learning; together with much
good language, and some sage Counsel too, all which are good and useful in
themselves; See Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato; and De Spectaculis lib.
Tertullian. De Spectac. lib. c. 27. and here Act. 3. Scene 1. accordingly.
but yet there is so much obscenity, scurrility and lewdness mixed with them,
like deadly poison in a sugared potion, that these See Didacus de Tapia in
tertiam partem divi Thomae, Artic. 8. p. 546. accordingly.
very good things make the Plays far worse. The stronger the wine, the
better, the sweeter the conserves wherewith poison is contemperated, the more
deadly, the more dangerously it works; the deeper it sinkes into the veins,
and the more greedily and Animae pestes ^anto periculosius laedunt quanto
subtilius serpunt. Council. Cabilonense 2. Can. 32.
insensibly it is swallowed down. So the more See Tapia qua ( h) and Mr.
Gosson his School of Abuses, and Plays confuted; I.G. his Refutation of the
Apology for Actors, accordingly.
witty, the more eloquent and rhetorical the Plays, the more imperceptibly,
the more perniciously and abundantly diffuse they their vices, their
obscenities, and poysonful corruptions into the ears and hearts of the
Spectators. It is a true saying of judicious Augustine, Valde noxia sunt prava
diserta. De Anim^ et eius Origin, li^. 2.
That evil things elegantly expressed are most pernicious: whence Nam et in
hoc et Philosophi, et oratores, et poetae perniciosi sunt, quod incautos animos
facile irretire possunt suavitate sermonis et carminum dulci modulatione
currentium. Mella sunt venenum ^egentia. De Iustitia l. 5. c. 1.
Lactantius affirms; that the heathen Philosophers, Orators and Poets were
most hurtful in this, that they did easily entangle unwary minds with the
sweetness of their words, and the harmony of their smooth-running verses, which
were but as honey covering poison. The more elegant and witty therefore the
Plays, the more dangerous and destructive are they, as the Fathers teach us;
there being nothing else but Venenum sub melle late^. Hi^ron. Epist. 57.
Damaso, Tom. 2. p. 195.
poison under the honey of art and eloquence. Secondly, the reason why there is
so much history, poetry, sweetness, wit and curious language in our
Stage Plays, is See Tertull. De Spectaculis c. 27. and Didacus de Tapia in
tertiam partem Thomae, Artic. 8. p. 546. accordingly; Venena enim non dantur
nisi melle circumlita. Hi^ron. Epist. 7. ad Laetam, c. 4.
only to conceal their venom, their contagion, that so the auditors, the
spectators may swallow it down with greater greediness, and less suspicion.
Iuvenal. Satyr. 10. p. 92.
Nulla aconita bibuntur fictilibus: the Devil and his accursed instruments
know full well, that poisoned potions must be infused Nulla^ acconita bibuntur
Fictilibus; tunc illa time cum pocula sumis Gemmata, et ^ato Getinum ardebit in
auro. Iuvenal. Ibidem.
not into earthen, but into golden Cups; that venomous pills must not be
tempered with gall or colloquint, but with honey, sweet-meates, or the most
luscious conserves, else none will swallow or quaffe them down: wherefore they
temper, they guild over their venomous obscenities and Stage-corruptions (which
See Didacus de Tapia accordingly.
if they came naked on the Stage without these trappings, would be so bitter,
so foul and desperately obscene that few Christians could digest them) with
these specious outsides, these luscious conserves of wit, of eloquence,
invention, learning, history, and the like, that so they may the better
countenance, shroud and vent them to the hurt of others. What Gregory the Great
writes of Heretics: Gregor. Mag. Moral. l. 5. c. 11.
Habent hoc haeretici proprium, ut malis bona permisc^ant, quatenus facile
sensus audientis illudant. Si enim semper prava discerent citius in sua
pravitate cogniti, quod vellent, minime persuaderent. Ita permiscent recta
perversis, ut ostendendo bona auditores ad se trahant; et exhibendo mala,
latenti eos peste corrumpant. Or what De Libero Ar^bitrio l. 1. c. 4. Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 505. F, G.
Faustus Rhegiensis writes of the Devil and malicious poysoners. Diabolus
calliditate veteris artificij ac multiformis ingenij, condit blandimenta
peccandi. Sic etiam malefici facere solent qui mortiferos herbarum temperant
succos in condito aut aliquo dulci poculo nescientibus propinaturi, gustum
mentita suavitate componunt, virus amaritudinis obscurant fraud dulcedinis.
Provocat primus odor poculi, sed praefocat inclusus sapor veneni. Mel est quod
ascendit in labia, fell est quod descendit in viscera. Or what Advers. Haereses
cap. 35.
Vincentius Lerinensis writes of Heretics: Faciunt quod hi solent qui
parvulis austera quaedam temperaturi pocula, prius ora melle circumli^unt; ut
incauta aetas cum dulcedinem praesenserit, amaritudinem non reformidet: Quod
etiam ijs curae est, qui mala gramina, et noxios succos, medicaminum vocabulis
praecolerant, ut nemo fere ubi supra-scriptum legerit remedium, suspicetur
venenum. The same may I truly write of Play-poets and Actors. They cover and
sweeten over their poison, their corruption with eloquence, art and witty
inventions, that so they may have the freer vent; and temper their evil with
some shows of good, that so it may more easily circumvent the Auditors, and
find freer entrance into their souls. This De Spectac. lib. and Epist. l. 2.
Ep. 2.
Cyprian, this De Spectac. c. 27.
Tertullian, De Gubern. Deil. 6.
Salvian, with other Chrysostom. Hom. 6, 7, and 38. in Matthew. See Act. 6. Scen 3,
4, 5, 12.
Fathers, together with In 3. partem Thomae Artic. 8. p. 546.
Didacus de Tapia, and sundry Bishop Babingto^, Northbrook, Gosson, Stubs, Dr.
Reinolds, and others in their forequoted works.
modern Authors testify: hear but Tertullian for them all, who writes thus
of the pleasure, the eloquence and good ingredients that are often in Plays. De
Specta^. lib. cap. 27.
Nemo venenum temper at fell et hellebora, sed conditis pulmentis et been
saporatis, et plurimum dulcibus id mali injicit. Ita diabolus letale quo
conficit, rebus Dei gratissimis ac acceptissimis imbuit. Omnia itaque illic
(speaking of the Theater) seu fortia, seu honesta, seu sonora, seu canora, seu
subtilia proinde habe ac si stillicidia mellis de libalun^ulo venenato; nec
tanti gulam facias voluptatis, quanti periculum. All the eloquence and
sweetness therefore that is in Stage Plays, is but like the drops of honey
out of a poisoned limbecke, which please the palate only, but destroy the man
that tastes them. So that I may well compare our Stage Plays to Apothecaries
Gallie-pots: Lactantius De Falsa Sapientia, lib. 3. c. 15.
Quorum tituli habent remedia, pyxides venena: which have glorious soothing
titles without, but poisons only within. Thirdly, though all these good things
are in Stage Plays now and then, yet they are there only as good things
perverted, which prove Matthew. 5.13. Luke 14.34, 35.
worst of any. Nothing is there so pernicious Vincentius Lerinensis Advers.
Haeres, c. 23, 24.
as good parts, or a good wit abused: as wit, art, eloquence and learning cast
away upon an amorous, profane, obscene lascivious subject; on which whiles
many out of a vainglorious humor have spent the very cream and flower of
their admired parts, I may truly affirm with Salvian, Praefatio in lib. 1. de
Gubern. Dei p. 2.
Non tam illustrasse mihi ipsa ingenia, quam damnasse videantur: they seem to
me not so much to have illustrated as damned their much applauded wits and
parts, in being acutely elegant in such unworthy sordid theames, which modest
e^es would blush to read, and chaste tender consciences bleed to thin^e of. As
therefore Ovids transcendent poetry, Martials profane and scurrilous pande^ly
wit, Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius their eloquence, made their obscene
lascivious poems far more pernicious, not more chaste and commendable; so the
elegancy, invention, style and phrase of Stage Plays, is only an argument of
their greater lewdness, not any probate of their real goodness. What
therefore Adversus Haereses lib. c^ 23, 24.
Vincentius Lerinensis writes of Origin and Tertullian, that their transcendent
abilities of eloquence, learning and acuteness, made their erroneous Tenants
far more dangerous: the same we may conclude of Plays and Poets; the more
witty and sublime their style or matter, the more pernicious their fruits: for
then, Prospe^ De Prudentia lib.
Viperium obducto pot^mus melle venenum.


We drink down deadly poison in a honey potion; which proves honey only in
the palate, but gall in the bowels, death in the heart; as the most
delightful amorous Stage Plays always do.

SCENA SEXTA.
THE 6. Objection in the defense of Stage Plays is this; Object. 6.
which is as See Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p. 104. and I.G. his
Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 60, 61.
common as it is profane: That Stage Plays are as good as Sermons; and that
many learn as much good at a Play as at a Sermon: therefore they cannot be ill.

To this I shall answer first in the words of Mr. Philip Stubs, Answ. 1.
and of I. G. in his Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 61. Oh blasphemy
intolerable! Are obscene Plays and filthy Enterludes comparable to the word
of God the food of life, and life it self? It is all one as if they had said;
Baudry, Heathenry, Paganism, Scurrilitie and Divelry it self is equal with
Gods word: or that Satan is equipollent with the Lord. God has ordained his
word, and made it the ordinary means of our salvation: the Devil has
inferred the other as the ordinary means of our destruction. God has set his
holy word and Ministers to instruct us in the way of life; the Devil
instituted Plays and Actors to seduce us into the way of death. And will they
yet compare the one with the other? If he be accursed, Isay 5.20.
that calls light darkness and darkness light; truth falsehood, and falsehood
truth; then a fortiori^ is he accursed that says, Plays and Enterludes are
equivalent with Sermons, or compares Comedies and Tragedies with the word of
God; whereas there is no mischief, almost, which they maintain not. Thus
they. But if Stage Plays be as good as Sermons (as many profane ones, who
hear and read more Plays than Sermons, deem them;) then Players certainly
by the selfsame argument, are as good as Preachers: and if this be so, what
difference between Christ and Belial, Play Houses and Churches, Ministers and
Actors? yea why then do we not erect new Theaters in every Parish, or turn
our Churches into Play Houses, our Preachers into Actors, since they are thus
parallels in their goodness? But what prodigious and more than stygean
profanesse is there in this comparison? Who ever paralleld hell with heaven,
vice with virtue, darkness with light, Devils with Angels, dirt with gold? yet
there is as great a disparity in goodness between Plays and Sermons, as
there is in these; the one being evermore reputed the Romans 15.29. Luke 2.10, 11
chiefest happiness, the other the Sea Act. 6. Scene 5.
greatest mischief in any Christian State. But this part of the objection is
too gross to confute, since the very naming of it is a sufficient refutation.
I come therefore to the second clause: That many learn as much good at Plays,
as at Sermons. And I believe it too; for had they ever learned any good at
Sermons, (which would be altogether needles, if so much goodness as is
objected might be learned from Plays) they would certainly have learned this
among the rest, never to resort to Stage Plays. The truth then is this; most
Play-haunters learn no good at all at Sermons; not because Sermons have no
goodness for to teach them, but because they are unapt to learn it: partly,
See Act. 6. Scene 12. and 20 throughout.
because they seldom frequent Sermons, at leastwise not so often as Plays:
partly, because their ears are so dull of hearing, and their minds so taken
up with Playhouse contemplations whiles they are at Church, that they mind not
seriously what they hear: partly because the evil which they learn at
Plays, overcomes the good they learn at Sermons, and will not suffer it to
take root within them: and partly, because Plays and Sermons are so
incompatible, that it is almost impossible for any man to receive any good at
all from Sermons, whiles he is a resorter unto Stageplayes: Well therefore may
they learn as much goodness from Plays as Sermons, because they never
learned ought from either, but much hurt from both, Luke 2.34. Romans 9.32, 33. 2
Cor. 2.15, 16, Heb. 6.7, 8.
the very word of God being a stumbling block, a means of greater
condemnation, yea a savor of death unto death to such unprofitable hearers who
reap no grace nor goodness from it. But to pass by this, if there be so much
goodness learned from Plays, I pray inform me who do learn it. If any,
then either the Actors or Spectators: For the Actors, their goodness verily is
so See Act. 4. Scene 1.
little, that it is altogether to be learnt as yet; and if ever they chance to
attain the smallest dram of grace (as they are never like to do whiles they
continue Players) it must be then from Sermons only, not from Plays, which
make them every day worse and worse, but cannot possibly make them better. For
the Spectators, they can learn no good at all from Plays, because (as Scenici
nec unquam eos qui delinquant cor^igere in animum inducunt, ne^ si velint, id
possint. Mimica enim eorum ars natura tantummodo ad nocendum comparata est.
Epist. l. 3. Ep. 336. Bibl. Pa^r. Tom. 5. pars 2 p. 613. A
Isiodor Pelusiota long since resolved it) Players and Stageplayes can teach
the^ none. Never heard or read I yet of any whom Stage Plays meliorated or
taught any good: all they can teach them, all they learn from them is but some
scurrill jests, some witty obscenities, some ribaldry ditties, some amorous
wanton complements, some fantastique fashions, some brothel-house Courtshippe
to woo a strumpet, or to court a whore: these are the best lessons these
schools of vice and lewdness teach, or these their scholars learn: I shall
therefore close up this objection with that of Anatomy of Abuses, p. 104, 10^.
Mr. Stubs and Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 60, 61, 62.
I. G. in their forequoted places. If you will learn to do any evil,
skilfully, cunningly, covertly or artificially, you need go no other where
than to the Theater. If you will learn falsehood, cosenage, indirect dealing^
if you will learn to deceive, to play the hypocrite, sycophant, parasite and
flatterer: if you will learn to cogge, lie and falsify; to jest, laugh, and
fleere; to grin, nodde, and mow; to play the vice, to curse, swear, tear, and
blaspheme both heaven and earth in all kinds and diversities of oaths: if you
will learn to play the bawd or curtesan; to pollute your self, to devirginate
maids, to deflowre wives, or to ravish widows by enticing them to lust: if
you will learn to drabbe and stabbe, to murder, kill and slay; to pick,
steal, rob and rove: if you will learn to rebel against Princes, closely to
carry treasons, to consume treasures, to practice idleness, to sing and talk
of filthy love and venery; to deride, quippe, scorn, scoff, mock and floate;
to flatter and smooth: to play the Devil, the swaggerer, the whoremaster, the
glutton, the drunkard, the injurious or incestuous person; if you will learn
to become proud, haughty and arrogant: Finally, if you will learn to contemn
God and all his laws, to care neither for heaven nor hell, and to commit all
kind of sin and mischief with secrecy and art, you need not go to any
other schools: for all these good examples may you see painted before your
eyes in Enterludes and Plays. These, and these only are the great good
instructions that either Actours or Spectatours learn from Stage-plaies; which
make them fit scholars only for the Devil, and train them up for hell, See
Act. 6. Scen. 12. and 20.
where all Playhouse goodness (unless God grants mercy and sincere
repentance) ever ends.

SCENA SEPTIMA.
Object. 7.
TO pass by other Objections in the defense of Stage Plays; as namely, that
they reprehend sin and vice; See Dr. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays.
that they inveigh against the corruptions and corrupt ones of the times; that
they remunerate and applaud virtue, and sharply censure vice: that their
abuses, their exces^es may be regulated, and themselves reduced to a good
decorum: therefore they are lawful: which Objections I have answered by the
way before: viz. at page 34. to 42. p. 96. to 106. and p. 124. to 127. The
grand Objection of our present dissolute times for the justification of these
Plays is this; This Objection as I have heard was much urged in a most
scurrilous and profane manner in the first Play that was acted in the
New-erected Playhouse: a fit consecration Sermon for that Devils Chapel.
That none but a company of Puritans and Precisians speak against them; all
else applaud and eke frequent them; therefore cetainly they are very good
recreations, since none but Puritans disaffect them.

To this I answer, Answ. 1.
that the objection is as false as frivolous: For first, I have already fully
manifested, that See Act. 6. Scen. 5. and Act. 7. Scen. 6, 7.
many Heathen States and Emperors, and among the rest, Tiberius, Nero, and
Julian the Apostate, (who were as far from Puritanisme, as the deboisest
Anti-puritans, the most dissolute Players or Play-patrons this day living) have
condemned, suppressed Plays and Players: Besides, I have largely proved, that
See Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, and 5.
not only Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, and other heathen Philosophers;
but even Horace, Iuvenal, nay Ovid and Propertius, (the most lascivious heathen
Poets, who were as far from Puritans, as they were from Christians) have
declaimed against Stage-plaies. And is not this then a notorious falsehood? that
none but Puritans condemn Stage-plaies. Were Tiberius, Nero, Julian,
Aristotle, Tibullus, Ovid, (think you) Puritans? Were all those See A^t. 6.
Scen. 5.
fore-quoted Pagans, who censured and suppressed Stage plays Puritans? If
these be now turned Puritans in the Objectors phrase, I pray what manner of
Christians (I dare not say incarnate Devils) are those persons, who thus tax
these dissolute Pagans for puritanicalll Precisians? certainly if they are
somewhat better than infernal Fiends, yet they are by Quantum ad legem divinam
per^inet, dico nos sine comparatione Barbaris esse meliores, quantu^ autem ad
vitam, ac actus, doleo et plango esse peior^s. Hoc est autem deteriorem esse,
magis r^um esse. I^ascens fortasse qui h^ec legis, et condemnas insuper quae
legis. Non refugio censuram tuam; condemna si mentior, condemna si non
probavero: condemna si id quod assero, non etiam Scripturas sac^as dixisse
monstravero, etc. Salvian De Gubern. Dei, l. 3. p. 127, 128. etc. Vid. Ibidem,
where he excellently proves this his assertion.
many degrees worse than the very worst of all these Pagans; who by their own
confessions, are In hanc enim morum pro. probrosita^em prope omnis
Ecclesiastica plebs redacta est; ut in cuncto populo Christiano genus
quodammodo sanctitatis sit, minus esse vitiosum. Salvian D^ Gubernatione Dei
lib. 3. page 86.
Saints, are Puritans in respect of them. O then the stupendous wickedness!
the unparalleld profaneness of our graceless times! when Christians are not
afraid, ashamed to profess themselves more desperately vicious, lascivious,
and deboist, than the very worst of Pagans, whom they thus honor with the
style of Puritans^ because they are more virtuous, less vicious than
themselves! Certainly if atheistical profaneness, and infernal lewdness
increase but a little more among us, as it is very like if Stage Plays still
continue, I am afraid these O^jectors will grow to that excess of wickedness
ere long^ that the Devil himself, (nay, Matthew. 12.24.
Beelzebub the very Prince of Devils) shall be canonized by them for a Puritan,
because he equals them not in wickedness. Let these Play-patrons therefore,
either waive this false Objection, or else confess these very heathen Puritans
(as they deem them) to be much better, much worthier of the name of
Christians, than themselves.

Secondly, I have infallibly manifested; See Act. 7. Scen. 2, 3, 4. and Act. 6.
Scen. 3, 4, 5, 12.
That the whole primitive Church both under the Law and Gospel, together with
all the primitive Christians, Fathers and Councels have most abundantly
censured and condemned Plays and Players in the very highest degree of
opposition. And were the primitive Church and Christians, the Fathers, or
Bishops who were present at these Councels, Puritans? If not: then the
objection is false. If Puritans; then Puritans are no such Novellers, or new
upstart humorists as the world reputes them: yea then they are in truth no
other, but the true Saints of God, the undoubted successors of the primitive
Church and Christians, whose doctrine, discipline^ graces, manners they only
practice and maintain. And indeed if the truth of things be well examined,
we may easily prove Nos itaque paratiores sumus cum istis viris, et cum
Ecclesia Christi in huius fidei antiquitate firmata, quaelibet maledicta et
contumelias perpeti, quam Pelagiani cuiuslibet eloquii praedicatione laudari.
Aug. De Nu^ijs et Concupiscentia, lib. 2. cap. 29.
the Fathers, the primitive Church and Christians, (yea Christ himself, his
Prophets and Apostles) Puritans, if that which brands men now for Puritans in
profane ones censures, may descide this Controversy. To instance in some few
particulars. One grand badge of a Puritan is (as the objection testifies) to
condemn Stage Plays, Players and Play-haunters, and wholly to renounce these
Pompes of the Devil: But this See Act. 7. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4. and Act. 6. Scen.
3, 4, 5, 12.
the Apostles, the Fathers, the primitive Councels, Church and Christians did,
as I have plentifully manifested, See here p. ^57.
this being the most notorious character of a faithful Christian, to abstain
from Stage Plays. By this badge therefore they are arrant Puritans. To
condemn Se^ here Act. 5. Scene 8. and Act. 7. Scene 3.
effeminate mixed dancing, lasciviousness, and See here Act. 7. Scene 3.
diceplay; together with See here Act. 7. Scene ^. and my Healths Sickness.
health-drinking, drunkenness, deboistnesse, roaring, whoring, See here Act.
3. Scene 1. and Act. 5. Scene 9.
ribaldry, obscene or amorous songs and jests, and naked filthy lust provoking
pictures, are now See Dr. Burgesses his Reioynder, Answer to the Preface, p. 6,
7. published by his Majesty's special command accordingly.
chief Symptoms of a notorious Puritan: but See here Act. 3. Scene 1. Act. 5.
Scen. 8, 9, 10, 11. and Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, 5, 12. and Act. 7. Scene 1. to 6.
Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, together with all the primitive Churches,
Christians, Fathers, Councels have condemned all and each of these with an
unanimous consent: therefore they are arrant Puritans. To speak or write
against See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, Archbishop Abbots Lecture 28. on
Jonas, sect. 11. p. 570, 571. and here Act. 5. Scene 6, 7. and Act. 6. Scene 3,
4.
men's wearing of perewigges, Love-lock^s, and long hair, together with the
effeminate frizling, pouldring, and accurate nice composing of it: to declaime
against our whorish females frizling, broydring, pouldring, dying, plaiting,
with their late impudent mannish, that I say not monstrous cutting and shearing
of their hair; and their false borrowed excrements: to declaime against
face-painting, vain wanton complements, strange fashions, tyr^s, newfangled or
overcostly apparel, are eminent characters of a branded Puritan: But See here
Act. 5. Scen. 1, 6, 7. and Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4. and Act. 7. Scene 3. and My
Vnlovelinesse of Lovelockes accordingly.
Christ Jesus himself, his Prophets and Apostles, with all the primitive
Churches, Councels, Fathers, Chri^tians, have earnestly spoken, written,
declaimed against all and each of these lewd sinful practices. Therefore they
are Puritans. To 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. 2 Pet. 3.11.
be holy in all manner of conversation even as God and Christ are holy: Titus
2.12.
to live right^ously, soberly and godly in this present evil world, Gal. 5.24.
Iam. 1.27. Psalm. 97.10 Psalm. 119 104, 128.
crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof; avoiding,
detesting all sin and wickedness whatsoever in ones self and others; and
Phil. 2.15, 16.
shining as lights and patterns of holiness in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation^ to be Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 1.2.
frequent in hearing, reading, preaching, or meditating^ and discoursing of
Gods word: to repeat Sermons, (a duty warranted by Acts 13.42. Mark 4.34.
Matthew. 13.10. to 53. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Mal. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19, 20. c. 4.29.
Col. 3.16. Hebr 8.11 c. 10.24, 25. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 15. Phil. 3.1. c. 416. Luke
28.18. to 36. Isay 28.9, 10, 13.
Scripture, and much pressed by Rogo vos fratres charissimi, semper recolite,
semper retinete quod vobis pro animae vestrae salute suggerimus: nolite hoc
^ransitorie accipere. Debet enim sermo noster in cord vestro radices figere,
ut in tempore retributionis possit aeternae vitae fructus soeliciter exhibere.
Qui potest totum retinere quod dicimus, Deo gratias agat; et aliis quod
retinet, semper ostendat. Qui totum non potest retinere, vel partem aliquam
recordetur. Et si totum non potestis, singuli ternas vel q^aternas sententias
retinete. Et dum unus alteri insinuat quod audivit, totum vobis invicem
referendo non solum memoriter retinere, sed etiam in bonis operibus Christo
adi^vante poteritis implere. Dicat unus alteri; Ego audivi Episcopum meum de
^astitate dicentem: Alius dicat; Ego in mente habeo illum de ele^mosynis
praedicasse; Alius dicat, Remansit in memoria mea quod dixit; ut sic colamus
animam nostram, quomodo colimus terram nostram. Alius referat; Ego retineo
dixisse Episcopum meum, ut qui novit litteras scripturam divinam studeat
l^gere; qui vero non ^ovit, quaerat sibi et roget qui illi debeat Dei prae^epta
relegere, et quod legerit, Deo adiuvante, implere. Dicat etiam allus; Ego
audivi Episcopum meum dicentem, quod q^omodo negotiatores qui non noverunt
litteras, conducunt sibi mercenarios litteratos, ut acquitant pecuniam; sic
Ch^istiani debent sibi requirere, et rogare, et (si necesse est) etiam mercedem
dare^ ut illis debeat aliquis Scripturam divi^am relegere: ut quomodo
negotiator alio legente acquirit pecuniam; sic illi acquiran^ vitam aeternam.
Haec si agitis, si vos invicem admonetis; et in hoc saeculo fideliter potestis
vivere, et postea ad aeternae vitae b^atitudinem perven^re. Nam si statim ubi
de Eccl^sia discesse^it stotum quod ab Episcopo au^isti oblitus fueris, sin^
fructu venisti ad ^cclesiam, sine fructu inan^s redisad domu^ tuam. Sed absit
hoc a vob^s^ fratres, etc. C^sarius Arelaten^^s^ Episc^ Homil. 20. Bibl. Patr.
Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 766. F, G, H.
Caesarius Arelatensis, an ancient Father; to pray constantly Psalm. 5.3. Psalm.
55.17. Psalm. 65.8.
morning and evening with ones family; Prove. 1.15, 16. See Act. 4. Scene 2.
to abandon Hebr. 11.25.
all lewd places and companions, See Act. 2.
all pleasures and delights of sin, all Christmas excesses and disorders, all
Pagan rites and heathenish customs; and to Psalm. 16.3.
make the holiest S^ints his best, his sole familiar friends, the Ier. 15.16.
word and service of God his chief delight: to Acts 21.13, 14 Gal. 2.11.
stand for God and for his truth in evil times when they are most opposed; to
live civilly and pio^sly in the Phil. 2.15, 16.
midst of wicked men, and 1 Pet. 4.34.
not to join with them in the same excess of sin and riot of dissoluteness
and deboistnesse that they run into: to 1 John 3.20. c. 7.7. Prove. 15.12.
reprove or cross men in their sinful fashions, customs, disorders, lusts or
courses: with sundry other particulars which I pretermit; are now See my
Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate, Epistle 3.
infallible arguments and symptoms of a rank Puritan. But this did Christ,
his Prophets and Apostles, together with all the primitive Churches, Councels,
Fathers and pious Christians, as those whom the world styles Puritans do now:
therefore without all doubt they are Puritans (as Puritans are now reputed)
even in the very highest degree. Yea, were our Savior Christ, St. Paul, St.
John, together with all those holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Fathers, and other primitive Saints which we read of in the Scriptures, or
Ecclesiastical Writers, now living here among us, I doubt not but they would
all be 1 Cor. 4.10, to 14. Acts 17.3 to 15. c. 21.27, 28. c. 24.5, 6. Isay
8.38. Psalm. 22.6. See my Perpetuity, Epistle 3.
pointed at, hissed, reviled, hated, scorned, if not persecuted, as the very
Archest Puritans, for their transcendent holiness, and rebukes of sin and
sinners: since those poor Saints of God, Matthew. 10.24, 25. John 15.18, 19, 20.
who have not attained to the moity of their transcendent grace and purity, are
now styled, and pointed at for Puritans, even for that little purity and
holiness which is discovered in their lives. If therefore Christ himself, his
Prophets and Apostles, together with all the primitive Churches, Fathers,
Councels, and Christians were Puritans, in that very sense, and on the
selfsame grounds that those whom the world styles Puritans are so named now,
as I have fully manifested by the premises; and dare make good in all
particulars against any Anti-puritans whatsoever; the objectors must now either
disclaim their A^tecedent, (that none but Puritans condemn Stage Plays:) or
in case they grant all these to be Puritans, they must now invert their rash
conclusion: that Stage Plays certainly are evil, because Christ, his
Prophets and Apostles, the whole primitive Church, the Fathers, Councels, and
primitive Christians, (all rank Puritans) have out of their very purity and
holiness condemned them long ago, and none but the very shame, the scumme of
Christians, or men unworthy that worthy title did anciently approve them, as I
have largely evidenced, Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. and Act. 7.
Scene 1. to 7.

Thirdly, I have manifested, that many See Act. 7. Scene 5. and Act. 6. Scene
3, 4, 5.
modern Christians, not only Protestants, but Papists too, have utterly
condemned Stage Plays. And I hope all Papists (the original inventors of this
style of Puritans, which they have cast See a Popish Pamphlet lately divulged;
That Protestanisme is nothing else but a Puritan conceit.
on orthodox Protestants as a very Motto or byword of disgrace,) are exempted
from this number of Puritans intended in the Objection. Either Papists
therefore must be Puritans, for condemning Plays, which many of the chief
Objectors being Papists (as are most of all our Players) will hardly grant; or
else the Objection must be false.

Fourthly, admit that none but Puritans condemn or censure Stage Plays;
consider then, I pray you, with an impartial eye, what kind of persons these
Play-abhorring conformable Puritans and Precisians are: See my Perpetuity,
Epistle 3. Mr. Boltons Discourse of true happiness, p 190. to 196. Dr. Burgess
his Reioynder, the An^wer to the Preface, published by special command from
his Majesty, and my Healths Sickness, p. 79, to 89 accordingly.
Are they not the holiest, the devoutest, the eminentest and most religious
gracious S^ints, who lead the strictest, purest, heavenliest, godliest lives,
outstripping all others both in the outward practice, and inward power of
grace? Are they not such whose piety, whose universal holiness in all
companies, times and places, are an See Prove. 29.27. John 3.19, 20. Psalm.
35.15, 16. Romans 1.29, ^0. Wi^d. 2.12, to 2^^
eyesore, a life-sore, an heart-sore, yea a shame and censure unto others? Are
they not such as De Iustitia l. 5. c. 9.
Lactantius writes of? Sunt aliqui ^ntempestive boni, qui corruptis moribus
publicis convicium been vivendo faciunt. Ergo tanquam scelerum et malitiae suae
testes extirpare funditus ni^^^tur et tollere; gravesque sibi putant tanquam
eorum vita coarguatur. Idcirco auferantur, quibus coram vivere pudet; qui
peccantium frontem etsi non verbis, qui^ tacent, tamen ipso vitae genere
dissimili feriunt et verberant: Ca^tigare enim videtur quicunque dissenti^.
(The case of the primitive, pious Christians, amongst the dissolute vicious
Gentiles.) And they not such who are Josh. 24.16, 18, 21.
peremptory in the co^scionable performance of every holy duty; resolute in the
Psalm. 119.104, 128.
hatred of every customary sin, 1 Pet. 3, 4.
refusing to run into the same excess of wickedness, into the gross
corruptions of the Romans 12.1, ^.
times, into which most men rush Ier. 8.6.
with greediness, as the horse into the battle? Doubtless, what ever the
malice of others may conceive of them, yet they are no other but such as these,
as the very fiercest Anti-puritans consciences whisper to them; Minucius Felix
Octavius, p 39.
qui suspectis omnibus ut improbos metuunt, etiam quos optimos sentire
potuerunt. If any man doubt of this, these few experimental arguments may
convince him. For first, there is never a sincere, de^out or pious Christian
this day living in England, who Psalm. 16.3.
excells in holiness of life, in integrity of con^ersation, 2 Pet. 1.4. Gal.
5.24.
avoiding all the corruptions that are in the world through lust; and Titus
2.13, 14.
living righteously, soberly and godly in this present evil world; refusing to
Romans 12.2. 1 John 2.14, 1 Pet. 1.14.
conform himself to the fashions, vanities, pleasures, sins, and wicked
humors of the times, (which perchance he has too much followed heretofore
before his true conversion,) but is See Mr. Boltons Discourse of true
happiness, p^ 19^. to 197. accordingly.
commonly reputed, and often times styled, a Puritan, a Precisian, and the like,
be his place or condition what it will. He who has more grace and goodness,
more chastity, modesty, temperance or sobriety, more love and dread of God,
more hatred of sin and wickedness; less tincture of atheism, impiety,
voluptuousness and profaneness, than others among whom he lives, let him be
never so just in his dealings toward men, never so Nunc aute^ novum
poenitentiae genus; oderunt nos, quasi hosts, quorum fidem public negare non
audent. Quid maledictorum pannos hinc inde con suitis, ut little carpitis vitam,
quorum fidei resistere non valetis? Hierom. Epist. 72. Pammacheo.
conformable to the doctrine and ceremonies of the Church, is forthwith branded
for a notorious Puritan and Precisian all England over; and Sicut cantharides
maxim adultos frugibus et rosis florentibus incumbunt; ita invidia maxim
adoritur bonos et ad virtutem et gloriam proficiscentes. Plutarch. De Invidia
^t Odio, lib. Vid. Ibid. Persequitur probos semper invidia, et cum deterioribus
non contendit. Pindari Nomen Ode 8. p. 293.
the more eminent his graces and holiness are in the view of others, the more
is he maligned, envied, hated, and the greater Puritan is he accounted, as
every man's own experience can inform him^ These Puritans and Precisians
therefore are the best of Christians. Secondly, those who are most violently
invective, and maliciously despitefull against Puritans and Precisians, both in
their words and actions, are such who are unsound or popishly affected in their
religion, or profane and dissolute in their lives. The most Romanized
Protestants, the Plane confitebor qui conqueruntur de sterilitate
Christianorum: primi sunt lenones, perductores, aquarioli, tum siccarii,
venena^ii, magi: item a rioli, a^uspices mathematici: his infructuosos esse
magnus est fructus. Ter^ul. Apologia advers. Gentes^ p. 706.
deboisest drunkards, the effeminatest Ru^fians, the most fantastic apish
Fashion-mongers; the lewdest whoremasters, Panders, Strumpets; the prophanest
Roarers, Players, Play-haunters, and Brothel-hunters; the most prodigious
Swearers, Epicures, and Health-quaffers; the most graceless vicious persons of
all ranks and professions; (especially temporizing, sloathfull, unorthodox,
epicurean, Alehouse haunting, dissolute Clergy men, the Sea Ier. 26.7, 8, 11.
Ezech. 22.25, 26. c. 13.22. Ier. 23.14, 15. Amos 7.10. to 15. Matthew. 27.1, 20.
greatest enemies of all others, to true grace and piety, as all ages
witness;) are always the greatest railers, the Q^ales ergo leges istae quas
adversus nos soli exercent impii, iniusti, turpes, truces, vani, ^ementes?
Tertul. Apolog. adversus Gente^ c. 5.
fiercest enemies against Puritans and Precisians as the world now styles them:
therefore they are certainly the very best and holiest Christians, because the
very worst of men (who like Nihil nisi grande aliquod bonuma Nerone damnatum.
Seneca De Vita Beata c. 24. and Tertulliani Apologia c. 5.
vicious Nero, never heartily condemn ought else, but some great good or
other) detest, revile them most. Seneca de Vita Beata c. 24.
Et argumentum recti est, malis displicere, as not only Seneca, but the 2 Timothy
3.3. Romans 1.29, 30. Psalm. 38.19, 20. Prove. 29.37.
Scripture teaches us. Thirdly, there is no man ever styled a Puritan or
Precisian by another in scorn or contempt, as these names are now commonly
used; but it is either for some evil or other that he hates, which he who
styles him so, affects; or for some grace or goodness, or some Omne id quod
communem sortem excellit invidiae aliorum obnoxium est: hinc illud eorum quorum
conditio inferior est contra se superiores bellum exist it. Dion Cassius Hist.
l. 38. p. 134, 135.
transcendent degree of holiness that is in him, which the other wants. To
instance in some particulars. Let a man make conscience See my Healths
Sickness, Epistle to the Reader, and p. 79. to 89.
of drunkenness, of drinking and pledging healthes, of frequenting Alehouses,
Tavernes, and Tobacco-shops; and presently he is cried out upon and censured
for a Puritan by all the Pot-companions, and Drunkards with whom he shall
converse. Let any one refuse to follow the guise and dissolute effeminate
fashions of the times; let him cry out against See my Vnlovelinesse of
Love-lockes, and here Act. 5. Scene 6. Absoloms Fall, or the Ruin of Roisters.
Wherein every Christian may as in a mirror behold, the vile and abominable
abuse of curled long hair, so much now used in this our Realm. f. 5, 6, 8, 9,
10.
Love-locks and ruffianly long hair; against false hair and perewigs which
our men and women now generally take up, as if they were quite ashamed of that
head which God has given them, and proud of the tire-womans which they have
dearly bought: Let any Gentlewoman of quality now refuse to cut, to Against
which see Cyprian de Habitu Virginum Tertullian De Cultu Muliebri, and De
Habitu Faeminarum. Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l. 2. c. 10, 12. l. 3. c. 1.
to. 5. Philo Iudaeus Legis Allegoria l. 2. p. 100, 101. De Fortitudine l. p.
106. De Specialibus Le^gibus, p. 1019. and De Mercede Meret^icis p etc. 1161,
1162. Zeno Veronensis Sermo de Pudicitia. Ser. de Continentia, Ser. de spiritu
et corpore. Ser. 2. de Avaritia. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 122, 124, 128, 130.
Isiodor Pelusiota lib. 2. Epist. 53. Nazianzen ad versus Mulieres ambitiosius
sese ornantes. August. Epist. 73. Gratian de Consecratione Distinctio ^.
Alexander Alesius Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 11. M^mb. 2. Art. 2. sect.
4. Quaest. 9. Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum pars 3. c. 10. and
pars 6. c. 2. and 69. Peter Martyr Locoru^ communium Classis 2. c. 11. sect 71
to 83^ Innocentius 3. De Contemptu mu^dil. 2. c. 40. Thomas Lake his Discourse
against Painting; with all those other Authors and Fathers here quoted Act. 5.
Scene 7. and in my Vnlov^ of Love locks, p. 1, 2, 16, to 21, 30, 49.50.
poulder, frizell, and set out her hair like a lascivious courtezan, or to
paint her face like some common prostituted harlot; or to follow any other
amorous complements and disguises of the times, 1 Timothy 3.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.2. to
6. See Calvin, Musculus, Aretius, Gualther, Dancus, Estius, Hyperius, Marlorat,
Go^ran, Hugo Cardinalis, Lyra, Tostatus, Anselme, HRabanus Maurus, O^cumenius,
Haymo, Theophylact, Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret, Remigius, Chrysostom,
Hierom and Ambrose, Ibidem.
adorning her self only in modest apparel, with shamefastness, sobriety and
good works, as becomes a woman professing godliness; the only feminine
ornaments that St. Paul commends: and what else shall they hear from all the
Ruffians, fantastiques, and Frenchefied wanton Dames that live about them, but
this opprobrious censure, that they are become professed Puritans. If any make
conscience of frequenting Play Houses, Dice-houses, Whore-houses; of See here
Act. 5. Scene 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and Act. 7. Scene 3, 5, 6, 7.
lascivious mixed dancing, lascivious ribaldry songs and discourses, inordinate
gaming, and such other sinful pleasures which the most delight in; refusing to
bear men company in these delights of sin: our Play-haunters, Dicers,
Gamesters, Whoremasters, and such voluptuous persons, will presently voice them
up for Puritans. Yea such is the desperate wickedness of the times, that let a
man be vicious in one kind, and yet temperate in another; as let him be a
Play-haunter, a gamester, and not a drunkard; a drunkard, and yet no swearer,
no whoremaster, no ruffian, or the like; or let a man be vicious in diverse
kinds, and yet not so bad as others of his companions, and he shall be
sometimes reproached for a Puritan, because he is not so universally, so
extremely wicked and deboist, as those of his companions who are far worse
than he. Whence we often times find, that such who are reputed no better than
profane ones, when they are in company somewhat better than themselves; are
censured for Puritans among profane ones, Genus quoddam sanctitatis sit minus
esse vitiosum. Sal^vian de Guber. Dei l. 3.
because they are not so unmeasurably wicked as the worst of them. And as those
who are not so desperately outrageous in their extravagant sinful courses as
others, are thus houted at for Puritans and Precisians, by such as are lewder
than themselves: so those who outstrip all others in holiness, piety and
virtue, are reputed Puritans too, because they excel in goodness. For let a
man be a diligent hearer and repeater of Sermons and Lectures; a constant See
my Perpetuity, p. 612. to 614. and Mr. Boltons Di^course of True Happiness, p.
190. to 198. Deuteronomy. 6.2. to 10 Psalm. 1.1, 2.
reader and discourser of Gods word; a strict observer of the Lords day; a
lover, and Psalm. 119.63. Tit. ^.8.
companion of the holiest men; a man that is 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. Ephesians. 4 29
Col. 4.6.
holy and gracious in his speeches in all companies and places, desirous to sow
some seeds of grace, and to plant religion where ever he comes: let him be
Psalm. 69.9, 10 11.
much in prayer, in meditation, in fasting and humiliation, Psalm. 50.1, to 12.
much grieving for his sins, and complaining of his corruptions; let him be
always Mat. 5.6.
hungring and thirsting after grace, and using all those means with
conscionable care which may bring him safe to heaven, Psalm. ^4.14. Psalm. ^.8.
Ps. 37.27. Ps. 119.115. Hebr. 11.25.
abandoning all those sins, those pleasures and companies which may hinder him
in his progress toward heaven: Let a man be a diligent powerful
soule-searching Amos 5.8.
sinne-reproving Minister, residing constantly upon his benefice, and See here
p. 531, 532, 629. Mr. Boltons Discourse of true Happiness, p. 193.
preaching every Lord's Day twice: or let him be a diligent upright Magistrate,
See 21. Iacobi cap. 7.
punishing drunkenness, drunkards, swearers, suppressing Alehouses, Derived
from the ancient Pagan feasts and pastim^s on the first of May, which feasts
they styled Maiuma, which Arcadius and Theodoret long since suppressed by this
Edict. Illud ve^o quod sibi nomen procax licentia vindicabit Maium^m faedum
atque indecorum spectaculu^ denegamus. Co^ex Theodosii l. 15. Tit. 6. Lex. 2.
See Calvini Lexicon ^uridicum, and Iacobus Spielegius, Pandulphus Proteus, and
H^eronimus Verrutius, Lexicon Iuris, Tit. Maiuma: and Suidas Mai^^mas, and
Spondanus An. 399. sect. 5.
M^y-games, Revels, See 1 Car. c. 1.
dancing, and other unlawful pastimes on the Lords day, according to his oath
and duty; Let any of any profession be but a little holier or sticter than the
Major part of men; and this his holiness, his forwardnes in reliligion, is
su^ficient warrant for all profane ones, for all who fall short of this his
practical power of grace to brand and hate him for a Puritan, as every man's
conscience cannot but inform him. It is manifest then by all these particular
experimental instances; that those whom the world styles Puritans and
Precisians, are the very best and holiest Christians, and that they are thus
ignominiously entitled, yea Malitia semper contra virtutem insanit. Chrysostom.
Hom. 23. in Genesis Tom. 1. Col. 142. A.
hated and maligned, because they are less vicious, more pious, strict and
virtuous in their lives than such who call them so. Fourthly, there is no man
so fierce an Antipuritan in his health and life, See Mr. Boltons Discourse of
true Happiness, p. 192, to 197. accordingly, an excellent place to this
purpose, well worth the reading, and all Antipuritans most serious
consideration.
but desires to turn Puritan and Precisian in the extremity of his sickness
and the day of death. When God sends his judgments, crosses, or tormenting
mortal diseases upon such who were most bitter Satyrists against Puritans all
their lives before; or when he awakens such men's consciences to see the ghastly
horror of their notorious sins, when they are lying perplexed on their
deathbeds with the fear of damnation ready to breath out their souls into
hell at every gasp, they will then turn Puritans in very good earnest,
desiring to die such as they would never live: yea then in such extremities as
these they send for those very Puritan Ministers, whom they before abhorred to
instruct, to comfort them, to pray with them, for them, and to advise them what
to do that they may be saved: and however they reputed the^ no better than
hypocrites, So were the Saints and servants of God reputed in former times. See
1 Cor. 1.18, 21, 23, 25, 27. c. 2.14. c. 3.18. c. 4.10. 2 Cor. 11.16, 17, 19,
23. Lactantius de Iustitia, l. 5. c. 16. Timor Domini simplicitas reputatur, ne
dicam fatuitas. Virum circumspectum et amicum propriae conscientiae
calumniantur hypocrita^. Ber^ard. De Consideratione l. 4. c. 2. Col. 885. C.
fools, or So were the Saints of old accounted, 1 Samuel 21.13, 14, 15. 1 Kings
9.11. Hosea 9.7. Isay 59.15. Ier. 29.26. Acts 26.24, 25. Mar. 3 21. John 10.10.
1 Cor. 14, 23. 2 Cor. 5, 13.
distracted furious mad ones before, yet they would willingly change lives,
change souls and consciences with them then, wishing with many tears and
sighs that they were but such as they. This every days experience almost
testifies; therefore Puritans and Precisians even in the true internal
conscientiall judgment of every Anti-puritan are the most godly men. Fifthly,
let a drunkard, a whoremaster, a swearer, a ruffian, or any other profane
notorious wicked person be truly converted from these their sins, and
unfainedly devoted and united to the Lord so as Psalm. 85.8.
never to return unto them more, Deuteronomy. 11.22. c. 10.20. Josh. 22.5. c. 23.8.
cleaving unseparably unto him both in their hearts and lives; or let God work
any such visible notorious happy change in men, as to Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Col. 1.13.
call them out of darkness into his marvelous light, and to translate them
from under the power of Satan into the kingdom of his dear Son; and no
sooner shall they be thus strangely Vt quisque nomine Christiani (I may now
say, Puritani) emendatur offendit. Tertul. Apologia c. 2, 3.
altered from bad to good, or from good to better, but presently they are
christened, as it were, with these two proverbs or reproach, and pointed at for
Vnum nomen est persecutionis, sed non una est causa certaminis. Leo De Qu^. dr.
Sermo 9. f. 89
Puritans and Precisians, as if they were now unworthy for to live because they
are thus converted to the Lord. Before people turn religious and gracious,
they are never pestered with these disdainful terms: but See Tertullian de
Pallio lib. and Mr. Boltons Discourse of true Happiness, p. 190. to 192. And
my Perpetuity, Epistle 3.
no sooner can they begin to look toward heaven, to change their vicious
courses and amend their lives, but these Mottoes of contempt are cast upon
them, even because they are grown better than they were before. Thus was it
long ago even in Salvian his days, who thus complains. De Gubern. Dei l. 4.
p. 110, 111. And ad Ecclesiam Catholicam lib. 3. page 408. he writes thus. At
vero nunc diversissime et impiissime nullis omnino a suis minus relinquitur,
qu^ quibus ob Dei reverentiam plus debetur: nullos pietas minus respicit, quam
quos praecipue religio commendat: Denique si qui a parentibus filii offeruntur
Deo, omnibus filiis postponuntur oblati; indigni iudicantur haereditate, qui
digni fuerint consecratione: ac per hoc una tantum re parentibus viles fiunt,
quia caeperint Deo esse preciosi.
Statim ut quis melior esse tentaverit deterioris abjectione calcatur. Si
fuerit sublimis, fit despicabilis; si fuerit splendidissimus, fit vilissimus:
fi fuerit totus honoris, fit totus injuriae: ubi enim quis mutaverit vestem,
mutavit protinus dignitatem. Perversa enim sum et in diversum cuncta mutata. Si
bonus est quispiam, quasi malus spernitur: si malus est, quasi bonus honoratur.
Si honoratior quispiam se religioni applicuerit, illico honoratus esse
desistit, ac per hoc omnes quodammodo mali esse coguntur ne viles habeantur. Et
ideo non sine causa Apostolus clamat: Seculum totum in malo positum est: et
verum est ^ merito enim totum in malo esse dicitur, ubi boni locum habere non
possunt: siquidem ita totum iniquitatibus plenum est, a^t ut mali sint, qui
sunt; aut qui boni sunt malorum persecutione crucientur. And thus is it now in
our days. Therefore Puritans and Precisians are undoubtedly the very primest
Christians, because they are never honored with these titles till they Multi,
quod dolendu^ est, pro^ectibus uruntur alienis; et qui se virtutibus vacuos
despici noverunt, arm^ntur in ^orum odium quorum non sequuntur exemplum. Leo De
Quadragesima Sermo 10. f. 91.
turn better than they were at first, yea better than all those that reproach
them by these names of s^orne. And here we may observe a difference between
eminency in religion, and excellency in all other things besides. For let a man
be exquisite in any other art or profession whatsoever, be it in Physic,
Music, Law, Philosophy, or any liberal science, or mechanicke trade; yea let
a man be a zealous forward Papist, Jesuit, Priest or Votary; the more eminent
they are in all or any of these, the more honored, reverenced, frequented,
admired, and beloved are they of all sorts of men; because they are but
natural humane excellencies, to which corrupt nature and the Devil have no
antipathy at all. But let any man become a In bono proposito constitutis,
inimicitiae dissimilium di abolo instigante non desunt, et facile in odia
prorumpunt, quorum improbi mores detestabiliores fiunt comparationerectorum.
Iniquitas cum iustitia non habet pacem, temperantiam odit ebrietas, falsitati
nulla est cum veritate concordia: non a^at superbia mansuetudinem, pe^ulantia
verecundiam, avaritia largitatem, et tam pertinaces habet diversitas is^a
conflictus, ut etiam si exterius conquiescat, ipsa tamen piorum cordium
penetralia inquietare non desinat, ut verum sit quod voluerunt in Christo pie
vivere, persecutione^ patientur, etc. Leo De Quadr. Ser. 9. f. 89.
conscionable, zealous, sincere and forward professor of true religion,
transcending others in the practical power of grace, or in the inward beauty
of holiness; and the more perspicuously eminent he grows in these, the more
is he commonly hated, slaundered, persecuted, reviled by the tongues of wicked
men, and the greater Puritan do they account him; because Gal. 5.17. 2 Cor.
6.15, 16.
there is grace within him, that is diametrally contrary to their corruptions.
Neither need we wonder at it: for ever since God at first put Genesis 3.15.
enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, Gal.
4.29. 1 Io^ 3.12, 13.
those who have been borne after the flesh, have persecuted, slandered,
abhorred those who have been borne after the spirit; and Ioh. 15.19, 20.
those who who are of this world, have hated such who are redeemed out of the
world; there 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.
being never as yet in any age, any concord or truce between Christ and
Belial, light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, Believers and
Infidels; Prove. 29.27.
those who are upright in the way, being always an abomination to the wicked,
for these very reasons only, and no other; Psalm. 38.19, 20.
because they follow the thing that good is, and 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
run not with them into the same excess of riot; 1 Ioh. 3.12, 13.
because their works are good, and theirs who thus revile and hate them, evil:
Wild. 2.15, 16. etc.
because their lives are not like other men, and their ways are of another
fashion: because they are not for wicked men's turns, and they are clean
contrary to their doings, upbraiding them with their offending the Law,
objecting to their infamy the transgressions of their education, and abstaining
from their ways as from filthiness, John 7.7. See my Perpetuity, Epistle 3.
Malignorum spirituum adversus sanctos insidiae non quiescunt, et sive occulto
dolo, sive aperto praelio, in omnibus fidelibus propositum bonae voluntatis
infestant. Inimicum autem illis est omne quod rectum, omne quod castum. Leo de
Passione Dom^ni Serm^ 19. f. 140.
testifying unto them by their holy lives, that the works they do are evil.
These and no other were the true original causes of men's hatred and reproach
against Maledictione autem et amatitudine replerios, valde mul^orum est. Quis
enim ita emendati cris est, quem non maledicenti consue^udo sollicitet? non
dicat adversus eos qui maledicto digni sunt, sed etiam adversus eos quos
Dominus non maledixit; id est, iustos et innocents viros. Origin lib. 3. in
Epist. ad Romans c. 3. Tom. 3. fol. 154. C. Vid. Ibid.
Christians, against Christ and his Apostles heretofore; and of men's inveterate
rancor and malicious calumnies against Puritans now, what ever men's pretenses
are against it, as I have more largely manifested in a In my Perpetuity Epist.
3. and Healths Sickness, p. 79. to 89.
precedent Treatise. If any think this strange, that men should be thus
persecuted, hated, reviled, nicknamed, slandered and contemned even for their
grace, their holiness, and the very practical sincere profession of religion:
let them consider but these few particulars which will give them ample
satisfaction in the point. First, those frequent predictions or premonitions of
our Savior to all the professors of his name: Mat. 10.16. to 36. c. 24.9. Ioh.
15.19, 20. c. 16.2, 33. c. 17.14.
That they shall be hated, persecuted, reviled of all men and Nations for his
sake: Mat. 5.11, 12. Luke 6.22, 23.
that they shall separate them from their company, cast out their names as
evil, and say all manner of evil against the^ Maioris contumeliae res est,
falsis quenquam notare et insignite crimimbus quam vera ingerere atque
oblectare delicta. Quod enim sese dici, et quod esse te senties, morsum habet
minorem testimonio tacitae recognitionis infractum. Illud vero ac^rbissime
vulnerat quod innoxios et quod decus nominis er aestimationis infamat. Arnobius
adversus Gentes l. 4. p. 147.
falsely for his names sake: John 16.33.
that in the world they shall have tribulation, and John 16.2.
that whosoever kills them shall think he does God good service. Secondly,
that memorable position of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.11, 12. Yea, and Omnes dixit,
excepit nullu^. Quis enim exceptus potest esse, cum ipse Dominus persecutionum
tentamenta toleraverit? Ambr. Enar. in Psalm. 118. Octon. 20. Tom. 2. p. 501. G.
See Ambrose, Chrysostom. Theodoret, Theophylact, Remigius, Beda, Anselme,
Primasius, Haymo, HRabanus Maurus, and all other Fathers and Expositors on this
text.
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution: Acts 14.22.
1 Thessalonians. 3.4.
for through many tribulations and afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom
of heaven. Thirdly, the examples of Gods Saints in all ages even from Adam to
this present. If we look upon Cain and Abel, the two firstborn of the world,
we shall behold graceless 1 John 3.12, 13.
Cain, who was of that wicked one, slaying his righteous brother Abel: and
wherefore slew he him? S. John resolves the question in these very terms,
because his own works were evil and his brothers righteous: and thereupon he
grounds this inference; Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you. De
Gubernatione Dei l. 1. p. 22.
Non enim mirum est, (writes Salvian) nunc sanctos homines quaedam aspera pati,
cum videamus quod Deus etiam per maximum nefas, primum sanctorum sivit occidi.
Look we upon holy King David, we shall find him thus complaining: Psalm.
38.19, 20. They that hate me wrongfully are multiplied, they also that render
me evil for good are my adversaries, (pray mark the only reason) because I
follow the thing that good is. The Prophet Isay complains thus of his times:
Isay 59.14, 15. Judgment is turned away backward and justice stands afar
off; for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter: yea truth
fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey, or is
accounted mad: yea he brings in Christ himself prophetically speaking in this
manner: Isay 8.18.
Behold I and the children whom the Lord has given me are for signs and
wonders even in Israel. The Prophet Amos writes thus of his age: Amos 5.8. They
hate him that rebukes in the gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly:
and the Prophet Zech. 3.8. See Psalm. 102.6. Ier. 12.9. Psalm. 71.7.
Zechariah informs us, that Joshua the high Priest, and his followers that
sat before him (to wit, Christ and all his followers) were men wondered at in
the world, as if they were some monstrous creatures, or men besides themselves.
The Prophet Daniel we know, was so Dan. 5.3, to 12.
unblameable in his life and actions, that his very enemies could not find any
error, fault, or occasion against him, except it were concerning the law of
his God, and that he made prayers and supplications before the Lord his God
three times a day: and for this his piety only they procured him to be cast
into the Lions den. I could instance in See my Perpetuity Epistle 3.
diverse others of Gods dearest Saints who were thus persecuted and maligned for
their graces before our Saviors time, but that Tertullian has long since
forestalled me; whose memorable passage to this purpose I wish all
Antipuritans to consider. Adversus Gnosticos lib. p. 430, 431.
Aprimordio justitia vim patitur: statim ut ^oli Deus caepit invidiam religio
sorti^a est. Qui Deo pla^uerat occiditur, et quidem a fratre, quo proclivius
impietas alie^um sanguinem sectaretur, a suo auspicata insectata est. Denique
non modo justorum, verum etiam et Prophetarum: David exagitatur, Elias fugatur,
Hieremias lapidatur, Esaias secatur, Zacharias inter altar et ^dem trucidatur;
perennes cruoris sui maculas silicibus adsignans. Ipse clausula legis et
Prophetarum, nec prophets sed Angelus dictus, contumeliosa caede truncatur in
puellae salticae lucar. Et utique qui spiritu Dei ageb^ntur, ab ipso in
martyria dirigebantur, etiam patiendo quae praedica^sent, etc. Talia a
primordio et praecepta et exempla debitricem martyrij fidem ostendunt. If we
look upon See my Perpetuity, Epistle 3. at large.
Christ and his Apostles, we shall find them hated, persecuted, slandered,
reviled with opprobrious names and obloquies, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10.
being made as the very filth of the world, and as the offscouring of all
things unto this day; yea we shall see them martyred and put to death for no
other cause at all, See Justin Martyr, Apologia 2. pro Christianis. Tertulliani
Apologia, Lactantius De Iustitia l. 5. c. 1, 5, 9.
but only for their grace, their holiness, their transcendent goodness, and
their opposition to the sins and errors of the times: as I have In my
Perpetuity, Epist. 3^
elsewhere amply discoursed. If we behold the primitive Christians but a while,
we shall discover no other cause of their hatred and persecutions against them,
but only this, that they were Christians, that they were better than they were
before, and more holy than their neighbors. This Epist. l. 10. Epist. 97.
Pliny himse^fe affirms in his Epistle to the Emperor Trajan. Affirmabant
autem hanc fuisse summam vel culpae Christianorum, vel erroris; quod essent
soliti stato die ante lucem convenire, carnemque Christo quasi De^ dicere secum
invicem: seque sacramento non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne
latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum
appellati d^negarent: And yet for this alone were they persecuted and put to
death. Hence was it that Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus in the behalf of
Christians: Stromatum l. 4. f. 104. F.
Nos ergo prosequuntur, non ut qui nos esse injustos depraehenderent, sed quod
nos vitae humanae injuriam facere existiment e^ quod simus Christiani, et ipsos
inquam, qui sic vitam instituimus, et alios ad^ortamur ut vitam degant similem.
Hence is that exce^lent discourse of Tertullian to the like purpose: Apologia
adversus Gentes, c. 2, 3.
Ecce autem et odio habemur ab omnibus hominibus nominis causa. Non scelus
aliquod in causa est, sed nomen: et solius nominis crimen est. Non ideo bonus
Caius, et prudens Lucius, quia Christianus. Vt quisquis nomine Christiani (I
may now say Puritani) emendatur offendit. Oditur in hominibus innocuis, nomen
innocuum. Nomen detinetur, nomen expugnatur, et ignotam sectam, ignotum et
auctorem vox sola praedamnat, quia nominatur non quia convincitur. Which I may
as justly apply to Purita^s and Precisians, as ever he did unto Christians who
are persecuted and hated only for their graces, their surpassing goodness,
under the vizard of these odious names, Nam et hoc quoque genus invenitur qui
meliores obtrectare malint quam imi^a^i, et quorum sim^li^udinem de^perent,
eorum affectant simultatem; s^^licet, u^i qui suo nomine obscuri sunt, alieno
innotescant. Ap^l^iu^ Floridorum l. 1. p. ^05
by such who would rather slander, than imitate their holiness. Hence Gregory
Nazianzen also thus complained of the usage of the pious Christians of his age:
Oration 21. p. 412.
Spectaculum uovum facti sumus non Angelis et hominibus, sed omnibus ferme
improbis et flagitiosis, et quovis tempore et loco, in foro, in
compo^ationibu^, in voluptatibus, in luctibus: Iam etiam ad scenam usque
prodijmus (quod propemodum lachrymis refero) et cum perditissimis
obscaenissimisque ridemur; nec ullum tam jucundum est spectaculum, quam
Christianus comicis cavillis suggillatus. And is it not as true of Who are often
trad^ced on the St^ge: See Sir Thomas Overburie his Cha^acter of an excellent
Actor^ and here Act. 3. Scene ^. accordingl^.
Puritans and Precisians now, as it was then of Christians? Hence also was the
complaint of holy St. Augustine. ^narratio in P^al. 90. Tom. 8 pars 2. p 145,
146. See ^nar. in Psalm. 128. p. 750, 751.
Insultatur homini quia Christianus est: insultatur etiam homini qui inter
multos Christianos melius vivit, et timens aspera verba insultatorum incidit in
laqueos diaboli. Enarratio in Psalm. 30. Tom. 8 pars 2. p. 209, 210. See Ibid.
p. 190. to 208. accor^ing^y: and ^e Civit. Dei l. 1. c. 1, 2.
Tibi pro convicio objicitur quod Christianus es. Cur autem modo objicitur quod
Christianus est? Tam pauci non Christiani remans^runt, ut ijs magis objiciatur,
quia Christiani non sunt, quam ipsi audeant aliquibus objicere quia Christiani
sunt. Tamen dico vobis fratres mei, incipe quicunque me audis vivere auomodo
Christianus, et vide si non tibi objiciatur et a Christianis, sed nomine, non
vita, non moribus. Nemo sentit nisi qui expertus est. And is not this the case
of Puritans^ among titular Christians now? Survey we all the other Justin
M^rtyr, Apol^gia 1, ^. A^axagoras pro Christianis Legat^o, C^^rian Epist. l. 2.
Epist. 2. Donato. Basil. Epist. 80. ^ustathio Medico, Lactantius de Iustitia l
5. c. 1, 9. Leo de Qu^dragesima Sermo 9. and Athanasius Ep ad Solitariam vitam
agentes. See Eusebius, Socrates Scholasticus, Theodoret, Sozomen, Cassiodorus,
Nicephorus Callistus, The English and French Book of Martyrs, the Centuries
and Baronius, passim accordingly.
Fathers and Ecclesiastical Historians, we shall find them very copious in
this theame^ that the best Christians have been evermore hated, persecuted and
reviled by carnal men, and that only for their grace and goodness: Witness
the express resolution of St. Chrysostom: Opus imperfectu^ in Matthew. Hom. 24.
Tom. 2. Col. 772. B.
Christianorum genus, non quia est odibile, sed quia est divinum, odiunt
carnales: Which St. Augustine thus seconds. Invidentiae illius diabolicae qua
invident bonis mali, nulla alia causa est, nisi quia illi boni sunt, illi mali.
De Civit. Dei l. 15. c. 5. and Enar. in Psalm. 128. p. 751.
Omnis enim malus ideo persequitur malum, quia illi non consentit ad malum. And
this only is the cause why Puritans and Precisians are thus maligned and
despited now.

If any here object, that they condemn not Puritans for their goodness, but
because they are hypocrites and dissemblers; or because they are seditious
factious persons, and enemies to the state and government; the crimes wherewith
the world now charge them, Qui odio nostri non secus atque rei honestae student
turpe forsan putantes si absque ratione nos odio persequi videantur, causas
odii contra nos et crimina fingunt. Nihil autem eorum quae contra nos feruntur
constanter tuentur, sed nunc hanc, paulo post aliam, et rursus quoque aliam
inimicitiae causam contra nos assignant: atque ita nulla in re malitia ^orum
consistit, sed mox atque ab hac intentata culpa resiliunt, alii incumbunt et
rursus illa neglecta aliam apprehendunt: et si omnia de quibus nos accusant
diluerimus, ab odio tamen non recedunt. Basil. Epist. 80. Eu^tat^io Medico,
Tom. 2^ p. 74. Vid. Ibidem.
whose accusations are still as various, flitting and uncertain against
Puritans, as they were of old against the Christians.

To this I answer first: That it is no wonder for Puritans to be reputed
hypocrites and impostors now: For even our Savior Christ himself was not
only counted, but Mat. 27.63. Ioh. 7.12, 47.
called a Deceiver, and one who did but cheat the people; though we all know
and believe that there was no guile at all within him: Yea all the Apostles and
Saints of God were accounted Deceivers, and yet they were true, 2 Cor. 6.8. And
Epist. 10. ad Furiam c. 1. See Spondanus Epit. Baronii Anno 56. sect. 3.
St. Hierom informs us, that Christians were thus styled even in his age.
Vbicunque viderint Christianum, statim illud e trivio (...); vocant Impostorem
et detrahunt. Hi rumores turpissimos serunt, et quod ab ipsis egressum est, id
ab alijs audisse se simulant; ijdem auctores et exaggeratores: as our
Antipuritans are now. Secondly, admit that Puritans were but hypocrites and
Impostors (which is impossible for any particular men to judge, since they are
unacquainted with the secrets of their hearts, Ier. 17.9^ 10. Acts 1.24. 1 Chronicles. 22.9. 1 Cor. 2.11.
which God alone can only search, which me thinks should stop these objectors
mouths) yet none exclaim against them as Puritans and Precisians for these
vices only; but for that very profession of religion which they make. For let
a man be never so treacherous or deceitful in his dealing, yet if he make no
forward profession of religion, he may pass very well Dat veniam corvis^ vexat
censura columbas. Iuve^al. Satyr. 2.
for a politic, crafty, provident man; he shall then be no Puritan: but let
him profess religion, be he never so honest in his dealings, yet he s^^^^
certainly be branded for a Puritan: It is not therefore men's hypocrisy, but
their profession of religion that makes them Puritans: which if it be but
merely counterfeit, why do not our Antipuritans make that profession of
religion in truth, the very show o^ which they so much hate, even for the
substance sake? Thirdly, admit some Puritans or Precisians are mere Impostors,
making Fideles se spondent ut oportunius fidentibus noceant. Bernard. De
Consideratione l. 9. c. 2. Col. 884. M.
religion a very veil to cloak their treachery, and circumvent their
brethren; as there are now too many such: yet malice it self must needs
acknowledge that the Major part of them are most just and upright in all their
dealings toward men; witness experience, and the common speech; that such and
such are very honest and upright in their trades, or they are worthy Gentlemen
which men may safely trust, but yet they are Puritans; as if their piety were a
disparagement to their honesty: and yet men hate and slander them all alike for
the hypocrisy only of some few; as they did the Christians in St. Augustines
days. August. Enar. in P^al. 30. p. 201, ^02.
Quanta mala (says he) dicunt in malos Christianos quae maledicta perveniunt
ad omnes Christianos? Nunquid enim dicit qui maledicit, aut qui reprehendit
Christianos, ecce quid faciunt non boni Christiani? Sed ecce quae faciunt
Christiani; non seperat, non discernit. Thus do men deal with Puritans now;
they hate, revile and persecute them in the lump without distinction; they
deem them hypocrites and deceivers all alike, when as the most of them are not
such; (as if their very profession of religion Christianus si sit improbus, ne
accuses professionem, sed re bona utentem male. Non enim oportet damnare re^,
sed eum quire bona male utitur. Quandoquide^ et Judas proditor fuit: verum ob
id non accusatur ordo Apostolicus, sed illius animus, nec crimen est
sacerdotii, sed malum animi. Chrysostom. Ho^. 4. de Ver^is Esaiae, Tom. 1. Col.
1302 Vid. Ibidem.
made them hypocrites, which men are apt to believe:) therefore they detest
them not for their hypocrisy which reaches only to some few, but for the
strict holiness and preciseness of their lives alone, wherein they all
accord. Fourthly, the reason why men thus uncharitablie forejudge^ all Puritans
for hypocrites, though they neither know their hearts nor persons, is only
this; because they Caecitatis duae ^pecies facile concurrunt ut qui non vident
quae sunt, videre videantur quae non sunt. Tertul. Apol. adv. Ge^^^^ c. 1.
see that holiness, grace and goodness in them, See Wisdom. 2.12, to 20. etc.
5.1, 2, 3, 4.
which they find not in themselves or others: and th^reupon to satisfy their
own selfe-condemning consciences, they censure all excess of grace and
holiness as mere hypocrisy, for fear themselves should be reputed but
profane in wanting all those graces, those eminent degrees of holiness
wherein they excel. It was a true speech of an heathen Orator: Cicero Tuscul.
Quaest. l. 5. Seneca Consolatio.
An non hoc ita fit in omni populo? nonne omnem exuperantiam virtutis oderunt?
Quid? Aristides nonne ob eam ipsam causam patria pulsus est quod praeter modum
justus esset? Certainly if the exuberancy of moral virtues have made heathens
Natura invidiosi erant Athenienses et ad optimis quibusque detrectandum
proclives, non solum iis qui in administratione reipubl. et magistratu
excellerent, veru^ etiam qui vel doctrina literarum vel vitae gravitate
praefulgerunt. AEhan Van^ his^. l. 2. c. 13.
odious unto vicious Pagans, no wonder if the transcendent eminency of Puritans
graces procure the malice, the reproaches of all carnal Christians, who being
1 Cor. 2.6. to 16.
unacquainted with the power of saving grace themselves, are apt to censure it
as folly, hypocrisy or madness in all others: but yet this may be their
comfort; Tertul. Apolog. adversus Gentes c. 50.
Cum damnamur a vobis, a Deo absolvimur.

If any now reply, that Puritans live not as they speak and teach; therefore
the world condemns them for hypocrites and dissemblers: let Seneca give them a
satisfactory answer. Seneca de Vita ^eata c. 19, 20, 21.
Aliter, inquit, loqueris; aliter vivis. Hoc per malignissima capita, et optimo
cuique inimicissima This therefore was an ancient common obiectiou against the
best heathen Philosophers, who were maligned for their virtues.
Platoni objectum est, objectum Epicuro, objectum Zenoni, Omnes enim isti
dicebant non quemadmodum ipsi viverent, sed quemadmodum vivendum esset. De
virtute, non de me loquor. Et cum vitijs convicium facio, in primis meis facio:
cum potuero, vivam quomodo oportet. Nec malignitas me ista multo veneno tincta
deterrebit ab optimis. Ne virus quidem istud, quo alios spargitis, vos necatis,
ne impediet, quo minus perseverem laudare vitam, non quam ago, sed quam agendam
scio, quo minus virtutem adorem, et ex intervallo ingenti reptabundus ^equar.
Expectabo scilicet, ut quicquam malivolentiae in^^olatum sit cui sacer nec
Rutilius fuit nec Cato, etc. De alterius vita, de alterius morte disputatis; et
ad nomen magnorum ob aliquam eximiam laudem virorum, sicut adoccursum ignotorum
hominum minuti canes, latratis. This then is the cause why men so hate and
slander Puritans, because their goodness shames other men's badnes.
Expedit enim vobis neminem videri bonum; quasi aliena virtus exprobratio
delictorum vestrorum sit. Inviti splendida cum sordibus vestris confertis, nec
intelligitis quanto id vestro detrimento audeatis. Nam si illi qui virtutem
sequuntur avari, libidinosi, ambitiosique sunt; quid vos estis quibus ipsum
nomen virtutis odio est? Negatis quenquam praestare quae loquitur, nec ad
exemplar orationis suae vivere. Quid mirum? cum loquantur fortia ingentia,
omnes humanas tempestates evadentia: cum refigere se crucibus conentur, in quas
unusquisque vestrum clavos suos ipse adjicit. Non praestant Philosophi quae
loquuntur, multa tamen praestant quod loquuntur, quod hone^ta mente concipiunt.
Nam si et paria dictis agerent, quid esset illis beatius? Interim non est quod
contemnas bona verba, et bonis cogitationibus plena praecordia studiorum
salutarium, etiam citra affectum, laudanda tractatio est. Quid mirum si non
ascendunt in altum? Arduos aggressus virtutis suscipe: etiam si decidunt magna
conantur. Generosa res est, respicientem non ad suas, sed ad naturae suae
vires, conari alta, tentare, et mente majora concipere, quam quae etiam ingenti
animo adornatis effici possint. Qui hoc facere proponet, volet, tentabit, ad
deos iter faciet; ne ille, etiamsi non tenuerit, magnis tamen excidet ausis.
Note this
Vos quidem qui virtutem cultoremque ejus odistis, nihil novi facitis. Nam et
solemn lumina aegra formidant, et aversantur diem ^plendidum nocturna animalia,
qui ad primum ejus ortum stupent; et latibula sua passim petunt, abduntur in
aliquas rimas, timida lucis. Gemite, et infaelicem linguam bonorum exercete
convicio. Instate, commordete, citius multo frangetis dentes quam imprimetis.
It is true that the best of all 2 Chronicles. 6.36 Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. James
3.2. 1 John 1.8. Acts 14.17.
Gods children have their weaknesses, their passions and infirmities, which
they cannot wholly conquer whiles they continue here; they have Romans 7.14^ to
25. Gal. 5.16, 17.
flesh in them as well as spirit, which sometimes shows it self; they have
Romans 7.24, 25.
a dying body of sin within them, which though it Romans 6.12, 13, 14.
reigns not in them as a King, yet sometimes it overmasters them in some
particular actions as a tyrant; Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.15^ 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
insomuch as they cannot do the good they would, and the evil that they would
not that they doe^ But yet this frees them from hypocrisy. First, that they
unfainedly Romans 7.16. to the end.
desire and endeavor to mortify all their sins and lusts, and to be freed
from them. Secondly, they utterly Romans 7.16. to the end. c. 8.13. Gal. 5.24.
Col. 3.4, 5, 6.
abominate and detest their sins, continually watching, fighting, praying
against them, and laboring to destroy them. Thirdly, when they fall into any
sin of infirmity out of humane frailty, 1 Cor. 11.31. Psalm. 32.3, 5. Psalm.
51.1, to 14. Psalm. 38.6.
they condemn and judge themselves for it; it is their greatest grief and
shame, and they go mourning for it all their days, Job 42.6. Ezech. 16.61, 63.
loathing and abhorring themselves because they have thus offended. Fourthly,
they become more Psalm. 39.1 Psalm. 141.3. Job 11.1. Mat. 26.41. 2 Cor. 7.11.
vigilant against their sins and frailties for the time to come, binding Job
31.1. Ps. 61.8. Eccles. 5.4, 5.
themselves by solemn vows and covenants never to relapse into them more,
Ezra 9.5. to 5. Dan. 9.4. to 20. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
crying mightily unto God for strength to resist^ and power to subdue them.
Fifthly, they Romans 7.15, 16. Psalm. 139.23, 24. Ps. 119.104.
allow not themselves in one known sin whatsoever; they sin not so
frequently, in that manner as others do, Psalm. 19.13.
keeping themselves innocent for the most part from great offenses, and
notorious sins, in which those who most condemn them wallow. Lastly, they
lead far 1 Pet. 1.12. to 16.
holier and stricter lives than other men, they serve and honor God more than
they; they Psalm. 119.20, 47, 48, 55, 57, 72, 97, 113. Psalm. 1.1, 2.
love and fear God more than others, being far more frequent, more constant
in hearing, reading, prayer, meditation, fasting, and all holy duties, than
those who declaime against them most; and yet Ps. 119.5, 10, 33, 34. Phil.
3.^3, 14.
they desire, they endeavor to be better and holier every day. Therefore they
are no hypocrites, as all Antipuritans for the most part are; who profess
themselves Christians as well as Puritans, and yet live like Pagans, like
Infidels in gross notorious sins, without any shame or sorrow for them, or
any war against them, endeavoring not to Exigo a me, non ut op^imis par sim,
sed ut malis melior. Sen^ca De Vita Beata cap. 16.
grow better than they are.

For the second part of the Objection; that Puritans and Precisians are
seditious, factious, troublesome, rebel^ious persons and enemies both to state
and government: and that this only is the cause why they are so much hated,
persecuted, reviled. I answer, that this is an ancient scandal which has
been always laid upon the choycest Saints of God from age to age; whe^fore we
may the less wonder at it now. For did not See Exodus 5.4, 5. and 10^8.
Pharaoh long ago, thus censure Moses and Aaron, and thereupon drove them out
of his presence as factions persons who did let the people from their work,
and stir them up to mutiny? Did not 1 King. 18.17, 18.
King Ahab accuse the holy Prophet Eliijah as a troubler of Israel, when as it
was only himself and his fathers house that did disquie^ it? and 1 Kings
22.8, 24, to 29.
did he not hate and imprison the good Prophet Micaiah as an enemy to him and
his proceedings, because he always prophesied truth unto him, and would not
flatter him in his ungodly courses and humors? Did not that wicked Ester 3.8,
9, to the end.
favorite Haman, accuse the whole Nation of the Jews to King Ahasuerus, that
their laws were diverse from all people, that they kept not the Kings laws,
and that it was not for the Kings profit to suffer them; and thereupon procure
the Kings Letters to the Lieutenants and Governors of the people, that they
might be destroyed? Did not Ezra 4.10 to 17.
Rehum and Sh^mshai write letters to King Axtaxerxes against Jerusalem of
purpose to hinder the building of it ou^ of their malice ^o the pious Jews:
that it was a rebellious and a bad City, and hurtful unto Kings and
provinces, and that they had moved sedition of old time in the midst thereof,
for which cause it was destroyed: informing the King withal, that if the walls
thereof were set up again, they would not then pay toll, tribute and custom,
and so the Kings revenue should be endammaged? and did not Nehem. 6.5, 6.
S^nballat send his servant to Nehemiah with an open letter in his hand,
wherein it was written; it is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu says it,
that thou and the Jews think to rebel, for which cause thou buildest the
wall, that thou may be their King? etc. Was not the Prophet Ier. 15.10. c.
20.1, 2, 3. c. 32.1. to 6. c. 38.1. to 14.
Jeremy persecuted and imprisoned by the high Priest, the Prin^es and all the
people, for a man of strife and contention to the whole earth; as a professed
enemy both to the King, the State, and all the people, for no other cause but
this, that he faithfully delivered those displeasing messages which God
enjoined him to proclaim against them for their sins? Did not Amos 7.10. to
15.
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel accuse the Prophet Amos to King Jeroboam, for
conspiring against him in the midst of the house of Israel, and that the land
was not able to bear his words? Which scandalons accusation not succeding, did
he not thereupon advise him, to flee into the land of Judah, and to eat bread
and prophecy there; charging him like an Episcopal controller, not to
prophecy any more at Bethel, for it was the Kings Chapel, and the Kings
Court, where he would have no faithful Prophets, no truth-telling
sinne-rebuking C^aplaines come who knew not how to flatter. Did not Dan. 6.12.
to 17.
the governors who conspired together against the Prophet Daniel, put in this
information against him to King Darius, that he neither regarded him nor his
decree which he had signed; accusing him of disobedience^ faction and
opposition to his laws and royal authority? Yea was not our blessed Savior
himself, though he Matthew. 17.24 25, 26, 27.
paid tribute to Caesar, injoyning all his followers, Matthew. 22.21.
to give unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's; being as free from all
sedition or rebellion against Princes as from all other sins; accused,
condemned as a seditious Anti-monarchicall person? Did not the Luke 23.1, 2,
10. and John 19.12.
whole multitude of the people with the chief Priests and Scribes accuse him
before Pilate, saying; We found this fellow perverting the Nation, and
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself was Christ a
King? and did not they thereupon cry out against P^tate when as he sought to
have released him, saying, if thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's
friend, for he speaks against Caesar? And if our most innocent Savior were
burdened with these most false and scandalous reproaches of sedition, faction,
treason and rebellion against Caesar; no wonder if Fundendo sanguinem et
patiendo ma^gis quam faciendo contumelias Christi fundata est Ecclesia:
pe^secutionibus crevit, martyriis coronata est etc. nos solos expelle^e
cupiunt: nos soli qui Ecclesiae communicamus, Ecclesiam findere dicimur.
Hierom. Ep^^t. 63. Cap. 4. ^. 226, 227.
none of all his followers can be exempted from these calumnies: Matthew. 10.24,
25, 26. John 13.16. and 15.20.
For if they have thus falsely called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more will they style those of his household so? the Disciple not being
above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord; as himself does argue in
this very case. To confirm this further by some other pregnant examples. Was
not Acts 16.20, 21. c. 17.5, 6, 7, 8.
St. Paul himself, together with all the Disciples and believing Christians
both at Philippi and Thessalonica, accused by the Jews and other lewd
companions, as men who did exceedingly trouble the City, and teaching new
customs which it was not lawful for men either to receive or observe? that
did all contrary to the decrees of Caesar, and that they had turned the whole
world upside-downe, insomuch that Acts 28.21.
their sect was every where spoken against? Did not the Jews cry out against
this most laborious Apostle St. Paul, saying, Acts 21.28. etc.
Men and brethren help; this is the man that teaches all men every where
against the people and the law and this place, and has likewise defiled this
holy place; and did not all the people thereupon lay violent hands upon him,
intending to put him to death, as a most seditious factious person. Yea did not
Acts 24.5. and 25.2.
Tertullus the Jewish Orator, accuse him before Felix, and the high Priests and
Pharisees traduce him before Festus, for a pestilent fellow, a mover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect
of the Nazarens? And yet who so free from sedition, fa^tion, rebellion or
discord, as this most blessed Apostle; who commands Romans 13.1, 2, etc.
every soul to be subject to the higher powers: Heb. 13.17.
to obey those who have the rule over them, and to submit unto them even out of
conscience sake? 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
who exhorts all men to make supplications, prayers, intercessions and
thanksgivings for Kings and all that are in authority: to Ephesians. 4.3.
keep the unity of the spirit in the bound of peace: to R^m. 16.17.
mark those who cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine they had
received, and to avoid them: 1 Cor. 1.12, 13.
blaming the Corinthians for their dissentions. Besides this, does not St.
Peter inform us, 1 Pet. 2.12. to 18. etc. 3.16, 17^ compared together.
that albeit the Christians in his time had their conversation honest among the
Gentiles, submitting themselves to their Governors, Kings and lawful
ordinances for the Lords sake; yet the Gentiles were always speaking against
them as evil doers, and falsely accusing their good conversation in Christ, as
if they were naught but seditious factious people, and rebels or enemies to
Governors and government? To pass by See 1 Cor. 4.9. to 15. 2 Cor. 4.8. to
12. c. 6.^. to 11. 2 Timothy 3.3, 4. 2 Pe^ 2.10, 11, 22 Hebr. 11, 36 37, 38. Jude
15. Rev 12.10.
many notable texts of Scripture which ratify this notorious truth; Do not
Ventum est igi^ur ad secun^dum titulum^ Iaesae augustioris m^ie^tatis, etc.
Propterea i^itur publici ho^tes Ch^istiani quia imperatoribus neque vanos,
neque mentientes, neque teni^rarios honores dicunt, etc. Apologi^ ad^^. Gentes,
Tom. 2. p. 673. to 685.
Tertullian, Advers. Gentes l. 1, 2, 3.
Arnobius, De Iustitia l^ 1. and 9.
Lactantius, Apologia^ 1. and 2. pro Christianis.
Justin Martyr, Octavius, passim.
Minutius Felix, Hom. 23. in cap. 13. ad Romano^^ Tom. ^ Col. 213^ A.
St. Chrysostom, with Eu^ebius Eccle^. Hist. l. 7^ c. 10.14^ Nicephorus
Callistus, Ecclesiast. Hist. l. ^. c. 3. to 8. Centuriae Magd. 2. Col. 419,
420. Centuria 4. Col. 10, 11, 121, 314. Baronius and Spondanus, Annals Eccles.
Anno Christi 9. sect. 2, 14. An. 56. s. 2. An. 66 ^. 3. An. 94. s. ^^. An. 98.
s. 1. An. 100. s. 2. An. 200. s. 2. An. 202. ^. 2, 3. An. 203 s. 3. An. 273.
^.1, 2. An. 253^ s. 15. An. 38. s. 3. An 286. s. 4. Mr. Fox Book of Martyr^,
1610 p. 42, 48, 50. Antonini Chron. pars 1. Tit. 4, 6, 7. See Hierom. Epist.
63. cap. 3^ 4.
all Ecclesiastical Historians, both ancient and modern, expressly inform us,
that the primitive Christians (who were often nicknamed by the ignominious titles
of Nicephorus Callistus^ Eccl. Hist. l^ 10. cap 4. page 558, and cap. 20. page
571. Origin contra Celsum lib. 5. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 1. p. 188. H. Tertullian.
Apologia advers. Gentes c. 50 Hierom. Epist. 10. ad Furiam, c. 1. Arnobius lib.
1. contra Gentes, and Baroni^s and Spon^anus qua l.
Galilaans, Sibyllists, Impostors, Greeks, Sarmentisij, Semassij, Biothonati,
Magitians, Socrates Scholast. l. 6. c. 4, 5, 16. To which I might add the name
of Lollard^
Ioannites, and the like, as they are now derided under the names of Puritans
and Precisians) though they were never detected of any tre^son, rebellion,
mutiny, or sedition whatsoever (the case of those whom men style Puritans and
Precisian^ now:) yet they were always slandered, accused, traduced, persecuted
as refractory, seditious, factious, mutineers; as enemies and rebels to the
Emperors and Governors under which they lived, and as the authors of all the
mischiefs and troubles that happened in the world; by which false pestilent
suggestions in the ears of Princes, continual bloody persecutions were raised
up against these innocent lambs, who had no other offensive or defensive
arms, but prayers and tears: and do not the Century-Authors thence conclude
eve^ for our present times; Centur. Mag^ 2. Col. 420.
Solenne est ut Christianis crimina seditionis, blasphemiae, et lesae
majestati^ a persecutoribus affingantur, quibus tamen non sun^ obnoxij? Do we
not likewise read, that Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 20. l. 2. c 22, 23
Theodoret Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. ^o Sozomen Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 21. Baronius
and Spondanus Anno ^29. s. 1. Anno 362. s. 18.
Athanasius, ^as^. Epist. 63. Spondanus An. 362. s. 18.
Basil, See Oration de Vita Gregorii Nazian^zeni prefixed to his works.
Nazianzen, Socrates Eccles. Hist l. 6. c. 4, 5, 16. Sozomen l. 8. c. 20.
Spondanus, An. 398. sect. 19. An. 404. s. 3
Chrysostom, with sundry other ancient sinne-reproving, error-confuting
Bishops were accused of faction and sedition for ^pposing the sins and vices
of the times? and was not our own worthy See Bp. Latimers 2.3. and 4. Sermon
before King Edward, and his 4. Sermon on the Lords prayer accordingly. And
Bishop Hoopers Apology to Qu. Mary.
Bishop Latimer, with other pious Martyrs, accused, slandered as raisers of
sedition, as factious, turbulent, and seditious persons, by those whose sins
and errors they reproved, and that even in good King Edward the 6^ his days?
Survey we all the Fathers, all Ecclesiastical Stories, we shall find poor
innocent peaceable harmless conscionable Christians in all times and places,
maliciously slaundered with the crimes of sedition, faction, rebellion,
disobedience to Princes and their lawe^, of purpose to make them odious both to
Prince and people, even without a cause; Luke 10.^.
they being but as lambs in the very midst of wolves. And is it any wonder
then^ that Puritans and Precisians should suffer the very selfsame calumnies
now? Alas what powder treasons, Incestu^ sum, cur non requirant? in Deos et
Caesaris aliquid committo, ^ur non hab^o quo purger? Tertull. advers. Gent^s c.
4.
what conspiracies have these poor Play-condemning Puritans and Precisians
hatched against King or State? what rebellions have they raised? what public
up^ores have they ever caused from the beginning of reformation till this
present? what treacheries, what mutinies are they guilty of, that they are thus
condemned, as if they were as bad or worse than Papists, Priests or Jesuits,
(for so some a^firme;) whose See the prayer upon the fifth of November, Mr.
John White his Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 24^ 1625. His defense of the Way,
cap. 6 and Dr. Crakenthorpe his Defense of Constantine, and his Treatise of the
Popes Temporal Monarchy acordingly.
very faith is faction, whose doctrine rebellion, and their practice Treason?
Certainly were these whom the dissoluteness of the times now brand for
Puritans and Precisians, though every way conformable to our Churches
discipline, such rebels, factionists, mutineers, disobedient antimonarchicall
persons as the world conceives them, as Papists, Priests, Jesuits, profane
and dissolu^e companions proclaim the^ for to be, we should have seen some
fruits, experiments and Si semper latemus, quomodo proditum est quod
admittimus? Fama tandiu sola conscia est scele^um Christianorum, hanc i^dicem
adver sus nos profertis, quae quod aliquando iactavit, tantoque spacio in
opinionem corroboravit, usque adhuc probare non va^uit. Ter^^^^. Apologia, cap.
7. vid. Ibid.
detections of it ere this. But blessed be God, we have heard of no Puritan
treasons, insurrections or rebellions in our age; and experience (in despite of
scandal and all lying rumors) has manifested, that these Puritans and
Precisians are such persons as both 1 Pet. 2.17.
fear God and honor the King, though they oppugn the corruptions, sins,
profanesse, and Popish and Pelagian Errors of the times, with all such factious
Innovators, who either broach new heresies and superstitions, or revive old.
As for their loyalty to their Prince, his power and prerogative, it is so
apparent, that however Papists and persons popishly affected, Ea enim de
castis, probis et pudicis fingitis quae fieri non crederimus, nisi devobis
probaretis. Minucius Felix Octauius p. 95. Voce neg^nt quod literis
confitentur. Hierom Epist. 78. p. 303.
now slander them as enemies to Monarchy and Princes Prerogatives in words,
(to Isti ut convicia in silenti^m mitterent sua vitam infamare conati sunt
alien^m. Et cum possent ipsi ab innocentibus argui, innocents arguere
studuerunt, mittentes ubique literas livore dictante cons^^ipta^. Optat^^
aduersu^ Parmin. lib. 1. page 23.
take off this merited imputation from themselves) yet they b^ame them even
under the very name of Puritans, as overgreat advancers and chiefest patriots
and propugners of Monarchy, of Princes supremacy, in their See the Answer to
De^s and Rex.
printed works; none going so far in suppressing the Popes usurped
Authority, or e^larging the Kings and tempora^l Magistrates prerogatives and
supremacy as they, as even the Jesuit in his Answer to Deus et Rex, has
proclaimed unto all the world. Let therefore the Moguntine Jesuits Contzen
disciples, (following the desperate plot of their Master, to cheat a Protestant
Church of her religion^ and to scrue in Popery into it by degrees without noise
o^ tumult, by raising slanders upon the Doctrines and persons of the most
zealous Protestant Ministers and Protestants, to bring them into the Princes,
Poli^icoru^ l. ^. c. 17^ 18, 19.
and peoples hatred, and thrust them out of office) accuse Puritans of faction,
sedition and rebellion now, Quis inson^ erit si accusatori crimine non probato
fides habeatur? Zonaras, Anual. Tom. 2. f. 118.
without any ground or proof at all as the Pagans did the Christians long
ago: or let the Epicures and profane ones of our voluptuous times repute them
such, because they Christiani, non generis humani hostis sed erroris. Tertul.
Apologi^ c. 37.
wage war against their sins and sinful pleasures: yet now upon the
serious consideration of all these premises, I hope their consciences will
acquit them of these malicious slanders, and readily subscribe to this
apparent truth, that they are the holiest, meekest, and most zealous
Christians, and that they are only hated and reviled for their goodness. See
Lipsius Oration de Calumnia. Insani sapiens, nomen fert aequus iniqui: Vltra
qua^ satis est virtutem si petat ipsam. Horace Epist. l. 1. Ep. ^.
Since therefore these Play-censuring conformable Puritans and Precisians in
their proper colors (uncased of these odious persecuted terms of scandal,
which represent them to men's fancies in a most ugly form; Mr. Bolton^
Discourse of true happiness, p. 193.
there being never poor persecuted word, since malice against God first seized
upon the damned Angels, and the graces of heaven dwelt in the heart of man,
that passed through the mouths of all sorts of unregenerate men with more
distastfulnesse and gnashing of teeth, than the name of PVRITAN does at this
day: which notwithstanding as it is now commonly meant, and ordinarily
proceeds from the spleen and spirit of profaneness and good fellowshippe, is
an honorable nickename of Christianity and grace; as a worthy reverend Divine
observes:) are the very eminentest, choicest, and most gracious forward
Christians, let us not think the better, Praestat enim paucis bonis adversus
malos omnes, quam cum multis malis adversus paucos pugnare. Diogenes L^ert. p.
6. Antistines p. 322.
but far worse of Stage Plays, because they all abominate, condemn them, as
all good Christians have done before them: and if any have thus persecuted,
hated, or reviled them out of ignorance or malice heretofore, let them heartily
bewail it, and give over now, Sacrilegii quippe genus est, Dei odisse
cultores. Sicut enim si servos nostros quispiam caedat, nos in servorum no
strorum caedit iniuriam: et si a quoquam filius verbereturalienus, in supplicio
filii pietas paterna torquetur: ita et cum servus Dei a quoquam laeditur,
maiestas divina violatur, dicente idipsum Apostolis suis Domino: Qui vos
recipit, me recipit; et qui vos spernit, me spernit. Benignissimus scilicet ac
p^^ssimus Dominus communem sibi cum servis suis et honorem simul et contumeliam
facit, ne quis cum laederet Dei servum, hominem tantum a se laedi arbitraretur:
^um absque dubio iniuriis servorum dominicorum Dei admisceretur iniuria,
testante id suis Deo affectu indulgentissimo, in hunc modum^ Quoniam qui vos
tangit, quasi qui tangit pupillam oculi mei. Ad exprimendam teneritudinis
pietatis suae, tenerrimam partem humani corporis nominavit, ut apertiflime
intelligeremus, Deum tam parva sanctorum suorum contumelia laedi, quam parvi
verberis tactus humani visus ac^es laederetur. Sal^ian. De Gubern. Dei l. 8. p.
286.
because it is not only a kind of sacrilege, but even an high indignity and
affront to God himself, to hate, to slander, persecute or wrong his servants,
especially for controlling us in our delights of sin, of which these
constantly condemned Stage Plays are the chief. And for a close of this
Objection, and Scene together, let us all remember that worthy sentence of St.
Hierom: Epist. 77. p. 302.
Apud Christianos, ut ait quidam, non qui patitur, sed qui facit contumeliam,
miser est: and then these maliciou^ calumnies against Puritans and Precisians
will quickly vanish.

CHORUS.
YOU have seen now Christian Readers, the several arguments and Authorities
against Stage Plays, together with the ^lender Apologies for them, which how
poor, how illiterate and weak they are, the very meanest capacity may at
first discern. Romans 12.1.
I beseech you therefore by the very mercies of God, as you tender the glory
of Almighty God; the honor and credit of religion; the happiness and safety
both of Church and State; the serious covenant you have made to God in
baptism; S^e here p. ^. and 42. to 62. and 561. to 566. accordingly.
to forsake the Devil and all his works, the pompes and vanities of this
wicked world, with all the sinful lusts of the flesh; whereof Stage Plays
certainly are not the least: as you regard that solemn Confession you have
publicly made to God, and ratified in the very sacred blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ, at every receiving of the Sacrament; S^e the Con^es^ion in our Common
Prayer-Booke before the Communion.
that you do earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for all your misdoings;
that the remembrance of them is grievous unto you; the burden of them
intolerable; and that you will ever hereafter serve and please God in newness
of life, to the honor and glory of his name: Romans 12.1, 2. and the
Thanksgiving after the Communi^on.
offering and presenting unto the Lord your selves, your souls and bodies to
be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto him: or as you respect your
own, or others souls, whom See Chrysostom. Homil. 7. in Matthew. here p. 409. and
Hom. 38. in Matthew. here p. 417.
your evil examples may lead down to hell: that upon the serious perusal of
all the premises, you would now at last abominate and utterly abandon
Stage Plays, as the very fatal pests both of your minds and manners, and the
most desperate soothing enemies of your souls, See Act. 6. Scene 5. and Act.
7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
as all ages, all places have found the^ by experience. It may be some of you
through 1 Pet. 1.14. 1 Timothy 1.13. Act. 3.17.
ignorance and incogitancy have formerly had good opinions and high thoughts of
Plays and Players, (as being altogether unacquainted with their infernal
originall^ and most lewd effects, which Act. 1, 2, and 6.
I have here displayed to the full, and that made you so diligently to frequent
them:) Let not this then which was only the ^in of ignorance, of weakness
heretofore, become the Incidere in falsae opinionis errorem priusquam vera
cognoscas, imperiti est animi et simplicis; perseverare vero in eo postquam
agnoveris, con^umaciae. Salviani Epistola Afro et Vero, p. 316.
sin of wilfulness, or presumption now: but as God by these my poor
endeavors has opened your eyes to see, so do you pray unto him for strength
and grace, to re^orme your ancient error in this case of Plays. Act. 8.22. 2
Cor. 7.8, 9, 10.
Repent therefore with tears of grief, for what is past; and then speedily
divorce your selves from Plays and Theaters for time to come; that as your
consciences upon the serious perusal of all the premises, cannot but now
subscribe to this strange Paradox, (as some may deem it) which I have here
made good: See here p. 6.
That all popular and common Stage Plays, whether Comicall, Tragical,
Satyricall, Mimicall, or mixed of either: (especially as they are now compiled
and personated among us) are such sinfull^ hurtful, pernicious recreations, as
are altogether unseemely, yea unlawful unto Christians: so the lives and
practice likewise may say Amen unto it. So shall you then obtain the intended
benefit, and I my self enjoy the much desired end of these my weak
Endeavors, which was, which is no other, but Gods own glory, your temporal
and eternal happiness, and the Republickes welfare: For which as I have
hitherto labored, so I shall now by Gods assistance proceed to endeavor it
in the ensuing part of this Play-scourging Discourse; which now craves your
favor and attention too.

THE SECOND PART.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
IF then all popular Stage Plays, be thus sinful hurtful, execrable,
unseemly, unlawful unto Christians, as I have at large evinced in the
precedent part of this my Histrio-mastix, I shall thence infer these 3.
ensuing Corollaries which necessarily issue from it.

First, That the profession of a Play-poet, or the composing

Secondly, That the very profession of a Stage Player,

Thirdly^ That it is an infamous shameful, and unlawful

In brief; the very penning, acting and beholding of Stage Plays, are
infamous, unseemly, unlawful unto Christians, since Plays themselves are so.

To begin with the first of these^ I shall for the better clearing of its truth
and the avoiding of all mistakes, most willingly acknowledge.

First, that as Poetrey it self is an excellent endowme^t, p^culier unto some
by Sponte sua carmen nu^^eros ven^^bat ad apto^, Et quod tentabam scribere
versus erat Ovid. Tristium, l. 4. Eleg. 10.
a kind of natural Genius; so it is likewise lawful, yea Carmine dli superi
placantur, carmine manes Hora^. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 282. Gaudet enim virtus
testes sibi inngere Musas, Car^en amat, quis quis carmine digna gerit. Claudian
pr^sat. in Lib. 3. de Laudibus Sti^iconis p. 193. see Ovid. de ponto lib. 4.
Eleg. Plutarch^ de Audiendis poetis lib. Pl^nie epist, l 7. epist. 9 Hora^
carm. l. 4. Ode. 8.
useful and commendable among Christians, if righly used: as not only the
divine hymmes recorded in Scripture, together with the famous ancient Poems of
Tertullian, Arator, Apollinaris, Nazianzen, Prudentius, Prosper, and other
Christian worthies, with the modern Distiques of Dubar^as, Beza, Scaliger,
Bucanon, Heinsius, Withars, Hall, Quarles, our late Soveraig^e King James, with
infinite others; but likewise the much applauded verses of Homer, Pindarus,
Virgil, Statius, Silius Italicus, Lucan, Claudian, Horace, Iuuenall, and some
parts of Ovid, where he is not obscene, most plentifully evidence; whose Poems
are both approved, read, and highly magnified of all learned Christians, who
both allow and teach them in their public Schools. Yea, were not Poetry and
Poets Lawful, we must then raze out of our Bibles. Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33.
Titus 1.12, 13. where the sentences of Menander, Epimenides, and Aratus, three
heathen Poets are not only recited but Canonized too. If any desire any further
satisfaction in this point which is so clear, I shall only refer them to
Tertullian ad Vxorem lib. 1. to St. Basil, de legendis libris Gentilium Oration:
to Nicephorus Callistus Eccle^^asticae Historae. l. 10. c, 26. to the ancient
and modern Comme^tators on these texts; to Georg Alley Bishop of Exeter, See
B. Alley his poor man Librarie^ part 1. fol. 105.106.
his poor man's Library part 1. Misellanea Praelectionis 4. page 165.166. and
D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stag^^playes p. 21, 22. who will abundantly satisfy
them in this point.

Secondly, that it is lawful to compile: a Poem in nature of a Tragedy, or
poetical Dialogue, with several acts and parts, to add life and luster to
it, especially, in case of necessity when as truth should else be suffocated.
Hence Edidit quoque Eu^ipidem aem^latus, Trag^^o^ actus Pin^ari etiam liram
attigit, et comica argumenta ad Menandri exemp^um tractavit, vniuscuinsque
carminis legibus rite servatis, atque ut semel dica^ sumpta ex di^inis literis
materia, a^gumentis eis tractandis, librisque componendis, numerum ^velicarum
disciplinarum aequavit. etc. Nicephorus Callist^^^ Ecclesiast. ^ist. l. 10. c.
25. and Cassiodorus. Tripartita hist. l. 6. ca. 37. vid, ibid.
Nicephorus and Cassiodor record of Apolinaris the Elder, that being inhibited
by Julian the Apostate to Preach or teach the Gospel, or to train the
christians children to learning and poetry, he thereupon translated diverse
Books of Scripture into verse, and composed diverse Tragedies in imitation of
Euripides, and sundry Comedies and lyricke verses in imitation of Menander and
Pindarus, consisting only of divine arguments and Scripture stories; by which
he instructed those to whom he could have no liberty to Preach: the like did
Gregory Nazianzen and others in the Primitive Church, upon the same occasion,
having no other means to defend See 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1. M. Fox his Book
of Martyrs, 1610. page, 1281. and Hen. Sta^bridge his exhortatorie epistle
against the pompous Popish Bishops of England. p. 18.
or propagate religion with approbation or connivance but by such Poems as
these. Hence diverse pious Christians likewise in King Henry the 8. and Queen
Mary's bloody reign, being restrained by Superior Popish-powers to oppose
received errors or propagate the truth and Doctrine of the Gospel in public
Sermons, or polemicall positive treatises, did covertly ven^ and publish sundry
truths, yea censure sundry Errors, and interpret diverse scriptures in Rimes,
in Comedies, Tragaedies, and Poems like to Plays under the names, the persons
of others, whom they brought in discoursing of sundry points of true religion,
which could not else be Preached but by such Poems as these, which the people
gladly heard and read, and the Magistrates and popish Priests conived at at
first; till at last King Henry the 8. by the statute of 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1.
M. Fox his bo. of Martyrs, p. 1281.
and Queen Marie by her express Proclamation in the first year of her reign
(which the popish Prelates did most strictly execute) Prohibited the setting
forth or penning of any songs, Plays, Rimes, or Enterludes, which meddled with
interpretations of Scripture, contrary to the doctrine established in their
reigns. Se Hen. Stalbridge his epist p. 18. accordingly.
Wherefore I shall here approve and not condemn, the ancient Tragedy styled,
Christus passus Se Lewen^l^vii censura huius operis, in Nazianzens works. edit
1571. pa. ^69. and Coci Censura. p. 125. accordingly.
falsely attributed to Nazianzen) wherein Christ's passion is elegantly
desc^phered, together with Bernardinus Ochin his Tragedy of Freewil, Plessie
Morney his Tragedy of Ieptha his daughter, See Balaeus de Scriptoribus Briti.
contur 8. cap. 66.6^.82.99.100.
Edward the 6. his Comedy de meretrice Babilonica, John Bale his Comedies de
Christo and de Lazare, Skeltons Comedies, de Virtute, de Magnificentia, and de
bono Ordine, Nich^laus Grimoaldus, de Archiprophetae Tragedia, etc. which like
Geffry Chaucers and Pierce the Plowmans tales and Dialogues, were penned only
to be See Basil. De Legendislibris Gentilium ora^io. and Nicephorus: Eccles.
hist. l. 10. c. 25.26.
read, not acted,

Thirdly, as it is lawful to pen, so likewise to recite, to read such
tragical or comicall poems as these, composed only to be read, not acted on
the Stage. And in truth the Tragedies, Comedies and Play-poems of ancient
times, as those of Sophocles, Euripedes, AEschylus, Menander, Seneca, and
others, were only read or recited by the Poets themselves, or some others of
their appointment before the people, not acted on the Stage by Players, as now
they are; it being a great disparagement to Poets to have their Poems acted, as
An tu^ demens, Vilibus in ludis dictari ^armina malis? Serm^ l. 1. sect. 10.
see here p. 37^.
Horace Bibl. hist l. 14. s. 110. page 649.650. and l. 15. sect. 7. pa. 663.
Diodor^s Siculus and De Oratoribus Dialog. sect. 14.
Quintilian testify. That these ancient Comedies and Tragedies were thus read
or recited only, not played or acted on the Stage, is evident by the express
testimonies of Horace: Sermo: l. 1. Satyr. 4. and 10, Epist. l. 2. Epist. 1.
and de Art Po^tica lib. of Iuuenall, Satyr. 1.4. and 8. of Diodorus Siculus.
Bibl. hist l. 14. sect. 110. p. 649, 650. of Plutarch, de Audiendis Poetis lib.
of Pliny: Epist: l. 1. Epist: 13. Epist: l. 2. Epist. 10. l, 3. Epist: 15.18.
l. 5. Epist. 3. l. 7. Epist. 17. l. 8. Epist. 21. l. 9. Epist. 27. Of Suetonius
in his Octauius sect. 89. Of Quintilian de Oratoribus Dialogus: 1.6.14. of
Polydor Virgil, de Invent. rerum, l. 3. c. 13. of Scaliger Poeticis l. 1. c. 7.
of Dr. Reinolds, in his Overthrow of Stageplayes p. 22. of Bul^ngerus de
Theatro. l. 2. c. 1. p. 339. A.B. with sundry others, who all give testimony to
this truth. Which takes of one grand objection that Players, and Play-poets
make to justify the Acting, and penning of Stage Plays; that many good men
have compiled Plays and Tragedies in former times, of purpose that they might
be acted on the Theater; when as in truth these Plays of theirs were never
acted but recited only, they being composed for Readers, not Spectators, for
private studies, not public Play houses, as our present Stageplayes are.

The sole controversy then is this; Not whether it be simply unlawful to
pen a Poem in nature of a Tragedy or Comedy, which may be done without
offense, in case it be pious, serious, good and profitable; not wanton amorous,
obscene, Profane, or heathenish, as most Plays are now: but, whether the
profession of a Playhouse-Poet, or the penning of Plays for public or private
Theaters, be warrantable or lawful? And for my own particular opinion, I hold
it altogether unlawful, for these ensuing reasons.

First, to be an inventer, a contriver of evil, scandalous, Romans 1.30, 31.
Psalm. 31.6. Eccles: 7.29. Prove. 14.22. c. 24.8. and Isay. 55.2. But
Stage Plays (as I have See part 1. Act 6. scene 1. to 20. and Act 7. scene
2.3.4.5.
already manifested at larg) are evil, scandalous, unprofitable, noxious
pastimes yea intolerable mischeifes both in a Church or State. Therefore the
inventing and contriving of them must certainly be unlawful.

Secondly, to be a compiler, an Author of the certain, These. 5.22. 2 Samuel
12.14. and Romans 1.30. But Stage Plays (as the Sea part 1. Act. ^. scene 1. to
20.
premises testify) are the certain, the common occasions of much wickedness,
vice and lewdness: Yea Play-poets and Play-poems if De vanitate scientiarum.
ca. 64.
Cornelius Agrippa may be credited, are the very greatest entisements to all
lechery, bauderie, vice, and lewdness: Vnde Poetae inter lenones principatum
facile obtinuerunt, quo suis lasciuis rithmis alijsque fabulis ac amatorijs
bucolicis, praeceptiunculis, comaedijsque ex penitissimis Veneris armarijs
depromptis laesciuis carminibus, lenocinio functa, pudicitiam omnem subuertit,
ac adolescentiae bonam indolem, moresque corrumpit. Therefore to be an Author,
a compiler of Stageplayes, can be no ways warrantable or lawful unto
Christians.

Tim. 5.22. Hab. 1.15, 16. Ezech. 13.18, 19, 20. But the penning of Plays for
Play Houses, foments men in their sins and sinful courses: See part. 1. Act.
6. Scene 2. 2, 3,4.5. etc.
It fostereth the spectators in their idleness, vanity, wantonness, ribaldry,
prodigality, lewdness, and the like; it draws them on to many other sins,
which else they might eschew: It supports all public Actors in their
graceles, infamous, ungodly, lewd profession of Acting, and others in their
sinful practice of beholding Stage Plays: if there were no new Plays to act
or see, all Players, all Play-haunters would quickly vanish, the Play-poet
being the Se Gossen his Plays confuted Artic. 1. and 4. and Chrysostom. Ho. 6.
in Math^.
prime mover in this infernal sphere of lewdness. Therefore the penning of
Plays for Play Houses,

Fourthly to be a professed factor for the Devil and his instruments; to
maintain his See part. 1. p. 55. to 62.
pomps and vanities which we have all renounced in Baptism, is sinful and
abominable: as the 1 Pet. 5.8, 10. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. c. 5.11. and
Ioh. 8.44. infalliblie evidence. But Stage-poets are professed factors for the
Devil and his instruments See part. 1. Act. 1.2. and 4.
who are most honored and delighted with them, now as well as heretofore) and
they maintain (yea forge and pen) the very pompes and works of the Devil
which we have all renou^ced in Baptism; for I have infalliblie proved See part
1. p. 42. to 62. act. 6 scene 12. and act 7. scene 2. pa 561 to 568.
accordingly, and Bulengerus de Circo Roma ^^ cap. 46. p. 172. E.
Stageplays (which they so seriously compile) to be the Devils pomps which we
protest against in Baptism: Therefore the profession of a Play-poet even in
this respect, is sinful and abominable.

Fif^ly for men to wast their wits, their parts and see Isay. 55.2. Psalm. 7.6.
Psalm. 4.2. 1 Samuel 12.21. 2 Cor. 5.15. Romans 12.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.20. and 10.31, 32,
33. Eccles. 5.16. Luke 1.74, 75. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. for proof of this
proposition.) But those who pen Plays for the Stage; do wast their wits,
their parts and precious time, (with which they ought to do God and men good
service) on See part 1. act. 3. through^out.
amarous, filthy, wanton, ridiculous, vain, profane, unprofitable, (yea
sometimes on atheistical, blasphemous, sacrilegious, diabolical, detestable)
subjects, (for such for the most part, are all our modern Plays) which tend
not to Gods honor Se part 1. act. 3. scene 7.
but to his great dishonor, and the Devils advantage: which bring no good at
all, but exceeding much hurt and mischeife unto others: and no comfort, no
peace, but horror and vexation only to the souls of their composers, who have
often been so terrified with the sad consideration of those infinite horid
sins which their Stage Plays have produced both in themselves and others,
that it has almost driven them to despair^, and drenched their souls in
stoods of brinish tears to wash away their guilt of Play-making: as the
memorable example of See part 1. act. 6. scene 12.19, 20.
Steven Gosson, and the Author of the third Blast, of retrait from Plays and
Theaters, besides a more bloody fresh example, most fully testify. Therefore
the penning of Plays for the Stage is altogether unlawful.

Sixthly; for men Ierm. 9.3.
to bend their wits like bows for lies, and to make their brain a very forge
for lying vanities, and old-wives fables; is certainly unlawful among
Christians, who must put away lying fables, and speak naught but truth: See
Ephesians. 4.25, 29. c. 5.3, 4. 1 Timothy 4.2, 7. and part 1. Act 3. Scene 4. p. 106,
107. accordingly. But Play-poets thus rack and bend their wits like bows for
lies and lying fables; they corrupt and misrepresent true histories, and make
their brains a very forge for lying vanities and old wives Fables: witness Act
3. Scene 4. p. 106, 107. with the Authors there quoted: witness the common
prouerbiall speech Plutar^h de Audendis Poe^tis lib. Tom, 1. pa. 28.29
Permulta canunt mendacia vates, that Play-poets broach very many lies, that
being no Poem in Ibid.
Socrates his judgment, a qua abesset mendacium, in which there i^ not some
lie or other couched: witness Diogenis La^^tii^ Solon: p. 46. and Plutarchi
Solon.
Solon who prohibited Thespis either to act or teach Tragedies, inutilem eas
falsi loquentiam vocans) because they were but unprofitabl^ lyes^ or vain
common thridbare fabulous figments of Stage-poets extolling vain and idle
things, with many words, as Excludant vanas vulgo protritas damnatasque fabulas
figmentorum po^ticorum scenicorumque res nihili multis verbis exaggerantium. De
Iudice. lib. p. 976.
Philo Iudaeus phraseth them. witnesse^ the 3. Blast of Retrait from
stage plays, p. 104. which informs us: That the notablest liar is becom^ the
best Poet: and that he who can make the most notorious lie, and disguise
falsehood in such s^n^, that it may pass unperceived, is hold the best writer,
for the strangest Comedy brings greatest delectation and pleasure. Yea
witness our own experience, our modern Plays being naught but amorous
ridiculous figments, lies and vanities, or sophisticated stories. The penning
therefore of such stories as these must needs be ill.

witness, Gal. 5.16, 17, 18. c. 6.15. Psalm. 119.9.104, 105. Romans 14.23. 1 Cor.
11.1. Ehes. 5.1, 5. Psalm. 129.7, 8.9. Phil. 4.6, 7, 8. But the profession of a
Play-poet, and the composing of Plays for Theaters, has no warant at all
either from the practice of the Saints of God See part 1. Act 6. Scene. 12, 14,
20. and Act. 7. throughout.
among whom we read of no professed Play poets or Players of ancient or modern
times, but such only who upon their true conversion and repentence renounced
this their hellish lewd profession: nor yet from the sacred word of God, the
square of all our lives and ways; in which I cannot so much as find one title,
one syllable to justify either the penning or acting of a Stage Play: so that
a man cannot proceed on in them either with faith or comfort, nor yet expect or
pray for Gods blessing or assistance on his Plays or Studies, which serve
only to advance the Divills service, and See part 1. Act 6. Scene 2, 4, 5. etc.
foment men's lusts and vices. Therefore the very profession of a Play-poet, and
the compiling of Plays for Theaters, must questionless be unwarrantable,
unlawful for a Christian.

Lastly, that very profession and function which Christians, which heathens,
which even relenting Play-poets themselves have censured, renounced, condemned,
as sinful and abominable; must undoubtedly be unlawful for a Christian: But
Christians, heathens, yea and Play-poets themselves have thus censured,
renounced, condemned the profession of a Play poet, and the making of Plays to
furnish Play Houses. Witness all the fore-quoted Fathers Councels and
Christian Writers, who in condemning Plays, have censured their composers, not
only by consequence, but in Cyprian and Tertulliande Spectac. Chrysost^ Hom.
6. and 7. in Matthew. Philo. Iudaeus. De Monarchia p. 1099. and in Flac^u^. l. p.
1305. Theophilu^ Ant^ochenus. here p. 557, 558. Minucius Felix Octavius p. 69,
70. Eusebius de praeparat. Evang. l. 4. c. 5. See p. 80. l.
express terms too. Witness the Sea here p. 445 730.
Athenians, and See here p. 449.484.51^^
Solon, who inhibited the penning of Comedies and Tragedies: together with See
here p. 368 448.
Plato and See here p. 449.
Tullie, who banished all Playpoets out of their Republikes, as the
effeminaters, the corrupters of men's minds and manners, leading them on to a
dissolute, sloathfull, vicious, voluptuous life: Witness the p. 121, 12^.455,
456.920, 92^.
Lacedaemonians, and Massilienses, who would never admit the penning or acting
of Comedies or Tragedies; together with See here page 449.703.
Gorgias See here p. 370.1. l.
Horace and Satyr 8. here p. 844.
Iuuenall, who condemn the composing of Plays for the Stage, as a base
unworthy thing, unfit for eminent Poets: Yea witness the constant practice of
all Players and Play-poets in the Sea here p. 561, 567, 571, 572, 574, 575,
577, 582, 617, 626, 652.
primitive Church, who upon their true conversion to the faith, renounced these
their lewd ungodly professions, and never returned to them more: together with
the modern examples of See his Epistola 97. and 395. See here p. 917, 918.
accordingly.
AEnaeas Sylvius, and See Theod. Bezae amatoria ab Ipso adolescente edita et ab
ipso post damnata. Lut. 1548.
Theodorus Beza, who publicly renounced, censured, and bewailed in their riper
years those wanton amorous plays and poems which they had compiled in their
youth^ of See here part 1. Act. 6. Scene. ^^14.20. p. 485, 486. fol. 566^ and
910.
M. Stephen Gosson, and the Author of the 3. Blast of retrait from plays and
Theaters; two Eminent English Play^poets Who being deeply wounded in
conscience for those Plays they had penned for the Stage, thereupon abandoned
this their hellish trade of Play-penning, as incompatible with Christianity or
salvation, and by way of holy recompense and revenge, compiled Stephen Gosson
h^s school of Abuse and Plays confuted in 5. Actions. and the 3. Blast of
retrait from Plays and Theaters p. 41. to 57.
three memorable printed Treatises against penning, acting and frequenting
Stage Plays, which now are extant to their eternal praise, and to the just
condemnation of all those Play poets which persevere in their relented and
reclaimed steps. The penning therefore of Stage Plays for the Theater (which
has no precept, no example for to warrant it in the Scripture or in the
Primitive Church) must certainly be sinful and unlawful unto Chr^stians. All
which I would wish our modern Play-poets to consider. Who being often times men
of eminent parts, and choysest wits, able pithily to express what ever they
undertake: I shall only say of them and their poems as Instit. Orat. l. 10. c.
1^ p. 570.
Quintilian does of Seneca and his books, Multae in eo claraeque sententiae,
multa etiam Elocutionis gratia legenda; sed in eloquendo corrupta plaeraque,
atque adeo perniciosissima, quod abundant vitijs. Velles enim suo ingenio
dixisse, alieno iudicio, etc. Digna fuit illa naturae quae meliora vellet, quae
quod voluit fecit. And thus much for the first conclusion.

ACTVS 2.
SCENA PRIMA.
I proceed now to the second Corollary, The infamy of Stageplayers
That the very profe^^io^ of a Stageplayer, and the acting of Stageplays is
base and infamous, yea sinful and unlawful among Christians. First, for the
infamy of Stage Players and play-acting, it may be evidenced by these
examples. First, they were infamous even among Pagans and Infidells: Witness
the ancient pagan Romans, who adjudged all Actors, all Stage Players infamous
persons; and thereupon excluded the^ their temples, disfranchised them their
tribs, as unworthy of their stock or kindred; disabling them both to inherit
lands as heirs to their parents, or to bear any public office in the
common^wealth: as Romans Hist. lib. 7. sect. ^.3.
Livie Oration pro P. Quin^tio.
Cicero, l. 2. c. 4.
Valerius Maximus, Excellentium Imperato^rum vitae, praefacio. p. 256.
AEmilius Probus Annall. l. 14^ s. 2.3.
Tacitus, Saturnal. l. 2^ c. 7.
Macrobius Tiberius. Sect. 35.
Suetonius, Noct. A^tic. lib. 20. c. 4.
Gellius, 6. Satyr. ^.
Iuvenall, De spectac. c. 22.
Tertullian, Adversus Gentes. l. 7. p. 233.
Arnobius, De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 10^ to 15.29. l. 4. c. 28.
Augustine Variarum. l. 7. c. 10.
Cassiodorus, Tom. 10. pars 3. in Matt. c. 6. Quaest. 38. f. 40. E.
Tostatus, De v^nitate scientiarum. c. 20.
Agrippa, Genialium Di^rum. l 3. c. 9.
Alexander ab Alexandro, Comment in Corpus iuris ciuilis Tom. 1. p. 342.338
Gothofrede, Comment in lib. Iudicum. c. 16. p. 570. to 575.
Arius Montanus, An^iqu. Lect. l. 14. c. 17.
Caelius Rhodiginus, De spectac. in codice Theodosij Comment. p. 268.
Barnabas Brissonius, Annot: in pandect.
Budaeus, Overthrow of Stage Players p. 4. to 10. and 29. to 82. where this
point is largely debated.
Dr. Rainol^s, See here p. 133. and 456. in the margent.
and infinite others testify. Hence Vlpianus l. 6. paragr. 5. Digest vet. l.
3. Tit, 2. Corpus iuris Ciuilis. Tom. 1. p. 342.
Nerva and Pegasus pronounce^ all such infamous, qui quaestus causa in
certamina discendunt, et propter praemium in Scenam prodeunt: Hence also ibidem
p. 338 Tit. de his qui notantur infamia.
Praetoris verba dicunt: infamia notatur qui artis Ludicrae pronunciandiue
causa in Scenam prodierit. Infames sunt qui comicam artem exercent: which
extends as well to voluntary as hired actors. And hence even by the Municipall
Laws of the ancient heathen Romans as qua ^ Corpus Iuris Civil^s: Tom. 1. p.
^38.342. and Gothof^ed Ibidem. and D. Rainolds. qua y before Ioanni^ Mariana.
De Spectac. lib. De Rege et Regum Instit. l. 3. c. 16. and Petrus Faber.
Agonistico^ l. 1. c. 3. p. 9.
Vlpian and other Civillians inform us, all stageplayers and Actors were
infamous persons; and so disabled to bear testimony, to inherit lands, or to
receive any public place of honor in the Commonweal. And as these Romans,
even so the Pagan Grecians too (who AEmilij Probi Praefatio. August. De Civit.
Dei l. 2^ c. 10, 11, 13, 14. l. 4. c. 28.
hono^red Stage Players at the first) reputed the^ infamous at the last, as
Homil. 38 in Matthew. and Homil. 13. in 1 Cor 4. here p. 738.
Chrysosto^ Comment. l. 29. f. 113.
Volat^ranus, together with Legum Dialogus. 7.
Plato and See Gellius Noct^ A^tic. l. ^o. c. 4.
Aristotle inform us, and Plutarchi Laconica Apotheg. p. 462. here p. 741, 742.
Agesilaus his answer to Callipedes implies. Secondly, as they were thus See
^ulengerus De Theatro lib. 1. c. 51. De infamia Theatri and Olaus Magnus Hist.
l. 15. c. 31.34.
infamous among Pagans, so much more are they among Christians, as both See
Concilium Eliberinum Can. 62. and those other councels quoted. p 133^134.561.
in the Margent, and here p. 844.
Councels Tertul. De spectac. c 22. Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. and
Arnobius, Clemens Romanus, Augustine Cassiodorus qua supra. l. m. n. and infra.
p. 844.
Fathers, See ^. u. x. ^. b. c before and Bulengerus de Theatro l. ^. c. 51.
and Codex ^heodos^i l. 15. Tit. 7. de Scenicis
Civilians, See Gratian Distinctio 33.48. and De Consecratione distinct. 2.
Paulo Lanceletto Institutiones Iuris Canonici: l. 2. Ti^. de Eucharistia: p.
269. Ioannis Caluini, and Iacobi Spielegii Lexicon Iuridicum Tit. histrione^:
Aluarus Pelagius de planctu Ecclesiae. l. 1 Ar^e 49. with sundry others here
quoted p. 844. etc.
Canonists, Astexanus decasibus l. 4. Tit. 7. Artic. 4. summa Ro^e^la, and
summa Angelica. Tit. histrio. Adula^io, and Infamia: with others p. 845.
Casuists, Alexander ^lensis^ summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 17. Artic. 2^ p.
394. Aquinas 32. pars Quaest. 8. Artic. 6. Didacus de Tapia in 3 am. partem
diui Thomae Artic. 8. p. 545, 546.
Schoolmen, Olaus Magnus Hist. l. 15. cap. 31 34. Bulengerus de Theatro. l. 1.
c. 51.
Historians D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage plays p. 4. to 10. and 29. to 82.
See here p. 561. s and p.
Divines, unanimously testify: Hear bu^ Comment^ in li^. Iudicum. c. 16. p.
570, 571.
Arias Montanus for all the rest, who informs us in express terms, that
public dancing or acting of plays for money or sport, is condemned as base^
infamous, and unworthy any ingenuous person, not only by Scripture and reason,
but almost by all humane laws. Et vocari fecerunt (says he) Simsonem ex domo
vinctoru^ etc. nec ad digniorem et honestiorem agendam rem, quam ad ridiculum
atque turpe de se spectaculum saltandrop aebendum inimicis, principilius, ac
populo. Qui legit intelligat; public saltantes; et huiusmodi spectaculorum
personas, ^urpitudinis atque infamiae nota inustas, et ratio ipsa, et antiqua
jura Nota.
fere omnia volunt, divina vero lex minime admittenda, sensuit, in vulgaribus
etiam ac vilibus capitibus^ nedum in honestioris ordinis atque census viris^
nequ^ vero tantum vl^^o non quaerenda and optanda, sed nec si inui^is fuerin^
illata, ferenda esse censet etc. Certe qui de virtute vera, ^leque corruptis
hominum moribu prudenter locuti sunt, hujus generis actiones ingenuo homine
iudignissimas duxerunt, vt ille de Nero^e.

Iuvenal Satyr. 8.
In Scena nunquam cantavit Orestes,
Haec opera, atque hae sunt generosi principis arts,
Gaudentis patrio peregrina aut pulpita sal^u
Prostitu^, Graiaeque apium meruisse coronae?
Which passage of his extends as well to Masquers, or Academical voluntary
Actors, as ^o common stage players, they being both alike in^amou^ in this
Authors judgment. How great this infamy of Actors was among Christians in the
primitive Church, and yet is, or at leastwise ought to be, with modern
Christians, will appear by these par^iculars. First, it See here p.
133.134.161.
excluded them from the Church, the Sacraments, and all Christian society^
making them ipso facto excommunicated so long as they continued players,
neither were they readmitted to the Church, til they had wholly relinquished and
given over acting^ Witness the severe imperial Edicts of Valentinian Valens and
Gracian, against Male and Female Actors. See Codex Theodosii. l. 15. Tit. 7. l
ex. 1. Baronius and Spondanus. Anno. 371. sect 10. See here p. ^68.469.
Scenici and Scenicae qui in ultimo vitae necessitate cogente interitus
imminentis ad Dei summi sacramenta properarunt, si fortassis evaserint, nulla
posthac in Theatralis spectaculi conventione revocentur: Ante omnia tamen
diligenti observatione tueri sanctione jubemus, ut vere et in extremo periculo
Constituti, id pro salute poscen^es (si tamen antistites probant) beneficij
consequantur. Quod vt fideliter fiat, statim eorum ad judices si in presenti
sunt, vel curatores Vrbium singularum desiderium perferatur, Quod and
inspectatoribus mis^is sedula exploratione quaeratur, an indulgeri his
necessitas pos^at extrema suffragia: which Edicts, exclude all Stage Players
from the Sacrament, even when they lay upon their deathbeds, unless they
earnestly des^red it, and manifested such sincere repentance for their
play-acting, as might in the Magistrates or Ministers judgment prepare and fit
them to receive it. Hence, See here p. 571, 572, 57, 574, 582, 583, 586, 517.
Concilium Eliberinum. Can. 62. Concilium Arelatense 1. Can^ 4, 5. and 2. Can.
20. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 88. Council. Constantinopolitanum 6. Can. 24.51.
Council. Hipponense. Can, 35. Council. Carthaginense. 3. Can. 35. Concilium
Africanum. Can. 12.28. and Synodus Augustensis 1549. Can. 19. expressly
decreed; that all Stage Players shall be excomunicated, and debarred from the
sacrament till they gave over their profession, and that upon their repentance
they should be admitted to the sacrament and reconciled to the Church. Hence
See here p. 652.
Clemens Romanus. Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 38. Tertullian de Pudicita. c. 7.
Cyprian Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Chrysostom Hom. 3. De Davide and Saul,
Theodoret de Martyribus. lib. Tom. 2. p. 390. Gratian Distinctio. 33. and 48.
and de Consecratione Distinctio. 2. expressly teach, that Sage-players are to
continue excomunicated and excluded from the Eucharist, and all Christian
society, till they abandon plays and acting. And hence Indubitanter turpe est
esse histrionem. Sacram quidem communionem histrionibus et mimis dum in malitia
perseve rant ex auctori^ate patru^ non ambigisesseprae clusam. etc. Ibid
Ioannes. Sarisberiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 8. Alexander, Alensis
Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quest. 17. Artic. 2. Sect. 4. p. 394. Aluarus Pelagius
de Planctu, Ecclesiae l. 1. Artic. 49. f. 28. Astexanus de Casibus. l. 4. Tit.
7. Artic. 4. Tostatus in Math. c. 6. Quaest. 38. Item histrionibus scenicis et
aliis infamibus notoriis et manifestis non est Eucharistia conferenda, quia
tales vitam ducunt illicitam sic dicit Cyprianus; nec pu^o Maiestati divinae,
nec Ecclesiasticae disciplinae congruere ut pudor et honor Ecclesiae tam turpi
atque infami contagione faedetur; et loquitur ibi de quodam qui fuit histrio,
qui public artem suam exercuit, et inde Doctor puerorum perdendorum suit.
Posset ergo illud decretum intelligi de quolibet simili histrione notorio:
Glossa dicit, quod hec tali nec cuicun que infami notorio est Eucharistia
impertienda. Si tamen tales revertantur ad de^um ex gratia vel reconciliatione,
eis deneganda non est. Non statim tamen debedari talibus hostia seu
Eucharistia, nisi vsq^e ad perac^^m paenitentiam, proptet reverent^m
Sacramenti, vt probetureorum conversio non ficta, nisi aliq^is articulus
necessitatis seu Pietatis aliter fieri suaderet, secu^dum Richard. Distinc^io.
9^ Ibidem.
Ioannis de Burgo, Pupilla oculi pars 4, cap. 8. l: Photius Monocanonis. Tit.
13. ca. 21.22. Ioannis Bertochinus de Episcopis, Tracta^us Tract. part 4. f.
25. ^. 101. Nichol^us Plo^e, de Sacr^menti^. Ibid. pars. 8. f. 51. n. 3.
Stephanus Costa. de Ludo. Tract. Tract. part. 1. f. 157.158.159, 160. Angelus
de Clavasio, summa Angelica Histrio. and Infamia. Baptista Tr^^^mala summa
Rosella Tit. Adulatio. Ioannis Banghe^^ucius de vita and honestate
Ecclesiasticorum lib. 2. ca. 22. See here p. 48.482. Scenici^ atque
histrionibus caeterisque personis huiusmodi, quamdiu tam detestandas arts
exercuerin^, non est danda eucharistia. nec enim Evangelicae Disciplinae
congruit vt pudor et honor ecclesiae tam turpi et infami contagione faede^ur
Ibidem.
Didacus de Tapia in teriam partem divi Thom^ A^tic. 8. Q^aest, vtrum
sacramentum dari potest histrionibus. p. 545.546. (e) Paulo Lanceletto,
Institutiones juris Canonici lib. 2. ^it. de Eucharistia. p. 269.270. Ivo
Carnote^sis, pars 11. Decret. c. 83. and pars 2. c. 35. Aquin. tertia part,
qu. 8. Art. 6. Josephus Angles Flores Theolog. qu. in. l. 4^ sent. pars 1.
quaest. de suscipientibus Eucharistiam. art, 4. conclus. 1. p. 101.102. Iacobus
Spielegius^ Lexicon juris civilis, and Iohannis Calvini Lexicon juridicium,
histrio^ Centuriae. Magd: cent: 3. col. 142. Bar^^ius and Spondanus Annal.
Eccl. An. 206. sect. 2, and 371. Sect. 10. Bulengerus de Theatro lib. 1. ca.
51. the 3 Blast of Retrait from plays and Theaters. pa. 116. Doct Rainolds, M^
Northbrook and M. Gosson in their Treatises against Stag^playes, Ioannis
Mariana de spectaculis lib. with See he^e p. 133, 1^4.561. and Act. 7 Scene 5.
Summula Raymundi fol. 97.
sundry other schoolmen, Canonists, and divines, expressly determine, that the
Eucharist or Sacrament of our Saviors body and blood, ought not to be
administered to Stageplayers^ as long as they use their detestable infamous
v^christian art of acting plays, which excludes them from the Sacrament, not
only of the Lords Supper, but of Baptism too no See here p. 561. to 568.571.
to 580.
Players, no play-haunters being received into the Primitive Church^ or
admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism, till they had renounced their acting and
beholding of stageplayes, as the very pompes and inventions of the Devil, as I
have elsewhere largely manifested. Such was, such is the notorious infamy of
acting plays, as thus to exile men from the Church, the Sacraments and all
Christian society, and to make them Excommunicate ipso facto; An infallible
evidence of its great vnlawfullnes.

Augustine de Ecclesiasticis Regulis cap. 20. and out of him, Decretal. pars 8.
c. 295.
I^o Carnotensis and Distinctio. 33.
Gratian, conclude; Clericum non ordinandu^ qui aliqua^do in scena lusisse
probatur: hence Hierom^ Epi. 83. Oceano, ca. 4. and Anselme in Epist. 1^ ad
Timotheum. c. 3. tom. 2. p. 356. write thus See Gratian distinctio 48. c.
Prohibentur accordingly.
Non congruit, vt here in Amphitheatro, hodie in Ecclesia; vespere in circo^
mane in altario: dudum fautor histrionum, nunc consecrator virginum. Hence Pope
Gregory the first, determines thus of Stageplayers Gratian Distinctio 33. cap.
Mari^um. f. 55.
Illos qui in Scena lusisse noscuntur non ordinandos censemus: all which extend
to voluntary, as well as hired Actors. Hence Tostatus Abulensis informs us, In
Matthew. 6. Quaest. 38. f. 40.
Histriones and qui adhaerent ijs sunt infames, nec possunt promoveri ad sacros
Ordines. Hence In c. cum decorum, de vita et honest Clericorum. and summa
Angelica. Histrio.
Panormitan affirms, Histriones non possunt promoveri ad clericatum etiam
peracta paenitentia, dummodo exercuerunt artem suam causa quaestus. Hence
Tractatus Tract. Tom. ^. p. 157. to 161.
Stephanus de Costa, writes. Histriones infames sunt, nec possunt ad ordines
promoveri. Hence Repertorii Moralis. pars. 2^ Histrio. p. 669.
Ioannes Bertochinus propounds this question. Quaero an histrio possit elegi
Episcopus? and he resolves it thus: Respondeo quod non, neque post peractam
paenitentiam. Quinimo histrio non potest corpus Christi accipere, ratio est^
quia est infamis notorie. Hence Super. l. 3. Decretalium. De vita et
honesta-C^ericorum. c. 12. Tom. 5. f. 4.
Antonius de Brutio avers: Histriones non possunt promover^ post paenitentiam,
quia infames, nisi Papa dispensarit: and he quotes Gratian distinctio. 51. and
causa 4. Quaest. 1. to warrant it. All which Pupilla Oculi. pars 7. c. 5. l.
Io^nnis de Burgo our Countryman, thus seconds. Item mimi, histriones and
huj^smodi non sunt ad ordines promovendi, nisi ex dispensatione Papae, quia
sunt infames. Hoc intellige de his qui public coram Populo faciunt aspectum
sive Ludibrium sui corporis exercendo opus illud. Si autem in occulto aliquis
saltaret, vel huiusmodi opus facere posset, nihil ominus post peractam
paenitentiam potest ordinari. Vilitas enim personae est causa quare tales ab
ordinibus repelluntur: for which he quotes Extrauag. de vita est honestate
Clericorum: cum decorum in glos. See here p. 653, 654.
Inno: etc. So that no academicall or private voluntary Actors by the cannon
Law ought to be admitted to orders, before they have publicly repented and
done some open pen^ance for this their private acting. The same we shall find
affirmed by Aluarus Pelagius: De Planctu Ecclesiae. l. 2. Artic. 28. H.
histriones (writes he) non promoventur ad clericatu^: and in Summula Raymundi
f. 93 94. Summa Angelica. Tit. Histrio. Summa Rosella^ Adulatio. Bulengerus de
Theatro. l. 1. c. 50, 51.
sundry other Canonists: Yea the Canon Law is so strict in this, See
Apostolorum Canones Can. 17. Gratian Distinct. 34. here p. 649.
that if any one married a woman actor, he could not be promoted to any
ecclesiastical living, or take orders upon him.

Thirdly, the acting of Plays made Players so infamous, that they could give
no public Testimony between man and man^ witness Council. Africanum Canon. 96.
and 7. Can. 2. here p. 577. Ioa^nes Bertachinus Repertorij Moralis. pars. 2. p.
669 Tit. histrio; Angelus De Clauasio, Summa Angelica. Tit. Infamia. Adulatio,
Histrio, and Testis: with Caluini Lexicon Iuridicum, and most other Canonists
in their Titles Histrio, Infamia Testis, etc.
diverse others.

Fourthly, it made Players so execrablie infamous, ipso facto: witness,
Concilium Eliberinum, can. 67. here p. 571.

Fifthly, the infamy of players was such, that they might lawfully be
disinherited by their parents, and so might Play-haunters too; histriones enim
sunt infames etc. et qui adhaerent mimis et histrionibus possunt exheredari
informs us. In Matthew. c. 6. Quaest. 38. f. 40


Lastly, Such is the infamy of Play-acting, that our own 22. H 8. c. 12.14.
Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4.1. Jacob. c. 7. See here p. 495, 496.
Statutes have branded Players with the style of Rogues and vagabonds, making
them liable to the stocks, the whipping post, and all other punishments to
which Rogues are subject: Which Statutes if any Actors think over rigorous;
let them remember that both See here p. 459, 460. accordingly.
Augustus Caesar, and Tacitus. Annal. l. 1. c. 14. and l. 4. c. 3. See here p.
460.
Tiberius, two heathen Roman Emperors, made Stage Players liable to the lash,
or Bedles whip, (a punishment suitable to such base idle Rogues as they) When
as it was altogether unlawful for any ingenuous Roman to be scourged Act.
16.37, 38. and 22.24. to 30. By all which Testimonies together with that
passage of Tully concerning Roscius the eminent Roman Actor, to whom Oration
pro. P Quintio. p. 225.
Syla gave an Annual Pension and a ring of gold; Etenim, cum artifex ejusmodi
est, ut solus dignus videatur esse, qui in scena spectetur; tum vir ejusmodi
est, ut solus dignus videatur qui eo non accedat: quid aliud apertissime
ostendens, (as Mac^obius Saturnal. l. 3. c. 14.
St. August: descants on it) nisi illam scenam esse tam turpe^, ut ta^to minus
ibi esse homo debeat, qua^to fuerit magis vir bonus: it is abundandly evident,
That Stageplayers are most De consensu Euangelistarum. l. 1. c. 33.
infamous persons, and their very pr^fession most base and execrable both among
Pagans and Christians. Sic itaque et circa voluptates spectaculorum infamata
conditio est. Tertullian de Corona m^litis. c. 5. p. 7^.


Neither is the art or public profession of acting Stage Plays vile and
execrable only when it is practiced for lucre sake, but likewise the voluntary
personating of them too for recreation or entertainment, especially in persons
of rank and quality. To instance in some particulars.

First, it has been always reputed dishonorable, shameful, infamous, for
Emperors, Kings, or Princes to come upon a Theater to dance, to masque, or act
a part in any public or private Enterludes^ to deligh^ themselves or others:
Hence Romans hist. l. 59 p. 830.
Dion Cassius Suetonii Caius Sect. 18.35.52, 53, 54, 55.
Suetonius, De Legatione ad Caium li.
Philo Iudaeus with sundry Zonaras, Eutropius, Sallicus Anton^nus, Grimsto^ in
his life, and Vinc^ntius Speculum hist. l. 7. c 1^9.
other writers impu^e this as an inexpiable infamy to that monster and shame
of Monarchs, Caius Caligula, Quendam equoru^su^oru^ Incitatum nomine, ad
caenam quoque ad hibebat, et ei in auro hordeum appo^e^at^ et poculis aureis
vinum pr^pi nabat, salutem eius ac for^unam ^urans; Consule^^^ se e^m creaturam
policiba^ur, facturus si d^ut^^s vixisset Dion Cassius l. 59. p. 83^.
(who was so far beso^^ed, as not only to drink his horses Incitatus
health. etc. and to spend whole nights in beholding masks and Stage Plays,
turning night as it were into day; but likewise by a public edict to compel
all the people to be present at his enterludes at his unseasonable hours, and
to chop off the heads of such as either came not to them, or departed from them
ere they were ended:) Quod procedente tempore et aurigauit et pugnauit, et
saltavit, et Tragaediam egit, semper haec tractans: et quod semel noctu
primoribus Patrum quasi ad necessariam deliberationem vocatis, coram saltav^,
ac desaltato cantico abijt: which caused Chaerea to conspire his death, and to
murder him as he was coming out of the Theater: which Lib. 59. p. 854. and
Su^tonii Caius sect. 56.58.
Dion Cassius thus rela^eth. Postquam vero saltare etiam et fabulam agere Caius
instituit, Chaerea cum suis rem extra^endam porro non rati, observarunt Noctem
quoque in diem velut mar^ in terram convertere volebat: nam loco in Lunae
formam curuato, vndique ignis quasi in theatro qu^dam videbatur, ita vt omnem
tenebrarum sensum eriperet. Ac ne qua vlli excusatio esset non veniendi in
theatrum (nam egerrime id ferebat si quis abesse^, aut spectaculo nondum finito
discederet) iustitium indixit. Interdixitetiam id vt obvii in viis Imperatorem
salutarent, quo inmirum facilius ad theatrum iri posset. Multos
inter^spectandum arreptos^ multos a theatro domum revertentes apprehendens
obtruncaret. Causa irae po^issima fuit, quod negligentius ad spectacula
conveniebant, scilicet vexati ^o, quod alias alio tempore quam edixisset, ac
saepe noctu etiam eo veniret, et quia non semper ^osdem, quos ipse probabant,
nonnunquam etiam inuisi, etc. Dion Cassius l. 59. p 831.837.842.
Theatro exeuntem, ut pueros spectaret, deprehensumque in angiportu
obtruncar^nt. An end most suitable to his vicious tyrannical play-adoring life,
which had quite exhausted the Roman treasury. We find this recorded to Nero
his perpetual shame. Tacitus. Annal. l. 14. c. 2. l. 15 c. 4, 5.6 Sabellicus
Eneid 7. l. 2 p. 201. Eutropius rerum To. l. 9. p. 204. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2.
fol. 98.
Quod postremo ipse scenam inscendit, multa cura tentans cytharam et
praemeditans, assistentibus familiaribus Quod faeminarum illustrium
senatorumque plures per arenam faedasset, et acriore in dies cupidine
adigebatur promiscuas scenas frequentandi. Nam adhuc per domum aut hortos
cecinerat iu^enalibus ludis, quos vt parum celebres et tantae voci angustos
spernebat. Non tamen Romae incipere scenas ausus, Neapolim quasi Graecam vrbem
dilegit: inde initium fore vt transgressus in Achaiam insignesque et antiquitus
sacras coronas adeptus maiore fama studia ciuium eliceret, etc. Suetonii Nero
Sect 12, 13, 20. to 25. et Sect. 42. he writes thus, Quinimo cum prosperi
quiddam ex provinciis nunciatum esset, superabundantissimam ca^na^ iocularia in
defectionis duces carmina, lasciueque modulata, quae vulgo inno^uerunt, etiam
gesticulatus est; ac spectaculis theatri clam illatus, ^uidam Scenico placenti
nuncium misit, abuti cum occupationibus suis, and sec. 54. Sub exitu quidem
vitae palam voverat, si sibi incolumis status permansisset, proditurum se
partae victoriae ludis, etiam hidraulam et choraulam, et vtricularium, ac
no^^ssimo die^ hi-strionem, saltaturumque Virgilii Turnum. etc.
Ibidem saepius per complures cantauit dies. Neque eo segnius adolecentulos
equestris ordinis et quinque amplius millia e plebe robustissimae iu^entutis
vndique elegit, qui divisi in factiones plausuum genera condiscerent, operamque
nauarent cantanti sibi insignes pinguissima coma, et excellentissimo cultu
pueri, nec sine annulo laeues: quorum duces quadragena millia H S. merebant.
Etiam Romae Neroneum agens ante praestitutum diem reuocauit: Nomen suum in albo
profitentium citharaedorum iussit ad scribi sorticulaque in vrnam cum caeteris
demissa, intrauit ordine suo^ simulque Praefecti praetorij citharam
sustinentes, post tribum militum, juxtaque amicorum intimi. Vtque constitit
peracto principio, Nioben se cantaturum per Cluvium Rufum consularem
pronuntiavit, et in horam fere decimam perseveravit^ coronamque eam, and
reliqua^ certaminis partem in annum sequentem distulit, ut saepe canendi
occasio esset. Quod cum tardum videretur, non cessauit identidem se publicare.
Non dubitauit etiam priuatis spectaculis opera^ inter scenicos dare, quoda^
praetorum H S. decies offerente Eutroplus Rerum Romans l. 9. f. 104. writes thus
of him: Ad postremum Nero tanto se dedecore prostituit, vt om^nia pene Italiae
ac Graeciae the^tra perlustratus, assumpto etia^ va^ii vestitus dedecore
saltaret, cantaret, in Scena citharedico habi^u ^el tragaedi^^. See Grimston in
the life of Nero. Vincentii Speculam histor. l 9. c. 6. Freculphi^ Chronicon.
Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 16. etc.
Tragaedias quoque cantauit personatus heroum Deorumque, item heroidum, a^
Dearum personis effictis ad similitudinem oris sui, et faeminae, prout quamque
diligeret: inter caetera cantaui^ Canacen parturientem, Orestem matricidam,
Oedipodem excaecatum, Herculem insanum. In quaefabula fama est tyrunculum
milite^ positum ad custodiam aditus, cum eum ornari ac vinciri catenis, sicut
argumentu^ postulabat, vid^ r^t, accurisse ferendae opis gratia. Mox ipse
aurigare atque etiam spectari saepius voluit, positoque in hortis inter
servitia et sordidam plebem rudimento, vniversorum se oculis in Circo maximo
praebuit, certamina deinceps obijt omnia. Cantante eo, ne necessaria quidem
causa excedere Theatro licitum erat. Itaque and enixae quaedam in spectaculis
dic^ntur, et multi taedio audiendi ^audandique, clausis oppidorum portis, aut
furtim dissiluisse de muro, aut morte simulata funere elati. Tacitus Annal^ l.
16. sect. 1.
Constitit plerosque equitum dum per angustias aditus and ingruentem
multitudinem enituntur obtritos, et alios dum Diem noctemque sedilibus
continuant, morbo exitiabili correptos; quippe gravior inerat metus si
spectaculo defuissent, multis palam et pluribus occultis, vt nomina ac v^ltus,
alacritatem, tristitiamque coeuntium scrutarentur. Vnde ten^iorib^s st^tim
irrogata supplicia, aduersus illustres dissimulatum ad presens, et mox redditum
odium. Interea Senatus propi^quo iam lustrali certamine, ut dedecus averterit,
offert Imperatori victoriam cantus, adijcit facundiae coronam, qua ludicra
deformitas velaretur. Sed Nero nihil ambitu nec potestate Senatus opus esse
dictitans, se aequum adversus aemulos et religione indicum meritam laudem
assecuturum, Nero public cit^ara cecinit; in circo aurigauit. Traiecit in
Graeciam, non ut maiores sui sed saltandi, citharae Pulsandae, praeconii
faciendi agendae que tragediae causa. Nec ^ ^i Roma satis ampla erat, sed
expedi^ione erat opus vt Periodonices, id est, pa^sim victor, vt a^^bat,
euaderet. Sed qui^ singula ^ius sacta enumeret? Nam vno verbo, quicquid viles
histriones representant ea omnia ipse dicebat et faciebat, et tolerabat, nisi
quod aureis catenis vin^iebatur, nam ferreae Romanorum Imperatorem haud
decuissent. A^iquando igitur Miles vinctum conspicatus prae indignatione
accurrit, cumque soluit. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. s. 98.
primo carmen in Scena recitat: mox flagitante vulgo vt omnia studia sua
publicaret (hac enim verba dix^re) ingreditur theatrum, cunctis citharae
legibus obtemperans: ne fessus resideret, ne sudorem nisi ea quam indutus
gerebat vest detergeret; vt nulla oris vel narium excrementa viserentur.
Postremo flexus genu, et caetum illum manu veneratus sententias iudicum
opperiebatur ficto pauore. Et plebs quoque vrbis histrionum quoque gestus
inuare solita personabat certis modis, pla^suque composito, Cr^deres laetari,
ac fortasse laetabantur per iniuriam Omnia in Ne^one probri et ignominiae
plena. Omni pudore abiecto Romae cantu in theatro certavit, vbi insanum
Herculem acturus, cum de more vinculis ornaretur, qui praesidi^ causa in
proximo sterit, catenas intuitus, ratusque vim illi intendi, consternatus
animo, co occurrit opem principi laturus. Nec satis fui^per haec indelebile^
Romano Populo notam ab eo inustam, in Graeciam cantandi studio navigavit
omnibusque eius ge^tis spectaculis, cantu, aurigatione, praeconio certavit.
Indereversus curru quo olim Augustus triumphans vrbem ingressus est, praemiorum
pompa titulisque singulorum certaminum longo ordine praemissis. Sabel^licius
AEn^id. 7 l. 2. p. 201.
publici flagitij: so he styles it. Sed qui remotis emunicipijs, seueramque
adhuc, et antiqui moris retinentes Italiam, quique per longas prouincias
lasciuiae inexperti, officio legationum, aut priuata v^ilitate advenerant:
neque aspectum illum tolerare, neque labori inhonesto sufficere, cum manibus
nescijs fatiscerent, turbare^t gnaro, ac saepe a militibus verberarentur, qui
per cuneos stabant, ne quod temporis momentum impari clamore, aut silentio
segni praeteriret, etc. Such was the Playerlike citharedicall life of this lewd
vicious Emperor: which made him so execrable to some noble Romans, who
affected him at first, before he fell to these infamous practices; that to
vindicate the honor of the Roman Empire, which was thus basely prostituted,
they conspired his destruction: which conspirarie being detected, Subrius
Flavius a chief captain, one of the conspirators, being demanded of Nero, for
what reason he had thus conspired against him? returned this answer Tacitus
Annal. l. 15. cap. 10 ^. 306.
Oderam te inquit, nec quisquam tibi fidelior militum fuit dum amari mer^isti;
odisse caepi postquam parricida matris et vxoris, auriga, Histrio, et
incendiarius extitisti. And Sulpitius Asper, a Centurian, being demanded the
like question, made this reply; Non aliter tot flagitijs eius subueniri posse.
And when as some of these Conspirators would have had Piso to succeed Nero in
case their treachery had succeeded, Flavius made them this answer Taci^^us
Annal. l. 15. ^ect. 9. p. 359.
Non refer dedecori, si citharaedus dimoueretur et Tragaedus succederet: quia
vt Nero ^ithara, ita Piso tragico ornatu canebat. All which, together with the
Satyricall invectiues of Res haud mi^^a tamen citha^^aedo Principe ^imus
Nobilis etc. In Scena nunquam can^avit Orestes: haec opera atque hae sunt
gene^osi Principis ^tes, Gauden^isfaedo peregrina ad pulpita saltu Prostitui,
Graiaeque apium meruisse coronae Iuuenal Satyr. 8. p. ^2, 83.
Inuenall and Eutropi^s, Zonaras, Sabellicus, and Grimston in his life. Arius
Montanus in lib. Iudicum c. 16. p. 590. 571. Dr. Rainolds Overthrow of
Stage Plays p. 1. to 10. and 29. ^ 82.
others against this infamous Playerlie Emperor, are a sufficent evidence, what
an ignoble shameful thing it is for any Prince or Emperor to sing, to dance,
or act upon a Stage. Hence Page 10, 91.
AElius Lampridius, and Eutropius in their Commodus Antoninus, and Herodian
historiae l. 1. and 2. p. 57. to 73. severely censure this dissolute Emperor
Commodus^ whom they and the people styled, a Gladiator, an Actor on the stage:
Quod nudus ingressus amphitheatrum est, sumptisque armis numeros gladiatorios
implebat etc. Triste vero (writes Histo^^ae. l. 1. p. 57.59.^^.
Herodia^) Romano populo spectaculum id visum, nobilissimum Imperatorem, post
tam multos parentis sui maiorumque triumphos, non quidem adversus Barbaros arma
capere militaria, vel Romanorum Imperio congruentia, se^ amplissimam
dignitatem, turpissimo faedissimoque cultu contaminare; eoque tandem vesaniae
provectus est, ut deserere principalem aulam atque in domicilium gladiatorium
migrare institueret. Neque se amplius Herculem appellari patiebatur, adoptato
nobilissimi gladiatoris nomine, qui jam vita excessisset: atque in basi
simulachri Colossei solis effigiem gerentis subscripsit, non quos consuesset
imperatorios Paternosque titulos, sed pro Germanico, mill gladiatoru^
vict^rem: To such prodigious degrees of baseness of degeneracy do dissolute
Princes come to by degrees, when as they once addict themselves to such
infamous delights. These actions of his were so execrable to the Senate, the
common people, and to all his friends; that when as on the feast of Ianus,
Herodian. Histor. l. 1. p. 59 61.63. See Eutropius, Zonares, Coc^ius
Sabellicus, Eli^us Lampridlus, Grimston, and others in his life accordingly.
Statuisset non quidem ex imperatorijs (ut mos erat) aedibus, sed ex ipso
gladiato^rio prodire in publicum, deducente gladiatorum agmine in conspectu
Populi Romani etc. Martia his best beloved Concubine, Intellecto tam absurdo
turpique Consilio, primu^ orare multis lachrymis, supplexque ad genua accidere,
ne aut Romanum imperium contumelia afficeret, aut ipse vitam sua^ perditis ac
deploratis hominibus tam periculose co^mitteret. Sed cum diu supplicando nihil
proficisse^, lachrymans discessit. Ille Praefectum exercitibus Laetum nomine et
Electum cubiculi custodem, ad se accitis, parare iubet in ludo ipso
gladiatorio, quo se dormitum recipiat, vt illic ad sacrificandum mane
procederet, ac se armatum Romano Populo ostentaret. Illi supplicabant et
persuadere tenta^ant, ne quid imperio indignum faceret. But lo the desperate
obstinacy of this wicked Emperor; ^ommodus id aegre ferens, eos quidem
amandauit: reversus autem in cubiculum ad capiendum somnum (nam meridie id
facere moris habebat) sumpto in manus libello, conscribit in eo quoscunque illa
nocte interficere destinaverat. Ex quibus prima erat Martia, mox Laetus atque
Electus: post hos ingens eorum numerus qui plurimum authoritatis in senatu
obtinebant. Note here the condition of wicked Princes and great persons; they
desire not to have any good men near them to censure or bear witness of their
shameful actions.
Siquidem senes vniversos, and reliquos patris amicos tollere e medio (quod
graves turpium factorum inspectores habere puderet) bonaque ipsa divitum
d^largiri partim militibus, partim gladiatoribus decreverat, vt alteri se
defenderent, alteri oblectarent. Which book coming to Martia her hands, she
and Electus with others, conspired to poison him: which when they had effected;
all the people rejoiced, and ra^ to their Temples, to give public thanks^
Herodian l. 2. p. 73. Eli^ Lampridii Commodus p. 94, 95, 96. Eutropius,
Zonaras, Sabe^licus and Grimston in his life.
vocerebant urque quidam, jacere tyrannum, pars gladiatorem, qui faelicitatem
suam alijs in rebus studijs faedissimis contaminasset. Which several passages,
are a most pregnant testimony, how infamous, how disgraceful a thing it is, for
Kings or Emperors to turn Actors, Masquers, or Gladiators on a Stage, even in
the very judgment of heathens, much more of Christians. It is storied of
Antoninus the Emperor to his deserved infamy; Herodian l. 5. p.
267.269.271.279.281.
Quod e Syriae profectus, statim debacchari supra modum caepit, cultum patrij
numinis, cui dicatus fuerat, celebrare supernacuis saltationibus, vestitum
vsurpans luxuriosum: ad tibiarum et tympanarum sonum in publicum prodibat orgya
numinis celebrans etc. From which Maesa earnestly deswaded him; ne spectantium
oculos offenderet. Ipse ver^ identidem aurigans aut saltans conspiciebatur:
quippe ne latere quidem sua patiebatur flagitia, procedens etiam in publicum
Let our effeminate men^ women who are guilty of the selfsame womanish folly
consider this.
pictis oculis genisquepurpurissatis, faciemque suapte natura for mosam,
indecoris coloribus inficiens. Quod ammaduertens Maesa, ac suspectans militum
ob talem Imperatoris vitam indignationem: persuadet leui alioqui stolidoque
adolescenti, vt sibi consobrinum suum Alexandrum adoptaret, et Caesarem
declararet, etc. Postea igitur quam Alexander Caesar est appellatus volebat eum
statim Antoninus suis illis institutis imbuere, ut scilicet choros agitans
saltansque, vestitu eodem atque artibus vteretur; quem tamen matter Mammaea a
Dancing therefore, together with acting, masquing were infamous among the
Romans. See Gul^elmus Stuckius Antiqui^ tatum Conviu: l. 3. c. 21. accordingly.
faedis illis et quae Imperatores dedecebant actionibus av^rtebat: atque omnium
disciplinarum doctores clam accersebat; modestiamque edocens, ac Palaestra
virilibusque gymnasijs insuefaciens, graecisque eum pariter ac la^inis literis
instituens. Quibus iratus Antoninus magnopere indignabatur. Quapropter omnes
illius Doctores aula exegit. Quosdamque illustriores partim morte, partim
exilio affecit; ridiculas allegans causas, The same do some object a^gainst
such tutors, friends, Masters, parents, who keep their scholars, servants and
children from these lewd practices and excesses now, which say they do quite
corrupt and make them Puritans.
Quod filium ipsius corrumperent, eum neque agitare choros, neque ebacchari
permittendo, sed ad modestiam componendo, et virilia officia edocendo. Eo^ue
vecordiae provectus est ut omnes scenicos artifices ac theatricos ad maximas
imperij dignitates promoveret. Quippe exercitibus saltatorem quendam praefecit,
qui olim i^uenis public in theatro operas dederat. Alium item e scena,
iuuentuti, alium senatui, alium etiam equestri ordini praeposuit. Aurigis item
et comaedis mimorumque histrionibus maximae imperij munia demandabat: seruisque
suis aut libertis vt quisque turpitudine reliquos an^eibat, procurationes
tradebat prouinciarum. Ita rebus omnibus per omnem contumeliam et temulentiam
debacchantibus, An evident and remarkable testimony how execrable, this
Emperors dancing and effeminacy was to all the Romans, though most of them
were then mere Pagans.
cum caeteri omnes, tum imprimis Romani milites indignabantur; abominabanturque
eum, vtpote vultum componentem ^legantius quam faeminam probam deceret: insuper
aureis monilibus, mollissimoque vestitu ba^dquaquam viriliter ornatum,,
saltantemque in conspectu omnium. Quare propensi^res animos in Alexandrum
habebant, spemque meliorem in puero modeste et continentere ducato, etc. Quae
intelligens Antoninus nihil non insidiarum Alexandro matrique intendebat, etc.
Quod milites aegre ferentes, imperato^em e medio tollere turpiter se gerentem
vellent; quapropter ipsum Antoninum et matrem Soaemidem interficiunt, cumque
ijs seruos ministrosque omnes scelerum. So execrable did his dancing, acting,
effeminacy, and love of Stage Players make him to all the Senate, soldiers and
people, that they thought him unworthy for to reign or live, and at last
dragged his carcass through the City and cast it into the common Iakes. It is
registered among other of Heliogabalus his lewd effeminate unworthy actions
AElii Lampridii Heliogabalus p. 189, 190.207. See here p. 208.
Quod agebat domi fabulam Paridis, ipse Veneris personam subiens, ita vt subito
vestes ad pedes defluerent, nudusque vna manu ad mammam, altera pudendis
adhibita, ingenicularet, posterioribus eminentibus in subactorem reiectis et
oppositis. Vultum praeterea eodem quo Venus pingitur schemate figurabat,
corpore toto expolitus; ipse cantavit, saltavit, ad tibias dixit, tuba cecinit,
pandurizavit, organo modulatus est. Fertur et vna die ad omnes Circi et theatri
meretrices (a good evidence that all whores, and few women else frequent these
Play Houses) tectus cuculione mulionico, ne agnosceretur, ingressus etc. An
aparant proof, that an Emperor dancing or acting a part in Plays or Masks
even in his own private palace is infamous, and his resort to playhouses more
abominable. To pass by the censure of Histor. l 6.
Philarcus and Dipnosoph. l. 14. c. 3. p. 980.
Athenaeus, upon Lysimachus, who bring in Demetrius thus usually speaking of
his Court. Aulam Lysimachi nihil differ a Scena Comica: to whom Lysimachus
replied: ego igitur meretricem exeuntem ex Scena tragica non vidi. It is
recorded to the shame of Vitellius; Cornelius Tacitus hist. l. 2. c. 2. r. p.
478. etc. ^6, 17. p 469.
Vitellio cogniti scurrae quibus ille amicitiarum dehonestamentis mire
gaudebat. Quantoque magis appropinquabat vrbi, tanto corruptius iter, mixtis
histrionibus and spadonum gregibus, et caetero Neronianae aulae ingenio. Namque
et Neronem ipsum Vitellius admiratione celebrabat sectari cantantem solitus non
necessitate, qua honestissimus q^isque, sed luxu et sagina mancipatus
emptusque. The like is storied to the infamy of Trebellii Polionis Gallieni
duo. p. 315, 316. See p. 306.309.
Gallienus the elder, qui natus abdomini et voluptatibus. Quod saepe ad
tibicinem processit, ad organum se recepit, cum processui et recessui cani
iuberet: et quod mensam secundam scurrarum et mimorum semper prope habuit. To
which I may add that of Saloninus Gallienus; Idem p. 319.
Quod plura quae ad dedecus pertinebant ab eo gesta sunt: nam noctibus popina
dicitur frequentasse, et cum lenonibus, mimis, scurrisque vixisse: And that of
the Emperor Carinus too, Flauii Vopisci Carinus p. 449.
Quod mimos vndique advocavit. Exhibuit et ludum Sarmeticum quo dulcius nihil
est: Donatum est et graecis artificibus, et gymnicis, et histrionibus, et
musicis aurum et argentum: donata et vestis serica. Sed haec omnia, nescio
quantum ad populum (writes Vopiscus) gratiae habeant, nullius certe sunt
momenti apud principes bonos. Dioclesiani denique dictum fertur, cumei quidam
largitionalis suus editionem Cari laudaret, dicens; multum placuisse
principibu^ illos, causa ludorum theatralium, ludorumque Circensium; ergo
(inquit) been risus est imperio suo Carus. All which is a convincing proof,
how absurd a thing it is for Princes to Hence also Duidas in his historica Col.
127. thus taxes Ardaburius Quod sedeflexit ad muliebres delicias. Gaudebat
enim Minis, et praestigiatoribus, et omnibus scenicis ludicris; et huiusmody
ineptiis totos dies exigens, glo^iae insignia prorsas negligebat.
delight in plays or Actors, much more to Act Enterludes or Masks
themselves, Theopompus Historiarium lib. 28^ and Athenaeus Dipnosph. lib. 6. c.
6. pa. 422. condemn King Philip, qui cum Thessalos prodigos esse cognovisset,
atque omnino intemperantes, artibus omnibus illis placere studuit: nam et
tripudiabat, et lasciviebat, omniaque praeter modestia^ patiebatur. Erat enim
natura scurra, singulisque diebus ebrius etc. Polybius hist l. 31. and
Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 10. c. 12. p. 694.695. See here p. 249, 250.
Polybius and Athenaeus, severely censure Antiochus the illustrious, who^ they
phrase the mad: Quod vna cu^ recitatoribus ludebat, totusque velatus
inferebatur a mimis, atque in t^rram deponebatur quasi vnus esset ex mimis.
Concinnitate deinde evocante, rex exiliebat, tripudiabatque et iocabatur cum
mimis, ita vt omnes verecundia caperentur. Ad res huiusmodi misoras inducit
stupor is, qui ex ebrietate ^ascitur. Yea Dipnosoph l. 12. c. 13 p. 841.
Athenaeus taxes Straton King of Sidonia for this very thing Quod conventus
cum tibicinis, saltatricibus ac cytharistis faciebat; multasque amicas ex
Peloponeso accersebat, compluresque cantatrices ex Ionia, atque ex vni^ersa
Graecia amicas puellas, quaru^ alias quide^ saltantibus, alias cane^tibus
amicis praemium certaminis proponere solebat, quibuscum etiam coire saepius
delectabatur: cum vitae huiusmodi institutionem complecteretur, ipsa natura
seruus erat voluptatum. By all which several recited examples (well worthy all
Christian Princes consideration and detestation too; De quibus nescio an
decuerit memoriae prodi, as Rorum Roma norum l. 7. p. 101.
Eutropius writes of Caligula his vices, nisi fort^ quia iuvat de Principibus
nosse omnia, vt improbi saltem famae metu declinent talia:) it is most evident:
that it has been always a most infamous thing for Kings, and Emperors to
act Plays or Masks either in private or public; or to sing, or dance upon a
Stage or theater; or to delight in Plays and Actors. Which assertion is
likewise confirmed by Plinius secundus Panegyr: Traiano dictus p. 32.45.110.
here p. 462, 463. Froysart his Chronicle Book 4. cap. 192. fol. 243.244. The
general history of France p. 231. Gueuara his Dial of Princes l. 3. c. 43. to
47. D. Rainolds his Overthrow of Stage Plays p. 6. to 10. and 63. to 76. Arius
Montanus in lib. Iudicum c. 16. p. 470.571. and Iuuenal Satyr 8. by Tacitus,
Herodian, Suetonius Polybius, Athenaeus, Flauius Vopiscus, AElius Lampridius,
Trebellius Pollio, Eutropius, Corceius Sabellicus, Antoninus, Grimston, in the
lives of these forenamed Emperors, and in the places quoted in the margent
with See Comment: and Notae Lubini, Ioannis Brittanici, P. Pithaei, Caelii
Secundi, Curionis, Theodor Pulmanni, et Thomae Parnabii in Iuvenal Satyr. 8.
Justin. Hist l. 30. p. 254. and Suida Histo^ica. Ardaburius.
sundry others whom I pretermit. See here p. 462, 463, 557, 558, 734. to 743.
and p. 710. the example of Ptolomie, accordingly.

Secondly as it is absurd and most infamous for Princes, so also is it for any
Magistrates, Nobles, Gentlemen, or persons of rank or quality, to act a part
in public or private on the Stage. Hence Annal. l. 14. c 2.3. p. 301, 32, 303.
Cornelius Tacitus writes thus of Nero his times. Sed faeminarum illustrium
Senatorumque plures per arenam faedati sunt. Ratusque dedecus amoliri si plures
faedasset, nobilium familiarum posteros egestate ^enales in Scenam deduxit,
quos fato perf^nctos, ne nominatim traedam, maiorib^s eorum tribuendum ^uto.
Nam et ei^s flagitium est qui pocuniam ob delicta potius dedit, quam ne
delinquerent. Notos quoque equites Romanos operas ^renae promitter^ subegit,
donis ingentibus, nisi quod merces ab eo quii ubere potest, ^im necessitatis
affert. Ne tam^n adhuc publico theatro dehonestare^ur, instituit ludos
I^uinalium vocabulo in quos passim nomina data non nobillitas cuiquam non aetas
aut acti honores impedimento, quo minus Graeci Latiniue histrionis artem
exercerent vsque ad gestus, motusque haut viriles etc. Whereupon diverse of the
Senators and people complained and cried out, Proceres Romani specie orationum
et carminum Scena polluantur, quid superesse, nisi vt corpora quoque nudent, et
caestu aessumant, easque pugnas pro militia et armis meditentur etc. vid
Ibide^: Which infamous act Sect. 11.12. See Lypsius de Saturn. et Sabellicus,
Eutropius Zonaras and Grimston in Nero his life.
Suetonius thus expresses, Spectaculorum plurima et varia genera edidit,
Invenales, Circences, Scenicos Ludos, gladiatorum munus: Iuvenalibus senes
quoque Consulares anusque matronas recepit ad lusum. Ludos quos proaeternitate
imperij susceptos appellari maximos voluit, ex vtroque ordine et sexu plerique
ludicras parts sustinuerunt. Exhibuit autem ad ferrum etiam quadringentos
Senatores, sexcentosque equites Romanos et quosdam fortunae atque eflimationis
integrae ex ij^dem ordinibus, confectoresque ferarum et ad varia arenae
ministeria, etc. Which ignobl^flagitious ba^e practice of his and others, the
Poet Iuvenal does thus notably inveigh against. Iuvenal Satyr 8. p. 81, 82.
At vos Troiugenae vobis ignoscitis, and quae
Turpia Cerdoni. Volesos, Bru^osque decebunt.
Quid si nunquam adeo foedis, adeoque pudendis
Vtimur exemplis, vt non peiora supersint?
Consumptis opibus vocem Damasippe locasti
Sippaerio, ^lamosum ageres vt Phasma Catulli.
Laureolum v^lox etiam been Lentulus egit,
Iudiceme, Nota.
dignus vera cruce: nec tamen ipsi.
Ignoscas populo: populi frons durior huius,
Qui sedet, and spectat trisc^rria patriciorum:
Planipedes audit Fabios ridere potest qui
Mamercorum alap^s, quanti sua funera ven^ant,
Quid refert? vendunt nullo cogente Nerone,
Ne^ dubitant celsi Praetoris vendere ludis.
Nota.
Finge tamen gladios inde, atque hinc pulpita pon^,
Quid satius? mortem sic quisquam exhorruit, vt sit
Zelotypus Thymeles, stupidi collega Corinthi?
Res haud mira tamen, citharoedo Principe mimus
Nobilis, haec vltra quid erit nisi ludus? and illic
Dedecus urbis habes, nec Mirmillonis in armi^,
Nec clypeo Gracchum pugnantem, aut falce supina.
(Damnat enim tales habitus, and damnat and odit.)
Nec galea frontem abscondit, movet ecce tridentem,
Postquam vibrata pendentia retia dextra
Nequicquam effudit, nudum ad spectacula vultum
Erigit, and tota fugit agnoscendus arena.
Ergo ignominiam graviorem pertulit omni
Vulnere, cum Gracco iussus pugnare secutor. etc.
An elegant description and demonstration of the infamy of such mensacting
plays: Which Laberius an ancient Roman Knight, drawn upon the Stage to act a
part by the hire and co^ma^d of Nero, does excellently descypher in this
expression of his own dishonor. Macrobius Saturn l. 2. c. 7. p. 408.409.
Laberiu^ asperae libertatis equitem Romanum (writes Macrobius) Caesar
quingentis millibus invitavit, ut prodiret in scenam, es ipse ageret mimos quos
scriptitabat. Sed potestas non solum si iu^itat, sed etiam si supplicet, cogit.
Vnde se et Laberius a Caesare coactum in Prologo testatur his versibus.
Necessitas, cuius cursus aversi impetum Voluerunt multi effugere, pauci
pot^erunt. Quo me detrusit pene extremis sensibus? Quem nulla ambitio, nulla
unquam largitio, Nullus timor, vis nulla, nulla aucto^itas Movere potuit in
iu^enta de statu; Ecce in senecta vt facile labefecit loco viri excellentis
mente clemente edito, Submissa placide blandiloquens oration. Etenim ipse dij
negare cui nihil potuerunt Hominem me denegare quis posset pati? Ego bis
tricenis annis actis, sine nota, Eques Romanus lare egressus meo, Domum
revertar mimus. Nota.
Nimirum hoc die Vno plus vixi mihi quam vivendum fuit. Fortuna immoderata in
bono atque in malo, Si tibi erat libitum literaru^ la^dibus Floris cacumen
nostrae famae frangere, Cur cum vigebam membris praeuiridantibus, Satisfacere
Populo, et tali cum poteram viro, Non flexibilem me concuruasti, vt caperes?
Nunc me quo d^ijcis? quid a scena affere? Decorem formae, an dignitatem
corporis? Animi virtutem, an vocis iocundae sonum? Vt haedera serpens vires
arboreas n^cat; ^ta me vetustas amplexu annorum necaet; Sepulchris similis, nil
nisi nome^ retineo. In ipsa quoque action subinde se qua poterat vlciscebatur,
inducto habitu Syri, qui velut flagris caesus, praeripientique se similis,
exclamabat. Porro, Quirites libertatem-perdimus^ Et paulo post adiecit; necesse
est mult^s timeat quem multi timent: quo dicto vniversitas populi ad solum
Caesarem oculos et ora convertit; notantes eius impotentiam hac dicacitate
lapidatam. A most pregnant evidence of the point in question. Among the ancient
Romans as Macrobius, Cicero, Seneca and others in their See here p. 245. to 251.
forequoted passages witness, it was an infamous thing for Senators, Knights,
for men or women of quallity, or their Children, to dance either in a public
Theater, or at any private feasts: Hence Seneca thus complains Contro. l. 1:
proaemio p. 967 See here p. 248.
Cantandi saltandique obs^aena studia effaeminatos tenent: Seneca Epist. 90 p.
377, 379.
hinc molles corporis motus docentium, mollesque cantus et infractos: Sapientia
vero animorum magistra, non indecoros corporis motus, ne^ varios per tubam et
tibiam cantus efficit, etc. Hence Dion Cassius Hist. l. 54. p. 682.
Augustus Caesar, quoniam Equites et feminae illustres adhuc in Orchestra
saltaban^, prohibuit ne non modo^ Patriciorum liberi (id enim antea cantum
erat) sed etiam nepotes eorum, quique equestris ^rant ordinis, amplius id
facerent. In his actionibus Legis^atoris Augustus et Imperatoris speciem
nomenque ostendit. Hence this is laid as a tax upon Caligula, that in his
presence, Dion Cassius hist l. 59. p. 831.
Patricij pueri Troiam l^serunt. And her^upon Dion Cassiu^ hist l. 60. p. 891^
Claudius his successor, to draw men from this infamy; In Orchestram
introduxit inter alios viros etiam equites ac mulieres, quales Caij principatu
saltare solebant; non quod ijs delectaretur, sed vt praeterita arg^eret. Nam
posthac certe nemo eorum in scena visus est dum Claudius viveret? Pueri quoque
quos ad Pyrr^icam saltationem Cains evocaverat, semel duntaxa^ ^a saltata
civitate donati, ac ablegati sunt, Alij deinde ex famulis Claudij saltarunt:
haec in theatro. Yea such was the infamy of acting plays among the ancient
Pagan Romans; that even lewd Corn. Tacitus Histor. l. 2. c. 15. p. 465.
Vitellius inacted this law: Cautum severe ne equites Romani Ludo et arena
pollu^rentur^ And Plinius Secundus in his Panegyricall oration to Traian, in
the name of the whole Roman Senate and people, styles the acting of Plays;
Page 38. and 45. See here p. 462, 463.
Effaemin^tas arts, et ind^^ora seculo studia: which the whole Roman Nation
did condemn. See here p. 462, 463. accordingly. To these several recited
Pagan testimonies, I might accumulate, the forequoted evidences of the Sea here
page 843, 844, 845, 846, 847^ etc.
Praetor, Budaeus, Arius Montanus, Vlpi^n, AEmilius Probus, Dio, See D.
Rainolds his overthrow of Stage plays, p. 8.
Xiphilinus, Dionyssius Gothofredus, Ioann^s d^ Burgo etc. together with the
concurrent suffrages of Lipsius Saturnal. l. 2. c. 1. and of Lubine Caelius
secundus, Farnaby, and others in their Commentaries and notes upon I^venal,
Satyr 8. who all affirm, the voluntary descending of any persons of quality
or rank upon the Stage ( See D. Rainolds his overthrow of Stage plays, p. 8.
etiam ^t sine praemio) to act a part even without reward or hire, to be
infamous and absurd: but our learned Dr. Rainolds in his Overthrow of
Stage Plays p. 4. to 11. and 63. to 77. and in other pages of that discourse,
has proved this point so fully, that I will here proceed no further in it.

See here p. 574.
Council of Carthage, Anno. Dom. 397. Can. 11. Decrees: That sons of Bishops
and Clergy men (much less then they themselves) should neither exhibit, act
or behold any secular Enterludes: Hence also the 4. Council of Carthage: Can.
56.60.62. The 7. Coun. of here 578, 582, 584, 595. etc. See Gulielmus Stuckius
Antiquita^um Convivialium l 3. c. 21.22. accordingly.
Carthage, can: 70. the 6. Coun. of Constantinople, can. 24.51.62. the 3. Synod
of Towers, can. 7.8. the 2. Synod of Cabilon, ca^ 9. the coun, of Mentz An.
813. can. 14. the Coun. of Paris, An. 829. can. 38. the Synod of Mentz under
Rabanus: can. 13. the Coun. of Nants, quoted by Gratian: distinct. 44 her. p.
599. The Coun. of Gants, An. 1231. here. p. 598. The Synod of Lingres, An.
1404. her. p. 599.600. The Council of Toledo, An. 1473. here. p, 603.604. The
Synod of Seine, An. 1524. here. p. 606. The Synod of Chartres, An. 1526. here
p. 609.610. The Coun. of Seine, An. 1528. can. 25. here p. 611. The Synod of
Heidelsheim An. 1539. can. 14. here p. 616. The Council of Triers An. 1549.
here p. 617. The Synod of Mentz, An. 1549. can. 74. here p. 620.621. The Coun.
of Paris: 1557. here p. 622. The Council of Trent. Sess. 24. De Reformatione
Can. 12. here p. 623. The Council of Millaine 1560. here p. 625. The Council of
Bordeaux An. 1582. here p. 630.631. The Council of Biturium An. 1584 here p.
633, 634. The Synod of Aquin. An. 1585. here p. 635. The Council of Tholoose:
An. 1590. and sundry other forementioned Counsels Act. 7. Scene 3. together
with here p. ^54, 655, 656. And yet Ipsi autem Episcopi redditus Ecclesiarum,
non in pias causas, sed consanguineis, histrionibus, adulatoribus, Venatoribus
Scortis et similibus personis friuole expendunt, et magis attendunt nequitiam
hominum quam necessitatem naturae, contra Canonum dedecreta. Episcopus
chemnensis Onus Ecclesiae cap 20. sect. 10.
Sextus, Odo Parisiensis, and Pope Pius the 5. Ivo Carnotensis Decret. pars 6.
cap. 208, 209.349. pars 11. cap. 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81. Hostiensis Summa l. 5.
Tit. de Clerico Venatore fol. 455. Summa Angelica Ludus, have possitiuely
prohibited all sorts of Clergymen whatsoever * from dancing^ from acting (and
which is far more strict, even from * beholding) Stage Plays or any such
ioculatorie Enterludes, either in public or private; which resolutions and
decrees of theirs, are abundantly ratified by the concurrent suffrage of all
the H^re p. 665, 666. and p. 843. to 848. Summula Raymundi f. 92, 9^.
forequoted Canonists and Civilians on which you may reflect. Yea such is the
rigidnesse of the Canon Law in this particular; than it makes not only all
professed Stageplayers, but likewise all Scholars and others who have
voluntarily acted any part in public or private Enterludes, incapable of any
Ecclesiastical Orders or preferments, till they have done public penance,
and openly manifested their serious repentance for the same; as our own famous
English Canonist Pupilla Oculi pars 7. c. 5. I. See here p. 846.
Ioannis de Burgo, Chanceller of the University of Cambridge in Henry the 6.
his reign (the only ancient extant writer of that University before Henry the
7. his days, which I have hitherto met with) Se Ivo Carnotensis Decret. pars 6
c. 349. and pars 8. c. 295. accordingly.
with others, expressly testify in their forementioned passages. And hereupon
Ioannis Langhecrucius a famous popish Canonist and Divine, in his Treatise De
vita et honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. after he had largely proved in the
20. and 21. Chapters of that Book, that Clergy men ought not to act or see
any Stage Plays or Enterludes; in the 22. Chapter he propounds this question
(which naturally comes here to be discussed from the premises;) Whether
Schoolemasters or their Scholars may at this day act any Co^edies, Tragaedies
or other Stagplayes? Vtrum scolares corumque Magistri, vel^ Ludimagistri
^orum^c discipuli (as the text and the margent propounde it) comaedias et
tragaedias aliosue ludos scenicos nunc agere possint?
And he resolves it negatively that they may not do it, whether these Masters
or scholars are such as are already admitted, or as yet not entered into
clericall Orders: Ibidem p. 318, 319, 320. etc.
Veru^ si quis in terroget (writ he) anne ludimagistri possint per discipulos
suos co^aedias et tragaedias aliosue ludos scenicos agere? Respo^dendu^
videtur, quod si praedicti ludimagistri, eoru^ve discipuliclericali to^sura
insigniti sint, eos non posse, vt per supradicta pat et. Quia jure canonico
express cautu^ est, vt clerici mimis ioculatoribus et histrionibus non
intendant. Verum si discipuli non sint tonsurati, nec illis quidem permittendum
hoc videtur, (pray mark it) praesertimsi lascivi vel prorsus profani sint, cu^
ab illis Pray note this reason well.
Christiana religio eos prohibeat. Nam cum paruuli qui succrescentes in maiorum
suorum locum in reipublicae tam ecclesiasticae quam secularis administratione
succedant, Nota.
conseque^s sit, ab ipsis prane ac nequiter institutis reip^b: pernicie^
imminere; idcirco summopere refert, vt pueritia, quae seminarium est omnium
rerum publicaru^ in timore Domini, verecundia, pudicitia, et bonis disciplinis
edoceatur, prout supra ex SS. Con^ilio Tridentino demonstratum fuit. Epist. l.
1. Epist. 10. ^ucrati.
Divus enim Cyprianus, consultus quid sibi videretur de histrione quodam, an
talis deberet communicare cum catholicis, qui adhuc in in eiusdem artis suae
dedecore perseuerabat; respondit his verbis: Puto ego nec maiestati divinae,
nec evangelicae disciplinae congruere, vt pudor ^t honor ecclesiae, tam turpi
et infami contagione faedetur, etc. Nec excusetse quispiam, si a theatro ipse
cessaverit cum tamen hoc caeteris doceat. Non potest enim uideri cessasse, qui
vicarios substituit, et qui pro se vno plures succedaneos suggerit, contra
institutionem Dei, erudiens et docens quem admodum masculus frangatur in
faeminam, et sexus art mutetur, et diabolo divinum plasma maculanti, per
corrupti at que ener nati corporis delicta placatur, etc. See here p. 584.
Then he quotes the forementioned passage of St. Cyprian to Donatus Epist. l.
2. Epist. 2. to justify this his answer: After which he thus proceeds. Deinde
in aecumenica Synodo sexta, quae fuit Constantinopolitana 3. Canon 62. statutum
est: vt nullus vir muliebri vest induatur, nec mulier vest viro conveniente;
sed nec Comicas, nec Tragicas nec Satyricas personas induant. Qui secus
fecerit, si clerici sint, deponantur; si Laici, segregentur a communione:
(which Canon prohibites all manner of persons whatsoever, whether laymen or
Clergiemen, from acting any sort of Enterludes, be they Comedies, Tragaedies or
Satyrs) Quare pie et recte a provinciali Synodo Mechliniensi statutum fuit; vt
illi auctores, qui per gentilitate^ aut turpes amores iuuenum mores Let those
who now erect Crucifixes and Images in our Churches contrary to our Articles,
Injunctions, homilies, Conons, Statutes, and writers yea contrary to their
own subscription, consider this: and those also who use any heathenish
Ceremonies and representations in their Enterludes.
corrumpere possent a scholis arceantur? Et vt non solum e templis et locis
sacris, verum etiam e domibus et hortis ecclesiasticorum tollantur imagines,
sculpturae, aulaea, quae gentilitatem, aut mendaces ethnicorum fabulas,
Satyrorum, faunorum^ Sy^enarum, terminorum ac Nympharum, ac id genus alia
repraesenta^t: (which are the commonnest representations in all Masks and
Stage Plays:) Similiter quaecunque figurae lasciu^, procaces, et ob pudendam
nuditatem vel alias tam obscenae, vt pios mentes offendant, et superstitiosae,
qui fidelium mentes a religione et devotione distrahunt et saepius graviter
offendunt. Then he quotes the Sea here page 601, 603, 604, 608, 611, 631, 634.
forementioned Canons, prohibiting childrens acting of Plays in Churches upon
Innocents day: together with the Canons of the Council of Millaine; See here
page 624, 625.
from all which he truly and positively concludes: That it is unlawful for
Schoolemasters or their Scholars, to act any Comedies, Tragedies or other
stageplayes. And shall Protestants then allow of that which the very Papists
condemn? God forbid. From all which premises thus laid together, we may
quickly lear^e what to judge, not only of the perso^ating of all private and
public Masks and Mummeries, which are now to frequent, but likewise of the
acting of Academicall Enterludes and the acting of them infamous See Gullelmus
Stuckius Anti. qui. Conviv. l. 3. c. 21, 22.
Academicall Enterludes, by Vndergraduates, Graduates, Deacons, and sometimes
young Divines; which Plays are commonly as scurrilous, as profane as
scandalous, as invectiue against religion and the professors of it, as
experience witnesses, as any that are acted in our standing Play-h^uses.
Certainly whatever the Error, the corruption of the times may judge; yet the
fore-aleaged See p. 573. to 668.843 to 850. and 933, 934, 940.
Councels, Fathers, Authors doom the acting, (yea the very beholding of such
academicall E^terludes, especially by Clergymen, who are now to forward to
pen, to act and see them whereas See Act. 7. Scene. 3.
above 40. several Councels have possitively decreed, that they ought not to
be present at any such Plays or E^terludes) to be both scandalous and
infamous, not only in the repute of Christians, but of Pagans too, especially
of the anciant Pagan Romans; In scenam enim pr^dire et populo esse spectaculo
That is, ^s first.
nemini in Graecis gentibus fuit turpitudini: quae omnia apud Romanos, partim
infamia, partim humilia, atque ab honestate remot^ ponuntur, as In his
Excellentium Imperatorum vitae: P^^fatio p. 356.
AEmilius Probus writes. And ca^ any gentlemen or scholars whatsoever, think
this an honor to them, to be excellent Actors, Masquers or dancers, in any
Academicall Enterludes, which the very heathen (besides, Councels, Fathers, and
Christian authors) have long since sentenced as their shame? Doubtless no
ingenuous christian ought to be so stupid^ so profane or graceless, as to
harbor any such conceit within their breasts. And here that I may not to far
digress into a large discourse against Academicall or private Enterludes since
I have been so over^eedious against popular, I shall only commend these three
considerations to the Readers, and all Academicall Actors consciences.

First, that the Fathers, the Primitive Christians, Popular and Academicull
Enterluds, but condemned all plays alike, as well those in See here page
573.581.
private houses, as in public Theators, as well those that were acted by
Voluntary as by hired and professed Actors, both which they reputed infamous,
as I have here largely manifested.

Secondly that all, at leastwise most of all the arguments, Paria sunt vni^s
sementis germina. Prosper Aquit. Contr. Collatorem c. 41.
for the most part both alike, and their original too.

Thirdly, that Academicall Enterludes are in this regard far worse then
popular, in that they give a kind of authority, and justification to public
Enterludes Enterludes as their chiefest Agument, their best apology both for
the use and lawfullnesse of public Stage Plays, as present experience
manifes^s: and in that their Velocius enim et citius nos corrumpunt vi^tiorum
domestica exempla subeunt animos magnis auctoribus. Iuvenal Satyr 14^ p. 126.
Exempla tantum conspectiora sunt, et efficacius movent, quanto illustriores
sunt perso^ae aquibus designantur Diodorus Sic. Bibl. hist. Epist. Dedic^t.
example, their scandal is far worse then that of popular stage plays, and
so apt to do more harm, by increasing the number both of popular players and
Actors, and hardening them in the love, the practice of acting and frequenting
Plays; because the persons who commonly Act, behold and pen them being
scholars and divines (who should be 1 Timothy 3.2. to 14. c. 4 12.
patterns of piety, gravity, sobriety and right christian conversation unto
others) are of far better education rank and qua^lity, in regard of their
professions, and of the Universities themselves in which they live, (they being
the very eyes and Lamps, the Seminaries and Nurseries of our Island, where
youth are usually either made or marde for ever, to the great public good or
hurt) then either the penners, or actors, of our common Enterludes, who are See
here Act. 4. Scene 1, 2.
ordinarily men of meanest quallity and lewdest conditions, even such as our 22
H. 8. c. 12.14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4.1. Iac. c. 7.
own statutes brand for Rogues. Which three Considerations added to all the
premises, to page 489.490.491. and to Doct. Reynolds his learned Overthrow of
Stageplayes, (where he has professedly proved, Academicall stageplayes as w^ll
as popular, to be unlawful, mauger all Doct. Gagers, or Doctor Gentiles their
slen^er cavils and objections to the contrary, which are there so solidly
answered, that they were enforced to yield their cause^ See the Epistle to the
Reader before Dr. Rainolds his Overthrow of Stage plays, accordingly.
Doct Gager subscribing at last unto D. Reynolds his judgment;) will be a
sufficient evidence, to convince the unlawfulness of Academicall Enterludes, and
the Sea I. G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors, here p. 490^ 491.
infamy of such as shall presume to act the^; A^l voluntary, hired, or
professed Actors of Academicall, of common Stageplayes being infamous persons,
as the foregoing Authorities, largely testify I shall therefore here conclude
this Scene, De Vanitate Scient. c. 20. See cap. 19.
with that excellent passage of Cornelius Agrippa, of the infamy of acting and
frequenting stagplayes, Proinde exercere histrinica^, non solu^ turpis et
scelesta occupatio est, sed etia^ conspicere et dilectari flagitiosum: siquidem
et lasciuientis animi oblectatio cadit in crimen. Nullu^ denique nomen olim
fuit infamius, quam histrionum, et legibus ipsis arcebantur ab honoribus,
quicunque fabulam saltassent in Theatro. And thus much for the infamy of
Acting Stageplayes: a good Prologue or introduction to the unlawfulnes both of
the Profession of stage players and of acting Plays, which I shall next
discuss.

SCENA SECVNDA.
IN the handling of which subject, The unlawfulness of a Players profes^ion
and of acting
I shall first of all briefly evidence, that the profession of a Player, and
the acting of Stage Plays are unlawful.

Secondly, I shall lay down the Several grounds and reasons of their
unlawfullnesse.

For the first of these, I shall need to urge no more but these ten Arguments

First. Argument 1.


That which has ever been infamous, scandalous and of ill report, both among
Christians and Pagans to, must questionless be sinful, unlawful unto
Christians, who are to follow things only of good report, and to provide things
honest in the sight of all men, giving no offense, either to Jew or Gentile, or
to the Church of God. 1. Tim. 3, 7. 1. Pet. 2.11.12.15. c, 3.15.16. Phil. 4,
5.8.9. Romans 13, 13. c. 14.13.19. cap. 15.2. cap. 12.17. 1. Cor. 10.31, 32, 33.
Ephesians. 4.2.

But the profession of Stagplayers, and the acting of plays either in public
or private, have been ever infamous, scandalous, and of ill report, both among
Christians and Pagans, as the foregoing Scene demonstrates.

Therefore it must questionless be sinful, unlawful unto Christians.

Argument, 2.
Secondly.

If those who have acted Stage Plays, have all ways been banished, excluded
and cast out of the common weal, and made incapable of any honor, or
promotion, by Christian by Pagan Republiques, Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, If
they have bin excommunicated both from the word, the Sacraments, the society
of Christians, and disabled to give any testimony, or to take any
Ecclesiastical Orders or promotions upon them, by the solemn resolutions,
constitutions and Decrees, of Councels, Fathers, and the whole Primitive
Church, even for their very Play-acting; which thus debarred them from all the
privileges both of Church and common weal, then certai^ely the profession of
a stage player, together with the acting of plays, is unbeseeming and
unlawful unto Christians, See p. 133, 134.

But those who acted plays, have always thus been handled: as being
altogether unworthy of any privileges of Church or common weal; witness the
examples of Plato, Aristotle, the Massilienses, Lacaedemonians, Jews, ancient
Germans, Tiberius, Augustus, Nero, Traian, Marcus Aurelius, Constantine,
Trebonius Rufin^s Henry the third, Philip Augustus, and others forecited; who
excluded Players and Play-poets out of their Republikes, and banished them
their Dominions: (to which I might add The General history of France p. 138.
Lewis the 9. surnamed the godly, who made diverse good Laws against
Dice-houses, Players, plays and other en^rmities) Witness the forealeaged
Councels, Fathers and Primitive Church, and Christians who excommunicated al
Stage Players and Actors from the word, the Sacraments and all Christian
society; disabling them to give any public testimony, or to take any
ecclesiastical orders and preferments etc. even for their very acting of
Stage Plays: See part 1. Act. 4. Scene 1. Act 6. Scene 5. Act. 7. Scene 2.3,
7. and the next fore going Scene, where all this is largely manifested.

Therefore the profession of a Stage Player, together with the acting of
stage plays, is unbeseeming and unlawful unto Christians.

Thirdly: Argument. 3.


^he profession, the action of any unlawful scandalous or dishonest sports,
cannot but be unlawful, especially unto Christians, who must abstain, not
only from all evil things, but likewise from all appearance of evil: 1 These.
5.22. See here Part 1. Act. 3. Scene 3. Act. 5. Scene 1, 2, 3. and Act. 6.
Scene 4. accordingly.

But Stageplayes as the Premises prove at large, are unlawful, scandalous and
dishonest sports.

Therefore their action cannot but be unlawful, especially unto Christians.

Fourthly. Argument. 4.


That profession which has neither Gods word for its rule, nor his glory for
its end, must certainly be unlawful unto Christians; witness, Psalm.
119.9.10. Gal. 6.16. 1 Cor. 10.31. c. 6.20. 1 Pet. 4.11. which inform us, that
Gods people must make his word the square, his glory the chief and only end
of all their actions.

But the pro^ession or art of acting Plays, has neither the word of God for
its rule (there being neither precept nor example in all the scripture for to
warrant it, but many texts against it: See here p. 547. to 551. and 723. to
730;) nor yet the glory of God for its end, as I have here largely manifested,
p. 127. to 133. and f. 5^0. to 570.

Therefore it must certainly be unlawful unto Christians.

Argument. 5.
Fifthly,

That art or trade of life, in which men cannot proceed with faith or comfort,
and on which men cannot pray for or expect a blessing from God, must
questionless be unlawful unto Christians: witness, Romans 14.23. Psalm. 129.7,
8. Phil. 4.6.8.9. 1 John 5.16. Neh. 1.11. c. 2.20. Psalm. 90.17.

But in this art or trade of acting Plays, men cannot proceed with faith or
comfort, because it has no warrant from the word, the Gal. 5.16. 2 Pet. 1.19.
rule of faith; nor from the Spirit, the efficient cause of faith; nor from the
Church or Saints of God, Gal. 5.22.
the household of faith: neither can men pray for or expect a blessing from God
upon their Playacting; Gal. 6.10.
it being a calling of the very See here p. 10. to 40.404. See the Table. Title
Devil and Players.
Devils institution, not of Gods appointment; a calling not authorized by the
word of God, and therefore no ways entitled to the blessing of God: A
profession I dare say, on which the very professors themselves, could never
heartily pray as yet for a blessing; Neither do or can those pious Christians
which go by whiles they are acting, say, Psalm. 129 8.
The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we bless you in the name of the Lord.
A profession which has often times drawn down the very vengeance and curse of
God on many who have practiced or beheld it, See here f. 552. to 568.

Therefore, it must questionless be unlawful unto Christians.

Argument. 6.
Sixthly.

That calling or profession in which a man cannot attribute his gains to the
blessing and favor of God; so as to say, it is God that has blessed me in
this my honest vocation and made me rich; and for his gains and thriving in
which he cannot render any thanks and praise to God; must doutblesse be an
ungodly calling and profession, not lawful among Christians: witness Prove:
10.22. Genesis 33.5.11. 2 Chronicles. 1.12. Eccles. 5.19. Matthew. 11.6.33. Psalm. 145.1,
2.15, 16. Acts 2.46, 47. 1 Timothy 4.3, 4. and Phil. 4.6.

But Players cannot attribute or ascribe their gains to the blessing and
favor of God; it being but See here p. 905, 906.
turpe lucrum, dishonest filthy gain, much like the Deutr. 22.18. Mich. 1.7.
hire of an harlot: neither can they render true praise or thanks to God for
what they gain by acting, because they have no assurance that it proceeds
from his good blessing, on this their lewd profession.

Therefore it must doutlesse be an ungodly calling and profession, not lawful
among Christians.

Seventhly. Argument. 7.


That profession toward the maintenance of which, a man cannot contribute
without sin, and sacrificing to the Devil himself, must questionless be
unlawful unto Christians; See 1 Cor. 10.21, 22, 23. Romans 1.30, 32. 2 John 10,
11.

But no man can contribute toward the maintenance of Stage Players, as
Stageplayers, with out sin, without ^acrificing to the very Devil himself:
For histrionibus dare imman^ peccatum est: and histrionibus dare, est
daemonibus immolare; as St Tract. 10. in Joan. here p^ 324.
Augustine, Summula Raymundi fol. 107.
Raymundus, and sundry others testify: See here p. 324, 325, 326.905.906. and
688.

Therefore it must questionless be unlawful unto Christians.

Eighthly. Argument. 8.


That calling or profession which altogether indisposeth and unfits men for
Gods worship and service, and for all religious duties, must necessarily be
sinful and unsu^able unto Christians: See Luke 1. 74, 75. Hebr. 12.1. and
Matt^. 5.29, 30. Act. 19.18, 19. Iam. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.

But the profession of Playacting does altogether indispose, and unfit men for
Gods worship, his service, for the hearing of his word, the receiving of his
Sacraments, (from which all Players were excomunicated) and from all other
religious duties: See here p. 393. to 420. and fol. 522. to 542. and p. 561. to
573.

Therefore it must necessarily be unlawful unto Christians.

Argument. 9.
Ninthly.

That profession which is pernicious and hurtful both to the manners minds and
souls of men, and prejudicial to the Church, the State that suffers it must
certainly be unlawful, intolerable among Christians: See here p. 447, 448.
and Ioh. 10.10.

But the profession of acting Plays is pernicious both to the manners minds
and souls of men, of actors and spectators, and prejudicial to the Churches
and States that suffer them: witness: page 302. to 568.

Therefore it must certainly be unlawful, intolerable among Christians.

Argument. 10.
Lastly.

That calling which the very professors of it upon their conversion and
repentance have utterly renounced with shame, and highest detestation, as
altogether incompatible with Christianity, piety or salvation^ must certainly
be sinful and utterly unlawful unto Christians: See Romans 6.20, 21.

But sundry professed Actors and Stage Players both in the Primitive Church and
since, upon their true conversion and repentance, have utterly renounced and
given over their profession of acting Plays, with soul confounding shame and
highest detestation, as altogether incompatible with Christianity, piety, or
salvation: See here p. 134. fol. 542.545.566.568. p. 561. to 573.840. and 910.

Therefore it must certainly be sinful and altogether unlawful unto
Christians.

And that upon these several grounds which is the second thing.

First, in regard of the parts and persons that are most usually acted on the
Stage: which are for the most part See part 1. Act 3. Scene ^, 2, 3, 4, 5. and
Act 5. Scene 3. to 6. Mr. Stubs Anatomy of Abuses p. 103, 104. I. G. his
re^utation of Apology for Actors p. 56 57.61. accordingly.
Devils, heat^en Idol Gods and Goddesses, Satyrs, Syluanes, Furies, Fayries,
Fates, Nymphs, Muses, and such like ethnicke idolatrous figments, which
Christians should not name or represent: Or else Adulterers, Whoremasters,
Adulteresses, Whores, Bawdes, Panders, Incestuous persons, Sodomites,
Parricides, Tyrants, Traitors, Blasphemers, Cheaters, Drunkards, Parasites,
Prodigals, Fantastiques, Ruffians, and all kind of vicious godless persons;
whose very wickednesses are the common Subject of those Stageplayes which men
so much applaud: And if the persons of any Magistrates Ministers or Professors
of Religion are brought upon the Stage (as now too often they are) it is See Part
1. Act 3. Scene 6. and p. 814, 815.
only to deride and jeere them, for that which most commends them to God and
all good men. The parts and persons therefore of Stage Plays being such, the
represention of the^ on the Stage must needs be ill, as I have largely proved:
page 88, 89, 94.175. to 178. etc.

Secondly, in respect of the subject matter of Stage Plays See Part 1. Act
3.5, 6. and 7. accordingly^
which is either profane or heathenish, fraught with the names, the histories,
ceremonies, applauses, acts and villainies of Pagan Idols: or ribaldrous,
wicked, and obscene, consisting of Adulteries, Whoredoms, Rapes^ Incests,
Treasons, Murders, solicitations to lewdness, ribaldrie, bawdrie,
treachery, prodigious periuries, blasphemies, oaths, execrations, and all
kinds of wickedness: Or impious and blasphemous, abusing Scripture, God,
Religion, Grace, and Goodness: Or Satyricall, slanderous, and defamatorie; or
vain and frothy at the best, full of amorous, effeminate wanton dalliances,
passages^ pastorals, or of idle words and actions. All which can neither be
uttered nor acted, without sin and shame, as I have more largely proved, Act.
3. and 5. throughout; and as De spectaculis. c. 15. to 22.
Tertullian Hom. 6.7. and 38. in Math. See here p 405.406.
Chrysostom De Spectaculis l. Epist. li. 1 Epist 10. and l. 2. Epist. 2.
Cyprian De vero Cultu c. 20.
Lactantius, De Gubern. dei. l. 6.
Saluian, his Treatise against Plays.
Northbrooke, Plays confuted Action 1.2.3.
Gosson, Anatomy of Abuses p 103 104.
Stubs, Overthrow of Stage plays p. 22, 23. etc.
Doct. Reynolds, and I. G. Refutation of the Apology for Actors p. 56.57.61.
others witness; because such things as these, Ephesians. 5.3.4.
ought not to be named, much less then Personated, among Christians: they are
evil in their own nature, their representations therefore, being the 1 These.
5.22.
appearances of evil, which Christians must abstain from, cannot be good.

Thirdly, in regard of the very manner of acting Plays, consisting of sundry
particular branches, which I have at large discussed Act. 5. Scene. 1.2.3.4.5,
6.7. etc. on which you may reflect, and therefore shall pass more briefly over
them now, reciting only some passages, some authorities that I there omitted.

The first considerable particular in personating of Stage Plays, is the
hypocrisy of it, in counterfeiting not only the habits, gestures, offices,
vices, words, actions, persons, but even the gestures and passions of others,
whose parts are represented; which I have proved hypocrisy, Act. 5. Scene 1.
p. 156. to 161 Hence De Coronati one Principis p. 987.
Philo Iudaeus compares hypocrites and secret enemies unto Stage Players:
tanquam in theatro personatos sub alieno habitu tegentes veram faciem: Hence
Histrionum igitur Epicritianorum ex Miletianistrans^u. gatorumscopus talis est,
talisque perfidia in moribus. Epist: ad Solitariam vitam agentes. p. 239. B.
Athanasius styles the hypocritical Epicritian heretics, who covered their
foul heresy with a fair outside, Stageplayers. Hence also is that passage of
Sermo de Ielunio. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 3 p. 127. G
Zeno Veronensis an ancient Father. Denique hypocrita ille dicitur, qui in
theatro persona vultui superimposita, cum ^lius sit, alius esse simulatur;
verbi causa, interdum regis persona vtitur, cum sit ipse plebeius, aut etiam
Domini cum forte ipse sit servus. Ita ergo in hac vita complurimi hominum
tanquam theatro simulatis personis vtuntur et fictis, (as too many likewise do
in this our age) et cum sunt extrinsecus aliud, aliud se esse hominibus
ostendunt. Parallel to which is that of In Mathae. Evang: l. 4. Bibl. Patrum
Tom. 9. pars 2.986. B. See here p. 158. in the margent.
Paschatius Ratbertus: Nunc autem quia hypocritae vt Mimisecundum tragicam
pietatem in theatricis Ludorum, coram hominibus Diabolo astipulante permulcent
se, et cupiunt iusti videri, cum rex militum venerit, invenient non se fuisse
quorum parts agebant in superficie, sed scenicorum imitatores quorum speciem
tenebant in cord. Which being added to that of learned and laborious Mr. Fox,
who styles hypocrites and false teachers, In Apocalypse c. 2. and 3. p^ 25.
histriones pietatis, (as De vita et mor. te Iuelli: p. 71.77.
Dr. Humphries and others call the Masse^ Histrionicam fabulam, et theatricum
Papismi Spectaculum) is a sufficient evidence, that Stage Players are
hypocrites, and the acting of Plays hypocrisy, therefore unlawful unto
Christians.

The second unlawful circumstance in the acting of Plays; is the gross
obscenity, amorousnesse, wantonness, and effeminacie that attends it, which
he^e I shall but name because I have at large debated it. Act 5. Scene 2, 3, 4,
5. to which I shall refer you.

The third, is the apparent vanity, folly, and fantastique lightness which
appears in those See Act. 5. Scene 4. and Act 3. Scene 7.
ridiculous antique, mimicall, foolish gestures, complements, embracements
smiles, nods, motions of the eyes, head, feet, hands, and whole entire body
which Players use, of purpose to provok their Spectators to profuse inordinate
laughter, which absurd irrational, unchristian if not inhumane gestures and
actions, more fit for skittish goats then men, or sober Christians, ^f grave
men, if reason or religion may be judges, are intruth naught else but the very
See 1. Sam. 21.13, 14, 15 Prove. 26 18, 19. Eccles. 2.2.12. c. 7.25. c. 9.3. c.
10 12, 13.
extremity of folly, of vanity, if not of Bedlam frenzy. For what greater
evidences can there be of vanity, folly. or frenzy, See Mr Stubs his Anatomy
of abuses p. 105. I. G. his refuta^tion of Apologi^ for Actors, p. 56.57. Dr.
Raynolds Over throw of Stage plays p. 17.10^ and 40.36.37.
then to see a wise man act the fools or clownes; a sober man the drunkards,
bedlams, wantons, fantastiques^ a patient man, the furies, murderers, tyrants
etc. a chaste man the Sodomites, whoremasters, adulterer, adultresses, whores
bauds or Panders; an honest man the theefs or cheaters; yea a reasonable man
the horses, Bears, Apes, Lions, etc. or a male the woman's part? What more
absurd, then to behold a base notorious Rogue representing not only the person
of a Maiestrate minister, Peer, Knight, etc. but even the Majesty, Pomp
State, office, of the greatest Monarch; the vanity that Solomon reprehended
long ago: when he Eccle^. 10.6, 7. Prove. 30.22. and 19.10.
saw folly set in great dignity; When he beheld Servants to ride on horses, and
Princes walking as servants on the earth. Or what can be more impious or
profane, then to be hold a Christian who bears the image of God, of Christ
engraven on his Soul, cuius ^ignum se in front portar^ asserit, et de cord
perdidit^ as Enarratio: in Psalm. 85. Tom. 8 pars 2.68.
St. Augustine speaks) to act the part, the person, to put on the habit, the
Image of a pagan, an Idol, See here p. 77.88.89. Tertull. De Idololatria lib.
Philo Iudaeus de Decalogo l. and all co^mentators on the second commandment
accordingly, with our own homilies against the peril of Idolatry.
yea a heathen-God and Goddess on the Stage, the very recital of whose names,
whose rites, the very making of whose images, is gross Idolatry, condemned by
the express letter of the second commandment, and See Exodus 23.24. Deutr 7.5.
2 King. 10.26. c. 11.18. c. 18.4. c. 23.14. 2 Chronicles. 34.3, 4, 7. 1 John 5 2^.
infinite other Scripture, as all Christian writers jointly witness.
Certainly if the Scriptures be so rigid, as to prohibit, Matthew. 12.36.37.
Ephesians. 5.2.3.4.
all idle wanton foolish words; all unseemely gestures, and lascivious motions
of the body: Isay 3.9. P^al. 10.^.^ Job 34.^. Psalm. ^^9 37. Mat. 5.28, 29. 2
Pet. 2.14. Prove. 6.12.13.
as the pride the loftines of the countenance, the Isay 3.16. Prove. 6.12.13. c.
7.10. to 14.
amorous glances of the eye, the walking with stretched out necks and wanton
eyes, the mincing, and tinckling of the feet etc. commanding Christians Psalm.
4.2. Psalm. 119 37. Eccles^ 9.9. c. 10.10. c. 1.17. c. 10.1 Psalm. 75.4. and 85
phes. 5.3. c. 9.1. 1 Cor. 11.13, 14. c. 13.5.
to put away vanity, folly and madness, with all (a) unseemely things; and
confineing them Tit. 2.3.22. 1 Timothy 2.9. to. Phil. 4.8. Ephesians 4.1. Ephesians. 5.7.5.17.
Romans 16. 2 Ph^^. 1.27.
to gravitie, modesty, comlines and sobriety, both in their actions 1 Timothy
2.9.10. Isay^ 3.18. to 29. Deuteronomy. 22.5. Zeph. 1.8. 1 Pet. 3.3^ 4.
gestures, apparel 1 Cor. 11.4. to 16. 1 Timothy 2.9. ^ Pet. 3.3. See my
unlovelines of Lovelocks.
hair Ephesians. 4.29.31. c. 5.3, 4. P^. 39.1. Ps. 9.14
words, thoughts, Genesis 6.5. Prove. 12, 5. c. 15.26. Ier. 4.1.
and things of smallest moment, the Here p. 294.402.403.
gravitie of Christ and Christians being such in former time that they were
never seen to laugh seldom to smile, much less to use any light dishonest
gestures, or play any wanton Childish pranks, as actors do:) we cannot but
from thence conclude, that it condemns these wanton postures, Complements,
dalliances, motions, and representations, that always attend the acting of
Plays; which in their very best acception Here p. 127. to 132.
are vanity and the appearance of evil, if not impiety and sin it self; and
so unlawful unto Christians.

The fourth is the apparel wherein Plays are acted;

For the first of these; not to insist upon this particular, See h^re, page
596.634. two ^ouncels against acting a part in Bishops, Ministers, or Religious
persons garments, and Ioannis Lang^^crucim, De Vit^ and Honestate
Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 22. p. 323.
Ministers, Magistrates, Gentlemen, Citizens, and others; yea, the robes of
Emperors, Princes, Nobles, Bishops, Judges, and those whose parts they act,
which are no ways suitable to their condition or profession; I shall only
pitch upon this one particular abuse, of men's acting female parts in women's
apparel and hair in Enterludes; Vbi alius soccis obauratis, indutus serica
vest, mundoque pretioso, and adtextis capite crinibus, incessu perfluo
faeminam mentitur; as Metamorphoseos. lib. 11. page 282.
Apuleius expresses it. Which practice is diametrally contrary to Deuteronomy. 22.5.
The woman shall not wear that which pertains to a man, neither shall a man
put on a woman's garment; for all that do so, are ^n abomination to the Lord
thy God. Which Scripture, as it condemns women's cutting of their hair like
men (as HRabanus Maurus, Nicholaus de Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis, Iunius, and sundry
other Act 5. Scene 6.
forequoted Expositors on this text affirm, who couple it with the 1 Cor.
11.4, to 16.) together with their clothing of themselves in man's array: (a
mannish whorish practice, of which Marianus Scotus. l. 3, AEtas. 6. An 854.
Col. 152. Martini. Poloni Supputationes. An. 855. Col. 152. Papa. 109.
Polychronicon. l. 5. c. 30. fol. 224. Caxtons Chronicle. part 5. Anno 885.
Vola^eranus Commentar. lib. 22. fol. 228. Balaeus De Romanorum Pontificum
Actis. lib. 4. page 125. with others here quoted. page 185.
Pope Ione, a notable strumpet; Nicephorus Callistus Ecclesiastic. Histor. lib.
17. cap. 5. Centuriae Magdeburg. 6. Col. 349.808.
Theodora, Suetonij Octavius. sect. 41.
a Roman Matron, who waited on Stephanio the Player, in cut hair, and man's
apparel, as his Page; Vincentij Speculum Historiale. lib. 9. cap. 48. Antonini
Chronicon. pars 1. Tit. 6. cap. 28. sect 5. fol. 137.
Tecla, a famous Virgin, Quae pro Paulo quaerendo tonsuram and virilem habitum
suscepit; (even against S. Paul's professed doctrine, 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 15.) and
so repaired thus disguised to his lodging, to be instructed by him. Vincentij
Speculum. Histor. l. 10. cap. 115.116. fol. 129.
Eugenia a female Romish Saint, who did cut her hair, and cloth her self in
man's apparel, and so went disguized to the Monastery of Saint Helenus the
Bishop, whether no woman might have excess, where she entered into Religion,
and lived many years in man's apparel like a Monk, and was at last elected
Abbot of that Monastery, which office she managed with great humility like a
man, as all reputed her. Vincentij Specul^m. Histor. l, 15. c. 74.75, 76, 77,
78. See lib. 17. cap. 89. the like example of Melania.
Marina, and Eufrosina, who polled their heads, and put on man's apparel, and
then entered into Monasteries, where they lived and died professed monkish
Votaries, (or rather disguised prostituted Strumpets to their chaste fellow
Monks) as See here, page 185.202, 203, 204. and Agrippa de Vanitate
Scientiarum. cap 63.
sundry others have done of latter times. Vincentij Spe^^lum. Histor. lib. 21.
cap. 44.
Gundo, an infamous Virago, Quae comam capitis inscidit, and contra Dei iura
virilia sumpsit indumenta; armisque accincta, baculoque innixa: and thus
attyred, resorted to the Monastery of S. Karilephus, who avoided the sight of
all women; But no sooner was she entered into the inward parts of the Abbathie,
but she was presently struck blind in both her eyes, and possessed with a
Devil, vomiting up blood in a horrid manner, for this her unnatural bold
attempt: with diverse other Romish See Vincentij Speculum Historiale. lib. 15,
cap 74. to 80. Socrates Scholast. Ecclesiast. Histor. l. 3. c. 43. Gratian
Causa^ 32. Quaest. 1. f. 540 b. and here, p. 184 185, 203, 204, 205, 206.
female Votaries, who have polled their heads, and entered into Monasteries as
professed Monks, in man's apparel, the better to satiate their own and other
unchaste Monks lusts, have been notoriously guilty. Witness Cornelius
Agrippa, who writes thus of these chaste Virgin Nonnes and Monks: De Vanit.
Scient. c. 63.
Quin and plurimae monialium and vestarum and beguinarum domus Restant nunc
solae moniales, etc. De his aute^ plura dicere (and si plura, quae dici possint
suppe^ebant) verecundia prohibet, ne non de caetu virginum Deo dicataru^ sed
magis de lupanaribus, de dolis and procacia mer^tricum, de stupris and
incestuosis operibus dandum sermonem, prolixe trahamus. Nam quid^ obsecro,
aliud sunt hoc tempore puellaru^ monasteria, nisi quaedam non dico Dei
sanctuaria, sed veneris execranda prostibula? Sed lascivoru^ and impudicorum
juvenu^ ad libidines explendas receptacula, ut idem hodie sit puellam velare,
quod and public ad ^cortandum exponere, etc. Ni^ol^us De Cl^^angis, De
C^rrupt^ Ecclesiae S^at^. lib. cap. 23. See cap. 15.
privatae quaedam meretriculorum fornices sunt, quas etiam monach^s and
religiosos (ne diffametur eorum castitas) nonnunquam sub monachali cuculla, ac
virili vest in monasterijs aluisse scimus, etc. Habent enim sacerdotes,
monachi, fraterculi, moniales, and quas vocant sorores specialem lenociniorum
praerogativam, quum illis religionis praetextu liberum sit quocunque pervolare,
and quibuscunque quantum and quoties libet, subspecie visitationis and
consolationis, aut confessionis secreto sine testibus loqui, tam pie personata
sunt eorum lenocinia and sunt ex illis quibus pecuniam tet^gisse piaculum est,
and nihilillos movent verba Pauli dicentis; Bonum est mulierem non tangere;
quas illi non raro impudicis contrectant manibus and clanculum cons^uunt ad
lupanaria, stuprant virgins sacras, vitiant viduas, and hospitum suorum
adulterantes uxores, nonnunquam etiam, quod ego scio and vidi, Iliaci instar
praedonis abducunt, and Platonica lege, cum popularibus suis communes
prostituunt, and quarum animas lucraridebent Deo, illarum corpora sacrificant
Diabolo; aliaque his multo sceleratiora, and Adolescentibus impudice abusi
sunt. heu heu, intra sanctam ecclesiam multi religiosi and Clerici in suis
latebris and conventiculis maxim in Italia, public quodammodo nefandu^
gymnasium constituunt and palestram, in illius flagitij abominatione se
exercentes, and optimi quique epheborum in lupanari ponuntur. Contra sanctam
castitatem quam Do nino promiserant sic offendunt continue etiam pulice,
praeter ea nefanda quae in occultis perpetrant, quod nec chartae reciperent,
nec posset calamus exarare. Alvarus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae. l. 2.
Artic. 2. fol. 83. and Artic. 28. fol. 134. Onus Ecclesiae. cap. 21.22, 23. and
here p. 213.445.
quae nefas est eloqui, insana libidine perpetrant: interim castitatis voto
abunde satisfacientes, si libidinem, si luxuriam, si fornicationem, si
adulteria, si incestum verbis acerrime incessent detestenturque^ and de virtute
locuti clunes agitent. Sed and flagitio^issimi lenones scelestissimaeque lenae
saepe sub illis religionum pellibus delitescunt. Tales habent aulicae dominae
plerumque sacrorum suorum mystas, and aulicarum nuptiarum scortationumque
consultores. Which passage seconded by Episcopi vero and Sacerdotes hujus
temporis castitat^s sanctimoniam (sine qua nemo videbit Deum) tam in cord quam
in corpore quomodo student observate? qui traditi in reprobum sensum faciunt
quae non convenient. Quae enim in occulto fiunt ab Episcopis turpe est dicere.
Melius itaque arbitror super hoc dissimulare and supersedere, quam aliquid,
unde scandalisentur innocents and inexperti dicere^ Sed ego cur verecundor
dicere, quod ipsi non verecundantur facere? imo quod Apostolus non verecundatur
scribere and praedicare. Dicit autem egregius predicator: Sic masculi in
masculos turpitudinem operantes, and mercede^ su^^^rroris recipi^ntes. Fratres,
factus sum insipiens; vos me coegistis. Bernard. Sermo. ad Pastores in Synodo
Rhemensi. fol. 317.
diverse other Popish and Protestant Authors, I wish our Romish Catholics, who
glory of the chastity of these their goatish Votaries, would consider.) So it
likewise reprehends men's nourishing of their hair like women, and their
putting on of women's attire, (though it be but now and then,) as an abomination
to the Lord: And no wonder, that ^he putting on of woman's apparel, and the
wearing of long hair should make men abominable unto God himself, since it
was an abomination even among Heathen men: Witness, not only the Sea page
199.200, 208, 209, 210.
forequoted examples of Heliogabalus, Sardanapalus, Nero, Sporus, See Suidae
Caius, p. 193. Quinetiam nefario furore correptus vestes muliebres induebat
Caius, and comam plicis quibusdam ornando, and faeminas imitando, and omnia
flagitia perpetrando.
Caius Caligula, and others: together with AElij Lampridij. Commodus. page 89.91.
Commodus and Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. c. 13. p. 848.
Annarus the effeminate governor of Babylon, (all great Sodomites and
Adulterers:) whose going clad sometimes in woman's apparel (for none of them
went constantly in that array, some of them only once or twice) has made them
for ever execrable to all posterity: insomuch that Commodus Antoninus. p. 89.91.
AElius Lampridius writes of Commodus, (qui clava non solum leones in vest
muliebri, sed etiam multos homines afflixit) Quod tantae impudentiae fuit, ut
cum muliebri vest in Amphitheatro and Theatro sedens public saepissime
biberit. And what accursed fruits this effeminacy of his produced, the same
Author witnesses; Page 86.
Nec irruentium in se iuvenum carebat infamia, omni part corporis atque ore in
sexum utrumque pollutus. It is storied of Athenaeus Dipnos. lib^ 6^ cap^ 6.
page 421.422.
Ortyges the Tyrant of Erythre and his companions, Qui legibus solutis res
administrabant civitatis; that they grew to that height of effeminacy: Quod per
hyemem muliebribus calceis induti ambulabant, comas nutriebant, nodique
capillorum erant studiosi, (let our Ruffianly Love-locke wearers mark it:)
caput purpureis cotoneisque diadematibus convolventes. Habebant etiam mundum
muliebrem totum aureum, sicut habere faeminae consueverunt; which made them so
abominable to the people, that Hippotes the brother of Cnopus invaded them with
an army, and slew them. The Dipnosoph. l. 12. c. 9. p. 832.
Samians are taxed for effeminacy by Duris and Athenaeus, Quod circa brachia
ornatum muliebrem gestare consueverant, atque cum Iunonium celebrarent comas
pexas habentes, atque in tergum reiectas incedebant. Sic illi pexi Iunonis
templa petebant Aurea Caesaream contortam vincula nectunt: and the Sybarites
are taxed for the selfsame crime; Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 12. cap. 6. p. 821.
Quod est etiam apud cos consuetudo, ut pueri ad impuberem usque etatem
purpuram, capillorumque nodos auro revinctos gestant. Pausaniae Arcadica. l. 8.
p. 214. Alebat adolescens Alpheo comam, eam ille cum, quo virgins more solent
religasset, in muliebri vest ad Daphnen venit, filiam se Oenomai simulans. Cum
itaque virgo esse ex corporis ha^itu facile crederetur, etc. miro sibi Daphnen
amore devinxit etc.
Pausanias writes of Leusippus, who went clad in woman's apparel, and wore long
effeminate hair like a woman, consecrated to Alpheus, the better to circumvent
the chastity of a Virgin whom he loved; that he was slain by Daphne and her
Nymphs, who discovered him to be a male in woman's attire, as he was bathing
among them: so detestable was this his lewdnes to them. Yea, such was the
detestation of this effeminate unnatural odious practice of men's putting on
women's apparel, even among Ethnickes; that the Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap.
6. sect. 13. page 66.
Lycians when they chanced to mourn, did usually put on a woman's garment, (ut
deformitate cultus commot^, maturius stultum proijcere maerorem velint, that
the very deformity and infamy of that array might move them the sooner to cast
of their foolish sorrow: and Charondas the famous Lawgiver, as Bibl. Histor.
lib. 12. sect. 16. page 420. See here, p. 584.
Diodorus Siculus informs us; is much applaud^d for enacting this law among
the Thurians, that whereas other Lawmakers made it capital for any man to
forsake his colors in the wars, or to refuse to bear arms for the defense
of his Country, he con^ra^iwise e^acted; that such men as these, should sit
three days together in the market place, clothed in woman's apparel. Which
Constitution (says Diodorus) as it exceeds the laws of other places in
mildness; so it does secretly deter such cowardly persons from their
effeminate c^ward^ce, (probri magnitudine) with the greatness of the
reproachful shame. Siquidem mort^m oppetere long praestat, quam tantum
ignominiae dedecus in patria experiri: For it is far better for a man to be
slain, then to undergo so great an ignominy and shame in his own Country.
The wearing of woman's apparel, even for a little space in these Pagans
judgments being so shameful, so execrable a thing, that a man were better to
be put to death, then to p^t on such array; with which Ascanius does thus
upbraide the Troianes.

Virgil. AEneidos. lib. 9. page 313.
Vobis picta croco, and fulgenti murice vestes:
Desidiae cordi: iuvat indulgere choreis:
Et tunicae manicas, and habent ridimicula mitrae.
O vere Phrygiae (neque enim Phryges) ite per alta
Dyndama, ubi assuetis biforum dat tibia cantum,
Tympana vos buxusque vocat Berecynthia matris
Ideae: sinite arma viris and cedite ferro.
Nothing being more abominable even among Heathens then effeminacy in Sint
procul a verbis juvenes ut faemina compti. Quique ^uas ponunt in statione
comas. Ovid De Art Amandi. l. 3. page 203.
long, count, frizled hair, and womanish apparel, as these examples, and
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 881.882, 883.
Maffaeus Vegius, De Educatione Puerorum. lib. 5. cap. 4. and Act 5. Scene 6.
abundantly testify: on which you may reflect. If then the putting on of woman's
apparel were so abominable to Pagans, no marvel is it if this text of
Deuteronomy styles it an abomination to the Lord our God; the grounds and
reasons of which, as I have at Act 5. Scene 6. page 192. to 214.
large insisted on before, so I shall briefly touch upon them now in De
Legibus. lib. c. 13. page 42.43.
Gulielmus Parisiensis his words. Causae vero prohibitionis, ne vir utatur
vest faeminea, vel e converso, multae fuere. Primo, fuit congruentia ipsius
naturae, videlicet, ut quod natura sexu discreverat, discerneret and vestitus.
Secundo ut oportunitas auferretur-turpitudinum latibulis; posset e^^^ See
Agrippa De Vanitate Scient. cap. 63.64. Tertullian De Pallio. c. 5. Summa
Angelica. Tit. Ornatus. sect. 5. Summa Rosella. Tit. Faemina. accordingly. and
here, page 208. to 214.
intrare vir ad mulierem sub habitu muliebri, and e converso mulier sub habitu
virili, (as the examples of Statius Achilleid. l. 1. and D. Rainolds Overthrow
of Stage-playcs. p. 13. to 87.
Achilles, who by putting on woman's apparel des^^ured Deidamia King Lycomedes
Daughter; of Suetonij Julius. sect. 74.
Clodius, who by this wile abused Pompeia, Julius Caesar's wife; and of
Pausaniae Arcadica. l. 8 p. 214.
Leucippus, who by this stratagem sought to ravish Daphne, with See here, page
184.185. together with the examples of Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus,
Commodus, Caligula, Annarus, and others forequoted, who acted their Sodomies,
whoredoms and adulteries, being thus attired in woman's apparel.
other examples of women clad in man's apparel to satiate the lusts of others,
witness:) Ablata est igitur per hanc discretionem vestitus, multa opportunitas
slagity. Ter^io, exterminatio sacrorum. See here, page 207. accordingly.
Martis and Veneris: in sacris n. Martis, non solum virili vestitu vestiebantur
mulieres, sed etiam armabantur, ut in ipsis vestimentis b^llicis, id est armis,
ipsum tanquam Deum belli and victoriae datorem colerent. Et Cocogrecus in libro
maledicto quem scripsit de stationibus ad cultum Veneris, inter alia sacrilega
and Deo odibilia praecepit, ut qui nefandum illum ritum exercct, coronam
faemineam habeat in capite suo. Eodem modo in sacris Veneris viri
effaeminabantur, videl^ cet in vestibus muliebribus sacra Veneris exercentes,
propter huiusmodi sacrilegos ritus Veneri se placere credentes atque
quaerentes. Quarta causa est, See here, page 208.209, 210. and D. Rainolds
Overthrow of Stage Plays. p 11. to 15.32. and 92. to 100. accordingly.
ut occasio magna provocationi libidinis auferretur: magna enim est provocatio
libidinis viris vestitus muliebris, and e converso: (how much more then when
amorous wanton parts are acted in it?) and hoc est quoniam vestis muliebris
viro circundata, vehementerrefricat memoriam, and commovet imaginationem
mulieris, and e converso: alibi autem didicistis, quia imaginatio rei
desiderabilis commovet desiderium. Quinta causa, See p. 208. to 214. and D.
Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playe^. p. 8. to 23.32, 34, 35.
ut auferretur occasio maleficij quibus gentes illae refertissimae erant, and
in ijs nutritae. Consueverant n. malefici and maleficae in vestibus aut de
vestibus libidinis, maleficia exercere, and hoc nos in eorum libris saepe
legimus. Vt ergo occasio huiusmodi tolleretur, iam voluit Deus hanc
confutationem vestitus esse in viris and mulieribus. Sexta causa, ut tolleretur
error periculosus and superstitiosa credulitas, qua trahi possent ad
idololatriam, quibus credebant decepti applicatione vestium muliebrium, maxim
in sacris Veneris, coniungi sibi ac conciliari amore fortissimo corda mulierum,
propter quas hoc facerent, vel quae postea huiusmodi vestibus uterentur:
similiter and deceptae mulieres idipsum credebant de viris, and virilibus
vestimentis. Voluit ergo Deus hunc superstitiosum errorem auferri de cordibus
eorum per ablationem abusionis istius, ne per illum tandem traherentur ad
cultum Veneris. Upon all which several reasons, but especially the 1.2, 4. and
5. Iuo Carnotensis. Decret. pars 11. cap. 64.83. and pars 7. cap. 78.80, 81.
Rupertus in Deuteronomy. lib. 1. c. 13. fol. 221. Ioannis Wolphius in Deuteronomy. lib. 3.
Sermo. 52. fol. 114. Dionysius Carthusianus in Deuteronomy. 22. fol. 479. Hugo
Cardinalis in Deuteronomy. 22. Petrus Bertorius. Tropologiarum. lib. 5. in Deuteronomy. cap.
22. fol. 47. Conradus Pellicanus in Deuteronomy. 22. v. 5. Lucas Osiander in Deuteronomy. 22.
verse. 5. Tostatus Abulensis in Deuteronomy. 22. Quaest. 2. Tom. 3. pars 2. p. 199.
B.C. Procopius, Leonardus Marius, and Cornelius a Lapide in Deuteronomy. 22. verse. 5.
Erasmus Marbachius. Comment. in Deuteronomy. 22. page 217.218 Ioannis Mariana, Scholia
in Deuteronomy. 22. verse. 5. p. 99. Paulus Fagius Annotationes Paraph. Onkeli Chald.
in Deuteronomy. Franciscus Iunius Analysis in Deuteronomy. 22. v. 5. Operum Genevae. 1613.
Tom. 5. Col. 572.573. (who makes this text of Deuteronomy, a Est praeceptu^
honestatis non in ceremonia, non in civili jure seu politico, sed in natura
ipsa funda^a. Ibidem. Col. 572. See here, page 211.212. and Doctor Rainolds
Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 9.10, 13, 14, 82, 83. accordingly.
Precept of honesty, not founded in the Ceremonial or Political law, but in
the very law of nature, as do all other Orthodox Writers:) together with
Maphaeus Vegius, De Educatione Puerorum. lib. 5. c. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15.
page 882. Angelus De Clavasio, Summa Angelica. Tit. Ornatus. sect. 5. Iacobus
De Graffijs Descitionum Aurearum. pars 2. l. 3. c. 26. sect. 5. Hyperius De
Ferijs Bacchanalibus. lib. Ioannis Langhecrucius, De Vita and Honestate
Ecclesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 21.22. page 319.321. I. G. his Refutation of the
Apology for Actors. page 16. with sundry See here, Act 5. Scene 6.
other forequoted Fathers, Councels, and other Authors, have absolutely
condemned, even from this very text, not only men's constant wearing, but
likewise their very putting on of woman's apparel (especially to act an
effeminate amorous woman's part upon the Stage) as an abominable, unnatural,
shameful, dishonest, unchaste, unmanly wicked act, which God and nature both
detest, for the precedent reasons. Yea, so universally exeorable has this
practice been in all ages, that the ^. Council of Bracara, Anno Dom. 610. (as
Decret. pars 11. cap. 64. See cap. 83. and pars 7. c. 78.80, 81. to the like
purpose.
Iuo Carnotensis informs us) enacted this particular Canon against men's acting
of Plays in women's, or women's acting or masquing in men's apparel: Si quis
balationes ante Ecclesias sanctorum, seu qui faciem suam transmutaverit in
habitu muliebri, and mulier in habitu viri, emendatione pollicita, tribu^ annis
paeniteat: and Baptista Trovomala, discussing this very question; Quaeritur an
faemina causa ludi vel ^oci utens ve^te virili, vel vir ve^te m^liebri pecce^
mortaliter, etc^ Summa Rosella. Tit. Faemina. fol. 214.215.
Whether it be a mortal sin for a woman to put on man's, or for a man to
wear woman's apparel to act a Masque or Play? makes this reply. Respondent
omnes praedicatores and totus mundus quod sic: all Preachers, and the whole
world do answer that it is: and for this (says he) they allege Gratian
Distinctio. 30. cap. Si qua mulier: and Deuteronomy. 22.5. The reason why it is a
mortal sin is rendered by Tertium quod requiritur in ornatu est convenientia
personae. Itaque mulier quae utitur vest virili, vel e contrario, peccat
mortaliter, quia facit contra praeceptum Deuteronomy. 22. Summa Angelica. Tit Ornatus.
sect. 5. and Tit. Habitus sect. 7.
Angelus De Clavasio, because it is contrary to this text of Deuteronomy. 22.5. and
inconvenient for the persons who put it on: and by Summa Theologiae. pars 2.
Quaest. 135. m. 2. page 617.618.
Alexander Alensis, and Prima secundae. Quaest. 102 Artic^ 6.6 m. and secunda
secundae. Quaest. 169. Artic. 2.3.
Aquinas: because it is directly contrary to the decency and virility of
nature, and likewise to this text of Deuteronomy; Nec pertinet ad honestatem
viri vest muliebri indui: utrique enim sexui diversa indumenta natura dedit.
Isiodor Hispalensis. Originum. lib. 19. cap. 23.
Habet enim and sexus institutam speciem habitus (writes Isiodor Hispalensis)
ut in viris tonsi capilli, in mulieribus redundantia crinium; quod maxim
virginibus insigne est, quarum and ornatus ipse proprie sic est, ut
concumulatus in verticem ipsam capitis sui arcem ambitu criniu^ contegat. If
then all these several Authors, and Councels, together with Vincentius
Belsensis Speculum Historiale. lib. 11. cap. 73. and lib. 21. cap. 44. with Act
5. Scene 6. page 176. to ^16.
others fore-alleaged; if all Preachers, and the whole world it self; or if
our own worthy Doctor Rainolds (who has largely and learnedly debated this
particular point in his Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 9. to 15. and 82. to
106. etc.) may be judges, the very putting on of woman's apparel by Players or
their Boys to act a Play, and so e converso, is a most execrable abomination
to the Lord our God, prohibited by this text of Deuteronomy. Neither will the
shortness of the time excuse the fact: For as Nero was truly said to wear
his suits, and to put on his apparel, though he never more one garment twice,
changing his raiment every day, as Suetonij Nero. sect. 3. Coc. Sabellicus.
AEneid. 8. lib. 11. p. 203. Eu^ropius, Grimston, and Zonaras, in the life of
Nero.
Historians relate; so he See D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p.
101.102. and here, p. 179. to 196.
who puts on a woman's attire for a day, an hour or two, or any lesser space to
act a woman's part, be it but once in all his life, is a putter on of woman's
apparel within the very words and meaning of this text^ which principally
provides as the fore-alleaged reasons, Authors, and examples witness, against
such temporary occasional wearing and pu^ting on of woman's apparel, which Ad
ea quae frequentius accidunt leges aptantur. See Sir Edward Cook, his Flowers.
oft-times happens, rather then against the daily constant wearing of it, which
few have been so unnatural as to use. What De Pallio. c. 5 p. 228.
Tertullian therefore writes of Hercules, attyred by his Mother in woman's
apparel, to satiate his lusts. ( Naturam itaque concussit Larissaeus heroes in
virginem mutando, etc. Feras in puero matris sollicitudinem patiens certe iam
ustriculas: certe virum alicuius clanculo functus adhuc sustinet, stolam
fundere, comam struere, cutem fingere, speculum consulere, collum demulcere,
aurem quoque foratu effaeminatus. Ecce itaque mutatio, monstrum equidem
geminum, de viro faemina, mox de faemina vir, quando neque veritas negari
debuisset, neque fallacia confiteri. Vterque habitus mutandi malus, alter
adversus naturam, alter contra salutem. Turpius adhuc libido virum cultu
transfiguravit, quam aliqua maternaformido; tamet si adoratur a vobis qui
erubescendus est Scytalo sagittipelliger ille, qui totam epitheti sui sortem
cum muliebri cultu compensavit. Tantum Lydiae clanculariae licuit, ut Hercules
in Omphale, and Omphale in Hercule prostitueretur, etc. The same may I say of
women who impudently cut their hair, or put on men's, or men who effeminately
See Archbishop Abbot, his 28. Lecture upon Jonah. sect. 11. page 570.571.
against long womanish hair.
nourish their hair, or put on woman's apparel to act any mummery, Masque, or
Stage Play, or for any such like ends; Debet enim habitus congruere qualitati
and conditioni personae and ^exus. Iacobus De Graffijs. Decisionum Aur^arum.
pars 2. lib. 3 cap 26. s^ct. 5.
that they sin against nature, their sex, their own salvation, making
themselves not only double monsters, but even an abomination to the Lord their
God, as all the premises witness. And what Christian, what Mummer, Masquer, or
Actor is there so desperately prodigal of his own salvation, as thus to
become an 1 Cor. 16.22.
Anathema Maranatha, a perpetual unsufferable abomination to his God, by
putting on such apparel for an hour, to act a Matrons, perchance a Strumpe^s
part, which may make him miserable for all eternity? As therefore this putting
on of woman's apparel is an abomination unto God, so let it be an execrable and
accursed thing to us; and since there i^ so much ingenuity left in most men,
rather to go could and naked, yea to expose their lives to hazard, then thus
unnaturally to cloth their nakedness, or to walk abroad in woman's vestments;
let there not be henceforth so much impudency in any Actors, Mummers,
Masquers, as to appear publicly in feminine habits, or attires on the Stage,
rather then to foregoe their lascivious sinful Plays and Enterludes, which
(if Enarratio in Psalm. 39. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 414.415.
S. Augustine, or D. Che^win, in his Strait gate and narrow way. cap. 7 page
70.
others may be credited,) are the very broad way, which leads men down to
Hell and endless death, in which many multitudes daily walk and sport
themselves. I shall therefore close up this particular (which Overthrow of
Stage Plays. page 9. to 15. and 82. to 168.
D. Rainolds has at large discussed, and I Act 5. Scene 6. page 178. to 216.
my self more copiously insisted on in the foregoing part) with the Commentary
of Argentor^ti. 1597. p. 217.218.
Erasmus Marbachius on this text of Deuteronomy. Distinxit Deus in creatione
virum a muliere, ut forma corporis, ita quoque officio: See RHabanus Maurus in
Deuteronomy. lib. 2. cap. 29. Tom. 2. Operum. page 437. Alexander Alensis Summa
Theologiae. pars 2^ Quaest. 135. memb. 2. page 617.618. and Mapheus Vegius, De
Educatione Puerorum. lib. 5. cap. 4. accordingly.
hanc distinctionem vult Deus conservari, and neutrum sexum habitu and vestitu
in alium se transformare, nec quae alterius sunt usurpare. Mulieris est suo
vestitu indui, and colum ac lanam tractare, domestic^querei curam ager^. Viri
est, suis quoque vestibus indui, and quae foris and reipub. curare, etc.
Prohibentur itaque hac lege larvae, quibus se homines transformant ut agnosci
nequeant, quae res occasionem praebet multorum gravissimorum scelerum.
Praeterea turpis and inhonestus vestitus, qui nec virilem, nec muliebrem sexum
decet; ipsa etiam vestitus novitas, quae animi levis and inconstantis, and vani
indicium est: the next particular, which I shall briefly touch.

De Mercede Meretricis, etc. p. 1164.
Philo Iudaeus discribing a lascivious painted frizled accurately attyred
Strumpet, styles her; Praestigiatrix splendide ac scenice ornata. Hence Oration
adversus Mulieres ambitiosius sese ornantes. p. 991, aec.
Gregory Nazianzen styles all women, who paint their faces, embroyder or frizle
their hair, and wear lascious gaudy apparel; Theatrice comptae and ornatae,
ob venustatem invenustae; as Levenclavius translates it: recording this as none
of his Mothers meanest virtues: Oration. 28. De Funere Patris. p. 472.476.
quod pictum and art quaesitum ornatum, ad eas, quae theatris delectantur
ablegabat; who were all notorious prostituted Strumpets. Hence Hom. 10. in
Matthew. Tom 2. Col. 250. D.
Chrysostom, declaiming against the count, glittering, painted, amorous
females of his age, writes, that they were nihil a theatralibus faeminis
discrepantes: and to beat down all fantastique pride and gawdinesse in
apparel, he reasons thus: Homil. 39 ad Pop^ Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 250. D.
Sed ornaris and comeris? Verum and equos comptos videre licet, homines vero
scenicos omnes. Hence Sermo ad Clerum, in Concilio Rhemensi fol. 317.
S. Bernard taxing the pride of Prelates and Popish Priests in his time
proceeds thus. Vnde hinc est eis quem quotidie ^idemus m^retricius nitor,
histrionicus habitus? Hence De Nugis Curialium. l. 3. c. 13. Bibl. Patrum. Tom.
15. p. 384. E.
John Sarisbery our Countri-man uses this expression in censuring the
effeminate count fantastique Gallants of his age; interim invident meretrici
histrionis habitum. And hence our learned Contra Hie^ronymu^ Osorium. lib. 3.
page 285.
Walter Haddon, phraseth Masse-attire, gaudy Copes, and such like vestments,
Histrionicus vestitus: Which several phrases and expressions, with sundry
others to the like purpose are frequent in most Greek and Latin Authors. All
which being coupled with 22. Henry 8. c. 13. (which speaks of the costlinesse
of Players Robes) and with Act 5. Scene 7. page 216. to 220. where I have more
largely demonstrated this particular, will be a sufficient evidence, of the
gawdinesse, lasciviousness, and newfanglednesse of Stage apparel, and so by
consequence of See Act 5. Scene 7. accordingly. Summa Angelica, and Summa
Rosella. Tit. Ornatus.
its unlawfulness too. For the strange disguisednesse of threatricall attires,
it is most apparent: For do not all Actors, Mummers, Masquers u^ually put on
the Sea Act 3. Scene 3. and Act 5. Scene 3.4. Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Tertullian. De Spectac. Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum. lib. 15. cap. 11.
Vizards, shapes and habits of Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, M^rcury, Bacchus, Vulcan,
Saturn, Venus, Diana, Nep^une, Pan, Ceres, Juno, and such like Pagan Idol-gods
and Goddesses: the persons, the representations of Devils, Satyrs, Nymphs,
Sylvanes, Fayries, Fates, Furies, Hobgoblin^, Muses, Sirens, Centaures, and
such other Pagan Fictions? yea, the por^raitures and forms of Lions, Bears,
Apes, Asses, Horses, Fishes, Fowls, which in outwar^ appearance metamorphose
them into Idols, Devils^ Monsters, Beasts, whose parts they repre^ent? and can
these disguises be lawful, be tolerable among Christians? No verily. For
first, the former sort of them, as Antiq. Iudae. l. 15. c. 11.
Josephus, De Decalog. lib. page 1037.
Philo Iudaeus, De Spectac. lib. cap. 22 De Coron^ M^litis. cap. 8. and De
Idololatria. lib.
Tertullian, See here, page 89.90.
with all ancient and modern Expositors on the 2. Commandment witness, are
merely idolatrous; the very See Act 2. and Act 3. Scene 3. page 77.
mentioning of these Idols names, much more then the representation of their
parts, the making and Exodus 23.4. cap. 23.24. cap^ 34.13. Levit. 26.1, 30.
Deuteronomy. 7.5. cap. 16.22. 2 Kings 10.26. cap. 17.10. cap^ 1^^ 4. cap. 23.14, 24. 2 Chronicles. 31.1. cap. 34.3, 4, 7. Ier. 43.13. cap. 50.2 Ezekiel. 6^ 4, 6. 1 Ioh. 5.21.
wearing of their Vizards, shapes, and Images being wholly condemned by the
Scripture; which commands Christians to 1 Cor. 10.7, 14. Propterea cl^mat
Apostolus, Fugi^e idololatriam, omnem utique and totam, etc. Longum enim
divortiu^ mandat ab idolol^tria, in nullo proxime agendum. Draco enim terrenus
de longinquo non minus spiritu absorbet alites. Ioannes, Filioli, inquit,
custodite vos ab Idolis: non jam ab idololatria quasi ab officio, sed ab
idolis, id est ab effigy eorum. Tertul. De Corona militis^ c. 8.
fly all Idolatry, and not to come near it, lest it should infect them.
Secondly, there is no warrant at all in Scripture for any such Stag^-disguises,
but very good ground against them. For first it Deuteronomy. 22.5. 1 Cor. 11.3. to 16.
See Act 5. Scene 6. and here page 879, etc.
condemns men's disguising of themselves like women, and women's metamorphosing
themselves into men either in hair, apparel, offices, or conditions: how much
more then men's transfiguring of themselves into the shapes of Idols, Devils,
Monsters, Beasts, etc. between which and man there is no Analogy or
proportion, as is between men and women. Secondly, it ^njoynes men and women,
1 Timothy 2 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5.
to attire themselves in modest, decent, and honest apparel, suitable to their
sexes and degrees, as b^commeth those who profess godliness: But such Vizards
and disguises as these, are neither modest, decent, honest, nor yet suitable to
their human nature. Thirdly, it requires them, Deuteronomy. 22.5. Isay 3.18, 19, 20.
Zeph. 1.8. Prove. 7.10. See Act 5. Scene 7.
to abandon all wanton, strange, lascivious, vain, fantastique dresses,
fashions, vestments: much more then such habits, such disguises as these, which
are both inhuman, bestiall, and Diabolical. Fourthly, it commands men, Psalm.
32.9.
not to be like to Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: therefore not
to act their parts, or to put on their skins or likeness. It was Gods heavy
Judgment upon King Dan. 4.33.
Nebuchadnezar, that he was driven from men, and did eat grass as Oxen, and
that his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his hairs were grown like
Eagles feathers, and his nails like Birds claws: yea, it is man's greatest
misery, Psalm. ^9.12, 20.
that being in honor he became like to the beasts that perish: And must it not
then be man's sin and shame to act a Beast, or bear his image, Pronaque cum
spectant animalia caetera terram: Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. Ovid. Metamorp^. lib. 1. Cicero
De Natura. Deorum. lib. 2.3.
with which he has no proportion? What is this but to obliterate that most
Genesis 1.26, 27. cap. 5.1. cap. 9.
glorious Image which God himself has stamped on us, to strip our selves of
all our excellency, and to prove worse then bruits? Certainly, that God who
Deuteronomy. 4.10, 17, 18. c. 5.8.
prohibits, the making of the likeness of any beast, or fish, or foul, or
creeping thing, whether male or female, to express or represent his own
likeness; condemning the idolatrous Gentiles, Romans 1.23. Psalm. 106.20.
for changing the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four footed beasts, and creep^ng things;
Isay 40.18. Acts 17.29.
with which he has no similitude or proportion; must certainly condemn the
putting on of such brutish Vizards, the changing of the glory, the shape of
reasonable men, into the likeness of unreasonable beasts and creatures, to act
a beastiall part in a lascivious Interlude. Fifthly, it enjoynes men, Eccles.
3.14. c. 7.13. Matthew. 5.36. c. 6.26. Pro. 22.28.
not to alter that form which God has given them by adding or detracting from
his work; not to remove the bounds that he has set them; but to 1 Cor. 7.24.
c. 11.3. to 16.
abide in that condition wherein he has placed them: Upon which grounds, as
the Cyprian, De Habitu Virginum. Tertul. De Cultu Faeminarum. Clemens Alexand.
Paedag. l. 3. c. 2.3, 11. Nazianzen adversus Mulieres ambitiosius sese Ornantes
Oration. Alexander Alensis. Summa Theologiae. pars 4. Q^aest. 11. Artic. 2.
Summa Angelica and Summa Rosella. Tir. Ornatus: See my Vnloveliness^ of
Lovelockes. page 2, etc. and here, Act 5. Scene 3.6, 7.
Fathers and others aptly censure face-painting, Perewigs, vain fashions,
disguises and attires, together with the enchroachments of one sex upon the
habits, offices, or duties of the other; so I may likewise condemn these
Play-hou^e Vizards, vestments, images and disguises, which during their usage
in outward appearance offer a kind of violence to Gods own Image and men's
humane shapes, metamorphosing them into those idolatrous, those brutish
forms, in which God never made them. Sixthly, it censures men's degenerating
into beasts, or Devils, either in their minds or manners, be it but for a
season; as the Psalm. 32.9. Psalm. 49.12, 20. 2 Pet. 2.22. Rev. 22.19. Psalm.
92.6. Psalm. 94.8 Psalm. 73.22.
marginall Scriptures witness; therefore it cannot approve of these
theatricall, bestiall, and diabolical See Dan. 4.33. Romans 9.7, 8, 9.
transfigurations of their bodies; which are inconsistent with the Psalm. 4.8. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. Titus 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12^ 1 Cor. 11.13.
rules of piety, gravity, honesty, modesty, civility, right reason, and
expedience, by which all Christians actions should be regulated. Seventhly, it
informs us, that even 1 Samuel 21.13 14, 15.
Achish King of Gath, a mere Pagan Idolater, when he saw David acting the
madman before him, and feining himself distracted, scrabling on the doors of
the gate, and letting the spittle fall down upon his beard; said thus unto his
servants; Lo you see the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to
me? Have I need of madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the
madman in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house? If then this
Heathen King was so impatient to see David act the Bedlam in his presence, even
in his ordinary apparel, that he would not suffer him to stay within his
Palace; how much more impatient should all Christian Princes and Magistrates be
of beholding Christians acting, not only Mad-mens, but eve^ Devils, Idols,
Furies, Monsters, beasts, and senseless creatures parts upon the Stage in such
prodigious deformed habits and disguises, as are unsuitable to their humanity,
their Christianity, gravity, sobriety; bewraying naught else but the very
vanity, folly, and brutish frenzy of the^r distempered minds? Certainly
those who readily censure and detest such habits, such representations in all
other places must needs condemn them in the Playhouse, whose See Act 6. Scene
3.4, 5. and Bullengerus, De Theatro. lib. 1. c. 50.51.
execrable infamous lewdness may happily make them more unlawful, never
commendable or fit for Christians. Lastly, these theatricall habits, vizards,
and disguises have been evermore abominated, condemned by the Church and
Saints of God: as namely, by the Jewish Church and Nation: who, as they never
admitted nor erected any Images of Pictures of God, of Christ, or Saints within
their Temple, as Est autem in media Hierusolyma quadroporticus, etc.
Simulachrum vero aut aliquod anathema ibi nequaquam est. Apud Iosephum. Contra
Apionem. lib. 1. page 833.
Hecataeus Abderita, AEgyptij plaeraque animalia effigiesque compositas
venerantur. Iudaei mente sola unumque numen intelligunt. Profanos qui nideum
imagines mortalibus materijs in species hominum effingant. Summum illud atque
aeternum, neque mutabile, neque interiturum. Igitur nulla simulachra urbibus
suis, neque templis. Non regibus haec adulatio, non Caesaribus honor. Histor.
lib. 5. cap. 1. page 592.
Cornelius Tacitus, Iudaei diversum a reliquis-hominibus ob tinent, cu^ alijs
in rebus usuque vitae quotidiano, tu^ eo praesertim quod nullu^ ex caeteris
Dijs colunt: unu^ aute^ quenda^ summo studio venera^tur, Tum quoque temporis
nullum Hierosolymis simulacrum extabat; nimirum suum illum Deum ineffabilem,
invisibilemque existimantes. Romans Hist. l. 37 fol 76.
Dion Cassius, Hactenus pro patria deprae catus postremas pro Templo preces
adhibeo. Hoc Templum Cai Domine, jam inde ab initio nullam unquam admisit
manufactam effigiem cum sit Deo domicilium: pictorum enim and statuariorum
opera sunt sensibilium Deorum imagines: illum autem invisibilom pingere aut
fingere nefas duxerunt nostri majores. Non Graecus, non Barbarus, non Rex
Satrapave ullus vel infensissimus; non seditio, non bellum, non captivitas, non
vastatio, non alia res ulla unquam tantam cladem intulit, ut contra veterem
morem effigies manufacta in id importaretur. De Legatione ad Caium. page 1386
vid. 1389, etc. See De Monarchi^. lib. fol. 1037.1038, 1039.
Philo Iudaeus, and Graecis itaque and alijs quibusdam bonum esse creditur
imagines instituere. Denique and patrum, and uxorum filrorumque ^iguras
depingentes exultant; quidam vero etiam nihil sibi competentium sumunt
imagines, etc. Porro autem legislator, non quasi prophetans Romanorum potentiam
non honorandam, sed tanquam causam neque Deo neque hominibus utilem despiciens,
and quoniam totius animati, multo magis Dei inanimati, probatur hoc inferius,
interdixit imagines fabricari: to which Sigismundus Silenius affixeth this
marginall note. Iudaei prorsus nullas imagines ferunt. Contra Apionem. lib. 2.
page 846.
Josephus witness: accounting it a heinous sin Exodus 20.4. Levit. 26.^, 30.
Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 25. c. 5.8. c. 16.21, 22.
contrary to the express words of the second Commandment, to paint or make
any Picture, any Image of God; because the John 1.18. c. 5.37. Romans 1.23. Col.
1.15. 1 Timothy 1.17. c. 6.16. Heb. 11.1. 1 Ioh 4.20. Deuteronomy. 4.15. Deus inter omnia
operibus quidem and muneribus clarus, and omni re manifestior, forma vero and
magnitudine nobis inenarrabilis. Omnis namque materies comparata ad hujus
imaginem, licet sit preciosa, tamen pro nullo est; cunctaque ars ad illius
imitationis inventum, extra artem esse cognoscitur: nihil simile neque videmus,
neque possumus suspicari neque conijcere, illeinvisibilis sola mente
percipitur. Josephus Contra Apionem. lib. 2. page 854. Philo Iudaeus de
Monarchia. lib. page 1097, etc.
invisible incorporiall God, (whom no man has seen at any time, nor can see;
between whom and any Image, Picture, or creature there is Isay 40.12. to 27.
Acts 17.29. Romans 1.23.
no similitude, no proportion,) cannot be expressed by any visible shape or
likeness whatsoever, (his Image being only spiritual and Col. 1.15. John
15.37. Deuteronomy. 4.15. Heb. 2.3. 1 Timothy 6.16. Philo Iudaeus, De Mundi Opificio.
page 8.9. Origin Contr. Celsium. lib. 7. fol. 72. and lib. 7. fol. 97.
invisible like himself,) as not only the Act 17.29. Isay 40.18, 15.
Scripture, but even Exurge modo, and re quoque dignum ^inge Deo, finges autem
non auro, non argento: Non potest ex hac materia, imago Dei exprimi similis.
Epist. 30. page 207.
Seneca and De Natura Deorum. lib. 1.2.
Tully inform us: Upon which grounds the Primitive Christians ( who had no
Images, no Pictures, no Altars in their Churches, as In hoc n. consuestis part
crimen nobis maximum impietatis affigere, quod non Deorum alicujus simulacru^
constituamus, non Altaria fabricemus, non Aras. Advers. Gentes l. 6. p. 185.
Arnobius, Non n. Christiani patiuntur vel Templa, vel aras, vel simulacra, and
statuas intueri: simulacra aperte vituperant, etc. Christiani vero and item
Iudaei, cum audiunt, Dominum Deum tuum timebis, and illi soli servies; nec tibi
feceris idolum, nec rei ullius similitudinem, quae cumque in caelo sunt and in
terra deorsum, etc. and ob alia pleraque non his dissimilia: non modo Deorum
templa and Aras and simulachra haec aversantur, sed vel ad mortem si fuerit
necesse promptius veniunt, ne ex aliquo recessu and impietate prorsus
inquinent, quod de De^ omnium conditore optime sentiunt, etc. Celsus igitur
haud quaquam pro dijs simulacra haberi affirmat, sed dijs dicata: cum plane
perspicuu^ sit hujusmodi facere and affirmare, hominum esse circa divinitatem
errantium. Sed ne divinae quidem imaginis simulacra haec esse duxerimus, quippe
qui Dei ut invisibilis ita and incorporei formam nullam effigiamus, etc. Cont.
Celsum. l. 7. f^ 96.97. See 91.92. Celsus and Aras and simulacra and delubra
nos ait defugere quo minus fundentur. Sunt nobis vero simulacra non per impuros
opifices aliquos fabricata, sed per Dei verbum in nobis edita and formata;
virtutes scilicet primogeniti omnis creaturae imitatrices, etc. in quibus par
esse crediderim, ei honorem deferri, qui omnium sit simulacrorum exemplar,
imago scilicet invisibilis Dei, unigenitus Deus, etc. Contr. Celsum l. 8. fol
100. vid. Ibid. and lib. 4 fol. 46.47.
Origin, Putatis nos occultare quod colimus si delubra and Aras non habemus:
quod enim simulacrum Deo fingam, cum si recte existimes sit Dei homo ipse
simulacrum. Octavius page 104.
Minucius Felix, and De Origin Erroris. l. 2. c. 2.3, 4, 5, 7, 17, 18, 19.
Lactantius testify, for which the Pagans blamed them:) as also Sed nec eos
qui hostijs multis coronisque ex floribus contextis colantur, homines qui eorum
statuas efficta in Templis statuerunt, Deos appelaverunt, quandoquidem haec
inania and mortua esse scimus, Deique formam e^ figuram non habere. Neque ^^tam
Dei figuram esse arbitramur, quam quidam honoris causa ad imitationem effictam
esse confirmant: sed illorum maloru^ geniorum habere and nomina and figuras.
Quid enim attinet vobis qui scitis, exponere e^ quae artifices disposita
materia secando, dividendo, conflando, percutiendo, and ex vasis ignominiosis
saepe artificio mutata solum forma and figura alia inducta, Deorum nomine
appellant? quod quide^ non solum stultu^ esse, sed etiam contumeliae Dei causa
fieri judicamus: qui cum gloriam formamque exprimi quae non potest habeat,
earum rerum quae intereunt, ^uraque egent, appelatur nomine. Quinetiam haru^
rerum artifices lascivi sunt, omnique malicia and improbitate praediti, etc.
Apologia. 2. pro Christianis. p. 16. B.C.
Justin Martyr, Adversus Haereses. l. 1. c. 23.24. p. 88 92. and l. 2. c. 6. p.
134.135.
Irenaeus, Deus, qui solus vere est Deus intelligentia percipitur, non sensu.
Antisthenes Socratis familiaris, dixit, Deum nulli esse similem, quare nemo
illum potest discere ex imagine. Xenophon autem Atheniensis ipse aperte
scribit: Qui omnia movet and quieta efficit, magnus quidem est and aperte
potens, sed cujusmodi sit forma non apparet, etc. Oration adhort. ad Gentes.
fol. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. vid. Ibid. an excellent discourse against Images:
Significat aute^ columna ignis, Dei non posse effingi imaginem, etc. Stromatum.
l. 1. f. 73. B. l. 5 f. 122. D.E. Nobis autem nullum est simulacru^ in mundo;
quoniam in rebus genitis nihil potest Dei refer imagine^. Praeterea oportet
Graecos doceri per legem and Prophetas, quod nec eorum quos colunt simulacra
sunt imagines: neque enim fugura tale est genus animarum, cujusmodi fingunt
Graeci statuas. Non cadunt n. animae sub aspectum, non solu^ quae sunt compotes
rationis, sed etiam animae aliorum animantium; quanto minus Dei invisibilis
imago. Strom. l. 6. f. 143. C. Moses praecipit hominibus nullam facere imaginem
quae Deum art repraesentat. Paedag. l. 3 c^ 2. f. 46. A.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Deus omne^ similitudinem vetat ^ieri, quanto magis
imaginis suae, etc. De Spectac. c. 23. De Corona Militis. c. 8. and De
Idololatria. lib. and Apologia Advers. Gentes: where Franciscus Zephyrus. p.
675. Comments thus. Perpetuo illud teneamus, Christianos tunc temporis odisse
maxim statuas cum suis ornamentis.
Tertullian, Contra Celsum. l. 7. f. 96.97. and l. 8. f. 100.
Origin, Octavius. p. 75.76, 77, 104.
Min^^ius Felix, Contra Demetrianum. lib p. 221.223. and De Idoloru^ Vanitate.
p. 264, etc.
Cyprian, Neque nobis in aedibus sacris effigies pro dijs, and illa simulachra
velitis ostendere, quae intelligitis vos quoque and renuitis confiteri,
vilissimi esse formas luti and fabroru^ figmenta puerilia, etc. Nunc ad speciem
veniamus and formas quibus esse descriptos superos Deos creditis, quibus imo
formatis and temploru^ amplissimis collacatis in sedibus. Nostra de hoc
sententia talis est; Natural omnem divina^, quae neque esse caeperit aliquando
neque vitalem ad terminu^ sit aliquando ventura, lini^mentis carere corporeis,
neque ullas formaru^ effigies possidere, quibus etiam circu^scriptio membroru^
solet coagmentata finire. Quicquid enim tale est mortale esse arbitramur and
labile: nec obtinere perpetua^ posse credimus aevitatem, quod extremis
coercitu^ finibus necessaria circu^cludit extremitas, etc. Si vera^ vultis
audire sententia^, aut nulla^ habet Deus forma^; aut si informatus est aliqua
ea quae fit, profecto nescimus. Neque n. quod videmus nunqua^, nescire esse
ducimus turpe, etc. Advers. Gentes. l. 3. p. 162. to 112. See l. 6. p. 185.191.
to 206. l. 7. p. 133.134, 135.
Arnobius, De Origin Erroris. l. 2. c. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 11, 17, 18, 19. Quae
igitur amentia est, aut ea fingere, quae ipsi postmodum timeant, aut timere
quae finxerunt. Non ipsa, inquiunt, timemus, sed eos ad quorum imagines ficta;
and quoru^ nominibus consecrata sunt. Nempe ideo timetis, quod eos in caelo
esse arbitramini: neque n. si dij sunt aliter fieri potest. Cur igitur oculos
in caelum non tollitis, and advocatis eorum nominibus in aperto sacrificia
celebratis? Cur ad parietes and ligna and lapides potissimu^, quam illo
spectatis, ubi eos esse creditis? Quid sibi templa? quid arae volunt, quid
denique ipsa simulachra? quae aut mortuorum aut absentium sunt monimenta. Nam
omnium fingendarum similitudinu^ ratio id^irco ab hominibus inventa est, ut
posset eorum memoria retineri, qui vel morte substracti, vel absentia fuerant
separati. Deo^ igitur in quorum numero reponemus? Si in mortuorum? quis tam
stultus ut colat? Si in absentu^, colendi ergo non sunt, si nec vident quae
facimus, nec etia^ audiunt quae precamur. Si autem dij absentes esse non
possent, qui, quonia^ divini sunt, in quacunque mundi part fuerint, vident and
audiunt universa: supervacua ergo sunt simulacra, illis ubique presentibus,
quum s^tis sit audientium nomina precibus advocare. At enim non nisi praesentes
ad imagines suas adsunt, etc. Sed tamen post qua^ praesto esse Deus ille
caepit, jam simulachro ejus opus non est. Quaero enim, si quis imaginem hominis
peregre constituti contempletur saepius, and ex e^ solatium capiat absentis;
number idem sanus esse videatur si eo reverso atque praesente, in contemplanda
imagine perseveret, eaque potius quam ipsius hominis aspectu, frui velit?
Minime profecto. Etenim hominis imago necessaria tum videtur quum procul abest,
supervacua futura quu^ praesto est. Dei autem cujus spiritus ac numen ubique
diffusum, abesse nun qua^ pot st, semper utique imago supervacua est. Sed
verentur ne omnis eorum religio manis sit and vana, si nihil in praesenti
videant quod adorent, and ideo simulacra constituunt, quae quia mortuoru^ sunt
imagines, similia mortuis sunt, omni enim sensu carent: Dei autem in aeternu^
viventis vivu^ and sensibile debet esse simulacrum: quod si a similitudine id
nomen accepit, qui possunt ista simulacra Deo similia judicari; quae nec
sentiunt, nec moventur? Itaque simulachrum Dei non illud est quod digitis
hominis ex lapide aut aere, aliave materia fabricatur, sed ipse homo; quonia^
and sentit and movetur, and multas magnasque actiones habet, etc. Quisqua^ne
igitur tam ineptus est, ut putet aliquid esse in simulacro Dei, in quo ne
hominis quide^ quicqua^ est praeter umbram? L^^tant. De Orig. Erroris c. 2.
Daemones sunt qui fingere imagines and simulacra docuerunt ut hominu^ mentes a
cultu very Dei averterent. Ibid c. 17. Quare non est dubium quin religio nulla
sit, ubicunque simul cru^ est. Nam si religio ex divinis rebus est, divini
autem nihil est nisi in caelestibus rebus: care^t ergo religione simulacra,
quia nihil potest esse caeleste in ea re quae fit ex terra, quod quide^ de
nomine ipso sapienti apparere potest. Quicquid n. simulatur id falsum sit
necesse est, nec potest unquam very nomen accipere quod veritatem ^uco and
imitatione mentitur. Si autem omnis imitatio, non res potissimum seria, sed
quasi ludus ac jocus est, non religio in simulacris, sed mimus religionis est.
Ibid c. 19.
Lactantius, Simulacroru^ odium commune est omnium qui fidei participes sunt;
sed ejus praecipuu^ quod Arianam infidelitatem similiter atque simulachroru^
cultum abominabatur. Nam eos qui in creatura numen divinum esse existimare^t,
nihilo minora colere atque venerati putabat quam qui ex materia simulachra
efficient, and recte ac pie ita judicabat. Nam qui creaturam ado^at etiam^i in
nomine Christi id facit, simulachrorum cultor est, Christi nome^ simulachro
imponens. Oration Funebris de Placilla p. 290.291. See Explanatio in Cant.
Cantic. p. 359.
Gregory Nyssen, Gentiles lignum adorant, quia Dei imagine^ putant, sed
invisibilis Dei imago non in eo est quod videtur, sed in eo utique quod non
videtur. Enar. in Psalm. 118. Octon. 10. Tom. 2. p 454. B. Ecclesiae inanes
ideas and varias nescit simulacroru^ figuras, sed veram novit Trinitatis
substantiam. De Fuga Seculi. cap. 5. See Epist. 31.
Ambrose, In primo praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in figmentis hominum Dei
similitudo; non qu^a non habet imaginem Deus, sed quia nulla imago e^
colli^ebat, nisi illa quae hoc esset quod ipse, nec ipsa pro illo sed cum illo^
Epist. 2^. De Celebratione Paschae. Tom. 9. p. 100. B. Imago autem and
similitudo Dei, non est corporis forma sed mentis, descripta ad similitudinem
verae imaginis Christi, qui est imago Dei invisibilis. Nos unam veneramu^
imaginem, quae est imago invisibilis and omnipotentis Dei. Comment in Ezech. l.
1. c. 1 Tom. 4. p. 331. H. and l. 4. c. 16. p. 372. D See Comment. in Esaias.
cap. 40.
Hierom, August. Epist. 119. Enar in Psalm. 113. Con^io. 2. Credimus etiam quod
^edet ad dextram Dei patris: Necideo tamen quasi humana forma circumscriptum
esse Deum patrem arbitrandu^ est, ut de illo cogitantibus dextrum aut sinistru^
latus ^nimo occurrat; aut id ipsum quod sedere pater dicitur, flexis poplitibus
fieri putandu^ est, ne in illud incidamus sacrilegium, quo execratur Apostolus
eos qui communicaverunt gloriam incorruptibilis Dei in similitudinem
corruptibilis hominis. Tale n. simulacrum Deo nefas est Christiano in Templo
collocare, multo magis in cord nefarium est, ubi vere est Templum Dei.
Augustine. De Fide and Symbolo cap. 7. Tom. 3. page 1^9. See De moribus
Ecclesiae Catholicae. cap. 24.
Augustine^ Quod enim corpus intellectui divino simil^tudinem habebit, cum nec
mentis humanae imaginem habere posse cognoscatur? humana n. men's incorporea est
atque simplex, corpus autem omne corruptibile atquecompositum. Quare jure,
rationalis atque immortalis anima and intellectus ejus imaginem and
similitudinem Dei habere dicitur, Immaterialis enim and incorporea,
intellectualis, rationalisque per essentiam est, virtutis and sapientiae capax.
Quod si hum^nae animae atque mentis formam and effigiem fingere impossible
est, quoniam nec sensu percipitur: quis adeo stultus erit, ut ligneum
simulachrum ac effigiem Dei creatoris omnium, similitudinem Dei habere
arbitraretur? Natura n. divina omnem materiam and omnia quae percepimus
excedit, mente solummodo and sanctis animis intellecta. Figura vero Iovis quae
in simulachro conspicitur, mortalis viri effigies est, non quae totum hominem,
sed pejorem ejus partem imitata, expressit, nullum n. vitae atque animae,
vestigium ostendit. Quomodo igitur universi Deus, mensque omnium creatrix ipse
Jupiter ^rit, qui aut in aer^, aut in mortuo ^bore cernitur? De Praeparatione
Evangelij. lib 3. cap. 3. page 53. See Ecclesiast. Histor. lib. 7. cap. 18.
Eusebius, Inveni^igitur velum pendens in foribus ejusdem Ecclesiae tinctum
atque depictum, and habens imaginem quasi Christi, vel sancti cujus^am, non
enim sat^s memini, cujus imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia
Christi contra auctoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, s^^di illud,
and majus dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci, ut pauperem mortuum eo
obvolverent and e^ferrent. Deinceps praecipere, in Ecclesia Christi istiusmodi
vel^, quae contra religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi. E^iphanius Epist. ad
Ioa^nem Hier^sol apud Hieron. Epist. 60: cap. 5 Tom. 1. page 211. See Bishop
Vshers Answer to the Jesuits challenge. page 507.
Epiphanius, Cui similitudini similem fecistis Deum? Quid n. erit ei simile and
equipollens se^ ^aturae, seu ponderis, seu nobilitatis ratione? Number enim art
fabri and lignarij, number auri fusorum peritia formatus est in imaginem alicujus
creaturae? An inquit effictus est, humana imago? Minime. Nihil enim ei quicquam
aequari potest. Deus n. cum sit, natura and ex se, quia aliud non ex^iti^,
omnibus omnino superior est. Cum itaque supra omne est quod factum est, and
quod genitum est, deride^ idolorum effictionem, etc. Cyrillus Alexandr. in
H^saiam. lib. 7. Tom. 1. page 276.277. and in Joan. Evang. lib. 3. cap. 11.
page 478.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Adhaec quisnam est, qui invisibilis and corpore
vacantis ac circumscriptionis and figurae expertis Dei simulachrum effingere
qu^at? Extrem^e itaque dementiae and impietatis fuerit divinum numen fingere ac
figurare. Atqui hinc est quod in veteri ^estamento mimine tritus ac pervulgatus
imaginum usus fuerit: Orthodoxae Fidei. lib. 4. cap. 17. page 477. and lib. 1.
cap. 4. page 251. vid. Ibidem.
Damascen, and See Hilar. De Trinit l. 1. p. 3. and l. 2. p. 7. G. Psalm. in
Nar. 129 8. p. 303. B. De Trinit. I. 6. page 31. Specie and figura caret Deus.
Non solum autem sculpturae artis Deus non est similis, sed neque alteri cuiquam
humanae cogitatione subijcitur. Theophylact. Enar. in Ioannem. c. 5. p. 248.
Chrysostom. Hom. 38 in Act. Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 587. C. Athana^ius, Contra Gentes
Oration. p. 7. and 10. Contra Sabellij Graegales. p. 48.49. and Quaest. 50. p.
400. Theodoret in Deuteronomy Quaest. 4. Nicephorus. Ecclesi. Hist. l. 18. c. 53. See
Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret, Remigius, Beda, Haymo, HRabanus Maurus,
Occumenius, Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Alselmus. Com. in Romans 1.23. and 1 Timothy
6.16. Serenus Marsiliensis^ apud Greg. Mag. Epist. l. 7. Epist. 109. and l. 9
Epist. 9. Claudius Taurinensis Contra Imagines. l. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 4. pars 1
p. 91. to 118. Amphilochius; in BB. Vshers answer to the Jesuits challenge. p.
506. Centur. Magd. 8. Col. 559.564. and D. Rainolds, De Idololatria. Romans
Ecclesiae. l. 2. c. 2. sect 9. accordingly.
other Fathers; together with Quod potest intelligentia solum perspici and
conprehendi mente, nec appetit formam qua cognoscatur, nec figuram admittit, ut
imaginem and effigiem^ O^atio. ad Sanctorum caetum. c 4. apud Eusebium. Tom. 2.
p. 300.
Constantine the Great, See the Homily against the peril of Idolatry pars 2.3.
Centur. 6^ Col. 329.375, 707. Centur. 8. Col. 3.12, 41, 33, 37, 531, 535, 558,
559, 560, 561, 665, 544, 545, 622, 623, 377, 274. Cent. 9. Col. 19.22, 24, 351,
352, 353.
Constantinus Caballinus, Nicephorus, Stauratius, Philippicus, Anthemius,
Theodosius the second, Leo Armenus, Valence, Theodosius the third, Michael
Balbus, Theophilus, Charles the Great, with other Emperors; the Councels of
Placuit, picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere; ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in
parietibus depingatur. Council. Elib. Can 36. Surius. Tom. 1. p. 365.
Eliberis, See the Homily against the peril of Idolatry. part 2.3. BB. Vshers
Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. page 511. to 514. Carolus Magnus. l. 4. Contra
Imagines.
Constantinople, Toledo, and Frankford; with sundry Ergo o stultae Gentiles,
cui simile fecistis Deum? Curauro and argento aut rei alicui insensatae? Aut
quam imaginem ponetis ei qui illum aliquo modo exprimat qui spiritus est, etc?
Cum igitur^^se incomprehensibilis and immensus sit, dicit sanctus, Cui me
assimulastis? cur homini, cur volucri, cur serpenti? Et cui me adaequastis? cur
auro, cur argento? cur alicui creaturae? Haymo Comment. in Isaiam. c. 40. fol.
331.335. See Agabardus de Picturis and Imaginibus. lib. and Lucas Tudensis. l.
2. Adversus Albigenses c. 3. and 20. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 13. page 260.272, 273.
an excellent discourse against the Images and Pictures of God or the Trinity,
where he thus concludes. Imag^ Dei^^cae Trinitatis, ab hominibus nec debeat,
nec possit depingi. See D. Rainolds de Idololatria Romans Eccl. l. 2. c. 2. sect.
10.
Popish and Peter Martyr, In Epist. ad Romans c. 1. p. 54. to 73. Calvin, Instit.
l. 1. c. 11. and Com. in Romans 1.23. and Act. 17.29. See Musculus, Marlorat,
Bucer, Bulinger, Aretius, and others Ibid. and in 1 Timothy 6.16. Doctor Wille^;
Com. on Romans 1. Contr. 22. p. 95.96. Hexapla in Exodus c. 20. Commandment 2.
Contr. 4. M. Cartwright on the Rhemish Test. on Act. 17. sect. 4. Heb. 9. s. 4.
1 Ioh. 5. s. 5. Rev. 13. sect. 7. and Mat. 9. s. 9. D. Boys his Postils. p.
49. Thomas Wilson, his Com. on Romans 1. Dial. 13. v. 22.23, 24^ with others
hereafter quoted^ p. 844.895.
Protestant Writers since, our late renowned His Premonition to all Christian
Princes p. 354.
Sovereign King James, and our own Homilies, against the peril of Idolatry,
(established by 13. Eliz. c. 12. Artic. 35.
Act of Parliament, and confirmed by our Articles and Canons, as the undoubted
Doctrine of our Church, to which all our Clergy subscribe:) do absolutely
condemn, Artic. 35. Canons 1603. Can. 82.85.
as sinful, idolatrous, and abominable the making of any Image or Picture of
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, or of the sacred Trinity, and the erecting
of them, of Crucifixes, or such like Pictures in Churches, which like the
Alexander S^verus Christo Templ^ facere voluit, ^umque inter Deos recipere;
quod and Hadrianus cogitasse fertur, qui Templa in omnibus civita^ibus sine
simulacr^s jusserat fieri. AElij Lampridij Severus. p. 236.
Emperor Adrians Temples built for Christ, should be without all Images, or
Saints Pictures. So they likewise condemned the very See Philo Iudaeus, De
Monarchia. l. 1. p. 1099. Josephus Contra Apionem l. 1 p. 858. Clemens Alex.
Oration Adhort. ad Gentes. Cyprian, De Idoloru^ Vanit. p. 264. Tertul. De
Idololatria. lib.
art of making Pictures and Images, as the occasion of Idolatry, together with
all Stage-portraitures, Images, Vizards, or representations of Heathen Idols,
etc. as gross Idolatry, as Antiq. Iudaeoru^. lib. 15. cap. 11. page 413.
Josephus witnesses: The selfsame censure is passed against these theatricall
Pictures, Vizards, Images, and disguises, by Philo Iudaeus, De Decalogo. lib.
page 1037. By Tertul De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 23. De Corona Militis. lib. cap.
8.9. and De Idololatria. lib. By Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. and lib. 1.
Epist. 10. and De Spectac. lib. By Arnobius Adversus Gentes. lib. 7. By
Lactantius De Vero Cultu lib. 6. cap. 20. By Augustine, De Civit. Dei. lib. 2.
cap. 5. to 14. By the 6. Council of Constantinople. Can. 60.62. (See here page
88.69, 583, 584,) By the Synod of Lingres. her^, page 600. By the Council of
Basil, here page 601. By the Council of Toledo, here page 603.604. by sundry
oother for^-quoted Councels and Synods. here page 606.625, 633, 635, etc. By
our own Statute of 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. against Mummers and Vizards. here page
493, 494. By Tostatus in Deuteronomy. 22. Quaest. 2. Tom. 2. pars 3. p. 119. B.C. By
Polidor Virgil, De Inventoribus Rerum. lib. 5. c. 2. By Ioannis Langhecrucius,
De Vita and Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 22. page 321.322, 323. By
Doctor Rainolds, in his Overthrow of Stage Plays, and by most others who have
written either against Stage Plays, vain fashions, and apparel, or
face-painting. Wherefore they are certainly unlawful, as I have formerly
proved at large. Act 3. Scene 3. and Act 5. Scene 1.2, 3, 5, 6, 7. on which you
may reflect. I shall therefore close this point with that speech of Col.
991.994. recited likewise by Vincentius Speculum. Histor. lib. 28. cap. 96.97.
Saint Bernard, in his Apology to William the Abbot, in his passage against
the Omitto oratorioru^ imme^^as altit^dines, immoderatas longitudines,
supervacuas latitudines, sumptuosas depolitiones, curiosas depictiones; quae
dum orantiu^ in se retorquent aspectum, impediunt and affectu^, etc. Quem
inquam ex his fructum requirimus? stultorum admirationem an simplicium
oblectationem? An quoniam commixti sumus inter Gentes, forte didicimus opera
eorum, and servimus adhuc sculptilibus eorum? Et ut aperte loquar, an non hoc
totum facit avaritia, quae est idolorum servitus, and non requirimus fru^tum
sed datum? Si quaeris, quomodo? miro, inquam modo. Tali quadam art spargitur
oes, ut multiplicetur: expenditur ut augeatur, and effusio copiam parit. Ipso
quippe visu sumptuosaru sed mirandarum vanitatum accenduntur homines magis ad
offerendum quam ad adorandum. Sic opes opibus hauriuntur, sic pecunia pecuniam
trahit, quia nescio quo pacto, ubi amplius divitiarum cernitur, ibi offertur
libentius. Auro tectis reliquijs signantur oculi, and loculi aperiuntur.
Ostenditur pulcherima forma sancti vel sanctae alicujus, and eo creditur
sanctior quo coloratior. Curru^t homines ad osculandum, invitantur ad donandum,
and magis mirantur pulchra quam venerantur sacra, etc. Quid putas in his
omnibus quaeritur, paenitentium compunctio, an intuentium admiratio? O vanitas
vanitatum! sed non vanior quam insanior. Fulget ecclesia in parietibus, and in
pauperibus eget. Suos lapides induit auro, and suos filios nudos deserit. De
sumptibus egenorum servitur oculis divitum. Inveniunt curiosi, quo delectentur,
and non inveniunt miseri quo sustententur. Bernard. Ibid. See the Homily
against the Peril of Idolatry, and of Adorning and keeping clean of Churches,
accordingly.
overcostly building and adorning of Temples, and the setting up of vain
Images and Pictures in Churches, (a thing much condemned by See the Homily
against the Peril of Idolatry, accordingly.
sundry Fathers, Councels, and Imperial Christian Constitutions; by all
Reformed Churches, and orthodox See Thomas Rogers, his Exposition on the 22.
Article. Proposition 3. p. 125.126. accordingly.
Protestant Writens, and by 3. Edw. 6. c. 10. 13. Eliz. c. 12.3. Iac. c. 5.
the Statutes, Queen Eliz. Injunctions. Injunct. 2.3, 23, 25. and Articles to
be inquired of in Visitations. Artic. 2. and 45.
Injunctions, Homilies against the peril of Idolatry. The Homilies of the
Right use of the Church, part 2. Homily of the place and time of Prayer. part 2.
Homilies, Can. 82.
Canons, Archbishop Cranmer who penned the Homilies against the peril of
Idolatry. BB. Hooper on the 2. Commandment; and in the Confession of his Faith
upon the Creed. Artic. 78. and 87. BB. Latimers Sermon, ad Clerum. fol. 3.11.
and his Sermon in the Shrowdes at Paul's. f. 18.21. BB. Ridley, his Treatise in
the name of the whole Clergy of England, to King Edward the VI. concerning
Images not to be set up, or worshipped in Churches. Mr. Fox his Book^ of
Martyrs. London 1610. p. 1927.1928, 1929, 1930, (See there page 116.433, 468,
492, 518, 521, 793, 796, 848, 1000, 1014, 1015, 1181, 1183, and 1940 where we
shall see Commissions both from H. 8. and E. 6. for pulling down Images out of
Churches: which Images were destroyed both at Zuricke and Basil, and condemned
by the Martyrs that suffered:) John Bale Cent. Script. Brit. p. 38.79, 80, 566,
648, ^55. BB. Alley his Poor man's Library. pars 1. f. 79.80. to which I might
add BB. Jewel, BB. Bi^son, BB. Abbot, BB. Babington, on the 2. Com^andement.
BB. Morton, BB. White, BB. Dav^nate, and others.
ancient and modern Bishops, and authorized M. Tindall in his Answer to Sir
Thomas More^ p. 270. to 275. and in his Answer to M. Moors 4. Book. p. 325.
D. Barnes his Treatise, that it is against the holy Scripture to honor Images p
339, etc. John Wragton, in his Course and Hunting of the Romish Fox, etc. John
Ver^n his strong battery of the Invocation of Saints. Thomas Beacon his
Catechism. p. 3^7. to 336. and his Romes Relics. c. 25 26. D. Ca^fehils
answer to John Marshials Treatise of the Cross, The Preface. fol. ^. to 19.
and Artc. 3.9, 10. f. 81. to 86. and 164. to 186. being an excellent Treatise
against setting up Images in Churches. Dr. Humfries De Vita and morte Iuelli.
p. 33. Gualt^erus Haddon Contra Osorium. l. 1. f. 33. to 37. l. 3. f. 254, 271,
272, 273, 286, 297, 332. D. Sparks against Albin^s Epistle to the Reader D
Rainolds De Idololatria Romans Ecclesiae: to whom I might add D. Fulkes Answer
to the Rhemish Testament Act. 17 sect. 5. p. 400.401. 1 Ioh. c. 5. sect. 5.
page 839. Answer to Martin. c. 3.4. D. Field, D. Crakenth^rpe, D. Willet, D.
John White, with all our Writers upon the 2. Commandment, who all concur in
this; that Images ought not to be suffered or set up in Churches; to which
Assertion every Bishop and Minister of the Church of England does subscribe in
subscribing to our Articles and Homilies, which affirm the same in positive
terms: those therefore who defend, or erect Images revolt from their own
subscription, and so ought to be deprived, by the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap. 12.
who caused Images to be taken out of Churches in the first and second years
of her Reign, as Haddon Contra Osor. l. 3. f. 171. and Dr. Fulke in his Answer
to Martin. c. 3. sect. 3. p. 36. expressly testify.
Writers of the Church and State of England, who teach, that all Images and
Pictures, especially Crucifixes, with the Images, the Pictures of God the
Father, and the sacred Trinity, which to make is gross Idolatry and
superstition, ought wholly to be abolished and cast out of Churches, in which
some of late erect the^:) where thus he writes. Caeterum in claustris (I may
^ay in Spectaculis and theatris) cora^ legentibus fratribus quid facit illa
ridicula monstruositas, mira deformis formositas, ac formosa deformitas? quid
ibi immundae simiae, quid feri leones? quid monstruosi Centauri? quid
semi-homines? quid maculosae tigrides? quid milites pugnantes? quid venatores
tubicina^tes? Videas sub uno capite multa corpora, and in uno corpore capita
multa. Cernitur hinc in quadrupede cauda serpentis, illinc in pisce caput
quadrupedis. ^bib^stia praefert equum, capram trahens retro dimidiam, hic
cornutum animal equum gerit posterius. Tam multa denique tamque mira diversarum
formarum ubique varietas apparet, ut magis legere libeat in marmoribus quam in
codicibus, totumque diem occupare singula ista mirando, quam in Dei lege
meditando. O vanitas vanitatum! sed non vanior quam insanior. Pro Deo si non
pudet ineptiarum; cur vel non piget expensarum. And thus much for the manner of
acting Stage Plays.

Seneca^ Thebais. Act^ 3. fol. 66.
qui praemium incertum petunt certum scelus: the second only of Academicall
and private Actors. To begin with the first. I say it is altogether unlawful
for any to act Plays for gain or profit sake, or to make a trade See Act 6.
Scene 5^ p^ 448. to 500.
examples of Plato, Aristotle, the Lacedaemonians, Massilienses, and others, who
excluded Stage Players their Republikes, and of the Sea Act 4. Scene 1. Act 6.
Scene 5.12, 20 and Act 7. Scene 2.3.
Primitive Church and Christians who excommunicated and banish^d them the
Church, together with our own 22 Henry 8. c. 12^ 14 Eliz c. 5.39. ^liz ^. 4.1.
Iac. cap. 7^
Statutes, who brand them all for Vagrant Rogues and sturdy Beggars, most
plentifully evidence. That therefore which all ages have thus solemnly censured
as infamous, ^xecrable and unchristian, can be no lawful calling for men to
live or gain by. Besides, the profession of a Stage Player, See Act 1 2. and
Act 8. Scene 7. and Act 8. Scene 2.
had its original institution from Pagan Idols and Idolaters: it was originally
devoted to Idolatry, to Bacchus, and Heathen Devill-gods: it tends only to See
Act 6. thorowout. Tacit. Annal. l. 14. cap. 2.3.
dissoluten^sse and profaneness, to nourish idleness, vice, and all kind of
wickedness both in the Actors and Spectators: yea, it makes men professed
vassals to the Devil, to maintain his very works and See here, page 42. to
61.561. to 568.
Pompes which they have utterly renounced in their baptism: it tends neither
to Gods glory, nor the good of men: needs therefore must it be unlawful; and
so likewise to get money by it. Secondly, Stage Plays in their very best
acception are See Act 3. Scene 7. and Act 5. Scene 4.
vanities or idle recreations, which have no price, no worth or value in them:
they cannot therefore be vendible because they are not valuable. In every
lawful way of gain or trade, there ought to be Hotoman De Vsuris, c. 2. M
Northbrooke against Vain Plays. p. 44.45. Summa Angelica. Tit. Ludus. BB.
Babington, Beacon, Dod, Perkins, and others on the 8. Commandment.
quid pro quo, some worth or other in the thing that is sold, equivalent to the
price the vendees pay, or else the gain is fraudulent and sinful; but there
is no value at all in Stage Plays or their action, which are but empty
worthless vanities; therefore no price ought to be taken for them. Thirdly,
See Act 6. Scene 5. and Act 7. Scene 2.3, 7. See Hostiensis, Summa Angelica.
Iacobus De Graffijs. De Ludo and Alea: and Danaeus de Ludo Aleae. lib. and
Alexander Alensis. Summa Theologiae. pars 4. Quaest. 24. Artic. 3. sect. 6.
neither the Word or Church of God, nor the Laws and Statutes of any Christian
Kingdom (which for the most part condemn al Actors and their lewd
profession,) did ever authorize the acting of Plays (no nor yet the Playing at
Cards or Dice, or Bowls,) as a lawful trade and means for men to live and
gain by. Yea, the acting of Stage Plays can never be made a lawful
profession, because Plays themselves are but recreations, which must not be
turned into professions; recreations being only to be used Voluptates
co^mendat rarior usus. Iuvenal Satyr. 11 p 111. See M. Northbrooke against
Vain Plays and Enterludes, and M. Wheatly his Redemption of time accordingly.
rarely, when men are tired out with honest Studies, callings, and employments;
(as Stage Plays ought to be were they lawful,) but professions, Genesis 3.17,
19. Exodus 20.9.
constantly from day to day. Therefore men cannot act them, to gain a living
by them. Upon these grounds the Sea here, p. 32^.326.
Fathers, Schooolemen, and Canonists teach us; that for men to give their money
to Stage Players for their playing, is a very great sin: Yea, Summa Aurea in
lib. 3. Senten^. Tract. 7. Quaest. 3. fol. 163.
Guillermus Altissiodorensis, Apud Iuonis Decret. pars 11. c. 84.
Hierom, Iuo, Speculum Historiale l. 29. c. 41.
Vincentius Bellovicensis, Historiae. l. 15. c. 31.32.
Olaus Magnus, Repertorij. pars 2. p. 664. Tit. Histrio.
Ioannis Bertachinus, De Ludo. Tract. sect. 2. n. 17. in Tractat. Tractar. Tom.
1. fol. 157.158.
Stephanus Costa, and Summa Summarum. Tit. Histrio. Iacobus De Graffijs. Dec^s.
Aurearum. lib. 2. cap. 121.
diverse other certify us; that, Histrionibus dare est Daemonibus immolare, to
give to Stage Players, is naught else but to sacrifice unto Devils: because
their profession is unlawful and Diabolical too: it being both a sin for
Play-haunters to give, or Players to take any money for their Plays and
action. Hence is it that In their Expositions on the 8. Commandment, and in
their discourses: De Ludo, and Restitutione, and Satisfactione.
most Divines and Casuists inform us, that money gotten by Dice, by Cards, by
acting Plays, or any unlawful profession whatsoever, is plain theft, and
that Dicers and Players are bound to restore their gains in case they are
able, or else to distribute it to the poor. Hence Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10.
Saint Cyprian (and out of him De Vita and Honestate Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap.
22.
Ioannes Langhecrucius, and Decretalium. pars 11. cap. 83.
Iuo Carnotensis) informs us, that Players gains do but separate them from
the Society of the Saints in Heaven, and fat them up for Hell: for thus he
writes of a Player who pretended poverty and necessity to continue in his
acting; Quod si penuriam talis and necessitatem paupertatis obtendit, potest
inter caeteros qui alimentis Ecclesiae sustinentur, huius quoque necessit as
adjuvari, si tamen contentus sit frugalioribus and innocentibus cibis. Nec
putet salario se esse redimendum ut a peccatis cesset, quando hoc non nobis sed
sibi praestet. Caeterum quando vult inde quaerat. Nota.
Qualis quaestus est qui de convivio Abrahae, Isaac, and Jacob and homines
rapuit, and male ac perniciose in seculo saginatos ad aeternae famis ac sitis
supplicia deducit? Et ideo quantum potes, eum a pravitate ac dedecore, ad vitam
innocentia, atque ad spem vitae suae revoca, ut sit contentus ecclesiae
sumptibus parcioribus quidem, sed salutaribus. Quod si illic ecclesia non
sufficit ut labor antibus praestentur alimenta, poterit se ad nos transfer,
and hic quod sibi ad victum atque vestitum necessarium fuerit, accipere, nec
alios extra eoclesiam mortalia docere, sed ipse in ecclesia salutaria discere.
The acting therefore of Plays for hire, gain, or profit sake (which ought not
to be the end of any man's lawful calling, but 1 Cor. 10.31. John 17.4.
only Gods glory and the good of men, which Plays and Actors never aim at:)
must certainly be unlawful; Which I would wish our Players and Play-haunters
to consider. Secondly, as it is unlawful to act Plays for profit, so likewise
for pleasure sake, See Act 5. Scene 11.
because this life is no life of carnal joy and jollity, but of weeping and
mourning for our own and other sins, and because carnal pleasures dampe, or
quite extinguish all spiritual heavenly joys, obdurate men's hearts, stupifie
their consciences, withdraw their minds and thoughts from God and better
things, Matthew. 24.38 39. Luke 21.34. 1 These. 5.3.
lullmen fast a sleep in dangerous security, so that they never seriously
think either of their sins or latter ends, as is evident by many Players and
Play-haunters lives, who are so intoxicated, so stupefied with these Syrenian
Enterludes, that they never seriously think of sin, of God, of Heaven, or
Hell, or of the means of grace. But because I have been more copious in this
theme before, I shall here briefly pass it over now, referring you to Part
1. Act 2. and Act 5. Scene 11. for fuller satis^action.

THe 6. and last ground of the unlawfulness of acting Part 1. Act 6.
thorowout,) and likewise to the Actors, which I shall here only name. As first,
it makes the Actors guilty of many sins; to wit, of vain, idle, ribaldrous,
and blasphemous words; of light, lascivious, wanton gestures and actions; loss
of time, hypocrisy, effeminacy imp^dency, theft, lust, with sundry other
sins, which they cannot avoid: Secondly, it ingenerates in them a perpetual
habit of vanity, effeminacy, idleness, whoredom adultery, and those other
vices which they daily act: Lactantius De Vero Cultu. c. 20. and Cyprian De
Spectac. lib.
Discunt enim facere dum assuescunt agere, and simulatis erudiuntur ad vera, as
Lactantius and Cyprian truly write. Whence we see for the most part in all our
common Actors the real practice of all those sins, and villainies which they
act in sport; they being (as No^ae in August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 13.
Ludovicus Vives, Lexicon Iuridicum. Tit. Histrio.
John Calvin the Civilian, and Lexicon Iuris Civilis. Tit. Histrio.
Iacobus Spielegius write) Perditissimis moribus, and deploratae nequitiei; men
of most lewd, most dissolute behavior, and most deplorable desperate
wickedness, as I have See here, Act 4. Scene 1.
elsewhere largely proved. And how can it be otherwise? Horat. Epist. lib. 1.
Epist. 2. page 243.
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu, being as true as it is
ancient. When Children ^acile ingenia adolescentium a recta honestaque via ad
luxum atque voluptates dilabuntur. Herodian Hist. lib. 1. page 4.
Youths and others, shall be trained up either in Universities, Schools, or
Play Houses, to Play effeminate amorous wanton Strumpets parts; to act the
parts of Wooers, Lovers, Bawdes, Panders, Whore-masters, Incestuous persons,
Sodomites, Adulterers, Cheaters, Roarers, Blaspemers, Paricides, and the like:
when they shall be instructed. Cypian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10.
Magisterio impudicae artis gestus quoque, turpes and molles and muliebres
exponere, as Saint Cyprian phraseth it, to express effeminate, womanish,
wanton, dishonest mimicall gestures, by the tutorship of an unchaste art; to
court Whores and Strumpets, to solicit the chastity and circumvent the modesty
of others; to contrive, to plot and execute any villainy with greatest secrecy
and security; to act any sins or wickedness to the life, as if they were
really performed; when they shall have their minds, their memories, and
mouths full fraught with Nil dictu faedum visuque haec limina tangat. Intra
quae p^^r est. Iuvenal. Satyr. 14^ p. 126.
amorous ribaldrous panderly Histories, Pastorals, Jests, discourses, and
witty, though filthy obscenities from day to day; (the case of all our common
Actors; especially those who have been trained up to acting from their youth;)
no wonder if we discover a Act 4. Scene 1. His enim atque hujusmodi figmentis,
and mendacijs dulcioribus corrumpuntur ingenia pueroru^; and eisdem fabulis
inhaerentibus, adusque summae aetatis roburadolescunt, and miseri consenescu^t.
Min^. Felix. Octa. p. 70
whole grove of all these notorious acted sins and villainies budding forth
continually in their ungodly lives; insomuch that those who in their younger
days represented other men's vices only, fall shortly after to act their own,
the better to enable them to personate other men's of the selfsame kind; he
being best able to play the sins of others, who has ofttimes perpetrated the
very selfsame crimes himself. Wh^nce commonly it comes to pass, that the
eminen^est Actors are the most lewd companions. Ioannis Saresberiensis De
Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. page 346. B.
Et nonne satis improbata est cujusque artis exercitatio, qua quanto quisque
doctior tanto nequior? Thirdly, it makes men vain, lascivious, profane and
scurrilous in their discourses; fantastical and newfangled in their hair and
apparel; mimicall, antique, histrionicall in their gate, their gestures,
complements and behaviors: prodigal in their expenses, impudent and
shameless in their carriage; false and treacherous in their dealings;
malicious, bloody and revengefull in their mi^des; atheistical, graceless,
unchaste, deboist and dissolute in their lives; and for the most part
impenitent and desperate in their deaths; according to that true rule of the
famous Roman Orator; Cicero Oration: pro P. Quinctio. page 224. B.
Mors honesta saepe vitam quoque turpem exornat; vita turpis ne morti quidem
honestae locum relinquit. These and many such like evils are the fruits of
Play-acting^ as too many ancient and modern visible examples witness.
Fourthly, See Act 6. Scene 1.
waste their precious time which should be husbanded, redeemed to far better
purposes. For though our common Players be ever acting, yet they are always
idle^ and make thousands idle to besides themselves; Horum enim non otiosa vita
est dicenda, sed desidiosa occupatio^ Nam de illis nemo dubitabit, quin operose
nihil agant: as De Brevitate Vitae. c. 11.12, 13.
Seneca wittily de^cants. And so great is our popular Stage Players (that I say
not our ordinary Play-haunters) idleness; quod totam vitam ordinant
adludendum, as Secunda secundae. Quaest. 168. Artic. 3.
Aquinas writes of them: they even spend their whole lives in playing: whence
Epistle 12. to Lambert.
Marcus Aurelius long agone, and our own 22. Henry 8. c. 12.14. Eliz. c. 5.39.
Eliz. c. 4.1. Iac. c. 7.
Statutes since, have ranked Players among the number of idle vagrant Truants,
Rogues, and V^gabonds, which ought severely to be punished and then set to some
honest work, ^o get their livings; their acting being naught else but
idleness in Gods, in men's account. And alas what a poor reward must they
expect from God at last, when Psalm. 62.12. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 22.12.
he shall remunerate every man according to his works, who have never wrought,
but one^y loytered and played all their days? Lastly, the acting of
Stage Plays See Cyprian de h^bitu Virginum, and Tertullian de Cultu
Faeminaru^. accordingly.
inthrals the Actors both in the guilt, the punishment of all those sins
which their Plays or action occasion in the Spectators. Which being so many in
number, so great in quality as experience manifests them to be, what Actors
conscience is able to stand under their guilt, their curse and condemnation,
either in this life or in the day of judgment, when they shall all be charged
on his soul? Lastly, the acting of Stage Plays, as it See Act 4. Scene 1. and
here part 2. Act 2. Scene 1.
of right excludes all Actors, both from the privileges of the Commonweal,
from the Church, the Sacraments, and society of the faithful here, and draws
a perpetual infamy upon their persons; ^o it certainly See Act 6. Scene
12.19, 20.
debars them from entering into Heaven, and brings down an eternal
condemnation on their souls and bodies hereafter, if they repent not in time,
those being bound over to the judgment of the great general Assizes and
eternal torments even in Heaven^ who are thus John 20.23. Matthew. 16.19.
bound and justly censured by the Laws and Edicts of the Church or State on
earth. Hence was it, See Act 6. Scene 20. and Act 7. Scene 2.3.
that diverse Players and Play-poets in the Primitive Church, and since,
renounced their professions, as altogether incompatible either with
Christianity or salvation; yea hence a late English Player some two years
since, falling mortally sick at the City of Bathe, whether he came ^o act;
being deeply wounded in conscience, and almost driven to despair with the sad
and serious consideration of his lewd infernal profession, lying upon his
deathbed ready to breath out his soul; adjured his son whom he had trained
up to Play-acting, with many bitter^teares and imprecations, as he tendered the
everlasting happiness of his soul, to abjure and forsake his ungodly
profession, which would but inthrall him to the Devils vassalage for the
present, and plunge him deeper into Hell at last. Such are the dismal
execrable soule-condemning fruits of Play-acting; the profession therefore of a
common Player, and the personating of theatricall Enterludes, must needs be
unlawful even in this respect. And thus much for the second Corolary; That the
profession of a Stage Player, and the acting of Stage Plays is infamous, yea
sinful and unlawful unto Christians.

ACTVS 3.
I Now proceed to the 3. Consectary; That it is a sinful, That it is unlawful
to be a Spectator of Stage Plays.
and unlawful thing for any Christians to be Spectators, frequenters of Plays
or Play Houses. In which I shall be very compendious, because I have so largely
manifested it in the first part of this discourse. Now the reasons of the
unlawfulness of beholding Stage Plays, are briefly these. First, because See
1 These. 5.22. Romans 1.32. and 12.9.
therefore the beholding of them must be such: Secondly, See Romans 12.17. 1
Cor. 10.31, 32. Phil. 4.8 and Act 7. thorowout.
because it has always been a scandalous, infamous and dishonest thing both
among Christians and Pagans to resort to Stage Plays, and a thing of ill
report: Thirdly, because it is See here, page 42. to 61.522. to 525.561. to 567.
contrary to our Christian vow in baptism, to forsake the Devil and all his
works, the pompes and vanities of this wicked world and all the sinful lusts
of the flesh, of which Stage Plays are not the meanest: Fourthly, because See
here page 409.417, 418.
it gives ill example to others, and maintains, and hardens Stage Players in
their ungodly profession, which else they would give over, were there no
Spectators to encourage or reward them. Fifthly, because it is an apparent
occasion of many great sins and mischiefs; as See Part 1. Act 6. thorowout.
loss of time, prodigality, effeminacy, whoredom, adultery, unchaste desires,
lustful speculations, luxury, drunkenness, profaneness, heathenisme,
atheism, blaspemy, scurrility, theft, murder, duels, fantastiquenesse,
cheating, idle discourses, wanton gestures and complements, vain fashions,
hatred of grace, of holiness, and all holy men, acquaintance with lewd
companions, the greatest enemies to men's salvation; and a world of such like
sins and mischiefs, as I have formerly Act 6. thorowout. Sixthly, because it
See Act 6. Scene 12.
with-drawes men's minds and thoughts from God and from his service unto
vanity; and indisposeth them to all holy duties, making all Gods holy
ordinances ineffectuall to Seve^thly, because it See Act 6. Scene 3^ 4, 5.
tends only to satisfy men's ^leshly lusts which war against their so^les;
men being carried always to the Playhouse by the si^full carnal suggestions
of the flesh; or by the ^ollicitations of lewd companions; but never by the
Dictate, the guidance of Gods holy Spirit or Word, Psalm 119.9. Psalm. 73.24. Rom
8.1, 14, 15. Gal 5.16, 18, 25. c. 6.16.
by which all Christians must be wholly guided, even in all their actions.
Eighthly, because all Christians ought to turn away their eyes from beholding
vanity. Psalm. 119.37. (a text See here, page 52.547, 548.
applied by the Fathers unto Stage Plays:) and what greater, what worser
vanities can men behold, then the ^cting of lascivious See part 1. Act 1.2.
but Pagan Heathenish pastimes, yea the ordinary recreations of Devill-Idols,
of Idolatrous voluptuous Pagans, whose pleasures and sports no Christians ought
to practice. Act 7. Scene 1. to 7. and Act 6. Scene 1. to 20.
Primitive Church and Saints of God, together with the very best of Christians,
of Pagans in all places, all ages, have constantly abandoned the beholding of
Stage Plays themselves, and condemned it in others, the very worst of Pagans
only, or men unworthy the name of Christians, and few or none but such alone
affoording them their presence, as the fore-quoted Authorities plentifully
evidence. Act 4. Scene 1.2. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5. and Act 7. Scene 1.2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. Which several reasons with all the rest that I have formerly produced
against Stage Plays in the first part of this Play-condemning Treatise, will
be a su^ficient conviction of the unlawfulness of beholding, of frequenting
Stage Plays, Nusquam enim and nunqua^ excusatur quod Deus damnat, nusqu^m and
nunquam licet, quod semper and ubique non licet. Tertul. De Specta^ c. 20.
as well in private houses, as in public Theaters: Which should cause all
Christians, all Play-haunters to abandon Stage Plays, as all the fore-alleaged
Fathers, Councels, and Authors do advise them; and that especially upon
Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes, on which Stage Plays and dancing are especially
prohibited by this pious Decree of Pope Iuo Carnotensis. Decret. pars 11. c.
77. fol. 162. and pars 4. cap. 13. page 117.
Eugenius c. 35. with which I shall cloze up this Act. Ne mulieres festis
diebus vanis ludis vacent. Sunt quidem and maxim mulieres, quifestis ac sacris
diebus, atque sanctorum natalicijs, quibus debent Deo vacare, non delectantur
ad ecclesiam venire, sed balando ac verba turpia de^antando, ac choreas
ducendo, similitudinem Paganoru^ peragendo advenire procurant. Tales enim si
cum minoribus veniunt ad ecclesiam, cum majoribus peccatis revertuntur. In tali
enim facto debet unusquisque Sac^rdos diligentissime populum admonere, ut pro
sola oratione his diebus ad ecclesiam recurrant, quia ipsi qui talia agunt, non
solum se perdunt, sed etiam alios d^perire attendunt. Nota.
Die autem Dominica nihil aliud agendum est, nisi Deo vacandum: nulla operatio
in die illa honesta comperiatur, nisi tantum hymnis and psalmis, and canticis
spiritualibus dies illa transeatur. Which I would wish all gross prophaners of
this sacred Day now seriously to consider.

ACTVS 4.
SCENA PRIMA.
HAving thus run over these three Corollaries of the unlawfulness of penning,
acting and beholding Stage Plays; I come now to answer such Objections as may
be made against them; especially against the unlawfulness of acting and
beholding Stage Plays. The arguments (or pretenses rather) for the acting of
Stage Plays (which I shall first reply to) are these:

First, it is lawful to read a Play; therefore to pen, Object^ 1.
to act, or see it acted.

To this I answer first; Answ. 1.
that the obscenity, ribaldry, amorousnesse, heathenishnesse, and profaneness
of most Play-bookes, Arcadiaes, and fained Histories that are now so much in
admiration, is such, that it is not lawful for any (especially for Children,
Youths, or those of the female ^ex, who take most pleasure in them) so much as
once to read them, for fear they should inflame their lusts, and draw them on
to actual lewdness, and profaneness. Hence Homil. in Cantit. Cant. apud
Hieronimi opera. Tom. 8. page 122. and in his own Works. Tom. 2. fol. 68.
Origin, Proaemium in Ezechiel. Tom. 4. p. 330. D.
Hierom and Theodoret Interp. in Canticum. Cantic. Tom. 1. p. 215. Philonis
Carpathiorum Episcopi in Cantica. Cant. Interpr. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 559.
E. Prosper Aquit. l. 3. De Vita Contempl. c. 6. Maphaeus Vegius, De
Perseverantia Religionis. lib. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. page 929. G. See
HRabanus Maurus, Lyra, Tostatus, Hugo Cardinalis, Os^ander, and others, who
have written upon the Canticles, accordingly.
others inform us, that in ancient times Children and Youths among the Jews
were not permitted to read the Book of Canticles before they came to the age
of 30. years, for fear they should draw those spiritual love passages to a
carnal sense, and make them instruments to inflame their lusts. Upon which
ground Homil. 1. in Cant. Cantic. See Philo Carpath. Episco. in Cant^ Cantic.
accordingly.
Origin advises all carnal persons, and those who are prone to lust, to
forbear the reading of this heavenly Song of Songs. Si enim aliquis
accesserit, qui secundum carnem tantummodo vir est, huic tali non parum ex hac
Scriptura discriminis periculique nascetur. Audire enim pure and castis auribus
amoris nomina nescie^s, ab interiori homine ad exteriorem and carnalem virum,
omnem deflectat auditum, and a spiritu convertetur ad carnem: nutrietque in
semetipso concupiscentias carnales, and ^ccasione divinae Scripturae commoveri,
and incitari videbitur ad libidinem carnis. Ob hoc ergo m^neo and consilium do,
omni qui nondum carnis and sanguinis molestijs caret, neque ab affectu naturae
materialis abscedit, ut a lectione libelli hujus, eorumque quae in eo dicentur,
penitus temperet. Aiunt enim observari etia^ apud Hebraeos, quod nisi quis ad
aetatem perfectam maturamque pervenerit, libellum hunc ne quidem in manibus
tenere permittatur. If Children, young men, and carnal persons then upon this
ground, are thus advised to refrain the reading of this sacred canonical
Book of Spiritual love expressions between Christ and his beloved Church:
Map^eus Vegius, De Perseverant. Relig. lib. 5. page 927.
Ne sub recordatione sanctarum faeminarum, etc. qu^ ibi nominantur, noxiae
titulationis stimulus excitaretur, etc. How much more then ought they to
forbear the reading of lascivious amorous scurrilous Play-bookes, Histories,
and Arcadiaes; there being no women, no youths so exactly chaste, which may
not easily be corrupted by them, and even inflamed unto fury with strange and
monstrous lusts; Neque vero machina quaevis ad oppugnandum, cum matronarum
pudicitia^, ^um virginum ac viduarum castimoniam validior, quam lectio lascivae
historiae and Poesis: nulla tam bonae indolis faemina, quae ha^ ipsa non
corrumpatur, mirumque putarem si aliqua reperiatur, aut virgo^ aut mulier, tam
exactae castitati^ sive pudiciti^, quae ejusmodi lectionibus and historijs
peregrina libidine non sa^pe ad furorem usque accen^atur. De Vanit. Scient.
cap. 64.
since there is no stronger engine to assault and vanquish the chastity of any
Maetron, Girl or Widow, of any male or female whatsoever, then these amo^o^s
Play-poets Poems and Histories, as Agrippa in his discourse of Bawdery, has
truly informed us. Atque tamen (writes he) quae in his libris plurimum edocta
puella est, quaeque horum s^it jacere dicteria, and ex horum disciplina cum
procis in multas horas facunde confabulari, haec demum est probe aulica. Hence
Clemens Romanus Constit. Apostol lib. 1. cap. 8. and Carolus Bovius in his
Scholia upon the same place. Ib. p. 125. Nazianzen de Recta Educatione ad
Selucum. page 1063. Basil, de Legendis libris Gentilium Oration. Tertullian De
Idololatria. lib. cap. 18. to 20. Ambrose in Evangelium Lucae. lib. 1. verse. 1.
Hierom. Epist. 22. cap 13. and Epist. 146. to Damasus. Lactantius de Falsa
Religioue. cap. 12.15. Augustine De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 1.8. and
Confessionum. lib. 1. cap. 15.16. Isiodor Hispalensis De Summo bono. lib. 3.
cap. 13. Prosper Aquittanicus, De Vita Contemplativa. c. 6. Theodoret in Cant.
Cantic. Tom. 1. page 215. Isiodor Pelusiota. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 62.63.
Gregory the first. Epist. l. 9. Epist. 48. Iuo Carnotensis. Decret. pars 4.
cap. 160. to 169. Gratian Distin^tio. 86. The 4. Council of Carthage. C^n. 16.
The Council of Colen under Adolphus. Anno^ 1549. Synodus Mechlinienses apud
Ioannem Langhecrucium, De Vita and Honestate Ecclesiast^ lib. 2. cap. 22. page
321. De Institutione. Iuventutis. Can. 3. The Council of Triers. Anno^ 1540.
Cap. De Sc^olis. Surius. Tom. 4. Council. page 838.890. Apud Boch^llum Decr^ta
Eccles. Gal. lib. 1. T^t. 10. cap. 3.4.5. page 95.
The Synod of Towers. Anno 1583. The Council of Bordeaux. 1582. The Synod of
Rothomagium. An. 1581. Franciscus Z^phyrus in his Epistle to Simon and Nicholas
prefixed to Tertullians Apology. G^orgius Fabritius, his Epistle to the Duke
of Saxony. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. lib. cap. 64. and 71. Lodovicus
Vives, De Tradendis Disciplinis. lib. 3. page 288.289. Episcopus Chemnensis,
Onus Ecclesiae. cap. 18. sect. 8.9, 10, 11. Osorius De Sunt enim quide^ poetae
petula^tes, obscaeni, molles, effaeminati lascivis and impuris carminibus
animos a industria, ad libidinem and ignavia^ turpiter avocantes, qui quide^
quo dulciores sunt, eo pejus nocent, and tanqua^ Syrenes quaeda^ omnibus, qui
aures illis praebent, perniciem and interitu^ moliuntur. In rebus enim turpibus
ille capitalior est qui majus ingeniu^ adhibet, quod in poetis valde
perspicitur: concinnu^ enim and eligans carmen libenter legimus and ediscimus.
Facilime igitur lascivi carminis venenu^ in animos influit, and eligantiae
suavitate conditum, prius interitum dignitati affert, quam aliquod remedium
adhiberi possit, etc. Omnes igitur Poetae qui non honestatem, sed turpitudinem
mollibus and lascivis carminibus exprimunt, non ab aula tantum regia, sed a
totius patriae finibus exterminandi and eijciendi sunt, etc. Ibidem.
Regum Instit. lib. 4. page 120.121 Mapheus Vegius De Educatione Liberorum.
lib. 2. cap. 18. lib. 3^ cap. 1.2. and De Perseverantia Religionis. lib. 5.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. page 929.930. D. Humphries of true Nobility. Book 2. D.
Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 122.123. Thomas Beacon, BB. Babington,
BB. Hooper, Ioannis Nyder, M. Perkins, Dod, Elton, Lake, Downeham, Williams,
and all other Expositors on the 7. Commandment, together with most
Commentators on Ephesians. 5.2, 3, 4. have expressly condemned and prohibited
Christians to pen, to print, to sell, to read, or Schoolmasters and others to
teach any amorous wanton Play-bookes, Histories, or Heathen Authors, especially
Ovids wanton Epistles and Books of love; Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius,
Martial, the Comedies of Plautus, Terence, and other such amorous Books
savoring either of Pagan Gods, of ethnicke rites and ceremonies, or of
scurrility, amorousnesse and profaneness; as their alleged places will most
amply testify to such who shall peruse them at their leisure: the reason of
which is thus expressed by Isiodor Hispalensis, Iuo Carnotensis, and Gratian,
Ideo prohibetur Christianis legere figmenta poetarum, quia per oblectamenta
fabularum mentem nimis excitent ad incentiva libidinum. Non enim thura solum
offerendo daemonibus immolatur, sed etiam eorum dicta libentius capiendo. The
penning and reading of all amorous Books was so execrable in the Primitive
times, how ever they are much admired now, that Nicephorus Callistus.
Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 34. Col. 757.
Heli^dorus Bishop of Trica was deprived of his Bishopric by a Provincial
Synod, for those wanton amorous Books he had written in his youth, his books
being likewis^ awarded to the fire to be burnt (though they are yet applauded
and read by many amorous persons) quia lectione eorum juvenes multi in
periculu^ conijcerentur: because diverse young men by reading of them might be
corrupted and entised unto lewdness; answerable to which memorable pious act
are these Constitutions of the Council of Bordeaux. An. 1582. and of the Synod
of Towers. Anno 1583. well worth our observation. Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. lib. 1. Tit. 10. cap 3.4, 5.
Quia multi a vera fide aberrantes contra professionem, etiam consulto gravius
peccant, etc. Prohibet haec Synodus, ne libri magicae artis, vel ad Nota.
lasciviam and luxum provocantes imprimantur, vendantur, legantur, aut
retineantur omnino; jubetque sicut repertifu^rint comburantur, sub ejusdem
Anathematis paena quam ipso facto incurrunt, qui minime paruerint. Moneantur
etiam saepissime fideles Christiani a suis Parochis and confessarijs ut
fugiant, tanquam virus mortiferum, lectionem librorum quorumcumque, qui vel ad
arts magicas pertinent, vel obscaenas and impias narrationes continent: eosque
ut olim tempore Acts 19.19.
Apostolorum factum legimus, comburant. Yea, Maffaeus in Vita Ignatij. lib. 4.
cap. 8. page 432.
Ignatius Loyola, the Father of the Jesuits, was so precise in this particular;
That he forbade the reading of Terence in Schools to Children and Youths,
before his obscenities were expunged, lest he should more corrupt their manners
by his wantonness, then by his Latin help their wits. And AEneas Sylvius,
afterward Pope Pius the second, in his Opera. Basileae. 1551. page 984.
Tractat^, De Liberorum Educatione, Dedicated to L^dislaus King of Hungary and
Bohemia; discoursing what Authors and Poets are to be red to Children; resolves
it thus. Ovidius ubique tristis, ubique dulcis est, in plerisque tamen locis
nimium lascivus. Horatius sive fuit multae eloquentiae, etc. sunt tamen in eo
quaedam quae tibi nec legere voluerim nec interpraetari. Martialis perniciosus,
quamvis floridus and ornatus, ita tamen spinis densus est, ut legi rosas absque
punctione non sinat. Elegiam qui scribunt omnes puero negari debent; nimium
enim sunt molles Tibullus, Propertius, Ca^ullus, and quae translata est apud
nos, Sapho, raro namque non amatoria scribunt, desertosque conqueruntur amores.
Amoveantur igitur, etc. Animadvertere etiam praeceptorem op^rtet dum tibi
comaedos tragaedosque legit, ne quid vitij persuadere videatur. And in his 359.
Epi^tle page 869.870, Where he repents him seriously of that amorous Treatise
which he had penned in his youth, he writes thus to our present purpose.
Tractatum de amore olim sensu pariterque aetate juvenes cum nos scripsisse
recolimus, paenitentia immodica pudorque ac maeror animum nostrum vehementer
excruciant: quippe qui sciamus quique protestati express fuimus, duo contineri
in eo libello, ^pertam videlicet, sed heu lasciviam nimis prurientemque amoris
historiam, and morale quod eam consequitur, edificans dogma. Quorum primum
fatuos atque errantes video sectari Nota.
quam plurimos, Alterum heu dolor, pene nullos. Ita impravatum est atque
obfuscatum infaelix mortalium genus. De amore igitur quae scripsimus olim
juvenes, contemnite o mortales atque respuite; sequimini quae nunc dicimus, and
seni magi^ quam juven^ credit. Nec privatum hominem plures facite quam
Pontificem: AEneam reijcite, Pium suscipite, etc. A passage which plainly
informs us, that amorous Plays and Poems though intermixed with grave
Sentences and Morals, are dangerous to be read or penned, because more will be
corrupted by their amorousnesse, then instructed or edified by their Morals, as
daily experience too well proves. If these authorities of Christians will not
sufficiently convince us of the danger, the unlawfulness of reading amorous
Books and Plays, the most assiduous studies of this our idle wanton age;
consider then that See here, page 448.
Plato, a Heathen Philosopher, banished all Play-poets, and their Poems out of
his Commonwealth; that See here, page 455.456^ 457.
the Lacedaemonians, Massilienses, and at last the Athenians to, prohibited and
suppressed all Plays and Play-poems, not suffering them to be read or acted:
See here, page 448.449, 450.
that Aristotle, Plutarch, and Quintilian expressly condemned the reading of
wanton, amorous, fabulous, obscene lascivious Poems and Writers; that Ovid
Tristiu^. l. 1.2. Manutius in Vita Ovidij^ See Sabellicus, Zonaras, Opmeerus
Chronicon Chronic. in Vita Ovidij and Augusti. accordingly.
Augustus banished Ovid for his obscene, and p^nderly Books of love; and that
See here, page 452.453, 454.
Ovid himself dissuaded men very seriously from re^ding his own or other men's
wanton Books and Poems, as being apt to inflame men's lusts, and to draw them
on to whoredom, adultery, effeminacy, scurrility, and all kind of beastly
lewdness. And can Christians then approve or justify the delightful reading
and revolving (that I say not the penning, studying, Ovids Art of Love, and
Aristotle's Problems are translated into English, and a new impression of them
vented almost every year.
printing and venting) of such lewd amorous Books and Plays, which these
very Heathen Authors have condemned, and so prove far worse then Pagans? I
shall therefore cloze up this first Reply to this Objection with the words of
learned reverend George Alley, ( Bishop of Exeter, in the second year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign,) against the reading, writing, and Printing of wanton
Books and Plays. In his Poor man's Library, London 1571. Cum gratia and
privilegio regiae Majestatis. part 1. Miscellanea. 6. Praelectio secunda. fol.
46.47, 48.
It is to be lamented, that not only in the time of the idolatrous and
superstitious Church, but even in this time also lascivious impur^, wanton
Books, pearce into many men's houses and hands. Alas what does such kind of
Books work and bring with them? Forsooth nothing else but fire, even the
burning flames of an unchaste mind, the brands of pleasure, the coals of
filthiness; the fire I say, that does consume, devour, and root out all the
nourishments of virtue, the fire I say, which is a proeme and entrance into the
eternal fire of Hell. What is so expedient unto a Commonwealth as not to
suffer witches to live? for so the Lord commanded by his servant Exodus 22.18^
Moses. And (I pray you) be not they worse then an hundred Witches, which take
men's senses from them? not with magical delusions, but with the enchantments
of dame Venus, and as it were to give them Circes cup to drink of, and so of
men to make them beasts. What punishment deserve they as either I would our
Play-poets and Play-printers would consider this.
make or print such unsavory Books; truly I would wish them the same reward
wherewith AElij Lampridij, Alexander Severus. page 230. See Eutropius and
Grimston in his life.
Alexander Severus recompensed his very familiar Vetronius Turinus, ut fumo
videlicet pereant qui fumum vendunt, that they perish with smoke who sell
smoke. And what other things do these set forth to sale, but smoke, ready to
break out into flame? For, that certain persons bequeath themselves wholly to
the reading of such lascivious and wanton Books, who knows not, that thereof
comes the first preparative of the mind, that when any one spark of fire
(be it never so little) falls into the tinder of Lady Venus, suddenly it is set
on fire as towe or flax. Many do read the verses which Lycoris the Strumpet,
the Paramour of Gallus the Poet did read, and the verses which Corynna
mentioned in Ovid, and which Neaera did read. Objection.
It will perchance be replied, that they do read them, either for the increase
of knowledge, or to drive away idleness. I answer, Answer.
If any do salute Venus, but a limine, as they say, that is, a far off, as
it were in the entry, what kindling and flames, I pray you, will ensue thereof
when the coals be once stirred? Note this well.
It is to be feared that no small number of them who profess Christianity, be
in this respect a great deal worse then the Heathen. The people called See
here, page 455.456.
Massilienses, before they knew Christ, yea, or heard whether there were a
Christ, but were very Pagans, and sacrificers to Idols, yet were known to all
the world to be of such pure and unc^rrupt manners, that the manners of the
Massilienses (as Plautus testifies) are commonly counted the best and most
approoved manners of all others. These among many other good orders of their
well nurtured City made a severe law, that there should be no Comedy played
within their City, for the argument for the most part of such Plays, did
contain the acts of dissolute and wanton love. They had also within their City
(about 613. years before the birth of Christ) a Sword of execution wherewith
the guilty and offenders should be slain; but the uprightness of their living
was such, that the Sword not being used was eaten with rust, and nothing meet
to serve that turn: And alas are not almost all places in these days
replenished with Iuglers,, Scoffers, Iesters, Players, which may say and do
what they lust be it never so fleshly and filthy? and yet suffered with laughing
and clapping of hands? Plutarchi Apothegmata. Hiero. Tom. 1. page 398.
Hiero Syracusanus, did punish Epicharmus the Poet, because he rehearsed
certain wanton verses in the presence of his wife, for he would that in his
house not only other parts of the body should be chaste, but the ears also,
which be unto other members of the body instead of a tunnell, to be kept,
sartas tectas, that is, defended and covered, as the proverb says, and to be
shut from all uncomely and ribaldry talk. Unto which fact of Hiero, the worthy
sentence of Joan. Sar^sberiensis. de Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Pericles is much consonant and agreeable. Sophocles, who was joint fellow with
Pericles in the Pr^torship, beholding and greatly praising the well favored
beauty of a certain Boy passing by him, was rebuked of Pericles his companion
after this sort: Not only the hands of him that is a Praetor ought to refrain
from lucre of money, but also the eyes to be continent from wanton looks. The
Plutarchus, De Gloria Atheniensium. lib. Volateranus Comment. l. 29. fol. 323.
See here, page 455.
Athenians provided very well for the integrity of their Judges, that it should
not be lawful for any of the Areopagites to write any Comedy or Play: and
Epicharmus suffered punishment at the hands of Hiero for the rehearsal of
certain unchaste verses. But I speak it with sorrow of heart; to our vicious
Ballad-makers, and indictors of lewd Songs and Plays, no revengment, but
rewards are largely paid and given: See Plutarchi Laconica Apothegmata: and
Laconica Institut. accordingly.
Gerardas a very ancient man of Lacedemonia, being demanded of his Host, what
pain adulterers suffered at Sparta, made this answer: O mine Host, there is no
adulterer among us neither can there be: (prey mark the reason:) For this was
the manner among them, that they were never present ^t any Comedy, nor any
other Plays, fearing lest they should hear and see those things which were
repugnant to their laws. But to revert to our purpose: Wanton Books, can be
no other thing but the fruits of wanton men, who although they write any one
good sentence in their Works, yet for the unwor^hinesse of the person the
sentence is rejected. The Plutarchi Apothegm^ta Laconica. page 496.
Sen^te of Lacedemonia would have refused a very worthy and apt saying of one
Demosthenes, for the unworthiness of the Author, if certain men of authority
called among them Ephori, had not come between, and caused another of the
Senators to have pronounced the sentence again, as his own saying. Plutarch
writes, that there was a law among the Grecians, that even the good Books of
ill men should be destroyed, that the memory of the Authors also, should
thereby utterly be blotted out and clean put away, Let all Play-poets, and
Authors, yea Printers and venters of lascivious amorous Books consider this.
Gerson; sometimes Chancellor of Paris, speaking of a certain Book made by
Ioannes Meldinensis, the title whereof is the Romant of the Rose, writes of
that Book two things. First, he says, if I had the Romant of the Rose, and
that there were but one of them to be had, and might have for it 500. Crowns,
I would rather burn it then sell it. Again, says he, if I did understand
that Ioannes Meldinensis did not repent with true sorrow of mind, for the
Peccant enim omnes artifices qui talia quae ad lasciviam pertinent componunt.
Alexander Alensis. Summa Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. m. 5. p. 619
making and setting forth of this Book, I would pray no more for him, then I
would for Judas Iscariot, of whose damnation I am most certain. And they also
which reading this Book, do apply it unto wicked and wanton manners, are the
Authors of his great pain and punishment. The like Ioannes Raulius said of the
Book and Fables of one Operius Danus, that he was a most damned man, unless
he repented and acknowledged his fault, for the setting forth of that Book. I
would God they heard these things whom it delights to write or read such
shameless and lascivious works. Let them remember the saying of Saint Paul;
Gal. 6.7, 8.
A man shall reap that which he has sown. Oration encomiastica in Petrum and
Paulum.
Chrysostom, a great enhaunser of Paul's praises, writes; that so long shall
the rewards of Paul rise more and more, how long there shall remain such,
which shall either by his life or doctrine be bronght unto the Lord God. The
same may we say of all such, who while they lived have sown ill seed, either
by doing, saying, writing, or reading, that unless they repented, the more
persons that are made ill by them, the more sharp and greater growth their
pain, as Saint Augustine wrote of Arrius. God save every Christian heart, from
either the delighting or reading of such miserable monuments. Thus concludes
this reverend Bishop, and so shall I this first reply. Secondly, admit it 1
Cor. 15.33.
corrupt them for the present, and bind them over to damnation for the future.
The Scripture we know commands men, Psalm. 4.2. Psalm 119.37. Col. 2.8, 20, 21,
22. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.16, 23. Acts 19.19.
not to delight in vanity, in old wives tales, in fabulous poetical
discourses, or other empty studies which tend not to our spiritual goo^^ Isay
55.1, 2.
Not to lay out our money for that which is not bread, and our labor for that
which satisfies not: Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5.
but to redeem the time, because the days are evil. Yea, it commands men to
Col. 1.10. Iam. 3.17. Ioh. 15.2. to 8.
be fruitful and abundant in all good workes^ 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16.
to be holy in all manner of conversation; 1 Cor. 15.58. Ioh. 15 2. to 8. 2 Timothy 4.7. 2 Pet. 3.18.
to be always doing and receiving good, and finishing that work which God
has given them to do, growing every day more and more in grace, and in the
knowledge of God and Christ, 1 Timothy 6.19.
laying up a good foundation against the time to come, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Pet. 1.10.
giving all diligence to mak^ their calling and election sure: 1 Cor. 10.30, 31.
doing all they do to the praise and glory of God. Now the ordinary reading of
Comedies, Tragedies, Arcadiaes, Amorous Histories, Poets, and other profane
Discourses, is altogether inconsistent with all and every of these sacred
Precepts, therefore it cannot be lawful. Besides the Scripture commands men
even Matthew 12.36. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Ier. 4.14.
wholly to abandon all idle words, all vain unprofitable discourses, thought^
and actions. If then it gives us no liberty so much as to think a vain
thought, or to utter an idle word, certainly it alots us no vacant time for
the reading of such vain wanton Plays or Books. Again, God enjoynes us,
Ephesians. 4.19, 31. Col. 4.6. Jude 20.
that our speech should be alway^s profitable and gracious, seasoned with salt,
that so it may administer grace to the hearers, and build them up in their most
holy faith: Therefore our writings, our studies, our reading must not be
unedifying, amorous and profane, which ought to be as holy as serious, and
profitable as our disco^rses. Moreover, it is the express precept of the
Apostle Paul, (whom many profane ones will here tax of Puritanisme) Ephesians.
4.29. etc. 5.3, 4. But fornication and all uncleanesse, or covetousness, let
it not be once named among you as becomes Saints: neither filt^inesse, nor
foolish talking nor jesting, which are not convenient, etc. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouths but that which is good to So the
Margent of our New translation renders it.
edify profitably, that it may mini^ter grace to the hearers, etc. And may we
then read or write these sins and vices which we ought not to name? or study
or peruse such wanton Plays and Pamplets, which can administer naught but
gracelesnesse, lust, profaneness to the Readers? Lastly, we are commanded to
John 5.34^ c. 7.5^. Acts 17.11. Deuteronomy. 6.5. to 10. cap. 17.19. Col. 3.16. Psalm.
1.2. Cant. 3.1.
search the Scriptures daily: to meditate in the Law of God day and night, and
to read therein all the days of our lives, that we may learn to fear the
Lord, and to keep and do all the works and Statutes of his Law; which was
Psalm. 119.97. Psalm. 16.7. Psalm. 119.57.
King David's study all the day long, yea, in the night season to: And because
no time should be left for any vain studies or discourses; we are further
enjoined, Deuteronomy. 6.5. to 10.
to have the Word of God always in our hearts; to teach it diligently to our
children, and to talk of it when we are sitting in our houses, and when we
are walking by the way, when we lie down, and when we rise up: Which for any
man now conscionably to perform, is no less then arrant Puritanisme, in the
worlds account. If then we believe these sacred precepts (to which I might add
two more; 1 These. 5.15, 16. Phil. 4.4.
Pray continually. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice) to
be the Word of God, and so to bind us to obedience; there are certainly no
vacant times allotted unto Christians, to read any idle Books or Playhouse
Pamphlets, which are altogether incompatible with these precepts, and the
serious pious study of the sacred Scripture, as S. Epist. 22. ad Eu^tochium.
cap. 13. Tom. 1^ page 62^ See Iuo Carnotensis. quarta pars. Decret. cap.
162.163, 164, 165, 166. Gratian Distinctio. 37. accordingly.
Hierom writes. Quae enim (quoth he) co^municatio luci ad tenebras? ^ui
consensus Christo cum Belial? quid facit cum Psalterio Horatius? cum Evangelijs
Maro? cum Apostolis Cicero? Et licet omnia munda mundis and nihil reijciend^m
quod cum gra^iarum action percipitur; tamen simul non debemus bibere calicem
Christi, and calicem Daemoniorum; as he there proves by his own example, which
I would wish all such as make profane Plays and human Authors their chiefest
studies, even seriously to consider; For says he, when ever I fell to read the
Prophets after I had been reading Tully and Plautus, Sermo horrebat incultus,
their uncompt style became irksome to me; and quia lumen caecis oculis non
videbam, non oculorum putabam culpam e^se, sed solis. Whiles the old Serpent
did thus delude me, a strong fever shed into my bones, invaded my weak body,
and brought me even to deaths door: at which time I was suddenly rapt in
spirit unto the Tribunal of a Judge, where there was such a great and glorious
light as cast me down upon my face, that I durst not look up. And being then
demanded what I was, I answered, I am a Christian: whereupon the Judge replied,
thou lie: Ciceronianus es, non Christianus: thou art a Ciceronian, not a
Christian: for where thy treasure is, there also is thy heart; whereupon I grew
speechless, and being beaten by the Judges command, and tortured with the fire
of conscience; I began to cry out and say, Lord have mercy upon me. Whereupon
those who stood by falling down at the Judges feet, entreated that he would
give pardon to my youth, and give place of repentance to my error: exact^rus
deinde cruciatum si gentilium litterarum libr^s aliq^ando legiss^m. I being
then in so great a strait, that I could be content to promise greater things,
began to swear and protest by his Name, saying, Domine si unquam habuero
^odices seculares, si legero, te negavi. And being dismissed upon this my oath
I returned to my self again, and opened my eyes, drenched with such a shower
of tears, that the very extremity of my grief would even cause the
incredulous to believe this tr^nce, which was no slumbe^ or vain dream, but a
thing really acted^ my very shoulders being black and blue with stripes, the
pain of which remained after I awaked. Since which time says he; Fateor me
tanto dehinc studio divina legisse, quanto non ante mortalia leg^ram. And from
hence this Father exhorts all Christians to give over the reading of all
profane Books, all wanton Poems, which in his 146. Epistle to Damasus, he
most aptly compares to the Husks with which the Prodigal in the Gospel was
fed; where he writes thus fitly to our purpose. Tom. 3. page 408.
Possumus and aliter siliquas interpraetari. Daemonum cibus est carmina
poetarum, saecularis sapientia, rhetoricorum pompa verborum. Haec sua omnes
suavitate delectant, and dum aures versibus dulci modulatione currentibus
capiuntur, animam quoque penetrant, and pectoris interna devinciunt. Verum, ubi
cum summo studio fu^rint, and labor perlect^, nihil aliud nisi inanem sonum,
and sermonum strepitum suis lectoribus tribuunt, nulla ibi saturitas veritatis,
nulla re^ectio justitiae reperitur: studiosi ^arum in fame very, in virtutum
penuria perseverant. Vnde and Apostolus prohibet; 1 Cor. 8.
ne in Idolio quis recumbat, etc. Nonne tibi videtur sub alijs verbis di^ere,
ne legas Philosop^os, Orato^es, Poetas, nec in illorum le^tione requiescas? Nec
nobis blandiamur, si in eis, quae sunt scripta, non credimus, cum aliorum
conscientia vulneretur, and putemur probare, quae dum legimus, non repr^bamus.
Absit ut de ore Christiano sonet, Iuppiter omnipoten^, and me Hercule, and me
Castor, and caetera magis portenta quam numina. At nunc etiam Sacerdotes Dei
(and is not as tr^e of our times?) omissis Evangelijs and Prophetis, videmus
Comaedias legere, amatoria Bucolicorum vers^um verba canere, ten^re Virgilium,
and id, quod in pueris necessitatis est, crimen in se fa^ere voluptatis.
Cavendum igitur si captivam velimus habere uxorem, ne in idolio recumbamus: aut
si certe fuerimus ejus amore decepti, mundemus eam, and omni sordium errore
purgemus, ne scandalum patiatur frater pro quo Christus mortuus, cum in ore
Christiani carmina, in idolorum laudem composita, audierit personare. Since
therefore all these idle Play-bookes and such like amorous Pastorals are but
empty husks, Inquinant non alunt. Seneca. Epist. 2. See Augustine. Confess. lib.
1. cap. 16.17. accordingly.
which yield no nourishment but to Swine, or such as wallow in their beastly
lusts and carnal pleasures; since they are incompatible with the pious study
and diligent reading of Gods sacred Word, ( Psalm. 19.10. Psalm. 119.103. Heb.
5.12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. Cant. 5.1. Psalm. 63.5, 6.
the gold, the honey, the milk, the marrow, the heavenly Manna, feast and
sweatest nourishment of our souls,) with the serious hearing, reading,
meditation, thoughts and study whereof we should always constantly feed,
refresh, rejoice, and feast our spirits, which commonly starve and pine away
whiles we are too much taken up with other studies or employments, especially
with Plays and idle amorous Pamphlets: (the very reading of which Confess. lib.
1. cap. 15.16, 17.
S. Augustine, repented and condemned:) let us hencefore lay aside such
unprofitable, unchristian studies, betaking our selves wholly at leastwise
principally to Gods sacred Word, which is 2 Timothy 3.15.
only able to make us wise unto salvation, and to nourish our souls unto
eternal life: and since Christianity is our general profession, let not
Paganism, scurrility, prophanes, wantonness, amorousnesse, Plays, or lewd
Poetical Figments or Histories, but Gods Word alone, which as Omnem scientiam
and doctrinam sacra Scriptura transc^ndit, verum praedicat and ad caelestem
patriam invitat. f. 1.
Su^mula Raymundi says, transcends all other Books and Sciences; be our
chiefest study, at all such vacant times as are not occupied in our lawful
callings, or other pious duties. I shall therefore cloze up this 2. reply, with
that Apostolical Constitution recorded by Constit. Apostol. lib. 1. cap. 6 7.
Apud Suriu^, Council. Tom. 1. page 45.
Clemens Romanus, (if the Book be his) which I would wish al Papists who deny
the reading of the Scripture unto Laymen, to who^ this good precept is
directed as the very Catholica doctrina de Laicis. Ibid. page 43.
Title and first Chapter proves, even seriously to consider. Sed sive ad
fideles and ejusdem sententiae homines accedis, conferens cum ijs vitali^ verba
loquere: sin minus accedis, intus sedens percurre legem, Reges, Prophetas:
Psalle hymnos David, Nota. See Hierom. Epist. 7. c. 3, 5. Epi. 9. c. 5. Ep. 10.
c. 4.5. Ep. 16. c. 3.4. Epist. 18. near the end. Ep. 22. c. 6.15, 16. Epi^ 23.
Epi. 25. c. 1. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Primasius, Sedulius, Theodoret, Beda, etc.
on Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. to the like purpose.
lege diligenter Evangelium, quod est horu^ complementu^. Abstine ab omnibus
Gentiliu^ libris. Quid enim tibi cum externis libris, vel legibus, vel
Prophetis? quae quidem leves a fide abducunt. Nam quid tibi deest in lege Dei,
ut ad illas gentium fabulas confugias? Nam si historica percurrere cupis, habes
Reges: si sophistica and Prophetica, habes Prophetas, and Job, and Proverbiorum
authorem, in quibus omnis poeticae, and sapientiae accuratam rationem invenies;
quoniam Domini Dei, qui solus est sapiens, voces sunt. Quod si cantilenas
cupis, habes Psalmos: si rerum origines nosse desideras, habes Genesim: si
leges and praecepta, gloriosam Dei legem. Ab omnibus igitur exteris and
diabolicis libris vehementer te contine^ Bernard Super Cantica. Sermo. 86. fol.
176. C.
quoniam in ipso verbo sunt omnia. Ibi remedium vulnerum, ibi subsidia
necessitatum, ibi resarcitus defectuum, ibi profectuum copiae, ibi denique
quicquid accipere vel habere hominibus expedit, quicquid decet, quicquid
oportet. Sine causa ergo aliud a verbo petitur, cum ipsum sit omnia. Thirdly,
admit a man may lawfully read a Play-book, yet it See D. Rainolds Overthrow of
Stage Plays, page 21.22. accordingly.
will not follow, that therefore he may pen, or act a Play, or see it acted.
For first, a man may lawfully read such things, as he cannot pen, or act, or
behold without offending God. A man perchance may lawfully read a Masse-booke,
but yet he cannot write a Masse-booke, nor yet act, or say, or see a Mass
without committing sin. Some men may lawfully read an See Th. Bibliandri
Apologia pro Editione Alcorani: and Nicolai de Cusa Cribratio Alcorani.
Alcoran, or any heretical Book, Ambros. Com. in Luc. l. 1. c. 1. Tom. 3. p.
3. C.
ut magis judicent quam sequantur; rather to confute then follow it; but no man
can pen, or print, or publish it with delight, (no nor yet read it out of love
and liking, as men read Play-bookes) but he must transgress. A man may safely
read the stories of Genesis 18^20, 21. cap. 19.4, 5. Ezech. 16.49. 2 Pet. 2.6, 8,
Jude 7.
the Sodomites sins, of the Canaanites and Israelites Idolatries; but yet to
act, or see them acted cannot be less then sinful. A man may and must Deuteronomy.
6.5, 6, 7. Psalm. 1.2. Acts 17.11.
daily read the sacred Scriptures, the Passion of our Savior, the Histories of
Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, Solomon, Job, and others recited in the Bible; yet
none See p. 108. to 126, 636, 763. to 767.
may Play or see them Played without sin, yea highest blasphemy and
profaneness; though some graceless wretches as well in private as in popular
Stage Plays much profane them, bringing not only Ministers, preaching and
praying, but even the very sacred Bible and the stories in it on the Stage, One
Atkinson a Minister in Bedford the last Christtide, in the Commissaries house
there, acted a private Interlude, where he made a prayer on the Stage, and
chose a Text. viz. Acts 10.14. on which he most profanely preached and jested,
to the very shame and grief of most that heard him.
as some late notorious damnable (if not damned) precedents witness; when as
not only our own pious Statute of See page 109.110.
3. Iacobi. cap. 21. but likewise Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. lib. 1. Tit.
10. c. 12. page 96.
Concilium Rhemense, Anno 1583. which decrees thus: Vt ea vitent fideles quibus
cultus divinus impediri potest, statuimus, ne quis Scripturae sacrae verba ad
scurriliae, detrectationes, superstitiones, incantationes, sorts, libellos
famosos audeat usurpare. Si quis contra fecerit, juris and arbitrij paenis
coerceatur: And Ibid. c. 13.
Concilium Bituriense. Anno 1554. which thus ordaines. Non liceat cuiquam verba
and sententias sacrae Scripturae ad scurrilia, fabulosa, vana, adulationes,
detractiones, superstitiones, and diabolicas incantationes, divinationes,
sorts, libellos famosos, and alias ejusmodi impietates usurpare: Qui in eo
peccaverint, ab Episcopis legitimis paenis coerce^tur: together with the Synod
of Rochell. An. 1571. (here p. 636.) and See William Wraghton his Rescuer of
the Romish Fox. fol. 97.
BB. Gardener have long since prohibited and condemned this atheistical horrid
profaneness, which no Christian can so much as think off, but with highest
detestation. Since therefore many things may be lawfully read, which cannot
honestly be penned, acted, heard or seen, the argument is but a mere
inconsequent. Secondly, though a man perchance may in some cases lawfully read
a Play-booke, See William Wraghton his Rescuer of the Romish Fox. fol. 97.
yet it will not follow, that he may compose, or act, or see a Stage Play: For
first, a man may read a Play with detestation both of its vanity, ribaldry and
profaneness; but he can neither pen, nor play, nor yet very willingly behold
it, as all Play-haunters do, without approbation prodigal vain expense of
money, or overgreat loss of time: but none can compile, or act, or see a
Stage Play See Act 6. Scene 1.2.
without loss of time, of money, which See Act 6. Scene 3. to 18.
but they can neither be compiled, beheld, or acted, without these several
unlawful circumstances which cannot be avoided.

See Part 1. Act 5. thorowout, and Part 2. Act 2. thorowout.
but they can neither be seen nor acted, without all, or most of these.
Fifthly, he that reads a Stage Play may pass by all obscene or amorous
passages, all profane or viva vox, that flexanimous rhetorical
Stage-elocution, that lively action and representation of the Players
themselves which put life and vigor into these their Enterludes, and make them
pierce more deeply into the Spectators eyes, their ears and lewd affections,
precipitating them on to lust: yea, the eyes, the ears of Play-readers want
all those lust-enraging objects, which Actors and Spectators meet with in the
Playhouse: Therefore though the reading of Stage Plays may be lawful, yet
the composing, acting, or seeing of them in all these several regards, cannot
be so. So that this first Objection is both false and frivolous.

The second Objection for the composing and acting of Plays is this. Object. 2.
Se Haywards Apology for Actors: and Doctor Gagers Reply to Doctor Rainolds,
p. 119.120. Augustine. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 16. accordingly.
The penning and acting of Plays does whet and exercise men's wits and poetry,
embolden youth, confirm their voices, help their memories, action and
elocution; and make them perfect Orators. Therefore it is both lawful, yea and
useful to.

To this I answer first: Answ. 1.
that this Objection makes only for academicall and private, but naught for
popular Enterludes. Secondly, academicall Stage Plays are seldom acted or
penned for any of the ends, the uses here recorded, but only for
entertainment, for mirth and pleasure sake. Thirdly, Romans 3.8. Ephesians. 5.3^ 4,
5.
men must not do therefore they may not discourse, as much or more then
Plays, See here. page 483. and August. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 15.16, 17.
yet none may use these wicked courses to obtain these petty benefits; no more
then he may oppress, or steal, or cheat, or perjure himself to augment his
wealth, or Hierom. Epist. 22. c. 13.
Melius est aliquid nescire, quam cum periculo discere. The hurt, the danger
that accrues to men by penning, by acting Plays, is evermore See August.
Confess. lib. 1. cap. 16.17. accordingly.
far greater then the good, the benefits here alleged: the evil is
certain, the good, uncertain: it is no wisdom, no safety therefore to plung
men into sundry great and certain evils, See Act 6. thorowout.
damage reaches to their souls, yea often unto their bodies, goods and names:
it is no discretion then for men to hazard the loss, the damage of their
souls, for Orator est vir bonus, dicendi peritus. Cicero. De Oratore. lib. 1.
Quintilian Instit. Orat. l. 12. cap. 1. accordingly.
express, to describe the things they speak of in an elegant flexanimous
phrase, and grave elocution: the duty of the one being to represent things to
the eye, whereas the other speaks only to the ear. Which diversity is
warranted both by the story of Cicero the Orator, and Roscius the Actor, who,
as Saturnal. lib. 3. cap. 14. page 459.
Macrobius writes, did use to contend together; Vtrum ille s^^pius ^andem
^ententia^ varijs gestibus efficeret, an ipse p^r eloquentiae copiam sermon
divers^ pronunciaret: by the very styles of Actor, and Oratoris opus oration.
Quintil. Instit. l. 12. c. 10. page 703.
Orator, the first, importing only corporal gestures, and representations;
the other, verbal expressions^ and by the usual phrases of seeing a
Stage Play, and hearing an Oration. Now what proportion is there between
gestures and words? between Horu^ omniu^ dissimilis atque diversa inter se
ratio est. Id itaque vitandu^ in quo magna pars errat, ne in oratione Poetas
nobis and Historicos, Oratores aut declamatores imitandos putemus. Sua cuique
proposita lex, suus decor est, etc. Quintil. Instit. l. 10 c 2. page 375.
acting and speaking well, that one should be such a help or furtherance to
the other? Alas what profit, what advantage can an Orator gain by acting an
amorous females, a Bawdes, a Panders, a Ru^^ians, Drunkards, Murderers,
Lovers, Soldiers, Kings, Tyrants, Fayries, Furies, Devils or Pagan Idols part
with suitable gestures and speeches? tell me I beseech you, what furtherances
these are to make a perfect Orator, who though he may plead or speak for
others, must act no other man but himself alone, whereas Players must never
act themselves but other parts? Certainly if we believe Instit. Orat. lib. 1.
cap. 19. and l. 11. c. 3. page 645.636, 648.
Quintilian, or a D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage Plays. p. 119^ to 126.
late famous Orator of our own, the acting of Plays, which is full of
wantonness, of light, of lewd, of foolish gestures and speeches, is the next
way to mar an Orator, whose speech, action and deportment mu^t be grave and
serious. Hence Instit. Orat. l. 1. c. 18.19. p. 79. l. 10. c. 2. p. 755. and
lib. 11. cap. 3. page 645.648, 677.
Quintilian (as eminent an Orator as most now extant) in his directions how an
Orator should frame his speech, his voice and gesture, expressly forbids him^ to
imitate the voice Orator utatur laterum inclinatione forti ac virili, non a
scena and histrionibus, sed ab a mis, etc. Non enim comaedum esse sed oratorem
volo. Quare nec in gestu persequemur omnis argutias, nec in ^oquendo
distinctionibus, temporibus, effictionibus moleste sequemur, ut si in scena sit
dicendum, etc.
or gestures of Players, or to express or act the slaves, the drunkards,
lovers, penni-fathers, cowards, or any such Playhouse part, because as they
were no ways necessary for an Orator, so they will rather corrupt his mind
and manners, then any ways help his elocution or action. The acting therefore
of Plays is no ways necessary or useful for an Orator, it being no
furtherance but an apparent obstacle to true oratory, action, elocution; there
being no analogy between the wanton amorous gestures, speeches, Pastorals,
jests, and florishes of a Poet, an Actor; and the sad, grave, serious elocution
or action of an Orator. And as Play-acting is no ways useful for an Orator,
so much less See M. Ber^ard his Faithful Shepherd. cap. 13. page 89.
accordingly.
for a Minister, or Divine, there being no Analogy between Preachers and
Players, Sermons and Plays, Theaters and Churches, between the sacred, sober,
chaste, and modest gestures, the soule-saving speeches of the one, and the
lascivious, scurrill, profane, ungodly action and discourses of the other.
Hence the Act 7. Scene 3. and Part 2. Act 2. Scene 1.
forementioned Councels, Fathers and Canonists, together with Item placuit, ut
eas prorsus mundanas dignitates, quas seculares viri vel principes terrae
exercere solent in venationibus scilicet, vel canticis secularibus, aut in
resoluta and immoderata laetitia, in lyris and tibijs and his similibus
^usibus, nullus sub ecclesiastico canone constitu^us ob inanis Iaetitiae
fluxu^, audeat, fastu superbiae tumidus, quandoque praesumendo abuti, etc.
Surius. Tom. 3. page 264.
Concilium Foro-juliense, Can. 6. which I before omitted, have inhibited
Ministers and Clergy men from penning, acting and beholding Stage Plays, as
being no ways suitable, but altogether incompatible with their most holy and
grave profession: Hence also they excluded all common Actors, (and likewise
academicall to, till they had done public penance) from the Ministerial
function; the acting of Plays being so far from making men fit for the
ministry, that it made them both unfit, and likewise incapable to receive it.
What therefore Plutarchi Laconica. Agis junior. p. 468.
Agis junior replied to a wicked fellow who often demanded of him, Quis esset
Spartanorum optimus? Quitui est dissimilimus; the same may I say of Ministers;
that he is the best Minister who is most unlike a Player both in his gesture,
habit, speech and elocution. Hence De Officijs. lib. 1. cap. 18. Tom. 4. p. 6.7.
Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, refused to give Ecclesiastical Orders to
one who sued for them, and likewise deprived another (who afterward fell to
the Arian heresy) Quia lucebat in eorum incessu species quaedam scurrarum
percursantium: condemning not only all those Clergy men, but also Laymen to,
who used Playerly gestures, qui sensim ambulando imitantur histrionicos gestus,
and quasi quaedam fercula pomparum, and statuarum motus nutantium, ut
quotiescunque gradum transferunt modulos quosdam servare videantur: avice too
common in this our antique wanton age. We that know that 1 Timothy 3.8.^ Ambros.
De Officijs. lib. 1. c. 18. Galataeus De Moribus.
all Christians, and more especially Ministers, ought to be sober, modest,
grave, chaste, both in their gesture and deportment; Hence Surius Council. Tom.
4. page 742.743.
Concilium Senonense. An. 1528. Decreta Morum. cap. 25. decrees thus. Clerici
in incessu quoque honestatem exhibeant, ut gravitate itineris, mentis
maturitatem ostendant. Incompositio enim corporis, risus dissolutus, indece^s
^culorum vagatio, inaequalitatem indicant mentis. And then it proceeds thus.
Non in scenam velut histriones prodeant, non comaedias vernaculas agant; non
spectaculum corporis sui faciant in publico privatove loco (pray mark it:)
Quae omnia cum omnibus sacerdotibus sunt indec^ra, and ordini clericali multum
detrahentia, tum illis praecipue, quibus animarum cura est commissa. An
infallible evidence that histrionicall gestures, and the acting of Stage Plays
either in public or private, are no wise useful, but altogether scandalous,
and unseemely for a Minister; and that the acting, the beholding of Plays,
will make men See Act 5. Scene 1.2, 3, 4. and Act 6. Scene 3. to 17.
accordingly.
amorous, wanton, light and Playerlike in their gestures, as Hom. 1. De Verbis
Isaiae. Tom. 1. Col. Col. 1281.1283, 1284. and Orat. 7. Tom. 5. Col. 1484.1485.
See here page 400.401.
Saint Chrysostom with others largely testi^ie. And as Theatricall gestures
are altogether unseemely in a Minister, (whence Protestants condemn See Act 3.
Scene 5. See D. Rainolds, Bishop Bale, Bishop M^rt^n, D. Sutcliffe, D. Beard,
and others of the Mass: and Haddon Contr. Osorium. lib. 3. fol. 263.
all Mass Priests gestures, crouchings and noddings in the celebrating or
acting of their Masses, which they compare to Plays,) So likewi^e are all
poetical Playhouse phrases, Clinches, and strong lines, as now some style
them; (too frequent in our Sermons; which in respect of their I have heard some
style their texts a Landscrip or Picture: others a Play or Spectacle, dividing
their texts into Actors, Spectators, Scenes, etc. as if they were acting of a
Play, not preaching of Gods Word.
Divisions, language, action, style, and subject matter, consisting either of
wanton flashes of luxurious wits, or mere quotations of humane Authors, Poets,
Orators, Histories, Philosophers, and Popish Schoolmen; or sesquipedalia
verba, great empty swelling words of vanity and estimation more fitter for the
Stage, from whence they are ofttimes borrowed, (then the Pulpet,) unsuitable for
Mini^ters Prosper De Vita Contempt. lib. 3. cap. 6. fol. 105.
qui dum indece^ter elegantes videre volunt, passim jam turpibus verbis
impude^^er insaniunt. Ministers are Gods 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors, therefore they Numb. 22.35, 28. Ier. 26.2. 1 Cor. 1.17. cap. 2.1,
4.
must speak nothing in the Pulpit but those words which God shall put into
their mouths; they must deliver Gods message in his own dialect; not in the
Col. 2.8.
language of Poets, and other humane Authors, in which Gods spirit never
breathes. They are Christ's Vnder-shepheards, Ioh. 10.3, 4, 5, 8, 16.
therefore they must speak unto their Flocks in Christ's own voice, which
they must only know and hear, and follow, not in the voice of strangers,
whose voice they will not, yea they must not hear: They are the Col. 1.25, 26,
27, 28. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 4, 13. 2 Pet. 1.16.
Ministers, the mouth of Christ, therefore they must only preach and speak
his language: They have no other Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15, 16.
Ephesians. 3.8, 9. Col. 1.25. to 29.
but to go and preach the Gospel, (not Histories and Poets) unto men: They
are the 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 1 Pet. 4.10^ ^1. Luke 12.42.
Stewards of the mysteries, and manifold graces of the Gospel, of the milk
and bread of Gods holy Word; and these alone they must dispense: They are sent
out by God for no other purpose, but only Acts 26.18.
to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them that are sanctified through faith that is in Christ
Jesus: therefore they must come unto them, not with the dim lights of human
learning, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.
but with the light, the brightness of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ: 1
Cor. 2.1, 4.
not with entising words of man's wisdom (which never yet converted or saved
any one soul,) but in demonstration of the spirit and of power: 1 Cor. 2.6, 7.
not with the wisdom of this world, which human Authors teach, but with the
wisdom of God in a mystery, which the holy Ghost teaches: Col. 2.8.
not with philosophy and vain deceit after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: but with the Word and Gospel of
Christ, the Romans 1.16. Iam. 1.21.
mighty power of God unto salvation, which is able (yea only able) to save
men's souls. Hence Epist. 2. c. 10. See cap. 4. and Epist. 22. c. 15.
Saint Hierom writes thu^ to Nepotianus, Docente te in Ecclesia non clamor
populi, sed gemitus suscitetur. Lachrymae auditoru^ lauds tuae sint. Sermo
Presbyteri Scripturarum lectione conditus sit. Nolo te declamatorem esse and
rabulam, garrulumque sine ratione, sed mysteriorum peritum, and sacramentorum
Dei tui peritissimum. Verba voluere, and celeritate dicendi apud imperitum
vulgus admirationem facere, indoctorum hominum est, etc. Hence De Vita
Contempl. lib. 1. cap. 23.24, 25. See Hierom, Ambrose Theodoret, Theophylact,
^eda, Haymo^ Occu^enius, Anselme, Remigius, Primasius, and others, in 1 Cor.
2.1. to 7. accordingly.
Prosper Aquitanicus positively affirms, Quod non se debeat Ecclesiae doctor
de accura^i sermonis ostentatione jactare, ne videatur Ecclesiam Deinon velle
aedificare, sed magis se quantae sit eruditionis ostendere. Non igitur in
verborum splendore, sed in operum virtute totam praedicandi fiduciam ponat: non
vocibus delectetur populi acclamantis sibi, sed fletibus, nec plausum a populo
studeat expectare sed gemitum. Hoc specialiter doctor Ecclesiasticus elaboret,
quo fiunt qui audiunt ^um sanis disputationibus meliores, n^n vana assentatione
fautores. Lachrymas quas vult a suis auditoribus fundi, ipse primitus fundat,
and sic e^s compunctione sui cordis accendat. Tam simplex and apertus, etiam si
minus Latinus, disciplinatus tamen and gravis sermo debet esse Pontificis ut ab
intelligentia sui nullos, quamvis imperitos, excludat: sed in omnium audientium
pectus cum quadam delectatione descendat. De^ique alia est ratio declamatorum,
and alia debet esse doctorum. Illi elucubratae declamationis pompam totis
facundiae suae viribus concupiscunt: isti sobrio usitatoque sermon Christi
gloriam quaerunt. Illi rebus inanibus pretiosa verborum induunt ornamenta, isti
veracibus sententijs or^ant, and commendant verba simplicia. Illi affectant
suorum sensuum deformitatem tanquam velamine quodam phalerati sermonis
abscondere; isti eloquiorum suorum rusticitatem student pretiosis sensibus
venustare. Illi totam laudem suam infavore vulgi, isti in virtute Dei
constituunt. Illi plausibiliter dicunt, and nihil auditoribus suis declamando
proficiunt: isti usitatis sermonibus docent, and imitatores svos instituunt;
quia rationem suam nulla fucatae compositionis affectatione corrumpunt. Isti
sunt ministri verbi, adjutores Dei, oraculum Spiritus sancti. Per tales Deus
placatur populo, populus instruitur Deo. Hence Epist. lib. 1. Epist^ 62.63.
Bibl Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 2. page 483. See Iuo Carnotensis. Decret^ pars 4.
cap. 160. to 168.
Isiodor Pelusiota writes thus sharply to Theopompus and Talelaeus two
preaching Monks. Quis te comicis salibus non perstringat? Quis te non
commiseretur, qui cum in ^hilosophiae discipulorum Domini tranquillitate
sedeas, Gentilium historicorum and poetarum tumultum atque aestum tecum trahas?
Quid enim dic quaeso, apud illos est, quod religioni nostrae sit praeferendum?
Quid non mendacio ac risu scatet ex ijs quae magno studio consectantur? An non
divinitates ex vi^iosis affectionibus? An non fortia facinora pro vitiosis
affectionibus? An non certamina pro vitiosis affectionibus? Quamobrem ipsam
quoque faeditatis and obscaenitatis lectionem fuge (nam and ^a miram ad
aperienda vulnera jam cicatrice obducta vim habet:) ne alioqui vehementiori cum
impetu spiritus improbus revertatur, ac deteriorem ac perniciosiorem tibi
priore ignorantia aut negligentia clad^m inferat. Sermo, qui ad audientium
utilitatem habetur, potens sermo est, quique optimo jure sermo appelletur,
imitationemque ad Deum habeat. At qui voluptate sola ac plausu terminatur,
aeris sonitus est, magno strepitu aurem personans. Quare aut sermonem tuam
gravitate moderare, ac sermonis fastui ac pompae mediocritatem antepone, aut te
cymbalum theatrorum scenae accomodum esse scito. And hence is that lamentable
complaint of Onus Ecclesiae. cap. 18. sect. 8.9, 10.
Episcopus Chemnensis: Modernis autem temporibus in academijs publicis scientia
duntaxit mun^ana invaluit, scientia Dei non est in terra. Sacrarum literarum
doctrina ubique prorsus perijt, doctores scientia inslati docent suum chere,
circumferuntur omni v^nto doctrinae. Sicut gentes, ambulant in vanitate sensus
sui, tenebris haebentes obscuratum intellectum, propter caecitatem cordis
ipsorum. Caeci speculatores educunt discipulos caecos in viam quam nesciunt,
ponunt tenebras in lucem, and prava in recta, and nox nocti indicat scientiam.
Et sic ubique suos seducunt oratores. Extollunt doctrinam Aristotelis,
Averrois, and aliorum Gentilium Scribarum, ad excogitandum profunda and
voraginosa dogmata, obscurantia solemn sapientiae Christianae ac Evangelicae
vitae, ac purum aerem religiosi status suis fastuosis verbis, acutisque
disputationibus, ac sophisticis garrulitatibus maculantia. Modo equidem
cernimus omnia fere gymnasia ubi olim tradebatur theologica doctrina, poeticis
figmentis, vanis nugis, ac fabulosis portentis esse impleta. Vbi est literatus?
Vbi legis verba ponderans? ubi est doctor parvulorum? videbis populum alti
sermonis, ita ut non possis intelligere disertitudinem linguae ejus, in qu^
nulla est s^pientia. Atqui praedicatores concionary student, non ut syncero
affectu, sed gratia propriae laudis and verbis ornatis and politis aures
auditorum demulceant. Meliores autem s^nt sermones veriores quam disertiores.
De talibus doctoribus disertis inquit Salvator. Matthew. 15.9.
In van^m m^ colunt, docentes doctrinas and praecepta hominum: relinquentes
enim mand^ta Dei, tenetis traditiones hominum. All which recited passages, are
sufficient testimonies, that poetical streines of wit and Playerly eloquence^
are no ways tolerable, much less then commendable in a preaching Minister.
Therefore the acting, the penning of Plays, is no ways necessary or useful
for Clergy men to further them in their ministry. All the benefit that
Scholars reap by acting Plays, is this; that it makes See M. Bernard his
Faithful Shepherd. cap. 13. p. 89. and D. Raino^ds Overthrow of Stage Plays.
p. 119. to 127.
them histrionicall, antique, unprofitable verbal, Preachers, more fit for a
Playhouse then a Pulpit. The acting and penning therefore of Stage Plays is
no ways helpefull either for an Orator or a Preacher, as the Objectors dream,
Lastly, men may learn boldness, eloquence, action, elocution by far
readier, easier, and and more laudable means then the penning or acting
Plays; as by frequent Declamations, and often repetitions of eloquent
Orations, and the like; the only means Instit. Orator. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Quintilian prescribes, and the ordinary method that all Schoolmasters and
Tutors use, to make men perfect Orators: no need therefore of penning, of
acting Plays, for these pretended ends, which it cannot effect. We never read
that the Apostles, Prophets, and elegant Fathers of old, (as Cyprian, Basil,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierom, Augustine, Leo, Gregory the Great,
Chrysologus, Bernard, and such other unparaleld Christian Preachers; that
Demosthenes, Cicero, or Quintilian, the most accomplished Heathen Orators for
action, phrase, and elocution that the world has known,) did ever attain to
their perfection of Oratory by acting Plays: neither have we heard of any
Orators of latter times who hve trod this unknown path to elocution, to
perfect rhetoric by acting Plays; yea I have not read to my remembrance of
any one common Actor or Play-poet, that was an exquisite Orator: The acting
therefore of Plays is but a preposterous Spurious course, to train up youths
to an oratoricall grave comely action or elocution, who should rather be Ephesians.
6.4. Genesis 18.19. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
educated in the fear and nurture of the Lord, in the Grounds and Principles
of Religion, in the knowledge and study of the Scriptures; in honest callings,
Sciences, Arts, employments, which might benefit themselves and others, then in
penning or acting Stage Plays, which has always been condemned as infamous,
both by Christians and Pagans too.

Object. 3.
The 3. Objection for the composing and acting of Plays, is this: See Thomas
Lodge, his Play of Plays; and Haywoods Apology for Actors accordingly.
That they dilucidate and well explain many dark obscure Histories,
imprinting them in men's minds in such indelible Characters, that they can
hardly be oblitterated: Therefore they are useful and commendable.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer first, that this Objection extends not unto feined Comedies or
Tragedies, which are now most in use, but unto such real tragical Histories
only as are brought upon the Stage, which Play-poets and Players mangle,
falsify, if not obscure with many additionall circumstances and poetical
fictions; they do See M. Gosson his Plays confuted. Action 2. and I.G. his
Refutation of the Apology for Actors, accordingly.
not therefore explain, but sophisticate, and deforme good Histories, with
many false varnishes and Playhouse fooleries. Secondly, these Histories are
more fully, more truly expressed, more readily and acurately learned in the
original Authors who record them, then in derivative Playhouse Pamphlets,
which corrupt them; all circumstances both of the persons, time, occasion,
place, cause, manner, end, etc. being commonly truly registered in the story,
which are either See Gosson his Plays confuted. Action 2.
altered or omitted in the Play. Thirdly, if this Objection be true, Historians
which we so much magnify would be of little use or worth; we might then make
waste paper of their voluminous works, and turn all the applauded Histories
both of former and future ages into Plays, which better express them then our
stories, and more deeply imprint them in men's minds. Lastly, admit the
Objection ^rue; yet the Histories Plays explain would not do the Actors or
Spectators half the good, nor yet stick by them half so long, as the Non
omnino per hanc turpitudinem verba ista co^modius discuntur, sed per haec verba
turpitudo ista confidentius perpetratur. August Confess. lib. 1. cap. 16.
corruptions that accompany them; that being a true rule of Noctium Attic. l.
12. c. 2.
Aulus Gellius. Adolescentium indolem non tam juvant quae been dicta sunt, quam
inficiunt quae pessime. Since then the good they bring to men is no way
equivalent to the hurt, as Confess. l. 1. cap. 16.17.
S. Augustine himself long since a^firmed, the penning and acting of them
cannot be lawful. Aristotle Topic. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 1.
Id enim magis est eligendum, cui majus bonum, vel minus malum est consequens,
as a very Heathen has truly taught us.

The 4. Objection for the penning and acting of Plays is this: Object. 4.
That both our Universities, and long continued custom approve them: therefore
they are good.

To this I answer first; Answ. 1.
that the Objection it self is false, since D. Gager in D. Rainolds his
Overthrow of Stage Plays. page 151.152.
both our Universities condemn all popular Enterludes, and the best, the
gravest in our Universities, all academicall Stage Plays too: as I have
already prooved: Act 6. Scene 5. page 489.490, 491. Secondly, though the
dissoluter and younger sort in our Universities, ( being See here, page 491.
but Youths or Children, who are apt to dote on spectacles of vanity, and
unable to judge of good or evil) approve perchance of Stage-plaies in their
practice; yet the holiest, the gravest in our Universities condemn them in
their judgments, if not their practice to. And here by the way, in case of
examples, we must ever learn to judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
things, not so much by the actions, as by the judgments and selfe-condemning
Romans 2.1, 2^14, 15, 21, 22, 23, 27, 29. Magna vis est conscientae. Cicero Orat.
3. in Catilinam. Quos diri conscia facti Men's habet attonitos and surdo verbere
caedit, Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum? Nocte dieque suum gestare
in pectore testem. Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia verbera pallent.
Iuvenal. Satyr. 13. page 123.
consciences of men, by which they shall at last be judged. There is never a
Drunkard, Whore-maste^, Liar, Hypocrite, Thief, that lives or wallowes in
these sins approving them as lawful by his continual practice, but does
secretly pass sentence against them in his conscience; As therefore we must
not argue, that drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, lying, hypocrisy and theft
are lawful, because they are commonly committed, and sometimes applauded,
since the very committers do condemn them, no more may we argue, that the
acting or beholding of Stage Plays is lawful, because Scholars and University
men do sometimes act and see them; since if they will but seriously examine
their checking consciences, they shall ^inde them passing a secret doom of
condemnation against them, what ever See Doctor Rainolds Overthrow of
Stage Plays. page 91.
Christians must not live by examples, but by precepts: if therefore the rules
of Religion and Christianity allow them not, no matter though the whole world
approve them; they will be evil and unlawful still, and so much the worse
because so many justify them. Lastly, admit the Objection true; yet Hierom.
Epist. 85. Tom. 2. page 311.
Si auctoritas quaeritur, orbis major est urbe: The authority of the Sea Part.
1. Act 7. thorowout.
whole Church of God from age to age, of 71. Fathers, 55. Councels, above 150.
modern Christian Authors, of diverse Christian and Heathen Nations,
Magistrates, Emperors, States, etc. of 40. Heathen Writers, and of our own
Church and State, See her^, page 483. to 497.714. to 717. accordingly.
who condemn the penning, acting, and seeing of Stage Plays, is far greater
then the custom or exemplary Authority (not the sad and serious resolution
after full debate, which Stageplayes never had as yet) of both our
Universities: This Objection therefore is too light to sway the balance of
this present controversy; Quintilian Instit. l. 1. c 11. page 56.
Consuetudo enim si ex eo quod plures faciunt nomen accipiat, periculosum dabit
exemplu^, non orationi modo, sed (quod majus est) vita. Ergo consuetudinem
vivendi vocabo consensum bonorum, sicut sermonis, consensum eruditorum. And
thus much for the chief Objections, both for the compiling and acting of
Stage Plays.

SCENA SECVNDA.
I now come to answer the Objections, the pretenses for seeing and frequenting
Stage Plays. Object. 1.
The first of them is this. We go to Play Houses (say all our Play-haunters)
with no evil intent at all: for recreation sake alone, and for no sinister
purpose: therefore our resort to Plays cannot be evil, because our
intentions, our purposes are not so. Answ. 1.


To this I might here reply as De Habitu Virginum. page 242.
Saint Cyprian did to those lascivious Virgins who ran to wanton Bathes, as
some do to our Bathes, to see and to be seen, or to bathe with naked men; and
made this very objection. Videris, inquis, qua illuc mente quis veniat, mihi
tantum reficiendi corpusculi cura est and lavandi: To which he gives this
answer: Non te purgat ista defensio, nec lasciviae and petulantiae crimen
excusat. Sordidat lavatio ista, non abluit, nec emundat membra sed maculat.
Impudice tu neminem conspicis, sed ipsa conspiceris impudice. Oculos tuos turpi
oblectatione non polluis, sed dum oblectas alios pollueris. Spectaculum de
lavacro facis, etc. Theatra sunt faediora quo convenis, verecundia illic omnis
exuitur, etc. but I answer, first; that men cannot run to Plays and
Play Houses with any good intent: For every intention is regulated by its
object, and if that be ill, the intention it self cannot be good. If a man
intend to murder another for any good or public end, the intent cannot be
good because the thing intended, to wit the murder, is evil. 2 Samuel 6.7.
Vzza no doubt had a good intent (far better then any Play-haunters have in
flocking to Plays or Play Houses) when as he put forth his hand to stay the
Arc, which was shaken and like to fall: and yet God presently ^^ew him for it,
because God had forbidden any to touch it but the Numb. 3.31. Deuteronomy. 10.8. Josh
3.3, 4, 6, 9, 13, 15.
Priests. The 1 Samuel 6.14. to 21.
Bethsheemites had questionless a good intention, when they took down the
Arc and pried into it upon its unexpected return from the Philistines: and yet
God slew fifty thousand threescore and ten men for it; because he had
prohibited all but the Priests and Levites to look into it. Romans 3.8.
Men must not do evil that good may come of it: therefore they must not, they
cannot go to Stage Plays, (whose sinfulness and unlawfulness I have
sufficiently discovered^) with any good intent; These Plays themselves being
ill their good intentions cannot make either them, or your resort unto them,
good and lawful. See Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5.
Common Strumpets, Bawdes, Panders, Adulteresses, Adulterers, Whore-masters,
etc. frequent either Plays or Play Houses, but for lewd and sinister
purposes; to conclude of times, of places for their shameful works of
darkness, to draw others on to sin, and to sa^iate their own ungodly lusts?
And why do most other Spectators flock unto them; but See August. Enar. in
Psalm. 80. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 8. and Confess. l. 6. c. 7 8. See Act 6. Scene 16.
accordingly.
either to gratify such lewd companions who entice them thither^ or to spend
and pass their time which might be better employed: Spectatum veniunt,
veniunt Spectentur ut ipsae. Ovid d^ Art Amandi. l. 1. p. 170. Clemens
Alexand. Paedag. l 3. c. 11. and Tertul. De Spectac. lib.
to see and to be seen: to learn some apish fashions, or antique complements:
to behold such or such an obscene or Satyricall Comedy acted: See Part 1. Act
2. and Act 5. Scene 11.
to laugh excessively in a profuse unchristian childish manner; to satisfy
some secret carnal lust or other, which pricks them on to Stage Plays; or
some strange fantastique humor of novalty, vanity, ridiculous mirth and
jollity; and the like? These I dareboldly say are the chief, if not the only
ends why men repair to Stage Plays; and these all are sinful: therefore
their intention in resorting unto Stage Plays is not good. Thirdly, no man
when he goes to see a Stage Play, propounds Gods glory (which 1 Cor. 10.31. See
Act 3. Scene 7.
ough to be the utmost end of all men's actions) for his end; nor yet the good,
the peace, the comfort of his own and others souls: his intentions therefore
cannot be warrantable. Fourthly, Bonus animus in malare dimidium est mali; as
even Pseudolus. page 471.
Plautus the Comedian writes: your good intentions make your ill actions far
the worse, because you commit them with greater greediness, and less remorse,
as if they were truly good, at least not ill. Fifthly, admit Prove. 14.9. cap.
24.17.
that we must not make a sport or mock of sin, it being the object 2 Pet.
2.7, 8. Psalm. 119.136, 139.
only of our godly sorrow, and deepest grief, not of our carnal joy: that we
may not recreate our selves Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. See Act 3. Scene 1.2.
with scurrility, ribaldry, lascivious, profane or amorous Enterludes, but
only with good and lawful things, which are no 1 Cor. 10.32, 33. Romans 12.17.
ways scandalous, or of ill report: therefore we may not make Plays the
object of our Recreation, which were ever See Act 6. Scene 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
infamous and unlawful too. Sixthly, I answer, that men's pretense of going to
Stage Plays merely for their honest recreation, is but a false surmise, which
will be most apparent, if we shall truly weight, what it is to do a thing,
only for honest Recreation, and what necessary ingredients and circumstances
all lawful recreations must have, Aquinas^ secunda secundae Quaest. 168. M.
Perkins his Cases of Conscience. l. 3. c 4. sect. 9. Vol. 2. page 140.141. M.
Northbrooke his Treatise of Vain Plays and Enterludes. M. Samuel Bird, his
Use of the Pleasures of this present life, and others who write of Recreations.
Every honest lawful Recreation must have these conditions: First the object,
the subject of it must be lawful, Christian, and commendable, Prove. 14.9.
not sinful, not infamous, or prohibited by the Magistrate. Secondly, it must
be bounded with due circumstances of Romans 12.17. 1 Cor. 10 32. Prove. 1.15. c.
2.19, 20. c. 4.14, 15.
place and persons, both of them must be honest, and of good report: in which
all Stage Plays (especially in Play Houses,) are defective. Thirdly, it must
have all these circumstances of time: First, It Isay 58.3, 13. c. 22.12, 13,
14. Exodus 20.8, 9. Ephesians. 5.16. See here Act 6. Scene 12. and Act 7. Scene 3.
Summa Angelica. Tit. Ludus, with all Expositors on the 4. Commandment.
must not be on Lords-dayes, on times devoted to Gods more special service,
on times either of public or private fasting and solemn humiliations: nor yet
in times designed for our honest studies, callings, or any necessary public
inployments: Secondly, it must not be in the Sea here, page 646.746, 747, 754,
75^. and 360. accordingly. and Seneca Epist. 122.
night season when men by Gods appointment, and the ordinary course of nature
ought to take their rest, to enable them the better to the duties of the
ensuing day: and so much the rather because such Ephesians. 5.11, 12, 13. Romans
13.12, 13. 1 These. 5.7. Prove. 7.9, 10. See here, page 360.
night-recreations are occasions, if not provocations unto works of
darkness. Thirdly, it must be only at such times when we stand in need of
recreations to refresh our bodies or spirits: It must be always either after
sicknesses, or natural infirmities, or distempers of body or mind, to recover
strength, health and vigor: or else after In oportuni and temporis and usus
occasion veluti laboris quae dam m^dicina ita ludus adhibendus est. Aristot.
^olit. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 7. See M^ Wheatly his Times Redemption: and all others
who write of Recreations.
honest labors, studies, and employments, in our lawful callings, to repair
the decays, to refresh the weariness of our bodies, or to whet the blunted
edge of our over-wearied minds: Fourthly, It must be Eccles. 3.1, 4.
Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. p. 111.
rare and seldom, not quotidian. Fifthly, the recreation must Nec Iusisse
pudet, sed non incidere ludum. Horat. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 14 p. 260. See M.
Wheatly his Times Redemption. and her^ p. 254.255, 258. and Act 6. Scene 1.
not be overlong, not time-consuming; it must be only as a bait to a
traviler, a whetting to a Mower or Carpenter, or as an hours sleep in the day
time to a wearied man; we must Job 21.11, 12, 13. Amos 6.1^ to 9. Isay 5.11.
Iam. 5.5. Mat. 24.18, 20. c. 20.6. Isay 16^ 12. Exodus 20.9.
not spend whole weeks, whole days, half days or nights on recreations, as
now too many do, Ezech. 16.49, 51.
abundance of idleness in this kind, being one of Sodomes heinous sins:
Fourthly, they must See here Act 6. Scene 2. accordingly. and Mr. Bo^tons
Walking with God. p. 154. to 181.
not be over-costly or expensive; but cheap and obvious, with as little
expense as may be. Fifthly, they See Summa Angelica. Tit. Ludus. and here Act
7. Scene 3. accordingly.
must be such as are suitable to men's callings, ages, places, sexes,
conditions, tempers of body, etc. that being not lawful or convenient in these
regards to one, which yet are and may be commendable in, or suitable to
another. The recreations of Princes being not meet for Peasants; and so ^
converso; nor all the pastimes of the Laity agreeable to the Clergy. Sixthly,
they must be all directed to a lawful end, See M. Wheatly his Times
Redemption, Dr. Raino^d^ Overthrow of Stage Plays: and others. See Act 3.
Scene 7.
even to the strengthening, quickening and refreshing both of our bodies and
spirits, that so we may go on with greater cheerfulness in the duties of our
callings, and in the worship and service of God, whose 1 Cor. 10.30, 31.
glory must be the utmost aim of all our recreations. If our recreations
fail in all or any of these circumstances, or if we use profane Plays or
sports in See here Act 7. Scene 3. thorowout. Summa Angelica. Tit. Ludus: and
our own Canons. 1603. Can. 88. which prohibit Plays in Churches.
Churches, in other sacred places devoted to Gods service, they presently cease
to be lawful or honest, and so prove sinful pleasures. Now Stage Plays, and
those who resort unto them under the pretense of recreation, are defective or
peccant in all or many of these parti^ulars. Therefore they are not used, not
frequented only for honest recreation ^ake. Lastly, admit men go to
Stage Plays only to recreate their minds, and to refresh their spirits; I
answer, that this is so far frow justifying or extenuating, that it does
highly aggravate the execrable vitiousnesse of this their action, and proclaim
them sinners in an high degree. For what men or women are there who can make a
play, a sport, a recreation of sin and sinful things; of ribaldry, profane
and scurrill Jests, Adulteries, Rapes, Incests, Blasphemies, and such other
notorious abominations, that are usually acted on the Stage, ( 2 Pet. 1.7, 8.
S^e he^ Act 5. Scene 11. and Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matthew. acco^di^gly.
which vex every righteous soul from day to day, and grieves it to the heart,)
but such who are void of grace, of sin-abhorring, vice-lamenting repentance,
and wholly enthralled to the love, the service of these sinful lusts and
pleasures, which will plunge them over head and ears into eternal torments at
the la^t; this being one of the highest degrees of lewdness, Isay 3.9. Phil.
3.19.
for men to take joy and pleasure even in sinful things.

Reply.
If any here reply in the second place, that they delight not in the scurrilous
sinful passages, speeches, gestures, representations or parts in Stage Plays,
which they altogether abhor, but only in the action, and in those honest
Spectacles and discourses, which no man can condemn.

Answer 1.
To this I answer first, That commonly the more See Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Epist.
2. and here Act 3 Scene 1. and 3. Act 5. Scene 1. to 5. accordingly.
obscene and scurrilous the Play, the more lascivious the Players action is,
the more it exhilerates, and delights the Auditors, the Spectators; no Plays,
no Actors giving less content, then those that are most free from lascivious,
amorous, profane, effeminate jests, and gestures, as experience and the
premises witness. This very See Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Chrysostom. Hom.
6.7. and 38. in Matthew. Tertullian De Spectaculis. Lactantius De Vero Cultu.
cap. 20. accordingly.
those wh^ delight in the appearances of evil, in the lively representations
of sin, or sinful things, can never cordially abhor the evils, the sins
themselves: for he that truly loathes a Man, a Toade, a Devil, a Serpent, (and
so by consequent, a sin, will abhor their very pictures, and resemblances.
Hence is it that a Christian who detests all sin, hates 1 These. 5.22. Jude
23. Psalm. 119.113.
the very thoughts and imaginations, and absteines from all the appearances of
it too. Since therefore Play-haunters delight thus in the representations of
whoredom, adultery, and such like execrable crimes, needs must they take
pleasure in the sins themselves. For, if men did cordially detest these
sins as they pretend, the nearer the representations came unto the sins (as
they oft-times come too near in Stage Plays, See Lampridij^ Heliogabalus.
page 212. Mimicis adulteris ea quae solent simulato fieri, effici ad verum
jussit, etc. See Aulus Gellius. Noct. Attic. lib. 7. cap. 5. the story of Polus.
even to the actual commission of the very abominations acted:) the more they
would abhor them, by reason of that near similitude they bear unto the
sins: but the more lively the resemblances of these Stage-lewdnesses are, the
greater vicinity they have unto the sins themselves, the more they are
applauded, admired Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
and actor ^o peritior quo turpior judicatur: therefore they do not hate, but
love these sins themselves, what ever they pretend. Thirdly, that which most
Play-haunters deem nothing else but the representation of sin in the acting
of Plays, is even the sin it self in Gods repute: the acting of an effeminate
whorish part upon the Stage in woman's apparel, with amorous, womanish speches,
gestures, kisses, co^plements, dalliances and imbracements, with wanton,
unchaste, lascivious glances, nods, and solicitations unto lewdness, yea the
very expressions of the acts of Venery on the Stage, are See Act 3. and 5.
thorowout, accordingly.
naught else but effeminacy, scurrility, wantonness, whoredom and adultery it
self in Gods esteem: the personating of a fools part in jest, Prove. 13.16.
c. 14.24. c. 15.21. Eccles. 2.3, 12, 13. c. 10.1, 6.
is folly and vanity in good earnest: the Sea Act 3. Scene 1.3, 5, 7.
accordingly.
speaking of vain words, the swearing by the names of Pagan Idols, and the
very uttering of their names, much more the acting of their parts: the very
naming of fornication and adultery, together with foolish talking and jesting
on the Stage, are naught else but actual sins in Gods account, not only in
the Actors, but the Romans 1.30. 2 John 11.
Spectators too; who give consent unto them: Those therefore who take pleasure
in all or any of these, delight not in the representations only of sin, but
even in sin it self, which should be their greatest sorrow. Fifthly, these
See Act 3. Scene 1.2, 3, 7. and Act 6. thorowout.
as the Fathers and premises witness: If then Play-haunters detest these
sins, why do they not likewise 1 These. 5.22. Matthew. 6, 13. c. 5.28, 29.30.
hate the very repres^ntations of them, which are a beaten rode, a strong
all^rement to these sins themselves? Certainly, their little care to avoid
the one, bewrayes their love, their little detestation of the other. Sixthly,
whereas some object, that they hate all scurrilous, filthy, amorous parts,
discourses, passages, Pastorals, jests, and gestures in the Plays they go to,
approving none but chaste, but modest representations, passages, speeches: To
this I answer^ That as few Play-haunters, I dare say, can speak this seriously
from his hearts: so it is but an See here, fol. 548.
hardly detest them S^e Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Isay 52.11.
avoid the whole Play for the evil parts and particles which defile the whole;
(as every man is apt to fly those Cities that are but in part infected with
the plague, and to eschew those sweet conserves and wholesome potions that are
contempered with a little poison,) then to behold the evil parts though with
detestation, that he may enjoy the pleasure of the good; there being more
danger of ^inne, of corruption by the one, then hope of any real benefit or
contentment from the other. Lastly, every Play-haunters See Chrysostom. Hom. 6.
and 38. in Matthew. accordingly.
presence at the whole entire Play, and his contribution to the Actors for
playing of the whole, is a notorious approbation of, an unavoydable assent unto
the whole, in Gods, if not in men's esteem, who will thence conclude that they
consented to and took pleasure in the whole. Let no Play-haunters therefore
any longer cheat themselves or others with these dilusory false pretenses,
which have neither truth nor substance in them: but quite abandon Plays and
Play Houses, notwithstanding these evasions which will not help them in the day
of Judgment. And thus much for the first Objection.

The 2. Objection or pretense for seeing Stage Plays is this: Object. 2.
That it serves to pa^se away men's idle time, which would else perchance be
worse employed.

To this I answer first; Answ. 1.
That See Act 6. Scen^ 1.
therefore it is evil because it thus consumes men's precious time which should
be better employed, either in public or private duties of piety and devotion,
or else in some honest studies, callings, or employments for the public good.
Secondly, there is no man De Brevitate Vitae. cap. 1.
Seneca and others, Ars longa, vita brevis; that our studies, our professions
are long, our lives exceeding short and swift; and shall we then add wings,
add spurs of life-consuming pleasures of sin to our few winged days, to make
them fly away with greatest haste and worser speed, as if we had too much
life? Job. 7^ 6. c. 16.22. Psalm. 30.6. Psalm. 103.15. Psalm. 144.4. Isay 40^6.
Iam. 4.14. See Act 6 Scene 1.
Our time is too too swift already; it runs whiles we sit still; it is
always flying more swift then any poast, whiles we are eating, drinking,
sleeping, playing, and think not of its haste: yea so swift winged is it
Seneca De Brevit. Vitae. lib. c. 1.2, 11, 12.
ubi per luxum ac negligentiam def^uit, ubi nullae rei bon^ impenditur, ut quod
ire non intelleximus praeterijsse sentimus; that whiles we waste it thus on
Plays and sports, it is past and gone before we discern it move. And shall we
then be so desperately prodigal of our lives, our rich and peerless hours,
as to plot, to study how to pass them qui^e away with mo^e celerity, and far
lesser fruit? Certainly if we would but seriously consider and peruse that
elegant Treatise of an Senec^ De Brevitate Vitae.
Heathen, Of the shortness of life, or this memorable speech of his Seneca
Epist. 24.
Quotidie morimur, quotidie enim demitu^ aliqua pars vitae, and tunc quoque cum
^escimus vita decrescit. Infantiam amisimus, deinde pueritiam^ deinde
adolescentiam, usque ad hesternum quicquid transijt temporis perit. Hunc ipsum
quem agimus diem, etiam cum morte dividimus, etc. If we would with all remember
the end for which God made us; to wit, Prove. 16.4. Rev. 4.11.
to do his service; John 17.4. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
to finish the work which he has given us to do; 1 Pet. 1.17.
and to pass the time of our pilgrimage here in his fear: Or the cause for
which our blessed Savior redeemed us, Luke 1.74, 75.
That we might serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our lives: Romans 14.7, 8.
that we should no longer live to our selves but unto him alone, and that
living and dying we might ^e hi^. If we would further seriou^ly ponder how many
holy duties we have every day to perform toward God; how many graces, and
degrees of grace we want; how many daily sins and lusts we have to lament and
mortify; See D. Gough, his Family duties, and Thomas Beacon, his Catechisme^
part 6. fol. 487. to 558.
how many offices of piety, of charity, of courtesy, duty and civility we
have to exercise toward our selves, our friends, our neighbors, our families,
our enemies, as we are men, or Christians, in all those several relations
wherein we stand to others: considering withal what time we ought to spend
upon our lawful callings, upon the care and culture of our souls An illa
ingemiscit and plangit, cui vacat cultum praeciosae vestis induere, nec
indumentum Chri^ti quod ^erdidit cogitare? accipere preciosa ornamenta and
monilia elaborata, nec divini and caelestis ornatus damna deflere? Cyprian De
Lapsis. page 343. See Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in 1 Timothy accordingly.
which are then most neglected, when as our bodies are most pampered, most
adorned; all which are su^ficient to monopolize even all our idle days and
more. And if we would add to this; these strict commands of God: Exodus 20.9.
Six days Which precept is not a mere permission to labor, as some explain
it, but an absolute peremptory command. See Thomas Beacon, his Catechism. fol.
343 344, 345. Nyder super Praeceptu^^ tertium. cap. 14. Gorran, Lyra, RHabanus
Maurus, BB. Babington, M. Perkins, Downeham, Dod, Lake, and others on the 4.
Commandment.
shall thou labor and do all thy work; Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground: (a curse, a precept
laid on all mankind.) Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See that ye walk circumspectly, not
as fools but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil: 2.
These. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. For even when we were with you this we commanded
you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For we hear there
are some (and O that we did not now hear of many ^uch among us) which walk
among you disorderly, not working at all, but are buste-bodies. Now them that
are such we^ command and exhort by our Lord Jesus, that with quie^nesse they
work and eat their own bread, not being weary in well doing. And if any obey
not our Word by this Epistle note that man, and have no communion with him,
that he may be ashamed, Did we, I say, consider all this, or did we remember,
Arcta and angusta est via, quae ducit ad vitam; durus and ard^us limes qui
tendit ad gloriam. Non est ad magna facilis ascensus. Quem ^udorem perpetimur,
quem laborem; cum conamur ascendere colles and vertices monti^m, quid ut
ascendamus ad caelum? Cyprian De Habit. Virg page 124.
how narrow, steep, and difficult the way is unto Heaven, and what pains all
those must take who mean to climb up thither; We should then speedily
discover, how little cause men have to run to Stage Plays to pass away their
idle hours, which fly away so speedily of themselves. But suppose there are
any such (as alas our idle age has too too many,) who though they are loath to
die, ( as all men should be Ioh. 17.5, 6. Act. 13.36. Luke 2.^6, 27, 28, 29,
30. 2. Tim. 4.6, 7, 8.
willing to depart who have finished or survived their work, or else want good
employments,) yet See Seneca De Brevita^e. Vitae. cap. 1.2, 9. to 12.
they have so much idle time, that they know not how to spend, standing all the
day idle, like those lazy Loyterers, Matthew. 20.1. to 8. even for want of work;
or loytring abroad like our common Vagrant Sturdy-beggers, not so much because
they cannot, but because they will not work; let all such idle Bees know, that
Christ Jesus their Lord and Master has a Vineyard in which they may and ought
to spend their time; he has store of employments for them though themselves
have none, even enough to take up all the vacant hours of their lives. When
therefore any Play-haunters or others have so much idle time that they know not
how to bestow it, let them presently step into the Lords Vineyard; let them
repair to Sermons, and such other public exercises of Religion; calling upon
one another and saying, Isay 2^ 3, 5.
Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: or
else betake themselves to their own private prayers and devotions: Let them
Deuteronomy. 6.5. to 8. cap. 17.19. John 5.39. Acts 17.11.
read the Scriptures, or some other pious Books, which may instruct them in
the ways of godliness: Ephesians. 5.19, 20. Col. 3.16.
or sing Psalmes^ and Hymns, and spiritual Songs to God^ let them seriously
Lament. 3.40. 1 Cor. 11.28.
examine their own consciences, hearts and lives, by the sacred Touchstone of
Gods Word; let them Ier. 31.9, 18, 19. Zach. 12.10, 11. Romans 7.24.
bewail their own original corruption, with all their actual
transgressions, and sue earnestly to God for pardon for them; let them labor 2
Pet. 1.5 to 10. cap. 3.18.
after all the graces and degrees of grace which yet they want, and be ever
adding to those graces which they have: let them Ier. 50.4, 5. Psalm. 61.8. Mal.
3.16. Psalm. 73.28.
renew their vows and covenants with God, and walk more closely, more exactly
with him every day: let them muse Genesis 24 63. Psalm. 1.2. Ps. 8. thorowout. Ps.
63.6. Psalm. 77.12. Psalm. 119.15 23, 48, 78. Psalm. 143.5.
and meditate on God, on all his great and glorious works and attributes; on
Christ and all his sufferings; on the holy Ghost and all his graces; on the Word
of God and all its precepts, promises, threatenings; on Heaven and everlasting
happiness: on Hell and all its torments; on sin and all the miseries that
attend it: Deuteronomy. 32.29.
on their own frailty and mortality; on the Sea Eccles. 1.1, 2, etc.
vanity of all earthly things; on the day of death and 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.
judgment, which should be always in their thoughts; and on a thousand such
like particulars, on which they should employ their minds and vacant hours.
If men will but thus improve their idle time which now they waste on Plays and
such like vanities (which Romans 2.5. S^e Part 1. Act 6. Scene 19.20.
only treasure up wrath unto their souls against the day of wrath, and plunge
them deeper into Hell at last,) what benefit, what comfort might they reap?
their idle vacant seasons would then prove the comfortablest, the profitablest
of all others, and bring them in a large return of grace here, of glory
hereafter. Let us therefore henceforth labor to improve our cast, our leisure
times to our eternal advantage; Seneca De Brev. Vitae cap. 1415.
and ab hoc exiguo^ and caduco temporis transitu, in illa nos toto demus animo,
quae immensa quae aeterna sunt, quae cum melioribus communia: Haec nobis dabunt
ad aeternitatem iter, and nos in illum locum ex quo nemo eijciet, sublenabunt:
haec una ratio est extendendae mortalitatis, imo, in immortalitatem vertendae:
and then we need not run to Masks, to Plays, or Play Houses to pass away
our time. Lastly, I answer, That men cannot be worse employed then in hearing
or beholding Stage Plays, Nihil enim tam damnosum bonis moribus, quam in
aliquo Spectaculo desidere: tunc enim per voluptatem facilius vitia surrepunt.
It was Seneca Epist. 7. Sec. Act 6. Scene. 5. page 449.484.
Seneca his resolution to his friend Lucilius, when he requested his advice,
what thing he would have him principally to avoid; and it may be a
satisfactory answer to this Objection. For how can men be worse employed, then
in hearing, seeing, learning all kind of vice, of villainy, and lewdness
whatsoever? then in depraving both their minds and manners, and treasuring up
damnation to their souls? See Part 1. Act 6. thorowout.
This is the only good employment, that our Play-haunters have at Plays,
which is the worst of any. This Objection therefore is but idle.

The 3. Objection which Play-frequenters make for the seeing of Plays, Object.
3.
is this. That the frequenting of Stage Plays (as their own experience
witnesses,) does men no hurt at all: it neither indisposeth them to holy
duties, nor inticeth them to lust or lewdness: therefore it is not ill. An
Objection made in Verum ut absurdam invenias tuorum spectaculorum quibus
suspensus inhia^ excusationem, dicis te utilitatem capere ex his ex quibus
jacturam pateris irrecuperabilem. Hom. 1. De Verbis Isa^^. Tom. 1. Col. 1284. A.
Chrysostomes time, as well as now.

To this I answer first; that Play-haunters are no meet judges in this case,
because most of them being yet Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. See Part 1. Act 4.
in the state of sin and death, are altogether senseless of the growth and
progress of their corruptions, of which they take no notice. Excellent to this
purpose is that speech of Epist. 54. page 241.
Seneca Quare vitia sua nemo confitetur? Quia etiam nunc in illis est. Somnium
narrare, vigilantis est; and vitia sua confireri, sanitatis indicium est
Expergiscamur ergo, ut errores nostros coarguere possimus. Stage-haunters are
for the most part lulled asleep in the Dalilaes lap of these sinful
pleasures, yea they are quite dead in sins and trespasses; their 2 Cor. 4.4.
Heb. 3.13.
eyes are so blinded that they will not see, their hearts so hardened that they
cannot discern, their consciences so cauterized that they never seriously
behold nor yet examine the execrable filthiness, greatness, multitude,
growth, or daily increase of their beloved sins and lusts; no marvel
therefore if they affirm this falsehood; that Male verum examinat omnis
corruptus Iudex. Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Satyr. 2. page 199.
corrupt, a partial, and so an unfitting judge, in his own cause. As
therefore men in ordinary differences, refer the censure and determination of
their own causes to indifferent Arbitrators who are no ways engaged in their
suits, declining their own particular discitions to avoid all partiality; it
being against reason (as Sect. 212.12. H. 4.8. Br. Leete 12.9. H. 6.10. a. 7.
H. 6.13. a. 1. E. 3.13. a. 23. a. 8. ^. 3.2. a.
Mr. Littleton and our Law-bookes teach us,) that any man should be the Judge
of his own cause. Or as Polit. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Aristotle writes of Physicians, that they use the help of other Physicians in
their own sickness, because they cannot discern the true touch of their own
diseases by reason of their distemper: the same should our Play-haunters do in
this particular; refer the examination of the hurt they receive from Plays
and Play Houses unto others, who are impartial judges; but not unto
themselves, whom self-love makes too Hierom; Epist. 1. c. 3.5.
Tunc maxim oppugnaris, si te oppugnari nescis. Adversarius noster, tanquam
leo rugiens, aliquem devorare quaerens circumit; and tu pacem putas? Sedet in
insidijs; insidiatur in occulto; and tu frondosae arboris tectus umbraoulo,
molles somnos futurus praeda, carpis? Inde me persequitur luxuria, inde
compellit libido, ut habitantem in me Spiritum sanctum fugem, ut templum ejus
violem: persequitur, inquam, me hostis, cui nomina mill, mill nocendi artes^
and ego infaelix victorem me putabo, dum capior? In illo aestu Charybdis
luxuriae salutem vorat. Ibi ore virgineo ad pudicitiae perpetranda naufragia,
Scylla seu renidens, libido blanditur. Hic barbarum litus, hic Diabolus pyrata
cum socijs portat vincula capiendis. Nolite credere, nolite esse securi. Licet
in modum stagni fusum aequor arrideat; licet vix summa jacentis elementi
spiritu terga crispentur: magnos hic campus montes habet; intus inclusum est
periculum, intus est hostis, expedite rudentes, vela suspendite; tranquillitas
ista tempesta^ est. Stage Players and Play-haunters are commonly most
dangerously corrupted by the Plays they act and see, when as they are least
sensible of their hurt; yea their often resort to Plays and Play Houses which
perchance did somewhat gall their consciences at the first, has made them
senseless of their mischief at the last. Bernard. De Consideratione. lib. 1.
c. 2.
Vulnere vetusto and neglecto callus obducitur, and eo insanabile quo
insensibile fit. Solum est cordurum quod semetipsum non exhorret quia nec
sentit. I shall therefore shut up this reply with that of De Consideratione. l.
2. c. 1.
Bernard, which I would wish all unlamenting Play-haunters and sinners to
consider. Scio, longius a salute absistere membrum quod obstupuit, and aegrum
sese non sentientem, periculosius laborare. Fourthly, the hurt men receive from
Stage Plays, is Iuvenal. Satyr 2. page 12.
Nemo repent fit tu pissimus: is as true as ancient. No man becomes extremely
vicious on a sudden, but by unsensible gradations, and so do Play-haunters
too, even by those seeds of vice which Stage Plays sow and nourish in them.
What Epist. 123. See Osorius de Regum Instit. lib. 4. here, p. 916. in the
margent, accordingly.
Seneca writes of the discourses of lewd companions; Horum sermo multum nocet;
Nametiam si non statim officit, semina in animo relinquit; sequiturque nos
etiam cum ab illis discesserimus resurrecturum postea malum. The same may I
truly write of Plays; whose evil fruits, like Matthew. 13.25, 26, etc.
tares that are buried under ground, are often concealed for a time, till at last
they bud forth by degrees, and come to perfect ripeness; and then they are
abvious unto all men's view. No wonder therefore if Play-haunters discover not
the hurt they receive from Plays, because it creepes thus on them by
imperceptible gradations, though faster upon some then others. But albeit
Play-haunters feel no hurt at first, (no more then those who drink down
poison in a sugered cup, which yet proves fatal to rhem at the last, though it
were sweet and luscious for the present,) yet when terrors of conscience,
death, and judgments, when crosses and afflictions shall thoroughly awaken them;
when God shall set all their sins in order before them, or bring them by his
grace and mercy to sincere repentance, then they shall find and know it to
their grief (as sundry See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 12.14, 18, 19, 20. and page
910.
penitent Players and Play-haunters have done before them,) that Stage Plays
have done them hurt indeed. Fifthly, See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 18, 19, 20.
depraved, corrupted many Spectators from time to time, and drawn them on to
diverse sins, which have even sunk their souls to Hell; as the premises
largely testify: And can any then think to escape all danger, even where they
have seen so many perish? Can any man rest secure where multitudes have
miscarried? What De Singularitate Clericorum. Tract. Tom. 2. p. 199.200.
S. Cyprian therefore writes in a like case, that shall I here commend to
Stage-haunters. Ad vos nunc mea exhortatio convertitur, quos nolumus experiri
talia praecipitia ruinarum. Metuite quantum potestis ejusmodi casus exitia. Et
in ista subversione labentium vos experimenta perterreant. Nimium praeceps est
quitransire contendit, ubi alium conspexerit cecidisse, and vehementer infrenis
est cui non incutitur timor alio pereunte. Amator vero est salutis suae qui
evitat alienae mortis incursum, and ipse est providus qui solicitus fit
cladibus caeterorum. Adversa est confidentia quae periculis vitam suam pro
certo commendat; and lubrica spes est quae inter fomen^a peccati salvari se
sperat. Incerta victoria est, inter hostilia arma pugnare; and impossibilis
liberatio est ^lammis circundari, nec ardere; quod Prove. 6.
Solomon non negat, dicens. Quis alligabit in sinu suo ignem, vestimenta autem
sua non comburet? Credit quaeso vos, credit divinae fidei quinimo plu^ quam
nostrae. Difficile quis venenum bibet and vivet: verendum est dormienti in
ripa, ne cadat, cum dicat Apostolus, 1 Cor. 10.
Qui se putat stare videat ne cadat. In h^c part expedit plus been timere,
quam male fidere. Et utilius est infirmum se homo cognoscat, ut fortis existat;
quam fortis videri velit, ut infirmus emergat. Sixthly, Iactant and gestiunt se
obtinuisse tutores quos magis ultores sensuisse debuerant. Bernard. Epist. 178.
fol. 212.
what ever they pretend: For first, these Plays inflame their lusts, engender
unchaste affections in their souls; mispend their money and time, indispose them
to Gods service and sincere repentance, by inthralling them in the guilt of
sundry other mischiefs, as I have Act 6. thorowout.
elsewhere largely prooved. Secondly, it makes them guilty of all the sins
that are either acted or committed at the Playhouse; of all the Play-poets,
all the Actors wickedness which they maintain and cherish both with their
purses and presence. A fearful mischief. De Gubernatione D^i l. 4. page 141.
See here page 417.
Nam qui alios peccare fecerit, multos secum praecipitat in mortem, and necesse
est ut sit pro tantis reus, quantos secum traxerit in ruinam; as Salvian well
observes. Thirdly, your very contribution unto Players for their Plays and
action if Saint See Act 6. Scene 2. page 324.325, 326, 472, 688, 904. to 907.
Augustine and others may be credited, is a very great and heinous sin; of
which every Play-haunter is guilty^ And is it not the greatest hurt that can
be, to be guilty of an heinous sin, which subjects men to Gods curse and
vengeance here, and to Prorsus displicet in pulcherrimo corpore non solu^
morbus sed and naevus. Bernard. Epist. 249. fol. 225. D.
scandalous and offensive to Gods Church, Gods Saints, Decet Christianum non
solum habere vitae sanitatem, sed and famae decorem. Bernard. Epist. 127. fol.
206. B.
and u^beseeming the Gospel of Christ, so it is a means to harden vicious
Play-haunters, to encourage and draw on many Spectators unto Stage Plays, who
are polluted, vitiated, and made worse by them: whose ^ins shall certainly be
put on your, as well as on their scores at last, whose lewd example was the
original occasion both of their sin and hurt. I shall therefore cloze up
this reply with that of Homil. 38. in Matthew. Tom. 2. Col. 300. A.B.
Chrysostom, to those who made this very objection. Sed ego, inquies,
ostend^m, nihil multis huj^smodi ludos ob^uisse: im^o veroid maxim nocet, quod
frustrae and incassu^ temp^^s consumi^, and scandalum alijs offers. Nam ets^ tu
quod^m excelsi animi robore, nihil inde tibi ^^li contraxisti: ^^^t^men qu^niam
alios imbecilli^^es exemplo tui spectaculorum studios^s fecisti, quomodo non
ipse malum tibi contraxisti, qui causam mali committendi alijs praebuisti? Qui
enim (...) corrumpuntur tam viri quam mulieres, omnes corruptionis crimi^^ and
causam in caput tuum transferunt. Nam quemadmodum si non esseu^ qui spectarent,
nec essent etiam qui luderent: sic quoniam uterque sunt causa peccatorum quae
committuntur, ignem etiam patientur. Quare quamvis ^nimi tui ^odestia
eff^cist^, ut nihil tibi inde obfuerit, quod ego fieri posse non arbitror:
quoniam tamen alij causa ludorum multa peccaru^t, gr^ves propter hoc paenas
lues, quamvis etiam multo modestior and temperantior esses, si nullo modo e^
pergeres. Which passage (formerly Here, page 417.4^8.
Englished) I would pleasures of sin, which we may avoid with safety, but
not resort to without fear of danger? Hierom. Epist. 47. cap. 1.
Quid tibi necesse est in ea versari domo in qu^ necesse habea^ aut perire, aut
vincere? Quis unquam mortalium juxta viperam securos somnos cepit? quae et si
non perculia^, certe sollicitat. Securius est perire non posse, qu^m juxta
periculum nonp^risse. O therefore let us fly these pestiferous Enterludes
which will endanger hurting us, if that they harm us not. R^ply.


If any here reply, as some did to Sed Sol, imo ipse Deus ista de caelo
spectat, nec contaminatur. Plane Sol^ and in cloacam radios suos defert, nec
contaminatur. Tertul. De Spectac. c. 20. page 397.
Tertullian in this very case: That the Sun shines on a dunghill, and yet
its beams are not defiled by it: so men may look ^n Stage Plays and yet not
be polluted; Titus 1.15.
for unto the pure all things are pure: And admit there be some obscenity in
Stage Plays, yet chaste hearts and ears will not be tainted with it. Prosper.
De Vita Contempl. l. 1. c. 6.
Auribus enim castis obscan^ sermones cum sono defici^^t, nec secretum pudici
cordis irr^mpunt: nec ^rumpit serm^ turpis ex mente nisi se voluntary men's
aute corrumpat, quam recipiat aliquid unde corrumpatur, aut proferat. Turpia
quoque verba per aures ingressa, quid praevalent, si non fuerint arbitrio
mentis admissa? Quando autem praevalent, non ipsam corrumpunt mentem, sed jam
corruptam spon^e reperiunt. Pulchrorum quoque corporum formae per oculos
irrepentes, animum non movent incorruptum; and quando corruptibiliter movent,
non corrumpun^ sarum, sed ostendunt propria voluntate corruptum; as Prosper
Aquitanicus writes.

To this I answer first, Answer.
that the Sun is of a pure and celestial nature, incapable of any defilement
whatsoever; its shining therefore on a dunghill can no ways maculate its pure
rays, which oft-times make the dung-heape stink the more. But man's nature as
it was capable of pollution at the first, before Adams fall, so it is Psalm.
14.2, 3. Psalm. 51.5. Job 14.4. cap. 15.14. Romans 3.9. to 19. cap. 7.12.^0, ^3,
24. Genesis 6.11, 12. Isay 60.26.
altogether ^ilthy, stinking, and corrupted since, more apt to be inflamed with
any lascivious amorous speeches, gestures, Plays and Enterludes, then Tinder,
Gunpowder, Flax, or Charcole are with the least sparks of fire. P^al. 51.5.
Job 14.4. Romans 5.12. to 20. See Augustine ad Valerium De Nuptijs and
Concupiscentia^ and all who have written of original sin, and its nature.
Every Son of Lapsed Adam is borne into the world a sinful, unclean,
depraved creature, overspred with a universal leprosy of corruption: Genesis
6.5, 11, 12.
all the imaginations of his heart are evil, yea only evil, and that
continually: Isay 64.6.
yea all his righteousness is but as menstruous rags, and Romans 7.18.
in him there dwells nothing that is good: his very 2 Pet. 2.14.
eyes being full of adultery, so that they cannot cease from sin; and his
Ier. 17.9.
heart most desperately wicked and deceitful above all things, as both
Scripture and experience teach us: No wonder then if Stage Plays (which if we
believe Hom. 38. in Matthew. here, p. 412.413.
S. Chrysostom, are far more contagious and filthy th^n any dung,) defile
men's vicious natures, though no stinking dung heap can pollute the shining
Sun. We see that Genesis 3.6.
the very sight of the forbidden fruit was sufficient to tempt Adam and Eve to
sin even before their Natures were depraved: and we know 2 Samuel 11.2. to 6.
that the casual sight of Bathsheba was sufficient to provoke even regenerate
David to an adulterous act: And will not then the premeditated voluntary
delightful beholding of an unchaste adulterous Play, much more contaminate a
voluptuous, carnal, graceless Play-haunter, who lies rotting in the sink of
his most beastly lusts? A very Heathen could inform us thus much: Seneca.
Epist. 97.
Ad deteriora non tantum pronum iter est, sed etiam praeceps; that man's nature
is not only prone, but precipitate unto evil things: and shall Christians
then think themselves, as incapable of contagion as the shining Sun? God
forbid: we may perchance^ be such in Heaven hereafter, as neither August. De
Corr^pt. and Gratia. cap. 11.12.
velle, ne^ posse peccare; but here we cannot be such; For what man among us
can say, Prove, 20.9.
that he has made hi^ heart clean, and that he is pure from his sin?
Certainly if any dare say so, (as some Papists write of their ^uper-errogating
super-arrogant Saints,) 1 John 1.8.
St. John^ will tell him that he is a liar, and there is no truth in him. And
although Tit. 1.15. See Ambrose, Hierom Theodoret, Pri^^sius, S^dul^^s,
Remigius, Beda, Anselme, Haymo, RHabanus Maurus, O^cumenius, Lyra, Anselme,
Tostatus, Calvin, Marlorat, and others. Ibidem.
unto the pure all things (that is all good, all lawful^, all indifferent
things, all meats and drinks, for of them the Apostle speaks) are pure, yet
unto the impure (and such S^e Part 1. Act 4. Scene 1.2.
for the most part are all Play-haunters) all things (that is all good, all
indifferent things, all meats, all drinks and recr^^tions) are unclean; and
so by consequence Stage Plays too; because their very conscience^ is defiled.
Secondly, whereas it is objected, that evil prove See here, fol. 548.
oft-times contagious. Thirdly, when as men see or hear them Peccata
praeterita non nocent quando non placent. Hierom. Com. in Marc. 16.
with highest detestation of their lewdness, and strong resolves against them:
not with delight or approbation. But thus men see and hear not Stage Plays,
to which they purposely and willingly^ resort, in which they place their
pleasure and delight. Therefore they cannot but corrupt, yea dangerously defile
them, because they do not loath but love them overmuch. And what so apt to
contaminate and deprave men, as that which they best affect?

The last Objection for the seeing of Plays is this: Object. 4.
If you debar us from beholding Stage Plays (say some) you will then deprive
us of all our mirth, our pleasures, and cause us for to live a melancholy, sad,
dumpish lif^, the which we cannot brook: therefore you must still permit us to
resort to Plays.

To this I answer first: Answ. 1.
that it is the condition of all voluptuous carnal persons, to deem
themselves much restrained, when as they are inhibited from any one sinful
pleasure in which they take delight; as if Nun^ perierunt omnia: nam voluptates
cum perdidit homo, non statuo eum vivere. Sophoclis Antigon^. page 389.
all their comforts, their contentments, yea their life it self, were utterly
lost and gone. Let a Drunkard be but restrained from his Cups and
Pot-companions; an Whore-master from his Queanes and Whoredoms, a common Dicer
from his unlawful gaming, or a Play-haunter from his Stage Plays, which
delight and feed his lusts; Luxurioso frugalitas paena est: pigro^ supplicij
loco labor est, desidioso studere torqueri est. Non ista difficilia sunt
natura, sed nos fluidi and enerves. Seneca. Epist. 71.
they presantly think themselves undo^e, yea quite bereaved of all their
pleasures: and all because they place their happiness, their chief delights
in these their carnal contentments, which always end in horror. But alas what
Si dicis, durus est hic sermo, non possum mundum spernere, and carnem meam odio
habere: dic mihi, ubi sunt amatores mundi qui ante pauc^ tempora nobiscum
erant? Nihil ex ijs remansit, nisi cineres and vermes. Attend diligenter quid
sunt, vel quid fuerunt. Homines fuerunt sicut tu, comederunt, biberunt,
riseruut, du^erum in bonis dies suos, and in (...) ad infer^^ des^e^der^^t. H^^
caro little vermibus, and illic anima ignibus deputatur, donec rursus infelici
collegio colligati sempiternis involuantur incendijs qui socij fuerunt in
vitijs. B^^nard^ Meditationes. cap. 2.
hard in^urious rest^aine is this, to inhibit them from sin and sinful
things, which would certainly plung them into eternal misery, from which the
very Laws of God, of nature, of Nations have long since debard them, under the
severest penalties? What, are Christians grown now such carnal Epicures, as
to think there is no pleasure, mirth or solace but in sin alone, in amorous
Pastorals, obscene lascivious speeches, jests, and Enterludes, or such lewd
notorious abominations as should even pierce all Christian hearts with grief?
See Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. and here, Act 5. Scene 11.
what, is there no pleasure think we but in that which God prohibits? in that
which he and all good men abhor? in that which shuts men out of Heaven, and
poasts them on to Hell? Good God, if these be the chief delights of Christians
now, which was the vice, the shame of Pagans, of Christians heretofore, why do
any such voluptuous carnal Christians hope for Heaven? Are there any
lascivious Stage Plays, Spectacles, Songs, or such like sinful vanities
there? are there any such lust-fomenting, sin-engendring sports or pastimes in
Heaven, as carnalists delight in here on earth? O no, Rev. 21.27. cap. 22.15.
there is no uncleanesse, vanity or lasciviousness in that holy place^ If men
therefore think themselves miserable when they are deprived of these pleasures
here, what happiness can they hope to find in Heaven hereafter, where there
are no such Enterludes, such carnal contentments as they delight in now? If
then we may be happy, yea eternally happy in the highest degree without these
lust-enraging Enterludes hereafter, why should we deem our selves unfortunate
in being restrained from them now? especially since Christ himself informs
us, Luke 9.23. Gal. 5.24.
that if any man will come after him, he must deny himself in all his sinful
pleasures, and crucify his flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. The
Saints and Angels now in Heaven; the Primitive Church and Christians, yea and
many Pagans, whiles they were on earth, accounted their lives most comfortable,
though they wanted Stage Plays, See Act 6. Scene 5. and Act 7. Scene 2.3.
yea, this was one of their greatest contentments, that they had quite
abandoned them: Nay those very Saints of God on earth, who now lead the most
comfortable, joyful, happy lives of all men in the world, are such who never
come at Stage-playes^ and many carnal men there are who live full merry, full
jolly lives without them. This Objection therefore is but frivolous. Secondly,
though men are deprived See Cyprian de Spectaculis, and Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in
Matthew accordingly. and Psa^. 8.1. to 9.
They have the several prospects of the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, the
Stars, the water, the earth, with all the infinite Psalm. ^43.5. Psalm. 8.3. to
the en^. Isay ^1.6. Psalm. 104.2. to 35.
variety of Creatures, of Fishes, Birds, Fowls, Beasts, cre^ping things,
Trees, Herbs, Plants, Roots, Stones, and Metals that are in them, to delight
their eyes: They have Psalm. 104.16. Eccles. 12.4. Cant. 2.12.
the Music of all Birds and singing creatures to please their ears; the
incomperably delicate Genesis 27.27. Canti^. 1.12. cap. 2.3. cap. 4.10, 11. c.
7.8, 13. Hosea 14.6.
^doriferous sents and perfumes of all H^arbes, all Flowers, Fruits, etc. to
refresh their noses^ the Genesis 27.4. to 14.28, 39. Psalm. 63.5. Isay 25.6.
savory tastes of all edible creatures to content their pallats, so far as
the rules of sobriety and temperance will permit: the pleasures Eccles. 2.5.
Genesis 2.8. to 17. cap. 3.1. to 12. 2 Kings 21.18. Esther 1.5. c. 7.7, 8. Ier.
39.4. c. 52.7. Cant. 5.1. cap. 6.2.11. John 18.1, 2.
that Orchards, Rivers, Gardens, Ponds, Woods, or any such earthly Paradices
can afford them: the Genesis 33.5. Psalm. 17.4. Psalm. 113.9. Ps. 127.3, 4. Ps.
128.3.4. Eccles 2.3. to 12. Mark 10.29, 30. See Chrysostom. 38. in Matthew.
accordingly.
comfort of Friends, Kindred, Wives, Children, Possessions, wealth, and all
other external blessings that God has bestowed upon them. And what want of
pleasures, of contentments can they complain of, who have all these for to
delight them, the very meanest whereof are far more pleasant, then the very
best of Enterludes, then all our Stage Plays put together? Besides, though men
are debard from Stage Plays, Dicing, or mix lascivious Dancing, or any other
unlawful sports, they have store of honest, of healthful recreations still
remaining, with which to refresh themselves; as walking, riding, fishing,
fowling, hawking, hunting, ringing, leaping, vauting, wrestling, running,
shooting, Eccles 2.8. 1 Samuel 18.6. 1 Chronicles. 23.5. 2 Chronicles. 5.13. Psalm. 68.25.
Psalm. 86.7. Psalm. 127.1, 7. Psalm. 149.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 150.3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 5.19.
Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13.
singing of Psalms and pious Ditties; playing upon musical Instruments,
casting of the Bar, tossing the Pike, riding of the great Horse, (an exercise
fit for men of quality) running at the ring, with a world of such like
lawdable, cheap, and harmless exercises; which being used in due season, with
moderation, temperance, and all lawful circumstances, will prove more wholesome
to their bodies, more profitable and Tempora quae Spectaculis, campo, tesseris,
ociosis denique sermonibus, ne dicam somno and conviviorum mora conterunt,
Geometriae potius, ac Musicae impendant, quanto plus delectationis ex his
habituri, quam ex illis ineruditis voluptatibus? Quintil. Instit. lib. 1^ cap.
19 page 83.
delightful to their souls, then all the Enterludes, the unlawful Pastimes
in the world. Men need not therefore complain for want of recreations in case
they are deprived of Plays, when they have such plenty of far better sports.
Thirdly, admit the objection true, that you shall be stripped of all your earthly
pleasures in case you are kept from Plays, yet what prejudice should your
souls or bodies suffer by it? Carnal worldly pleasures, you know, are no
part, no particle of a Christians comfort, he can live a most happy joyful
life without them; yea he can hardly live happily or safely with them. Worldly
pleasures are full of dangerous soule-entangling snares, which are apt to
endanger the very best of Christians. Hence was it, Heb 11.25.
that holy Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Hence our Luke 6.25.
Savior pronounces an woe unto them that laugh now, for they shall weep and
lament hereafter; Hence Iam. 4.9, 10.
S. James advises men, to turn their laughter into mourning, and their joy
into heaviness: And Eccles. 7.3, 4, 5.
Solomon hereupon instructs men; that it is better to go to the house of
mourning, then to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and
the living will lay it to his heart. That sorrow is better then laughter, for
by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better: And that the heart
of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart only of fools in the
house of mirth: there being nothing more dangerous to men's souls, Virtuti
inimica voluptas. Silius Italicus. Punic. Bell. lib. 15 fol. 185.
more opposite to their virtues, then carnal pleasures. This Heathen men long
since acknowledged. Voluptas esca malorum qua nulla capitalior pestis hominibus
a natura datur, Nihil altum, nihil magnificum and divinum suscipere possunt,
qui suas omnes cogitationes abjecerunt in rem tam humilem atque contemptam:
writes De Senectute page 652. De Amic^tia. p. 661.
Cicero. Respuendae sunt voluptates, enervant and effaeminant. Voluptati
indulgere initium omnium malorum est. Indurandus itaque est animus and
blandimentis voluptatum procul abstrahendus. Vna Hannibalem hyberna soluerunt,
and indomitum illum nivibus atque Alpibus virum enervaverunt fomenta Campaniae.
Armis vicit, vitijs victus est, etc. Debellandae itaque sunt imprimis
voluptates; is the advice of Epist. 51.104.110.
Seneca. And good reason is there for it. Quippe nec ira Deum tantum, nec tela,
nec hosts,
Quantum sola noces animis illapsa voluptas,
as Punicorum Bell. lib. 15. fol. 186.
Silius Italicus affirmed long ago: answerable to which is that of Livi. Hist.
Romans lib. 30. page 749.
Scipio, appliable to our present times. Non est tantum ab hostibus armatis
aetati nostrae pericul^, quantum a circumfusis undique voluptatibus: qui eas
sua temperantia frenavit ac domuit, multo majus decus majoremque victoriam sibi
peperit quam nos Syphace victo habemus. And is it then any such tedious
irksome matter for Christians out of their love to Christ, (for whom they
should part with Luke 14.33.
all things) to part with these their worldly pleasures, so dangerous to their
souls, when as Pagans have thus censured, abandoned them long ago? Let us
therefore contemn the loss of these our worthless, vain and sinful
Enterludes, Non tantigulam facias voluptatis quanti periculum. Tertul. De
Spectac. c. 27.
whose danger far exceeds their pleasure, and since we shall not enjoy them
hereafter in Heaven, let us not desire them whiles we are on earth. Fourthly,
this world, this life is See Act 6. Scene 11. page 293.294.
no time, no place for pleasure, mirth or carnal jollity, it being only a
vale of misery, a place of sorrow, grief and labor to all the Saints of God.
Bernard. De eo quod Scriptum est. Beatus homo, etc. Sermo. fol. 84. a.
Cum enim legatur Adam in loco voluptatis ab initio positus ut operaretur, quis
sanum sapiens, filios ejus in loco afflictionis ad feriandum positos
arbitretur? Every man is Natura hominem tantum nudum, and in nuda humo, natali
die abijcit ad vagitus statim and ploratum, nullumque tot animalium aliud ad
lachrymas, and has protenus vitae principio. At hercule risus praecox ille and
celerimus ante quadragesimum diem nulli datur. Ab hoc lucis rudimento quae ne
feras quidem inter nos genitas, vincula excipiunt, and omnis membrorum nexus.
At homo infeliciter natus jacet, manibus pedibusque devinctis, f^ens, animal
caeteris imperaturum, and a supplicijs vitam auspicatur, unam tantum ob culpam,
quia natum est. Heu dementiam ab ijs initijs existimantium ad superbiam se
genitos, etc. Plinius. ad l. 7. Not Hist. Proaemium. p. 289.290.
borne into this world weeping, to signify that it is a place of tears, not
of laughter; a prison, not a Paradise; and shall we then think to make it
only a Theater of jollity and delights? Fifthly, let no men so far deceive
themselves, as to expect an Neque enim ad hoc nos de Paradiso voluptatis
animadversio divina eijcisse videtur, ut alterum sibi hic Paradisum adinventio
humana prepararet. Bernardi Declamat. fol. 569. F.
earthly Paradise and an heavenly too; as to enjoy the pleasures of earth and
Heaven both. Hi^rom. Epist. 1. c. 9.
Delicatus es frater si and hic vis gaudere cum saeculo, and postea regnare cum
Christo, writes Saint Hierom. Alas, those who receive their pleasure in this
life, must not look for any comfort, but torments only in the life to come,
Rev. 18.7.
and so much pleasure as they have enjoyed here, so much torment shall they
sustain hereafter Psalm. 126.5, 6.
None reap enjoy hereafter, but those who sow in tears of godly sorrow now. 2
Cor. 4.17.
Our light afflictions (not our carnal pleasures) which are but for a moment,
are the only instruments that purchase for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. Act. 14.22.
Through many afflictions (not through the pleasant way of worldly pleasures
and Spectacles which are quite out of the rode to Heaven) we must all enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Isay 25.8. Rev. 7.17. cap. 21.4. Faelices
lachrymae quas benigna manus conditoris absterget. Bernardi Declamationes. fol.
270. D.
where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, which here must ever flow with
tears of sorrow for our own and others sins. Memorable is that speech of
Abraham to the rich man. See Bernardi Declamat. fol. 179. and Cyprian. De Caena
Domini. Sermon. page 299.
Luke 16.25. Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
pleasure, (as some Translations render it) and Lazarus pain; but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. Lo here, a voluptuous life, ending in
torments; and a sorrowful life terminating in eternal bliss. It is recorded
of the wicked, Job 21.12, 13. That they take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice
at the sound of the Organ: they spend their days in wealth and in a moment go
down to Hell. And Solomon, Eccles. 11.8, 9. speaks thus unto all voluptuous
persons who delight in worldly jollity: If a man live many years, and rejoice
in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness for they are many.
All that comes is vanity: Rejoice, O Young man, in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things
God will bring thee to Judgment. Which two remarkable places coupled with
Revel. 18.7. How much she has glorified herself and lived deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her: are sufficient evidences that all worldly
pleasures without Gods merci^ and repentance bring men only to Ille maeret and
de^^et, cui been non potest esse post se^ulum, cuju; vivendi fructus omnis hic
capi^u^; cujus hic ^olatium omne finitur, cujus caduca ac brevis vita hic
aliquam dulcedinem co^put^t voluptatum; cum istinc recesserit, paena jam alia
superest ad dolo^em. Cyprian. Contra Demetr. page 225.
Hell, to torments at the last. It will be therefore your happiness, your Si
aliqua amisistis Vitae gaudia, negot^atio est aliquid amittere ut majo^a
lucr^ris. Tert^^lian ad Mar^yres. cap. 2.
eternal adva^tage, not your prejudice, to foregoe all your sinful pleasures
now, that so ye may gain far greater, far better in Heaven Sixthly, those
Enterludes and carnal pastime^ wherein the world takes so much solace, can
bring no true joy to a Christians heart, who tramples upon them as not worthy
the enjoying. It is an excellent saying of Epist. 111. fol. 203. A. and Epist.
114. h. Hanc Dei gratiam recolens, qui de sacro calice bibit amplius sitit, and
ad Deum vivum erigens desiderium, ita singulari fame illo uno appetitu tenetur,
ut deinceps fellca peccatoru^ horreat pocula, and omnis sapor delectamentorum
carnaliu^, sit ei quasi rancidum rodensque pallatu^ acutae mordacitatis acetum.
Cyprian. De Caena Domini Sermon. page 301.
Bernard: Gustato spiritu, necesse est desipere carnem: affectanti caelestia,
terrena non sapiunt: aeternis inhanti, fastidio sunt transitoria. Revera illud
verum and solum est gaudium, quod non de creatura sed de creatore concipitur,
and quod cum possideris nemo tollet a te. Cui comparata omnis aliunde
jocunditas, maeror est; omnis suavitas, dolor est; omne dulce, amarum; omne
decorum, faedum; omne postremo quodcunque aliud delectari possit, molestum.
Every pious Christian has the 2 Cor. 1 3, 4. Quicquid nobis adest praeter Deum
nostrum, non est dulce. Nolimus omnia quae dedit, si non dat seipsum qui omnia
dedit. Augustine. Enarratio in Psalm. 85. Tom. 8. pars 2. page 66. See Job 15.11.
God of all comfort and consolation, (without whom nothing is pleasant,) with
all his great and glorious attributes: the mercies of God the Father; the
merits and soule-saving passion of God the Son; the consolations, joys and
graces of God the holy Ghost; the wisdom, power, goodness, eternity,
omnipotency, mercy, truth and alsufficiency of the sacred Trinity, Nimi^um ad
imaginem Dei facta anima rationalis, caeteris omnibus occupari potest, repleri
omnino non potest. Capacem Dei, quicquid Deo minus est, non impleb^t. Bernardi
Declamationes. fol. 169. F.
which are only able for to fill the soul: the word, the promises of the God
of truth; the eternal joys of Heaven; the fellowship of the blessed Saints
and Angels, to ravish, solace, and rejoice his soul upon all occasions: on
these he may cast the eyes, yea fix the very intentions and desires of his
heart: in the^e his affections may even satiate themselves, and take their full
contentment, without any subsequent repentance, sin, or sorrow of heart:
Those then who cannot satisfy their souls with these celestial Spectacles,
and soule-ravishing delights, in which all Chistians place their complacency
and supreme felicity, it is a sure character, that they have yet no share in
Christ, no acquaintance with the least degrees of grace, no interest in Gods
favor, no true desire of grace, of Heaven, and everlasting life, which would
soon embitter and debase al worldly pleasures, which are but ciphers in
respect of these. Lastly, if any Play-haunter be yet Augustines words: Quid
ergo facimus fratres? writes Enar. in Psalm. 39. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 417.418.
he in our very case. Dimissuri eum sumus? sine spectaculo morietur, non
subsistet, non nos sequetur. Quid ergo faciemus? Demus pro spectaculis
spectacula. Et quae spectacula daturi sumus Christiano homini, quem volumus ab
illis spectaculis revocare? Gratias ago Domino Deo nostro, sequente versu
ostendit nobis quae spectatoribus spectare volentibus spectacula praeberemus,
and ostendere debeamus. Ecce aversus fuerit a Circo, a Theatro, ab
Amphitheatro, quaerat quod spectet, prorsus quaerat; non eum relinquimus sine
spectaculo. Quid pro illis dabimus? Audi quid sequitur. Multa fecisti tu Domine
Deus meus mirabilia tua. Miracula hominum intuebatur, intendat mirabilia Dei.
Multa fecit Dominus mirabilia sua, haec respiciat. Quare illi viluerunt?
Aurigam laudas regentem quatuor equos, and sine lapsu atque offensione
currentes. Forte talia miracula spiritalia non fecit Dominus. Regat luxuriam,
regat injustitiam, regat imprudentiam: motus istos qui nimium lapsi haec vitia
faciunt, regat and subdat sibi and teneat habena^ and non rapiatur: ducat quo
vult, non ^rahatur quo non vult: aurigam laudabat, aurigam laudabit. Clamabat,
ut auriga vest cooperiretur, immortalitate vestietur. Haec munera, haec
spectacula dedit Deus; clamat de caelo, Specto vos: luctamini, adjuvabo:
vincite, coronabo, etc. Nunc specta histrionem. Didicit enim homo magno studio
in fune ambulare, and pendens te suspendit. Illum attend aeditorem majorum
Spectaculorum. Didicit iste in fune ambulare, nunquid fecit in mare ambulare?
Obliviscere Theatrum tuum, attend Petrum nostrum, non in fune ambulantem, sed
ut ita dicam, in mari ambulantem, etc, See here, page 345. to 349. to the same
purpose. Christians then in this Fathers judgment have far greater, far
better Spectacles then all the Play Houses in the world can yield them: They
have See the 2. Epistle Dedicatory, accordingly.
many heavenly, sweet and spiritual Spectacles on which to cast their eyes and
thoughts; these they must always contemplate; not these base filthy
Enterludes. I shall therefore cloze up this objection with that excellent
passage of Tertullian, which answers it to the full. Nostrae caenae, nostrae
nuptiae nondum sunt: non possum cum illis (Spectatoribus) discumbere, quia nec
illi nobiscum. Vicibus disposita res est. De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 27.28, 29.
Tom. 2. page 401.402, 403.
Nunc illi letantur, nos con^lictamur. John 16.20, 21, 22.
Seculum (inquit) gaudebit, vos tri^tes eritis. Lugeamus ergo dum Ethnici
gaudent, ut cum lugere caeperint, gaudeamus; ne pariter nunc gaudentes, tunc
quoque pariter lugeamus. Delicatus es Christian, si and in seculo voluptatem
concupiscis, im^ nimium stultus si hoc existimas voluptatem. Philosophi quidem
hoc nomen quieti and tranquillitati dederunt, in ea gaudent, in ea avocantur,
in ea etiam gloriantur. Tu mihi metas and scenas and pulverem, and harenas
suspiras. Dicas velim, non possumus vivere sine voluptate, qui mori cum
voluptate debebimus? Nam quod est aliud votum nostrum, quam quod and Apostoli;
Phil. 1.23.
exire de seculo and recipi apud Dominum. Haec voluptas, ubi and votum. Iam
nunc si putas delectamentis exigere spacium hoc, cur tam ingratus es, ut tot,
and tales voluptates a Deo contributas tibi satis non habeas, neque
recognoscas? Quid enim jocundius quam Dei Patris and Domini reconciliatio, quam
veritatis revelatio, quam errorum recognitio, quam tantorum retro criminum
venia? quae major voluptas, Nota.
quam fastidium ipsius voluptatis, quam seculi totius contemptus, quam vera
libertas, quam conscientia integra, quam vita sufficiens, quam mortis timor
nullus, quod calcas Deos Nationum, quod Daemonia expellis, quod medicinas
facis, quod revelationes pe^ is, quod Deo vivis? Hae voluptates, haec
spectacula Christianorum, sancta, perpetua, gratuita; in his tibi ludos
circenses interpraetare; cursus seculi intuere, tempora labentia dinumera,
metas consummationis expecta, societates ecclesiarum defend, ad signum Dei
suscitare, ad tubam Angeli erigere, ad martyrij palmas gloriare. Nota.
Si scenicae doctrinae delectant, satis nobis literarum est, satis versuum est,
satis sententiarum, satis etiam canticorum, satis vocum, nec fabulae, sed
veritates, nec strophae, sed simplicitates. Vis and pugillatus and luctatus?
praesto sunt, non parva sed multa. Aspice impudicitiam dejectam a castitate,
perfidiam caesam a fide, saevitiam a misericordia contusam, petulantiam a
modestia adumbratam, and tales apud nos sunt agones, in quibus ipsi coronamur.
Vis autem and sanguinis aliquid? habes Christi. Quale autem spectaculum in
proximo est, adventus Domini jam indubitati, jam superbi, jam triumphantis?
Quae illa exultatio Angelorum, quae gloria resurgentium sanctorum? quale regnum
exinde justorum? qualis civitas nova Jerusalem? At enim supersunt alia
spectacula, ille ultimus and perpetuus judicij dies, ille nationibus
insperatus, ille derisus, cum tanta seculi vetustas, and tot ejus nativitates 2
Pet. 3.7, 9.
uno igni haurientur. Quae tunc spectaculi latitudo? quid admirer? quid rideam?
ubi gaudiam, ubi exultem spectans tot ac tantos reges, qui in caelum recepti
nuntiabantur cum ipso Jove, and ipsis suis testibus inimis tenebris
congemiscentes? item praesid^s persecutores dominici nominis saevioribus quam
ipsi flammis saevierunt insultantibus contra Christianos, liquescentes: quos
praeterea sapientes illos philosophos coram discipulis suis una conflagrantibus
^rubescentes, quibus nihil ad Deum pertinere suadebant, quibus animas aut
nullas, aut non in pristina corpora redituras adfirmabant; etiam poe^as, non ad
Rhodamanti nec ad Minois, sed ad inopinati Christi tribunal palpitantes. Tunc
magis Let our Tragedians and Actors observe this passage.
Tragaedi audiendi, magis scilicet vocales in sua propria calamitate. Tunc
histriones cognoscendi solutiores multo per ignem: tunc spectandus auriga in
flammea rota totus rubens: tunc Xystici contemplandi, non in gymnasijs, sed in
igne ja^ulati, nisi quod nec tunc quidem illos velim visos, ut qui malim ad eos
potius conspectum insatiabilem confer qui in dominum desaevierunt. Hic est
ille (dicam) Matthew. 13.55. Mark. 6.3.
fabri aut quaestuariae filius, John 5.16.
Sabbati destructor, John 8.48.
Samarites and Daemonium habens. Matthew. 26.14, 15, 67, 68. c. 27.29, 30, 31, 34.
Hic est quem a Judah redimistis, hic est ille arundinis and colaphis
diverberatus, sputame^tis dedecoratus, fell and aceto potatus. Hic est quem
Matthew. 28.11. to 16.
clam discentes subripuerunt, u^ resurrexisse dicatur, vel hortulanus detraxit
ne lactucae suae frequentia comeantium laederentur. Vt talia spectes, ut
talibus exultes, quis tibi praetor, aut consul, aut quaestor, aut sacerdos de
sua liberalitate praestabit? and tamen haec jam quodammodo per fidem habemus
spiritu imaginante repraesentata. Caeter^m qualia illa sunt, 1 Cor. 2.9. Isay
64.4.
quae nec oculus vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascenderunt?
credo Circo, and utraque cauca and omni stadio gratiora.

ACTVS QVINTVS.
THe unlawfulness of penning, acting, and beholding Stage Plays, being thus
at large evinced, and those Objections answered, which are most usually opposed
in their unjust defense, there is nothing now remaining, but that I should
cloze up this whole Treatise with a few words of exhortation to Play-poets,
Players, and Play-haunters, whom the love of Stage Plays has Abstrahunt ^
recto quae opinione nostra cara sunt, pretio ^uo vilia. Nescimus aestimare res,
de quibus non cum fama, sed cum rerum natura deliberandum. Nihil habe^t ista
magnificum, quo mentes in se nostras tra^^ant, praeter hoc, quod mirari illa
consuescimus. Non enim quia concupiscenda sunt laudantur; sed concupiscuntur
quia laudata sunt; and cum singulorum error publicum fecerit, singulorum
erro^em facit publicus. Seneca. Epist. 81. page 331.
seduced, to their eternal prejudice.

And here I shall first of all beseech all Play-poets, to ponder with
themselves; that they are the primary causes of all the sins which Players,
Plays or Play Houses do occasion: not any one sin is there that any Actors,
Auditors, or Spectators commit by means of acting or beholding these their
Stage Plays, but flows originally from them, and 1 Timothy 5.22. See my Healthes
Sickness page 52.
shall at last be set on their account: for if there were no Play-house-poets
there could be no Plays to see or act, and so by consequence no such accursed
Qui semen praebuit is enatae segitis malorum est auctor. Demosthenes Oration De
Corona.
fruits of Stage Plays as now are too too frequent in the world, both to the
public and men's private hurt. Now tell me I beseech you, what man, what
Christian is there who in Gods, in men's account would thus be branded Romans 1.30.
for an inventor of evil things; a public nursery of all sin and wickedness;
a man borne only for the common hurt both of himself and others, yea an
instrument raised up from Hell it self to draw on thousands to that horrid
place of their eternal woe. Seneca De Clementia. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Quanto autem non nasci melius fuit, qua^ sic numerari inter publico malo
natos? Matthew. 26.24.
Better had it been for you never to have had a being, to Job 3.11, 16.
Eccles. 6.3. Psalm 58.8.
have perished in the womb like an untimely birth: yea happier were it that a
Matthew. 18.6. Mark 9.42. Luke 17.1, 2.
millstone had been fastened about your necks and you so drowned in the very
depth of the Sea, then that you should thus pull down damnation, eternal
damnation on your own and infinite others heads by these your profane ungodly
Enterludes, which will See here, page 916. to 924 accordingly.
prove no other at the last but the evidences of your vanity, folly, sin and
shame, and without repentance your own and others destruction. O therefore
dear Christian Brethren, as you tender your own, the States, the Churches
welfare; as you fear, that dreadful Romans 14.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5.10.
reckning which you must shortly make before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
when Matthew. 12.36. Eccles. 12.14. Romans 2.16. Jude 14.15. Rev. 20.12, 1^.
all your idle, wanton, amorous, profane, ungodly, scurrilous Plays and
words, with all the sins they have produced, shall be charged on your souls;
let me now persuade you with many a Zach. 12.10. Ierem. 6.26. cap. 31.15. Isay
22.4. cap. 33.7.
bitter sigh and tear, to lament your former, and seriously to renounce your
future Play-making, as See here, page 360.436, 437, 438, 486. fol. 542.545,
566, 568. page 841.842, 910, 918, 922.
many tr^e penitent Play-poets have done before you, endeavoring to consecrate
your much applauded wits, your parts and industry to Gods glory, the Churches,
the Republikes benefit, your own and others spiritual good, which you have
formerly devoted to the Sea page 10. to 62.
Devils pompes and service, See page 302. to fol. 5^6. accordingly.
the Republikes prejudice, sins advantage, Religions infamy, and men's common
hurt. O consider, consider I beseech you, that as long as you continue
Play-poets, you are but the Sea here, page 42. to 62.92, 133. to 143.
professed agents of the world, the flesh, the Devil, whose pompes, whose
lusts and vanities you have long since renounced; that you do but sacrifice
your wits, your parts, your studies, your inventions, your lives to these
accursed Masters, who can gratify you with no other Romans 6.23. Psalm. 9.17.
Matthew. 25.41.
wages at the last, but Hell and endless torments; a poor reward for so hard
a service. Do not, O do not then devote your precious time, your flourishing
parts of Poetry, Eloquence, Art and Learning to these usurping hellish tyrants,
which you should Romans 12.1. 1 Cor. 6.20. Romans 6.13.
wh^ly dedicate to your God, 1 Cor. 6^19, 20.
to whom they are only due: but since you are Romans 8.12.
no longer debtors to the flesh to live after the flesh, nor yet to the Romans
6.16, 17, 18, 11, 12. Iam. 4.4. Romans 12.2. 1 John 2.15, 16.
world, the Devil, or sin to do them servic^, let God alone henceforth
enjoy them, Romans 11.36. Rev. 4.11. Pr^v. 16.4.
from whom, for whom you did at first receive them. Alas my Brethren when you
shall come to die, when Isay 33.18. Job 6.4. c. 18.11. cap. 27.20. Psalm. 55.4.
Psalm. 73.19. Psalm. 88.15, 16.
terrors of conscience shall seize upon your souls, or when as Dan. 7.9, 10.
Matthew. 25.31, ^2.
Christ himself shall sit upon his Throne of Glory for to Judge you, what
good, what comfort, (yea what Romans 6.21. Ier. 3.25. cap. 51.51. Ezech^ 16.52,
54, 63.
shame and Psalm. 55.5. Psalm. 1^9.53. Ezech. 7.8^
horror) will all your Play-poems bring to your amazed spirits? then will you
wish in earnest, O that we had been so happy as never to have pend, or seen a
Stage Play; yea woe be to us that we were ever ^o ill employed as to cast away
our time, our parts, our studies, our learning upon such heathenish, foolish
and unchristian vanities. Alas, Psalm. 84.10.
one day, one hour in Gods Courts, Gods service, had Eccles. 6.12.
been far better to us; then all the years of our vain useless lives,
which we have spent on Plays and Theaters, which now bring nothing else but a
more multiplied treasure of endless miseries and condemnation on our own and
others souls, which these our Enterludes have drawn on to sundry sins. Job
3.3, 11, 13.
O that the day had perished wherein we were borne, and the night wherein it
was said, there is a man-child conceived! Why dyed we not from the womb, why
did we not give up the ghost when we came out of the belly, before ever we had
learnt the art of making Plays? for then should we have lien still and been
at rest; then had we been free from all those Playhouse sins and tortures
which now ^urcharge our souls, then had we never drawn such Qui enim alios
peccare fecerit, multos secum praecipitat in mortem, and necesse est ut sit pro
tantis reus, quantos secum traxerit in ruinam. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei. l. 4.
p. 141.
troops of Players, of Play-haunters after us into Hell, whose company cannot
mitigate, but infinitely enlarge our endless torments. And then all this
over-late repentance will be to little purpose. O then be truly penitent and
wise Job 8.5.
be^imes, before these days of horror and amazement over-whelme you, that so
you may have Psalm. 37.37. Prove. 19.21.
peace and comfort in your latter ends, in that Joel 2.1, 2.
Great, that terrible Day of the Lord Jesus, when all impenitent Play-poets,
Players, and Play-haunters Joel 2.6. Nahum 2.10. Isay 13.6, 7, 8, 9.
faces shall gather blackness, their hearts faint, their spirits languish,
their joints tremble, their knees smite one against the other, and their
mouths shreeke out unto the Luke 23.30. Rev. 6.16.17.
Mountains to fall upon them, and unto the Rocks to cover them, for fear of
the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he shall come in ^laming fire
to render Romans 2.8, 9. Jude 14.15. 2 These. 1.8.
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of man that does
evil, whether he be Jew or Gentile. Certainly the time will Rev. 12.20. Iam.
5.8, 9. Heb. 10.37. 2 Pet. 3.16. Jude 14.
come ere long, when the Rev. 6.12. to 17. Isay 34.4. cap. 13.9, 10, 11. Luke
23.36. 2 Pet. 3.7, 10^12.
Sun shall become black as sackcloth, and the Moon a^ blood: when the
Stars of Heaven shall fall unto the earth even as a Figtree casts her
untimely fruit when she is shaken with a mighty wind; when the Heave^s shall
depart as a scrowle when it is rolled together, and the Elements melt with
fervent heat; when every Mountain and I sland shall be moved out of their
places, yea the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up
with fire: when the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, (who now wallow securely in their
sinful lusts and pleasures without fear of God or man) and every Bondman and
every Freeman (who lives and dies in sin and vain delights) shall hide
themselves in the Dens and Rocks of the Mountains; yea say to the
Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and cover us from the face of him that
sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the Great Day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? And then what Job 33.27.
Romans 6.21. 1 Samuel 12.21. Isay 55.2.
good, what profit will all the Stage Plays you have penned, seen, or acted,
do you? will they appease that sin-revenging Judge, before whose Tribunal you
shall then be dragged? Will they any way comfort or support your drooping
trembling souls? or any whit assuage your endless, easelesse torments? O no!
Wisd. 5.1. 1 John 4.17. Phil. 3.9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.1. to 21.
nothing but Christ, nothing but grace and holiness, (which the Wisd. 5.3, 4.
See here, page 120. to 128. 814.815. accordingly.
world, which Plays and Play-poets now deride and laugh at) will then stand
you instead, and shield of all the terrors of that dismal Day. 2 Pet. 3.^1,
14. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16, 17.
Wherefore (beloved) seeing that all these dreadful Spectacles, and this day
of horror draw so nigh, be diligent that ye may be found of God in peace,
without spot and blameless; abandoning Play-making, with all such fruitless
studies, passing all the time of your sojourning here in fear, endeavoring to
be holy in all manner of conversation, even as God is holy; 2 Pet. 3.18.
and growing up daily more and more in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.19. Heb. 9.28.
laying up in store for your selves a good foundation against the time to come;
that so you may lay hold on eternal life, and receive that Crown of
righteousness which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give at that Day to all
those who love, and wait for his appearing.

Secondly, I shall here beseech all voluntary Actors, See here, page 841. to
866.
the Primitive Christians, and Protestants, but even Pagans and Papists have
condemned. Alas how can you justify or excuse your selves in the sight of God
for this your action, when as you are thus condemned in the eyes of men? or how
can you appear before God with comfort in the Day of Judgment, when as you
are unable to stand innocent before man's tribunal in these days of grace?
Certainly, if Matthew. 1^.36^ 37. Isay 3.16.
for every idle word that men shall speak, (yea and for every idle part or
gesture to, which they shall act or use) they must give an account at the day
of Judgment; what a dreadful reckning must you then expect for all those idle
wanton words and gestures which have passed from you whiles you have acted
Plays? Repent therefore, repent I say with floods of brinish tears for wha^
is past, and never adventure the acting of any academicall Interlude for time
to come. And if any Clergymen, who have taken ministerial Orders upon them,
are guilty of this infamy, this impiety of profaning, of polluting their high
and heavenly profession by acting or dancing on any public or private Stage;
becoming thereby the worlds, the Devils professed Ministers instead of
Christ's, to the intolerable scandal of Religion, the ill example of the Laity,
( See Bernard. Concio ad Clerum. and Oration ad Pastores. accordingly.
who are apt to imitate them in their Ideoque timendum est, ne quos duces hujus
recti itineris habere nos credimus, ^os comites habeamus erroris. Hi^rom.
Epist. 14. cap. 3. page 43.
lewdness) and their own deserved infamy; Let such disorderly histrionicall
Divines, consider that of Epist. 127. fol. 186.
Bernard, Si quis de populo deviat solus perit, Verum Pastoris error multos
involuit, and tantis ob est quantis praeest ipse. Epist. 42. fol. 186.
Verum tu Sacerdos Dei altissimi, cui ex his placere gestis, mundo an Deo? Si
mundo, cur Sacerdos? Si Deo, cur qualis populus talis and Sacerdos? Nam si
placere vis mundo, quid tibi prodest Sacerdotium? Volens itaque placere
hominibus, Deo non places. Si non places, non placas. Alas how can any commit
the custody of their souls to such who are altogether negligent of their own.
Bernard. Ser. 11. in Psalm. Qui habitat. f. 748.
Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? Epist. 146. fol. 200.
Placet vobis ut illi homini credam animam meam qui perdidit suam? was S.
Bernards question to Pope Innocent; it may be mine to Patrons and Ordinaries
who present or admit such Play-acting or other scandalous Ministers to the cure
of souls, which ought to be deprived of all sacred Orders and preferments, as
the Sea here, page 150.469, 512. and 573. to 668.841. to 868. and Summula
Raymundi. f. 91.92, 93, 94. Summa Hostiensis. lib. 3. De Vita and honestate
Clericorum. fol. 237. and l. 5. De Clerico Venatore. fol. 455. Edit. Lugduni
1517. Innocentius 3. Operum. Tom. 1. page 471. accordingly.
precedent Councels and Canonists witness. But how ever such Actors chance to
escape all humane penalties here, let them remember that they shall surely
undergo the everlasting censure of the 1 Pet. 5.4.
Great Shepherd of the Sheep, Christ Jesus, hereafter: and let this for ever
dissuade them from this ungodly practice of personating Stage Plays, which
has been most execrably infamous in all former ages. As for all professed
common Actors, I shall here adjure them by the very hopes and joys of Heaven,
and the eternal torments of Hell, to abominate, to renounce all future acting,
and this their See here, Act 4. Scene 1. Act 6. Scene 20. and Act 7. Scene 2.3.
hellish profession, which makes them the very instruments, the arch-agents,
the professed bondslaves of the Devil, the public enemies both of Church and
State, the authors of their own and others just damnation; excommunicating
them both from the Church, the Sacraments, and society of the faithful in this
life, and everlastingly excluding them from Gods blessed presence in the life
to come. You then who are but newly entered into this infernal unchristian
course of Play-acting, consider I beseech you, that this your infamous
profession is the broad beaten rode to all kind of vice, of wickedness and
profaneness; the readiest passage unto Hell it self, in which you cannot
finally proceed without the assured loss of Heaven; and a professed
apprentiship to the very Devil, whose pompes, whose service you have long
since renounced in your baptism; and therefore cannot now embrace without the
highest perjury. O then take pity on your own poor souls before it be too
late; before Stage Plays, sin, and Satan have Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit
malum sero recusat far quod subijt jugum. Seneca Hyp^olitus. Act 1. Facile
est tenero^ adhuc animos componere. Difficulter reciduntur vitia quae nobiscum
creverunt. Seneca. De Ira. lib. 2. cap. 18.
gotten such absolute full possession of you, as utterly to disable you to cast
off their yoke: And now I pray say thus unto your souls; Bernardi
Meditationes. cap. 2. fol. 280. A. and Epist. 19. fol. 199. B.
Cur ergo tantopere vitam istam desideramus, in qua quanto amplius vivimus
tanto plus peccamus? Quanto est vita longior, tanto culpa numerosior. Quotidie
namque crescunt mala and subtrahuntur bona. Mi^ime pro certo est bonus qui
melior esse non vult: and ubi incipis nolle fieri melior, ibi etiam desinis
esse bonus. Alas why will you die, why will you voluntarily cast away your
souls for ever by this trade of acting Plays, when as you need not hazard
them if you will now renounce it? What, is there any profit or pleasure in your
own damnation? is there any advantage to be gotten by the Devils service? is
there any safe living in the very mouth of Hell it self? Why then should you
proceed on in this Diabolical trade? Do your Friends or graceless Paren^s
press, or else induce you to it, even against your wills? O give them that
pathetical resolute answer which Helyas the Monk once gave unto his Parents.
Bernard. Epist. 111. fol. 202^ G.
Sime vere ut boni, ut pij Parents diligitis; si veram si fidelem erga filium
pietatem habetis, quid me patri omnium Deo placere satagentem inquietatis, and
ab ejus servitio cujus servire regnare est, retrahere attentatis? Vere nunc
cognosco, Mich. 7.
quod inimici hominis domestici ejus. In hoc vobis obedire non debeo, in hoc
vos non agnosco parents sed hosts. Si diligeretis me gauderetis utique
quiavado admeum atque vestrum, immo universorum patrem. Alioquin quid mihi and
vobis? Secundum exteriorem hominem de parentibus illis venio, qui me ante
fecerunt damnatu^, qu^m natum. Peccatores peccatorem in peccato suo genuerunt,
and de p^ccato nutriverunt. Nihil ex eis habeo nisi miseriam and peccatu^, and
corruptibile hoc corpus quod gesto. Quid sum ego? Homo de humore liquido. Fui
enim in momento conceptionisde humano semine conceptus, etc. Deinde spuma illa
coagulata modicum crescendo caro facta est. Poste^ plorans and ejulans traditus
sum hujus mundi exilio, and ecce jam morior plenus iniquitatibus and
abominationibus. Iamjam presentabor ante districtum judicem, de operibus meis
rationem redditurus, etc. Bernardi Medicationes cap. 2. ^ol. 280.
Quid a vobis habeo nisi peccatum and miseriam? hoc solum quod gesto
corruptibile corpus de vestro me habere fateor and agnosco. Non sufficit vobis
quod me in hanc seculi miseriam miserum miseri induxistis, quod in peccato
vestro peccatores peccatorem genuistis; quod in peccato natum de peccato
nutristis, nisi etiam invidendo mihi misericordiam quam consecutus sum ab eo
qui non vult mortem peccatoris, filium insuper gehennae faciatis? O durum
patrem! o saevam matrem! o parents crudeles and impios! imo non parents sed
peremptores, quorum dolor salus pignoris, quorum consolatio mors filij est. Qui
me malunt perire cum ijs, quam regnare sine eis. Qui me rursus ad naufragium
unde tandem nudus evasi, rursus ad ignem, unde vix semiustus exivi, rursus
adlatrones a quibus semivivus relictus sum, sed miserante Samaritano jam
aliquantulum convalui, revocare conantur, and militem Christi prope jam rapto
caelo triumphantem, ab ipso jam introitu gloriae, tanquam canem ad vomitum,
tanquam suem ad lutum, ad seculum reducere moliuntur. Mira abusio. Domus ardet;
ignis instat a tergo, and fugienti prohibetur egredi, evadenti suadetur
regredi? and haec ab his qui in incendio positi sunt and obstinatissima
dementia, ac dementissima obstinatione fugere periculum nolunt? Proh furor! Si
vos contemnitis mortem vestram, cur etiam appetitis meam? Si inquam negligitis
salutem vestram, quid juvat etiam persequi meam? Quare vos non potius sequimini
me fugientem, ut non ardeatis? An hoc est vestri cruciatus levamen, si me etiam
perimatis, and hoc solumtimetis, ne soli pereatis? Ardens ardentibus quod
solatium praestare poterit? Quae inquam consolatio damnatis socios habere suae
damnationis, etc? Desinite igitur parents mei, desinite, and vos frustra
plorando affligere, and me gratis revocando inquietere. Does the love of gain
or pleasure allure you to it? Alas, Matthew. 16.26.
what will it profit you to win the whole world (much less a little filthy
gain, or foolish carnal momentany delight) and then to lose your souls?
Eccles. 12.1.
Remember therefore your Creator in the days of your youth, by abjuring the
Devils service, and betaking your selves to Gods, lest the Devil being your
lord and master in your youth, prove your tormentor only in your age. Eusebius
Gallicanus Sermo. exhort. contra diversa vitia. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 1.
page 594. H.
Recedat itaque peccandi amor, succedat judicij timor. Nam quamdiu in vobis
carnalium re^um vixerit appetitus, spiritalium a vobis sensuum elongabit
affectus. Nemo in vas aliquo faetore corruptum balsama pretiosa transfundit;
and sicut dixit Dominus: Nemo mittit vinum novum in utres veteres. Difficile
est ut assurgere ad bonum possis, nisi a malo ante diverteris: quamdiu nova
delicta adijciuntur, vetera non curantur. Prorsus peccata non redimet, qui
peccare non desinit: quia nemo potest duobus dominis servire. In uno animae
domicilio iniquitas atque justitia, castitas atque luxuria simul habitare non
possunt. Interdicatur igitur accessus voluptati, atque libidini, ut domus munda
pateat castitati: excludatur Diabolus cum militia vitiorum, ut Christus cum
choro possit intrate virtutum. You who have been ancient Stage Players, and
have served many Apprentiships to the Devil in this your infernal profession,
O consider, consider seriously I beseech you, the wretched condition wherein
now you stand: your parts are almost acted, your last dying Scenes draw on
apace, and it will not be long ere you go off the Theater of this world Acts
1.25.
unto your proper place; and then how miserable will your condition be? You
have been the Devils professed agents, his meniall hired servants all your
lives, and must you not then expect his wages at your deaths? You have
treasured up naught but wrath unto your selves against the day of wrath, whiles
you lived here, Romans 2.5. to 12.
precipitating both your selves and others to destruction; and can you reap
ought but wrath and vengeance hereafter if you repent not now? Your very See
Act 4. Scene 1. and 7. Scene 2.3. and Part 2. p. 843.844, 845.
profession has excommunicated you the Church, the Sacraments, the society of
the Saints on earth; and will it not then much more exclude you out of Heaven?
Hierom. Epist. 3. cap. 6.
O miserabilis humana conditio, and sine Christo vanum omne quod vivimus! was
S. Hieroms patheticall ejaculation: and may it not be much more yours, who have
Ephesians. 2.12.
lived without Christ in the world, who have renounced his service, and betaken
your selves to the Devils works and pompes against your bapti^mall vow, as if
you had covenanted by your selves and others to serve the Devil, and perform
his works, even then when you did at first abjure them: O then bewail with
many a bitter tear, with many an heart-piercing sigh; with much shame, much
horror, grief and indignation, the loss of all that precious time which you
have already consumed in the Devils vassalage^ and since God has forborne you
for so many years, out of his tender mercy, O now at last think it enough,
yea too too much that you have spent your best, your chiefest days in this
unchristian diabolical lewd profession; professing publicly in 1 Pet. 4.2,
3, 4.
S. Peter's words; The time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles, and of the Devil to, we will henceforth live to God
alone: If you will now cast of your former hellish trade of life, with shame
and detesta^ion; if you will prove new men, new creatures for the time to come;
Christ's arms, Christ's wounds, yea and the Church her bosom stand open to
receive you, notwithstanding all the 1 Pet. 1.11, 12, 13.
lusts and sins of your former ignorance. But if you will yet stop your
ears, and harden your hearts against all advice proceeding on still in this
your ungodly trade of life, Quid autem eo infaelicius cui jam esse malum
necesse est. Seneca. De Ira. lib. 1. c. 13.
in which you cannot but be wicked, then know you are such as are marked out
for Hell; 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
such who are given up to a reprobate sense to work all uncleanesse even with
greediness, that you all may be damned in the Day of Judgment, for taking
pleasure in unrighteousness, and disobeying the truth. As therefore you expect
to enter Heaven Gates, or to escape eternal damnation in that great dreadful
Day, 2 Cor. 5.10. Matthew. 12.36. Romans 14.10.
when you must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give a
particular account of all those idle, vain and sinful actions gestures, words
and thoughts, which have proceeded from you, or been occasioned in others by
you all your days; be sure to give over this wicked trade of Play-acting
without any more delays, which will certainly bring you to destruction, if
you renounce it not, See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 14.^0. and here p. 910.
as all true penitent Players have done before you. For if the righteous shall
scarcely be saved in the Day of Judgment, where shall such ungodly sinners, as
you appear? 1 Pet. 4.17.18.
Certainly, Psalm. 1.5, 6.
you shall not be able to stand in Judgment, or to justify your selves in
this your profession in that sinne-confounding soule-appaling Day: but 2 These.
1.8, 9.
you shall then be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, if the very riches of his grace and
mercy will not persuade you to renounce this calling now; Bernardi
Meditationes. c. 2. fol. 280.
Quantoque diutius Deus vos expectavit vt emendetis, tanto districtius
judicabit si neglexeritis: by how much the longer God has forborne you here
expecting your repentance, the more severely shall he then condemn you.

If any Stage Players here object, Objection.
that they know not how to live or maintain themselves if they should give
over acting.

To this I answer first, Answ. 1.
that as it is no good argument for Bawdes, Panders, Whores, Thieves,
Sorcerers, Witches, Cheaters, to persevere in these their wicked courses,
because they cannot else maintain themselves; so it is no good Plea for
Players. See Tertul. de Idololatria. lib. Chrysostom. Hom. 50. in Matthew. and
Alexander Alensis. Summa Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. memb. 5.
No man must live by any sinful profession; nor yet do evil that good may
come of it: therefore you must not maintain your selves by acting Plays, it
being a lewd unchristian infamous occupation. Secondly, there are diverse
lawful callings and employments by which Players might live in better credit,
in a far happier condition then now they do, would they but be industrious:
See Marcus Aurelius, Epistle 12. to Lambert, accordingly^ and Part 1. Act 6.
Scene 5.
It is therefore Players idleness, their love of vanity and sinful pleasures,
not want of other callings, that is the ground of this objection. Thirdly,
admit there were no other course of life but this for Players; I dare boldly
aver that the charity of Christians is such, as that they would readily
supply the wants of all such indigent impotent aged Actors (unable to get their
livelihood by any other lawful trade) who out of conscience shall give over
Playing. Certainly, the charity of Christians was such in Epist lib. 1. Epist.
10. See here p. 906.
Cyprians days, that they would rather maintain poor penitent Actors with
their public alms, then suffer them to perish, or continue acting; and I
doubt not but their charity will be now as large in this particular as it was
then. Lastly, admit the objection true; yet it were far better for you to
die, to starve, then any ways to live by sin or sinful courses. There is
Nulla est necessitas delinquendi quibus una est necessitas non delinquendi.
T^rtul. ^e Corona Militis. cap. 7.
no absolute necessity at all that men should live; but there is this necessity
lies on all men, not to sinne^ yea every pious Christian as is evident by the
concurrent examples of all the Martyrs, should rather choose to die the
cruellest death, then to commit one act of sin. Better therefore is it for
Players to part with their profession for Christ's sake even with the very loss
of their lives and goods, (which Matthew. 10.37, 38.
they must willingly lose for Christ, or else they are not worthy of him,) then
to retain their Play-acting, and so lose their Savior, themselves, their very
bodies and souls for all eternity, as all unreclaimed, unrepenting Players in
all probability ever do. Let Players therefore if they will be merciful to
themselves, show mercy rather to their souls, then to their bodies or estates.
Bernard, ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apologia. Col. 9^88 I.
Talis enim misericordia crudelitate plena est, qua videl^cet ita corpori
servitur, ut anima juguletur. Quae enim charitas est, carnem diligere, and
spiritum negligere? ^i tam sollicitus es, si nec minima spernis, si tam
prudenter servas paleas tuas, etiam hotreum tuum servare memento and custodire.
Imo vero non exponas thesaurum tuum qui sic incubas sterquilinio tuo. Bernard.
Sermo. 7. in Psalm. Qui habitat. fol. 70. H.
Quaeve discretio, totum dare corpori and animae nihil? Qualis vero
mis^^icordia ancillam reficere and dominam interficere? Nemo pro hujusmodi
misericordia sperat se consequi misericordiam sed certissime potius paenam
expectet. Yea let them renounce their Play-acting though they perish here,
rather then perish eternally hereafter to live by it now.

Lastly, I shall here exhort all Play-haunters, all Spectators of any public
or private Enterludes, to ponder all the premised reasons and Authorities
against Stage Plays, together with those See Part 1. Act 6. thorowout.
several soule-condemning wickednesses, sins, yea fearful judgments, in
which they frequently involue their Actors and Spectators: to remember, that
they are the very See here, page 42. to 62.129, 231, 236, 257, 405, 430. fol.
522, 524, 528, page 561. to 567.658.
Devils snares, his works, his pompes, which they most solemnly renounced in
their baptism: that they are Part 1. Act 6. Scene 1. to 20. accordingly.
the greatest, the most pernicious corruptions both of their Actors, their
Spectators minds and manners; the only Canker-wormes of their graces, their
virtues; the chiefest incendiaries of their carnal lusts^ the common occasions
of much actual lewdness, sin and wickedness; the principal obstacles of
their sincere repentance; the grand empoysoners of their souls; and if we
believe Ecce qua voleb^s ire, ecce turba viae latae, non frustra ipsa ducit ad
Amphitheatrum, non frustra ipsa ducit ad mortem. Via mortifera est, latitudo
ejus delectat ad tempus, finis ejus angustus in aeternum. Sed turbae strepunt,
turbae festinant, turbae colluctantur, turbae concurrunt. Noli imitari, noli
averti: vanitates sun^ and insaniae mondaces. Noli numerare turbas hominum
incedentes latas vias, implentes crastinum Circum; civitatis natale^ clamando
celebrantes, civitatem ipsam male vivendo turbantes. Noli ergo illos attendere,
multi sunt. Et quis numerat? Pauci autem per viam angustam. Enar. in Psalm. 39.
Tom^ 8. pars. 1. p. 414.415. vid. p. 416.417, 418.
S. Augustine, the mortiferous broad beaten way to Hell it self, and
everlasting death, in which whole troops of men run daily on unto destruction.
O then let all these, all other fore-alleaged flexanimous considerations
divorce you now from Stage Plays, from Theaters, which else will separate you
from your God; and so engage your hearts, your judgments, your consciences
against them, as never to frequent them more upon any occasion or persuasion
whatsoever. You have heard and seen at large what Censures, what Verdicts the Sea Part 1. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 12. and Act 7. Scene 1. to 7.
Primitive Church, both before and under the Law and Gospel; the ancientest
Christians, Councels, Fathers; the best Ch^istian, the best Pagan Nations,
Emperors, Princes, States, Magistrates, Writers, both ancient and modern,
have constantly, have unanimously passed upon Stage Plays, Theaters, Players,
Play-haunters, against whom Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Salvian, and other Fathers, with sundry modern Authors, have professedly
written ample Volumes: You have seen all ages, all places, all qualities and
degrees of men, See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 12. and Act 7. Scene 2. to 7.
Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, Christians and Pagans, Protestants
and Papists, yea Popes and Jesuits to, concurring in their just damnation. Be
not, O be not ye therefore Nun quid patribus doctiores aut devotiores sumus?
Periculose praesumimus quicquid ipsorum in talibus prudentia preterivit.
Bernard. Epist. 174. fol. 111.
wiser, nay worser, then all, then any of these Play-condemning Worthies who
have gone before you; (whose harmonious Play-confounding resolutions agreeable
with the Scripture, if Saint Obedientia quae majoribus praebetur Deo exhibetur.
Quamobrem quicquid vice Dei praecipit homo, quod non sit tamen certum
displicere Deo, haud secus omnino accipiend^m est, quam si p^aecipiat Deus.
Quid enim interest utrum per se an per suos ministros sive homines sive Angelos
hominibus innotescat suum placitum Deus? Sive enim Deus, sive homo vicarius Dei
mandatum quodcunque tradiderit, pari profecto obsequendum est cura, pari
reverentia deferendum, ^bi tamen Deo contraria non praecipit homo. De Praecepto
and Dispensatione. fol. 250. H.K.
Bernard may be credited, must bind you to renounce all Stage Plays, in the
very selfsame manner as if God himself had expressly commanded you to abandon
them:) frequent not Plays which they abominated; plead not for Enterludes
which they so seriously, so abundantly condemned: Let not that censure of holy
Iam religionis antiquae non solum virtutem amisimus, ^ed nec speciem retinemus.
Ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apologia. fol. 260. D.
Bernard be verified of you; that you have now not only lost the power of the
ancient Christian Religion, but even the very show and outside to: but as you
are Christians in name, in profession, so be you such in truth, in practice.
And since it was the S^e here, p. 4.61, 557. accordingly.
most notorious character of Christians heretofore, to abominate, to abandon
Players, Plays and Play Houses; let it be your honor, your piety, your
practical badge of Christianity to forsake them now: that so imitating the
Primitive Play-renouncing Christians in their holiness, you may at last
participate with them in their eternal bliss. And so much the rather let me
admonish you to withdraw your selves from Plays and Play Houses, because no
ordinance of God can do you any good, or cleanse you from your sins, whiles
you resort to Theaters, as I have See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 12. and p. 392. to
406.436, 433.
largely proved: hear but Saint Chrysostom once more to this purpose, where
speaking against men's and women's parling, laughing, and gazing about in
Churches (which See Chrysostom. Homil. 24 in Acta Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 519^520.
Hom. 36. in 1 Cor 14. Tom. 4. Col. 535^536. and Homil. 8^9. in 1 Timothy
accordingly.
he severely censures) he writes thus. Homil. 24. in Acta Apost. Tom. ^. Col.
520. B.C. See here p. 432. to the like purpose^
Nunquid theatrica sunt haec quae hic geruntur? opinor autem quod id Theatris
debeamus. Inobedientes enim multos nobis constituunt and ineptos: quae enim hic
extruuntur, illic subvertuntur: and non hoc solum, sed and alias immunditias
necesse est Theatri studiosis adhaerere. Et perinde fit ac si quis campum velit
purgare, in quem fons lut^ fluens, ins^uat; quantum enim purgaris, tantum
influit. Hoc and hic fit, quando enim purgamus a Theatro huc venientes, and
immundiciam afferentes, dum illuc iterum abeunt, majorem contrahunt
immundiciam, quasi dedita opera sic vivant ut nobis negocium faciant, and
iterum veniunt multo luto sordidati, in moribus, in gestibus, in verbis, in
risu, i^ desidia. Deinde iterum nos fodimus, quasi dedita opera in hoc
fodientes, ut puros illos dimissos iterum videamus luto ac caeno inquinari. You
then who have been constant Play-haunters besmeared with their filth and dung
for diverse years together, you who have spent your youth your manhood, your
best and chiefest days Eccles. 12.1. Luke 1.74, 75. Romans 12.1, 2. Ephesians. 5.16,
17.
which you should have dedicated to God, your honest callings, and far better
things; on Plays, on Play Houses, and such lascivious sports, you who have
cast away your money, your estates on Players, Plays and Play Houses, (the Sea
here, page 10.11, 49, 50, 52, 67, 68, 69, 101, 102, 329, 330, 341, 374, 386,
418, 431, 446, 472, 474, 488, 510, 560.
very factors, pompes and synagogues of the Devil) 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Heb.
13.16. Prove. 19 17. 1 John. 3.17. See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 2.
wherewith you should have cherished Christ's poor needy members; You who have
been ancient Patriots, Supporters of Actors or their Enterludes either by your
purses, or your presence, drawing thereby upon your souls the guilt of many a
fearful unlamented sin; remember, O remember that it is now Romans 13.11, 12.
1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
more then time for you to cleanse your selves from these Augaean Stables; with
which you have been too long defiled: to renounce these cursed pompes of
Satan, which you have too long served; Ephesians. 5.15, 16. Col. 4.5.
to redeem the short remainder of that most sacred time which you have too
prodigally, too sinfully consumed; to take some speedy serious course for the
Col. 3.5, 6, 7. Romans 13.13. 1 Pet. 2.11. Gal. 5.24.
mortifying of those soule-slaying ^leshly lusts which you have overlong
fomented; for the Psalm. 149.4. Isay 1.16. Romans 13 14. Rev. ^.18. Vanus error
hominis, and inanis cultus dignitatis, fulgere purpura, mente sordescere.
Minucius Felix. Octavius p. 122.
adorning, the saving of those immortal souls, which you have overmuch
neglected; for the 2 Cor. 5.20. Romans 5.1.
attoning of that holy God, that blessed Savior that sanctifying Spirit of
grace, which you have too highly, too long Isay 3.8. Ier. 41.8. Psalm. 106.7,
33.43.
provoked, Heb. 6.6.
crucified, Ephesians. 4.29, 30. Heb. 10.29.
grieved; which you See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 12. and 20.
can never do whiles you resort to Stage Plays. And since the world, the
flesh, the Devil have had your youth and strength, let God be sure to enjoy
your age, whom you have Deo dicata membra nulla tibi temeritate usurpes;
sciens, quod pietati sanctificatanon absque gravi sacrilegio in usus vanitatis,
voluptatis, aut ejusmodi seculario operis assumantur. Bernard. in Psalm. Qui
Habitat. Sermon 8. fol. 71.
sacrilegiously robbed of all the rest. Alas, all the time that you have
already past in Play-haunting, and such delights of sin, has been but a
time of spiritual death, wherein you have been worse then naught in Gods
account: Epist. 3. c. 5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
Ab eo enim tempore censemur ex quo in Christo renascimur, as Saint Hierom
truly writes: and what other profit have you reaped from Plays or
Play Houses, Hierom. Epist. 3. c. 7.
Nisi quod senes magis onusti peccatorum fasce proficiscimini, as the same
Father speaks? O therefore now at last before it be too Matthew. 25.10. to 14.
late, before death has wounded you, Heaven excluded you, Hell devoured you,
repent of all your former Play-haunting with many a sob and tear, abandoning
all Plays, all Play Houses for the future; Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 5. p.
37.
ut sic correcti atque in meliu^ reformati, qui admirati fuerant prius in
Spectaculis insaniam, nunc admirentur in moribus disciplinam. You who are but
young and newly entered into this dangerous course of Play-haunting; you of whom
I may say as Seneca. Epist. 47. page 229.
Seneca once did of the Roman gentry; Ostendam nobilissimos juvenes mancipia
pantomimorum, remember that holy covenant which you not long since made to God
in baptism, See here, page 3. and 42. to 62.
to forsake the Devil and all his works, the pompes, the vanities of this
wicked world, with all the sinful lusts of the flesh, of which Stage Plays
(as the Sea here, page 3.42. to 62.561. to 567.230, 236, 257, 425, 430, 522,
524, 528, 658.
Fathers teach you) are the chief; O perjure, perjure not your selves,
renounce not your christianity, your faith, your vow, your baptism (by
frequenting Plays) in your youth, your childhood; Tu si templu^ spiritus
sancti violas, si intra te sacrarium Dei deturbas and faedas, si cum calic^
Christi, de calice Daemoniorum communicas, contumelia est, non religio:
injuria, non devotio: Idolorum servitus and horrenda abominatio, velle simul
Baal famulari and Christo. Cyprian De Caena Dom. Sermon. p. 299.
bequeath not your selves so soon unto the Devil, after your solemn
consecration unto God in Christ; let not him gain possession of your persons,
your service in your youth, that so he may command, and challenge them in your
age; Seneca Epist. 116.
Non enim obtin^bis ut desinat si incipere permiseris: ergo intranti
resistamus, etc. But as Romans 12.1, 2. cap. 6.3. to 14. Luke 1.74, 75.
you have given up your souls and bodies as an holy living sacrifice unto God
in baptism, to serve him with them in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of your lives; so be ye sure to make good your promise, by
Eccles. 12.1.
remembering, by serving your Creator in the days of your youth, your strength,
your health and life, who will Romans 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.8. Hebr. 2.7, 9.
then crown you with glory and immortality at your death. Pity it is to see
how many ingenious Youths and Girls; how many young (that I say not old)
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of birth and quality, (as if they were borne for no
other purpose but to consume their youth, their lives in lascivious dalliances,
Plays and pastimes, or in pampering, in To whom I may use S. Cyprians words in
the like case. Tu licet indumenta peregrina and vestes sericas indues, nuda es:
Auro te licet and margaritis gemmisque condecores, sine Christi decore deformis
es. Si quem de tuis charis mortalibus exitu perdidisses, ingemiscer^s dolenter
and fleres, facie inculta, vest mutata neglecto capillo, vultu nubilo, ore
dejecto jndicia maeroris ostenderes. Animam tuam misera perdidisti,
spiritualiter mortua supervivere hic tibi, and ipsa ambulans funus tuum portare
caepisti, and non acriter plangis, non jugiter ingemiscis? Non te vel pudore
criminis, vel continuatione lamentationis obscondis? Ecce pejora ad huc
pe^candi vulnera, ecce majora delicta; peccasse, nec satisfacere; deliquisse,
nec delicta de^lere. Cyprian. De Lapsis Sermo. Tom. 2. page 347.
adorning those idolized living carcases of theirs, which will turn to earth,
to dung, to rottenness and wormes-meat ere be long, and to condemn, their
poor neglected souls) casting by all honest studies, callings, employments,
all care of Heaven, of salvation, of their own immortal souls, of that God
who made them, that Savior who redeemed them, that Spirit who should sanctify
them, and that Commonweal that fosters them; do in this idle age of ours,
like those Isay 5.11, 12. c. 22.12, 13. cap. 56.12. Amos 6.1. to 8. Dan. 5.1.2,
3, 4. Iam. 5.5. and Job 21.11. to 16.
Epicures of old most prodigally, most sinfully riot away the very cream and
flower of their years, their days in Play Houses, in Dancing-schooles,
Tavernes, Alehouses, Dice-houses, Tobacco-shops, Bowling-allies, and such
infamous places, upon those life-devouring, time-exhausting Plays and
pastimes, (that I say not sins beside,) as is a shame for Pagans, much more
for Christians to approve. O that men endued with reason, ennobled with
religion; with immortal souls, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. Phil. 4.8, 9. Isay 43.21. Romans
14.7, 8.
fit only for the noblest, heavenliest, sublimest and divinest actions, should
ever be so desperately besotted as to wast their precious time upon such
vain, such childish, base ignoble pleasures, which can Eccles. 2.1. to
12.16.11. 1 Samuel 12.21. Isay 55.2. Job 15.31. Hosea 8.7. Romans 6.21.
no way profit soul or body, Church or State; nor yet advance their temporal,
much less their spiritual and eternal good, which they should ever seek.
You therefore dear Christian Brethren, who are, who have been peccant in this
kind, for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, for the holy Ghosts sake, for Religions
sake, (which now extremely Romans 2.24. Isay 52.5. Ezech. 36.20, 23.
suffers by this your folly;) for the Church and Commonweals sake, for your
own souls sake, which you so much neglect, repent of what is past recalling,
and for the future time resolve through Gods assistance, never to cast away
your time, your money, your estates, your good names, your lives, your
salvation, upon these unprofitable spectacles of vanity, lewdness,
lasciviousness, or these delights of sin, of which you must necessarily
repent and be Romans 6.21. Ezra 9.6. Isay 1.29. c. 26.11. Ezech. 16.61, 63.
ashamed, or else be condemned for them at the last; 1 Pet. 1.17.
passing all the time of your pilgrimage here in fear, and employing all the
remainder of your short inconstant lives, in those honest studies, callings^
and pious Christian duties, Romans 6.22.
which have their fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. And
because we have now many wanton females of all sorts resorting daily by troops
unto our Plays, our Play Houses, to see and to be seen, as they did in See
here, page 452.
Ovids age; I shall only desire them (if not their Parents and Husbands, to
consider; See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 2.4, 5. and p. 144.145, 146, 331, 332, 333,
349, 270, 389, 390, 391, 419, 430, to 442^ 452, 498, 662. accordingly.
that it has evermore been the notorious badge of prostituted Strumpets and
the lewdest Harlots, to ramble abroad to Plays, to Play Houses; whether no
honest, chaste or sober Girls or Women, but only branded Whores, and infamous
Adulteresses did usually resort in ancient times: the Adulterijs^ impudicitijs,
puerorum violationibus omnia fervent, pernoctationes execrandae ^iebant
mulieresque ad ea spectacula vocabanturi: o scelestum illud nocturnu^
funestu^que spectaculu^! in Theatro fiebat ea pernoctatio; and virgo inter
adolescentes insanos atque ebriam turbam sedere cogebatur, etc. Chrysostom. Hom.
5. in Tit. 1. Tom. 4. Col. 1484. B.
Theater being then made a common Brothell: And that all ages, all places have
constantly suspected the chastity, yea branded the honesty of those females who
have been so immodest as to resort to Theaters, to Stage Plays, which either
find or make them Harlots; See page 333.356, 439, 443, 444. accordingly.
inhibiting all married Wives and Virgins to resort to Plays and Theaters, See
Thomas Beacon his Catechism. fol. 515. and 536. Women ought not to resort to
Plays or Enterludes.
as I have here amply proved^ Since therefore Saint Paul expressly enjoynes all
women (especially those of the younger sort) to be Tit. 2.4, 5.
sober, chaste, keepers at home, (yea See here page 434.435. and Doctor Tailor
his Commentary upon Titus 3. verse. 5. page 389.390. Thomas Beacon his
Catechism. fol. 515.536. and in his 3. Book of Matrimony. fol. 675.
therefore keepers at home, that they may be chaste and sober, as ancient and
modern Commentators gloss it;) that the Word of God be not blasphemed: (where
as the dissoluteness of our lascivious, impudent, rattle-pated gadding females
now is such, that as if they had purposely studied to appropriate to themselves
King Solomon's memorable character of an whorish woman, Prove. 7.10, 11, 12, 13.
See Lyra, Cartwright, Dod, and Holcot on this place.
with an impudent face, a subtle heart and the attire of an Harlot; they are
loud and stubborn; their feet abide not in their houses; now they are
without, now in the streets, and lie in wait at every corner; being never well
pleased nor contented, but when they are wandering abroad to Plays, to
Play Houses, Dancing-matches, Masks, and public Shows; from which nature it
self (if we believe S. Nam quoniam a scena and ijs quae illic sunt turpia and
ind^cora ipsa natura abduxit mulieres, Diabolus quae sunt Theatri abduxit in
gynecaeum, molles inqua^, seu pathicos and meretrices. Hom. 12. in Col. 4 Tom.
4. Col. 1210 B^^id. Ibidem.
Chrysostom has sequestered all women; (or to such suspicious places under
pretense of business or some idle visits, where they oft-times leave their
modesty, their chastity behind them, to their eternal infamy:) Let me now
beseech all female Play-haunters, as they regard this Apostolical precept,
which enjoynes them, to be sober, chaste, keepers at home ( or good careful
House-wives, as See Coverdals and Tindals Translations; and the Fathers, who
render it for the most part. Do^us curam habentes.
some have rendered it:) 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 15.
Isay 3.16. to 25. Prove. 7.10. 2 King 9.30. See Gulielmus Peraldus. Summae
Virtutum ac vitiorum. Tom. 2. Tit. De Superbia. cap. 10. to 15.
adorning themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety:
(which now are out of fashion) not with broidered cut or borrowed plaited
hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array, (the only fashions of our age;)
but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works: As they
tender their own honesty, fame or reputation both with God and men; the honor
of their sex; the praise of that Christian Religion, which they profess, the
glory of their God, their Savior, and their Cum enim judicium carnis ex anima
pendeat, carni nihil potest utilius quam salus animae provideri. Bernardi
Declamationes. fol. 170. B.
souls salvation, to abandon Plays and Play Houses, as most pernicious Pests;
where See Part 1. Act 6. Scen^ 3.4, 5, 20. and page 333.356, 439, 443, 444.
all females, wrecke their credits; most, their chastity; some, their fortunes;
not a few, their souls: and to say unto them as the Philosopher did unto his
wealth which he cast into the Sea, Hierom. Epist. 34. cap. 3. page 90.
Abite in profundum malae cupiditates; ego vos mergam ne ipse mergar a vobis.

CATASTROPHE.
I Have now dear Christian Readers, through Gods assistance, completely
finished this my Histrio-Mastix, wherein I have represented both to your view
and In hoc enim Tractatu, non solum pium Lectorem sed etiam liberum correctorem
desidero. Veruntamen sicut lectorem meum nolo mihi esse deditum, ita
correctore^ nolo sibi. Ille me non amet amplius quam catholicam ^idem; iste se
non am^t amplius quam catholicam veritatem. Augustinus. lib. 3. De Trinitate.
Pro^mio. and Petrus Lombardus. in lib. 4. Se^tentiarum. Pr^logus.
censures to, (as well as my poor ability, and other interloping Employments
would permit,) the unlawfulness, the mischievous qualities and effects of
Stage Plays themselves, and of their penning, acting, and frequenting;
endeavoring (out of a Romans 10.1.
cordial desire of your eternal welfare) as much as in me lies, to persuade
you to abandon them; by ripping up the several mischiefs and dangers that
attend them. If any therefore henceforth perish by frequenting Stage Plays,
after this large discovery of their sin-engendring soule-condemning qualities,
their sin, Ezech. 34.^. Acts 20.26.
their blood shall light upon their own heads, not an mine, who have taken all
this pains to do them good. All then I shall desire of you in recompense of
my labor, is but this; that as I have acted my part in oppugning, so you would
now play your parts to in abominating, in abandoning, Stage Plays, without
which this Play-refuting Treatise, will do no good, but hurt unto your souls,
by turning your sins of ignorance, into sins of knowledge and rebellion.
The labor of it has been mine alone; my desire, my prayer is and shall be,
that the benefit, the comfort of it may be yours, the Republikes, and the
glory, Gods; the Vbi Deus Magister est^ quam cito discitur quod docetur. Le^.
1. De Pentecoste. Sermon. 1. cap. 1.
convincing concurrence of whose ever-blessed Spirit, so bless, so prosper it
to your everlasting weal, that 1 These. 5.23.
your whole spirits, souls and bodies, may be henceforth preserved blameless,
from all future soule-defiling Enterludes and delights of sin, unto the
coming of our Lord Iesui Christ^ ( 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.10, 11.
before whose dreadful Tribunal we must al ere long be summoned, to give an
account of all our actions:) and that you may so judge of Stage Plays now, as
you will determine of them in that great dreadful Day of Judgment, and in the
day of death, when you shall not judge amiss. And because no dissolute
Libertines, or licentious Readers through Satan's or the worlds delusions,
should cheat their ^oules of the benefit intended to them by this work, out of
a prejudicate opinion, that it is overstrict, and more then puritanically
invective against Players, Plays and Theaters; to prevent this fond evasion,
and to put all Nunquam n. sine querela aegra tanguntur. Seneca De Ira. lib. 3.
cap. 10.
exclaiming Play-patriots to perpetual silence, pretermitting the memorable
omitted authorities of Gulielmus Stuckius, Antiquitatum Convivalium. lib. 3.
cap, 20^21, 22, etc Tiguri. 1597. and of Gulielmus Peraldus, Summae Virtutum ac
Vitiorum. Tom. 2. Lugduni. 1585. Tit. De Luxuria. c. 3. p. 68. to 77. two
excellent learned Discourses against Stage Plays, health-drinking, and Against
which See Robertus Massonius his Treatise of Dancing^ and Part 1. Act 5. Scene
8.9. with the Author^ there quoted; and those other Writers in the Table.
mixed lascivious dancing, which I shall commend unto your reading; with Quando
populus ad ecclesiam venerit tam per dies Dominicos, quam and per solemnitates
sanctorum, aliud ibi non agat, nisi quod ad Dei pertinet servitium. Illas vero
balationes and saltationes, canticaque turpia, and luxuriosa, and illa lusa
Diabolica non faciat, nec in plateis, nec in domibus, neque in ullo loco, quia
haec de Paganorum consuetudine remanserunt. Et qui ipsa fecerit canonicam
sententiam accipiat. Bo^hellus Decret. Ecclesiae Gallicanae. lib. 4. Tit. 1.
cap. 39. page 549, etc. See Tit. 10. cap. 2. to 19. where there are diverse
Constitutions to the same purpose.
the Imperial Edicts of Charles the Great, against Stage Plays and Dancing on
Lords-dayes, and Holy Days, and all forecited Play-condemning Authorities:) I
shall here by way of Conclusion, cloze up this whole Discourse, with the words
of Ioannis Mariana, a famous Spanish Jesuit; who besides his large and learned
Book, De Spectaculis, professedly oppugning Stage Plays, has since the
publication of that Treatise, in his 3. Book and 16. Chapter De Rege and Regum
Institutione. page 341. to 352. (dedicated to King Philip the 3. of Spain, and
published in the year 1598. Cum Privilegio Caesareae Majestatis and permissu
Superiorum, with the special prefixed approbations of Stephanus Hoieda,
Visitor, and Petrus De Onna, Master Provincial of the Jesuits of the Province
of Toledo, in Spain,) delivered his positive and deliberate resolution against
Players, Plays, and Play Houses in these ensuing terms, which is every way as
harsh, as rigid and precise as any verdict, that either I my self, or any
other fore-quoted Authors have here past against them. His words well worthy
all Players and Play-haunters consideration are these.

De Rege and Regum Instit. lib. 3. cap. 16. p. 341. to 352. Edit. We^belij.
1611.
Publicam ludorum insaniam, quae spectacula nominantur, In his Books De
Spectaculis. Coloniae. Agrip. 1609. See here page 695.
seperata disputatione pro virili part castigavimus, multisque Argumentis and
majorum testimonijs confirmavimus, theatri licentiam, de qua potissimum
laborandum est, nihil esse aliud; Nota.
quam o^ficinam impudicitiae and improbitatis, ubi omnis aetatis, sexus and
conditionis homines depravantur: simulatisque and ludicris actionibus ad vitia
vera informantur. Admonentur enim quid facere possint, and inflammantur
libidine, quae aspectu maxim and auribus concitatur: puellae presertim, and
juvenes, quos intempestive voluptatibus infici grave est, Nota been.
atque reipublicae Christianae exitiale malum. Quid enim continet scena, nisi
virginum Hence Saint Hierom writes thus: Repertum est facinus quod nec mimus
fingere, nec scurra ludere, nec Atella^us possit effari. Epist. 48. cap. 3.
page 103. because Players usually acted most wicked things.
stupra, and mores prostituti pudoris faeminarum, lenonum arts, atque lenarum,
ancillarum and servorum frauds, versibus numerosis and ornatis explicata,
sententiarum luminibus distincta, eoque tenacius memoriae adhaerentia, quarum
rerum ignoratio multo commodi^r est? Histrionum impudici motus and gestus,
fractaeque in faeminarum modum voces, quibus impudicas mulieres imitantur, quid
aliud nisi ad libidinem in^lammant, per se ad vitia satis proclives? An major
ulla corruptela morum excogitari possit? Quae enim in scena per imaginem
aguntur, peracta fabula cum risu commemorantur, sine pudore deinde fiunt,
voluptatis cupiditate animum titillante: qui sunt veluti gradus ad suscipiendam
pravitatem, cum sit facilie a jocis ad seria transitus. Recte enim and
sapienter Solomon, Quasi per risum, inquit, stultus operatur Scelus; turpia
enim, atque inhonesta factu dictuque dum ridemus, approbamus: suoque pondere
pravitas identidem inpejus trahit: Nota.
Censeo ergo, moribus Christianis certissima^ pestem afferre theatri licentiam,
nomini Christiano gravissimam ignominiam. Censeo Principi eam rem vel maxim
curae fore, ne aut ipse suo exemplo authoritatem conciliet arti vanissimae, si
frequenter intersit spectaculis, audiatque libenter fabulas, praesertim quae ab
histrionibus venalibus exhibentur: and quoad fieri poterit, de tota provincia
exturbet eam pravitatem. Neque concedat mores suorum ea turpitudine depravari.
Nota.
Hoc nostrum votum est destinataque sententia. Verum populi levitas and
peccantium multitudo, quasi moles quaedam opponitur; tum auctoritas eorum qui
communi Errori patrocinantur. Et est excusatio furoris multitudo insanorum, hoc
quoque nomine prava nostra natura, quod vitijs suis and cupiditatibus favet,
neque facile avelli se sinit ab ijs quae cum voluptate suscipiuntur; cujus
sumus natura cupidissimi. Vsque adeo ut si quis vanitati resistat, ei
vehementer irascatur populi multitudo. See here, page 3.4.
Ille si^ publicus inimicus, Augustinus ait, cui haec faelicitas displicet,
quisquis eam auferre vel mutare tentaverit, eum libera multitudo, avertat ab
auribus, evertat a sedibus, auferat a viventibus. Excaecat nimirum prava
consuetudo animos, and quae passim fieri videmus, defendere conantur quidem Let
our Play-patrons well observe this Epithet.
licentiae patroni, magni scilicet Theologi, quasi juri and aequitati consona,
otio and literis abu^entes: quos redarguere facile erit testimonio and
authoritate veterum Theologorum, in hac re non discrepantium; a quibus
discedere nostrae aetatis Theologos velle non putamus. Has omnes simulatae
veritatis praestigias retegere non erit difficile, multitudinem a furore
retinere difficilius erit: nisi publica accesserit authoritas, quorum interest
magistratuum. Profecto curandum est, ut ea opinio public suscipiatur, Let
Play-haunters note this well.
Theatra sane, quibus obscaena argumenta tractantur; officinam universae
improbitatis esse, qui concurrunt eo non secus facere, quam qui ad ganeas, ad
furta, ad caedes, ad lupanaria: qui suscepti laboris fructus erit multo
maximus. Erunt enim qui pravitate cognita desinant peccare, salutemque suam
turpi voluptate potiorem habeant, neque prudenter and scientes in mortem
ferantur furentes, rapidi, and miserabiles. Illud certe omni cura prestandum,
ut haec Let Players mark this style and title.
natio perditorum hominum, penitus a templis exturbet^r: quod Romanorum tempore
fuisse aliquando factum, Tacitus, Libro quartodecimo his verbis indicat. Ac ne
modica quidem studia plebis exarsere, quia redditi quanquam scaenae pantomimi,
And if Pagans prohibited Players to come unto their Idols Solemnities, shall
Christians admit them to the Church or Sacraments?
certamnibus sacris prohibeantur. Stage Plays then are no fit Ornaments for
Christian Feastivals and Solemnities, this very Jesuit being Judge.
Qua ergo front histriones de foro raptos e publicis diversorijs in Templu^
Christiani inducent, ut per eos sacra festorum laetitia augeatur? Aut qui
conveniat, uti Augustinus contra Romanos antiquos ait; histriones ignominia
notare, atque in infamium numero ponere, per quos divinus cultus honestatur?
cur a sacris ordinibus repellantur, quod ecclesiasticae leges sanciunt, quorum
opera dies festi and caelestium celebritates illustrantur? Sed obijcis
fortasse, eos in templis non in turpibus argumentis versari, sed sacras
historias refer; quod utinam verum esset, and non potius ad movendum populi
risum, obscaenissima quoque actitarent. Et est acerbum negare non posse, quod
sit turpe confiteri. Such is the holiness of our Popish Plays.
S^imus s^pe in sanctissimis templis inter fabuli actus, ch^ri adinstar
adulterorum furta, amores tu^pes recitari, ut honestissimus quisque ea
spectacula vitare debeat, si decori, and pudori consultum velit. Nota been.
Et putabimus tamen quae a modestis hominibus fugiuntur, ea caelestibus esse
grata? Ego crediderim potius quasi sordes and religionis ludibria, hos omnes
ludos a sanctissimistemplis esse exterminandos, ac imprimis publicos
histriones, qui cum turpi vita sint, religionem faedare potius sua ipsorum
ignominia videntur; and assueti turpibus, in sanctissimis locis odorem, quo
imbuti sunt, ore, oculis, and toto corpore exhalant: ac nescio an aliquando
fabulam agant, quin verba turpia, vel imprudentibus saepe excidant: and hos
tamen contendemus divinis celebritatibus adhibere? Sed fac, (quod nunquam
accidisse probabis) histriones severa aliqua lege constrictos, intra modestiae
fines contineri posse, ac sacras tantum historias cum dignitate refer; Sacred
stories therefore in this Jesuits judgment ought not to be acted on the Stage,
no nor yet in Church^^: which controls the practice of his fellow Priests and
Jesuits.
contendo, non minus eum morem cum religionis sanctitate pugnare, neque minus
dedecus reipub. afferre: Qui enim conveniat ab hominibus turpibus Divorum res
gestas referri, eosque Francisci, Dominici, Magdalenae, Apostolorum, ipsius
etiam Quanto res sacratior tanto abusus ^jus damnabilior. Council. Coloniense
1536. pars 9. cap 16. Surius. Tom. 4 page 787.
Christi personas repraesentare? An non id sit Caelum terrae, aut caeno potius,
sacra profanis miscere? Imagines in templis magna honestate depingi cavetur,
and impudicam faeminam Mariae aut Catharinae, probosum hominem Augustini, aut
Antonij personam sustinere patiamur? Quod Arnobius certe, and antiquior
Tertullianus ab antiquis factitatum accusant: ignominiosos homines in scenam
sanctissimorum Deorum personas inducere. Nonne violatur Majestas. (
Tertullianus ait) and divinitas constupratur, laudantibus vobis? Quae verba ad
nostros mores transferas licet, atque in antiquis interpreteris^ nostrorum
licentiam and turpitudinem accusari. Nota.
Itaque si duorum optio danda esset, mallem ab histrionibus profanas fabulas
agi, quam sacras historias: quo^iam cum decore and honestate eos facere non
posse persuasum plane habeo, tum ob eorum vilitatem and dedecus, tum ob
faedissimos mores, paremque actionum levitatem and turpitudinem. Et ipse
cogitabam in templis festisque Divorum omnia ad pietatera and modestiara
comparanda esse, quibus rebus animus excitatur ad religionem and ad rerum
divinarum contemplationem, ijsque communiter and privatim vacandum esse. Risus,
plausus, clamores an id praestens, per se quisque considerabit. Sequitur
pravitas alia, neque minor superiori, neque minus devitanda. They h^ve Women
actors in Spain, as we have fem^le Spectators, and Playing Boys in Women's
attire.
Mulieres excellenti pulchritudine, eximia actionum venustate and gratia
inducuntur in Theatrum, quod maximum est incitamentum libidinis, and ad
corrumpendos homines potissimum valet. Deus enim (uti Basilius ait libro de
virginitate) cum conderet animantes in utrumque sexum distinctas, aestrum
mutuae cupiditatis inseruit, inter homines maxim, qua se invicem appeterent,
majorem multo in viro, quoniam faeminam de ejus latere formatam diligit ut
proprium membrum, and ad eam toto impetu rapitur. N^ta.
Sic faemina in se quandam virtutem habet, miramque potestatem trahendi ad se
virum, non secus a^ Magnes, cum ipse non moveatur, ferrum ad se rapit. Contra
hanc potissimum cupiditatem pugnare debent, quicunque pudicitiae dignitatem
consequi student, nunquam interrupto usque ad vitae finem certamine: Let
Play-haunters ponder this.
Quod an ij faciant, qui tanto studio ad Theatra concurrunt, pius and modestus
lector secum ipse consideret. Enim vero cum histriones studia omnia lucro
metiantur, ut multitudinem alliciant, quam non ignorant aspectu mulierum, and
auditu maxim capi, omnes frauds suscipiunt, nulla honestatis cura: usque eo
ut in templa etiam turpes has mulierculas inducant: quod his Annis non semel
factitatum est, neque uno loco in Hispania, quod horrescunt audire aures; de
quibus rebus egerint pudet, pigetque dicere. Et Nota.
Principum munus est resistere levitati multitudinis, and perditorum hominum
temeritati. Non ignoramus antiquis temporibus mulieres in scenas fuisse
invectas, quas insigni impudentia corpora etiam nudasse, omnemque aetatem
objecta specie libidinis expugnasse passim atque corrupisse, sua quoque aetate
Hom, 38. in Matthew.
Chrysostomus multis locis accusat. Nudas quidem in nostra Theatra mulieres
prodire non arbitror, tametsi nonnunquam in ipsa action nudari audiebam, certe
tenuissimis vestibus indutas prodire, quibus membra omnia figurantur, ac ferme
subijcuntur oculis. Mulieris autem aspectu pulchrae and ornatae, preterea
ge^tus and verba in molliciem fracta adjungentis, quid potentius esse possit ad
illiciendas animas, atque in sempiternam mortem impellendas, inflammandasque
libidine, ego sane non video: vincit officium linguae periculi magnitudo: eo
amplius quod haec etiam turpitudo suos patronos habet, non quosuis de populo,
sed viros eruditionis and modestiae opinione praestantes. Aiunt enim aut
comaedias in universum abdicandas, aut mulieres inducendas in Theatrum, Nota
be^e.
quod majus periculum immineat si pueri substituantur in vest muliebri and
ornatu, quo aspectu ad praeposteram and nefariam libidinem populus solicitetur.
Nimirum velamen malitiae quaerunt: aliud agunt, aliud agere videri volunt.
Hispanorum nationi suspicio criminis imponitur, a quo natura abhorret, (paucos
excipio) and nos in provincijs quibus id malum viget, scimus saepe pueros in
scenam prodijsse sine periculo; variasque personas ut res se dabat cum
dignitate, eligantiaque actitasse. Cupiditas autem muliebris sexus latius
patet, majoresque multo impetus habet, non solum in corruptissimis hominibus
and pravis, quales sunt qui puerorum amoribus indulgent, sed in alijs etiam
viris, aliqua probitatis and modestiae laud conspicuis. Mit^o quod faeminae
scenicae, quae histriones consectantur and adjuvant, formasunt venali, sive
quod tot viris procacibus and otiosis circumseptae, Nota been.
mira^uli instar esset, si pudice viverent: and ex turpi questuplerumque
raptae, posito amplius in Theatro pudore ad ingenium redeunt. Ita vulgato inter
plures corpore omnibus exitium afferunt, juvenes otiosi and perditi (quorum
magnus numerus ubique est) eo aspectu concitati feruntur precipites: unde rixae
graves, vulnera, and cedes, contemptus parentum and rei familiaris prae amore
earum muliercularum. Quae probra, and similia multa alia, qui digna non putat
quae omni studio avertantur, ferreus sit and communi hominum caeterorum sensu
rationeque destitutus. No standing Play Houses are to be suffered by this
Jesuits sentence, whose reasons I wish all Magistrates and others would
consider.
Censeo praeterea nullam certam sedem histrionibus extruendam public, domum
aut Theatrum, quam lucri part locatam unde inopes alantur, aut quod in alias
publicas utilitates impendatur; ea enim species obtenditur ab ijs qui contra
statuunt. No standing Play Houses are to be suffered by this Jesuits sentence,
whose reasons I wish all Magistrates and others would consider.
Primum enim facto Theatro occasio manifesta praebetur honesta condition viris
and faeminis inter se libere conveniendi, praesertim domus, aut Theatri
magistro venali: nam qui emit magno, venda^ necesse est omnem licentiam, quae
ab illo flagitare homines perditi poterunt: fietque ex Theatro lupanar multo
exitialius quam alia: deinde frequentiores ludi erunt perpetua sede public
designata, quam omnino sit opus. Alliciet loci opportunitas ad ludendum and
spectandum, and praefectus cum magno eam sedem conduxerit histriones undique
conquiret, nullumque diem elabi sine ludo patietur; quin potius diebus noctes
continuabit, quanta cum perturbatione reipublicae dicere non est necesse. Quis
enim juvenes avellat ab ea vanitate? Opifices and agrestes relicto opere
quotidiano concurrent, famuli heroes contemnent, faeminae viros and familiam,
prae cupiditate spectandi: quod scimus hoc etiam tempore ex part contingere.
Praeterea histrionum numerus extructo certe Theatro per urbes and oppida,
immensum augebitur pondus iners atque inutile, cum sint enervati voluptatibus;
nam and lucri aviditas multos excitabit, neque nisi magno numero poterunt tam
multis Theatris satisfacere. O that all Christian Princes, Magistrates, and
Play-haunters would well weigh this reason.
Postremo, number juvenes ex his privilegijs and bacchanalibus, aut strenuos
milites, aut bonos senatores fore credimus? descent illi quidem ea inspectione
amare, armorum pondus, aliasque molestias sustinere non poterunt, cum totos
dies residere in Theatris consueverint: quo tempore aut aequos calcaribus
inci^are and flectere potuissent, aut alia ratione vires corporis exercere, aut
certe pacis arts commentari. Scimus Romae primum ex lapide Theatrum a Gneio
Pompeio fuisse extructum, nam antea scena ad tempus ex materia facta utebantur,
tanta ex eo opere populi gratia, ut magni cognomen ex ea fabrica accesserit. Id
fuit multitudinis judicium, qua pal^ae instar levissimae in omnes parts
circumfertur: nam prudentiorum magnae partis repraehensionem incurrit, unde
laudem captabat. Sic docet Tacitus libro quartodecimo, productis etiam in
utramque partem probandi and improbandi Theatra argumentis: ut Nota been.
quod in ea temporum faece and morum labe dubitatumest^ nobis pro certo lege
esse debeat, nequaquam populi Christiani moribus and sanctitati convenire, ut
per urbes and appida, certa, perpetuaque seeds histrionibus detur. Scimus saepa
a Censoribus Romae eversa Theatra nihilominus, quasi morum certissimam a
lascivia labem: and erit in populo Christiano, hac professione, qui restituenda
contendat? Ad haec: Suscepta Christi religione per omnes pene Civitates cadunt
Theatra, uti Augustinus ait, caveae turpitudinum and publicae professiones
flagitiosoru^; and nos ea instauranda contendamus? Vincit rei dignitas
orationis facultatem. Nota^
Neque excuses, nostra Theatra non esse conferenda cum antiquis, neque
majestate operis, neque ludorum apparatu^ Turpit^dinem loci accusamus, non
structurae modum; rivus tenuis, naturam continet fontis unde manat; surcu^us
arboris unde excisus est, succum habet. Nam si magno vectigali, sublato Theatro
rempub^ privari accuses, risum tenere non potero, neque enim tanti lucrum esse
debet, ut mores populi and religio negligantur; neque deerunt aliunde rations,
si Theatra repudiemus, ad egenorum inopiam sublevandam. Et mihi qui secus
statuunt, magni Pompeij factum imitari velle videntur. Is enim ut
reprehensionem evaderet quasi Theatro constituto turpitudinis scholam
apperuis^et, Veneris Templo Theatrum quasi appendicem adjunxit, religionis
sanctitate novam structuram velaturus, nimirum verebatur ne aliquando memoriae
suae censoria ignominia accederet, quasi arcem omnium turpitudinum struxisset;
uti Tertullianus ait: Ergo Pompeij imitatione cum templis, aut hospitijs
pauperum theatrum jungatur, quo majus lucrum sit, honestius susceptae
improbitatis velamen. Note this ensuing passage, and the accursed fruits of
Stage Plays, well.
Censeo ergo cum multis, fore e republica, si histriones pretio venales penitus
removeantur. Omnes enim pecuniae vias norunt, and pecuniae causa omnes
turpitudines suscipiunt, instillantque alijs; questuaria art exhauriunt iunt
pecunias, and veluti sopitis voluptate sensibus latenter extorquent, quas non
minori turpitudine insumant, otio and desidia ut torpeant Cives efficient, quae
omnium vitiorum radix est, vitijs omnibus and fraudibus viam muniunt, libidine
maxim, quae auribus and oculis suscipitur. Divinum Cultum minuunt diebus
festis, cum vacandum esset rebus divinis, populo ad spectacula attracto, quae
pestis omnibus piaculis procuranda videbatur. This the Jesuit writes, not that
he would have any Stage Plays suffered, for he professes the contrary before;
but only by way of prevention; that in case he could not procure all Plays to
be suppressed, that yet those that were tolerated might be thus regulated.
Quod si non obtinemus, ut ludi scenici penitus amoveantur, and placet
nihilominus eam oblectationem populis dare: quod jus and aequitas postulare
videtur, impetrare certe cupimus, ut delectus aliquis sit, neque promiscue
licentia quidvis agendi histrionibus concedatur: sed legibus certis
circumscribantur and finibus, quos nemo impune transgrediatur. Nota been.
Tametsi nullis legibus putabam furorem hunc satis frenari: prudenter quidam O
here, inquit, quae res nec modum habet neque Consilium, ratione, modoque
tractari non vult. Sequamur tamen Platonis institutum, qui poetarum Carminibus
examinandis praefici sanxit viros prudentes non minores quinquaginta annis:
eorum judicio quaecunque agendae erunt fabulae examinentur, ipsi etiam
intermedij actus quibus major turpitudo inesse solet; mulieres in Theatra
inducere nefas esto: Theatrum nusquam public constituatur. Diebus festis (u^i
antiquis legibus sancitum meminimus) ludi scenici ne exhibeantur, ne temporibus
quidem jejunij Christiani: quid enim commercij squalori cum Theatri risu,
plausuque. A templis and sanctorum qui cum Christo in Caelo regnant, ac omnino
divinis celebritatibus amoveantur: ac praesertim ij modi and gestus, quibus
turpitudo in memoriam revocatur, and ferme oculis subijcit^r, quae sunt
vulnerareligionis nostrae probra, monstraque immania: Hispanorum nationis
dedecora, See here, page 213.445, 446, 881. and BB Ponet his Apology or Answer
to D. Martyn, p. 61^ and 78. Ba^aeus Centur. 8. page 665. where the Sodomy of
the Papists and Popish Clergy is descried.
adeo faeda, ut stilus contrectare vereatur, suoque se faetore tueri hoc genus
mali videatur. Postremo, quoad fieri poterit minori aetate pueri and puellae
arceantur ab ijs spectaculis, ne a teneris reipublicae s^minarium vitijs
inficiatur, quae gravissima pestis est. A^sint inspectores public designati,
viri pij and prudentes quibus cura sit ut turpitudo omnis amoveatur, and
potestas coercendi paena si quis se petulanter gesserit. Denique, populus
intelligat, histriones non probari a republica, sed populi oblectationi atque
importunis precibus dati: quae cum non potest quae ^unt meliora obtinere, solet
aliquando minora mala tolerare, and populi levitati aliquid concedere. What
could any Puritan or Precisian (as the Sea here Part 1 Act 8. Scene 7. page
797. to 828. accordingly. Quod autem de istis quaedam inhonesta and maligna
jactantur, nolo mireris, cum scias hoc esse opus s^mper Diaboli, ut servos Dei
mendacio lacerat, and opinionibus falsis gloriosum nomen infamet; ut qui
conscientiae luce suae clarescunt alienis rumoribus sordidentur. Cyprian.
Epist. l. 4. Epist. 1. p 170.171.
world now styles all such who run not with them into the same excess of riot
and profaneness) write more against Stage Plays, Play Houses, Players,
Play-haunters; or what have I said more against them in this Treatise, then
this great Jesuit has done, and that by public approbation both of his Royal
Sovereign, his Visitor and Superior too? And must not Stage Plays then be
extremely bad when as pofessed Jesuits so severely censure them? yea, shall not
Protestants, nay Papists to, be unexcusably licentious, if they should be more
moderate or indulgent unto Plays, then they? Let no Player, or Play-haunter,
no voluptuous libertine therefore henceforth quarrel either with me or others,
as being too puritanically rigid against Stage Plays, when as these loose
Jesuits equalize, if not exceed us in their Play-condemning Censures, as this
large transcribed passage fully proves. 2 Pet. 3.17.
Ye therefore, beloved Readers, seeing ye now know these things before hand,
beware lest ye also being led away to Plays, to Theaters, with the error, the
example, the importunate solicitations of the wicked ( as many ignorant and
unstable nominall Christians have been before you;) fall from your own
steadfastness, faith and Christian virtues, into a sink of hellish vices, to
your eternal ruin. Heb. 13.20, 21.
Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will; working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

Augustinus de Symbolo ad Catechumenos. l. 4. c. 2.

Quisquis contempto Deo sequeris mundum, and ipse te deserit mundus. Sequere
adhuc quantu^ potes fugitivum, and si potes apprehendere eum, tene eum: sed
video non potes, fallis te. Illen. labiles motus suos torrentis ictu
percurrens, dum te videt inhaerentem sibi, and tenentem se, ad hoc te rapit,
non ut salvet, sed ut perdat te. Quid n. cu^ pompis Diaboli amator Christi?
Noli te fallere, odit n. tales Deus, nec inter suos deputat professores, quos
cernit viae suae desertores. Ecce ruinosus est mundus, eccetantis calamitatibus
replevit Dominus mundum, ecce amarus est mundus and sic amatur, quid faceremus
si dulcis esset? O munde immunde! teneri vis periens, quid faceres si maneres?
Quem non deciperes dulcis si amarus alimenta mentiris? Vultis dilectissimi non
inhaerere mundo, eligite amare creator^m mundi, and renunciate pompis mundanis,
quibus Princeps est Diabolus cum Angelis suis. FINIS.
A TABLE (WITH SOME brief Additions) of the chiefest Passages in this
Treatise: p. signifying the Page: f. the Folioes^ from page 513. to 545. (which
exceeded the Printers Computation) m. the marginall notes: if you find f.
before any pages from 545. to 568. then look the Folioes which are overcast:
if p. then the pages following.
A
Abomination, used always for a heinous sin in Scripture. page 181.212. Men's
wearing of women's, and women's putting on of men's apparel, an Abomination to
the Lord. p. 178. to 216.879. to 899. Acting of popular or private Enterludes,
for gain or pleasure, infamous, unlawful, and that as well in Princes,
Nobles, Gentlemen, Scholars, Divines, as common Actors. p. 133.134, 137, 140,
841. to 911. p. 571. to 668. Sparsim. accompanied with effeminacic, hypocrisy,
and others sins. p. 151. to 250.841. to 911. It occasions diverse sins in
Actors and Spectators. p. 151. to 250.907. to 911. It helps not men's action or
elocution. p. 931. to 939. Objections for acting of Plays answered. p. 84. to
106. and 913. to 943. Children ought not to be trained up nor taught to act.
page 135.138, 168, 169, 172, 908. Acting of Idols, Devils, evil persons par^s,
or evil things, sinful p. 84. to 106.141, 176, 177, 405, 406, 949. See Idols.
Achilles taxed for putting on women's apparel. p. 182.199, 884. Adrian his
Temples built for Christ, without Images. page 901. Adultery an heinous
dangerous sin. page 376. to 384. punished with death in diverse places. p.
382.383. See the Homily against Adultery. part 3. page 86.87. and Thomas Beacon
his 3. Book of Matrimony. p. 660. to 670. occasioned, fomented by Plays and
Play Houses. p. 227. to 446.498, 662. Egyptians, condemned music. p^ 287.
AEtredus, his censure of lascivious Church-musicke. page 279.280. of Plays.
page 684. AEneas Sylvius, his profane Play and life. p. 112.113, 765. his
recantation of his amorous Poems. page 840.918. his censure of wanton Poets. p.
917.918. of Plays and Players. page 691.737 m. AEschylus, one of the first
inventors of Tragedies. page 17. f. 552. his strange and sudden death. fol.
552.553. AEthiopians, punished adultery with death. page 382. Agefilaus his
answer to Callipides. p. 741.742. C. Agrippa, his censure of Dan^ing. page
237.238. of lascivious Church-muficke. page 284^285. of Popish Stews, and of
the incontinency of Monks, Nons, and Popish Clergy men. page 213.215, 445,
446, 880, 881. of Plays and Players. page 692.869. of wanton Poems. p 385.836,
915. Alcibiades, traduced by Eupolis. page 121. f. 553. his dislike of Music.
p. 287. Alcaeus, his modesty. fol. 515. Alchuvinus, his censure of
Stage Plays, wanton Music, Kalends, New-yeeres gifts, and men's acting of
Plays in women's apparel. page 197.198, 278, 564, 755, 756. m. his passage for
sanctifying the Lords Day. page 630. m. Alehouses, much haunted on Lords-dayes
and Holy Days. f. 536. Clergy men prohibited to keep, or haunt them. p. 591.
to 637.655, 666, 667. Alexander Fabritius, his censure of Dancing,
Dancing-women and their attires. p. 238.256, 257, 258. Of Dice-play; Epistle
Dedicatory 1. and p. 626. m. of Stage Plays p. 434.435. Alexander Severus, his
Temple for Christ. p. 901. m. withdrew Players peusions. page 313. Alipius, a
memorable story of his fall and Apostasy by resorting to a Playhouse. fol.
548. Bishop Alley, his censure of Plays and Play-bookes. p. 9^9. to 923.
Altars, honored and danced about by Pagans. p. 235.236, 758. m. none in the
Primitive Church. p. 896. placing of Tapers on them, derived from Saturn his
worshippers. page 758. m. See Bishop ^ewels censure of Altars, and of their
standing at the East end of the Church; in his Answer to M. Hardings Preface.
p. 6. in his Reply to Harding. Artic. 3. Devis. 27. page 195.196. and Artic.
13. Devis. 6. p. 488. Thomas Beacon, in his Cat^chisme. fol. 484. William
Wraghton, in his Hunting of the Romish Fox. fol. 12. Bishop Hooper, his
Judgment of them. See Hooper. Gulielmus Altisiodorensis, his censure of
Plays. page 68^. S. Ambrose, his censure of Dancing, especially in women. page
223.232. m. of Dicing. Epist. Ded. 1. of men's putting on women's apparel. p.
191.192, 193. of men's long and frizled hair. p. 190.193, 209. m. of Images,
especially of the Deity. p. 898. m. of Kalends and New years gifts. p. 20.786.
of lascivious Songs. p. 266. Of Stage Plays. p. 339.671. of giving money to
Players. p. 316.323. How Christ's Nativity ought to be celebrated. p. 774. to
781. Ammianus Marcellinus, his censure of Plays and Dicing. p. 465.710.
Anna^us, his effeminacy. page 88^. Anselme, his censure of Plays. page
684.846. fol. 545. Anthemius, his Edict for sanctifying the Lords Day, and
suppressing Stage Plays. page 469.470. against Images. page 900. Antioch, its
preeminence before Rome, p. 410.424. Antiochus the mad, taxed for his Dancing,
Masquing, Play-haunting, page 249.250, 857. Antiphanes the Comedian, his death.
fol. 553. Antoninus the Emperor censured for his Dancing and delight in Plays.
page 710.854, 855. Antoninus his censure of Plays and Players. page 691.
Apparel, the end and use of it. p. 207. over costly newfangled Playhouse
apparel censured. page 19.216. to 220.420, 427, 571, 584, 586, 755, 757, 772,
775, 776, 896. to 904. Men's putting on of women's, and women's of men's apparel
(especially to act a Play) unlawful, abominable, unnatural, the occasion of
Sodomie and lewdness: proved at large. p. 168. to 172.178. to 276.584, 850,
859. to 889. Appearances of evil to be avoided. p. 88.89, to 106, 948, 949.
Apostles, their Constitutions against Stage-playe^ and Actors. p. 550.649. to
652. slandered and persecuted as Seditious persons. p. 813.833. Puritans, as
the world now judges. page 799.800, 801. Applauses of Plays and Players
censured p. 297.298, 299. See Chrysostom. Hom. 30. in Act. Apostol. Tom. 3. Col.
549.550. against Stage-applauses, and the heming and applauding of Preachers in
their Sermons. Aquinas his censure of Plays, Players, and putting on women's
apparel. page 179.182, 306, 324. f. 543.689, 887. Arabians punish adultery
with death. p. 382. Arcadius his Edict against Sword-playes. page 75.468.
Architas his modesty. page 515. Ardalion his strange baptism and conversion.
p. 119. Ardaburius censured for delighting in Plays. page 857. m. Arias
Montanus his censure of Dancing, Plays and Acting. fol. 558.559. page 842.843.
Aristodemus his effeminate practice and death. page ^05. Aristophanes his abuse
of Socrates. p. 121.730. Aristotle his censure of Plays, Players, and wanton
pictures. p. 121.366, 367, 448, 449, 484, 586. m. 703. Arnobius his censure of
Plays and Dancing. p. 222^ 334. of Images in Churches, and of making Gods
Image. p. 896.897. m. Ast^rius his verdict against Dancing, Stage Plays,
Mummers, Kalends, New-yeeres gifts, Stage Plays, and men's acting in women's
apparel. page 197.316, 317. fol. 533. Ateas his censure of Music. p. 287.
Athanasius, what singing he ordained in Churches. p. 283.284. his testimonies
of George the Arrian. page 671.672. of the ill effects of acting Pagan Idols
vices. p. 95. against Images. p. 900. m. Atheism, occasioned and fomented by
Stage plays. f. 550.551. and p. 363. Athe^agoras his censure of Sword-playes
and Stage Plays. p. 558^669. Athaeneus, his censure of Dancing, Dancers,
Players, Plays, long hair, effeminacy, lascivious Music, etc. p. 249.250,
288, 209. m. 704.883. Athenians first inventors of Stage Plays. p. 17. their
prodigality on them and hurt by them. p. 312. fol. 562. p. 709.710. Abandoned
Plays and Play-Poets at last. p. 457.730, 921, 839. S. Augustine, his censure
of Dancing and amorous Songs. p. 223, 270, 271. of Images, specially of God. p.
898^ m. of New-yeeres gifts and Heath-drinking. page 20.22, 756. Of
Stage-playes^ Players, Theaters, and Play-haunting. Epistle Ded. 2. p. 49.50,
164, 165, 313, 316, 324.325, 341, to 349, 474, 475, 476, fo. 524, 525, 532,
541, 542, 560, 681, 843, 844, 971, 987. of men's acting in women's apparel and
long hair. p. 193.194.189.202. See Enar. in Ps. 32. p. 244. his repentance for
resorting to Plays before his co^version. f. 568. his opinion of the beginning
of the Lords Day. p. 643. of giving money to Stage Players. p. 324.325, 873.
Augustus his proceedings and Laws against Plays, Actors, and Dancing. p.
459.460, 707, 708, 861. M. Aurelius his laws and cens^res against Plays and
Players, whom he banished into Hellespont. p. 318.319, 463, 464, 137, 138.
Axiothea her resort to Plato his School in man's apparel taxed. p. 184.
B
Bishop Babington his censure of Stage Plays. p. 359.360. Bacchanalia, how
celebrated by Pagans. p. 744.745, 751. to 760. Imitated by Christians. f. 536.
p. 743. to 749.757. to 765. Bacchus, Players, Plays and Play Houses dedicated
to his worship. p. 17.22, 168, 510, 511. not to be invocated. p. 584. Baptism
in jest upon the Stage turned into earnest. p. 118.119. Stage Plays and
Dancing the uery Pompes of the Devil which we renounce in baptismo. p. 3.15,
25, 42. to 61.129, 230, 236, 257, 425, 430.522, 523, 524, 528, 560. to 567,
658, 684, 704, 829, 836, 837, 911, 990. Our vow in baptism to be performed and
most seriously considered, p. 53. to 61. a great preservative against sin if
often remembered. p. 563.564. Baronius his censure of Stage Plays. p. 566.567,
696. S. Basil his censure of Dancing. p. 223.224, 225. m. 277.278. of
Health-drinking, p. 22. of lascivious Songs and Music. p. 266.273, 276, 277,
278, 308. of Stage Plays, and Play-poets. p. 308.337, 679, 680, 915. of men's
effeminate long hair. p. 211. m. Ba^tologies in prayer prohibited. p. 19.
Thomas Beacon his censure of Dancing, Dicing, and Stage Plays. page 626. m.
693. of lascivious Church-Musicke. p. 282. to 28^. Bellarmine his censure of
Plays. fol. 538. page 696.697. Beare-baiting censured and prohibited. p. 583.
and fol. 556. S. Bernard against Stage Plays, Dicing, long hair, and
ribaldrie Songs. p. 350.560.684. against Images, etc. p. 902.903, 904. his
praise of the Scriptures fullness. p. 928. B^za his recantation of his
lascivious Poems. p. 840. Bishops children prohibited to behold, act, or set
forth Stage Plays, p. 574.591, 653. ought to suppress Plays, Dancing, and
Play-haunters. p. 150. ought to invite the poor to their tables, and to have
some part of the Scripture read at meals, and then to discourse of it p.
591.653. See Gratian. Distinct. 44. not to wear costly apparel. p. 621^ must
not play at Dice, nor behold Dice-players, nor keep any Dicers or idle persons
in their houses. p. 657. to 661.666. Bishops parts not to be acted on the
Stage. p. 596.601. ought not to read Heathen or profane Authors. page 78.79,
915, 916, 925, 926, etc. ought to preach constantly once a day in BB. Hoopers
opinion. fol. 521. p. 629. See Ministers. Petrus Blesensis hi^ character of an
Official. f^ 537. m. his censure of Players. and such who harbor them. page
556.684, 737. Bodine his censure of Stage Plays. page 483.484. M. Bolton his
verdict of Stage Plays page 16 364, 365. Bonefix^s condemned by Councels and
Fathers. p. 21.22, 580, 583, 585, 587, 588, 770, 772, 773, f^ 535, Books of
Paganism and Pagan Idols prohibited to be read. p. 78.79, 915, to 928.
Profane, lascivious, amorous Play-bookes, Poems, Histories, and Arcadi^es
unlawful to be penn^d, printed, read, especially of children and youths. page
103. m. 108. m. 307.453, 454, 831.913. to 929. Magic, and lascivious Books
ought to be burnt. p. 916.717, 919, 920, 922. Bowing to and before Altars,
derived from Pagans. p. 236, See my Lame Giles his Haltings. p. 36. to 39. and
the Appendix to it. p. 15.16. Bowing and kneeling down to Images, is Idolatry.
p. 896. to 904. m Exodus 20.5. c. 23.24 Levit. 26.1. Number. 25.2. Deuteronomy. 5.8, 9.
Josh. 23.7, 16. Judge. 2.12, 17, 19, 1 King. 19.18 2 King. 5.18. c. 17.35. 2 Chronicles. 25.14. Dan. 3.5, 6, 28. Romans 11.4. Therefore bowing and cringing to
Altars ( a thing never used by the I^wes or Primitive Church and Christians,
but only by the Papists, who decree thus: Summa reverentia and honor maximus
sanctis Altaribus exhibeatur, and maxim ^ubi sacrosanctum corpus Domini
res^rvatur and Missa celebratur. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1.
c. 81. p 558.) must be Idolatry too. If any reply; that they bow and kneel not
unto Images, Altars, or Communion Tables, but before them: I answer, that as
bowing, kneeling, praying, and worshipping before God; is the same in Scripture
phrase with bowing, kneeling^ praying unto God, and worshipping of God: as is
evident by De^t. 26^6. 1 Samuel 1.12, 15, 19. 2 Chronicles. 20.18^ Psalm. 2^.7. Psalm.
72.9 Ps. 86^9: Ps. 95.6. Ps. 96.9, 15. Psalm. 98.6, 9. Isay 66.23. Rev. 3.9. c.
4.10. ^. 5.8. cap 7.11. c. 15.4. compared with Isay 45.23. c. 49.23. c^ 60.14.
Rom^ 14.11. Genesis 24.26.48. c. 47.31. Heb. 11.21. Exodus 4.31^ c. 12.27. c. 34.8.
1 Chron^ 29.20. 2 Chronicles. 7.3. c. 29.29, 30. Nehem. 8.6. P^. 72.9. And as
bowing, kneeling, or fall^ng d^wne before m^n, is all on^ with bowing,
kneeling, and fall^ng down to men: witness Genesis 49.8. 1 Samuel 25.23. 2 Samuel
14.33. cap. 24.20. 1 King. 1.16, 23. 2 King. 2.15. Prove. 14.9. compared with
Genes. 27.29. Exodus 11.8. 1 King. 2.9. 1 Chronicles 21.21. So bowing, kneeling, and
falling down before Images, Altars, or Communion-Tables, is the very same in
Gods own language and repute, with bowing, kneeling, and falling down unto
them: as the 2 Chronicles 25.14. L^k. 4.7. Dan. 3, 3.5, 6. paralleld with Exo. 20.5.
Levit. 26.1. Matthew. 11.9^ and the fore alleged Scriptures infallibly
demonstrate, and the Homily against the peril of idolatry. p. 44. to 75 with
William Wraghton his Rep^y to the Rescuer of the Romish Fox, and the Authors
here quoted. p. 902.903. abundantly prove: Needs therefore must it be most
gross Idolatry, as our own Homilies and Writers teach us. Thomas Bradwardine
his passage against Stage Plays. p. 689. Bram^nes, Brasilians, and those of
Bantam punish adultery with death. p. 382.383. Bribe-takers act their parts in
Hell. p. 13. M. Brinsley his censure of Stage Plays. p. ^63.364. f^ 550.
Brownists censured. p. 38. Bucer his opinion of academical and popular Plays.
p. 7.692. for two Sermons every Lords Day. p. 629 m. Brissoniu^ his censure of
Stage plays. p. 695. C. Bulengerius his censure of, and Book against
Stage^playes^ p. 320.358, 696, 697 John de Burgo^ his verdict^ of Players,
Plays and Dancing. p. 238.239, 689, 844. m. 846.847.
C
C. Caligula censured for favoring Players, for acting and frequenting
Stage Plays, putting on wom^ns apparel, and drinking his Horses health. page
200.249, 462, 708, 709, 736, 741, 848 849. slain at a Play. f. 554. p. 849.
Calvin his censure of Plays and Players. p. 692.907. of Dancing. p. 226.240.
Candlemas, and the burning of Tapers on it derived from the Pagan Februalia. p.
758.760. Canticles, anciently prohibited to be read of children and carnal
persons p. 914.915. Cappadocia, its extent and division. p 678.679. its
praises. p. 675. Cappadocians, not always infamous. page 674. to 677.
Cappadox, not a proverbiall but a national title. p. 674. to 678. Carinus
censured for favoring Players, and lewd persons. f. 547. p. 710.857.
Cassiodorus his censure of Plays and Players. p. 470.471, 478, 682, 683.
Cirque-playes censured and condemned by Fathers and Emperors. page 470. 556,
685, 340, 729. fol. 519, 523, 524, 525. Catiline his conditions, page 133.149.
Cato, how much feared of the Romans. f. 529. his gravity. p. 740. Catullus
censured, page 916. Censors appointed to correct Plays and Players. p 38.478,
472. Charles the Great his censure and Edicts against Stage Plays, Dancing,
and ribaldry Songs on Lords-dayes and Holy Days, p. 271.715.996. See the
places of Bochellus quoted in the margent: against Images. p. 900. Charles the
6. of France his danger at a Masque. f. 557.558. Charles the 9. of France, his
Edicts against Plays and Dancing on Lords-dayes and Holy Days. p. 715. King
Charles his pious Statute for suppressing all Plays, and Enterludes, and
unlawful pastimes on the Lord's Day. p. 241.243, 495, 715, 716, 717. Dancing
upon Lords-dayes punishable by this Statute. Ibidem. Charondas his law against
Cowards page 584^ m. 883. Children to be kept from Plays. p. 366.367. See
Parents. Christ wept often, but never laughed. page 294.402, 403. fol. 526.
accused of sedition and rebellion. p. 822.823. counted a Deceiver. p. 816. a
Puritan, page 799.800, 801. his Nativity how to be celebrated. p. 48.225, 526,
743, to 783 for what end he dyed and suffered, and was incarnate. p. 26.526,
749. to 752^ the only pattern of our imitation. f. 526. p. 732. dishonored
and offended with Stage-playes^ p. 44.48. f. 525.526. p. 743. to 750. His
passion ought not to be acted, and yet Papists and profane Jesuits play it. p.
108. to 119, 624, 636, 763, 764, 765, 766, 929. Why he redeemed us. p. 26.27,
749, 450. Christians, must imitate and follow Christ alone. p. 98.99, 526, 732.
must excel Pagans in grace and virtue. p. 57.98, 99, 4^5, 454, 455, 711, to
713. what they are and ought to be. p. 56.57, 63, 425, persecuted and hated for
their goodness and because they are Christians. p. 799. to 826 nicknamed page
824. accused of faction, rebellion, and hypocrisy. page 816. to 828. must not
follow Pagan customs. p. 17. to 28. 32, 33, 47, 578, 580, 582, 583, 584, 585,
586, 587, 751. to 762. not to read Plays and wanton Books: but the Scriptures
and good Books. p. 913. to 924. the Primitive Christians condemned
Stage Plays, and excommunicated Players and Play-haunters. p. 2.3^ 4, 49. to
53. 325. to 355.545. to 705. and passim. Ill Christians worse then Pagans. p.
454.455, 711. to 713. 798^ exceedingly dishonor Christ, and scandalize
religion. page 744. to 749. Christmas disorders censured at large^ p. 48 225,
743, to 783.600. to 635. See. Haddon Cont. Osoriu^. l. 3. f. 203. derived from
Papists, and Pagans Saturnalia. p. 600. to 635. Sparsim. 751. to 769.
Christmas, how to be celebrated. p. 48. 225, 226, 526, 576, 585, 586, 600. to
635. Sparsim. 743. to 783. See Holi-dayes. Christmas Lords of Misrule, whence
derived. p. 767. Chrysologus, his censure of Dancing^ page 224. m.f. 526.
Chrysostom, his censure of dancing, especially at ma^riages. p. 222.223, 228.
m. 555. See Marriage. of Dice-play. Epist. Dedicit. 1. p. 423. of lascivious
Songs and Music. p. 263.267, 268, 269, 412, 413, 420. See Homil. 20. ad
Ephesians. and Hom. 12. ad Collos. of gaudy apparel and Stage-attires. p. 219.420.
of excessive laughter. p. 290. to 296.403, 404. of ^ffeminacy page 169. of men's
long hair, wome^s cutting their hair, and men's putting on of women's apparel.
page 169.195, 196, 426. Of Stage Plays, Players, Play-haunters and
Play Houses. p. 50.66, 156, 164, 169, 392, to 432, 474.552, 563, 566, 680, 681,
738, 988, 989. See Hom. 12^ in Collos. and 20. in Ephesians. Churches, no Plays,
Dances, scurrilous Songs or Pastimes to be suffered in them, nor yet in
Churchyards. p. 581.600. to 660. Sp^rsim. 995.999, 947. Gazers in i^ censured.
p. 418.999. no Images, Crucifixes, or Saints Pictures to be suffered in the^. p.
894. to 905. not to be overcuriously or vainly adorned. p. 902.903. the
Primitive Church excommunicated Players and Play-haunters, and condemned
Stage Plays, and dancing. p. 134.543. to 690. See Plays. Clemangis his
censure of Dancing, Dicing, Plays, and Players, and of the abuses on
Lords-dayes and Holidayes. f. 535.536, 5^ 7. p. 690.691. of Popish Non^ and
their gross incontinency. p. 880. m. Clemens Alexandrinus his censure of
lascivious kisses and dancing. p. 166. m. 222. of men's acting in women's
apparel and wearing long hair p. 167.187 189. of lascivious apparel. p. 218.
of Images, especially of God the Father. p. 896.897. m. of excessive laughter.
p. 392. s^urrilous Songs. p. 266. effeminate Music. page 275. of
Stage Plays, and Theaters, p. 67. m. 329. 344, 472, 532, 609. Clemens Romanus
his censure of men's long and frizled hair. p. 189. m. of Players, Plays, and
Play-haunters. p. 49. f. 532. p. 649. to 652. his command and exhortation to
Laymen to read the Scriptures. p. 927. Commodus, censured for acting the
Player and Gladiator; for favoring Players and Gladiators, for Sodomie and
putting on women's apparel, etc. fol. 555.721, 852, 853, 894, 882. his murder.
f. 555. p. 854. Company of ^vill persons to be eschued. p. 144, 148. to 153. f.
547.548. a dangerous snare, apt to draw men to Plays and sundry sins. page
143. to 152.416, 417. f. 547.548, 549. got by frequenting Plays. f. 547.548,
549, 598. See Master Boltons walking with God. p. 73, etc. Constantine the
Great an Englishman borne: a suppressor of Stage Plays, of Sword-playes. p.
75.467. and of Images. p. 900. Constantius his Edict against Sword-playes. p.
468. Councels: 55. against Stage Plays. page 570. to 668. against Dancing,
Dicing, Health-drinking, Beare-bayting, Bonefires, New^yeeres gifts, lascivious
Pictures, Songs and Musicke^ profaning of Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, Churches,
Pagan customs, haunting of Alehouses and Tavernes, Clergymens seeing and
acting of Plays, Dancing, Dicing, Non-residency, etc. p. 570. to 668 p. 150.
m. 221.222, 240, 265, 286, 287, 354, 756, 915, 917, etc. See these several
Titles. General Councels bind in point of manners. Ibidem. For s^nctifying
the Lords Day. p. 242. m. 570. to 660. Crab his Councels against Stage Plays.
p. 571. to 660. Crossing of the face when men go to Plays, shuts in the
Devil. p. 342. Crowns of Laurel not to be worn of Christians. p. 20.36.
Cyprian his censure of Men's long hair. p. 189 of men's acting in women's
apparel. p. 168, 169, 187, 188. of lascivious apparel. p. 217, of Images. p.
897. his Books against Stage Plays, and censure of Players, Plays,
Play-haunting and Theaters, etc. page 135.136, 168, 169, 187, 188, 331, 332,
333, 334, 473, 523, 546, 558, 562, 670, 392, 722, 728, 729. Cyr^llus
Alexandrinus, his censure of making Gods Image. p. 898. of Dancing and
Stage Plays, especially on Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes. page 278.279, 533, 534,
682, of wanton Music. p. 278.279. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus, his censure of
Stage Plays, as the Devils pomps, etc. which we renounce in baptism. page
49.339, 562, 565.
D
Damascen his censure of Plays and Dancing, specially on the Lords Day. page
260.349. f. 533.544. p. 683. of making the Picture of God. p. 899 m. Damnation,
often occasioned by Stage Plays. f. 565. to 569. p. 910. often to be thought on.
Ibidem. Dancing at marriages, condemned. p. 20. 22, 36,, 222, 278, 555, 573,
602, 603. See Marriage: the Devils procession and invention. p. 228.229, 232,
one of the Devils pomps which we renounce in baptism. p. 225.228, 229, 232,
236, 238^ 257, 562, 565. an occasion of the breach of all the 10.
Commandments. p. 231.232. an offense against all the Sacraments. p. 257.258.
derived from Pagans who spent their Festivals in dancing, and courted their
Idols with it. p. 225.233, 234, 235, 236, 251, 575, 576, 584, 704, 751. to 763,
771, 779. Infamous among Pagans, and condemned by them. page 245. to 252. and
709. to 711.849. to 864.884, 854, 855, 801. a concomitant of Stage Plays. p.
220.221, 259, 260. condemned by the Waldenses and French Protestants. p. 226.
to 233.636, 637. Christians ought not to teach their Children, especially their
Daughters, to dance. p. 232.233, 236, 636, 637. Delight and skill in Dancing, a
badge of lewd lascivious women and strumpets. page 232.236, 237, 238, 240,
245, 248, 249.250.258. The Devil danceth in dancing women. p. 228.229, 232,
257, 258, 260. effeminate, mixed, lascivious dancing condemned by Scriptures,
Councels, Fathers, Pagan and modern Christian Authors of all sorts, as an
occasion of much sin and lewdnes, etc. p. 22.56, 220. to 262.271, 272. f.
534.575, 576, 599, 584, 600.636, 637, 652, 666, 693, 799, 698, 704, to 711.729,
765, 770, 771, 772, 479. Prohibited and condemned upon Lords-dayes, and
Holi-dayes as a sinful, unse^mely, and unlawful pastime, by Councels,
Fathers, Imperial and Canonical Constitutions, Christian Writers of all sorrs
by our own English Canons and Homilies, and by the Statutes of 1. Car. c. 1.
and 5, and 6. E. 6. c. 3. p. 231. m. 220.222, 240. to 245. 257, 258, 260, ^71,
272, 530. to 540. p. 575, 576, 580, 605. to 609.615, 620, 621, 622, 625, 627.
to 636.664, 715, 716, 717, 770, 771, to 779, 780, 781, 913, 693, 419. All
Clergymen prohibited to dance, or to behold others dancing, or to reward or
encourage Dancers. p. 573. to 678. Sparsim. See Prudentius contr. Symmachum.
lib. 1. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 4. p 910. D Greg. Nyssen de Resurrect Christi.
Oration. 3. p. 160^ Valeri^n. Hom. 1. De bono pudicitiae. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5.
pars 3. p. 477. C. D. Arias Montanus in lib. Iudicum. c. 16. p. 568. to 573.
Ioannis Munster De Saltationibus. lib. Gulielmus St^cki^s Antiqu. Convivalium.
l. 3. cap^ 21.22. Zeghedini Lo^i Communes. Tit. Chorea and Saltatio. Gulielmus
Peraldus Summa Virtutum ac Vitiorum. Tom. 2. Tit. De Luxuria c. 3. p. 68. M.
Deering his 10. Lecture on the Hebr^wes. Francis Salis his Introduction to a
devout life. part 3. c. 32.33. p. 648.649. Vincentius Beluacensis Speculum
Morale l. 3. pars 9. Distinct. 6. p. 251.252. and Summula Raymundi. fol. 93.
where a Dance is thus defined. Chorea est circulus ca^henatus cujus centrum est
Diabolus. with sundry others here omitted, against Dancing. David his Royal
resolution. p. 737. censured for feining himself mad. p. 894. 160. his dancing
before the Arc no justification of our lascivious dancing. p. 552. to 555.729,
773, 729. Day of Judgment at hand, and ever to be meditated on^ p. 56.59.976.
to 979. Dice-play, and Dice-houses censured, condemned, by Councels, Fathers,
all sorts of Writers both Christian and Pagan, by Mahomet in his Alcoran, by
Imperial Edicts, and Princes Laws, and by the Statutes of ou^ Kingdom
Epistle Dedicatory. 1.2. p. 471.492, 494, 495, 618, 626, 627, 655 to 666.693,
700, 795. Ministers and Clergymen prohibited to play at Dice or Tables, to
stand by or look upon Dicers, or to suffer any Dicing, Carding, or Gaming in
their houses. p. 573. to 668. Sparsim. Dicers excommunicated and kept from the
Sacrament in the Primitive Church. p. 618.926. Did^cus de Tapia, his censure of
Players, Plays, and Theaters. page 481.482, 483, 766. Diodorus Siculus his
testimony of the original of Plays: and censure of them. p. 510.704. Diogenes
Cinnic^s his censure of Music. p. 287. Diogenes La^rti^s his censure of
Stage Plays. p. 707. Dion Cassius, his censure of Dancing, Plays, and
Caligula his acting of them. p. 707. to 710. Dionysius Halicarnasseus his
censure of Plays, their original and use. p. 704. Devils and Devill-Idols the
inventors, the fomenters of Stage Plays, and Dancing which were appropriated
to their solemn honor and worship, their Festivals being spent in Plays and
Dancing, which they exacted from their worshippers. p. 9. to 50.96, 131, 164,
165, 177, ^25, 228, 229, ^32, 236, 238, 257, 403, 404, 430, 47^, 479, 509, 510,
522, 523, 524, 550, 551, 561, to 567, 576, 584, 658, 684, 692, 704, 726, to
734, 751, to 763, 766, 772, 773, 779, 780, 786, 793. have Stage Plays in Hell
every Lord's Day night. p. 12.13. The inventors of no good things, and the
enemies of mankind. page 9.14, 15, 16, etc. Claim Plays, Play-haunters, and
Play Houses as their own. p. 10.11, 483. f. 523, 524, 555. honored oft-times
in stead of Christ. p. 744.745, 759. The only gainers by Stage Plays. p. 44.
to 48. Divinations and charms unlawful. page 20.21, 583. Divorce; women who
resort to Plays and Play Houses, may be divorced from their Husbands by the
ancient Romans and Justinian his Lawe^. p. 391.661, 662. S. Dominicke, a story
of his going to Hell. p. 12, 13. Domitian banished Players and suppressed
Plays. p. 461.714. Domna censured for putting on man's apparel. p. 204.
Drunkenness, occasioned by Stage Plays p. 508. to 512.731, 732. a great and
scandalous sin, especially in Clergy men. p. 508.509, 591. to 636. Sparsim.
780. m.
E
Edgar, his excellent Oration to his Prelates. p. 762. Edricke his censure. p.
133. Edward the 6. his Statutes and Commission for abolishing Images and Saints
pictures out of Churches. p. 902.903. m. For sanctifying the Lords Day, etc p.
781. his Comedy, De Meretrice Babilonica. p. 834. Effeminacy, a great sin. p.
167.206. fol. 546.547. a neces^ary concomitant of Play-acting and a fruit of
Plays. page 167. to 214.420.422, 458. f. 540, 547, 548, 874. to 895.949. in
hair, apparel, speech or gestures much condemned. Ibidem. Queen ELIZABETH,
and her Counsel suppressed Plays, Play Houses, and Dice-houses. p. 491.492.
her Injunctions against Images and Pictures in Churches, which she caused to
be demolished and taken out of Churches. page 902.903. m. her Statutes against
Plays and Players. p. 495. English Laws, Statutes, Magistrates, Universities,
Writers, against Dicing, Mummers, Players, Dancing, Stage Plays, lascivious
Songs and Music, Play-bookes, etc. p. 109.110, 227, 261, 273, 279. to
288.358. to 366.434. to 445.485. to 497. f. 517, 518, 519. p. 698.699, 700,
715, 716, 717, 793, 794, 919. to 924. against Images in Churches. p. 901.902,
903. m. Epist. Ded. 1. For the sanctification of the Lords Day. page 241.242,
243, 715, 716, 717, 781. Ephori. page 288.922. Ephorus his censure of Music.
p. 287. Epicarmus punished for his wanton Verses. p. 921. Epiphanius his
censure of Stage Plays, wanton Music, men's wearing of women's apparel, long
hair, and women's cutting their hair. page 188.279, 556, 680. of Images in
Churches^ p. 899. m. Erasmus his censure of wanton Church-singing. p. 285. Esau
and Jacob a tipe of the Reprobate and Elect. p. 347. Euclid censured for
putting on women's apparel. p. 182. Eu^hrosina and Empona censured for cutting
their hair, and putting on man's apparel. p. 184.204. Eupolis the Poet drowned
by Alcc^iad^^. p. 121. f. 553. Eus^bius his censure of Stage Plays, Dancing
and wanton Music, especially on Lords-dayes. p. 164.260. fol. 533.534. ^.
279.670. of making the Image of God. p. 899. m. Euripides his death. f. 553.
Eustatius condemned for an Heretic, for persuading women to cut their hair
and put on man's apparel under pretense of devotion. p. 203, 204 184. Examples
of Gods fearful Judgments upon Play-poets, Players, and Play-haunters. f.
553. to 565. Exhortations to Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters, p. 53. to 62.
f. 567.568. page 566. to 569 686, 687, 701, 711, 712, 717, 718, 8^9, 830, 974.
to 995.
F
Fa^e-painting condemned p. 159, 160, 505 394, 229, 890, 799, 780, 854, 893.
See Gulielmus Peraldus Summa Virtutum ac Vitioru. Tom. 2. De Superbia. c. 14.
Fathers: against Dancing. p. 22.36, 221. to 230. Dicing. Epistle Dedicatory. 1.
Heathenish customs. page 20. to 37. Health-drinking. p. 26.597, 598, 609, 614,
615. Men's long hair and Periwigs. p 188. to 191.209, 210. lascivious Songs and
Music. p. 261. to 285. fan^astique and gaudy apparel and fashions. p.
217.218, 890. to 904. Images in Churches, and the making of Gods Image. page
894. to 904. Stage Plays. p. 66 67, 309. to 355.392. to 432.668. to 688.
Sword-playes. p. 74.75, 347, 467, 468, Reading of Play-bookes and profane
Authors. p. 78.79, 915. to 928. New-yeeres gifts. p. 20^36, 197, 198, 429, 430,
755, 756. See all these Titles. Their concurring resolutions to be submitted
to. p. 685.686, 687, 718, 719, 720. Puritans. p. 222. 798. to 802. Feastivals
of Pagans spent in Plays, in dancing and excess. page 225.233. to 237.251,
751. to 761.771, 779. See Dancing: to be abandon^d by all Christians page
20.21, 575, 576, 584, 751. to 761. turned into Christian Holi-dayes, and so
brought in Heathenish abuses. page 751. to 761. S^e Holi-da^es. F^asts of the
Primitive Christians described p. 768. to 780. Few saved. p. 244.787, 788. See
D. C^etwin his strait way and narrow gate. Julius Firmicus, against men's long
hair and putting on of women's apparel: and Stage Plays. p. 194.195, 670.
Floralian Enterludes acted by Whores obscene and invective. p. 122.163, 214.
fol. 529. Fornication a heinous sin. page 375. to 3^0. men prone unto it. p.
372.373. occasioned and fomented by Stage Plays. page 327. to 446.144, 145,
146, 432, 433, 498, 662. See whores and whoredom. Not to be acted among
Christians. p. 63. to 72.89. to 94. A^dreas Frisi^s his censure of Dancing,
Dicing, Plays and scurrill Songs. page 693.
G
Gallienus censured, yea slain for favoring Players, acting and frequenting
Plays. p. 465. f. 555. p. 739.856. Gallus the Poet censured. p. 454. Gelliu^
his censure of Stage Plays. p. 452. George the Arrian, a Cappadocian borne. p.
671. to 679. George the Martyr made Symbolicall by Melancton and others. p.
676.677. Gerardas his saying. p. 920. Ger^anes punish adultery with death. p.
382. used to poll their wives taken in adultery and so ^urne the^ packing. p.
203 condemned Stage Plays and kept their wives from them. p. 434 457, 458,
713. Gerson his censure of lascivious Poems, Plays and dancing. p 690.538.922.
Gestur^s of Ministers and others ought to be grave. p. 934.935. Gluverius his
censure of Stage Plays. p. 457.458. Gods Image or Picture cannot, ought not to
be made; a great impiety to make it p. 894. to 904. his Commandments not to be
broken in ^est page 84. to 88. he abhorres Stage Plays 130, 131. fol. 525,
526. Gorgias his censure of Stage Plays. page 449.703. Gosson a penitent
Play-poet, his censure and Books against Stage Plays. p. 140.360, 36^, 362,
436, 437, 486, 489. I.G. his refutation of the Apology for Actors, and his
censure of Plays. p. 141.142, 146, 487, 491, 698, 700, 795, 796. Goths and
Vandals rejected Stage Plays p. 457. f. 527^ p. 713. Gratian the Emperor his
Edict against Players, and Plays. p. 468.813. Gratian the Canonist, his
censure of Players and Plays. page 684.846. of New-yeeres gifts. p. 796. of
Health-drinking. p. 596. Grecians, the original inventers of Plays p. 17.509.
admired Plays and Players at first, but abandoned and made them infamous at
last. page 455.704, 730, 731, 738, 843, 844. Their manners, customs, and
Plays prohibited Christians. p. 21.22, 549, 586, 650, 651, 652. Gregory the
Great, turned Pagan Festivals unto Christian. p. 759.760. his censure of Plays
and Pagan Authors. p. 78.79, 683, 848. Gregory Nazianz^n, his censure of
Dancing p. 225.279, 637. m. 771.772, 773. ^ace-painting. p. 217.890, 893. men's
long and frizled hai^e. page 189. men's putting on of women's ^pparell. page
169.170, 188, 189. lascivious attyres. p. 217.896. Players and Stage Plays. p.
136.163, 164, 169, 315, 338, ^39, 473, fol. 527.680. how Christ's Nativity must
be solemnized. page 771. 772, 773. Gregory Nyssen, his censure of Dancing,
lascivious pictures, and Stage plays. p 337.338, 527. fol. 559.560 page 680.
of Images and Gods Picture. page 898. Gregory the worker of Miracles, his
hatred of Plays caused a sudden pestilence among Players and Play-haunters. f.
559.560. Th. Gualensis his censure of Plays and laughter. p. 296.301, 689.
Gualther his censure of Dancing, Players, Iesters, Plays, and Play-haunters,
p. 45. m. 226.320, 479, 480, 481, 692, 737, 739. Guevara his censure of
Stage Plays and Actors. p. 461.462, 696, 731. Gulielmus Parisiensis his
censure of Stage Plays and Dancing. p. 688. his passage and reasons against
men's putting on of women's apparel, or women of men's. p. 884.885, 886. Gunda
her punishment for cutting her hair, and putting on man's apparel. p. 800.
H
Hair, women's cutting and frizling of their hair condemned by Deuteronomy. 22.5. 2
King. 9.30. Isay 3.18, 20, 22, 24. 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 29. Ti^. 2.2,
3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. Romans 1.26. Zeph. ^.8. Prove. 7.10, 13. Rev. 17.4. c.
^.8. by Councels, Fathers, and Christian Writers of all sorts as an unnatural,
impudent whorish practice. page 184. to 206.217. m. f. 514, 799.805.879. to
890. Sparsim. 994. See Gulielmus Peraldus Summa Virtu^um ac Vitiorum. Tom. 2.
Tit. de Superbia. c. 14. accordingly. Examples of women who have cut their
hair, censured. Ibidem. Whores and Adulteresses punished heretofore by cutting
their hair, which our women now make a fashion. p. 202.203, 204. Popish Nons
cutting of their hair when they are admitted into Nonneries derived from the
ancient punishment of Harlots, and Eustatius his Disciples. p. 202.203, 204.
condemned. Ibidem. Men's wearing of long, false, curled hair and lovelockes,
condemned by Deuteronomy. 22.5. Ezech. 44.20. Dan. 4.33. 1 Cor. 11.14, 15. Rev. 9.8.
Number. 6.5. Ier. 7.29. Psalm. 68.21. compared together, by Councels, Fathers, and
other Writers, as an effeminate unnatural amorous practice, an incitation of
lust, an occasion of Sodomy, and a practice of ancient Ganymedes and Sodomites.
p. 186. to 203.209, 210, 211.426, 560, 799, 873, to 890.893. Ep. Ded. 2. and 3.
To the Reader. See Guli. Peraldus qua supra. M. Bolton his comfortable
directions for walking with God. p. 195.200. W. T. his Absoloms fall, wherein
every Christian may as in a Mirror behold the vile and abominable abuse of
curled long hair so much now used in this our Realm page 8.9, 10, 17, 1^, 19.
Archbishop Abbot his 18. Lecture upon Jonah. sect. 11. p. 570.571. Augustine.
E^ar. in Psalm. 32. Tom. 8. pars 1. page 24^. M. Edward Rainolds his sinfulness
of sin. p. 135. Quintil. Instit. l. 1. c. 15. against men's long count hair.
Hauking, Hunting, yea keeping of Hawks and Hounds prohibited Clergy men by
sundry Canons and Councels. p. 587. to 668. Sparsim. Haymo his censure of
Stage Plays and Actors. p. 349.863. of making Gods Image. p. 900. m.
Health-drinking, prohibited, condemned by Councels, Fathers, and others. page
22.596, 597, 598, 609, 614, 615, 656, 772, 780. m. 782.790. See my Healths
sickne^se, with the Authors th^re quoted. H^abanus Maur^s Com. in Titum. c. 1.
Tom. 5. page 502. E. Homil. in Dominicis diebus. Tom. 5. Op. p. 605. D.
Iohannis Sarisberiensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 8. c. 6. Iuo Carnotensis.
Decret. pars 6. c. 252 Master Gualther Hom. 9. in Haba^. p. 229.230.
Innocentius 3. Operum Tom. 1. p 470. Gulielmus Stuckins Antiqu. Convivalium.
lib. 3. thorowout. Hostiensis Summa. l. 1. Tit. de Tempore ordinat. f. 51.
Joan. Langhecrucius. de Vita and Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 11. p.
250. etc. 12. p. 254.255 Gratian Distinct. 44. Polydor Virgil. de Invent.
rerum. l. 3. c. 5. p. 215. D. John White his Sermon at Paul's Cross. March 24.
1615. sect. 16. Nathaniel Col^ his preservative against sin. p. 380. M.
Heildersham his 12. Lecture upon John the 4. verse. 20. page 130. Barnaby Rich
his Irish Hubbub. London 161^. p. 24.25. M. Edward Raynolds his sinfulness of
sin. 1631. p. 125. who expressly condemn the drinking and pledging of
Healths, especially in Clergymen, who ought by the Canon Law to be deprived
for it. Heaven, no Stage Plays there. page 964.965. Hecataeus Abderita his
testimony of the Jews wanting Images. p. 894. H^lena Constantine the Great his
Mother, an English woman. p. 467. Heliodorus deprived of his Bi^hopprick^ for
his amorous Books. p. 916. Helioga^alus censured. p. 278.710, 856. Henry the
3. the Emperor rejected Plays and Players. p. 471. Henry the 4. of England his
Statute against Rimers and Minstrels. p. 493. Henry the 8. his Statute against
Mumm^rs, Vizards and Dice-play. p. 493.494. his expenses upon Plays and
Masks. p. 320. his Commissions for aboli^hing Images in Churches. page 903.
m. Hen^y the 3. of France his Edicts against Stage Plays and dancing on
Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes p. 715. Hercules censured for putting on woman's
apparel. page 888. Herod Agrippa smitten in the Theater by an Angel, and so
dyed. fol. 554.555. See Freculphi Chronicon. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 14. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 9. p. 408. Herod the Great, the first erecter of a Theater among the
Jews, who thereupon conspire his death. p. 486. f. 552.553. p. 555^ Herodian
his censure of Plays and Dancing. p. 710.851.852, 853, 854, 855. Herodias, her
dancing taxed: the Devil danced in her. p. 228.229. m. 232. m. 260.773. f.
534. Hi^ro punished Epica^mus for his wanton Verses. p. 921. Hierom his censure
of men's long and curled hair. p. 188.340. of lascivious Music and Songs. p.
275.276, 340. of Images, specially of God. p. 898. m. of Players and
Stage Plays. page 340. 680. of Dancing. p. 223. of reading Poets and profane
Authors. p. 78.79 114, 115, 917, 918, 925, 926, 927. his trance. p. 925.926.
for Laymens reading the Scripture. p. 928. m. how Ministers ought to preach. p.
936.937. Hilarie his censure of Stage Plays, page 339.670. of making Gods
Image. p. 900. m. Histories sophisticated by Players and Play-poets. p.
940.941. Hol^ot his censure of Stage Plays and Dancing. p. 229. m. 256.689.
Holi-dayes, how to be spent and solemnized. p. 240. to 244. f. 537.538, etc.
575 585, 586, 605. to 686. Sparsim. 743. to 783. exceedingly profaned with
dancing, dicing, drunkenness and profane pastimes. p. 222.232. to 250.
Sparsim. 271.363. fo. 530. to 541.575. to 666.743. to 783.933. Dancing and
Stage Plays prohibited on Holi-dayes by Councels, Fathers, and all Writers,
Ibidem. See Dancing. and p. 913. Augmented by Papists who have turned Pagan
Festivals into Christian. p. 751. to 761. See Haddon Cont. Osorium. l. 3. f.
262.263, 264. Abridged by Trajan. f. 539. Ho^inesse becomes Christians. page
63. 64, 528. Homilies of our Church against Images in Churches, etc. p.
286.901.902, 903. Honorius Augustodunensis censure of Stage Plays. page 505.
m. 684. of Playerly Mass Priests. p. 113.114. Honorius the Emperor suppressed
Sword-playes, p. 75.468. Bishop Hooper preached twice every day of the week;
would have Bishops to preach once every day, would have two Sermons every Lords
Day. his censure of those who complain of two much preaching. f. 531. a
professed Anti-Arminian. f. 532. condemned Dice-play. Epist. Ded. 1. yea,
Altars too, of which he writes thus in his 3. Sermon upon Jonah, before King
Edward 6. An. 1551. p. 81. If question now be asked, in there then no
Sacrifices left to b^ done of Christian people? yea truly ^ut none other then
such as ought to be done without Altars: and they be of 3. sorts: The first is
the sacrifices of thankes-giving. Psalm. 51. 17, 19. Amos 4.5. Heb, 13.15. Hos.
14 2. The 2. is benevolence and liberality to the poor, Mich. 6.8. 1 Cor.
16.1, 2, 2 Cor. 8.19. Hebr. 13.16. The third kind of sacrifice is the
mortifying of our own bodies, and to dye from sin. Romans 12.1. Matthew. ^1.
Luke 14. If we study not daily to offer these sacrifices to God, we be no
Christian men. Seeing Christian men have no other sacrifices then these, which
may and ought to be done without Altars, there should among Christians be no
Altars. And therefore is was not without the great wisdom and knowledge of
God, that Christ, his Apostles and the Primitive Church lacked Altars, for they
knew that the use of Altars then was taken away. It were well then that it
might please the Magistrates to turn the Altars into Tables, according to the
first institution of Christ, to take away the false persuasion of the people
they have of sacrifices to be done upon the Altars. For as long as the Altars
remain, both the ignorant people, and the ignorant and evil persuaded Priest
will dream alway^s of sa^rifice. Therefore were it best that the Magistrates
remove all the monuments and tokens of Idolatry and superstition. Then should
the true Religion of God sooner take place, etc. and Sermon 8. f. 150. A great
shame it is for a Noble King, Emperor or Magistrate contrary to Gods Word to
detain or keep from the Devil or his ministers, any of their goods or
treasure, as the Candles, Images, Crosses, Vestm^^^s, Altars; for if they be
kept in the Church as things ind^ffe^ent, at lengt^ they w^ll be maintained as
things necessary. And do not we see his words prove true? Against the making
of Gods Image and s^ffring or erecting Im^ges in Churches. page 902. m. of which
he writes thus in his^ Declaration of the second Commandment. London 1588.
fol. 29. to 32. This Commandment ^ath 3. parts: The first takes from us all
liberty and license, that we in no case represent or manifest the God invisible
and incomprehensible with any Figur^ or Image, or represent him unto our senses
that cannot be comprehended by the wit of man nor Angel. The second part
forbids to honor any Image. The third part shows us, that it is no need
to present God to us by any Image. Moses gives ^ reason of the first part, why
no Image should be made, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Remember, says (...) to the people, that
the Lord spoke to thee in the vale of Oreb. thou ^eardest a voice, but saw
no manner of si^ilitude, but only a voice be^rdest thou. Esaias c. 40.18. and
449 etc. diligent^y shows what an absurdity and undecent thing it is to
proph^re the Majesty of God incom^reh^nsible with a little block or stone; a
spirit, with an Image. The like does Paul in the 17. o^ the Acts. The text
therefore forbids all mann^r of Images that are made to express or
represent Almighty God. The second part forbids to honor any Image made: The
first word honor signifies, to bow head, leg, knee, or any part of the body
unto them, as all those do^ (pray mark it) that say with good conscience they
may be suffered in the Church of Christ, etc. Seeing th^n there is no
Commandment in any of both Testaments, to have Images, but as you see the
contrary; and also the universal Catholic and holy Church never used Images,
as the writings of the Apostles and Prophets testify, it is but an Ethnike
v^rity and Gentile Idolatry, to say God and his Saints be honored in them,
when as all Histories testifi^, that in manner ^or the space of 500. years
after Christ's Ascension, when the doctrine of the Gospel was most sincerely
preached, was (...) Image used, etc. Therefore S. John bids us not only
beware of honoring of Images, but of the Images themselves. Thou shall find
the original of Images in no place of Gods Word, but in the writings of the
Gentiles and Infidels, or in such that more followed their own opinion and
superstitious imaginations, than the authority of Gods Word. Herodorus says,
that the Egyptians were the first that made Images to represent their gods.
And as the Gentiles ^ashioned their gods with what figures they lusted, so do
the Christians. To declare God to be strong they made ^im in the form of a
Lion, to be vigilant and diligent, in the form of a Dog, etc. So do they that
would be accounted Christians, paint God and his Saints, with such pictures as
they imagine in their fantasies. God, like an old man with a ^orie head, as
though his youth were past, which has neither beginning nor ending etc. No
difference at all bet^eene a Christian man and Gentile in this Idolatry, saving
only the name. For they thought not their Images to be God, but supposed that
their Gods would be honored that ways, as the Christians do. I write these
things rather in contempt and hatred of this abominable Idolatry then to learn
any Eng^ishman the truth, etc. The third part declares, that it is no n^ed to
show God unto us by Images, and proves the same with 3. reasons. First, I am
the Lord thy God, that loves thee, helps thee, defends thee, is present
with thee: be^ieve and love m^, so shall thou have no need to seek me and my
favorable presence in any Image. The second reason: I am a jealous God and
cannot suffer thee to love any thing but in me and for me. I cannot suffer to
be otherwise honored than I have taught in my Tables and Testament The 3.
reason is, that God revengeth the profanation of his Divine Majesty, if it be
trans^ribed to any creature or Image, and that not only in him that commits
the Idolatry, but also in his posterity in the third and fourth generation, if
they follow their Fathers Idolatry. Then to avoid the ire of God and to obtain
his favor, we must use no Image to honor him with all. Gods Laws expulseth
and puts Images out of the Church, then no man's laws should bring them in.
All which he thus seconds in his brief and clear Confession of the Christian
Faith in an 10^. Articles, according to the Order of the Creed of the Apostles.
London 1581. Artic. 79. and 87. I believe (written he) that to the Magistrate it
does appertain, not only to have regard unto the Commonwealth, but also unto
Ecclesiastical matters, to take away and to overthrow all Idolatry and false
serving of God, and to advance the Kingdom of Christ, to cause the Word of the
Gospel every where to be preached, and the same to maintain unto death: to
chasten also and to punish the false pro^hets which lead the poor people
after Idols and strange gods, etc. I believe also that the beginning of all
Idolatry was the finding out and invention of Images, which also were made to
the great offense of the souls of men, and are as snares and traps for the
feet of the ignorant to make them to ^all. Therefore they ought not to be
honored, served, worshipped, neither to be suffered in the Temples or Churches,
where Christian people do meet together, to hear and understand the Word of
God, b^t rather the same ought utterly to be taken away and thrown down,
according to the effect of the 2. Commandment of God: and that ought to be
done ^y the common authority of the Magistrate, and not by the private
authority of every particular man For the wood of the Gallows whereby justice
is done, is blessed of God, but the Image made by man's hand is accursed of the
Lord, and so is he that made it. And therefore we ought to beware of Images
above all things. This was this Godly Martyrs faith concerning Images: this was
the faith and doctrine of all our pious Martyrs and Prelates in King Henry the
8. King Edward the 6. Queen Mary's, and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns: this is the
authorized doctrine both of the Articles and Homilies of our Church which every
English Minister now subscribes to, and is enjoined for to teach the people as
the undoubted truth: Yea this was one of the Articles propounded by Doctor
Chambers, to which the reverend Bishop, Jewel, and all other young Protestant
Students in both our Universities subscribed, in Edward the 6. and Queen
Mary's Reign, Imagines and simulachra non esse in Templis habenda; ^osque
gloriam Dei imminuere qui vel fuderint vel fabricati fu^rint vel finxerint, vel
pinxerint, vel fabricanda and facienda locarint: as Doctor Humfries De Vita and
Morte Iuelli. page 43. informs us: which I wish our modern Innovators and
Patrons of Images would remember. Horace his censure of Plays and Players. p.
370.452, 711, 834. Hybristica sacra, how solemnized. p. 204. Hylas the Player
whipped. p. 459. Hypocrisy, a necessary concomit^nt of acting Plays, and a
damnable sin. page 156. to 161. 876. 877. Christ, his Apostles, the primitive
and modern Christians unjustly taxed of it. p. 816. to 821. Hypocrites and
Players, the same. p. 158. 159. 876. Hypolitus his censure of Stage Plays, and
lascivious Songs. f. 565.566.
I
King James his Statute against profaning Scripture and Gods Name in Plays.
p. 109.110. his Statutes make Players Rogues, and Plays unlawful pastimes.
page 495.496. expressly condemned the making of God the Fathers Image or
Picture. p. 901. Jason, the first introducer of Heathenish Plays among the
Jews. p. 548.549, 550, 552, 553. Ianus the author of New-yeeres gifts, etc.
See Kalends and New-yeeres gifts. Idleness a dangerous mischievous sin
occasioned, fomented by Stage Plays. p. 141.471, 501, to 504.909, 947, 951. to
956.480, 1002. Idols and Devils parts and stories unlawful to be acted; their
Images, shapes and representations not to be made. p. 75. to 106.141, 176, 177,
f. 550.551 552. page 547.865, 866, 890. to 904. The mentioning of their names
and imprecations, adjurations, or exclamations by them, unlawful. p. 32.33,
36, 77. to 89.891, 925. Things originally consecrated to them unlawful. page
28. to 42.81. to 90. Stage Plays invented by, and consecrated unto Idols, and
Devil-gods, who were courted with them in their Festivals. See Devils, Dancing,
and Festivals. page 478.479, 482. fol. 558.559, p. 731, 732, 735. Idolatry a
grand sin; to which men are naturally prone. p. 27.58, 59, 80, 81, 82, 83.
the mother of Stage Plays. p. 28. to 40.58, 59. f. 522.558, 559. page 546.547.
The acting of an Idols part, or making his representatio^ Idolatry. p. 89.90,
865, 866, 891, 892. The very relics and shadows of it ^o be avoided. p.
27.58, 59, 80, 81, 652, 891, 892. occasioned by Stage Plays and Play-poets p.
80.81.84, fol. 550.551, 55^. p. 650.651, 652. Jesuits act Christ's passion, etc.
in stead of preaching it p. 116.117, 765, 766, 767, 999. Gods Judgment upon
them for a profane Play. f. 558. Some of them have condemned Stage Plays.
page 996.997, etc. Jews, condemned and rejected Stage Plays, and Idols shapes
and vizards. page 466.552. to 556.714, 718, 723, 894, 981. had no Images in
their Temples, and condemned the very art of Imagery. p. 894. to 902. keept
their Sabbath from Evening to Evening. p. 639.642. Ignatius the Martyr,
condemned Dancing on the Lords Day. p. 222.231. m. Ignatius Loyola, prohibited
Terence to be read in Schools. p. 917. Images and Pictures of God the Father,
Son and holy Ghost unlawful to be made, or set up in Churches. page 286.894.
to 904. See Hooper. Images in Churches condemned by Fathers, Councels,
Emperors, Protestant Churches and Writers, and by our own English Statutes,
Articles, Injunctions, Homilies, Canons, ancient Bishops and Writers, Ibidem.
See Bishop Ie^els Reply to M. Harding. Artic. 14. p. 496. to 517. Rodericke
Mors his complaint to the Parliament in King Henry the 8. days. cap. 19.24^ D.
John Ponet BB. of Winchester, his Apology or Answer to Martyn. 1555. c^p. 6.7.
page 74.84, 85. Archb shop Vshers An^wer to the Jesuits Challenge. page 495. to
514. Edit. ult. and a short Description of Antichrist. 1555. page 26.
Demolished at Zuricke, and Basil, and here in England by Henry the 8. Edward
the 6. and Queen Elizabeth. p. 903. m. Images condemned by the Persians,
Syrians, Scythians, and Lybians of old. Origin. Cont. Celsum. lib. 7. fol. 96.
none suffered in the Temples and Synagogues of the Jews, Turks, Sarazens,
Mores, Moschovites, or barbarous Heathen Nations of Asia, Africa and Europe
now. Haddon. Cont. Osorium. lib. 3. f. 254. condemned by Ma^omet in his
Alcoran. Edit. Lat. Bibliandri. 1550. p. 19.105, 126, 144, 152. and shall
Christians, shall Protestants suffer, applaud, erect them, when as these
condemn them? See Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 19. De Religiosorum domibus.
cap. 150. to 162. Imitation of Pagans and their customs unlawful. p. 18. to
23.730. to 734. See Pagans. Impudency a dangerous sin occasioned by
Stage Plays. p. 441.512. to 516. Infamous to act Plays. See Acting, Players.
p. 412.429, 841. to 860. Intention of Play-haunters. p. 943. to 947. Inventions
of Pagans, how far lawful and unlawful. p. 16. to 42. Josephus his censure
of Stage Plays and Theaters p 466.467, 553, 554, etc. of Images. p. 894.895.
Isiodo^ Hispa^e^sis, his censure of Dice-play^ Epist. Dedic. 1. of Stage Plays
and Theaters. p. 349. f. 524.525. page 562.583, 757, 758. m. of New-yeeres
gifts. p. 757.758. m. of reading profane Writers p. 78.79, 915, 916. Isiodor
Pelufiota his censure of Plays and Players. p 477.795. of reciting human
Authors in Sermons. page 937 938. Isocrates his censure of Plays and Players.
p. 121.450, 703. Iren^eus his censure of Players and Plays. p. 158. m. 669.
Judgments of God upon Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters^ f. 550.552. to 565.
Julian the Apostate his Edi^t against Ministers resort to Plays or Alehouses.
p. 461.665. Julius Messalla his expense on Plays. p. 315.322. Iuo Carnotensis
his censure of Plays, Players, acting in women's apparel, etc. 665.684, 846,
886, 906. Iunius Mauricus his censure of Plays. p. 458. Justinian his Edicts
against Dicing, Players, Sword-playes, Stage Plays, which he styles the
Devils pompes. p. 469.562, 563, 656. to 663. his law for divorcing of
Play-haunting wives. p. 391.661, 662. Justin Martyr his censure of Images. page
896. of lascivious Music. p. 275. Justin the Historian his censure of Plays
and Dancing. p. 709.710. Iuvenal his censure of Players, Plays, Play-haunters
and Dancers. page 249. 250, 319, 370, 452, 843, 852. m. 859. 860.
K
Kalends, their observation, especially of the first of January, prohibited. p.
19. to 23.197, 198, 429, 430, 580, 581, 583, 755, 756, 780, 752. Kings most
honored when God is best served by their subjects. p. 644. have suppressed
Plays and Dicing, and exiled Players. p 455. to 472.656. to 665.703. to
713.725, 870. infamous for them to act or frequent Plays, or favor Players.
page 250.451, 428, 429, 459, to 47^. f. 557.558. p. 707. to 711.734. to
744.848. to 858.897. A good King and bad Counselors, worse then an ill King
and good Councellers. p, 153. what makes Kings evil. f. 547. Their life ought
to be exemplary. p. 734.735, 741. Kissing in Dances and Plays dangerous p.
166.243, 386. Knights prohibited to act, to dance, or come upon the Stage. p
459.860, 861, 862.
L
Laberius, his censure of his Play-acting. p. 860.861. Lacedaemonians prohibited
Stage Plays, and lascivious Music. p. 121.122, 288 455, 713, 921, 839.
L^ctantius his censure of Images. p. 896.897, 898^ m. of acting in women's
apparel. p. ^88. of Stage Plays and Actors. p. 169.180, 334, 335, 336,
473.670. Joan. Langhe^rucius his censure of Health-drinking, Stage plays,
acting of Academicall Enterludes, and acting in women's apparell^ p. 596.597, m.
695. 864, 865, 866. Lasciviousness condemned: a necessary concomitant and
effect of Plays, and Play-acting. p. 161 to 178.332. to 446. Bishop Latymer
his censure of Dice-play. Epist. Dedic. 1. of dancing and profaning
Lords-dayes. f. 535. of Images. p. 902. accused of sedition. page 8^5.
Laughter, profane, profuse, excessive, censured. p. 290. to 298.123, 403, 404.
Christ never laughed. 294.403, 404. this life no time of laughter but of
^eares. p. 293.294, 404. See Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Collos. 4. an excellent
discourse to this purpose: occasioned by Plays. p. 175.290. to 304.403, 404.
Laurel, Christians prohibited to dress their houses with it. p. 21.581, 756,
m. 770.771, 772. See Tertul. de Corona militis. lib. c. 11.12. Laymen enjoined
by Councels, Fathers, and God himself to read the Scriptures diligently.
Epist. Dedicat. ^. page 585.924. to 932. are spiritual Priests^ and ought to
be as holy as the Clergy. p. 410.647, 648. Leo the Emperor his Edict for the
sanctifying of the Lords Day and suppression of Stage Plays p. 469.470. Lewis
the 9. of France his Edict against Players, Play Houses, and Dice-houses. p.
870. Leucippus, his effeminacy in hair and apparel censured. p. 883.885.
Livie his censure of Stage Plays. p. 449.450. f. 560. p. 705. Lodovicus the
Emperor his Edict against Clergie-mens resort to Plays, etc. p. 715. Lodovicus
Archbishop of Magdeburge, his death, f. 557. Lodovicus Vives, his censure of
Players, Plays, Play-bookes, Dancing, and Popish Enterludes. page 114.115,
134, 226. fol. 554. page 691.916. London Magistrates suppressed Plays,
Play Houses and Dice-houses. p. 491.492. Lords Day, (exceedingly profaned by
Stage plays, Masks and Dances, which are prohibited on it by Councels,
Fathers, Imperial Laws, our own English Statutes, Homilies, Injunctions, and
sundry other Writers,) how it ought to be spent and sanctified p. 13.22, 240.
to 24^.271, 363, 468, 469, 470, 491, 530. to 541.489, 554, 556, 575, 576, 615.
to 663. Sparsim. 715.716, 913, 946. See Dancing, Holi-dayes. and Thomas
Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 17. cap. 140.141, 142 Plays, Masks and Dancing
unlawful on it, Ibidem. and p. 575.576, 996. and on Lords Day and Saturday
nights. page 12.13, 40, 645, 646. It begins at evening, not at morning or
midnight; proved at large by Councels, Fathers, and others. p. 638. to 646.
Hence Iuo carnotensis. Decret pars 6. cap. 71. Gratian Distinct. 75. and all
Canonists on this place of his, upon the words of Pope Leo Epist 81. cap. 1.
conclude thus, that the Lords Day begins at Evening: Non passim (say they)
di^bus omnibus sacerdotalis vel levitica ordinatio celebretur, sed post diem
Sabbati ejusque noctis quae in prima Sabbati luc^s^it, exordia consecrandi
deligantur. Quod ejusdem observantae eritsi mane ipso Dominico die continuato
Sabbati jej^nio celebretur, a quo tempore praecedentis noctis initia non
recedunt. Quod ad diem resurrectionis (sicut etiam in Pascha domini declaratur)
pertinere non est dubium, etc. His qui consecrandi sunt nunquam benedictio nis
in die Dominicae resurrectionis tribuatur, cui a vespere Sabbati initium
constat ascribi. Dies Dominica initium habet a vespere Sabbati; and vespera
praecedentis noctis trahitur ad diem sequentem, ut sive de vesp^re in Sabbato,
sive de mane in Domini^o ordines conferantur semper in die Dominico videantur
conferri. Hence also Hostiensis. Sum. lib. 2. Tit. de Ferijs. fol. 149 Baptista
Trovomala in his Summa Rosella Tit. Feriae sect. 4.5. Summa Angelica. Tit. Dies
sect. 1. Lindwood Constit. provin^ lib. 2. Tit de Ferijs. ^ol. 74. with all
other Canonis^s Tit de Ferijs, and Ioannis de Burgo Pupilia oculi pars 9. cap.
6. De Ferijs. D^E. lay down this for an infallible maxim. Quod abstinendu^
est a servilibus operibus omni die Dominica abhora vespertina diei Sabbati
inchoando, non ipsam horam praeveniendo. Quod feriationem tenere debemus a
vespera in vesperam. Quod debemus festum incipere, quantum ad feriationem a
vespera in vesperam; scilicet ab ultima part diei praecedentis seu vigiliae.
Quod dies diversis modis incipit and desinit: nam quoad celebrationem
divinarum, consideratur de vespera in vesperam: quoad judicia, de mane in
vesperam, and sic de luce in lucem: sed quoad contractus, de media nocte in
mediam noctem: And this has been the received resolution of all former ages,
which should over-b^llance all new opinions. See Polydor Virgil. De Invent.
Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 6. for the beginning and ending of days. Lovelockes,
bushes of vanity whereby the Devil leads and holds men captive. Epistle to the
Reader: provocations to lust and unnatural lewdness, in use among Sodomites
and Pagans of old, and none else. p. 188. to 195.209, 210, 211, 882, 883, 888.
See Hair. Lucas Tudensis against making the picture of the Trinity. p. 900 m.
Luxury a dangerous sin, occasioned by Stage Plays. p^ 508. to 513. Lycurgus
prohibited Plays. p. 455. Lyd^ans effeminated by Music, Dancing, Plays, and
idleness. p. 288. Lies, condemned: frequent in Plays. p. 106.107, 108, 837,
838. Lysima^hus his Court censured. p. 856.
M
Macarius AEgyptius his censure of Plays and Players. p. 45. m. f. 556. p.
670. Macrobius his censure of Dancing and Play-acting. p. 245.246, 129, 704,
860, 861. his testimony of the Saturnalian Feasts. p 751.752. Macro his advice
to Caligula. p. 741. Magic Books censured p. 917. Magistrates ought to
suppress Players, Plays, and Play Houses, and have anciently done so. p. 448.
to 495.787. Mahomet his censure of Dice-play. p 665. Manners and minds of
people corrupted by Plays. p. 329. to 501. Marriages; Dancing and Plays at
them prohibited, condemned by Fathers and Councels. See Dancing: and Saint
Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Colos. 2. Tom. 4. Col. 1210. to 1214. Hom. 20. in
Ephesians. 5. Tom. 4. Col. 1009. where he writes thus. In matrimonio omnia oportet
esse plena temperantia and modestia, gravitate and ho^esta^^. Contrarium autem
video, saltantes tanquam camelos, tanquam mulos. Quid facis o homo? quid
ludibria illa, quid monstra in^ucis? Omnino turpe est and indecoru^, viros
molles and saltantes and omnem pompam Satanicam domum introducore. Quando
unguentum componitis nihil male olens sinitis appropinquare. Matrimonium est
unguentum; cur caeni faetorem inducis in compositionem unguenti? Quid dicis?
s^ltar virgo, and no^ eam pudet suae aequalis? oport^^ enim ipsam hac ^sse
honestiorem and graviorem, ex ulna enim egressa est, non ex palaestra, etc. Ne
transuehas and in pompam ducas virginitatem. An non sunt haec probrum and
dedecus? Sunt. Probrum enim and dedocus est se indecore gerere etiamsi sit
Regis filia, etiamsi serva si^ virgo, etc. The ^rum enim non est matrimonium,
est mysterium, seu sacramentum, and rei magnae typus. Sacramentum inquit, hoc
magnum est, ego au^em dico in Christo and Ecclesia. Ecclesiae est typus and
Christi, and saltatri^es introducis? Si ergo, inquis, n^^que v^rgines saltant,
neque quae nupserunt, quis saltabit? Nullus. Saltationis enim quaenam est
necessitas? In mysterijs Graecorum sunt saltationes: in nostris autem,
silentium, honesta gravitas, pudor and modestia. Magnum peragitur mysterium,
for as meretrices saltatrices, for as prophani, etc. Haec vobis non temere dicta
sunt, sed ut vos nec nuptijs, nec saltationibus, nec choris adsitis Satanicis.
Vide enim quid invenerit Diabolus. Nam quoniam a scena and ijs quae illic sunt
turpia and indecora, ipsa natura abduxit mulieres, quae sunt theatri abduxit in
gynaecium, molles inquam, se^ pathicos and meretrices. Hanc pestem invexit lex
nuptialis, imo vero non lex nuptialis, absit, sed lex nostrae mollitiei. Quid
ergo dico oportere? Omnia tu^pia cantica quae sunt Satanica, inhonestas
cantilenas, immundoru^ juvenum circuitiones auferre a matrimonio,, and haec
poterant castigare sponsam and modestam reddere; statim n. apud se
considerabit, Papae; qualis est hi^ vir! est philosophus; hanc vitam nihili
ducit, ad procreandos liberos and educandos me domi duxit, and ad domum
custodier d^m. Ex his ipsis ostendit mentem suam, nullo horum delecta^i, neque
unquam concessurum ut siant saltationes and can^ntur impudica cantica. Sed haec
sponsae sunt injucunda ad primum usque and secundum diem, non autem deinceps;
sed and maxima^ ^apiet voluptatem se ab omni suspicione liberans. Nam qui neque
tibias neque saltantes, nequ^ fractos ^antus sustinuerit, idque (...)
nuptiarum, vix ipse in animum induxerit ut turpe aliquid unquam aut faciat aut
dicat. Sed videntur res quidem in^ifferens quae fiunt circa matrimonium. Sunt
autem causae magnorum malorum. Omnia sunt plena iniqui^ate. Turpitudo and
stultiloquium and scurrile verbum, inquit, exore vestro non exeat. Omnia autem
illa sunt turpitudo, and stultiloquium and scurrilitas, non leviter, sed cum
intention. Ars enim est hoc, and magnam affert laudem ijs qui eam exercent.
Ars facta sunt peccata. Non leviter and tom^re ea tractamus sed adhibito studio
and scientia, and de caetero Diabolus est harum rerum Dux and Imperator. Vbi n.
ebrietas and lascivia, ubi lermo obscaenus and saltatio, ade^t Diabolus sua
afferens. Cum his convivans dic quaeso, Christi mysterium peragis, and Diabolum
invocas? Me forte existimatis gravem and importunu^. Nam hoc quosque est multae
perversitatis, quod qui increpat ludibrio habetur tanquam austerus. Nonne
auditis Paulum dicentem. Quicquid faciatis sive comedatis, sive bibatis, sive
aliquid faciatis, omnia ad gloriam Dei facite? Vos autem ad maledicentiam and
ignominiam. Non auditis Prophetam dicentem. Servite domino in timore, and
exultate ei in tremore? Vos autem diffundimini and luxu diffluitis. An non vero
licet etiam tuto laetari? Vis audire pulchros modos? Maxim quidem ne oporteret
quidem. Sed me dimitto, and me tibi accommodo. Si velis, non audias Satanicos
modos, sed spirituales. Vis videre saltantes? Vide chorum Angelorum. Et quomodo
fieri potest ut videam? Si haec abegeris, veniet Christus quoque ad has
nuptias. Si adsit autem Christus, adest etiam chorus Angelorum. Si velis, nunc
quoque faciet miracula sicut and tunc. Faciet nunc quoque aquam vinum and multo
admirabilius. Diffluentem and dissolutam convertet laetitiam and cupiditatem,
and transferet ad spiritualem. Hoc est ex aqua vinum f^cere. Vbi sunt Tibicines
(pray mark it) nequaquam est Christus. Sed and si fuerit ingressus, eos primum
eijcit, and tunc facit miracula. Quando itaque es facturus nuptias ne domos
obeas, specula and ve^tes commodato accipiens; res n. non fit ad ostentationem,
neque filiam adducis ad pompam: sod ijs quae in ea sunt domum exhiler^ns, voco
vicinos, amicos and cognatos. Quos nosti quidem bonos and probos, eos voca, and
ut ijs quae adsunt contenti sint admone. Ex ijs qui sunt ex Orchestra, adsit
nullus. Illic n. est sumptus vacuus and indecorus. Ante alios omnes voca
Christum. Orna sponsum non aureis ornamentis, sed mansuetudine and pudore and
consuetis vestibus. Pro quovis mundo aureo and implicaturis and intexturis,
induens pudorem and verecundiam, and quod illa non quaerat. Nullus sit
tumultus, nulla perturbatio. Vocetur sponsus, accipiat virginem. Prandia and
caenae non sint plena ebrietatis, sed satietate cum voluptate. Videamus quam
multa ex hoc sunt bona, quando viderimus, ex ijs quae nunc fiunt nuptijs, si
nuptiae and non potius pompae sunt dicendae, quot mala? Illic enim Christus,
hic Satanas. Illic tristitia, hic cura. Illic voluptas, hic dolor. Illic
sumptus, hic nihil tale. Illic probrum and dedecus, hic modestia. Illic
invidia, hic nulla plane est invidia: Illic ebrietas, hic salus, hic
temperantia. Haec autem omnia cogitantes, hactenus malum sistamus, ac
cohibeamus, ut Deo placeamus, and digni habeamur qui consequamur bona quae sunt
promissa ijs qui ipsum diligunt, gratia and benignitate Domini nostri Jesus
Christi. The whole Homilies are worth the reading, but thus much only I
thought good to insert to control the marriage disorders of our lascivious
age. Marbachius his censure of Vizards, disguises, wanton apparel, and acting
in women's apparel. p. 889.890. Mariana the Jesuit his Book against, and
censure of Stage Plays, Players, and Theaters. p. 695.996. to 1000. Marius his
censure of Dicers, of Players. p. 450. Martial his Poems censured. p. 792.916,
917. Mass turned into a Stage Play, and priests oft-times into Actors. p. 112.
to 116.573. to 668. Sparsim^ page 762. to 767.877, 935, 999. Sacrilegious unto
Christ and his merits. p. 759. Massilienses prohibited and condemned Plays and
idleness. p. 65.445, 446, 480, 713, 920, 839. May-games, and May-poles derived
from the ancient prohibited Heathen Majumae. p. 253. m. 807. m. and from the
Floralian Feasts and Enterludes of the Pagan Romans, which were solemnized on
the first of May. See Ovid Fastorum. lib. 4. page 81. Mill venit varijs florum
dea nexa coronis. Scena joci morem liberioris habet. Exit and in Majas Festu^
Florale Kalendas. and lib. 5. page 86. t^ 92. Matter ades florum ludis
celebranda jocosis Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maij: Alter te fugiens,
cum venit, alter habet. Cum tua sint, cedantque tibi confinia mensum, Convenit
in lauds ille vel ille tuas. Circus in hunc exit clamataque palma Theatris,
etc. Dic Dea, respondi, ludorum quae sit origo. etc. Convenere Patres: and si
been floreat annus. Numinibus nostris annua festa vovent. Annuimus votis,
Consul nunc consule ludos. Posthumio Lenas persoluere mihi. Quaerere conabar
quare l^scivia major, His foret in ludis liberiorque jocus; Sed mihi succurrit
numen non esse severum, Aptaque delicijs munera far Deam. Tempora sutilibus
cinguntur tota coronis, Et latet injecta splendida mensa rosa. Ebrius incinctis
philyra conviva capillis, Saltat, and imprudens utitur art meri^ Ebrius ad
durum formosae limen amicae Cantat: habens unctae mollia ^erta comae. Nulla
coronata peraguntur seria front: Nec liquidae vinctis flore bibuntur aquae,
etc. Bacchus amat flores; Baccho placuis^e coronam Ex Ariadnaeo sidere nosse
potes. Scena lenis decet hanc: non est, mihi credit, non est, Illa cothurnatas
inter habenda Deas. Turba quidem cur hos celebret meretricia ludos, Non est de
tetricis, non est de magna professis, Vult sua plebeio sacra patere choro, etc.
See Alexander ab Alexand. Genial. Dierum lib. 6. cap. 8. Godwin, his Roman
Antiquities lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 3 page 87. Polydor Virgil, de Invent. Rerum.
lib. 4. c. 14. Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 50. page 296. to the like
purpose. He who shall but seriously consider this manner of celebrating these
Floralian Festivals, and parallel them with our May-games; will soon conclude
as Polydor Virgil does in express terms ( De Invent. Rerum. lib 5. cap. 2)
that our May-games, Maying, and May-pole^ (adorned commonly with Flowrie
Garlands) had their original from these Floralian Feastivals, or the Heathen
Majumae; and that therefore Christians ought wholly to abandon them, as they are
expressly enjoined both by Imperial Edicts, Councels and Fathers. See here, p.
807. m. 575.576, 581, 583, 584, 587, 755, 756. m. ( Pope Martyns Decree) page
750, 770, 780, 20, 21, 22, 23. Tertullian De Corona Militis lib. Polydor
Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2. M. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses. p
109.110. (who particularly condemn both May-games and May-poles:) and Francis
de Croy his first Conformity^ cap. 19.20. accordingly. Menander the Com^dian
his death^ fol. 553. Ministers and Clergymen, prohibited to Dance, Card or
Dice, or to behold Dancers, Carders, Dicers, in public or private, or to
suffer them in their houses, to act or behold either public or private
Enterludes: to play at any dishonest or unlawful games: to disguise
themselves: to Hawk, Hunt, or to keep Hawks or Hounds: to haunt or keep
Tavernes or Alehouses, or to enter into them but only in case of necessity when
they travel: to begin or pledge any Healths; to frequent or make any riotous
Feasts; or to wear costly apparel. p. 150.469, 739.933. to 938.979, 980. fol.
528. page 573. to 668. Sparsim. See Vincent^ Speculum. Hist. lib. 27. cap. 39.
40.47, Summa Angelica Clericus. 11. and all Canonists. De Vita and Honestate
Clericorum: conclude the like. Ought to suppress and dissuade others from
Dancing, Dicing, Health-drinking, or resort to Plays. Ibidem. Scurrilous
Jesting, Dancing, Dicing, Play-acting, or Play-haunting Ministers to be
suspended and deprived. Ibidem. Their duties. Ibidem. Ought not to meddle with
secular affairs; not to bear secular offices. Ibidem. Ought to be resident on
their Cures, and to preach twice a day. fol. 531. page 639.623, 624. Ought to
be grave in their gestures and speeches, nor Player-like. p. 933. to 938. Ought
not to read lascivious Poems, or profane Authors, not to stuff their Sermons
with them, p. 70.79, 915. to 939. No Players or Actors of Plays to be made
Ministers, or to take Orders, f. 528. p. 846.847, 934, 935. Minucius Felix, his
censure of Plays and Players, p. 336.337, 558, 670. of Images. p. 896.897.
Modesty and shamefastness banished by Plays. fol. 512. to 516. their praise.
Ibidem. Molanus his justification of profane sacrilegious Popish Enterludes.
p. 763. 764, 765. Monks many of the^ Sodomites, Whoremasters, Epicures. page
213.760, 761, 762, 880, 881. See Vincentij Speculum. Hist. lib. 27. c. 29. to
58. lib. 28. cap. 6. to 19. cap. 90. to 101. Women-Monkes. page 184.185, 201,
202, 203, 204, 880, 881. Morice-dances censured. p. 20. See Dances and
May-games. Moscovites how they keep their Christmas. page 782. Moses
prohibited Plays and Enterludes. why. page 555. Mourning for other men's
sins, a duty. p. 291. to 295. This life a life of mour^ Ibid. and p. 967. to
973. See Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Colos. accordingly. Multitude no argument of
goodness. page 787.788, 442. Mummeries and Mummers condemned. p. 493.494. fol.
51^.891. to 904. Murders occasioned often by Plays. fol. 516. to 520. Music,
lawful, useful. p. 274. lascivious effeminate Music, unlawful. p. 273. to
290.394.395. See Vincentij Speculu^. Hist. lib. 29. cap. 144. M. Northbrooke
his Treatise against vain Plays, etc. fol. 39.40, 41. Agrippa De V^nitate
Scient. cap. 64. M. Stubs his An^tomy of Abuses. p. 128.129, 130, etc.
Church-musicke ought to be grave, serious, pious, not quaint, delicate, or
lascivious; which abuses of it are censured. p. 276 to 288. and Reformatio
Legu^^ Ecclesiast. ex Authoritate Regis. Hen. ^. and Edw. 6. Lo^di^i 1571. Tit.
De Divin^s Offi^^^. c. 5. ^. 43. grounded on, and authorized by the Statutes of
25. H^^ry 8. c. 19.27. H^^^y S. c. 15. and. 3. and 4. Edward 6. c. 11. which
proscribos this rule in (...). In divinis (...) recitandis and Psalmis (...),
ministri and clerici diligent^r Do c^gitare ^ebent, non solum ^se Doum la^dari
oportere, sed alios etiam hortatu and exemplo and observatione illorum, ad
cundem cultu^ adducendos esse. Qua propter partite voces and distinct
pronuncient, and cantus sit illorum clarus and aptus, ut ad auditorum omnis
fensum, and intelligentiam perveniant. Itaque vibratam i^am and operosam
musicani, quae figurata dicitur, auferri placet, quae sic in multitudinis
auribus tumultuatur, ut saepe linguam non possit ipsam loquent^m intelligere.
(See Q. Eliz. Injunctions. Injunct. 49, accordingly.) Which kind of quaint and
delicate Church-musicke is largely censured, by Hugo Parisiensis. lib. 2. de
Claustro Animae, by Vincentius Beluacensis. Speculum Histor. lib. 27 c. 45. by
John Bale his Image of both Churches, on Rev. c. 18 sect. 10.11 by William
Wraghton his Hunting and Rescuer of the Romish Fox. fol. 12.59, 125, 126. by
Gualtherus Haddon Contr. Osorium lib. 3. fol. 263.264. and M. Northbrooke
against Dice-play. fol. 40.41. Music, when, why, and by whom brought into the
Church. p. 277. to 288.
N
Name of God not to be used in Plays, in which it is often profaned. page 108.
to 112. Names of Idols not to be named, invocated, etc. by Christians. p.
32.33, 36, 77, 78. to 88.584, 891, 926. Naked Harlots not to be looked on. page
406. dancing naked censured. p. 246. 251. See Lampridij Commodus. p. 90. Nero
censured, and his death conspired for his singing, acting, dancing, and
Masquing on the Stage. p^ 451.465. fol. 517.555. page 707.736, 737, 843, 849.
to 853. Suppressed Plays and Players. p. 460.516.517, 714. Nerva prohibited
Sword-playes. page 75. 468. New-yeeres gifts, and the observation of New-yeeres
day, condemned as a Pagan custom, by Councels, Fathers, and others. page 20.
36, 197, 198, 429, 430, 580, 581, 583, 755, 756, 757, 781. Spent in
Stage Plays, Mummeri^s and dances by Pagans. Ibidem. a public fast enjoined
on it to bewail the abominations thereon committed by Pagans. Ibidem. Night,
not to be spent in Plays, in Dancing, Masks, and such disorders, but in
sleep, in prayer, in devotion: night disorders censured. p. 255.360, 645, 646,
746, 747, 754, 755, 848, 849, 946, 429. Nilus his censure of Plays. page
349.385, 682. Non-residency censured by 55. several Councels. p 623.624. by
sundry Canonical Decrees and Canonists. Ibid. See the Canonists in their
^itles, De Clericis Nonresidentibus. and My Anti-Arminianisine. Tit. Bisho^s in
the Table, together with M. Whetenhall his Discourse of the Abuses now in
question in the Churches of Christ. p. 170 182.192, 202, 203, 206, 208. D.
Tailor his Commentary upon Titus. c. 3. verse, 12. p. 726^ to 730. Doctor Wille^
on the 1 Samuel cap. 14 28. Master Robert Bolton, of True Happiness. page 111.
Master William Attersoll on Philemon. Master Jeremy Dike his Cav^at to
Archippus on Col. 4.17. London 1619. of late: Bishop Hooper on the 8.
Commandment, his first Sermon upon Jonas. fol. 22. Sermon 3. fol. 69.70.
Sermon 5. fol 112.119, Bishop Latymer his 4. Sermon of the Plough. Master
William Tyndall in his Works. London 1573. page 20.102, 135, 136, 267, 289,
360, 373. Master Roger Hutchinson in his Image of God, 1550. Epistle Dedicatory
to Archbishop Cranmer, and f. 76.77, 86, 87, 173, 174, 175. and his 1. Sermon
of the Lords Supper. 1552. Reformatiolegum Ecclesiasticarum fol. 31. cap.
12.14.15. Bernard Gilpin his Sermon before King Edward 1552. p. 8. to 26. See
in Ezechiell Woodward, his Dowayes Dross, Epistle to his revolted Countrymen,
a story of Gilpin against Non-residency. Haddon Contr. Osorium. l. 3. f. 297.
The ship of Fools. p. 58.59, 60. Thomas Beacon his Preface to his Works, to
the Archbishops and Bishops of England, and his Catechism. f. 361. ^ulielmus
Peraldus Summa Virtutum and Vitioru^. Tom. 2. Avaritia^ p. 58.59, 60. Petrus
Binsfeldius de Iustitia and Injustitia Clericorum in Ordine ad Beneficia. c. 3.
in his Enchiridion Theologiae. 1609. page 489. to 506. Summa Angelica Clericus
7. Ambrose Sermon. 7. and 9. Tom. 5. p. 5. and 6. G. H. Hierom. Epist. 1. c 7.8.
Epist. 3. c. 5. Epist. 4. c. 1. Epist. 83. c. 2. Prosper de Vita Contempl. l.
1. c. 13. to 35. Augustinus de Pastoribus. lib. Tom. 9. Chrysostom. de
Sacerdotio. lib. 6. Tom. 5. Operum^ Greg. Magnus Pastoraliu^. lib. and Hom. 47.
in Evangelia. Bernard. Hom. 77. Super Cant. De Consideratione. l. 2. c. 4.
Declamationes, and ad Pastores. Sermo. Hildebertus. Epist. 46. Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 12. pars 1. p. 328. Hinc mari Rhemensis. Epi^t. 14. Bibl. Patrum Tom 9.
pars 2. p. 47. Pe^rus Blesensis. Epist. 148. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 12. pars 2. p.
824. Athanasius Constanti^nsis, De Necess^ria Episc. Residentia. Epist. 8.
Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. page 486^ to 492. Cyprian Epist. l. 1. Epist. 2. 3^ 9.
and l. 3. Epist. 15. BB. Jewel on the Thesa^onians. p 406.407. with sundry
other Commentators on the 8. Commandment, on Ezech. 34.2. to 18.22, 23^ c.
44.8. Ier 23.1. to 5. c. 3.15. c. 6.3. c. 31.10 cap. 50.6, 7. Zech. 11.4, 5, 7,
8, 15. M^l 2.6, 7, 8. Prove. 27.23. Isay 40.11. c. 54, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ps. 78.71,
72. Genesis 31.38, 39, 40. 1 Samuel 17.28, 34, 35. Luke 2.8. Ioh. 10.3. to 14. c.
21.15, 16, 17. Acts 20.18, 20, 28. cap. 15.35, 36. Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 9.7, 9,
11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 27. 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. Phil. 2.20, 21, 26,
30. Col. 4.17. 1 These. 2.7, 8, 9. c. 5.12. 2 These. 3.10, 11. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 5.
c. 4.6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. c. 5.17, 18. c. 6.17. 2 Timothy 1.6, 11. c. 2.1, 2, 4,
14, 24, 25. cap. 3.16, 17. c. 4.1, 2, 5, 7, 17. Titus 1.5, 9. c. 2, ^. to the
end. c. 3.1. to 12. Heb. 10.24, 25. c. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. c. 5.1, 2, 3.
2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. Jude 3.5. all which condemn Non-residency, and
Non-residents, who act their parts in Hell. page 13. and go to Heaven by their
Curates, to Hell by themselves. page 88. For preaching and feeding of their
flocks with care and conscience being a personal duty imposed on them by God
himself, as the very essence of their function, they can no more discharge it
by a Substitute, then themselves or Laymen can receive the Sacrament, pray,
hear, read the Word, or serve God by a Deputy, neglecting all these duties
themselves. And if cures may be well discharged by a poor stipendiary Curate,
I see no reason but Lay-patrons (as some Ecclesiastical do) may keep their
Livings in their own hands when they fall, so as they procure a sufficient
Clergie-man to discharge the cure, which they may do perchance with the tenth
part of the profits: which some Non-residents think too much for a laborious
learned Curate who takes all the toil, when as two or three good Livings is
not sufficient for themselves, who take no pains at all, or very little.
Certainly if 10. or 20. or 30. pounds a year be a sufficient stipend for an
able painful Substitute, (perchance a man of more worth, more learning, and
of a greater charge then his Master Non-resident) it must needs be a more then
sufficient competency for the negligent Encu^bent, who transcends not his
Curate, either in function, or desert, but only in sloth, in pride, and
idleness. I shall therefore desire all such Non-residents and Pluralists who
feed their flocks by Substitutes, to consider the words of Guli. Peraldus
Summa Virtutu^ ac Vitioru^. Tom. 2. Tit. Avaritia f. 59.60. (a most excellent
discourse against Pluralists,) where thus he writes. Contra illos vero qui
credunt se posse habere plura talia beneficia, quia vicarios ponunt. Primo
dicimus, quod eadem ratione Lai^cus unus, immo etiam mulier posset habere dece^
beneficia ecclesiastica: posset enim ponere vicarios. Praeterea, ridiculum est
matrimonium contrahere spe ponendi vicarium; and qui hoc facit, videtur
incidisse in illam maledictionem. Deutronomij 18. Vxorem habebit and alius
dormiet cum ea. Tertio, quaerimus de Vicario eo, utrum ^it Pastor vel
mercenarius? Si mercenarius est, latro est, sicut prius ostensum est. Quum ergo
dicit aliquis, Been possum habere hoc beneficium, quia ponam ibi vicarium,
paene idem est ac si dicat; Been possum illud habere, quia ponam ibi Latronem,
qui furetur, and mactet, and perdat; Ioannis 10^ Si vero Pastor est, quae ratio
est ut tu habeas duas Ecclesias, ipse vero nullam? Nunquid dicet tibi Ioannes,
id est gratia Dei, vel in quo est gratia Dei; Non licet tibi habere uxorem
fratris tui? Quarto quaerimus a tali, utrum vicarius ille ^it minus bonus, vel
aeque bonus, vel melior quam ipse? Si minus bonus, tunc naturalis ratio dictat,
quod non est recipiendus pro eo. Operarius n^ in vineam alicujus conductus, non
potest vicarium minus bonum pon^re. Si vero aeque bonus est vel melior, quae
causa est, quod iste habeat duo beneficia, and ille nullum? Quinto, quod ipse
deberet attendere quid acciderit de primo vicario Synagogae. Sic enim legitur
Exodi. 32. Moses relinquens populum, satis parvam moram facturus cum Domino,
dimisit vicarium satis bonum Aaron, and tamen in reditu populum quem reliquerat
fidelem, infidelem and idololatram invenit. Praeterea dixit Apostolus, quod si
quis non laborat, non manducet. Quo jure igitur pascitur aliquis de beneficio
illo ubi ipse non laborat? Ordinavit Deus, ut qui seminat spiritualia, metat
carnalia. Qua ratione ergo pauper vicarius spiritualia seminabit, and alius
carnalia metet? Et quum Dominus dicat; Quos Deus conjunxit homo non separet:
quo jure denarius ille quem subditus offert vicario pauperi sibi spiritualia
seminanti, accipietur a patrono male vivente? Et si quo ad forum contensiosum
jus ibi^ videatur habere: tamen quoad judicium sac^ae Scripturae ipse raptor
est, usurpans sibi alterum eorum quae a Deo conjuncta sunt sine reliquo; id est
mercedem sine Iabore: immo etiam homicida reputatur, and respectu mercenarij
quem defraudat, and respectu pauperum subditorum quorum sudorem comedit. De
primo legitur. Ecclesiast. 33. Qui effundit sanguinem, and qui fraudem facit
mercenario, fratres sunt. De secundo ^egitur ibidem. Qui aufert in sudore panem
quasi qui occidit proximum suum. Vltimo dicemus, quod illi qui vicarium ponunt,
qui sola cupiditate lucri serviunt, and non amore Dei, talem amorem faciunt
matri suae ecclesiae qualem amorem aliquis faceret matri suae carnali, si pedem
verum ei auferret, and loco ejus pedem ligneum sub^^itueret. Pes ligneus non
vivit neque corpori adhaeret. Si^ vicarius qui charitatem non habet non est
membrum vivum vita spirituali, nec adhaeret corpori ecclesiae. Sola n.
charitate vivit quis, and adhaeret caeteris membris Ecclesiae. See much more to
this p^rpose in that pithy^ Discourse. Nonnes, many of them notorious Whores,
and Bawdes; who have clad themselves in man's apparel, shorn their hair, and
entered into religion in Mon^staries as Monks, to satiate these their holy
Votaries lusts. page 184.185, 201, 202, 203, 204, 879.880, 881, 885. See
William Wraghton his Hunting of the Romish Fox. fol. 24. and John Bale his Acts
of English Votaries. Cambdeni Britta. Gloucestershire, Barkly Castle. Their
hair shaven off when they enter into Orders. page 201.202, 203, 204. Yet
Ioannes de Wankel. Clementinarum Constit. Tit. de Statu Monachorum. f. 64.
propounds this question. An moniales possint nutrire comam, aut debeant sibi
crines praescindere? and Hostiensis Sum. lib. 1. Tit. de Tempore ordinationis,
etc. concludes: Quod mulieribus ordines non sunt conferendi, quia nec tonsurari
debent, nec mulieris coma amputanda est: quoting Gratian Distinct. 30. to
warrant it. See Summa Angelica. Faemina. sect. 1. and Sum, Rosella. Faemina. 2.
accordingly. Master Northbrooke his Treatise against, and censure of Dancing,
Dicing, Stage Plays, and Actors. p. 485.698.626. m. ^227.
O
Oaths of the Gentiles, or by Pagan-Idols unlawful. page 21.22, 81. to 89.
fol. 551. Objections in defense of Stage Plays, of acting, penning, and
beholding them, answered. page 34. to 42.96. to 106.124. to 127.721. to
828.913. to 975. in defense of lascivious mixed Dancing, answered p. 252. to
257. Obscenity and scurrility condemned; which abound in Stage^playes^ p. 62.
to 72.160. to 168.262, 264, 265, 382, 385, 423, 914. to 930.593, 594. Occasions
of sin to be eschued. page 423.424, 911. Ochin his Tragedy of Free Will. p.
834. Odo Parisiensis, his Decretals against Clergie-mens Dicing and resort to
Plays. page 654.655. Official, characterized. f. 537. See Vincentij Speculum.
Hist. lib. 29. cap. 128. Ofilius Hilarus the Player, his death. fol. 553. Olaus
Magnus his censure of Players, Iesters, Plays, lascivious Pictures, and such
who favor Players. p. 739.740. 741. Olympiodorus his censure of Plays and
Play-haunting. fol. 524. Operius Danus his wanton Books censured. p. 922.
Opmeerus his verdict of Stage Plays. page 481. Oratorie not helped or acquired
by acting Plays. p. 931. to 938. Organs by whom brought first into Churches.
p. 260.283, 285, 286, 287. See William Wraghton his Hunting of the Romish Fox,
and his Answer to the Rescuer. fol. 12.59, 125, 126. Origin his censure of
Altars and Images. p. 896.897. of Stage Plays, Actors, and Play-haunters. fol.
528. m. 330.331, 555, 669, 670. Orosius his doom of Stage Plays. p. 476. fol.
560. p. 682. Ortyges his effeminacy and death. page 882.883. Osorius his censure
of wanton Books and Poems. p. 916. m. Ovid his exile for his amorous Books.
page 369.921. See Thomas Beacon his Book of Matrimony. pars 4. fol 662. his
censure of Plays, Play Houses, Play-poets, and the resorters to them; and of
wanton Dancing, Songs and Music. p. 249.272, 288, 369, 370, 452, 453, 454,
921. his description of Pagan Feastivals. p. 233.753, 754. Oxford, the
Vniversiti^s Edict against Stage Plays. p. 490.491, 941, 942.
P
Pagans, the original inventors and frequenters of Stage Plays. page 16. to
40.731, 732. See Stage Plays: their customs and ceremonies to be avoided.
Ibidem. and p. 236.545, 546, 552, 555, 561, 575, 578, 580. to 588.650, 651,
652, 658, 730. to 734.743. to 781. Sparsim. No paternes for Christians, who
must excel them. p. 96. to 100.111. to 228.730. to 734. Some inventions of
theirs lawful, others not. p. 18. to 29. Their virtues counterfeit, and
shining sins. page 96. to 100. spent their Feastivals and honored their Idols
with Plays and Dances. See Dances, Feastivals and Idols. Many, yea all the best
of them condemned Stage Plays, and made Players infamous. See Players and
Stage Plays. Paganism, men prone unto it. page 27.28. Rich. Panpolitanus his
censure of Plays and Play-haunters. p. 690. Papists much addicted to Plays,
many of our Players being such. p. 12.142, 560. to 568. Sparsim. 762. to 766.
Act the passion and story of our Savior, the Legends of their Saints, etc.
both on the Stage and in Churches, which many of them condemn: many of their
Priests Players. p. 108. to 119.580. to 668. Sparsim. 762. to 766.9^9, 999,
1000. See Popes, Monks, Nons. Parents ought not to train up or encourage
their children to act, to dance, or behold Stage Plays: See Acting and
Dancing. and page 335.336, 339, 340, 342, 343, 350, 3^3, 364, 306, 367, 369,
370, 373, 37^, 391, 392, 437, 439, 441, 44^, 447, to 491. Sparsim. 574.999 to
1005. S. Paul his Constitu^ions against Plays and Players. p. 550.55^, 652.
would not have a lodging in Rome near the Playhouse, and why. fol. 545. See
HRabanus Maurus. Comment. in Epist. Pauli. lib. 26. Operum. Tom. 5. page 537.
D. Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 19. De Religiosorum Domibus. cap. 149. fol.
268. Hierom. Comment. in Philemon. Tom. 6. page 216. E. Iacobus Pamelius
Comment. in Epist. Pauli ad Philem. apud HRabanum Maurum. Operum. Tom. 5. p.
166. G. and most ancient many modern Protestant and Popish Authors on the
Epistle to Philemon, accordingly. Paul's Church in London originally consecrated
to Diana. p. 38. Peace becomes Christians who must be peaceable. p. 73.74,
120. Pericles his grave saying. p. 921. Petrarcha his censure of Plays and
Dancing. p. 237.238, 355, 356, 357. Philipides the ^omedian his sudden death.
fol. 553. Philip Augustus, his dislike and censure of Plays and Players. p.
471.484, 715. Philip of Mac^don, slain at a Play. f. 554. censured for acting
and dancing. page 857. Philo Iudaeus, his praise. p. 554.668. his censure of
Stage Plays, Dancing, men's putting on of women's apparel, and wearing
Periwigs, or long effeminate frizled hair. p. 168.186, 209. m. 222.307, 308,
554, 637. m. 668.669. of Images in Churches. page 895. m. of the Vizards and
Histories of Pagan-Idols. page 79^ 89, 901^ of luxurious Feasts. p. 554.754,
755. his opinion how the Sabbath should be sanctified. p. 554. m. Pictures
amorous and lascivious, provocations unto lust and lewdness, condemned. page
94.367, 387, 586, 740, 741, 329, 338, 865, 866. Pilades the Player whipped. p.
460. Plag^es occasioned by Stage Plays. fol. 559.566, 561. All the Roman
Actors consumed by a plague. Ibidem. The Romans used Plays to assuage the
p^stilence that was in Rome. Ibidem. and p. 18.28, 29. Plato his censure of
lascivious Songs and Music, Play-poets, Players, and Plays. p. 264.288, 368,
448, 703, 918, 839, 480. Plautus his misery. f. 553. Play-bookes: See Books.
Players, infamous, both among Christians and Pagans, excommunicated the Church,
debarred from the Sacraments, incapable of Orders, of giving testimony, of
bearing any public office, of inheriting lands: disfranchised their tribes,
rogues by Statute, and subject to the whipping-post, p. 46. m. 133.134, 137,
140, 193, 341, 362, 429, 455, 456, 460, 468, 481, 482, 495, 496. fol. 527.528,
560, 561, 567, 571. to 587.617, 618, 626, 637, 649, ^52, 654, 691, 699, 735. to
741.^43. to 870.904, 905, 910, 998, 999. Renounced their profession before they
could be admitted into the Primitive Church. Ibidem. Many of them Papists and
most desperate wicked wretches. p. 100.125, 132. to 143.388, 728, 907, 908,
909, 998. The giving of money to them, a grand sin, yea a sacrificing unto
Devils. page 46.324, ^25, 326, 472, 688, 739, 904, 905, 906. Their gains,
theft, and ought to be restored. Ibidem. Professed agents and instruments of
the Devil, the pests of the Commonweal, the corrupters and destroyers of
youth. p. 92.472, 133. to 143.330. to 355.447. to 501. Sparsim. 842. to 911.
Sparsim. 980. to 986.^002, 1003, 1004. Hypocrites: See that Title. Can hardly
be saved without repentance and giving over their ungodly trade. Ibidem. and p.
45.46. fol. 521. to 547.565, 566, 567, 842. to 911. Play-haunters, the worst
and lewdest persons, for the most part. p. 100.104, 143. to 155.388, 389, 415,
416, 451, 476, 505, 514, 711, 71^, 719, 720, 730, 797 788, 798, etc. See
Whores: excommunicated in the Primitive Church. page 392.393, 527, 528. Unfit
to hear Gods Word, or to receive the Sacrament. p. 392. to 396. 399, 400, 401,
425, 426, 430, 431, 432. f. 521. to 550, 988, 989. Their minds and manners
corrupted by Plays, and themselves made guilty of many sins. Ibid. See p. 302.
to 368.910, 911, 912, 913, 943. to 975. Judgments o^ God upon Play-haunters.
f. 555. to 563, 850, 851. Play-haunting unlawful. p. 72. to f. 832.911, 912,
913. Objections in defense of it answered. p. 943. to 960. Play Houses styled
by the Fathers, and others, the Devils temples, chapels, synagogues; the
chair of pestilence, the dens of lewdness and filthiness; the schools of
bawdery and uncleanesse; the Stews of shame and modesty; the shops of Satan:
the plagues, the poisons of men's souls; a Babilonish Brothell, etc. p. 10.11,
49, 50, 52, 67, 68, 69, 101, 102, 144, 145, 163, 172, 329, 330, 337 341, 349,
369, 370, 374, 386, 389, 390, 418, 431, 440, 441, 446, 472, 474, 488, 489, 580.
f. 513.560. Public Stews and common Receptacles of whores in former times and
now to. p. 144.145, 380, 389, 390, 331, 332, 333 349, to 369.370, 391, 419. to
448. 524, 452, 453, 498, 662, 1005. See Whores and Stews. Always full of
devils, who claim them as their own. p. 11. 51, 52, 143.404, 431, 483. f.
510.523, 524, 556. p. 766. Not to be tolerated, and why. page 369.370, 404,
415, 416, 422, 427, 428, 431, 447. to 501. Sparsim. 1002.1003.1004. Play-poems
recited, not acted in former times. p. 834.835. Play-poets, examples of Gods
Judgments on the chiefest of them. fol. 552.553. Their profession and the
penning of Plays, for Play Houses, unlawful p. 448.831. to 843. the
Objections in defense of them answered. p. 913. to 943. Examples of diverse
Play-poets who have repented, bewailed with much grief and many tears their
penning of Plays, and written against it too^ page 138.360, 436, 437, 438,
440, 486. fol. 542.545, 566, 568, 837, 840, 910, 917, 918, 922. Pleasures: See
worldly. Pliny his censure of Plays and Actors. p. 450.451.462, 463, 703.
Plutarch his censure of Plays, Players, and Play-poets. p. 321.449, 706.
Po^try, lawful and commendable. p. 882. to 830. Obscene Poets, Poems, most
pernicious and unlawful. p. 385.835. to 843.913. to 930. See Books. Poe^s,
banished by Plato. p. 449 918^ the chi^fe fomenters of Paganism p. 78.80. The
greatest Panders. p. 385.915, 916, 919^ to 925. Policarpus his censure of
Marcion^ p. 194. Polydor Virgil his censure of eff^minate wanton
Church-musicke, p. 283.^84. of Dancing, Stage Plays, and Mummers. p. 226.117,
494, 692. Pom^a, what it signifies. p. 565.566. Pompes of the Devil which we
renounce in baptism, are Stage Plays and Dancing. See Baptism, Dancing,
Devil. Poor prejudiced by Stage Plays. page 45.311, 325, 471, 472, 481, 718.
ought not to wander abroad. Ibidem. Pope Boniface the 8. his Secular
Enterludes. p. 760 763. Pope Clement the 1. his censure of Plays, Players,
Dances, etc. See Clemens Romanus. Pope Clement the 5. his prohibition of Nons
to behold Plays or Dances. page 654. Pope Eugenius his Decree against
Enterludes and Plays on the Lords Day. p 913. Pope Eusebius his Decre^all
against Clergie-mens resort to Plays, etc. p. 652.653. Pope Gregory the first
his censu^e of Plays and Players. p. ^83.846. against Bishops reading of Pagan
Authors. p. 78.915, 916. turned Pagan Festivals into Christian. p. 759 760.
Pope Innocent the 1. his censure of Plays. p. 655.656. See Iuo Carnotensis
Decret. pars 6. c. 349, and pars 11. c. 78. Pope Innocent the 3. his censure of
Plays. p. 684.685. Pope Ione, an infamous Strumpet, who cut her hair and
clothed her self in man's apparel. p. 185 879. Pope Leo the 1. his censure of
Playes^ ^ 533. p. 682. Pope Leo the 10. reputed the History of Christ a mere
fable. p. 117. Pope Nicholas the 5. his S^cular Plays. f. 559. p. 763. Pope
Pius the 2. See AEneas Sylvius. Pope Pius the fifth, his Decretall against
Clergie-mens Dancing, Dicing, or resorting to Plays, etc. page 654. Sextus his
Decretals against acting and jesting Clergymen. Pope Sixtus the fourth,
erected a male and female Stews, out of which he and his Successors reserved
an annual R^venue. p. 215.445.446. Popes, Popish Priests, Prelates, Monks,
etc. great Sodomites, Adulteres, Epicures, etc. p. 213.214, 215, 445, 456, 879,
880 881. The chief fautors and bringers in of Stage Plays, Christmas
disorders, and Pagan customs into the Church, yea oft-times Actors and
Spectators of Stage Plays. p. 108. to 119.580. to 666. Sparsim. 754. to 767
929. Popish Saints what they are, and how honored. p. 116, 117, 118. Porpherya
Player, his strange conversion. p. 118.119. Processions, their reason and
abuses, page 115.116. Prodigality a great sin occasioned by Plays. p.
157.310. to 327.47^.472, 708, 709, 710, 416, 429, 481, 512, 857, 1004.
Propertius his censure of Plays and Play Houses. p. 455. Prosper Aquitanicus
his censure of Playes^ p. 349.682. his opinion for plain and profitable
preaching. p. 937.938. Prudentius his censure of Plays. p. 680.720. fol. 561.
Psalms ought to be sung at Christian Feasts, not filthy songs. page 48.264,
554, 555, 766. to 780.642. m. Ptolomie censured for dancing, playing, and
acting. p. 710. Puel de Dieu, her mannish practice and execution. p. 185.284,
285. Puritans; condemners of Stage Plays and other corruptions styled so^ p.
3.4, 5^567, 568, 569, 797. to 828.1005. The very best and holiest Christians
called so, even for their grace and goodness. Ibidem. and fol. 542. Christ.
his Prophets, Apostles, the Fathers, and Primitive Christians, Puritans as men
now judge. p. 797. to 828. hated, and condemned only for their grace yea
holiness of life. Ibidem. accused of hypocrisy and sedition, and why so. page
816. to 828. Puritan, an honorable nickname of christianity and grace. p. 827.
Q
Quarrels and tumults occasioned by Stage Plays. p. 516.517, 518. Quiroga his
Index Expurgatorius expunging a passage of Lodovicus Vives against Popish
Enterludes. p. 115. Quintilian his censure of Plays, etc. page 705 706, 966 m.
of the ill education of youth. Ibidem. of Seneca. p. 842. against childrens or
men's acting of Plays to make them Orators. p. 933.
R
HRabanus Maurus his censure of Players, Plays, Dancing, New-yeeres gifts,
Health-drinking, and acting in women's apparel. p. 198. fol. 524. p. 562. 683,
756, 780. m. his judgment of the beginning and sanctifying of the Lords Day.
p. 645. m. D. Rainolds his Overthrow and censure of Stage Plays both popular
and academicall; of Dancing, and men's acting in women's apparel. p. 198.199,
227, 309, 320, 358, 487, 698, 887. of Images in Churches. page 900.903.
Vindicated against a late Opposer. p. 671. to 680. Rare things most admired. p.
742.743. Railing and Satyrs, especially against goodness, and good men,
frequent in Stage Plays. p. 120. to 127.814, 815. condemned. Ibidem. Raymundi
Summula its praise of the Scripture. page 927. against giving to Players. p.
873. Reading: See Books and Scriptures: Some things lawful to be read, and
yet unlawful to be penned or acted. p 928. to 931. Recreations, when, why, and
how to be used, what circumstances requisite to make them lawful. p. 945. to
948. See Master Bolton his general Directions for our walking with God. p. 154
to 181. Great variety of honest Recreations besides Stage Plays. p.
40.417.965. to 970. Repetition of Sermons commended, commanded by Scriptures
and Fathers p. 432.800, 801. See Chrysostom. Hom. 20^ in Ep^es. 5. Tom. 4 Col.
1010. C. Sint praeces vobis communes; unusquisque ea^ ad ecclesiam, and eorum
quae illic dicuntur and leguntur, and maritus ab vxore partem domi exigat, and
illa a marito. Si sanctum quemquam inveneris qui possit domu^ vestrae
benedicere, and pedum ingressu valeat universam infer Dei benedictionem, ^um
voca: Thus he See 1 Cor. 14.35. Domi inquit, a suis maritis discant. Hoc autem
and illas ornatas reddit, and viros attentiores facit, ut qui debeant, quae in
Ecclesia audiverunt, uxoribus ea interrogantibus recitare, ac veluti apud eas
deponere. Theophylact. Enar. in 1 Cor. 14. page 427. See Primasius in 1 Cor.
14. and most modern Protestant Commentators, accordingly. Reprehention of
sins and vices, how, when, where, and by whom to be made. p. 124. to 127.
not to be done by Players. Ibidem. R^publike, much prejudiced by Plays and
Actors, which ought not to be tolerated in it. p. 45.445. to 501 997. to 1006.
Restitution, to be made by Players and Gamesters p. 46.906. Romans, anc^ently
condemned, suppressed^ Plays and Theaters, and made Players infamous. p.
456.714, 843, 844, 737, 998, 9^9. Rome Christian, the same with Pagan. p. 757.
to 765. Its beastines. p. 215.767. Roscius the Actor his skill. p. 932. Tull^
his censure of his acting. p. 848. f. 525. Ruscians much given to Dancing. p.
602^ 603.
S
Sabb^th: See Lords Day: examples of Gods vengeance upon the prophaners of it.
f. 556.557. Sabine Virgi^s ravished at a Play. page 30.452, 453. Salust, his
censure of Plays and Dancing^ p. 245.704^ Salvian his censure of Stage plays:
Epistle to the Reader. p. 51.52, 105, 313, 314, 351, 352, 477. f. 525.526, 527.
p. 682. Samians taxed for their effeminacy and long count hair. p. 883. John
Saresberi^ against lascivious Music, Plays, Players, and Dice-play. p
281.282, 318, 350, 351, 684. Saturnalia, when and how celebrated. p. 751. to
766. the ground and pattern of disorderly Christmasses. Ibidem. Scipio
Africanus, his censure of Dancing. p. 245.246. Scipio Nassica, his censure, his
suppression of Plays and Theaters. p. 458.475, 561, 714. Scriptures against
Dancing. p. 228. Pagan customs, and names of Pagan-Idols. p. 18.19, 77.
Stage Plays. p. 545. to 551.723, 724. against effeminacy, adultery,
fornication, idleness, prodigality, drunkenness, men's long hair, women's
curling and cutting their hair, men's acting in women's apparel, lasciviou^
attire, fashions, apparel: lying, hypocrisy, vanity, etc. See ^hese Titles:
Ought diligently to be read, as well of Laymen as Clergymen. Epist. Ded. 2.
f. 521. page 585.586, 913. to 940.591.760, 772. To be read at meals at Bishops
and Ministers Tables. p. 591.653, 769, 772, 773. Not to be abused or used in
Stage Plays, Jests, Libels, etc. f. 405. p. 110. to 116.929. f. 553.763, 764,
765. Their excellency and all sufficiency. p 927.928. Sedition, occasioned by
Stage Plays. page 136. fol. 516.517, 518. Christ, his Prophets, Apostles, and
Christians in all ages accused of it, though most unjustly. p. 821. to 8^8. See
5. R. 2. c. 5.2. H. 4. c. 15.2. H. 5. c. 7.1. and 2. Phil. Mary. c. 6. Haddon
Contr. Osorium. l. 2. f. 212. where we shall find Witcliffe, Luther, and the
ancient English Protestants, whom they nicknamed La^lards, accused of Sedition.
Occasioned for want of preaching, not by preaching. f. 531. Semproni^ taxed for
her dancing p. 245. Sempronius Sophus divorced his wife for resorting to Plays
without his leave. p. 39^.662. Seneca his censure of Stage Plays. p. ^68.369,
449, 4^7, 484, 703. of dancing, lascivious songs and music, of men's comp^
long frizled hair. p. 24^.249. of men's putting on women's apparel. p. 199. of
night disorders. p. 746.747. m. of the ancie^^ S^turnalia^ p. 752.7^3. of
making Gods Image. p. 895. m. Sermons twice every Lord's Day and solemn
Holi-day enjoined by BB. Hooper, Martyn ^ucer, a Popish Council. f. 531. p.
629. and by 5^ and 6. E. 6. c. ^.3. ^. Eliz. c. 2.25. ^liz. cap. 3.1 Ia^. c. 4.
which join divine Service and Sermons together on Sundays and Holi-dayes,
because on such days one of them should be as frequent as the other, and men
ought to hear them both alike, See 5. ^. 2. c. 5. Ought to be plain, edifying,
not fraughtwith Poets, Histories, flashes of wit, etc. but with Scripture proof
and phrases. p. 935. to 939. Godfathers enjoined by our Church to call upon
their God^children to hear Sermons. fol. 530. Shaving of Priests crowns and
beards in use with Papists, an Heathenish custom. p. 23.24. Shaving and
polling of Nonnes, censured. p. 202. to 205. Socrat^s traduced in Plays. page
121. his censure of Plays. p. 450. Sodoms Theaters and punish^ent. f. 561.
Sodomie occasioned by acting in women's apparel, by wearing long count hair
and Love-lockes. p. 208. to 214.882, 884, 885, 1001, 10^5. Players, Play-poets
guilty of it. page 125.211. Popes, Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks addicted to
it. page 213.445, 446, 881, 767, 100^, 1005. See Balaeus O^nt. Script. Brit.
page 665. Many Nations, and man's nature prone unto it. page 20^. to 214.1001,
1005. An execrable sin, styled abomination in Scripture. p. 208.212. Capital
by our English Laws. p. 214. Sodomites u^ually clad their Ganymedes in women's
apparel, caused them to nourish, to frizle their hai^e, to wear Periwigs and
Love-lockes page 208. to 214. and 882. to 890. Solon his censure of
Stage Plays. p. 449.484, 516, 838, 839. Songs lascivious and ribaldrous
frequent in Stage-playes^ condemned. p 261. to 274.412, 413, 420, 435, 518,
572, 578, 579, 588, 606, 610, 611, 613, 771, 774, 532. See Vi^c^n^ij Speculum.
Histor. lib. 29. cap. 144. and Agripp^ De Vanitate Scien^. cap. 64. Sop^oc^es
the Tragedian his death. f. 553. Spoctacl^s of Christians, what^ Epist. Ded. 2.
page 245. to 249.971. to 975. Speeches of Christians ought to be gracious and
profitable. fol. 521.528, 529, 6^, 128.924. Spells unlawful. page 21.583.
Stage Plays: condemned by Scripture. p. 545. to 551.7^3. to 727. By the whole
Church of God both under the Law and Gospel. p. 551. to 570. By 55.
oecumenicall, National, Provincial Synodes, Councels, the Apostles Canons,
sundry Imperial, Canonical Constitutions. p. 570. to 668. By 71. Fahers and
ancient Christian Writers from our Saviors Nativity, till An. 1200 p. 668. to
688^329. to 354.392. to 434.47^. to 478. f. 522. to 528. By above ^50. modern
Christian Writers from An. 1200. to 1632. p. 688. to 702. page 68.69, 355. to
366.434. to 445.485. to 488. By 40. Heathen Authors. p. 702. to 713.365, to
361^447. to 467. By diverse Pagan and Christian Nations, Republikes, Emperors,
Magistrates, Kings, etc. both ancient and modern. p. 455. to 472.713. to 718.
and 137.138.847. to 862. By our own English Statutes, Princes, Magistrates,
Universities, Writers, Divines. p. 68.69, 357. to 434.485. to 499.698, 699,
700, 715, 716, 919. to 923. Proved unlawful in sundry respects. First, of their
inventors which were Devils, Pagans. p. 9. to 48 96. See Devils, Pagans.
Secondly, of the ends for which they were inve^ted, to wit, the solemn worship
and honor of Devil-Idols, on whose Festivals they were acted, or other
unlawful ends. p. 28. to 54. See Devils. Thirdly, of their subject matter,
which is, first, amorous, obscene. p. 62. to 72.327. to 480. and 914. to 9^4.
Secondly, tragical, tyrannical. p. 72. to 75. Thirdly, Heathenish, profane.
p. 75. to 106.176, 177. Fourthly, false, fabulous. p. 106. to 109. Fifthly,
sacrilegious, impious, blasphemous, abusing the Scripture, and our Saviors
Passion. p. 108. to 125.763. to 767.929, 999, 1000. See Christ. Sixthly,
Satyricall, invective, especially against religion and religious men. p. 120.
to 127^ fol. 542.543, 8.4, 815. Hence the believing Jews and Christians. Hebr.
10.33. (and 1 Cor. 4.9.) are said (...), to be made a Play, a Spectacle, or
gazing stock, through reproaches and afflictions, or to be brought on a
public Stage and there derided, personated, traduced, as Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Primasius, Haymo, Anselme, Remigius, and most other interpret it: because
nothing was more usual in the idolatrous Gentiles Stage Plays, then to
personate jeare, and ^lander Christians (as now they do Puritans) on the
Stage^ See page 814.815. Seventhly, vain, unprofitable, bringing no glory to
God, or good to men. p. 38.43, 44, 127. to 132. Fourthly, in regard of their
Actors, Spectators, which are commonly lewd and wicked persons. p. 132. to
155^ f. 547. to 550. See Players, Play-haunters. Whores. Fifthly, in regard of
their manner of acting and those circumstances which attend it: as first,
hypocrisy and dissimulation. p. 156. to 161.876, 877. Secondly,
lasciviousness. p. 161. to 176. Thirdly, effeminacy. p. 167. to 173. f. 546.
p. 877. Fourthly, vanity, ridiculous folly. p. 173. to 175.877, 878. Fifthly,
lewd Diabolical sinful parts and pas^ages. p. 75. to 106.175. to 178.890,
904. Sixthly, men's acting in women's apparel. p. 178. to 216.879. to 894.
Seventhly, gaudy, lascivious, fantastique apparel, vizards, disguises. page
216. to 220.890. to 904. Eighthly, effeminate lascivious mixed dancing. p. 220.
to 261. See Dancing. Ninthly, amorous scurrilous Songs and Poems. p. 261. to
273. See Songs. Tenthly, effeminate lust-provoking Music. p. 273. to 290. See
Music. Eleventhly, profuse lascivious laughter and applauses. p. 290. to 302.
See Laughter, Applauses. Sixthly, in respect of those mischievous fruits that
issue from them: as first, mispence of time. p. 302. to 310.39, 45, 1002. See
Time. Secondly, prodigality and vain expense. p. 39.45, 302. to 312, 1004. See
Prodigal^ty. Thirdly, the inflammation and irritation of men's lusts. p. 327, to
446.1000.1002. Fourthly, much contemplative and actual adultery, whoredom,
uncleanes. p. 328. to 446.1002, 1003. See Adultery, Whores. Fifthly, a general
depravation of the Actors, the Spectators minds, manners, and the Republikes
hurt. p. 42.132, 140, 447. to 501. 734, 735, 740, 784, 795, 796. Sixthly, ^loath
and idleness. p. 501. to 508.709, 710, 1002, 1003, 1006. Seventhly, luxury,
drunkenness, and excess. p. 508. to 512. Eighthly, impudency and
shamelessness, even in sinful things. f. 512. to 516. Ninthly, cosinage,
fraud, theft. f. 515.516. Tenthly, cruelty, fierceness, quarrels, seditions,
murders. fol. 516. to 520. Eleventhly, unprofitable, vain, lewd discourses.
f. 520.521. Twelfely, indisposition to all holy duties; avocation from Gods
service: profanation of Lords-dayes and religious Festivals: contempt of Gods
Ordinances, Word^ Ministers; and the making of all Gods Ordinances ineffectuall
to men's souls. p. 393. to 404.407, 408, 431, 432. f. 521. to 54^.988, 989,
1004. Thirteenthly, an emnity against, and disesteeme of grace, of virtue, and
all religions men. f. 542.543. p. 120. to 127. p. 814.815. Fourteenthly,
inamoring men with sin, vanity, and indisposing them to repentance. f. 544.545.
Fifteenthly, effeminacy in words, apparel, hair, actions. p. 167. to 212. f.
546.547. p. 708.740. Sixteenthly, acquaintance with lewd companions. p. 131.
to 155. f. 547. to 550. Seventeenthly, Atheism, Paganism and gross Idolatry.
p. 75. to 106. fol. 550.551. Eighteenthly, the breach of all the 10.
Commandments. f. 551.522. Ninteenthly, the drawing down of Gods heavy
Judgments both upon their Penners, Actors, Spectators, with those Republikes
and Cities which suffer them. p. 484.485. and^ f. 552. to 565. Twentiethly,
eternal damnation of men's souls without sincere repentance. p. 45.46, 61.476.
f. 565, 566.567. and p. 910. See Players. Authorities against them. p^ 305 to
721. Sparsim. Objections in defense of them answered. p. 721. to 830. The
penning, acting, beholding of them prooved unlawful. p. 831. to 914.
Objections in defense of the penning, acting, seeing of them, answered. page
913. to 989. Stage Plays, the very pompes of the Devil which we renounce in
baptism. See Baptism, Devil, Pompes. Styled by the Fathers and others, The
seminaries of vice, of lewdness; the lectures of bawdery, the plagues, the
poison of men's souls, and minds: the grand empoysoners of all grace, all
goodness, the spectacles and food of Devils, etc. p. 2.10, 46, 47, 50, 67, 69,
329. to 590. Sparsim. f. 566 See Play Houses: unsufferable ^vi^s in any
Christian Church or State^ f. 330. to 501. Sparsim^ and 545. to 780. Devils and
Devill-Idols delighted with them, honored by them. See Dancing, Devils, Ido^s,
Festivals. Incorrigible mischiefs. p. 38. to 42. The Devil the only gainer
by them. p. 44. to 47. More obscene of latter then any in former times. page
38.39, 70, 132, 458. Rarely acted heretofore. page 742.743, 768. Academicall
Stage Plays censured. page 7.8, 490, 491, 700, 701, 841. to 867. Sparsim.
99^.999. Statius his censure of Achilles wearing of Women's apparel. p. 199.
Statutes against Players, Plays, and Dice-play. Epist. Ded. 1. page 109.495
496, 497, 715, 716. Stephanio the Pla^er whipped. p. 459. Stews erected by
Heliog^balus. p. 389. Suffered in Pagan Rome of old. p 767. Erected in
Antichristian Rome by Pope Sixtus the 4. and continued by his Successors, who
make a great revenue of them. p. 215.445, 446. Play Houses, Stews in former
times, if not now to. p. 144.145, 358, 359, 389, 390.446, 993. See Justin:
Autent. C^llat 5. Tit. 4. f. 46. Strabo the Geographer a Cappadocian borne; his
division of Cappadocia. page 678. Straton King of the Sydonians, censured for
his dancing, etc. p. 250.857. Master St^bs his censure of Dancing, Dicing,
May-poles, Wakes, Stage Plays, Epist. Ded 1. page 227.358, 435, 436, 698, 626^
m. 793.794, 795, 796. Guli. Stucki^s his censure of Dancing, Health-drinking
and Stage-^layes page 996 Sword-playes condemned, prohibited, suppressed by
Fathers, Emperors, and others. page 74.75, 347, 367, 368, 548, 685, 467, 468,
519. Sybarites their effeminacy and effeminate Pages who did wear long hair
and Love-lockes, censured. p. 883.209. m. Sylla his expense upon Actors. page
315.840.
T
Tables, and no Altars in the Primitive Church. p. 396.400, 408. See Altars and
Hooper. C. Tacitus his censure of Plays, of Players, of N^ro and others who
either acted or frequented Plays. page 368.451, 465, 705, 849, to 853.858,
859. Tamerlan his lewd-nesse. p. 387. Tapers on Altars and in Churches, derived
from the Pagans: censured. p. 22.23, 36, 758. Tatianus his censure of Plays
and Players. p. 334.669. Tecla censured for cutting her hair, and wearing man's
apparel. p. 879. Terence his death. f. 553. his Comedies censured, prohibited
to be read in Schools. p. 916.917. Terynthians, much accustomed to laughter.
etc. ^. 200. Tertullian his censure of, and Book against Stage Plays. page
49.162, 163, 330, 331, 472. fol. 522.523, 547, 557, ^69, 972, 973. against
acting in women's apparel. p. 187.888. against Images, Vizards and
Stage-disguises. p. 36. m. 60.89. m. 160.897. m. 901. his censure of
face-painting, lascivious apparel, false hair, wearing of Laurel crowns,
Bonefires, and disorderly Festivals^ page 20.160. m. 217.581. m. 745. m.
768.769, 770. m. Thales pressed to death at a Play. f. 557. Theater, not
always taken for a Playhouse, but sometimes for a place of public meeting
where Orations were made, and Malefactors executed. page 724. to 727. Theaters
overturned by tempests. f. 558.559. Theft, occasioned and taught by
Stage Plays and Dicing. Epist. Ded. 1. fol. 558.559. Money got by Dice-play,
unlawful games, or acting Stage Plays, theft. p. 325.326, 905.906.
Themistocles^ his law against Magistrates resort to Plays. p. 456.457.
Theodectes his punishment for inserting Scripture into his Plays. p. 110. fol.
553. Theodora censured for putting on man's apparel. p. 201.879. Theodoret his
censure of Plays and Players fol. 550, Theo^oricus ^is censure of Plays and
Players. p 470.471. fol. 517.518. Theodosius his inhib^tion of lascivious
Songs, of Stage Plays and Actors^ p. 263.264, 422, 423, 424.^68, 715.
Theophilact his censure of Plays, and dancing. page 224.228, 684. See his
Enar. in Act. 17. p. 804. Theophilus A^ti^^henus his cens^re of Pla^es and
Players. p. 334.557, 558, 669. Theopompus his divine punishment. p. 110.
Tiberius A^tinius a story of him. p. 11.12. Tiberius banished Players, and
suppressed Plays. p. 122 137, 460. f. 516.517. p. 708. his lewdness. p. 387.
Tibullus, not to be read. page 453.454, 916, 917. Time shrot, precious, and to
be redeemed. p. 48. m. 302.303, 310.346. consumed, misspent on Plays and
vanities. page 302. to 310.837.903, 946, 951. to 946.951.952, 953, 957, 958. f.
530. vacant times and hours how to be spent. p. 952. to 956. T^sta^us his
censure of Plays, and Players. p. 690.846, 847. Tragedies and bloody
Spectacles, censured p. 72 to 76. f. 516 to 520. Trajan his censure and
suppression of Plays and Players. p 462.463, 714. his abridgement of the
number of Holi-dayes. f. 539. Trebonius Rufinus banished Plays from Vienna. p.
458. Tully his censure of Dancing and Stage Plays. p. 246.247, 248, 449, 703.
his contesting with Roscius. p. 932. his censure of him. p. 848. Tumblers
censured. page 22. Turks, punish adultery with death. p. 382. may justly
censure Christians for their excess. p. 747.748. condemn idleness as a
mortal sin. p. 506.
V
Valens his Edict against Players and Plays. p. 468.843. Valentinian his Edict
against Sword-playes, Stage Plays, and Stage Players. p. 468.843, 844.
Valerian his censure of amorous Music, Songs, Plays. page 269.270, 276, 683.
Valerius Maximus his censure of Plays. p. 450.704, 732. Valesius a story of
him. page 11. Vanity and vain things to be avoided of Christians. p. 128.129,
173, 174. fol. 544.545. Stage Plays vanity, and vain delights. Ibidem. and p.
52.127. to 132.173. to 178. Venus the Patroness of Stage Plays. p. 168.386.
her effeminate Priests in women's attire and long hair. p. 194.204, 207, 885.
her sacrifices. Ibidem. Veronius Turinus his death. page 920. Virtue of
Heathens, no virtue, no pattern for Christians. page 96. to 100. God only can
teach it, not Plays or Players. p. 96. to 103.139. Vesta^l Virgins how
punished for fornication. p. 382. did cut their hair and consecrate it to
Lucina, from whence the polling of Popish Nonnes is derived. page 202.
Vestments of the Gentiles prohibited. page 22. Vices, acted in, and taught by
Stage-playes^ page 100, to 106.305. to 568. God only can teach men to hate
vice, not Stage Plays. p. 139.140. Vigils why appointed. p^ 642. See Gratian
Distinct^ 75. abolished. p. 754. m. 578. Vincentius Beluacensis censure of
Plays, and Dancing. p. 637. 688, 471, 472. Vitellius taxed for favoring
Players. p^g. 856. his law against Knights acting on a Stage. page 862. Lod.
Vives, his censure of Players, Plays, and Popish Enterludes. p. 103. m. 114.
115, 134. m. 691. Universities their censure of common Enterludes. p. 490.491,
941, 942. m. Volateranus his censure of Plays. p. 730. Vortiger his vices.
page 133.135. Vulgar, delighted with Plays. fol. 540. Vzza his death. page
943.944.
W
Wakes, derived from the ancient Vigils. p. 236.754. m. their hurt. fol. 516.
See M. Stubs his Anatomy. page 112.113. Waldens^s, their censure of Dancing,
Dicing, and Stage Plays. p. 228. to 233. 636. See Lydij Waldensia. Tom. 2. p.
358. and Andreas Frisiu^ de Republica ^me^danda. l. 1. cap. 23. f. 90. Of
Church-musicke, Altars, and Organs. p 285. m. Thomas Waldensis censure of
Stage Plays as the Devils pompes page 565.690. Paulus Wan his censure of
Plays, and Dancing, p. 691.258. m. Whipping-post, Players adjudged to it. page
413.459, 460, 847, 848, 849. Wh^redome occasioned by Stage^playes. p. 328. to
446. See Adultery. Wh^res harbored, prostituted in Play Houses. p 144.145, 349,
358, 389, 390, 391, 856. Usual resor^ers to Plays to Play Houses, whether few
women but known or suspected Harlots, and Adulteres^es re^ort. page 144. 145,
146, 349, 361, 362, 363, 370, 371, 389, 390, 391, 419. to 442.438, 453, 662,
355, 356, 369, 944. fol. 5^4. p 856.991, 994, 1002. Wickliffe his censure of
giving money to Players. p. 324.689. Women, skill in dancing no good sign of
their honesty, ought not to learn, nor train up their children to dance. page
220.229. to 261. See Dancing. Ought not to frizle or cut their hair, to wear
false hair, to put on men's apparel, to paint their faces, or to wear garish
lascivious attire. p. 159.179. to 221.258. f. 514.879. to 890. See Hair,
Apparel, and Face-pa^nting. and Gulielmus ^^raldus. Summa Virtutum and
Viti^rum. ^om. 2. f. 119. to 128. Ti^. Superbia^ and fol. 16. to 21. Tit.
Luxuria: Ought to nurse their own children. p. 705.706. m. See Reformatio
Legum Ecclesiasticarum. Ti^. De Matrimonio. c. 13. f. ^2. D. Taylo^s Commentary
upon Titus. p. 382.383. Thomas B^acon his Catechism. f. 517.5^8. Ought to be
keepers at home, not gadder^ abroad. p. 434^435, 992, 993. Ought not to resort
to Plays to Play Houses, which either find or quickly make them Whores. p.
340.341, 349, 356, 360, 362, 370, 389. to 393.419, 434. to 446.453, 662, 457,
458, 992, 993. See Whores. The Devils Sword and Instrument especially when they
dance. page 228.229, 230, 258. Women-Actors, notorious whores. p. 162. 214,
215, 1002, 1003. Unlawful. Ibid. Hence Justinian. Autenticorum Collat. 5. Tit.
4. f. 46. enacted this Law: Scenicas non solum si fidejussores prestent, sed
etiam si jus-jurandum dent quod observabunt and impiam complebunt operationem,
and quod nunquam ab impia illa and turpi operatione cessabunt, possent sine
periculo discedere. Et tale jus-jurandum a scenica praestitum, and fidejussoris
datio non tenebit. And good reason: for S. Paul prohibites women to speak
publicly in the Church. 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Tim^ 2.12. And dare then any Christian
women be so more then whorishly impudent, as to act, to speak publicly on a
Stage, (perchance in man's apparel, and cut hair, here proved sinful and
abominable) in the presence of sundry men and women? Dij ta^em terris avertite
p^stem. O let such presidents of impudency, of impiety be never heard of or
suffered among Christians. Words idle and unprofitable condemned. page 128.
World, the fashions and customs of it not to be followed. p. 18 to 28 57, 58.
this world no place of carnal mirth and jollity. p. 293.294, 907, 908. Worldly
pleasures dangerous, and to be avoided. p^g. 907.966, 967, 968, 969, 970. fol.
551.
X
Xenophon his story of the Persian Schoolmaster, of the Syracusian and his
dancing Trull. p. 249.361, 366. f. 515.516.
Y
Youth how to be educated; to be kept from acting, reading and beholding
Plays. p. 366.367, 498. See Acting, Books, Parents. Yvie Garlands not to be
worn of Christians; dressing of houses with it prohibited. p. 21.581, 756. m.
Z
Zeno Veronensis his censure of Plays and Dancing. p. 670. Fr. Zephyrus, his
censure of Plays, and wanton Poets. p. 694. Tho. Zerula, his censure of
Plays. p. 696. Th^od Zuinger his censure of Plays and Actors. page 694.
The names of many other Authors quoted in this Treatise against Stage Plays,
Dancing, etc. I have omitted in this Table for brevity sake, a Catalogue of
whose names and Works you may find p. 32^. to 566.969.668. to 713.843. to
860.882. to 890.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Courteous Reader, besides the Printers mistakes collected in the beginning of
the Book, I shall desire thee to correct these Errataes following.

In the Pages. p. 17. l. 15. p. 39. l. 35. and p. 65. l. 29. for Major, r.
Minor. p. 29. l. 14. and p. 66. l. 2. f. advers. and Contr. ad Autolichum. p.
69. l. 4. Brissonius. p. 77. l. 6. demoniacall. and l. 30. names of Idols. p.
91. l. ^, righteous. p. 115. l. 28. reasons. p. 140. l. 34. sinners. p. 153. l.
6. it is. p. 189. l. 16. and lib. 3. p. 191. l. 11. judges. p. 201. l. 12.
words. l. 226. l. 11. Dub. 13. and l. 13. Mapheus. p. 250. l. 10. f. Strabo,
Straton. p. 279. l. 2. f. Turvy Towers. p. 281. l. 20. ingemiscit. p. 291. l.
19. and 296. l. 22. Antoninus. p. 315. l. 12. Players. p. 357. l. 29. Agrippa.
p. 378. l. 7. strike, and l. 24. Twelfely. p. 400. l. 7. evidence. and l, 20.
thy. p. 408. ^^ 34. if it. p. 445. l. 20. f. three, four. p. 447. l. 1. f. 5.
r. 6. p. 440. l. 19. undoubted. p. 451. l. 17.18. Soloninus. p. 489. l. 34. his
Re^utation of the: fol. 530. l. 24. he fol. 546. l. 25. f. Epist. Epit. fol.
559. l. 26. f, first, fifth. and 8. l. 4. for might, nigh. p. 549. l. 2.
Hispalensis. p. 551. l. 21. sinful. p. 620. l. 24. f. Dances, Plays. p. 628.
l. 15. vanu. p. 644. l. 29. di^i. p. 643. l. 2. r. 291. l 3. r Can. 1. f. 2. l.
6. r. p. 277. p. 666. l. 31 Ecclesia. p. 66^. l. 14. r. 71. p. 669. l. 33. f.
work, worth: and l. 32. Antichrist^. p. 671. l. 12. and in other places, f.
Zozomen. Sozomen. p. 672. l. 32. indigni^ p. 673. l. 16. Flacius. p. 678. l.
11.12. p. 679. l. 7. f. Gloucester and Gloucestershire; Oxford and Oxfordshire.
p^ 691. l. 24. f. Histrio, Adulatio. p. 695. l. 17. f. 210. r. 230. p. 707. l.
9. Ves. l. 29. vel. and l. 37. w^ites thus. p. 709. l. 10. perijt. p. 723. l.
11. f. this^ his. p. 733. l. 8. dele, ^^. p. 747. l. 27. Infidels^ p. 818. l.
32. f. ne, me. p. 819. l. 29. f. qui, quae. p. 827. l. 10. f. Protestants,
Laics. p. 835. l. 33. dele by. p. 840. l. 37. r. dulcibus vitijs. p. 842. l.
22. r. saltando praebendu^. p. 843. l. 15. f. aut, r. ad. p. 845. l. 2. No m^:
and l. ^0. tertiam. p. 848. l. 9. Sylla. p. 857. l. 2. popina^. p. 858. l. 22.
Cocciu^. p. 861. l. 32. cautam. p. 867. l. 9. Christians. p. 22. Theaters, and
l. 27. Stage Plays. p. 870. l. 29. Rufinus. p. 880 l. 15. Gunda. p. 881. l. 1.
me^etricularu^. p. 884. l. 6. f. Ascanius, Numanus. p. 887. l. 28. and 907. l.
29. Beluacensis. p. 885. l. 9. C^cogr^cus. p. 909. l. 35. f. Lastly, Fifthly. ^.
915. l. 23. lib. 3. c. 6. p. 934. l. 33. f. that, all. p. 935. l. 27. f.
estimation, ostentation. p. 940. l^ 2. have. p. 942. l. 13. find. p. 950. l.
6. f. his, their. p. 957. l. 24. vulneri. p. 958. l. 10. obvious: and 17. them.
p. 996. l. 11. mixed. p. 997. l. 26. facili^. p. 998. l. 37. certaminibus. p.
999. l. 14. fabula.

In the margent. p. 4. l. 2. f. advers. r. ad. p. 23. l. 29. r. Hist. l. r. p.
25. l. 10. r. Quid. p. 74. l. 31. f. Contr r. ad. p. 75. l. 5. and other
places, ^. Sozomen. p. 94. l. 45. ad Demonicu^. p. 110. l. 18. injuria. p. 126.
l. 39. aliene. p. 129. l. 13. Pan^omimu^. p. 153. l. 39. Vnus. p. 156. l. 14.
migr^vit. p. 158. l. 49. mimum. p. 171. l. 41. a^. p. 179. l. 23. Can. p. 38.
Tom. p. 189. l. 38. hominis. p. 200. l. 2. ^. 28. p. 212. l. 34. fabulam. p.
215. l. 35. and 552. l. 25. Alvarus. p. 219. l. 40. versa^tur. p^ 233. l. 38.
Phryx. p. 3^0. l. 26. r. c 41. p. 324. l. 14 and 326. l. 25. f. Rosella,
Angelica. p. 358. l. 20. Var^o. p. 374. l. 39. munera. p. 457. l. 23. f. ad, ^.
p. 459. l. 2 Aurelius. p. 472. l. 37. Theatra. p. 480. l. 5. and page 448. fol.
516. l. 1. Cyprian. f. 550. b. l. 40. contemnere. l. 42. jurat. f. 55^. l. 12.
Suetonij Julius. sect. 39. omitted. f. 559. l. 41. so writes^ p. 549. l. 26.
Hispalensis. p. 561. l. 37. Nomocan. p. 614. l. 43. precipimus. p. 685. l. 29.
Vincentius. p. 686. l. 33. Furens. p. 708. l. 12. vicious. p. 715. l. 22. r.
lib. 4. Tit. 7. p. 720. l. 16. r. p. 20. p. 755. l. 41. augurijs. p. 798. ^.
15. irasceru. p. 82^. l. 29. teneritudinem. p^ 832. l. 16. jungere. l. 34.
Library. p. 834. l. 25. Satyr^ p. 836. l. 6. f. Artic. r. Act. p. 841. l. 37.
Stage Plays. p. 844. l. 41.42. debet propter. p. 845. l. 13. r. 481. p. 848.
l. 31. and 851. l. 44. Sabellicus. p. 849. l. 30. nimiru^. p. 852. l. 15.16.
arts Gaudenti^. p. 853. l. 4. Zona^as. p. 858. l. 1. R^ru^. l. 19. Suid. p.
869. l. 5. cum subeunt. p. 879. l. 11. crucius. p. 884. l. 5. vob^. p. 894. l.
13. f. m, in. p. 900. l. 4. Enar. in Psalm. l. 44. r. p. 902.903. p. 902. l. 39.
r. 79. p. 933. l. 41. r. omnes. p. 964. l. 37. ^iserunt. p. 971. l. 3. Tom. 2.
p. 990. l. 36. secularu.


