The Protestants and Jesuits up in Arms in Gulicke-land.

Also, A true and wonderful relation of a Dutch maiden (called Eve Fliegen of
Meurs in the Country of Meurs) who being now (this present year) 36 years of
age, has fasted for the space of 14 years, confirmed by the testimony of
persons, both Honorable and worshipful, (as well English, as Dutch.

Truly translated according to the Dutch Copy.

portrait of woman holding flower EVA VLIEGE


Imprinted at London for Nicholas Bourne, 1611.

Laus Deo this 27 of July Anno 1611 stilo magnae Brytanniae. The Letter.
Beloved Brother: many hearty commendations, etc. I have sent unto you the
picture and lively description of a Dutch maiden, drawn out of Dutch colors,
and put into English. The Dutch copy comes along with it, which I have
translated, as well to give you testimony of my brotherly affection toward
you, as to have my Countrymen in England acquainted with so miraculous a power
of Gods work on so weak a creature, thereby the more to magnify his glory. If
the news of this be not as yet come to London, I wish you to send it to the
Press. It is not to be doubted but that a relation so fresh and vn-common, will
be acceptable to our Nation, to whom News are most welcome I know. To confirm
the truth hereof, my Lord General, with many other noble Gentlemen, are worthy
witnesses, who both know this maiden, and have seen her. The report is new and
lately published: If it had bin possible to have gotten means (by a messenger)
sooner to have sent it to you, it had sooner come to your hands. But as it is,
I pray receive it, and with it, a second News, as fresh in the mouths of all
men, and fuller of construction, by reason of an expected Event thereof, to
break into a wars. And that is in Aken, within a dozen miles of Gulicke:
which I pray you likewise to publish to the common view.

The Dutch Copy of the relation of Eve Fliegen of Meurs in the County of
Meurs, a maiden (now aged 36 years) who has neither eat nor drunk, any
manner of Sustenance, by the space of 14 years, translated into English as
follows.
THe Omnipotent Creator of the world, has not in times past only expressed
the glory of his power, in his wonderful composition, framing and presenting
to the eye of Man all sorts of creatures, both in heaven, earth, and the
waters: But even now at this day, is the same his miraculous hand working
still. Amongst infinite numbers of which his excellent pieces, able to bold man
in astonishment, this of a Maiden is well worthy of admiration, of whom
(because the true body and shape cannot in substance be sent up and down the
world) this picture or counterfeit (so near as words can express her) shows
her drawn to the life.

This Maiden (by name Eve Fliegen) lives at this present within the town of
Meurs, she was borne in the year of our Lord 1575, within a little of that
town at a place called Fliegen-house, whereupon she takes her name: of mean
and very poor parents. So that in her younger days (they being not able better
to maintain her) she was compelled to keep swine for the country people,
enduring (by that hard course of life) the bitterness of much hunger, as she
her self confesses.

Living in this extremity of misery, she often (so well as she could, seeing no
other ways nor hope of comfort) made earnest prayers to God, that he would
take pity of her wretchedness, and relieve her, from that daily hunger, by
which her body was tormented and consumed: her prayers were heard, according to
her request: And such compassion took the Almighty of her miseries that in the
year 1594, her desire of feeding, which in former times she had grew to be
faint, and very small. Insomuch that every 2, 3 and 4 days, she took little
sustenance or none at all. From the 4 day she began voluntarily to fast til the
^0 day and so did forbear, or rather had no stomach to meat, the space of
fourteen days together, which abstene^ce of hers grew in the end end to such
a custom, that she utterly refused the taste either of meat or drink, and in
that manner has her body (by Gods providence) been preserved ever since the
year of our Lord 1597 to this present year 1611 (being full 14 years) This
strange wonder continuing thus long, drew not only many people to see her, but
also many trials to be put upon her, amongst which, this was one, In the year
1599, the Noble Countess of Meurs with her waiting Gentlewoman, having brought
this Eve Fleigen into a garden, with much importunity to have her eat
somewhat, so prevailed that she plucked a cherry and tasted it, and had no
sooner eaten it down, but that the Lady with her servants were in fear she
would there presently have dyed, she fell into so sudden and violent passion
of an extreme sickness: in the which she continued a long time, but in the
end with much ado recovered her health. Which a year after the said Eve
falling again into a greater sickness, it was held fit (by the opinion of
Docters) to have her drink a spoonefull or two of the thin whey, which comes
from Buttermilke, being sodden: she made offer to taste it, but could by no
means take it down. At another time of sickness, she her self thought she
could sup the broth of a chicken, but no more then a spoonefull being offered
to her, she fell into a more extreme fit of sickness then before, so that
finding her body afflicted by these trials, she utterly abandoned the use of
any food, or nourishment, by the full space now of 14 years. In all which
time, through no disposition of the season or time of the year, has she been
seen or known either to complain of thirst or hunger: yet until her age of
20 or 22 years, she took her food (where by her labor or other honest
means it could be gotten) as other people commonly use to do.

This her forbearance to take the due nourishment that should maintain life,
has brought her body to a weakness, and her face to an exceeding palenes.

She says that every second day an exceeding clear light shines round about
her body; the common light or brightness of the day, being nothing comparable to
it: which light when she beholds and (as she says) feels shining upon her,
she has likewise a feeling on her tongue of a strange and extraordinary
delicate sweetenes, the moisture of which strengthens her (to her seeming) for
her eyes can behold no other thing but only that perfect and unusual light.

The Preacher of Meurs (by name, Conradus Felthnijsen) could not along time be
persuaded that this was truth, which he heard reported of this maiden: to give
therefore not only content to himself, but satisfaction in this matter to
others his friends who were of his belief likewise, he took the said Eve
(being come to hear the evening Sermon) home with him to his own house, and
there kept her in a chamber by the space of 13 days, watched day and night by
sundry other persons his friends, candles burning every night, and she never
being suffered to be alone without company the space of one minute, in all
which time she never tasted food, and (at the end of 13 days and nights)
being demanded whether she where then either hungry or thirsty, she answered
no: so that the Preacher now having by the experience of his own eyes, found
out that which he could not before believe, is now enforced with admiration to
acknowledge to be true. To whose testimony, a thousand persons (both honorable
and of other condition) can witness, and there is she living at this day, in
the town of Meurs to be seen, and spoken with daily and hourly, and her
manner of living being observed with the narrowest eyes, and seuerest
circumspection, so that it is impossible, she should be an imposter or deluder:
and the better to confirm the truth of this, a worthy Magistrate of the same
town has given liberal and ample approbation to certain Cities, and to
several persons of worth, with his certificate and the seal of the town
thereunto annexed: if all these testimonies of her, cannot persuade and win
credit to our report, the maiden (of whom it is made) is yet to be seen, in
the town of Meurs. Nor shall it be amiss, the better to strengthen this short
discourse, to set down in a few lines more what some histories of our present
times do mention of persons who in the like manner have fasted long (beyond the
ordinary strength and custom of man's body) and lived (as this maiden does now)
without eating.

Franciscus Citesius (Doctor in the university at Poitiers) witnesses (in his
book written in Lattine and imprinted at Montpellier in Anno 1602) that for
certain years, one Catherine of Colberghen lived in Spires 7 years together,
without meat or drink. Also within the town of Conflans in France lying upon
the borders of Limosin upon the river Vien, A Smith (by name, John Balam) begot
of his wife (Lucrece Chambelle) in the year 1588, a daughter named Ione Balam,
who for the space of two years, did neither eat or drink, in publication of
which wonder, that famous and eloquent Doctor, Iacobus Viuerius wrote certain
verses, which are thus Englished.

How many wonders great before our eyes appears,
Whereof no reason firm to you can showed be.
Behold, (...) in health, indures at woman's years
Twice a months long to fast, for sustenance none takes she.
The Lords and neighbors there, to her had good regard,
That dwelt in Conflans town, on that Vienish fare.
No meat no^ drink in all that time so long she mard,
Her throat so narrow was, her victuals she did spare.
Full strange it was to see, her belly was so flat,
The passages were shut, no entrance there was found,
She voyded nothing forth, nothing at all she ate,
Her privy parts were clean, thence nothing fell to ground,
But yet she speaks, she sighs, she goes, she feels I know,
Mine eyes are witness sure, here of you need not doubt:
Which wo^drous work does teach, that nature here below
By God alone is ruled, who gouernes all about.
To whom all things that were, or ever yet shall be,
Must stoop their lofty tops, their heads also must bend,
Whose wisdom, might and power, o man does teach to thee
To praise his name for aye: And so I make an end.
Over the picture of the maiden in the Dutch Copy, stood these Lattine verses,
viz.

Meursae haec (quam Cernis) decies tor, sexque peregit
Annos, bis septem prorsus non vescitur Annis.
Nec potat, sic sola sedet, sic pallida vitam
Ducit, and exigni se oblectat floribus Horti.
Thus Englished.

This Maid (of Meurs) has thirty six year spent.
Fourteen of which she took no nourishment,
Thus pale and wan she sits (sad and alone)
A garden is all she loves to look upon.
The Letter.
Beloved Brother, if you call to remembrance my former letters (written unto
you about the beginning of September 1605) you shall find in the^, a report of
this Maiden of Meurs, who at ye time had fasted but eight years: which report
I know you very slightly entertained, and as I think, thought it fabulous and
untrue: But before that time, and ever since, her manner of living has been
so narrowly looked into, that I am now my self thoroughly persuaded to believe
it, because not only I, but thousands besides, have seen her, and can testify
with me. None of the Princes of Germany, nor any Noblemen or Gentlemen of
England, traveling near that way, but have been eyewitnesses of what I write
to you, concerning her many at this present in the English Court have seen
her. His excellency (Grave Maurice) who is Earl of Meurs, never comes into
the Town, but he makes her one of his guests, yet she eats noting at all.
Thus much of this wonder. Now for Gulicke-newes.

The Protestants and Jesuits up in Arms in Gulicke-land.
AT Aken, a great Town (where the Crown of the Empire is kept) standing
within 12 miles of Gulicke, in Gulicke-land did this quarrel begin, upon the
occasion following.

Since the taking of Gulick, that the land was governed by a Protestant Prince,
the Protestants presumed (as well they might) to have more liberty then they
had wont, and to go to hear Sermons a mile or two out of the town (yet in
most Towns in Cleue-land they use to preach in Churches) The Jesuits taking
note of this, and the Magistrates being Papists and favorers of their own
religion, consulted together how to stop this tide and passage of the
Protestants from swelling to a greater stream and thereupon suddenly
apprehended as many of the Protestants that had been at the Sermons as they
could possible lay hands upon: Great fines being set upon some, and the rest
(whose number were not few) appointed to be banished. Which severity and cruel
doom was borne with patience so long, that out of Aken were drawn into
banishment 300 families at least, and that upon the 13 day of June (now last
past) there were to be sent from thence into the like misery and exile a great
number more, The sight of which, striking into the hearts of the common
Burgesses of the town, and moving the^ to compassion, they resolved to go
altogether to the Town Hall, to have their poor countrymen, with their wives
and children stayed: at their entreaty, and humble intercession, they did so,
as they resolved, and came to the place where their Magistrates were assembled:
But no prayers, no tears, no entreaty could prevail, but all were by the
Magistrates sharply charged and commanded to depart peaceably home to their
houses: for they knew well enough what belonged to their places, to the state
of town, and what was to be done.

But a number of people (both Protestants and Papists) in a mixed assembly
being gathered together, before the Towne-hall, the Papists expecting the event
of this new business, the Protestants lamenting the banishment and departure of
their friends, kinds-folkes, and countrymen, and seeing no hope to find any
mercy at the Magistrates hands, some (amongst the rest) burst out into
passionate expostulations, crying (out of their true pity, sorrow, and desire
of revenge.) Is there no remedy, no helping strong hand that can, or that
dares cast off a burden so heavy, and so intolerable as this? Must we behold
our fathers, our sons, our brethren, wives, sisters and acquaintance, driven
thus like outcasts into foreign and unknown countries (out of our native
land) only for hearing the word of God truly preached amongst us. And is there
none so valiant to step forth and defend them and us from this miserable and
tyranous bondage? Can we fight for the same cause (O you faint-harted Dutch
nation) against proud foreign people, keeping them out at the swords point,
and shall we not be able to maintain our own quarrel against our own
countrymen? Can our arms and our weapons, with which we have won battles,
not now help our selves? no, no, replied others, we the wretched and despised
number of the Protestants are few, but the Jesuits and Papists (our cruel
enemies) are many and strong, Yet cried others in what nobler, in what better
quarrel can we venture our lives, and, venturing so loose them, then in
defense of the Gospel, our country, our brethren, kindred, and friends? We
are Gods Soldiers in so just a war, and therefore why do we not arm our
selves to maintain his cause? These and such like speeches, annimated the
people, kindled manly fire in their bosoms, and so inflamed the^, that on a
sudden, flying to their best defense and guard of safety, Arm, Arm, Arm,
was cried, every one betook him to his weapons, so that within one half
hour, all the town was filled with armed men, the walls giving as much cause
of terror to the country-faction as the streets did, because they were as
suddenly and as bravely manned too.

The keys of the gates being seized upon, into the Protestants hands, an able
and stout watch was presently choosen, and planted for their better security:
the old Magistrates removed and new put into their places, and (as it often
happens in such co^motions) nothing was left undone, which the rage of people
newly delivered from fear, and having now the bridle of government to
themselves, had will to execute, so that all prisons were set open, and all
prisoners at liberty to strengthen their side, and fight for them, because they
were now rather to do then to deliberate: to the Jesuits Cloisters they went,
where they slew some, took other prisoners, and those who escaped best went
away with much danger of their lives: the Cloisters were defaced, Altars
thrown down, Images broken in pieces, and after many violent-outrages, in the
end the town of Aken was surprised and made theirs. And now (coming to
capitulations) the Papists would be content to suffer the Protestants to Preach
without the town: but the Protestants on the contrary part, will not now
suffer them to exercise their Mass within the Town, but thrust them out of
the gate.

This quarrel hanging yet in a doubtful balance, is to be decided by the
Duke of Brandenburgh, (prince of that country) now being in high Germany. What
hereafter ensues upon it I shall (dear broth^r) God willing acquaint you in
writing, and be sorry, if this short relation of our Gulicks service, prove not
delightful to your self, or to any of your friends and my Countrymen, that
may read happily the same. I did not more enlarge it. Farewell from Vtrecht.

FINIS.

