A BRIEF SVRVAY AND CENSVRE OF Mr COZENS His Couzening Devotions.

Proving both the form and matter of Mr Cozens his Book of Private Devotions,
or the Hours of Prayer, lately publ^shed, to be merely Popish: to differ from
the private Prayers Authorized by Queen Elizabeth 1560. to b^ transcribed out
of Popish Authors, with which they are here paralelled: and to be scandalous
and prejudicial to our Church, and aduantagious only to the Church of Rome.

By William Prynne Gent. Hospitij Lincolniensis.

MAT. 7.15, 16. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheep clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves: Ye shall know them by their fruits.

2 COR. 11.14, 15. For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light.
Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works.

Printed at London. 1628.

To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons
house of Parliament now assembled.
RIght honorable, thrice worthy, and true Christian Senators, your pious z^ale,
and zealous piety, in questioning some Popish and Arminian Books, which have
been lately published (and I would I could not say authorized and patronized:)
by some spurious and Romanized, if not Apostalized Sons, and Pastors of our
Church, to the inquietation of o^r State, the h^zzard of our Church, the
propagation of Pop^ry and Arminianisme, the be^r^ying of the truth, the
encouragement of our Enemies, and the inexpiable blemish of our orthodox and
Apostolical Religion; has, as at first invited me to pen, so now emboldened
me to p^blish, and dedicate, this BRIEF SVRVAY and Censure of Maste^ Cozens
his cozening Devotions to your Honors: if not to animate, help, or further,
yet at least to ease you in the Anatomy and clear Discovery of that virulent
and popish poison, which is couched in the veins, and cloaked under the Coule,
and Saint-like habit of those new Devotions, which now expect, nay need, your
doom and censure. As it fares with potent States and Nulla magna Ciuitas diu
quiescere potest: si foris hostem non habet domi inuenit. Liuie. Rom Histor. l.
30. sect. 14. Arma quae non habent hostem, saepisame in ciuem conuertuntur.
Case. Polit. l. 7. c. 14. p. 6^2.
ample Cities; that they can no sooner want an enemy abroad, but presently
they find and feel some foes at home: so has it of late befell our Church;
who having secured her self against the fear of foraigne Enemies by those
Quam grave and quam acerbe est hostibus tam pro^ligatis, and nemine^x aduerso
se opponere audente, vt ipsi nos oppugnaremus mutuo, and sic ^aetitiam inimicis
atque adeo ^^sum praeberemus. Theodoret. Ecclesiast. hist l 1 c. 7.
sundry victories and glorious Trophi^s, which her Tyndall, her Fox, her
Jewel, her Rainolds, her Whitakers, her Fulke, her Perkins, her Abbot, her
Whites, her Willet, her Morton, her Usher, and her other learned Wo^thies have
ofttimes gained over Romes Master-Champions, and greatest Goliahs, who
proclaim us Victors by their long continued silence: is now endangered and
almost surprised by Couzning and Non long scilicet hosts Quaren li nobis,
circumsta^t vndique muros Virgi. Aeneid. l. 11. Intus habes, qu^ poscis. Ovid.
Met. l. 6
Domesticke foes, who in fighting for her, do but war against her: her
foraigne peace, has bred her wars and iarres at home; and raisd Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 2.
a Trojan Horse within her bowels, which is like to set her all on fire at
unawares, unless some showers of sovereign Justice quench her flames. Now
blessed be the God of heaven, who has infused this Christian providence, and
zealous care into your pious hearts, to single out these wily and
friend-seeming enemies of our Church, before you have seized on those ravenous
and oppressing Quot usquisque en^m iuxta diuitem pauper, aut i^tactus aut tutus
est? Quid enim omnium aliud dignitas sublimium quam proscriptio ciuitatum: aut
quid aliud quorundam, quos taceo praefectura, quam praeda? Nulla siquidem mayor
pauperculorum est depopulatio, qua^ potestas. Ad hoc enim honor a paucis
emitur, vt cunctorum vastatione soluatur. Quo quid esse indignius aut iniquius
potest? Reddunt miseri dignitatum praetia quas nonemunt. Comercium nes^iunt, et
solutionem sciunt: vt pauci illustrentur, mundus euertitur. Vnius honor, orbis
excidium est. Veniunt plerumque noui nun^^, noui^ epistu ar^ a summis
sublimitatibus missi, qui commendantur illustribus paucis ad exitiae
plu^^morum: decernuntur his noua muner^, decernuntur noua indictiones:
decornunt potentes, quod soluant paupe^es: decernit gratia diuitum, quoa perdat
turba miserorum, Ipsi enim in nullo se^t^unt, quod decernunt. Salu. De
Gubernat. Dei l. 4. p. 104.105. l. 5. p. 161. 162.
Wolves, which prey upon our State. What Authority and right a Parliament has,
to deal in Ecclesiastical affairs; to patronize Religion; to vindicate and
plead its cause: and to arraigne, convent, and censure such, who violate the
settled and received Doctrines of our Church; let Christ Jesus testify: who
informs his Apostles and Saints: Mark 14.9. Luke 21.12.13.
that they should be brought, not only before Councels and Synogouges: but
likewise, before Kings and Rulers; that is before secular Magistrates: not for
temporal and State affairs only: but for his name sake, and for bearing
witness to his truth and Gospel: Whereby he admits, that temporal
Magistrates, may intermeddle with Religion, if occasion serve: Whence it was,
that not only Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. c. 16.17
John the Evangelist, and other Justin Martyr Atolog. 1. and 2. Tertul. Apolog.
aduersus Gent. et ad Scapulam lib see Zozeman. Eusebius. Nicepherus. Socrates.
and the book of Martyrs, according.
Christians in the Primative Church, were conuented before temporal
Magistrates for matters of Religion: but likewise St. Paul himself was by the
very Jews themselves accused Act. 24.25. and 26.
before Faelix, Festus, and Agrippa, for his very preaching and Doctrine;
before whom he pleads his cause; and at last Act. 25.9.10.11.12.
appeals to Caesar's judgment seat, even in these particulars of Religion:
which he would not have done, had not Princes and secular Magistrates a
Jurisdiction and Prerogative, as well in Church, as State affairs. Not to
trouble you with the Sea Thomas of Walsingham. hist. Angl. Rich. 2. p. 256.257.
petition of Mr. John Witcliffe to the Parliament, in the time of Richard the
2. for the Reformation of the Clergy; for the weeding out of many false, and
the establishment of sundry Orthodox point^ of Doctrine in our Church: his
several posi^ions. Ibidem. p. 205.208.209.
That the Parliament or temporal Lords, might lawfully examine and discuss
the State, the disorders and corruptions of the Church: That they might
lawfully and deservedly, (yea that they were bound in conscience,) upon the
discovery of the Errors and corruptions of the Church, deprive her of all her
Tithes and temporal endowments, till she were reformed. And that any
Ecclesiastical person, yea the Pope of Rome himself might be lawfully
accused, censured and corrected by Lay men: do sufficiently confirm your
Parliamentary praerogatiue in matters of Religion: Not to recite the opinions
and Resolutions of two reverend and learned Praelates of our Church Defense of
the Apology. part. 6. cap. 2. division 1. page ^22.
Jewel and Christian subjection, and Ant^christian Rebellion. part. 3. near
the end.
Bilson: who both acknowledge; that Eccl^siasticall or Church affairs, and
matters of Religion, both may, and have been always debated, determined and
settled in Parliament, as well in former, as in latter ages: Our Common
prayer-booke, our Articles, and our Homilies, (in which the body of our
Religion does subsist) which are all established and settled in our Church by 2.
and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 1.19.3. and 4. Ed. 6. c. 10.5. and 6. Ed. 6 cap. 1. 1. Eliz.
cap. 2.
Act of Parliament: together with Articuli super Clerum. 1. E. 2.36. E. 3. c.
8.1. R. 2. c. 13.15.2. H. 4. c. 25.4. H. 4. c. 17.2. H. 5. c. 7.26. H. 8. c.
1.2.27. H. 8. c. 15.28. H. 8. c. 10.31. H. 8. c. 9.14.32. H. 8. c. 15.26.33. H.
8. c. 31.32.34. and 35. H. 8. c. 1.35. H. 8. c. 5.1. Ed. 6. c. 1.2. 2. and 3.
Ed. 6. c. 1.19.20.21.23.3. and 4. Ed. 6. c. 10.11.12.5. and 6. Ed. 6. c.
1.3.12.1. and 2. Phil. and Mary c. 8.1. Eliz. c. 1.2.5. Eliz. c. ^.28.27. Eliz.
c. 2.39. Eliz. c. 8.1. Iac. c. 4.11.12.3. Iac. c. 1.4.5.7. Iac. c. 8. and
sundry other Statutes, both in the times of Popery, (when as Clergy men had the
greatst jurisdiction and command:) and since; for the establishing and settling
of Religion; the ordering of Ecclesiastical persons and affairs; and the
suppression of haeresies and haeretiques: do abundantly testify: that the
Parliament has an ancient, genuine, just and lawful praerogatiue, to
establish true Religion in our Church: to abolish and suppr^sse all false, all
new and counterfeit Doctrines whatsoever; and to question and censure all such
persons, who shall by word or writing oppugn the settled and received Articles
and Doctrines of our Church: what ever some ignorant or supercilious Clergy
men (who can be content to merge and drown themselves in secular Offices, and
Employments, in lay and State Affairs, against the resolution of See Apostol.
Canones. Can. ^ 7.80. 82. Clemens. Conflit. l. 2. cap. 6. Council. El^berenu^.
Can. 19. Carthag 1. Can. 6.9. 3. Can. 15. 4. Can 18.20.51.52.53. Chalcedon.
Can. 3. Tur^nense. 1 Can. 5. 3. Can. 23. Aurelianense. 3. Can. 26 4. Can. 23.
Mateconense. 1. Can, 11.13. Toletanum. 4 Can. 30.4^. 11, Can. 6. Constan^in^^.
6. Can. 9. Palat^um. Vernis. Can. 16. Nicanu^ 2. Can. 10. Forotuliense. Can^ 6.
Cabilon^nse. 2. Can. 5.6.11.12. Moguntinu^. Can. 10.12.14. and sub Rabano. Can
13. Rhemense Can. 29.30. Aquigian Can 85.93.100. Parisiense. l. 1. cap. 28.
Meldense. Can. 49. Wormatense. Can. 67. Synod. 8. Oecumenica. Can. ^4.
Triburiense. Can. 2. Coloniense. part. 2. cap. 25.30.^1. Lateran. pars. 1. cap.
12. part. 17. and Can. 106. Reformat. Cleri. Germania, cap 4 Synod. Augustensis
cap. 10. Council. Trident Sess. 2^. de Reformat cap. 2. Sess. 25 cap. 1. Sess.
25. cap. 17. See Gratian. Causa. 21. Quaestio. 3. Roger Houedon. histo. Angl.
p. 589.590. H^erom. Epist ^ ad N^potianu^. Decreta Pelagii. cap 17 Surius
Council. Tom. 2. p. 295. Rescripta Nicholai. 1. Tit. 10. cap. 6.7. Bernard de
Consid. l. 3. c. ^.^. l. 4. c. 2. See Thomas of Walsingham hist. Angl. p. 181.
^podigma Neustria p. 132 Where upon the petition of the ^ords in Parliment. 4
(...) of Ed. 3. all Bishops and Clergy men were d^priued of all their
temporal offices.
sundry and famous Councels, which prohibit it.) do mutter and object against
it. What right or calling Laickes have to write of matters of Religion, I have
fully discussed in a Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate: The appendix to
the Epistle to the Reader.
former Treatise: only let me add to this; (to anticipate the envious and
malignant Cauils of some peevish Divines, who would monopolize Divinity to
themselves alone:) that Laics even in the Primitive Church, have not only
converted whole Nations unto God: witness the Theodoret. Eccl. hist. lib. 1.
c. 23.
Indians converted by Erumentius; and the Theodoret. Ib. c. 24.
Iberians, and Munster Cosmogr. l 4. c. 39.
Bulgarians reduced and brought home to God from Paganism, by two Christian
woman; (a thing well worthy observation:) but likewise written of points and
matters of Divinity with public approbation. Not to record those 16. ancient
lay writers in the primative Church recorded by me in another place. St.
Augustine himself informs us in express terms: Extant libri quos adhuc
laicus recentissima mea conuersione conscripsi, etc. Contra Iulianum. l. 6. c.
4. Tom. 7. part. 2. p. 508.
That he pennd and published sundry books and Treatises of Divinity which
are yet extant, whiles he was a Layman, not entered into Orders. To pass by
August. de Anima et eius Origin* l. 2. c. 1. 2.
Vincentius Victor a young Laicke, who wrought three several Treatises of
Divinity, which S. Augustine answered, together with whole Catalogues of
modern lay-Authors which I might enumerate: I shall ground and rest my self
with that one famous example of Origin: who did not only Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l.
6. c. 19.20.21.22.23.
compile many Commentaries on the Scriptures, and sundry other Treatises of
Divinity being yet a Layman, for which he was honored and respected far
and near of all the learned and godly Bishops of his age, who were glad to
learn Divinity from him: but Eusebius, Ecel. hist. l. 6. c. 19.
did likewise dispute, and expound the Scriptures in open Church unto the
people, being yet not called to the Ministry, at the earnest suite and
entreaty of the Palestine Bishops: For which fact of his when he was blamed and
censured by one Demetrius; (a pragmaticall Clergy man as it seems:) as being
an unheard of practice and praesident; that Laymen should teach in the Church
in the presence of Bishops: Alexander then Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctystus
Bishop of Caesarea wrought thus unto Demetrius in defense of this fact of
Origin: that he had reported a manifest untruth: when as there might be found
such Laymen as had taught the people in open Assemblies, when as there were
present learned men that could profit the people, and more over holy Bishops at
that time also exhorting them to preach: for example sake; at Laranda Euelpis
was thus requested by Neon; at Iconium, Paulinu^ was thus requested by Celsus;
at Synada, Theodorus was thus requested by Atticus, who were no Clergy men,
but godly brethren: It is like also (say they) that this was practiced in other
places: So that by all these pregnant proofs and testimonies, it is clearly
evident, that not only your Honors being but Laymen may proceed iudicially:
but I my self being See Doctor Sparks Answer to Albines, cap. 13. And Bishop
Vshers Praeface to Sir Christopher Syb^^orps book, accordingly.

Nihil itaque ind^gnadu^ vel dolendum si quicunque de diuinis quaerat, sential,
proferat^ cum non disp^tanti^ authoritas, sed disputationis ipsius veritas
requiratur: atque etiam quo impe^it^or sermo, hoc illustrior ratio est
Minutius, Fal^^: Oct^u^o. p 44.


but a Laicke may go on ministerially; to suruay and censure these Cozening
and Popish Devotions, as far forth as they vary from the Scriptures, and the
established doctrines of our Church.

Go on therefore, you Christian Heroes, and valiant worthies of the Lord, to
vindicate the cause, and Doctrines of our Church, against those Cozening,
treacherous and rebellious Sons (if Sons) of hers, who have betrayed her with a
kiss and A^tera manu ferunt lapidem dum panem ostentant altera, P^auti.
Aulularia. Act 1. p 82.
wounded her with one hand, whiles they seemingly embrace her with the other:
and the God of heaven shall be with you. And have you not cause enough, (yea is
it not now high time) to execute your power, and display your zeal^, in the
cause and quarrel of our Church? do not her goared sides, her bleeding scarrs,
and festered sores, now need* may crave your help and cure; since Ier. 8.22.
there is no balm in Gilead, at least no good Physician there, to suppell and
bind up her wounds? Since she has few P^iests or Praelate^, for to pity her,
fewer to succor her in her present dangers? Alas, wh^re are the learned,
reverend, humble, stout, and zealous Praelates? where are the Ecclesiastical
or High Commission Courts? where is the Convocation or assembly of the
Prophets, that either do, or dare apply^ a salve or plaster, to her homebred
maladies; or avenge her of those treacherous, corrupt and Cozening watchmen,
Cant^c. 5.7.
who have smitten her to the heart, and almost betrayed her to her Roman
enemies? What Bishops Consistory, what Conuocation-house, or High Commission
Court, have lately questioned, censured, suspended or degraded, a Mountague, a
Cozens, a Iackson, or a Manwering? a Papist or Arminian? a Nonresident, or
careless Pastor, who never feeds his flock? a iouiall or good fellow
Minister, whose Tobacco-pipe is his Psalter, and his Can, his Text? or a
railing and inueying Shemie, whose sermons are but bitter, profane, and
poisonous Sa^yrs against the practical power, and forwardest Professors of
Religion; whom he reuiles and scoffs at under the name of Purit^ns, or holy
Brethren; Heb. 3.1. 1 Cor. 16.20 Ephesians 6.23. 1 These. 5.26. 1 John. 3.16.
a phrase which the holy Ghost does of^ times use? What Popish or Arminian
books; what I^suiticall Treatises, or Romish prayer-bookes, Portua^ses, and
Mannuals, (which have been lately scattered) and printed here among us in See
Gees Catalogue of of Popish books, that have been lately printed and
d^spersed here in England*
great abundance;) have been of late anticipated, prohibited, or suppressed by
them; though it be their proper Office to forestall, and crush them in the
shell? Nay shall I speak the Maluerim ver^^ effendere quam ^lacere adul^i^do.
Seneca de Clementia. cap. 2.
truth unto your Honors, (which I beseech you to lay near your hearts or else
farewell Religion:) what Popish and Arminian books have not been vented, yea,
countenanced^ authorized, and borne out of late against all op^positions
whatsoever, by some who say they are, (and I would to God they were,) the
Fathers of our Church, and Pillars of our Faith? have not M. Mountagues two
Popish and Arminian Books, (though questioned th^ice in Parliament,) been
licenced and approved at the first by some, (I say not by such who had then
Authority, though since they have had their Interregnum:) and since not only
not quaestioned nor inhibited sale: but even patronized, justified, and
protected by force and sinister practices, against all adverse powers? Was not
the way and pass^ge to the p^esse blockt up at first against all such whose
zeal to piety, to the public weal and safety of our Church, had caused them
to t^k^ up pen and paper arms against his Popish, and Arminian Doctrin^s? and
have not all their Orthodox and pious works which past the Press by steal^h
or othe^wise, b^ene questioned and prohibited, since the unhappy breach of the
l^st Parli^mentary Asse^bly, though they were tainted or accused of no Heresy,
Scisme, False doctrine or Sedition? Was not reverend Bishop Carltons book,
though backed with the joint Attestation of that learned Praelate, Dr. Dauenat
Bishop of Sarum, Dr. Ward, Dr. Goad, and Dr. Bel-Canquell, our selected Dort
Divines: together with Dr. Succliffes book, Mr. Rouse his book, Mr. Burtons
book, Mr. Yates his book, Mr. Wottons book, Dr. Goads Parallel, Doctor
Featlies Parallel* (^o omit my own poor Treatise of Perseverance, which
though it were licensed and reprinted, is yet suppressed and called in, upon no
doctrinall nor just exc^ptions:) inhibited, called in and seized on, under the
bare pretense of not being lic^nsed, but in truth because they did oppose Mr.
Mountagues Popery and Arminianisme, (which the Parliament it self took notice
of,) and displaid both it and all his treachery and falsehood to the wo^ld? and
were not all the Printers and Stationers, which were the instruments to publish
them unto the world, conuented Ex Officio, before the High Commissioners,
(where they were glad to buy their peace at last) for their good service to
our Church and State, in printing and divulging all t^ese books, to the
affronting and suppressing of his spreading errors? Since these old stirs and
garbo^l^s, have not these private Devotions and hours of prayer, whose Censure
and Suruay, I here do humbly tender to your Honors: been licensed in a
sp^ciall manner for the Press^, ^uen with an affixed and printed Approbation;
(like that of Dr. Whites, to Mr. Mountagues Appeal:) and since its
publication, so guarded and supported by Autho^ity, though fraught with 20*
several points of Popery, and patched up of Popish rags and relics: that
neither the complaints and cries of m^n against them, nor the voy^e and
presence of a Parliament, could yet move any of our swaying, great, and zealous
Praelates to suppress them, or pass a doom of condemnation on them: who now
inste^d of Answering, and inhibiting them, do not only d^ny to license, but
likewise diligently suppress and intercept all Answers and R^plies unto them,
as the intercepting Mr Burtons Answer at the Press, and the detaining of the
Copy of this my present Censure in the Licensers hands, who will neither
license nor deliver it, do abundan^ly testify.

And is it not then high time for your Honors to engage, besti^re, and show
your zeal in the cause, the quarrel and patronage of our Church and Faith,
when Popery and Arminianisme are grown now so potent, so headstrong, so
impudent, saucy, and audacious, as to ouer-top, control, affront and beard the
very truth and Doctrines of our Church; to Temeraria, falsa and impia dicta
refell^tote redarguste, reprobate: Nam Intercipere scripta, and publicatam
velle submergere lection^m non est Deos defendere, sed veritatis
testificationem timere: Arnob: Adu: Gentes^ l: 3. p: 104.
stop their pleas, and b^rre their passage to the Press in a peremptory and
presumptuous manner, even whiles the Parliament doors of Justice stand wide
open to hear their pressures, and avenge their wrongs; bidding particular and
personal defiance to these two spreading and combinings errors which threaten
ruin and surpris^ll to them? When those Consistories and High Commission
Courts, which should be Sanctuaries, Shields, and chief Protectors to them,
against domesticke vipers, which gnaw out their bowels; and those from whom
they might expect and justly challenge, the greatest favor, aid, and best
support; are now so far from shielding and assisting them against their
Mountebanke, Cozenin^, and domesticke Opposites: that they do even bend
themselves against them, in intercepting all supplies which private lovers
would impart unto them; in silencing, questioning, and clubbing down such by
force, who take up arms in their defense against their personal, homebred,
and professed foes? Al^s, whith^r should our poor distressed Church, or our
Religion flee? where should they seek for succor and relief in this their
forlorn and distressed condition; when as they are so forsaken of their own
indeared and engaged friends, that few of them have ears to hear, or hearts
to pity their pressures and most just complaints; and fewer courage, hands, or
strength enough, to ease or quit them of these pressing, opressing, and
suppressing vulters, which rent and tear their liu^rs and their in most parts?
To you, to you alone (right Christian Senators, and valiant worthies of the
Lord) they now address their tongue-tide grieuances, and silenced complaints:
to you they fly for present succor and redress against their adverse and
prevailing powers; and now implore your aid, your justice, doom, and final
sentence, (even with silent sobs and mournful tears, because their mouths
are closed and shut up,) against those open and professed enemies whose works
and writings have betrayed their cause: and those tyrannical usurping powers,
who have en^oyn'd them silence at the Press, and interc^pted or rejected all
those Counterplees, Answers, and Rebutters which have been tendered, or drawn
up by any to vindicate their right and cause, against homebred and perfidious
Opposites: And can ^ou then deny their importunate, fl^xanimous and most just
^equests, which you have so readily and cheerfully embr^c^d at the first,
w^^hout Petition? Blessed be God, your zeal and cour^ge for Religion are so
eminent and intense already, that they need no spu^s o^ mine to quicken or
^xcite them, to so necessary and pious a work: Therefore leaving all needless
exhortations and encouragements to set on these requests, I shall bri^fely
glance upon the best and speediest means of dis^n^rating our Church of all her
pr^sent grieuances; of rescuing her restrained Doctrines from their Egyptian
thraldom; of reinuensting them in their former privileges, and quitting them
from all future damages, incrochments, and invasions what^oeu^r; which mean^s
I here humbly prostrate and submit to your mature, grave and pious wisdoms,
which have no such Pole Star to direct them as themselves. The means which I
shall meekely off^r and propose to your refined judgments for this purpose,
are:

First, to suppress those Popish Devotions, and Arminian which have been
published of late among us by appprobation and authority: and to expiate;
defecate, and pu^ge out their Romish and Arminian dross and filth, at least by
fire; that so they stand not as Records against us, to the shame, the weakening,
or betraying of our Cause, and Church.

Secondly, to Cuncta prius tentanda: sed immedicabi^e vulnus ense reseidendum
est, ne pars syncerae trahatu^. Oui. Metamop l. 1.
lop off those putred, gangrend, festred and contagious members, who are like
Grex totus in agris, vniu^ scabie ca^i^: and porrigine porci, v^aque conspecta,
liuorem ducit ab vua. Iuuen. Satyr. 2
to putrify, leaven and infect the whole entire body of our Church: and have
already sown by their pernicious writings the Tares of Popery, and Cockels of
Arminianisme which sprout up ap^ce, amidst the Wheat and pure Doctrines of our
Church: that so their Cum feriunt vnum non vnum fulmi^^ t^rrent Iunct aque
per^usso tur^a ^auer^ solet. Ovid de Pont. l. 3. ele. 3
exemplary and open punishment^ may deter all others, from ^he like
^udacious, scandalous, treacherous and pernicious attempts.

Thirdly, to inquire out, the roots and great-bulkt trees which nourish and
support those limbs and vnder-branches, which have thrust forth these buds of
Popery, and blossoms of Arminianisme, which your flamish zeal and feruency to
Relig^on, are like to scorch and blast before they come unto maturity: to
discry those superior spheeres, and uppermost wheels which move those lower
and inferior Orbs, which now run out of course; to search those Dens and
Burrowes out, which harbor and protect those Cant. 2.15.
little Popish and Arminian Foxes, which now spoil our Vines, and offer
violence to their tender Grapes: and to discover those higher Springs, and
poisonous Fountains, which send out those muddy, bitter and unwholesome
streams, which do not water, but poison and defile our Church. Certainly,
these budding branches whose Popish and Arminian fruits you now examine,
receive their sap, their nourish^ment, and support, from some greater Trunkes
and deeper Roots, which must be felled and stockt up, before these bitter
fruits will fade or fall. These petty Orbs and vnderwheeles, which have made
such irregular motions, and commotions in our Church; derive their motions,
from some higher and superior spheeres; which must be rectified, and reduced
to their true and proper motions, before the l^sser Planets, and clocke-wheeles
of our Church will move aright. These little Foxes, have some strong and mighty
Burrowes, wherein to shelter and repose themselves, which must be stopped and
demolished, before the Grapes, the Vines and Vinyard of ou^ Church be freed
from their invasions: These poisonous, muddy, and polluted riu^lets, descend
and flow from greater streams, and higher Fountains: which must be known,
dammed, and dried up, at least diuerted; or else the waters of our Church will
still be venomous, slimie and unwholesome. And till all this be well
accomplished, you shall but only skin, (and Alitur vitium, cresci^que
tegendo. Virg. G^ag l 3. Multa dum le^iter corriguntur, sapius mai^ra
consurgunt. Council. Cabilonense 1. c. 19
so increase) not heal and cure the festr^d sores and wounds of this our
Church; which will soon break out again with greater torment, and less
hopes of cure.

Fourthly, to examine and find out the cause (if it Herodotus: Euterpe: sect
42, 43, 44. Strabo: Geog^ l. 17. Diodor: Sicul: Bibl: hist: l: 1: sect: 32:
Lucan: Pharsal: l: 10:
Nilus, unsearchable and past finding out, though Purc: Pilgr: lib: 2: c: 19:
some of late, record the contrary:) why Popish and Arminian books have now of
late been published, printed, and countenanced by Authority, and not
suppressed as they ought to be? why there is now such diligent and daily search
at Printing-houses, to anticipate and stop all Answers to Mr Cozens his, or
Mr Mountagues Books? from what original grounds, and whence it comes to
pass, that the several Answers and Replies to Mr Mountagues Gagge, and
virulent Appeal, were denied license at the first, and since surprised and
called in, though there was neither matter of Haeresie, Schism, false
Doctrine, or Sedition in them, but only a bare defense, and positive
justification of the established Doctrines of our Church, oppugned and traduced
in those Arminian and Popish Books of his, which were never yet so much as
once inhibited or questioned but in Parliament? and who were the principal
Agents and Factors in this worthy service, of suppressing all these Answers?
The ^^ucleating and discussing of these intricate and perplexed Quaerees, (a
task which well befits a Parliament) may happily reveal a world of treachery,
and unfold a deep, obstruce, and hidden Mystery of Iniquity; yea, it may
chance to shake and ouerturne the very pillars, and foundation stones of the
Roman and Arminian Faction, if it be but prosecuted, sifted, and ventilated to
the full.

Answers and Replies, consonant to the established Doctrine and discipline of
the Church of England, which have been given to Mr Mountagues, or any other
such Popish or Arminian Books, and since suppressed; may be henceforth
lawfully printed and dispersed without control, to counterplead and beat down
Popery and Arminianisme; and to give public testimony and satisfaction to the
world, that how ever some have lately broached, yet that our Church disclaimes
and disapproues their Popish and Arminian Doctrines. And withal, to secure the
Authors, Printers, and Dispersers of all such Answers and Replies, from all
High Commission suits, and other troubles and vexations whatsoever: Else none
will ever dare to write or print hereafter, in the defense and quarrel of our
Church and Truth, in hard and evil times (from which God ke^pe us) when Popery
and Error shall have all, and Truth no sway, nor license for the Press; For
Qui^ enim virtu^em amplectituripsam, pramia sitoll^s? Iuuenal: Satyr: 10.
what encouragement can men have to write, or to show themselves active for the
Churches good, when they shall have no other reward nor gratification for their
pains and industry, but High Commission Suits and troubles: but heavy fines
and mulcts, or long and tedious imprisonments and restraints (which is all the
encouragement, reward and thanks that some have found:) And if no writers to
vindicate Religion, the Truth and Churches cause, when as they are opposed, by
authorized writings; then Truth, Religion, Church, (yea State and Kingdom
which fall or stand together with them) will soon be ouer^grown with
Haeresies, Errors, Schisms, Factions, and false Doctrines, and so brought
quite to ruin.

Sixthly, to take some speedy course, to inhibit the

Seauenthly and lastly, to take special care and Order, Universities of our
Kingdom (the very nurseries and seed-plots of our Church) may be defaecated
and purged, from all poisonous, Popish, and Arminian Doctrines: and that all
such heads and fellows of Colleges, together with all our other Divines, who
are either notoriously known, or justly suspected, to be the chief Abbettors,
Heads, or Patriots of the Arminian, or Popish cause or Faction, may be speedily
conuented before a selected Committee, assisted by some orthodox, choice and
prime Divines and Prelates: to be there interrogated and examined, in all the
now controuerted points of Popery and Arminianisme: and upon their just
conviction or attainder of all or any of the foresaid Points, to be enjoined a
particular and open recantation of them in writing (to which they shall
subscribe their names) so far forth as they are dissonant either from the
Homelies, Articles, and established Doctrines of the Church of England, or
Ireland; or from the five Conclusions and Resolutions of the Synod of Dort: or
else upon refusal of such recantation and subscription, Tutius est hos
offendere quam demer^isse. Seneca: de Beneficiis, l: 2. c: 24:
to be immediately deprived of all their Ecclesiastical and spiritual
promotions whatsoever.

These are the ways and courses in my raw conceit (which I humbly submit to
your maturer judgments:) to quit and free our Church and our Religion from all
their present: and to bulwark, and secure them against all future homebred
opposites, and pressures whatsoever. Now he who has put that zeal, that care
and courage into your pious hearts, as to engage your selves in the defense and
patronage of our Church and Faith, which are now beser, and violently
assaulted, by troops of foreign and domestique Enemies, who would spoil and
cheat us of them to our faces: inspire you with such heavenly wisdom from
above, as may pitch you on the speediest, best, and safest proiects, for the
extirpation and suppression of all their open or concealed Foes; the
vindicating of their former purity and freedom: the establishment of their
future peace: and the perennious preservation and propagation of that pure
orthodox and sincere Religion which we yet enjoy. Which Religion, as it is the
breath and fragrant odor of our nostrils; the delight and pleasure of our eyes;
the swetest harmony and music to our ears; the most luscious honey and Manna
to our pallats; the most rauishing joy and satisfactory contentment to our
hearts: (the only food, the essence, life and being of our souls; the grand
procurer of all our outward comfort and prosperity; the only Author of our
peace and welfare; the most transcendent glory and honor of our Nation; the
brazen wall, the strongest fence and bulwark of our kingdom; the chiefest
dread and terror to our Enemies; the sole encouragement and comfort of our
Confederates; the fundamental prop and pillar of our State; the only pawn
and evidence of our future hopes and happiness; and the only polestar, way
and passage to conduct and lead us unto Christ, to God, to heaven and eternal
bliss: (all motives for to prise and hold it fast, in these degenerating,
declining and reuolting times:) so if we once but slack our hold, or let it
go, (it being the very rock on which our Church, our kingdom, and we all do
rest and Anchor:) both Church and State, our selves, our souls, and all we now
poss^sse are wrackt, and lost for ever. Wherefore right Christian Worthies,
what ever becomes of other outward Privileges and Cito indignatur libertas si
opprimit^r Nemo plus impetrat a libero quam qui seruire non cogit: Hierom.
Epist. 62, cap. 3. Ipsi Britanni dilectum ac tributa, and iniuncta imperii
munera impegre obeunt sim^uria absint: has a^gre tolerant ^am domiti vt pareant
nondum vt seruiant: Taciti^ Apri^oll vita: cap: 5:
hereditary liberties, (the loss of which you cannot brook with any patience;
where as the condescending unto them alone, would win your hearts and purses
too:) be sure to hold fast and guard this maine foundation whereon our Church,
our kingdom, and we and ours stand, against all Cozening under miners and
Fauxes whatsoever, who labor for to blow it up: If this be safe, our Church,
our King, our Kingdom, our lives, our goods, and liberties are all secure; we
need not fear, what Spain, what France, Psalm: 56, 11: Psalm: 118, 6:
what man can do unto us: For then 1 Cor: 3, 21, 22: 2 Chronicles: 20, 15, 17, 22:
Judge: 5, 20.
God is ours, Christ is ours, the holy Ghost is ours: Angels, and Men and all
the hosts and creatures of heaven and earth, yea earth and heaven it self,
and all is ours: all these will take our parts, and plead our cause against our
Enemies; Rom: 8: 31.
and if these be for us, who, what can be against us?? But if this be once
endangered or rased but a little, O then we sink, we droope, we perish: our
God, our Crown, our peace, our glory, our wealth, our liberties, and all those
sundry magazines, and heaps of blessings which we now enjoy, will forthwith
take their wings, and fly away, and leave us destitute, helpless, hopeless
and forelorne, in those ouerwhelming floods and bitter storms of misery,
bondage, sorrow, want, and woe, which shall even break our hearts, and crush
our bones, and sink our souls in endless horror and despair. O therefore
look betimes to this Foundation, which now begins to shake, to totter, and
moulder by degrees; settle but this a right, and root out all those domestique
Roman and Arminian Pioners, who dig so deep and fast, to undermine it; and
then both Church and State will soon be settled in their former peace and
happiness: O consider, that the present totterings, declinings, and ruins of
our State, arise but from the wauerings, wastings, and backslidings of our
Church: Our State and kingdom now decline so fast, and hasten to the period of
their former glory; because our Church, our faith, our love, our Religion, lose
their ground: Our Realm is full of factions, and divisions, because our Church
is so: Popery, Arminianisme, False doctrines, sin, and all prophannesse have
ouer-spred our Church, yea wasted and corrupted our Religion: no wonder then if
pressures, greuances, losses, crosses, penury, misery, beggary, shame, and a
world of other evils do now annoy our State: Our State Enemies, are no other
but our Church Enemies: O therefore curb, purge out, and quite suppress, the
Achans, Errors, and great Annoyances, which trouble, oppress and undermine our
Church, and our Religion; and then our State and Kingdom will be settled, and
freed from those many pressures, miseries, and afflictions which they now
sustain; and not before. In vain is it to mend the tiles and upper rooms,
till the Foundation be repaired: in vain do any labor to repair the deck,
whiles the keele is full of leakes; whiles the head and heart is sick, the
other members cannot prosper. Never look that our decaying State should thrive
or flowrish, till our Church be healed and recovered: Go on and hasten
therefore with this maine and weighty Cure, and have a special eye to this
great Cozening and infectious plague sore, whose brief Suruay and Censure, I
here in all humility present and tender to your Honors: and the great
Physician both of soul and body, so bless and aid you in all your good
endeauours; that all the festring wounds and sores of our gangrend and
consuming Church and State, may now receive a sound, a perfect, and a present
Cure, and be reduced to their perfect soundn^sse: that so our wilderness may
be like Eden, Isay 51, 3:
and our Desert as the Garden of the Lord: that our wast places may be
comforted, and all our sad and drooping hearts may be filled with joy and
gladness, with thanksgiving and the voice of melody: that you, and I, 2 Chronicles: 7, 10:
and all the people of the Land, in the period and perclose of this your great
Assembly; may be sent away unto our tents and habitations, glad and merry in
heart, for all the goodness that the Lord has showed unto David and Solomon; to
our King, our Church, our State, and to Israel, we his people, by this your
happy, and much desired meeting: and let all that love our David, our Solomon,
or our Israel say: Amen.

Your Honors in all humility, service, and respect, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

A BRIEF SVRVAY, AND CENSVRE, OF Master COVZENS his Couzening DEVOTIONS.
IT has always been the beaten rode, and method, of all Heretics, and
seducing Spirits, in all the ages of the Church: to Venena non dantur nisi
melle circumlita. Hierom. Epist. 7 c. 4.
Dulcerate their Venomus, Harsh, and bitter Potions, with Lushious, and sweet
Ingreedients: De spectaculis c. 27.
Nemo venenum temperat fell and hell^boro, sed conditis pulmentis, and been
saporatis; says Tertullian: Heretics, and false Teachers are always cunning
Apothecaries: they never temper their Poisons with Gall, or Colloquint: but
with the best, and pleasantest Conserues: their venom lurkes in Honey Potions,
that so men may swallow it down with greater greediness, and less suspicion.

Prosper Aquit. de Prouidentia Lib.
Viperium obducto potamus melle venenum.
Heresies, and false Doctrines, (yea, Omne malu^ aut timore, aut pudore natura
perfudit. Tertul. Apolog. Ad Gent. c. 2.
all evil things whatsoever,) as they are of an Odious, so likewise are they
of a Timorous, and Bashful disposition: they dare Error per seipsum non
ostenditur, no denudatus depraehendatur: sed amictu splendido calli de ornatur,
vt ipsa veritate veriorem se exhibere videatur imperitioribus, per externam
apparentiam. Iraeneus. Adu. Haer. l. 1. Proaemio.
not walk Unmasked, (especially, in the brightest Orb and Hemisphere of the
Gospel-sunne:) for fear of present discovery: whence, they always claspe, and
twine themselves at first, with known and approved Trueths: (which serve as
Sauce, or Baits to draw them down:) Abscondunt omnes haeretici and operiunt
mendaciorum suorum dogmatu, vt sagitta^t in obscuro rectos cord. Heirom l. 1.
in Dan. 5.
and cloathe themselves in the Amiable dress, and Rich attire, or at least
wise Christen themselves, by the name and title, of the Orthodoxe, and received
Doctrine of the Church, under whose Banners they pretend they fight: that so
they may the more insensibly Insinuate, and more strongly Anima pestes tanto
periculosius laedunt, quanto subtilius serpunt. Council. Cabilon. 2. Can. 32
and dangerously incorporate themselves, into the Hearts, and Intralls, of
vncautelous, and ouer-credulous Christians, who are ensnared by them, at
unawares. As the long and beaten experience of former ages, so the Assiduous
practice of some Couzening, and seducing Authors, in these our present, and
declining times, do abundantly evidence, and confirm this Truth: Who because
they dare not yet proceed so far, as to show themselves open and professed
Factors for the Church of Rome, for fear their plots, and aims should be
detected: do therefore vent the Adulterous Drugges, and Poisonous Doctrines of
the Reu. 17.4.5.
Whore of Rome, under the veil, and color of DEVOTION: and that in such a Si
non cast, tamen caute. Terent. Eunuchus.
Clandestine, Subdolus and enchanting manner, that they have even charmed
Authority it self; and lulled Argos quite asleep: Whose vigilant eyes,
should always so far wake, as to distinguish Popery from true Devotion: and
not to ouer-looke the one, whiles they admire, and approve the other. But
though Argos, and the MAISTER-WATCHMEN sleep, and close their eyes, and ears,
at once: yet, it is fit that some should wake, and watch against devout, Math.
7.15.
and sheepe-skind Wolves: (who think to prey Cum Priuilegio on the flock,
because the Shepherd has Authorized them,) for fear lest flock and
Shepherd perish: And this has caused me, See Liuie Romans Hist. l. 5. Sect. 47.
like that Roman Goose, in the sleep, and slumber of the Dogs, and Watchmen:
to clap my wings, and stretch my voice, at the covert, and Tanto silentio in
summum euasere, vt non custodes tantum fallerent, sed ne canes quidem solicitum
animal ad nocturnos strepitus excitarent. Ib.
tacit approach, of those treacherous, Mountebanke, Couzening, and Domestique
Gauls, who now are scaling of our sacred Capitol; that so some Manlius, or
other might awake, to rout and chase them from our walls, and banish them for
ever from our Confines.

The Book which I have here pitched upon, is entitled: A COLLECTION OF
PRIVATE DEVOTIONS, OR THE HOURS OF PRAYER: The Author, and Composer of it, is
rumoured to be one Master COVZENS, Chaplain to the Bishop of Winchester,
that now is: Plutarch. de Oracul. Cessatione lib. Coelius Rhod. Antiq. lect. l
3. c. 8.
Ex vngue leonem: You may discover the Authors qualities and conditions, by
this his Paw, and Handy-worke, which smells, nay, stinkes of Popery.

Not to enter upon any large, and punctual discovery of the absurdities, and
Errors of these pernicious Devotions, nor yet to trace the Author in his
course, from page, to page: I shall resolve the sum of my Exceptions to this
work of his, into these ensuing Conclusions.

First, that this Book of Private Devotions, is merely Popish, both in the
form, and matter of it. Secondly, that the Authors end in publishing of it,
was Popery into our Church: at least to grace and countenance it. Thirdly,
that the Author endeavors to make Queen of ever blessed Memory, the
Patroness of this his Popery; and to harber it under her Protection.
Fourthly, that the Prayer book of Queen Elizabeth, William Seeres, a 1560.
and a 1573. (which the Author only mentions, to give a gloss, and color to
his Popery, and to delude the simple; and less wary by it:) does neither
warrant the form, nor matter of these new Devotions: which in truth were most
of them stolen out of Popish Primers, Prayer Books, and Chatechismes; and not
transcribed out of the Prayer Book of Queen Eilzabeth. Fifthly, that there are
diverse falsities, Popish absurdities, and abuses of Scripture in it. Sixthly,
that there are some profane, and dangerous passages inuolued in it. Seventhly,
that it is fraught with contradictions. Eighthly, that it is scandalous, and
prejudicial to our own, and aduantagious only to the Church of Rome.
For the first of these; That this Book of Devotions is merely Popish; it is
most clearly evident: First, from its Frontispice: Secondly, from its Title:
Thirdly, from its Frame and Method: Fourthly, from its Style and Phrases:
Fifthly, from its Subject and Matter.

First, it is merely Popish, in regard of the Heu quam difficile est crimen
non prodere vultu. Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 2.
Frontispiece. For, if you view the Forefront of these Devotions, you shall
find these three Capital letters; ( I H S.) incircled in a Sun, supported
by two Angels, with two devout Nuns, or Women praying to it, one of them
holding a Cross in her hand. Now, what is this but an undoubted Badge, and
Character of a Popish, and Jesuitical Book; of an Idolatrous, and Romish
Devotion? Look into the Frontispiece of all Jesuits works, you shall find
this stamp, and Impresse on them; ( I H S.) in the selfsame form as here:
Look into your Popish Horaries, Primers, Offices, Prayers, and Devotions: Lo
there a Cross, a ( I H S.) and men praying to them, or before them: But never
saw I such a Forefront in any Orthodoxe English, or Outlandish writers.
Clarke de Aulico. l. 1. p. 30
Index animi vultus; the very Effigies, Draught, and Portraiture therefore of
the Frontispiece, proclaims the Book it self, and him that Penned it, to be
merely Popish: It has the very Reu. 14.9.11
Mark, and Seal of the Beast upon its Forehead; therefore, it must needs be
his.

But if Pictures, which Papists style; Synod. Nicen^ 2. Actio. 1. Sur. Tom 3.
Council p. 54. Actio. 6. lb. p. 48 150.154. Adriani. 1. Scriptu^ de Imaginibus.
Ib. p. 214.
their Laymens Books, want tongues to publish our Authors Hieroglyphicall,
and Implicit Popery to the World: then let the very Title of the Book, and
Forefront testify, what the dumb, and speechless Picture cannot utter. Not
to pick any quarrel with the word DEVOTIONS, with which some men might chance
to jar: the variation of it: (OR THE HOURS OF PRAYER:) in this Church and
age of ours, is a sufficient evidence, that the Book, and Author both are
Popish. For where shall you ever find these HOURS OF PRAYER mentioned, or
prescribed, (at least in the abstract, as here,) but only in Popish Authors? I
confess indeed, that there is mention made both in the Acts 2.1.15. and 3.1.
and 19.3.9. Dan 6.10. Psalm. 55.17.
Scriptures and the Fathers, of the third; the sixth; and the ninth hour: (that
is, of Morning, Evening, and of Noonday;) and of Solemn Prayers, both
public and private at these hours. Cypr. Sermon. 6. de Orat. Dom. Hierom. ad
Eustochium.
But never could I find as yet, where these HOURS OF PRAYER, were
prescribed, or distributed after the Roman computation: where the antiquity,
or use of them were justified and defended: where the Devotions of any were
confined to these Hours: or where men's private Devotions at these limited
seasons, were ever styled, the HOURS OF PRAYER, in the abstract: but only in
Popish Counsels, Offices, Primers, and Authors, from whom our Author took his
Title. I confess, indeed: that the first Edition of the Book of Latin
Prayers, published by Queen Elizabeth in the year 1560. quoted by our Author,
in the second Title page; was styled: ORARIVM: SEV, LIBELLVS PRAECATIONVM: (not
Horarium: nor Libellus praecationum, seu, Orarium:) in which there is only a
brief recital of the first; the third; and the ninth hour of Prayer, far
different from our Authors, as I shall show anon: But this very Book, in the
second, and third Impressions of it: in the year 1564. and 1573. had no other
Title, but PRAECES PRIVATAE IN STVDIOSORVM GRATIAN COLLECTAE: and in these
Editions which were the last and best, there is not so much as any touch or
menti^n, of these Canonical Hours of Prayer, or first, sixth* or ninth hours:
Never could I hear as yet of any Devotions, or Prayer Books, entitled the
HOURS OF PRAYER: but only one in Spanish, Printed at Paris, by William
Merlin, 1556. Styled, HORAS DE NVESTRA SENIORA* The Hours of our Lady: Fraught
with the very dregs of Popery, and Idolatry: The very Phrase, and Emphasis
therefore of this Title, (which is never mentioned by way of approbation, in
any Protestant writers; nor yet in the Articles, Common Prayer Book, the
Books of Homilies, or Canons of our Church: nor yet in any Orthodoxe English
writer,) does stamp a kind of Brand, and Impresse of Popery, and
Superstition, on the Book it self, and evidence it to be merely Popish.

our Ladies Primer, or Office: Printed in Lattaine at Antwerpe, 1593. and in
Lattaine, and English for the utility of such of the English Nation, as
understand not the English tongue: 1604. According to the Breuiary of Pius the
fifth, and Clemens the eight: Printed at Antwerpe, 1621. and the Hours of our
Lady, Printed at Paris, 1556. For first, you have here a Frontispice: with ( I
H S.) in a Sun held up by two Angels: and two devout Females, one of them
holding a Cross in here hand, Supplicating unto it: Then you have for the
Title: A Collection of private Devotions: or the Hours of Prayer: together
with a Preface. Justifying Canonical Hours; condemning all conceived Prayers;
and confining men to the unerring Devotions of the Church; and to the
Ceremonies, Forms, and Sacraments of the ancient Church: (which can be no
other but the Church of Rome, as I shall prove anon:) Then you have a Calender
with a Preface to it: Containing the Festival, and Fasting days of the
Church; and the Memories forsooth, of none but holy Martyrs and Saints:
(though many of them were never found in rerum natura, and others of them were
never Sainted but at Rome:) Next you have a Table of moveable Feasts, and rules
for them: Then you have the Fasting days of the Church; or days of special
Abstinence and Devotion: whereof our Ember weeks, and Rogation days;
Ash-wedensday: the Fridayes after Whitsontide, and holy Cross: the Saturday
after Saint Lucies day: and all the Fridayes and Saturdayes of the year, must
be the chief; though our Church enioynes them not: Next you have the times
wherein Marriages are not to be Solemnized: which times, the Calenders,
Articles, and Canons of our Church, do neither mention, nor prescribe. Then
succeedes the Apostles Creed in twelve Articles: the Lords Prayer in seven
Petitions: the ten Commandments with the duties enjoined, and the Sins
prohibited by them: together with These are only to be found in Popish
Primers, Catechismes and Writers.
the Precepts of Charity; the Precepts of the Church; the Sacraments of the
Church: (and these forsooth, must be seven:) the three Theological Virtues:
the three kinds of good Works. The seven gifts of the holy Ghost: the twelve
fruits of the holy Ghost: the Spiritual, and Corporal works of Mercy: the
eight Beatitudes: Seven deadly Sins, and their contrary Virtues: then Quatuor
nouissima: all Popish trash and trumpery, stolen out of Popish Primers, and
Chatechismes, as I shall prove anon: and never mentioned in any Protestant
writers. Then comes in His collections for private Devotions, with his Plees
both from Scriptures, Fathers, and Popish Authors: for the practice, and
observation of Canonical Hours, both in general, and special; all taken out
of Bellarm. de bonis Operibus in Partit. l. 1. c. 13.
Bellarmine, Instit. Moralium part. 1 l. 9 c. 2.10.6.
Azorius, and the Annotatio^s on Acts 10. Sect. 6.
Rhemish Testament: And first, you have his preparatiue Prayers, before
Mattins: and among them, one at our entrance into the Church, and another when
we come into the Quire: then you have a preparatiue Hymn. Then comes in a
Justification of the antiquity of Mattins, AND THAT AT THE FIRST HOUR: then
follows His Mattins for the first; the third; the sixth; and ninth Hour,
beginning with the Lords Prayer; seconded with an Hymn; continued with
Psalms, and gloria Patri, etc. with a piece or fragment of a Chapter, or
Lesson; and Consummated, with some Prayers, and a Thanksgiving: Then succeed
his VESPERS, then his COMPLINE: all of them exactly framed, after the Popish
Offices, Primers, and Horaries, and not according to our Common Prayer Book,
or any Protestants Method. Now follow some other Prayers, with the seven
Penitential Psalms: Next the Collects of our Church; with several
Aduertisments, and Prefaces them: then Prayers and Meditations both before and
after the Sacrament: and among them, one WHEN WE ARE PROSTRATE BEFORE THE
ALTER: a Prayer worth the observing: another, desiring the MEDIATION OF ANGELS:
Then follow several forms of Confessions to be used, according to the
directions of the Church, especially, before the receiving of the Sacrament:
then a devout manner of preparing our selves, TO RECEIVE ABSOLVTION: with a
Thanksgiving after ABSOLVTION: then follows some special PRAYERS FOR
EMBER-WEEKES, not mentioned in our Common Prayer Book: Then Prayers for the
Sick; Prayers at the Hour of Death; yea, and A PRAYER FOR THE DEAD: then
other Prayers and Thankesgiuings: And as he begins with the SIGN OF THE
CROSS, so he concludes with the VIRTVE OF CHRIST'S BLESSED CROSS: yea, and
with the INTERCESSION OF ALL SAINTS (as I have heard:) before the leaf was
altered and torn out, upon some exceptions taken to it. So that if you Suruay
the whole frame and model, of these Devotions and Hours of Prayers; either in
the whole entire structure: or in the form, and order of its several parts:
you shall find; that it took its pattern, and sample, from our Ladies
Primer, and the forequoted Devotions, which run in the self same method,
form, yea, matter too* not from the private Prayers of Queen Elizabeth, nor
yet from our Book of Common Prayers, as I shall prove more fully anon.

Fourthly, the very Style, and Phrases of it, do evidence, The Hours of
Prayer: which is eighteen several times mentioned, and some twelve of them by
way of Preface; or Title: The ancient Church: in the second Title page: the
Ancient Laws and godly Canons of the Church: in the first Preface: The
Festiualls, and Fasting days of the Church: the Title before the Calender: The
Fasting days of the Church. The precepts of the Church: The Sacraments of the
Church: (which being all compared together, with their subject matter, will
plainly testify, that he means the Church of Rome, and no other; since the
Ancient Laws and Canons of the Church, for the observation of Canonical
Hours: the Precepts of the Church there mentioned, and the Sacraments of the
Church, which he makes seven, can be appropriated to no Church but that
alone, and not unto our own, or other Churches, which approve of no such
Sacraments, and know of no such Canons, Laws, and Precepts, as are here
recorded:) To these I may add: his first, his third* his sixth, and his ninth
Hours of Prayer: His Vespers, Page 143.
Suffrages, and Page 165.
Compleine: his Priests, and Priests of Gods Church (often repeated: and the word
Ministers never used, though See Doctor Rainolds conference wi^h Heart. pa. 4^6
to 473. Doctor ^ulkes Notes on Heb. 8.9. and 10.
we affirm, the name of Priests, to be an incongruous word, not proper to the
Ministers of the Gospel:) His Times wherein Marriages are not Solemnized: The
two Precepts of Charity: The three Theological Virtues: Three kinds of good
Works: Seven Gifts: and twelve Fruits of the holy Ghost: After his Calendar.
The 7. Spiritual, and Corporal works of Mercy: The eight Beatitudes: Seven
deadly Sins, Quatuor nouissima: Page 17.
A Prayer, when we come into the Quire: Page 132.
The seven Penitential Psalms to be used in times of Penance, etc. P.
233.334.
Septuagessima Sunday, was but to prepare the people for their solemn Fasting,
and Penance; and to forewarne them of Lent: that when it came, they might more
strictly, and Religiously observe it. Part. 2 the Title.
Christ's holy Sacrament, his blessed Body and Blood. 2 Part. p. 4.
When we are prostrate before the Altar: Page 10.
That the remembrance which we now offer up to thee, may by the Ministry of
thy holy Angels, be brought into thy Heavenly Tabernacle: Page 12.13.
At the receiving of the Body: Adding with the Priest: Page 25.30.
A devout manner of preparing our selves to Absolution: A thanksgiving after
Absolution: compared with the fifth Precept of the Church: Page 122.
The virtue of Christ's blessed Cross, etc: these several Phrases, and
Passages, which are seldom or nowhere found, but in Popish Authors, and bear
a tange, and smell of Popery always with them: are a strong and pregnant
evidence, that these Devotions are patched up of shreds of Popery.



1. That the Church of Rome is the true and Ancient Mother Church; and that her
holy Canons, Laws, Precepts, Ceremonies, Constitutions, Canonical Hours and
Sacraments, are duly and Religiously to be observed by us.

2. That the visible Church of Christ, (yea, the very Church of Rome) can never
Err in matters of Faith.

3. That the Lent-fast, is an Apostolical Constitution; that it comes from
Divine Authority: And that we are to observe and keep, both it, and Ember
weeks, Rogation days, together with Wednesdayes, Fridayes, Saturdayes, and
Holy day Eues, with Devotion, and Abstinence: not in political respects, as
prescribed, and enjoined by the State; but by virtue of the precepts and
injunctions of the Church.

4. That the Pictures, and Images of God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, may
be lawfully made.

5. That men may worship them in these Images.

6. That men may adore the Persons, and Images, of Saints, and Angels, though
not with that Solemn worship of Latria, which is due t^ God alone.

7. That Auricular Confession to a Priest, and Absolution from him, are
necessary.

8. That there are seven Sacr^ments of the Church.

9. That there are but three kinds of good Works.

10. That there are Sins Venial in their own Nature.

11. That Christ is corporally present in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

12. That the Sacrament is a rea^l Sacrifice, and that we are for to adore it.

13. That Ange^s are our Mediators to present our Prayers and services unto
God, as well as Christ.

14. That Prayer for the Dead is lawful.

15. That there is a Divine blessing and efficacy in the bare Cross of Christ.

These fifteen Points of Fundamental, rank, and Doctrinall Popery, are
shrouded, and cherished under the protection, and countenance of these Pious
Devotions.

For the first of these, I collect it from the Title page: This Title is taken
From the hours of our Lady: Printed at Paris, 1556. From Bellarmine de Bonis
Operibus in Partit. l 1. c. 13 And our Ladies Primer.
The practice of the Ancient Church, called, The Hours of Prayer: From the
Preface to the Book, Those who accuse us here in England to have despised all
the old Cermonies, and cast behind us the blessed Sacraments of Christ's
Catholic Church, do but betray their own infirmities: This from A Manual
of Prayers by Laur. Kellam: Printed at Doway 604 at the beginning.
The Fasting days of the Church, or days of special Abstinence, and
Devotion: Whereof Lent, Ember weeks: some Holy day Eues, and all the Fridayes
of the year, except those that fall within the Twelve days of Christmas. This
out of our Ladies Primer. James Ledesma his Catechism Cap 13. Bellarmines
Ch^istian Doctine cap. 7. Vaux his Cate^hisme. c. 3.
The Precepts of the Church: First, to observe the Festiualls, and Holy days
appointed: Secondly, to keep the Fasting days with Devotion, and Abstinence:
Thirdly, to observe the Ecclesiastical customs, and Ceremonies established,
and that without frowardness, or contradiction: Fourthly, to repair unto the
public Service of the Church, for Mattins, and Evening song, with other Holy
offices at times appointed, unless there be a just, and unfeigned cause to the
contrary: Fifthly, to receive the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ with frequent Devotion, and three times a year at least, of which times
Easter to be always one. And for better preparation thereunto as occasion is,
to disburthen, and quit our Consciences of those sins that may grieve us, or
scruples that may trouble us; to a Learned, and discreet Priest, and from him,
to receive advice and benefit of Absolution: This is stolen from Our Ladies
Primer at the beginning. Ledesma his Catechism cap. 15. Vaux his Catechism cap.
4. Bellarmines Christian Doctrine. cap. 9.
The Sacraments of the Church: The principal, and truly so called, (as
generally necessary to Salvation,) are Baptism, and the Lords Supper: The
other five, that is to say; Confirmation, Penitence, Orders, Matrimony, and
Visitation of the Sick, or extreme Unction, though they be sometimes called,
and have the name of Sacraments, yet have they not the like nature, that the
two principal, and true Sacraments have. From all these several passages
stolen out of Popish Authors: and not so much as mentioned in the Prayers of
Queen Elizabeth, or in our Common Prayer Book, Homellies, or Articles: I
argue thus; If there be no Ancient Church, which enioynes the practice of
Canonical Hours, and strict observation of the recorded Fasting days, with
Abstinence, and Devotion: If there be no Church, which admits, or allows of
seven Sacraments, or gives such Precepts, as are here recited, but only the
Church of Rome: then it is certain, that the Author affirms the Church of
Rome, to be the True, and Ancient Mother Church, and that her holy Canons,
Precepts, Ceremonies, Canonical Hours, and Sacraments are duly, and
Rerigiously to be observed by us: But there is no Ancient Church, which
enioynes the Practical observation of Canonical Hours, and the strict
observation of the Recorded Fasting days; there is no Church, which approoues
of seven Sacraments, or which gives such Precepts, as are here recited, but
only the Church of Rome. Therefore it is certain, that our Author, affirms
the Church of Rome, to be the True, and Ancient Mother Church: and that her
Canons, Ceremonies, Precepts, Canonical Hours, and Sacraments, are duly, and
Religiously to be observed by us. The sequel cannot be denied, because the
Author, does press these Canonical Hours, Precepts, Ceremonies, and
Sacraments upon us, from the Authority, and practice of the Church, in which
they always have been, and yet are in use. The Minor is already evident:
because See the Homily of Fasting. Part. 2.
no Church by its own Authority alone without a relation to the Policy of
State, does urge any set Fasting days, nor yet enioynes Canonical Hours, or
Auricular Confession to a Priest: nor allows of seven Sacraments, (as I shall
prove more largely in its place:) but only the Church of Rome, whose secret
Factor questionless our Author was: Therefore, our Author is undoubtedly
guilty, of this first Popish Tenent.

For the second, that the visible Church of Christ, That we might be sure to
speak in the Grane, and Pious language of Christ's Church; which has ever more
been guided by the Spirit of God, and the holy Ghost. From which I argue thus.

That CHVRCH, which is evermore guided by the Spirit of God, and the holy
Ghost, can never Err in matters of Faith: this all Protestants, and Papists
testify.

But the Church of Christ, (says our Author, speaking of that particular
Church, out of which these scattered Devotions were collected, which is no
other, but the Church of Rome:) is evermore guided by the Spirit of God* and
the holy Ghost, and that in matters of Faith, and Doctrine: according to the Sea Epist. Synodales Council. Basil. Surius Tom 4. page 143. Rhemists
Annotations on John 14. Sect. 5. On cap 16. Sect. 2.5. and cap 17. Sect 2.
Bellarmine l. 3. de Eccles. cap. 14 and all other Papists on this Controversy,
accordingly.
Tenent of the Papists: who affirm; that the Pope, the Church, and General
Counsels cannot Err; because they are always guided by the Spirit of God,
and the holy Ghost: And contrary to the express Doctrine, and Tenent of See
Whitakers De Ecels^. Cont. 2. Quaest. 4. c 2.3. Master Bernards Rheemes against
Rome Proposition 12. Doctor Raynolds Thesis 2. Apologia 2. Thesis and
Conference with Heart, with all other Protestants both of our own and other
Churches who write of this Controversy.
all Protestant Divines: who affirm; that any visible Church, or General
Counsels, yea, that the Church, and Pope of Rome, may Err: because they are
not all evermore guided by the Spirit of God: with which the 19. and 21.
Articles of our Church concur.

Therefore the Church of Christ, (to wit, particular Churches, or General
Counsels, which are the representative Church,) in our Authors judgment,
cannot Err in matters of Faith, and Doctrine: which is a Branded Error.

Now mark what good use our Antagonist makes of this Conclusion, even the same
that the Pope, and Church of Rome do: to Countenance, and Justify all those
Erroneous, and Popish Ceremonies, Trumperies, and Positions, which are couched,
and set abroach in his Devotions, and to make them pass for current Truth:
because these Devotions, are nothing else but the approved, and accustomed
Devotions of the Ancient Church of Christ, (videsicet the Church of Rome,)
which was evermore guided by the Spirit of God, and the holy Ghost: and not the
Devotions of private ghosts, and spirits, (as he there styles them,) which are
subject unto Error. Therefore there can be no hurt, no Error, no False, nor
Popish Doctrine, couched in them. So that he does not only justify, and
approve, but likewise apply this Popish Position, in a Subdolous, and Popish
manner, even to justify the vnerrabilitie of these his Devotions: and in them
the infallibility of the Church of Rome, from whose weedie Garden, this
Garland of Devotions has been gathered.

Come we now unto his third Position collected from This is transcribed out of
Laur. Kellams Manual of Prayers Printed at Doway, 1604. Immediately after his
Calender.
The fasting days of the Church. Or days of special Abstinence and Devotion:
The holy days of Lent: The Ember weeks at the four seasons: The three
Rogation days: The Eues and Vigils before some thirteen Holy days. It has
been also an Ancient Custom to fast all the Frydayes in the year, except
those that fall within the 12 days of Christmas. P. 234.235.
To this end: (speaking of Septuagesima Sunday, and the Lent Fast) there was a
godly Ordinance in the Ancient Church (made by the Council of Anxerre more
then a thousand years since) that in the end of the Epiphany there should be
certain days appointed (such as this, and the two Sundays following are.)
Wherein to prepare the people for their solemn Fasting and Penance, to give
them warning of their Lent before hand, that when it came, it might be the
more strictly and religiously observed. And afterward, through the variety of
Fasting in diverse places, it came to pass that these three Sundays were made
to be the beginnings of the Lent-Fast: Some extending their humiliation, to a
larger time then Ordinary, and others excepting from it those days of the
Week, whereupon many Christians, had either no custom, or no leave to fast.
All agreeing in this, that whether we begin at Septuagesima, or any of the
Sundays following, the Lent-Fast is duly to be kept at one solemn time of the
year, and Religiously to be continued unto the great Feast of Easter. P. 237.
By the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Church of Christ, we still observe an
yearly solemn time of fasting and prayer, which we call our Lent-Fast. Page
240
The Lent Fast which we now keep is, and ever has been an Apostolical
Constitution. It is no humane Invention (as they call it) but it comes from
Divine Authority, that we Fast our Forty Days in Lent. Page 246.247.
The last week of Lent is an holy week, and Christians have used to call it,
The holy and great week, or the passion week, and more solemnly to observe it
then any of the rest before, etc. This is the reason why all the Wednesdayes of
the year have bin heretofore, and why the Frydaies and Saturdayes of every
week besides are now continued, and made common days of Abstinence and Prayer.

From the words and scope of all which passages, the Author does palpably and
infallibly teach: That the Lent-Fast is an Apostolical Constitution, coming
from Divine Authority, which binds us accordingly to observe it. And that Ember
weeks, Rogation days, together with Wednesdayes, Frydayes, Saturdayes, and
the last week of Lent especially, and some certain Holy Day Eues are to be
kept with Devotion and Abstinence: Not in any Political respect, as prescribed
and enjoined by the State for Politic ends: As the increase of Cattle, the
maintaining of Ships, and Mariners, and the encouragement of Fishermen: (in
which respect our Church does principally observe these days: not as Fasting
days, or days of Devotion to be spent in Prayer and Fasting: but rather, yea
chiefly, as Fish-dayes, for the advancement of Fishing, and sparing of young
Cattle: not as days enjoined by the Churches but designed by the States
Authority: As our Homely of Fasting Part. 2. 2- Ed 6. cap. 19. 5. Ed 6. cap. 3.
5. Eliz cap 5. 27. Eliz. cap. 11. 29. Eliz. cap. 5. The Kings Majesty's
Proclamations, for the observing of Lent, and most of our Protestant Divines
affirm,) but as Apostolical Praecepts and Constitutions, praescribed and
enjoined by the Churches bare Authority: which opinion both of the Lent-Fast,
and of these other Fasting-dayes* (or Fish-dayes rather;) all Calvin Instit.
lib 4 cap. 12. Sect. 20. Doctor Fulk^ Answer to the Rhemish Testament, Matthew.
9. Sect 11 Math. 4. Sect. 2 Mark 1. Sect. 6. Luke 4. Sect. 1 and ^. Sect 4.
Acts 13. Sect 5. Festus Hommius Disput. 69. number: 4. p. 469 Hocker Eccles. Poll.
l. 5 Sect. 72. Doctor Featly Handmayde of Devotion. p. 526 54^. to 546. Mr.
Masons Christians Fast. cap. 10.
Protestant Authors do disclaim, as a mere Popish Assertion; And none but
Bellarm de bonis Oper. in partic l. 2. c. 14 Rhemish Annotations on Mat. 4.
Sect. 2. Mark 1. Sect. 6 and Luke 4 Sect. 1. See the Popish Authors quoted by
Mr. Mason in his Christians Fast cap. 10. p. 151.152. All to this purpose: That
the Lent Fast is a Divine, or at least an Apostolical Institution: as Master.
Cozens here affirms.
professed Papists do maintain. We keep our Lent, and the fore-recited
Fasts, by virtue of the Statute of 2. and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 19. and by no
Ecclesiastical, or Apostolical constitutions: We know no express Precepts,
in our Articles, Homelies, Canons, or Common Prayer Book of our Church, that
bind us to observe these Fasts; but only the fore-recited Statutes: which are
the Laws, and Precepts of the State, not of the Church: Therefore our Authors
Doctrine in these points of Lent and Fasting Days, which differ from the
express words, and Preamble of the Statute of 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 19. from
the Homely of Fasting, part. 2
Doctrine of our Homelies: and the received Tenent of all our Writers: agreeing
verbatim with the assertion of Jesuits, and Popish writers; must needs be
Popish.

For the fourth; That the Pictures of God the Son, and God the holy Ghost,
may be lawfully made: it is covertly, and necessarily intimated in his first
Division of such who do off^nd, against the second Commandment: Offenders
against the second Commandment (says he) are, They that fancy to themselves,
any likeness of the Deity; or frame for to make any Image, either of God the
blessed Trinity, or of God the Father; who never appeared to the World in a
visible shape: So that he clearly admits, and intimates in these words: that
the Images, and Pictures of God the Son, and God the holy Ghost. may be
safely made: This is Bellarmines reason in his Christian Doctrine. c. 6. p.
142.143.
because they appeared to the World in a visible shape, (as he pretends;)
though God the Father, and the blessed Trinity never did. His applying then of
this reason only to God the Father, and the blessed Trinity: His stopping at
the Father; without any further mention of the Son, and holy Ghost; together
with his ensuing words: Those that make any other Image, (be it of Christ and
his Cross, or be it of his blessed Angels,) with an intent to worship them.
Do fully evidence, that he approoues the making of the Images, and Pictures
of God the Son, and God the holy Ghost: a mere Popish assertion, which the
Rhemists Annotat. in Acts. 17. Sect. 5 Vaux: in his Catechism on the 2
Commandment. The Council of Basil: of Trent: and all the Papists. See Bishop
Vshers answer to the Jesuits Challenge. cap. 10.
Papists only do maintain: and which our own Hom. 2. and 3 against the
peril of Idolat^y Article 22.
Homelies, and Dr. Fulks Annotations in Acts 17. Sect. 5. Bishop Babington, Mr.
Perkins, and Mr. Dod on the 2. Commandment. BB. Vshers Answer to the Jesuits
Challenge. ca. 10. Where all the Fathers are quoted to this purpose. M. John
Whites Way to the Church. Digres. 51. Sect. 11. Calvin. Institut. l 1. c. 11.
Sect 12. And all our Protestant Divines that writ of Images.
Orthodoxe writers do expressly condemn, as Sinful, and Unlawful.

For the fifth Position; That God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, may be
worshipped in their Images; which is necessarily collected from these words:
Offenders against the second Commandment: are, They that make any other
Images, or the likeness of any thing whatsoever* (be it of Christ and his
Cross, or be it of his blessed Angels,) with an intent to fall down and
worship them. They that are worshippers of Idols or representments of false
Gods: In which passages, our Author only disclaimes the worshipping of meree
Pictures, Idols, and false Gods, which the Bellarmines Ch^istian Doctrine, cap
6. p. 139. Vaux his Catechism, c. 3. Rhemists Notes on 1 John 5. Sect. 5
Papists lik^wise do condemn: or the adoration of the bare Pictures of
Christ, and the holy Ghost: intimating, that we may worship them in their
Pictures, (for why else does he allow men for to make them:) though we may
not Adore the Pictures themselves; according to the Rhemists Notes on Phil. 2.
Council. Trident. Sess 25.
ancient Popish distinction, and evasion; which our Hom. 1.2 3 Against the
peril of Idolatry. BB Babington. Mr. Perkins, and Mr. (...) on the 2.
Comm^ndement PB. Vshers Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. cap. 10.
Homelies, and the fore-quoted Protestant Authors do condemn, and utterly
reject, as Popish and Erroneous.

For the sixth; That the Persons, and Images of Saints and Angels, may be
worshipped, though not with the s^lfesame worship* wherewith we Adore God
himself This is evidently enforced from his Exposiotin on the second
Commandment. Thi^ being compaiared with his blessing at the end: whe^ein there
was the Intercession of all Saints ^nser^ed. (as I have heard) before his
Majesty took exceptions to it* will evidence his meaning to the full.
God is to be worshipped with the lowly reverence of our bodies: also; This to
be religiously done unto him: This also to be done purely, without any such
outward, and solemn worship, to be given either to the Person, or Image of
Saint, or Angel, or any other creature whatsoever: which being compared with
that which follows: Offenders against this Commandment; They that are
worshippers of Saints Images, and out of a false opinion of demeriting the
protection of the blessed Virgin, or any other Saint of God, do give a
religious Adoration, to those usual representations that are made of them. So
that he does here evidently, and clearly grant, Answer to the Gagg. page
318. See Dr. Featly his Parallel p. 21.22.
as Master Mountague also in express terms does:) That Council. Trident.
Sess. 25. Bellarmines Christian Doctrine, cap. 6. James Ledesma his Catechism
cap. 6.
there may be a religious use of the Images of Saints, and Angels; and that
we may Worship, and Adore, either Saints, or Angels, at least wise, with the
Worship of Dulia, as the Rhemists Notes no Mat. 4. Sect. 3. Act^ 10. Sect. 7.
c. 14. Sect. 2. Hebr. 11. Sect. 9. Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 2. and 4. Sur Council.
To^. 3. p. 74.102.120. Adrianis Scriptum de Imaginibus. Ib. page 217.
Papists hold: though not with that outward and solemn worship, (mark the
Emphasis of the words,) which is due to God alone: For he only condemns the
giving of religious Adoration, to the bare Images, not to the persons of
Saints, and Angels, (which his last words do seem clearly to admit,) and the
yielding, not of Religious worship, and Adoration: but of that outward, and
solemn Worship only, which is due to God alone: which is no more, then all
the Papists do acknowledge: who appropriate the worship of Latria unto God
alone; though they give that of Dulia, and Hyperdulia unto Angels, Saints, and
Images. So that in these Points of Images, and Prayer to Saints, (make the best
of them that can be,) he goes no further then moderate Papists, and not so
far as all Orthodoxe Protestant Authors do: so Frozen are his Zeal, and
hot Devotions in these points of Saints, and Angels, which are merely Popish.

For the seventh; That Confession to a Priest, and Absolution fifth Precept of
the Church: to wit, To receive the Blessed Communion of Christ's Body, and
Blood, with frequent Devotion, and three times of the year at least, whereof
Easter to be one: And for better preparation there unto, as occasion is, to
disburthen, and quite our Consciences of those sins, that may grieve us, or
scruples that may trouble us, to a Learned, and discreet Priest, and from him
to receive advice, and the benefit of Absolution. Lo Compare this with his
prayer before Absolution, and his thanksgiving after it, together with his
Form of Confession.
here a pregnant proof for Auricular Confession: wherein there are three
things obserueable: First, that the Confession, which our Author speaks of, is
no arbetrarie, or voluntary, but a forced, and enjoined Confession, and that
by the Authority, and Precept of the Church: whereas The Exhortation before
the Communion Dr. Fulke Rhemish Testament on John 20. Sect. 5. Mr. Bernard
Rheemes against Rome Proposition 20 page 203. Homily of Repentance. part. 2
ours, and all other Protestant Churches, prescribe it only by way of advice;
and that only in case of necessity, when as men's Consciences cannot else be
quieted. Secondly, that this Confession must be made, not to a Minister of Gods
word, as (our Common Prayer Book renders it: but So the Papists in express
terms, Council. Lateran. sub Innocen. 3. cap. 21 Rhem. Notes on Luke 17. Sect.
4. Ioh 20. Sect. 5. on Iam. 5. Sect. 10.
to a discreet, and Learned Priest: that is, to some Popish Massing Priest or
other: Thirdly, that he must not lay open his grief, that troubles and
disquiets his Conscience, as our Communion Book reads it: but he must
disburthen his Conscience, of those sins that may (not that do) grieve him,
and those scruples that may trouble him: Fourthly, that he must do this, not
when he is troubled in Conscience only: but as occasion is; that is, as often
as he receives the Sacrament, if the Priests leisure, and his own occasions
will permit him. All which are, directly contrary to the Sea Homily of
Repentance part. 2.
Doctrine of the Church of England* and Dr. Fulkes Notes on the Rhemish
Testament, John 20. Sect. 5. Luke 17. sect 4 Iam. 5. sect. 10. Mr John Whites
Pathway, Numb 40. Digres ^3. Calu Instit. l 3. (...) sect. 9
all Protestant Authors; and consonant to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome:
who approoues, and practices Auricular Confession, Rhemists Notes on 1 Cor. 11
sect. 1^.
especially, before the receiving of the Sacrament: and makes this, one Our
Ladies P^^mer* James Ledesma in Chatechisme. c. 13. Bellarm. Christian
Doctrine, cap 7.
principal Precept of the Church, (as our Deuotioner does here:) To confess
our sins to an approved Priest, once a year, and to receive the Sacrament,
at the least every Easter. Therefore he is apparently guilty of this gross
point of Popery.

Come we now to the eighteth; That there are seven collected from these words.
The Sacraments of the Church: here is the Title; then follow the Sacraments
themselves. The principal, and truly so called: (as generally necessary to
Salvation,) are Baptism, and the Lords Supper: The other five; that is to say,
Confirmation, Penitence, Orders, Matrimony, and Visitation of the Sick,
(which no Papist yet accounted any,) or Extreame-vnction: though they are
sometimes called, and have the name of Sacraments, yet have they not the like
nature, that the two principal, and true Sacraments have: Lo here a
litterall, and manifest acknowledgement, and publication of seven Sacraments:
For first, the whole seven, have reference to the Superscription: The
Sacraments of the Church: Secondly, he styles them, the other five; and names
them in particular: Thirdly, he says, that they are sometimes called, and have
the name of Sacraments: quoting Scriptures for them in the margent. He does
not say, that they are so called by the Papists, who only repute them
Sacraments; but that they are so called, and named, viz. by the Church, to
which only it has relation: Fourthly, he does not say with our Chatechisme
there quoted; that Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, are the two only
Sacraments, that are generally necessary to Salvation: nor with our See the
Homely of Com^on Prayer and the Sacraments.
Homelies and 25. Article: that the other five, that is to say; Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreame-vnction, are not to be counted for
Sacraments of the Gospel; but such as have grown from the corrupt following of
the Apostles, etc. All he faith by way of exclusion, is only this. That
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are the principal Sacraments, truly so
called: that they are generally necessary to Salvation, and that the other have
not the like nature with them: which does not exclude the rest from being
true, or less necessary, and inferior Sacraments: since all Papists who
acknowledge seven Sacraments, do confess: that Council. Trident. Sess. 7. C^n^
sect. 3. Bellar. Christian Doctrine c. 9. page 205.
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are the principal, and most necessary
Sacraments of all the rest: And the rather am I induced to think, that I have
not wronged our Devout Author in his Arethmetique; because he ioynes his five
Precepts of the Church: his six Corporal, and seven Spiritual works of
Mercy, his seven Deadly sins, and seven contrary Virtues: his eight
Beatitudes, and other particulars: (Transcribed verbatim out of our Ladies
Psalter, and James Ledesma his Chatechisme, where the seven Sacraments are
inserted with them:) with these seven Sacraments; since therefore he iumpes so
fully with the Papists in all the other particulars, I doubt not, but he does
concur with them in this: and so is culpable of this known, and professed
Popish Tenent: which our second Book of Homelies. Hom. 9. our 25. Article, and
all our Orthodoxe writers, do with one consent condemn, and disauow.

That there are but three kinds of good works: which does necessarily result
from these words: Three kinds of good Works; Fasting, Prayer, and
Almesdeedes: which as they are transcribed verbatim out of our Ladies Primer,
Vaux his Chatechisme: Matthias Coschi, his Otium Spirituale melliftuarum
Praecationum: Printed 1617. page 105. and Bellarm. de Bonis Operibus in partic.
lib. 1.
other Popish Authors: So it altogether justifies that Popish Assertion: That
there are but these three kind of good Works: Which our 1 and 2. Part of the
Homily of good works 1. Part of the Homily of Fasting.
Homelies, and all Protestant Divines do utterly deny: since Hearing, Reading,
and Meditating of Gods Word: the Honoring, Loving, Fearing, Obaying, and
Serving of God, both in our general, and particular calling: our believing in
his Name, together with all other duties of Piety, and Religion, both to God,
our selves, or others, and the keeping of all Gods Commandments, are as
really, and properly good Works as those: as our Homelies of good Works, and
Scriptures testify.

That there are some sins which are but Venial, not Mortal, in their own
nature: which is evidently deduced from this passage. Seven Deadly sins; 1.
Pride; 2. Covetousness; 3. Luxury; 4. Envy; 5. Gluttony; 6. Anger; 7. Sloth:
which as it is directly stolen out of our Ladies Primer, Ledesma his
Chatechisme. cap. 14. The Hours of our Lady: Printed at Paris. 1556. fol. 3,
4, 5. Bellarmines Christian Doctrine. cap. 19. Otium Spirituale. by Matthias
Coschi. page 112. and other Popish Pamphlets, Chatechismes, and Devotions; not
out of any Protestant Authors: so it necessarily implies: that these seven
Sins, are the greatest Sins of all others: and that there are some Sins,
which are not Deadly in their own nature: for so do the Popish writers
infer from thence: whence it is, that after they have discoursed of these
seven Deadly sins; they then fall So does Bellarmine in his Christian
Doctrine, c. 18.19
immediately to dispute of Venial sins: which Venial sins, Mr. Rogers 4
Proposition on the 9. Article. Mr Whites Way to the Church. Digres. 39. Doct.
Fulk on Mat 6 Sect. 5. Romans 1. Sect 11.
our own, and all other Protestant Churches do renounce. Neither is this any
ways salued by the clause, ( as they are commonly so called,) which our Author
(conscious no doubt to himself, of his own guilt,) has added to his latter
Impressions: For these are no where commonly called, the seven Deadly sins:
but among Philippus Loni^erus, Tur^. Hist. l. 2. c. 15,
Turks, and Papists; not amomg Protestants. Whence our Ladies Primer, and
James Ledesma the Jesuit, his Chatechisme. cap. 14 Speaking of these seven
sins, give them this Superscription: The seven Capital sins, which are
commonly called Deadly: So that our Authors latter Edition which renders it;
not Deadly sins, as his first Impression does: but, Seven Deadly sins, as
they are commonly so called: does rather mar then mend his cause, because it
is now more suitable to Ledesma, and our Ladies Primer, then before: and so
more likely to infer this Popish Conclusion: That there are some sins,
which are but Venial in their own nature: which Protestants do quite
renounce.

But our Author does not set a stop, and period to his Transubstantiation, or
a Corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament* which I clearly collect from
these two passages: Part. 2. p. 1.12.
Christ's holy Sacrament, his blessed Body and Blood: At the receiving of the
Body: Lord I am not worthy, etc. he does not say: the holy Sacrament of
Christ's Body, and Blood: or at the delivery of the Bread, as our Book of
Common Prayers does; in the Order of the Administration of the Lords Supper:
But, Christ's holy Sacrament, his blessed Body and Blood: and At the receiving
of the Body: not of the Bread: which does imply, A Transubstantiation, or
Corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which the Rhemists on Matt. 26.
S^ct. 4. and 9. on 1 Cor. 11. Sect. 4 5, 6. on 1 Cor. 11. Sect. 16.
Papists do so eagerly maintain: The Homilies of the worthy receiving of the
Sacrament Artic. 28. Harmony of Confessions, Sect 14. B 3. Vshers answer to the
Jesuits Challenge c. 3. BB. Jewels Apology.
and our Church, and writers so frequently condemn.

Yet this is not all; For our Devout Author, as he admits a Corporal presence:
so he impliedly affirms, An unbloody Sacrifice of Christ's Body, together with
an Adoration of it: as these words import. Page 4.12.13
A prayer when we are prostrate before the Altar: Thou art worthy O Lord, etc.
This is taken of Kellams Manual of Prayers p. 80
Adding with the Priest: The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Lo here; a
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ; an Altar; a Prostration; (not a kneeling,)
before this Altar; together with a Priest: And what Papist; yea, what
Protestant, may not hence conclude; an approbation of the Popish Mass; An
unbloody Sacrifice of Christ's Body, offered on the Altar, by a Priest, together
with an See part 1. page 18.
Adoration of it. Things which all Calvin Instit l. 3. c. 18. Morney of the
Mass. BB. Jewels Apology Melchisedechs Antitype. Dr. Fulke Rhem. Test. on 1
Cor 11. Sect. 8. to 22. Heb. 7. Sect 7, 8 c 9. Sect. 5.6. Artic. 28.
Protestant Authors do abhor: and none but Council. Trid. Sess. 22.
Papists do admit.

Our Author still proceeds, even to the very Mediation of Angels: in these
words. Part. 2. p. 9.
Command, that the Prayers, and Supplications, together with the remembrance of
Christ's Passion, which we now offer up unto thee, may by the Ministry of thy
holy Angels, be brought up into thy Heavenly Tabernacle: This as it was
borrowed from Missale Romanum: Canon Missae page 272. So it is, so clear an
evidence for the Mediation of Angels: (a Doctrine which Dr. Fulke on Rhem Test.
1 Timothy 2. Sect. 4. Doctor Rainolds Conference with Heart: cap. 8. Diuis. 4. BB.
Vshers Answ: to the Jesuits Challenge. c. 9 BB Jewels Apology.
our Church, and all good Protestants, do utterly renounce:) that our Author,
who in his second Edition, did only alter it, from Angels, to Angel: in his
last Edition, was even constrained to raze, and blot it out: but yet it stands
upon Record, both against him, and us, in all his first Impressions, to the
disgrace, and scandal of our Church; and the great advantage of our
Adversaries.

As 2 Timothy 3.13
Wicked men, and Seducers, wax worse, and worse; so does our Devout Author,
who slips from one point of Popery, to an other: from the Mediation of Angels,
to Prayer for the Dead: in these words. And (pray well observe this word:) Part
2. page 104.105.
O thou Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, grant him thy
peace: with this Prayer: which makes it yet more evident. O Lord with whom do
live the Spirits of them that die: and by whom the Souls of thy Servants,
after they be delivered from the burden of the flesh, be in perpetual Joy,
and Felicity: (a clause taken out of our first Prayer, at the burying of the
Dead: and therefore does here necessarily import, that this Prayer, is a
Prayer for the Dead; who are delivered from the burden of the flesh:) We most
meekely beseech thee, for this thy Servant, that having now received the
Absolution from all his sins, which he has committed in this world: he may
escape the gates of Hell, and the pains of Eternal darkness: that he may
dwell for ever with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the region of light: (a
clause transcribed out of the Breuiarie of Pius 5. and Clemens 8. Printed at
Antwerpe, 1621. Officium Defunctorum, page 154. and that out of a Prayer for
the dead, which runns thus. Vt animam famuli tui, quam de hoc seculo migrare
iussisti, in pacis ac lucis regione constituas, and sanctorum tuorum iubeas
esse consortem:) and thy blessed presence, where there is neither weeping nor
heaviness. And that when the general day of thy judgment shall come, he may
rise again with the just, and receive this dead body which must now be buried
in the earth, (a clause which puts all out of question:) to be joined with his
soul, etc. Lee here a palpable prayer for the dead; which he who runns may
read, and see: (yea, and a Limbus Patrum too, employed in these words: that he
may dwell for ever with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the region of light, which
Rhemists on Luke 16. Sect. 7, 8. And all the Papists who describe this Limbus.
region, the Papists style their Limbus Patrum:) Yea, but an Index
Expurgatorius has passed on this prayer. True it is, that the Author in his
last Edition, has rectified this prayer of his, after great exceptions taken
to it, and complaint against it. But this does only evidence and make clear
his guilt: (For if there were no apparent Popery in it, why should he purge it
out?) not mittigate or assuage his fault. The Author is a Scholar: he had long
since collected these Devotions for his own private use, (as the Printer in
his Epistle annexed to the latter Editions, testifies:) and among them he had
inserted this prayer for the dead; (consarcinated and patched out of sundry
other prayers by himself alone, and not transcribed out of our Common, or
Queen Elizabeth's private Prayer Book;) which he has published unto the world
upon deliberation and advice, and that for 4: weighty reasons, as the Preface
testifies. Therefore this was no slip nor oversight in the Author, (much less
in the Printer, who labors to take the blame upon himself, though there is
not one Presse-error in the Book) but a voluntary, wilful, and affected
error, of purpose to justify and countenance, the Popish Assertion, of Prayer
for the Dead, which Article 22. BB. Vshers answer to the Jesuits Challenge. cap
7. Dr. Fulks Rhe^. Test. Acts 23. Sect. 1. 2 Cor 5. Sect. 1. 1 John 5. sect. 4.
the Church of England and all her Worthies, have hitherto opposed.

Lastly, as our Author began with the sign, so he concludes, with Page 129.
the Virtue of Christ's blessed (or of So was it Printed at first, as I have
heard.
the holy) Cross: which implies, there is seem divine virtue in the sign of
the Cross, as the Rhemists Annotations on Mark 9. Sect 4. 1 Timothy 4. Sect.
12.13. Bellar. lib. 2. de Imaginib. c. 30
Papists testify* and as Appeal page 280. Gag. 320.321. Dr. Featlies Parallel
3. part. p. 25.
Master Mountague himself auers upon his own experience. And the rather am I
induced to make this co^lection from this passage, for these two reasons.
First, because the Sea Otium Spirituale page 169. where there is such a Picture.
Frontispeece of the Book is adorned with a Cross, held out in the hand of a
devout supplicant. Secondly, because I never find this form of blessing, but
in Popish Authors, who ascribe a Divine virtue and efficacy to the bare sign
of the Cross: since therefore this form of blessing was borrowed from
Papists: I doubt not, but he concurres with them in the Doctrine, as well as in
the sign, and mention of the Cross: And thus have you these fifteen
dangerous points of Doctrinall, and fundamental Popery, taken out of Romish
Primers, Pamphlets, and Prayer Books, inuolued, and couched in these Pious
Devotions.

To these I shall add one more, which I had almost The approbation of Popish
Penance: which is necessarily collected from this clause and passage. Page 181,
and 233.
The seven Penitential Psalms, to be used in times of Penance, etc. Let any
indifferent Reader now consider: First, that Protestants know no times of
Penance, but only Papists: Secondly, that as See Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c 19.
sect. 14, 15, 16. Dr. Fulke ans. Rhem. Test. John 20. Sect. 5 Defense of the
English Translation. page 13. Confutation of Dr. Allens Book, part. 1. cap.
10.11. Mr. Whites Way to the Church. Digres. 55.
they renounce the Doctrine, so likewise they Dr. Fulks Defense of the English
Translation, c. 13.
disauow the very word, and phrase of Penance: not only in their own
writings, but in all their English Translations of the Bible, (for which the
Papists tax them:) because in its usual, and accustomed signification, it
imports nothing else: but a certain punishment, taken upon men for
satisfaction of their sins to God: and so it is a word that derogates from
the satisfaction, and Passion of Jesus Christ, which should cause all
Christians to reject it: Thirdly, that the Papists make Penance a Sacrament,
and Rhemists Notes on John 20. Sect. 5. Gregory Martyr. and all their other
Writers.
often recite it in their writings, of purpose to express their Shrift, and
Popish Penance of Whipping, Pilgrimage, and such like satisfactory mulcts, and
punishments, (as they deem them) by it: Fourthly, that the word Penance, in
its ordinary and proper use, especially, times of Penance: does import, and
signify nothing else but Popish Penance: Fifthly, that it is the use and
practice of Popish Priests, to enjoin their poor deluded Penitents during the
times of their Penance, to mumble over the seven Penitential Psalms, here
mentioned by our Author, once every day at least: I say, let any impartial
Reader, but lay all these together, and consider how our Author had formerly
enjoined Shrift, or Auricular Confession of our sins unto a Priest, before
the receiving of the Sacrament: and then he cannot but from hence conclude, a
plain, and evident approbation, and publishing of Popish Penance; which all
Protestant Churches do abhor, as exceeding derogatory to the death of Christ.

But passing from these Doctrinall, and Fundamental, I come now to those other
Ceremonious, and Circumstantiall points of Popery, that are directly Broached,
and Patronized in these new Devotions: which are four in number.


The Hours of Prayer:) the many proofs and quotations out of the Scriptures,
and Fathers, to justify the antiquity, use, and practice of them; (which are
transcribed out of De Bouis Operibus in partic. l. 1. c. 11.13
Bellarmine, Instit. Moralium. Part. 1. l 9. c. 2. to 16.
Azorius, Notes on Acts, 10. Sect. 6
and the Rhemists:) The Prefaces which our Author makes to all these Hours:
together with the scope and drift of the whole Book, (which is only to
confine, and limit men's Devotions to these Canonical Hours:) do abudantly,
and infalibly testify, and confirm this Popish assertion, (in the proof of
which, Azorius, Bellarmine, and the Rhemists take such pains): That Canonical
Hours, even after the late Popish division, are of ancient, and laudable use:
and that they are diligently to be observed, even of private Christians: which
is more then either De bonis Operibus in partic. l. 1. c. 19.
Bellarmine* Instit. Moral. Part. 1 lib. 9. cap. 3.5, 6.
Azorius, the Notes on Acts 10. Sect 6.
Rhemists, Catechism cap. of Orders
Vaux, or any Jesuit, or Popish Monk, or Priest affirms: who expressly
teach; That none are bound to observe Canonical Hours, but such Religious
persons, who have entered into holy Orders, but especially Monks, and Nuns,
and such whose Devotions are not interrupted by necessary Study and
employments. For the Antiquity of these Canonical Hours, after the Romish
computation, to wit: Mattens, the Prime, the third, the sixth, the ninth Hour;
Vespers, and the Compline: (to which our Author adds Bed time* as we lie down
to sleep; or the last Hour of the night:) some would derive it from the
Primitive Church: Qua supra.
so Bellarmine, and Azorius: and for proof of this, they quote Clemens
Romanus, Constit. Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 34.40. And of this opinion Master
Couzens seems to be, who much relies upon the same Authority, which is See
Page 35.87.107:125.147
always placed in the forefront: But lo the vanity of the Papists, and the
impudency, and treachery of Master Couzens, who build the Antiquity of their
Canonical Hours, upon such a sandy foundation; upon such a counterfeite, and
fictitious Author as this Clemens: who is bored and branded by See Cocus:
Censura, Scriptor veterum. page 16. to. 20.
many Papists, and all Protestant writers of any judgment; for a mere
counterfeite, composed by some vain, and illiterate Monks of puny times:
Others attribute the invention of them to Saint Hierome: others to David, and
Daniell: but all these speak only of the third, the sixth, and ninth Hour: As
for the first Hour, Bellarmine himself confesses; that it was not invented
till Cassianus his time: and that the Compline was never mentioned by any
Author before Saint Benedict who inserts it in his 16. Rule. Polyd. Virgil De
Inuest. Rerum. l. 6. c. 2
Pope Pelagius the second was the first that enjoined Priests, and
Religi-persons to observe these Hours of Prayer: which afterward the Council
of Aquisgraue under Jews the first, Anno. 816. cap. 131. The Council of Basil
under Eugenius the fourth, Session 21. The Synod of Moguntium under Rabanus,
cap. 16. The Provincial Council of Senona, or Seine. 1528. Decreta Morum cap.
18.19. The Provincial Council of Colen. 1536. part. 2. cap. 6.7, 8. part. 3.
cap. 5. The Provincial Council of Trier. 1549. commanded Canonical, and
Religious persons to observe these Hours: but never were any Papists so
absurd, as to inioyne any persons out of Popish Orders to observe them. What
Protestants have thought of these Canonical Hours: Let De Bonis Operibus in
partic. lib. 1. c. 12.
Bellarmine himself testify; who produces Witcliffe, Luther, Illyricus,
Brentius, the Confession of Wittenberge, Tilemannus, and Hesbusius, expressly
condemning them. To these let me add the Harmony of Confessions. Sect. 15.
Confessio. Zanchij. cap. 25. Calvin Instit. lib. 3. cap. 20. Sect. 29.30.
Melancthon, Musculus, Martyr, Aretius, Loci. Communes. De precatione Locus.
Docter Fulke. Rhemish Testament. on Luke 18. Sect. 1. Acts 3. Sect. 1. cap,
10. Sect. 3. Gal. 4. Sect. 6. Master Perkins. his Cases of Conscience. lib. 2.
Quest. 3. Sect. 4. Who all reject these Canonical Hours, as Popish, Vain,
and Superstitious trash: neither is there any This the Rhemists, in their Notes
on Acts 10. Sect. 6. and Gal. 4. Sect. 6. acknowledge.
Protestant Church, or Author, to my knowledge, that ever did approve them,
either in Doctrine, or in Practice: True it is, that our own and other
Protestant Churches, have bounded out some set times and Hours, for public
Prayers, and Devotions, that so men might with more conuenience meet together;
for Gods public worship and service. But yet these times and meetings, are
far different from these Canonical hours: For first, they are but Dr. Fulke
on the Rhemish. Test. Acts 10. Sect, 6.
Twice a day at most, to wit, Morning, and Evening: Secondly, they are not
confined to the compass of an Hour, not to any set limits of time, which may
not be exceeded: Thirdly, the Form, the Method, yea, and the matter of their
Devotions differ: Fourthly, there is some variety, and change of Prayers,
Chapters, and Psalms in the one: but there is an identitie of matter, and
prayers in the other, which may not be altered: Fifthly, this is public and
common to all persons whatsoever, the other private, and proper only to
Religious, and Canonical persons: Sixthly, these times of public Prayers, and
meetings, are only for conueniencie: these Canonical Hours, are prescribed
as matters of necessity, and as a part of Gods Worship, and Service.
Seventhly, these Canonical Hours, cannot be altered, nor changed: our set
times of Prayer, and public meetings may, being some times sooner, some times
later, as occasion serves. For private Devotions, of private men, Dr. Fulke,
Ibid.
our Church leaves every man to his free liberty, to Pray, and Read, at what
Hours, and Times he please: Euenings, and Mornings, are the seasons, both of
public and private prayer, which She commends: not the first, the third, the
sixth, the ninth Hours; which She never yet prescribed unto any, since her
reformation: Since therefore our Church, as the Notes on Ac^^ 10. Sect. 6.
Rhemists themselves expressly testify: and all reformed Churches in Foreign
parts, together with the fore-quoted Authors, have utterly rejected these
Canonical Hours: I wonder much, how our Author dares to impose, or press
them on us now. What, did he dream we would all turn cloistered Monks, and
mued Nuns; or Ancorites, and brutish Hermites? that we would all take
Popish Orders once again: or that we would voluntarily chant, and mumble over
his Devotions every day? (An harder task then Papists do enjoin their
strictest Orders:) Or would he have us to renounce all Secular employments, and
Gods public Ordinances, and wholly to deuote our selves to private Prayer? and
so make us all turn Seperatists, under pretense of private Devotion? If so,
then there were some cause, and color to confine both us, and our Devotions,
to these Canonical Hours. But if he has no such aim as this; then let his
Hours, and Devotions go as needless, and superfluous Romish trash, that are
fit for nothing, but the Cloisters, or the Dunghill, since no Church but Rome,
did ever own them: and since our own, and all Protestant Churches, have
discarded them as superstitious, as the Ibidem.
Rhemists truly do affirm.

Object.
If any object: that these Canonical hours were approved, and Authorized by
Queen Elizabeth in that Orarium, or book of Private Prayers, Printed by
William Seeres, 1560. published by the Queens Authority: and therefore the
Church of England does approve of them; which is all that our Author can plead
in the defense of these his Hours of Prayer.

Answ.
To this I answer: First, that there was indeed some the first, third, sixth, and
ninth hour, and of Mattens, Evening song, and Compline: But yet, that Book
was never entitled, the Hours of Prayer, as these Devotions are: nether is
there any one word spoken, or Scripture, or Author quoted in it to approve and
justify the use, and practice; or to set forth the Antiquity of these Hours:
whereas our Author pleades as much as any Papist has, or can do for them.



Elizabeth was so far from Patronizing Canonical hours, that in the second
Impression of these Private Prayers, in the year 1564. printed by her
Authority, these Hours were quite oblitterated, and not so much as mentioned
in that, or in the subsequent Edition in the year, 1573. which does plainly
evidence: that those Hours, were either secretly foisted into these private
Prayers, after they were licenced for the Press: (as I fear me much of our
Authors Devotions were,) or else, that they were ouer-slipped by the haste and
carelessenesse of the Lic^n^er, as our Authors Popery was: else questionless
they had not been omitted, not obliterated in the ensuing Impressions.
Doubtless, if Queen Elizabeth, or the Church of England had ever approved of
these How^rs, they had never caused an Index expurgatorius to pass upon them
in the succeeding Editions: Since therefore these hours were only named in
the first, but quite purged out, and that by Authority, in the second and third
Impressions: it is certain, that the Church of England, and Q^. Elizabeth,
(who gave the greatest blow and cownefa^^ to Romes Devotions) were so far
from countenancing and approving: that they did even utterly reject, exile and
damn them. And here I must observe the treacherous and partia^l carriage of
our Author, who to testify his dear affection to the Whore of Rome, and his
great disloyalty to the Church of England: does covertly pass by the second,
third, and most corrected and reformed Impressions of those private Prayers
(where these Canonical Hours are not so much as named:) renewing only the
name and memory of the first Impression, which was buried in silence and
oblivion, wherein these Hours are recorded, which may give some seeming
advantage to the Church of Rome. Doubtless if he had respected Englands good
and profit, more then Romes: or intended the increase of tr^e Devotion, more
then the propagation of Romish Superstition, he would either have suffered
these Private Prayers to rest in silence, or at least he would have framed his
Devotions according to the form and model of the last and best Editions: and
not have molded them according to the Hours in the first Impression, which
suite with none but Popish Devotions: but more of this hereafter.

Fourthly, It is evident both by the 5: and 6: Ed. 6 cap. 1.1 Eliz. cap. 2.
Statutes of King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth, 5 Iacobi. March. 5.
and the Proclamations of King James of happy memory: for the uniformity of
Common Prayer: (which master Cozens himself, I know not by what Authority,
has lately caused to be annexed to, and Printed with all the Books of Common
Prayer whatsoeueuer, whereas formerly they were omitted:) by the Praeface to
the Common Prayer Book; and by the Common Prayer Book it self: That the
Church of England has utterly rejected, and antiquated Canonical Hours, as
vain and Superstitious Ceremonies, which suit with none but Cloistered
persons: and that She only enioynes and retains; both in public, or
private, none but Morning and Evening Prayer, and that at no set Hours, but
such as may be altered as men's conueniences and occasions serve. Yea the
forequoted Authors, and the Notes on Acts 10. Sect. 6
Rhemists themselves do expressly testify: That the Church of England has
utterly rejected Canonical Hours, as vain and Superstitious: So that our
Author cannot prove, that Queen Elizabeth, or the reformed Church of England,
did ever countenance or Patronize these Hours of Prayer: in the reviving and
broaching of which, he is only an Agent and Factor for the Church of Rome; the
Reason 1.
Authority of whose Ancient Laws, and old godly Canons, he endeauours to
continue and praeserue: as himself professes in his Praeface.

Praeface to his Calender: he affirms: That all those Persons whose names are
preserved in the Calender of the Church (and so in his ensuing Calender) there
to remain upon Record and Register, as sacred memorialls of Gods mercy toward
us, and as forcible witnesses of the Ancient Truth: were holy and heavenly
Saints, the blessed servants of God: and holy Persons, which the universal
Church of Christ, and not our people only, were best affected too: and that
they are now like the Angels of God in Heaven. Now, many of these Saints
recorded in his Calender, were never Canonized but at Rome; others of them were
notorious wicked men: and some of them were never found in rerum natura:
witness Saint Agnes, Saint Vincent, Saint Valentine, Saint David, Saint Cedde,
Saint Benedict the Famous, (the Father and Founder of our Monks and Friars:)
Saint Richard of Chichester, Saint Alphage of Canterbury, Saint George the
famous, Saint Dunstane of Canterbury, Saint Austin the Monk, Saint Boniface of
Mentz, Saint Swithine of Winchester, Saint Margaret of Antioch Saint Anne,
Saint Giles, Saint Lambert, Saint Denis of France, Saint Edward, Saint Audry,
St. Leonard, Saint Martyn, Saint Bruce, St. Machutea, Saint Hugh, Saint Edmond,
Saint Katherine, Saint Nicholas, and Saint Syluester: Now all these (if our
Author may be credited) are holy and heavenly Saints, and are now like the
Angels of God in Heaven: though some of them were never yet in being: and
others of them were professed Papists, and never Saincted but at Rome: I
confess indeed, that these names, with sundry others are recorded and
preserved in our Calenders: not that we repute them all for Saints or holy men:
(they are the express words of Admonitio ad Lectorem: at the end of the
Calendar.
Praeces Priuatae, Printed by William Seeres, by Queen Elizabeth's approbation:
1573. out of which these new Devotions are pretended to be collected:) or that
(if they were the most holy persons of all other) we deem them worthy of any
divine worship or honor: but that they may be as notes of some certain
things, and fixed seasons, the knowledge of which is very beneficial, and the
ignorance of which would be very praeiudiciall to the people: Our Church
enrolles, or rather reserues their names within her Calender, not to Canonize
them for Saints, but to dedesigne and point out times: therefore our Author who
does record them in his Calender only for this reason, that they were holy and
heavenly Saints, and the blessed servants of God, who are now like the Angels
of God in heaven: must needs be guilty of Canonizing Popish Saints, both in
his Doctrine, and his practice too.

From the Canonizing of Saints: we pass to the Solemnization That there are
some certain seasons wherein Marriages are not solemnized: to wit, from Aduent
Sunday, until eight days after the Epiphany: from Septuagesima Sunday, until
eight days after Easter: from Rogation Sunday, until Trinity Sunday: which is
full five Months in a year: And why, I pray, are not Marriages to be
solemnized in these times? Forsooth, because, some of these being times of
solemn Fasting, and Abstinence: some of holy Festiuity, and Joy; both are fit
to be spent in such Sacred exercises, without other Auocations: And whence had
our Author these prohibited times of Marriage? from our own, or from the
Church of Rome? If from our Church? I must confess ingeniously, that though
our Spiritual Courts for their own private lucre, permit not men to Marry at
certain seasons of the year, unless they first procure a Licens from them,
for which often times they pay full dear: (an abuse and grieuance, which would
be searched into, and quite removed:) yet there is no Clause, no Article, nor
Canon, either in our Common Prayer Book, our Church Calendar, our Articles,
Homelies, our Book of Canons, or our Statutes to my knowledge, that prohibits
Marriages at any time, much less, in the fore-recited seasons: Sure I am, the
Scriptures confine not Marriage, Heb. 13.4.
which is honorable in the sight of all men, to any times, or seasons of the
year; but gives men this liberty at any season; (especially in Spring time,
when as men's lusts are most impetuous, and predominant;) 1 Cor 7.9.
rather to Marry then to burn. Why then should we be entangled, in a yoke of
bondage, when as the Scriptures leaves us free, to Marry when we please; so as
we 1 Cor. 7.39.
always Marry in the Lord? If Marriages be lawful at any season, why then
should men be put to such a needless trouble, and expense, as to procure a
Licens for a lawful thing? If it be not lawful at some seasons, either by the
Law of God, or Man: (which Laws I never yet could see nor hear of:) how then
can a Licens from a Spiritual Court, dispense, or make that lawful, which is
unlawful of itself? The truth is this; our Church prohibites Marriages, at
no seasons whatsoever, so as they are Religiously, and duly solemnized: much
less, does She restrain the use of them, at Festival, Holy, and Joyful
time, (as our Author does absurdly reason:) because as Marriage is a holy
Ordinance of God, and so fit for holy Times: so Psalm. 19.5. Psalm. 45.15. Judges
14.10.11. Prou. 5.18. Eccles. 9.9. Isai. 61, 10. and 62, 5 Ier. 7, 34. and 16,
^. and 25, 10 and 23, 11. Mat. 9, 15. and 24.38 John 3, 29.
likewise it is a Festival, and Joyful thing, and so most seasonable, and
suitable, for Festival, and Joyful times, and Seasons; as the Scriptures, and
daily practice of all Christians testify; who defer their Marriages for the
most part, till such times as these: If then the Church of England knows no
times, especially, no Festival, nor Joyful times, wherein the solemnization
of Marriages is prohibited: Whence then had our Author these nonlicet seasons?
Truly, from the very Council of Trent. Sessio. 23. Decretum. De Reformatione
Matrimonij. cap. 10. From Breuiarium Romanum Pij. 5. and Clementis Octaui, at
the beginning, or from Laurance Kellams Manual of Prayers, a little after his
Calendar; who both inform us out of the Council of Trent: under this Title:
When Marriages may not be solemnized: That the solemnizing of Marriages, is
forbidden, from the first Sunday of Aduent until Twelfe day, and from the
beginning of Lent, until Low Sunday, or eight days after Easter, all other
days they may be solemnized. Lo here your prohibition of Marriages at
certain limited seasons, proceeds originally from the Council of Trent, and
from no other Divine, or Humane Authority, that ever I could find: and from
hence our Author questionless, did Transcribe it. Only in this he exceedes
this Council, and the recited Popish Authors: that he prohibites Marriages,
from Rogation Sunday, to Trinity Sunday; adding a reason, with all to back,
and justify the restraint of Marriages in these seasons; when as the Trent
Council, and other Papists, are not yet so reasonable, as to yield a reason of
any such restraint; nor so unreasonable, as to proceed so far in this
restraint, by one three weeks, as our Author does: But of this enough, if not
to much.

Quire, which our Author seems to make more holy then the body, or any other
part, or parcel of the Church: For when he has prescribed us a short
Eiaculation, or Meditation; Part. 1. page 17.18.
At our entrance into the Church: out of the fifth Psalm: This is transcribed
out of Otium Spirituale, pap. 31. Horas neusta Seignora fol. 10 And our Ladies
Primer, page 102.
transcribed out of Popish Authors: he then enioynes us another Contemplatory
Eiaculation, out of the eighty four Psalm: When we are come into the Quire:
together with another out of Revel. the fourth: When as we fall down to
Worship, and Adore, before the presence of God: Now what does this intimate,
or implie unto us; but that the Quire is far holier then any other parcel of
the Church; a mere superstitious, absurd, and Popish opinion, which I will not
stand for to refute.

Primers, Chatechismes, and Prayer Books:) it is as evident as the Sun at
Noonday; that the very Subject matter of these Devotions, is merely Popish;
which was my fifth, and chiefest proof, to evidence, and clear my first
Conclusion: which I will here shut up with this short Syllogism.

That Book, whose Frontispiece, Title, Frame and Method, Style, and Phrases,
yea, and Subject matter too, is altogether Popish: must needs be merely
Popish, both in Form, and Matter.

But the Frontispiece, Title, Frame and Method, Style, and Phrases, yea, and
the Subject matter too, of this Book of Private Devotions, is altogether
Popish.

Therefore this Book of Private Devotions, must needs be merely Popish,
both in Form, and Matter.

Which was my first, and now makes ready way, and passage to my second
Conclusion.

To wit; That the Authors end in publishing this Book

This second Assertion is infalliblie euidenced, and confirmed by the former.
For what design, or end can any, (especially, one who pretends himself a
Protestant,) have, in publishing any Treatise, whose Form, and Matter is
merely Popish, but only the propagating, or at least, the countenancing, and
advancing of Popery, and Romish Superstition? Now I have already proved, both
the Form, and Matter of these Private Devotions, to be altogether Popish, by
sundry pregnant evidences. Therefore, the Authors aim and purpose in
publishing them, could be no other, but to propagate Popery, and secretly to
Usher it by degrees into our Church; at least, to give it some Grace, and
Countenance now among us. Besides all this; If we consider, that these
Devotions are consarcinated, and patched up of Popish Relics, and Fragments,
raked out of the very Dunghill, of Popish Psalters, Primers, Chatechismes, and
Prayer books: (as I have already in part, and shall anon more fully
demonstrate; though the Author, and Printer do pretend the contrary:) how can
we but conjecture, nay, infalliblie conclude: that the Advancement, and
Introduction of Popery, and Munkish Devotions, was the true and utmost end, of
contriuing, collecting, and publishing these Devotions? Again, if we
di^igently observe, how these Devotions are framed, only for the use of the
Monastical, and Cloistered Male, and Female Orders, of the Church of Rome;
that they are altogether fitted for the daily exercise, and practice of those
English Iesuitesses, (a new invented Order,) Friars, Munkes, and Nuns, which
lurk among us, or else, are mued up in Foreign Cells, and Cloisters of
Impiety: Or for the behoof, the furtherance, and encouragement of those
vnprofessed Roman Pro^e^tes, and Conuerts: (who swarm so thick of late in
every corner, and buy up these Devotions thick and threefold, as I am
informed: on the cover of which, they stamp an ( I H S.) as they do on all
their Popish Primers, Breuiaries, and Prayer Books, in token, that this Book
is merely Popish, and serving only for their use:) the first of which, are
wholly tied, and devoted, by their Orders; and the latter, only advised, as
occasion and leisure serves, to the use and practice of Canonical Hours, and
times of Private Devotion: How can we but surmise, that the chief and Primary
end of these Devotions, was only to revive to countenance, and set up Munkery;
and to aduauce, and further the Cloistered, and superstitious D^uotions, of
Regular, and Canonical persons, which our Church has long since, quite
exploded, and cast out, as Menstruous, and polluted relics of the Romish
Whore? If we accumulate and add to this; that these Devotions can never
square, nor suite with Protestants, nor any ways promote their private
Prayers, or Devotions: we need not doubt, nor stager at this Conclusion: that
these Devotions were merely published for Romes advantage, and for the
advancement, and furtherance of Her cause, and faction: For I would willingly
learn but thus much from the Author, or any of his Patriots, or Abbetters:
what use there is of these Devotions, or Hours of Prayer, in our Church, or
State? If they are suited, and squared for the practice, and 3 Reason in the
first Preface.
daily use of any who are religiously given, as the Preface to them does
surmise: I would know what kind of persons those should be, who should be tied
and confined to the devout, the ancient and orderly exercise of these Howerly
Devotions? If any: then they must be either Canonical and Regular persons who
have entered into Popish Orders, (whom our Church has long since spued out as
crapulous and noisome humors:) or else they are Secular and vnprof^^sed
persons, not tainted with the Monastical and unholy Orders of the Church of
Rome; which are the only members which our Church or State acknowledge. If the
latter of these, (for the first we utterly disclaim:) then they must be either
Clergy men, or Laics and Secular persons: If Clergy men: then either those
that have Cures, or those that want them: If those that have Cures, then either
conscionable and painful Residents, who Bonu^ Pastor ad ouium custodiam
hortatore non indiget. Chrysostom. Hom. 59. in John.
readily feed their Flocks with care and conscience, and Preach unto them
once a Sunday, at least, (as the Canon. 45.
Canons of our Church enjoin them, though many deem this clause to strict,
and therefore make no conscience to observe it:) or else unconscionable, lazy,
Qui dimitit oues in pascua absque custode, Pastor est non Ouium sed Luporum:
Bernard. super Cant. Sermon 77
Wolfe-feeding and Soule-murthering Nonresidents, (the Epidemicall and fatal
plague, and sickness of our Church) who labor only to purchase and procure,
and then to Quem mihi da^is de numero istorum praepositorum, qui non plu^
inuigilet subditorum, vacuandis marsupiis, quam vitiis extirpandi^? Bern. Ib.
But let these remember. Petro tertio dictum est, Pasce, nec mulge, seu tonde
semel additum est. Bern. Declamat. Col. 998. V.
fleece and staruc, but not to feed their Flocks: If the former of the two:
Alas our Author, and most of his Abettors, who think one Sermon in a Month
enough, or to too much: do doom all these for branded Puritans; because they
are so diligent, and frequent in their Preaching: and thefore there is little
hope of working them to these Canonical Hours (which the Horologe and Clock
of Rome has measured out,) unless our Author can charm their consciences
with some Magic spells; or cause some higher Powers to silence, and close up
their mouths: or to Cloister, Mue, and shut them up in some close, and
loathsome Prison, Cell, or Dungeon; because they Preach too much, and draw too
many unto God: or speak to plain, and bluntly against the sins, the vices,
and corruptions of the times: for else their Consciences, Studies, and Pious
execution of their function, either will, or cannot brook, the restraint, and
curb of these Canonical Hours, and Private Devotions, which would interrupt
their public Employments, and withdraw them, from their Popular, and public
Ministry. If the latter of the two: Alas, these are so taken up with Secular,
or State affairs: with Paul's, or Westminster Hall: with some Justice of
Peace-ship or other: with O vtinam tam vigiles reperirentur ad Curam, quam
allacres currunt ad Cathedram: Bernard. super Cant. Sermon. 77
the eager prosecution of some fat Benefice, Deanery, or Bishopric, or some
such suite at Court: or Hinc Monstruosius dilatantur renes humerosi: hinc
tumentes vteri non tam impinguantur, quam impregnantur aruina, ita vt carnis
onus ossa non sustinent. Bernard. de Co^uersatione ad Clericos. cap. 12.
so fatted with some Deanery, or Prebendary, (the common receptacles of those
idle Drones, and Abbie-lubbers, who suck the Honey of our Church, whiles the
laboring, and industrious Bees, who bear the heat, and burden of the day,
and Cure, are a most starued, with their five, or tenne-pound Pensions:) that
they either want time, or breath, to mumble over these Devotions: Indeed,
Nonresidents are the only men, that I can think of, who have, or at leastwise
might have, leisure time, to practice these Devotions; and turn them over
every day, at their prefixed Hours: but I fear me, that they are so wholly
engrossed with the recited employments, that they cannot: or that their sloth,
and lasinesse is so great, and their Devotion so small and key-cold, that they
will not brook so hard, and heavy a task: Certainly, they who have not so
much Conscience, or Devotion, as to keep, and feed their Flocks, and to
Preach unto them once a week, (it may be, scarce once, or twice a year;)
though Mark. 16.15 Math 28.19. John 21.15.16 17. Acts 20, 28. Col. 4.17. 1 Pet.
5 2.3.
Christ himself, and the They are styled Pastors, and Shepherds: and should
not a Shepherd feed his Flock? Ezech. 34.2.3 Ier. 23.1.4. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Oues
sunt in tendite pastui. Bern. sup. Ca^t. Sermo. 76.
name, and essence of their Function, tie them to it: will never find
Conscience, or Devotion enough, to chant over these Devotions duly once a day;
nay, once a month: especially, since there is no other argument to persuade
them to it, but our Authors bare persuasion, and advice; which I dare presume,
was never seconded by his practice. So that if you will confine our Beneficed
Clergymen to these Devotions, and Hours of Prayer; there is little hopes of
good success: For those that have no Cures of their own, if they officiate
other men's Cures, as they ought: their stipends usually are so mean, and
beggarly, (especially, if they are honest, and laborious men,) unless the
Parish-purse augment it; that they are commonly enforced to Teach, or Tutor
poor men's children, or to turn trencher-Chaplaines, or Schoole-maisters to
some Country Gentlemen; or to betake themselves to some Base, Illiberall,
Mechanical, or servile Work, or Labor, to preserve their lives, and souls
together: so that what with their pains, and industry in the discharge of
their Cures, and their other auocations, and imploiments for their necessary
support, and liuely-hood, they have no vacant time for these Howerly, and set
Devotions: Yea, such is the penury, and miserable indigencie of many poor
Curates, (to the shame and infamy of their fast-handed, and hard-hearted,
Maister-brethren be it spoken, whose Primus in opere, postremus in Ordine.
Bernard. de Ordin. Vitae. lib. Col. 1116. I.
care and sweat these underlings undergo;) that if they had both will, and
time to practice these Canonical Devotions, yet they want means to buy, and
purchase them; yea, to procure competent, and convenient food, and raiment,
answerable to the degree, and honor, of their Divine, and Heavenly Function:
So, that there is no probability of confyning Clergymen, of any rank or
quality whatsoever, to the Ancient, Orderly, and Devout exercise of these
Canonical Hours, and Devotions. And will you then confine us Laickes, and
Secular persons to them, when as all Ministers, and Clergymen, A^^orum est
Deum credere, scire, adorare, reuereri, Clericorum vero sapere, intelligere,
cognoscere, frui. Bern. de vita Solitaria. Col. 1020. G
whose lives, and conuersations should be more Heavenly, and Devout then
others, are exempted from them? If so, what kind of Secular persons should
they be? What Courtiers? Alas, they are so taken up with sports, and pleasures,
or necessary attendance: with Complements, and Ceremonies; with thoughts of
Honor, Greatness, and Preferments; with Aulici Reges adulatione ad flagitia
impellunt: nec vllum est genus hominum huiusmodi consiliariis pernici osius:
Comineus: Comment. lib. 7. p. 278. Adulatio vetus in Republica malu^: Tacit
Annal. l. 2 Sect. 4.
Flattering, and undermining Adulation, the common Plague, and Ruin, both of
Kings and Kingdom: that they have scarce space, or time to think of Exeat
Aula, qui vult esse pius, Lucan. Phar^al l. 8. p. 142.
Prayer, or any part of Piety; much less, to practice these Howerly, and
Munkish Devotions, which would soon transform a Court into a Monastery. Or
Court, and Country Ladies? Alas, their See Agrippa De Va^itate Scient. cap. 71.
guiddy heads are now so troubled, and fraught with newfound fashions, and
antique Dressings, and Attires: their Faces are now so long a Painting, and
their Heads attiring every morning, that they have no vacant time, to think of
these Devotions, nor yet to cast their eyes upon them, unless you could
Ingraue them in their Looking-glasses; their thoughts, their time, and service,
are so devoted to their Heads, and Faces, (the only Quod enim quisque prae
ceteris colit, id sibi D^um constituisse probatur. Bernard. Declamat.
Gods and Idols, which they now Adore;) that there is no Devotion, Care, nor
Thought within them, for God, or for their hearts: Yea, the Devotions of most
Ladies, and Gentlewomen, (whose whole employment is but to be idle, at least,
to Pranke, and Dress themselves, and to pass away their lives in Dancing,
Carding, Chatting, Gazing, and in Visits, as if they had no God to serve, nor
Souls to save:) are now so Sloathfull, Drowsy, and Bed-ridden; that their
Vespers would be almost quite run out, before they would be fitted, and
attired for their Morning-Song; There is therefore little hope of working
these, especially, to your Morning Hours, and Devotions, unless you could
change your Mattens into Vespers, and your Vespers into Midnight Songs; which
were an Irregular course. You see then, that these Devotions can never suite,
with Courtiers of either Sex, who are commonly the idlest persons of all
others, and have the least employments: On whom then would you impose them? On
Merchants, Citizens* and Mechanickes? Alas, all these have Trades, and Callings
for to follow: your Devotions are incompatible with their Professions: they
must needs renounce the one, if they should but once deuote themselves unto
the other. On Lawyers, Justices, Countrey-Gentlemen, and painful Husbandmen,
Redit agricolis labor actus in ^rbem. Virgil. Georg. l. 1
whose work runs away in a Maze, and Circle, and never finds an end? Alas,
these have Clients, and Suites: these have Sessions, Courts, and Country
affairs; these have Hawks, and Hounds, and Plowes to follow, besides a
thousand other quotidian, and Howerly Auocations; and is there any
probability, of regulating, squaring, and reducing these to the Slavery, and
Bondage, of your Canonical Devotions, and Hours of Prayer? Truly, there is
as much hope, of making the restless Sun to stay its motion, or the fixed
Earth to move, and turn with in its Circle: so unsuitable, and
disproportionable are these new Devotions, to all those qualities, estates,
conditions, and ranks of men; of which our Church, and State consist. If then
these Hours of Prayer are consonant, applicable, or aduantagious, to no
members of our Church, and State, but only to Popish Hermites, Anchorites,
Friars, Munkes, and Nuns; it is impossible for any to conjecture (unless
they will condemn, and tax our Author, of gross and palpable folly, and
improuidence:) but that the end of publishing these Devotions in such times as
ours, was merely to advance, and further Popery, and Popish Devotions; since
they can be no furtherance, or help to any other. But what need I seek for
proofs abroad, when as our Author does in a manner, intimate, and confess
as much at home? for he informs us in his Preface: That the grounds, and
motives, that induce him to publish these Devotions, were: First, to continue,
and preserve, the authority of the To wit, the Laws and Canons of the Church
of Rome.
Ancient Laws, and old Godly CANONS of the Church, which were made, and set
forth for this purpose; that men before they set themselves to Pray, might
know what to say: and not Pray what, and how, and Our Author therefore would
not only advise, but impose these Hours upon men.
when they list: Secondly, to let the World understand, that they who give out,
and accuse us here in ENGLAND, to have set up, a new Church, and a new Faith:
to have abandoned, The Authors end is reduce us to the old Rilion, as they
style it: and to the Ancient Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and of our
Popish Forefathers.
all the Ancient forms of Piety, and Devotion: and to have taken away all the
Religious exercises, and Prayers of our Forefathers, and to have despised all
the old Ceremonies of Christ's Catholic Church, (by which the Obiecters, and
our Author, only mean the Church of Rome, which the Jesuits, and Papists
style, and term; the Ancient, and Catholic Church of Christ;) do but
betray their own infirmity, and That is, they take us for Protestants but if
the truth were known, many of us are good Roman Catholics.
will not understand us, what we are: Thirdly, that they, who are That is
Popishly.
this way already Religiously given, (I pray mark the Emphasis of the words:)
and whom Such lets and impediments have our Popish Recusants who refuse to
frequent the public, and therefore betake themselus to such private Devotions.
earnest le^s, and impediments do often hinder from being partakers of the
Public, might have here a daily, and devout order of private Prayer, wherein
to exercise themselves* and to spend some Hours of the day at least: (as the
That is, the Ancient Monks and Nuns.
old godly Christians were wont to do,) in Gods holy Worship, and Service, etc
Lastly, that those, who perhaps are coldly this way yet affected, (that is,
such as are not yet affected toward Popery:) might by others example be
stirred up, to the like Heavenly duty, of performing their daily, and
Christian (to wit, their Popish) Devotions: By all which reasons, and passages,
(to which I might have added, his Part. 1. page 3. to 9.
discourse of the Ancient, and accustomed times of Prayer in general, tending
to the selfsame purpose:) our Author does expressly testify: that the end
of publishing these Devotions, was but to Introduce, and Usher the old
Religious Ceremonies, Canons, Laws, Sacraments, Prayers, Canonical Hours,
and Devotions, of our Superstitious, and Popish Forefathers, and the Church of
Rome, into our Church; and to advance the Catholic cause, and Roman Faith
among us; to whose obedience he labors now, (as other Cassandrian Moderators,
have of late,) to reduce, and reconcile us once again. Since therefore, you
find him guilty of this Conclusion, by his own Confession; I will not
trouble you with further proof.

I come now unto my third Conclusion. That the This is most clear and
evident: First, from the Title: Secondly, from the Preface of the Book. For
the first of these; our Author entitles this Book of his, A collection of
Private Devotions: in the Practice of the Ancient Church, called the Hours of
Prayer: as they were after this manner, published by Authority of Queen
Elizabeth 1560. (says the first and second; but: as they were much after this
manner published by Authority of Queen Elizabeth, 1560. says the third
Impression:) taken out of holy Scriptures, the Ancient Fathers, and the Divine
Service of our own Church: In which he affirms these two things. First, that
these private Devotions, and Hours of Prayer, are no new Devotions of his own
composing, but only a reuiuall or new Impression of those private Prayers and
Devotions, as were formerly published by Queen Elizabeth, in the year 1560.
and so did most men take them to be at first, till they had better sifted and
examined them. Secondly, that the matter of these Devotions were published by
the approbation of Queen Elizabeth, or at leastwise warranted by her
Authority: therefore there can be no Popery or poisonous Doctrines couched in
them, and all that love the name and memory of that blessed Queen, should buy
and approve them. A glorious and bewitching Title or Prologue I confess, but
yet a dangerous and insnaring Book. Of which I may truly say, Lactantius De
falsa Sapientia, cap. 15.
Tituli habent remedia, pyxides venena, the Title is wholesome, but the Book
it self is poison. Our Author, no doubt, had learnt this lesson long ago.
Iu^enal. Satyr. 10.
Nulla aconita bibuntur, fictilibus: that poison must always be administered in
golden Challices, else none will quaffe, and drink it down: and therefore he
puts a golden Front and outside, (even the sacred Diadem and Authority of that
vnparalell'd and renowned Queen: whose royal Duggs gave life and growth, to
that most Orthodoxe, Ancient, Holy and Sincere Religion, which hitherto we
have, and I hope we always shall enjoy, in despite of all Domesticke Romish
Vipers, who harbor in our bowels, and labor for to gnaw them out in an
imperceptible, smooth, and friendly manner:) that so these poisonous Pills and
Romish druggs, which are inuolued in the Book it self, Facile sequentia
irreperent si prima placuissent. Prosp. Aquit. Contr. Collatorem. cap. 33.
might be more greedily, confidently, and securely swallowed down. But yet
all this untempered dawbing has not so skind nor cloacked, the Boyles and
dangerous Ulcers of these Romanized Devotions, but that some searching and
jealous Chyrurgions, Fronti nulla Fides. Iunenal. Satyr. 2.
who give no credit to glorious Titles, have at length discovered their
dangerous and infectious plague-soares, which are only vizarded and palliated,
not clothed nor warmed with the sacred Robes of that Royal Queen, whose
authorized Prayers have no affinity with these Spurious and Bastard Devotions,
as the Premises do, and the subsequent conclusion shall at large declare. The
second passage which would pinn these Popish Devotions on Queen Elizabeth's
sleeue, is this which follows in the Praeface: A part of which Ancient piety
are these daily Devotions and Prayers that hereafter follow: Prayers which
after the same manner and division of Hours, as here they are, having
heretofore been published among us by high and sacred Authority: (for which
he quotes in the Margent, the Horary set forth with the Queens Authority,
1560. and reuewed 1573. Imprinted with Privilege at London, by William Seers;)
are now also renewed, and more fully set forth again. Which passage, does
but back and second, what the Title Page, had formerly auerred: both of them
iumping in this scandalous, and unworthy Act: to make the Memory, Name, and
Royal Authority of that Neuer-dying, and Religious Queen, the Sanctuary, and
Patroness of all those seeds, and heads of Popery, which are Scattered, Sown,
and Diuulged, in these dangerous, and Romish Devotions: and so to Usher in
Popery under her Sacred colors and Protection, who was the chiefest instrument
to purge, and thrust it out. Now what an Audacious, Impudent, Odious, Wicked,
and Treacherous Villainy, and Plot is this, and how worthy of the sharpest, and
seuerest punishment, that Law, or Justice can inflict; for an Englishman, a
Protestant, (at least in show and reputation:) yea, a Minister, and Pastor of
our Church: who if we may believe the The Printers Epistle to the Reader
annexed to the third Edidion.
Printer, is as ready to engage his credit, and his life, in the defense of the
stablished Faith, of the present Church of England, and in opposition of
Popery, and Romish superstition, as any other: to make not only the very
Reign and Life; but even the Sacred ashes, and Suruiuing memory of that
Euer-blessed, Devout, and Pious Queen, (who gave the greatest life, increase,
and vigor, to our Protestant, Orthodoxe, Zealous, Pious, and sincere Religion,
and Devotions: and the chiefest f^^le, eclipse, and downfall to the Church of
Rome: as the vote, and suffrage, b^th of our own, and foreign Nations
testify;) a forged Patroness, and grand Protectresse of that Roman Faith, and
Popish Ceremonies, which She so much oppugned, and abhorred all Her life; and
the only Stamp, and Royal Impresse to make them pass for current,
Orthodoxe, and true English Coin, in this Church, and State of ours: which had
long since boared, and cast them out, as counterfeite, and Romish dr^sse, and
Metal? Certainly, if the counterfeiting, or forging of a Princes Seal, or
Coin be capital: what shall the Treacherous, Scandalous, and Pernicious
forging, Slandering, Sophisticating, Perverting, Deprauing, and ruinating of
the Religion, of such a Royal, and Religious Princess as Queen Elizabeth,
be? I only do propound the question, I leave the full discussion, and
discition of it unto others, who are more judicious then my self.

I now proceed unto my fourth Conclusion; which I

First, that these Devotions, and Hours of Prayer, Queen Elizabeth.

Secondly that they are not warranted by them, nor

Thirdly, that both the Form, and Matter of them, are stolen, taken, and
transcribed out of Popish Authors, Primers, Breuiaries, Chatechismes,
Prayer-Bookes, and Horaries; which the Author, and the Printer both deny.

The Difference between Mr. Cozens Devotions, and the private Prayers
authorized by Qu: Elizabeth.
are far different from the private Prayers Authorized by Queen Elizabeth;
yea, from the very first Edition of them, on which our Author most insists; I
shall evidence by these apparent discrepancies.

First, they vary in the Frontispiece: The one has a Cross, and (IHS.) upon
its forehead* the other has no such Roman Character, or Badge at all.

A Collection of private Devotions, or the Hours of Prayer: the other;
Orarium, s^u libellus Praecationum: An Orary, or little Book of Prayers: Or,
Praeces priuatae in studiosorum gratiam collectae: as the second, and third,
impressions of them are entitled.

English, the other in Lataine; and so are all the subsequent Editions.

in studiosorum gratiam: for the benefit of Scholars* and such who were
skillful in the Lattaine tongue; as the Title, and the Printers admoniti^n; in
the second, and third Editions, of the private Prayers of Queen Elizabeth
testify.

To continue* and preserve the ancient Laws, and godly C^n^ns of the Church;
to exterminate all conceived Prayers* which our Author s^^l^s* extemporall
effusions of irksome, and undigested Prayers: to abolish all private Prayers
of private men* not first allowed and Authorized by the Church, framed only by
private Spirits, and Ghosts of our own: and to confine men to a set, and
constant form^, and time of Prayer: To let the World understand; that our
Church retains, all the Ancient forms of Piety, and Devotion, yea, all the
Religious exercises, and Prayers of our Forefathers: all the old Ceremonies,
and blessed Sacraments of Christ's Catholic Church: (to wit, the Church of
Rome:) to tie men to a daily practice of Canonical Hours, and Munkish
Devotions, as the Preface: and to Usher Popery into our Church, as my second
Conclusion proves: where as the former were diuulged* to help, and further
young Scholars, and Students, in the ex^rcise and knowledge of the Lattaine
tongue: to ground them in the points of Chatechisme, and to instru^t them, not
so much when, or what, as how to Pray: and that not only in private, but in
public too: whence all the Morning, and Evening Prayer in our Common Prayer
Book* together with our common Chatechisme* and the description of Christ's
Passion, is inserted in it.

Sixthly, they differ much in the very form and structure, with a (...) and so
proceeds with sundry proofs, and discourses justifying the use* and practice
of Canonical Hours: the Canonization of Romish Saints: the Apostolical, and
Divine Institution (...) Lent, and the like: The other has no such Prefaces,
nor Prologues in it: nor any such Popish trash as the Prefaces, and the first
part of these (...) Devotions do (...): These Ancient Prayer (...), begin with
a K^l^nder* far different from our Authors: then follows, the Chatechisme in
our Common (...) M^rning* and Evening Prayer, with (...) before and after
meat: next the General Confession, (...) in our Common Prayer Book: all
which, these new Devotions want. Then ensue Morning* and (...) Pray^rs* the
matter and form of which, (vnl^ss^ it be one Hymn only, or the first, the
third, the sixth, the ninth Hour, and the Compline; which are quite left out in
the second, and third Editions.) being almost the same with our Common Prayer
Book: and far different from Master Couzens his Devotions, which vary wholly
from them, both in Prefaces, Order, Prayers, Chapters, Hymns, and Psalms, but
only in the first Hour; in which they do in part, but yet not totally
accord: Then follow seven selected Psalms: (not seven Penitential, to be
used in times of Penanc^, etc. as our new Author phraseth them:) Next ensue the
Letanie: a Description of the Passion of Christ, out of the Psalms, and Saint
^ohn, with sundry other devout, and godly Prayers, to the end of the Book: all
which, being the better half of that Prayer Book, and the best and vsefullest
part, are wholly omitted in these new Devotions. Take but away the seven
selected Psalms, the Letanie, and some three Psalms more: and I dare
confidently a^^rre, that these old Prayers, and new Devotions, agree not so
much, as in one leaf: and that there are not so much, as six leaves of this
ancient Prayer Book of Queen Elizabeth, contained in this new: On the other
side, take the first part of these new Devotions, from the Title page to the
end of Quatuor Nouissima: which are not figured: together with the residue of
the Book, from page 121. the first part: to the conclusion and period of the
Book, (in which most of our Authors Popery is inuolued:) and there is scarce
one word, or sentence of it in the Ancient private Prayer Book of Queen
Elizabeth, which our Author would make the World believe to be the same, or
almost the same, with these his new, and Popish Devotions: So that they differ
plainly, both in form and matter.

first, the third, the sixth, the ninth Hour* and the C^mpline, which slipped
into the first Edition, through forgery, ^r oversight, and were afterward
exploded in the ^ubsequent ^mpressions. Therefore, these new Devotions, and
H^wers of Prayer, are ^arre different from the private Prayers Authorized by
Queen Elizabeth, in all these respects; What penalty then and censure, is our
Author worthy of, who by this Title, and Preface, would make the World believe,
they were either altogether, or almost Paralells in form, in matter, end, and
all respects; of purpose to conceal, advance, diffuse, and v^nt his Popery:
and to delude, mescate, and ins^are men with it?

For the second; that these new Devotions are not Queen Elizabeth, nor from
our Common Prayer Book: it is clear and evident by the former differences:
There is not in these private Prayers, nor in our Common Prayer Book any such
trash, as his several Prologues, and Prefaces, as the first part of his Book,
which is not paged; or as his Prayer for the Dead; his Prayer to God for the
Mediation of Angels, and all the fore-r^cited Popish passages do contain:
there is nothing in all these private Prayers to justify, or approve, either
the Method, Form, or Matter of these new Devotions, as the premises d^e
su^ficiently euid^nce: Therefore this second Conclusion likewise must be
granted.

For the third, and maine Proposition: That both the though the Author in his
Title page, and Preface; and the supposed Printer, in his Epistle to the
Reader, a^firme: That they were but the Hours, and private Prayers, published
by the Authority of Queen Elizabeth, now renewed, and more fully set out
again, as they were after this manner published heretofore. 1560. and 1573.
Collected, and taken out of holy Scriptures, the Ancient Fathers, and the
Divine Service of our own Church, and compiled out of sundry warrantable
Books: Whence the Form and Pattern of these Devotions has been taken: (to
wit, from our Ladies Primer, the Hours of our Lady: the Breuiary of Pius
quintus, and Clemens the eight: and such like Popish Devotions:) I have Page 3.
to 9.
already su^ficiently demonstrated: and therefore will not here examine it: I
will therefore now confine my self to the Matter, and Substance of these
Devotions, which I will now Parallel, and Sampler with those Popish Authors,
Prayer-Bookes, Chatechismes, Horaries, and Devotions, from whence they were
extracted: To pass by the Cross, and ( IHS.) in the Forefront; the Badge,
and Chara^ter of the Romish Whore, which is stamped on the Frontispiece, and
Cover of ^esuiticall, and Popish Prayer and pocket Books: I will begin my
Parallel, with the Title.

Papists.
A Parallel of Mr. Cozens Devotions with the Papists.
HOras de Neustra Sennora: Printed at Paris, 1556. and Horae beatissimae
Virginis Mariae, secundum vsum Saru^: which I have seen, and which you shall
find cited in Mr. Rogers his Articles, page: 124. Our Ladies Primer; and
Breuiarium Pij quinti and Clemens the 8. have the form, the use, and practice
of these Hours, not the Title.

Laur. Kellams Manuell of Prayers: Printed at D^way. 1624.
The Fasting days i^ all the year. In all the Church these Fasting days are
observed.
All the Lent, except Sunday: The Ember days, which are the Wednesday, Friday,
and Saturday next after Saint Lucies day: after the first Sunday in Lent, after
Whitsonday, and after the exaltation of the holy Cross. The Eues of Christmas,
of Whitsonday, of the Assumption of our Lady, of all Saints, of most of the
Apostles, Saint John Baptist, and Saint Laurence. Besides this, it is the
custom in England to fast all Fridayes, (except within the twelve days, and
Easter week:) also other three Eues of our Lady, to wit, of the Purification,
the Nativity, and Conception. The Annunciation Eve is not Fasted if it fall on
Easter week: Saint Marks day (not falling in Easter week) and the three
Rogation days, that is, Monday, Tewsday, and Wenesday, we abstain from flesh
at least.

Of the time of Marriage: so Manual of Prayers.
Kellam* Or: Of the time wherein Matrimo^y may not be solem^ized: so the
Ses^^o: 24. Decret de Reform* M^trimonii. cap. 10.
Council of Tre^t. and the Printed at A^twerp 1621 Bellarmines Christian
Doctrine, cap. 7.
Breui^rie o^ Pius 5. and Clem. 8. and Bellarmine. The solemnizing of Marriages
is forbidden from the first Sunday of Aduent, until after Twelfeday: and from
the beginning of Lent until Low Sunday: all other days they may be solemnized.

James Ledesma his Christian Doctrine Printed 1609. cap. 2. Gropper. Institut.
Colon. Agrip. 1546. Bellarmines Christian doctrine, cap. 3. p. 15. I find not
the Creed nor the Lords Prayer thus divided into Articles and Petitions in the
Prayers of Queen Elizabeth, or in our Common Prayer Book, or ^ther Protestant
Authors: but only in Popish Writers, out of whom no doubt they were transcribed.
The Apostles Creed.
1 I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. 2 And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. 3 Who was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary. 4 Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead
and buried, 5 He descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the
dead. 6 He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
Father almighty, 7 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
8 I believe in the holy Ghost, 9 The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints. 10 The forgiveness of sins. 11 The Resurrection of the flesh. 12 And
the Life everlasting.
Gropperi. Institut. Ledesma his Catechism: or Christian Doctrine, cap. 5.
The Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven, 1 Hallowed be thy name. 2 Thy kingdom come. 3
Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven. 4 Give us this day our daily
bread. 5 And for give us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. 6 And lead us not into temptation: 7 But deliver us from eui^^.


Matthias Cesch^. Otium Spirituale. page 108. Our Ladies Primer.
The two Pecepts of Charity.
1 Thou shall love the Lord the God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. 2 Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: which is more
s^^t^ble to the Scripture then the other.
Our Ladies Primer. Otium Spirituale. page 108. Ledesmas Christian Doctrine.
cap. 13. Bellarmines Christian Doctrine: cap. 7.
The Precepts of the Church.
1 To celebrate the appointed Feast days of the Church in abstaining from
servile works. 2 Reverently to hear the sacred O^lice of the Mass, on the
Holy days. 3 To fast the Lent, the four Imber tides, and the Eu^s, according
to the custom of the Church: and the Friday, and Saturday to abstain from
flesh. 4 To confess thy sins to a Priest allowed; to receive the holy
Eucharist, or blessed Sacrament, at the least at Easter, as some: or about
Easter, as others render it: and to do these things at the least once in the
year: which some of them divide into two several Precepts. 5 Of this Mr.
Cozens had forme^l^ made mention, and therefore he omits ^t here.
Not to solemnize Marriage on the days forbidden by the Church: as some: Or to
pay Tithes: as others do record it.
Lo here a Concordance in number, if not in matter.

Our Ladies Primer. Croppers Institut. O^^um Spirituale, p 105. Ledesma his
Christian Doctrine. cap. 15. Vaux his Catechism, c. 4. Bellarmines Christian
Doctrine. cap. 9. page 205.
The Sacraments, or 7. Sacraments of the holy Catholic Church.
Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and
Matrimony.

Bellar. Ib. page 209.
These Sacraments are all great, and so every one of them has some peculiar
greatn^sse. The greatest of all, is the most holy Eucharist: yet touching the
necessity, the most necessary of all, are Baptism, and Penance.

Compare these two together, and you shall find but little difference. See
page 21.

Our Ladies Primer. Otiu^ Spirituale, p. 106. Ledesma. cap. 17. Bellarmines
Christian Doctrine cap. 11. Groppers^ Institut.
The three Theological Virtues.
Faith, Hope, Charity.

Otium Spirituale, p. 113.114. Gropper^ Institut. Vaux his Catechism cap. 5.
Three kinds of good Works.
Prayer, Fasting, and Almesdeeds. See page 22.

Ledesma: c. 17. Our Ladi^s Primer. Otium Spirituale. p. 106.107. Gropper^
Instit. Bellar. Christ. Doctr. cap. 13.
Seven Gifts, or Fruits of the holy Ghost.
1 The gift of Wisdom: 2 of Understanding.

3 Of Counsel: 4 of Fortitude.

5 Of Knowledge: 6 of Piety.

7 And the fear of God* or godly Fear.

Otium spirituale. p. 107. Ledesma c. 17. Our Ladies Primer.
The twelve Fruits of the holy Ghost.
Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, B^nignitie, Goodn^sse, Longanimitie, Meekness,
Faith, Modesti^, Continency, ^hasti^ie

Otium Spirituale^ p. 109. Our Ladies Primer. Ledesma, cap. 17. Bellar. Christ.
Doctr. cap. 15.
The spiritual works of Mercy.
1 To instru^t the Ignorant: 2 To corre^t, ^r admonish those that Sin: 3 T^
as^ist by Coun^e^ him that needs it: 4 To comfort the af^^ict^d: 5 ^a^iently
to suffer ini^ries: 6 To pardon offenses, and injuries received: 7 To pray for
the living, and the dead, and thy persecuters.

See the Authors at ( q) and Gropperi. Institutio.
The corporal works of Mercy.
1 To feed the Hungry: 2 To give drink to the Thirsty: 3 To harbor the
Stranger: 4 To clothe the Naked: 5 To visit the Sick: 6 To visit Prisoners,
and redeem the Captive: 7 To bury the Dead.

Our Ladies Primer. Cropper^. Instit. Ledesma cap. 18. Otium Spirituale. page
110. Bellar. Christ. Doct. cap. 14.
The eight Beatitudes.
1 Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 2
Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall receive comfort. 3 Blessed are the
Meek, for they shall receive the inheritance of the Earth. 4 Blessed are they
that hunger an^ thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. 5
Bl^ssed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 6 Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. 7 Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall
be called the children of God. 8 Blessed are they that suffer for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.
Our Ladies Primer. Horas Neustr Sennora. Otium Spirituale, p. 112 Ledesma. c.
14. Gropper^. Instit. B^llar. Christ. Doct. cap. 19.
Seven deadly sins: Or, the seven capital sins which are commonly called
deadly.
1 Pride, 2 Covetousness 3 Lechery, 4 Envy, 5 Gluttony, 6 Anger, 7 Sloth.

Gropperi Instit. Otium Spirit. p. 112.
The contrary virtues.
1 Humility. 2 Contempt of the world. 3 Chastity. 4 Charity. 5 Abstinence. 6
Patience. 7 Alacrity, or spiritual cheerfulness, or Devotion.

Our Ladies Primer^ Otium Spirit. p 114. Gropperi Institut. Bellarm. Christ.
Doctr. cap. 22.
Quatuor Nouissima, or the four last things to be remembered.
Death, the last Judgment, Hell, and the Kingdom of Heaven.

Mr. Cozens.
A Collection of Private Devotions, or the hours of Prayer. Printed at London,
1627.

These Books are welnigh Paral^lls in the Title: we will n^xt examine how
they suite in substance with these, or other Popish Records.

The Fasting Days of the Church, or days of special Abstinence and Devotion.
The forty days of Lent: The Ember weeks at the 4. sea^ons: being the
Wenesday, Friday, and Saturday after the first Sunday in Lent: after the feast
of Pentecost: after holy Cross, September 14. Saint L^cies day^ December 13.
The three Rogation days; which be the Monday, Tewsday, and Wednesday before
holy Thursday, or the Ascension of our Lord: The Eues or Vigils before the
Nativity of Christ: The Purification, and Annunciation of the blessed Virgin:
The Nativity of Saint John Baptist, Saint Matthias, Saint Peter, Saint James,
Saint Bartholomew, Saint Matthew, Saint Simon and ^ude, Saint Andrew, Saint
Thomas, and all Saints day: It has also been an ancient Religious custom to
fast all the Fridayes of the year, except those that f^ll within the twelve
days of Christmas.

The times wherein Marriages are not solemnized.
From Aduent Sunday until 8. days after the Epiphany: From Septuagessima
Sunday until 8, days after Easter: From Rogation Sunday until Trinity
Sunday. Some of these being times of Fasting, and abstinence: and others, holy
Festiuals and times of joy, fit only to be spent in these holy exercises
without other au^cations.

The Apostles Creed divided into 12 Articles.
1 I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. 2 And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord 3 Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary. 4 He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried. 5 He descended into Hell: the third day he rose again from
the Dead, 6 He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
Father almighty, 7 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
8 I believe in the Holy Ghost, 9 The holy Catholic Church, the communion of
Saints, le^t our in the first, but added in the last Impression.) 10 The
fo^giuenesse of sins. 11 The Resurrection of the body. 12 And the Life ever
lasting.
The Lords Prayer d^uided into 7. Petitions.
Our Father which art in Heaven, 1 Hallowed be thy Name. 2 Thy kingdom come. 3
Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven. 4 Give us this d^y our daily
bread, 5 And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. 6 And lead us not into temptation: 7 But deliver us from eu^ll.


The two Precepts of Charity.
1 To love God above all for his own sake. 2 To love all men as our selves,
for Gods sake, and to do unto others as we would they should do unto us.
The Precepts of the Church.
1 To observe the Festiualls, and Holy days* appointed. 2 To keep the Fasting
days with Devotion, and abstinence. 3 To observe the Ecclesiastical customs,
and Ceremonies established, and that without frowardness, or contradiction. 4
To repair to the public Service of the Church, for Mattens, and Evening Song,
with other holy Offices at times appointed, unless there be a just, and
unfeigned cause to the contrary. 5 To receive the blessed Sacrament, of the
blessed Body and Blood of Christ, with frequent Devotion, and three times of
the year at least, whereof Easter to be always one, and for better preparing
thereunto as occasion is to disburthen, and quit our Consciences of these sins
that may grieve us, or scruples that may trouble us to a learned, and discre^te
^riest, and from him to receive advice, and the benefit of Absolution.
The Sacraments of the Church.
The principal, and truly so called, (as generally necessary to Salvation,)
are Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

The other five, that is to say; Confirmation, Penitence, Order, Matrimony, and
Visitation of the sick, or Extreme Unction, though they be some times called,
and have the name of Sacraments: yet they have not the like nature, that the
two principal, and true Sacraments have.

The three Theological Virtues.
Faith, Hope, Charity.

Three kinds of good Works.
Fasting, Prayer, and Almesdeedes.

Seven gifts of the holy Ghost.
1 The Spirit of Wisdom: 2 and Understanding.

3 The Spirit of Council: 4 and Ghostly strength.

5 The Spirit of Knowledge: 6 and Piety.

7 The Spirit of a Holy, and godly Fear.

The twelve Fruits of the holy Ghost.
Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, Mercy, Goodness, ^on^ suffering, Meekness,
Faith* Shamefastness, Modes^^e, S^brie^ie.

The spiritual works of Mercy.
1 To instruct the Ignorant: 2 To correct Offenders: 3 To Counsel the
doubtful: 4 To comfort the a^flicted: 5 To suffer-iniuries with patience: 6 To
forg^ue offenses, and wrongs: 7 To pray for others.

The corporal works of Mercy.
1 To feed the Hungry, and to give drink to the Thirsty: 2 To clothe the
Naked: 3 To harbor the stranger* and needy: 4 To visit the Sick: 5 To
Minister to Prisoners, and Captives: 6 To bury the Dead.

The eight Beatitudes.
1 Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for t^eirs is the kingdom of Heaven. 2
Blessed are th^^ that Mourn, for they shall receive comfort. 3 Blessed are the
Meek, for they shall receive the inheritance of the Earth. 4 Blessed are they
that h^nger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. 5
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 6 Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. 7 Blessed are the peace m^kers, for they
shall be called the children of God. 8 Blessed are they that suffer for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Seven deadly sins, as the first: or seven deadly sins, as they are commonly
so called: as the last Impressions renders it.
1 Pride, 2 Covetousness, 3 Luxury, 4 Envy, 5 Gluttony, 6 Anger, 7 Sloth.

The contrary virtues.
1 Humility. 2 Liberality. 3 Chastity. 4 Gentleness 5 Temperance. 6
Patience. 7 Devout, and earn^st serving of God.

Quatuor Nouissima: or the four last things that befall any man.
Death, Judgment, Hell, or Heaven.

Lo thus far you have an exact, and perfect Parallel of our Authors writings
with the Papists, which suite and claspe like twins, who derive their birth,
and pedigree from the selfsame womb. I confess, that the matter of them:
especially, of the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the eight Beatitudes are
contained in the Scriptures, and in our Common Prayer Book: but take both
form and matter together, and those other particulars which are here paraleld,
and you shall never find them but in Popish writers: Sure I am, you shall
never meet with these, or any of them, in the private Prayers, Printed by
Queen Elizabeth's Authority, nor in our Common Prayer Book, in that manner,
form, and method, as they are here registered by our Author: The remainder of
whose works, I come now to Parallel.

Not to spend time or paper to Parallel, and Sampler his several
Aduertisements, Prefaces, and Discourses: Concerning Mattens, the Divisions,
Use, Antiquity, and practice of Canonical Hours, or Prayer: as the first,
the third, the sixth, the ninth Hour; the Morning, Evening, or Compline, or the
like: which were stolen, and Transcribed verbatim out of De Bonis Operibus* ^n
partic. lib. 1. cap. 11.13.
Bellarmine, Moral. Instit. pars. 1. l. 9. cap. 2. to 6.
Azorius, and the Notes on Acts 10. Sect. 6
Rhemish Testament, who produce the selfsame Scriptures, Fathers,
Authorities, and Quotations, for the Authority, Division, Justification, and
practice of Canonical Hours: as any judicious Reader, who will but take the
pain^s for to compare them, may at first discern. I shall only pitch upon
these ensuing passages: which if they are not Popish in themselves, yet they
are wholly Transcribed out of Popish Authors.

Mr. Couzens.
At our vprising. page 14.
IN the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.
Blessed be the Holy, and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore.

At our going abroad. page 16.
Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

At our entrance into the Church. page, 17, and part. 2.
As for me I will go into thy house, O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercies,
and in thy fear will I worship thee in thy h^ly Temple.

Preparatorie Prayers to all the hours that follow. page. 40.
God be in my head and understanding: God be in my eyes and in my seeing: God
be in my mouth and in my speaking: God be in my heart and in my thinking: God
be at my end and my departing, Amen.

Veni Creator, etc. page 91.
Are Paralells.

The Benediction. page 174.
God the Father bless me, God the Son defend me, God the holy Ghost
pre^erue m^ now and forever, Amen.

When we enter into our Bed. Page 176.
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was cruci^i^d vp^^ the Cross, and
laid vp^n his grave f^r me) I lay (...) down to rest^ he bless me. k^^pe
me, and save me, rai^e me up again, and bring me at last to life eternal.
Amen.

Papists.
Our Ladies Primer in Latin and English Printed at Antwerp. 1604 Folio 199.
La^r. Kellams Manuell, 1604. p 1.
When thou risest in the Morning, say:
IN the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen.
Blessed be the Holy, and undivided Trinity, now and ever, etc.

Ibid^ Fol. 202 Otium. Spirit. page 30.
In going forth of thy house* say:
Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

Ibid. fol. 202 Otium Spirit. Page 31. Horas Neustr. Sennora, ^ol. 10.
Entering into the Church.
O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercies, I will enter into thy house, I will
adore at thy holy Temple, and will Confess unto thy Name.

Kellams Manuell of Prayers, page 8.
A blessing to be used at the beginning of Prayer.
God be in my head and in my being: God be in my mind and understanding: God
be in mine eyes and in my seeing: God be in my mouth and in my speaking: God
be in my heart and in my thinking, Amen.

Otium Spirit p. ^5^.159.
Ven^ Creator, etc. Laur. Ke^lam^ Manuel, Page 21.
The Conclusion.
God the Father bless me, Jesus Christ defend me, and the virtue of the of the
Holy Ghost illuminate and sanctify me, this night and evermore, Amen.

A Prayer as thou entrest into thy bed.
In the name the the Lord Jesus Christ, that was crucified for me, I go into my
be^: let him b^^sse me, govern me, and defend me, and bring me into life
everlasting, Amen.

I will not compare, nor Parallel our Authors Page 230. to 241.246.247
Aduerti^ements concerning Lent, and Septuagesima Sunday, where he a^firmes,
the Lent Fast, to be a Divine, and Apostolical Institution: which is
transcribed out of Popish Authors: because I have mentioned, and compared them
with these Authors heretofore: I will therefore pass to his Pra^ers, before
the receiving of the Sacrament.

Papists.
Horas Neustra Sen^ora. F^l. 11.
When thou do bow thy self before the Altar thou shall say these verses:
All the e^rth does worship thee O Lord, etc.
Missale Romanum^ P^inted at Antwerpe 1574. page 272.
COmmand, that the Prayers, and Sacrifice which we now offer up unto thee, may
be brought up into thy presence by the Ministry of thy holy Angel: which may
have a better construction, then our Authors.

Kellams Manual, page 80.
Receiving, say with the Priest, thrice.
Lord I am not worthy thou should enter into my house, but only speak the
word, and my Soul shall be healed.

Mr. Couzens.
When we are prostrate before the Altar: part. 2. page 4. Thou art worthy O
Lord, etc. which is merely Popish, both for phrase, for time, and place.
Command, that the Prayers and Suppli^ations, together with the remembrance of
Christ's Passion, which we now offer up unto thee, may by the Ministry of thy
holy Angels, be brought up into thy Heavenly Tabernacle: page 10.

At the receiving of the Body. page 12.
Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my ^^fe^ but speak the
word only, and my Soul shall be healed,: adding with the Priest. etc.

That which our Author Prefaceth concerning Ember weeks. page 55.56. (to omit
his Lauds taken out of our Ladies Primer,) is for the most part transcribed
out of Kellams Manual, presantly after his Calendar: where he describes, the
use, and reason of these Ember weeks: the Paralelling of which; together with
his Prayer for the Dead, (which I have already touched upon;) I purposely omit,
for fear of being two prolixe; since I have here, as I suppose, su^ficiently
euidenced, the truth of this Assertion, by the premises and present Parallel,
which I mean not now to enlarge. (That both the form, and matter of these
Devotions, are transcribed, and extracted out of Popish Authors, Primers,
Chatechismes, and Prayer Books:) not out of the Prayer Book of Queen
Elizabeth, or our Common Prayer Book, in which there are no such passages to
be found. Now the reasons which induce me more strongly to susp^^t, that our
Author borrowed both the form, and matter of these Devotions from Popish
Authors, as the present Parallel does abundantly testify; are chiefly two:
First, because the Author has for sundry years together, Monopolized, and
bought up for his own private use, (as I am crediblely informed,) all sorts of
Popish Primers, Prayer Books, Chatechismes, Breuiaries, and Pamphlets
whatsoever, (of which he has great store:) and yet he is always inquisitiue
after more. Secondly, because he has caused sundry of his Popish Prayer
Books, Primers, and breuiaries, to be bound up in a very curious, and costly
manner, with gilded leaves, and Couers, stamped sometimes with a Cr^sse, or
Crucifixe, other times with our Ladies Picture, and Jesus ^^her arms: all
after the Popish form; as his own Booke-binders have certified me: which
doubtl^sse he would never do, did he not admi^e, affect, and prise these
Books, and Pamplets in his heart; and likewise, make some use of them, both in
his private practice, and Devotions, and his public writings, as he here has
done.

His seven deadly sins: to wit, Pride, Covetousness, Luxury, Envy,
Gluttony, Anger, Sloth: for which he quotes, as the Papists out of which he
did transcribe them do: Galat. 5. in the margent. Now if you look into Galat.
5.19, 20, 21. the Text which he quotes; you shall find not seven, but
seventeen deadly sins, particularly expressed: to wit; Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envying, Murders,
Drunkenness, Reuilings, and such like, besides: so that our Author has
committed a treble absurdity, the seven, to wit, Pride, Covetousness,
Luxury, Gluttony, Anger, and Sloth, are not so much as mentioned here:
whereby he sophisticates, and peruerts the Scripture: Thirdly, in mustering up
these inferior sins, as the Idolatry, Heresy, Adultery, Witchcraft,
Uncleanness, Sedition, and Drunkenness; to which I might add, Atheisine,
Infidelity, Contempt of the Gospel, Blasphemy, Sacrilege, the Profanation of
the Sacraments, Oppre^sion, Interlege^ ^^sas delinqui^tur, inter ^ur^ peccatur,
innocentia nec vbi defe^ditur, reseruaetur. Qui sedi^ crimina vendicat^rus,
admittit: and vt reus innocens pereat, fit nocens Iudex. Cypr. Epist l. 2. Ep.
2. Donato.
Injustice* in Courts of Justice; Murder, Perjury, Bribery, Ecclesiastical,
and Temporal Lucri ^onus est odor ex re qualibet: Suetonij. Vespatian c. 23.
Vnde habeat nemo quarit, sed oportet habere I^uenal. Satyr. 14.
Simonie* (the Only step, and door, to Honor and pr^^erment, both in Church,
and State, in this our Aurea nun^ vere sunt saecula; plurimu^ auro venit honos:
auro conciliatur amor. Ipse licet venias Musis comitatus Homer^, Nil tamen
attuleru ibis H^mere for as. Ovid. de Art Amandi, l. 2.
Golden age:) far greater sins then any of the former seven; which is but a
mere extenuation, and slighting of these greater sins. But our Author cannot
be content with this, unless he likewise wilfully incur another Popish
absurdity, which he grounds upon the selfsame Chapter. For recording, the
twelve fruits of the holy Ghost: to wit, Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, Mercy,
Goodness, Long-suffering, Meekness, Faith, Modesty, Shamefastness,
Sobri^tie: (which he took from Popish Authors,) he quotes in the m^rg^nt,
Galat. 5. for proof of this Arithmeticall computation: which as it failed by
Substraction in the enumeration of sins: so it offends in Addition here: For
Saint Paul* Galat. 5.22, 23. enumerates but nine fruits of the Spirit: Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance: against which there is no Law: whereas Patience, Mercy, Modesty,
Shamefastness, and Sobriety: five of our Authors tw^lue Fruits, are not so
much as named by the Apostle: and Gentleness, Temperance, two of the Apost^es
nine, are not recorded in our Authors Catalogue: which is a gross abuse, a
wreathing, and perverting of the Scriptures. As our Authors Arithmetique has
fa^led him in the fruits, because he cast up his reckoning with Popish
counters: so it has likewise cheated him, in the gifts of the holy Ghost,
which he makes seven. 1 The Spirit of Wisdom, 2 and Understanding. 3 The
Spirit of Council, 4 and Ghostly strength. 5 The Spirit of Knowledge, 6 and
Piety. 7 The Spirit of a holy and godly fear: for which he quotes Esaias. 11.
Now Esaias 11.2. makes mention but of six, or rather three Attributes, or
operations; not gifts, of the Spirit. The Spirit of the Lord, (says he
speaking of Christ Jesus,) shall rest upon him: The Spirit of Wisdom* and
Understanding: The Spirit of Council, and Might* The Spirit of Knowledge* and
of the fear of the Lord: Lo here you have mention only of six, or rather
three operations, effects, or Attributes, not gifts of Gods Spirit: For the
Spirit of Wisdom, Understanding, Council, and Knowledge, are Sinonimaes, and
vary more in phrase then substance: so that in truth here are but three
distinct gifts, or operations of the Spirit: at least, there are but six, and
of these, the Spirit of Piety, (which the Papists and our Author annex unto
the rest) is none. So that this Scripture is plainly abused by our Author, not
only in stiling these, the gifts, (which are rather the Attributes, and
operations, then the gifts) of the Spirit: but likewise in adding one unto
their number. Indeed, if our Author were as well studied in the Scriptures, as
in Popish Authors, he might have found Saint Paul enumerating, not seven; but
nine gifts of the Spirit: 1 Cor. 12. v. 9, 10.
For to one (says he,) is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom* to another
the word of Knowledge by the same Spirit. To another Faith by the same Spirit,
to another the gift of Healing by the same Spirit: To another the working of
Miracles* to another Prophecy* to another discerning of Spirits, to another
diverse ki^des of Tongues* (an See Acts 2, 3 to 12. and 10.46. and. 11.15.17.
eminent, and frequent gift of the holy Ghost, which our Author mentions not:)
to another the interpretation of Tongues: Lo here nine several gifts of the
Spirit* mustred up by the Apostle, in three files, or verses of one Chapter:
How Popish, absurd, and do^ing then is this our Author, who giving more credit
unto Papists* then Saint Paul, would reduce them only unto seven: and so
eclipse the Grace, and Bounty of the holy Ghost, which is so diverse in his
gifts, and Heavenly operations, for the good and welfare of the Church? To
these I may add our Authors eight Beatitudes, (transcribed out of the Popish
Pamphlets, as all the other were, as I have proved in my former Parallel,) for
which he quotes Matthew. 5. as the Papists do: Now there are not eight, but
nine Beatitudes, pronounced by our Savior in that Chapter: the last of which:
to wit, Math 5.11.
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, etc. Our Author and the
Papists both omit: and so dismember, and abuse the holy Scripture, Revel. 22.18
19. Deuteronomy 4.2. c. 12.32. Josh. 1.7. Pro. 30.6.
to which no man can add, nor take away, without apparent loss and hazard of
his soul: I will end, and shut up this Conclusion; with the visitation of the
Sick: which our Author makes one of his seven Sacraments; an absurdity,
solecisme, and noualtie, which I never heard, nor red of yet, in any
Protestant, or Popish Author. But though this visitation of the Sick be not a
Sacrament, as our Author dreams, (perchance, because he found it in the
Common Prayer Book:) yet I am sure it is Math. 25.36.37, 43, 44. Iam. 1.27.
and 5, 14, 15.
a necessary duty which G^d, and Christ, yea, and our Visitation of the sick.
own Church, and Canon. 67.
Canons, impose upon all Ministers: How then shall those Nonresidents, and
Plurality men excuse themselves, either to God, or Man, (especially, in that
Great, and terrible day of Judgment, when Christ the 1 Pet. 5, 4. John 10, 11.
Heb. 11.20.
Master, good, and careful Shepherd of the Sheep, who Psalm. 121. Math. 23,
20 Isay 27.3. Ier. 23 3, 4. Isay 40 11. Ezech. 34, 10, 11.12.
is always Resident with his flock, and has Ioh. 10, 11, 17. Act. 20, 28 1
Pet. 1, 18, 19 Ehp. 5.25, 26, 27.
parted with his Blood, and Life, to purchase, Heal, and save their souls;
shall summon them, to Heb. 13.17 Ezech 33, 6, 8 Ier. 23, 1, 2 Eze. 34, 9, 10.
give an account of all the Souls, which they have lost, or slain though
carelessness, or sloth: and to exact, their blood at their hands:) who are so
far from visiting the sick, and diseased bodies of their forelorne Sheep:
that they quite neglect their dead, and sickly Souls; which fester, rot, and
pine away; yea, die, and that for ever, in their sins, and trespasses: for
want of Spiritual physic, and Cordialls to recover them? O the
hard-heartednesse, of these Woluish, Ier. 23, 1. Ezec. 34, 3, 4, 5 8. Mr.
Perkins on the 6 Commandment.
Murdering, and Soule-deuouring Pastors. Who thus neglect, nay, starve, and
butcher the very Cant 4, 1, 7, 5, 10.11. and 6, 4, 5. and 7, 6, 10.11. Act. 20,
28
dearest dear, and Love of Christ, his chosen, and beloved flock; which he
has purchased with his dearest Blood? had they any of Christ's Love, or Bowels:
of Christ's Pity, and Conpassion: nay, any spark of Grace, or Nature in them,
they would not, they could not; nay, they durst not so much undervalue Christ's
bosom Friends, Ioh. 21, 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 5 25.29, 30. d^ut 32, 10. Psalm. 17,
8. Zach. 2.8.
his Lambs, his Love, his Blood, his Spouse, and dearest members, as out of
Covetousness, Sloth, Sensuality, Pride, Unskillfulness, or Negligence, to put
them over unto Ezech 34.2, 3, 8. and 44 8. Zech. 11, 5. John 10 12.13
hirelings, which God himself condemns, as if themselves were either to
great, or good for to attend them. Alas, the meanest Souls, cost Christ as
much, Eiusmodi apud Deum praetii sunt, qui vno Christi sanguine sunt redempti:
nec interest qua quis condition natus sit, cum in Christo aequaliter
renascamur. Hierom. Epist. To^. 1. Epist. 14. c. 5.
and so they are, as dear unto him,) as the greatest Monarchs; they cost the
very Son of God, his best, and dearest Blood: And dare you then advance your
selves so far above Christ Jesus, whose underlings, and servants you profess
your selves: as not to deem those worthy of your sweat, your pains, and 1
Cor. 8.11, 12. Act. 20.28 Romans 14.15.
greatest care, for whom Christ Jesus died? As to prefer your case, your
Deliciis occupati gregis Domini dam^a non curant. Hierom. Comment. lib. 11. in
Ezech. c. 34.
pleasures, your bellies, skins, and backs: your honors, profits, and
preferments: nay, your very Cadit Asina, and est qui subleuet eam. Perit anima,
and nemo est qui reputet. Optimi videlicet estimateres rerum, qui magnam de
minimis, paruam aut nullam ^e maximis curam gerunt. Sed liquido d^tur
intelligi, patientius ferimus Christi iacturam, quam nostram. Bernard. de
Consid. lib. 4 cap. 6.
Asses, Swine, and beasts; before the wealth, and safety of your flocks:
whose rich, and peerless Souls, are more of price and value, then ten
thousand worlds? As to withdraw, absent, and alienate your selves so from them,
as to become mere strangers to them, and scarce to visit them once a quarter,
nay once a year, unless your Tithes and private gains induce you to it; though
2 Chronicles. 13.10, 11. Prou. 27 23. Isay 40, 11 le^. 3, 5. and 6, 3. and 23.4.
Genesis 31, 39.40. Eze. 34, 2, to 18. Zech 11.4, 5, 7, 17. Mal. 2.7. Acts 20.18,
20 28. John 10, 3.4, 14 and 21.15 16.17. Romans 12 7, 8. 1 Cor. 9, 7 to 17. Phil.
2, 20, 21, 26. Col. 4, 17. ^ These. 2.7, 8, 9 and 5, 12. 2 These 3, 10. 1 Timothy 3,
5. and 4, 12, 13. and 5, 17. 2 Timothy 4 1, 5. 1 Pet. 5, 2, 3 4
God himself, and Apostolor: Canones cap. 13 14, 15, 37, 57. Council: Nicaenum
Can. 15.16. Eliberinum can 19. Ar^latense: 1. can. 2, 22. and 2 can. 12.
Antioch. can. 3, 17.21.22. Sardic: can. 1, 2.^, 15, 20. Constantinop. 1 can. 2.
and 6 can 8 Carthag. 3 can. 38, 4. can 27.5 can. 5, and 6. c^n. 15, 16. Ap^ric.
can 38. Agatense: can. 64 Chalcedonense: can. 3.10, 20* 23, 25. Turonense: 1
can. 11 ^3. can. 4. Toletanum: 2. can. 4:11. can 2. Aurelianense: 2. can 14.3.
can. 11. Bracarense: 3. can. 8. Palatium: Vernis: can. 12. Nicanum: 2. can.
10.15. Are^atense: 4. can. 3.10. Cabilonense: 2. can. 52, 54. Aquis^ra: can.
45, 50, 71, 87. and sub Ludou Pio: can: 11, 16. Parisiense: lib. 1, cap. 21,
36. Meldense: cap. 28, 29, ^6, 50. Valentinum: cap 14, 16. Capit: Graecar
Synod: cap. 1, ca: 5, 6, 11, 12. Tridentinum Sess. 6, cap 1, 2. De Reformat:
Sess. 7, cap. 2, 3. de Reformat: sess: 14, de Reformat: can: 8, 9. sess. 23.
can. 1, 16.
30. several Councels, enjoin both Bishops themselves, and al inferior
Pastors, unto a fixed, constant, and laborious Residence: condemning al
Nonresidency under pain of deposition? As to assign them over to some
careless hireling, (as if that personal duty, work, and service, which God
himself has laid on Ministers, might be transferred over at their pleasures,
and be discharged by a Proxy, without any wrong to God, or to their Flocks:)
whiles you your selves are feasting and wallowing in your ease and pleasures,
in some Peers or Prelates Palace: or at some Cathedral Church, or College,
like so many Epicures, or Tonne-growne Abbylubbers, as Pierce the Plowman
phraseth them: or i^tting up and down at Court, in Paul's, or London streets,
in Plush, in Sattins, Veluets, Silks, and cocked Beauers, which affront the
Heavens: carrying whole Steeples on your backs at once; as Nunc leua oculos
tuos, et vide fi non aeque vt prius pellicula discolor sacrum ordinem
decolorat. Quid sibi vult quod Cierici aliud esse, aliud videri volunt? Id
quidem minus castum, minusque sincerum. Nempo habitu milites, quaestu Clericos,
actu neutrum exhibent. Nam neque pugnant vt milites: neque vt Clerici
Euangelizant. Cuius ordinis sunt? Cum vtriusque esse cupiunt, vtrumque
deserunt, vtrumque confundunt. Bernard. de Consid. l. 3. c. 5.
if you were some Knights, or petty Lords; or the only proud and swaggering
Gallants that the Court or Kingdom yield: as Non amici profecto sponsi, s^a
aemuli sunt. Ib. Intuere quomodo incedunt nitidi and ornati, circumamicti
varietatibus, tanquam sponsa procedens de thalamo suo: nonne si quempiam talium
repent eminu^ procedentem aspexeris, sponsam potius putabis quam sponsae
custodem? Bern. sup. Cant. Ser. 77. See De Co^sid. l. 4. c. 2.3. against the
pride and costly array of Prelates.
if you were the very bride himself, or Lucifers proud Priests and Prelates,
as old Chaucer styles them: and not the meek, and lowly Ministers of Jesus
Christ: ( Who are bound by sundry Council. Carthag: 4. can. 15.45. Maticonense.
1 can. 5.2. can. 13.15. Constant: 6. ca^. 27. and others.
Councels, (though they are the greatest and the richest Prelates) to cloth
and furnish themselves with modest, humble, mean, and cheap array, and
Housholdstuffe: to testi^ie the lowliness and meekenes of their gracious
hearts, and give example unto others: abandoning all Veluets, Silks, and
Sattins, and such exoticke, costly, proud, Pontifical, and heart-swelling
array, which Christ and his Apostles never used; as Forma haec Vestium
deformitatis mentium ac morum indicium est. Bern. de Consid. l. 3. c. 5.
the badges of their pride, and blemish of their Function:) without any thought
or care at all of your forelorne and forsaken Flocks? Well, let me tell you
thus much from my heart, (and the Lord of heaven fix it on, and bless to your
souls:) that as your Si quis non edificat Ecclesiam Christi, nec plebem sibi
subiectam instruit, vt de subiecto populo, Christ's Ecclesia construatur, and
quasi mercenarius nequaquam gregis salutem cogitat, sed tantummodo de ^uibus
lac and lanam, cibum videlicet and vestimenta captat: iste falsus est Pastor;
nec Apostolus, nec Propheta, nec Euangelista, nec Pastor, nec Magister est
appellandus: Hierom. Com. lib. 2. in Ephesians. 4. This was Wickliff^s opinion too.
Nonresidencie and carelessness in feeding of your Flocks, depriues you of the
very name and function of Pastors in Gods sight, 1 Cor. 9. to 15. 2 These.
3.10.12.
and so you have no right nor title to the Fleece, in Gods account; because you
attend not on the Flock: so there is a day of Judgment and an Audit coming,
wherein Christ Jesus, the careful Master-shepheard of your Pasture-Sheepe,
shall call you to a strikt account for all the Sheep and Lambs of which you
undertook the Charge; requiring all their blood at your hands; and then what
plea, Apology, reply, or answer can you make to mittigate or salve this
bloody and soule-slaying sin? What will the Statutes, or Canons of our
Church, which tolerate Pluralities, and Nonresidence in some certain cases*
will a Faculty, a Totquot^ or any such Non plane fidelis dispens^^^e (...)
dissipatio. Bern. de Consid. l. 3. c. 4.
dissipating Dispensations: be any Estople, or Plea in bar to Jesus Christ?
No, no: He has certified you by that written word of his, by which you shall
be Judged at the last: that there is an Zech. 11.1^. l^. 22.1.
Woe to every idle Shepherd that forsakes the Flock: the sword shall be upon
his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his
right eye shall be utterly darkened: and Ezech. 23.13.6. and 349.10.
that he will require the blood of all his Flock at your hands: which no
humane Laws nor Dispensations can control. Wherefore you must needss incur
that everlasting doom and sentence, which Christ himself records for your
instruction, yea your terror and damnation if you mend not speedily. Math.
29.40 to the end.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: For I was an hungered, and you gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and
you gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and you took me not in; naked, and
you clothed me not; sick, and in pri^on, and you visited me not. Verily. I
say unto, you i^asmuch as you did it not to one of the least of these, (how
much more then, when you did it not to that great and numerous Flock, which I
my self committed to your charge; Ezech. 34, 2.3.
whose Fleece you always share, whose Milk you drunk, and Tithes you
gathered, and exacted to the utmost farthing, and yet made no Conscience for to
keep, to guide, to teach, instruct, or feed them both by life and
conversation:) you did it not to me; and therefore go away you must, you
shall, and that deservedly, into everlasting punishment. If therefore, you
would not have Jesus Christ to visit you thus hereafter, be sure now to visit,
teach, Isay 41.11. Ezech. 34.14.16.
bind up, and cure, your destitute, sickely, starued, and forlorn Flocks; and
to reside, and dwell so frequently, and constantly among them, as John. 10.3.4
14.27. Exodus 28.9.12.29.
to know, and call them all by name, as Christ Jesus does: because though it
be no Sacrament, yet it is your duty thus to teach, to visit, and reside
among them.

But lest some should tax, and censure me, as being a Preface. Reason 1.
they style: Extemporary effusions of irksome, and indigested Prayers, which
they use to make, that herein are subject to no good order, or form of words,
but pray both what, and how, and when they will: abrupt, or rude dictates,
which are framed by private Spirits, and Ghosts of our own, in which we lose
our ^elues with confusion on a sudden. A most profane, and scurri^ous
passage; as if God did not give the Zech 12.10 Romans 8.15.26.27.
Spirit of Pray^r, and Supplication to all his Children, whereby they are
enabled to power out their Hearts, and Souls before him

Secondly, he styles the opposing o^ these points of Popery, and
Arminianisme, which are now in C^ntr^uersie among us, nothing ^l^e. But the
curious Disquisition of many unnecessary Questions* (as if the freedom of Gods
free Grace, and the Truth, and purity of Religion, were a matter of no such
consequence:) being nothing else, but either the new seeds, or the old fruits
of m^lice: and by consequence: the enemies of Godliness, and the abatement of
that true Devotion, wherewith God is more delighted and a good Soul more
inf^amed, and comforted, then with all the busy subtilties of the World: A
profane and dangerous passage: which makes the freedom, truth, and
perpetuity of Grace, (wherein the very life, and power of Christianity, and
the root, and marrow of all true Christian joy consist:) together with the
controversies of original Corruption, of man's free will, and the li^e: mere
curious Disquisitions, unnecessary Questions, and busy subtilties: (when as
the very pith, and essence of Religion is inuolued in them:) which extenuates,
and slights the Controversies of Popery, and Arminimisme, as not worth the
heeding; that so they might through our security, more Neglecta solent
incendia sumere vires. Horace Epist. l. 1 Epist. 18. Nihil tuto in host
despicitur: quem spreueris valentiorem negligentia facies. Qu: Curtius l. 6.
Sect. 3. Hostis non tam suis viribus, quam nostra neglige^tia auctus est:
Demost* Orat. 1 in Philip. Quod d^spectui est facilius nocet. Solinus Polyhist.
c. 8. p. 183. Securitas Detrimentoru^ semper matter est. Paulus Diac. De Gest
Longobardorum. l. 1 c. 11. Nemo celerius opprimitur qua^ qui nihil aut parum
timet: and frequentissimum calamitatis initium est securitas. (...). Rom Hist.
l 2. p. ^25. (...) interdum malum neglectum* ingeus periculum parit. (...) Rom
hist. l. 1 p ^. R^lus minimis ac tricis neglectis magna interdum euertuntur
imperia. Nihi^ contemn, n^m nihil paruum est. Case. Polit. l. 5. c. 3. p 435
c. 7. p. 46.
smoothly, speedily, and imperceptibly (...)* and i^corporate themselves into
our Church, without resistance, whiles they are thus slighted, despised, and
neglected by us, as mere toys, and trifles. Which styles the resistance, and
oppo^ition of the^e Popish, and Arminian Doctrines: the new seeds, or the old
fruits of malice, the enemy of all Godliness, and all true Devotion. But if
the defenc^, and patron^ge of Religion, and the established Doctrines of the
Church: be but the seeds, or fruits of malice; not of Zeal, and Love to
God, or Christian Piety, as in truth they are: what must the opposition of a^
grace, and goodness; what the protection, and propagation of Popery, and false
Doctrine be? If this be but the enemy of all Godliness, and true Devotion,
which is the only prop, and pillar to support them: (for if the truth of our
Religion once decay, and Popery* or Arminianisme ouer-spred us, as they will
do, if they want Opponents; far well all Godliness, and true Devotion, yea,
Church, and Kingdom too:) what is the persecuting of Godliness, and godly
Men? what is the suppression of the Truth, and Doctrine of our Church, and the
publishing of Popish Doctrines, and Devotions, in which our Author has had his
hands, and thumbes? Well, this passage, does su^ficiently evidence: how our
Author stands affe^ted to our Religion; even so, as that he slights those
great, and weighty differences, which are between Papists, and Arminians, and
our Church; as if they were not worth the naming: and that he honors Popery,
and Arminianisme in his Heart, since he brands the very oppugning of them, as
the fruits, or seeds of malice: as the enemy of Godliness* and abatement of
all true Devotion: (as if there were no Devotion in withstanding Error, and
protecting Truth:) Good God, in what a miserable condition were our poor
distressed Church, and how happy were Arminians, and the Church of Rome; had
she now no other Advocates, nor no stouter Champions then our Author, to
justify, and maintain her cause? But I pass from this, unto a third
prophannesse. That a man apology, the ordinary swearers make, who hope they
may ^awfully swear a truth without offense. This I colle^t from his
Exposition of the thi^^ Commandment. Offenders against the third Commandment,
(says he) are: They that use vain, or customary swearing: They which in
matters serious swear fasely; and periure themselves: without any such
addition: thos^ that swear ordinarily in serious matters, not being lawfully
ca^^ed to it by a Magistrate, though they swear a true th: which does
necessarily inferr^ the former colle^tion.

Iudaizing observation: in these words: 6. Exposition on the 4. Commandment.
Offenders against the fourth Commandment are they, that under a pretense of
serving God more strictly then others, (especially for hearing and meditating
of Sermons) I pray Observe the Parenthesis well: Do by their Fasts, and
certain Iudaizing observations, condemn the joyful festiuitie of this high
and holy day: which the Church allows, as well for the necessary recreation of
the Body in due time, as for spiritual exercises of the soul. In Ista
pau^^rum breuitate verborum, non duarum tantum, sed multarum impietatum
numerosa connexio est. Prosper. contr. Collator: cap. 24.
In which passage: you have first a vilification, censure, and apparent
branding of all such pious Christians, for Sabath-breakers: who have most care
and Conscience for to sanctify and spend it in the hearing, and meditating of
Gods Word: a Doctrine never heard of in the Church before.

Secondly, a lash and ierke at all such holy and religious persons, (and in
them at the very hearing and meditating Texts alone, but even their Sermons,
and their Prayers too: (for which they often t^mes pray in ay^e of others:) for
^eare of taking to much pains, or tr^ub^^ng th^^r heads with heau^n^y Notions,
which are Quotidiana^ ^xpensas, quotidiano reciprocamu^ s^rutinio, and c^ntinua
Dominici gregis detriment anes^imus. Bern De Consid. l^ 4. cap 6.
full fraught with worldly cares, with secu^ar and Vide^ omne^ Ecclesiasticum
zelum fe^uere sola pro digninitate tuenda: honori totum datur, sanctitati nihil
aut parum. lb. cap 2.
a^piring thoughts and proiects, or some Political and State-affa^res: Sure I
am, that See Math. 5.2 and 8.28.29. and 13 3. Luke 5.3, 4.3 6. and 6.20.29. and
7.1. Acts 2.2, 14. and 3.12. and 4.1 31. and 7.2. and 10.6.34. and 13.15.16.
and 17.22^ and 20 7. and 28.31.
Christ himself, and his Apostles did always pray and preach with-out-Booke:
yea, it is expr^ssely said of Christ: Luke 4.17. to 28.
That when he had read his Text, he closed his Book, and gave it again unto
the Minister; and then he opened his mouth, and spak^, not red, unto the
people: From whence then flows this new invented reading practice? Certainly
from slothful, and rare-preaching Ministers of superior rank, (who have most
time to ^on their Sermons, and their Prayers, because they Pray, and Preach so
seldom; and therefore have least cause to use it:) Who to grati^ie their own
lasie dispositions: (when as the very high^st calling in the Ministry, 1 Timothy
3 1.2. and 5.17. Episcopatus nomen est operis, non honoris. Aug De Ciu. Dei l
19. c 1^. Aquisgranens. Con^ sub. Lud. P^o. c 9.11. Episcopi nomen non
Dominium, sed Officium. Bern^ de C^nsid l. 2. ^. 6. Praesis vt prosis, vt
dispenses n^n (...) imperes. lb. l. ^. c. ^. Praeside^ non tam ad imperitandum
quam ad factitandum: s^rculo tib^ ^pus est non sceptro: Dominatio interdicitur:
indicitur Ministratio. lb. lib. 2 c. 6.
is not an ease, an honor, or domineering Lordship, as most men make it, but a
work; which should not lessen, but augement their labors:) to justify that
received conceit: that the very reading of the Word is Preaching; (and so by it
to pull down, or diminish Preaching at the last:) and to cool the Zeal, and
forwardness of those Conscionable, Faithful, and Laborious Ministers, (who
Preach with Zeal, with Power, and Affection, and vent their Hearts, together
with their words:) by their cold and lasie example; have labored to promote
this practice, and bring it into fashion, especially, at the Court: from whence
it should descend, Cum Priuilegio, to all inferior places, and so eat out all
powerful, Heart-warming, and Soule-searching Preaching at the last: yea, and
all diligent, and conscionable hearing too: For who would deem that worthy
hearing, which the Minister thinks not worth remembering? who would lay up that
as treasure in his heart, which the Preacher, (or the R^ader rather,) had never
in his head, nor heart, but only in Book? Or who can think that he either
Prays, or Preaches, from the very abundance of his heart, and the feruencie,
and strength of his affections; who prays, or speaks, but only from his
coppie, and that p^rchance some others, not his own? Yea, how can any such
Ministers exhort the people to remember what they hear; when as themselves
commit not that to memory, which they Preach? or how can the people ever
think, that those Ministers will ta^e pains to practice what they teach in
their lives; when as they labor not so much as to imprint it in their minds?
or that they duly instruct their families, or Pray daily with them in private,
as they ought: who cannot Pray, nor Preach by heart in public? This very use,
and practice therefore, as it is a means to bring the Ministry into contempt,
and scorn, so likewise it is the ready way to ouerturne, all conscionable,
profitable, and frequent hearing, Preaching, yea, and practice too: since las^e
Preachers make but drowsy hearers, and key-cold, slow, and slothful
practisers. No meruile then, if our Author, and those Reading-preachers;
condemn the hearing, and meditating of Sermons, as a Sabbath-breach, and
Iud^izing observation: (a most Profane, Blasphemous, and Ungodly Doctrine:)
who labor thus, to eat out all conscionable diligent, and painful
Preaching: But of this enough.

quickly, ea^e out all Religion, an^ Usher in all Prophane^esse, and
wickedness whatsoever: and therefore had need to be suppressed in due time.
Well, let our Author pretend Devotion, and the advancement of it, whiles he
will: yet this one clause, and passage, if there were no other; were Ex hoc
quod patet, suspec^um facis esse quod late^. August. contr. Julian l 3. c. 26.
sufficient to bewray his pestilent, dangerous, and Popish Designs: and to
proclaim unto the World; that he endeauours nothing more, Expugnare te credo
quod lauda^, sed laudare te doleo quod expugnas. Quomo^o fideliter agas ista
non vidio: and v^ lauds velut amicam, and expugnas velut inimicam: Vnum eorum
credimu^, sed elig^ quid credamus. Si ex animo pugnas; non ex animo laudas: si
aut^m simplic^^er agis in praeconio, colludis in praelio. Aug. lb. c. 21.26.
but to root out all true Protestant Pi^tie, and Deuotion^ and to bring in all
prophannesse, under the very name^ and vizard of Devotion, which his Booke^ and
Title seem to praise and magnify.

To these profane and dangerous passages, our Author ioynes some manifest and
apparent contradictions in the seventh place: which I will but lightly touch:
In his Title Page, he informs us in the first and second Impressions: That
these his Private Devotions and hours of Prayer, were after this manner
published by Authority of Queen Elizabeth 1560. his third Edition says, that
these were not published after, but much after this manner: In his Preface, he
condemns all Prayers whatsoever, that are made by private spirits, or Ghosts
of our own: yea the very prayers of private Ministers that are not Authorized
by the Church: how then can he justify these private Devotions of his own,
composed by his private, (and no public) Ghost or spirit, unless it were the
Catholic and public spirit of the Church of Rome? Again, he certifieth us:
That all Deacons and Ministers, (and much are enjoined by the Preface to our
Common Prayer Book, to a set and constant form of Prayer: viz. To say the
Morning and Evening Devotions of our Church, for their daily and private
Prayers: What need or use then of these Private Devotions, if our Church
confine men's private and daily Prayers, to her own public morning and evening
Devotions? Certainly they are altogether needless and superfluous, unless it
be to ouerturne and thwart this Edict and Iniunction of our Church, and to
withdraw from us the use and Practice of our public Lyturgie and Common Prayer
Book. Yea, but he informs us, that his third reason of publishing these
Devotions was: that they who by reason of their earnest letts and impediments
were hindered from the public, might have here a daily and devout order of
private Prayer wherein to exercise themselves, and to spend ^ome hours of the
day at least in Gods holy worship, and service: But questionless those who can
find no leisure for the public, will hardly find whole vacant hours, every
day at least, for these his private devotions: his Praeface therefore is but a
mere Rebutter and Counterplee to his Book, and a contradiction to it self.
Our Author informs us in another place: that Marriage is a Sacrament: yet he
sticks not to record it: that there are times and seasons of the year when
Marriages are not to be solemnized, because they are times of holy Festiuitie
and Joy, which are fit only for such holy Exercises, without other Auocations.
Marriage is a Sacrament, therefore not fit for holy times: therefore no such
holy exercise: It is a joyful and festival Ordinance, and always has been
so reputed: therefore unseasonable for festival and joyful seasons: this is
our Authors learned Argument which needs no other Respondent but it self: But
if Marriages (as our Author reasons) be incongruous and unlawful at festival,
joyful, and holy seasons: then by consequence they are unsuitable, and
unlawful at any season. At times of solemn Fasting and Abstinence.; so
himself does reason in the selfsame place: because it is a Festival,
pleasurable, and joyful Ordinance of God: At ordinary, common, and unholy
seasons, because it is a Sacrament, (as he sti^es it) or an holy Ordinance: and
so incongruous and unseemly at such vulgar times: And so altogether unlawful
at any season: and then no Sacrament: Or if a Sacrament, then lawful at any
season whatsoever, which nullifies these non-li^et times of Marriage, which are
no other, then the very Doctrine of Deuils^ as 1. Tim. 4.1.3
Saint Paul affirms. A manifold, and notable contradiction: and yet behold,
another as worthy note as this: Offenders (says he) against the fourth
Commandment; are, they that spend this holy Festival away in idle, and vain
sports, that eat, and drink, and discourse, and sleep it way: and yet
presently, in his sixth Division, he informs us: That the Church allows the
joyful Festiuit^e of this high and holy day, as well for the necessary
recreations of the body in due time, as for spiritual exercises of the Soul:
and that they are Sabath-breakers, who under pretense of serving God more
strictly then others (especially, for hearing, and meditating of Sermons,) do
by their Fasts* and certain Iud^izing observations, condemn the high, and
joyful Festiuitie of this holy day: a pregnant, and Diametrall contradiction.
Again, he informs us: That it is the fourth Precept of the Church, to repair
unto the public Service of the Church, for Mattens, and Evening Song, and
other holy Videlicet. Officium Beat^ Maria: Officium Spiritus Sancti: Officium
Missa, or Officium defunctorum: For no other construction can be made of it.
Offices at times appointed: And yet he has published these private
Devotions, and Hours of Prayer, of purpose to detain us from them: For he
that shall diligently, and constantly observe the one in public, cannot
possibly discharge the other in private, in his daily practice; especially, if
he use our morning, and Evening Devotions at home in private, as our Author,
and our Common Prayer Book, d^e both inioyne him. Again, he enumerates, the
Visitation of the Sick, among the seven Sacraments: and yet afterward he
ranks it, among the corporal works of Mercy. If a corporal work of Mercy
only; how then a Sacrament? If a Sacrament: then no corporal work of Mercy: I
will conclude with that, in his prayer for the dead; where our Author in his
second Edition, thinking to Dum stulti vitia vitant, in contraria currunt.
Iuuenal. Satyr. 6.
avoid this Rock, of praying for the dead, by obliterating the word, them; and
transposing, with this Prayer: in this manner: And these to be repeated with
the Prayers following, until the Soul be departed: does split himself upon
the selfsame Rock again, at least, upon the Rock of contradiction: praying,
for the party departing, being yet alive: Part. 2. p. 125
that he may receive his dead body, which must be buried in the earth, to be
joined with his Soul, etc. If the body be dead, and ready to be buried; how
is the man alive? if the man be dead, as well as the body, as he must be, or
else the body is not dead: how is this then no Prayer for the dead? A Prayer
for a dead body, must be a Prayer for the dead, or else a dead body must be a
living man: I could muster up some other suchlike contradictions, but that
breuity contradicts me, and calls me to my last Conclusion.

To wit: That this Book of Private Devotions, or Hours of Prayer, is
scandalous, and p^eiudiciall to our own, and aduantagious, only to the Church
of Rome. Scandalous, I say, it is to our own Church.

Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, the Patroness and Protectresse of all
these points of Popery, that are published and vented in it.

Papists, Brownists, Anabaptists, Separatists, and Nonconformitans, occasion to
bost, report, and brag; and many Religious, and Understanding persons, both
of our own, and other Churches* to fear and suspect: that our Church, after
so many glorious Triumphs over all Romes greatest Champions, (who have yielded
up the wasters to us, and proclaimed us victors by their silence, for some few
years past:) is now degenerating from her ancient Sincerity, Purity, and
Glory: and Backsliding, and inclining to her former Popish superstitions: since
she does Harbor, Nurse, and train up such graceless Sons, and viporous
Children in her bosom, as dare prove open Advocates, and Proctors for the
Church of Rome, to justify her Assertions, even in her own Domestique
Consistory, and that without any Ecclesiastical control or censure. That
she is now swayed by some such Collauding, and Temporizing Pr^lates, and
Divines, who out of ignorance, carelessness, wilfulness, or affection, give
public Conniuance, Countenance, and Approbation, not only to the persons,
but likewise to the Papisticall, and Arminian writings, Doctrines, and
Devotions, of these Unnatural, and Treacherous Children, who would betray
their Mother, to the Church of Rome; as appears, by their Licensing, and
Countenancing, of these Popish Devotions: and Master Mountagues writings; and
their suppression of all such books, as give any answer to them: which has
caused Mr. Cartwright against Wh^tgift: and sundry other namelesse Authors and
priu^te persons, both of later and former times.
many, both now, and heretofore, to disaffect the ^^scipline, and Government of
our Church: and to condemn, not only the persons vices, Pride, Lordlinesse,
Idleness, Fl^tery, Luxury, Nonresidency, and Monstruosa res est, gradus summus
et animus infimus: seeds prima, and vita ima^ lingua magniloqua, et manus
oti^sa sermo multu^ and fr^ctus mullu^: ^ultu^ gr^^nis and actus leni^^ i^gen^
auctorit^^ et nutans stabilita^. Ber. de Co^sid. l. 3. c 7.
Monstrous lives; but even the very calling of our Bishops, (which in it self,
is 1 Timothy 3.1.2 3. and 5.17. ^it. 1.5.7.8 9.
Honorable, Lawful, Good, and useful in the Church; especially, if it be
rightly managed:) as Antichristian, and repugnant to the word of God, both to
their own, and our shame and scandal: These are the common bruites and
rumors; these are the fears, and iealousies, these are the scarres and
blemishes; yea, these are the scandalous, and noxious fruits, (I speak it
even with grief, and Pudet haec opprobria nobis, Et dici potuisse et non
potuisse refelli. O^id. Metamor* l 1.
shame because I know not how, for to disprooue them, or excuse them, unless ^
plead Ignorantia no excusat peccatu^ neque negligentia. Arist (...) l. ^. c. 5.
ignorance, or carelessness, which are no plea in Law, much less in Gospel;
especially, in men of highest place:) which the Licensing, Publishing, and
Countenancing, of these Private Devotions, and some other writings now in
question, have produced, to the shame, and scandal of our Church and Prelates,
who ought for to suppress them.

Secondly, as they are thus scandalous, so likewise are they prejudicial to
our Church, and aduantagious only to the Church of Rome: Prejudicial to our
own Church: First, in breeding fears, and iealousies in the hearts of many,
that Popery is now creeping in, and getting ground among us: Secondly, in
causing many to w^uer, an^ st^gger in Re^igion, like Zen^ph Memora^iliu^. l. 2.
Cic^ro, Offic l. 1
young Hercules in his Biui^m, not knowing what ^^^igion for to choose: since
they see th^se Popish Books diuulged by Authority, and no Authori^^d answer
given them.



See Fluds Answer to Dr. White: Dedicated to his Majesty: And Printed
Permissis Superiorum, commonly sold and not suppressed.
latter Writings against us, and Mr. Mountagues Books in sundry late
disputations with Papists, were the only Arguments pressed against us.
Disputations with us, have had no other Arguments to oppugn us with, but our
own Popish Writers.

As they are thus prejudicial to our own, so likewise are they aduantagious
to the Church of Rome, in these subsequent respects.

First, in giving her good hopes and encouragements, that we are now falling
back to her former obedience; which makes her the more industrious for to
win us.

Secondly, in encouraging and animating those Priests and Jesuits that lurk
among us, to seduce more confidently and boldly.

Thirdly, in confirming our poor seduced Brethren in their Romish
Superstitions, and Devotions, whiles they behold them seconded, backed, and
approved, by these Authorized and approved Writings.

Fourthly, in administering strong, and almost impregnable Arguments, to all
seducing Priests, and Popish Factors, to inuegle, pervert, and seduce the
week, the feeble, and unstable members of our Church, (yea, and the stronger
to,) and to win them unto Romes Allegiance; with whom they contend and argue
thus: What mean you now to continue Protestants, and to disaffect our ancient
Mother Church, and Catholic Religion any longer? Do you not see how your own
Church is now ashamed of her Tenants, and that she now approues and stic^es to
our Doctrines? Does not Master See his Gag and his Appeal Doctor Featlies
Parallel. Mr. Wottons, B B. Carletons, Mr. Burtons, and Mr. Yeat^s his
Answers and Books against him.
Mountague expressly testify in his Authorized, and uncontrolled Writings,
which no man can have leave or liberty to oppose: That the Church of England
disclaimes all absolute irrespectiue Praedestination, as a desperate Doctrine:
That none are elected, but from the foresight of their Faith, and from a
disproportion in the object it self. That man has free will to resist the
inward offer of Gods operative Grace. That men may fall totally and finally
from the state of Grace. That the Church of Rome does still remain the Church
and Spouse of Christ: That she is and ever was a true Church, ever since she
was a Church? That she holds the Foundation, and embraces Communion with
the Ancient and undoubted Church of Christ, and has not erred in matters of
Faith: That Justification consists not only in forgiveness of sins, but
partly in it, and partly in sanctifying graces infused, by which graces we are
justified. That our Works are meritorious ex Condigno: That there are
Evangelical Counsels or Works of Supererogation. That there is no difference
between us and the Papists about the Real Presence: That the manner of Christ's
presence is inutterable; and that we make no matter of Consubstantiation or
Transubstantiation. That Images may be lawfully set up in Churches: That they
may serve for Religious employments, and be worshipped with any worship save
Patria. That there (...) an operative virtue and power in the sign of the
Cross. That there is no great impiety in praying to Saints to pray for us;
and that we may invoke those Angels that are our Guardians. That a man cannot
be sure of Salvation. That the Turk and Pope are Antichrist: but rather the
Turk then the Pope. That there was a Limbus Patrum. That Doctrinall Traditions
both for Faith and manners may be allowed, and that they are equal to the holy
Scriptures. Are not all these our Assertions, directly justified and defended
in his Writings, with many more: and do not the greater part of your Bishops
justify and approve these Books of his? Do they not protect his person, and
his Writings, and suppress the Works of all such persons as write against
them with great anxiety and care, (when as they have not for these sundry
years, so much as once suppressed or questioned any of our Books which have
been here published among you in great abundance) even in despite of
Parliament, which represent your State, and not your Church, which is included
in your Bishops breasts, who will (most of them) maintain, and justify his
Books and Do^trines to the death, though the Parliament has often questioned
them? And if all this be not sufficient: have they not since approved and
Licenced a Book of Private Devotions, or Hours of Prayer, which we Catholi^es
admire, and buy up apace: graced not only with the License, but likewise with
the annexed and special Approbation of the right Reverend Father, the Lord
Bishop of London, Wherein our Cross, our Canonical Hours, (and so our holy
Friars, Monks, and Nuns, who are only tied to the strict observance of them:)
Our Canonization of, and Canonized Saints; Our prohibited times of Marriage:
nay more then this. The Antiquity, Authority, and holy Laws and Canons of
our Church: Our Pictures of God the Son, and God the holy Ghost: Our
worshipping of Saints and Images; Our Churches Precepts; Our 7. Sacraments: Our
Venial sins, Our Apostolical and Divine Institution of Lent, and
Fasting-dayes: Our Auricular Confession to a Priest: Our Priests, our Altars,
our Penance, our Odoration of the Host* and Corporal Presence: our Mediation
of Angels; Our praying for the Dead: With a number of such like particulars,
transcribed Verbatim out of our Primers, Breuiaries, Horaries, Catechismes and
Prayer Books: after whose forms and model they are exactly framed: are
directly broached, justified and approved? Do not you see plainly by these,
how they directly yield to us almost in every point of our Religion: Unless it
be in point of our Popes Supremacy, which they dare not breach as yet, for
fear of incurring his Majesty's displeasure Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque
potestas, impatiens consortis erit. Non capit fortuna duos. Nec quenqua^ ^a^
far potest Casarue priorem, Pompeiusue p^rem. Lucan. Phars. l. 1. Nulla
sancta societas nec fides regni est. Cicero. Offic. lib. 1. Non capit regnum
duos. Senec. Thiestes Act 3. Insociabile est regnum. Qu: Cu^tius. l^b. 10 Sect.
^. Mundus duobus solibus. nec regnum duobus regibus administrari potest.
Justin. hist. l. 11. p. 119
^who cannot brook an equal, or superior in his own Dominion:) or for
danger of the 35. H. 8. c. 3. 1. Ed 6. c. 12. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1.
Laws, which make this Doctrine, high Treason at the least: When as we have
never yielded one foot or Inch to them? Why then should you be auerse and
obstinate any longer, since your grave and learned Prelates, and these your
learned and approved Writers, have assented, and thus yielded to us? What are
you more wise and learned then they? Or do you think that they would ever
prove so false and treacherous; as to suffer these our Popish Doctrines to be
taught and published, and so backed by Solent Haeretics potentum mundi
defensionibus, quasi quibusdam armis se tegere: Cregor. Mag. Moral. l. 31. c. 23
Authority; that none can have so much as leave to give any answer or reply
unto them; (yea that all Answerers to them are presently suppressed at the
Press, as one to these Devotions was of late: and both Authors, Printers, and
Publishers of them, tormenten and prosecuted in the High Commission Court:)
unless they know, and were persuaded in their Consciences, that your Church,
were in the wrong at first: and that we only have the truth, and are the
only true, and Catholic Church, out of which there is no Salvation? By which
arguments, and reasonings, which cannot be controled: these wily men-hunters,
have ensnared, and perverted diverse; (yea, some that were conuer^^d from them
heretofore:) to their great advantage, and our loss, and shame. Lastly, they
give advantage to the Church of Rome, in this respect: that their Priests, and
Jesuits, when as they have had nothing to reply unto our learned Writers, and
Disputants, that was worthy answer; have even blanked, and silenced them with
these P^pish Authorities and writings, which have been published, and broached
among us now of late, by License, and Authority: which they know not how to
shift, or answer, but by laying blame upon the Authors, and the Licencers, (a
beggarly, and poor evasion:) whence they proclaim their Trophies, and their
Triumphs over us, and return with troops of Conquered, and seduced captives.
Thus do they scourge us with our own rods, and Conquer us only by our
selves, whereas else we were Impregnable: So that I may well conclude, that
these Devotions, and Hours of Prayer, are scandalous, and prejudicial to our
own, and aduantagious only to the Church of Rome: which was my last
Conclusion.

Having thus run through and proved these 8. Conclusions, or Articles of
exception against these Private Devotions, or Hours of Prayer, which I
propounded in the beginning of this Suruay: by which I have sufficiently
euidenced those dangerous Points of Popery, and Prophannesse which are couched
in them; the pernicious consequences, effects, and fruits, which have issued
from them: together with the Authors ill intent in publishing them, especially
in such ambiguous and wavering times as these. I will now descend to answer
those Apologies and Plees, which the Author, or any of his Abettors may chance
to make, either to justify or extenuate this capital and transcendent Crime
of his, (which the burning of his Books can hardly expiate:) that so I may
leave him without all excuse.

Excuse 1.
The first Excuse or Justification that may be pleaded for him is this. That
these Devotions of his were published not only by the bare License of George,
Lord Bishop of London; but even by his special and extraordinary Approbation,
Febr. 22. 1626. Imprinted on the back side of the Title Page, in these words.
I have read over this Book, which for the increase of Private Devotions, I do
think may well be Printed, and therefore do give License for the same: Geor:
London: Therefore there is no Popery in them: or if there there be, yet this
extraordinary Approbation of the Ordinary, who has power by the State to
License Books, does excuse the Author, and the Printer to.

Answer 1.
To this I answer first: that the Author is an happy man,, and highly in his
Lordships favor, that he could procure his License for the Publishing and
Printing of these his Popish Devotions in this Age of ours, when as few
Orthodox, or pious Authors can find such grace and favor at his or others
hands. For my own part, I have heard of diverse who have tendered Books of late
to License, to which there could be no exceptions taken, and yet they had
repulse without any cause assigned. Some of them have been rejected for the
Authors name alone: and others for their pious matter, as a Reverend Doctor of
this City was, not long ago, put from Preaching at Paul's Cross, by reason of
his To wit, Isai. 42, 24, 25.
Seasonable and right pious Text; Not to speak of others: I my self can
testify: that I have tendered sundry Treatises of mine own to License: (as one
against Health-drinking, and this very Suruay and Censure of Mr. Cozens his
Devotions among others:) to which there was no just exceptions taken, but that
they were mine; or that they opposed the errors, sins, and common evils of the
Times, (which it seems are like to pass without control,) and for this they
were rejected: yea I had one Treatise of late denied License, which else had
passed readily to the Press, but that they knew at last it was my hand: and
that alone was cause enough to purchase a Non-licet: though God knows I never
yet, (neither shall I hereafter by my good will) published any thing, but what
all Othodoxe Divines and godly Christians have approved, as Orthodox,
seasonable, and necessary for the present times. I wonder therefore since so
few Books (especially good Books in defense of truth, and opposition of sin)
can have the happiness to find any publik approbation for the Press; that
these Popish Devotions, together with some other Treatises and Sermons now in
question, could be so fortunate, as to procure not only License, but presixed
Approbations. Certainly there is some mystery or secret in it which would be
worth the search and knowledge: For if all such Popish, Factious, and Arminian
Books which have been lately published by Authority, may pass the Press
with Approbation and Applause; If Chrysostom. Hom. 6.7. and 3 8. in Mat.
Lactant. de vero Cultu. c. 20. Clem. Alexa^d. Orat. Exhort. ad Ge^t. Padag. l.
3. c. 11. Salu. de Guber. Dei. lib. 6.
Play-Bookes, which are the very Devils Grammar, and the chief fomenters and
nourishers of all wickedness and prophannesse whatsoever; If profane,
lascivious, and frivolous Ballades, Poems, Tales, and Jests: or bitter and
inuectiue Treatises, against the practice, power, profession, and Professors of
Religion, may be readily Authorized without control; as we see and know they
art: whiles the Works and Writings of such who oppose themselves against the
Doctrinall, or Morrall Errors of the Times, are smoothered before they come, or
else suppressed when they come to light; Alas, what will become of our
Religion, our Manners, our Church and state ere long? Surely they will be
altogether lost, or else endangered: they will be quickly ouergrowne with
Heresies, Popery, Arminianisme, Luxury, Riot, Excess of sin and
wickedness, and all prophannesse, (which I hope the Wise, the Vigilant,
Prudent, Zealous, and right Christian Senators of our high Court of Parliament,
will carefully lay to heart:) whereas if the Press were shut to the former,
and open only to these Orthodox and latter writings; these spreading Heresies,
Errors, sins, and vices, would soon pull in their horns, and never dare to
show their heads among us. Well to pass by this, I would feign be satisfied in
this Quere: Whether these Popish Devotions were ever Licenced or approved for
the Press? If so, then he that Licenced them, and he that published them, have
the greater sin, the more palpable and apparent guilt. What was it not enough
for the Author to print or to disperse them covertly, but that he must grow so
Fortem animum praestant rebus, qua^ turpiter a^dent. Iuuen. Satyr. 6.
Impudent and Audacious, as to procure a public License and special
Approbation for them: that so he might vent and publish his Popery to the
World, Cum Priuilegio: to give the greater and more public scandal and
offense: the deeper wound and blow to our Religion and our Church; the more
irrecouerable advantage, and notorious triumph to the Church of Rome: the more
dangerous downfall to our Religion? and that these his Popish Devotions might
stand as an unanswerable, authorized and approved record against us unto all
Posterity? Certainly the Authors impudency in seeking, and his treachery in
purchasing this public and notorious Approbation for his Book, that so it
might do the greater hurt, and give a more fatal and pernicious blow and
brand to our Religion, is so far from extenuating, that it does infinitely
aggrauate and increase his guilt. Authority added unto evil things detracts
not from their evil, but intends it more: this Approbation therefore will not
salve, but fester and enlarge his sore. But were these Popish Devotions
Licenced in good earnest? Why then was not the Approbation annexed to the
written Copy as it ought to be, but to a mere loose Paper, which was never
joined with the Copy? Why does the Printer report abroad, that the Bishop of
London never read the Book; and that he carried him nothing but a bare white
Paper, with a Message from the Bishop of Winchester, that now is, to License
these Devotions: to which he set his hand, and wrote his Approbation, when as
he never had perused, nor seen the Book it self? Either the Printer
therefore is a lying Knave, (as most report him to be:) or else the Bishop of
London never read, and so never could approve this Book: But admit the Printer
(whose dishonestie is reported to be such, that he will Print any thing
whatsoever for his private gain,) has mis-reported the carriage of this
License, and that the BB. of London read the Book (as is most probable, because
his Aprobation shows as much:) yet I would willingly learn thus much, whether
this Printed Copy differs not from the written one, which was allowed by his
Lordship? or whether there is not some Popery inserted in the Printed, which
was either wholly razed out, or else omitted in the written Copy? For mine
own part, I cannot but suspect, that most of the Popery, that is broached and
couched in this book was foysted in at the Press, without my Lord of Londons
priuitie: and the more jealous am I of this, because the Printer had his
written Copy but by peecemeale, sheet by sheet, and not complete together;
because the written Copy was taken from the Printer as he Printed it, by the
Author, against the usual course: and because there were sundry leaves
reprinted and altered at the Press by the Authors bare direction: (who has
likewise lately made some alterations in our Common Prayer Book, by what
Authority I know not:) So that it is most probable, that our Author has
exceeded, and abused, not followed his Authority, which makes his crime the
greater. So that this first excuse and Plea, does only aggrauate, not lessen
or abate his fault.

Excuse 2.
Our Authors second excuse is this: That these Private Devotions of his were
compiled for the private use of a well-disposed friend, without any meaning to
make the same public to the World: though a certain number of them, by leave
and warrant of the Ordinary, were printed at the charge of the Party; for whose
only use the same was collected; to save the labor and trouble of writing
Coppies, to be sparingly communicated to some few friends: they are the very
words of the Author in his Epistle to the Reader, in the last Edition; which is
but shrouded under the Printers name, when as in truth it is the Authors own,
as the Printer has in part confessed: These Devotions therefore being Printed
but for the benefit of some private friends, without any intennt to make them
public, may seem to mittigate, if not excuse the Authors guilt.

To this I answer: First, that this underhand printing and spreading of these
Devotions among some private friends, is a violent and strong presumption: that
the Author was conscious to himself; that they were fraught with Popish trash:
If they were the private prayers, published by the Authority of Queen
E^izabeth, as his Title page and Preface do surmise: Dic oro ^e, celandas
schedulas scripser^s, an prodendas? si vt celares, cur scrip^i^ti? si vt
proderes, cur celabas? Hierom. Apolog. aduer. Ruffinum, c^o Nouu^ malitiae
genus, scribere quod occultes. Si vera sunt qua scripsit, cur publicum timuit?
si falsa, cur scripsit? Intemperantia^ est scribere qutequa^ quod occultari
velis. Hierom. adu. Ruffinum. l. 1. c. 1. To^. 2. p. 232
or if they were orthodox or fit to further and increase Devotion, why should
he thus conceal them from the world, and imprison them in the hands and
closets of some few private friends: since Veritas nunquam lat^t. Seneca Troas
Act. 3. Bonus sermo secreta non quaerit, quin potius delectatur laudibus suis,
and testimonio plurimorum. Hierom. Epist. 12. cap. 3.
Truth desires to be public, and seeks no corners for to hide her self? If
they were Popish and corrupt, why then were they printed and disperced
sparingly among some private friends: or why were they Penned and collected,
why were they printed or disperced at all? Secondly, this close and secret
scattering of these Popish Devotions, is ten times more dangerous and
infectious, then the open publishing of them to the world at first: because it
finds the least opposition, and so (perhaps) seduceth many before it be
discovered: Ira quae tegitur nocet: professa perdu^t odia vindicta locum:
Senec. Medea. Act. 2. Anima pestes tant^ periculosius laedunt quanto subtilius
serpunt: Council Ca^ilonense. 2. can 32
As a concealed enemy, or fire in a close obscure building, which is not
obuious unto all men's sight, are most pernicious and inevitable: so Popish
Pamphlets which pass from hand to hand, and are scattered up and down in
private, are most seducing and infectious: because they pass without
discovery and control: whereas they would quickly be descried, and so either
answered or suppressed, before they could entrap, infect, or poison any, were
they but obuious unto all men's view and censure at the first: so that our
Authors underhand communicating of his Ioh. 3.19.20.
Popery does aggrauate his fault, and make his dealings more suspicious, (c)
because they shun and fly the light, as all evil works and workers do.
Thirdly, I would demand what private friend that was, for whose use these
private Devotions were compiled, who would be at so much cost and charge, as
to print such Popish trash as this. Was this private friend a Papist, or a
Protestant? If a Papist, (as I dare presume it was) then questionless these
Devotions which were composed for the benefit and use of Papists, must needs
be Popish: If a Protestant: then doubtless it was such a one whom our Author
would persuade to become a Roman Proselite, yea to enter into Popish Orders,
to which these hours of Prayer only suite: else he would never have taken so
much pains, to compose these Canonical and Popish Devotions, for his private
use, which Protestants do disclaim. It were well therefore, if this our
Authors friend were enquired after, that so we might Noscitur ex comite, qui
non cognoscitur ex se. Carm* Proverb.
know his Religion by his friend: which is in part discovered by his book.
Thirdly, I answer: that this is but a mere forged and false pretense, as most
evidently appears: First, by the multitude of the books that were printed
off, yea sold, at first: being 250 at the least, as the Printer has confessed:
since which, there has been a second Impression of 1000. Books more, little
different from the first: Now would any one be so mad, as to print off 1250
Books at least, to bequeath as a Legacy or New-yeares-gift to one private
friend or two, when as twelve or 20 Books would serve for such a purpose? the
multitude therefore, and second Impression of these Devotions do sufficiently
evidence: that the Authors end in printing was, to publish them unto the world;
and by them to scatter his seeds of Popery far and near: Secondly, our
Authors tendering his book to license to the Ordinary, and his procuring of his
annexed approbation, is a pregnant testimony, that his first intent was to
divulge it, else there were no need of any such approbation: Thirdly, the
Ordinaries approbation which runs thus: I have read over this Book* which for
the increase of private Devotions, I think may well be printed, and therefore
do give license for the same. Geo. London. does intimate as much: else he
would have entered his approbation thus. I give license for some few Copies of
this Book to be printed, for the use and benefit of some private friends of
the Authors: (and not, for the increase of private Devotions:) I think it may
well be printed, which is no private, but a publik^ approbation for a popular
and public use: else why should the Author himself affixe it to his last, as
well as to his first and second Editions: the first, the second, third and last
Editions had but one and the same allowance: therefore one and the selfsame
public intent. Lastly, our Authors Preface to his first Edition, (to omit his
other Prologues, and Aduertisements to his several hours of Prayer, his Lent,
and Ember w^ekes, which testi^ie his intent to publish these Devotions:) does
as clearly evidence, that his first intention of printing these hours of
Prayer, was not to divulge them to the world, and not communicate them to some
private friends alone: as his causing of 280 Lights and Tapers (as I have
heard) besides Torches, to be lighted in the Cathedral Church of Durham, on
Candlemas day last past, after the Popish custom, Accendu^t lumina veluti in
tenebris. Number igitur mentis suae compos putandus est, qui auctori and datori
luminis candelarum and ceraru^ lumen offert pro munere? etc. Lact. de vero
Cultu. l. 6. c 2.
as if the God of Light had needed Lights and Tapers to behold his blind and
dark Devotions, did then evidence and discover him to be a notorious and
professed Papist, or a Pagan rather: who Tertul. Apol^g. aduersus Gent. l. 1.
and de Idolat. lib. Lact De vero Cultu c 2. Rhenanus Comm. in Tertul Apolog.
Ormerod. Pagano-Papismus: Semblance 37, 123, 124, 125. Barn^h. 6.18.
were addicted to this Ceremony, of lighting Tapers to their Idol Gods: For
in his Praeface he lays down four reasons, of setting forth these new
Devotions more fully then they were in Queen Elizabeth's days: As first to
continue and preserve the old ancient Laws and godly Cannons of the Church to
abandon all extemporarie and conceived Prayers; to reduce men to an orderly and
set form of Prayer, and to instruct them both what, how, and when to pray:
Secondly, to let the world understand: (pray mark this well, and then judge
whether these were only printed for a private friend:) That they who give it
out, and accuse us here in England, to abandon all the ancient forms of Piety
and Devotion, etc. do but betray their own infirmities, etc. Thirdly, that
they (not his private friend) who are this way already given, and whom earnest
lets and impediments do often hinder from being partakers of the public,
might have here a daily and devout order of private prayer, wherein to exercise
themselves, and to spend some Hours of the day at least, etc. Lastly, that
those (not one friend or two of his:) who perhaps are but coldly this way yet
affected, might by others example be stirred up to the like Heavenly duty of
performing their Daily, and Heavenly Devotions to Almighty God, etc. Now these
four popular, and public reasons, do diametrally oppose, and contradict,
this In vna re, and in parua Epistola, qua^ta varietas and dissonantia
mentiendi? Hirom. Apol. adu. Ruff. c. 10.
lying, and forged excuse, which the Author Fathers on the Printer: that this
Book was never intended, to be Printed for any public, but only for the
private use, of a private Friend, at whose cost, and charge they were Printed
at the first: So that this pretense is merely false, and will not mittigate
nor allay his Crime.

Excuse 3.
The third Excuse which our Author, or his friends in his behalf may plead, is
this: that some of the Popery in the first, is clearly purged out of the
second, and third Editions: and therefore the Author may be well excused, and
his Book may pass for current now.

Answer 3.
To this I answer first; that the purging of the first, and second Editions of
some drugges of Popery, is a manifest, and plain confession, that there was
Popery couched, and vented in them at the first, else why should they be purged
thus. Secondly, I answer; that in the second Impression, there was only one
point of Popery, to wit, the Prayer for the dead: a little Sapientia ^orum vt
plurimum efficiat non abscindit vitia, sed abscondit. Lacta^t De fal^a Sap. l.
3. c. 26.
altered, obscur^d and refined: but there was no point clean oblitterated, no
not so much as this Prayer for the dead, unless you will have the man alive,
even then, when as his Soul is disunited from his body; which is an absurd,
and impossible thing. Thirdly, in the last Impression, there are only two
Popish Assertions rectified; to wit, the Mediation of Angels, not altered in
the second; and the Prayer for the Dead, refined only in the second, but quite
expunged out of the last Impression: which though it be cleared of these two:
yet it is still furnished with those 18. other points of Popery which I have
formerly deduced from it: and that Popish trash, and Romish absurdities, which
I have discovered in my precedent Conclusions. Yea, the very form and method
of it, which is wholly Popish, is still the same: wherefore there needs a
further purging of these unclean Devotions, I mean by fire, which only can
defecate, and cleanse them from their Romish dross. Fourthly, though there are
some points of Popery oblitterated, not voluntarily, but upon great complaints
at Counsel Table: yet there is no point at all recanted in any of the
subsequent Editions, to give any public satisfaction to the World: yea, there
is neither of the Editions suppressed, or inhibited sale as they ought to be:
but all of them being of one date, of one year, even 1627. having the
selfsame allowance, and approbation prefixed them, are sold, (and for ought I
know Printed,) promiscuously without any let, or contradiction: so that our
Author stands but where he did at first, since all his editions stand
approved, and pass for current Coin. Fifthly, the private Prayers Authorized
by Queen Elizabeth 1560. though they mention the first* the third, the ninth
Hours of Prayer, the Vespers, and the Compli^e: yet in the second, and third
Editions of them, 1564. and 1573. these Popish phrases, and Hours are totally
omitted, there being no remainders of them left: And yet our Author to
propagate, and authorize this new-broach^d Popery, can waiue, and pass by
these latter, and refined Impressions, where these Hours are expunged, and
betake himself unto the first, and worst Impression only: and will he not
much more do the same in his own Devotions, if occasion serve? will he not
easily disclaim the latter, and own his first Impression, which he never yet
recanted, if Popery should once get head among us, as it now begins to do
apace? yes verily: Wherefore since he has taken this liberty to himself, to
waiue the last, and cleave unto the first Impression only of these private
Prayers: so he must give us leave, (as we have done,) to do the like with his
Devotions, and Hours of Prayer, especially, since the first Edition of them
was never yet suppressed, nor recanted: so that this excuse does more
condemn, then quit, and no ways help nor clear our Author.

If it be now replied; Excuse 4.
that his former Editions may be all suppressed, and that a further Index
expurgatorius may pass upon them, till all their Popery and Errors, are quite
cleansed out.

Answer 4.
I answer first; that most of the former Impressions, be already vented, and
dispersed into sundry men's; yea, into Papists hands, (who store them up as
Jewels, and Monuments of their Church, and our defection from our selves, to
them:) therefore it is now impossible to suppress them. Secondly, those who
should have suppressed, and crushed them in the shell, are now such
Sanctuaries, and Shelters to them: C^r eorum ne verbo quidem qu^mpi^^ a^dent
laedere, nos solos expellere cupiunt^ Nossol^ qui Ecclesiae co^municamus,
Ecclesiam s^indere dicimur? Or^ t^, non^^ aqua est ista postulatio, vt a^t
illos nobiscum expella^t, aut (...) cum illis temeant. Hierom Epist. 72. c. 3.
that in steed of suppressing them, they intercept such Books at Press, as
give any answer, or reply unto them, not suffering them to pass the Press on
any terms; when as they should in Justice, either License both, or neither at
the least, and not one side alone. And is there any likelihood then, of calling
in these Popish Devotions, which are thus guarded, and protected, even in
d^spite of Parliament, which labors for to Damn them? Thirdly, no Index
expurgatorius, but only an Ignis expurgatorius, can cleanse them from their
Popish dross. The whole frame, and almost the moitie of their subject matter,
is merely Popish, as I have already proou^d: and can any thing then but fire,
and faggot, refine, and purge them as they ought to be. And why should they not
be purged, and refined thus? Are they not a public brand and blemish to our
Church, and a strong record against our cause? Are they not a great advantage
to our Popish Adversaries, and a grief, and eyesore to our Friends, and all
that wish the welfare of our Zion? Can any thing but fire expiate their guilt,
or satisfy, and wipe off that disgrace, that brand, and great dishonor, which
they have brought upon our Religion, and our Church? If Doctor Mocketts Book,
if Master Eltons Book upon the Commandments, for some few points of
Puritanism^, only, (as they style it,) in the burning of which, Master Cozens
and his Patrons had the greatest hands, though they never stird, nor spoke as
yet to my remembrance, against any Popish Treatises whatsoever. If Paraeus his
Book, (himself being but a mere Forraigner, and out of our Kings
Allegiance,) for one mere point of State, against the Supremacy of Kings,
were so solemnly burnt, with all the ignominy, and disgrace that might be;
and could not have the happiness, nor favor of an Index expurgatorius, to
wipe out these their Errors in some new Impressions: shall Master Mountagues:
shall Master Couzens his Book, (he being a Minister of our own Church, at
least in outward show, and not a forraigner as Paraeus was,) wherein there is
twenty points of Popery broached at the least: wherein there are sundry
profane, and dangerous passages, and Popish absurdities: wherein the Heretici
^dio digni sunt, vel eo etiam quod sancti cuiusque viri m^moriam tanquam
sopitos iam cineres prophana man^^ ventilant. and qua sil^^tio sepelir^
op^rt^bat rediuius opinions diffaemant. Vincent Lerinensis. contr. Here Is. cap.
11.
Sacred ashes, Fame, and Piety of our Religious, and renowned Queen
Elizabeth, are Profaned, and made the Shelters, and Patronage of Popery; and
the very Doctrine, and Practice of our Religion are highly violated; find so
much favor, and unjust coniuance, as to escape the fiery flames which these
have undergone? God forbid: Certainly, though Master Couzens has a singular
faculty in altering, and purging of our Common Prayer Book, where he has
purged out Ministers, and put in Priests, of purpose to bring in Mass: yet it
is requisite, that these Books of his, should be at leastwise purged from
their Profane, and Popish dross, by such solemn and public flames, as will
desolue them into ashes, and quite annihilate that public scandal, and purge
out those deepe-died blots, and open scarres, which they have justly brought
upon our Church: So that this fourth excuse is weak and bootelesse.

If any object; Excuse 5.
that many of those Popish points which I have laid unto our Authors charge,
are not directly bro^ched, but only wrested, and inferred, by strained
collections from certain passages in these his private Devotions, of which I
ought to make the best construction.

I answer first; Answer 5.
that sundry of the points, as that of Canonical Hours; Mediation of Angels;
Prayers for the Dead; Seven Sacraments; Canonnization of Saints; The
Apostolical, and Divine Institution of Lent; Auricular Confession to a Priest;
The approbation of Priests, and Altars, and with them of Mass: The inhibition
of Marriage at certain seasons; and the Authority of the Church of Rome, (our
Authors best beloved Mother,) with sundry others, are so particularly, and
clearly set down in positive words: and the residue of those Popish points,
so necessarily, and plainly deduced from his words and meaning, being Paraleld
with those Popis^ Authors, from whence they were extracted; that he who runs
may plainly read them* and I should have wronged our Author much, had I not
made such Expositions of his words, which will properly brook no other
construction, then that which has been given them. Secondly, the whole frame
and model of these Devotions, together with the subject matter of them, were
wholly borrowed, and consarcinated out of Popish Tractets, and Devotions: and
besides our Authors end, and drift in publishing them, was no other, but to
serve, and usher Popery into our Church, See P. 39 54
as I have already proved. No charity therefore ought so far to fool, or
blind me, as to put out mine eyes; or cause me for to thwart the very
meaning, words, and purpose of our Author, to excuse his guilt; which is so
gross, and obuious to the eyes of all men: that I should but contract my own
guilt, in abating his. Lastly, let such who make this Plea consider; that it
always has, it is, and ever will be, the beaten rode, and method, of all
insinuating, and seducing Spirits, to couch, and broach their Errors at the
first, as warily, and Breue sit quod ^urpiter ^udes. Iuu. Sa. 8
sparingly as may be: and to scatter A minimis ^ncipiunt qui ^n maxima
proruunt. Bern. de Ord. Vitae, lib. Col. 11 26.
some seeds, and kernels of them, here, and there, in shor^, obscure passages,
Habent ho^ Haeretici proprium, vt malis bona permisc^ant, qua^e^nu^ facile
sensu^ audientu^ illudant. Si enim semper praua dicere^t, citius in sua
pr^^itate cogniti, quod ve^^e^t, minim^ persu^derent. Itaq. permiscent recta
per^ersis, vt ostendendo bona auditores ad se traba^t^ et exhibend^ m^l^,
l^^e^^^ eos p^ste corrumpant, Greg. Mag. Moral. l. 5. c. 11 Id certe moris
(...) apud haereticos, vt obumb^^nt seipso^, et occulte^t in principiis
quousque maiorem fiduciam cap^an^, and quodam fauore multitudi^i^ i^^entur:
tun^ enim conta^i^s^ sua ven^na intrepidi effundu^t Chrysostom. in M^t. Ho^ 47.
and not to sow them thick together, but with some intermixed truethes, for
fear of present discovery: that so they might spring and grow up by degrees,
till they have gotten strength and force to grapple, and encounter with the
Truth in open field: This the Nemo repent fuit turpissim^s. ^uu^n Satyr. 2.
common proverb, and the experience and practice of all Ages testify: Whence
the Sea Iraeneus and Epiphaniu^ con^r. Haeres. Athanas and Hilar. contr. Arian.
Hierom contr. Ruff^ contr. Pelag. l^b. A^gust. To^. 7. and Prosper contra
Collat.
Fathers in the Primitive Church, who knew that Heresies must be always
crushed in the shell, have been so jealous over springing Heretics, that
they have sifted every Sentence, word, and ^yllable of their Writings to the
bran, and given them that interpretation always, which was most ^utable and
consonant to their Heretical and pernicious purposes and intents: when as they
would have borne a more fa^ourable, Orthodox^, and ^ayrer construction, had
they beheld them only with the eyes of Charity, and not of Justice,
providence, and discretion too: And is not this our Authors practice? Is^ud
f^llend^ art machinatu^ est, vt per bona fac^lius suader^t and mae^a. Sed
tant^ magis caue^^us est, quanto occul^i^^ sub diuini legi^ vmbraculis l^titat.
Scit ^uim foetores suos nulli f^re cito esse ^la^ituros, si nudi and simplices
exhalentur: idcirc^ ^os c^^^stis eloqui^ velut qu^dam are^ate asp^rgit, vt
ille, qui humanum facile despiceret erro^em, diuina non ^acile
contemnatoracul^. Itaque facit, quod hi solent qui paruuli^ austera quada^
temper^turi pocula, priu^^^ra mellecircu^linunt, vt incauta ^tas dum dulcedinem
pr^senserit, amaritudinem non reformidet^ Quod etiam (...) curae est qui mala
gramina, and noxios succos medicaminum vocabulis praecolorant, vt nemo fore vbi
suprascriptum legerit remedium, suspicetur venenum. Vincent. Lerinen^^s: Adu.
Heraes. cap. 17.25. See Gregor. Mag. Mor. l. 5. c. 11. and l. 18. c. 9.
Does he no^ cunningly sow and intermixe his Tares and Drugs of Popery with
seeds of Truth, and Scriptures? does not he like a Nurse* or skillful Physician
sweeten his Popish Pills, and bitter Potions with some sugered and pleasant
ingredients: and adorn the poisonous and rotten carkas of his Book^, with the
Saintlike Style and Title of Deu^tion; that so his truths, his piety, and
glosing Title, might draw down, and vent his Romish Errors, pylls, and
poisonous Potions? Why then should aany out of a blind and ^oolish Charity,
extenuate or conceal his treacherous and seducing Practices, or qua^f off
these his poisonous, though health-promising Po^ions, to his own and others
hurt: and not di^ulge and and lay them open to the view of all men, in the
amplest manner, that so they might avoid and shun them more? Well, let other
men con^iue and wincke at Errors; and smooth over, slight, or disregard; or
else extennute, fal^e, or skinne-ouer these Popish passages, Doctrines, and
pernicious practices, of our Author whiles they will, out of a foolish pity or
del^ded Charity: (which is the only means to spread their poison and contagion
far and near: and to betray our Church and Truth into our enemies hands
without resistance:) Yet my poor Judgment, and my Conscience tell me, that I
cannot act a greater or higher part of Love and Charity, to God, to Church, to
State, or to the ouer-credulous, and secure souls of men, who are apt to
swallow all that comes to hand without suspicion: then to Anatomize and rip up
all those hidden veins, wherein the Romish and soule-slaying poison of these
Devotions lie, and to display them to the World, that so men might shun their
venom and Infection for all future times. In which I have gone so euenly
between the Author and the Truth, that all Circumstances being well
considered, I hope I have neither gone to far in strayning of the Words and
meaning of the one, nor fell to short (but where my ability and leisure could
not reach) in vindicating the wrong and quarrel of the other: which cleares my
Innocence, and falsifies this Excuse.

Excuse 6.
The last excuse which may be made and pleaded for our Author, is that which the
supposed Printer (but in truth the very Author) makes. The Printers Epi^tle to
the Reader.
That whateuer reproachful Imputations have been cast upon the Author or his
Book by the maleuolency of some dispositions of the times, who make this Book
of his an Apish imitation of Romish Superstition: yet he is a faithful
Minister, though inferior unto most, (a clause which never came from any
Printers quill, who always do applaud their Authors, not depresse them thus:)
and a Member of the Church of England: and that he It seems by this that there
were more heads, and hands then one, in consarcinating and collecting these
Devotions: a matt^r worth inquiry.
and others who were therewith acquainted before the Printing of the Book; are
as ready to engage their credits, and lives, in defense of the Faith of the
present Church of England by Law established, and in opposition of Popery and
Romish Superstition, as any other: therefore the Author and his Work are
guiltless.

To this I answer: First, that these are but the Printers vaunts, Answer 6.
and bragges, if The Printers Epistle to the Reader.
Titles may be credited, and not the Authors Plea; who ought to justify and
acquit himself. But admit it be the Avthors proper Plea; as in truth it is,
though the Printer bear the name: I answer in the second place, that our
Author Nemo non benignus est sui index. Sen. de Beneficijs, l. 2. c. 26.
may be to partial a Judge in his own behalf: and therefore he must re^erve
himself to such impartial Iuges, who can judge more clearly of him then
himself: and that Homines malunt exempla quam verba, quia loqui facile est,
prastare difficil^. Lactan. de vera Sap. l 4. c. 23.
not by hi^ words alone, but by his deeds; by which he shall be judged at the
last. Wherefore we must not wholly dote upon our Authors or the Printers
words, but sentence or acquit him by his works. Now it is as evident as the
Sun at Noone-tide, that these Devotions of our Author are wholly Popish both
in Method, Manner, Form, and Use, and all concurring circumstances; as this
Suruay and Censure of them proves: Why then should we balance or Judge him by
his own, or by his Printers smooth and glosing words, which are contrary and
repugnant to his Works? If Words or ample protestations of Sincerity and
Loyalty to the Truth and Church might pass for current: Then Heretici sub
nomine Christi, milita^t contra nomen Christi: and fallend^ art per sermone^
de se insinuant quod per exhibition^^ nega^t Greg. Mag. Mor. l. 20. c. 8. l 32.
c. 16. Haeretici licet foris sint, tame^ se nominant Christian^s. Hi^r Apol.
adu Ruff c. 11. Haeretici perdulces sermones corda seducunt innocentium.
Chrysostom. Ho^ 24. in Mat.
Heretics, who always give good words, protesting that they are for Christ
and for his Church, when as yet they war against them, under these pretenses;
might always escape vnsentenced, and undiscovered, and pass for Orthodox,
zealous, and true hearted Christians. Qui profite^tur se Christi ^sse: non mod^
ex iis quae dicunt, sed ex iis quae faciunt, cognoscuntur. Ex fructu enim arbor
dignoscitur. Ignat. Ep. 14. ad Ephesians. Non in lingua, sed in cord Christianita^
est; nec interest quali vtare sermon, res enim non verba quaeruntur. Lact. de
Falsa Sap^ l. ^. c. 13.
He therefore who professes himself a Christian, a Protestant, or faithful
member of our Church, and would have others deem him so ^ must declare
himself to be such a one, not only by his words, but by his fruits and
actions: which if they contradict his speeches (as our Authors do:) they are
so far from expiating the guilt, Omnia dicta and facta tua inter se congruant
and respondeant sibi, and vna forma percussa sint. Non est huiu^ animu^ in
recto, cuius acta discordant. Seneca Epist. 34.
that they do but propalate and discover the hollownesse and treachery of his
heart; and subject him to the sharper censures: It skills not then what Verbal
protestations our Author, or the Printer for him make: since these his Hours
of Prayer, which would usher Popery into our Church again, with public
approbation, under the name and Standard of our blessed Elizabeth: to baff^e,
and cheat us of that Orthodox, pure, and undoubted Religion, which we have so
long and happily enjoyed, in peace, in wealth, and all variety of outward
blessings: and therefore should not now begin to loath and cast it off at last:
together with his alteration of our Common prayer Book, and putting in of
Priests for Ministers: his engrossing of Popish Prayer-Bookes, Portuasses, and
Devotions for sundry years, and his curious and costly binding, and stamping
of them afthe Popish manner: his forwardness in suppressing such Parallels and
Answers as were written against Master Mountague his bosom friend, and brother
in evil, without any lawful warrant: his causing 280. wax Tapers to be
lighted in the Cathedral Church of Durham, on Candlemas day last past, as I
have heard: with the publik brute, and same of most that know him; proclaim
him an open and professed Papist, an industrious Factor, and an undoubted
member of the Church of Rome, whose good he wholly labors: and no true member
of our English Church. Since therefore our Author has now nothing left, to
justify or excuse his person, or this work of his, which is so derogatory,
and scandalous to our renowned Queen: so prejudicial, and dangerous to our
Church, our Cause, and our established Religion, which they oppugn, in a
notorious, and high degree: and so adu^ntagious for the Whorish Church of Rome,
who still contriues, and works our ruin by our selves alone: I will here
conclude my verbal Censure, and Sur^ay, of him, and his Devotions* and lea^e
both him, and them, to the real Censure, and Suruay, of that Honorable,
Pious, Zealous, and Grave Assembly of Parliament, which I hope, will render
both to him, and them, according to their just demerits: that so F^lix
quicunque d^lore, Alterius dis^es posse ^arer^ t^o Tibul. Eleg. l. 3 Eleg. 7.
their penal ex^mples* ^ay prove others medecines.

HIEROM. Epist. 54. Hac s^nt quae coargutione non indigent: per^idiam cor^^
exposuisse superasso est.
FINIS.

