CERTAIN QVAERES propounded to the Bowers at the NAME OF JESUS and to the
Patrons thereof.

Wherein the Authorities, and Reasons alleged by Bishop Andrews and his
Followers, in defense of this Ceremony, are briefly examined and refuted; the
Mistranslation of Phil. 2.10.11. cleared, and that Text, with others acquitted
both from commanding or authorizing this Novell Ceremony, here gived to be
unlawful in sundry respects.

Colossians. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and Vain
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ:

Matthew: 15.9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
Commandments of men.

Isaiah. 1.12. When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at
your hand?

Brentius in Levit. c. 17. Hypocritae observantes Sacra sine Verbo Dei
instituta, tunc pessimi sunt, hoc est, peccatores and homicidae, cum sibi
optimi and religiosissimi videntur.

The fourth Edition corrected.

In the Year M.DC.XXXVI.

The Publisher to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, the strange violent late proceedings, both of our High
Commissions in their Commission Courts, and of our Bishops and their Visitors
in their unwarrantable Visitations, upon Canons Oaths and Articles of their
own forging, printed on their own Names, without any commission at all from
his Majesty under his great Seal, (contrary to the statutes of 25. H. 8. c.
19.21.26. H. 8. c. 1.31. H. c. 26.37. H. 8. c. 17.1. Ed. 6. c. 2.1. Eliz. c.
1.2.5. Eliz. c. 1.8. Eliz. c. 1.13. Eliz: c. 12. with other statutes and to
their own 12. Canon.) Yea contrary to the statute of Magna Charta c. 19. and
the late Petition of Right, now laid a sleep;) has occasioned me to set
forth another impression of these Quaeres, wherein all the whole controversy
concerning the Bowing of the name of Jesus in time of Divine service and
sermon,, is summarily Discussed; which Quaeres I would desire our
Commissioners, Bishops and Visitors to resolve and Answer in a satisfactory
manner (which yet they have not done,) before they violently without Law,
reason, or lawful authority, silence, suspend, present, excommunicate, fine,
deprive, or imprison any of their Fellow-Brethren, or vex any of his Majesty
Subjects; (as they have of late molested many) either for omitting, or speaking
against this Ceremony. It is the duty of all good Prelates, first to instruct
and inform men's consciences and judgment with the Gal. 6.1. 2. Tim. 2.25. Col.
3.12.13.14.
spirit of meekness, in such Ceremonies which they have good cause to deem
unlawful for them to use, before they urge them with violence to the practice
of them, or rigidly proceed against them in judgment for omitting them. This
they have not hitherto sufficiently done, in case of this much urged Ceremony,
pressing it only by Club-law, without reason or moderation. Let them therefore
now satisfy these, their weak Brethrens Quaeres, if they can; or else cease
to molest them, or urge this Ceremony longer, if they cannot do it; since
their great Guide Bishop Andrews, though in other things famous for his
learning and Judgment; is doubles miserably mistaken in this particular, and
can noe longer patronize either his own, or this their cause, as these Quaeres
will demonstrate, having so often times passed abroad in print without resolution.

Vale.
A PREFACE.
FOr the better clearing of this ceremony to be no duty of this text of Phil.
2.10.11. be pleased in brief to take notice of these four particulars: First,
what the Fathers (whom Page 84.85, 86.110 unto 141. None of the Fathers tell us
(writes he) that this reverence of bowing the knee is to be done at the name of
Jesus, neither is there ANY express or full authority in them Therefore all
that I strive for is that the Fathers by their expositions of this text do not
cross and contradict that meaning which our Church does seem to gather out of
it. In a word, I labor not that the fathers should be fully for me, but I
hope to make good that they are not against me. I desire in this matter to have
them lookers on: So he against Bp. Andrews and others, who say all the fathers
are for them, that is, not for, but against them.
Mr. Page confesses not to be for this ceremony) generally interpret to be the
name above every name mentioned in this text. Very many of the^ interpret it to
be nothing else, but the very name of God, and Deity of Christ it self. So
Tertullian de Trinitate. lib. Tom. 2. p. 261.262, Athanasius de Incarnatione
Christi Contr. Apollinarium. p. 271. C. Hilary in Psa. 2. p. 196 H Ambrose,
Rabanus Maurus, and John Salisburie on Phil. 2.9, 10. Dionysius Alexandrinus
Epist. Contr. Paulum Samosatenum Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 74.75. Titus Bostrensis
in cap. 1. Evang. Lucae. Ibid. Tom. 4. p. 339. E. Idacius advers. Varimadum.
lib. Ibid. p. 622. a. Caesarij Dialog. 1. p. 650. Basilius Magnus de Spiritu
Sancto ad Amphil. c. 8. Tom. 1. p. 180. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Esayam l. 5.
Tom. 1. p. 362. E.F. in Ioannis Evang. l. 11. c. 17. p. 666. c. 20. p. 669. a.
c. 22. p. 670. D.E. Thesauri. l. 13. Tom. 2. p. 270. E.F. Agobardus ad
Ludovicum Imp. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 556. g. h. Paschatius Ratbertus
in Matthew. Evan. lib. 10. Ibid. pars 2. p. 1156. b. c. lib. 11. p. 1177. b.
Exposit. in Psalm. 44. p. 1249. G. Ioannis Cyperis. de Inform. divini nominis.
cap. 11. Ibid. Tom. 11. p. 499. E. Paulus Aquiliensis Patr. Cont. Felicem
Vrgelium Epist. l. 2. Aquinas 3 Apud Alchuvini Opera. col. 1830.1831.
part. qu. 49. Art. 6. Conclusio. Alexander Alensis Theol. Summa. pars 1. qu.
21. m. 1. Artic. 4. together with Chytraeus Postil. in Domin. Palmarum. page
160, Zanchius in Phil. 2.9, 10. and other modern Expositors. Other Fathers and
Writers interpret it, to be the name of the only natural begotten Son of
God. Thus Hierom, Theodoret, Sedulius, Remigius, Beda, Haymo, Theophylact,
Anselme, and Oecumenius on Phil. 2.10, 11. Basil de Spirit. Sancto. c. 8, Tom.
1. p. 180. Augustine Contr Maximinum, l. 2. c. 2. Sancti Procli Sermo in
Transfig. Christi. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 1. pars 1. p. 536. C. Etherij and Beati. l.
1. Ibid. Tom. 8. p. 342. Musculus, Aretius, Zanchius, with other late
Expositors. Others interpret this name to be nothing else, but the Glory,
Fame, Lordship, Sovereignty, and universal dominion and Majesty of Christ. So
Chrysostom and Theodoret, in Phil, 2. Petrus Blesensis Sermon. 46. Bibl. Patr.
Tom. 11. pars 1. p. 210. C. and others of old. Olevian, Musculus, Gualther,
Marlorat, Dr. Ayray, Bishop Babington, and the whole stream of modern
interpriters. Others refer this text to his name Christ, as Paschatius
Ratbertus Exposit. in Psalm. 44. page 1246. g. Paulinus Epist. ad Augustinu^,
Bibl. Patr. Tom 5. pars 1. p. 210. e

Secondly, What they mean by bowing the knee. Not any actual bowing of the
knee in this life, at the sound, sight, or hearing of the Name Jesus; but a
Universal subjection of all creatures to the Sovereign Lordship, judicature
and supreme power of Christ, especially at the day of judgment, when this text
shall be only actually, literally, and really fulfilled. This all the Fathers
and Writers quoted in the Appendix, Lame Giles, and premises, and all the
Authors extant that I have seen, accord to be the genuine, true, undoubted
meaning. Bishop Andrews, Dr. Boys, and Mr. Page himself confessing it.

Thirdly, To what this bowing must be given by the Fathers verdict: Not to the
name Jesus, but immediately to Christ himself. Hence Hierom Com. l. 3. in
Isayam 45. Gregory Nyssen de Anima and Resurrect. disp. p. 104.212. Ambros.
Enar. in Psalm. 118. Octon. 20. Hilari de Trinitate lib. p. 64. Chrysostom. Hom.
32. in 1 Cor. 12. Fulgentius Object. Arrianorum discus. page 204. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus de Incarnatione Vnigeniti. c. 11.26. Hypolitus de Consummat. Mundi
and Antichristo. Orat. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3 p. 17. b. Dionysius Alexandrinus.
Contr. Paulu^ Samosatenum. Ib. p. 74. b. Prosper Exposit. in Ps. 102. f. 236.
a. Paulinus Epist. ad Apiu^. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 2. p. 187. b. Sancti
Procli Sermo in transfig. Christi, Ibid. p. 335. E. Arnobius Com. in Psa. 64.
Bibl. Patr. pars 3. p. 262. a. Agobardus ad Lud. Imper. Ibi. Tom. 9. pars 1. p.
556. g. Angelomi Strom. in l. Regum. 2. c. 12. p. 740, E. Damascen Orthodoxae
fidei. l. 3. c. 29. p. 433. C. Simeon These. Archiepiscopi de divino Templo
Bibl. Patr. Tom. 12. pars 1. p. 880. C. Petrus Blesensis de Transfig. Dom Ibid.
pars 2. p. 915. b. Nicholaus Cabasila de Vita in Christo. l. 6, Ibid. Tom. 14.
p. 127. Papa Innocentius 5. in Circumcis. Dom. Sermo. Tom. 1. p. 95. de
Contemptu Mundi. l. 2. c. 15. p. 445. with Brentius in Phil. 2. 9.10. and
sundry others jointly render and read this text; Mihi, ipsi, ei, illi, or coram
illo flectotur omne genu, etc. not in nomine, or ad nomen Jesus: to testify,
that this bowing of the knee in the text shall be given, not to, or at the name
Jesus; but to the very person of Christ himself. So Isay 45.23. and Romans
14.9.10, 11. expressly resolve. As I live says the LORD, every knee shall bow
to ME, and every tongue shall confess to GOD. No color therefore is there in
this text for bowing at, or to the name JESUS, but only to JESUS HIMSELF,
when we shall all jointly appear before his Tribunal. The rather, because In
Isalam l. 5. ca. 55. Tom. 1. p. 362. E. In Ioannis Evang. l. 11. c. 17. p. 666
de Incarn Vnigeniti. c. 11. p. 114 Dialog. de Trinit. l. 3 p. 270. a.
St. Cyril of Alexandria, reads it thus. Vt in nomine Jesus Christi omne genu se
flectat, coupling Christ and Jesus together, and making one as much the name in
the text as the other. The Surius Council. Tom. 3, p. 274.
Council of Franckford upon the Mane under Adrian the first, reads it thus.
Cessate cum adoptiuum nominare, qui verus Deus. Et verus Dei filius; in cujus
nomine omne genu flectitur, etc. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 3. p. 75. b.
Dionysius Alexandrinus Epist. Contr. Paulum Samos. reads it thus. Vt in nomine
ejus omne genu flectatur. Arnobius Can. in Psalm. 88. thus. Ego primogenitum,
ponam eum, ut in nomine ejus omne genu flectatur. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 5. pars 3.
p. 277. b.
Angelomus in his Strom. in l. 3. Regum c. 8. thus. Christo enimpropter
gloriosae meritum passionis datum est nomen quod est super omne nomen: ut in
nomine ejus omne genu flectatur, etc. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 770. b.
Paschatius Ratbertus in Matthew l. 11. thus: Et donavit illi nomen quod est
super omne nomen, ut in nomine DOMINI, omne genu flectetur, etc. All which
antiquities overthrow this bowing at the name Jesus.

Fourthly, when and where this bowing shall be. Hypolitus de Consummat. mundi
Orat. Bibl. Patru^. Tom. 9. pars 2. p. 1156. b.
Ephraim Syrus de Apparit. Crucis temp. Iudicij p. 230. and 703. Bibl. Patru^.
Tom. 5. pars 1. p. 924.
Gregentius Archiepisc. Tephensis Disp. cum Herbano Iudaeo. Bibl. Patru^. Tom.
12. pars 1. p. 880.
Simeon These. Arch. de divino Templo. Isiodor Hisp. Com. in Genesis c. 30. p. 301.
in direct terms, to omit all others. Bp. Alley, Bp. Babington, Dr. Fulke, Dr.
Willet, Dr. Boys, Dr. Ayray, in their places hereafter cited, and the whole
current of Expositors, expressly conclude, That it shall be only in the
general Day of Judgment, for time; before Christ's tribunal, for place, when
and where all things in Heaven, earth, and under the earth shall stand before
his Judgment Seat, and there cast themselves down jointly before him,
confessing him with one consent to be their Sovereign Lord, and calling him
their LORD. This Page 73.74, 75, 80 81.
Mr. Page himself, and all our Antagonists do and must confess to be the
time and place of this genuflection, prophesied of rather than prescribed, or
now commanded in this text: Since Isay 45.23. Romans 14.9, 10, 11. Matthew. 7.21,
22, 23. cap. 25.31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 41, 44, 46. Revel. 5.13, 14, 15. cap. 7.11,
12. John 5.22, 23, 27, 28, 29. Acts 2.34.36. cap. 10.36. and other texts in the
1. and 7. Quaere thus determine it, past all dispute. Hence then I thus argue.

If the name above every name, in which all knees must bow, mentioned in this
text of Phil. 2.10.11. be not the name Jesus; the bowing of the knee, no
litterall actual present genus^ection, but only the general subjection of all
creatures in Heaven, earth, and under the earth to ^he very person of Christ as
their LORD, not to or at his name Jesus; and that at the general Day of
Judgment before Christ's own Tribunal, not in time of Divine Service or
Sermons here on earth; then this bowing at the name Jesus, neither is nor can
be This Mr. Page confesses. p. 2.5, 73, 74, 75, etc. the later part of whose
book is a confutation of the ^ormer in all Scholl^rs judgment, whereupon it
was called in by the Bishops, and not answered.
a duty warranted, much less prescribed by this text.

But all this is apparent by the premised Fathers and Authorities.

Therefore the conclusion undeniable, maugre all the late ridiculous Pamphlets
and passages to the contrary, of Widows, Shelford, Page, Heylyn, Wr^n, Re^ve,
Moun^ague, Pocklington, Brown, Reed, Adams, a Coal from the Altar, Bishop
White, or any other, who babble and scribble much in the Jesuits and Papists
words, but prove nothing at all by Scripture or Antiquity for this Ceremonies
use or lawfulness, or new duty of the text, now so much urged every where,
point blank against John 5.23. That all men should honor the Son, even as
^hey honor the Father. But no men honor the Father thus in bowing at the
recital of his name. Therefore they ought not thus to honor the Son.

Courteous R^ader, that the Aut^or without whose privity these and other
Impressions have been published may not suffer by mine or the Printers
negligence, pray correct these following errors which corrupt the sense, ere
thou read the Treatise.
In the Title, 1, 9. f gived, r. proved. p. 1. l. 16. f. Mat 20. r. 25 p. 2 l.
1. (...). l. 14. an interrogation point is wanting before; whether. l. 19.
counted, r. corrupted. l. 22. contemn, r. confirm. p. 3. l. 23. As it is not,
r^ as it? If not^ p. 4. l. ^. that of, etc. r. yet it is. l. 22. as, r or. p.
5. l 13. the^ r. they. p^ 8. l. 3. Clichtouius. l. 21. Alcuvinus. p, 9. l. 30.
added, r. adored. p 10. l. 29. worship, r. worshipping. l. 21. Romish, r.
Rhemist^. p. 11. l. 19. r. it can. l. 33^ r. person. p. 12. l. 3. they, r. the.
p. 13. l. 31. has, r. had. p. 14. l. 10. blot out, that reverence to him. l.
28. person, r. reason. page 16. l. 31. Statutes, r. Stationes. pag^ 17. l. 4.
use, r. used. l. 27. r. of a. p. 19. l. 35. certi^ie, r. justifi^^ page 20. l.
28^ r^ Altar-wise. p. 23. l. 24. r. this Statute. p. 25. l. 19. blot out since.
l. 21. them. r. Her. p. 28. l. 2. of, r^ at. p. 30. l. 15. at, r^ ad. page 36.
l. thing, r. Church. page 37. l. 7. 4. r. 1. l 15. Matthew. 28. p. 39. l. 19.3.
r. 31. page 40 l. 16 here, r. where^ p. 41. l. 6. the, r^ thi^ to it to. In the
margin, p. 4 l. ^3. r. Phil. p. 10. l. 12. Vshers. p. 21. l^ 6. Har. 28. p. 16.
l. 40. r. Turonense. l. 4. r. Pro. l^ 42. r. Cent. cir^a orationem. page 18. l.
7. inferred, r. referred. p. 20. l. 40. r. Molanus. l. 41. r. Horae, etc. Hist.
l. 40. r. secundum usum Sarum. p. 21. l. 39. r. Spec. f. Brige, r. Being. p.
24. l. blot out 3. Hen^^ 2. c. Iurisdiction^ page 38. l. 38. curvab^tur. l. 40.
r. con^itebitur. p. 39. l 20. r^ inimici^ l. 34. Simeon. Omission. page 24. l.
8. r. bonnet at the naming of Jesus.

Certain QVAERES propounded to the Bowers at the name of JESUS, and to the
Patrons thereof.
WHether the Text of the Phil. 2.9.10.11. Isay. 45. 23. As I live says the
Lord every knee shall bow to me etc. and expressly interpreted of and applied
to the day of Judgment by S. Paul himself. Romans 14.9.10.11. By S. John.
Revel. 5. n. 12.13.14. Chap. 7.11.12. John. 5.22, 23, 27, 28, 29. And by Christ
himself Math. 20.5, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 41, 44, 46. And Chap. 7.21, 22, 23.
And whether this be a good inference? All knees of things in heaven, earth, and
under the earth, shall submit and bow to Christ before his Tribunal in the
day of Judgment, as to their supreme Lord and Judge: Therefore all men and
women ought now to bow their knees, or put of their hatts when ever they hear
the name Jesus mentioned in the Church in time of divine Service and Sermon,
The sole argument that can properly be deducted from this Text to justify this
practice?

In, (not At) the name of Jesus; And this phrase thus Englished and translated
in all other places of the Bible? Whether all the Greek and Latin Fathers
whatsoever do not thus render it; In (not at) the name, And all English
Translations too; (as Wickliffs, Purvi^s, Tyndalls, Coverdalls, Mathewes, The
Bishops Bible, set forth in the 2. Year of Queen Elizabeth, used in all
Churches during her Reign, And since, till the last Tran^lation 1614. Erasmus
Paraphrase, All our ancient English writers, and the Common Prayer Book it
self, In the Epistle on Palm Sunday till M. Cozens corrupted it in the year
16^9. by turning In into At, without any lawful authority and causing it to
be since so printed,) Except the Geneva translation only which mistaking M.
B^za (whom the Translator followed) rendered his Ad nomen, to the name, At ^he
name whether the last English Translation (which the Translators themselves
rendered, In the name according to the Original, and all former authorized
English Translations, but the Geneva, which Confe^rence at Hampton Court p 46.
King James condemned as the worst of all, and enjoined the Translators not to
follow) was not counted by See his Sermon on Phil, 2.9.10.
Bishop Andrews (As some on good grounds report) who without their privity
altered In into At the name, when the Copy was fitted for the Press of
purpose to contemn this Ceremony for which he had preached: Else it had been
printed In (not At) the name, as the Translators truly Englished it and as the
same phrase is ever translated by them S^e Acts. 3.6. c. 9.27.29. c. 16.18. 1.
Cor. 5.4^ Ephesians. 5.20.2. These. 3.6. with sundry others.
in all other places throughout the Bible; which had over^throwen this his
pretended duty of the text:

At, for I^ the name, does not mar both the since and English of the Text,
and make it no sense? If any man should translate, I believe in God; I believe
at God: Our Father which art in heaven; Our Father which art at heaven:
Whatsoever you shall ask in my name. Whatsoever you shall ask at my name: I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, I baptize thee at
the name of the Father etc. Go to God in my name, Go to God at my name: In
the name of the Lord I will destroy them, At the name of the Lord I will
destroy them: Pray to God in the name of Christ, Pray to God at the name of
Christ: Mary kept all these sayings in her heart, She kept all these sayings at
her heart, and the like; It would mar both the English and sense, and prove no
better then non sense. And does it not the like here; there being noe such
phrase as ( At the name) to be found in any other Text of Scripture or any
English Author but in this place alone? The changinge of which In, into At here
making the bowing in the name (To wit) in the Soverraigne Lordship and Power
of Christ) to be nothing else, but a bowing at the naming of Jesus in time of
divine Service or Sermons, contrary to the scope of this place.

How the name Jesus, imposed on our Saviors Humanity 1. Luke 1.31. c. 2. 21.
Acts 4.27. Cann truly be said, to be the name above every name, given him after
his Resurrection and exaltation, As the name in this Text of the Philippians
was? and to be the true, chief, yea proper name of God and of Christ's
Divinity, As the Patrons of this Ceremony affirm; And how this they say can be
proved?

Whether the name Savior ( which is given to God himself. 106.21. Isay 43.
11. Chap. 45.15.22. Ier. 14.8. Hosea 13.4.) be the very same with Jesus, And as
venerable, as comfortable, yea as much the name of God as it is not: as is most
evident, they differing in words, in use in all languages, the one being a
Christen name imposed at his circumcision the other a Title or Surname; and
both if them often coupled together in Scripture, as in these texts: A Acts
13.23. Gal. 3.20. 2. Tim. 5.10. Tit. 1.4. c. 2.13. c. 3.6.
Savior which is Jesus, Jesus our Savior etc. which were a tautologia being
one and the same. Then why do the Bishop Andrews Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11
Patrons of this Ceremony make them one and the same; The one of them (to wit)
the name of Savior, being attributed to God the Father as well as to Christ,
the other only to Christ not to God the Father, who was never called Jesus,
But Tit. 1.3. Psalm. 106.21. 1. Tim. 1.1.
often Savior? If so, Then why do they not teach, that men ought to bow at
the name of Savior as well as at the name of Jesus? The rather, Because
Savior, (though it be not the same that Jesus is in Letters sound, or use, the
one being as we say, a Christen name, the other, not properly a name, but a
Ti^le, or purchased surname, though this Bishop confounds them as one;) that of
it is the sense and interpretation of the name Jesus, M^^h. 1.21. And
themselves write and preach, Bp Andrews in his Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10. M.
William Page in his treatise of Justification of b^wing at the name of Jesus.
That men must not bow to the Letters, sound, nor sillabes of the name Jesus,
But to the sense only, which is Savior, to which, at which by this their
doctrine, they should rather bow then to, or at Jesus.

Whether Sermon on Psalm. 1.9.10.11.
Bishop Andrews Reason, That we must bow at the name of Jesus because it is
the name of God, and because Savior (As he says) is the cheifest name of God;
does not more strongly Father, Son, holy Ghost, Emmanuel, Son of God,
Christ, Jehovah, Elohim, Adonai. (which we commonly english, the Lord,) being
all Psalm. 29.2. Psalm. 34.3. Psalm. 66.2. Psalm. 79.9. Ps. 83.18. Psalm. 96.8.
Psalm. 99.3. Ps. 111.9. Ps. 148.13. Deutr. 28.58.
reverend, excellent, great, holy, and dreadful names as well as at the name
Jesus, Since all of them are the names of God? Whether this Proposition can be
proved either by Scriptur or reason (which they take as granted,) That we must
bow the knee at the utteringe or hearing of that name which is the name of
God? (the Antecedent or proposition on which the Bishops first argument or
reason is grounded:) which Proposition if it be true, will overturne the bowing
at this name Jesus; which is not properly the name of God as of Christ's Deity,
Because diverse who were but mere men had it imposed on them before Christ, And
it was given to Christ principally not as he was God, but man upon his Nativity
and Circumcision Math. 1.21.25. Chap. 2.1. Luke 1.31. Chap. 2.31. Acts 4.27?

Whether since Jesus is not, cannot be a Jesus or Savior to Angels in heaven,
Or Math. 8.28.29.
Devils in hell, Whose nature he took not on him, Heb. 2.16. Nor yet to
Reprobates in hell or earth, who are not saved by him, but yet a Lord and
supreme Judge over them all, Math. 28.18. Acts 10.36. Chap. 2.34, 36. Luke
8.31, 32, 33. Heb. 1.6. Jude. 6. 2. Peter: 2.4. Romans 14.9, 10, 11, 12. Revel.
5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Chap. 7.9, 10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.) His name (
Lord) be not more likely, to be the name above every name given to him upon his
exaltation, in which every knee shall bow, intended in this Text then Jesus:
Lord being the name given to Christ upon his Exaltation, as purchased by his
death and Resurrection. Romans 14.6, 8, 9, 10, 11. Acts. 2.34, 36. Chap 10.36.
Math. 28.18. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. The name which every tongue shall confess
and call Christ by at last in the day of Judgment, (As the very Text itself
resolves in the words) Every ^oung shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord,
Phil. 2.11. Yea as Christ himself determines, Math. 7.21.22. Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall ent^r into the Kingdom of heaven, etc.
Many will say unto me in that day Lord, Lord, Math. 25.31, 37, 44, 45. When the
Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him; then
shall he si^t upon the Throne of his glory etc. Then shall the righteouse on
the right hand answer him saying, Lord etc. Then shall the on the left hand
answer him and say, Lord when saw we thee an hungered etc. The name that is
used Isay. 45.23.24.25. Romans 14.11. As I live says the Lord, (Not Jesus) Every
knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God: (The original
Text to which that of the Philippians referrs) The name by which Christ is
called with reference to the day of Judgment. 2. Cor. 5.11. Romans 14.11. Heb.
10.30. 2. Petr. 3.8, 9, 10. Jude. 14. Revel. 18.8. Chap. 19.1.6. Yea the name
of his greatest dignity supremacy and terror, He being called, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, in respect of dominion and Judicature, as by a name
given him since his Exaltion. 1. Tim. 6.14, 15. Revel. 17.14. Chap. 19.19.
Whether this name Lord (I say) in all these respects Extending equally to all
things in heaven, earth and under the earth be not the name above every name
here meant, rather then his name Jesus; He being in truth a Lord, but yet noe
Jesus, no Savior to Angels, Devils, and Reprobates, who therefore cannot, will
not, shall not, bow unto him as their Jesus, but only as their Lord? Math.
7.21.22. c. 25.31.37.44. Isay. 45.23.24. Romans 14.9.10.11.

Whether this bowinge at the name of Jesus (being a duty of the Text only in
time of divine Service or Sermons, as the Bp. Andrews Doctor Boys, Giles,
Widows. M. Page, with others.
Patrons of it af^irme) can be in any probability the bowinge intended in the
Text; Since there are noe Common Prayers or Sermons at all, for certain in
hell, or under the earth, Noe nor yet in the greatest part of the earth, which
neither know nor worship Jesus; Nor yet in heaven, where there are noe Sermons
or common Prayers, but only Rev. 5.11.12^13.14 c. 7.12.
Blessings, praises, and thanksgivings unto God and Christ. Now that bowing
which this Text speaks of, is such a bowinge as is common to all, both in
heaven, earth, and under the earth; A bowinge which they may, and shall all
equally and jointly Jesus in the time of Divine Service and Sermons, which they
want; and therefore cannot use, Neither shall or can they ever actually
perform?

How Jesus can be truly called a Bp. Andrews Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11. M.
Page his Treatise of bowing at the name of Jesus.
proper and peculiar name given to Christ alone, when as we read of diverse
others in Scripture that were called Jesus besides Christ. As Jesus the Son
of Nunn, And Jesus surnamed Iustus. Acts. 7.45. Coll. 4.11. Heb. 4.8. Jesus the
Son of Syrack, Jesus the high Priest, Bar Iesus^ Acts. 13.6. etc. Or how can
Christ be truly stilled, a common name, Since none was ever called Christ
Others are called only adjectively that is annointed^ but not Christ, a title
peculiar to our Savior, as it used substantiuely as a title.
substantively and abstractively or Messiah, but he alone? And none ever
anointed with the Deity and holy Ghost and that to be both a King, Priest
and Prophet to his Church, but he? Psalm. 45.7. Acts. 4.27. Chap. 10.38. Isai.
61.1.

Whether this be not a notorious Paradoxe and falsehood, Bp. Andrews Sermon on
Phil. 2.9.10.11.
That that thing that name which is proper, is ever better then that which is
common? Since All accord, that the common good, of the Republic and weal of
the whole catholic Church, is better essence of the D^itie and name of God, (
which are common to each of the Three persons in the Trinity, as we learn in
Athanasius Creed) should be worser then, inferior to the personal subsistence
and names of each person in the Trinity, which are proper and incommunicable
one to the other, where as the essence and name of the Deity are common to
each three persons: Which were heresy and Blasphemy to affirm, yea the
Socrates Scholasticus Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 32.33.
very heresy of Nestorious condemned in the Council of Ephesus:

Whether it be not See Athanasius Quod Christus sit verus Deus, S^^r.
Ecclesiact. Hist. l. 7. c. 32.33.
heresy to say, that Christ is not God, nor the name Christ the name of God?
it being directly contrary to Romans 9.5. Christ, who is over all, God blessed
for ever, Amen. Athanasius his Creed, And the second Article of Religion of
the Church of England, Which say, that God and man is one Christ: Contrary to
the Doctrine of See Hilary, Athanasius, Basil^ Nazianzen and others in their
writings and Sermons against the Arrians.
all Orthodox Fathers and Writers against the A^^i^ns, who unanimously aver,
See Athanasius Quod Christus sit verus Deus.
; that Christ is God; Yea contrary to Titus 2. 13. Lookinge for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearinge of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ? Where Christ is not only called God, But the great God: and to the
Book o^ In the Letany, and thanksgiving after the Communion received.
Common Prayer, which injoines us thus to pray: CHRIST have mercy upon us: O
CHRIST hear us: From our enemies defend us O CHRIST, etc. And to say, Thou
only O CHRIST, with the holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the
Father: All which passages, expressly resolve Christ to be God, and the name of
God, else we should not thus pray unto him as God.

Whether this be not a falsehood, Bishsp Andrews Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
that God cannot be anointed, as anointing signifies a designation to an
office; Since Christ Ti^. 1.3.4. c. 2.13^ Lu. 1.47.
both as he is God and Man, was designed to be a Savior; and since we read
thus of Christ's annointinge, Psalm. 45.7. Therefore God, thy God, has anointed
thee, with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: Which the Fathers thus
interpret, Bishop Andrews Ibidem.
O God the Son, Thy God (to wit) God the Father has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness, (to wit) with the holy Ghost. Acts. 10.38. Heb. 1.8.9.)
Whence S. Augustine, Beda, Paschatius, Ra^ber^us, with sundry others on the 44.
(our 45.) Psalm write thus: D^us ungitur a Deo etc. God is anointed by God,
God the Son, by God the Father, with God the holy Ghost: And whether this be
not an error, That Christ is not the name of God nor of our Saviors Divinity
but in his Declaration, Quod Christus sit verus D^us, that Christ is true God.
P. 377. (therefore this name of Christ, the name of God) Nazianzen in his 5.
Oration p. 167. B. With Elias Cretensis on that place; Damascen Orthodoxae
fidei l. 3. c. 3. p. 365. with Clichtonius in his Commentary on that place p.
366. And Aquinas 3. part Quaest 16. Art. 5. Quaest. 17. Art. 1. expressly
resolve; That Christ is called Christ, in respect of his Divinity; That Christ
is the name both of his Divinity and Humanity, In which are expressed and
comprised both his Divinity anointing, and his Humanity anointed; And that he
could not be called Christ, if he were only man; this name being predicated of
both his natures, and given to him in respect

If this proposition be true, Bishop Andrews Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
That Jesus is the proper name of God, and that God cannot be anointed, and so
Christ not the name of God, as Bishop Andrews argues: How can this agree with
Acts. 4.27. Thy holy Child Jesus whom thou have anointed, etc. And Acts.
10.38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost and with power?
Or with that of Tertullian (to omit other Fathers) adversus Prazean: p. 709.
Sieve Jesus tantummodo positum est, intelligitur and Christus, quia Jesus unctus
est: sive solummodo Christus, idem est and Jesus, quia unctus est Jesus? Either
Jesus therefore must not be the proper name of God, but the name only of
Christ's humanity, as Exposit. in Matthew. 1. Tom. 5. Col. 1.
Beda, Expositio in Matt. 1. Tom. 1 p. 5. and in epist. ad Romanos c. 1. Tom.
2. p. 5.6.
Anselme, De Divinis Officiis c. 41. Col, 1125. a
Alcuninus and 3. part qu. 16. Art. 5. qu. 17. Art. 1.
Aquinas teach us, who say; that, Jesus est proprium nomen assump^ae carnis;
Jesus is the proper name of Christ's assumed humanity. And, Hoc nomen Jesus
signi^icat solam naturam humanam, This name Jesus signifies only the humane
nature; And so by the Bishops own Doctrine, we must not bow unto it, because
it is not the name of God, or Christ's Divinity, but of his humanity only as
these Fathers teach; Or else this proposition ( God cannot be anointed) must
be false, because these two Texts expressly say, that Jesus as Jesus, was
anointed; And themselves confess, Bishop Andrews Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
that Jesus as Jesus is God, And so God may be anointed, And then Christ will
prove the name of God as well as Jesus, notwithstanding the Bishops reason, and
be therefore of right to be bowed unto, as well as it, by the Bishops own
arguinge, if it be solid.

Acts. 4.12. ( Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other
name under heaven given among men w^ereby we must be saved,) be meant of the
name Jesus; As if men were saved by it alone, or only of the Person of Christ,
as the 10.11. verses, and the very first words ( Neither is there salvation in
any other) with the Contents of our Bibles, that by the same Jesus only we must
be eternally saved; and all O^^hodox Int^^preters expound it?

If of the name Jesus only, Bishop Andrews Sermon. on Phil. 2.9.10.11. Giles
Widows. his Confutation of an Appendix p. 38. M. Page, and others in their
Sermons.
As the Patrons of this Ceremony gloss it; How then can they be excused from
Blasphemy, in attributing our Salvation unto the bare name of Jesus, which we
receive only from his person and Merits, which make him a Savior, and
purchased him the Title of Jesus? Matthew. 1.21. Acts. 13.23. Or how will it
follow hence; There is noe other name under heaven whereby we must be saved,
but the name Jesus, (though) not expressed in the Text, E^go we must bow a^,
and to this name, as often as we hear it mentioned in the Church? If of the
person only [as is most true] why then do they abuse this Text [yea that place
in Ps. 95.6. O come let u^ worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our
Maker; not Jesus or Savior being written long before our Saviors Nativity, or
the name Jesus was given him, and so not meant of it] in applying it merely to
the name Jesus, to cause simple people to adore it, when as it speaks of the
person only?

If the name of Jesus be thus to, be bowed to and at; Why Operum Tom. 3. Tract.
37. p. 335.
Salmeron the Jesuit teaches them; That this name whether it be pronounced
with the mouth, or heard, with the ear, or where ever it is written, painted,
or engraven, is worthy divine worship, not for the bare word, wri^ing or
picture it self, but for the signification of it, as the Cross, and Image of
Christ, are deservedly added with the worship of Lat^ia for the type and
mystery represented in and by them? yea why bow and reverence they not it
rather when they hear men dishonor and prosane it by cursing, swearinge,
blaspheminge, when it is most contemned, vilified, abused, and so needs most
honor and respect, then when it is only religiously and reverently used and
uttered in the Church, without any irreverence, contempt or dishonor offered
to it? And if bowing at the name Jesus in the Church, be a means to keep
Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
yea then men should rather bow at the name of God than Jesus, Since that name
is more abused by swearinge, and cursing then Jesus.

Whether these words of Bishop Andrews and others, He is exalted to whose
person knees do bow; But he to whose name ONLY much more; his person is taken
out of our sight, All that we can do will not reach unto it; But his name he
has left behind to us, that we may sh^we by our reverence and respect to it,
how much we esteem him; be not contrary to Math. 28.20. Lo I am with you
always even to the end of the World? to Gal. 2.20. and Ephesians. 3.17. Where
Christ is said to live and dwell in us? to the Ibidem.
Bishops own words, who there immediately says, that his body and soul, and
these not without his Deity are really present in the Sacrament: and so his
person; and that Jesus is the proper and and chief name of his Deity, which
is ever present with us and not taken from us? Whether they be not a mere
Idolizing of the very name Jesus, and a confining of this bowing only to his
name, not person? Whether this speech and caution of his, ( Ibidem.
do it to the sense, have mind of him that is named, and do his name the
honor and spare not,) be not a mere Idolatrous Popish passage, The 2. and 3.
Part. of the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry. Bishop Vs^ers Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge of Images. p. 496.497. Doctor John Rainolds De Idololatria
Romanae Ecclesiae l. 2. C. 3. Sect. 69.
borrowed by him from the Patrons of Image and Bread worship? Whether Papists
may not as lawfully adore and bow to Images, Crucifixes, the Host and the
like, as they or we may do to the name of Jesus, with this distinction and
caution, borrowed from them by the Bishops, and by them from the Pagans, in
defense of their Idols relative worship, and adoring of the Image, with a
reference and eye to the person whom it represents? And what difference is
there between worship the name, and the Cross, Host, Crucifix or Image of
Jesus, which the Notes on Phil. 2. v. 9.10^ on Apoc. v. 3. Sect. 11. Carolus
Stengelius De sacrosancto nomine Jesus. c. 23. Salmeran, Operum. Tom. 3. Tract.
37. p. 335.
Romish and other Papists make the same? and conjoine together as one both in
reason and verity.

Whether this Text of Philippians 2.10, 11. does not couple the bowinge of the
knee, and confession of the tongue ( that Jesus Christ is Lord,) together, as
duties equally to be performed at heads, bodies, or stir their Caps at the
naminge of Jesus, confess likewise, ad cry out aloude with their tounges, that
Jesus Christ is Lord? Since the Text thus conjoines and requires them both
alike; Or else are they not infringers of this Text and precept, for neglecting
it?

Whether bowinge at the name of Jesus only, not of Savior, God, with other
names and Titles of Christ, does not seem to reviue the heresy of Irenaeu^
adv. Hereses lib. 1. c. 25. Epiphanius Contr. Haereses. Haer.
Cer^nthus, That Jesus and Christ are two distinct persons and essences? That
Jesus is better then Christ, yea then Savior, then Emanuel, then Son of God,
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, God etc. That he is more honorable, worshipful,
and reverent as he is Jesus, and when he is so styled; then as he is God, and
when he is so called; or then when he is termed Savior, Christ, Emanuel, Son
of God, Lord, King, and the like? And whether learned Doctor Whitaker in his
Answer to William R^ynolds the Rhemists Notes on Phil. 2.10, 11. P. 398, 399.
writes not That the bowinge at the name of Jesus only, and not at the name of?

Whether bowinge at the name of Jesus only, not at the name of the Father, or
Holy Ghost, (to Doctor Boys, Postil on the Epistle on Palm Sunday p. 280.
H^oker Eccles. Polity. l. 5. Sect. 30. M. Adams his Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
and Bishop Andrews on Phil. 2.9.10.
testify Jesus to be God, and the name of God;) Does not make a kind of
disparity between the Three sacred persons of the Trinity, Athanasius Creed
Articles of Religion: 1.2.5.
who are coaeternall together and coaequall; in givinge more honor, reverence,
adoration, to the one, then to the other; and imply, the Father and holy Ghost
not to be God, or so much God, not to be so venerable, so honorable as Jesus,
because their persons and names are not so much bowed to, and adored as his?

If Three persons of equal dignity should be made the Kings Viceroy, in any of
his Dominions, and all men should bow to, Cappe and honor the persons, and
name of the one when ever it were mentioned, but neglect to do it when the
other Two are named; Would not this intimate, One of them to be more honorable,
or of greater authority then the other Two? And is not this case the same? When
Ministers and people shall all Capp and bend the knee, as soon as ever they
hear the sound of the name Jesus, but not so much as stir either Cap or
knee, when they names of God the Father and Holy Ghost are mentioned with it,
even in the same breath and Sentence almost, as they are in the Apostles and
Athanasius Creed, and in the ordinary Blessing at the end of Divine Service
and Sermons, wherewith the people are usually dismissed. When men shall
repeat, I believe in God the Father allmighty Maker of Heaven and Earth;
without any great reverence or bowinge of the knee; And then pronounce the next
words, And in Jesus Christ our Lord, with a stentorian voice, bowinge both the
body and knee very superstitiously (I should say devoutly,) as soon as ever
the word Jesus, is uttered, before Christ our Lord be pronounced, out of their
great reverence and respect to this name Jesus, (which they here prefer
before God the Father allmighty and Christ our Lord,) And then shall proceed
to, I believe in the Holy Ghost; and utter that without any such Ceremony or
solemnity; Or when they shall pronounce, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with much solemnity, cappinge and genuflection when Jesus, (not Lord and
Christ) are pronounced; And then shall slightly pass over, the Love of God the
Father, and the comfortable fellowship of God the Holy Ghost, without any such
Ceremony or incurvation. What man in his right senses must not of necessity
acknowledge, that the very name Jesus, is more honored, reverenced and adored,
then either the names, or Persons of God the Father, or God the Holy Ghost,
that more adoration is rendered to the Second, then to the First, or Third
person of the Trinity, and a great disparity made between them?

If Jews or Infidells should come into our Churches, and observe this
difference and disparity, would they not forthwith conclude, that we had no
other God but Jesus? that the Father and Holy Ghost were not esteemed of us to
be God? Or at least, made not so great and honorable a God, as the Son? and
that Christ and Jesus, were not one and the same person, the one being thus
bowed to, not the other? Yes verily. We read in Fox Acts and Monuments,
London: 1610. p. 1514.1595.1604.
the Book of Martyrs, that the Bishops and Commissioners, appointed by Queen
Mary to dispute with Cranmer, Latymer, and Ridley at Oxford, when ever they
named, or heard the name of the Pope, put of their Capps thereto, (as men now
do at the naminge of Jesus,) Which these 3. godly Martyrs would by no means
do, But when God, Christ, or the Queen were mentioned, they used no such
Reverence to their names: Did not these Commissioners then (in our Martyrs
judgments) prefer the person, the name of their By Jewels Defense of the
Apology. part. 5. Divis. 11. c. 6. p. 480.
Lord God the Pope, before the persons, the names both of God himself, of
Christ; of the holy Ghost, at leastwise of the Queen? and thereby signify
that the Pope was more honorable and far greater then the Queen, or any other
earthly Potentate, whose name could not challenge or command the like
reverence and Cappinge from them? yea doubtless.

If Three men were sittinge together, and those who pass by, put of their Hats
to one of them, not to the other two; does not this make an inequallity
between them advancinge the one that is thus capped or bowed too above his
fellows? Certainly it does: I find in the Edition 1610.
Book of Martyrs P. 1699. That when Archbishop Cranmer was convented before
the Popes and Queens Commissionors in S. Mary's Church in Oxford; he putting
of his Cap, and humbly bowing his knee to the ground, made reverence to the
Queens Proctors and Commissioners, who represented her person, but beholding
Bishop Brooks in the face, who was the Popes Delegate and represented his
person, he put on his Cap again, making no manner of token of obedience
toward him at all. Whereat the Bishop being And may not God the Father and the
holy Ghost, by as good and the same reason be offended at the bowing only at
the name of Jesus, as this Bishop was at Cranmers bowing to the Queens
Commissioners and Proctors, pretermitting him.
offended, says unto him, that it might become him right well (weiginge the
honor, veneration and authority he did represent,) to do his duty unto him.
Whereunto Doctor Cranmer answered, that he has once taken a solemn Oath,
never to consent to the admitting of the Bishop of Romes authority into this
Realm of England again, and that he had done it advisedly; and therefore
would commit nothing, either by sign or token, which might win his consent
to the receivinge of the same: and that he did it not for any contempt to the
Bishops person, which he could have been content to have honored as well as any
of the other, If his Commission had come from as good an authority as theirs:
This answered he modestly, wisely, and patiently with his Cap on his head, not
once bowinge or making any Reverence to him that reverence to him that
represented the Popes person, which was wonderously of the people marked: If
this Archbishops puttinge off his Cap and, bowinge his knee to the one and not
to the other to the Queens commissioners only not the Popes. Did here in his
own, the Commissioner, and all the peoples judgment: make a great disparity
between the power and Jurisdiction of the one and other, and prefer the one
of them before the other: Must not, does not the bowinge and cappinge at the
name only of Jesus, not of God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, uttered
altogether, or severally, do the like? noe doubt it does. Sermon on Phil.
2.9.10.11. M. Page, Widows, the Rhemists Salmeron S^^ngelius and others in
their forequoted places.
Bishop Andrews, and other of our bowers at the name, of Jesus, teach us in
express terms, that the name Jesus is in this more honorable then all other
Titles of Christ, and exalted ahove them all, because men must only bow their
knees and veil their Cappes to it, but not to any other of his Titles: If
therefore their bowinge at the name of Jesus, makes a disparity between it and
all other names of his, preferring it far above them all; Must it not likewise
make an inequallity and disparity between the names and persons of the Trinity
too, by the selfsame Person, and advaunce Jesus above the Father, and the holy
Ghost, at whose names they never bow or stir their Capps. Wherefore this
bowinge to, at, and Cappinge at the name Jesus only, must needs make, and imply
an inequallity between the 3. Persons of the Trinity, As M. Cartwright largely
proves in his Answer to the Rhemis^s Annotations on Phil. 2.9, 10.11.
Therefore it is neither to be practiced nor endured among Christians, who
believe the Athanasius his Cr^ed Articles of Religion. 1.2.5.
pari^ie and equallitie of the Trinity both in Essence, internal and
external, honor, adoration, and veneration to.

Whether, if Bishop Andrews Doctrine (warranted by no Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10,
11.
that we must bow at the name of Jesus, not of Christ, because the end is
better then the means; and the end for which Christ was anointed, better then
his unction itself; it will not hence follow; that the humanity of Christ,
being anointed by his Divinity, and the Holy Ghost; And the Salvation of us
men, the end for which Christ was anointed; are much better then his Divinity,
and Acts. 10.38. Isai. 61.1.
the Holy Ghost himself, the ointment and means anointing his Humanity and
enabling him to be a Savior? And whether the plain meaning of his
Proposition be not this in substance; that the Humanity of Christ is better
then his Divinity, or the Holy Ghosts Deity? and the Salvation of man the end,
better then the Deity and Humanity of Christ, the means of man's salvation?
which is no less then Blasphemy to affirm.

What See the Appendix concerning bowing at the name of Jesus and Lame Giles
his Haultings.
Father, or ancient Writer for above 1250. years Jesus, the name above every
name principally meant and intended in this Text, and not rather the names God
and Lord? Or that makes this Ceremony of bowing or cappinge at every naminge of
Jesus in time of divine Service, or Sermons in the Church, the bowinge spoken
of in this Text? and what are their words to this purpose? Or whether it be not
an undoubted truth, that no Father or Writer for 1200. years after Christ and
more, made any such interpretation of these words, or mention of any such
Ceremony used in the Church, which certainly used it not till above 1150 years
after Christ, and so deemed it not a duty of the Text, or necessary Ceremony.

What Father, Ecclesiastical Historian, or Writer for 1500. that this Ceremony
was taken up by the Christians in the primitive Church, to justify, to
testify the eternal Deity of Christ against the Arrians, and other Heretics
who denied it? whether this ground of the original use of this Ceremony, be
not a mere groundless forgery and fancye of some late Writers, Zanchius in
Phil. 2.9.10. Mr. Hooker his Ecclesias^icall Polity. l^ 5. Sect. 30. D^ Bays
his Postill. on the Epistle on Palm Sunday. p. 280. and M. Page his
Justification of bowinge at the name of Jesus.
void of all prooffe, authority, and not warranted by any antiquity? and
a^mittinge it true, whether does it not clearly demonstrate, that the
primitive Christians (who by this Argument used it not before Arrianisme
sprung) with those who used it only on this ground, reputed it no duty
prescribed by this text, because thus occasionally taken up to refell and
discover Arrians? That they bowed as much at the name of Christ, Son of God,
Savior, Emanuel, and other names or Titles of Christ, as at his name Jesus;
since the Arrians denied his Deity, principally as he was Christ; (this being
their ordinary assertion confuted, condemned by the orthodox Counsels and
Fathers, See Athanasius, Basil, Naziancen^ the Acts of the Counsels of Nice,
Constantinople, Chalcedon, Ephesus; and all Historians and Writers of Arrian
Controversy.
that Christ was not God:) and opposed his eternal Deity when he was styled by
any of these names or Titles, as much as when he was called Jesus, or as he was
a Jesus? That they bowed at the name of the Holy Ghost; since as many, or more
See Epiphanius and Augustine de Haeresib.
Heretics denied his Deity, as denied Christ's? And that this bowinge is now
needelesse and superfluous for the present on this ground, (especially in our
Churches where none deny Christ's Deity, as the Arr^ans and the other ancient
Heretics did) and all pray unto him as God, even with bended knees and hearts,
in our common Liturgy, as CHRIST, (not Jesus) have mercy upon us, etc.
testifies.

Whether the Christians in the primitive Church for above 800. years after
Christ, used not always to pray standing between Easter and Whitsuntide, and
on every Lords day throughout the year; and de geniculis adorare, to adore
standing^ Never using, but expressly prohibiting by sundry Council. Nicaenum.
Can. 20. Constantinop. 6. Can. 90. Timonense 3. sub Carolo Magno, Can. 37.
Aquisgranense sub Ludovico Pi^. can. 46.
Counsels, all to kneel, or bow their knees in time of prayer, Sacraments, or
Sermons, in honor and memory of Chris^s Resurrection: And were not their
meetings from hence termed, Tertullian de Corona Militis lib. ad uxorem. l. 2.
and Rhenani ^ot^ Ibid Contra Psyc^ic^s^ lib. contr. Magd. 3. c. 6. De Ritib^
cura grationem^ Col. 137. and cont. 4. c. 6. coll. 432.433.
Stations, Statutes, or Standings, because they thus performed

If so, (as all ancient, all modern Ecclesiastical Historians and Write^s
acknowledge^) Then that Assertion of Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
Bishop Andrews and others is false; That the primitive Christians use to
kneel at the Sacrament, and to bow their knees when ever they offered, prayed,
or heared the name of Jesus mentioned in time of divine Service or Sermons,
since between Easter and whitsu^tide, and on every Lords day, Justin Martyr.
Apol. 2. Tertullian. d^ Corona Militis.
(the ordinary time of their public assemblies) they never used to bow their
knees, no not so much as in prayer, in which it is Acts. 7.60. c. 21.5. Ephesians.
3.14. 2. Chron. 6.13. Psalm. 95.6. Dan. 6.10. Luke^ 22.41. Acts. 9.40. c. 20.36.
most proper, much less then at the Sacrament, or name of Jesus, at which we
find not in any antiquity, that they used to kneel or bow the knee, though
they usually did it in all their prayers and assemblies on the week days
after Whitsuntide: The only thing the Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
Bishops marginall authorities prove, though neither himself nor any one else
may thence infer, The primitive Church and Christians used in their Weekeday
meetings, after Whitsunday, to pray kneelinge. Ergo they used to kneel at the
sacrament and bow their knees at the naminge of Jesus in time of divine service
and sermons, (especially on the Lordsday, whereon they never kneel) it being a
mere inconsequent.

Whether In Isay. 45.
S. Hieroms words, quoted by Bishop Andrews and others, Mori^ est e^im
Ecclesiastici Christo genn flectere; Sermon on Phil. 2.10.11. Giles Widows
his confutation of an Appendix p. 122.
It is an Ecclesiastical Custom to pray kneelinge to Christ, (not Ies^s) be a
convincinge authority to prove; that the primitive Christians used to bow at
the name of Jesus, not of Christ, in the time of divine Service and Sermons,
when as this Text, speaks only a bowinge of the knee in prayer to Christ; not
Jesus; not of a bowinge at the naminge of Jesus; which name is not so much as
mentioned in this place of his; and the bowinge here spoken of ascribed only to
the person, not to the name of Christ, muchlesse of Jesus? yet this is the
Antiquity they most rely on. Or whether Lib. 4. c. 45. T^m. 5. p. 312.
S. Cirylls words on Isai. 45, (where there is not so much as any mention of
the name Jesus, Hexameron. l. 6. c. 9.
muchlesse of any bowinge at, or to it, but only a relation, that all Nations
shall be converted to God:) Or Theodorets Exposition on Phil. 2.10, 11. ( Who
makes the name of the begotten Son of God, not Jesus, the name above every
name, intended in this Text, which he proves out of Heb. 1.4.5. Psalm. 2.7.12.)
Or Ambrose his words, (The knee is flexible where with before the other members
the offense of the Lord is mittigated, anger appeased, grace provoked. For this
is the gift of the highest Father toward his Son, That in the name (In
nomine) of Jesus, every knee He and many others read it only passiuely, as
inferred by Christ's power, at last not actiuely, as voluntarily rendered by any
now.
should be bowed, of things in heaven, earth, and under the earth; and that
every tongue should confess, that the Lord Jesus is in the glory of God the
Father: For there are two things which above others appease God, Humility, and
Faith, The foot therefore expresses the affection of Humility, and the
obsequiousness of diligent service.) Which Father readinge this Text, In (not
at) the name; making the bowinge there expressed, to be subjection, humility,
and service to Christ, (not any genuflexion at the naminge of Jesus in time of
divine Service and Sermons, of which there is not one syllable or any the least
intimation in this passage:) and defininge the name Son in this place, (if
any name,) not Jesus; and the name God in his Commentary on this Text, the name
above every name, here intended: Whether I say, can these impertinent
Authorities, (the only places quoted by the Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11.
Widows, Page, and others in their Sermons.
Bishop and his followers, to justify the antiquity of this Ceremony,) prove
that the primitive Church and Christians used to bow at every mentioninge of
the name Jesus, in time of divine Service and Sermons; or that this is a duty
of the Text? when as they never so much as intimate any such thing, and
neither make the name Jesus, the name, nor this kind of bowinge, the bowinge
here prescribed? Yet these are our great learned men's best, yea sole
Authorities, on which they would found this novell duty, which do in truth
confound it.

Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11. Mr. Page, Widows Stengelius, Salmeron: with
others quoted in Lame Giles.
Bishops and others Reasons for bowinge at the name Jesus, drawn only from the
Nature, Letters, Quality, or Circumstances of the name, not of the Person of
Jesus; their bowinge and reverence given to the person of Jesus, as they
pretend, only in respect of his name Jesus, at which, to which name of his
they only bow, when, and because it is named; not at other seasons, when his
person, is as really, as fully, represented to them under other of his names
and Titles; not to this his name in respect of his person; (which is of equal
dignity, when ever represented under all, or any his names and Titles) together
with the bendinge of their heads and bodies at every mention of the name Jesus,
in a more special and humble manner, even in the midst of their prayers, when
they are already prostrate on their knees to God and Jesus, and their minds
immediately fixed upon both their persons; be not on infallible demonstration,
that they adore the name, more then the very person of Jesus, or of God
himself, and so make it a notorious Idol, since they bow thus unto his
person, only in respect, and because of this his name; since when as they are
prostrate in prayer in the very higth of their devotion, and their minds
immediately fixed upon the person of God and Jesus, they yet give a special
congee, bendinge, and inclination of their heads and bodies, when the name
Jesus is but uttered; and so reverence honor and adore it more, then either
the very person of God or Christ? Else what need this new incuruation at the
name, when as they are already devoutly prostrate on their knees to the person?

What warrant is therefore men to put off their Hatts, or bow their heads and
upper parts only at the naminge of Jesus? since this Text precisely requires,
the bowinge of the knee (yea of both knees, because of every knee?) and men's
capps, hatts, heads, bodies, are not their knees, nor yet enjoined here to bow?

Whether See the Appendix to Lame Giles, where all this is proved at large.
Popes with pop^sh Counsels, and Writers, Especially who instile themselves
thus from the name Jesus, above one 1000. If not 1200. years after Christ,
were not the first broachers, inventors, and propagators, of this ceremony,
and that with Charters and indulgences for many days sins, to such who
should vouchsafe to use it; of purpose to satisfy and countenance their
worshippinge of Images, Crucifixes, the Host, and other such parts of their
Romish Idola^ry?

Whether did not the Church of England with other Protestant Churches (by the
Notes on Phil. 2 9.10. and on Apoc. 13. Sect. 7.
Rhemists, Stengelius, and other Papists Confessions,) abolish it as
superstitious? De S. Nomine Jesus. c. 23.
and whether have not our Bi^hop Alley his Power man's Library: p. 2. f. 88.103.
Bishop Rabinghton Exposition of the Catholic Faith^ p. 195.196.197. Doctor
Whitakers Answer to William Raynolds. p. 398.399. and in his Preface to
Saunders his Demonstration. Doctor Fulke and M. Carthwrights Confutation of the
Rhemist Testament Notes on Phil. 2.9.10. and in Apoc. 13. Sect. 7. Doctor Ayray
on Phil. 2.9.10. Doctor Willet Synopsis Papismi Conc. 2. Error. 51.
own, with Brentius, Calvin, Marlorat, Musculus, Piscato^, and Paraeus in
Phil. 2.9.10. and in Romans 14.
other protestant Writers against the Papists, condemned and written against it
as no ways grounded on this Text? whether the Papists to draw on the
adoration of this name Milanus, Hist. de Imaginibu^ l. 3. c. 1.
have not made golden Characters and Images of it, Yea instituted both a
Brentius, Calvin, Marlorat, Musculus, Piscato^, and Paraeus in Phil. 2.9.10.
and in Romans 14.
solemn holy day of the name of Jesus on the 7. of August, Calendarium
Romanum: Histori^e beatissime^ Nominis Jesus sed cum Vsum sanum: f. 74.169.170.
and Hours of the name Jesus, with this Collect or Prayer, for all those who
devoutly bow unto it. God who have made the most glorious name of thy only
begotten Son Jesus Christ, to they faithful ones the highest Miracle with
the affection of sweetness, and exceeding dreadful, and terrible to wicked
Spirits, Mercifully grannt, that all those who devou^ly worship this name
Jesus in earth (to wit, by bowinge at or to it, in ^ime of divine Service or
Sermons,) may partake of the sweetness of its holy consola^ion in this life,
and in the World to come may obtain the joy of endless exaltation and
rejoycinge, by the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son? And whether the
present violent pressing and enforcing of this Ceremony, which Ecclesiastical
Policy: l. 5. c. 30.
Mr. Hooker, Con^utation of the Rhemist Testament: Notes on Phil. 2.9.10.
Doctor Fulke and Synopsis Papismi the 9. General Controversy. Error 51.
Doctor Will^t, say, no man is, or ought to be forced or enjoined to use,) in
the selfsame, yea in a far more earnest manner then ever the Papists urged it
upon any, by Fyninge, imprisoninge, suspendinge, deprivinge such Ministers and
others who refuse to use it, against all Law, all Justice, the chap. 29. See
Rastall Title Accusation.
Statute of Magna Charta and Petittion of Right, tendes not only to the
erectinge of Popery, and bringinge in of bowinge to Altars, Images, the Host,
Transu^^stantiation and Mass, as late experience and the turning of Communion
Tables to Altars or Altaringe, every where manifests?

Whether bowinge at the name of Jesus, be not divine worship and adoration,
given immediately, either to the person or as the The Rhemists, Stengelius, and
Salmeron, in their fore-noted places, and ^ornelius a Lapide in Phil. 2.9.10.11.
Papists, the Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.11. Giles Widows his answer to an
Appendix: and others quoted in Lame Giles.
Bishop, and all those grant, who make it a duty of the Text,) whether it be
not direct superstition and willworship, and so to be abandoned of us, since
doubtless it is not enjoined or prescribed by this, or any other Text of
Scripture? and whether the misalleaginge and mistranslating of Phil. 2.9, 10,
11. of purpose to justify this Ceremony, of bowing and capping at and to the
name Jesus, in time of Divine Service and Sermons; be not an express wilful
perverting, corrupting, yea abusing of the Scripture, (and so a dangerous
soule-condemning sin. 2. Pet. 3.16. Acts. 13.10, 11. Rev. 22.18, 19.) which
every good Christian is bound in Conscience, to Gal. 2.14. Ps. 1.27.28 Jude
3.2. 2. Pet. 3.16.1^. Acts 13.10.11.2. John. 10.11
resist? And the bowing at the very naming of Jesus in the midst, or beginning
of a Sentence read, or preached, before we hear, or know what follows, a
rash inconsiderate disorderly Ceremony or Superstition, (and so prohibited, 1.
Cor. 14.33, 40.) causing men often times to neglect, or forget the sense of what
is read unto them, to bow at the names of Acts. 7.47. Hebr. 4.8.
Jesus surnamed Joshua, Col. 4.11.
Iustus, and the like; yea at the very name of Acts. 13.6.
Bar-Iesus the Sorcerer, to and at which Mr. Cozens, with many more at Durham,
most devoutly bowed, no less then twice in one day, one after another, (such
was their gross supersticious dotage;) and confoundinge adoration, and the
act of outward worship and bowing, with hearing and reading of Gods word,
which are distinguished from it?

Whether Sermon on Phil. 2.9.10.
Bishop Andrews words, ( The knee that will not bow at the name of Jesus, shall
he stricken with somewhat that it shall not be able to bow, and for the name,
they that will do no honor to it, by bowing to it, at it, when it is recited,
when time of necessity comes shall receive no comfort by it,) be not a mere
fabulous Bugbeare and groundless Commination, warranted by no Scripture nor
Example; Much like that Lyinge Legend of Ignatius the Martyr Vincentius Syrc,
test. l. 11. c. 57. Carolus Stengelius de Sacr. Nomine Jesus. c. 27. Salmeron.
Operum, Tom. 3. Tract. 37. Magarinu^ de la Brige de sancto Ignatio. Bibl. Patr.
Tom. 1. p. 76.
late fabulous F^iers) That Jesus est amor meus, was found written in golden
Characters in his heart, not in his knees; which some now publish as an
undoubted verity, to draw on cappinge and bowinge to the name of Jesus, at
which none write, that this Ignatius

Whether the Emperor Eusebius de Vita Constantini, l. 1. c. 23. Baronius and
Spardanus Anno 311. Sect. 4.
Constantine with other of his Successor Emperors, and their Christian
Soldiers, did not engrave the name of Christ in Characters, both in their
Ensigns and Helmets, to testify, what honor and reverence they yielded to
this title of his, from whence they where styled Christians. Acts. 11.16. Chap.
26.28. 1. Pet. 4.16. Ephesians. 3.14, 15. And did not every Nicephorus Eccl. Hist.
l. 17. c. 4. Molanus Sacrar. Imaginum. Hist. l. 3. c. 1
Citizen of Antioch, when their City was grievously shaken with an Earthquake,
write the name of Christ over their Doors, and so escaped? Vnusquisque Civium
Christi nomen pro foribus inscribens, Eo modo terrae motum dispulit, quum Deus
religioso cuidam homini oraculo haec verba inscribere foribus praecepisset,
Christus:) when as we read of no such honor then given or drawn by them to
the name Jesus? And does not this infer, that the Emperors and Christians in
those times, gave as much reverence and honor to the name Christ as Jesus, if
not far more? and so it ought now to be as much capped and bowed to as it,
what ever the Bishop objects against it?

Whether Calvin, Marlorat, Bishop Alley, Doctor Whitaker, Bishop Babington,
Doctor Fulk, Doctor Willet, Doctor Ayry, and other domestic Divines in their
In their places quoted, Quaest. 27.
authorized works, resolved not in express terms; that the bowing at the
name of Jesus in time of Divine service and sermons, is not a duty either
warranted by, grounded on, or commanded in this Text? That the Sorbon
Sophisters, Papists, Jesuits, are more then ridiculous and absurd, who will
infer and prove this Ceremony from it? That it is an See Doctor Whi^^ker
Preface in his Answer to Saunders his demonstration of Antichrist, when he
derides this, as one of the Papists most absurd ridiculous arguments and
inferences.
absurd and idle consequent and nonsequitur, not deducible from it, the name
Jesus, being neither the name, nor this kind of bowinge, the bowing intended
in the Text? That those who used this Ceremony make the name of Jesus a kind
of magical if so, (as they all do) then how absurd, ridiculous,
superstitious, and magical are those, who deduce such consequences from the
Text now?

Whether this Ceremony of bowinge at the name Jesus in time of divine Service
or Sermons, be enjoined, or prescribed in the Book of common Prayer and
administration of the Sacraments, other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England? if not, (which is most certain) whether those Bishops and Ministers,
who use, or press this Ceremony upon others, or preach in defense of it, or
any others not prescribed in that Book, contrary to the express statute of 1.
Eliz. c. 2. (which enacts; that no Person, Vicar, Minister, or Curate, shall
use; and no other person or persons enforce or persuade any of them to use any
Therefore standing up at Gloria Patri, the Gosple, Athanasius and the Nicene
Creed, Praying toward the East Altars, receiving the Sacrament at the
Communion Table, Bowing to the Table, and such other, New urged Ceremonies, not
mentioned or praescribed in the Book o^ Common Prayer, are expressly against
this act, ought not to be used, and those who use them may be indicted for it,
and as such as urge, or press, or prea^h for them too.
other Rite or Ceremony in saying of Mattens, Evensonge, or administringe the
Sacraments, then such as are prescribed in the Book of common Prayer, (before
which this Act is printed) under pain of imprisonment, and other forfeitures;)
have not thereby incurred the several penalties mentioned in that Statute? And
whether they are not more conformable to the Laws and established doctrine and
discipline of the Church of England, who refuse to use this Ceremony, then all,
or any of those, who thus enforce or practice it, contrary to the provision of
Statute, (which inhibits it,) the Book of common Prayer, (wherein all the
ceremonies by Law and Parliament established in the Church of England are
comprised, so far forth as concerns Divine Service, Sacraments, and
Preachinge,) together with our Homilies, and Articles of Religion, not so much
as mentioninge or requiringe it, and so in truth, exploding it by their silence?

Obj. If any object, that the 18. Canon enjoynes it, therefore it must be used.

Answ. I answer first, that the Canon speaks not one word of bowinge or
cappinge at the name Jesus, but only says, That when in time of Divine Service
the Lord Jesus (not the name Jesus) which is not the Lord Jesus, shall be
mentioned, And none is due but wha^ Christ himself res^rves or prescribes in
his Word.
Due and Lowly reverence (not putting off the cap, since this Canon enjoynes
all to si^t uncovered in the Church,) shall be ^one by all persons present, as
h^th been accustomed etc. The Canon therefore speaking only of the Lord Jesus,
not of the name Jesus, and of due reverence; that is such as God requires in
his Word; not of bowing the knee, or vaylinge the Bonnet, which God no where
prescribes or requires as due to Christ, makes nothing for this purpose.

2. The Canon if it does any thing, only advises it by way of direction, not
simply commands it, as necessary to be obeyed. Leavinge it Hooker
E^clesiasticall Polity l. 5. Sect. 3. W^llet Synopsis Papismi Contr. genesis 9
Error. 51
arbitrary to men to use, or not to use it, and prescribinge no penalty to
those who shall omit it. Whence Archbishop Bancrofi, in his Visi^ation
Articles, not long after the Canon made, does wholly omit the urging or
inquiry after the use of this Ceremony. Bishop Andrewes^ being the first that
ever gave it in charg in Visitation Articles, at least 16. years after its
first compiling.

3. These Canons were never confirmed by Act of Parliament, or consented to by
the temporal Lords and Commons, but by the Major part of the Prelates and
Clergy in Convocation, and that with much opposition of Bish^p Rudde, and
others of the better, though the weaker side; Therefore they are See 25. H. 8.
c. 14.19.21.1. Eliz. c. 1.2. The Petition of Right, 3. Carl^, 31. H. 8. c.
26.3. Ed. 6. c. 12.8. Eliz. c. 1.13. Eliz. c. 12. Kings Ecclesiastical Laws
and all Acts touching Ecclesiastical matters.
no ways obligatorie or binding in point of L^w, either to the Clergy or
Laity; neither can they control the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. or Book of
common Prayer thereby establi^hed, by prescribinge new Ceremonies in time of
Divine Service and Sermons, not mentioned in that Book and Statute; the
Ceremonies whereof being confined and limited by Parliament, can neither be
altered nor multiplied but by Parliament, which has the Sea the Epistle of
Pope Elutheriu^ to King Lucius: Fox Acts, and Monuments 71.96. E^d. Hist.
Novor^m l. 3. p. 67. and Ioannis Seldeni 5. Stat. 2. c Jurisdiction.
Spicilegium Ibidem p. 167.168 20. H. 3^ c. 9.4. E 1. c 5.36. E. 3 c 8.2. H.
2.14. E. 3. Statute. 3. for the Clergy 2. H. 4. c. 15.5. H. 2. c. 6. M. 19. F.
3. ^itz. Jurisdiction 28.
hole power and right of making Laws and Canons to bind the Subjects, as
well in Ecclesiastical and religious, as temprall matters, as Bishop Jewel
records in his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England. part. 6. c.
2. Divis. 1. p. 521, 522. and Bishop Bilson, in his true difference between
Christian subjection and unchristian Rebellion. part. 3. p. 540, 541, 542, 543.
and the confirming of the Book of common Prayer, of the Order of making and
consecrating Priests and Bishops; Of the 39. Articles of Religion, and all
other Ecclesiastical matters, together with the very Subsedies of the Clergy
by Act of Parliament witness. As for the last clause in the Statute of 1.
Eliz. c. 2. for the publishing of new Ceremonies, by the Queen with the
Archbishops or her Commissioners advice; as it clearly shows, that Bishops
have no power, to make, or alter Ceremonies, as they daily do, nor yet the
King, unless specially enabled and authorized by Parliament (else this proviso
had been idle;) so it is personal only to the Queen, whom the Parliament knew
and trusted, not reaching to her heirs and successors, which were then
unknowen, and therefore purposely omitted and not named or trusted in this
clause, though they are since named in other clauses of this Act: so that being
personal only it quite expired with them, and descending not to her
successors, can give them or the present Prelates no power to prescribe, or
enforce either this or other rites and Ceremonies, as they do: I shall
therefore conclude all with the Words of Doctor Willet in his Synopsis
Papismi. The 9. general Controversy Error 51^ The bowing at the name of
Jesus, as it is used in Popery, to bend the knee at the sound thereof, is not
commanded in this place of Phil. 2. 10, 11. which showed especially the
subjection of all Creatures, of Turks, Jews, Infidells, yea of the Devils
themselves, to the power and judgment of Christ: The kneeling at the name of
Jesus is superstitiously abused in Popery, for the As our people now generally
do use it.
people s^oope only at the sound, not understanding what is read, and so make
an As most now do.
Idol of the Letters and Sillabes, adoring and worshipping the very name, when
they hear or see it: And again, in sitting and not veyling at the These names
then are as much to be capped and bowed to as the name Jesus.
name of Christ Immanuell, God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and
bowing only at the name of Jesus, as the Papists do. Protestants have only
taken away, the supersticious abuse of the name Jesus: Note this.
Due reverence may be used to our Savior, without any such Ceremony of
capping and kneeling. (Therefore the 18. Canon, which requires only due
reverence to be given; fullfilled without it too:) Neither do we Why then it
is now so strictly given in charge to all, and Ministers and people so severely
punished for omitting it, or refusing to use it?
bind any of necessity to use this reverence to the name of Jesus as the
Papists do, ( and our Bishops now also do as well as they,) which think,
that Christ cannot otherwise be honored. Neither do we judge or condemn
those, that do use it, being free from superstition, and As this is not so
grounded
grounded in knowledge and careful not to give offense, for The true grounds
of this Ceremony.
supersticious and offensive ignorance is not in any case to be defended.
Finally this outward reverence to the name of Jesus, was first taken up among
Christians, because (as some affirm See Lame Giles and the Appendix concerning
bowing at the name Jesus.
though without ground or warrant) of all other names, it was most derided and
scorned of the Pagans and Jews, and therefore they did the more honor it.
Note this, Therefore Protestant now when Popery is so prevalent, should rather
omit, then urge or use it.
But now there is greater danger of Popish superstition in abusing holy things,
then of profane Paganism in utterly contemninge them; and therefore there is
not such necessary and just occasion of usinge this external ges^ture now, as
was in former times, it was not used of necessity then, much less now. Our
Prelates therefore should not so enforce it, both upon Ministers and people as
they do, nor yet suspend, silence, imprison those Ministers, excommunicate and
vex those people, who out of judgment and conscience refuse to use it; it
being never given in charge or urged upon men in any Visitation Articles, till
Bishop Andrews, (the first Protestant Divine who ever presumed to make it a
duty of the Text, contray to the Tenent of all Antiquity,) nor people
presented, molested, or Ministers silenced, suspended, censured, (yea fined and
imprisoned) for not using it, or preaching against it, as no duty of the Text,
till this last worst age of ours, for ought appears by any histories, Writers,
or records; and that against all Law, all reason, religion, the Statute of
Magna Charta: c. 29. the Petition of Right, with other In Rastall Accusation.
Laws enacted for the peoples liberties, which cannot be taken from them, but
by Parliament, which never yet prescribed this strange genuflection to them.

Psalm. 119.128.

I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every
false way.

AN APPENDIX.
CHristian Reader, I shall for thy better satisfaction concerning the bowing of
the naminge of Jesus, and clearing it to be no duty of the Text, recite the
opinions of 6. our learned Writers, concerning this very Point, registered in
their authorized Works: I shall begin, with that famous learned divine William
Alley, Bishop of Exeter, Bishop Alley.
Divinity Lecturer at Paul's, in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, In his
Poor Man's Library, Tom. 2. Miscellanea Praelectionis, 3. and 5. London, Cum
gratia and privilegio Regiae Majestatis, 1571. fol. 42, 43, 88, 103, 104. God
the Father gave unto Christ (says he) not only the glory of his body, but
also the glory of his name: As it is written by Paul, Phil. 2, 9, 10. He gave
him a name, which is above all names, that In (so he ^wice renders it) the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, of things in
earth, and of things under the earth. These words ( writes he, answering the
Papists, objecting it for proof of their Maginarie Purgatory,) are not to be
understood of the worshipping of God; for, this worship, stands not in this,
that the knee should be bowed, but does especially require the spiritual
effects and motions of the mind. Paul, there, speaks of the great authority
and power, which is committed and given to Christ, by which power every
creature of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, is made subject unto him, even the Devil
himself, with all the wicked and damned Spirits, will they nill they are all
under his feet, and the words which go before show this sufficiently, for it
is said, God gave him a name, that is above all names, that all knees should
bow in that name; which words if ye will apply unto the divine worship, as
though they, which worship God be in Purgatory; Then must you grant also, that
the Devils and all the damned Spirits do worship Christ. Nomen, Name in this
is taken for dignity and honor, and so it is used almost in all tongues,
especially in the Scriptures, it is a familiar speech. Paul therefore, by this
word, Name, signifies high and great power to be given to Christ, and Christ,
to be set in chiefest degree of honor, that there may no dignity be found
like, either in heaven or in earth. It is to be wondered of some which do
co-actly restrai^e this Sentence of Paul to the two Syllables of this name
Jesus, Paul speaks of the whole Majesty of Christ. For, they which do
consider and have no further respect, but only to the two syllables of the
name, do like as one would discuss and find out by this word, Alexander, the
great prowess of the name which Alexander gatt him. But I pray you how And are
not many of our Prelates, Ministers, and people, now, in this rega^d as foolish
as they?
much more foolish are the Sorbonists, which gather by this place of Paul, that
the knee is to be bowed, as often as this name Jesus is pronounced, as though
this word were a word, which has in the very so^nd all the power included. But
Paul speaks here of the honor, which is to be given to the Son of God and
to his Majesty, and not to the Syllables either sounded or written: And in this
behalf how much (I pray you) did the pelting Pardoners, deceive the people in
selling this name in goulden or painted Papers; as though they might obtain,
either remission of Sins, or else the favor of God thereby? Thus much Bishop
Alley.

Reverend Doctor Gervace Babington, Bishop Babington.
Bishop of Worcester in his Works London, 1622 Page 195, 196, 197. D^termines
also, thus of this Text, and Ceremony: The Papists, ( says he,) strangely
descant of this holy name Jesus, but whether such stuff be worth the touch, I
refer it to you. Surely to rake up this channel were to stir up a great
deal of foul matter. For, in truth, the follies of their Writers, he^ein, are
most monstrous. But, said I follies? I might say more and say but right. Then
he relates their descants on this name and the strange Mysteries they have
found in it, to make it venerable and worthy cap and knee: After which he
says, I think the place to the Philippians ( c. 2, 9, 10.) not well
understood has and does deceive them. Indeed, they are easily deceived, that
will not search for truth, and they are justly given over to strong delusions,
that delight in error, and have not a love to the truth; otherwise, the place
to the Philippians would not be mistaken. But look we a little at the same,
and mark from whence the Apostle took it, and compare spiritual things with
spiritual things. The place is borrowed from the Prophet Isaiah, 45.23.
Isay, and therefore by conference evident, that the word, name, signifies
power, glory, honor, and authority, above all powers, glories, honors and
authorities; and bowing the knee, signifies s^bjection, submission, and
obedience of all creatures to his beck, rule, and government. For, what
material knees have things in heaven, hell, etc. This knew the ancient Father
S. Origin, and therefore writing upon the 14. to the Romans, where these words
be again, he says, Non est carnaliter hoc accipiendum, quasi caelestia, ut
Sol, Luna, Angeli, genua aut linguas habeant, sed genuflectere signi^icat
cuncta subjecta esse and cultu^ Dei obedire: These words are not to be taken
carnally, as though things in heaven, as the Sunn, Moon, Angels had knees or
tongues; but to bow the knee signifies, that all things should be subject, and
obedient to the Service of God. This knew S. Jerome also, and therefore he
says, Non at genua corporis, sed ad subjectionem mentis and inclinationem
spectat, Sicut David dicit, adhaesit pavimento anima mea. It does not belong to
the knees of the body, but to the subjection and bowing of the mind; as David
says, my Soul cleaves to the earth or dust; noting his inward humiliation,
not a real and outward matter. For, shall we think (says he) that either
heavenly things, 1. Kings, 19.18.
or all earthly things have knees? No, I say again, but by this phrase of
speech, is meant subjection, whereof bowinge of the knees is a sign. As when
he says, I have left me 7000. men which have not bowed the knee to Baal: That
is, which have not bine subject to that Idol. Fornicator libidini genu flectit
etc. The Fornicatour is said to bow his knee to Lust, the covetous man to his
riches or desire, the proud man to his pride, etc. because they are subject to
these things. Et toties Diabolo ^lectimus, quoties p^ccamus; And so often we bow
to the Devil, as we commit sin; says this good Father. The like in effect,
have, Theophilact, Beda, Ambrose, the Gloss, and some of their own Papists.
Imperio ejus subjiciantur Angeli, homine^, Daemones. To his rule and
government shall be subject Angels in heaven, Men or Earth and Devils under
the Earth. This is to bow the knee to him, and this is for him to have a name
above all names. Let it suffice both for answer to the place of Philippians and
for declaration of this popish ignorance and error. Great is the j^dgement,
certainly, when men have eyes and see not; ear^s and yet hear not; hearts and
yet understand not, and God in mercy avert it from his people more and more.
After which, he thus proceeds. This Title of Christ is given to our Savior,
to distinguish him from others that were called Jesus as well as he, who were
many, (the name in those places and times being usual) as Jesus the Son of
Nun, Jesus the Son of Iehozadeck, Iose^hu^.
Jesus the Son of Syrack, Jesus Iustus, Coll. 4, 11. and many more; Heb. 4, 7.
but none of all these was Jesus Christ. Aag. 11, 1.
Therefore this addition of Christ, Ezra. 3, 2.
you see, makes a difference betwixt this one Jesus and all those. And by the
way (if I should touch it again) does not even the common use of the name
show, that the place of the Philippians is not literally to be understood? For,
how could that name be a name above all names, which so many had as well as
he, if you respect the literal name? Therefore, needs, by name, must be meant
some other thing (as you heard before) even power, authority, rule and
government, which is in Christ above all others. Secondly, this title ^heweth
his office^ for, it signifies anointed. And this again showed the gross
ignorance or will^ull malice of Papists in so extolling the bare name Jesus.
For, whether is gre^ter, Henry a proper name, yet common to many of his
Subjects, or, King a name of office peculiar to himself? Mary or Queen, John
or Earl and Lord? As, then Henry and King be, so is Jesus and Christ:
Therefore judge, whether is greater if we were to stand upon names and
literal rules. This have some of their own well seen and confessed: But I
had rather al eadge the Scriptures. First t^en consider, the first tydinge
brought of his happy Birth under the Shepherds, mark now the Angels content
not themselves to say, Luke. 2, 11^
Unto you is borne a Jesus or a Savior, but they add much more comfort, Note
this.
which is Christ the Lord. Thereby preferring this Jesus before all that ever
were so called by a title of his office. The like we read in Matthew, Mat. 1,
16
Of whom is borne Jesus, which is called Christ. In John 7, 43
John we read of a dissension etc. not whether he were Jesus or no, but
whether he were Christ; knowing the greater moment to be in that. Again, ^
John 9, 22
Law was made to excommunicate whomsoever confessed him to be Christ, not
against calling him Jesus. In the same place you see the poor man which had
received sight to fall down and worship, when he heard the Title of the Son
of God, and not doing it before in that sort, though he knew his name to be
Jesus. In the 10. of John, John 10, 33
they would have stoned him for saying he was the Son of God, and called it
Blasphemy, but they did not for the name of Jesus. In Luke they demand of him,
Luke 22, 67.
Art thou the very Christ? not art thou Jesus? for, so they called him without
offense; and when they heard his answer, they rent their clothes: Thereby
declaring how far greater it was to be Christ, than to have the litterall
name of Jesus. All which places, with many more ought truly to teach and
persuade our Souls, to look for his Office, that has this name, which is so
comfortable, and not to be children playing with letters and sillables, and
adoring titles which that honor, that is due to the Person, as these fond men
do, salving all the matter with Used by Bp. Andrews, M. Page, and their
followers.
a foolish distinction of concomitancie, by which all Idolatry may be as well
excused. Thus this learned pious Bishop also.

Doctor Whitaker.
Regius Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, in his answer to Wm. Reynolds the
Rhemist. Cambridge, 1590, Page 398, 399. writes thus of this Text and Ceremony.
Concerning putting off our capps and making courtesies at the name of Jesus, M.
Reynolds is very earnest, and concludes in the end, that I am an Atheist and
make no account of Christ, for denying that, seeing we yield this honor of
capp and courtesy:, to the letters, name, seal, and seat of the Prince. If
this be a true argument ( M. Reynolds) as you in your vehemence would have it
seem, How comes it to pass, that Gods name among you is not honored with
like reverence of capp and knee, whenever it is heard? Will you put of your
capp, when the Prince is named, and will you make courtesies at the Popes name,
at his Triple Crown or Cross, and will you never once stir your capps or
bow your knees when God is named? Is this your Religion? Is this your fashion?
Then let me conclude against you, as you have done against me, that you are by
your own, argument very Atheists, such as make no account of God himself,
for, otherwise this conclusion of yours: (that I am such a one, for not
honoring the name of Jesus in such sort) is falsely though most maliciously
devised. The Jews and Infidels have abhorred the name of Jesus, I grant, but
no more the name of Jesus, than the name of Christ, seeing Jesus is Christ, and
Christ has as much deserved to be hated of them as Jesus, Christ's name may a
thousand times be heard amongst you, and no man mooveth capp or knee, Jesus is
no sooner sounded, but every man by and by puts of his capp, and scrapeth on
the ground with his foot; And yet not always, or in all places, but in the
Church and especially at reading of the Gospel. This may breed a more
dangerous opinion, than any it can remoove, that Jesus is better than Christ
is, and more worthy of reverence, which is wicked to imagine.

The same learned Doctor also in his preface, Doctor Whitaker
to his answer to Saunders his Demonstration concerning Antichrist, mustering
up diverse absurd consequences of the Papists and Jesuits, from sundry Texts
of Scripture; as, Christ entered into Peter's Ship; Therefore the whole Church is
Peter's; to wit, the Popes Ship. Barnabas laid down the whole price of the
field he sold, at the Apostles feet: therefore the Popes feet are to be
kissed. With many such like consequences; He concludes with this, as the
grossest of all the rest. A Name above every name is given to Christ, that in
the name of Jesus every knee should bow; therefore as often as we hear the name
of Jesus mentioned, we must uncover our heads, and bow our knees. After which
he thus proceeds: When (I say) men shall hear these and infinite such like
expositions, and argumentations of these New-masters, if there be any sense
left in them, not only of the Holy Ghost, but likewise of common judgment,
they cannot think, that a religion grounded upon those foundations, can be
firm and certain, to be preferred before all others.

For yet further proof in this 4. place, take also M. Cartwrights testimony,
who brings in the Rhemists writing thus; M. Cartwright.
( just as our Patriotes of bowing at the name of Jesus, now both write and
preach:) They by the like wickedness charge the faithful people for capping
and kneeing when they hear the name of Jesus, as though they worshipped not
our Lord God therein, but the Sillables or letters, or other material
elements, whereof the word written or spoken consists; and all this by
Sophistications to draw the people from due honor and devotion toward Christ
Jesus, which is Satan's drift, by putting Scruples into poor simple men's
minds at his Sacraments, his Saints, his Cross, his Name, his Image, and such
like to abolish all true religion out of the World and to make them plain
Atheists. But, the Church knows Satan's cogitations and therefore by
Scriptures and reason, warranteth and teaches all her children, to do
reverence whenever Jesus is named, because Catholics do not honor these
things, nor count them holy for their matter, color, sound and syllables, but
for the respect and relation they have to our Savior, bringing us to
remembrance and apprehension of Christ, by sight, hearing, or use of the same
signs; Else; why make we not reverence at the name of Ie^us the Son of
Syrack, as well as Jesus Christ? And it is a pittyfull case, to see these
profane subtilities of Heretics to take place in religion, which were
ridiculous in all other trade of life. When we hear our Prince or Sovereign
named, we may without these scruples do obeisance, but toward Christ it must
be superstitious. Thus the Rhemists. To whom M. Cartwright thus replies: This
dirt which they dash us with, is as well made of them, as thrown by them. For
it is false, that we will have no reverence to be given to the name of Jesus;
we say, that there ought to be no other honor, or reverence given to it, than
to the name of Christ, of Lord, of God: And further we say, that this
supplenesse of your knees, in bowing at the name of Jesus, is nothing but a
mask to hide the straitnes and numbnesse of all the joints of your heart and
Soul in your submission, to the Commandment of Jesus. For, it is well known
that your knees which are cammel like in the courtesy which you give to this
name, are joyntlesse and Elephantlike in your obedience unto his precepts, to
whom this Name appertains. Again, we testify that this is a Will Worship,
not only trouble^ome to the assembly, by irksome scraping of the pavement and
unseasonable interruption of that which is read or preached, but pernicious
also in regard of the suspision, that it may move of the inequality of the
Persons in Trinity, whilst a title of the Son being honored with capp and
knee, the other Persons have neither bonnet veiled, nor foot moved to
testify any honor to them. The vaunt of Scripture for proof of this worship
must needs avaunt. For this, being the only stay and prop, which they can
pretend out of Scripture, makes nothing for it.

First, for that this name of Jesus in this place signifies not

Secondly, for that he understands not by this word, knee,

Thirdly, for that the kneeling and courtesying here spoken this Service. And,
seeing the name of Jesus in the Son of Nun, and in the High Priest of that
name, of whom only we are assured that they were rightly thus called, is the
same with the name ascribed unto Christ, Mark this.
we see not by wha^ reason honor may be withdrawn from the one which is
given to the other, especially considering they had not this title of Jesus in
their own right, but in the right of Christ, whose figures and lively
representations they were. And if others might withhould it, yet you which give
the same honor to the Image, which you give to the thing it self, cannot be
conceived, so to do. What will you answer to this, that as you are in danger
of superstition in the former point; so in this you are charged with
profaneness, who neither capp nor knee at the name of Jesus out of the thing,
when the name is the same, and as well to be honored without, as within the
Church? Which Service you profane in the Cross, Note this.
whereunto you do honor or homage, as well when it stands in the field, as
when it is erected in the Church or Chancells. To your other reason, that in
reverence we uncover our heads at the name of Princes: We answer, that, if
it were so; the civil hono^r is not tied to such strict laws, as is the
Divine, therefore there is greater freedom of choice in the one than in the
other. And it is known what is said of civil honor, that it rather stands
on the will and judgment of the Giver, than of the Taker, which is clean
contrary in the honor of God, which depends on the pleasure and commandment
of him that takes it, not of him that gives it. Thus far M. Cartwright.

To him I shall annexe that late learned and reverend Divine D. Ayray.
Provost of Queens Colleidge in Oxford, who upon this text of the Lecture 30,
upon, Phil. 2. Page 345. to 348.
Philippians, writes thus: And has given him a Name, etc. Where we are not
to understand that God gave unto Christ after his resurrection any new Name,
which he had not before. For, as before, so after, and as after, so before,
he was, and is called the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the true Light of
the world, Faithful and true, Holy and just, the Apostle and High Priest of
our profession, a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, the Savior
of the World, the Prince of Peace, the Mediator of the new covenant, the Head
of the Church, the Lord of Glory, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, the
Son of God, and God. Neither had he any name after his resurrection which he
has not before. But by a name in this place is to be understood, Glory, and
Honor, and Dominion, and Majesty, and Power over all things created (as the
same word is, elsewher used, as Ephesians. 4, 21.) So that, when it is said, God
has given him a name above every name; The meaning is, that God having raised
up Christ Jesus from the dead, has so highly exalted him in the heavenly
places, thath he has given him all Power, both in Heaven and Earth, all
Dominion over all creatures whatsoever, and the same glory, which he has with
him, from the Beginning, so that now he reigns and ruled with him, King over
all, and blessed for ever. Which he there proves and paralells with Heb. 2, 9.
Ephesians. 1, 20.21. John, 17, 5. Matthew. 18.18. and then conclude^ thus: To knitt
up all in a word, Christ, God and Man, after his resurrection, was crowned with
glory and honor, even such as plainly showed him to be God. There to rule and
reign as sovereign Lord, and King, till he came in the clouds, to Accipit
potestatem judicandi sicut Paulus Apostolus ait, Et dedit ei nomen, quod est
super omne nomen ut in nomine Jesus omne ge^^ flectatur. St. Isiodor.
Hispal^nsis Comment. in Gen c. 30. p. 301.2.
judge both quick and dead: After which, he proceeds in these words: Ibidem
Page 153, 154, 155.
Where by the name of Jesus we are not to understand the bare name of Jesus,
as though it had the virtue in it, to drive away Devils, or as though at the
very sound of it, all were to bow their knees; For, at the name of Savior
(which is the same with Jesus) none boweth, and the name of Christ, Emanuell,
of the Son of God, of God, which are names no less precious and glorious,
than is the name of Jesus True it is that bowing at the name of Jesus, is a
custom, which had been much used, and may without offense be retained, when
the mind is free from supe^stition; But to bow and kneel at the very sound of
the name, when we only hear the name of Jesus, sounding in our ears, but
know not what the name means, savoureth of superstition. By bowing the knee,
the Apostle here means, that subjection which all creatures ought continually
to perform, and which all creatures shall perform to Christ Quando nosiris
adspicimus oculis ineffabile c^elorum Regnum, rursusque ex alia part
conspiciemus supplicia horrenda, tormentaque expaveseenda revelari atque
apparere Medium vere horum adsistere omne hominum gentes omnemque Spiritu^ a
primo formato Adam: ^^que ad ultimu^ omnium hominu^, cunctosque faciem
praecedentes atque adorantes, secundum illud Scripturae, vivo ego dicit
dominus: quia mihi curtantur omne genu. Tune quoque Sermo implebitur Apostoli
dicentis in nomin^ Jesus Christi, omne genu slectetur caelestium, terrestium,
and infernorum, and omnis lingua cantilebitur, quia Domin^^ Jesus Christus in
gloria Dei Patris, Ephesians. Syrus de apparit Crucis tempore judicij, p. 230. p. 703.
in that day, some unwillingly and to their confusion, as the Devils and
wicked men their instruments; for, so the Lord by his Prophet uses the same
phrase of speech, where he says Isai. 45, 23.
: Every knee shall bow to me, that is^ shall be subject to me and worshipp
me. Here then is a duty prescribed, necessary to be performed of every
Christian, which is, to glorify him who is exalted in the highth of glory, both
in our bodies and in our Souls, to worship him with holy worship, to subject
our selves to him in all obedience unto his heavenly will. For, worthy is the
Lamb that was killed to receive all power, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and praise and glory. The Angels in heaven, they glorify the name of
Jesus, in that they are always ready to execute his will, and do whatsoever
he commands them. This also is that holy worshipp wherewith we ought to
worshipp him, and to glorify his name, even to be Apoc. 5.12.
Hearers and Doers of his will in his word, to obey his will, to walk in his
Laws, and to keep his commandments; not the bare and outward capping, and
kneeing of the name Jesus, but principally obedience to his will, that is
named, is the honor, which here he accepts of us. For, as, not every one
that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven. So, not every
one that boweth at the name of Jesus, shall enter into his Kingdom, but he
that does ^is will, and walks in his ways. Saul when he was send to slay
the Amalekites, thought to honor God greatly by sparing the best of the Sheep
and Oxen, to sacrifice unto him; But it was said unto him Mark this Bowing.
: Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and Sacrifices, as when
his voice is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken
is better than the fatt of Rames: So you happly think you honor our blessed
Savior greatly, when you bow your selves at every sound of his 1. Sam. 15.22.
name; but behold, to obey his will is better than capping and kneeing, and
all outward Ceremonies whatsoever. Yet mistake me not, I beseech you, as
though I thought, that the names of Jesus Christ, of the Lord, of God, of the
Father, of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost, were names of ordinary account or
reckoning, or to be passed over, without reverence, as other names; Nay,
whenever we hear or speak or think of them, we are to reverence the
Majesty of God signified thereby. And fearful it may be to them, that think
or speak of them prosanely, or slightly, or upon each light or trifling
occasion, or o^herwise than with great reverence and fear, that the Lord may
not hold them guiltless. Mark this,
But this I say, that neither the sound of those Syllables of Jesus, nor the
name of Jesus, should af^ect us more than any other names of Christ, as though
there lay some virtue in the bare word. But whenever we hear, or think, or
speak of him, we are to reverence his Majesty, and in the reverend fear of
his name to subject our selves unto his will. This is a precept of that duty,
whereby we must glorify Christ Jesus. After this in the 3. Lecture he
proceeds to prove, That by bowing of the knee in this Text, is meant the
subjection of all creatures unto Christ, and that this text shall be actually
and principally ^ulfilled, before his Tribunal only in tho Sede a dextris
meis, donec mundi finis and consummatio veneri^, and mittam te judicem vivorum
and mortuorum: Et TVNC s^ectet omne genu caeles^ium, terr^strium and inferorum
potentiae tuae, tuique Inimico ^rosternentur velu^ calcandum Scabellum pedum
tuoru^ and reddes unicuique secundum opera sua. Haec veritas sit interpretatur
and exponit si modo velis assentire and approba^e Gregentius Archiepisc.
Tepheusis, Disp. cum Herbano Iudaeo, Bibl. Patris Tom. 1.5^ ps. 1, p. 924.
general day of judgment. So that by his express resolution he concludes.

1. First, that this name Jesus is not the name above every name mentioned and
intended in this Text of Phil. 2.9.10.11. 2. Secondly, that bowing or capping
at this name is not here enjoined. 3. That no more capping or bowing is to be
given to the name Jesus, then to any other names of Christ or God. 4. Fourthly,
that the bowing and capping at this name only is sup^rstitious, and attributes
some virtue to the letters and syllables of the name it self. 5. Fif^ly, that
the bowing of every knee here mentioned, is and shall be Dum dicit sancta
sanct^, populus vicissim cl^mat, unus Sanctus, unus Jesus Ch^istus in gloria
Dei Patris. Quod a Paulo scriptum resonabit in extrema die, quando Jesus
f^ectetur omne genu, and omni^ lingua confitebitur, etc. Simton. These.
Archiep. de D. Templo. Bibl. Patr. T 12. ps. 1. p. 880.
p^incipally performed in the day of judgment, before Christ's Tribunal, and
not till then. 6. Six^ly, He here tacitly intimates, that such as are most
observant of this Ceremony, are ignorant supersticious persons, and most
disobedient to Christ, in their lives and actions; and that we cannot bow to
one name of Christ, as, to his name Jesus, more than to another, without
appa^ent Superstition.
Finally, our learned Doctor William Fulke, in his Confutation of the Rhemists
Notes and Testament, on Phil. 2. Sect. 2.8.10. determines thus: First IT IS
CERTAIN, that the bowing of the knee at the sound of the name of Jesus IS NOT
COMMANDED NOR PROPHESIED IN THIS PLACE. But it pertains to the subjection of
all Creatures to the judgment of Christ, when not only Turks and Jews, which
would y^eld no honor to Jesus, but even the Devils themselves shall be
constrained to acknowledge that he is their Judge. Secondly, the capping and
kneeling at the name of Jesus is of it self an indifferent thing (therefore no
duty of the Text) and therefore may be u^ed superstitiously as in Popery, here
the people stoup at the name when it is read, not understanding what it
means, or, what is read concerning him. And also in sitting and not veyling
at the name of Christ, Emanuel, God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
and bowing ONLY at the name of Jesus. It may be used also well ( perchance)
when the mind is free from Superstition, in sign and reverence of his
Majesty, and as in a matter wherein CHRISTIAN LIBERTY OUGHT TO TAKE PLACE. And
DVE REVERENCE may be yielded to our Savior (and so the very words of the 18.
Canon which our Bishops much insist on, fullfilled) without any such outward
Ceremony of capping and kneeling.

Thus this great Mall of the Papists Doctor Fulke; whom Doctor Willet follows
in his forecited passages. What the Fathers and foreign Writers have
determined of this Ceremony, has been elsewhere manifested, not one of them
making it a duty, either commanded or insinuated by the Text; I hope therefore,
the zealous Patriots of this new-coyned duty, will forbear the urging of it,
until they shall prove it a duty of the Text, by argument, scripture, reason,
and authority, not mere will, and power, their present eagern^ss^, in
enforcing it on men, against their conscience and the expr^sse s^atute of 1,
Eliza. c. 2. (which inhibites all other rites, and Ceremonies to be used in
time of divine Service or Sermons, than those prescribed in the Book of Common
Prayer, which does not so much as once mention, muchlesse enjoyne the Ceremony)
showing to be a mee^^ superstitious humane invention, to usher in, advance and
set forward some Popish designs, ( as, bowing to Communion-Tables, Altars,
Crucifixes, Images and the Hostia,) not any divine institution, tending to the
advancement of Gods glory, Christ's honor, or the peoples spiritual good, for
then these superstitious Popish Innovators, would never be so zealous to
promote it, with such tyranny, violence, and earnestness, as now they do,
without either Law, or statute to authorize them.

FINIS.

