LAME GILES HIS HAVLTINGS OR, A BRIEF SVRVEY OF GILES WIDDOVVES HIS
Confutation of an Appendix, concerning Bowing at the name of Jesus.

Together with a short Relation of the Popish Original and Progress of this
groundless novell ceremony: Wherein Mr. WIDDOVVES his manifold Forgeries,
Oversights, and Absurdities are in part detected; and the point, Of bowing at
the name of Jesus, together with that, of cringing to Altars and
Communion-tables, is now more largely discussed.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, an Vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inn.

PROVERBS 26. 3. 5. A whip for the horse, a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for
the Fools back. Answer a Fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his
own conceit. Horatius Sermonum lib. 2. Satyr. 3. O major tandem parcas insane
minori. Imprinted for Giles Widows, MDCXXX.

To his much honored Mother, the famous unparalleled University of Oxford,
WILLIAM PRYNNE, an vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inn, wishes all Grace,
Honor, Happiness, and Tranquillity.
MOST illustrious, most renowned Foster-Mother, (if it may be lawful for me, a
quondam-sonne of yours, even now to style you so;) the tender regard I have of
your unspotted fame, has enforced me, out of my filial duty, to acquaint you
with some notorious Errors, and more than ridiculous Oversights of an
Individuum-vagum-sonne of yours, come forth in print of late under your
Authority, as same (I hope Mendax fama noces. Propertiu^l. 4. Eleg. 2. p. 191.
but lying) has reported; which if you correct not in due season, (as I
presume you will) are like to make the world believe, that Ignoramus, to
Players and Plays, (whom both Fathers and Pagan Authors rightly style, the
plague of souls) remove in times of pestilence from infected places where they
have brought a plague, to places not infected.
avoid the Plague, has fled from Cambridge unto Oxford, this Vacation; and
that you have given him, not only entertainment, but a new Commission, both to
pen, to print, to act, and publish to the world, his This is Mr. Widows 2.
Book.
Second part. This Son of yours, which I mean, is one Giles Widows, a
Mark. 12. 42, 43.
poor haulting widow in truth for brains and learning, of which he never
had two mites: of whom I cannot say as Acts 26. 24.
Festus did of Paul, that too much learning did make him He has been once or
twice distracted.
mad, but want of wit. These Errors and Oversights of his, with which I here
acquaint you, are contained in a new divulged Book, much like the Author;
entitled, The lawless kneelesse schismatic Puritan, etc. In confutation of
which, I need say no more to such as know him, but, that Giles Widows
Rectour of St. Martins Church in Oxford, was the Author; for whose use alone,
(if we may believe the Title) it is imprinted, there being nothing in it fit
for other men's use, unless it be to make them laugh these winter-nights. It
was my chance in my late passage through Oxford toward London, to hear, that
this ridiculous Pamphlet, (which made mirth enough in writing) was newly
preferred (and that by public license) to the Press, to make the Author of
it (no simple Ignoramus) a fool in print. Whereupon I repaired to the
Printing House, where I found the written Copy, (which I only turned over,
not perused) so mangled, so interlined and razed by Mr. So have I been
informed, that he had the perusal of it.
Page, and others who perused it before its approbation, that there was scarce
one page in all the Coppie, in which there were not several written Errors,
Absurdities and Impertinencies quite expunged; and if all of them had had the
sign of the Cross upon their faces, as well as some, the Printer
questionless should have had no work When I beheld so many Errors crossed in
the written Copy, (perchance to please the Author, who in his Page 71. 72.
Book has made the Sign of the Cross a necessary Ceremony, he means (I
take it) for to cross out his Oversights;) I expected none at all in the
printed pages; on which I had no sooner cast mine eyes, but I espied diverse
Bedlam Errors, and those so gross, that I thought such visible notorious
malefactors (whose very faces did proclaim their guiltiness, though their
tongues were mute) could never pass through an University press, and not be
pressed quite to death. Whereupon taking pity on the crazie Author, with
whose many known infirmities I was of old experimentally acquainted, whiles I
was a resident in Oriell college; and withal compassionating the oversight of
the Licenser, who for fear of crossing out all the Book, (as he had crossed
out very much) permitted such foul gross Errataes to pass uncrossed;
(perchance because the Anti-puritan Author was here turned puritan, I hear
that Mr. Widows was very angry with Mr. Page, for crossing out so much of his
book as he did.
in good earnest, and would not suffer these Infants of his pure brain to be
baptized with the Cross, for which he deserves a Censure:) For the
anticipation of that great scandal and disreputation which I presaged might
light on you, Dear Mother, for giving the least show of approbation (...)
ridiculous erroneous toys as these; as soon as I arrived at London, I wrote
two Letters, the one to your present Vice Chancellor; the other to your Son,
Giles Widows. wherein I informed them privately of these ignorant absurd
Mistakes, which were like to fly abroad in print; advising them to correct them
in due season, before they were divulged, for fear they should eclipse your
honor, and blurre their own repute. The Copies of which Letters I shall here
set down, that so your self and others may take notice, how fairly, how
sincerely I have dealt both with you and them; and so see what cause I have to
write thus to you in print, to clear both my own and your reputation.

The Letter I wrote to Mr. Vice Chancellor, (in which I enclosed a short
Survey of Mr. Widows his Errors, in this his Confutation of my Appendix, was
this.
SIR, the reverend respect I bear unto my much honored Mother, the University
of Oxford, and to your self as her Vice Chancellor, has induced me to
present you with the enclosed short Survey of Mr. Widows his Answer to my
Appendix, authorized by you for the press, (as friends inform me) through
which it has well-nigh passed: In which there are so many gross mistakes; so
many false, absurd, impertinent Quotations; so many illiterate, ridiculous
brainsicke passages, exposing the frenticke Author to the lash, if not your
self the Licenser, and the University her self (whose Vice Chancellor (...)
^^thorized, and whose Son has penned, has published so vain erroneous a
Book) to unexpiable disgrace: that though they give an infinite advantage to
my cause, (which needs no Patron but it self;) yet I have chosen rather to
advise you privately as a friend, in time for to correct them before they fly
abroad, in print, then to hazard your own, or the Universities reputation, in
suppressing, in repenting the publication of them, when it is too late. For
mine own part, I desire not to crush Mr. Widows his Infant in the cradle, as
though I feared it, there being nothing in it worthy the Press, much less a
Reply: but my desire is to conceal his known weakness, (if not the
Universities and your own Oversight) by a timely discovery of his authorized
gross mistakes; which if they should take printed wings, and fly about, (as
they are almost ready to forsake their nest) I shall be forced in my own
defense, to pass such a public Censure on them, as will not only scare the
often distracted Author out of his crazy wits, but draw perchance some blot of
disreputation on your self, who should not suffer such cackling ^^raying
wild-geese as these, to fly Cum privilegio from our Oxford presses. Thus
referring this short enclosed Survey of a whole field of tares, and wild-oates,
(which I would wish you to mow down in time) unto your grave consideration; I
commend you with my best well-wishes unto Gods direction: Resting

Lincolnes Inn. October 20. 1630. The unfeigned tenderer of your own, and the
University of Oxfords reputation, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
The Survey enclosed in this my Letter, (which I shall now entitle, Lame Giles
his haultings; Or, The Brainlesse All-knee Superstitious Anti-puritan) was this
which follows.



A brief Survey of Mr. Giles Widows his Answer to Mr. Prynne his Appendix.
IN this Answer of M. Widows, I shall desire you to consider these six
particulars.

First, his injurious imputation of many false Quotations to me, which
Quotations are all true. To instance in some few.

Page 5: He writes in general; This is thri^^ repeated; page 5, 60. and 68.
lest Dulman his reader should forget it; and at last he prints it in hls Errata
too, that all might know it is but a trebl^ Error.
That I have falsified Whereas he can never prove, that I have falsified one
of them: The most of the Fathers and Authors quoted in my Appendix he never
as yet so (...) as read; to conclude then that I have falsified them (...) ever
he has viewed them, is but an over-auda(...) Censure, yea a forged Calumny;
as may app^^^^^^ these particular Instances.

Page 16: He taxes me for misquoting Calvin on Phil: 29, 10. asfirming; Yet
himself in his Errata confesses it to be an Error.
That Calvin makes no mention of the Sorbonists in this place of his. Whereas
if he will be pleased to use the help of his spectacles to review his Calvin
writing thus of the Sorbonists in that very place. Plusquam ridiculi sunt
Sorbonici sophistae, qui ex praesenti loco colligunt, genu flectendum esse,
quoties nomen Jesus pronunciatur, quasi vox esset magica, quae totam in sono vim
haberet inclusam. Which saying of Calvin is repeated and approved by Marlorat
on Phil: 2, 9, 10.

In the same 16 page, o ridiculous ignorance! he blames Magdeburgian Centuries:
in the 2. Cent: cap: 5: where there is nothing concerning bowing at the name of
Jesus, no mention of the Sorbonists: When as This himself acknowledges in
his Errata, under which Title his whole Confutation (which is nothing else but
a Chaos of all-compacted Errors) may be most aptly placed
my quotation in my Appendix, is Dr. Willets Synopsis Papismi: (which is
divided into Centuries) Century 2. Error. 51. Where Dr. Willet handles this
point of Bowing at the name of Jesus, by way of Appendix; condemning it for a
Popish Error, a superstitious Custom contrary to their own popish Canons and
Decrees. An Authority which Mr. Widows can never answer.

In the 17 page, he writes; That page 398, and 399. of Dr. Whitaker his Answer
to Mr. William Rainolds Refutation, are false Quotations. But if Mr. Widows,
or any man else will be pleased to peruse this Answer of Dr. Whitakers, printed
at Cambridge by John Legate, Anno 159^, p: 398, 399. (the Impression which I
followed in my Appendix) he shall find the Quotation true both for page and
matter; and Dr. Whitakers opinion point-blanke against the very bowing at the
name of Jesus only, which (says he) may breed a more dangerous Error than
any it can remove, to wit, that Jesus is better than Christ, which is wicked to
imagine.

injuring Pope Gregory the 10: and that in two particulars: first, for
misquoting, secondly, for perverting his words. The misquoting is, of Sexti
Decretalia, lib: 2, Tit: 23, cap: 2: for Lib: 3: De Immunitate Ecclesiae, cap:
Decet: 6. The perverting is in my putting of only, for chiefly. For the
misquotation, if it please Mr. Widows to survey my Anti-Arminianisme, p: 193,
number 5, in the margent; he shall find there, that I have quoted the Book
right: For it is there, Sexti Decretalia, lib: 3, Tit: 23, cap: 2: and so it is
in my Appendix too, in most Coppies; if it be not so in his, let him blame the
Printer, not my self; so that the book is not misquoted by me. And whereas
Mr. Widows to correct my false Quotation, writes; that it is, lib: 3, See
Sexti Decretalia Paris. 1507. fol. 187. the Edition which I follow.
De Immunitate Ecclesiae, cap: Decet: 6: I must needs inform him, that, De
Immunitate Ecclesiae, has reference not to lib: 3: but to Tit: 23. and for the
chapter, it is cap: 2: not cap: Decet: 6. So that his correction is false, my
Quotation true. For the perverting of Pope Gregory's words, I must needs
reply, that I have not falsified Pope Gregory's words, but Mr. Widows has
grossly misrecited mine: For whereas I write, that Pope Gregory enjoynes men
to bow [especially] at the Mass; Mr. Widows would thrust in, only at the
Mass: So that Mr. Widows grossly injures me (not I Pope Gregory) in these
and sundry other particulars of this nature,

Secondly, his falsifying and gross mistake of Councels, Fathers, and other
Authorities alleged by him in his answer, to justify the bowing at the name
of Jesus. For instance in all the Councels, and Fathers, which he quotes for
the Antiquity of this duty.

Page 22. To bow at the name of Jesus is the 20. Canon of the Council of Nice:
whereas that Canon only enjoynes men Quoniam sunt in Dominica die quidem ad
orationem genua flectentes, and in diebus Pentecostes, placuit de hoc sanctae
and magnae Synodo, cunctos in omnibus locis consonanter et consenti. enter
stantes Dominum ora^ redebere, Surius Tom, 1. p 347.
to pray standing, (not kneeling) between Easter and Whitsontide, and on every
Lords day, in token of Christ's resurrection.

Page 23. The Council of Ephesus consisting of 200 Bishops against Nestorius,
has inserted bowing at the name of Jesus among their Acts. So Binius: Tom: 1:
cap: 5: p: For page 687 Edit. Coloniae Ag^ip: 1606. the Edition in Oxford
Library, which Mr. Widows (who has converted all his books into good
liquor) follows.
685: I here being no such thing in Binius, nor in that Ephesine Council,
which commands men only, to worship Jesus with the worship of God: but not to
bow their knees at the mention of his name; which they do not at the recital
of the name of God.

Page 21. He quotes Cyril of Alexandria, for this bowing: and what are his
words? Adoramus Emanuelem, etc. Ergo, we must bow at the name of Jesus: A
strange inconsequent: Ergo we must bow at the name Emmanuel, (which none ever
do) had been far better.

In the same page, he quotes Athanasius to Adelphius page: For page 53. 54. Edit
Parisiis 1608^ in Si^ Thomas Bodlies Library.
69. And what are his words? Ideo adoravit, etc. Athanasius speaks it of rerum
natura, when the rocks did cleave, etc. at the passion of Christ: Mr. Widows
applies it to the Church, in bowing at the name of Jesus: A gross mistake.

Page 22: He quotes St. Hierom on Esaias c: 45. for bowing at the name of Jesus.
What are his words? Moris est Ecclesiastici, etc. (I will add the concealed
words to make some sense) Christo genu flectere: It is an Ecclesiastical use
to pray kneeling to Christ: Ergo to bow at the name of Jesus. Risum teneatis
amici? Is not this more ridiculous then Ignoramus?

Page 16, 17. He misquoteth Calvin, Marlorat, the Centuries, Mr. Cartwright,
and Dr. Whitaker, who all conclude against him in this point of bowing.

Canon of the Council of Nice, from which he must argue thus: The Council of
Nice commands men to pray standing (not kneeling) on Lords-dayes, and on
Pentecost, in Of which custom, with the reason of it, you may read, Council.
Carthag 6. Can. 20. Council. Constanti^op. 6. Can 90 Council ^utenens^ sub Car.
magno, Can. 37. Gratian. Distinctio 3. Justin Martyr, Explie. Quaest. Christ. ^
Gent. positarum. Quaest. 115. Hierom. adver. Luci^erianos, c. 4. And these
prayers were styled Stationes. Tertu^^d Vxorem, cap. 3. etc advers. Psychicos
lib.
remembrance of Christ's resurrection: Ergo to bow at the name of Jesus. Page
23. He quotes the Council of Ephesus; from whence he thus disputes: The
Council of Ephesus enjoynes men to worship Christ crucified, as God: Ergo to
bow at the name of Jesus. The like Inferences he brings from Cyrill Athanasius,
Hierom, Calvin, the Centurists, Dr. Whitaker, and others: page 16, 17, 21, 22:
(and so page 40 to 47.) All these accord, that Christ must be adored, because
he is God: Ergo we must bow at the name of Jesus. Were ever such consequents
heard from an University man, a Logician, a Page 1. line (...)
Metaphysicall Divine, who is better acquainted with Essentialls, Essentiates,
and their modalities, (as it seems by his 2, 3, 13 and 14 pages) then with the
question now in controversy, or with any Article of his Creed?

Fourthly, the Tautologies, Chasmes, confusion, ill-connexion, and
immethodicall disorder of his style, his matter, which has no more dependancy,
order, art, or method, then Tom Coriots Travells, or Lady Davis her Comment
upon Daniel, whose halting style Lame Giles has followed.

Fifthly, his vain idle terms of art, brought in by Essentialls,
Essentiates, and their modalities, which have confounded the fanatique
Professor, (to wit the Author) and overthrown his chair: page 2, 3: His
real moral Correlation, his internal Relations, Entities, Causations,
Inherence, Products, and mutual dependence, etc: which Mr. Prynne understands
not: page 14, nor yet Mr, Widows himself as I suppose; if his brains be now
as crazie as I have known them.

Sixthly, his absurd invective scurrilous railing passages Which Church, the
first reformers of our Church, and all our godly Martyrs highly magnified,
especially for her Orthodox Doctrines, how ever some contemn^ and hate her now.
Geneva, which Doctrine is the same with ours: page 6, 7. A passage so vile, so
venomous, that it deserves at least the Ferula, if not the rod of his Mother
University, who would blush to authorize such absurdities, such lies, such
passages and frentique Treatises for the Press, as these.

Ex ungue leonem; by this short Survey of some few pages, you may judge of all
this Animals book, how false, how vain it is.

This (my dear Mother) was the Survey of some few printed pages of Mr.
Widows his Confutation, which I sent enclosed in my Letrer to your
Vice Chancellor, who had time enough to correct them, to suppress them ere
the book came forth.

At the very selfsame time I wrote another friendly Letter to Mr. Widows, in
which I admonished him of these his oversights, advising him to correct them
ere his Confutation came to public light; the Contents of which Letter^ (that
so you may see my condour toward him, who is so full of causeless gall and
bitterness toward me) I have here subscribed.

MR. Widows, I understand that your Answer to my Appendix, about bowing at
the name of Jesus, is almost finished at the Press; in which Answer of your^
there are sundry false Quotations, Inconsequents, Oversights, and gross
mistakes, which for College and old-acquaintance sake I thought good to
admonish you of in time, that so you might correct them before you publish them
to the world, for fear of after-claps. It is not the common use of adverse
Writers, to acquaint one another privately with their slips before hand; but my
love and mildness toward you is such, in regard we were once
fellow-collegians, that I would rather anticipate, than take advantage of your
errors. Mistake me not, as though I wrote this to you to Yet even a fool when
he holds his peace, is counted wise, Prove. 17. 28.
suppress your answer: alas, it is so illiterate, so absurdly impertinent in
most things, that I rather pity than fear it: My only meaning is, to
forestall your printed Oversights, (not your Answer:) which are so many, so
absurd, that most will deem you crackt-braind when you penned, if not the
Licenser hare-braind when he authorized them. What these your Misquotations,
Oversights, and Absurdities are, you may learn from Mr. Vice Chancellor, to
whom I have now sent a Survey of them, which I would wish you to peruse. To
give you a touch of some of them in a word: Dictum sapienti sat est. Page 16.
You tax me for misquoting the Magdeburgian Centuries, when as I quote not
them, but Dr. Willets 2. Century of Popish Errors: Error: 51. Page 17. You
censure me for misquoting Dr. Whitaker: p: 398, 399: which quotation is true in
that Edition of Cambridge: 1590: which I follow. Page 16: You reprehend me for
misquoting Calvin on Phil: 2: 9, 10: as if he made there no mention of the
Sorbonists; as in truth he does. Page 22. You vouch the 20 Cannon of the
Council of Nice, which commands men to pray standing on Lords-dayes and
Pentecoft, as a direct authority for bowing at the name of Jesus. Page 21, 22,
23. You absurdly misapply the passages you quote out of the Council of
Ephesus, Cyril, Athanasius, Hierom, and others, to bowing at the name of Jesus,
when as their words import not any such thing, as you may see, if you will but
peruse them once again. These few, together with an hundred such like
oversights, which I spare to mention, are sufficient to inform you, how open
you lie unto my lash, which you may chance to feel, if you will needs make
your self an Ignoramus, or a Fool in print. Stripes are prepared for the
back of Fools, Prove: 19, 29: and I have some in store for you, if you expunge
not these your errors ere they come to public light. Lo, I have forewarned
you as a private Friend, and if you take not this my warning; you must excuse
me if I fall foul upon these your Oversights as an open Adversary. Thus much
for your bowing.

For your Schismatic Puritan, which you strive to justify in your first and
second pages. I must inform you of 4 mistakes committed in it: The first is in
the very Definition of a Puritan, which most besides your self define to be,
not, A Protestant Nonconformist, as you; but, Est vir ftultus, inconsultus,
expers ratione, mente captus and deceptus, etc.
A Protestant scared out of his Mr. Widows has bin once, and most say, twice
distracted; and would you not think so by his writing? therefore by this
definition he is twice a Puritan.
wits: and how near this definition may concern your self, and whether it
makes not you, at least a simple, if not a See John Whites Way to the true
Church, sect. 4. number. 19, p. 141 who writes, that Papists are the Puritans.
double Puritan, I leave you to consider. The second is in the Genus of a
Puritan; which you make a Protestant, but falsely, yea absurdly; since a
Protestant is not the Genus of Novatians, Catherists, Donatists, or Papists;
(who were never yet reputed Protestants, and were long before the name of
Protestants was known;) who yet are true and real Puritans both by your own
and others confession. The third is in the Differentia Essentialis of a
puritan; which, say you, is a Nonconformist: which difference, as it excludes
all Papists from being Puritans, because they are most conformable to any
ceremonies, especially to this, of bowing at the name of Jesus; (which
contradicts your first Species of a Puritan, in which you include the Papist:)
so it makes all foreign reformed Churches, Puritans, (which I hope you dare
not say) they being not conformable to our Cerememonies: and withal it thwarts
Bishop Mountagues distinction, of Conformable and Inconformable Puritans: of
Puritans in Doctrine, not in Discipline: of See his Appeal to Caesar
Tantum non in Episcopat^ Puritani: and I hope you dare not control this
learned Bishop. The fourth, is in the Species of a Puritan; which say you are
ten; there being ten several See his Confutation, page 2.
Puritanities: But this is only Endymionis somnium. For the Perfectist, the
first Species; which say you is the Novatian Catherist and Papist, are no
Protestants; Ergo no Species of a Paritan, whose Genus you make a Protestant.
Moreover, the Brownists and Anabaptists (to omit the other several Species of
Puritans, which have no specificall difference between them) are no
Protestants, neither in doctrine, nor in discipline: Protestants disclaim
them, and they Protestants, from whom they sever and divide themselves even
altogether: therefore they are no Puritans, because no Protestants. These
several Oversights I thought good to recommend to your second and more refined
sober thoughts; which if you impudently publish to the world without fear or
wit, before some caftigations pass upon the^, are as so many wandering Bedla^s
very like to taste of the whipping-post: and I doubt not but their stripes will
prove your smart. Thus desiring your favorable acceptance of this my friendly
admonition, together with the resolution of these ten Queries in your Reply to
this my Letter, or in some Appendix to your Answer: viz.





Zanchius, Whitguift, or H^^ker, which testify, that bowing at the name of
Jesus was used in the time of Arrius?

Whether there be any one Father, who speaks directly

Whether Popes, or Popish Councels and Authors

What difference is there between Papists and Protestants since Protestants
condemn them for this Ceremony, and yet do use it?

What reasons are there, that men should bow only Jesus, more than at the
name of Savior, which is the same with Jesus; or at the name of Emmanuel, God,
or the like?

Why men should rather bow at the mention of the The reason of this Quere I
have now added; with the reasons of the two ensuing Queries.
since Christ himself tells us, John 5, 23: That all men must honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father, and no otherwise: and Phil: 2, 10:
informs us, that Christ by this his exaltation is only, in the glory (as the
Fathers and others read it) not above the glory of God the Father, at whose
name none ever bow?

Whether the sole bowing at the name of Jesus, be Dr. Willet, Dr. Fulke,
Pareus, and other Protestant VVriters? And why men should rather bow at the
pronunciation of the name of Jesus, than at the sight of it in a Bible, a wall,
a glasse-window, or in the frontispice of a Jesuits works, before all which
it is prefixed; since at the name of Jesus, may be as aptly applied to the eye,
as to the ear; to the sight, as to the sound or hearing of the name of Jesus?

Whether the not bowing at every recital of the name Jesus: because every part
of divine service, especially This himself acknowledges; p. 84. l. 28, 29, 30,
1.
kneeling in prayer, prayers unto Jesus, and in the name of Jesus, are nothing
else but an ample testimony of our service, thankfulness and subjection to him
as our Lord and Savior) rather than a duty at other times, when men show less
reverence, and submission unto Jesus; and are more apt to abuse and profane his
sacred name?

I take my farewell of you; commending your Errors to your own castigation,
and your self to Mr. Vice-Chancellours better instruction: and so I rest

Lincolnes Inn. October 20. 1630. Your loving Friend, WILLIAM PRYNNE^

TO these Letters of mine I never yet received answer, though they were both
delivered before this Confutation was fully printed. Which Confutation now
flying abroad without any castigations of these forequoted Errors,
notwithstanding these two Letters, I thought it my duty with all convenient
speed to acquaint your Motherhood with them, with these two Letters, and the
enclosed brief Survey, that so you might the better discern the Prove. 14, 16.
The fool rages and is confident.
brazen-faced impudency of your Son Giles Widows, who has published these
his Errors to the world, to your disgrace, for all my friendly advice; that so
you may more justly tutour him at least, if not chastise him for these his
frenticke Oversights, which may draw a greater blurre upon your self, than
ever they can cast on me, or him, whose reputation is so small, that he is not
capable of disgrace.

And now, Dear Mother, that you may know what cause you have in time to
censure, to correct this untutered Son of yours, (whom you may do well to
set to school some twenty years longer, before you suffer him to print any
more, at leastwise under your authority, which I suppose he has now abused;)
I shall desire you to take into your grave consideration, and then into your
Censure, these few ensuing particulars, which I have gleaned since his book
was published.

To pass by his false Quotations of Page 21, 23
Binius Council: Tom: 1, page 670, for 671: and page 685, for 687. Edit:
Coloniae Agrip: 1608. Of Page 21.
Athanasius to Adelphius, page 69, for page 53, 54, Edit: Parisijs: 1608. Of
Page 28.
Irenaeus, page 51, for page 38, 39, Edit: Basiliae, 1571. Of Page 28.
Hilary, lib: 9, De Trin: p: 135, for 64, Edit: Colon: Agrip: 1617. Of Page 31,
32
Cyrill Thesauri, l: 8, p: 99, for p: 190, Edit: Parisijs 1604: the Editions in
Sir Thomas Bodlie his Library, which Mr. Widows (who has exchanged all his
Books for Cans) has followed: together with his Quotation of Page 32, 41
Athanasius Oration 2. Contra Arianos, for lib: 3, Contra Arianos, p: 101.
Which perchance were only Errors of the Printer, though they are not
corrected: as are these for which he taxes me: page 67, viz These Errataes I
could not correct for want of figured pages in my Appendix.
Theophilact, for Theophilus: St. Cyril: lib: 17, for lib: 11, on St: John: and
lib: 13, for lib: 12, Thesauri: Gaiae Papae, for Gaij: Leo Epist: Decret: Ep.
14, 81, and 95: for 15, 83, and 97. Aelredus Sermo 1, for Sermo 3: Koming stein
for Koneigstein: the chapters and pages of all which are truly vouched. I shall
remember you only of these his following gross mistakes.

Page 44: he quotes Origin on Philip: 2: there being no

Page 67: he taxes me for quoting Ambrosij Hexaemeron: Critique!) for
Hexameroon: When as the printed Titles both of Coloniae A. grip 1616. Tom. 1.
p. 1. to 52.
Ambrose, and the Latin Basiliae 1565.
Basil: are Hexaemeron; as I have quoted them: not Hexameroon; there being no
such Latin word in any Latin Dictionary or Author that I have ever met with.

Ibid: page 67: he writes; that St. Cyrils 5 lib: in Hesai^^^ 362: is a Non
ens; when as in the very Edition of my Cyril (Parisijs 1608) which himself
does follow, it is both Ens and Verum too.

he averres, that Primasius says nothing on Rom: 14. yet he has a Commentary
on that chapter; and on the 11 verse he writes thus: Omnes enim stabimus ante
tribunal Dei: Deum esse Christum qui judicaturus est non dubites: Scriptum est
enim, Vivo ego, dicit Dominus; quoniam mihi flectetur et genu omenis lingua
confitebitur, etc. Where this bowing of every knee to Christ, is referred by
this Father to the day of judgment.

Ibide^, (to show himself more than an ordinary Ignoramus) he writes, that
neither Luther nor Ferus has a Postil on Palm Sunday. When as Luther (as you
may find in his Editio^ of Postils: Arge^torati, 1533, fol: 229, etc.) has 3
several Postils on Palm Sunday; and Ferus has no less then 10 Postills on
that very day: Witness his Postillae, pars 2. Antwerpiae 1554: fol: 156: to
184: and Lugduni 1554: fol: 849 to 896. That Ferus nor Luther then have no
Postills on Palme-Sunday, when as they have 13 at the least, is a part of the
Antipuritans See his p. 21 l. 14.
Legend, worthy to be registered in See his p: 68. l. 16.
St. Whetstones works, in which Mr. Widows (as it seems by this) is too
well read.

Ibidem, he records, that Mr. Tyndall has nothing but a Prologue on the
Philippians: whereas in his English Bible, which the statute of 34 and 35 H. 8,
c: 1: does mention; he has Notes upon this very Text of Phil: 2: 9: 10: (which
Mr. Widows it seems has never read) where he makes the subjection of all
things unto Christ at last, the only bowing at the name of Jesus intended in
that Text.

Ibidem, he concludes, that because Petrus Mattheus writes the (...) of the
Popes Constitutions, and Philip Matthaeus writes civil law; ergo there is no
such book as Matthaeus his Postills, which I have quoted: Whereas if he had
but viewed the very two first lines of the selfsame Page 322.
page of the Oxford Catalogue, out of which he has quoted Petr: and Phil:
Matthaeus, he might have found Johannes Matthaeus his Postills, in Epistolas
Dominicales Viteburgae: 1581: reimprinted. Viteburgae 1584: where there is at
p: 173: to 179: (if Mr. Widows understands what Dominica Palmarum, is in
English) a Postill on Palme-Sunday. Besides him there is one M. Matthaeus
Iudex, who has written Postills on all the Dominicall Epistles, and See ibid.
fol. 184 to 192.
on the Epistle on Palme-Sunday too: printed islebij 1578: both these interpret
this text of the Philippians, as I have vouched them. For this learned See his
page 1. line ult.
Metaphysicall Divine then to conclude, that there is no such book, as
Matthaeus his postils, because Phil: and Petr: Matthaeus have writ none such,
is but the gross Nonsequel of a silly Ignoramus, who should have known more,
and written less.

Ibidem, he writes, that Chytraeus has no Postills: (for Chrytaeus, for
Chytraeus, which was but the Printers transposition of one letter.) Indeed
there are no such Postils of his in the Oxford Catalogue; and thence grew this
error, with that of Luthers and Ferus not having Postils too. But Mr. Widows
must know, that all printed books are not in the Oxford Catalogue: I have at
least 50 my self, which the Oxford Catalogue (increased much since the last
Impression) never mentions; and among the rest David Chytraeus his Postils on
the Dominicall Epistles, printed Vitebergae 1576. is one; where p: 156 to 169:
there is a Postill on Palme-Sunday, where he interprets the text of Phil: 2. 9^
10. as I in my Appendix do.

Ibidem, he writes, That Mr. Charke was but a Kentish When as he was a reverend
And the Lecturer of Lincolnes Inn.
learned Divine, appointed by the Sea the Conference at the Tower, etc. London
1583, the fourth days Conference.
State to dispute with Campian the Jesuit in the Tower: and if any man will be
pleased to peruse his Conference, he shall find him the acutest Disputant of
all those learned men that conferred with him. These 8 last gross oversights
(worthy to be registered in the next new Impression of Ignoramus, or the ship
of Fools) are included within the circumference of 15 lines: And how many such
like may you then expect throughout the Book? But I pass from these to worser
Errors.

Page 72, 73, he writes thus: That the ring in marriage is necessarily deduced
from Matthew: 19 v: 4, 5, 6. The sign of the Cross, from Matthew: 16, 24.
Kneeling at the Lords Supper, from Yet when this Psalm was penned, there was no
Sacrament to kneel at, much less to adore.
Psalm: 95, 6. I thought procession had not been so ancient.
Procession, from Mat: 28, 19. The Surplesse, from It seems the Saints shall
wear surplesses in heaven.
Rev. 19, 8. Standing at the Creed, from Ephesians. 6. 14. The 4 cornered Cappe, (
Risum teneatis?) from Ephesians: 4. 11, 12, 13, 14. The penitential sheet, (which
me thinks he should never have ranked in equipage with the surplesse) from
Matthew: 11, 21. And then he concludes thus, (though Durandus out See his
Rationale Div. Offic.
of whom he has stolen it, dares not do it.) These signs, which are express
Scripture, (o the monstrous See his page 1, l ult.
Metaphisicall Divinity of this Page 2, l. ult, its his own phrase.
fanaticke Professor, who dares make these things, any thing, Scripture) are
universal and so necessary Ceremonies of the Catholic Church. And is it not
time for you (good Mother) to pack away this Son of yours, (not to See his
p. 29 l. 19.
Amsterdam, or New England) but to Bedlam, for this his mad Divinity?

Page 25, 26. He argues, that bowing at the name of Jesus is a duty of the
Text: and why? Spell, and then it is But that at the several namings of Jesus
in time of Divine service every knee or head shall bow, cannot be found or
spelled out of this Text.
At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, etc. An Argument much like to that
of the Papists Hoc est corpus meum, Mat: 26, 26. Ergo, the bread is the very
real body of Christ. Tu es Petrus, etc. Mat: 16, 18. Ergo, Peter is the head
(they should rather say the foot, because the foundation) of the Church. This
is all he has written to prove it a duty of the Text: And this all is nothing,
as I have largely proved in my Appendix.

Page 28. He writes, that, In nomine, and ad nomen: So the original Fathers,
and most Latin and English Translatours read it. See my Anti-Arminianisme, p.
192.
In the name, or at the name of Jesus are both one: And Grammar, In a place, or
at a place, ( viz. in a Tavern, or at a Tavern; in an Alehouse, or at an
Alehouse) are both one to Mr. Widows; you may be sure to find him in or at
either, Non obstante the 75 Canon. But are in, and at a place all one? This is
not always true. In loco, and ad locum, differ much; though apud locum, and in
loco, may accord. No man can say that, Our Father which art in heaven, is the
same, with Our Father which art at heaven: in heaven, and at heaven are not all
one. Stars in heaven, is good sense: stars at heaven, nonsense. Mr. Widows
is in his Cappe, his Surplesse, Gown and Hood, when he reads 8 a clock
prayers, this is good English: (though even then he bows not at the name of
Jesus, as The 12 day of October last I heard Mr. Widows read prayers at 8 of
the clock at night in St. Martins Church in Oxford; and though he read all the
prayers standing, yet he never so much as bowed his head or knee at the name
of Jesus, (which he pronounced with a Stentorian voice) neither in the chapter,
Creed, not Collects.
I saw by experience since this book of his was in the Press, which makes me
think he believes this Doctrine of his to be erroneous, because he puts it not
in practice;) But to say that he reads prayers at his Cappe, his Surples^e,
Gown or Hood, is almost as great a solecisme, as to aver, that Mr. Widows
wit was not in, but at his head, when he made this curious observation. But
what if in a place or at a place, in a time or at a time, etc. be all one: are
therefore in nomine, and ad nomen, in the name, and at the name of Jesus, all
one? They differ in words, in phrase, cases, in sense; therefore they are not
one. See it in instances. To pray in the name, and at the name; to believe in
the name, and at the name; to cast out Devils in the name or at the name of
Jesus, are different things: Therefore to bow In nomine Jesus, etc. is never
translated, at the name of Jesus in any place of Scripture else. See Acts 2,
38. c. 7, 6, c 4, 18, c. 5, 40, c. 8, 16, c. 9, 27, 29, c. 1^, 18 1 Cor. 5, 4.
Ephesians. 5, 20, Col 3, 17 2 Thessalonians, 3, 6. Why then should it be thus englished here,
when as it is hardly sense, or English, as these insta^cestestifie.
in, or at his name, is not the same. If any should say, I believe at God, for
I believe in God At the name of God Amen, for In the name of God Amen; At the
Kings name, for in the Kings name: Would not children hoote at him for a
Nonsense Fool? Yet this is Mr. Widows his English, Grammar, and Divinity;
much like his englishing of Athanasius his Latin, and others, in his 21, 22,
and 23 pages, whom he englisheth as punctual witnesses for bowing at the name
of Jesus, when as there is not one such word, or intimation of it in their
Latin.

Page 30, 31, 32, 33, 81, 82. He does by way of necessary That Jesus was more
humbled, hated, persecuted and derided of the Jews, than Christ: (as if Jesus
and Christ were not one person:) That the name of Jesus was more vilified and
hated than the name of Christ; and therefore for this only reason (which he
much insisteth on) we must bow at the name of Jesus only, not at the name of
Christ, of Savior, and the like. A false conclusion from dangerous premises,
which sunder Christ and Jesus, who are see Mat, 1, 16. Luke 2. 11. 26. Acts 18.
5. 1 Cor. 1. 13.
one in all things, in humiliation, in passion, in exaltation, in power, in
Majesty, dominion and glory. If we look upon our Saviors humiliation and
passion, the Scripture informs us, that Christ was incarnate and born into the
world, as well as Jesus, Mat. 1, 16, c: 2. 4. Luke 2 11 That See Artic: of
England 3, 4. of Ireland 30. accoidingly.
Christ was mocked, crucified, humbled, despised, put to death for our sins,
and nailed to the Cross, (which is always styled 1 Cor. 1, 17 Gal. 6, 12. 14.
Phil. 2, 18. Col. 1, 7, 20. not Jesus his Cross
the Cross of Christ) as well as Jesus: Mat: 26, 63, 67, 68. Acts 3, 18, c: 4,
26. Gal: 2, 20 c: 3, 13 c: 6, 14. Rom: 3: 8, c: 8, 34, c: 5, 8, c: 14, 9. 1
Cor: 15, 3, c: 1, 23 1 Pet: 1, 19, c: 2, 21, 23, 24, c: 3: 18, c: 4, 13, 14,
16. That we were redeemed, sprinkled from an evil conscience, justified, and
made nigh unto God, by the blood, the precious blood of Christ, [not Jesus:] 1
Pet: 1, 19. Hebr: 9, 14. Rom: 5, 8, 9, Gal: 2, 17. Ephesians: 2, 13. That God was
in Christ [not Iesus] reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor: 5, 19, 20.
That Christ [not Iesus] redeemed and made us free, Gal: 3, 13, c: 5 1. Hence
Luke 24, 26, and 46: Christ himself speaks thus to his Disciples: Ought See
Acts 17. 3, c. 26. 22, 23.
not Christ [not Iesus] to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory? Thus it is written, and thus it behooveth Christ [not Iesus] to suffer,
and to rise from the dead the third day. And hence the Minister by our Churches
appoinment, in the administration of the holy Co^mmunion, says thus: Take and
eat this in remembrance that Not Jesus.
Christ died for thee, etc. Drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was
shed for thee, etc. Christ therefore was humbled, suffered and did as much for
us as Jesus; and therefore in this regard deserves as much reverence, love and
duty from us, as does Jesus. If we reflect on Christ's exaltation; the
Scriptures certify us: First, that See the Collects on Easter day which begin
thus, Christ (not Jesus) is risen again, etc. and Artic. 4.
Christ was raised again from the grave; and that by his resurrection all his
shall be raised up again at the last: Rom: 6, 4. 1 Cor: 15, 12, 13, 14, 22,
Col: 3, 1. Secondly, that Christ [not Iesus] is exalted to the right hand of
God his Father, 1, 7, to 28. c: 3, 1. 1 Cor: 15, 23, to 29. Thirdly, that God
[not Iesus] and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places with Christ, Ephesians: 1. 3. c: 2, 5, 6. Fourthly, that God has
gathered together all things in Christ, [not Iesus] and that Christ [not Iesus]
is all and in all: Ephesians: 1, 10. 23. Col: 3, 11. In this regard therefore Christ
is as venerable, as worthy to be bowed to, as is Jesus If we consider the
offices and titles of Christ, we shall find Christ as venerable every way as
Jesus. For is Jesus a Savior? So is Christ: Luke 2, 11. John 4, 42. Ephesians: 5,
23. Phil: 3, 20. Is he a Mediator? So is Christ: 1 Timothy: 2, 5. 1 John 2, 1. Is
he the head of the Church? So is Christ: 1 Cor: 11, 3. Ephesians: 4, 15. c: 5, 23.
c: 1, 20, 22. Is he a King, a Lord, a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? So is
Christ, Acts 2, 36. Luke 23, 2, c: 2, 11. 1 Cor: 8, 6: 1 Timothy: 6, 14, 15, 16:
Col. 3, 24. Rev: 11, 15, c: 12, 10, c: 20, 4^ 6. and by our own Churches
confession after the Communion received; Glory be to god on high, etc. O Lord
God, heavenly King, etc. for thou only art holy, thou only art the A good
Comment on Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.
Lord, thou only O Christ [not Iesus] with the holy Ghost, art most high in
the glory of God the Father. Is he the Judge of all men? So is Christ: whence
the day of judgment is styled the day of Christ, and the place of judgment,
the judgment seat of Christ, [not Iesus] 2 Cor: 5, 10. Rom: 14, 9, 10, Phil:
1, 10 and 2^ 16. Is he the Son of God? So is Christ, Luke 9 20^ Acts 4. 37,
Mat: 16, 16. Is he God equal with his Father? So is Christ: Tit: 2. 13. 2
Pet: 1, 1. c: 2. 16, 17. and the second See Article of Ireland 19.
Article of our Church. Is he the Messiah? So is Christ: John 1^ 41. chap: 4.
25. There is nothing recorded in Scripture of the humiliation, passion,
exaltation, offices, titles, or sovereignty of Jesus; but the very selfsame
thing is recorded of Christ: Whence these two names, Witness the common phrases
in the new Testament; Jesus Christ, Christ Jesus, and the like.
Jesus and Christ, are for the most part joined together throughout the whole
new Testament. If then we respect the person, offices, passion, or exaltation
of Jesus, we shall find that he deserves as much capping and bowing when he is
called Christ, as when he is styled Jesus. If we now reflect upon the names of
Christ and Jesus, as they have reference to our Saviors person, we shall
find: First, that our Savior was buffeted, spit upon and derided of the high
Priests and Jews by the name of See 1 Pet. 2 21, 22, 23.
Christ, Matthew: 26, 67, 68. not by the name of Jesus: and that they rent their
clothes, and crucefied him, not for that he called himself Jesus; but because
he said he was Christ the Son of the living God, Matthew: 26, 63, 64, 65.
Secondly, that the Scripture when it speaks of our Saviors sufferings, does
always style them, the 1 Pet, 4, 13 14, c. 5, 1, c. 2, 21, c. 3, 17, 18, 2
Cor. 1, 5, 6, 7 Col. 1, 24. and Acts 26, 22, 23
sufferings of Christ, not of Jesus. Thirdly, that the Saints which suffer
hatred or persecution for our Saviors sake; do suffer for him as he is styled
Christ, not Jesus: Witness 1 Cor: 4, 9 10, 11. We are made a spectacle unto
the world, and to Angels, and to men: We are fools for Christ [not Iesus]
sake: We are weak, we are despised, we are naked, persecuted, reviled,
buffeted. And 2 Cor: 12, 10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities,
inreproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ [not
Iesus] sake. Witness John 9, 22. Where the Jews agreed, that if any did
confess that our Savior was Christ, [not Iesus] he should be put out of the
Synagogue. and Mat: 24, 9. They shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall
kill you, and ye shall be hated of all Nations for my Names sake. And what name
is this? If any, then certainly the name of Call. 6, 12. Lest they should suffer
persecution for the Cross of Christ.
Christ, not Jesus: Witness, verse 5. Many shall come in my name saying, I am
Christ: and verse 23, 24. If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ,
or there, believe it not: For there shall arise false Christ's, etc. Hence Hebr:
11, 24. We have mention of the reproach of Christ, [not Jesus.] Hence Col: 1,
24: St: Paul writes, That he did fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ [not Iesus] in his flesh. Hence Phil: ^, 13: he styles
his fetters, his bonds in Christ, [not Iesus] and v: 20, 21, Christ shall be
magnified in my body, that is, in my corporal sufferings for him; For to me to
live is Christ, [not Jesus.] Yea hence both Paul and Peter (as if they had
purposely written to resolve this point) inform us: Phil: ^, 29: That it is
given to us in the behalf of Christ [not Iesus] not only to believe on him,
but also to suffer for his sake. And 1 Pet: 4, 13, 14, 16. That if we be
reproached for the name of Christ, [not Iesus] happy are w^, inasmuch as we are
partakers of christ's sufferings. Therefore (says he) if any man suffer as a
Christian, (derived only from the name of Christ) let him not be ashamed. The
name therefore of Christ, [not Iesus] was the name in which Acts 4, 26, The
Kings of the earth stand up, etc. against the Lord and against his Christ.
Christ and Christians suffered most reproach, contempt, and persecution: and
for this name did the Martyrs always suffer in the primitive Church; as the
recited Scriptures and See Eusebius, Sozeman, Baronius, the Centuries;
Tertulliani Apolog and Plin, Epist, l: 10, Ep: 97.
Ecclesiastical stories testify. Mr. Widows his Doctrine therefore, Page 36
to 42.
That Jesus was humbled and suffered more than Christ: That God only in the
name of Jesus humbled himself, and suffered shame and rebuke: and that
therefore in the same name Jesus he will be most of all magnified to the worlds
end, more than in any other Title; because no other name of his but Jesus [no
not his name Christ] did suffer shame, reproach, It seems by this, that the
name of Jesus did only die, and suffer for us, not his person; or else his
name together with his person
death and hell: And therefore for this one reason only (for he insisteth on
no other but this alone) we must bow at the name of Jesus only, not of Christ:
is a most false, absurd, erroneous, if not wicked doctrine; which not only 1
Cor: 1, 13.
divides Christ from Jesus, and Dr: Whitakers Answer to will: Raynolds p: 399.
makes them different in degree and dignity; reviving the ancient Heresy of
Cerinthus, who affirmed, Irenaeus advers: Haereses l: 1, c: 25. Epiphanius
contra haereses, Haeros. 28. Baroniu^, and Spondanus, Anno 60, sect. 2, Anno
97, sect. 7. and the Centuries, 11.
That Christ and Jesus were two; that Christ descended into Jesus after
baptism in the form of a dove; that Christ flew back again out of Jesus at
the time of his passion, and that Jesus only suffered for us, not Christ, who
continued spiritual and impassible. (An heresy, of which the sole bowers at
the name of Jesus are far more guilty, than their oppugners are of
Arrianisme, which some ridiculously cast upon them, though themselves be most
of all guilty of it, since Arrius denied not the eternal Deity of our Savior,
etc. under his name Jesus which he seldom or never mentioned; See Athanasius,
Hila^y, Nazienzen, Basil, Epiphanius Eusebius Pamphilus, Socrates Scholast. and
others in their works against the Arrians; and Baronius, and Spondanus, Anno
318. sect. 9. accordingly.
but under his name, Son of God, Word, Wisdom, Christ, and the like; at
which names Bp. Andrews, Stengelius, Mr. Widows, with others, in their places
quoted in my Appendix.
our opposites teach, men must not bow at all; and so are Arrians by their own
confession, if the not bowing at our Saviors names may make men Arrians; a
conceit not heard of till of late.) But likewise contradicts the whole new
Testament and the forequoted scriptures. For confutation of which I need use
no other texts, than Gal: 3. 13. Christ [not Jesus, as Page 37.
Mr. Widows misrecites it] has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
made a curse for us. 2 Cor. 13. 3. 4. Christ [not Jesus, as hee] was crucified
through weakness, etc. The Page 37.
texts on which he grounds this Error; And this very text of Philippians 2.
which as it begins, continues and ends with the name of Christ [not Iesus] See
v. 1. 16. and 30. So it joins Christ and Jesus together in the very depth of
humiliation: v. 5. etc. Let the same mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus,
etc. and in the height of exaltation: v. 11. That every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. And so are they:
Acts 4, 10 12. a place much stood upon in this controversy.
Christ Jesus, both named and conjoined in the clause of debasement: Jesus
Christ is Lord; both mentioned and united in the clause of advancement in this
very original text, on which all the controversy is founded. Whence the
Contents of this chapter in our authorized English Bibles, run thus: He
exhorts them to unity and all humbleness of mind by the example of Christ's
[not Iesus] humility and exaltation. All which does give a fatal overthrow to
this brainsick dream; That Jesus was more humbled, and so more honored than
Christ: and puts a period to the present controversy, which has no other
pillar to support it but this notorious error; and that other coupled with it,
page 37. to wit, That Jesus is the greatest name of God, proposed to us to
worship, etc. because it was humbled most, and therefore most advanced above
all other names, yea above the name of God, or Christ. The falsenesse of which
position that you may more evidently discern, I shall here propound some
unanswerable Arguments, to prove; That the name of Jesus is not more
honorable, more worthy cap and knee; yea See Bp. Babing tons Exposition of the
Catholic faith p. 196, 196, 197. where this point is excellently proved.
not so eminent, so glorious, and so not so venerable among Christians, as the
name of Christ.

First, the name Jesus is only a Bp. Andrews p 475, etc. Salmeron Tom. 3,
Tract. 37
proper personal imposed on our Savior, to distinguish him from other men:
whereas the name Christ, is a Bp. Babington: qua l.
name of office, including all his several offices of King, Priest and
Prophet, to Acts 4, 26, 27. c. 10, 38. Heb. 18, 9. Psalm. 45, 7. 8. Luke 4, 18.
Isay 62, 1.
which he was anointed: As therefore the names of Emperor, King, Prince,
Earl, Lord Keeper, etc. are far more honorable than the names of Henry,
Charles, John, Thomas, etc. which are common to the meanest subjects; because
the first are titles of honor and office; the other only ordinary proper
names imposed for distinction sake. Even so must the name of Christ, a name of
office, of unction, be far more honorable than Jesus; a name though Mat. 1, 21.
originally derived from the office of a Savior, yet imposed on him at his
nativity as a proper name, to difference him from other men.

Secondly, That name which is peculiar to our Savior as a Savior, is more
honorable than that which is common to him with other men. But the name
Christ, is a name Mat 1, 16. Luke 2, 11 See Argument 4. Yea Christ's unction
authorized, enabled him to be a Jesus, a Savior, a King, etc.
peculiar to our Savior as a Savior: none ever being styled Christ in
Scripture, but he alone. Whereas the name Jesus wa^ common unto others, viz.
To Jesus the son of Nun, Hebr, 4, 8. To Jesus surnamed Iustus, Col. 4, 11. To
Jesus the son of Iosedech, Hag. 1. 1. Ezra 3. 2. To Jesus the son of
Sirach, The Prologue and Title to Ecclesiasticus. and See Josephus Baronius,
Nicephorus, Epiphanius, and others.
to others. Therefore it is more honorable than Jesus.

Mat: 1. 21. 25. Luke 1, 31. c: 2, 21. Whereas his Jesus proprium nomen est
assumptae carnis; Christus est nomen dignitatis. Beda Exposit, in c. 1, Mat.
Tom. 5, Col. 1. Hoc nomen Jesus significat solam naturam humanam, sed hoc nomen
Christus dat intelligere utramque naturam, in que intelligitur Divinitas
ungens, and humanitas uncta. Aquinas 3. part, Quaest. 16, Artic. 5, and
Quaest. 17 Artic, 1. See Ire^aens l: 3, c. 20 and the second Article of our
Church accordingly.
name Christ, was given him in respect of both his natures: Acts 10, 38. Hebr:
1, 8, 9. See here page 21, 22. and Vrsini Catech: pars 2, Quest: 31, p: 204.
Ergo, it is not so excellent, so venerable as his name Christ.

See Bishop Babingtons Exposition of the Catholic faith, p. 196, 197,
accordingly.
does distinguish our Savior from all others who were styled Jesus, and gives
him an excellency, a precedence above them all. Witness, Mat. 1. 16. Of whom
was borne Jesus which is called Christ. Luke 2, 11. Unto you is borne a Jesus,
or Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Matthew: 27, 17. Jesus which is called
Christ. Acts 2, 36. Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has
made the same Jesus whom you have crucified both Lord and Christ. Acts 17, 3:
and 18, 5, 28: Paul preached and testified both to the Jews and Gentiles, and
convinced them mightily, that Jesus was the Christ. 1 John 2, 22 Who is a liar,
but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? 1 John 5, 1: Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God. John 20, 31, These things are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus in the Christ the Son of God, and
that believing ye might have life through his name. All which do likewise
imply, that Christ, is a title of office, more honorable by far than the
bare name of Jesus: Ergo, it must needs be more venerable and excellent than
the name Jesus is.

Fifthly, That name by which our Savior was most of Yea Saturnius,
Carpocrates, Cerinthus, Marcus, Marcion, Cerdon, Apelles, Theodotus, the
Ebionites, Samosatenians, Nestorians, and other heretics; are reprehended by
the Fathers, for denying the Deity, the humanity, the two natures etc. of
Christ, (not Jesus.) See Tertul. De Praescript. advers. Haereticos: Irenaeus,
and Epiphanious advers. Haereses; Augustine de Haeresibus; Eusebius,
Nicephorus, Sozeman, Theodoret, Baronius, the Centuries, and other
Ecclesiastical histories; and Mr. Rogers analysis on the second Article of our
Church, Propos. 1: therefore it was the most known name of our Savior. See
Romans 15, 19, 20; 1. Cor. 1, 23, c. 10, 4, 16. Col: 1. 27. c. 2. 8; yea the name
of our Savior as he is God, though some absurdly, if not heretically deny it.
Christ, not Jesus. Hence the Magi, Mat: 2, 4, inquire where Christ [not Iesus]
should be borne. Hence John Baptist, when the people enquired who he was,
confessed, that he was not the Christ, [not Jesus.] John 1, 20, and 2, 28:
Hence the people confess, that our Savior was the very Christ, etc. John 7,
26, 27, 31, 41. Hence the woman of Samaria demanded, Is not this the Christ?
and the Samaritans themselves replied, Now we believe and know, that this is
indeed the Christ, [not the Iesus] the Savior of the world. John 4, 25, 29,
42: Hence the Priest and Pharisees demanded of him, whether he were the Christ
or not. Mat: 26: 63: Luke 22, 67: Hence the Devils themselves cried out, and
said, Thou art Christ the Son of God, for they knew that he was Christ. Luke
4, 41: Hence the Angels tell the Shepherds, that there was borne to them a
Savior, which was Christ [not Iesus] the Lord. Luke 2, 11: and the Apostles
being demanded of our Savior, who he was; make this reply by Peter in all
their names, Thou art Christ, [not Iesus] the Son of the living God: Thou art
the Christ of God. Mat: 16, 16: Luke 9, 20: John 6, 69: Hence Acts 2, 36, he is
said to be made both Lord and Christ: and Acts 4, 26: The Kings of the earth
stand up, and the Rulers are gathered together against the Lord, and against
his Christ, not Jesus. Hence, Rev: 11, 15. There were great voices in heaven,
saying, These subsequent texts do lively discipher the power and kingdom of
Christ, by his name Christ, not Jesus
The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ [not Iesus] And Revel; 12, 10: Now is come salvation, and strength, and
the Kingdom of God, and the power of his Christ, etc. Rev: 20, 4, 6. And I saw
a throne, etc. and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: They
shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reagne with him a thousand
years. Hence S. Paul proclaims; Romans 1, 16
That he was, not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: 1 Cor. 1, 23 c. 2, 2.
That he desired to know nothing but Christ crucified: Ephesians: 3, 8
That he preached to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: Phil: 3.
7, 8.
That he accounted all things loss and dung, that he might win Christ: Phil
1, 23.
That he desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which was best of all.
All which with infinite other texts of Scripture, (together with all the This
all their Indexes testify in which Christus, is 20 times and more recited for
one Jesus.
Fathers, and our own Articles of England, Artic 2, 3, ^, and Artic. of
Ireland 29, where our Savior is always styled Christ, but never Jesus.
Articles, who more commonly style our Savior in all their Writings Christ
than Jesus) sufficiently confirm my Minor, and so by consequence the
conclusion too.

the word, and Gospel of [not Jesus:] Rom: 1, 16. ^: 15, 19 20 29. 1 Cor: 9,
12, 18. 2 Cor: 2, 12. c: 4, 14. Gal: 1, 7, 15, 16, 18, Phil: 1, 27. 1 These: 3,
2^ 2. These: 1, 8. Ephesians: 3, 4, Romans 6, 4. 1 Cor: 1, 17. Ga^: 3, 27.
Baptism of Christ, and 1 Cor. 10, 16
the communion of the body and blood of Christ, [not Jesus.] Thirdly, it
denominates his Church, which is styled, the Church, and Churches of 16, 16.
not of Jesus. The body, flesh wife, and members of Christ, 1 Cor: 12, 7. Ephesians:
4, 12, 13, 15. c: 5, 23, to 33. Col: 1, 24. not of Jesus: Yea Christ himself 1
Cor: 12, 22. As the body is one, etc. so also is Christ, not Jesus. 1 Cor. 4, 1
2 Cor. 11, 13, 23. Col, 1, 7. 1 These 2, 6.
Apostles, Ministers, Gal. 1, 10. c. 6, 6. Col. 4, 12.
servants, and 2 Cor. 5, 19, 20.
Ambassadors of Christ, not Jesus: 1 Cor. 4, 15.
Instructers in Christ; 2 Cor. 2, 14 15.
a sweet savor of Christ; and 2 Cor. 8, 23, 5.
the glory of Christ, not of Jesus. Fifthly, it denominates his Saints, who are
styled, Christians, [not Iesuites] Acts 11, 26: c: 26, 28. 1 Pet: 4, 16: The
members of Christ, Ephesians: 5, 30, 31; 32: 1 Cor. 6, 15. not of Jesus. The Epistle
of Christ, 2 Cor: 3, 3: not of Jesus: Heirs annexed with Christ, and heirs of
God through Christ, [not Jesus.] Rom: 8, 17. Gal: 4, 7. Babes in Christ, 1 Cor:
3, 1: and Servants 6, 5, 6. Hence Christians are said, to be in Christ and
Christ in them, Gal: 2, 20. Ephesians: 3, 17. 2 Cor: 5, 17. To have Christ formed
in them, Gal: 4, 19. To be baptized into Christ, and to put on Christ, Gal: 1,
21. c: 3, 37. Rom: 16, 5, 7. To be Christ's, Gal: 3. 29. c: ^, 24. 1 Cor: 3, 23.
c: 11. 1. 1 Cor: 15, 23. 2 Cor: 10, 7. To be all one in Christ, Gal: 3, 28.
Ephesians: 1, 10. To be in obedience and subjection unto Christ, [not Iesus] Ephesians:
5. 23, 24. c: 6, 5, 6. 2 Cor: 9, 13. and 10, 5, 7. as to their sovereign Lord
and Master. And to be Priests of Christ, [not of Iesus] Rev: 20, 6: c. 1, 6.
Sixthly, it deno^^nates the Kingdom of Christ, Ephesians: 5, 5. Rev: 11, 15. not
of Jesus. Therefore it must needs be more venerable and glorious among
Christians, than the name Jesus is; which gives no such denominations to them
to these, as it.

Lastly, Christians have as much cause to reverence and See p. 20, 21 22, 23.
That Christ died for them, Ephesians. 5, ^, 25.
loved, saved, redeemed them, and the like: So it records, That Christ gives
them light, Ephesians: 5, 14. That Christ has made the^ free, Gal: 5, 1. That Christ
does strengthen the^ to do all things Phil: 4, 13. That Christ does forgive
them, Col: 3, 13. That they serve the Lord Christ, Col: 3, 24. That Christ is
their consolation, 2 Cor: 1, 5. Phil: 2, 1. That Christ is in them the hope of
glory, Col: 1, 27. That Christ is their life, and that their lives are hid with
Christ in God, Col: 3, 3, 4. That Christ lives in them, and that they live by
him, Gal: 2, 20: That Christ dwells in their hearts by faith, Ephesians: 3, 17:
That Christ is for them an high Priest of good things to come, Hebr: 9, 11:
That God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor: 5, 19: That
Christ loves them; that this love of Christ to them surpasses knowledge; and
that nothing shall be ever able to sever them from Christ's love, which
constrains them to live unto him, Ephesians: 5, 25 2 Cor: 5, 14: Ephesians: 3, 13: Rom:
8, 35. That Christ is all and in all, yea all unto them: Col: 3, 11: Ephesians: 1,
20, 23. Which considerations made Paul to prise Christ so much; as to Phil. 3,
7, 8.
count all things loss and dung to win Christ; and to desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, which was best of all. Phil: 1, 23.
Therefore certainly, Christ, and his name Christ, (which Eusebius. de vita
Constant. l. 1, cap: 25. Baronius and Spondanus, Ann^ 312, sect: 4
name the Emperor Constantine, with other Christian Emperors, and their
Christian soldiers did so much honor, as to engrave and wear it both in their
helmets and their ensigns: whereas we never read that they gave such honor
to this name Jesus:) are as honorable, as great, as worthy reverence, capping,
and bowing, as Jesus, or his name Jesus, which comes short of his name Christ,
in all these respects. And let this for ever silence the s^^^stitious bowers at
the name of Jesus, who engrosse all reverence and honor to the name of Jesus
alone, preferring it above all other Titles of our Savior; yea before his
style of Christ, of Savior, which is the same with Jesus, and does more really
and fully express his office of a Savior, (it being the very Luke 1, 47. c.
2, 11. John 4, 42. 2 Pet: ^^ 1, 11. 1 John 4, 14 Acts 5, 31. c. 13 23. Ephesians. 5;
23 Phil. 3, 20. 1 Timothy 4, 10. Tit. 1, 4. c. 2, 13 c. 3, 4, 6.
title of that office in the Scripture) than his name Jesus does.

Page 34, he affirms, That Angels and Saints in heaven do bow at the name of
Jesus. A confident assertion of a See his p. 1, l. ult.
Metaphysicall Divine; who in my hearing preached twice or thrice so learnedly
of Angels, (the chief subject of his elevated metaphysicall contemplations) in
St. Mary's in Oxford, that he preached most of his Auditors out of the Church.
But admit Mr. Widows out of his intimate^ acquaintance with the Angels knows
this for certain, (which neither he, nor any other man can ever prove) that
Angels and Saints in heaven do bow their knees at every naming of Jesus: yet
how can he prove his second position, page 34, That Devils and Reprobates bow
at this name, as stubborn prisoners. I hope he was never as yet the Devils
Chaplain, This he, and his Pupills often reported, when I was resident in Oxford.
(though he has often disputed and combated with him in his study hand to hand;)
that he so knowingly, so confidently avers, that Devils and Reprobates bow at
the name of Jesus in hell: Which bowing as Page 19, 75 76, 88
himself records, being a duty of the Text in time of divine service only,
disproves this idle dream of his. For, who ever heard? who ever read divine
service in hell as Chaplain to the Devil? If then there be no divine service
heard or read in hell, (as I believe there will be none till Mr. Widows
chaunts it) then questionless there is no bowing at the name of Jesus there, a
duty, a ceremony in time of divine service only, as this Author writes: who
can never prove, that Devils bow at the name of Jesus in hell, but by some
special revelation from the Devil, or those spirit raised up from thence,
which long since frayed him out of his little wits.

To pass by his gross falsification of Origin on Rom: writing, page 54, that
we must bow at the name of Jesus, because he is humble: when as Bishop Andrews
and himself See Dr. Willet and Pareus on Romans 14, who quote Origin against
this litterall bowing at the name of Jesus.
confess, in the very selfsame page; and page 21, 90: that Origin of all the
other Fathers is against them: together with his corrupting of Chrysostom,
page 62, line 16, 17, 18: and See here p. 7, 8.
of Athanasius, and the Council of Ephesus, page 76, 77, in the very
selfsame manner; when as neither of them writes one word of bowing at the
name of Jesus in the alleged places, as the perusal of them in their works,
and the Survey of the Council of Ephesus, (which The words of which Co^cell
are these, Si quis audet dicere assumptum hominem coadorari cum Deo verbo
oportere, etc. ac non potius una adoratione veneratur Emmanuelem vnamque ei
glorificationem dependit, anathema sit. Surius Con. Tom. 1, p. 606, 607, Can. 8.
anathematizeth those only, which did co^dore the humanity of our Savior with
his Deity, and not rather Emmanuel, God and man, with one adoration: there
being neither the name Jesus, nor one word of bowing (much less of bowing at
the name of Jesus) in the 8. Canon of that Council, which he voucheth) will
fully evide^ce. Nor yet to remem^er his strange Divinity, page 40, That Jesus
his name was given him twice; once till death, afterward for ever: and that
the Disciples for saking, and Peter's denying of Christ, was a death of his name
Jesus. Or page 59, l: 10, 11, 12: That we must bow at the name of Jesus more
then is required by Phil: 2: Isay 45: or Rom: 14: (the chief texts on which
this duty is (though Our English Bibles, do all expound Phil: 2, 9, 10, by
Isay 45, 23. and Rom: 14, 10 11; and so do all Exposstours too. If then Phil.
2, 9, 10; that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc be the same with
Isay 45, 23. and Romans 14 10, 11; As I live, says the Lord, or, I have sworn
by my self, etc, that unto me every knee shalbow, as all Commentators
acknowledge; the to bow in the name of Jesus, is nothing else but to submit, or
bow to Christ himself, or to the power and scepter of Christ, as God, as Lord,
and Judge of all; and not to bow at every several recital of his name Jesus;
a ceremony not heard of in the primitive Church, not yet universally received
in all modern Churches: and therefore not the bowing of every knee intended in
these Scriptures.
absurdly) grounded:) which to recite alone is to confute. I shall request you
to take notice of 21 Scriptures, which he has mangled, falsified, and grossly
misapplyed; that so I may meet with him for his notorious slander; Page 5, 60,
and 68, and his Errata too.
That I have falsified 15, nay 36 Texts of Scripture, and above 80 Authors;
which he only writes, but prove; not in any one particular. Page 9, l: 27: he
misrecites the 1 Cor: 16, 22; omitting the name Christ, to add more reverence
to the name Jesus. Page 16, l: 12, 13: he writes; That bowing at the name of
Jesus is a duty required at Psalm: 95, 6; O come let us worship and bow down,
and kneel before the Lord our Maker. As if the name Jesus (which was Mat. 1,
16, 21, 25.
given to our Savior many hundred years after the penning of this Psalm)
were our Lord and Maker intended in this verse. Page 27 l: 17, 18, he brings in
the 24 Elders Rev: 5, 12, 13, bowing at the name of Jesus in time of this life:
when as the text records only, that they worshipped the Lamb, etc. not Jesus,
or his name: and that in heaven not on earth, for ought that there appears to
contradict it. Page 31, l. 18. he argues thus from Acts 3, 15. Ye killed the
Prince of life; Ergo, no name was ever so abused as the name of Jesus; and
therefore we must bow at it more than at any other name. Page 37, l: 34, 35,
he falsifieth Gal: 3, 13: and 1 Cor: 13, 4; foysting in Jesus into them, in
stead of Christ, when as the name Jesus is not mentioned in these texts, but
Christ alone. Page 38, l: 18; he concludes out of Acts 4, 12, That Jesus is the
only He applies that to the name, which the Scripture attributes only to the
person of Jesus, whose person, merits, offices, and intercession only save us,
not his name Jesus, as this Clerk dath dream.
name by which we are saved: as if the bare name of Jesus only (not the
person, power, or merits of Jesus, the only name intended in this verse, as all
Expositours on it accord;) were our only Savior: Yet the name Jesus is not
mentioned in this verse; and verse 10, does join the name of Christ and Jesus
together; [ Jesus Christ of Nazareth, etc] adding no more virtue to the one
than to the other. Page 38, l. 31, 32; he falsifieth the 2 Cor: 5, 19: God was
in Jesus reconciling the world to himself: whereas the text is, God was in
Christ, not Jesus. Page 48, he misrecites 6 Scriptures together: viz. Ephesians: 1,
10, 19, 20, 21; where he reads Jesus, for Christ; the text being Christ, not
Jesus: Matthew: 7, 23, 24, where the text is Lord, not Jesus: the 1 Cor: 15, 25,
where the name Jesus is not once mentioned, but Christ alone, from verse 12, to
26: yet he reads it Jesus, etc. not Christ: Ephesians: 4, 7, 8, and Col: 2, 15;
where he forgeth in Jesus See v. 3, 5, 8, 11, 17, 20.
for Christ: And all to prove Jesus, qua Jesus, a confirming Jesus to Angels, a
commanding Jesus to Devils, and an exalted and triumphing Jesus over Devils,
out of these texts: which no ways warrant his collection; and style him only
by the name of Christ, or Lord, not Jesus; and so make quite against him. Page
55, l. 10, he applies Rev: 21, 24, to Jesus, which the text, with all
Interpreters expressly apply, to the City, the Church, and new Jerusalem, in the
precedent verses, and can be applied to no other. Page 55, l: 21, he again
corrupts, Ephesians: 1, 20, 21, exchanging Jesus for Christ: and page 73, he
perverts no less than 7 several texts together, as grossly, as Papistically
as Durandus, or any other Papist ever did; Which Scriptures I shall here pass
over, because I have touched them See page 18
before. These several Scriptures, with sundry others, has this monstrously
learned Divine corrupted, falsified, and wilfully perverted, to draw on capping
and bowing at the name of Jesus; a duty which the Sea my Appendix.
primitive Church, and Errat aute^ is qui a via quam Patrum electic monstravit
a berrat: Hormise^^ Papae Epist. ad Possessorem. Bib. ^P. T. 6. pars 1, p: 375.
Fathers never heard of; and which most Protestant Churches quite disclaim:
and so are Arrians, Puritans, Schismatickes Nonconformists, Disputers against
the holy Ghost, yea rebels, traitors, enemies to Jesus, and to our Sovereign
his Vicegerent, and I know not what besides, if Mr. Widows Divinity, or *
Confutation may be credited; which makes bowing at the names of Jesus, (not the
adoration of our Savior Jesus, God and man, to whom we yield all the divine
honor and worship that himself requires, as our prayers to him, our whole
dependence on him, our public and private worship of him, etc. testify,
though we bow not superstitiously at his name;) a moral command, a necessary,
an universal Ceremony which God requires in all Churches, not only for a day
or a year, but for ever, etc. Page 74. though few but Papists and Popish
Churches ever practiced it, and these but lately, as I shall prove anon. See p:
1, 6, 7 8, 9, 10, 29, 30, 31, 39 40, 42, 44, 45, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 67, 68,
70, 74, 78, 79, 80, 83, 86, 89, 90, where he thus railes outright against me,
and all that bow not at the name of Jesus.


Page 34, he has this Romish passage; The Church is the place of Gods
presence, etc. where his Priests sacrifice their own, and the militant
Churches prayers, and the Lords Supper, to reconcile us to God offended with
our daily sins: ^rgo the Priests of the Church of England, (especially those
who erect adore, and cringe to Altars) are sacrificing Priests; and the Lords
Supper is a propitiatory sacrifice, sacrificed by these Priests for men's daily
sins. And is this your Doctrine, or our Churches, Mother?

That Christ Jesus by his sufferings did merit something to himself; and among
other things, this in special; the exaltation, adoration, of and bowing unto
his name Jesus. See Dr. Field, Of the Church Book 5, chap. ^^, reimprinted at
Oxford, 1628, accordingly.
A Doctrine which Calvin, Marlorat, Dr. Fulke, Mr. Cartwright, and generally
all Protestant Divines on Phil: 2, 9, 10, do utterly condemn as Popish, as
derogatory to the greatness and freenes of Christ's love to his: Yea a Doctrine
which this forgetful Angelical Dr. (who often confutes himself) does fully
contradict, p. 37, 38; where he writes^ That God rewarded Jesus freely; that
his name Jesus was^ free gift, and freely given to him, etc. therefore not
^^^^ted by him.

18.
Page 89, he writes; That there is good reason why we should bow at or toward
the Communion Table, though there be neither Scripture nor Canon that binds us
thus to bow: because the Communion Table is the Chair of state of the Lord
Jesus, and his chiefest place of presence in our Church: because we may bow at
his Majesty's chair of estate, who is but Jesus his Deputy: and because the
Communion Table is the sign of the place where our Savior was most despised,
dishonored and crucified.

It is strange, that he who could avouch express Scripture, for ringing of
bells, procession, the 4 cornered cap, the penitential sheet, etc. page 72,
73; should find neither Scripture nor Canon for bowing to, or at
Communion-tables and Altars: but stranger, that he should justify this bowing;
there being neither Scripture nor Canon for it; when as there is both
Scripture, (...)
Statute, and (...)
Canon to, against it. The Scriptures, we know, do positively condemn as
gross idolatry, the bowing at, to or before any Images, Pictures, Idols, and
Altars, Levit: 26, 1. Exodus: 20, 5. c: 23, 24. Deuteronomy: 5. 7, 82 Kings 17, 35.
Numb: 25, 2. Josh: 23, 16. Isay 2, 8, 9. 1 Kings 19, 18. 2 Chronicles: 25, 14. Yea
our own (...) the (...) of idelatry, and of the time and place of prayer, p^
31 10
Homilies, 3 Edd 6. c. 10.
Statutes, Canons, 1571. p. 19, Canons, 1603. Can: 82; See Arti: 22, Artic. of
I^eland, 53.
Canons, and Jewel, Morton, Tyndall, Barnes. Willet, Raynolds, Ormerod and
others
Writers, as they expressly inhibit the setting up of any Images, Pictures,
Crucifixes, or Altars in Churches, (a thing now much in use:) so they instruct
us likewise, The Homily against tho peril of Idolatry, part 3, page 41, to 76.
and p. 131. Ormerod his picture of a Papist, p. 1. to 15. and so all Protestant
Writers on the 2. Commandment, from these words, Thou shall not bow down to
them, etc. See 2 Chro, 25, 14.
That the bowing or kneeling before an image, crucifix, picture, or Altar, and
the very bowing to them, is Idolatry: And why then should not the bowing at,
to, or before the Communion Table (which is no where commanded by the
Scripture) be Idolatry too? Francis de Croy in his first Conformity, cap. 24,
with others testify. The Paganizing Popish Priests have borrowed this bowing
to See Tho: Beacons Relics of Rome c: 24, fol: 82, when Altars first came in,
and Dr. Raynolds, and Fran cis de Croy, in their quoted places.
Altars, from the Pagans; a practice much in use among them: witness their
spurious D. Iacobi Divina Missa, Coloniae A^g^ip. 1618.
Bibl. Patrum Tom. 1. p, 15. F. 19. D. their forged Dionysius Areopagita, De
Ecclesiast. Hierarch. lib: c: 5. lbid: p: 132, C, H, 13^, A. their Rusticus
Diaconus Cardinalis, contra Achephalos Disputatio. Bib. Patr. Tom: 6, pars 2,
p: 125, G: 229, E: their Stephanus Eduensis Episc: De Sacramento Altaris, cap:
12, Bib: Pat: Tom: 10, p: 416, C. Honorius Augustodunensis De Antiquo ritu
Missae, l: 2, c: 30, Bib. Patr. Tom. 12, pars 1, p: 1054: Radulphus Tungrensis
de Canonum Observantia, Propositio 23, Bib: Pat: T: 14, page: 250, B. Eugenius
Roblesius De Authoritate et Ordine Officij Mazabarici, lib: cap: 27, 28. Bib:
Patr: Tom: 15, p. 781, G, H. Alexius Menesius Missa Christianorum apud Indos,
Ibid: p: 793, 795, 796, their idolatrous Masse-books, Durandus, with other
Authors, and common experience; all which sufficiently testify the Papists
daily practice of bowing unto Altars. From which, some superstitious Romanizing
Protestants, without either Scripture or Canon to authorize them, have of late
begun to bow and cringe to Communion-tables, (or in truth to new erected
Condemned by the Clu^hof^ng^ land See my Appendix; the two last pages: Honuly
3. against he Peril of Idolatry. p. 47. Hom: 2, of the time and place of
Prayer p: 131, Thomas Beacons Romes Relics c. 81, 82 Bishop Babington, Notes
on Exodus 20, and 27, p: 279, 307. Dr Willets Synopsis Papismi, Century 2, Error.
53, 54. The 82 Canon Francis de Croy his 1 Conformity, cap: 24. Pelichdorfius
contra Waldenses cap: 24, Bibl. Patrum, Tom: 13. p. 325, 1, Ed: 6, c: 1, and 1
Eliz. c: 2; condemns them likewise: by virtue of which, and of E. 6, c 10, the
late erecters of Altars, and Images may ^and ought to be indicted and punished,
to avoid the new encroachments of Idolatry.
high Altars, as they style them:) which how it differs from Papists
Altar-adorations, or from their bowing and cringing to Pictures and Crucifixes,
or how it can be excused from superstition, will worship, and idolatry, I cannot
yet conjecture. Bowing before the Altar, or Communion Table, if the Sea those
here above quoted
Papists, or His Collection of ^rivate Devotions, p: 292, when we are
prostrate before the Altar.
Mr. Cozens may be credited, is no less than adoration; and I presume Mr
Widows (who makes bowing at the name of Jesus, a part of divine worship)
intends it to be no less. Being therefore not commanded in Scripture, it must
needs be Idolatry, or will worship at the least, and so to be abhorred
notwithstanding the three Popish (if not foolish) reasons produced for to
justify it; which I shall now examine, For the first of them: That the
Communion Table is the Lord Jesus his chair of Estate, etc. therefore we may
(we must) lawfully bow unto it: it is an absurd argument. Our Lord Jesus his
chair of estate Acts 2, 33, 34, c: 7, 56. R^. 8, 34 Psalm: 110 1. Ephesians: 1, 20.
Col. 3, 1. Hebr: 1, 3, 13. c: 10, 12. cap. 12. 2. 1 Pet 3, 22.
is only at his Fathers own right hand, were he now sits and raig^es in
glory: Psa. 103, 19 Psalm. 11, 4. Isay 66, 1. Acts 7, 49, c: 17, 24.
Heaven is his throne, earth but his footestoole. If he has any throne or
chair of estate on earth, it is in the hearts and souls of his elect. in
which he Ephesians: 3, 17. Gal: 2, 20. Isay 57, 15. Rev: 3, 20.
dwells, and Mat: 12, 28 Luk 1, 33. Col: 3, 15.
reigns. He is on the Communion table, (and that only when the consecrated
bread and wine at the Sacrament, are upon it, not at And yet out obsequious
superstitious cringers bow unto it then.
other times) not as a King in a royal throne, but as a 1 Cor: 11, 24, 25, 26.
crucified Savior, a 1 Cor: 11, 24, to 30. John 6, 47, to 64. And who ever
worshipped or bowed to his meat, or table?
spiritual repast, which our souls by faith must feed on: and even then, he
is not so much preser^ at or on the Communion Table, as in the Ministers, the
receivers hand and Ephesians: 3, 17.
heart; as in the bread and wine, the 1 Cor: 11, 25, 26, 27.
Chalice, and Cup, which no men bow to. This first reason therefore is both
ridiculous and erroneous, The second, The men may bow to the Kings chair of
Estate, etc. as it is a mere See the Rhemists notes Phil: 2, sect. 2; and
William Reynolds ibid.
Popish cavil, which Mr. Perkins, of divine and religious worship, vol. 1, p:
701^ Dr. Whitakers Answer to W. Reynolds, p. 398.
Protestants often have answered; so it is impertinent to the present purpose,
because the Kings chair of estate, and so the bowing to it, is but a civil
thing; whereas the Communion Table (made August. Epist. 50, Bp. Babington Notes
on Exodus 27, p. 307. See my Appendix accordingly, and the Authors there quoted.
of wood, (not stone) is a religious implement Luke 22; 30, 1 Cor. 10. 21.
of Gods own appointment, August. dverbis Dom, secundum loannem Sermon. 46. Tom.
10. p. 223. Walafridus Strabo de Rebus Ecclesiasticis lib. cap 4. Bib, Patr.
Tom. 9. pars 1. p 954. etc 19. p. 955: Dr. Willets Synopsis Papismi Cent. 2,
Error 53. p. 496. Bp. Babington, Notes on Exodus c. 20 and 27. p. 279, 307.
Eusebius: Pamp: Eccles. Hist 1. 10, c. 4, p. 204.
standing anciently, See the Rubric before the Communion, Canon 82. Qu. Eliz,
Injunctions near the end. and my Appendix.
as now it ought, in the very midst, not at the east end of the Church: and so
the genuflection, or inclining of the body, to it, or before it, is a religious
external worship at the least; which being not commanded by divine authority,
is no less than superstition or idolatry. The last reason, as it make more for
bowing to crucifixes, to Golgatha, to the high Priests hal, tha^ to Communion
tables or Altars, so it is a mere ridiculous absurdity For the Communion table
is not a sign of the Mat: 26. v. 59. to 64.
high Priests palace, nor yet of Mat 27. 33. Mar. ^5, 22.
Golgatha, nor of the Mat. 27. 42. Heb. 12, 2.
Cross, therefore it is no sign of the place where our Savior was most
dishonored, despised, and crucified: If it be any sign at all, it is only a
sign of a spiritual repasting place, or of an heavenly banquet, where in
Christ does spiritually Mat. 26. 27. 28.
distribute his body and blood, with all the benefits of his passion, to al who
worthily receive them. But that it should be a sign of the place where our
Savior suffered, is as new Divinity unto me, as is the very bowing to
Communion-tables, which has neither Scripture, Law, nor Canon for to warrant
it.

Page 21, 22, 23; He writes thus: That all the Fathers and Ancients on this
place, but Origin, do literally understand this text of Phil. 2. 9, 10, and
approve of this actual bowing at the name of Jesus, which we now dispute of;
That this bowing was the custom of St. Hieroms time: and that it was a most
ancient custom, even in the beginning of the Church: for proof of which he
has vouched Bp. Andrews, Bp. Whitguist, Zanchius, the Councels of Nice and
Ephesus, Athanasius, Cyrill and Hierom. But than Gregory the 10 who lived in
the year of our Lord 1273, was one of the first Fathers of it, this (writes
he) is fabulous, and a part of the Puritans Legend.

This passage I dare boldly aver, is as fabulous as any in the golden Legend,
there being not one Father, one ancient Expositor this day extant, that did
ever interpret this text, of any corporal genuflection or bowing at the
recital of the name of Jesus, in time of divine service only, (to which
Jews, Turks, and Arrians seldom come, Which answers his Allegation, p. 78.
and so it is needless in respect of them) or at other seasons. I have already
in my Appendix Not falsified and corrupted, as he writes, p. 50, 60 and 68.
truly vouched some 80, or more several ancient and modern Authors, who
reciting, and descanting on this Text, have found out no such Duty, or
Ceremony, of bowing at the naming of Jesus in time of divine service, as this
upstart Chymicke has extracted (I should say wrested) from it, even by head
and shoulders, against the very words and meaning, as I have there largely
proved. To these I shall accumulate some other ancient and modern Writers, who
give no other interpretation of the name above every name, and of the bowing of
every knee of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, in the name of Jesus, in this text of the Philippians, than that I have
mentioned in my Appendix: Which Writers because they are many, I shall
therefore only quote their names and books, (which the learned Reader may
peruse at leisure) not their words: Their names and works in brief are these:
Sancti Hippoliti Oration De Consum. Mundi, and de Antichristo, Bibl: Patrum
Coloniae Agrip: 1618. Tom: 3. p. 17. B. Dionuysij Alexandrini Epistolacontra
Paulu^ Samo satensem, Ibid, has reference to the same Tome of Bibl Patrum,
quoted before it.
ibid: p: 75. B. C, D Zeno Veronensis Sermo in Psa: 126, ibid: p: 97, G, S.
Antonij Abbatis Epist: 6. Bibl: Patrum Tom: 4, p: 30; B. Phaebadi Episc: contra
Arrianos lib: ibid: p: 230; G. Idacij. advers: Varimadum lib: ibid: p: 622; A;
Caesarij Dialogus 1; ibid: p: 650. A. S. Marci Eremita Praecepta salutaria,
ibid: p: 959; B, C, D. Editione Duaci, 1577.
Prosper Aquit: De Praedictionibus Dei pars 1; c: 25; pars 2; c: 24. Expositio
in Psalm: 102; fol: 236; A. in Psalm: 109, fol: 254; A. 255; B; in Psalm: 137; f.
296. Paulinus Epist; 9; ad Severum. Bibl: Patr: Tom: pars 1. p: 163 G. Ad
Aprum: Epist: 1, p: 187; B, and Ad Augustinum Epist: 3, p: 216, C. where he
applies this text. Quibus insitum Christi nomen, quod est supra omne nomen,
hanc deberi venerationem facit, ut non possit a credente contemni.
to the name of Christ, not of Jesus. S. Procli Sermo in Transfig. Christi,
ibid: p 535; D, E: 536; C. Eusebij Gallicani Homil: 1; De Nativ. Domini, Ibid:
p: 544; C; D. Eucherius Lugdunensis Epist: Paraenetica ad Valerium; ibid: p:
777: D. and Commentarij in Genefim l: 3. ibid. p: 832. A. p: 836. G. Gregentius
Archiepisc. Tephrensis, Disputatio cum Herbano Iudaeo, ibid p: Sede a
dextrismeis, donec mundi finis and consummatio venerit, and mittam te iudicem
vivorum and mortuorum; and tunc flectet omne genu super-coelestium terrestrium,
and inferorum, potentiaetuae, tuique inimici pro^ sternentur velut calcandum
scabellum pedum tuorum, and reddes unicuique secundum opera sua. Haec
veritassic interpretatur and exponit, simodo velis assentiri and approbare.
Ibid.
924. C. a pregnant place for my Exposition. Claudius Mamerchus Destatu Animae,
lib: 1. ibid. p. 951. F; G. Cassianus De Incarnatione Vnigeniti, lib: 4 Bibl
Patr: Tom. 5, pars 2; p. 71. F, G. Isiodori Pelusiotae Epist: l: 1. Ep. 139.
ibid. p. 491; D; E. Arnobij and Serapionis Conflictus, Bibl. Pat. Tom: 5, pars
3, p: 218, C. Arnobij Comment: in Psalm: 7, Ibid: p: 234, C. in Psalm: 64, p:
262, A. in Psalm: 88, p: 277, B. in Psalm: 137, p: 308, E, F. Ruricij Epist: l:
2. Epist: 10, Ibid: p: 544, 545. Theodulus Caelesyriensis Comment: in Epist: ad
Romanos, c: 14. p: 590, B, C, D. Vigily Episc: Tridentini, Disputatio de
Christo, D, N, etc. Ibid: p: 693, D, E. 703, A. and adversus Eutichen l: 5,
Apud Georgij Cassandri Opera, Parisijs 1616, p: 561. Ferrandus Diaconus ad
Reginum Paraeneticus: Quarta innocentiae Regula, Bibl: Patrum Tom: 6, pars 1,
p: 349, F, G. Iusti Orgelitani Episc: in Cantica Cantic: Explicatio, Ibid: p:
512, F: Isychius in Levit: l: 7, c: 24. Bibl: Patrum Tom: 7, p: 108, B. Etherij
and Beati lib: 1, Bibl: Patrum Tom: 8, p: 342, C, D, E. 346, E, F. Amalarius
Fortunatus, De Ecclesiasticis Officijs lib:1, c: 11. Bibl. Patrum Tom: 9, pars
1, p: Nomen Domini in lo^co isto (scilicet Phil: 2, 9, 10) proredebemus
intelligere: ta^en non abhorret a vero, sidixerimus, in nomine Do^ini,
posseintel^^^^ in praecep^^^ (...)
308, F, G. Agobardi Episc: Lugdun: ad Ludovicum Imperator^^, Ibid: p: 556, G,
H. De Picturis et Imaginibus lib: Ibid: p: 598, C, D. and Sermo De Trinitate,
p: 610, G, H. 611, A, B. Angelomi Stromata in lib: 1, Regum, cap: 2, Ibid; p:
708, C, D: 700, F, G. In lib: Regum 2, cap^ 2, p: 730, C: cap: 12, p: 740, E.
In lib: Regum 3: c: 8, p: 771 D. Iesse Ambianensis Episc: Epist: Bib: Patrum
Tom: 9, pars 2, p: 251, D. Ambrosius Ansbertus in Apocalypse: l: 3, Ibid: p:
378, E, F. HRabanus Maurus, Comment: in Pauli Epistolas lib: 19, c: 2. Operum
Coloniae Agrip: 1626, Tom: 5, p: 460, D, E. and l: 6, p: 449, E. Paschatius
Ratbertus in Matthaei Evang: l: 10, Ibid: p: 1156, B, C. Lib: 11, p: 1177, A,
B. lib: 12, p: 1234, G, H. Expositio in Psalm: 44, p: 1246, G. 1249, G. Remigij
Altisiodorensis Episcopi in Psalm: 15, Enarrat, Ibid: p, 654, B: in Psalm: 148,
p: 869, B. Ioannis Cyparissioti Decad; 4, c: 10, De Informatione Divini
Nominis, Bibl: Patrum Tom: 11, p: 499, B. Simeonis Thessal: Archiepij copide
Divino Templo, Bibl: Patrum Tom: 12, pars 1, Dum dicit fancta fanctis; populus
vicissim clamat; Vnussanctus, unus lesus Christus in gloria Dei Patris; Quod a
Paulo scriptum resonabit in extremo die, quando Jesus flectetur omne genu, and
omnis lingua confitebitur. etc.
p: 880, C; Zacharias Chrysopolitanus, in Vnum ex 4 or. lib: ibid: p: 185, F;
Petrus Cluniacensis contra Iudaeos, Tract: cap: 1, Bib: Patrum Tom: 12, pars 2,
p: 156, D, cap: 3, p: 171, F, G; cap: 4, p: 182, F; Contra Petrobusianos ibid:
p: 225, C, D; De Transfig: Domini Sermo, ibid: p: 2^4, D; Petrus Blesensis
Bathoniensis Archidiaconus, Sermo 31, ibid: p: 886, D; Sermo 46, p: 907, H. De
Transfig: Domini, p 915, B; Ioannis Salisburiensis, in Phil: 2, 9, 10; MS; in
Bibliotheca Bodleiana: Lucas Tudensis adversus. Albigensium Errores, l: 2, cap:
10; Bibl: Patrum Tom: 13, p: 261, F; c: 16, p: 267, 268; Guilbertus De Tornaco
De Officio Episcopi, et Ecclesiae Ceremonijs lib: cap: 13; ibid: p: 398. D.
Nicolai Cabasilae, De vitain Christo lib: 6, Bib: Patrum Tom: 14, p: 127, A;
Papa Innocentius 3. Sermo 1, in Dominica. 2, post Pascha; Coloniae Agrip. 1606.
Operum, Tom: 1, p: 43, In Circumcisione Domini Sermo 1, Page: 95, In festo
omnium Sanctorum Sermo 1, p: 156, Mysteriorum Missae lib: 2, c: 44, p^ 329, and
De contemptu mundi; l. 2, c: 15, p 449, Thomas Opera. Venetiis 1571.
Waldensis Tom: 3, Tit: 5, De Baptismi Sacr: cap: 54, fol: 103, number: 6, Petr:
Lombard. Sententiarum, l: 3, Distinctio 18. See Gorrichen, and the other
Schoolmen Ibidem: to which I shall add Francosurti 1548, fol, 54, to 58.
Ioannis Brentius, Zuinglius, Selneccerus, and Scholia in Epist, ad Phil. c. 2
v 9, 10. Herbornae 1616, p. 1160, 1162.
Piscator in Phil. 2, 9, 10 Iacobus Naclantus Enarratio in Epist ad Romanos,
cap. 14 Venetijs 1557 fol. 159; Pareus Comment: inc. 14, ad Romanos, v. 11,
Col. 1475, 1476, 1477; Ioannis Lukawits, Waldensis, Conjessio Taboritarum, in
Balthazaris Lydij Editio 2, Roterodami, 1622.
Waldensia pars 1, p. 161, 162, 163; Polanus Syntagma Theologiae, Genevae 1616
l. 2, c. 5, p. 211; Zachariae Vrsini Catechet, Explic. 1617, pars 2, Qu. 50,
fol. 305 Henricus Bullingerus Assert ^o Orthodoxa utriusque naturae Christi,
Tiguri 1534, fol, 35, 36; Josias Simlerus, De Filio Dei, lib 2, Tiguri 1568,
fol. 79, and 134; Dr. Field Of the Church, Book 5, chapter 20; Sixti Senensis
Bibliothecae sanctae, lib. 5, Annotatio 150. These 60 ancient Fathers, and
modern Authors, (to whom I could have added sundry others, did not the desire
of brevity and my Tearme-occasions stint me,) together with those 80, already
recited in my Appendix, in their quotations and expositions of Phil: 3^ 9, 10.
That In nomine, not ad nome^ thus all the recited Authors read it.
in the name of Jesus, That is, in the sovereign Authority of Jesus: (Which
phrase, in the name of Jesus, is answerable to the usual clause in our
ordinary Proclamations, Commissions, Warrants: These are to will, require,
charge, command you in, not at, his Majesty's name; or in, not at, the Kings
name; a speech most frequent in all Officers mouths of all sorts: that is, in
the virtue of his Majesty's royal authority, to do this or thus) every knee
should bow, etc. have made no such liter all exposition of this text, neither
have they hence collected any such duty of bowing at the name of Jesus in time
of Divine service, as Mr. Widows has squeized from it: most of them
interpreting the name above every name, intended in this text; to be, either
the This is the general Interpretation of all the Fathers and Ancients, and so
our Church in Te Deum laudamus, does seem to interpret it.
name God, Jehovah, Lord, Son of God, Christ; etc. or at leastwise This is
the received Exposition of all modern Expositours.
the Majesty, Glory, Honor, Authourity, Power, Sovereignty, Fame, and
Monarchy of Christ, as himself confesses, page 66, 67. All of them
concluding, the bowing of every knee, etc. in this text, to be, the subjection
of all things unto Christ, as to their sovereign Lord, their King and Judge;
and that especially at the day of judgment, (when this Scripture For every
knee of things in heaven, and things in earth and things under the earth, shall
not bow to Christ till then, neither shall every tongue til then confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord. This Scripture therefore being only then fulfilled, cannot
without falsification and perverting be applied to any other time but that
alone.
shall be only actually and fully verified;) or the adoration of Christ in
prayer, as God equal with his Father: Not one of them interpreting it, of any
bowing, or cringing at the naming of Jesus; a Ceremony, a duty of this text,
not heard of in the primitive Church, not known to the Fathers, or any ancient
Expositors of this text; in whom I dare confidently affirm, and let any, nay
all the bowers at the name of Jesus disprove me if they can, there is no
mention of this duty, this ceremony: which our Church cannot approve of without
degenerating from all antiquity, from all reformed Churches, which I dare
presume she will not do. Indeed In his Sermon at WhiteHall, 1614. in his late
works p. 475, 476, 477.
Bp. Andrews, and Mr. Consutation p: 21, 22, 23 77, 78.
Widows have quoted Fathers for it, but how impertinently, Here p. 7, 8, 31,
32.
I have already demonstrated: and if the Reader will but examine them, he shall
find them either altogether extravagant, or point-blanke against them. All the
Antiquity that seems to give any color to this bowing, is the fabulous story
of Ignatius the Martyr, in whose heart ( as Lincolniensis super Evangelia part
4, c. 7. Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium vitiorum pars 4, c 38, G;
Vincentius in speculo l 10, c. 57; Magarinus De la Bigne; De ^. Ignatio, etc.
Bib. Patr. Tom 1, p. 76; Molanus De Picturis c: 60; Carolus Stengelius, De S.
Nomine Jesus c. 27; Salmeron Operu^, Tom. 3. Tract. 37.
some Popish Authors have recorded,) the name of Jesus, or rather, Jesus est
amor meus, was found written in golden Characters. But these golden Letters,
are but a part of the golden Legend; for neither Eusebius, Socrates
Scholasticus, Sozemon, Nicephorus; nor any other ancient Ecclesiastical
writers, who make mention of Ignatius his Martyrdom, have recorded any such
thing: and besides Eusebius writes, Lincolniensis super Evangelia part 4, c.
7. Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium vitiorum pars 4, c 38, G; Vincentius in
speculo l 10, c. 57; Magarinus De la Bigne; De ^. Ignatio, etc. Bib. Patr. Tom
1, p. 76; Molanus De Picturis c: 60; Carolus Stengelius, De S. Nomine Jesus c.
27; Salmeron Operu^, Tom. 3. Tract. 37.
That he was torn in pieces of the Lions, to whom he was cast. Neither do the
Popish relaters of it agree in one: some recording, that the Eusebius. Eccl. Hist
l. 3, c. 32. See Carolus Stengelius c 27, accordingly.
Magarinus and Molanus qua ^.
name Jesus only was written in his heart: others, that Vincentius Stengelius,
and Salmeron.
Jesus Christus, was written throughout his heart: Lincolniensis and Fabritius.
others, that Jesus est amor meus, was there inscribed. But admit this Legend
(which some Protestants now vouch with too much credulity) were true; yet the
relaters of it (and of some others of this nature, viz. Who had this
Inscription, Jesus, and Jesus est amor meus, engraven in their hearts; If we
believe Stengelius De SS. Nomine Jesus cap. 27, p, 145, 146.
B. Virginis Clarae de Monte falernis, and of a noble Soldier) record not, that
Ignatius did use to bow at the name of Jesus, but that he had it always in his
mouth, whence it was afterward thus engraven in golden Letters in his heart,
not in his knees, in which it had been undoubtedly written, had he used to bow
and cringe unto it. This fable therefore of Ignatius his heart, (not knees)
makes nothing for this new-coyn'd duty, this di^orderly ceremony of bowing the
knee at every naming of Jesus, (which must needs disturb men in their
devotions, since this name Jesus, is often times mentioned Mark 11, 33 cap. 10,
47, 52. 1 Thessalonians. ^, 1, c. 4, 14 2 These. 1, 12, 1 Timothy 1, 4, 14 2 Timothy 2, 1. 1
Pet, 1, 3; 2 Pet. 1, 1; Jude 1; Revel 1, 9, Matthew. 27, 11, 1 Cor: 5, 4; c: 12,
3; 2, Cor. 4, 5, 10, 11, 14. Jesus, is twice recited in one verse; and John 19,
38, thrice in one verse; 1 Cor: ^, 1, to 11, 9 times in 10 verses, twice in one
verse. Ephesians 1, 1, 2, 3 four times in three verses; Col. 1. ^, ^, 3, 4^ its
four times mentioned in 4 verses: and to bow down to the ground almost,
soofte^, in a reverent and serious manner, must needs interrupt a man much in
his hearing, reading, and attention to the text and sense.
twice, and sometime thrice together in one verse;) for which there is no
ground, no warrant in the Fathers, in Antiquity, as this fabulous scribler has
recorded; who should have forborne to have Page 5, 60, and 68.
taxed me, for falsifying, for misvouching those 80 Fathers, and Authors,
quoted in my Appendix; since there is not one of them, (let the Committ^es
employed to examine them, be the umpires) but concludes pointblanke against him
in the Interpretation of the name, or bowing in this text; of which not one of
them, (no not Page 66. 67. 20.
Zanchi^s, nor Dr. Boys, as he suggestes, who both interpret it as I have
done,) did ever make, this bowing at the name of Jesus, a duty; as this
brainsicke nonsense Noveller does Which bowing (as a ceremony only, not a
duty,) was never publicly enjoined unto any, till Pope Gregory the 10. his
time, for ought that can be proved; and therefore to style him one of the first
Fathers of it, is no Puritans Legend, as he styles it; but an apparent truth;
which all the Anti-puritan bowers at the name of Jesus put together, cannot
disprove. Should I now here at large inform you, of his absurd dispute, Page
13, to 25.
Whether bowing at the name of Jesus be some thing? occasioned by the two first
lines of my Appendix; viz. [ The bowing of the head or knee at the name of
Jesus, if it be any thing, etc.] which words if any thing as they neither
affirm, nor yet suppose, the bowing at the name of Jesus to be a mere
nothing, both in genere entis, and moris, as he Page 9, 10, 13, 14.
vainly cavills: since my whole Appendix grants it, proves it, to be a
superstitious, Popish ^^^^^lesse Ceremony; and so acknowledges it to (...)
something, in genere entis, at the least; a thing which no man ever questioned.
So (they being a most usual form of Argument drawn from a See Aditus ad
Logicam, p. 119, 120.
Disjunction, which every Fresh-man knows,) imply no more but this; That
bowing at the name of Jesus, is nothing; (to wit, in causa religionis, in point
of Religion or divine worship only, not in genere entis;) because it is
neither a Ceremony, nor a duty of the Text, as I have there sufficiently
proved. Which phrase of speech, to call something in genere entis, nothing;
that is, in genere moris, in point of religion, or to some special purposes,
to which it is unavailable, impertinent, or as much as nothing, is most
frequent in the Scripture: as St. Paul's stiling of an Idol, 1 cor. 8. 4 c: 10,
19
nothing in the world that is, in See 1 Cor: 8, 5, 6; Isay 44. 9, c: 4^, 20, c.
46 7 c. 11, 23, 24, 29.
regard of any Deity it has in it, or in respect of any help or good it can
yield to those who worship it: and his calling of 1 Cor. 7, 19
Circumcision, and uncircumcision nothing; that is, See Call. 5, 6.
in p^int of Justification, where they are as nothing: with See Mat 23 16, 18.
Acts 21 24. 1 Cor: 3, 7. c. 8, 2. c: 10, 19. Call. 2, 7. c 6, 3 Phil 3, 7, 8.
and 1 Timothy 6, 4, accordingly.
sundry other instances, plentifully testify, to 2 ^ct. 2, 16.
rebuke the madness of this erroneous Prophet, who is so ignorant of his See
his page 5, l 35.
own Modalities, as thus to carpe at nothing. Or should I here show you, how
your Son has contradicted himself in this very controversy; In making this
bowing, See p. 15, 16 17, 18, etc.
a duty of the Text and yet a ceremony too A duty and a ceremony Page 19, 75
76, 88.
only in time of divine service, and yet a duty, Page 34.
which Angels and Saints (...) heaven, and Devils and Reprobates in hell
perform. A ^^ty incident only to the name of Jesus, and yet enjoined by
Cyrill, and the Council of Ephesus, to the name of Emmanuel, Page 21.
as he write. In averring, Page 25, 26, etc.
That Jesus is the name above every name, etc. and that the litterall bowing of
the knee at the name of Jesus is the bowing intended in Phil: 2, 9 10. reciting
the Authors quoted by me in my Appendix, as making for it, when as they all For
they write that God etc, is the name not Jesus, p ^6, 67. and that this bowing
is adortion, and sub^ection etc p 60, 61, to 67 not any corporal genuflectio^
at the naming of Jesus.
conclude against it, by his own confession, if you observe them well: with
sundry other contradictions which I ^mit. Or should I here discover his many
absurd impertinent misquotations; his mis-englishing of those Latin Authors
which he voucheth: and his gross perverting of Authors, and Scriptures: page
15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 28, 32, 37, 41, 42, and 59, to 68, in which there
is scarce a pertinent true quotation, or right englishing of any Latin
Author, if you examine them well. Or should I now inform you, how he has
misquoted Qu. Eliz. obsolete Injunctions, Injunct. 52. and the A Canon only of
direction, by way of advise, not of obligation, by way of command, there being
no penalty expressed in it.
18. Canon: In which there is no such clause: That all present at Divine
service should bow at the name of Jesus: the words of the Canon being, That
when in time of Divine service the Lord Jesus [which has reference only to
the person of Jesus, represented to us under any of his names] not the name of
Jesus, should be mentioned, That is, such reverence as the Scripture commands,
for none else is due to Christ: whereas this of bowing at the name of Jesus, is
not commanded in scripture, for ought that can appear, therefore not due.
due and lowly reverence (not bowing of the head or knee, much less the
putting off of the hat, which this Yet most men use the contrary. yea many at
their first entrance into the Church intime of Divine service, fall to their
first private devotions, which this Canon, and the 2. part of the Homily of the
right use of the Church, p. 8, expressly prohibit; and yet they are not
censured, but commended for it.
Canon forbids men to put on in time of Divine service) shall be done by all
persons present, etc. Or should I here relate unto you, that all his strong
Armor, all his Arguments, page 87, 88, 89, wherein he trusts, are but a mere
petitio principij; wherein he beggs of me the question, as he has This diverse
have informed me upon their knowledge.
run about the University like a Friar mendicant, to beg his Arguments,
which are all built upon this sandy false foundation; That bowing at the naming
of Jesus is a duty of the text: an honor which God has given to Jesus, and he
has merited from us, and therefore we must yield it to him, to testify our
own humility, and to declare his sovereignty, that he is Lord and Jesus: the
thing which he should prove, and I, (yea all the 80 Authors which I have
quoted in my Appendix, with these sixty others here recited) deny; I should
but tire my own and your patience, and waste both time and paper to no purpose.

Wherefore ( Dear Mother) recommending to your gravest consideration, and
then to your correction, the several gross notorious Oversights of this brave
Champion-Sonne of yours, who like some great Goliath, to show his valor, (or
his folly rather) has sent Page 90, l. 29, 30, 31.
a printed Challenge to me, (a little David in respect of him) to dispute even
face to face with him in the Schools, etc. perchance because he thinks himself
a better Disputant, than he is here a Writer) that so I may no longer trouble
the Church; I hope, for your own honor and reputation, which now lie at stake
in this your unworthy Sons absurd illiterate Confutation, you will upon the
serious perusal of this my Survey, proceed to bind this his erroneous (and I
trust unlicensed) Pamphlet, (which is like to bring a Prove 10, 1. A foolish son
is a heaviness to his Mother.
scandal on his Mother) to the good behavior, and his untutered, scurrilous,
Quid stulti proprium? non posse and velle nocere. Ausonii sapientes p. 91.
foolish, scribbling Goose-quill, to everlasting peace: by reducing his person,
his Syllogismes to Bocardo, the only Mood, the fittest School for such a
Challenger, such a Writer to dispute in, who would not conclude his notorious
known Errors, in Celarent, upon my timely private Letter and advice. Thus
wholly referring his Confutation, Errors, Person, to your motherly lash and
Censure, (as being loath to incroach upon your Liberties, or to trouble my
self with such an Adversary, who has taken much Nihil est enim inamabilius
quam diligens stultitia, Seneca Cont. l. 7. Con^ tr. 5, p. 1136.
unamiable pains to Prove. 13. 16
spread h^s too wellknowne folly, and mar his laud-unworthy cause, which was
bad and weak enough before,) I here humbly close up all, and ever rest,

From my study at Lincolnes Inn, November 15. 1630 Your dutiful Son in all
filial Respects: WILLIAM PRYNNE.

Arnobius Advers. Gentes lib. 1. QVoniam comperi nonnullos, qui se plurimum
sapere suis persuasionibus credunt, insanire, bacchari, and velut quiddam
promptum ex oraculo dicere. etc. statui pro captu acmediocritate sermonis,
contraire invidiae, and calumniosas dissolvere criminationes, ne, aut illi sibi
videantur, popularia dum verba depromunt magnum aliquid dicere, aut si nos
talibus continuerimus a litibus, obtinuisse se causam putent, victam suo vitio,
non assertorum silentio destitutam.
FINIS.
CHRISTIAN Reader, I here present thee with a short historical or
Chronologicall Discourse, of the true original and progress of Bowing at the
name of Jesus; 1 Ceremony, (and as some write) a Duty, much pressed, practiced
and abetted now of late by some, who though they style themselves Christians,
not Jesuits; will yet with See Salmeron, Stengelius, the Sorbonists, Rhemists
and others hereafter cited
Jesuits, and other Papists, monopolize all worship, all bowing to the name
Jesus only, and give none to Christ, from which their very ti^le of Christians
is derived What these men's present violent enforcing, propugning of this
upstarr Popish Ceremony by preaching, by printing: or what the suspension,
silencing or censuring of such as speak, as preach against it, means, or
whence it springs, I cannot well determine. If it be only a misguided
superstitious zeal, arising from mere ignorance of the true original Popish
rise and progress of this Ceremony; I hope the ensuing pages will both
instruct them whence it sprung, and whither it tends; and so reform them. But
if it be a wilful obstinate symbolizing with the Church of Rome, (whose
Images, Altars, Cringes, Crosses, ^hey say they bow to the Communion table,
because it is the place of Christ's special presence: Yet Acts 7. 48. and 17 24
certify u^; that ^od dwells not in ^emples made with hands; and Acts ^. 11,
c 2, 33, 34 c. 3, 21, etc. 7, 56, instruct us, That our Savior is now
as^cended into the heavens; that he sits now at his Fathers right hand, and
that the heaven must contain him until the times of restitution of all things.
Bowings to, and turning of Communion-tables Altar-wise, like a Kitching
Dresser, not a Table Psalm. 128, 3. 1 Kings 13, 20 Math. 26, 20. Mar. 14, 18. Lu
22, 14. 27, 30. John 13. 12^ 28.
at which men usually sit round; both against See here p. 35, 36, 37, 38. and
my Appendix the two last pages.
our Statutes, Homilies, Articles, and Canons, creep in apace among us without
any public censure or control:) I hope this Treatise, (which shows them
whose and what they strive for, even for the very spawne, the Relics of the
whore and Popes of Rome, from whom bowing at the name of Jesus had its birth,
its breeding as I shall here demonstrate:) will, if not reclaim them, yet at
leastwise shame them, show whose they are and what they aim at. Wherefore I
here submit it to thy pious censure, requesting only thus much from thee; that
as I have written it faithfully with an upright heart, void of all schism of
faction to beat down superstition, Popery, and declare the truth; so thou
would embrace and read it with a love of truth. And if thou can not
contradict it, let Contra Gentiles lib.
Athan^sius his Maxim be now thy resolution in this case. Quod pessimo initio
nititur, in nullo unquam censeri poterit bonum. And so I rest.

Thine, and the Truths, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
A short Relation of the true beginning, and progress, of bowing at the name
of Jesus; necessary for the determination of the present Controversy.
POpe John the 20, who swayed the Popedom about the year 1030: Anno Dom: 103
is the first I read of, that set abroach this Ceremony, of bowing at the name
of Jesus: of whom Sir Edwin Sands, in his Europae Speculum, Hagae 1629 page 16.
writes thus. By grant from Pope John the 20, every inclining of the head at the
name of Jesus gets 20, years pardon; a matter in Italy no not this day
unpractised. And to grace that Ceremony the more, I have heard sundry of their
renowned Divines teach in the Pulpit: that Christ himself on the Cross bowed
his head on the right side, to reverence his own name which was written over
it. This is the highest pedigree of this late upstart Ceremony, that I have
hither to met with.

Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bathe, Anno 1160.
who flourished about the year 1160: Bibl: Patr: Colon: Agrip: 1618, Tom: 12
pars 2, p: 88 1, D
Sermo 28, De Assumptione B. Mariae, has this ensuing passage. Non frustra
consuevit Ecclesia intercessione beatae Virginis affectuosius caeteris
implorare, ita quod audito ejus nomine Which may be either intended to worship
and pray to her, or else to bow at the recital of her name:
genua terrae a^^igat; imopro nominis reverentia quasi mare confragosum sonant
vota populorum. And in the margent there is this note. Mariae genua flectuntur.
Which passages seem to imply, that men did then use to bow and do reverence
at the naming of the Virgin Mary: but that they did so at the naming of Jesus,
I find no such authority in this writer.

Lucas Tudensis, Anno 1220.
who wrote about the year of our Lord, 1220. Adversus Albigensium Errores, (c)
Bib. Patrum Tom. 13, (...) ^ C. (...)
lib. 2. cap. 14. writes thus. Qui humilitate superbiae principem vicit,
humilitate nos contra potestates aerias semper pugnare docuit: quod ipse et
fecit tempore carnis suae quando non recto capite, sed inclinato emisit
spiritum. Inclinemus nos and illi capita nostra, non solum mentis, sed and
corporis, lauds and gratias persolventes, qui pro nobis peccatoribus se
misericorditer inclinavit. Sed sunt nonnulli qui superbiae spiritu tumefacti,
(de quibus valde dolendum est) qui etiam cum Gloria, vel Laus Deo recitatur in
Ecclesia, contemnunt, aut erubescunt, Regi Regum Jesus To Jesus Christ, not to
Jesus only.
Christo capita inclinare: coram transeunte Cruce, vel Christi Euangelio non
assurgunt: in celebratione Missae Sacerdote se ad eos vertente et Dominum
annunciante inclinari contemnunt: ad benedictionem Pontificis caput nudare
negligunt: et quod omnino nefarium est, et haeresi proximum, cum elevatur
corpus Christi a Sacerdote in sacratissimo Ministerio Missae, vel alias
refertur, erubescunt vel refugiunt suppliciter adorare. Hoc maxim nonnulli
faciunt Curiales, qui consueverunt terrenis Principibus flexis genibus et nudo
capite ministrare, etc. Hunc ergo tantae promissionis accepta fiducia totis
nisibus collaudemus: illi simplicitate recta humiliemur: illi mentis and
corporis capita non verecundemur nudare and inclinare, qui Deus fortis pro
nobis infirmis se inclinavit, ut homo infirmus fieret, ut humana firmitas
soliditate perpetua firmaretur. A passage which may happily imply, that in
those times men did use to bow their heads (not knees) to Jesus Christ the King
of Kings, who bowed his head for them: But this was not as I take it, at every
recital of his name Jesus, but at the lifting up of the host in the time of
the Mass, or at the passing by of the sign of the Cross, as the sense and
words import.

Sanctus Franciscus, the Arch-Frier, who lived about the year 1230, Anno 1230.
in his Litera ad Sacerdotes: has this ensuing clause. Bibliotheca Pattum Tom.
13. p 351. B.
Salute^ in eo qui redemit et lavit nos in sanguine suo: Cujus nomen audientes
adorate eum cum timore et reverentia proni in terra; Dominus Jesus * Not Jesus
only
Christus, altissimus filius nomen illi, qui est benedictus in seculo, Amen.
Which implies an injunction from this Arch-Frier, St. Francis, for adoration of
the Lord Jesus Christ at that time, when as his name was mentioned.

Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 13. p. 452. H.
Friar David de Augusta: who flourished about the year 1240. Anno 1240.
De 7. Processibus religiosi cap. 11. writes thus. Sunt exteriores
caeremoniales observantiae; ut inclinationes, genuflectiones in horis,
pulsationes, et omnes gesticulationes, quibus claustrales utuntur in divino
officio, vel alijs, quibus saepe minus virtuosi majorem vim faciunt, qua^
aliqui perfecti, et magis devoti. Which seems to imply; that Monks in those
days (for of them he writes) did use duckings and genflections, either to the
host, the crucifix, or altar, and it may be to the name of Jesus; in which
ceremonies the less virtuous, says he, were for the most part most devout.

These are the only passages I find in all antiquity before the Council of
Lions, Anno 1273.
which give any color to the use or practice of this Ceremony; which was never
established in the Church, till Pope Gregory the 10. his time; who in the
Popish Council of Lions, in the year 1273 made this Decree. See Sexti
Decretalia lib. 3. tit. 23. c. 2. fol 187. Cent. Magd. Basiliae 1574. Cent. 13.
Col. 919, 934, 935. Greg. 10. Decretalium l. 6^ De Immunitate Ecclesiae, cap.
Decet. Carolus Stengelius De ^5, Nomine Jesus cap. 23, p. 123.
Decet domu^ Domini sanctitudo: decet ut cujus in pace factus est locus, ejus
cultus sit cum debita veneratione pacificus Sit itaque ad Ecclesias humilis et
devotus ingressus; sit in ijs quieta conversatio, Deo grata^ inspicientibus
placida, quae considerantes non solum instruat, sed et reficiat. Convenientes
ibidem nomen illud, quod est super omne nomen, a quo aliud sub c^^lo non est
datum hominibus, in quo salvos fieri credentes oporteat, nomen videlicet Jesus
Christi, qui salvum faciet populum suum a peccatis eorum, exhibitione
reverentiae specialis attollant: et quod generaliter scribitur; ut in nomine
Jesus omne genu slectatur, Phil^ 2.
singuli singulariter in seipsis implentes (praecipue dum aguntur Missarum
sacra mysteria) gloriosum illud nomen quandocunque recolitur, flectant genua
cordis sui, quod vel capitis inclinatione testentur. This is the highest
antiquity, that any See Ca^olu^ Stengelius De ss. Nomine Jesus, c: 23, and
Salmeron, Operum tom: 3, tract: 37, p: 335 etc: who can raise this Ceremony
from no higherpedegree.
Papist or Jesuit has hitherto found out, to justify their bowing at the
name of Jesus. Yet this Constitution binds men only, to bow the knees of
their hearts, ( not of their bodies) at the naming of Jesus; (and that
especially whiles the Mass is acting) which bowing of the heart, they must
testify, by the inclination of their heads, not of their knees.

After this, Pope Ioannes 22, ducentos dies verae indulgentiae omnibus qui ad
nome^ Jesus genua flecterent, vel caput inclinarent, vel tunderent pectus,
largitus est: Salmeron Operum, tom: 3, tract: 37, p: 335
John the 22, about the year 1330: to induce men to the practice of this
Popish Ceremony, did, as Salmeron the Jesuit records; grant 200 days of true
Indulgence to all who should bend their knees, or incline their heads, or knock
their breasts, at the name of Jesus. Therefore it was then no received duty.

Since that, about the year 1420, one Bernardinus, a Franciscan Friar, and a
Popish See Marty. riologium Romanum; and Op meeri Chronog^ p: 414.
Canonized Saint, a great lover and admirer of the name of Jesus, Carolus
Stengelius De ss: Nomine Jesus cap: 29, p: 157, 159.
did earnestly exhort the people in all his Sermons and public exhortations,
that they would give devotion, bowing and reverence to the name of Jesus, which
is above every name, in which every knee does bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth: neither is there any other name
under heaven given to men, in which they can be saved. This Friar, the better
to draw the people to adore and bow to the name of Jesus, Carolus Stengelius
ibid p: 159, 160, 161 Molanus De Picturis and Imag: cap: 56; Antoninuspars 3,
historiae tit. 24, cap. 5; Salmeron Ope^u^ tom. 3. tract, 37, p. 335.
did use about the end of his Sermons, to show unto them a picture, in which
the name JESUS, was written in golden Letters, enclosed on every side with
Sun beams; or a Glory: which Pictured name the people beholding did most
devoutly adore, with bended knees. For which fact of his being complained
against by some who maligned his fame, to Pope Martin the 5. this Pope when as
he had heard his answer, gave him free liberty, not only to preach, So writes
Salmeron.
but likewise to carry about and show unto the people this picture of the name
of Jesus. From Molanus De Pictur. et Imag. c. 56.
which pattern of his, all pictures of the name of Jesus both in
glasse-windowes, Popish Authors, and Masse-bookes were at first derived.
Indeed Pars 3. Hist. Tit: 24, c: 5: see S tengelius p. 162.
Antoninus records: that Pope Martin enjoined him that he should no more show
this picture unto the people, lest some superstition, or scandal should be
raised in the Church by this his novalty: which injunction he obeyed. But Pope
Clement the 7. ( as Qua K, see Stengelius; p: 162; and Dr^ Fulkes Notes on the
Rhemish Testament, On A^ poc: 13, sect: 7, 8, 9.
Molanus records) at the request of the Friars Minorites, ordained, that all
their Order, and the Nuns of the Order of St. Clare, should use this picture;
and withal he appointed a double great solemn feast, of the most holy name
Jesus, ( in which its likely this name was solemnly adored and bowed to;) which
feast, as Stengelius writes, is most famous through many Churches, and among
the common people.

This Ceremony, it seems, was not yet so generally received as the Papists did
desire: and therefore the Popish Council of Basil: Anno Dom. 1431. Anno 1431
Surius Council: Tom: 4, p: 61, 2.
Sess. 21. Tit. Quomodo divinum o^^icium in Ecclesia celebrandum sit: decreed:
That all Canonical persons, in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, whiles
they were saying their Canonical hours, when the glorious name of Jesus was
named, should bow their heads, not knees: The words of which Decree are these.
Statuit igitur sancta Synodus, ut in cunctis cathedralibus ac collegiatis
Ecclesijs, etc. Horas canonicas dicturi, etc. Cum dicitur Gloria Patri, Filio,
et Spiritui Sancto, omnes consurgaut. Cum nominatur gloriosum illud nomen,
Jesus, in quo omne genu flectitur coelestium, terrestrium et inferorum, omnes
caput inclinent.

The Provincial Popish Council of Sienna, or Seine, in the year 1524. Anno
1524
Following the pattern of the Council of Basil, Decreta Morum, cap. 18.
established the use of this Ceremony in all Collegiate and Cathedral Churches,
in the very selfsame words. viz. Surius Council tom. 4. p. 740, 741.
Et ut in majoribus Ecclesijs cultus Dei vivi sanctior, juxta majorum (...) in
melius reformetur: statuimus, ut in Cathedra^^bus ac collegiatis et
conventualibus Ecclesijs, horis debitis, etc. Horas autem canonicas dicturi
etc. Cum nominatur illud nomen gloriosum, Jesus, in quo omne genu flectitur
coelestiu^, terresti i^ et inferoru^, omnes caput ( not genu) inclinent. Phil 2.
And Decreta Surius ibid. p, 731.
Fidei cap. 14, it draws this Argument, from this very Ceremony, to prove the
lawfulness of worshipping the image of Christ. Et nos quidem non quasi ante
divinitatem, ante imaginem prosternimur; sed illum adoramus, quem per imaginem
aut passum, vel in throno sedentem, recordamur. Et dum per ipsam picturam quasi
per Scripturam, ad memoriam Filium Dei reducimus; animum nostrum de
resurrectione laetificat, aut de passione mulcet, non majore quid^m
idololatriae periculo, quam cum in nomine Jesus omne genu flectitur, coelestium,
terrestrium et inferorum. Phil. 2.
Quem enim vocabula cursim auribus insinuat, hunc eundem fidelibus oculis imago
sedulo repraesentat.

Not long after this, Anno 1548.
the Diocesan Popish Synod of Augusta, Anno 1548, cap. 23. in more obscure
terms, prescribes this bowing, etc. to all Ecclesiastical persons, not only
at the recital of the name of Jesus, but of the Virgin Mary too. Surius
Council. tom. 4. p. 810.
The Canon runs thus: Cum autem Deo Opt. Max. Creatori et Redemptori suo
honorem, timorem et reverentiam homo tanquam creatura debeat; multosque videmus
ea in re damnata ignavia desides esse; omnibus Ecclesiasticis personis nostrae
Dioecesis districte praecipiendo mandamus, ut post haec summa pietate Deum
ubique et honorent, et timeant, praecipue vero in templis humiliter revereantur
et venerentur. Et quum in nomine Domini nostri Jesus Both names are here
expressed.
Christi omne genu coelestium, terrestrium et inferorum flectendum sit; Phil. 2.
volumus, ut omnes quotiescunque in sacris Concionibus^ aut Missis nomine
sanguinis vel corporis Christi, aut Dei genitricis Mariae Virginis fiat mentio,
aut quando canticum, Gloria in excelsis, aut gloria tibi Domine, aut Evangelij
initium, aut Na^ivitatis Christi ex Virgin, et incarnatio in Symbolo, aut
gratiarum actio in praefatione, aut hujusmodi alia in divinis o^^icijs
canuntur, vel commemorantur, detec. to capite, genibusque flexis, ante Nota.
Altar, vel ut locus tempusque postulaverit, Deo reverentiam exhibeant
debitam, et populum ad ejus rei imitationem verbis factisque commoveant atque
hortentur.

The very next year after, Anno 1549.
the Provincial Popish Synod of Surius to^^. 4. p. 869.
Moguns or Mentz, under Sebastian the Archbishop, Anno Dom. Not Anno 813. as
some mistake it.
1549. cap. 59. which has this title to it. Missa, quo gestu, et qua devotione
audienda: this Ceremony was thus enjoined. Sedulo commonendus est populus
fidelis, Clerici etiam per Praelatos debita animadversione inducendi, ut in
celebratione Missarum, adversus tantum mysterium, quantum quisp; per
valitudinem potest, etiam corporis gestu reverentiam quandam adhibeant:
videlicet, ut dum in Collectis, pro communi orbis terrarum incolumitate, ad
Deum praeces funduntur, ipsi quoque tanquam hujus sacrae Communionis cives,
suas praeces cum oratione publica conjungunt, et vultu ad Nota.
altar verso, aperto et demisso capite stantes, gestum orantibus convenientem
prae se ferant. Pari religione ad nomen Salvatoris nostri Jesus Jesus and Christ
are here both united.
Christi, similiter ad Evangelium, Magnificat; Benedictus, Nunc dimitti^,
Gloria in Excelsis^ Gloria Patri, caeterasque id genus officiorum parts, sic
genuum flectione, apertione capitis, ac totius corporis gestu se componant, ut
ad ea quae ib^ aguntur, animum intendere videantur.

The Popish Council of Rhemes since that, viz. Anno Domini 1583. Anno 1583.
as Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib. 1. tit. 2, cap. 22; p. 21.
Bochellus records, made this Decree or Canon following: In pronunciatione
nominis Jesus, etcum dicitur versus, Gloria Patri, caput aperiant et inclinent.
That in the pronouncing of the name Jesus, and when the verse, Glory be to the
Father, was said or read, men should uncover their heads and bow. Which Canon
extends not unto women, 1. Cor. 11, 5, to 16.
who ought not to uncover their heads in the Church; much less to come thither
as so many strumpets, with 1 Cor. 11, 5 to 16. 1 Timothy 2, 9, 10. (...): 3, 3, 4.
Synodus Turon: 1^83, and Council. ^itur: 1584, apud ^ochel. Decr. Ecclesiae Gal.
l. 6. Tit 9, c^ 11, 12: See my Vn^lovelinesse of Love locks p. 12, to 23, 30,
31, 32, and 43, to 51.
cut, or broidred powldred hair, as our Viragoes do of late: Whereas the
words of Phil. 2. 9, 10, In the name of Jesus every knee should bow: extend to
women, as well as men: and rather to women's bowing, (who in their courtesies
bow both their knees full low) than to men's; who in their common courtesies or
legs at the name of Jesus, or to men, bow See Genesis 51 43. Matthew: 27, 29, Rom:
11, 4. bow the knee, not knees.
only one, not both their knees: whereas this text requires every knee to bow;
and so enjoynes the bowing of both knees, not of one alone; the courtesies of
women, not the heads, the caps, or legs of men.

The Popish Council of Aquitan: alias Bochellus Decr Eccl. Gal. l: 1, Tit: 7,
c: 28 p: 86.
Council: Bituricense, the very next year following: viz. Anno Dom: 1584, Anno
1584
promulgated this Canon to the like effect. In sine Psalmorum, et ubicunque
Gloria sanctissimae Trinitati redditur, omnes consurgant, et in invocatione
nominis Jesus, genu flectant: Which may be construed as well of kneeling only in
the invocation of the name of Jesus, as of bowing at the pronunciation of the
name of Jesus.

Besides these several Popish Councels; the Sorbonists about the year 1540,
from Phil: 2. v. 9, 10. as Calvin and Marlorat on that text record: began to
publish and teach this Doctrine; that as often as the name of Jesus should be
mentioned, ( as in some Portuasses and Masse-bookes it is repeated See Jesus
his Psalter, in which the name Jesus is called upon 450 times, 30 times
together in a place: which requires 30 several Genuflections. see Bp.
Babingtons Exposition of the Catholic faith, page 19^.
12, 20, and 30, if not 40 times together) so often men must bow their knees:
for which Doctrine write Calvin and Marlorat, they are more than ridiculous.
Plusquam ridiculi sunt Sorbonici Sophistae, etc. See page 5 before.

After these, the Rhemists about the year 1^82, in their Notes in their
Rhemish Testament, on Phil, 2. v. 9. 10 See Dr. Fu^k and Mr. Cart. wrights
Answer to the Rhemish Testament: ^b.
sect: 2 and on Apoc: 13. sect. 7. set on this Ceremony in an higher strain,
where they write thus. By the like wickedness the Protestants charge the
faithful people for capping or kneeling, when they hear the name of Jesus, as
though they worshipped not our Lord God therein, but the syllables or letters,
or other material elements, whereof the word written or spoken consi^teth: and
all this by sophistications to draw the people from due honor and devotion
toward Christ Jesus, which is Satan's drift, by putting scruples into poor
simple men's minds, about his Sacraments, his Saints, his His Cross and name;
etc. are here coupled together.
Cross, his Name, his Image, and such like, to abolish all true Religion out
of the world, and to make them plain Atheists. But the Church knows Satan's
cogitations, and therefore by the Scripture and reason, warranteth andteacheth
Nota.
all her children to do reverence whenever Jesus is named, because
Catholics What difference then can any Protestant bower at the name of Jesus
make between his bowing and the Papists; which Protestants formerly condemned,
and yet many of them now contend for.
do not honor these things, nor count them holy for their matter, color,
sound and syllables, but for the respect and relation they have to our Savior;
bringing us to the remembrance and apprehension of Christ, by sight, hearing,
and use of the same signs, else why make we not reverence at the name of Jesus
the son of Sirach, as well as at Jesus Christ. And it is a pitiful case to
see these profane subdeties of heretics to take place in religion, which
were ridiculous in all other trade of life. When we hear our Prince or
Sovereign named, we may without these scruples do obeisance. But toward
Christ it must be superstitious. And here it is much to be noted, that the
Protestants pulling down the Which some Protestants, in name at-least, begin
now to set up again, to please the Rhemists and Papists.
Image of Christ out of all Churches, and the sign of the Cross from men's
foreheads, and taking away the honor and reverence of the name of Jesus, do
make room for Antichrists Image, and mark, and name. Thus the Rhemists, whose
steps and genius the modern Protestant advocates and Patrons of bowing at the
name of Jesus, do follow to an hairs breadth; though Dr. Fulke, in his
Answer to the Rhemish Testament, Notes, on Phil. 2, secti^ 2 and on Apoc: 13,
sect; 7. Dr. Whitaker in his Answer to William Reinolds the Rhemist: Cantabrig^
1590, p: 398, 399. Mr. Cartwright in his Answer to the Rhemish Testament Where
he pithily disputes this point, as also in his first Reply to Bp. Whitguifts
Answer p. 163 and in his 2. Reply p. 215.
Notes on Phil: 2, sect: 2. Dr. Willet in his Synopsis Papismi, Century 2,
Error: 51, Dr. Aytie in his Lectures on Phil: 2. 9, 1^. And above all other,
that Reverend Father of our Church, Gervase Babington, Bishop of Worcester, a
professed enemy to this Popish Ceremony, In his Exposition of the Catho like
Faith; in his Works in Folio, London, 1622, part 2, page 195, 196, 197
professedly condemn this Doctrine, this Ceremony of theirs, as a gross
ridiculous Popish Error: which is no ways grounded on Phil: 2, verse 9, 10.
as all these: together with Pareus, Heidelbergiae 1613.
Commentarius in cap: 14, ad Romanos, verse. 11. Col: 1475, 1476, 1477. Ioannes
Brentius in his Francosurti 1548, fol. 54, to 58.
Explicatio in Epist Pauli ad Phillip: c: 2, v: 9, 10. Ioannes Piscator,
Herbornae 1616.
Scholia in cap: 2, ad Philip: v: 9: 10: page: 1166. and Obser: 6. ex verse: 10,
p: 1162. to omit all others formerly quoted, do largely prove.

Since these, I find some private Popish. Authors, (especially the Jesuits,
who deriving the style of their Order from the name of Jesus, do most stickle
for this bowing at the name of Jesus;) who have As I hear of some Protestants
who are now writing for this Ceremony too, as hot as any Jesuits.
written in defense and patronage of this Popish Ceremony: As namely one
Alphonsus Salmeron a famous Jesuit: who in his Works at large: Tom: 1,
Prolegomenon. 24. De Dignit. et Majest. Evang: p. 387, 388, writes thus. That
certain Popes of Rome, ( and among the rest, Oper^^ Tom. 3. Tract. 37, p. 335.
Pope John the 22. who granted an Indulgence for 200 days to all who should
either bow their knees, or incline their heads, or knock their breasts at the
name of Jesus) have taught, that men are to bow their heads or knees at the
naming of Jesus to represent the great humiliation and ex^^inition of Christ:
and that a certain Monk was cuffed by the It seems the Devil is better
pleased with this bowing, than Christ.
Devil for omitting this bowing, etc. And Operum Tom: 3, Tract. 37. Vccatum
est nomen ejus Jesus: p: 335, he records; That the name of Jesus is worthy all
worship, genuflection and adoration, in which name Paul would have every knee
to bow both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth. For this name, whether it be pronounced with the mouth, or heard with
the ear, or Let our Bowers at the name of Jesus note this well, and answer it
as they can.
where ever it is written, painted, or engraven, is worthy divine worship; not
for the bare word, writing, or picture it self, but for the signification of
it: as You see how the Papists rank these three together; the adoration of the
Cross, the Image, and the name of Jesus.
the Cross and Image of Christ are deservedly adored with the worship of
Latria, for the type and mystery represented in them. etc. The same Doctrine we
shall find in Comelius a Lapide a Jesuit, in his Commentary on Phil. 2. 9,
10. and in Carolus Printed Augustae Vindelicorum 1613, where there is much
written of this name to little purpose.
Stengelius De SS. Nomine Jesus, cap: 23. where he quotes this text of Phil. 2.
9, 10. and the Decree of Pope Gregory the 10. informing Protestants: ibid: p:
125, 126. that Papists honor not the Letters, syllables or sound of the name
Jesus, but the thing contained and signified together with the sound and
syllables: But some, says he, may say: Why do we bow at the name of Jesus,
rather than at the name of Christ? I answer, because Christ is not a proper
name, but a declaration of Christ's kingdom and power: But This is Bp^ Andrews
his Reason too; see his Sermons, p. 475, 476, 477.
Jesus is a proper name, which he has bought with his great pain, and has
received as a reward of his labor. For although this name were imposed on him
in his very Circumcision, and promised to him in his conception, yet both these
were done, because he ought to do that in his time, which the name does
signiie; to wit, to save his people. Paul therefore affirms, that this name
was given to him, because he actually performed this with his great pain.
Phil: 2. He humbled himself, therefore God has highly exalt^d him, and given
him a name above every name: that in the name of Jesus every knee should (...),
etc. Therefore this most honorable name is given, because he merited it. This
is Mr. Widows his reason: see his Confutation, p. 6. and. 30 to 32, and 81,
82.
The name it self is thus honored, because be has merited it. As often
therefore as we Catholics honor the name of Jesus by bowing the knee, so often
we give unto him due and deserved honor, which he has merited with a great
price, so often we do that we might and are bound to do; not only (...) of
cong^^ity for the greatness of the benefit conferred upon us, but also out of
debt, by reason of the will and precept of the eternal Father; who has
therefore given this name unto his Son, that In nomine, not, adnomen, which
signifies to, not at the name; so that those who bow (...) Jesus, (...) to it,
not (...), and so are (...).
in this name every knee should ^ow, that all should worship this name, and in
worshipping should confess, that Jesus is in the glory of his Father. But as
often as the heretics (who utter and hear this name without any reverence,
because they have not the holy Ghost) do not worship this name, as often as they
refuse to bow and worship; as often as they decide others who worship and bow the
knee unto it; So writes Mr. Widows too; page 6, 14 15, 16, 17, 25, 26, 74,
86, 87, 88, 90.
so often they violate the precept and will of God the Father; so often they do
injury to God the Some, and deny him his due honor; so often they contradict the
Apostle, so often they scandalize, or rather decide the Church of God: Finally,
so often they d^e acceptable service to the Devil, Yet Salmeron informed us
before, that the Diveleassed a Monk for omitting it and therefore he is rather
the Author, than the hinderer of this bowing.
who has in an especial manner taught them this, and by them does (...) this
impiety unto others. This (...) much more to this purpose does this Benedictine
Fr^er, Stengeli^s, write: which I thought good in part to transcribe, because
its verbati^^ the same with Mr. Widows, and other late Protestants writings,
and See Bp. Andrews Sermons in Folio. p. 475 476, 477, Mr. Adams his Sermons,
p. 1203. Dr. Wrens Sermon, Febr. 12 26 27. p. 26, 28.
Sermons to this purpose; between whom and these, there is now no difference
at all in this point of ^^^ing (...) the ^^^ing of Jesus, for ought that I can
find; and so they are both accorded.

Finally, ^^^sseby (...)
Richardus Hampole his Book De (...) nominis Jesus with ^^^dry other Popish
Authors, who have written largely of this subject, and found out many See
Luca^ Tudensis Ad. verse. Albigens. Errores l. 2, c. 10. Iunocentius 3. in
Circumcisione Domini, Sermo 1. Operum Tom. 1, p. 93, 94, 95. Carolus Stengelius
de ss. Nomine Jesus: cap: ^, and 30: See Bp. Babington Exposit of the Catholic
faith, p. 196, 197. Erasmus Paraph. on Phil. 2^ and others accordingly.
absurd, ridiculous, cabalisticall conceits and mysteries in the very letters
of the name Jesus, to draw more reverence and bowing to it: The Popes, the
Church and Priests of Rome, to advance this Ceremony the more, See the Mass
book, Jesus his Psalter^ and Carolus Stengelius, De ss. Nomine Jesus cap. 23,
p: 127 accordingly.
have inserted this notable prayer for the bowers at the name of Jesus, into
the Mass of the name Jesus: ( for which very name they have a particular
Mass, and Psalter, as they have a Feast:) God, who have made the most glorious
name of Jesus Christ thy only Son amiable with the chief affection of
sweetness to thy faithful ones, and dreadful and terrible to evil spirits,
mercifully grant, that all those who devoutly Viz by bowing unto it, when it is
pronounced, as Stengelius understands it.
worship this name of Jesus on earth; may receive the sweetness of its holy
consolation in this present world, and in the world to come may obtain the joy
of endless exultation and bliss in heaven, by the same our Lord Jesus Christ
thy Son. The benefit of which Masse-prayer, our modern Advocates for bowing
at the name of Jesus, with all their zealous Proselites, may do well to claim.

This is the only true gennine Pedigree and progress of this much pressed
Duty, and admired Ceremony, of bowing at the name of Jesus, that I in my poor
reading can find in all antiquity. If better, graver, or more learned Heralds
can derive its Parentage higher, ( as Bp. Andrews and Mr. Widows, who quote
some Fathers for it: whereas Bp. Whitguist, and Zanchius write only, That it
was an ancient custom and practice in the Church, but quote no Authorities to
prove it, because in truth there are none extant.
some have vainly endeavored, to deduce it from the Fathers, and the
constantpractise of the Primitive Church; when as I am confident upon good
inquiry, that there is no one Father, no ancient Writer extant, to prove or
warrant what they write, as the examination of their See here p. 7, 8, 31, 32.
alleged testimonies will at first discover,) I shall be willing to be
corrected and instructed by them. But if they must needs concur with me in
this its Popish Descent, which I have here set down; (as I presume they must,
since Popish Priests and Jesuits, who have been most inquisitive in
discovering its original, have raised it no higher than the Popes I have
recited:) let them now at last for very shame (unless they intend to turn
professed Jesuits, and open Champions for the Romish whore,) contend no more
for such a Duty such a Ceremony, which had no other Father, but the forenamed
Popes; no other Mother, Nurse, or Midwife, but the Antichristian Church of
Rome, with whose Popish Ceremonies, Relics, Altars, Images, Crucifixes,
Genuflections, Bowings and such like idolatrous, Sic nata Romana superstitio,
quorum ritus si percenseas, ridenda quam multa, multa etiam miseranda funt.
Minucius Felix, Octav. p. 76.
superstitious, ridiculous Rites, which get ground apace upon us; the reformed
Church of England, with all her faithful Bishops, Ministers, Members, (
especially since the prodigious, unparalleld hellish Powder Plot) should stand
at everlasting defiance; for fear 2 Thessalonians: 2, 10, 11, 12
God give us over to strong delusions to believe her impious lies to our
damnation; and then shower down his long-threatned judgments on us, (of which
the late revived Plague, and feared Famine, should now in time admonish us) to
our eternal ruin. What therefore Tertullian writes of Stage Plays, ( which
had the very Devil himself for their original Author, as he, with Cyprian,
De spectac. lib Salvian De Guber. Dei l. 6.
others largely proves, which should cause all Christians, who in their very
baptism have renounced the Devil and all his works, etc. for ever to abandon
them:) De spectaculis lib. c, 8.
Facit ad originis maculam, ne bonum existimes quod initium a malo accepit: the
same shall be my conclusion in the point in question; Bowing at the name of
Jesus, had its original, growth and progress from the Antichristian Popes and
Church of Rome, who propagated it by their Indulgences, See the Council of
Seine, the Rhemists, Salmeron, Stengelius and Fulkqua supra.
to justify their idolatrous bowing to Images, Crucifixes, Hosts and Altars,
as I have fully manifested in the premises: therefore proceeding from such a
putr^d fountain, such an impure Parentage, no pious Protestant, I dare say,
can repute it good, much less praiseworthy. Tertullian. De Spectac. (...)
Oderis itaque Christian, cujus auctores non poteris non odisse.

FINIS.
Errata, and Omissions.
COurteous Reader, I thought good to admonish thee of one gross omission,
which through the Printers carelessness has happened in the 36. page, line 1.
between idolatrous too? and Francis de Croy, etc. which because it interrupts
the Discourse, I shall request thee instead of Francis de Croy, etc. to read
as follows.

Bowing at, to, or before Altars, how highly soever some men esteem it, had
its original from idolatrous Pagans: who, as they Instauratque choros,
mistique Altaria ^ircum Cretesque Dryopesque fremunt, pictique Agathyrsi etc.
stant arae circum. Virgil. AEneid. l. 4, p. 179, 184, Dona ferunt, cumulantque
oneratis lancibus Aras: Tum Salii ad cantus incensa Altaria circum, Populeis
adsunt incincti tempora ramis Hic iuvenum chorus, ille senum, etc. Virg. AE
neid. l. 8, Antwerpiae 1613, p. 280, see Strabo Geog l. 10, Ovid Fastoru^ l. 4,
5, 6. and Alexander ab Alexandro l. 4, c. 17, f. 226, 227, accordingly.
danced and stood round about their Altars when they sacrificed; in which, on
which, or at leastwise by and over which, the Sea Exodus 34, 13. Deutr. 7, 5; c.
12 3; ^ Kings 11, 18; Ezech. 6, 4, 6; 2 Chronicles. 14, 3; c. 34, 4; Acts 17, 16,
23, 29, and Dr. Rainolds De Idol. Romans Ecclesiae, l, 2, c; 3, sect; 46.
Images of their Idols were placed or engraven; (in imitation of which, most
Popish glittering Altars have their gaudy Crucifixes, Saints, or Images
standing on them, near them, over them; to entice the people to bow down unto
them: when as God commanded all his Altars, to be made of naught Exodus: 20, 24,
25, 26; Deuteronomy: 27 5, 6, Josh: 8, ^, 31.
but earth; or of unhewen stones: (not polished, graven marble, gold, or
silver:) without any images or curious sculptures; the better to keep the
people from bowing to them, or before them; to which more See Exodus: 20, 23, 24,
Psalm: 115, 4, and 135, 15, Isay 2, 20, and 30, 22, Ier, 10, 4, Ezech; 16, 17,
18, Dan, 3, 1, to 8, and 5, 4, 23, Hosea 13, 2, and Acts 17, 29, Quis ergo
dubitat horum imagines consecratas vulgus orare, et public colere, dum opinio
et men's imperitorum artis concinnitate deeipitur, auri fulgore perstring^tur,
argenti nitore, et candore eboris hebitatur, Minucius Felix, Octav, p, 73, 74,
75, see the 2, and 3, part of the Homily against the peril of Idolatry
accordingly.
rich materials of silver, gold and pearls, set out by art, might easily
induce them;) so they likewise honored their Altars with cappe and knee,
Autante ora Deum pingues spatiatur ad Aras Dicitur ante Aras media inter numina
Di^um: Multa Iovem manibus supplex orasse supinis Virg. AEneid l. 4. p. 171
175. Iamque dies epulata novem gens omnis, and Aris factus honos AEneid. l. 5.
p. 213 Hane Aram luco statuit quaemaxima semper, Dicetur nobis, and erit quae
maxima semper AEneid l. 8, p. 279 anotable description of an high Altar.
bowing down unto them, yea war shipping, praying at them and before them.
Whence God enjoynes the Israelites. [Exod. 34. 13. Deutr. 7. 5. c: 12, 3. Judge.
6. 25, 26, 28, 30. 2 Kings 11. 18. 2 Chronicles: 14, 3, c. 30. 14, c. 32, 12. c. 33,
15, and 34, 4, 5, 7. Isay 36, 7. Hosea 8, 11, and 10. 1, 2.] to throw down and
quite demolish the Altars and Images of these Idolaters, (which the good Kings
of Israel did accordingly.) not only because they sacrificed on them, but
because they also worshipped and bowed to them, and before them: As Exodus 20,
4, 5, 23; 24, 25. c: 23, 24, c: 34, 13. Levit. 26. 1. Deutr. 7. 5. cap: 12, 2,
3. 2 Kings 11, 18, c: 18. 22. 2 Chronicles: 14, 3, 5. c: 28. 24. 25. c: 30, 14. c:
32, 12. c: 34, 4, 5, 7. Isay 2. 8, 9. c: 17, 8. c: 36, 7. Hosea 10. 1, 2. Acts
17, 23. 2 Chronicles: 25: 14. compared together: incomparable Dr. Rainolds, De
Roman^e Ecclesi^ Idololatria, l: 2, c: 3, sect: 46, p: 431, 432, Francis De
Cr^y in his first Conformity, cap: 24, with others testify. Then read as in
the Copy.

Other material Omissions and Errataes there are, which because they are
already corrected, I here pass by, informing thee only of one thing worth thy
observation: To wit, that it appears expressly by Levit: 1, 11, 16. Exodus: 20,
26. c: 26, 35, c: 40, 6, 7. 26, to 34. Josh: 22, 10, 11, 2 Samuel: 24, 18, 25. 1
Kings 6, 22. c: 8, 64 c: 18, 32, 35. 2 Kings 11, 11 c: 12; 9. c: 16, 14, c: 1,
5. c: 23, 12, 2 Chronicles: 1, 6. c: 5, 12. c: 15, 8. c: 33, 4, 5. Psalm: 26, 6. Isay
19, 19. Ier: 11, 13. c: 17, 2. Ez^ch: 6, 4, 5. c: 8, 5. c: 9, 2. c: 40, 47.
Joel 2, 17. Matthew: 23, 35, that both religious and idolatrous Altars
heretofore, did not stand Eastward, nor yet at the east and of their Temples
against a wall, at Popish Altars, and some Communion-tables turned Altar-wise,
now do (...) Northward, or Southward; either before the d^^^es, or in the
Court, the porch, the entrance, the body, or midst of their Temples; and that
in such a manner, as men might have space enough either to stand, or walk even
round about them. And hence I suppose our The last Ru^^^^e before the (...).
Common-Prayer-Booke, our Canon 82.
Canons, Iniunction ult. For Tables in the Church.
and Qu. Elizabeth's Injunctions, expressly order: That all our Communion Tables,
when the Sacrament is administered; shall stand, (not in the East end of the
Chancel Altarwise, No Table ever stands so at which men use to eat; the
placing of it therefore in this posture like a Kitchen Dresser, Bench, or
Sidetable, does in a manner make it cease to be a Communion Table, and adds
disgrace unto it.
with one side against the wall, where some unconformable over-Conformists have
lately hedged them in; for which an Indictment lies against them upon the
Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 2. besides other Ecclesiastical Censures by their
Ordinary:) but in the body of the Church or Chancell, so as the Communicants
may place themselves round about them. Men usually Psalm, 128, 3. 1 Samuel 16, 11.
sit round about their Tables at meals: yea See Mat, 26 20, 26, 27. Mat. 14,
18, etc. Luk 12, 14, 27, 30. John 13, 12, 28 1 Cor. 10, 16, 11. c. 11, 20, to
the end. See Luke 24, 30, c. 7 37, 49. c. 11, 37 Mat. 9, 10, Mat 16, 14. Ps^
128, 3, 1 Samuel 16, 11, and Godwins Jewish Antiquities, l. 3 c. 11. p. 114, 115,
116. How Christ, his Apostles, and the Jews did use to sit round about their
Tables; and that Christ did sit so when he instituted the Sacrament. Therefore
if we will imitate Christ, our Communion tables must be so placed, that the
Communicants may sit or kneel round about them.
Christ himself and Apostles sat round the Table when he instituted this his
holy Sacrament, as all the Evangelists witness, and so should we do too.
Which I observe the rather, to control the irregular practice of some
ignorant Popish Innovatours: who against the express command both of our
Common-prayer-booke, Canons, Injunctions, yea the very practice of Christ, his
Apostles, and of the Church before and since their time; dare turn
Communion-tables into Altars, (though we have now none else but Romans 15, 27 1.
Pet, 2, 5. John 12, 1, Phil, 4, 18. Heb. 13, 10, 15. c. 4, 26, 27, 28. c. 10,
to the 14.
spiritual Priests and Sacrifices, and so no Altars, but one spiritual Altar,
which is Christ:) or at leastwise place the^ Altarwise, against the wall and
East End of the Church, even when the Communion is administered. Which
uncanonicall practices I hope they will now reform; or else I trust our
Bishops in their Consistories, or in their default, our Judges and ^ustices in
their Sessions, will legally proceed against them; and against those who set
up Images and Saints Pictures in our Churches, contrary to the express Statute
of 3. E. 6. c. 10. the Homelies against the peril of, (...) ^^^^blished by the
22. and 35. Articles of our Church, and by the Statute of 13, Eliz. c. 12.
which confirms our Articles, as the undoubted Doctrine of the Church of
England, and so by consequent our Homilies (...) contrary to Qu. Eliz.
Injunctions, Injunct. 2, 3, 23, 25. and the Articles to be enquired of in
Visit^tions, set forth in 1559. Artic: 2, and 45 All which expressly command all
Images, (...) the Stat. of 13 Eliz. c. 2. al such as bring over any consecrated
Ag^^^^ Dei, Crosses, Pictures, ^eads or such like superstitious things, and
such who wittingly buy, receive, or wear the same, incur a Praemunire. And
yet how many now transgress this Law?
Crucifixes, Shrines, Pictures, Paintings, Candlestickes, Bundles and Rolls of
wax, and all other Monuments of f^ined Miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry and
Supersticion, to be taken away, defaced, destroyed, and utterly extinct, so
that there remain no memory of the same in walls, glasse-windowes, or
elsewhere, neither in Churches, nor private houses. Yea contrary to the Statate
of 3. Iacobi chap. 5. Which as it enacts: See 3, and 4, E. 6, c. 10, to the
same effect
That no person or persons shall bring from beyond the seas, nor shall print,
sell, or buy any Popish Primmers, Ladies Psalters, Manuels, Rosaries, Popish
Catechismes, Missalls, Breviaries, Portalls, Legends and Lives of Saints,
containing superstitious matter, printed or written in any language whatsoever,
nor any other superstitious books printed or written in the English Tongue;
upon pain of forfeiture of 40 shillings for every such book. (A law that needs
due execution now, when so many of these Books are brought over into England
every Especially the last, when there were few else, but such books as these
brought over.
Mart, and sold publicly almost in every shop without control:) soit
authorizeth Justices of the Peace, Majors, Baylifes, and other chief Officers
in their liberties, to search the houses and lodgings both of convicted and
suspected Recusants for such books, and relics, and to deface and burn their
The Altar does always sanctify the sacrifice, not the sacrifice the Altar,
Mat: 23, 18, 19, 20. If then we have any Altars now, then our Altars
consecrate the Sacrament, not the Priests, or words of consecration: and so our
Altars are greater and better than our Sacraments.
Altars, Pictures, Beads, and Crucifixes, as the very Relics of Popery and
monuments of Idolatry: All which our Church, our State, thus abolishing and
condemning, I hope they will speedily inflict such penalties on all those
Popish agents who now endeavor to reduce the^, as their offense demerits, and
our Laws prescribe.

FINIS.

