A TREATISE OF THE SABBATH AND THE LORD'S DAY.

Distinguished into four parts.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED BOTH THE Nature, Original, and Observation, as well of
the one under the Old, as of the other under the New Testament.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY DAVID PRIMEROSE Batchelour in Divinity in the University
of Oxford, and Minister of the Gospel in the Protestant Church of Roven.

Englished out of his French Manuscript by his Father G. P. D. D.



LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger for William Hope, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Glove in Corne-Hill. 1636.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
I Wrote to my Son, Preacher of the Gospel at Roven, desiring him to set
down in a paper (distinctly and clearly) his oinion concerning the Sabbath,
with the confirmation thereof by such arguments which he should think most
pregnant, and a solid refutation of the contrary arguments; which he did
accordingly, but in the French Tongue, as writing only out of a dutiful
affection to condescend to my desire, not thinking, and far less desiring it
should be Englished and made public here: Neither had I any such intention, as
being most unwilling that he, who is a stranger to this nation, although not a
stranger to the Church, should go foremost to break this ye. And therefore I
kept it by me three years, till being advertised that others were gone before,
and their Books were on the Press, and finding no man that would or could
translate it into our Tongue, and take the wearisome pains to place the
additions (which he sent me at diverse times afterward) in their rooms: I
undertook this labor my self, hoping that things being compared with things,
cause with cause, reasons with reasons, and the contrary arguments, which are
to be found in so many books, for and against the morality of a seventh day of
a weekly Sabbath, being examined and conferred one by another, the Christian,
charitable, and judicious Readers shall be stirred up, after they have proved 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
all things, to hold fast that which is good, without imparing any thing of
that religious service which they owe and yield publicly in the Church, and
privately at home with their families to the Lord their God, who needs not the
errors of men (though never so specious) for the upholding of his service. If
in this end of my translation I have done any thing amiss, I say with David,
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a Psalm. 141. v. 5.
kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not
break mine head. In the mean while, let all Christians, according to the
exhortation of the Apostle, put off anger, wrath, malice, Col. 3. v. 8, 14.
and put on charity, which is the bond of perfection, and so walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith Ephesians. 4. v. 1, 2, 3.
we are called, with all lowlines and meekness, with long suffering,
forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace; that living in 2 Cor. 13. v. 11,
peace, the God of love and peace may be with us, and live in us for ever and
ever.

Amen.
THE PREFACE.
The state of the Question.
1. All men are bound to serve God every day privately, in some measure,
according to his word.

2. They are also bound to serve him publicly, and to have a day stinted for
his public service.

3. There is among godly and learned Christians a great controversy about the
Original, Nature, and Observation of that day.

4. Some hold the sanctification and observation of one of the seven days of
the week to be moral, and therefore of perpetual necessity, since the
beginning unto the end of the world.

5. Others maintain, that the stinting of a day for Gods public service, is a
point of order, and of Ecclesiastical government, depending wholly on
institution.

6. This Treatise made for the defense of this last opinion, is divided into
four parts.

1 ALl men are obliged to honor and serve God all the days of their life, by
the heedfull practice of all the exercises of religion and godliness, which
he has prescribed in his holy word. Neither ought they to let any day slip
without the employment of some time, and the careful applying of themselves in
some competent measure to that duty, that thereby they may thrive in the
knowledge of truth which is after godliness, and increase in sanctification,
without which no man shall see the Lord. Nevertheless, seeing God has
ordained, that man in the sweat of his face shall eat his bread, and live by
the labor of his own hands, Genesis 3. v. 19. that this transitory and dying
life is besieged with so numerous an host of difficulties, that it cannot be
guarded without many necessary employments returning every day, that the labor
whereunto all men are tied, will scarcely suffer them to take their breath,
they cannot, for the most part, apply themselves to the necessary actions of
Gods service, with such care, vigilancie, attention, and continuance, as is
requisite.

2 These ordinary pains of temporal callings are a far greater impeachment to
the public and solemn service that the faithful are bound to render jointly
to God in their public meetings. For the King of heaven is not satisfied with
their private devotions in their closets severally, or together with their
families at home: but will have them also to do unto him full and absolute
homage abroad, confessing him to be their Creator, Redeemer, and perpetual
Benefactor, calling upon his holy name, and setting forth his praise in their
congregations, and religious assemblies. Now the days of man are a warfare
upon earth, and his days are like the days of an hireling, and the life of
the faithful is entangled and diverted with so many necessary and toilesome
affairs, that it is very difficult unto them, to have such holy and religious
meetings every day; yea, in many places it is impossible. Therefore it is
altogether necessary, that a day be chosen and picked out from amongst a number
of other days, and peculiarly appointed, that in it, as often as it returns,
all persons, setting aside the care of all temporal and worldly affairs, and
daily employments, may extraordinarily set themselves with one accord to serve
God publicly in the assemblies appointed for that end, and that each person
may, on that day, serve him apart, before and after the public service, with
such a regard and assiduity, that it go beyond the ordinary devotion of every
day. No body amongst true Christians which take to heart the honor, glory and
service of God, will make a controversy of this. Neither is this the subject
of the controversy which is canvassed and sifted on both sides with great
earnestness, yea with too great eagerness between many Christians, which are
learned, godly, and consenting in the profession of the same doctrine and truth
of the Gospel of peace.

3 Their variance and disagreement is about the nature, beginning, and
particular observation of the day which is separated from all other days, that
it may be especially applied to Gods service; to wit, 1. If it be a thing of
natural justice, of perpetual necessity, and whereunto all are tied by a
moral commandment appertaining to the New as well as to the Old Testament,
that of seven days of the week one be kept for the end aforesaid. 2. If
before the Law was given by Moses to the people of Israel, yea if from the
beginning of the world God himself made the particular designation of this
day, setting it apart for his service, and commanding to Adam, and to all his
posterity, the hallowing and keeping of it. 3. If under the New Testament there
be a divine ordinance of such a day of rest, as well as there was under the Old
Testament. 4. And if by Gods command the consciences of faithful Christians
are under the Gospel as much obliged to hallow it, as the Jews were under the
Law, and for the better, and more religious sanctification thereof, to abstain
from all outward works, which are lawful and are practiced on other days,
lest they should transgress that divine Commandment, and so finne against
religion and conscience.

These are the maine points which some learned Divines, and godly Christians
instructed by them demurre upon. 1. Some of them deem, that the keeping of one
of the seven days of the week is a moral and natural duty, that God
himself sanctified it for his service by an express and perpetual
Commandment, that so it was from the beginning, so it is still, and shall
never be otherwise till the end of the world. 2. That before sin came into the
world, as soon as Adam was created, God prescribed unto him and to Eve our
first parents, and in them to all men which were in their loins, and were to
come out of them, the hallowing of one day of the week, which was the seventh
day. 3. That he reiterated and renewed this Commandment in the fourth precept
of the moral Law, which he gave in Horeb to the people of Israel, and has
bound all Christians under the New Testament to hallow and keep it
religiously, because it is of the same nature with the rest of the
Commandments of the Decalogue, which are all moral. 4. That for this cause
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his blessed Apostles have ordained and
prescribed it unto them; And so all men have been, all men are, all men shall
in all times be tied to the religious observation thereof by the necessity of a
divine and moral Commandment. 5. That we are bound in conscience by the
binding power of this Commandment, to refrain always on this seventh day of
Sabbath or of rest, from all earthly works used on the other days of the
week. 6. This only they acknowledge, that the particular observation of one
constant day amongst these seven, as of the first or of the last of seven, is
not moral, nor of a like obligation under the Old, and under the New
Testament; that it is only a point of order, and of ecclesiastical
government, which God did otherwise order and settle under the Old, than he
has done under the New Testament: That under the Old Testament, from the
creation of the world, till the coming of Christ, he ordained the observation
of the last day of the week, in remembrance that he created the world in six
days; and rested on the seventh or last day from all the works that he had
made: whereas he has ordained, that under the New Testament, the first day of
the week shall be religiously solemnized, in remembrance that on that day our
Lord Jesus Christ rose from death to life, and by the exceeding greatness of
the power of his glorious resurrection has performed the work of the second
creation, which is the redemption of the world, from the slavery of the devil,
the power of the Law, the bondage of sin; And therefore it behooveth the
first work of the Creation to yield to this work the prerogative of
excellency of nature, as likewise of the possession which it had till then of
the solemn day of rest. That for this cause so important and peremptory the
day of Gods service was to be changed and removed from the last day of the
week, wherein was finished the first Creation, unto the first day wherein the
second was fully accomplished by our Lord Jesus Christ, who has himself
appointed this alteration.

5 Others do hold, that verily it is a duty natural, moral, and perpetual,
to serve God publicly; 1. That all men are obliged unto it; and bound to meet
together in the Church for that purpose. 2. That being there, they ought to
give their minds to the exercises of religion with a more particular
earnestnes, and diligence, than they are able to do every day at home, or
abroad. 3. That they must have a set day purposely stinted for the fulfilling
of a duty so religious, so necessary, and so fruitful. 4. But that such a day
must be one of seven, or of another number, and which in order of that number,
they deny to be a moral point, and to have in it any natural necessity. For
their tenet is, that it is a thing of order, and of Ecclesiastical government,
depending entirely of institution. 5. That indeed under the Law, which God gave
by Moses to the children of Israel, this holy and most perfect Lawgiver,
amongst other points whereby he directed the Ecclesiastical order and
Church Government which that people was to be ruled by, instituted and
commanded the consecrating of a several day for his service, even of one of
seven, and of the last of those seven which he had rested on from all his
works, and a most strict and precise forbearance of all worldly works on that
day. 6. But appears not at all, that God gave any commandment to Adam,
either before or after his fall, binding him or his progeny to the keeping of
any day whatsoever, as to a thing moral and necessary, neither is there any
trace of such a Commandment to be found, till the coming of the Israelites to
the wilderness, for till then God had left it free. 7. That under the New
Testament one day of seven is kept, to wit, the first day of the week, wherein
our Lord Jesus Christ rose from the dead; But not for any moral necessity
tying all men to observe one day of the week; Nay, not for any express
Commandment which God the only Lawgiver has given by Jesus Christ, or his
Apostles, to keep such a day, and namely the first; but through an usage which
has been introduced and conserved in the Christian Church since her first
beginnings, till this present time. 8. That therefore this observation is
simply of Ecclesiastical order, and that a cessation from ordinary works on
this day, is more particularly requisite than in another day of the week,
seeing the Church has appointed and set it apart for Gods public service:
Yea, that an universal refraining from all these works, to the intent that
the whole day be without disturbance bestowed on Gods service, is good and
laudable. 9. Yet this is not in such sort necessary, as if it were a sin
against religion and conscience to a Christian, after divine service finished
in the Church, to apply himself to outward actions belonging to the lawful and
honest commodities and pleasures of this decaying and troublesome life, when
they do it with Christian wisdom, which must be the guide of all our
actions, leading us so warily that we transgress not the wholesome laws of
the state, or of the Church wherein we live, and that we shun all partialities
and cause of schism, which is the bane of the Church, dismembring, and tearing
in factious pieces the mystical body of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, which the true
doctrine of faith had preserved from the poison of mortal herefie.

6 Of these two foresaid opinions, the last, to my judgment, is the truest,
and has more solid and clear reasons than the first, as shall be seen by
the canvasing and sifting out of the reasons that are broached on both sides.
Which to do more distinctly and clearly, I will divide this Treatise into
four parts: In the first I shall endeavor to prove, that the institution and
observation of a seventh day of Sabbath, is not moral, that it began not with
the beginning of the world, that it had no existence, till the people of Israel
were brought from Egypt to the wilderness, and was not known in any part of
the universal world till then, and that the Commandment whereby it was
confirmed in Horeb, obliges not under the New Testament. In the second, I
shall answer all the reasons that I have found alleged for the contrary
opinion. In the third, I shall discourse of the appointing of Sunday for Gods
service, and show whence, in greatest likeness of truth, it takes its
beginning and establishment in the Christian Church. In the last, I will
declare what was the cessation of works enjoined in the Sabbath day under the
old Testament, and how far we are obliged unto it under the New Testament. For
these are the principal points that Christians jarre and differ about in this
matter of the Sabbath.

Perlegi hunc Tractatum, cui Titulus est [A Treatise of the Sabbath and the
Lords-day] and nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo
minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur; ita tamen ut si non intra septem menses
proxime sequentes typis mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis Ianuar. 5. 1635. GUIL. BRAY R. in Christo Patri D.
Arch. Cant. Capel. Domest.

THE FIRST PART wherein it is proved that the Ordinance and observation of a
Seventh-Day of Sabbath, is not moral, has not its beginning since the
beginning of the World, and obliges not under the New Testament.
CHAPTER First.
REASON I.
1. First Reason. The times and places of Gods service, are accidental
circumstances, and have no moral equity in them, but depend on a particular
institution.

2. GOD took occasion of his resting on the Seventh day to institute that day.

3. Confession of some that are of the contrary opinion.

1 TO establish the second of these two opinions before mentioned, and to refute
the first, whereby the observation of one day of rest in the week is affirmed
to be a moral duty, I say First, that the nature of the thing called in
question is repugnant to this opinio. For it is a thing evident of it self,
that as the places, even so the times of Gods service are accidental
circumstances, which have no foundation in any natural and essential justice
and equity, nor any necessity inherent in them, but depend absolutely on the
ordinance of God, or of men. What has in it one day of seven, more than one of
a greater or lesser number, wherefore we should affirm, that the observation
of that day, rather than of another day, is a moral duty, appertaining, yea
necessary to whole mankind, that thereby it may attain unto the end for which
man was created, therefore it has an obligatory power over all nations in all
ages, which may be demonstrated and showed perspicuously by natural reasons,
as some have too hardily pronounced, but without any evidence produced, saving
their simple word, which to men that have eyes in their heads, and scorn to be
Pythagoras Disciples is no good payment.

2 It was the Creation of the world in six days, and Gods rest on the seventh
day, that was to God the occasion of the appointing of the seventh day, for his
service: Now who can show in that wonderful work of the Creation in six
days, and in Gods rest on the seventh day the least appearance of morality? As
there appears no such thing unto us, so no other reason of this dispensation
is made manifest unto us, saving the good pleasure of GOD, who would have it
so. For who can conceive, and far less express and show by words, any
essential justice in the observation of this number of days that God pitched
upon for the framing of his works, and his resting from them?

3 Some of them against whom I have undertaken this brotherly disputation, have
acknowledged and said, that we observe not one day of seven under the New
Testament, as a part of Gods service, but only as the time thereof, which
shows that it is not a moral thing. For if it were, it should be
essentially a part of Gods service, as is universally whatsoever is moral.
Under the Old Testament it made a part of Gods service, not of the moral, but
of the ceremonial and typike service, established then in the infancy of the
Church, and which was not to continue but during that time, as we shall see
hereafter.

CHAPTER Second.
REASON 2.
1. Second Reason, Adam knew not the Sabbath by natural light, therefore it
was not moral.

2. Reply by a distinction of moral things, in those that are natural or
positive.

3. First answer, all moral things are naturally just.

4. Second answer, all moral things are perpetual, which moral are not.

1 SEcondly, if the keeping of a seventh day were a moral duty, our first
Father Adam, by that light of nature which GOD put in his mind when he created
him, would have known it, as well as he knew all other things which in
themselves are good and necessary. But he neither had, nor should have had any
knowledge thereof, if God had not enjoined it unto him by a particular
commandment, as those which maintain the morality of the Sabbath do avouch,
pretending that such a command was given him for that end, which we shall
ponder and discuss in time and place. In the mean while of this it follows
manifestly, that the observation of a seventh day, is a thing depending merely
of institution and ecclesiastical regiment, and that in the decalogue the
fourth Commandment, in as far as it injoyneth a seventh day, is not of the
same nature with the rest: For if it were, God had observed the same course
toward Adam for that commandment, as he did for all the rest, and for all
the rest as for that, which nevertheless he did not: For he ingraved the
substance and tenor of all the other Commandments in Adams heart, and made him
to know them naturally, without any instruction by word of mouth, whereof he
had no need. But he wrote not in his heart the knowledge of the fourth
Commandment, seeing, as they say, he declared it unto them by audible words
resounding in his ears, that he might know it: whence it follows, that all
the rest are moral, but this is not whereof we shall have occasion to
discourse more largely in the first Chapter of the second part of this Treatise.

2 Of those that defend the morality of one Sabbath day in the week, some
seek to decline the weight and edge of the foresaid arguments by a frivolous
distinction, saying, that moral things are of two sorts, the one that are
founded in the Law of nature, and therefore oblige all men naturally: The
others that are of a positive Law, depend on institution, and notwithstanding
are parts of the moral Law, of a perpetual necessity, and of an immutable
right, as well as all other moral precepts are; that the moral Law, as it is
moral, is of far greater extension then is the Law of nature, and that the
Sabbath is moral in this last sort.

3 But first, they speak against the ordinary sense and custom of all men,
who by the word moral understand that which is naturally and universally just,
that is, which reason when it is not misled, and the inward Law of nature
dictateth by common principles of honesty, or ought to dictate to all men, of
it self, without any outward Usher: This Law all men take for the Law of
nature, and reciprocally they take the Law of nature for this Law: which is
proved by the ordinary and common distinction that all Divines make between
the moral, ceremonial, and judicial Laws, which in former times God gave to
the Jews, in which distinction they refer to the last hands and sorts all
the positive ordinances which pertained to the ecclesiastical or civil
government, and to the first the ordinances and rules of the Law of nature,
whereof these others were circumstantiall appendices and determinations. Nay
moral signifies only the duties of essential godliness and righteousness,
in things belonging naturally to good and holy manners, toward GOD, or toward
man, whether in doing good, or departing from evil, and not all things that
may be useful, and in some sort may be referred to the rules of good
behavior. Otherwise things ceremonial and judicial, as such, should not be
distinguished from moral things, for these also have an useful reference to
the foresaid duties of good and godly behavior. And therefore if the ordinance
of the Sabbath, although advowed to be a positive Law, is notwithstanding
called moral, it shall be, in one and the same respect, both moral and
ceremonial, and all there ceremonies may after the same manner challenge the
name of Moralities, which is absurd.

4 Secondly, after they have confessed the Sabbath to be a part of the
positive Law, grounded only on the order and discipline that GOD was pleased to
establish, they broach an affirmation without ground and without reason, when
they say therewith, that it is of an immutable right, and carries with it a
perpetual obligation. For where and from whence is there any evidence of this?
does this right belong to all things that are of the positive Law? Their
condition and nature gives it unto them? Will any Divine, any Lawgiver, any
Logician make of this a problem, and hold for the affirmative? Away with
Sophistry and captious dealing. It must be the revealed will of God that
matcheth positive with natural Laws, and marketh them with the silver stamp
of immutability. Now if GOD has not communicated this dignity with any
positive Law ordained by him from the beginning of the world till this day,
what appearance is there, that he has given it, as it were by birthright, to
the Sabbath? Have they to underprop this their assertion any clear and evident
testimony brought from the unreprocheable truth of holy Scripture? For we make
no account of any man's bare affirmation. But the whole drift of the discourse
following shall show more and more, God willing, how short they come of their
promises, and of the But and Blank they aim at.

CHAPTER third.
REASON 3.
1. The Pagans never knew, neither by Nature, nor by Tradition, the necessity
of the keeping of a Seventh day of Sabbath.

2. Yet they knew all moral duties commanded in the first and second Table of
the moral Law.

3. They knew also, that God is to be served publicly, and that a part of his
service consisted in the offering of Sacrifices.

4. They knew likewise by natural light, that some days are to be appointed
for his service, and are blamed for the transgression of all other
Commandments that are moral, etc.

5. But are never blamed for the inobservation of one day of Seven.

6. Nay they did laugh to scorn the Jewish Sabbath.

7. Answer to an objection taken out of Philo against the foresaid affirmation.

8. To another from JOSEPHUS.

9. As also to other passages of diverse Authors, Pagans, Jews, and
Christians, which serve to overthrow it.

10. The Pagans did never keep regularly, for their public devotions, any
other Seventh day of the week.

11. Yea are never reproved for any such omission.

12. Reply to this answer.

13. First answer to the said reply.

14. Second answer unto it.

1 MY third argument shall be taken from this, that the Gentiles never knew by
natural light, nor also by tradition come unto them from hand to hand by the
care of their Forefathers, the necessity of the keeping of the Seventh day of
the week, and never practiced any such day. Surely if it were a morality, and
a point of the Law of Nature, or if GOD had prescribed it by a particular
Commandment to Adam, willing him to sanctify it particularly, and to
celebrate in it the remembrance of his works and rest, he had done it
purposely, that Adam should instruct his offspring to the like, seeing there
was a like reason for them and for him. Yea all his progeny and successors, in
whom abides still the Law of Nature, although darkened with sin, had known
in some sort by the residue of the light of Nature glittering in them, that
they were bound to keep a Seventh Day. At least the notice of this
Commandment, which is pretended to have been given to their first Father from
the beginning, should have come to them by Tradition successively from the
Fathers to the Children till their days. For we see that all the Gentiles by
the light of Nature, and by Tradition, have had some knowledge of all things
that in themselves are good and lawful, and of all moral precepts.

2 They have known, that one true and only GOD is to be worshipped in spirit
and in truth, and not in material idols: That His Name ought to be hallowed,
and great heed is to be had, that it be not profaned: That respect and
honor is to be yielded to Fathers, to Mothers, and to all Superiors: That
murder, adultery, lechery, theft, false witness, covetousness of things
belonging to another, are vices condemnable, and worthy to be censured. We
find a great deal of good precepts and excellent documents in the Laws and
writings of Paynims pertaining to these points. And they all may be confirmed
by natural reason. Therefore the Apostle speaking of Infidels in his Epistle
to the Romans, Romans 2. verse 14, 15. says, That they do by nature the
things contained in the Law, show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
and are a Law unto themselves. If they have sinned against these points, as
undoubtedly they have most horribly many ways, as the same Apostle shows in
the first Chapter of the said Epistle, they have by such heinous and monstrous
sins fought against their own knowledge, and detained in unrighteousness
the truth which GOD had imprinted in their minds, and whereof they were not
ignorant, Romans 1. 18. Whereupon God thunders fearful threats upon their
unrighteous heads, which in all ages have been accompanied with terrible
thunder bolts of exemplary judgment.

Moreover, in things concerning Gods outward and public service, they have
known, that all men ought to serve GOD publicly, and that to offer sacrifices
unto him, is a service wherewith he is well pleased. This they knew, not only
by a natural instinct, and by the voice of that inward Doctor, saying to their
hearts, that all sins whereof mortal men are guilty, must be expiated, and
that atonement must be made between man offender, and God offended, by
offerings and sacrifices; But also questionless, by an acquired knowledge,
come unto them successively, from these first Fathers, who by Gods Ordinance
and allowance had offered sacrifices of atonement to his most holy Majesty:
This is the true original and source of the sacrifices, which these blind and
misled wights have always offered to the Godhead, which they in their
ignorance thought worthy to be worshipped.

4 They have likewise known by natural and necessary consequence; that seeing
God will be served publicly, and by troops of people, times must be appointed
for their meetings. Therefore they have with one accord consecrated festival
and solemn days for the public and common exercises of their religion: Exodus
34. verse 15. Numb. 25. verse 2. 2 Kin. 10. 20 Psalm. 106. v. 35, 37, 38. Hos.
2. v. 12. 1 Cor. 10. verse 20.
And God has often blamed the vices and abominations of their sacrifices and
solemnities, propounding and traducing them in the persence of his people, to
whom he spoke, having regard to their instruction and correction, and not to
the conversion of the Gentiles, whom he suffered to walk in their own ways,
Acts 14. verse. 16.

5 But as there is no natural reason showing the least sparkle of justice and
equity, in the keeping of the seventh day of the week rather than another: So
the Gentiles did not keep, and are no where blamed for not keeping one day of
seven, which is to be thought on, and considered with great attention: For if
they knew, or were bound to know the necessity of the observation of this day,
if they were obliged unto it, as to a moral thing, or as to an Ordinance of
God, published by God himself to all men in the person of Adam, Father of us
all, from the beginning of the world; I ask, What can be the cause that God
never accused, never reprehended them for the inobservation, or profanation of
so holy a day? Seeing he rebuked and threatened them so eagerly for the
transgression of all other Commandments of the moral Law, as may be seen in
diverse places of the Books of Moses: Fxodus 23. verse 24. 32. Exodus 34. verse.
12. 13, 14, 15, 16. Levit. 18. verse. 3. 24. Levit. 20. verse. 23. Deuteronomy. 6. verse.
14. Deuteronomy. 7. verse. 4. 5. 10. 25. Deuteronomy. 12. ver. 2. 3. 30. 31. Of the Prophets:
1 King. 14. verse. 23. 24. 2 Chronicles. 33. verse. 2. etc. Psalm. 106. verse. 35. etc.
Esa. 10. verse. 7. 12, 13. Esa. 13. verse. 11. Esa. 16. verse. 6, Esa. 47. verse.
6. etc. Ierm. 10. verse. 2. 3. Ierem. 48. verse. 7. 13. 29. 30, 35. Ierem. 31.
ver. 13. 35. 47. Ezech. 16. verse. 49. Ezech. 20. verse. 7. Ezech. 23. verse 7.
8. 30. Ezech. 25. verse. 3. 15. Ezech. 28. verse. 2. 5. 16, 17. 18. Ezech. 32.
verse. 12. Ezech. 35. verse. 5. 6. 12. Amos 1. verse. 3. 6. 9. 11. Obad. verse. 3.
10, 11. Micah 4. verse. 5. Nahum. 1. verse. 14. Nahum. 2. verse. 12. Nahum. 3.
verse. 14. Habak. 1. verse. 11. 13. 16. Habak. 2. verse. 5. 6. 8. 9. 10. 15. 18
19. Zeph. 2. verse. 8. 10. 15. Zech. 9. verse. 3. 5. and elsewhere, and of the
new Testament, and namely in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.
Again, I would feign know, how it is come to pass, that Gods ordinary custom
was to withdraw the Israelites from all the vices that he had forbidden, by
telling them, that the profane and aliene Nations had defiled themselves with
all these vices, and when these vices of Infidells were in some sort of such a
quality, that they sorted well to his people, would most bitterly upbraide them
with following the abominations of the Nations, and yet he has never kept
that course in the inhibitions that he has made so frequently to the
Israelites, against the breach of the Sabbath, has never told them that the
Gentiles were Sabbath Breakers, has never warned them not to follow in this
crime their example, which had been much to the purpose, if the Gentiles had
been obliged to keep the Sabbath day.

6 Surely God never tied them by any positive Law to such a day, neither gave
he them any notice thereof by the inbred light of nature; And it appears not
any where, that they ever heard amongst them any mention of a seventh day of
Sabbath, but as of a Jewish Ceremony and Ecclesiastical regiment, the rumor
whereof ran abroad, after the Law was given to the people of Israel in the
wilderness. Hence it is, that this ceremonies is by their Authors attributed
to the Jews, as come from them, and particular to their Nation. Yea, many of
them laid it in their dish with flowting and derision. Whereunto some do apply
these words of Jeremiah, in his Lamentations, Chap. 1. verse 7. The adversaries
of Jerusalem saw her, and did mock at her Sabbaths: And Seneca, a wise
Heathen, said of the Jews, jeering at them, that by the observation of their
Sabbath, they made August. de Civitat. Dei lib. 6. ca. 11.
loss of the seventh part of their life.

7 They object against this, that Philo, a learned Jew, who lived in the times
of the Apostles, in the second Book of the life of Moses, speaking of other
Nations, which were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from
the Covenants of promise made with the Jews, says, with an affirmative
interrogation; Who does not honor the sacred and holy day that returns every
week? But besides that, it may be he spoke hyperbolically, and led away with
a Jewish affection toward the ceremonies of his own Nation, he designs, at
the most, some reverend opinion which the observation of that day, solemnized
with so great devotion amongst the Jews, had purchased amongst foreign
Nations, which seeing that Jewish discipline and devotion, were in a manner,
forced to admire it, And not that they also kept it commonly, as being, or
holding that they were naturally obliged thereunto. It is manifest that we
must give this interpretation to these words of Philo, by other places, where
in the same, yea, in stronger terms, he says the like of the fast observed
solemnly by the Jews on a certain day of the year: Who, says he, does not
worship with admiration, the feast which returns yearly in the sacred month?
And in general, speaking of all the statutes observed by the Jews, and of all
the Laws given by Moses, he says, that men of all other Nations almost had
them in some veneration. This Moses had foretold in the Book of Deuteronomy,
Chap. 4. verse. 6. where speaking to the people of the Statutes and Judgments
which he had taught them, even as the LORD his God commanded him, he says,
Keep therefore, and do them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding
in the sight of all Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes, and shall
say, Surely this great Nation alone, is awise and understanding people. Thus
Philo shows clearly enough; that the Gentiles knew nothing of the Sabbath
day, no more then of the other ordinances of Moses, but by the relation of the
Jews: He attributes nothing to the Sabbath, but he affirms the same of
all other ordinances of the Law, and therefore no man can build upon his words
a more universal obligation for the Sabbath, then for all the rest of the
Jewish ceremonies. For who will say, that the fast and other ceremonies which
he speaks of in the same discourse, obliged by a natural or positive Law
other Nations, or that they were ordinarily practiced among them? Likewise,
when he says in his Book, of the workmanship of the World, that the Sabbath
day is a feast, not of one people only, but of all Nations, he utters only
his opinion concerning the dignity and merit of that day, and not what was in
effect practiced amongst other Nations, as he explaineth his own words,
adding, This day is worthy to be called a feast of all Natitions, although no
Nation in the world, the Jews excepted, has ever solemnized it with a common
and ordinary observation. And indeed, this learned man, writing in his Book
upon the Decalogue, that the fourth Commandment ordains the seventh day, and
an holy and pious observation thereof, he appropriates that saying to the
Jews, adding, that every seventh day is holy to the Jews, and faith only of
other Nations, that some of them observed a seventh day every month, beginning
to reckon the days by the new Moon. If perhaps some amongst these people
reverenced and observed the seventh day of the week in some sort, that came
not from a natural instinct enforcing them thereunto, nor from any knowledge
derived unto them by the Traditions and Instructions of their Fathers, but from
imitations of the Jews, from whose practice and fashions in their religious
devotions, and amongst the rest in the observation and celebration of the
Sabbath, questionless many particularities were introduced amongst the
Gentiles, in the celebration of their feasts and solemnities. As some among
them, taking example from the Jews, circumcised their children.

3 This is the meaning of Josephus, in his second Book against Appion, when
he says, that other Nations had zeal and emulation for the piety and
religion of the Jews, and forthwith alleges the custom of the seventh day,
as which was come to them all: Of which passage, those that alleged it, cannot
take an argument for the morality and perpetuity of the Sabbath day, more
then for the other ceremonies of the Jews admitted and allowed of all, which
the same people and Nations imitated, and whereof Josephus speaks in the same
place. For he mentions with the seventh day the fasts, lights, prohibition
of certain meats, which he says also to have been observed by them, not for
any reason and natural obligation that they saw in these things, or in the
Sabbath, more than in the rest, but through a facility and inclination of man's
spirit to imitate the outward fashions of devotion which are practiced by
others.

9 These passages of Philo, of Josephus, and others, gathered out of other
authors, Jews, Pagans, Christians, which make mention of a common knowledge of
the seventh day of Sabbath among the Gentiles, and also of some kind of
observation thereof amongst some of them, are of no use: For all these authors
have written long, yea, some thousand years and more, after the establishment
of the Jewish government and religion. At which time the Ordinance that God had
given to the Jews, about the Sabbath, might have been known of all Nations,
and imitated of those who thought fit so to do. Were not the ten Tribes
transported out of their native soil, and dispersed among the Medes, Perses,
and other Nations? Had not the Jews been captives in Babylon threescore and
ten years, and sent home by Cyrus, before any man amongst the Gentiles, set his
hand to a pen to write Histories? Were not the Jews spread over the whole
Roman Empire before CHRIST came into the World? What wonder then, if their
rites and ceremonies were known every where, yea, and followed by those of the
Gentiles that became Proselytes, such as was the Ethiopian. Eunuch in his own
Country? Acts 8. verse. 27. The Roman Centurion Cornelius in Cesaria, Acts 10.
verse 2. Another Centurion in Capernaum, Luke 7. verse 4, 5. and more, during
the Empire of the Romans, and may be, before it also. What if whole Nations had
embraced all the Jewish ceremonies, or a part of them, or the Sabbath only,
and a thousand Writers should give testimony thereunto, can we out of that
cloud of Heathen, Jewish, or Christian witnesses, make a necessary inference,
that the observation of a seventh day of Sabbath, is a point of the natural
and moral law, or that it had sway as soon as the world began? Which is the
maine point in this question to be thoroughly sifted out, and clearly proved. As
for the passages of a few heathenish Poets, Linus, Homere, Hesiode, which
speak of the seventh day, as of a holy day, that all things were made in,
exceptions may be taken against them, because either they are not to be found
in those authors, upon whom they are fathered, and therefore they are justly
suspected to be a Cuckoes eggs, or are mis-taken, and wrested into a contrary
meaning, which is most clear in the passage of Hesiode, who speaks not of a
seventh day of the week, but of a seventh day of the month, consecrated to
the remembrance of Apollo's birth, and whose holiness was not thought by him,
nor others, to have a more ancient beginning. I say further, that these Writers
lived many hundred years after the Law was given by Moses to the Jews, that
some knowledge of the points of the said Law, and by it of the keeping of the
seventh day might have come unto them, but under a cloud so thick and dark,
that they spoke of it, as all the Poets have done of the Flood, saying, that on
the seventh day all things were made, whereas on it nothing was made. Some of
those which lay hold on such passages, seeing this, acknowledge freely, that
they are not strong enough to enforce men to believe, that from the beginning,
and in all times, the Gentiles celebrated the seventh day, and made of it a day
of rest.

10 Indeed, if we could find that the Gentiles have commonly, and regularly
observed from time to time a seventh day, though not the same seventh, to wit,
the last of seven that God rested in, and hallowed, a more probable inference
might be made of that continual practice, that the observation of a seventh
day, is of the Law of nature, or at least, that God from the beginning enjoined
it to all mankind, and that so it passed by tradition to the Gentiles, yet not
without receiving some alteration and corruption by process of time, and by
the treachery of men. But no such thing is to be found, nothing can be gathered
out of the ancient Writers, saving this only, that the Gentiles have kept holy
and solemn days, yet with great diversity, which fits not the turn of the
maintainers of the Sabbath, but avails only to prove, that the hallowing of
some days to the Godhead for his solemn service, is a point of the law of
nature; further it goes not, and is no manner of way steading to prove the
necessity of the consecration of a particular day amongst a settled number,
rather then of another day, and far less of a seventh day for Gods service.

11 I repeat what I have said before in part, that if the keeping of a seventh
day had been a point of natural morality, and if God had commanded it from
the beginning to Adam, Father of all mankind, to be kept by him, and by all
his offspring after him, all the Gentiles in all times should have known and
practiced it, either by natural instinct, or by Tradition, as they had the
knowledge of all other moral duties, and in some measure practiced them. Of if
they had utterly forgotten that day, GOD had rebuked them for this omission and
inobservation, as he reprehended them most sharply for the transgression of all
the rest of moral Commandments. As indeed they had been for such an omission
and commission blame worthy, chiefly after they were informed by the renewed
institution of this day among the Jews, that GOD had ordained it from the
beginning of the world, to be kept by all men, they should not have found any
pretense to excuse the ignorance of their duty, whereby they were bound to
keep holy that day, if, as it is pretended, the fourth Commandment of the Law
employed an universal observation of that duty amongst all people and Nations
of the world. For if they believed not, that the Commandment did belong to
them, their unbelief could not be unto them a cause of excuse, and make them
blameless: Nay, they were so much the more worthy of reprehension, that their
blindness was voluntary: And in such a case God had not been silent.

12 Some of those that acknowledge the Ordinance of the Sabbath to be a
positive commandment, unknown by nature, and depending wholly of institution,
yet as ancient as the creation of our first Parents, reply, that God did not
check the Gentiles for the inobservation of the Sabbath, because he had
matters worthy of reprehension of far greater consequence then this was,
namely heinous crimes against the Law of nature common to them all, which made
him to conceal this under the cloak of silence, as being only an omission of
a positive Law forgotten by them, and of far lesser consequence then these
monstrous and ougly sins: That no man can infer of this silence, that the
Ordinance of the Sabbath has not been, and was not obligatory from the
beginning, seeing we find some crimes committed even against the Law of
nature, which GOD has not in any part of holy Scripture censured in the
Gentiles. As for example, Polygamy, or having of more than one wife at once. And
yet no Christian will infer thence, that the marriage of two persons only to
be one flesh, has not been established by God from the beginning, to be
practiced of all men.

13 This reply is of small weight. For although the forgetting and
inobservation of the Sabbath be a crime lesser, than are many which are
committed against the Law of nature, and that might have been a reason to God
to censure it more seldom, and not so eagerly in the Gentiles, as he did in
his own people, yet in all likeness of truth, it could not be a reason to
his wisdom and goodness, why he should not reprove it at all, but pass it
under perpetual silence, whiles he rebuked in diverse places most carefully
their other crimes, seeing that when he made reflection upon the Jews, although
the inobservation of the Sabbath, considered in it self, was in them also a
crime of lesser moment, then others whereby they violated the moral Law,
nevertheless he has most frequently and sharply imputed it unto them. If
the renewing of the Sabbath to them, as is pretended, was afterward to God a
sufficient ground and just reason, to reprove them grievously, both for the
oblivion, and for the contempt thereof, when now and then they transgressed in
the one or in the other, supposing the first institution of the Sabbath to have
been made for all men, and given to all from the beginning of the world, why
was it not also a just cause to chide the Gentiles, if not so eagerly as the
Jews, yet in some sort, for transgressing it, namely when GOD set himself
purposely to condemn their faults, and so much the more, that the oblivion of
it could not in any sort be a colorable excuse to help them. Moreover the
neglecting of such a day continually, by sin of omission, for want of
observation, and not only the setting at naught, but also the profaning of that
day, which God had ordained to be holy, and to be used in all nations with
great holiness, for so notable, and so worthy an end, as is the commemoration
of that great work of the Creation common to all men, and so falling into the
most filthy sin of commission, for polluting the said day by doing all kind
of works and actions contrary to the sanctification thereof, and thus heaping
transgression upon transgression, was not a crime of so little importance, that
it can make any man believe, that God would have exempted it from all kind of
censure in the Gentiles, when he checked their other sins, seeing he blamed
it so extremely in the Jews, and made the reproves of that sin to sound so
a loud in their ears.

13 The instance before urged, that God found not fault with the Polygamie of
the Gentiles, although it was against the institution of God in the beginning,
and also against the Law of nature (as is said, but not granted,) is found to
be false: For in the eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus, where God speaks to the
Jews, forbids all unlawful and impure cohabitations, amongst many others in
the 18. Verse, he forbids them to take a Wife and her Sister, or to her Sister,
that is, to take another Wife with the first, to vex the first by conjunction
with the other, in the first wives life time. For this is the signification of
the Hebrew Phrase, as we may see by diverse examples, Genesis 26. verse 31.
Exodus 25. verse 20. Exodus 26. verse 3. 27. Moreover, GOD adds in the same
Chapter of Leviticus ver. 24. 27, 30. that in this filthy crime, as in all
others that are there named, the nations had defiled themselves, for which the
land had vomited them out.

CHAPTER Fourth.
REASON 4.
1. The Patriarchs from the Creation till the Law, knew not the observation of
a Seventh day in the week.

2. The public service of God began in the time of Enos, and was, in all
likeness of truth, solemnized every day of the week.

3. From Noah till the Law, the families of the Patriarchs served God
privately, and kept not the Seventh day.

4. Confirmation of this truth by Scriptures, and by the consent of Ancient and
Modern Divines.

5. Answer to the first reply, the Patriarchs fasted, and their fasts are not
written.

6. Answer to the second reply: The Patriarchs are not reproved for Polygamie,
no more than for the inobservation of the Sabbath.

7. Answer to the third reply, taken from a pretended paritie of reason
between the making of one man and one woman to be one flesh, and Gods rest on
the Seventh day.

8. Answer to the fourth reply, that no mention is made of the Sabbath day in
the book of Judges, and some others written after the Law was given in Horeb.

9. Conclusion of the foresaid Reasons taken from the Gentiles and the
Patriarchs.

1 IF the keeping of one Seventh day of rest had been a moral Commandment,
and if GOD had given it to Adam to be sanctified by him and his posterity, at
least the Patriarchs and holy Fathers, amongst whom remained the exercise of
true Religion had known that day, and hallowed it by the ordinary duties of
godliness, as they knew and observed in the whole course of their life all
other moral Commandments. We find in their lives written by Moses many
proofs and examples of the Religious 1. Com.
worship which they yielded to Jehovah alone, as to the only true, only
perfect, only Almighty and all sufficient God, walking in sincerity and
integrity before his face, Genesis 5. ver. 22. Genesis 6. ver. 9. Genes. 17.
ver. 1. Of their hatred against Idols, which 1. Com.
were to them things so abominable, that they buried them under the ground, as
not only unworthy, but also ougly to be seen, and infectious to be touched,
Genesis 35. v. 2. 4. Of their religious care 2. Com.
to hallow the Name of GOD, by calling upon his holy Name, Genesis 12. ver. 8.
by vowing vows to his Divine Majesty, Genesis 28. ver. 8. by taking holily and
religiously in their mouths his glorious and fearful Name in the necessary
oaths that they made before him, Genesis 21. ver. 24. 31. Genesis 31. ver. 35. Of
the awful 3. Com.
observance and obedience wherewith they honored Fathers, Mothers, Masters,
and all superiors, Genesis 9. ver. 23. Genesis 27. ver. 13, 14. Genesis 28. ver. 5. Genesis
42. ver. 6. Genesis 47. ver. 12. Of the abomination and detestation that was in
their inward parts against murder, Genesis 49. ver. 5, 6. whoredom, adultery,
incest, Genesis 34. ver. 31. Genesis 38. ver. 24. Genesis 39. ver. 10. Genesis 49. ver. 4.
Theft, Genesis 31. ver. 32. 37. Genesis 44. ver. 8. 9. 5. Com. 6. Com. 7. Com. 8 Com.
9. Com. 10. Com.
Leasings and false witness, Genesis 20. ver. 12. Genesis 42. ver. 11. and
consequently lust, which is the fruitful mother of all those vices, Genesis 14.
ver. 22. 23. Genesis 39. ver. 9. 10. But we find no where that they kept holy a
Seventh day, for Gods outward service, according to the fourth Commandment of
the Law given afterward in Mount Sina. This only do we find, that they
practiced that service, builded Altars, offered sacrifices to the Lord
indifferently in all days, and at all hours, as they had occasion. Neither is
it any where noted in holy Scripture, that they had any set day, far less a
Seventh day prefixed unto them for their exercises, which were never
particularly tied to a Seventh, day with preference to other days of the
week. Yea considering that the consecration of a certain day for Gods
service, whatsoever it be, is not properly necessary, but when many may troop
together, and make up a body of a Church to solemnize that service publicly,
with great assemblies of people, it may be justly questioned, if when the
Patriarchs were alone, when they were with their little families, might with
them serve God every day easily and with great assiduity, being, as they were,
disposed to all exercises of godliness, and not being incombred with the many
and great affairs which ensnare those that give themselves too much to worldly
businesses, whether at all they kept any ordinary day more prrticularly then
other days, if they served not God alike every day without distinction of
days, unknown at that time, and more particularly, if they erected not
Altars, and offered sacrifices on them, as God gave them some particular
occasions, they not having a constant rule given unto them for the time and
place of these devotions.

2 When it is said in the fourth of Genesis verse 26. that in the time of Enos,
men began to call upon the Name of the Lord, although this passage may suffer
diverse interpretations, yet, it is likely, and it is the most current
interpretation, that it betokens, that Enos and the remnant of the faithful
associated with him, being grown to a competent multitude, withdrew themselves
from the wicked and worldy brood of Cain, and began to institute among
themselves a more solemn service then had been in former times, and for the
celebration of that service ordained of free choice set times and places; For
which cause the Scripture says, that they began to call upon the Name of the
Lord, to wit, publicly and in a numerous assembly, which had not been
practiced before. If this be the true sense of these words, yet it shall not
follow by any necessary argument or reason, that they established for that
public service a particular day returning successively after a certain number
of days, seeing it is as probable, that this calling upon the Name of the Lord
which they began in those days, was indifferently every days exercise, in
each of which they came together to call upon God, and to serve him in the time
and place that they had appointed, their number not being so great, nor their
necessary employments about the things of this life so many, but that they
might set a part some hours every day for this holy business. Nay granting
that they appointed a certain day out of a greater number, to remain firm
and unmovable, what reason can any man produce, why it ought to be the Seventh
day of the week? Was it because God rested on that day? But how could they
guess that this was a reason obliging them to the sanctification of that day,
seeing it is not a reason carrying with it any natural evidence of obligation,
and is no reason at all, but by the free will and appointment of GOD? Will they
say, that from the creation of the world God blessed and hallowed that day to
men? But this is the point in question. Or that Enos and his fellows asked
counsel at the mouth of the Lord, to learn of him on what day they should
meet to yield unto his Majesty the public service which they had instituted,
and that God ordained unto them the Seventh day of the week? This is a conceit
taken at random, without any certain ground. They know well enough already
what kind of service they ought to yield to God, and in what Religious actions
it consisted: For God from the beginning had acquainted his Church with it, and
their Fathers had trained them in the knowledge and practice thereof, neither
was it needful that they should ask advise of the Lord concerning this duty.
Therefore it was not necessary, nay it was rather unseemely, that they should
ask him what was the time of the ordinary and public practice of that
service, as if they had not been bound to judge, that having no great lets to
interrupt their devotion, they ought to appoint a fit time every day for so
holy and necessary a duty: Or, at least, if they alloted any day of rest, the
more frequent they should make it, so much the better should they perform
their duty, and be so much the more acceptable to God. And in case God had
named unto them such a day, there is no probablenesse that he ordained one of
seven, as he did afterward to the people of Israel. For they were but a small
number of people, and might easily keep more days in the week than one,
without any hinderance to their worldly affairs. But the Israelites being
grown to a great and populous commonwealth, God assigned unto them the
Seventh day of the week, as a particular point of that ecclesiastical
government, whereof he prescribed unto them all the particularities. Therefore
the consequence from the one to the other is manifestly of no value. But upon
that which is said, that in Enos his time men began to call upon the Name of
the Lord, that is, to ordain a public service, and unmovable times for it, I
do infer with great probability, that before that time there was none such,
and therefore no Seventh day was kept. For if it had been observed, how could
it be said, that in Enos his time men began to call upon the Name of the Lord?

3 This good course begun in the days of Enos continued undoubtedly
afterward, as long as the malice of men could suffer it. For their wickedness
was great, and the corruption had crept from among the sons of men among the
Sons of God in such manner, that it drew upon the face of the earth an
universal flood of waters, which destroyed all men then living, Noah and his
families consisting of eight persons only excepted. After the flood, there is
little or no mention made of any exercise of the true Religion, saving in the
days of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and in their families. Them God had chosen
and picked out from the rest of the world, with them God made his covenant,
they were religious and obsequious servants of Almighty God; but their families
being small, Gods service might with great facility be practiced in them every
day, and there was no necessity of setting a part an ordinary day for the
gathering together of their children and servants, which ordinarily were never
so far separated, but that they might come together once or twice a day to
do homage to the Lord their God. Therefore there is no probablenesse that
there was among them a particular keeping of such a day. At least we read not
any such thing, till the time that Abraham's posterity being much increased and
multiplied in the land of Egypt, GOD brought them out of that land, gathered
them together in the wilderness, and afterward in the land of Canaan, made
choice of them amongst all the nations of the world to be his people, gave them
his statutes, prescribed unto them all the particularities of his public
service, and ordained the observation of the Seventh day of the week for the
solemn practice thereof. This ordinance became then necessary, because GODS
Church was become a great people.

4 Verily, it is not likely, that if the Patriarchs had kept unmoveably a
stinted day, and namely the Seventh day of the week, as a divine Ordinance,
that the holy History would have been silent, and made no mention of it. It
relates unto us carefully things of far lesser moment, it has set down their
lives, has specified the general points of the service which they yielded to
God, by prayer, by building of Altars, by offering of Sacrifices upon them. But
it makes no mention, neither general, nor particular of any day hallowed by
them for the exercise of these their devotions, which undoubtedly they would
have appropriated to that day: And so there was a fit occasion to speak of the
day, in speaking of the service, if there had been any such day consecrated by
them. Wherefore the particular times kept by them ordinarily, or
extraordinarily in the practice of Gods service, depended on their wisdom and
will, which being carried with most earnest affection to godliness, and to the
performing of all duties belonging to Gods service, there is no question to be
made, but that they employed a good deal of time every day to the practice of
all exercises of religion, and upon special occasions of new and extraordinary
blessings, increased their devotion, and gave unto it proportionally a longer
measure of time. All the service wherewith they honored the Lord their God
consisted undoubtedly in prayers and in sacrifices, whereof mention is made in
their lives registered in the Scripture, but it is not likely that they honored
a Seventh day of Sabbath, because it is no where written.

5 Also the Ancient Fathers, for the most part, some Rabbis of the Jews, many
recent and orthodoxe Divines deny it directly: Amongst those that affirm it,
the most learned and renowned dare not avouch it, but as a thing uncertain and
probable only. And amongst those that most confidently stand unto it, Some are
constrained to call in question, if the Patriarchs kept it, after the manner
which was afterward prescribed to the Jews, to wit, with a strict obligation
of an exact cessation from all works, as from kindling of fire, etc. Exodus 35.
ver. 3. All these thought it a thing unsuitable to the condition of the
Patriarchs, that they should have been laden with so many scruples and
difficulties. Nevertheless it is most probable, that if God had charged them
with the keeping of the Sabbath day, he would also have tied them to this
intermission of works, in consideration whereof it was called the Sabbath, it
represented and called to remembrance GODs resting from all his works, and was
a type of the spiritual, eternal, and glorious rest of the faithful in the
kingdom of heaven, which was the principal end of the institution thereof. I
might stuff the paper with the testimonies of all the foresaid Authors, if I
had not resolved to dispute by arguments taken out of holy Scripture, and from
reason, and not by authorities of men.

6 Diverse Replies are made against this argument, to impair the strength, and
debace the worth thereof, when I say, it is not written that the Patriarchs
observed the Sabbath, and therefore they kept it not. And first, they suppose
that they celebrated diverse fasts, whereof no mention is made in the Book of
holy Scripture, which is indeed a mere supposition, if fasting be taken
properly for days of abstinence from all kind of meat, through devotion, and
for religious ends. For where is that written? If it be not written, as it is
not, why may I not mistrust, gainsay, and deny it, and pray the authors of
this reply, to defend their cause, not with forcelesse and deniable
suppositions, but with powerful and undeniable reasons from Scripture, or from
Nature. Now, supposing their supposition to be as true, as I suppose it to be
false, do they not know that fasting is not a part of Gods service, that God
has not been earnest about it; that by the Law of Moses, which exacted so
many kinds of serviceable devotions, he commanded no ordinary and stinted
fast, saving a yearly one, for a typical reason, on the feast of atonement,
Levit. 16. verse 29. 30. 31. and Levit. 23. verse. 27. 29? that he prescribed
not any before the Law, and has not enjoined any to Christians under the
Gospel? Therefore God having left the indiction and observation of such fasts
free, as the Patriarchs should think fit, although now and then they had
humbled themselves before God with extraordinary fasting, It is no marvel that
no mention is made thereof in the History of their religious exercises, because
it was not one of them, but, at the most, a certain help unto them, or an
accidental dependancy on them. The same must be said of all other doings of
the Patriarchs, which either did not belong to Gods service, or were not of
great importance. For it was not needful that the Scripture should tell us all
things done by them in their employments about the affairs of this present
life. This cannot be said of the observation of the Sabbath day: For seeing it
is pretended to be moral, that God from the beginning of the world ordained it
to Adam, and to all his progeny, that it has always been necessary for his
service, undoubtedly it had been mentioned in the History of the Patriarchs,
if they had practiced it. But seeing it is not so much as once named, this
perpetual silence theweth, in all likelihood, that they never practiced it,
that therefore all that is pretended to the contrary is untrue. This, as I have
said, the most part of the ancient, and many of our modern Divine confirm by
their consent.

7 Secondly, some do make another reply, saying, that albeit the Patriarchs
had not kept the Sabbath day, nothing can be thence concluded, saving an
oblivion and negligence of that day, which should not call in question the
first institution and observation thereof, no more then Polygamie, which is the
having at once of more wives then one, practiced in their time, not only by
Infidels, but by them also, can justify, that the holy Law of marriage
between two persons only, was not established from the beginning.

To this I answer, that there is no even match between these two. For the
Scripture teaches us clearly in the History of the creation, that in the
beginning God formed but one man, and one woman, which he took from man, and
established marriage between them two only, that they might be twain in one
flesh, and no more, and that Adam had a perfect and clear knowledge of this
truth, Genes. 2. verse. 22, 23, 24. Likewise in other places of the Ancient
Testament, Malac. 2. verse. 15. and of the New Testament, Matthew. 19. verse. 4, 5.
Mark. 10. verse. 7, 8. Ephesians. 5. verse. 31. the unseparable union of two persons
in wedlock is confirmed by the institution of marriage in the beginning.
Moreover, this institution is grounded on justice and honesty, known of
Pagans, which had no light given them by instruction from the Word of God. All
the holy Fathers that were before the flood, observed it faithfully. The first
that violated it was Lamech, a man of the posterity of wicked Cain, of whom it
is recorded, as a thing extraordinary and new, that he took unto him two
wives, Genes. 4. verse. 19. Wherefore, if after the flood some practiced
polygamie, no man can thence make a sound inference, that by Gods institution
it was so from the beginning, seeing the contrary is evident and undeniable:
And that abuse of marriage by plurality of wives among the Patriarchs, must be
imputed to some other reasons. What if among the Israelites, many stumbled at
the same stone? Who will infer thence, that God had not forewarned them to
take heed to their ways, forebidding them to multiply their wives, by an
express Law, which may be seen, Levit. 18. verse. 18. and Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 17?
But seeing we can no where find, that before the Law was given by Moses, the
Patriarchs kept the seventh day of rest, we have good reason to make a
question, if that day was instituted from the beginning of the world: For the
institution thereof appears not clearly in the History of the creation, it
is not in any part of the Bible referred to that first time, neither is it
grounded on any natural or moral righteousness, as shall be seen largely
hereafter.

This is a sufficient answer to a third reply, which some would feign take from
purity of reason, Saying, that as in the beginning God made but one man, and
one woman, and matched them together to be one body, and to beget a lawful and
holy posterity. Mal. 2. verse. 15. And as Malachy gathers thence a perpetual
rule, even so from Gods resting on the seventh day we ought to gather a
perpetual rule of the sanctification of that day. For, as it is manifest by
that which has been said, there is a great disparity between these two,
cosidering that in the first, which is the union of two persons in wedlock,
there is a foundation of natural honesty and righteousness, whereof the
practice and confirmation has been always since the beginning of the world,
both in the old and new Testament. But in the second, which concerns Gods
rest on the seventh day, and his hallowing of that day, rather than of any
other, there is no natural righteousness, and therefore no necessity obliging
all men from the beginning to the end of the World. As also no hallowing, no
practicing of it is to be seen in the old Testament before the Law was given
by Moses, and far less is any confirmation of it to be found in the new
Testament.

8 The fourth and last reply is, that after the Law given by Moses, no mention
is made in the Book of Judges, nor in some other historical Books of the old
Testament, of the observation of the Sabbath, and yet from this no inference
can be made, that the Sabbath was not observed in those days; in like manner
none should infer, that it was not kept in the days of the Patriarchs,
because, forsooth, there is no record in their history, that they hallowed it.
This reply is so clean from the matter, that no reckoning is to be made of it.
Verily the first conlusion were too bad, because the institution of the Sabbath
was made in a most express manner before the days specified in the foresaid
Books, to continue through all the ages of the Commonwealth of Israel. And no
doubt is to be made, but that it was kept in all those days, although there
was no occasion offered to relate so much in the foresaid Books. It suffices,
that it is often mentioned in other Books, which show the continual practice
thereof under the Law, and the Israelites are in them grievously censured, as
guilty of a most heinous crime, when they observed it not. But the second
conclusion is most reasonable: For if the Sabbath had been observed about two
thousand years by the Patriarchs, before the Law was given, and if it was in
all that time a part of Gods service, is it not a thing uncoth, and far from
all likelihood, that no notice is given us, neither in the story of those
times, nor in any other part of Scripture, that the Sabbath was then commanded,
and religiously observed? Namely, seeing the Church was at that time in a
particular estate, and was ruled by an economy, far different from the
government under the Law, of which estate and economy, there was a just cause
why the whole service should be notified unto us; and namely, this part
thereof, which is pretended to be so necessary.

9 Now this is worthy to be marked, putting the case that assuredly neither the
Gentiles, nor the Patriarchs have observed a seventh day of Sabbath, before
the Law was given by Moses to the Jews, that the two reasons before alleged,
are of great force to justify, that the keeping of that day, is neither of the
Law of nature, nor of divine institution by a positive Law given to Adam, and
to his posterity from the beginning of the World. But although it could be
showed, that either the Patriarchs or the Gentiles observed that day from the
beginning, no more can be gathered of these premises with a reasonable
inference, saving that God had instituted and commanded the seventh day before
the Law was given by Moses. But it should be a most unreasonable conclusion to
gather from thence, that the keeping holy of the seventh day, is a point of the
natural and moral Law, which, as I have said, has in it a natural,
unchangeable, and universal justice, whereas positive Laws are of things
indifferent, which have no justice but in the will of the Lawgiver, and stand
or fall at his pleasure.

CHAPTER fifth.
REASON 5.
1 If God had commanded the seventh day from the beginning, or if the
observation thereof were a moral duty, God had enjoined all Adams posterity to
keep it.

2 This was impossible, by reason of the diverse situation of the earth.

3 As also because of the impossibility that is in the most part of men to
keep such a commandment.

4 Therefore God gave it to the Jews only, and has not bound the Catholic
Church to any regular and set day.

1 IF the observation of one day in every week, or of a seventh day were a
thing moral, and if particularly God had ordained to Adam the observation of
the last day of seven, which he rested on, and which afterward he prescribed
to the Isaelites by the Law, undoubtedly he had thereby intended to bind all
Adams posterity to the observation of one day of seven, yea, to the last day of
seven, which he had prescribed to their first Father, at least till he himself
had changed it into another day of seven, as is pretended he did by our Lord
Jesus Christ. And indeed the common tenet of those which hold the morality of
the Sabbath day, is, that the keeping, not only of a seventh day, but also of
the last of seven obliged all men till the coming of Christ.

2 But this was, is, and ever shall be impossible. For Adams posterity, after
it was multiplied, extended it self abroad very largely, through all the
quarters of the earth, the diverse situation whereof, in regard of the course
of the Sun, diversifieth the days extremely, the Sun rising according to
the diversity of places with much difference, sooner or later. It is night in
some parts, when it is day in others. Yea, there are some Regions, where the
Sun goes not under the Horizon for the space of a whole month, others where
it sets not in the space of two, three, four, five, six months together,
which all make but one continual day. And thereafter they have as many months
of night, the Sun never coming nigh them in all that time. Considering this
great and well known variety; I ask, how it was possible to all men thus
dispersed under so many and diverse elevations, to keep this seventh day
wherein God rested from all his works? And how those to whom many months make
but one day, and as many but one night, yea, to whom the whole year is but one
day, and one night, could keep distinctly and regularly but one day of seven?
Was it necessary that these men, after the revolution of six of their days,
and of as many nights, which came to many, not only months, but also years,
should observe the seventh following, that is, whole months, whole half
years, or a whole year for one Sabbath only? Or these only have they been
freed from the observation of a fixed day for Gods service, and left to their
own liberty to take such order about that matter as they should think good?
Who sees not in this a manifest absurdity? Does it not remain always? Is
not the situation of the earth, which is the same that it was from the
beginning, as great an impediment under the new Testament to the universal
keeping of a seventh day in all places, and namely, of that particular seventh,
wherein Christ rose from death unto life, which is the first of the seven days
of the week, as it was under the old Testament, to an universal observation
of a particular seventh in those times, to wit, of the last of the week?

4 Whatsoever is moral is universal, obliges equally all men, and may be
kept of all. Likewise all commandments which Gods purpose is to give to all
men, are such that they may be kept of all. How then is a thing called moral,
the keeping whereof the order of nature has made impossible to many men; such
as is the regular keeping of a set day? And how is it said, that the
Commandment enjoining the keeping of a particular seventh day, whether the
last or the first of seven, was on Gods part an universal commandment,
obliging all men, seeing it is far more impossible to a great number of men
to keep it, because they dwell in more remote climats then we do?

5 Therefore it is more conformable to reason to say, that the Commandment
which under the Old Testament ordained the keeping of a Seventh day, obliged
the people of Israel only, which was the only people of GOD, was shut up
within the narrow bounds of a little corner of the earth, and might with great
facility keep that day, even as all the rest of the politic and
ecclesiastical regiment established by Moses pertained to them only: And that
under the new Testament, in whose times the Church has been spread abroad
through all the earth, God has not given any particular Ordinance concerning
the keeping of any day whatsoever, but has left to the discretion of the
Church, to appoint the times of Gods service according to the circumstances of
places, and of fit occasions.

CHAPTER Sixth.
REASON 6.
1. The Observation of the Seventh day of the week is no where commanded in
the New Testament, and therefore it is not moral.

2. Jesus Christ prescribing to his Disciples the celebration of the Sacrament
of his body and blood, appointed not a particular and set day for that holy
exercise.

3. Neither did he by himself, or by his Apostles, appoint a particular time
for the other exercises of Religion.

4. Whence it follows, that the keeping of a Seventh day for Gods service,
cannot be a moral point.

1 THe whole tenor of the Gospel confirms our assertion. It is most
certain, that if it were a moral duty to keep a Seventh day, all Christians
should be obliged unto it under the New Testament, as the Jews were under the
Old Testament. Now if Christians were bound unto it under the New Testament, we
should find some express Ordinance concerning it in the writings of the
Evangelists and of the Apostles. For if all the moral points which the Law
commands are ratified in many places of their books, and all the faithful
are often commanded to keep them, as the worshipping of one true God, the
shunning and detestation of Idols, and of all services of man's invention, the
sanctification of the Name of God, the honor dew to Fathers, to Mothers, and
to all superiors, the refraining from murder, from whoredom, from adultery,
from theft, from false witness, from all lusting after evil things, and such
like. Also in them are often commanded and recommended the holy meetings for
the hearing of the word of God, the administration of the Sacraments, the
public prayers, and generally the appointing of times for that use, because it
is a moral thing that GOD be served publicly, whereunto fixed and stinted
times are necessary. But as for the ruling and stinting of those times, God
has left it, as he has done the appointing of places, to the Church. For he
would not prescribe unto us any particular place nor time for his service, as
he did under the Old Testament, because he gives greater liberty to the
Church under the New Testament, then he did under the Old Testament, to whose
bondage pertained this restraint of a certain day and place of Gods service by
express commandment, as also because the greatness and dilatation of the
Church of the New Testament, which is Catholic, could not suffer such a
particular determination, nay made it so impossible, that of absolute necessity
it depends on the discretion and commodities of the Church.

2 When JESUS CHRIST made his last Supper with his Disciples, and commanded it
should be celebrated to the worlds end, as he determined the use and practice
thereof, with certain elements of Bread and Wine, he might, if he had thought
fit, allot unto it a certain time, such as was of old, the time of Passover:
But he was pleased to say only this in general terms; This do ye, as often
as ye do it in remembrance of me. Likewise Saint Paul, As often as you shall
1 Cor. 11. v. 25, 26.
eat this bread, and drink this cup, you shall show the LORDS death till he
come, both limiting the elements as the necessary matter of this Sacrament. But
neither of them prescribes a particular time for the solemnizing thereof,
which being an accidental circumstance, he left the direction thereof to the
Church, to the which Church, in things concerning times, places, and other
circumstances of like nature, God has given no other commandment, saving this
general one, Let all 1 Cor. 14. v. 40.
things be done decently, and in good order.

3 Now there is no other ordinance of Christ, or of his Apostles concerning
particular times for all other duties of the Christian Religion, then for the
time of the LORDS Supper: For seeing they were pleased to say of the Holy
Supper, As often as you do this, it is an easy matter to conclude thence,
that they intended not to ordain any thing over and besides, belonging to the
other exercises, but to say only, as often as you shall come together to hear
the word, to pray publicly, etc. Leaving the determination of the fittest
times for all such things to the Church, and therefore there is not to be
found in the whole Gospel any thing injoined to that purpose: Also there is
the same reason for all other exercises, and for the Lords Supper, concerning
the determination of a set ti^^. For if our Lord Jesus Christ had thought
expedient to appoint a set time for the hearing of the Word, there had been as
good cause to prescribe one also for the Communion of his Body and of his
Blood. I know that some passages of the new Testament are produced, which are
pretended by those of the contrary opinion, to injoine expressly a set day of
the week for the exercises of Religion; but I shall show hereafter, God
willing, that they are deceived in their pretense.

4 Of this I infer, that seeing in the Gospel there is no express command
touching the keeping of a seventh day of rest, it cannot be a moral point. For
since all other moral points are so often and so expressly injoined therein,
what likelihood is there, that God would have omitted this without making an
evident injunction thereof? Nay, seeing under the old Testament God was so
careful to recommend the keeping of his Sabbaths, as may be seen every where
in the Books of the Prophets; is it credible, that if he had intended under
the new Testament to tie us to the observation of a seventh day of Sabbath, he
would have shown as great care to recommend it unto us, as he did theirs to
the Jews, seeing it is pretended, that on Gods behalf we are as straightly
bound to the observation of the Sabbath as they were?

CHAPTER seventh.
REASON 7.
1 Manifest reasons out of the three first Evangelists against the morality of
the Sabbath. What is meant by the Sabbath second first.

2 Exposition of Christ's answer to the Pharisees, who blamed his Disciples for
plucking the cares of corn, and rubbing them to eat on the Sabbath day.

3 First argument out of this answer, The Sabbath is declared to be of the same
nature that the Show bread, and Sacrifices were of, and mercy is preferred unto
it. Therefore it is not moral.

4 Second argument: Christ affirms, that the Sabbath was made for man, not
man for the Sabbath; Therefore it is not moral.

5 A reply to this argument refuted.

6 Third argument: Christ adds, that the Son of man is Lord, even of the
Sabbath day: Therefore the Son of man being taken for Christ, as he is Christ
and Mediator, it is not moral.

7 Fourth argument, Christ did handie-works without necessity, and commanded
servile works to be done on the Sabbath day without necessity: Therefore it is
not moral.

8 Christ, as the Son of man, was not Lord of the moral Law, but only of the
ceremonial: Therefore the Sabbath is not moral.

9 If the Son of man, who is Lord of the Sabbath, be taken in its vulgar
signification, for every man, the Sabbath cannot be moral.

10 Hence it follows, that the Sabbath was only a positive Law, given to the
Jews, and not to Christians.

1 I Add, that not only there is nothing expressly set down in the Gospel,
confirming the morality of a Sabbath day, but much otherwise, that it
furnishes strong arguments to overthrow it. As among others, those namely,
which are to be found in S. Matthew, Ghap. 12. verse. 1, etc. in S. Mark, Chap.
2. verse. 23. etc. in S. Luke, Chap. 6. verse. 1, etc. where is related a thing
that came to pass on the Sabbath day, which S. Matthew and S. Mark call
simply the Sabbath, and S. Luke, (...), The Sabbath second first, or second
principal, which the interpretors take diversely. Some understand it of two
holy days, the one following the other immediately, and more particularly of
the second day after the first of the feast of unleavended bread: For that
feast was kept seven days, which all were Sabbaths, although the first and the
last only were solemn Sabbaths of holy convocation. Others take it for the
seventh and last day of the said feast of unleavened bread, which was a very
solemn day, and equal in holiness to the first day of the said feast; whence
it was called Second First, that is to say, another first, or the first called
back again, and renewed. A third sort expound it of the second solemn feast
of the year, called the feast of weeks, or of first fruits, and by S. Luke,
the Sabbath Second First, that is, second in order after the first, and as it
were another first in dignity: For all the feast days were Sabbaths. It may be
also, that this Sabbath Second First fell out on an ordinary Sabbath of the
week. Wherein there is a great appearance of truth, seeing the Pharisees blamed
Christ's Disciples for plucking the ears of corn, and rubbing them in their
hands to eat on that day: which they could not have done with any color,
saving on an ordinary and weekly day of Sabbath, wherein God had forebidden
all kind of work, and namely, the making ready of meat. For in all other
solemn Sabbaths of yearly feasts, he had expressly permitted this particular
work of making ready whatsoever was necessary to every one to eat, as may be
seen, Exodus 12. verse. 16. But although this Sabbath Second first be understood
of another day, then of an ordinary Sabbath, it imports not much; and no
exception can be taken against it, to impair the strength of the arguments
which are gathered out of the foresaid places: For whatsoever, Christ said in
defense of that which his Disciples did, and the Pharisees blamed, in this
Sabbath second first, is manifestly general, and pertains to all Sabbaths
kept in times past among the Jews, whether ordinary, or extraordinary.

Thus then the three Evangelists do record, that Jesus went on the Sabbath day
through the corn fields, and his Disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did
eat, rubbing them in their hands. Whereof being reproved by the Pharisees, as
profaners of the Sabbath, whereon God forebad to do any work; Jesus Christ,
to clear them, and refute the Pharisees, alleges the example of David, and
of those that were with him, Which, when they were an hungry did take and eat
the Shewbread, which was not lawful to eat, but to the Priests alone, and
were not blamed for this, because the necessity of hunger was a sufficient
excuse unto them. Whence his intent was to infer, that his Disciples also in
that which they did then, were to be excused of breaking of the Sabbath, by the
same necessity of hunger which they were pinched with, and which gave them
liberty to do that which otherwise was not lawful to do on the Sabbath day.
Moreover, Jesus Christ adds, If ye had known what this means, I will have
Mercy, and not Sacrifice; ye Os^. 6. v. 7.
would not have condemned the guiltless, Of which argument this is the force,
that if God preferred the works of mercy and of love to the Sacrifices, which
in all the outward service of the Law were the most holy, and would have the
Sacrifices to give place to those works, by identity of reason his meaning was
also, that the keeping of the Sabbath, or abstaining from outward works on that
day, should give place to that mercy and love which man owes to himself, or
to his neighbors, and would not have allowed that a man should consent to die
for want of meat, to be hunger-starved, or to bring harm to himself by some
other evil, rather then to break the Sabbath by making meat ready, or doing
some other necessary work, which was otherwise forbidden on the Sabbath day.
He Mar. 2. 27.
confirms this, saying, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath; the meaning of which words is, that although God had ordained by the
Law of Moses, that his people should surcease from all outward and servile
works on the Sabbath day, yet he required not that cessation, as a thing
essential to his service, or so necessary, that it could not upon any occasion
be lawful to man to do such works on that day, but rather that authority and
power was given him, according to Gods intention, in case he were forced
thereunto by some urgent necessity. As for example: the saving or sustaining of
his life: For the keeping of the Sabbath was not the scope and end which man
was made for, or a thing of so great consideration before God, as is the
conservation of the necessary interests of man. For if that had been, it
should not have been lawful to man to break it upon any case or necessity
whatsoever: but nill he will he, he must be subject to the most strait
observation thereof, notwithstanding any danger whatsoever he may fall into
thereby. Nay, man was rather the scope and end of the Sabbath, and of the
observation thereof, and his interests were of greater importance then they.
And therefore, when man's goods, life, or reputation are in jeopardy, the
Sabbath must give place unto them, as being a thing wherein consists not
properly and essentially the glory and service of God, and which is to be kept
only as a help to his service, when stronger and more profitable
considerations, for the glory and service of God, bind not to the contrary, as
they do, when life, honor, or such other things of great consequence to man
come in question: For then it is more expedient for the glory and service of
God, that a man's life, honor, goods, etc. be saved by some work otherwise
forebidden on the Sabbath day, then that with a manifest hazard of his life,
honor, or goods, he should tie himself to a precise keeping of the Sabbath,
and to a scrupulous cessation, which in such a case should become
superstitious. It is questionless that the matter was to be taken so under the
old Testament, and this is the maine point that Christ intended to maintain
and verify against the Pharisees, which urged a so precise and strict
observation of the Sabbath, that it turned to the prejudice and damage of man,
made man slave of the Sabbath, subjected not the Sabbath to man, and GOD so
inthralled man with the keeping of that day, that it was a thing unlawful unto
him, to prepare, and take in his pinching hunger a mouthfull of meat for his
sustenance, although he should starve and perish for want of food.

3 Upon this reasoning of Jesus Christ, it follows clearly, that the keeping
of a seventh day of Sabbath, appointed in the fourth Commandment is not
moral: For first, Christ sorts it with the observations commanded in the Law,
touching the Shewbread, the sacrifices, and other ceremonial services of the
Temple: Matthew. 12. verse. 6. as being of the same nature, that is, belonging
simply to the Judicial policy, order and government. And all the strength of
his argument is grounded upon this point, that the Sabbath is of the same
nature with these ceremonies, and therefore as they might be dispensed with
keeping of them, if stronger reasons obliged them to the contrary, so they
might sometimes be released from the forbearing of all works on the Sabbath
day, if they had just and necessary reason to do some works that day. Else
the Pharisees might have most easily replied, that although David in his hunger
took the liberty to eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful to eat, but to
the Priests, and albeit it was lawful to any man to prefer the works of
mercy, in his own, or in his neighbors necessity, to sacrifice, yet it
followed not, that hunger could give him any license to break the Sabbath,
because these observations concerning the Shewbread, and the Sacrifices, were
but ceremonies, which might be sometimes omitted and dispensed with, whereas
the Sabbath and the keeping of it, was a thing moral and undispensable.

4 Secondly, Jesus Christ says, that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man
for the Sabbath, Mark 2. verse 27. Now it cannot be said of any thing truly
moral, and ordained of God by a moral Commandment, that it is made for man,
and not man for it, that it is the end of man, and not man the end of it, that
it should yield to the interests of man, and not man to the interests of it.
For example, dare any man be so bold as to say, that the Commandments to have
no other GOD but the true GOD, to shun Idolatry, to abstain from blaspheming
and profaning in any manner the name of GOD, to honor Father and Mother, not
to be a Murderer, a Whoremunger, a Thief, a false Witness, not to covet
another man's goods, not to love GOD and the neighbor, are made for man, and
not man for them, and that man may dispense with them for his owe particular
interests? Verily it is not lawful to a man to break these Commandments, as
it is lawful to him to break the Sabbath for his own conservation, in any
thing that has reference unto him. Nay, he should tread under foot all his
own interests, rather then transgress in any of those points. Which shows
evidently, that the Commandment concerning the Sabbath, is not of the same
nature that these others are of. That these are moral, are of the Law of
nature, have in themselves an essential justice and equity, and for that cause
are undispensable; so binding conscience at all times, that it cannot be
lawful at any time to do any thing against them: That this of the Sabbath was
only a Commandment of order, of ceremonial policy, of a positive Law, and
for that cause liable to dispensation and abrogation, as in effect it was
dispensed with in the forenamed occasions, and CHRIST by his coming into the
world has abolished under the new Testament, the particular Commanment given
concerning it.

5 The observation which is made by some, that Christ says, that man was not
made for the Sabbath, or for the day of rest, but says not, that man was not
made to sanctify the Sabbath, is but a vain subtilty. For by the Sabbath,
Christ understands both the rest of the day, and the day of rest. For in the
Scripture, the word Sabbath signifies the one and the other. And seeing the
observation and sanctification of the day consisted, at least in part, in a
rest and cessation of all external works, as is evident by the words of the
fourth Commandment, and of Exodus, Chap. 31. v. 14, 15. and of Jeremiah, Chap.
17. verse. 22. 24. yea, seeing this sanctification only was proper unto it, and
particularly tied unto it, and seeing it takes from it the name of Sabbath,
wherewith it is honored, to say that man is not made for the rest or cessation,
and is not necessarily tied unto it, but may dispense with it, not through a
fancy, and at his own pleasure, but in the extreme necessity of his just and
reasonable interests, is as much as to say, that man is not made, in that
respect, for the sanctification of the Sabbath, but that the said
sanctification is subject to him. Now, this is the point in question, to wit,
Whether to keep a seventh day for a day of rest, or of cessation, according to
the injunction given in so precise terms in the fourth Commandment, be a
moral duty. I cannot see what other sanctification of the Sabbath day can be
understood by those which say, that man was made for it, in the sense that
Christ takes this kind of speech, is a moral duty. For if they understand a
sanctification by works truly and properly moral, such as are works of
godliness, mercy, and charity, whereby God is principally and directly
glorified, and we and our neighbors are edified, and maintained for his glory,
and say, that man is made for this sanctification, ought to observe it
carefully, and to make, if need be, the rest of the Sabbath day, to stoop,
and give place unto it, this is most true; but our question is not about this
kind of sanctifying the Sabbath day; neither is it proper and peculiar to the
seventh day, but is equally required in all the days of the week. And by this
is confirmed our saying, that the sanctification proper to the Sabbath, as it
is such, and which is the maine point that we treat of pro and contra, cannot
be moral, seeing it yields, and submits it self to the moral duties of every
day, and for their sake may and ought to be violated.

6 Thirdly, for the cleerer and better confirmation of the foresaid truth, is
very useful that which Christ adds after these words, The Sabbath is made for
man, saying; For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day. For whether by
the son of man, we understand particularly the Son of God, as he is Christ, and
Mediator, as he is often in that respect so named; whether generally every man
according to the common signification which it has in holy Scripture, the one
and the other sense overthrows the morality of the Sabbath. If Jesus Christ
speaks of himself, as he is Christ and Mediator, under the name of the Son
of man, as in my opinion he does, his meaning is, that as such and in that
quality, he had power over the Sabbath, as Lord to dispense with the keeping of
it, whom and when he would: as he said in the same sense and to the same
purpose, In this place is one greater then the Temple. Yea he insinuates, that
Mat. 12. v. 6
he was come to make this abrogation of the Sabbath, as of the Temple, and of
all the ceremonies practiced therein: For what other end had he to allege his
sovereignty and maistery over the Sabbath, but to say, that he had power to
dispose of it, at his own pleasure, and to cause men work in it, as he should
think fit? To declare only the lawful use and practice of the Sabbath, argued
not that sovereignty and authority that Christ challenged to Himself.

7 Fourthly, to show effectually his dominion in that behalf, he chused often
the Sabbath day, to do, or to injoyne to others on that day works which might
have been done in any other day of the week, and were not simply works of
mercifulness, or of urgent necessity, permitted by the Law, nay were servile
and unnecessary works, which the Law forbad: As is manifest, by his healing
the sick ordinarily on the Sabbath day, and that with handy work, whereas he
might have done those cures with a word of his mouth: As when he restored to
sight the man that was borne blind, making clay of his spittle, and anointing
the eyes of that blind man with the clay, John 9. ver. 6. 14. As also when he
commanded some sick, whom he had healed, to bear burdens on the Sabbath day,
which GOD had forbidden, Ierem. 17. ver. 21. Thus he commanded on the Sabbath
day the man whom he had cured of the palsy, to rise, take up his bed, and
walk, Ioh. 5. ver. 8, 9, 10. which was not lawful to him to do, no more than
to anyother such man, who by ordinary means had recovered his health, if it
had not been for Christ's command, notwithstanding that miraculous deliverance
after a so long and incurable disease: For he needed not, ntither for the glory
of God, nor for his own good, to take up his little bed on the Sabbath day,
seeing that without any such work his recovery was doubtless clear and
manifest to all.

8 Now if the Sabbath day, and the keeping thereof had been moral, Christ had
never spoken, never done so. For he had not, as he was the son of man, any
authority and Lord-ship over the things that are moral, and of the Law of
Nature, to dispense with men for the doing or not doing, the keeping or not
keeping of them. Because in them shines the justice of the most righteous and
holy God, his glory to command them, the excellency of man to yield obedience
unto them, as having a natural righteousness and equity inherent in them,
carrying with them an universal obligation, and being of perpetual
continuance grounded essentially in themselves, and on their own nature: Such
are these commandments, Thou shall love God with all thine heart, and thy
neighbor as thy self. Also we see not, that Christ at any time has done or
caused to be done, by any man, any thing whatsoever against them, nay he has
rather backed and confirmed them, has himself kept them most religiously, and
has enjoined also to others the keeping of them. But as Mediator he had power
over all things which were simply ceremonial, positive, adiaphorous, that is,
neither good nor evil in themselves, wherein the true service of God consisted
not, which were no thing but helps to that service for a time, and were
established of God simply for certain reasons relative to some better things.
For as Jesus Christ himself was not liable unto those things, but so far as
it was his reason to apply himself unto them, least he should give offense to
any man. And as the reason of their institution could not take hold on him, so
likewise was it in his power to exempt from them whom he would. For although
they were to be usually in strength and practice till the hour of his death,
that was no hinderance to that authority which he had in his life time, and
during his conversation in these lowest parts of the earth, to give particular
commandments whereby he dispensed whom he pleased with their observation.
Such things were the circumcision, the sacrifices, other legal ordinances and
among the rest the Sabbath, whereof, upon this occasion, he declared himself
to be Lord.

If Christ, when he said, The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath, will have us
to understand by the Son of man, every man, as many interpreters do take it
so, meaning that every true believer has authority and freedom to exempt
himself from the keeping of the Sabbath for his own need and to yield to such
necessities which are more urgent, and of greater importance then was the
Sabbath, of which sort was the narrow strait, whereunto hunger had driven
Christ's Disciples, that is no less forcible to fight against the morality of
the Sabbath, as appears by that which has been already said.

10 Such then being the nature of the Sabbath, it is evident that it is not
moral, that of its self it obliges not the conscience to the keeping of it,
that if it binds conscience, it comes from GODS command by a positive Law,
such as he gave to the Jews, and that only when more enforcing reasons do not
dispense with the observation of it, as there be some such. Now the positive
Laws given to the Jews being wholly abrogated, no man can say, that the Law
of the Sabbath binds the conscience of Christians, if it be not showed, that
Christ will have this Law of the Sabbath to continue under the New Testament,
and has commanded the keeping of a Seventh day, as he might have done. In
which case, that Law should be obligatory, not for any morality it has in it,
but because Christ had ordained it for the order of the Church. This I pretend
cannot be showed, but rather that the stinting of the time of GODS public
service has been left to the free will of the Church, and that even now at
this time when a Seventh day is set down, we ought to keep it, in obedience
to the Church, as following herein the order which she has thought good to
institute, and not through opinion of any necessity proceeding from GODS
immediate command, far less of Religion inherent in the thing it self.

CHAPTER Eighth.
REASON 8.
1. The Apostle condemns the Galatians for observing days, and months, and
times, and years.

2. It is answered, that the Apostle condemns only the observation of days,
etc. prescribed in the ceremonial Law.

3. Refutation of that answer, out of the drift of the whole Chapter.

4. Besides, that it makes the Apostle to condemn that which he approved, and
so to contradict himself, if this answer were true.

1 I further justify this by the Apostle in his Epistle to the Galatians
Chapter 4. verse 10. where he blames them for observing days, and months,
and times, and years, for they deemed that in the observing of them there was
a point of Religion and of Gods, service, which they were necessarily obliged
unto on Gods behalf, and that for conscience sake, either because the thing it
self deserved as much, or through respect to Gods Commandment. It is this
surmise which the Apostle blames. For if the Galatians had kept some days,
but as a thing indifferent, and an ecclesiastical order, for the public
practice of divine service by the exercise of the ministry, the celebration of
the Sacraments, and other holy duties more and more sanctified with prayers,
thankesgiving, Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, knowing and being
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there was no divine obligation, no Religion
tied to those days, in themselves, it is as sure as can be, that they had not
bin worthy to be censured, for all that is done, and may be done in the Church,
under the New Testament. Hereupon I say, that we fall manifestly into the
Apostles censure, if we keep a Seventh day of Sabbath, believing it to be a
moral thing which God has expressly commanded, and therefore necessary, and as
such binding the conscience. For this is evidently to observe days after the
fashion which the Apostle condemns.

2 It is answered to this, that the Apostle speaks in that Chapter of
judaicall days, months, times, and years only, as they are ordained to be
kept by the ceremonial Law of Moses; as for example, to observe, in things
belonging to the Sabbath, the Seventh day of the week. Which law being
abolished, he blames the Galatians, that they endeavored to set up again the
observation of days after the manner of the Jews, but reproves them not for
keeping a Sabbath day.

3 This answer gives no content at all. I acknowledge freely, that doubtless
the days kept by the Galatians were the same which the Jews observed. For to
esteem that they were days consecrated to Idols, which they had been enured
unto, when they lived in Paganism, and had observed unto that time, even after
their conversion, is far from all likelihood, and contrary to the Text, which
speaks of days belonging to these weak and beggarly rudiments which God had
ordained in the infancy of the Gal. 4 v. 9.
Church, which were judaicall days, and none other, and from which Jesus
Christ was come into the world to redeem men. And the Apostle blames the
Galatians universally, for observing such days, without exception of any other
day, which he ought to have excepted, if there had been any other obligatory:
Nay he blames them not for keeping them after the fashion of the Jews, by the
practice of the ceremonial service which the Jews yielded to God on those
days whereof he makes no mention, neither is there any likelihood that the
Galatians did any such thing; but for keeping them for Religions sake: And his
reprehension is such a one, that the right thing he aimed at in it, is to
condemn the observation of any day whatsoever under the New Testament for
Religion and conscience sake in reference to any obligation from the day it
self. The foundation of his reproof, as appears manifestly by the whole
drift of his discourse, is this, that to be Religious about days, and to be
tied unto them by Gods command, was a point of bondage belonging to the
rudiments of the Law, and that the Gospel, which is the Law of liberty, cannot
suffer this bondage. Therefore he speaks in general terms, Ye observe
days, and months, and times, and years, and adds not judaicall, or after
the Jewish fashion: because also to keep other days then those of the Jews,
and that for conscience sake, and for the same opinion of Religion which the
Jews had of their days, although otherwise then they, h^d been as bad, and
contrary to the Gospel, it is not so, when days are kept simply for
ecclesiastical order, although they were Judicial days. And indeed the
Sabbath day of the Jews, to wit, the last day of the week was kept by the
Apostles and by diverse Christians in the Primitive Church many years
constantly. As likewise the feasts of the Jewish Passover and Pentecost were
observed by the first Christians, without any fault or offense on their part,
because this observation was not practiced by them in the same respects that
they were by the Jews, that is, through opinion of Religious necessity and
divine obligation.

4 Verily, if we be obliged in our conscience, and by a divine commandment
under the new Testament, to the observation of a seventh day of rest,
^eligiously as the Jews were, as is pretended, although it be not the same
seventh day; who will not conceive, that it had not well become the Apostle to
condemn the observation of Judicial days, namely, of the particular day of
the Jewish Sabbath, as being a yoke, and a ceremony of the Law, considering,
that in the mean while, he tied the Christians to the odinary and precise
observation of a stinted day, even of a seventh day of Sabbath, which was all
one: seeing the day only had been changed, and the yoke and the ceremony had
been still kept. For the yoke and bondage of the Law consisted in the
observation of certain stinted days, and namely of a seventh day of Sabbath
by Gods Ordinance and obligation of conscience, and not in keeping the last
seventh day, rather than another, seeing otherwise it is not a heavy yoke,
nor a greater bondage to keep the last, then to keep the first of the seven
days of the week.

CHAPTER ninth.
REASON 9.
1 A most forcible argument out of the Epistle to the Colossians, Chap. 2.
verse. 16. where the Apostle teaches, that Christian men's conscience is not
tied to the keeping of holy days, and of Sabbaths.

2 Answer is made, that the naming of Sabbaths in the plural number shows
they must be understood of the Sabbaths of holy days, and not of the weekly
Sabbath.

3 First reply. In the name of a holy day, the Sabbaths thereof are included.

4 Second reply. Sabbaths in the plural number, include necessarily the
weekly Sabbath, which also is most frequently called Sabbaths in holy
Scripture.

5 Third reply. The Apostle by Sabbaths, understands only the weekly
Sabbath.

6 Fourth reply. The weekly Sabbath did belong to the Law of Commandments,
which is abolished, and the Apostle speaks without exception indefinitely of
the ^^^gation of holy days, and Sabbaths.

7. Thence it follows, that the fourth Commandment, in so far as it
stinteth the seventh day for Gods service, is not moral.

1 OF the same nature is the passage in the second Chapter of the Epistle to
the Colossians, verse 16. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in
distinction of a holy day, or of the new Moon, or of Sabbaths. Where the
Apostle teaches, that under the New Testament the conscience of believers is
not bound to make distinction and observation of any holy day, and namely of
Sabbaths, neither altogether, nor in part, no more than of meats and of
drinks, ranking all those with the ordinances and shadows which have been
abrogated by Jesus Christ, ver. 14, 17. For like as in matters concerning meat
and drink, nature has necessarily need of them for the entertainment of the
body, but the conscience is not now bound to that distinction of them which was
of old prescribed by the Law of Moses, even so it is necessary, for the
maintenance of the Soul, that times be appointed for Gods public service in
the Church, but men's conscience is no more subjected to a seventh day which the
Law prescribed to the Jews.

2 To this passage answer is made, that the Apostle speaks of the Jewish holy
days, the Passover, Pentecost, etc. and of diverse Sabbaths which the Jews
observed, such as were the first and last day of some annual feasts, which
lasted many days, to wit of the Passover, of the feast of Tabernacles, of the
feast of Propitiations which was kept on the tenth day of the seventh month,
every seventh year, which was the Sabbath of rest unto the land, because in it
they did neither sow their field, nor prune their Vineyards every Lev. 23. v.
7, 8, 34, 35, 36. Lev. 25, v. 4, 8.
fiftieth year, which was a jubilee. All which times are called Sabbaths in the
Scripture. But its denied that he speaks of the Sabbath day which God had
ordained to be kept weekly, as well under the New, as under the Old Testament:
For which cause the Apostle speaks of Sabbaths in the plural number, and not
of a Sabbath in the fingular number, to signify that he understood those
Sabbaths, and not this.

3 This answer is not sufficient. For the Apostle speaks generally of an holy
day, and of Sabbaths, saying that we should not be judged or condemned in
distinction and separation, or part and respect of an Holy day, and putting the
word signifying an Holy day, in the singular number, (...), which word denotes
any holy day whatsoever. Now if we be bound for conscience sake to the
observation of a seventh day of Sabbath, if we be tied by Religion to make a
distinction of days, if we be condemned for the omission of that pretended
duty, are we not condemned (...), in distinction of an Holy day?

4 Again, seeing he speaks of Sabbath in the plural number, with what
reason can it be affirmed, that his intention was to speak only of the Sabbaths
of certain yearly feasts, and not of the ordinary Sabbath of every week,
although he uses a word befitting it as well, yea more, than the rest, and
including it infallibly in its plurality? Namely seeing this word is much more
used in the plural number, then in the fingular, and is ordinarily taken both
in the New and in the Old Testament for the Sabbath whereof we treat. The
seventy Greek translators of the Old Testament are accustomed to say (...) in
the plural number, when in Hebrew mention is made of the ordinary Sabbath of
the week in the singular number, as we may see, Exodus 16. ver. 23, 26, 29.
Exodus 20. uer. 8, 10. Exodus 31. ver. 16. Exodus 35. v. 2, 3. Levit. 23. v. 3.
Levit. 24. ver. 8. Numb. 28. 2, 9. Deuteronomy. 5. ver. 12, 14, 15. and else where
conformably to them. This plural (...) is used in the same sense by the
writers in the New Testament, as Matthew 12. verse 1, 5, 10, 12. Matthew. 28.
ver. 1. Mark. 1. ver. 21. Mark. 2. ver. 24, 28. Mark. 3. ver. 2. Luke 4. ver.
16, 31. Luke 13. ver. 10. John 20. ver. 1, 19. Acts 13. ver. 14. Acts 16. ver.
13. Acts 17. ver. 2. I say therefore, that to conclude that the Apostle in the
foresaid passage speaks not of the Sabbath day which returned weekly,
because he uses the word Sabbath in the plural number, is a weak argument,
seeing in the Scriptures style and manner of speaking this word in the plural
number has a single signification.

Nay, it may be affirmed with good reason, that the Apostle, when he speaks
of Sabbaths, understands only the ordinary Sabbath of the seventh day, and
under the name going before of an Holy day, has comprehended all other
Sabbaths which God had commanded in the Law, even as God himself in Leviticus
Chapter 23. ver. 37. by the word Feasts understands all other solemn days
which he had commanded, and ver. 38. by the word Sabbaths the seventh day in
every week, according to the ordinary signification thereof, not only in the
Greek, but also in the Hebrew tongue, to which purpose there is a most
manifest place, Exodus 31. ver. 13. where God says, Uerily my Sabbaths ye
shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations,
that ye may know, that I am the Lord that does sanctify you. And for more
ample declaration, in the Verses following, 14. 15, 16, 17. he expounds those
Sabbaths of the weekly Sabbath only. Although this were not so, whosoever
speaks of Sabbaths in the number of multitude, and makes no exception,
understands whatsoever is contained in the signification of that word, and
has the same denomination. Verily, when the Apostle says, that no man should
condemn us in distinction of an Holy day, or of Sabbaths, if he had not
understood all Sabbaths, but had believed that God has expressly ordained under
the New Testament, as he did under the old, a day to be for his service a day
of festivity and of Sabbath, he was bound to except it particularly and by
name, and so to keep the Church from falling into an error, namely seeing we
are not taught in any part of his Epistles, nor else where in the New
Testament, that GOD has made such an ordinance, that in any time the
observation of a Sabbath has been enjoined unto us, that any such day has
been excepted from those days and Sabbaths which in the said New Testament we
are forbidden to keep.

6 When the Apostle says, that Christ has abolished the Law of commandments,
Ephesians. 2. verse. 15. and has made a change of the Law, Heb. 7. verse. 12. We see
easily, that he understands the ceremonial, and not the moral Law, because
in the same places he explicates his meaning, calling it, The Law of
Commandments contained in ordinances, the middle wall of partition between
the Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. verse. 14, 15. the Law of a carnal
Commandment, and of the Leviticall Priesthood, weak, unprofitable, and which
made nothing perfect, Heb. 7. verse. 11. 16, 18, 19. Because also in many other
places we are taught, that the Law abolished by Christ, is the Ceremonial
only, and do see all moral Commandments confirmed and ratified by him. But
when the Apostle discourses of the abolishment of holy days, and of Sabbaths,
without any limitation or modification, there is no cause why the seventh day
should be excepted, seeing he excepted it not, neither is it excepted in any
place of the Gospel, which speaks no where unto us of moral days of
Sabbath, as also it is absurd to establish any such day.

7 It suffices not to allege, that the fourth Commandment of the Law
injoineth the seventh day of Sabbath, and to infer from thence, that of
necessity the Apostles mind was to except that Sabbath, as being moral. For I
say rather, that the fourth Commandment in as far as it injoineth the
observation of a seventh day of Sabbath, is not moral, seeing the Apostle
without exception says, that under the Gospel our consciences should not be
tied to Sabbath days; words which he had never so uttered, if the Sabbath of
the fourth Commandment had been moral and obligatory: At least in some other
places, information and instructions had been given us of this, by him, and by
the rest of the Evangelists and Apostles, who have instructed us in the
knowledge of all other moral points, which is not to be found. For there is
not to be seen in the whole new Testament any injunction to observe a Sabbath
day: But of this point we shall speak more fully hereafter.

CHAPTER Tenth.
REASON 10.
1 The Christians in S. Paul's time, had no time appointed to them for Gods
service, seeing some of them esteemed one day above another, others esteemed
every day alike.

2 Answer is made to this argument, that those which esteemed every day alike,
were week, and therefore erred.

3 Refutation of this answer: First, by the analogy of the other point, where
he who did eat herbs only, is called weak, and he who knew he might eat all
things is called strong.

4 Second, Because to esteem all days alike, cannot be called weakness.

5 Third, Because, if Christ or his Apostles had appointed a set day for Gods
service, to esteem all days alike, had not been weakness, but profaneness,
which nevertheless it was not.

6 Fourth, Otherwise the Apostle would not have said, that he that does not
regard a day, to the Lord does not regard it, but rather against the Lord.

7 Of what day it is said, that one regarded it, another regarded it not.

8 Fifth, Seeing to regard a day is weakness, and not to regard a day is
strength of knowledge, God has not obliged the Christian Church to any set day
for his service, by any moral or positive Law.

1 THE same is plainly showed by these words of the Epistle to the Romans Chap.
14. verse. 5, 6. One man esteems one day above another: another esteems
every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that
regards a day, regards it unto the Lord: And he that regards not the day,
to the Lord he does not regard it. In this place the Apostle speaks of
religious Christians, showing that they were at variance about two diverse
heads. For some of them believed that a Christian man should not stick, nor
make a scruple of conscience to eat indifferently all meats. Others for
conscience sake would eat nothing but herbs. Some of them also esteemed every
day alike, others esteemed one day above another. Of those two parties he
calls the one strong, the other weak, and exhorts Romans 14. v. 1
them that were strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak, namely, seeing
these things were of small moment, and that the weak did such things out of
conscience, and through a religious respect to God; that indeed their
conscience was not well informed and directed, but at length might be, and
affiance was to be had, that they should be holden up, because GOD was able to
make them stand verse 4.

As concerning eating of all things, or eating of herbs only, the Apostle
calls directly weak those which did eat nothing but herbs; And strong
those which believed that they might eat, Romans 14. v. 2
and indeed did eat all things indifferently. But on the other point
concerning the disagreement which was among them about days, whether every day
should be esteemed alike, or one day should be esteemed above another, he
declares not expressly who were strong, who weak. Some of those which urge the
observation of the Sabbath day, as a point of Religion and of conscience
commanded by Christ, shunning the argument which this place affords against
their opinion, do say, that those which esteemed every day alike, were weak,
and the others were strong, and that this is the Apostle his intention. But it
is easy to perceive, that the contrary opinion is true, that, say I, those
which esteemed every day alike, were strong, and those weak which esteemed one
day above another.

3 First the analogy of the other point which the Apostle alleges concerning
meats, shows it manifestly. For as those which did not stick for conscience
sake to eat all kind of meats, because they esteemed them all to be
indifferent, were strong, and those which were scrupulous for conscience sake
to eat any thing but herbs, were weak, even so accordingly to that, we
must acacknowledge, those which made no difference of days for conscience
sake, but esteemed all days equally, to have been strong, and those which
esteemed one day above another to have been weak.

4 Secondly, I cannot see how any man should imagine, that the Apostle in his
judgment esteemed those to be weak which esteemed every day alike, seeing to
esteem every day equally, without distinction of any day for conscience sake,
putting the case there were a fault in that opinion, cannot be called
weakness and infirmity, in the sense wherein this word weakness is taken by
the Apostle in this place, and in other places of the Gospel. For weakness and
infirmity is said to be in a man, when there is a defect in his belief
concerning things which are lawful to him, that is to say when he believes
not that to be lawful, which is lawful unto him, and therefore refraineth
for conscience sake from that which he is not bound to forbear. So he who
believes, that it is not lawful unto him to eat all kind of meats,
although God has given him the free use of them all, is weak and infirm. But
when there is excess in his belief, when I say, he believes to have liberty
to do that which is not lawful unto him to do, and does it without any
respect of conscience unto it, that is not in the Scriptures language, called
weakness, but rather ignorance, error, mistaking. If then those which esteemed
every day alike had failed in this point, as they had done of necessity, if
there had been any fault in them, they had never been esteemed and called
weak by the Apostle, as they are pretended to have been, but rather ignorant,
errants, nay dissolute, loose, profane.

5 Verily, if it were true, that Jesus Christ had ordained the observation of a
set day of rest, that the Apostles had commanded it, that the Church had
practiced it, as a divine ordinance, and as a moral point belonging to
Religion, as is pretended, these Christians, who could not be ignorant of such
things, and nevertheless esteemed every day alike, established not religion
and a point of conscience in any of them, and made no greater account of the
Lords day then of any other day, were of necessity profane men, and no better
reckoning was to be made of them. Yet the Apostle reputeth them not to be
such: For he forbids to judge and condemn them, as he will not have them
to judge and condemn those that were of contrary opinion, ver. 3. 10.

6 Nay, he affirms, that those which regarded not the day, to the Lord
regarded it not verse 6. the meaning of which words is, that in so doing they
had regard to the glory and obedience due to God, knowing that he had made them
free from the distinction of days, and received them, being well pleased with
that which they did. Now supposing the morality of the Sabbath, and the
commandment of Christ and of his Apostles, which made the observation thereof
a necessary point of Religion, which these men could not be ignorant of, I
cannot conceive, how not regarding the day for Religion and conscience sake, to
the Lord they regarded it not, seeing they had rather sinned against the Lord
by not regarding it. For they had manifestly vilipended him, by their
misbeliefe, whereby they esteemed not the observation of a day of rest, which
they knew to be moral, and most straitely commanded of God, to be a necessary
point of Religion. It is therefore more conformable to reason, that those which
made distinction of days and esteemed one above onother, were weak: And in
this do all the interpreters agree. Nevertheless the Apostle says with good
reason of these weak ones, that what they did, they did it to the Lord,
because they did it through devotion, and tenderness of conscience, having
some Religious ground, which was a colorable excuse to their infirmity, and
made it tolerable, not only to men, but to God also.

7 Now it being so, that the Apostle did write to the Romans who were Gentiles
converted to the Christian faith, we may esteem with great appearance, that
this day, which some of them, through infirmity, had so much regard unto, was
Sunday, which was kept in the Church, not by any divine Ordinance, not also
through necessity of Religion, but simply by an ecclesiastical custom, in
remembrance, that on that day Christ rose from death unto life, and was
esteemed of them a day of necessary observation, in and for it self, which
others better instructed esteemed not. This, being so, establishes thoroughly
the opinion that I defend, and evicts the other. But although the Apostle had
intended to speak of days commanded in the Old Testament by the Law of Moses,
to the religious observation whereof many, not as yet well instructed in the
knowledge of Evangelicall liberty, thought themselves to be bound for
conscience sake, the argument remains as strong as can be.

8 For howsoever the Apostle his meaning be taken, he speaks generally, and
imputes to infirmity of knowledge and of conscience under the Gospel, the
esteeming of one day above another, and to strength and firmness the
esteeming of all days alike, which he neither could nor should have pronounced
so in general terms, if at the same time there had been a set day of rest
binding the conscience of Christians to observe it, for its own sake, as being
moral, and for Gods sake who had commanded it. For by this means those had
not well done, so far were they from being strong in knowledge and
conscience, for esteeming every day equally, which they should not have done.
But the others had done well and religiously, to esteem one day above another,
so far were they from being weak: which yet notwithstanding is manifestly
against the scope of the Apostle, who declares them to be weak, not simply as
we have touched heretofore, for observing a certain day, but for keeping it
with a conscientious regard, and opinion of a religious obligation, particular
unto it, more than to any other day which is the only thing worthy to be
blamed, and might be a just cause of offense.

CHAPTER Eleventh.
REASON II.
1. The Sabbath was to the Israelites a sign of their sanctification.

2. Not only in the toylesome ages of this mortal life, but also in the
eternity and rest of the life to come.

3. Through JESUS CHRIST, who has perfectly accomplished the benefits which it
represented imperfectly.

4. And therefore it was to continue till his coming only.

5. This truth is confirmed in the Epistle to the Hebrews, by the type of the
bodily rest of the people in the land of Canaan.

6. As also by the type of Gods rest on the Seventh day.

7. Gods rest and the rest of the people were two types of the same thing, but
unknown till the Law was given.

8. This is acknowledged by the Jews, who confirm it by Scripture.

9. Hereof it follows, that the Sabbath was not given to Adam.

10. As also that it is not obligatory under the New Testament.

11. Although the heavenly rest which it typed be not yet come.

1 IT is manifest enough by the foresaid passages, that the observation of a
Seventh day of Sabbath is not a moral duty, and obliges not by a divine
Commandment, men's consciences under the New Testament, Nay it is apparent that
the Sabbath day was instituted to the Jews only, and appertained to the
ceremonies of the Law. I confirm this again by these words of GOD in Exodus
Chapter 31. verse 13. and in Ezekiel Chapter 20. ver. 12, 20. Verily my
Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your
generations, that ye may know, that I am the LORD that does sanctify you.
Where is to be marked the Sabbath is called a sign ordained of GOD, not to all
men, but to the Israelites only, to signify unto them their consecration to
his service, and their sanctification, which consisted in a continual
abstinence from all vices and sins, which verily trouble and disquiet the
soul, and also in a bodily rest sometimes from the turmoiles and cares of this
life, that they might bestow some fit and convenient time without hinderance
upon the contemplation of God, and meditation of his graces, and so give place
to the operation of the holy Ghost, whereby they might bring forth works of
godliness, and of true holiness. To the end that the Sabbath day might
express this visibly, and also be unto them a help and mean to so necessary
a duty, they were commanded to forbear exactly all servile works, and all
bodily labor belonging to the worldly imploiments of this present life. Which
figured, and taught them sufficiently, that God obliged them far more to
cease from the works of sin, which are properly servile, according as it is
written, Whosoever commits sin, is servant of sin Ioh. 8. ver. 34. Romans
6. v. 16. And to abstain from the lusts and acts of the flesh and of the old
man, and to compose and quiet themselves conveniently with a spiritual rest,
that they might receive the heavenly inspirations of his grace; And as it is
said in Esaiah, Chap. 58. v. 13. not follow their own ways, nor find their
own pleasure, nor speak their own words: For, as I have said, God purposed
to figure by that bodily and external abstinence from ear^hly works, the
inward and spiritual abstinence from sin.

2 Nay, to instruct and assure them by the Sabbath, as by a sign, that it is
he, even the Lord, that sanctifies his own children, that gives them grace
to rest in some measure from their sins and troubles in these lower parts of
the earth, and shall fully perform their sanctification in heaven, where after
the works and turmoiles of the anger of this life, there shall be, as it were,
a seventh day of Sabbath, a time of perfect and eternal rest for them: For we
may esteem, not without some likeness of truth, that the generations of the
world ought to be six, composed each of them of a thousand years, and figured
by the six days of work, in respect whereof it is, perhaps, said, that one
day is with the Lord as a thousand years; and a thousand years as one day,
Psalm, 9. verse. 4. and 2 Peter 3. verse. 8.

3 The Sabbath day was interrupted by other worke-daies, and returned only
every seventh day by a continual reciprocation and vicissitude, whereby it
represented but imperfectly the perpetuity of the true rest, as figures can
hardly represent in perfection the truth whereof they are figures: But at the
end of the world this reciprocation of days shall cease, and there shall be,
as it were, one perpetual day, which, as Zechariah says, Chap. 14. verse. 6,
7. Shall be all one day, wherein there shall not be day and night, light and
darkness, but a perpetual light without darkness. After this manner the
spiritual rest has its interruptions and discontinuance in this world, the
continuation of it is, as it were, by fits, and new beginnings: But in the
world to come, it shall have a continuance without intermission, with an entire
and solid perfection, without any trouble of sin, or of labor. God grants
this rest to his own children for his Son the Messiah his sake, the only
consideration of whose death, the force and efficacy whereof stretched out it
self as well forward to those that went before, as afterward to those that
have, or shall come after the accomplishment thereof, was unto him in these
times of the old Testament, as since, a most forcible motive to confer upon
his elect sanctification, with other comfortable and saving benefits here on
earth beneath, and there in heaven above. So the Sabbath di^ected the Jews to
Christ who was to come, and was a figure thereof, representing unto them a
benefit of the Covenant, which Christ was to purchase and ratify with his own
blood, and therefore it ought to have its accomplishment and end in him, as
have had all other ancient figures, whereby he was represented.

4 And indeed, in the passages before cited, it is called a sign between GOD
and the Israelites, which is the same name that is given to the Circumcision,
the Passover, and other legal figures; and moreover, it is said, that it
shall be a sign between God and the Israelites, for a perpetual covenant,
and for ever, but in the same sense that all other ordinances of the Law, and
diverse temporal promises made to the Israelites, are called perpetual, that
is, in their generations, which is expressly marked in the forenamed place of
Exodus, Chap. 31. verse. 16, 17. where God says, Wherefore the children of
Israel shall keep my Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their
generations for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever, meaning, that it should remain till the coming
of Messiah, during the economy of the Law, and whilst the people of Israel
should be the only people of God, but no more in the time of Messiah, whose
time and generation belongs not to those generations which God allotted to
the Israelites, when he said, that such and such things should be done, and
should continue in their generations, words which are ordinarily spoken of
things that were to persist only in the time of the old Testament. As when God
ordained the Sacrament of Circumcision, he said to Abraham, that it should be
to him, and to his seed after him in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant, Genesis 17. verse. 7. 9. 10. When he commanded the Israelites to fill an
Omer of Manna, and to keep it, he said, it should be for their generations,
Exodus 16. verse. 32. 33. that is, till the coming of Messiah, and not after. So
he said to Jacob, I will give this Land to thy seed after thee, for an
everlasting possession, Genes. 48. verse. 4. So to the Israelites of the
Passover, You shall keep it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations,
by an ordinance for ever, Exodus 12. v. 14. So the ordering of oil in the Lamps
from evening to morning, in the Tabernacle of Congregation, before the
testimony, by Aaron and his sons, is called a statute for ever unto their
generations, Exo. 27. verse. 21. So to Phineas, and to his seed after him, God
promised the covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, Numbr. 25. verse. 13.

5 What I have said and made good of the Sabbath day, that it was of old a
figue of the spiritual and heavenly rest, the beginnings whereof God gives to
his children in this life, and shall give them the full plenitude in Heaven,
may be confirmed by the words of the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Chap. 4. where intending to show to the Hebrews, that there is an heavenly
rest, prepared and promised by God to them that are his, which they should
labor to enter into by faith, and take heed to themselves, lest any of them
should come short of it through unbelief, he alleges two types and figures
thereof. The one is the bodyly and terrestrial rest which God had promised of
old to the Israelites, in the Land of Canaan, called for that cause, The Land
of rest, Deuteronomy. 25. Josh. 1. ver. 13. and Gods rest, Psalm. 95. verse. 11. which
those of the Israelites that were incredulous and rebellious in the wilderness
entered not into, but those only that believed Gods promise: By this God
represented, that no Infidells shall enter into the heavenly and eternal rest,
but the faithful only. Now he verifieth that the rest of the Land of Canaan
promised and conferred upon them that believed, and denied to those that were
rebellious, was a figure of that other better rest which the faithful receive,
and all Infidells are shut out of, by this, that after so long a time, to wit,
four hundred years after the Israelites were by Ioshuah brought into the Land
of Canaan, God speaking by the mouth of David, yet again warns the
Israelites then living, that at what time they shall hear his voice, they
harden not their hearts, as their forefathers did in the wilderness, lest they
should come short of entering into the heavenly rest promised to them; as their
ancestors for their unbelief were bereaved of the effect of the promise to
enter into the earthly rest of Canaan. This advertisement is perpetual, and
belongs also to Christians: nay, we may say, that it has properly relation
to the time of the Gospel, which is that certain time determined and limited
of God, whereof mention is made in the seventh verse, and is so called
ordinarily in the new Testament, Gal. 4. verse. 2. 4. Ephesians. 1. verse. 10. Tit. 1.
verse. 3. Therefore we which are under the Gospel to day, and have the Gospel
of Christ preached unto us, and hear the voice of his Gospel, must beware,
lest, because of our unbelief and rebellion, we enter not into the celestial
rest, no more then at that time the rebellious Israelites entered into the rest
of earthly Canaan. For from hence the Apostle makes this collection, that
considering the Israelites were entered into the Land of Canaan, and possessed
it peaceably without fear, when God by his servant David spoke again the
foresaid words of entering into his rest; sure Gods meaning was to signify a
far better promise of a more excellent rest, then was the rest of the Land of
Canaan, even a spiritual and an heavenly rest, whereof that other, and the
promise thereof, was but a figure and shadow. For if the promise to enter into
Gods rest made first and foremost to the Israelites had attained its full and
whole accomplishment, after that Ioshuah had introduced, and given them rest in
the Land of Canaan, God after that introduction, had not exhorted them, to take
heed that they hardened not their hearts in that day, in which he should make
them hear his voice, lest they should not enter into his rest, as if they had
not been in it already. Whereby he therewith made them a promise of entering
into his rest, if they believed and were obedient. Therefore the Apostle
concludes, that there remains a rest to the people of God, verse. 9. a rest
spiritual and heavenly, purchased unto them by the true Ioshuah, even by Jesus
Christ, of whom the other Ioshuah was but a figure.

6 The other Type which he propounds to the same purpose, is taken from Gods
rest on the seventh day, after the creation of all things, which rest could not
be understood by the promise which God made so many ages after the creation, of
entering into his rest, because it was past and finished then, when he ended and
finished all his works, as may be clearly seen by the History written in
Genesis, Chap. 2. verse. 2. But the meaning of the Apostle is, that it was a
figure of this other spiritual and heavenly rest, ordained and prepared from
the foundation of the world. For, if the rest promised and granted to the
Israelites in the land of Canaan is mentioned as a type, this rest of God on
the seventh day is alleged in the same quality, seeing they are both coupled
together. The Apostle confirms, that Gods resting on the seventh day was a
type, by the words written, Genesis 2. verse. 2. where it is said, that God
rested the seventh day from all his works, Heb. 4. verse. 3, 4. which had not
been thus so expressly written, considering that, to speak properly, God, who
was not wearied, rested not, and his resting was only a ceasing from the
production of his creatures, and from giving being to any more kinds then
those which he had made in six days: Seeing also one day is not of it self
better than another day, if God in this seventh day, and his resting in it, had
not intended to set down a type, and to figure some mystery, to wit, that as
he had his works of the creation by diverse degrees in six days, and rested
on the seventh day, doing no more, but only keeping and preserving his works
in the being he had given them, even so he produces and sets forward by a
continual advancement the work of his grace in his elect, during the six
days of this world, after which, having ended this blessed work of his mercy,
he shall rest from it, and shall intertaine and continue in this happy state of
perfection for ever and ever, and shall make them to rest also with him on the
seventh day of the world to come, which shall never have an end. Undoubtedly,
to signify this perpetuity, no mention is made in the history of the creation
of any term or end of the seventh day, that God rested in, as it is of the
other days, nor also of Gods rest, which in effect has continued ever since,
because this other rest which it figured shall never have an end.

7 Now this figure of Gods resting from the works of grace, which he had first
resolved and determined in himself, and founded upon his own rest from the
works of nature, was intimated by him, when giving his Law to the Israelites,
he commanded to forbear all works, and by that cessation to sanctify the
seventh day which he had rested in, to the intent that this day, and their
cessation on it, as an image correspondent in some sort to the example of his
own rest, should be unto them likewise a type and figure of the eternal rest
which they should obtain in heaven, after all the works and toiles of this
life, according to his good pleasure whereby he had ordained from the beginning
that it should be so. And so Gods rest on the seventh day, after the creation
was ended, and the rest which he ordained also to the Israelites on that same
day after their six days work, were in effect two types of one and the same
thing, to wit, of the accomplishment of the salvation, and of the blessedness
and glory of the faithful in heaven; but in diverse respects, according as this
accomplishment may have relation, either to God, or to the faithful. To God,
as to the author, who having begun and furthered it, will also accomplish and
perfect it, in which respect it has had properly Gods rest for figure: To the
faithful, as unto those which shall enjoy and possess the benefit thereof
after the turmoile of their irksome works in this world. In which regard it
had properly for type the rest ordained to the Israelites. It is likely that
the Apostle in consideration of this mystery, when he speaks, verse. 9. of the
heavenly rest, calls it not (...), as he does in all the former verses, but
(...), using a word taken from the Sabbath of the Jews, and that purposely to
teach us, that the Sabbath of the Jews in the relation it had to Gods rest on
the seventh day which it was founded upon, was a figure of the eternal rest
prepared for the faithful.

8 And indeed, the Jews have always understood it so. For they teach, that
this rest of the seventh day, was a type of the rest prepared for Gods people
in the world to come. Whereunto they apply this Title of the 92. Psalm, A
Psame of song for the Sabbath day, saying, that this Psalm is a song for the
time to come, to wit, for the day of eternal life, which is all Sabbath, all
an holy rest, signified also by the Sabbath named jointly with the new Moons
in Isaiah 66. Chapter verse 23. Where God says, that from one New Moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
before him. Which words, being applied to the estate and condition of the world
to come, as they may be most fitly, give to understand, that the New Moons and
the Sabbaths, wherein holy convocations and solemn actions of Gods service
were practiced, were types and figures of the great convocation of all that are
his, in his heavenly kingdom, and of the eternal rest which they shall enjoy
there, serving him without interruption, because there is no intervall, no
space there between the Sabbaths and the New Moons, that is, between the
times appointed for rest and the solemn service of GOD, as there was under the
Law among the Jews, but one Sabbath following immediately another, one New
Moon succeeding, without interposition, another, as the words of the Text do
import, and the whole time being nothing else then a continual Sabbath, that
is, a perpetual tenor, an unintermitted continuance without change, of serving
God after a most glorious and unconceivable manner. And as God, after he had
created and made all his works in six days, ceased on the seventh day,
ceased, I say, not simply, but with pleasure and content, enjoying that glory
which from hence redounded unto him; even so he shall then rejoice and magnify
himself on that day in all his faithful in whom he shall have accomplished
his glorious work of their redemption, and they reciprocally shall rejoice in
him, shall rest from their labors, and their works shall follow them, Revel.
14. ver. 3. That is, they shall receive pleasure, glory, and reward of all
their good works, and shall inherit a glorious rest conformable in some sort
to Gods rest. Undoubtedly the use which the Sabbath day had to be a type and
figure of this heavenly rest, was the cause that God did so precisely urge the
Jews to observe and keep it inviolably. For he designed by so severe an
injunction of the exact observation of the typ^, the great importance and
necessity of the thing signified thereby.

9 Of this I infer, first that the day of rest, seeing it was ordained to be
a type and figure of the heavenly and eternal rest which Jesus Christ was to
purchase to those that are his, ^ons^^ering ^^so that the Scripture for no
other ^ause makes mention o^ Gods resting on that day, and hallowing of it,
out for this typical and m^sterious use, that say I, that day was not ordained
to Adam from the beginning, to be kept by him in the state of innocence,
because there is great cause to believe, that although Adam had persevered in
that state and condition, he should not have entered into the heavenly rest, but
had enjoyed simply a terrestrial and eternal blessedness here below in the
Paradise of Heden, where God had put him; because the heavenly happiness is
always proposed in the Scripture as a supernatural gift of the grace of God
through Christ Jesus, and not at all as a natural grace. And it is in that
respect that the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans Chapter 5. ver. 15. 16,
17. says, that we receive much more in Jesus Christ, then we have lost in
Adam, and that there is a superaboundance of grace by JESUS CHRIST toward us,
going far beyond all the loss we have made in Adam, which could not be
said, if we had lost any thing over and above an earthly felicity, and
immortality in these lower parts, and if Adam persisting in the state of
integrity, was to be, after many ages on earth, received into the kingdom of
heaven. To which belongs also that which is written in the fifteenth Chapter
of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where the Apostle making a distinction
between Adam and Christ, says verse 45. that Adam was made (...), into a
living soul, that is to live a natural life on earth, and to communicate it
to his offspring, but Jesus Christ was made (...), into a quickening spirit,
that is, to give to those that are his, a spiritual and heavenly life by the
mighty power of the grace of Sanctification. Also that which he adds, Verse
47. The first man made of the earth, was earthy, ordained to abide on earth:
But the second man is the Lord from heaven, ordained to have his residence in
heaven, and to introduce thither all that are his. So in all likelihood Adam
was not to be transported into the kingdom of heaven, although he had
continued constantly in his first integrity and uprightness: Nay in case he
had been received into that glorious felicity, that could not, nor should not
have befallen him by Jesus Christ, as such an one, that is, as Savior and
Mediator. And therefore it is not likely, that God ordained in the state of
innocence, the Seventh day of rest, which was never established by him, but to
be a figure of the heavenly rest and eternal blessedness which Jesus Christ
imparts to all those that believe in him.

10 Secondly, I infer again from the same doctrine, that seeing the day of
rest was first established to be a figure of the heavenly rest, whereof CHRIST
is author, it has no obligatory force under the New Testament, but ought to
cease, as have done all other signs, figuring the graces which Jesus Christ
has brought unto us, and among the rest the type and figure of the rest of the
Israelites in the land of Canaan, which the Apostle joyneth together with the
rest of the Seventh day, setting down the one and the other as types, in the
same fashion and of the same nature, of the heavenly rest.

11 The exception which some take against this inference is most absurd, when
they say, that if the Sabbath day was a type of the heavenly rest, it ought to
remain in its vigor and strength, till this rest come, and all the faithful
have obtained it. For to the end it should continue no longer, it suffices
that this heavenly and eternal rest has been purchased by JESUS CHRIST, and
that the faithful possess it already in part, some of them being in heaven
happy in their souls, and resting from their labors, the rest being here
beneath, where they receive the first fruits, and an essay of that
blessedness, by the spiritual consolations, contentments and delights, which
in the midst of their greatest afflictions are shed abroad in their hearts by
the Holy Ghost which dwells in them. Otherwise, if the foresaid reason were
of any value, the other Sabbaths, to wit, the Sabbath of the seventh year, and
the Iubile of the fiftieth year, which were Sabbaths of rest unto the the land
should continue still, because they were figures of that rest which is not yet
come. Nay all the signs of the Old Testament should remain, because they
figured spiritual benefits, which are always to come, either wholly, or in
part, to all GODs Elect while they are here on earrh. The signification of the
Jewish circumcision, to wit, the circumcision of the heart shall not be brought
to perfection and absolutely finished till we be in the kingdom of heaven.
But it suffices for an absolute abolishment of all the signs of the Old
Testament, that Jesus Christ has actually acquired all the benefits figured by
them, although the Elect inherit them not yet totally and perfectly. As for
the day which the Church has appointed to be a day of rest under the New
Testament, it has not been ordained to serve for a type and figure, which it
neither could, nor ought to do, but only for order, and to be a means of the
practice of holy duties, whereunto some day was of necessity to be allowed.

CHAPTER Twelfth.
Answer to the replies made unto the former Argument.
1. First reply, the Sabbath being moral from the beginning of the world, the
figure was accidentally annexed unto it.

2. Answer. The Sabbath was a legal figure, and no thing else.

3. Second reply. The Sabbath was never a figurative and Typical sign, but
only doctrinall, marking the strait communion between GOD, and those that are
his, and is still such a sign.

4. Answer to this reply, by the distinction of signs, in those that are only
doctrinall and only memorial, or which besides are figurative or typical.

5. Of which last sort was the Sabbath.

6. And therefore it was to be abrogated, as well as all other types and
figures of the Law.

7. Which were all, not only typical, but also doctrinall.

8. Why the signs of the Christian Church, are not figures and types.

9. Third reply, concerning the Rainbow, which is a sign only, and no type
at all, answered.

10. Some things yet subsisting, which were signs, figures and types under the
Law, may be yet lawfully used, but not as signs, figures, types.

11. For clearing of this, the types of the Law are distinguished into those
whose whole essence consisted in their typical use, as the Circumcision,
Passover, sacrifices, etc.

12 And in those, which besides the type, may in the new Testament have some
other good and religious use, as abstinence of certain meats, observation of
the first day of Months, of feasts, of Sabbaths, etc. but not as any part of
Gods service, or through necessity of obedience to Gods Commandment.

13 Of this last sort is the Sabbath.

14 Fourth reply. The Sabbath did not figure Christ, therefore it was not a
type.

15 Answer by a distinction of legal types, in those which represented
directly Christ's person and actions;

16 And in those which represented directly his benefits, such as were the
Circumcision, all kind of Sabbaths, the weekly Sabbath: all these are
abrogated, and therefore this also.

17 All other judaicall ceremonies, although they had no relation to Christ,
have been abrogated; how much more the Sabbath.

1 TO the last reason heretofore alleged, some do reply, that indeed in the
Sabbath there was a kind of figure and ceremony annexed only unto it
accidentally, but as for the thing it self, the Sabbath has been since the
beginning of the world, and continues still a moral thing, seeing it was
ordained to Adam before sin came unto the world, and to the Israelites before
the Law, since the giving whereof God added the ceremony to the day, to the
intent it might be a part, not only of the moral, but also of the ceremonial
Law; that Christ has taken away the ceremony, but a seventh day of Sabbath
has always the same vigor and force, it had from the beginning.

2 It suffices to answer, that this reply lays a false foundation, to wit,
that a seventh day of Sabbath is of it self moral, that it was in the time of
innocence ordained to Adam, and commanded to the Israelites before the Law.
Whereas it was first ordained by the Law, and not before, and the figure was
not annexed unto it, as an accident to a thing already subsisting; Nay, it was
never of its own nature but a legal figure, belonging to the government and
ceremonies of the Law, as has been already, and shall be more abundantly
confirmed in the refutation of the arguments broached for the contrary opinion.

3 Others do reply, by denying that in the observation of a seventh day of
Sabbath there was any legal figure and ceremony, which was to be abrogated by
Christ: That indeed God in the foresaid passages of Exodus and Ezechiel says,
that the Sabbath day was to the Israelites a sign that God sanctified them.
But the word Sign signifies not always a type and figure; for love is a
sign that we are Christ's Disciples, and is not a type; And the public
profession of a thing, is a sign of that thing, and is not a type thereof;
Even so the Sabbath in the strict keeping thereof was a mark of the strait
communion which was between God and the faithful Israelites, as it has still
the same use toward Christians; but was not a sign of the nature of those
which were abrogated by Jesus Christ, to wit, a sign typical and figurative
of things to come, to the fulfilling whereof it ought to yield and give place,
but only a doctrinall sign, that is, given to be unto them a document and
instruction of Gods benefits toward them, and of their duty to him, which
therefore was such a sign, that it might, and ought to subsist together with
the thing that it signified; and so it follows not, that it ought to be
abrogated at the coming of Christ, but rather that it continues under the new
Testament, to be unto us a sign and document of the same benefits which
concern us as much as the Israelites.

4 But this reply is of no better metal then the former, and the distinction
that it is founded upon is vain and frivolous. It is true, that whatsoever
under the old Testament might in some sort be called a sign, was not always a
type and figure: For the word Sign is now and then taken in a most general
sense, for any mark and token whatsoever, which makes a thing to be known,
for every effect showing the cause from whence it proceeds, or for every
adjunct denoting the subject wherein it is inherent; As in the examples
aforesaid, the actions and courses that men take themselves unto, may be signs
of their inward disposition, of their religion, or of some other thing that
concerns them. And as Christ said to his Disciples, that by this should all
men know that they were his Disciples, if they had love one to another, Ioh.
13. v. 35. Even so may it be said, that a pure and holy life, a religious and
upright conversation under the old Testament, made the true Israelites to be
known, and were a sign whereby they were denoted, as by the same badges the
true Christians are now known. There is an infinite number of such signs,
which were never, neither could be types and figures. But these are not the
signs that we treat of, nor also other signs ordained purposely to be
memorialls of things past, whereof there were, perhaps, some which had no other
use, and were never types, and shadows of better things. The signs we are
about, are ceremonies and outward observations ordained of God to men, to
signify unto them on his behalf the saving graces which he will communicate,
and Jesus Christ has purchased unto them by his death: And I affirm, that
there was no such sign under the old Testament, which was not a type and
shadow of Jesus Christ to come.

5 The Sabbath ought to be sorted among these. I acknowledge it was a
doctrinall sign, teaching the Israelites, that God maker of all things, and
therefore of all men, nevertheless amongst all had consecrated and hallowed
them particularly to himself, with which sign, the thing, to wit, their
sanctification was present. As they also by it made public profession of their
religion and pious affection toward God. But that barred it not from being a
typical and figurative sign, in as much as it was a ceremony ordained of God
to the Israelites, that it might signify unto them a most profitable benefit,
which, although it was in that same time graciously bestowed upon them, had
notwithstanding relation to the Messiah to come, for whose sake they received
it, as we do also at this time.

6 Whereupon it cannot be inferred, that we therefore ought to have the same
sign at this time in the Christian Church: Nay, on the contrary, we should not
have it at all. For although the Covenant of Grace, in regard of the saving
benefits comprehended in it, be in substance the same since the coming of
Christ, that it was before his coming, yet it is new in regard of their
signs. For it behooved the old signs to cease for ever, and to give over
their place to the new. The Sabbath, and all other Signs and Sacraments of the
Law were of the same degree.

7 They were all jointly doctrinall and figurative. They taught the faithful
what was their duty toward GOD, and what were GOD's graces toward them, and
figured unto them the Messiah to come, as the meritorious cause, and as that
wonderful one, who, in the fullness of times, was to purchase those graces,
which in reference to that acquisition, and to a more full communication of
them under the new Testament, and their accomplishment in heaven, are called
The good things to come, Col. 2. verse. 17. Heb. 10. verse. 1. Although all true
believers received them in part, even then, in as much as Christ's future death
was no less present to God, then if he had suffered it already, and obtained
the same worth, power and efficacy. Their Sacraments the Circumcision,
Passover, Sacrifices, Aspersions, etc. were they not signs of Spiritual
benefits, which God granted to his faithful servants at the very instant of
their celebration, as of the forgiveness and blotting out of their sins, of
their regeneration, and of other heavenly and saving graces? Were they not out
of hand made actually partakers of these graces, as soon as they received the
signs whereby they were signified, and they instructed and assured by them, as
by most certain documents and pledges of their present and real exhibition?
Did not GOD declare himself to be, and was he not really the GOD of Abraham at
that same instant, when he ordained unto him the Circumcision in his flesh to
seal that gracious promise in his heart? And did not that promise contain the
whole substance of the Covenant of grace?

8 But although they received the graces signified, the signs were never the
less typical and figurative; for as much as the Messiah to come, was the
mark that they were levelled unto, and by whose death those graces were to be
deserved and purchased. Also they have all ceased at the coming of Christ; and
although we receive under the new Testament the same graces, we have no more
those ancient signs: For Christ has given us other signs, which with greater
clearenesse and perspicuity represent and assure us, that God gives them unto
us, but as being already purchased. Which therefore to speak properly, are not
signs and types, because they have no relation to the Messiah to come, nor to
a future acquisition to be made by him, as were all other signs, wherewith
under the old Testament God had clothed the Covenant of Grace, and which also
for this cause, Christ has abrogated. Neither can it be showed, that GOD will
have to continue under the new Testament, any thing that he had ordained under
the old Testament, to be an outward sign, signifying any saving grace, that
Christ at his coming was to purchase by his death to his Church, God will have
it to continue under the new Testament.

9 They allege to this purpose, but most unfitly, the Rainbow in the clouds,
which God gave of old for a sign to Noah, and continues still in this use of
a sign. For it was a sign ordained only to confirm a temporal promise,
common, not only to all men, but also to all living creatures of all flesh
that is upon the earth, to wit, that there shall not any more be an universal
flood to destroy the earth, and all the creatures that are therein, as he had
done before, Genes. 9. verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. which was not a
benefit of the Covenant of grace founded upon Jesus Christ, but a natural
covenant, and therefore was in no sense typical, had no relation to the
Messiah to come, and for this cause ought not to be abolished by him, but was
to continue, as in its natural being, even so in its being relative,
signifying this temporal grace, which the earth shall enjoy to the worlds end.

10 It is true, that some things which in the old Covenant have been used for
types and figures, and subsist still in their natural and absolute essence,
may be freely and indifferently applied to some good and lawful uses, which
they are capable of under the new Covenant. But in regard of the end they had
to be typical signs, and of that necessary obligation which was in them by
Gods ancient Ordinance for any end whatsoever, they are all abolished; neither
is there any one of them that has vigor and strength under the new Testament.

11 Which to explain more clearly, I say, that typical things under the old
Testament were of diverse sorts: Some of them were in such sort typical, that
their whole essence consisted in that; neither can in matters of religion, the
type and figure be severed from their lawful use, nor applied to the exercise
of any religious function allowed in the state of the Gospel. Of this
condition, for example, were the Circumcision, the immolation of the Paschall
Lamb, the Sacrifices: The whole use of which signs was to figurate Christ to
come, and his benefits; neither is there any respect fitting for the exercises
of our Evangelicall religion, for which any man may lawfully circumcise his
children, offer the Paschall Lamb, or give sacrifices of beasts to God.

12 Others were in such sort typical, that they may in themselves have another
use then to be types, and be employed lawfully in the practice of actions of
the Christian Religion: As for example, these that the Apostle speaks of in
the Epistle to the Colossians, Chap. 2. verse. 16. to wit, the abstinence of
certain meats, the keeping of new Moons, of Holy days, of Sabbaths. For we
may abstain from meats, nay, from a certain kind of meats, to fast, to keep
under our body, and bring it into subjection. We may observe the first days of
every Month, the Holy days, the Sabbaths, to rest from the toil of the
world, and to apply our selves more carefully and particularly, then usually we
do, to the hearing of Gods Word, to singing of Psalms, to public Prayers, to
bestowing alms on the poor, all which are Evangelicall duties, for which it
is not only lawful, but also fitting that some times be appointed. As indeed
from all times both fasts and diverse feasts have been observed in the
Christian Church. But to keep all those things for Religion and Conscience
sake, as a necessary point of Gods service, or to believe that we are bound to
do so, by the Commandments which God gave under the old Testament, when he
established them for shadows and figures, were a thing altogether unlawful.

13 The Sabbath day is wholly of this kind. It is certain that Christians may
observe that day indifferently, as any other day, and in it give themselves
unto all exercises of our Christian Religion. And indeed the Christian Church
kept it in her first ages many years together, as well as the Sunday, which we
shall show more expressly hereafter. But to keep it as a type and figure, as it
was of old, or believe that we are bound to keep it rather than any other day
by the Commandment which God gave at that time, or to make of it, for any
other respect, a point of conscience, it is a thing in no case tolerable under
the Gospel, in the time whereof Gods Commandments given under the old Testament
concercerning any typical thing, although capable otherwise to be applied to
some other use then to be a type, are not obligatory, and bind not the
conscience. And as putting apart the typical consideration, diverse good uses
may be found, for which a course may be taken to keep the first day of every
Month, the solemn feasts of the Passover, of Pentecost, of Iubiles at the
end of fifty years, and others, yet all these days are abolished, and if any
man would lay a necessity of such observations upon Christians, in the
authority of the ancient Commandments of the Law, which the Gospel has not
ratified, and establish in them a point of Religion, he should withstand the
Gospel: Even so, albeit reasons may be found, laying aside the type and figure,
to make lawful the observation of the Sabbath day, by applying it to
Evangelicall uses, nevertheless it should be a sin against the Gospel to make
the observation thereof necessary, by virtue of the Commandments which God
gave of old, but the Gospel has no more ratified then these others, or
otherwise to establish in it any part of Gods service, seeing it was a typical
thing which has been abolished with all the rest. This is the maine point
which I stand unto here: Not that it is unlawful to keep the Sabbath day just
as any other day; But that there is not on Gods part any obligation to that
day, more than to another day, and that it cannot be of it self a service of
our Christian Religion, because it was a type of the old Testament, and all the
types of that time have ceased, in regard of their obligation, notwithstanding
any lawful use of them, which otherwise may be thought on under the new
Testament.

14 And wherefore, I pray, if all other types be abolished, ought the Sabbath
only to continue, seeing it was a type of the same nature with the rest,
figuring to the Israelites their sanctification by the Messiah to come? Upon
what grounds is it said, that it was not typical and figurative as all the
rest? Is it, because nothing can be seen in it figurative of Jesus Christ, as
in all other signs? As in the feast of Passover, the Lamb which was killed
figured manifestly the person of Jesus Christ put to death for our redemption:
The sacrifices of beasts were figures of the Sacrifice of Christ's body: The
sprinklings and washings were types of his blood, of the shedding of it upon
the cross, of the sprinkling thereof upon our consciences by the holy Ghost,
and of the spiritual washing which we receive thereby.

15 To this I answer, that the figurative and typical signs of the old
Testament, were not all of one sort. It is true, that all had relation to
Christ, but some of them represented merely and directly Christ's person, the
actions of his person, and consequently the benefits depending thereon: Others
represented nothing directly but his spiritual benefits, yet as proceeding
from him, and from his actions, which consequently they figured also. Of the
first kind was the Paschall Lamb, and the sacrifices that were offered, which
properly were figures of Christ's person and of his sacrifice, and consequently
of our redemption, and of the expiation of our sins made by him, which is the
benefit proceeding from his sacrifice.

16 Of the second sort was the Sabbath day, which properly and directly
represented the sanctification of the people, and their ceasing from works of
sin, but figured also therewith Jesus Christ: Because by him, that benefit
was to be purchased to the faithful, and they were to receive it by his
means. For it is by the offering of the body of JESUS CHRIST once for all that
we are sanctified, Heb. 10. ver. 10. Of the same sort was the Circumcision,
wherein no thing can be found that figured properly CHRIST'S person, and the
actions thereof. But because it sealed the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.
verse 11. figured the spiritual circumcision of the heart, Romans 2. ver. 28,
29. Col. 2. ver. 11. and was a sign of the covenant of grace, Genesis 17. ver.
7, 9, 10, 11. which benefits Christ was to deserve by his death, in that
respect it was a figure of Christ, and a shadow, whereof the body was in him,
who also has abolished it. The like were so many Sabbaths ordained on the
first and last day of the feasts of the Passover, and of Tabernacles, on the
feast of Pentecost, on the tenth day of the seventh month, in every seventh
year, in the fiftieth year of Iubile, which all confess to have been
abolished by Jesus Christ, as things typical. Yet there was no thing in them
that made them more particular to the Jews, more ceremonial and typike, nay
not so much as the ordinary Sabbath, whereof God had said, that which he has
not said of these, that it was a sign between him and his people, etc.
Neither figured they Jesus Christ otherwise then this ordinary Sabbath did. For
they were not types of his person, nor of his actions, but only of the
spiritual benefits which are always received of the faithful, and which the
true Jews received then in him and through him. Now if all the signs of this
second kind, which had of old a great sway in the Synagogue, were accounted to
be figurative, and as such are abrogated, wherefore should not the Sabbath be
likewise abolished?

17 Yea how many things were there under the Old Testament, whereof no man can
tell what relation they had to Christ, either in his person, in his actions, or
in his benefits, and which perhaps in effect represented no such thing, had no
typical signification, but were only ordinances belonging to order and
ecclesiastical government, servill exercises, childish rudiments, elements of
the world, wherewith it was GODs pleasure to burden his people in those times,
which were the times of the infancy and bondage of the Church, and therefore
were ceremonies, as well as those that had some typical and figurative
signification. (For under the name of Ceremonies may and ought to be comprised
not only the types and figures, which properly and manifestly were such, but
universally all the observations of the ecclesiastical policy and government
of the Jews, all the ordinances of the Law of commandments, which were a
partition wall between them and all other nations, as the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 2. verse 14, 15.) Or were memorials of things past, which did belong to
the Jews only, and for that cause have been abrogated by Jesus Christ. So
that, although the Sabbath had not had any typical signification, nor relation
to Jesus Christ, as it had, it was enough to make it to be done away, that it
did belong to the ecclesiastical government of the Jews, and was also given
them for memorial of a benefit particular to them, to wit of their deliverance
out of the land of Egypt, and of that miserable bondage wherein they had not
any one day free, neither to rest from their labors, nor to serve the Lord
their God. For in the fifth Chapter of Deuteronomie, God repeating by the mouth
of Moses the Commandments of his Law, adds to the fourth Commandment this
reason of the institution of the Sabbath, ver. 15. And remember that thou wast
a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out
thence, through a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm: Therefore the Lord
thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day, showing by these words, that
the deliverance which he had given them from that laborious bondage of the land
of Egypt, should not only oblige them to keep the Sabbath so much the more
carefully and religiously, but was a cause why he ordained it, to wit, that it
might be unto them a memorial, or a token for remembrance of that glorious and
wonderful deliverance.

CHAPTER Thirteenth.
Conclusion of the first part of this Treatise.
1. The Sabbath was not ordained, nor known, till after the deliverance of the
Israelites out of the land of Egypt.

2. The Sabbath was only a sign figurative of Christ, and a memorial of a
benefit particular to the Jews.

3. All the days of the week ought to be Sabbaths to Christians.

1 OF all that has been said heretofore we conclude, First, that the Sabbath
was not ordained till after the deliverance of the Israelites out of the land
of Egypt, and consequently, that they kept it not in Egypt, and therefore
that they had not learned of the Patriarchs their Fathers to observe it; that
the Patriarchs did not observe it; that Adam received not any commandment of
God to keep it, neither had any notice thereof; finally that therefore it is
not moral. For if it were moral, and therefore always and in all times
necessary, if God had commanded it to Adam, if the Patriarchs had kept it, they
had taught their children to keep it, and that being so, the Israelites had
assuredly kept it in Egypt. If there they had kept it, there had been no cause
to ordain it for a memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt, and to say,
that after their deliverance, and in consideration thereof, they were commanded
to keep the Sabbath day, which is the thing that God pronounces most
expressly in the place lately cited, Deuteronomy. 5. verse 15. and Ezekiel. 20. verse
11, 12. where upon that he had said ver. 10. that he caused the Israelites to
go forth out of the land of Egypt, he adds, and I gave them my statutes,
moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths, etc.

2 Secondly, seeing the Sabbath day was ordained to be a memorial of a benefit
particular to the Israelites, to wit, of their deliverance out of the land of
Egypt, and of their separation from all other nations, it follows that the
Sabbath day obliges not Christians under the New Testament, as if it were
moral, and as if God had ^^dained it by an express commandment to continue
till the worlds end. For this end of the Sabbath, to be a memorial of their
deliverance and separation from all other people dwelling upon the face of the
earth, with the other end before mentioned, to be a figurative sign of Jesus
Christ to come, and of the saving benefits, which were to be purchased by him,
made up the whole use of the Sabbath: Of which end neither the one nor the
other does belong to the New Testament.

3 The faithful Christians are a people more spiritual then the Jews were,
because they are under the Gospel, which is an estate more spiritual and
heavenly then was the condition of Gods people under the Law, for which cause
it is called the kingdom of heaven: And therefore all days under the Gospel
should be to all the faithful that live in that blessed and heavenly estate as
many Sabbath days, more particularly then to the Jews, to rest from their
sins, and to give themselves to prayers calling upon the Name of the Lord, to
reading and meditation of his holy Word, and to other religious exercises of
godliness, according to the words in Isaiah Chapter 66. v. 23. if they be
applied unto the estate of the Church under the Gospel, as they may be, and
indeed are so expounded by many interpreters, when it is there said, that then
there shall be no more New Moons, nor Sabbaths distinguished by intervalls and
spaces of times, but one Sabbath shall succeed immediately to another Sabbath,
and that all the days of the week and of the whole year shall be as
Sabbaths unto them. This is the conclusion of all that has been said in this
first part, which shall be more fully confirmed by the refutation of the
arguments that are brought to maintain the morality of the Sabbath. Which
refutation shall be the subject of the second part of this Treatise.

THE SECOND PART wherein the reasons brought to justify the morality and
perpetuity of a Seventh day of Sabbath are confuted.
CHAPTER First.
First Answer to the first Reason.
1. The opinion of those that hold the morality of a Seventh day of Sabbath
clearly set down.

2. Their first Reason taken out of Genesis Chapter 2. ver. 2, 3. Where it is
said, that God rested on the Seventh day from all his works, and blessed the
Seventh day, and sanctified it, etc.

3. First answer to this Reason. Moses writing the History of the Creation
after the Law was given, declares occasionally the cause that moved God to
bless and sanctify the Seventh day to the Jews, according to the custom of
the Scripture, to join things done long before with those that were done long
after, as if they had been done together, and at one time.

4. Confirmation of this by places named by anticipation.

5. By that which is written, Exodus 16. ver. 33, 34. where it is said, that
Aaron laid up in a Pot an Omer of Manna before the Testimony, which was not
done many years after.

6. And by the History of David's combat with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. Where it is
written, ver. 54. that David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it
to Jerusalem, but he put his armor in his tent, although there was a great
intervall of time between these two actions.

7. This joining of things far removed in time, is not unsuitable to him that
speaks or writes.

8. First instance against this answer, taken from the connection of the third
verse with the second, from the same tence used in both, and from the identitie
of the same seventh day spoken of in both, etc.

9. First answer to this instance, showing, that in the holy Scripture things
distant in-time, are expressed by words of the same tence, when the one has
some dependancie upon the other.

10. Application of this answer to the blessing and sanctification of the
seventh day in Moses his time, joined with Gods rest after the creation,
because it was the foundation of that blessing.

11. Second answer, It was not the same particular seventh day after the
creation, but the same by revolution which God sanctified.

12. Third answer, the Hebrew article (...) confirms not, that the seventh
day which God blessed was the same seventh day wherein he rested.

13. Second instance, as Gods blessing of his creatures after they were made,
was present, so was his blessing of the seventh day immediately after the
creation.

14. Answer to this instance, the reason is not alike.

15. Confirmation of the answer made to the words of Moses in Genesis, by the
conformity of the same words used in the commandment given to the Jews
concerning the Sabbath.

16. As also, because the Sabbath was not hallowed for Adam who in the estate
of innocence had no need of such a day.

17. First instance, Adam was taught by Gods example that he stood in need of
such a day, refuted.

18. Second instance, as God ordained Sacraments to Adam, so he ordained to him
a seventh day of rest, refuted by a reason showing the nullity of that
consequence.

19. And by the excellency of Adams condition, to which the ordination of such
a day was derogatory.

20. Third instance, as Gods rest on the Seventh day was the foundation of the
commandment given to the Jews to rest on that day, so was it from the
beginning, refuted.

1 THose that hold the second opinion do say, that the keeping of a Seventh
day of Sabbath is a moral thing, which from the beginning of the world should
continue to the end thereof, with this difference only, that God before and
till the coming of Jesus Christ had ordained, that the last day of the week
wherein he rested from all the works which he had made, when he created the
world, should be sanctified by all men, in remembrance of the creation, and of
his rest on that day: But since the manifestation of Jesus Christ, it was his
will, that instead of the last day of the week, the first day, wherein Christ,
rising from among the dead, rested from the work of our redemption, should be
observed in the Christian Church, for a memorial of this work, which being
more excellent then the former, it was beseeming and just, that this last day
of the creation, should yield the possession of the day of rest unto it.

2 To underprop this opinion, they have broached diverse reasons, amongst which
we shall order in the first place the reason taken out of the second Chapter of
Genesis, ver. 3. where Moses, after he had said, that God finished all his
works in six days, and rested on the seventh day, adds, And God blessed
the Seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all
his works which he created and made. Of which words they conclude, that as
soon as ever the Creation was ended, and the Seventh day begun to subsist in
nature, it was blessed and sanctified, that is, consecrated to Gods service,
and ordained, even then to our first Parents while they were in the state of
innocence, to be kept by them for this end, and therefore the observation of a
Seventh day is moral, is of the Law of nature, and is in no wise ceremonial,
seeing it was established before sin came into the world, at which time there
was no shadows and figures of Christ, because in that state of innocence our
first Parents had not stood in need of him, nor of any direction to him by
ceremonies. If then in that estate, wherein no corruption of sin had hindered
them to serve God continually, and the bodily employments had been no great
disturbance unto them in the practice of that duty, God judged necessary to
injoine unto them a seventh day, to the intent that giving over all other care,
they should in it addict themselves only to the actions of his service, and all
religious exercises, how much more in the state of sin, wherein men have so
many hindrances from Gods service, both by sin, and by the laborious
occupations of their worldly callings, is it necessary, that a set day of rest
be ordained unto them, to cease wholly in it from the turmoile of their secular
affairs, and to give themselves only to holy and religious exercises belonging
to Gods service. This necessity is as great under the new Testament, as it was
under the old; and therefore God has not omitted to ordain under both a
Sabbath day, yea, a seventh day of rest, which being established before sin,
and consequently being moral, binds all men perpetually.

3 There be diverse means to answer this objection: First, nothing obliges us
to believe, that the words written in the third verse of the second Chapter of
Genesis should be thus translated: And God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it, as if Moses had meant to express a time past long before his
penning of this Book; and to tell, that this blessing and sanctifying was made
even from the time that the creation was finished, and from the first seventh
day of the world: Whereas they may be translated thus, And God has blessed the
seventh day, and has sanctified it, and understood, as being said with a
Parenthesis, and in regard of the Ordinance which God had lately made in the
days of Moses concerning the seventh day, when he gave by his Ministry the
Law of the Israelites* Which ordinance Moses made mention of in his relation to
the history of the creation, as of a thing established and known of the
Israelites when he writ, and by occasion of that he had said, that God after he
had created all his works in six days, rested on the seventh day. So we may
give this exposition to Moses words; God made all his works in six days, and
rested on the seventh day, and thence he took occasion to bless and sanctify
now that day, giving commandment by his Law to his people of Israel to keep
it in their generations: So it shall be a narration made in this place
occasionally, according to the ordinary custom of holy Writers, and specially
of Moses, when in the historical relation of things that were come to pass
long before, they find occasion to speak of things happened since, specially of
those that were come to pass in their time when they wrote, to interlace, upon
that occasion, a short rehearsal of them, with the narration of things more
ancient, and to speak of both in such a manner, as if they had happened in the
same time, whereof I will here set down some examples.

4 First we find diverse places named by anticipation: As in the 12. Chapter of
Genesis, verse 8. It is said, that Abraham removed unto a mountain Eastward
from Bethel, which name of Bethel was not in the days of Abraham the name of
the place betokened by it in the foresaid words: For it was not called Bethel,
till in it Jacob saw a ladder reaching to heaven, and the Lord standing above
it. Then Jacob called it Bethel, that is, The house of God, whereas before that
time it was called Luz, as may be seen in Genesis, Chap. 28. verse. 13. 19. But
Moses writing the history of Abraham, called it Bethel, by an historical
anticipation, because in his time, Bethel was the ordinary name of that place:
We read in the fourth Chapter of Ioshuah, verse. 19. that the people came up out
of Jordan, and pitched in Gilgal, which was not so called, till Ioshuah in that
place circumcised the people, Chap. 5. verse. 9. Likewise in the second Chapter
of Judges, and first verse, the Author says, that the Angel of the Lord came
up from Gilgal to Bokim, because the place which he calls Bokim was so called
when he wrote that history, although it was not yet so called when the Angel
came thither, but received that name afterward, from the tears which the
people shed and powered out before God, after the Angel had rebuked them; For
the Text says, that when the Angel of the Lord spoke these words to all the
children of Israel, the people lift up their voice and wept: Therefore they
called the name of that place BOKIM, verse. 4, 5.

5 Secondly, we find the same anticipation in the description of things and
actions: As in the 16. Chapter of Exodus, where Moses reports, how God began
first to give Manna to the Israelites (which I pretend also to be the time of
the first institution of the Sabbath) and how the Israelites carried themselves
about the ordering thereof, and immediately he adds, how he by Gods command,
ordained that an Omer of it should be filled, to be kept for the generations of
the Israelites, verse. 32. and gave an injunction to Aaron to take a pot, to put
in it that Omer full of Manna, and to lay it up before the LORD to be kept for
their generation, verse. 33. He recites also at once, that as the LORD
commanded him, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony to be kept, verse. 34.
which things, as it is evident, were not done at the first, when God gave them
that bread to eat, because then there was as yet neither Tabernacle, nor Arc,
nor Tables of the Law. But because when Moses wrote, all these things were
done, and had their full performance, he taking occasion of the historical
narration, which he was writing of the first Manna which God sent to his
people, relates also the Ordinance that God gave to put a pot full of it in
the Tabernacle, before the Arc, and the execution of the said Ordinance, which
nevertheless must be referred to a long time after.

6 So in the first Book of Samuel, and in the 17. chapter, after the narration
made of David's combat against Goliath, of his victory of that Giant, and of the
defeat of the Philistines, it is added in the Text, verse 54. And David took
the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put his armor
into his Tent, which notwithstanding was not done, but after that David, being
anointed King, took the whole town of Jerusalem from the Iebusites, with the
strong hold of Sion, and dwelled in it, calling it the City of David, 2 Samuel 5.
verse. 7. 9. And therefore our French translation in the foresaid place, 1 Samuel
17. adds the word depuis, that is, since, saying, And David since brought the
head of the Philistine to Jerusalem, and put his arms in his Tabernacle, to
show, that David did not this as soon as he had overthrown the Philistine,
although it be related in the Text jointly and at once, with his combat and
victory, as if both had happened together, because when that history was a
writing, the transportation of the head and arms of Goliath to Jerusalem, and
to the fort of Sion was done: And therefore it is related by occasion, as it
were with one breath, in consequence of the victory gotten over him: Other
examples might be found to this purpose, if it were needful.

7 To keep this course in discoursing and writing is no wise unfitting nor
misbecomming. If any writing under the New Testament the History of the first
Creation of the world, and relating the forming of light on the first day,
should add by occasion. And it is also on the first day, that the true light
of the world has shined by his resurrection from the dead, and for that cause
we observe that day: Or if re-hearzing, that God brought forth bread out of
the earth to strengthen man's heart, and Wine to make it glad, he should add
jointly upon this occasion: And it is in this bread and in this Wine which
nourish the body, that Jesus Christ has instituted the Sacrament of the
nourishment of the soul by him, who should find any thing blameworthy in
such discourses. Wherefore then Moses might he not most fitly, by occasion of
that he had written of the Seventh day, and of Gods rest in it, in the History
of the Creation, touch also in the same discourse the edict made about the
sanctification of that day, seeing that edict had a great sway when he wrote
the History of the Creation, and Gods rest on the Seventh day was the cause and
reason thereof, although it was not so ancient as the first Seventh day?

8 Against this answer the instance has no force which they urge from the
conjunction and, whereby the third verse is joined with the second, that is,
the blessing and hallowing of the Seventh day, with the finishing of the works
of God, and of his rest on that day, as being done at the same time, and
expressed in words of the same tence and mood. Nor what they say further, that
in these two verses, as most clearly appears, the whole discourse is of the
same Seventh day, and as in the second verse is understood the first Seventh
day, wherein God, after he had finished his works, rested, likewise in the
third verse it is understood so, when it is said, that he blessed and
sanctified the Seventh day, which is also expressed by the demonstrative
Article (...): to show that it was the same Seventh day: that otherwise the
reason which is added, and taken from the rest of God, should be worthless,
because God did not rest from the work of Creation on that day which he
ordained to the Jews, to be their Sabbath day, but on that day wherein he
finished first all his works.

9 For I answer to this, that the conjunction and may well enough join things
distant in time, and far removed one from another, that also they may be
expressed by words of the same tence and mood, specially if they have any
connection and dependancy one upon another, as in this place, The blessing and
hallowing of the Seventh day, although done long after Gods rest on the Seventh
day, depends upon that rest, as upon the cause and reason which was an
occasion to God to make it. In the Texts before mentioned of Exodus 16. Chapter
the 32. and 33. verses, and of the 17. Chapter of the first book of Samuel, in
the 54. verse, which express manifestly things done many years after these
which are rehearsed before, but depending on them, are joined to the verses
immediately going before, by the conjunction and, which is diverse time
reiterated, and the words whereby these diverse things are expressed, are set
down in the same tence and mood. It imports not, that in these examples the
thing subsequent joined straight with the precedent, was not a great deal so
far remote in time from it, because both happened within the space of the age
of one man, as should be in the Text of Genesis before cited the sanctification
of the Seventh day from Gods rest on the Seventh day, if this being past on the
first Seventh day after the Creation, that came not to pass till the days of
Moses, which should be an intervall of more than two thousand years. For when
two things separated and distant in time, are to be coupled together in a
discourse, if so be the one hang upon the other, those that are remote by many
thousand of years, may be joined together, as well as those of twenty or forty
years distance. Neither do I see wherefore it is not as allowable and
convenient to rehearse at once a thing come to pass two thousand years and
more, after another that it relyeth on, notwithstanding there be a great
intervall of time between, as to recite one chanced twenty or forty years
after another whereunto it has some relation. In the one and in the other
there is the same reason, and the same liberty.

10 Wherefore the blessing of the Seventh day made in the days of Moses, might
be fitly coupled with the Rest of God, after the Creation, which was the
foundation thereof, notwithstanding any whatsoever distance of time between
them. As indeed it is so joined in the fourth Commandment, Exodus Chapter 20.
verse 11. where GOD speaking to the Israelites says, In six days the LORD
made heaven and earth, and rested the Seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed
the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. In which place cannot be understood a
blessing and hallowing done at the same time, that God rested first on the
Seventh day, but that only which was made in behalf of the Israelites, as is
clear by the repetition of the Law in the fifth Chapter of Deuteronomie, where
that which was absolutely said in Exodus, Therefore the Lord blessed the Seventh
day, is restrained to the Israelites, v. 15. Therefore the Lord commanded thee
to keep the Sabbath day. And in Exodus 16. v. 29. The Lord has given you the
Sabbath. And in the 31. Chap. ver. 16, 17. The Children of Israel shall keep
the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their generation, for a
perpetual covenant: It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for
ever. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the Seventh day
he rested; where it cannot be denied, but that with the end of the Creation,
and Gods rest on the Seventh day, is immediately joined the institution of the
Sabbath to the Israelites, at least in quality of a sign. If then in that
place Moses might speak after this manner, and say, God created in six days
heaven and earth, and rested the Seventh day, and therefore he has ordained to
the Israelites the Sabbath day for a sign; wherefore in the second of Genesis;
might he not say after the same manner, God made heaven and earth, in six
days, and finished them on the Seventh day, and rested from all his works,
and this his Rest on the Seventh day has moved him to bless and sanctify
that day, to wit, to the Israelites, to be a sign unto them according to that
has been said in the places before mentioned, which are an evident and clear
explication thereof.

11 Neither is it any wise necessary, as is pretended, that in the second
Chapter of Genesis, in the second and third verses, one and the same singular
seventh day should be understood, and that God has precisely sanctified the
same seventh day wherein he rested, and rested on the same day that he
sanctified, and therefore because in the second verse the first seventh day
after the Creation is understood, it must be taken so in the third verse. For
it suffices to understand in the third verse the same seventh day in likeness
and revolution, and generally a seventh day correspondent continually in order
to that which GOD rested on, after his works of the six days. And this
reason, that God rested on the first seventh day, might have been to God a most
reasonable cause to ordain long after the sanctification of a seventh day,
answerable in all points to that first seventh day. The sequel of Moses his
discourse is as fitting in this regard, as in the other; As if I said, our Lord
Jesus Christ rose again, and rested from the work of our redemption on the
first day of the week, wherefore the Church has dedicated the first day of
the week that he rose in, to be holy and solemn, the sequel is good,
although it be not the same first singular day that Christ rose on, and the
Church has consecrated, but the same only in likeness and revolution, yea
although there passed a long time after the Resurrection of our Lord and
Savior before the first day of the week could be well settled as a day of holy
and religious exercises. We say on Friday before Easter, this day Christ has
suffered: on the Ascension day, this day Christ is ascended into heaven: At
Whitsunday, On this day the Holy Ghost is come down, although those things
came to pass on a certain singular day which is past long ago. But we name
so all the days following which correspond to that first day, according to the
similitude which is between them. And we call the day of the Passion, of the
Ascension, of the descent of the Holy Ghost, those which are not such properly,
but only have by revolution correspondancie with the first days, wherein such
things were done. Even so, when it is said in the third verse of the second
Chapter of Genesis, And therefore the Lord has blessed the Seventh day, and
has hallowed it, because in it he has rested from all his works, that is to
be understood, not of the same first day wherein he rested, but of a Seventh
day answering unto it in the order and continual succeson of days.

12 The Article (...) put in the third verse, before the word that signifies
seven (...) proves not, that it is a peculiar seventh, even that seventh day
that God rested in verse 2. For although the Article (...) be often used to
betoken emphatically a thing singular and individual, already known and
mentioned, yet this is not universal. For it is used much without any
emphasis, or express demonstration of any thing, either singular or certain,
yea simply to serve for an ornament, and to make the word that it is joined
unto more full, which use has also in the Greek tongue the article (...).
Verily in the third ver. which we speak of in this place, it is clear, that
the said Article cannot be restrained to a seventh singular day, as it is in
the second verse; Nay it betokens more generally a seventh day comprehending
in it many singular days, which by similitude, in regard of the order and
succession of times, have reference and analogy to the first seventh day
mentioned in the said second verse, and have followed it from time to time at
the end of six days. For it is such a seventh day that God has sanctified,
and not a singular seventh. And that seventh day may be called a particular
seventh, and considered as particularised by the Article (...), as it is in
effect, in as much as it is not indifferently all seventh day, or any of the
seven days of the week that God has sanctified, but it is the last of them.
We seek only to know, when God began to bless and to hallow it to men, to be
kept by them. And I maintain that this hallowing began not incontinent after
the Creation was finished, but more than two thousand years after. Neither is
the contrary proved by this passage of Genesis.

13 No greater weight has another instance which is much urged, that as in the
course of the Creation, when it is said, that God after he had created every
living thing, blessed them, Genesis 1. v. 21, 22, 27, 28. is to be understood a
present benediction, and not put off to a long time: Even so, when in the
second of Genesis, with the perfection of the Creation on the seventh day, is
joined the blessing and hallowing of that day, a present sanctification is to
be understood.

14 For the reason is not alike in the one, and in the other. First, the
blessing of all living creatures, and the blessing of the seventh day are not
to be taken in the same sense. That is a blessing of actual and real
communication of goods and graces: This is a blessing of destination to be
solemnized by men. Secondly, all living creatures, as soon as GOD had created
them, stood in necessary need of this communication of his graces, without
which they could not have subsisted in their being: And therefore we ought to
understand, that at that time God blessed them after that manner, but there was
no necessity, that man should solemnize the seventh day as soon as it was
made, more than any other day of the week, and therefore it was not necessary
that GOD should then consecrate it to that use. Thirdly, it is clearly set
down in the Text, that God blessed all living creatures as soon as he created
them: For it is added, And God blessed them, and God said unto them, be
fruitful, and multiply, etc. But it is not said, that God blessed the day of
rest, and at that same time commanded Adam and his posterity to keep it;
wherefore a like blessing and hollowing cannot be proved from thence to have
been made from the beginning of the seventh day.

15 This first answer to the precedent objection, is moreover confirmed by the
conformity of the words which Moses makes use of in this verse of the second
of Genesis, with those whereby the hallowing of the Sabbath was enjoined in the
Law, for they are the same; which is an help to show, that Moses writing since
God pronounced the Law, spoke of the hallowing of the seventh day, in regard
only to the Ordinance that God in his time had made thereof, seeing he
imployeth the same words, and the same discourse.

16 Again, the same answer is confirmed by this, that it is not probable, that
God from the beginning sanctified the seventh day to ordain it to Adam for a
day of rest, because Adam in the estate of innocence should not have had any
use of such a day. For he was without sin, which might have hindered him to
serve God continually, and therefore needed not a sign, which by the
similitude of a bodily rest and cessation, might teach him to cease and rest
from sin, as if he had been already obnoxious unto it, and so be for that
purpose a good help unto him. And though he was capable of sin, and had a
possibility of falling into it afterward: Yet as the holy Angels were and are
still capable of sin, and might of themselves fall into sin, if God confirmed
them not in grace, and yet a day of Sabbath was not behoofefull unto them,
because they are in a perpetual course of serving God: Even so to man, in that
estate of innocence, a particular day of rest was neither very necessary, nor
very sufficient to keep him from falling into sin. For to prevent that mis-hap
he stood in need of daily helps far more powerful, making him to cleave to God
with purpose of heart, to call upon him, to think seriously on him, and
consider deeply his favors and graces, which he might and was bound to do,
seeing he had no distraction from Gods service by any temporal and earthly
business. For although it be true, that God put him in the garden of Heden,
and commanded him to dress it, Genes. 2. verse. 15. yet seeing that place was
unto him a place of pleasure, delights, and innocence, the dressing of it could
not hinder him to serve God every day, with all necessary continuance and
assiduity. It had rather been unto him a recreation and delightful diversion,
to keep him from idleness, then a necessary occupation, seeing the earth had
of it self brought forth all fruits unto him; no painful imploiment, because
it had not bin accompanied with toilesome travel and weariness, and had not
required of him an oversight and employment so long, that a particular day
would have bin necessary unto him, to rest on it from his works, and to apply
himself without distraction to Gods service; whereas the occupations of
sinful men are such, that they are forced of necessity to win their bread in
the sweat of their face. Moreover, in that estate of innocence, Adam and Eve
being alone, had no outward exercises of Religion, such as are those that are
practiced in a Church assembled, and which, to attend on them, require of
necessity a stinted time, and a cessation from all bodily works. But rather all
the service that God required of Adam, and which he might have applied himself
unto, was a particular meditation and consideration of his works, and the
calling upon his holy name: Which service he was able to discharge every day
abundantly, yea, even then, when he was busied about the dressing of the
garden, which was capable rather to stir up and entertain his spirit in the
mediation of Gods works, then to hinder it.

17 Of no weight is the instance that some make, saying, that although Adam in
the estate of innocence had no distraction from Gods service, nor trouble and
weariness by his ordinary labor, yet it was behoofefull unto him to keep a
seventh day of rest, seeing God himself, although he was in no regard wearied
and distracted by making all his works in six days, nevertheless rested on
the seventh day. Verily, if God after the making of his works in six days,
had rested on the seventh day purposely, to the intent, that by an intermission
of his painful labors, and appointment and solemn applying of that seventh
day to some particular holiness for himself and his own use, as having need
thereof, because he could not in the six precedent days be earnest enough
about it, he might afterward return to the making of other works after the
former, and so continue that reciprocation, the foresaid instance by far
greater reason should be much worth. But that saying, that God rested on the
seventh day, signifies nothing saving this, that God ceased to make more
works, and viewed them when they were made, because in the former six days
he had finished them all, and this cessation was only a resultance and
necessary consequence of the entire perfection of all his work, wherefore also
it continued, not only on that seventh day, but ever sithence; Because God has
never since made any new creatures. Whence it is clearly apparent that the
instance is altogether vain, because there is not the same reason of Gods rest
on the seventh day, and of the rest, the necessity whereof they would feign put
upon man in the estate of innocence. All that this example of God could oblige
Adam unto, was only to endeavor, after he had done his work, to contemplate
Gods works, and admire in them his glory, which, I say, he might have done
sufficiently every day. Now if this example binds us not at this time under
the New Testament, as shall be proved hereafter, how far less obliged it
Adam?

18 No more force has that which is also objected, that if God ordained to
Adam, when he was in his integrity, outward signs and Sacraments, as the tree
of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil, he might as conveniently
ordain unto him a day of rest. For the tree of life, and the tree of
knowledge, of good and evil, to speak properly, were no more Sacraments to
Adam, then the other trees of the Garden, yea then all other works of God, in
all which he might have considered signs and marks of the grace and power of
GOD; But the one was unto him a means of the perpetual conservation of his
bodily life by eating of the fruit thereof, and the other an occasion to try his
obedience, by the prohibition made unto him to eat thereof. Besides this the
consequence is naught: For to establish signs and Sacraments signifying to
Adam the perpetual grace of God, and his immortality, if he persevered in
obedience, and on the contrary threatening him with the disgrace of God, and
with death, if he became a transgressor, was not a thing repugnant to his
condition in the state of innocence, neither had it any unreasonablenesse
joined with it: But to ordain a particular day of rest to a man, to whom all
the days had been Sabbaths, and who day by day had served God, as much as was
necessary, and as God did require of him, was not a thing suitable and
convenient to his condition.

As in the heavenly Paradise there is no particular day of Sabbath, but a
perpetual Sabbath, because there GOD is glorified without stint or ceasing by
the heavenly Host, even so in the terrestrial Paradise, where man was
righteous and holy, and in a condition conform, in some sort, to that of the
kingdom of heaven, and a figure thereof, he had observed a perpetual Sabbath
to GOD. For although he could not do it so perfectly as it is done in heaven,
because he was obnoxious to the necessities of this natural life,
nevertheless he might have done it, and did it as perfectly as the quality
and condition of his being here beneath could suffer, so that it was no wise
requisite that he should have a particular day of Sabbath.

19 Nay I esteem, that to affirm, that GOD ordained unto him a seventh day of
Sabbath, derogateth too much from the excellency of his condition. For it is
most sure, that the determination of a particular time of GODs service made to
a man expressly, supposes that he wants the commodity, and is not able to
serve GOD ordinarily, or has not an inclination and affection to do it, and
it therefore must be laid upon him, as a Yoke tying him thereunto, and
withdrawing him from his other occupations, as also it is a mark of a servile
condition, in witness whereof, the appointment of so many solemn days of
Gods service under the Law, was a part of the Yoke thereof, from which God has
freed the state of the Gospel, as being more free and more perfect, wherein
we should be stirred up with a more free and voluntary affection to his
service. To one that is both able and willing to serve God continually every
day, as Adam was in that state of innocence and of perfect righteousness, it
is not needful to limit a particular day. And though a day chosen and picked
out from others had been useful to Adam, to the end that giving over all
other things, he might give himself entirely and only to Gods service,
doubtless God had left that choice to his liberty, considering the wisdom
and godliness wherewith he had endowed him.

20 To say that since Gods rest on the seventh day, after the labor of six
days in the Creation, was the foundation and the reason of the institution
made in the Law, of a seventh day, to be a Sabbath day, the same reason being
of the same force and use from the beginning of the world, should have caused
at that time the same ordinance, and the same hallowing of the seventh day to
all men, it is a forceles consequence. For there was not a like necessity of
the institution of a particular day of rest in these first beginnings, when
Adam was in the state of innocence, nor afterward when the Church subsisted in
a few families, or particular persons, as there has been, after the Church was
become a great body of people, having need of a stinted order and government,
whereof GOD would take the care upon himself, and for that end, among other
points of ecclesiastical order, and rules of his service, ordain to his
people of Israel grown to a great number, a day of Sabbath, and the seventh of
the week, taking for the foundation and reason of the institution of a seventh
day his own resting on the seventh day, which became, at that time only, a
reason of this ordinance, because God grounded himself thereupon to make it,
but it follows not, that before that time, and from the beginning of the
world this rest of God, which was on the first seventh day, should be a reason
of the same ordinance. That should be right and prove good, if it were of its
own nature a reason absolutely necessary, and a cause bringing forth
unfallibly such an effect, which is not. Otherwise it should follow, that God
was bound to hallow the seventh day, and could not sanctify any other. It is
indeed a reason, not of it self, but only for as much as God thought fit, and
was pleased to ground upon it the sanctification of the seventh day. Whereof
this is a manifest proof, that under the New Testament this reason has no
force to make us observe the day of Gods rest. Now there is no necessity
obliging us to infer, that if God would and thought fit it should be a
reason in the time of the Law, he was also willing, and thought fit, it should
be a reason also before the Law, and since the beginning of the world: Whereas
it is manifest by the reasons already alleged, that it was very fit it should
be so under the Law, but was not so from the beginning, and before the Law was
given.

CHAPTER Second.
Three other answers to the first reason.
1. Second answer, although God had from the beginning sanctified the Seventh
day, he gave no commandment to man to sanctify it.

2. Third answer, although God had sanctified the Seventh day with relation to
man, he had done it only with intention to command it afterward to the
Israelites under the Law.

3. For in Scriptures sanctification is often taken for destination to some use
in time to come.

4. The Reply, that so God should have rested on the Seventh day by destination
only to rest afterward, refuted.

5. Fourth answer, although God had commanded Adam to hallow the Seventh day,
that proves not the morality of the Sabbath, but only the necessity of a set
time, for orders sake in Gods service.

6. Whence no necessity can be inferred of the observation of the same time
stinted to Adam, by all men.

7. But rather of more times to be kept by them, seeing all are sinners.

1 But Secondly put the case that the mention made in the second Chapter of
Genesis ver. 3. Of Gods blessing and hallowing the seventh day, should be
understood, as done at that time, it follows not, that his meaning was in
that sanctification, to prescribe it to Adam and to his posterity, to be
observed by them. For it is said only that God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it, but not that he commanded man to sanctify it, as he did in the
Law. This sanctification includes not necessarily a precept given to man. For
we may conceive simply, that God in his own mind blessed and sanctified it,
that is, magnified it, gave it a special recommendation, made a particular
account, and had a good liking of it, and, as it were, rejoiced and gloried in
it, because then he rested from all his works, beheld seriously their most
beautiful and perfect structure, and his glory in them. Which implies not,
that he was willing to give an ordinance to man to observe it. For according to
the style of the Scripture, times, as well as places, are called holy, and are
said to be sanctified by the Lord, simply in regard of his appearing in them by
some famous action, or some other notable mark, whether he ordains them to
men to be kept by them, or not, as may be gathered out of Exodus Chapter 3.
verse 5. Chapter 19. ver. 23. of Deuteronomie, Chapter 26. ver. 15. of Joshua
Chapter 5. verse 15. Of Psalm 11. ver. 4. Of Jeremy 31. ver. 40. Of Ezechiel
Chapter 28. ver. 22. Of Sophoniah Chapter 1. ver. 7. Of 2 Peter Chapter 1. ver.
18.

2 Thirdly, although this blessing and sanctifying of the seventh day, were to
be understood, as done at that first time, and relatively to man, it should not
follow, that it was done for that time, that it had relation to Adam and to
Eve, and that God had given unto them notice thereof. For God might have
blessed and sanctified that seventh day by an appointment and design to
command the observation thereof to men, not at that time, nor long after, but
only when he was to give the Law to his people of Israel, as also he did. If
any at this time relating the History how Noah and his family were in the Arc
saved by the waters of the flood; or how the Israelites were delivered from the
hands of Pharaoh by the waters of the Red Sea, upon the occasion of that
discourse should add, that then God sanctified the Baptism of the New
Testament, he should speak fitly to the purpose, because these things were
figures, which in Gods intention had relation to the figure of Baptism 1 Cor.
10. ver. 2. and 1 Pet. 3. ver. 21. Although God sanctified not Baptism to be
practiced at that time in the Church, but long after: likewise Moses might very
well say, that God, as soon as he rested on the seventh day, sanctified that
day, because he rested on it purposely, to ordain it to be to men a holy day,
although he ordained it not at that time, but long after in the days of the
common wealth of Israel. And indeed the Hebrew word which is translated, by the
word Sanctify, signifies, to consecrate, ordain, prepare, publish,
proclaim, and is often taken relatively to that which is to come, whether it
be applied to persons, Isa. 13. ver. 3. Ierem. 51. verse 27. 28. to things,
Ierem. 6. verse. 4. or to times, 2 King. 10. verse. 20. Joel 1. verse. 14. Joel 2.
verse. 15. in which places, as may be seen there, the Holy Ghost speaking in
the present tence, persons are said to be actually sanctified, that is,
destinated and appointed for some actions which they were not to do then, but
long after: Likewise actions are named, which were to be performed after a long
time; as also times and days to be solemnized, which were not to happen but
after a good while, the times between, which were correspondent to them in the
ordinary course of months and weeks, having no part in this solemnity. And why
may we not say, that even so, the seventh day was blessed and sanctified, that
is, ordained to be kept, but not at that time by Adam and Eve, but only by
their posterity many ages after, and to begin to be observed, when the Law
should be given to the people of Israel.

3 It must not be thought more strange that such a sanctification done at the
beginning of the world should be relative to the giving of the Law, which came
to pass two thousand years after, then to see in the aforesaid passages
diverse sanctifications relative to actions which were to fall out some hundred
years after. More or less time are of no moment in such things. It suffices
to sanctify, and to say that a thing has been sanctified in the present
time, for a time to come, which is evident by the places before mentioned, and
by others such like. If God is said to have chosen, set apart, and sanctified
from the womb certain persons, because he was to employ them in holy
functions when they should be of a mature and ripe age, and such as he should
think fit, before which time he suffers them to remain in a common
condition with other men, as may be seen in Jeremiah, Chap. 1. verse. 5. and in
the Epistle to the Galatians, Chap. 1. verse. 15. why may it not be said, that
after the same manner he sanctifies a day to be applied to holy uses a long
while after this sanctification, and in the mean while leaves it, till that
time come, in the common and ordinary use of and with other days.

4 Their reply is very light, when they say, that if the aforesaid answer be of
any value, we must say likewise, that as God sanctified not in the beginning
the seventh day, but by destinating it to be holy afterward, even so he rested
not on that day, but after the same manner, in as much as he appointed it for
his rest in some time to come, which indeed is absurd. For this reply
presupposes, that Gods rest on the seventh day, and the sanctification of that
day are one thing, and that these two fashions of speech may and ought to be
taken in the same sense and meaning: which is not so, when we say of any body
that rests and cease to work, that imports a thing present; and not done
by destination only: But when it is said, that one has sanctified a thing, in
the sense that the word sanctify is taken, to wit, to destinate and appoint to
an holy use, it is not necessary that such an use begin, as soon as the
thing is sanctified, for it may be very well appointed for a time to come.

5 Fourthly, although it should be granted, that the seventh day was prescribed
to Adam, to be observed by him continually, that touches not the morality of
the Sabbath. For this being granted, I say the seventh day was not ordained
unto him, as a moral thing, nor also as a ceremony and figure directing to
Christ, of whom he had no need in the state of innocence, but only as a point
of order and of government, which God was pleased to subject him unto, and to
stint unto him that time, to wit, the seventh day, for the particular time of
his service, even as he appointed unto him the garden of Heden for the place
where he would have him to make his residence, and there to apply himself to
admire the works of his Creator, to serve and to worship him. And indeed, any
man may with as good reason conclude, that it must needs be a moral thing to
serve God in Heden, because it was the place where God had settled Adam to be
served by him there in the state of his innocence, as they do which seek to
prove, that it is a point of morality to keep a seventh day of Sabbath,
because God ordained in that state a seventh day to Adam. For the determination
of a certain time can no more be a moral point, then the determination of a
place, neither of them being founded in the principles of nature, and of
natural justice and equity, as should be whatsoever is moral, and as indeed
is all that is written in the ten Commandments, saving the Commandment of the
seventh day of Sabbath, which is a thing depending entirely on institution and
government, as shall be seen more fully afterward. Or why may it not be
inferred, that not only a seventh day, but the last of seven is moral, because
if God ordained a seventh day to Adam, it was the last of seven, as those
against whom we do dispute do avouch.

6 Now if a seventh day could not be ordained to Adam in quality of a moral
thing, but only as a point and rule of order, granting that it was prescribed
unto him, it is inconsequent that it was to continue afterward by a perpetual
ordinance given to all men. For there is no necessity, that all men after sin
came into the world, ought to be always ruled in Gods service, by the same
outward order that Adam was ruled by before he sinned, seeing things pertaining
merely and simply to order, are subject to alteration.

7 It is most true, that if in the state of innocence God had ordained to Adam
a particular day amongst others to serve him, it should be as much, nay far
more fit and necessary, that we under the state of sin should always have
alike ordinance for us: But I say withal, seeing it is supposed that Adam had
one of seven days prescribed unto him in that estate, although he applied
himself every day to Gods service without distraction, that we in the estate
we are in, and wherein we give our selves so seldom and so sparingly to Gods
ordinary service, by reason of our worldly employments, should have been tied
to more then one in seven. Yet for all that, Seeing God has never prescribed
to sinful men but one seventh day, and that, as I pretend, for the time of the
bondage of the Law only; Seeing also under the new Testament, although we be
always sinners, he would not stint unto us any day, but in that point has
left his Church free; I infer from thence, that it is not likely, that he
ordained and limited to Adam a seventh day; nay, not any other day of Sabbath.
For by such a limitation he had tied and inthralled him in that estate of
innocence, as much and more then his offspring in the estate of sin; which
seems to imply, that he was as much and more led daily away from Gods
service, then are poor sinners which go far beyond all reason.

CHAPTER Third.
Answer to the second Reason.
1. Second reason for the morality of the Sabbath, that before the Law was
given, the people of Israel went not out to gather Manna in the wilderness, on
the seventh day of the week.

2. First answer, Of this argument the morality of the Sabbath cannot be
inferred, no more than of many ceremonies which were religiously observed long
before the Law was given.

3. Second answer, In the wilderness God commanded the observation of the
Sabbath, and of sundry other ceremonies before the Law was given, and then
only began the keeping of the Sabbath.

4. Therefore in vain are urged the words of Exodus, Chap. 16. verse. 29, 30.
The Lord has given you the Sabbath, etc. which have relation only to the
command newly made.

5. Third answer, If the institution of the Sabbath had been more ancient, and
if it had been kept by the Patriarchs, their children had known it, and
practiced it in Egypt.

6. Nullity of the reply made to this answer, that they had forgotten it,
first, because God did never rebuke them for the inobservation of the Sabbath
in the land of Egypt.

7. Secondly, because many godly men which were in Egypt, had not forgotten it,
and yet before the commandment concerning it was given in the wilderness,
made never mention of it, nay, knew it not, as is proved by the Text.

8. And by other places of the old Testament.

9. Second reply, that besides the general reason which moved God to give the
Sabbath to all men, he appropriated it to the people of Israel for some other
reasons besides.

10. First answer to this reply, it cannot be proved, that GOD gave it to all
men, nay, it is absolutely appropriated to the Jews.

11. Second answer, There is not one of the reasons why God gave the Sabbath to
the Jews, adapted to other nations, although they were capable of many of them.

12. Nor also to the Patriarchs, who had no notice of the Sabbath.

13. If in the Scripture any thing be adapted to the Jews, which was common to
other men, it is known to have been common either by the nature thereof, or
by the testimony of Scripture: But it is not so of the Sabbath.

1 THe second argument alleged for the morality of the Sabbath, is, that
before the Law was given by Moses, it was observed; which is proved by the
sixteenth Chapter of Exodus, where it is said, that on the seventh day the
Israelites Exodus 16. verse. 22, 13, 29, 30
went not out to gather Manna, but rested every man in his place on that day,
because it was the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, which the Lord himself had
ordained: Whence they would conclude, that it was already an ancient ordinance
known of the Israelites to be such, that for this cause they went not out on
the seventh day to seek Manna, that for the same cause God powered it not down
on that day, lest it should be an occasion unto them of violating the Sabbath.
For all this was done before the Law was given, the giving whereof is described
afterward in the same Book of Exodus, Chap. 20.

2 To this I answer first, that although it could be most clearly showed that
the Sabbath was observed from the beginning before the Law, which
notwithstanding cannot be proved, that avails nothing for the morality of the
Sabbath. We see that from the beginning, and in all times before the Law, the
firstlings of the slocke, and the first fruits of the ground were offered to
God. Genes. 4. ver. 3. 4. distinction was made between beasts clean and
unclean. Genes. 7. verse. 2. tithes were paid. Genes. 14. 20. Genes. 28. verse.
2. Circumcision was given to Abraham four hundred and thirty years before the
Law: Yet no man will conclude thence, that such things were moral: All things
observed before the Law were not necessarily moral; many things may be found
in them which were figures and ceremonies, and others which did belong only to
some order and rules concerning Gods service, and of that nature should have
been the Sabbath day, if it could appear that it was kept before the Law.

3 But secondly, my opinion is, that this cannot be proved, and the testimony
brought out of the sixteenth Chapter of Exodus for the proof thereof is
extreemly weak. It is true; we find there that the Israelites kept the
Sabbath, but no conclusion can be inferred from thence, that it was kept in all
times before the Law, nay, it is rather most likely, that then began the first
observation of the Sabbath, because before that time, in the whole life of the
Patriarchs, and in the whole conversation of the Israelites in Egypt, there is
no mention found of such a day; neither should the time wherein we see the
Israelites kept the Sabbath, be reckoned as a time which went before the Law,
but as the proper time of the giving thereof, and the ordinance then made to
keep the Sabbath, as one of the first legal Ordinances. The ordinances of the
Law of Moses were not all given at once, but by succession of time, and sundry
resumptions, as may be seen in his Books. As soon as the Israelites went out
of Egypt, and about that very instant, God instituted the Passover unto them,
and a few days after he ordained the Sabbath day. Quickly after followed the
other ordinances, as appears by the Chapters immediately following this
sixteenth Chapter. God then being about to give solemnly his Law a few days
after in mount Sina, as it is apparent by the conference of the sixteenth
Chapter of Exodus, verse. 1. with the ninteenth, verse. 1. 11. of which Law the
injunction of the Sabbath was to be a good share, it pleased him to give them
before hand a particular commandment concerning the Sabbath, by occasion of
the Manna, which by and by he was to power down upon them from the clouds six
days every morning, but not on the seventh day, and that to ratify, by this
his cessation on the seventh day, the Commandment that he was to give them in
his Law a few days after, for the Sabbath of the seventh day, and to prepare
them before hand to the careful and religious observation thereof. Therefore it
was necessary that he should warn them to gather on the sixth day bread for
two days, and not to go out on the seventh day, but to rest in their tents,
because there should be none found in the field. The injunction and warning
which he gave them is clearly set down in the fifth verse, although abridged
into few words. For GOD said to Moses, On the sixth day they shall prepare that
which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily, to
wit, because there shall be none found on the seventh day, and my will is, that
they rest on that day. This is suppressed in the Text, but certainly GOD
expressed it to Moses amply, and Moses to the people, who obeying that
advertisement, gathered twice as much bread on the sixth day.

4 Therefore, it is to no purpose that they enforce these words in the verses
23. 26, 29, 30. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the LORD: On the
seventh day is the Sabbath: See that the LORD has given you the Sabbath; so
the people rested on the seventh day, as if they denoted, that the Sabbath was
an ancient custom, that it was practiced in all times from the beginning, and
that the Israelites conformably to the ancient custom rested then. For they
had no regard but to the ordinance that was newly made, and which God had
notified to Moses in the fifth verse of the same Chapter, when he spoke unto
him of the Manna: This is clear by these words in the 23. verse; This is that
which the Lord has said, To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord, and in the 29. verse, See that the Lord has given you the Sabbath: which
cannot be referred to any other thing, then to that which God had said and
ordained to Moses a little before in the fifth verse. For if it be not referred
thither, When was it that the Lord said and ordained to the Israelites, that
the seventh day should be their rest? Where shall we find before this time the
word and the ordinance thereof? Must we reascend to the first days of Adam,
and have our recourse to the sanctification of the seventh day mentioned in
Genesis, Chap. 2. which, as we have showed, was not for Adam, nor for his time,
but was the same whereof God did begin to speak in this sixteenth Chapter,
because it began then, and not sooner, but is occasionally rehearsed in the
second Chapter of Genesis.

5 And verily if it had been an ancient ordinance practiced by the Patriarchs,
how is it come to pass, that the Israelites their children knew it not? If
they knew it, why did they not practice it of themselves? If they practiced it,
what need was there of injoyning and laying it upon them so expressly, and with
so great care, as GOD did by the occasion of the Manna?

6 Some do reply, that the long captivity of Egypt where they were tyrannized,
as well in their consciences, as in their bodies, might have been the cause
that they lost all remembrance thereof and kept it not: and therefore it was
necessary, that it should be renewed unto them: But this is a supposition, not
only without any show of truth. For if the Israelites had forgotten or
neglected in Egypt the observation of the Sabbath, whereunto God had tied them,
how is it, that God who charged and upbraided them now and then with the crimes
and sins committed by them in Egypt, did not object unto them the
inobservation of the Sabbath? In the twentieth Chapter of Ezekiel, ver. 7, 8.
God says, that he spoke to the Israelites in Egypt, and gave them
commandments. But of what? to cast away the abomination of their eyes, and not
defile themselves with the filthy Gods of Egypt. And he blames them for
rebellion against him in this, and for refusing to hearken unto him, without
making the least mention, that he had enjoined them to keep the Sabbath day,
as also he imputes not unto them the inobservation thereof, although in the
same Chapter ver. 12. he speaks of that day, but as given unto them after he
had delivered them out of the land of Egypt, neither does he cast in their
teeth the careless regard that they had of it, saving since the time that they
were in the wilderness, ver. 13.

7 Secondly, supposing that some of the Israelites had put the ordinance of the
Sabbath out of mind, this fault could not be common to all, not forsooth, to
Moses, Aaron, Caleb, Ioshuah, and to other persons eminent in godliness, and
authority. If these had it in memory, how did they not put the people in mind
of it, to make them keep it as soon as they were in the wilderness in a full
liberty to serve GOD without hinderance? But so far were they from remembering
it, that it is noted ver. 22. that all the rulers of the congregation, who
should have had best knowledge of the divine and ancient ordinances, when they
saw the people gather and prepare on the sixth day Manna for that day, and for
the seventh following, according to the express command which Moses had given
them, were astonished at it, as at a strange and extraordinary thing, whereby
they were moved to come to Moses, and acquaint him with it, who upon that
occasion informed them of Gods ordinance concerning the day of Sabbath, not as
of an ancient, but as of a new thing, which was unknown before unto them, and
which he had a fresh learned himself verse 23. So in the 29. verse, he said to
the Israelites, See that the Lord has given You the Sabbath, speaking of it,
as of an ordinance particular to them.

8 It is also mentioned elsewhere in the same respect, as an observation which
God had enjoined them particularly, and as a prerogative proper unto them,
whereby GOD had separated them from all other nations, and consecrated them to
himself, as he had done by the rest of the ceremonies of the Law of Moses.
This the Levites made a religious confession of in Nehemiah. 9. Chapter verse
13, 19. Thou came down upon Mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven,
and gave them right judgments, true Laws, good statutes and commandments,
and made known unto them thy Sabbath, etc. This the Lord said to them by
Ezekiel in the twentieth Chapter ver. 10, 11, 12. I caused them to go forth
out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness, and I gave
them my statutes, etc. Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign
between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify
them. Which shows evidently, that the Sabbath was never given but for the
Jews, who also have acknowledged by those places, and taught in their books,
that the Gentiles were not bound to keep the Sabbath.

9 They reply, that the Sabbath is thus appropriated to the Israelites in the
places which we have cited, because besides the general reason, which was the
cause of the institution and ordinance thereof to all, and for all, since the
beginning of the world, to wit, to be a memorial of the Creation, and of the
rest of God, God renewed it again to the Jews for other reasons particular to
them, as to be a token for remembrance of their deliverance and rest which God
had given them from the bondage of Egypt, and of the miracle done in the Manna.

10 This reply which they bring cannot be of any weight, seeing it cannot be
found that any one man has kept the Sabbath day, nor that GOD has at any time
commanded it to the Israelites for any reason whatsoever, nor that the people
of Israel had kept and observed it at any time before their abode in the
wilderness: Nay it is said, that God gave it to them in the wilderness, and
the Sabbath is often appropriated to them absolutely, even in its substance,
without mention of any circumstances, or particular reasons, as we proved in
the places before cited out of the ninth Chapter of Nehemiah, and the sixteenth
Chapter of Exodus verse 29. in the last of which places God establishes not
the Sabbath for a memorial of the miracle of the Manna, but says, that he had
ordained to the Jews the Sabbath to be kept by them, and for that cause rained
not Manna on that day upon them.

11 Moreover seeing there is not any of the reasons that moved GOD to institute
the Sabbath, found to be adapted to any other, but to them, it is unreasonable
to extend the Sabbath it self to others then to them. For although to be a
memorial of the creation, as also to be a sign of sanctification, are reasons
capable of themselves to be common to others, as well as to them, yet God
applies them never to others, but to them only. To them only he said, Uerily
my Sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you throughout
your generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord that does sanctify you,
Exodus 31. ver. 13. And verse 17. It is a sign between me and the children of
Israel for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the
seventh day he rested, and was refreshed; which shows clearly, that God took
not occasion of his rest on the seventh day from all his works, to institute
that day for a day of rest, but for the Israelites sake only, to wit, that it
might be a sign of their consecration to God to be his people, of their
sanctification, and of their spiritual and eternal rest, which were benefits
peculiar unto them, and not common to other nations. For it is against reason
to say that God would ordain a sign of these benefits to other nations, which
he had excluded from the covenant of grace, and consequently from
sanctification, and from eternal life.

12 It is no more reasonable to say, that it was a sign to the Patriarchs and
faithful which were before the Law, seeing that is not mentioned in the
Scripture, where it is said expressly, that it was a sign belonging to the
generations of the Israelites, that is, to the ages of the continuance of the
Law, under which the Israelites did live, and not to them that had lived
before, or were to live after. And as when God said to Abraham, that he
established his covenant, to wit, Circumcision, with him and his seed after
him, in their generations, Genes. 17. verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. we infer from
thence very well, that before the days of Abraham Circumcision was not used.
In like manner, from the institution of the Sabbath to be kept by the
Israelites in their generations, we conclude soundly, that before that time it
was not observed. Nay with as good reason may it be thought, that circumcision
was used before the days of Abraham, and that GOD did only revive it after
some particular fashion, although no mention be made thereof before Abraham, as
many do surmise the Sabbath day to have been kept from the beginning, and
that God did only renew it to the Jews, although that be not written.

13 I acknowledge, that in some places of Scripture some things may be found
appropriated to the Israelites particularly, which appertained and did still
pertain to others as well as to them, and that by reason of some particular
form whereby GOD gave them more excellently unto them then unto others, and of
certain circumstances wherewith he accompanied them, to make them more
commendable unto them, and move them to keep them more carefully, and that
ordinances obligatory to all men were given them, clothed with certain
ceremonies belonging to them only: But these are things which carry with them
their own evidence, or which the Scripture teaches otherwhere to have been
common to others. But as for the seventh day of Sabbath, it appears not,
neither by the nature thereof, nor by any declaration of Scripture, that it did
belong to others then to the Jews. And therefore from this that we find it
never appropriated to any people but to them, we conclude most rationally, that
it was never ordained to any people, saving unto them.

CHAPTER Fourth.
Answer to the third Reason.
1. Third Reason for the morality of a seventh day of Sabbath, from the
knowledge the Patriarchs had of the distinction of weeks, and the use they
made of it.

2. First answer, This argument has no consequence.

3. Second answer, The faithful before the Law observed not the distinction of
weeks.

4. Impertinent allegation of the Dove which Noah sent forth after seven days
out of the Arc.

5. As of the week of the feast of JACOBS marriage with Leah.

6. Of the insufficiency of the arguments alleged to prove the distinction of
weeks, it follows that there was no such distinction before the Law.

7. And yet it follows not thence, that the Patriarchs did not celebrate the
remembrance of the creation which they had learned of their fathers, and taught
their Children by tradition.

8. Although it was not necessary, that they should have a solemn and stinted
day, and specially the last day of the week, for that use.

1 TO prove that the Patriarchs and other faithful which were before the Law
kept the seventh day of Sabbath, some take an argument from the distinction of
weeks, which is pretended to have been usual in their time. To this purpose
they allege the eight Chapter of Genesis, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. where it is
said, that Noah having sent forth a Dove to know if the waters were abated from
of the face of the earth, and the Pigeon returning unto him into the Arc, he
stayed yet other seven days, and sent her forth the second time, and again
other seven days, and sent her forth the third time; Whence they would feign
infer, that Noah observed weeks, and in them the seventh day. They allege
likewise out of the 29. Chapter of Genesis, ver. 27. that Jacob complaining of
Laban, who had beguiled him, giving him Leah instead of Rachel, for whom he had
served seven years, Laban answered, fulfill her week, and we will give thee
this also for the service that thou shall serve with me yet other seven years.
Moreover, they add this inconvenience, that if the Patriarchs before the Law
observed not the distinction of weeks, and in them the seventh day, they
observed and solemnized not also the remembrance of the Creation, which God
performed in six days, and of his rest on the seventh day.

2 To that I answer, first, that although the Fathers before the Law had kept a
regular distinction of weeks, it should not follow, that they observed the
seventh day particularly, and made of it a day of rest, and of exercises of
Religion. For they might have kept that distinction simply as a distinction of
time, as they did of months and of years, without tying unto it any rule for
the exercises of Religion, no more than to these other.

3 But, Secondly, I say, that it appears not, that before the Law they
observed the foresaid distinction. We find in the History of their lives, that
they have observed distinction of days, of months, of years, of which times
express mention is there made, as also the distinction of these times is
grounded upon the two great heavenly lights, to wit, the Sun and the Moon,
which God created purposely to be for signs, and for seasons, and for days,
and years, as is to be seen in Genesis, first Chapter, verse 14. whereof the
Patriarchs were well informed, having a great knowledge of the Will of GOD, and
of natural things. Whereas the distinction of weeks is not grounded upon any
natural reason, nor also upon any ordinance of GOD which may be proved to have
been made from the beginning: Neither is there any where mention made of any
observation of weeks before the Law: The passages alleged to demonstrate it,
being too feeble for that purpose.

4 To the first of the eight of Genesis I say, that the argument which is
grounded upon it, consists only in a simple and uncertain conjecture. Indeed
Noah twice or thrice, one seventh day after another, did let out the Pigeon, or
as the Text says, after he had stayed seven days, but the History tells us
not what reason he had to observe after that manner an intervall of seven
days; And it were too great rashness to determine it. Howsoever, no man can
gather from thence an ordinary and stinted distinction of weeks, such as has
been since the Law was given. For to come to that, they must suppose without
any evidence produced, or testimony brought, that the first time that Noah sent
out the Dove was the seventh day after he had let out the Raven, and that the
second time he sent forth the Pigeon precisely on the seventh day following
after the first seventh day, and so likewise the third time. For if he let her
out after seven days fully expired, as the words may be taken, it shall be on
the eight day, which should make a distinction, of a space not of seven, but of
eight days. Secondly, in case it was on each seventh day that he sent out the
Dove, it must be supposed, that it was precisely on the last, or on the first
day of the week, and that he observed exactly the one or the other for that
purpose. For if he sent her forth on some other day, then the first or the
last, and sent her forth again on the seventh day following, that would only
make a week perverted and irregular, and not the seventh day established and
ordained by the Law, whereof the Sabbath day was the last day, which can be
far less proved by the passage before cited, to have been observed by Noah.
For to make that good, it must be certain that he sent forth his Pigeon on the
proper day of Sabbath, and that of purpose to perform in so doing a work of
sanctification belonging to that day: Which not only is not certain, but is
also against all likelihood. For seeing the observation of the seventh day,
ordained by the Law, obliges man to rest from all servile works, and to cause
all other living creatures that are in his possession to rest likewise, if Noah
had known and observed the Sabbath day, such as the Law ordained afterward,
he had kept himself quiet, and had not applied so holy a day to let forth the
Pigeon, that it might fly abroad here and there, and to observe what tokens
she should bring unto him of the decreasing of the waters, which was rather a
violation, then a sanctification of the Sabbath, according to the tenor of the
Law. And therefore, although Noah had let out the Dove on the seventh day of
the week, that should not be attributed to any particular design tied to that
day, rather than to another, but taken as done on that day indifferently, as it
might have been done on any other day, without seeking any other reason
thereof.

5 To the other passage taken out of the 29. Chapter of Genesis, I answer, that
the week there mentioned is not necessarily to be understood of a week of
days ordinary and regular: But it may be taken for a week of years, or for a
number of seven years, and the pronoune THIS twice repeated, for Rachel, the
sense of Labans words to Jacob being this, As thou have served seven years,
(...) Zoth.
and have received Leah for reward to be thy Wife, fulfill also a week, that
is, serve other seven years, for THIS, that is, for Rachel, and she also shall
be given thee to be thy wife; and so is this place explained by many
interpreters. But if the pronoune (...) in the first place, is understood of
Leah, and the week, of a week of days, and if Labans words to Jacob be
taken, as if he had desired him to fulfill a week of days ordained for the
celebration of the solemnity of his marriage with Leah, promising that after
these seven days he should also give him Rachel, as others take it, that also
availes not. For from thence is proved only, that the custom was to bestow
seven days on the solemnities and pastimes of weddings. But that there was
then a week regular and ordinary, whereof the last day was the same that God
rested on from all his works, and was also to that people an holy day of rest,
it is a conclusion which cannot be gathered out of that history, and will never
be proved.

6 Seeing therefore there is no sufficient proof of a stinted distinction of
days before the Law, this may be to me a contrary argument to prove, that the
Sabbath day was not then kept. For seeing out of the observation thereof
follows of necessity the distinction of weeks, if it had been observed from
the beginning of the world, frequent mention had bin then made of weeks, and
the men of those days had counted by weeks as well as by days months, and
years, which is not to be found: Nay it is most likely, that the distinction
of weeks began first among the Jews, as soon as the Law was given, and
from the Jews came to the Gentiles, as a distinction of time very commodious
and convenient, though they corrupted it, consecrating the seven days of the
week to the seven planets, which they made Idols of, and imposing unto them
their names, whereas the Jews named them according to their order, with
relation to the Sabbath, the first, second, third, etc. of the Sabbath.

7 Yet, although the faithful before the Law did not keep a distinction of
days, the inconvenience propounded in the beginning of this Chapter follows
not, to wit, that if so be they did not celebrate the remembrance of the
creation which God finished in six days, and from which he began to rest on
the seventh day, or that they had otherwise forgotten that great work of God.
For considering the creation absolutely, they could not be ignorant that God
had created the world, seeing the thing speaks of it self, and all creatures
cry with a loud voice, that they have one Author that has made them, seeing
also the distinction of days and months that was known unto them, by the
ordinary course of the heavenly lights, led them of necessity to a beginning,
no less then the distinction of weeks, which had in it no particular thing
capable to teach them so much. As for the Gentiles which were ignorant of the
creation of the World, and weened it to be eternal, that was in them a gross
and blockish error against the light and documents of Nature. Yet it was not
universal; For there have been some in all times, who have believed and
taught, that the world has had a beginning, and was made, though they have
erred in their opinions concerning the framing thereof.

8 Add to this, that in the holy generation of these first faithful, the
Fathers had always a special care to teach it to their children by a
continual tradition, which, with the manifestation of the creation in
general, might also make known unto them the particular order observed of God
in that wonderful work, to wit, that in six days he made heaven and earth,
and rested the seventh day. For it is likely that Adam learned it of God, that
he kept the knowledge thereof, and imparted it to his children, who called it
to memory, and at all occasions glorified for it the Lord their God. So they
might know, without any regular observation of weeks, on what day God began,
and on what day he ended the creation of the world. For the foresaid tradition
being supposed by the distinction of months and years, which was always
observed, it was easy to make that supputation, although some, even of the
chief men among the Jews, as Philo in the first Book of the life of Moses,
stick not to say, that the natall day of the world, wherein it was finished,
began not to be known, but by the Israelites, when God at first rained Manna
upon them in the wilderness, and that it was wholly unknown to the Fathers,
in which affirmation I see no inconvenience.

9 But howsoever, it was no manner of way necessary, that they should celebrate
ordinarily the memory of the creation, and of the rest of God on a solemn and
stinted day; yea, on the last of the seven days wherein GOD rested; and mark
the revolution thereof from day to day; Neither does it appear, that they did
any such thing. Nay, it is far more apparent, that God gave the first
knowledge, and commanded the ordinary and common observation of this day, when
raining Manna upon the Israelites six days consequently, he gave then none on
the seventh day, saying, it was the Sabbath day, which he would have them to
keep in time to come, and which he enjoined expressly unto them in the
Decalogue, declaring that on that day he rested from the works of the
Creation.

CHAPTER fifth.
Answer to the fourth Reason.
1. Fourth reason for the morality of the Sabbath, taken out of the fourth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, verse. 3 and 4.

2. Whence they gather, that the Sabbath day was ordained to all men from the
beginning of the world.

3. And that by three arguments enforced upon the words of the Apostle.

4. First answer, In that place the Apostle speaks not directly of any rest
ordained to man, but only of Gods rest.

5. Second answer, Indirectly Gods rest on the seventh day, and the rest of the
Jews commanded to them afterward, being as types and figures of the heavenly
rest applied unto the said words, prove not that both are one rest, and the one
as ancient as the other.

6. Confirmation of this answer.

7. Answer to the first argument, It is not necessary to understand that Gods
rest on the seventh day is a rest given to man, as the two other rests of God
must be so understood.

8. Answer to the second argument, showing by the exposition of the words of
the Apostle, that there is no equivocation to be found in them, although the
rest of God in one place be not understood of a rest given to man, as in the
two other places.

9. Answer to the third argument, showing there is no defect in the
argumentation of the Apostle, although he speaks not directly of the rest
ordained in the fourth Commandment.

THEY object also from the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that
the Apostle cites out of the 95. Psalm verse 11. and applies to the
Hebrews, the threat denounced of old against the incredulous Israelites in the
days of Moses, that they should never enter into his rest: That the Psalmist
adapted it also to the Jews of his time, exhorting them not to harden their
hearts, when they shall hear the voice of God, as their Fathers have done,
lest they also should come short of entering into his rest. That, I say, the
Apostle citing that threat, as applied by the Psalmist to his time, observes,
that God at that time spoke on this wise; I have sworn in my wrath, if they
shall enter into my rest, although his works were finished from the foundation
of the world, For he spoke in a certain place (to wit, in the second Chapter
of Genesis) of the seventh day on this wise: And God rested the seventh day
from all his works. And that from thence the Apostle makes this inference,
that God in this threat, wherein he spoke in David's time of a rest to come,
whereof the Israelites should come short, could not understand the rest of the
seventh day, mentioned in the second of Genesis, because that rest had a great
sway from the foundation of the world: As he shows also in the verses
following, that it could not be taken for the rest of the Land of Canaan,
because Ioshuah a long time before had brought the Israelites into that rest,
and therefore of necessity God spoke of another rest then of these two, to wit,
of a spiritual and heavenly rest, which those that believe are admitted into,
and all those that believe not come short of.

2 They endeavor to make out of this discourse this illation, that the
observation of the Sabbath day was ordained to all men from the beginning of
the world, even from that seventh day wherein God rested from all his works.
For they put in this the force of the argumentation of the Apostle, to wit,
That the rest of the seventh day was not to be understood in the threat
denounced in David's time against the Israelites, that they should never enter
into Gods rest, because men were already entered into it from the beginning of
the world, as it is written; And God rested the seventh day from all his
works, and is so cited by the Apostle, and by them urged as impossible to be
understood only of Gods resting from all his works after he had finished them,
and as of necessity to be taken, for a rest ordained of God to men, which at
that same time he brought them into.

3 Because, even as the Apostle by the other rest of the land of Canaan, which
he alleges also, and by the heavenly rest, which he mentions likewise,
understands a rest that men enter into, and whereof they have an enjoying and
possession, the one and the other Canaan, and of the heavenly rest; should by
the first understand a rest whereby God only rested, and belonging to him
alone, and by the two others a rest which he had given, or was to give to men
for their rest. That moreover, if by the rest of the seventh day he had
Hebrews might have replied unto him, that God understood, and denoted it in
that threat, wherewith he threatened the Israelites by David, that they should
not enter into his rest, and so he had not obtained his end, which was to
show, that God speaks there of the heavenly rest, and not of any other.

4 To all this reasoning, which, to some that make use of it, seems to be of
great weight, to others but light and probable, I answer shortly, that albeit
it has some show, it has not strength enough to prove that which is in
question, to wit, that the observation of the Sabbath day was ordained to man
from the beginning of the world. For the Apostle in the place above cited, ver.
3. and 4. speaks not expressly of any rest ordained to man, nor that men had
at that time entered into any rest; nay, he makes no mention, that God had
blessed and sanctified the Sabbath day, but says that God did rest the seventh
day, as soon as his works were finished. Therefore it is not his scope to
teach, that the rest of the seventh day was kept by men from the foundation of
the world, and that for that cause God could not understand it, when in the
days of David he spoke to the Israelites of a new entrance into his rest. For
if he had propounded to himself that end, doubtless he had uttered it in
more express terms, at least he had rather cited these words of the second
Chapter of Genesis, And God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it, which had
manifestly been more unto the purpose, then these others, And the seventh day,
God rested from all his works. Although that howbeit he had alleged them, no
man can necessarily infer from thence, that he had such an intention: whereas
his mentioning only of GODS rest on the seventh day, and his omitting of the
blessing and hallowing thereof which follows immediately in the Text, shows
he acknowledged, that it was not practiced from the beginning, and that also
his mind was to speak directly of GODS Rest only, and to show, as a thing
most evident, that that rest, seeing it was past, and there was no possibility
of entering into it, could not be understood in the promise which God so long
after made by David to the faithful, of entering into his rest, Hebr. 1. ver.
1, 3. which promise was included in the threat, that unbeleevers should not
enter into his Rest; but another rest, to wit, a spiritual rest prepared to
the faithful in heaven, whereof that Rest of God on the seventh day was as a
type and figure.

5 Which GOD gave them to understand, when he caused Moses to observe in the
description of the History of the Creation, that 5
on the seventh day he rested from all his works, conformably whereunto he
commanded the Jews to keep the seventh day, and to rest on it, as he had
rested, that it might be unto them a type and figure of the heavenly rest. And
in this respect we may grant, that the Apostle speaks also of the rest of the
seventh day ordained to men, and excludes it out of the sense of the threat,
but indirectly and by consequence only, for as much as affirming, that even the
rest of God Himself on the seventh day after he had finished his works, was
not understood in the foresaid threat when GOD denounced it by David, we may
infer from thence, that likewise the rest ordained to men was not understood
in it. Not because this was as ancient as that, for in such an asseveration
there is no consequence; but because that was the foundation of the institution
of this to the Israelites, and this had a great sway when GOD gave that warning
with such a threat, as well as that, albeit not of so long a date.

6 To confirm that I say serves the tenth verse, where it is said, 6
that he that is entered into Gods Rest, has also rested from his own works,
as God did also from his, the meaning of which words is, that they which are
entered into the heavenly Rest cease from all their labors and businesses of
this life, even as God on the seventh day rested from all his works, whereby
the Apostle signifies, that God in his own rest established a figure of the
heavenly Rest, which he would confer upon men, whereof he gave them notice
afterward; whence it follows, that in the third and fourth verses (which the
tenth verse has relation unto) where it is observed, that God from the
foundation of the world, after his works were finished, rested the seventh
day, and notified so much by Moses in the second Chap. of Genesis, the Apostle
designed directly no other rest, but Gods own Rest, and meant not rest
ordained from the beginning to Adam. For if he had meant such a rest, he had
said in the 10. verse, he that enters into Gods heavenly rest, cease from
all the works of this life, even as Adam by Gods commandment rested on the
seventh day, and had not said simply, as God rested from all his works.

7 The instances alleged are weak. For what necessity is there, that because
by the two other rests of God mentioned by the Apostle, He. 4. v. 1, 8, 9. to
wit, the rest of the land of Canaan, and the heavenly rest, a rest given to men
is understood, even so by the rest of the seventh day in the 2. and 3. verses a
like rest is to be formally understood, and in the same respect; As if one and
the same word were not often found in the Scripture, in the same tenor of a
discourse, taken in different respects, and much more different then is here
Gods rest, which in two places signifies directly and expressly a Rest of God,
in as much as given to men, and in the third a Rest of God, in as much as he
himself rested: But indirectly and by consequence, in as much as he ordained
afterward to men to rest according to his example.

8 Which is an equivocation (if they will have it to be so called) of small
weight, and inferior to many others which in other passages may be found in one
and the same word, which moreover brings no inconveniency with it. For what
necessity was there that this term The Rest of God, should be always in this
discourse of the Apostle taken in the same sense, seeing his only intention was
to demonstrate, that all other Rest of God, which the Scripture calls so,
saving the heavenly rest, in whatsoever sense it be taken, could not be
understood in the threat denounced by David. For I will here set down a sense
which may be conveniently fitted to the words of the Apostle. God in his
threat wherewith he threatened the Israelites by David, that if they were
rebellious, they should not enter into his rest, understood either his own
Rest which he rested on the seventh day, after his works were finished, from
the Creation of the world; and which was the foundation and occasion moving him
to ordain long after the rest of the Seventh day to men; Or the rest of the
land of Canaan, or the heavenly Rest, seeing there is no mention in the
Scripture of any Rest of God, but of those three. Now of necessity he
understood the heavenly Rest. For he could not understand the rest of the land
of Canaan, because the Israelites were already entered into that land, and
enjoyed it: Nor also his own Rest which he rested on the seventh day, because
it was past and gone from the foundation of the world, besides that it was not
of such a nature that men could enter into it: Whence followed also that
likewise God did not understand the Rest of the seventh day ordained to men,
because indeed it was not ordained unto them, but conformably to the example of
Gods Rest, which was the cause and reason of the institution thereof: And
therefore if this rest was excluded from Gods intention in his threat, that was
excluded also, although the Apostle expresses not this unto us, and far
less at what time God gave to men the ordinance of the seventh day, contenting
himself with the expression of Gods own Rest, after he had finished his
works, on the first seventh day, which Rest being excluded, excluded also the
other ordained to men, in whatsoever time it was ordained unto them, whether in
the proper time of Gods rest, or long after: Neither of which can be learned of
the Apostles words in this discourse, but may be elsewhere.

9 According to this, it is clear, that by the Apostles reasoning the way was
shut up to the foresaid reply, which, as is pretended, may be made of the
maymednesse of his argumentation, wherein is left out the rest commanded to men
in the fourth Commandment, if by the rest of God we must understand Gods own
rest, and not the rest which he ordained to men. For I deny not, but that this
was also understood by the Apostle. But, as I have said, courtly, indirectly,
and by consequence taken from the rest which he expresses, from which this
other has its beginning and dependence, although it be not of the same
antiquity, and that it cannot be proved, that the Apostle means any such
thing. Moreover, albeit we could not find a way to answer such a reply, and to
refute it, there should not be in that any great inconvenience, seeing the
thing it self affords an easy answer, and the Apostle answers not always
formally in all places to all replies, which might be made to his allegations:
It suffices, if their vanity be evident of it self, or if they may be
otherwise refuted, as here the reply which is broached against the Apostle his
reasoning might have been easily.

CHAPTER Sixth.
Answer to the fifth Reason taken from the fourth Commandment, and first to
the general argument taken from the nature of the said Commandment.
1. First objection. The fourth Commandment is a part of the moral Law, and
therefore it is moral.

2. A general answer showing the nullity of this objection.

3. A particular answer, showing that the Decalogue is an abridgment of the
whole Law of Moses.

4. Specially, that the fourth Commandment is an abridgment of the ceremonial
Law.

5. This is confirmed by the Prophets, who by the profanation of the Sabbath,
understand the transgression of the whole ceremonial Law.

6. Falsity of an objection, that the Prophets urged not the transgression of
the ceremonial Law.

7. Second Objection: The Decalogue had diverse prerogatives which the
ceremonial and Judicial Law had not.

8. Clear refutation of this Objection.

9. Third Objection, God distinguishes between his covenant comprehending the
moralities only, and his statutes and judgments, which were ceremonial laws.

10. Uanity of the said distinction.

11. Fourth Objection. The Summarie of the Decalogue is moral: therefore all
the precepts thereof are moral.

12. Answer, in this summary the ceremonial Law is comprised.

13. Refutation of the fifth Objection, taken from the union of the ten
Commandments.

14. Answer to the sixth Objection, that our opinion mutilates the Decalogue of
a Commandment, and authoriseth the changing of times.

15. Another Answer, The fourth Commandment is moral in the principal
substance thereof.

16. But is ceremonial in the determination of a particular seventh day for
Gods service.

17. Seventh Objection, that if this were so, God would not have named it in
the Decalogue, more then the place of his service.

18. Answer, these things are not alike.

19. Eight Objection answered, to wit, that God might have named in the
Decalogue the New Moons, and other Holy days.

20. The former answer confirmed.

21. A farther answer showing that under the Sabbath all Holy days were
comprised, as under the word Sanctify all ceremonial duties.

22. Those of the contrary opinion confessing that there is some thing
ceremonial in the fourth Commandment, cast themselves into a great absurdity.

23. The falsitie of their doctrine, that a seventh day in general is only
commanded, showed by Scriptures.

24. And by reason.

25. How it may be said, that all days appointed for Gods service are grounded
on the fourth Commandment.

26. One of seven days cannot be moral, and the seventh ceremonial.

27. Wherein consists the morality of the fourth Commandment.

28. How the keeping of one of seven days may be gathered out of the fourth
Commandment.

29. Answer to the first inconvenience, that of ten Commandments nine only
should be moral.

30. Answer to the second inconvenience, that Papists may affirm the second
Commandment to be likewise ceremonial.

31. Confirmed by the testimony of Pagans, of the Prophets and of the Apostles.

32. Answer to the third inconvenience, that the second Commandment should
also be ceremonial.

33. Confirmed by Bellarmine.

34. Answer to the fourth inconvenience, that the fourth Commandment might be
taken out of the Decalogue.

35. The retorsion showing that the doctrine of the morality of the Sabbath,
gives a great advantage to the Roman Church.

1 THe principal reason alleged to prove the morality of the Sabbath, is
taken from the fourth Commandment, Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy,
etc. And first, they urge in general the nature of the Commandment, which is
one of the ten of the moral Law, which God Himself pronounced with his own
mouth, ingraved with his own hand upon two Tables of stone, for a sign and
token of perpetual continuance, and caused the said Tables to be put and kept
in the Arc, and therefore the fourth Commandment must of necessity be moral
and perpetual, as the rest are, otherwise nine Commandments only shall be
moral. But these nine being moral, it cannot be said reasonably that this is
not moral. And if any man should dare to say it, profane men may be so
licentiously bold, as to make the same exception against the rest, in all
things wherein they cope with their particular vices, saying also, that they
are not moral. That they of the Roman Church, who, to shrink from the
objection which we make against their idolatry by the formal words of the
second Commandment of the Law, presume to answer that this Commandment is not
moral, and did belong to the Jews only, shall find a sufficient color to
this answer, if it were true, that in the moral Law there is to be found a
Commandment which is not moral, and that the fourth Commandment is such a
one. And therefore as they have taken out of the Decalogue the second
Commandment, although without all reason, seeing it is moral and perpetual,
others may take out of it the fourth Commandment, and comprehend it no more
with the rest, and that with as good reason, seeing it is not moral, and
concerns us not.

2 To this I answer, first, that in vain do they seek to show, that the
Commandment of the Sabbath obliges us, because it makes a part of that Law
which God uttered with his own mouth in the mountain of Sina with so many
evidences of his Majesty, and wrote it with his finger upon two Tables of
stone, which he gave to Moses, and caused to be put in the Arc, as if these
considerations did give greater force and efficacy to this Law to bind us, as
it did bind the Jews, to keep it in all things that it comprehends; for
they might prove with as good reason, that in these time under the Gospel we
are bound to have a Tabernacle or Temple like unto that which the Jews had of
old, and to observe the same service which they observed in it, because God in
the same mountain with much Majesty showed the pattern thereof to Moses, and
commanded him to make it after that pattern. Whereas much otherwise, we are
not bound to keep the Law in that respect, that God pronounced it in the
Mountain of Sina, and wrote it upon two Tables which were given to Moses. For
in those respects, it obliged the Jews only to whom alone also it was adressed
in the preface put before it, Hear Israel, etc. No more are these
considerations of value to make it continue for ever. The inscription thereof in
Tables of stone might have had another end and usage, then that which is
pretended by those which say that it denotes the perpetuity of all that is
contained therein; for it represented the hardness of the heart of man, which
is more refractary and thwart to the spiritual inscription of the Law of God,
then the hardest stone is to the material inscription, which hardness the Law
is not of it self able to vanquish and overcome, because it is a dead letter
written in stone. It is God, God alone who by his grace, and by the power of
the Gospel, and of the Spirit which accompanies the Gospel, changes the
heart of stone into an heart of flesh, Ezech. 36. ver. 26. and 2 Cor. 3. ver.
3, 6, 7, 8. We are bound to the observation of the Law, and it is perpetual
only as it is moral, and written naturally in the tables of the heart, and as
it commands us things which of their nature are good, just, and holy, or
forbids those which in themselves are evil, which also the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, our only Law, has declared and confirmed to be such, as it confirms
the other nine Commandments, but makes no mention of the fourth Commandment,
which is here brought in question, as if it did bind us to the observation of
a seventh day.

3 Neither do I see any inconvenience to affirm, that the Law of the ten
Commandments which is called Moral, is not such in its totality, but only in
regard of the greatest part thereof, to wit, of the nine Commandments, for
whose sake it has deserved the title given unto it, of moral, natural,
universal, and perpetual Law, as often the whole is named from that which is
the principal in it: And that it is Ceremonial, particular, and temporal in
regard of a parcel thereof, to wit, of the fourth Commandment. For the
Scripture says no where, that all the Commandments of this Law are without
exception Moral. Nay, seeing this Law is often called in general terms Gods
Covenant made with the Israelites, Exodus 34. verse. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 13. 23.
Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 3. Deuteronomy. 9. verse. 9. 11. 15. etc. 1 King. 8. verse. 21. (which
Covenant comprehended not only the Moral points, but also the Ceremonies, as
may be seen, Exodus 24. verse. 7, 8. Exodus 34. verse. 10. 27. Levit. 2. verse. 13.
Levit. 26. verse. 2. 15. Ierem. 34. verse. 13.) It is most like, or rather most
plain, that God comprehended in the said Law, as in an Epitome or short
discourse, all his Ordinances, both Moral and Ceremonial, which afterward he
declared more fully to Moses, and which are dispersed here and there in his
Books. And as the other nine Commandments are the summary of the Moral
ordinances, even so the fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath day, and the
sanctification thereof, which was done with the practice of Ceremonies, is a
summary of all the Ceremonial ordinances.

4 For to this Sabbath day all other Sabbaths and legal feasts have relation,
and to them all the Ceremonies whereby they were solemnized, have reference.
Philo a learned Jew, has observed this very well in his exposition of the
Decalogue, where he says, that the ten Commandments are the summary of all
the special Laws contained in the whole sacred volume of the Lawgiver, and
that the fourth Commandment contains compendiously the Feasts, Sabbaths,
Sacrifices, Vows, Purifications, and other Ceremonies. And indeed the Sabbath
is joined with all other holy days in the 23. Chapter of Leviticus, as being
of the same nature, and is put in the first place before them all, as being the
first and principal of them all. It is also joined with the Sanctuary, Levit.
19. verse. 30. and with the new Moons and other solemnities, Esa. 1. v. 13, 14.
where God declares, that he cannot away with it, and makes no better account
of it then of all the rest of their solemn meetings, and appointed Feasts.
Esa. 51. verse 2. Esa. 58. v. 13 Ier. 17. v. 22 24. 27. Ezech. 20. v. 11, 12, 13
Also the observation of the Sabbath day is taken in diverse places of the old
Testament, as denoting summarily all the Ceremonial service which God had of
old enjoined to Israel, as being a special and principal point of that
service, and a mean for the observation of all the other points whereby he
would be honored. Notable amongst other places is that of Ezechiel, Chap. 20.
verse. 11. 12, 13. where God says first, that he gave them his Statutes, and
made them to know his Judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in
them, verse. 11. understanding by Statutes and Judgments the Moral
Commandments properly, as it is evident by the 18. Chapter of Leviticus,
whence these words are taken, and where the Statutes, Judgments, and
Ordinances, whereof we speak, are expressly opposed to the vices of the Land of
Egypt, and of the Land of Canaan, verse. 3, 4, 5. As in the foresaid 20. Chapter
of Ezechiel, verse. 18. 19. they are also opposed to the vices of their Fathers,
who in former times had lived in Egypt, to which vices the Commandment of the
ceremonial Law could not be conveniently opposed, because before the times of
the pilgrimage of the Israelites in the wilderness, they were unknown, and
had no sway. Now after this, God adds in the foresaid Chapter of Ezechiel,
ver. 12. Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and
them, etc. distinguishing the Sabbaths from the Statutes whereof he had spoken
before, as a Commandment ceremonial and typical, from those that are Moral,
and comprehending under it all other typike and figurative ordinances of the
Law, whereof for this cause, although he had established them in the
wilderness, as well as the Sabbath, he makes no mention at all.

5 And in the 22. Chapter of the same Prophet, God blaming in many
particularities the crimes committed by the Jews against the Moral Law,
condemns their transgression of the Ceremonial Law, saying simply, verse. 26
that they had defiled his holy things, and had their eyes from his Sabbaths.
Likewise in the 23. Chapter, verse. 38. and in other places, the profanation of
the Sabbath is set down to signify the violation of the whole outward and
ceremonial service which God had ordained in that time, because the Sabbath
day was then solemnly destinated to the practice thereof; Yea, the violation
also of the internal, spiritual and Moral service, but by consequence,
because the external service was ordained of God to be unto his people a help
and means to fortify them in the practice of the other, in such sort, that he
who neglected, or set at naught the outward, could not in truth and sincerity
practice the inward service.

6 Out of that I have said, resulteth an answer to an objection, to wit, that
the Prophets are accustomed to urge only the Moral Law, and not the
Ceremonies, but run slightly over them, saying, he takes no delight in them,
Esa. 1. verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. 15. Esa. 66. verse. 3. Psalm. 50. verse. 13. Ierem.
6. verse. 20. Amos 3. verse. 21. Micah 6. verse. 7. For it is false, that the
Prophets urge not the observation of Ceremonies, seeing when they urged the
observation of the Sabbath, they comprised under it for the aforesaid reason,
all the Ceremonies of the Law: Moreover, we find other where, that they have
recommended them by their names, as well as the Sabbath, have blamed the
inobservation, have deplored the interruption of them, as among other places
may be seen: Psalm. 4. verse. 6. Psalm. 118. verse. 27. Ierem. 17. verse. 26.
Ezech. 20. verse. 40, 41. Dan. 11. verse. 31. Joel 1. v. 9. 13. Malac. 1. v. 7,
8, 10, 13, 14. Mal. 3. v. 8. 10. Mal. 4. v. 4. etc. If sometimes they seem to
reject them, they do it only by way of comparison with the spiritual
service, and in regard that they were joined not with it.

7 Therefore it is without any solid ground, that the Moral Commandments are
distinguished from the Ceremonial, by this, that the Moral Precepts only
were spoken to all the people with Gods own mouth, were written with his own
hand upon two tables, were put in the Arc at Horeb by Moses, to be kept there,
1 King. 8. verse. 9. That the Ceremonialls had no share at all in these
prerogatives, but were declared by God to Moses in particular only, and were
written and taught by Moses to the people, to infer from thence, that the
fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath, must needs be Moral, because it
did partake of all the foresaid prerogatives.

8 For I say with as good and better reason, that all the Commandments, both
Ceremonial and Moral, were honored with the foresaid prerogatives, for as
much as the Decalogue is the abridgement of the one and of the other, which it
was Gods pleasure to utter with his own mouth, and writ so solemnly and
summarily with his own hand, to procure so much more authority to all his
Ordinances, leaving hereafter to Moses the care to declare and explain them
more fully to the people, which also he did: For as may be seen in all his
Books, he taught not only ceremonial things, but also moral, being in the
one and in the other an interpretor and commentator of the Decalogue, which God
had pronounced, and wherein he had by abridgement comprehended the one and the
other. And indeed, in the foresaid 34. Chapter of Exodus, the connection of the
27. with the 28. verse is worthy to be marked. For God having said to Moses in
the 27. verse, that he had made a covenant with him, and with Israel, after the
tenor of these words which he had at that instant pronounced unto him, and
which are contained in the former verses, where there are ordinances not only
moral, but also ceremonial; in the 28. verse following, these words are
added, And He wrote upon the Tables the words of the Covenant, the ten
Commandments. HE, not Moses, but the LORD himself, as Moses declares, Deuteronomy.
10. verse. 24. Where, by the Covenant, is undoubtedly meant the same whereof he
had spoken in the 27. verse immediately going before. Whence it follows, that
the Decalogue written with Gods own hand upon two Tables, was an Epitome of
all his foresaid Ordinances appertaining to his Covenant, which he commanded
Moses to write also, but more fully, and according to all their extent, Exodus
34. ver. 27. And so he did, Exodus 24. verse. 4. Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 58. Deuteronomy. 30.
verse. 10. Deuteronomy. 31. verse. 9.

9 There is no value in the proof that they seek in the fourth Chapter of
Deuteronomy, to prop the aforesaid distinction, where, when it is said, verse.
13. that God declared to the Israelites his Covenant, which he commanded them
to perform, even the ten Words, and verse. 14. that also he commanded Moses to
teach them Statutes and Judgments, they fancy that by the Covenant, are
understood only the moralities, and by the Statutes and Judgments, the
ceremonies and observations of order and of government, and the one
distinguished from the other, in this, that God pronounced the moralities with
his own mouth, and Moses taught the Statutes and Judgments.

10 For these two verses established not a distinction and diversity between
the things spoken, written and taught, whereof mention is made in these verses,
but only between those that are denoted in them as proposers of these things,
and the diverse manner of propounding them by the one and by the other. The
Covenant, the Statutes, and Judgments signify the same thing in substance.
But in the 13. verse God is said to have propounded them with his own mouth,
and written them with his own finger upon two Tables of stone, comprising them
all in the abridgement of ten Words or Commandments. And in the 14. verse,
Moses is said to have taught them more amply and diffusedly, which is confirmed
by that has been already said, as also by these words of the 14. verse, The
Lord commanded me also that same time to teach you Statutes and Judgments. For
it is certain, that God commanded Moses to teach, not only ceremonial, but
also moral Statutes: And Moses says no other thing but this, that God
contented not himself with that short and summary declaration which he had
given them, of the one and of the other, but enjoined him to teach them more
fully and largely. The conference of the 14. verse with the 1, 2. 5. 6. 8. of
the same Chapter furnishes a most evident proof thereof; For the Statutes and
Judgments which God commanded Moses to teach, verse 19. are the same which in
the aforesaid verses going before Moses says, he taught, and commanded the
Israelites to keep, that they might live, exhorting them to take heed that
they neither add unto them, nor take ought from them, because they were
righteous Statutes and Judgments, and their wisdom and understanding in the
sight of all Nations: which agrees as well, yea, far more with the Moral
Commandments, as with the Ceremonial. And Moses by express commission from
God, taught them the one and the other, with this injunction, to keep them, as
may be seen in Leviticus, Chap, 19. verse. 27. and 20. verse. 8. and 21. verse.
31. And if we behold in Exodus, Chap. 20. and in the Chapters following, and in
Deuteronomy, Chap. 5. and in the Chapters following, the things that God
charged Moses in the mountain, to declare to the people, and whereunto Moses
has regard in the 14. verse of the fourth Chapter of Deuteronomy, when he
says, The Lord commanded me also at that time, etc. we shall find, that
they were not only ceremonial, or merely judicial, but also moral
ordinances, and illustrations more ample of the Decalogue.

11 They object again, that Jesus Christ in the Gospel, has set down the
summary of the whole Law of the Decalogue in these two Commandments, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind: and thy neighbor Mat. 22. ve. 37. 39. Luke 10. ve. 27.
as thy self, and that as this summary is moral, even so the Law, whereof it
is the abridgement, is purely moral, unless we will accuse Christ to have
given a moral summary of a thing that is ceremonial.

12 But this objection is of no force. For, first, I might answer, that this
summary has reference to the Law of the Decalogue, in as much as it is moral,
and that being in the greatest part of its Commandments moral, and only
ceremonial in one, it is not uncoth, that the summary thereof is propounded as
moral and not ceremonial. But, Secondly, I say, that this summary has
reference not only to the moral Law, which is preten^ed to be alone contained
in the Decalogue, but also to the ceremonial, which I maintain to be likewise
summarily comprised in it. And indeed Moses having said in the sixth Chapter of
Deuteronomy, ver. 1, 2, 3. These are the Commandments, Statutes, and
Judgments which the Lord your God has commanded, and which I command thee,
that thou may hear them, and take heed to do them, he adds in the 4. and
5. verses, Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord alone: Thou shall therefore
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all
thy might, referring this summary which commands them to love God, to all the
Commandments, Judgments, and Statutes of God, which he had before designed,
as being the foundation of the obedience due unto them. And in the Gospel the
Lawyer asked the Lord in general, which is the greatest Commandment of the
Law, whereunto the Lord answered, The greatest Commandment (to wit, not in
dignity only, but also Mat. 22. v. 37, 38, 30, 40.
in extent) is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, And the
second like unto this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. Which answer shows, that
unto this summary did belong whatsoever is comprised in the Law and in the
Prophets, and therefore the ceremonial Law as well as the moral. It cannot be
denied, but that the ceremonies, as long as they were in force, were to be kept
through love to God, as well as moral duties. And the love of God obliged the
Jews as strictly to practice the ceremonialls as the moralls: For the love of
God requires the observation of all his Commandments, and it is known to be
sincere by the keeping of them all. Now God had commanded the ceremonies to the
Jews for the whole time of the old Testament: And therefore in this respect,
that God had commanded them, and also in regard they had all, or the most part
of them a moral foundation, they might very well, nay, they ought to be
referred to this moral summary, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, As if Christ had said, The Commandment most general and
principal of all, and which is the foundation of the obedience that ought to
be yielded to all the other Commandments, is to love God with all the heart.
For whosoever loves him so, will undoubtedly serve him always according to
all his Commandments.

13 As for the argument taken from the union which is between the fourth
Commandment and the other nine, wherewith it makes up one Law, to prove from
thence, that it is of the same nature, and moral as they are, it is a light
and slight argumentation: For it is an ordinary thing, and most manifest in all
Laws of God and men, that in the same body of a Law, which is framed of many
Articles following one another, there are some different in nature from the
rest. Under the same name of Gods covenant are sufficiently understood all the
heads and Articles both ceremonial and moral, as is evident by the passages
already cited. And God comprehended them all together in gross, when he spoke
so often to his people of the keeping of his whole Law, of all his
Commandments, Testimonies, Ordinances, and Judgments. These terms occure
ordinarily in holy Scripture joined together, and all acknowledge with one
consent that by them and in them all points, as well ceremonial as moral, are
understood. Why then, I pray, might they not far more be distinctly and
particularly set down together in the body of the same Law, without enforcing
from thence, that they are of the same nature? And (to make my advantage of
similitudes, which some of those against whom I dispute, make use of) if in a
natural body, the diverse parts whereof it is framed, are not always of the
same nature; as in the bodies of men and beasts, other is the nature of flesh,
other of bones, other of gristles, etc. If in an artificial body, as in a
chain and in a carkanet, grains of coral, of silver, of gold, etc. are fitly
coupled together, why may not much more be different in nature the parts and
articles of a legal body (if I may name it so) although they have no
essential connection together? And certes in many places of the books of Moses
commandments moral and ceremonial are to be found mixed one with another.
Now should not a man argue fondly and unsoundly, if, because in these diverse
places, and namely in the foresaid 34. Chapter of Exodus, from the tenth to the
eight and twentieth verse, God joyneth in one tenor certain speeches to Moses,
wherein are expressed sundry ordinances of a diverse nature, he would seek to
make an inference from that union, that they are all of the same nature,
although the contrary be most evident and true? For the commandments
prohibiting to worship any other God but him, to make any material Idols, and
to worship them, to match with Infidels, which are moral commandments, are
there combined with other Commandments of keeping the feast of unleavened
bread, and other solemn feasts, as of consecrating unto him all the first
borne of men and cattle that open the matrix, which are ceremonial. Yea, the
Commandment of keeping the Sabbath day, which is in the 21. verse is placed
there amongst commandments that are wholly ceremonial: Will they against whom
we dispute, allow us to infer upon this, that the Sabbath is ceremonial?
doubtless not. Let them therefore suffer us to reject this their
argumentation, that the Commandment concerning the Sabbath is moral, because
in the Decalogue it is put among moral commandments, and on the otherside to
judge it to be most reasonable, that God in the first Table thereof, where his
scope was to comprehend compendiously all that concerns the service which he
would have yielded unto him, has set down first three commandments
concerning the moral and perpetual service, and next the fourth concerning
the ceremonial service established by him at that time.

14 Neither is it a diminishing from Gods Commandments, against the
prohibition which he has made, Deuteronomy. 12. verse. 32. to say that the fourth
Commandment of the Decalogue was ceremonial and for a season, no more then to
say the same of all other commandments manifestly ceremonial, which God gave
of old to the Jews, and in consideration whereof, as well as of those of the
Decalogue, God gave in that place objected against us, Whatsoever thing I
command you, observe to do it: Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it. It is not a diminishing from it, to explain the nature thereof, and to
show of these ten Commandments which are moral and perpetual, which are
ceremonial and temporal. No more is it an unjust usurpation of authority to
change times, with the wicked Antiochus, Dan. 7. verse. 25. to keep no more the
seventh day ordained by the fourth Commandment, As it is no changing of times,
to forbear the keeping of all other days ordained of God under the Law, but
it is a submitting of our selves to that changing, which God himself would
have to be made, seeing he had not ordained the Sabbath, nor the feast days,
but for a certain space of time, to wit, til the time of the new Testament, as
it is manifest by that has been said.

15 But secondly, albeit that which the fourh Commandment enjoineth in
express terms concerning the seventh day, the sanctification of that day, and
the ceasing from all works in it be ceremonial, nevertheless, I grant that
it is moral in its foundation, end, marrow and principal substance, which
must be distinguished from particular determinations laid upon this foundation,
and added to this principal substance. The foundation and principal substance
hid and infoulded in the terms of the Commandment, is, that there must be an
order according unto which God is to be served and worshipped, not only by
each person by himself, and in his particular conversation, but also openly,
publicly, and in common by the whole body of his people assembled and drawn
together, that consequently, it is necessary a certain time be appointed for
this public service, and applied ordinarily to that use. For without a stinted
time, how can many meet together to give their mind to the public practice of
Religion. This is moral, grounded upon the principles of nature. Witnesses be
the Gentiles, which having no other Law but the Law of nature, have
acknowledged and practiced this, appointing all of them set days for the
public exercise of their Religion. This also is ratified by the Gospel, Mat.
18. v 20. Romans 10. v. 14, 17 Ephesians. 4. v. 11. 12. 1 Cor. 11. v. 18, 20. Heb. 10.
v. 24, 25.
which recommendeth unto the faithful the assembling of themselves together,
for the preaching of the word, administration of the Sacraments, common
prayers, collections, and other holy exercises, which are in use under the
Gospel, and consequently that they have appointed times to attend upon them,
and as under the Old Testament the word of Moses and of the Prophets was read
and preached every Sabbath day, Acts 13. verse 27. Acts 15. verse 21. that even
so the word of the Gospel have days appointed wherein it to be read and
preached. In this do agree and shake hands together the Law and the Gospel,
Moses and Christ. Because this is moral, God has enjoined it in the moral
Law, and this is the scope of the fourth Commandment. For as in the three
first God ordained the inward and outward service which he will have every
particular man to yield unto him every day in private, and severally from the
society of other men, so in this fourth Commandment he injoyneth a service
common and public, which all must yield together unto him, forbearing in the
mean while all other businesses, to give themselves without disturbance to
that necessary duty. This is the end of the fourth Commandment, for as in the
three first he had ordained his service, according as it may, and ought to be
rendered unto him every day, upon all occasions, particularly by every one
apart, and out of the company of other men; so in this fourth Commandment, he
injoyneth a solemn time for a public service, which all are bound to render
unto him, ceassing in the mean while from all other occupations, that they may
without any disturbance apply themselves unto it, with all religious zeal and
devotion.

16 The thing which is not moral in the fourth Commandment, and that I
affirm to be an ordinance appertaining to the Jewish government, and to the
time, not of the New but of the Old Testament, is that which is expressed by
the terms of the Commandment, to wit, the determination of a seventh day,
and of a particular seventh, even the last of seven. For in this there is no
thing that has any taste of morality. It is not founded on the Law of nature,
the Gentiles had never any knowledge thereof, the Gospel has not ratified it,
as has been showed before.

17 They object, that if there be no thing moral in the fourth Commandment,
more than I have said, the ordinance of the Sabbath day for Gods service shall
no more be moral then was the Commandment concerning the building of the
ancient Tabernacle to be the place of Gods service, seeing this command
teaches us also, that of necessity there must be some place assigned for
ecclesiastical meetings, and that it was no more needful to put in the
Decalogue, Thou shall keep the Sabbath day, then Thou shall frequent the
Temple.

18 To this I answer, that verily there is a morality in this point, that the
faithful resort of ten to some place where they may attend on GODS service,
But it was not at all so needful to make express mention thereof in the
Decalogue, as of an ordinary and set time, for that this ordinance concerning
such a time, draws of necessity after it the ordinance of some place, because
it is not possible to flock together on an ordinary and solemn day to serve
God, if there be not a place appointed for that purpose: But the appointing of
a certain place, includes not the institution of an ordinary time. For a
place may be ordained for public meetings, wherein there is no ordinary
meeting. Far less was it necessary, nay it was no ways necessary in regard
of the morality, to put in the Decalogue a commandment concerning a particular
house, such as was of old the Tabernacle; because although there be some
morality by consequence in it, or rather a necessary sequel of a morality, for
as much as necessity being imposed to the faithful to meet together, there
must be some place appointed for their meetings, but it is not needful that
those meetings should be with that absolute necessity always in a house
builded and erected for that end. For although they should come together in an
open air, having no other cover but the sky, in grots and dens under the
ground, or in some other place, without house or Temple, as the Christians were
forced to meet together in the Primitive persecutions, in such a state of the
Church this suffices, and no more is required as moral. It is only the
decency and commodity which obliges us to have houses and Temples builded
expressly for Gods service. For these reasons GOD would not make mention in the
Decalogue at a particular place, as he did of a time stinted for his service.

19 This is a sufficient answer to another objection, when they say, that God
might as well have put in the Decalogue, Thou shall keep the New Moons, or the
yearly feasts, as the Sabbath day, because that command, as well as this, had
taught us, that there must be a time appointed and stinted for Gods service.
For I deny that such a command could have taught us this duty, as well as the
other, because such days being rare, and returning only from month to month,
or from year to year, had not taught us the convenient and suitable frequency
of GODS public service, as did the Sabbath day, which returned weekly.
Therefore it being more frequent, yea more holy and venerable then all the rest
of festival days ordained of GOD under the Law, he made mention of it in the
fourth Commandment, rather than of them wherein GOD has observed a way like
unto that which he has kept in the other Commandments, which is, to set down
a principal head under which he compriseth all other points that have relation
unto it. Wherefore, as in the second Commandment he forbids to make Images,
to how down to them, and under that point prohibiteth all will worship: As in
the fifth Commandment under the name of Father and Mother, and of the honor
which he commands to give unto them, he comprehends all superiors, and
the respect due to them: As in the sixth under murder he compriseth all other
violences against our neighbor: And as in the seventh under Adultery he
understands all uncleanness of fleshly lust; so likewise in the fourth
Commandment, under the Sabbath day, and the observation thereof, which was his
principal festival, he understands all other holy days, and all the
ceremonies which he had enjoined, and the practice of them all; As also, (which
I have already marked) his custom is other where in the Old Testament, to
range under that point all other semblable points of his service, yea all
godliness and Religion, and make it, in some sort, to consist altogether in
the observation of the Sabbath: whereof the reason is, that a man cannot be
pious and religious to Godward, unless he observe the external means and
aides of Religion and godliness which he has ordained. Now the principal
means of this kind ordained by him at that time, was the sanctification of the
Sabbath: All other means of the same kind were referred to it and were
established and dressed as it were, upon the mould of it; even as whatsoever is
the first and head in every kind of things, is the rule of all others that are
inferior and subordinate unto it: wherefore it is no wonder, that GOD would in
express terms set down this particular determination of the observation of
the Sabbath day, rather than any other, and comprise under it the moral
substance of that Commandment. For having thought expedient to ordain and
stint to the Jews the ordinary celebration of his public service on a set
day, to wit, on every seventh, and on the last of the seven days of the week,
the moral substance of the said commandment, which is to have a time regulate
and frequent for his public service, could not be so well comprised and
designed under any other ordinance relative unto it, as under this which was
the most notable and principal of them all: So the fourth Commandment is
moral and perpetual in one respect, to wit, in this principal substance
which it infoldeth covertly, and ceremonial and positive in another, to wit,
in the foresaid determination, as also of the sanctification which it
expresses.

20 For when God says in the beginning thereof, Remember the Sabbath day to
sanctify it, he understands by the Sabbath day, not a day of rest
indefinitely and without limitation, but a seventh day, and the last of the
week wherein he rested, as is manifest by that is said after in the same
Commandment, For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it: where the day of rest, or the Sabbath day
signifies manifestly the same day whereof mention is made in the beginning of
the Commandment, which is the day of Gods rest, to wit, the seventh that he
rested on, as it is likewise so restrained in the second Chapter of Genesis,
And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had
rested from all his works: Therefore it was not a day of rest in general that
he sanctified, but the particular seventh day of the Creation, and not any
other. Also this name, The Sabbath day, or the day of rest, does never signify
in the Scripture any other day besides the seventh and last day of the week,
which GOD had ordained to the Jews. For these two appellations, The Sabbath
day, and the seventh or last day of the week, are indifferently taken for the
same thing, and the one is the explication of the other, as may be seen in
infinite places, Exodus 16. verse 29. Exodus 20. ver. 10, 11. Exodus 23. ver. 12.
Exodus 31. verse 15. Exodus 35. verse 2. Levit. 23. verse 3. Luke 13. verse 14.
etc. Yea this name, The Sabbath day, is the proper and particular name of the
seventh and last day of the week, whereby it was distinguished from all the
rest, which, as has been observed before, did take from it their
denomination, being called the first, second, third of the Sabbath, etc.

21 Also by the sanctification of this day, which God injoyneth in the foresaid
words of the commandment, is not expressed and particularised formally any
other, then that which consists in the abstinence of several works, whereof
mention is made in the words following, which may be taken for an explication
of the sanctification before enjoined, even as in this abstinence is expressly
established the sanctification of the said day, Evod. 31. verse 16. Neh. 13.
verse 22. Ierem. 17. verse 22, 24, 27. And it is indeed that sanctification
which ordinarily God betokens and requires of the people of the Jews in the
Old Testament, when he speaks of the sanctification of the Sabbath day, as on
the contrary, the profanation of that day whereof he blames them, is that
which they committed in doing works which he had prohibited. But if it be
referred to a sanctification which was to be practiced by the use of certain
actual duties of Religion, God understands a sanctification by the
observation of legal ceremonies as well as of moral duties. Yea he
understands rather that then this, because the observation of moral duties
is not tied more particularly to one day then to another, but is a service
appertaining equally and alike to all days of the week; whereas the
ceremonies of Gods outward service, were to be observed more particularly on
that day, then in all the rest: And therefore this Commandment, in as much as
it injoyneth the sanctification of the seventh day, is ceremonial, and if in
regard of this sanctification it is abolished, what inconvenience is there,
that it be likewise abolished in regard of the day? Neither is it a thing
singular to this Commandment to have some particular determination belonging
to the Jews only added to the substance which is moral, universal, and
perpetual. For the preface of the Law, which some had rather make a part of
the first Commandment, concerning the deliverance out of the land of Egypt,
and out of the house of bondage, and the temporal promise of long days upon
the Land of Canaan added to the fifth Commandment, are manifestly
circumstances which have relation to the Jews only, and have no morality in
them, nay, were ceremonial and typike. Now if a ceremonial promise has found
a room in the Decalogue, there is no greater inconvenience, that a ceremonial
and temporal Commandment be found in it also. Neither is it a whit more
repugnant to say, that the fourth Commandment is both moral and ceremonial,
because it is not so in the same, but in a diverse sense and respect, as I have
showed. Among the Laws given by Moses, many are to be found, which are
ceremonial and temporal in that which they express, and moral in their
foundation and end. As, for example, the Laws forbidding to muzzle the Ox
when he treads out the corn, Deuteronomy. 25. verse 4. to seethe a Kid in his
mothers milk, Exodus 23. verse. 19. to take in a birds nest the Dam with the
young ones, Deuteronomy. 22. verse. 6, 7. to plow with an Ox and an Ass together,
Deuteronomy. 22. verse. 10. and others such like.

22 And indeed those against whom I write, must acknowledge, nill they, will
they; that in the fourth Commandment there is some thing that is not moral,
that obliges not for ever, and that did pertain only to the Jews, and to
their ceremonies and Ecclesiastical government, to wit, the ordinance about
the observing not only of one day of seven, but the last of seven. For we
keep not any more this last day under the new Testament, wherein we should
sin, if it were a moral thing. Neither can an instance be made from the
fourth Commandment, that the observing of a seventh day is a thing natural
and moral, but by the same means it shall be proved, against the intention of
those that make use of this argument, that to observe a seventh day is also
moral, because the Commandment ordains not without restriction a seventh
day, but stinteth particularly and by name the last of seven.

23 There be some, who to avoid the strength of this argument, do say, that
the fourth Commandment enjoyneth only a seventh day, as the genus, and as a
moral thing, but none of the kinds, whether the last of seven observed by the
Jews, or the first of seven observed by Christians is particularly enjoined,
because in this there is no morality: Or if in the fourth Commandment besides
the seventh day in general, a particular seventh is injoined, the general is
enjoined as moral, the particular as ceremonial, and so the genus, to wit, a
seventh day, as being moral, continues for ever, as well under the Gospel, as
under the Law, and the particular seventh, to wit, the last of the week, is
only abrogated by the Gospel. This is a bold reply, and makes me to wonder at
it, seeing on the contrary it is evident by that has been already said, that
we may affirm with good reason, that the fourth Commandment makes not at
all any general mention of observing an unlimited day, but particularizeth
expressly a certain seventh day, to wit, the last. For God after he had said,
Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work, adds, but the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, which expression alone and by it self,
although there were no other thing said, shows, that he means the seventh
in order, following the other six. When a man utters his mind in this sort;
the third, the fourth, the fifth, etc. his intention is, to denote that which
is such in order relatively to others going before, neither is there any man
that will take it otherwise. But besides this, God unfoldeth forthwith which
seventh he means, to wit, the particular seventh wherein he rested, after he
had made all his works in the six days which went before, which was the last
of seven. Moreover, it is evident, that in the fourth Commandment, the seventh
day, and the day of rest are the same, as also wheresoever mention is made of
them. And the day of Rest is there taken for the day that God rested in, as is
manifest by these words following: And he rested the seventh day, wherefore he
blessed the Sabbath day, and hollowed it; the which day wherein he rested is
the seventh, or the last day after the six of the creation, as is evident by
these words also; He made his works in six days, and rested on the seventh
day. Wherefore it is the last seventh, and none other, that is designed in the
fourth Commandment as the object of the blessing and hallowing of God; which
is yet more clear by the second Chapter of Genesis, and third verse, where
after Moses had said, that God in six days made the heaven and the earth, and
all the hosts of them, and after he had ended his works, rested the seventh
day, he adds, And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because in
it he had rested from all his works, to wit, that seventh which afterward he
blessed.

24 For the Pronoune It, has a necessary relation to a particular day
specified in the foresaid words, as blessed of God, and limited forthwith, as
the day of his rest; so it is manifest that the day which God blessed, is the
same that he rested in, the same, I say, by correspondency in the order and
succession of days, as I have showed before: Otherwise, what should be the
sense of these words? God has blessed and sanctified the seventh day, that is,
as is pretended, a seventh day undetermined, because in it he rested, etc. This
Pronoune It, can it fitly and conveniently denote a day uncertain and
unlimited? Where is to be found a seventh day unlimited, wherein God did rest?
Moreover; Gods blessing and sanctification can it have an indefinite and
uncertain object; so that God in particular sanctified nothing? Again, can it
be a convenient reason, having any likelihood, that God having rested on a
certain seventh day, and having considered in it all his works which he had
finished, after he had made them in the six days before, which was the cause
that he loved and esteemed particularly that day, has in that respect
sanctified one of seven days indefinitely, which by that means might have
been one of those wherein he wrought, and not the same seventh wherein he
rested? If that were true, it should follow that the Israelites did not observe
the last day of the week, by obligation of the fourth Commandment tying them
thereunto, but only in general one of the seven days of the week, and that
by some other particular Law they were taught to observe the last of seven,
although all the rest of Gods Ordinances, which are to be found concerning the
Sabbath, say no more then does the fourth Commandment, and are relative unto
it. Whereas it is most sure, that the Jews in all times have professed, and
do still make profession, that they keep the last day of the week by
express obligation of the fourth Commandment, which, according to this saying
they did never understand. All these are as many palpable absurdities. And
therefore it is most certain, that the fourth Commandment ordains expressly
and formally the observation of a particular seventh day, to wit, of the last
of seven, and not of another.

25 Nevertheless, it may be said in some sort, that any day whatsoever, which
is celebrated to the honor and glory of God, has its foundation on the fourth
Commandment, and that so we now do observe our Sunday, and other solemn and
extraordinary days by virtue of that Commandment: Not that it enjoyneth them
properly and directly, but only indirectly, and by deduction or consequence
taken from the foundation, and general end thereof, which is to enjoyne all
men, to serve God publicly, and to consecrate for that purpose, some solemn
times, which in this respect, whatsoever they be, may be all referred unto it,
not as being commanded in their particular kind, but only in their genus,
which is covertly and fundamentally contained in it, and therewith determined
expressly to one kind only, to wit, to the seventh day, and to the last of
seven, not for ever, but during the time of the old Testament only. Wherefore
to say that the fourth Commandment obliges only, and in express terms to a
seventh day unstinted, and not to this particular seventh, which is here the
point in question, is a thing altogether unreasonable, as is evident by that
has been said.

26 It is also a thing far removed from all reason to say, that verily the
observation of a certain day of seven, to wit, the last, was a thing
ceremonial and positive, and that this is the day which the Gospel has
abrogated, but to observe always one day of seven, is moral, and that this is
ratified and confirmed by the Gospel. For the determination and particular
observation of any day whatsoever amongst a certain number, in quality of such
a one, cannot be a moral thing. Now to ordain one of seven to be kept, makes
a determination and particular observation, not forsooth, so particular, as
when one of seven: as for example, the last is by name determined and
appointed, yet so far particular, that none can devise, far less tell
reasonably, wherefore there should be a morality to ordain and observe a
seventh day regularly, rather then to ordain and observe the last of seven;
wherefore the Gospel should confirm that more then this, abrogate this more
then that: wherefore finally, there is lesser inconvenience to avouch, that the
fourth Commandment is ceremonial and positive, in as much as it ordains a
particular seventh day, to wit, the last, (whereof some of those against whom I
dispute, are constrained to acknowledge the establishment in the fourth
Commandment, but as of a ceremony) as to say, that it is also ceremonial and
positive in as much as it ordains one day of seven, which is the point I
stand unto.

27 Verily there is far more reason to say, that the fourth Commandment
ordains, as a moral thing, the public service of God, and consequently that
there be for that purpose a stinted day, ordinary, common, and so frequent in
its revolution, that it may be sufficient for the practice and exercise of that
service, for the continual edification of the Church. For nature teaches,
that it is fit that the public service of God be frequently practiced, which
has as great force under the Gospel, as under the Law, but that the said
Commandment obliges precisely to a seventh day, and to that seventh day
wherein God rested from all his works, it is an ordinance of ceremony and of
order, which was for the Jews only, and has been disanulled by the Gospel.

28 For since the Gospel came, it is a thing in its self indifferent to
observe, not forsooth one day of any number how great so ever it be, as of
thirty, sixty, of an hundred, or of a year, which as all the world may see,
should not be sufficient to serve God publicly by his people, and should
bewray in such a people a great negligence and want of affection to Gods
service, but one of four, of five, of six, or in sum, of such a number
wherein that day may return frequently, and suffice for the intertainement of
Religion and godliness. And it may perhaps be gathered out of the fourth
Commandment that one day in seven is very suitable and fit, and that we should
not under the Gospel dedicate less to God, for seeing GOD ordained to the
Jews (other ways burdened with many other ceremonies and holy days) one of
seven, it is an argument probable enough that Christians ought to consecrate to
him, at least as much if not more of their time, which nevertheless God left
to the liberty of the Church to ordain with wisdom and conscience as has
been already said. And so although the ceremonial order prescribed in the
fourth Commandment concerning the day of rest, obliges not precisely and
directly the Christian Church, she may notwithstanding infer from thence good
instructions, whereby she may be directed in things concerning a convenient
time for Gods public service, as she makes a good use for her direction of
many other ceremonies of the Law. Wherefore if there were any man who would
rashly maintain, that it suffices under the New Testament to observe one day
of twenty, or of an hundred, he should be sufficiently refuted by the foresaid
reason, besides the practice of the Christian Church, which has judged it fit
to observe one of seven days, which practice no man shall gainesay, but he
shall forthwith bewray himself to be newfangled, fantastical, and
selfe-willed.

28 Of all that has been said it is evident, that the inconveniences
alleged in the argument, are not to be feared. For I have already showed,
that it is no inconvenience to say, that of ten Commandments contained in
the Decalogue, there are but nine moral which oblige us now, and that the Law
which is called moral belongs not unto us in all that it contains. Yet in
some sort all the ten may be defended to be moral, because the fourth
Commandment is moral as well as the rest in its foundation and principal
end, although the thing expressed in it be a particular determination,
ceremonial, and positive. Whence profane fellows cannot with any color of
reason infer, that the substance of the other Commandments is not moral nor
obligatory to Christians. For whatsoever is in them (saving the promise annexed
to the fifth Commandment, which belongs not to the substance thereof)
shows of it self, that it is moral, because it has its foundation in the
Law of nature written in the hearts of all men, and is found so frequently,
that no thing is more frequently, ratified and confirmed by the Scripture of
the New Testament, which is the rule of Christianity, and therefore obliges
all Christians until the worlds end, which can not be so said of the fourth
Commandment, in the expression that it makes of a seventh day, for a day of
rest: For fitly that is not of the Law of Nature, and is not prescribed by the
Gospel, it cannot oblige Christians as a moral Law.

29 By the same means is taken from the Roman Church the pretense, which some
think this doctrine furnishes unto them, that the second Commandment, whereof
we make so great use against their Idolatry, is not moral nor perpetual, but
was particular to the Jews, even as, according to our confession, was the
fourth Commandment. For all that the second Commandment aims at, is
contained and expressed most clearly in the words thereof, which is to forbid
to represent and worship God by Images, to make Images to bow down to them,
and to serve them religiously, and all that is essentially moral and
perpetual, grounded on the Law of nature, which of it self teaches and
shows, that it is a thing most absurd and unworthy of God, who is a Spirit
Infinite, Almighty, Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and the only Wise GOD, to
represent and serve him by mortal Images; As also a thing unworthy of man to
worship the work of his own hands, as the Paynims themselve have acknowledged
and written.

30 Witnesses hereof are the most ancient Romans, who knowing by the Law of
Nature, that GOD is a Spirit, judged by the same light, that he ought not to
be figured nor served by Images. And therefore they had no Images at all during
the space of more then an hundred threescore and ten years. And Uarro a
Roman, and a Pagan, says, that if that had continued so, the Gods had been
served more purely, adding, that the first which framed Images to the Gods,
abolished the fear due unto them, and were the cause of many errors; as we
read in S. Augustine, in the fourth book and 35. Chapter of the City of God.

The Prophets also, in many places of the old Testament, rebuke the Nations
which were strangers from the Covenant of God, for their Images and Statues, as
being guilty of a most heinous sin, in making and worshipping them, against a
Law which pertained to them, and which they were bound to know. These their
reprehensions they confirm by natural reasons, as may be seen, Exodus 23.
verse. 24. Exodus 34. verse. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. verse. 5. 25. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 3. Deuteronomy. 29.
verse. 17. Psalm. 97. verse. 7. Psalm. 115. verse. 4, 5, 6. 7, 8. Psalm. 131. verse.
15. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Esaias 44. verse. 9. 10. 18. 19. Ierem. 10.
verse. 3. etc, Ierem. 8. verse. 19. Ier. 51. verse. 17, 18, 19, 47. Habac. 2.
verse. 18, 19, 20.

The Apostles have likewise done the same in the new Testament, and namely S.
Paul, who in the 17. Chapter of the Acts proved and made it known to the
Athenians; And in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, condemned the
Romans for transgressing the Law of Nature, darkening the light thereof, and
smothering the secret and inward sting of their consciences, by changing the
glory of the incorruptible God, into the Image of a corruptible man, and of
other living creatures. S. John in his first Epistle, and in the fifth Chapter
and last verse thereof, exhorts the faithful to keep themselves from
Idols: And in the ninth Chapter of the Revelation, the crossnesse of false
Christians is noted verse 20. by this, that notwithstanding so many plagues,
wherewith GOD had visited them, they repented not of the works of their hands,
that they should not worship Idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone,
and of wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. Therefore seeing the
whole matter of the second Commandment is moral, grounded upon the Law of
nature, and established, not only by the Old, but also by the New Testament,
the Commandment is also moral.

32 For whereas some would refer and reduce to the second Commandment, the
whole external service of the Jews, as contained, in some sort, therein, to
infer from thence, that if the fourth Commandment be in part ceremonial,
because unto it are referred all the Sabbaths of the Jews, all their holy
days, and New Moons, the second may likewise be called ceremonial in part,
for the same reason. To that I answer, that a reduction and reference of the
external and ceremonial service of the Jews may, in some respect, be made to
all the Commandments of the first Table: As indeed some ceremonial ordinances
are in certain respects referred to each of them by some interpreters: And may
be all in this manner referred to the second Commandment, which being
negative, GOD under the prohibition to make any kind of Images for religious
worship, compriseth all will worship. And since in all negative commandments
the affirmative opposed unto them are comprehended, he commands on the
contrary, that he be served according to his ordinance and Commandment. Now
since at that time the manner of his service consisted in the observation of
holy days, and diverse ceremonies prescribed by him in the Law of Moses, it
may be said, that in it he commanded them all: But indirectly, and a far of:
Which cannot make the second Commandment to be ceremonial, because the
ceremonial and outward service appertains not Directly and properly to the
substance thereof, and is not expressed therein. But whatsoever is expressed in
it, is of it self moral: Whereas in the fourth Commandment the foresaid
feasts and ceremonies are directly and nearly comprised. For in it God
ordains a principal holy day, and under it comprehends all others: All
that is expressed in it is ceremonial: And the ceremonial service of the
Jews makes an essential part of the sanctification of the Sabbath enjoined
in it. So this commandment is not ceremonial indirectly, and in regard only
that unto it may be referred and appropriated, by a remote and far fetched
reduction, the feasts, New Moons, and Jewish Sabbaths, but it is such directly
and properly in it self, even in the nearest substance and matter which it
propounds. So the foresaid exceptions against it should be absurd and
impertinently inferred upon our saying concerning the fourth Commandment,
because these two Commandments stand not in equal terms.

33 If any Papists should make such an inference, Bellarmine himself will lend
us his helping hand to refute it. For in the seventh Chapter of his second
book of Relikes and Images, he acknowledges and affirms, that saving the
Commandment of the Sabbath, all the rest are explications of the Law of
nature, and are natural precepts, which all Christians are bound to observe.

34 This being so, the Roman Church cannot cleanse her self of a great crime,
for cutting off from the Decalogue, in all her service books the second
Commandment, and for not propounding it ordinarily to the people, for that it
fights against her idolatry. And, in my judgment, it should be also an
heinous fault, although not in the same manner and respect, to nip away from
the Decalogue the fourth Commandment, or to make no mention of it in the
Church For though it be not moral, and obliges not Christians under the New
Testament in the particulars which it expresses, yet since it is moral in the
foundation whereupon it is built, and in the general end that it aims at, as
has been said before, and since God would insert it in the abridgement of his
Law which he gave of old to the people of Israel, it should be foole-hardinesse
to pull it away, and to remove it out of the room where God has placed it.
Even as, although that which is said in the preface of the Law, concerning the
deliverance of the people out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of
bondage; and in the fifth Commandment, of the prolongation of days in the
land of Cannaan, is not addressed to us directly, in that which these terms
do express, yet it should be ill done, to cut these clauses quite off, or to
make no mention of them, when we learn, write, rehearse, or teach the
Decalogue. We must keep religiously, and mention whatsoever God has been
pleased to put in it: But we must also understand every thing conveniently,
appropriating to us whatsoever belongs to us as well as to the Jews, and to
the Jews only, that which was proper to them: And such was the ordinance of
the seventh day.

35 Which day if it be not acknowledged to be ceremonial, and therefore
Subject to be abrogated by JESUS CHRIST, and comprised among the points of the
Law which the Gospel declared to be annulled, place should be given to an
inconvenience that will follow thereupon far better, then the former which is
inferred upon the opinion that the fourth Commandment is ceremonial, for so
the bridle should be loosed to the immoderate, transcendent and irregular
authority which Papists challenge to the Church, to have power to change and
alter the things which God himself has established. For it is evident, that
God by the fourth Commandment has established the seventh and last day of the
week to be a day of rest, and it is agreed upon, as most true, that under the
Gospel that seventh day has been changed into another, neither can it be
sufficiently and clearly proved, that Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, have made
that innovation, as shall be seen hereafter: whence they do infer, that the
Church having done it of her self, without commandment, she may change the
things established and ordained of God in the moral Law. Whereunto it is
impossible to give a pertinent answer, but by saying, as it is most true, that
the prescription of the seventh day of Sabbath, although it be among the
Commandments of the moral Law, is not moral for that but pertains to the
government of the Jews, and is to be numbered with these things which were but
for a time, to wit, (...), until the time of reformation, as the Apostle
speaks, Hebr. 9. verse. 10. of these shadows of things to come, whereof the
body was in Christ, as they are named, Col. 2. verse. 16, 17. where amongst
other shadows the Sabbaths are specified. That therefore the Church in not
keeping any more the Sabbath prescribed by the fourth Commandment, but
another, has not usurped any authority upon the things established of God, but
has followed the order of God, who had not established that day, but for a
certain time, to wit, until the coming of the Messiah, by whose death the
ceremonies were to be abolished, and consequently the Sabbath day was to expire
and give up the Ghost.

CHAPTER Seventh.
Answer to the particular reasons taken from the words of the fourth
Commandment.
1. First Objection, The Sabbath was long before the Law, because God commanded
to remember it, and remembrance is of things past.

2. Three answers to this Objection.

3. Second Objection, from the first reason of the keeping of the Sabbath, six
days shall thou labor, etc. which is a reason of equity, binding Christians
as well as Jews.

4. Answer to this Objection, showing what is moral and obligatory in this
reason, what not.

5. Third Objection; If the labor of six days be not ceremonial, the rest
on the seventh day likewise is not ceremonial, refuted by three answers.

6. Fourth Objection from the second reason in the words, but the seventh day
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, it is Gods day, therefore it is sacrilege
to rob him of it.

7. Two answers to this Objection.

8. Fifth Objection from the third reason in the words, In it thou shall not
do any work, etc. where a great regard is had unto servants, beasts,
strangers, whereunto Christians are also obliged.

9. Answer showing what in this reason is moral, what belonging to order only.

10. Sixth Objection from the words; For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, and rested the seventh day, showing, that God after his example will
have all men to keep the seventh day till the end of the world.

11. First answer, denying that God ordained the seventh day for a memorial of
the creation.

12. Second answer, although things past should be kept in perpetual
remembrance, their memorialls ordained in the old Testament are not perpetual.

13. Third answer to the instance taken from Gods example showing in which
attributes God is to be imitated, in which not.

14. As also in which of his actions, in which not, we are to follow his
example.

15. This answer is applied to the seventh day, showing that it has not
inherent in it any essential righteousness why God did rest in it, but as
many other actions, has no other foundation but Gods free will.

16. Whereby he ordained the observation of that day to the Jews, and not to
Christians.

17. Who in the observation of their holy day, follow not Gods example, as they
should, if it had any morality in it.

18. Instance, the seventh day was changed into the first day of the week, in
remembrance of our redemption by Christ, which is a greater work then the
creation.

19. First answer, hence it follows, that the observation of one of seven
days is not moral.

20. Second answer, showing diverse absurdities following the opinion of the
morality of one of seven days, and of the substitution of the first of seven
to the last by Christ himself.

21. Their reply, that when Christ made the first alteration of the Sabbath,
the Disciples observed the Sabbath of the last and of the first day of the
week consecutively, is but an imagination.

22. Christ's resurrection was of as great force to change the general order of
the observation of one of seven days, as of the last day of the week, nay, to
ordain each fourth day of the week for Gods service, as well as the first.

23. The day of Christ's resurrection is no more obligatory, then the day of his
nativity, of his death, or of his ascension, and is a mere institution of the
Church.

24. Seventh Objection from the last words of the Commandment; And God blessed
the seventh day, and sanctified it, whence they gather, that the keeping of the
seventh day is a means of all kind of blessings, whereof Christians have as
great need at Jews, etc.

25. First answer, Christians have as great need of Gods blessing as had the
Jews, but not by the same means.

26. Second answer, the Sabbath was not a means of blessing to the Jews, by
any inherent and natural quality, but by reason of the exercises of godliness
practiced in it, and so the exercises of our Christian religion bring a
blessing upon us whenever they are practiced.

27. It is a fond assertion, that if God has not appointed to Christians a
particular day for his service, as he did to the Jews, our condition shall be
worse then theirs.

28. All the particularities of the fourth Commandment may be applied to
Christians, as well as to Jews.

29. As the reasons of the institution of their holy days.

30. Which nevertheless we are not bound to keep.

31. Item, the remembrance of the creation, etc.

32. The necessity of a new day for Gods service infers not a divine
institution.

1 BEsides the general argument which is taken from the nature of the fourth
Commandment, and has been refuted in the former Chapter, others more
particular are taken from the terms and words of the said Commandment; and
first they urge vehemently these first words thereof, Remember the Sabbath day,
from whence, as they pretend, it may be inferred, that seeing the remembering of
a thing denotes that it was known before; God, when he commanded the
Israelites to remember the Sabbath day, supposes that it was not a new
ordinance which he gave unto them then, but an ancient one, yet, which
undoubtedly they had forgotten, and whereof it was necessary they should be put
in remembrance, and the observation urged for the time to come.

2 It is said also, that the sanctification of the Sabbath day which God
enjoyneth, saying, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, cannot be called
a ceremony, but this instance is very feeble. For first, although it should
prove that the institution of the Sabbath day, which is here debated, did
preceed the Law from the beginning, it cannot for all that enforce the morality
thereof. Nay, much otherwise, some do think, that God in the beginning and
entrance of the Commandment used the word Remember, because it not being
natural and moral, as the rest are, the Jews might have more easily
forgotten it.

Secondly, it does no manner of way prove the antiquity of this ordinance. For
when he that commands any thing, says to him to whom he gives instructions,
Remember what I say and command thee, such a speech implies not always that
an injunction is given him of a thing he knew before, which is again recorded
unto him, that he may call it to mind; Nay, most often, his intention is only
to advise him to consider exactly, to meditate carefully, and to accomplish
faithfully in time to come, that which at that time is enjoined him. For this
term, Remember, when commandments are given, is not always relative to the
time past, but sometimes has regard only to the time to come, which joining
and continuing for some days or years successively, the time wherein they
were given is past, and so men have need to call them to mind, as a thing
past. So God instituted the Passover for a memorial of the deliverance of the
first borne of his people from the destroyer, when the first borne of the
Egyptians were slain, although it happened after the said institution, Exodus
12. verse. 14. 27. 29. So Moses said unto them, Remember this day in which ye
came out from Egypt, Exodus 13, verse. 3. willing them in time to come to call to
mind that whereof they had the first knowledge and experience, and not before,
but at that instant. So Christ instituted to his Disciples the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, saying, This do ye in remembrance of me, that is, of my death, 1
Cor. 11. verse. 24. 25, 26. although he was at table with them, and was not put
to death, till the next day after. So this speech, Remember the Sabbath day,
must be taken relatively to the time to come, as if God had said; Take heed
that afterward ye keep in mind the ordinance which I give you at this
instant, that you may observe it carefully; and in the 12. verse of the fifth
Chapter of Deuteronomy, in liev of Remember, it is written, Keep the Sabbath
day, or, Take heed to the Sabbath day to sanctify it. He that commands
another to do any thing of moment, in a time future, ordinary, and regulate,
may very well speak unto him in these terms, Remember such a thing, and the
time that thou art to do it in, before it come, to the end, that when it shall
come, thou may be prepared to do it, and may do it accordingly, which
is all that God intended to say to the Jews in his Commandment touching the
Sabbath, to wit, that before that day should fall out, they should remember it
in the precedent days, and dispose themselves in time to sanctify it.

Thirdly, although it should be taken as relative to the time past, it is
needless to extend it to a long time before, and namely to the beginning of
the world, but only to some few days foregoing, when GOD, through the occasion
of the Manna, spoke unto them of the Sabbath day, forbidding them to go out of
their place on that day, to gather of it, because they should find none, and
commanding them to rest, and to abide every man in his place: which day, when
afterward he gave the Law, he commanded them more particularly and expressly
to remember, because they heard mention made of it a short while before, and to
beware of profaning it, as they had done already, Exodus 16. verse 28, 29. And
questionless, to that which he said unto them concerning the Sabbath in the
sixteenth Chapter of Exodus, are to be referred these words which in the fifth
Chapter of Deuteronomie are added to the fourth Commandment, Keep the Sabbath
day to sanctify it, as the Lord has commanded thee. As for the Sanctification
of the Sabbath day which God ordains, and of which it is said that it cannot
be called a ceremony, I answer, that indeed to speak universally and
absolutely, it cannot be so called: For the Sabbath day was and ought to be
sanctified by moral duties: But in as much as it was tied to the seventh day,
and was practiced by sacrifices, offerings, and other services of the like
kind, and by an exact resting from all worldly travels, such as GOD ordains
in the fourth Commandment, it is ceremonial.

3 Secondly, they stand much upon the words following, Six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work, but the seventh day, etc. Where, as they say,
there is a reason of the observation of the seventh day of Sabbath, which has
its foundation in equity and justice. For if God gives to men six days for
their own affairs, and for the works of their worldly calling, is it not
more than just, that they consecrate a seventh day to his service? And is it
not as just for Christians, as for Jews? And therefore, say they, Christians,
since they take six days for their works, are as much obliged as the Jews to
observe a seventh day of Sabbath to God. They add also, that as the labor of
six days which is mentioned in this reason, and whence it is taken, is not a
ceremonial thing, no more should the rest of the seventh day be ceremonial.

4 I answer, that in the foresaid reason there is a manifest justice and
equity, which continues for ever. But that justice is generally in this, that,
if a man has many days for himself and for his own works, it is reasonable
he consecrate one amongst many for Gods service. Yea, there should be a great
deal more justice, to employ, if it were possible, a greater number of days
upon Gods service, then upon our own business, Nay, to bestow them all. Also
in consequence of this justice and equity, we have said before, that under the
New Testament, in whose time the Christians are far more beholden to God,
then the Jews were, since God has discharged them of many burdens of outward
ceremonies, which did lay heavy upon that people, and has called them to be
in some sort a people more frank and more affectionate to his service, all the
days of the week, as much as possibly can be, should be Holy days unto the
LORD. And because they cannot possibly meet together every day to serve in
common, which nevertheless he looks for as well as for a particular service,
they must stint some ordinary day for that end, and in this stinting must not
show themselves inferiors to the Jews, appointing less than one day among
seven to Gods service. This is all that can be gathered from the foresaid
reason, as it is obligatory for ever. For to dedicate to God precisely a
seventh day, after we have bestowed six days upon our selves, it cannot be
denied but that it is most just, yet it is not more just nor better
proportioned, nor more obligatory, of it self and in its own nature, specially
to Christians, nay not so much, as to consecrate to God one of six, or of
five, or of four. For the more we hallow to God, the more do we that which is
just, equitable, and well ordered, and the more do we perform our duty that
we are naturally bound unto toward him. If then God ordained in times past
under the Law, that the day which he would have his people to dedicate unto
him, should be particularly one of seven, it was not for any natural justice
which was more in that number, or for any proportion which in it self was more
convenient in that behalf, then the appointment of any other number, but
because it was his good pleasure to direct and rule for that season the time of
his service, and to impose no more than one day of seven upon a people laden
already with many ceremonies. And therefore no particular justice being tied to
this number of seven, more than to any other, this reason contained in the
foresaid words of the fourth Commandment, cannot be moral, nor consequently
perpetual, but only positive and for a short continuance, in that it
commands to work six days, and to rest the seventh day. It is moral only
in the foundation and substance thereof, which is this, that if God gives us
liberty to bestow a number of days upon our own affairs, it is reasonable,
that there be one day appointed wherein we ought to serve him: We I say, that
are Christians, and that as frequently, nay much more than the Jews did, which
we accord willingly to be perpetual: But with this restriction, that under the
New Testament the choice of one day, amongst a number of other days, is not
stinted of God, and that he binds us no more to one of seven, then to one of
six, or of five.

3 Whereas they add that as the labor of six days is not a thing
ceremonial, so neither should the rest on the seventh day be placed in that
rank. I answer, first, inferring from thence a contrary argument, that as to
take pains in the works of our temporal callings, considering the condition
of this present life, is a thing just and necessary, and may be called moral,
but to work of seven days six, has not in it any special necessity, even so
it is necessary, just, and moral to dedicate some time to Gods public
service, but that such a time should be precisely one of seven days, is by no
means moral.

Secondly, that which I say to be ceremonial in the 4. Commandment, is the
Commandment it self, to wit, that which God expressly and purposely
injoyneth to be kept, as belonging to his outward and public service. Now he
commands not any thing in it precisely, saving the observation and
sanctification of the day of rest, by refraining from all temporal callings.
And whereas it is said, Six days shall thou labor, as that makes no part of
Gods service, no more does it make a part of the Commandment (although God
thereby warns men, that they ought not to pass their days in idleness, but
should apply themselves every day to the labor of an honest calling,) but is a
permission put only by concession, and relatively to the Commandment in this
sense: Thou art permitted to work six days, but on the 7th. day thou shall
abstain from all kind of work. Therefore it follows not, that if these words
put occasionally in the Commandment do not impart any ceremony, the
Commandment it self is not ceremonial.

Thirdly, the Scripture in the labor of six days establishes not unto us
any ceremony, as it does in the rest of the seventh day, which it makes as
expressly as can be, a type of the heavenly rest, as we have clearly seen
before. And yet in relation to the heavenly rest, figured by the rest of the
seventh day, I may say, that the painful labor of six days before the
Sabbath, was a type and figure of these troubles and afflictions wherewith the
faithful are tossed to and fro during the ages of this life, before they come
to the rest of the kingdom of heaven, and that so this labor also was
ceremonial.

6 They take their third argument from these words, The seventh day is the rest
of the LORD thy God, that is, it is the day which God has not only created and
made, as the other days, but also has put a part, to the end that it be
applied to his service. Whence it is often called, The day holy to the Lord,
the rest of God, or Gods Sabbath, etc. Of this they infer, seeing it is not
lawful to steal from God that which pertains unto him, nor to commit
sacrilege, by devouring that which is holy, Pro. 20. ver. 25. we must, if we
will not incur this crime, consecrate always to God one of seven days.

7 But I answer first, that if this argument be of any value it shall prove,
that it is the last of seven which all are bound to keep always, as the rest
of God. For it is this particular seventh day which is understood in the words
before alleged, and which also was the Sabbath holy to the Lord.

Secondly, I say, that these words serve not at all to prove the morality and
perpetuity of the Seventh day. In them it is truly said, that the seventh day
is the Lords rest, to wit, because at that time he ordained it to the Jews, to
be observed by them in their generations, and if the Jews had not observed,
but applied it to their own affairs, undoubtedly they had been guilty of
sacrilege; but does it follow, that, because it is called the Lords Rest, in
regard of the ordinance whereby he enjoined the Jews to keep it, we also are
obliged under the New Testament to sanctify it? Does he not also in the Old
Testament, when he speaks of the Leviticall, sacrifices, and offerings, etc.
call them most frequently His sacrifices, His offerings, and all the other
Sabbaths of the Jews, His Sabbaths, as well as the Sabbath of the seventh day?
In a word, does he not claim all other things which he commanded to the
Jews concerning his service, as his own? Shall we then conclude by the same
reason, that seeing it is not lawful to touch holy things, and God did claim
all these things as belonging unto him, we must yet dedicate and consecrate
them unto him under the New Testament? Who sees not the absurdity of this
consequence, and by the same means of the consequence which is inferred of
these words, The seventh day is Gods Rest? For as these things, which I have
mentioned, did belong to God, but did oblige the Jews only to observe them, it
fares even so with the Sabbath.

8 In the fourth place they urge also these words, In it thou shall not do any
work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maide-servant, nor thine Ox, nor thy Ass, nor any of thy Cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates: Where they observe, that God has respect to
the easing of servants and of cattle, to the intent, that when they have been
kept six days at work, a seventh of relaxation be given them to rest, and as
it were, to breath a little, and specially that the servants as well as their
masters, may set themselves about Gods service, to learn and practice it. For
which cause in the fifth Chapter of Deuteronomie this particularitie is added
at the end of the 4th. Commandment, That thy manservant, and thy
maide-servant may Rest as well as thou. The same is likewise to be found,
Exodus 23. verse 12. All this is of perpetual justice and equity. For God
under the New Testament has not stripped and cast away the bowels of compassion,
and forsaken the care of servants, and poor beasts. They take also in
consideration, that the stranger is by name and specially obliged to keep the
Sabbath day, by refraining from all kind of work, from whence they infer,
that it was not a Jewish ceremony, but a moral point, because nothing is
universal, binding strangers as well as Jews, saving that which is moral,
whereas the ceremonies were only for the Jews, and as it were a middle wall of
separation between them and all strangers, Ephesians. 2. ver. 14. And therefore,
seeing the strangers which were Gentiles, were by Gods command bound to keep
the Sabbath day, as well as the Jews, and when they were in the Land of
Canaan, were constrained unto it by the Magistrates, as may be seen in the 13.
Chapter of Nehem. verse. 28. it follows, that the observation of the seventh
day of Sabbath is a moral point, and not simply ceremonial.

9 I answer, that to give refreshment to servants and poor beasts after they
have been wearied with labor, and to be careful that servants learn to
serve God, and apply them to so holy a duty, as well as their Masters, is a
thing naturally just and equitable, and that the words of the fourth
Commandment, as far as they have respect to that duty, do denote a
perpetual morality, and therefore Christians ought to give a time of
relaxation and rest from labor to their servants and beasts, instruct their
servants in the fear of God, and be careful that they serve him, both in
their particular devotions at home, and public abroad with the rest of the
faithful, in such times and places that are appointed for that service by the
order of the Church, which if they do not, they sin. But to set apart for the
rest and easing of servants, and their employment in Gods service one of seven
days, rather then one of another number, and to rest precisely on the seventh
day, according to the words of the Commandment, The seventh day is the rest:
In it thou shall not do any work, that I say again and again, is a thing
simply belonging to order and Church-governement, and binds not necessarily
for ever.

As for the instance taken from the words whereby strangers are bound to keeke
the Sabbath day, it is altogether vain and frivolous. For there mention is
made only of strangers that were within the gates of the Jews, that is,
dwelling and sojourning among them. These strangers were either Proselytes
converted to the religion of the Jews, which were in effect obliged by
religion to the observation of the Sabbath, just as the Jews themselves,
because they were of the same religion that the Jews were of, and by their
conversion were become Jews: Or they were strangers, Pagans and Infidels,
sojourning in Judea for diverse temporal occasions, such as were those of whom
mention is made in Nehem. Chap. 13. These indeed were constrained by the
Magistrate to keep, or rather not to violate the Sabbath publicly, as those
were of whom mention is made in the foresaid Chapter of Nehemiah, not for their
own sake, but only in consideration of the Jews, lest they should offend
them, and give them occasion to break the Sabbath after their example. For the
observation of the Sabbath did no more oblige them naturally, then the other
observation of the Jewish religion. lust as in all politic regiment, which is
well ordered, it is usual to hinder those that are strangers to the religion
professed in it, from giving any disturbance to the exercises of devotion, and
namely in the solemnities and holy days. To urge this point, is it not true,
that among the Jews, strangers were obliged to keep all other Sabbaths, new
Moons, holy days, solemnities after the same manner that they were constrained
to keep the Sabhath, that is, not to violate them publicly and with offense?
Were they not forbidden as well as the Jews to eat leavened bread, during the
seven days of the Passover, Exodus 12. verse 19. as also to eat blood,
Levit. 17, verse. 10. 12, 13. Will any man upon this infer, that the
ordinances of all these Sabbaths, new Moons, Feasts, unleavened bread,
abstinence from eating blood, were not ceremonies, but moral ordinances
obliging for ever all men, and consequently all Christians under the new
Testament? Sure this must be concluded by the same reasoning, the vanity
whereof is by this sufficiently demonstrated and discredited.

10 Fifthly, they enforce their opinion with these words; For in six days the
LORD maae heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day. Whence they gather, that since the creation must be in perpetual
remembrance, and God ordained to the Jews the seventh day for a memorial
thereof, and of his rest, all men ought to keep it continually for the same
end, and in that follow his example, which also he proposes in the words
before mentioned, to the end, that as he made his works in six days, and
rested the seventh day, so likewise men following his example, should give
themselves to the works of their calling, during the six days of the week,
and rest on the seventh day, that they may apply it to the consideration of the
works of God; which they pretend to be no less obligatory toward Christians
under the new Testament, then toward the Jews under the old Testament,
because we cannot follow and imitate a better example then the example of God.

11 To this I answer, first, that it may be denied that Gods end in the
institution of the Sabbath day was, that it should be a memorial of the
creation of all his works on six days, and of his rest on the seventh day.
That is not said any where, but this only is specified, that God sanctified
the seventh day, because in it he rested from his works after he had made them
in six days. Which shows only the occasion that God took to ordain and
establish the Sabbath day, but not the end of the institution thereof, which is
declared unto us in the foresaid places of Exodus 31. verse. 13. and of Ezech.
20. verse. 12. where it is said, that God ordained it, to be a sign between him
and the Israelites, that he was the Lord that did sanctify them. This end of
the said institution, as likewise the motive and occasion thereof, are coupled
together in the 16. and 17. verses of the said 31. Chapter of Exodus, in these
words; The children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath throughout their
generations for a perpetual covenant: It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever. Whereof a sign? Certainly, that they may know
that I am the Lord that does sanctify them, as it is written in the 13. verse.
This is the end of the Institution of the Sabbath, which must be supplied from
thence. After that it follows: For in six days the LORD made heaven and
earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. This is the
occasion and motive of the said institution. There be some that would feign of
this For make That, and join the two members of the 17. verse, as if they were
but one, after this manner; It is a sign between me and the children of
Israel for ever, that in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, to infer
from thence, that the Sabbath was ordained expressly, to the end it might be a
memorial of the Creation; but although the particle (...) signifies That, as
well as For, yet that in the foresaid verse it should rather signify For, and
that the said verse should have two distinct members, and each of them its own
particular sentence, it appears probably, both by the changing of the form
of speech that God uses, speaking of himself in the first person in the first
member, It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, and in
the third person in the second member, For in six days the LORD made heaven
and earth, whereas if it had been the continuance of the same period without
distinction, he should have rather have said, It is a sign between me and
the children of Israel, that I have created in six days, or that I am the
Lord, who have created in six days heaven and earth, etc. As also by the
Hebrew accent, Athnach, which it put at the end of the first member, and is an
accent denoting usually a pause and notable respiration, and a distinction of a
complete sentence.

12 Secondly, to stand longer upon this first answer, although I should yield
that the seventh day of Sabbath was instituted of God purposely to be a
memorial of the Creation, the argument is nevertheless inconsequent. For
although things past should be in perpetual remembrance; It follows not that
the signs and memorialls of such things instituted under the old Testament,
should be perpetual: Nay, they ought not to be, if they have been therewith
types and figures relative to the Messiah. God made a covenant with Abraham,
and promised unto him to be God unto him, and to his seed after him, Genesis 17.
verse. 7. which is a perpetual benefit, and worthy to be remembered, by all his
spiritual posterity, till the end of the world: Yet the sign and memorial
that he gave him at that time, of this covenant, to wit, the Circumcision, was
not to be perpetual, and has continued only till the time of the new
Testament. Likewise all the Sacraments under the old Testament have been
signs, and memorialls of perpetual benefits, to wit, of justification,
sanctification, etc. Notwithstanding they ought not to persist for ever,
because they also were types. The same is the condition of the Sabbath. We may
and ought to call to mind under the new Testament the benefit of the Creation,
and of Gods rest after it, although we have no particular sign thereof, which
by Gods ordinance is a sign of remembrance. In the Kingdom of heaven we shall
celebrate eternally the remembrance of our Creation and Redemption without any
signs. And I cannot see a cause, why under the new Testament, we should
burden our selves with a sign, which God declares to have been ordained by
him to the Jews in their generations, as if without it we could not remember
the thing signified unto them by it. Let us content our selves with the
gracions signs and memorialls, which Jesus Christ has instituted and given
us, of the work of our Redemption fulfilled by him, of our justification, of
our sanctification, etc. These are Baptism and the Lords Supper, which being
signs of a work far more excellent then the Creation, have caused the
ancient memorial of that other work to cease, which notwithstanding we may
and ought to record, having in nature continually many memorialls thereof
before our eyes, to wit, the heavens, the earth, all the creatures, which
advertise us of their Author, and of the beginning of their existance: And in
holy Scripture many documents which entertain, and hold us most frequently in
the consideration of this work. Yea, the Sacraments also signifying unto us
our Regeneration and new Creation, draw us back consequently to the meditation
of our first Creation. And we may in all places and times indifferently call to
mind, and for it glorify the Lord our God possessour of heaven and earth,
although we be not tied by the Law to any particular day. For of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things. To him be glory for ever, Romans 11. 36.

13 The example of God, who made in six days heaven and earth, and rested on
the seventh day, is of no force to this purpose. For to say, without
restriction, that Gods example is of necessity to be always followed, as being
of it self and of its nature imitable, or rather that God in all his works
proposes himself as a pattern and president to follow, is a proposition too
general. God may be considered, either in regard of his attributes, or in
regard of his actions. Of his attributes there be some, which we ought to
imitate, and they are in the Scripture laid down unto us as examples of
imitation. Such are his goodness, his mercy, his love, his justice, as it is
written; Be ye holy, for I am holy, Levit. 19. verse. 2. 1 Pet. 1. verse. 16. Be
ye perfect and merciful as your Father which is in heaven is perfect and
merciful, Matthew. 6. verse. 48. Luke 6. verse. 36. Let us love one another, for
love is of God, for God is love, 1 Ioh. 4. verse. 7, 8. If ye know that he is
righteous, ye know that every one that does righteousness, is borne of him, 1
Ioh. 2. verse. 29. There be others, which, to speak properly, are not paterns
of imitation, neither are we in any sort able to imitate them. Such are his
Eternity, the Infinity of his Essence, and Knowledge, his omnipotency, etc.
which also we are nev^^ exhorted to imitate.

14 It is consequently even so of his actions, and of his fashion in working.
Of them some flow immediately from these first attributes of his holiness,
bounty, mercy, love, righteousness, etc. and are essentially actions
charitable, merciful, bountiful, righteous, etc. These of their nature, and
of themselves are imitable, and that always. For example, God is bountiful,
and does good unto all, forgiveth all those that have recourse to his mercy,
gives a convenient and suitable reward unto virtue, and a due punishment to
vice, protecteth those that are strengthlesse and oppressed, upholdeth those
that are infirm and weak, etc. whereof he has given trial by diverse
experiences: From thence we may conclude truly and soundly, that, by reason
of the righteousness, holiness, goodness, which are essentially imprinted in
these actions, men ought to imitate them in all times, to their power and
ability, according to the calling wherein they are called, and the rules that
he has in his holy Word prescribed unto them.

There be other actions proceeding from these other attributes or proprieties
of God: For example, from his omnipotency, Such as are his miraculous actions;
God has created the world of nothing, has framed man of the dust of the
earth, and does a thousand more or such great wonders: These actions oblige us
not to imitate Gods example in them; also God propounds them not unto us as
examples to be followed, for we are not able to imitate them.

Likewise we are not bound to immitate the actions and proceedings of God,
which are grounded on his Will pure and simple, whereof, although God had the
reasons in his own breast, yet we cannot on our part, allege any reason taken
from an essential righteousness inherent in them, but only say for all
reason, he has done as it pleased him: As that he made the walls of Ierico to
fall down by seven blasts of seven trumpets of Rams-hornes, in seven several
days, Josh. 6. verse. 3. 4. 20. cured Naaman of his leprosy, sending him to
Jordan to wash in it seven times, 2 King. 5. verse. 10. 14, etc.

15 Like in all things is unto this the course which God did observe in the
Creation, making all his works in six days, and resting on the seventh day.
For no man can tell why he did so, saving only, because he would; the thing it
self not having in it any natural equity, or evident morality. And therefore
no kind of obligation to do the like can be naturally inferred from thence, I
mean to observe six days of work, and one of rest. All these, and other
semblable proceedings of God are not an example, and oblige not any man to
imitate them, saving in case God be pleased to command them to do so: as he
would, not through any necessity which was in the thing, and whereby he was
bound to make such a Commandment, but because such was his good pleasure,
command the Jews to work six days, and rest the seventh day, who also
afterward observed that precept, not through necessity of imitation taken from
the thing it self, nor that naturally it was emplary unto them, but because it
pleased God to command them so to do: As also in the fourth Commandment this
reason, that God in six days made and finished all his works, and rested the
seventh day, is not alleged immediately for an example, and a cause of
obligation to the Jews to do the like, but as an occasion that GOD took,
according to his free will, to bind them by that Commandment to this
observation, which also in consequence of the said Commandment they practiced.
For it is said in express terms, In six days God made all his works, and
rested the seventh day, Therefore he blessed the seventh day and hallowed it,
to wit, to be observed by the Jews. And it was this blessing and hallowing,
notified by Commandment, which obliged the Jews to the observation of the
seventh day, and not Gods course of proceeding immediately. For undoubtedly
this will be advowed, that if God had not declared his will by a Commandment,
the Jews had not thought themselves bound to this observation, and Gods
proceeding alone had not been obligatory unto them, nor had the force of a Law
among them: Which shows, that in it there is no morality, no example binding
the conscience necessarily and for ever.

16 This being so, it follows not, that if God was pleased to give this
ordinance to the Jews by occasion of the order that he observed in the
Creation, he would also have it to continue among Christians, seeing it was not
grounded in any moral thing, which should have life and vigor for ever, no
more than so many other ordinances which he had given to that people upon good
considerations, oblige not Christians, because the reasons were not moral And
as these ordinances are changed and abolished, without any blame of
variableness or of turning that God has incurred on his part, even so that
ordinance concerning the Sabbath might and ought to cease likewise. All the
morality that can be gathered from Gods example, is, that as God after he had
made all his works in the space of some days, rested on another day, so we
should have some day wherein, leaving off our ordinary occupations, we may
busy our selves about Gods service, But not that Gods example obliges us to
the same day of rest which God observed.

17 And indeed, the Christians in the observation of their day of rest do not
any more ground themselves upon Gods example in the Creation. For although they
keep six days of work, and a seventh of rest, yet it is not the seventh day
that God rested in, for they work on that day, and rest on the first day of the
week, which God began in to make all his works, and so they change Gods
order: Which shows, that this example of God is not obligatory of it self,
and for ever. For if it were, we should be bound to keep, not only one of
seven, but the same seventh which God gave us example to rest in, there being
no reason wherefore one and the same example of God should neither be
obligatory for ever in one of its parts, to wit, in that he observed six
days of labor, and a seventh of rest, then in the other, to wit, in that he
employed the first six days of the week to work in, and the last to rest in.

18 They get no advantage to say, that under the New Testament the alteration
of the Sabbath day has been made from the last day of the week to the first,
because JESUS CHRIST rising on this day rested from the work of our
redemption, which is greater and more excellent than the work of Creation,
seeing that by it, man, who was created in the flat mutable state of nature,
and of a natural grace, from which he fell away, and was also to remain upon
earth, is put in the supernatural and immutable state of grace, to be received
in heaven, to be admitted to the contemplation of God himself, and to live
there in a light and purity, far more perfect then that which he had in the
first Creation: That also heaven and earth shall be renewed, and established in
a state a great deal more beautiful and excellent then the state they were
created in; Nay that the Angels themselves have thereby received many and great
benefits: In a word, that in virtue of that work, has in part been already
made, and one day shall be made compleately a new Creation of all things, as
Christ himself speaks, Matthew. 19. verse 28. And therefore it deserved well,
that the day wherein Christ, after he had finished it, did rest, should be
consecrated by all those that pretend to have part in it, and to whom the
benefit thereof is offered, if they reject it not by their own fault, to be a
day of rest under the New Testament, instead of the day which was observed
under the Old Testament, in remembrance of Gods resting from the works of the
Creation.

19 For I grant willingly this to be true: But with all I say, that the
altering of the Sabbath day upon the occasion of Christ's Resurrection, shows
plainly, that the example of Gods proceeding in the Creation, and the
observation of one of seven days, and of the last of seven founded thereupon
under the Old Testament, was not moral. For if it had been, no alteration, no
changing could have been made of that time, neither altogether, nor in part,
for any occasion occurring and falling out sithence, because all moral things
are perpetual, have been confirmed and ratified by Jesus Christ, and have not
been casheered by him, nor by his Church. Now it is constant by the practice of
all Christian Churches, that a change has been made, and in the beginning of
that innovation the order of the observation of one of seven days was of
necessity subject to be changed, and ceased to be obligatory. For when
Christians began, or might have begun to omit the last day of the week, and to
keep the first, they might also then have neglected and violated the foresaid
order of dedicating to GOD one day of seven, which nevertheless is pretended
to be moral, since by the death of Jesus Christ all the Jewish ceremonies, and
amongst them the ancient day of Sabbath, that is, the precise observation of
the seventh, or the last day of the week, which is not denied to have been
ceremonial, being abrogated of right, in the week wherein happened the death of
Christ, and on the Friday of that week, the Disciples were not obliged to
observe the last day of that week, which was Saturday, or the Sabbath of the
Jews immediately following, but they might have observed another in the week
following: which being true, it follows, that they might have overslipt all
the seven days of the said week, without consecrating any of them to God: And
in effect, in whatsoever time the Church begun at first to overpasse the last
day of the week, of necessity she passed a whole week, wherein there was no
seventh day of Sabbath, which she could not have done lawfully, if to observe
one day of seven were a moral point.

20 Furthermore, according to this maxim, which proposes the necessity of the
observation of one day in the week, yea, of a whole day, as of a pointmorall,
since none can institute such a day but God alone, this also of necessity must
be laid as a fundamental point of our Religion, that our Lord Jesus Christ on
the same day that he rose from death to life made this alteration of the last
day into the first, and gave notice of it to his Disciples, who other ways
could not have acknowledged so soon the necessity of this changing. For if he
did it not, seeing they were no more obliged to the Sabbath day of the Jews
which was abrogated by his death, they might have been not only in the week
wherein Christ died, but also in the week following wherein he rose again,
free from all obligation tying them to any Sabbath day, which the aforesaid
maxim rejects, as unlawful. Now what certainty or probability is there,
that Jesus Christ on the first day of his appearing to his Disciples gave them
this ordinance? Further, although he had given it, since he appeared not unto
them till the evening following the day, in the morning whereof he rose again,
they were, at least all that day preceding his first manifestation unto them,
free from all bond tying them to the observation of any particular seventh day,
and their obligation to the observation of a certain day has begun by the
extremity of the day, to wit, at the same time when CHRIST appearing unto them
enjoined them to heepe it, which difficulties I see not how those that hold the
aforesaid maxim can well resolve.

21 They say, that when the first change was made, the Disciples kept two
Sabbaths consecutively, to wit, the last of the week, to put an end to the
order of the ancient Testament, and thereafter the first day of the week
immediately following, to begin the new order, which was to remain for ever
under the New Testament, and to keep always one day of seven.

But this saying is a pure imagination. For who has told them that the
Disciples did keep that course? Besides, this gives no satisfaction to the
difficulties before mentioned. For Jesus Christ being dead, and having by his
death abrogated all the ceremonies of the Law, the last day of the week, at
the same very instant that he gave up the Ghost ceased to be obligatory: And
so, although Jesus Christ showing himself to his Disciples on the first day of
the week that he rose in, had ordained unto them expressly that day, and made
them to sanctify it in quality of a Sabbath day to persist afterward till the
end of the world, nevertheless since the day before, which was the Sabbath, had
not obliged them to keep it, and if they observed it, they did it not through
any obligation binding them thereunto, because it was abolished, it follows
manifestly that the obligation to one day of seven was caused in one week at
least, yea, in more then one, if he ordained not Sunday to be kept as soon as
he showed himself unto them after his resurrection: Nay, is casseered in them
all, if he gave them no ordinance at all concerning that or any other day,
which is more probable, as we shall see more fully hereafter: Howsoever of this
arises this conclusion, that the order of one of seven days is not moral,
since it could suffer, once at least, an interruption in the obligation, or
binding power which it had.

22 I would again feign know, since Christ's resurrection might, without
inconvenience, cause the changing of the particular day, wherein the Sabbath
was before observed, which was the last day of the week into another day,
which was the first wherein it came to pass, why it might not likewise,
without any inconvenience at all, give occasion to change the whole general
order of the observation of one day of seven, and deliver the Church from all
obligation unto it, Since, as we have already showed, there is no greater
necessity to observe one day of seven, then the last of seven? Since also this
resurrection of Christ, which was, as it were, his rest from the work of our
Redemption, cannot be said to have happened, as Gods rest from the work of
Creation, after six days of labor, to ratify thereby the observation of
this number, but to reckon since the day wherein Christ began to be in agony in
the garden, which was, to speak properly, the beginning of the work of our
Redemption, till the day that he rose out of the grave, which contains the
space of three or four days, wherein he suffered, died, was buried, came to
pass after three or four days only of labor and of pain, whereby he
redeemed us, why may it not, with as good reason, be a foundation and powerful
motive, to change one day of seven into one of four, since Christ rose on the
fourth day after the beginning of his passion, as well as the observation of
the last day of the week into the first, in consequence of his resurrection on
that first day? For there should be as little evil or danger in the one as in
the other.

23 But here is the maine point of the matter. For as much as the order which
God observed of six days for his labor in the Creation, and of a seventh day
for his rest, carries not with it any necessary and natural obligation to
imitate it, and was not obligatory under the old Testament, but because it
pleased God to command and establish it by his Law, for that time only, under
the new Testament there was no obligation to keep it, and therefore the
necessity of observing it, as of all other legal ceremonies, having come to an
end, and being expired, the last day of seven has wihout sin, yea, with good
reason been changed into the first that Christ rose in; the Church thinking it
fit to do so, whereunto she was not moved by an opinion, that the consideration
of Christ's rising from the dead on that day was of it self obligatory. For why
should the day of Christ's resurrection of its nature oblige us to observe it,
as a day holy and solemn, rather then the day of his nativity, or the day of
his death whereby he said All was fulfilled, Ioh. 19. verse. 30. to wit, all
that was requisite for the expiation of our sins, and redemption of the
world, conformably to the ancient prophecies and figures of the Law, or the day
of his ascension, which might as well and better be called the day of Christ's
rest, then the day of his resurrection? Sure the Church might have in any of
those days called to mind and celebrated the remembrance of the work of our
Redemption as well as in the day of the Resurrection, because all the actions
of Christ have respect unto it. Nay, she might have as well changed the order
of one of seven into a day of another number, seeing the work of Redemption
was not tied to the same number of days was that the work of Creation. But
because there was no necessity in this, she thought it expedient to keep this
order of one day in the week observed by the Jews, amongst whom the week had
its beginning, and to change only the particular seventh day of the Jews into
another, to make a distinction between them and that servile people, as also to
keep a memorial of Christ's Resurrection. Of all this it appears evidently,
that the reason taken from Gods example, as it is alleged out of the fourth
Commandment, has no force to prove that which it is produced for, and to
shelter those that make a buckler of it.

24 Finally, they rely much upon these last words of the Commandment; God has
blessd the Sabbath day, and has sanctified it. Now, say they, if GOD has
ordained this seventh day to be observed, and to be a means that procures his
blessing corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal, upon those that
keep it, as these words do insinuate, have we not as great need of these
blessings of GOD, as the Jews? God will he not grant them to us as well as to
them? Wherefore then shall we not keep that which he has ordained to be a
means whereby he does communicate them, or if we keep them not, how can we
promise to our selves, that he will grant them unto us? Which is, as if we
should promise to our selves the grace of God by the usage of the Sacraments
which he has instituted as means thereof, changing the elements which he
has ordained in them. They say also, that if God had not ordained unto us who
are Christians a Sabbath day, he had left us in a worse condition then the
Jews.

25 I answer, that verily we have as great need of Gods blessings, as the Jews
had, and that God promises them unto us as well as unto them: But it follows
not, that he should impart them unto us by the same outward means. God
bestowed of old his blessings upon the Jews, not only by the observation of
the seventh day of Sabbath, but also of their Sabbaths, solemn Feasts,
Sacrifices, Offerings, Sprinklings, and other legal ceremonies, and says
often, that he has sanctified them, and would bless them to their use. As
then it follows not, that we should keep these things, and that they should
be unto us means of Gods blessing: Likewise upon God saying, that he had
blessed and sanctified the Sabbath day to the Jews, does it ensue, that we are
still bound to keep it. Indeed, if the Jews, to whom, under the old
Testament, God had expressly ordained the observation of the seventh day, to be
unto them a means of the grant of his blessings, had neglected or rejected
that day, and had of their own fancy chosen another, they had deprived
themselves of the blessing of God, by rejecting a means of the communication
thereof ordained by him. And if it were constant, that to us also God had
ordained the seventh day, as it is constant that he has ordained unto us the
use of cercaine elements in the Sacraments, and that the fourth Commandment
obliges us, as it did the Jews, the same danger were to be feared for us, in
case we observed it not, but since that is not, we have no cause to fear.

26 To come nearer unto them, I say, that the seventh day, in its nature, was
not a holy day, nor a means of blessing, more then another day, but only in
regard of the duties of religion and of godliness, whereunto it was
particularly destinated, and which were practiced in it. Therefore when we
shall practice religiously, and according to the will of God under the new
Testament, the duties of religion and Christian godliness, which Jesus Christ
has prescribed unto us in the Gospel; they shall be unto us means of
blessing, as were unto the Jews their exercises, and whatsoever day the Church
shall appoint ordinarily for that use, seeing Jesus Christ has left unto her
that liberty, and has not made any particular determination thereupon, it
shall be unto us, by reason of those holy duties, a blessed and holy day, as
well as was unto the Jews their seventh day, which God enjoined them to keep.

27 It is against all reason to esteem, that if God has not ordained unto us
a particular day, as he did to the Jews, our condition shall be worse then
theirs. For that is alike as if they should say, that Christians are in a worse
condition then the Jews, because God has not appointed unto them a particular
place whereunto he has allotted the public exercise of his service, as he did
to the Jews. It is true, that if Christians did not ordinarily meet together
in one place and time, to serve GOD publicly, they should be far inferior
to the Jews, and should have far less religion and devotion then they had.
Whereas it is their great advantage above the Jews, that God would not stint
unto them any place, nor any time of their holy exercises, but would have the
choice and settling of the one, and of the other to depend on their liberty, and
left that to their zeal and wisdom, even as it is their great prerogative,
that he has made them free from all other legal ceremonies: which testifies,
that he has loved them more, and would not use them rigidly as little
children, or servants, but as children of a ripe age, and as a willing people.

28 So it has been showed, that although the fourth Commandment obliges us
always to appoint an ordinary day for Gods service, yet no solid thing can be
gathered from the nature and words thereof, to prove the morality of a seventh
day of Sabbath, far less of Sunday, and a perpetual obligation in Gods
intention, to the observation thereof under the new Testament. And it is a most
impertinent argumentation, that because all the particularities of the fourth
Commandment may be applied unto us, as well as to the Jews, and that we may
now, as they of old, rest on the seventh and last day of the week, as in it
God rested, therefore we should do it. For we may also observe all the holy
days and ceremonies which of old the Jews observed, and find reasons to apply
them unto us: For example, as they observed the new Moons, or the first days
of their months, to give thanks to God for his continual government, and
favorable intertainment, which his divine providence had showed to them,
making, after the last month, a new month to come, and to pray him to
perpetuate the grace toward them, as also that it might be unto them a figure
of the future renewing of the Church by the Messiah. Also as they observed the
feast of Pentecost, for a memorial, as many do esteem, of the Law given on
that day, or, which is more certain, to give thanks to God for the corns,
which by his favor, they had reapt, and whereof they offered unto him two
loaves of new and fine flower: Likewise, as they observed the feast of
Tabernacles for a remembrance that they had been pilgrims in the wilderness,
and had sojourned in Tents, during the time of their journey to the Land of
Canaan, as also for a thanksgiving to God, for the gathering in of all the
fruits of the Land: Even so might we observe all the same feasts, by an
application of the reasons of their institution unto us. For God from month to
month continues his providence toward us, and has granted us the renewing of
the holy Ghost. The Law which he gave in Sina to the people of Israel,
appertains to us in all the morality thereof, as well as unto them. It is his
gift, that we gather in yearly the corns, and other productions of the ground
for our nourishment, as they did. We are pilgrims, and strangers in this world,
and we aspire to the heavenly Canaan etc. All these things might be capable to
afford unto us subject and occasion to celebrate a thankful and religious
remembrance of them on solemn days answerable to these of the Jews. For
although there were some particular reasons belonging only to the Jews, and
taken from certain circumstances, for which God ordained these feasts and
others unto them, and though there was in them a figure of the good things to
come by Jesus Christ, Hebr. 10. verse. 1. in which respects they cannot be
observed by us (which also, by the confession of those against whom I dispute,
is to be found in the Sabbath day) that is no let, but that the general
reasons, which are to be found in them, may be unto us a ground of observation,
and that we may practice and celebrate, as a memorial or sign relative to the
time past, or present, that which they practiced as a figure relative to the
time to come. And what they observed in a respect circumstanced after a fashion
which was proper to them, that we may observe in another respect somewhat
diversified, and fitted to our estate. Even as, although we observe not the
Sabbath for some particular reasons, in regard whereof it is avouched that it
was appropriated to the Jews, yet many do maintain eagerly, that we ought to
keep it for some other general reasons. Yea, since almost all the Jewish
ceremonies had some moral foundation, reason, or end, which considered in it
self regards us, as well as them, that might be set abroach as a subject and
occasion to observe them under the Gospel.

30 Yet for all that, it follows not that God obliges us to such an
observation. Yea it should be contrary to the liberty and simplicity of the
Gospel. Likewise whatsoever general reasons may be considered, as capable in
themselves, to be motives unto us, to observe the Sabbath, it follows not
that God has prescribed and determined the observation thereof under the
Gospel.

31 All these reasons which were motives to ordain these ceremonies, were not
natural essential, and necessary reasons of their institution, but depended
simply on the will of God, who had the power to make them, and give value and
authority to the said reasons by the observation of these ceremonies for a
certain time only, and at another time without ceremonies, or by ceremonies of
another kind: As he wills us to give him thanks under the new Testament, for
the continuation of his favorable providence over us, in the ordinary course
of days, of months, of the revenues of the earth; for giving us, not only the
Law, but also the Gospel of grace, and for preparing for us the heavenly
inheritance, after the few and evil days of the pilgrimages of this life, all
which things concern us, and yet he binds us not to celebrate in remembrance
of these his blessings, the ancient festival days, nor any other. Even so he
will have us to celebrate the remembrance of our Creation, and after we have
bestowed days upon our own businesses, to appoint also some for his public
service, and to assubject unto it our wives, our children, our servants, and
all other persons depending of us: As likewise to give a sufficient time of
rest to our servants and beasts, after we have kept them at work for us; which
are the reasons of the fourth Commandment that concern us also. And yet of
them no inference can be made, that God will have us to observe one of seven,
or the last of the seven days of the week, as in consideration of them he
ordained the seventh day to the Jews. For we may do it as well on another
day, ordained after another manner.

32 He had ordained the Sabbath, as all other ceremonies to be signs for that
time, and not for the time of the New Testament, under which the world being,
as it were, renewed, all things pertaining to the order and government of the
Religion were also to be made new. New Ministers, new Sacraments, etc. were to
be established, as it is written, Esa. 65. verse 17. Agg. 2. verse 6. Heb. 8.
ver. 13. Heb. 12. verse 26, 27. 2 Cor. 5. verse 17. And therefore it was
convenient and suitable to this New estate, that there should be a new day of
Gods service, different from the day which the Jews observed under the Old
Testament: But it was not necessary, that it should be one of seven, or that
Christ Himself should have ordained it; which notwithstanding they endeavor
to prove by diverse other passages and arguments gathered out of holy
Scripture, pertaining directly to the New Testament, and obliging all
Christians living under it, to keep the Sabbath, as much as the Jews were
under the Old Testament, yea to keep a certain and set day of Sabbath, not by
ecclesiastical constitution, but by divine ordinance, as they deem.

CHAPTER Eight.
Answer to the Sixth Reason.
1. Ob. Isaiah has prophesied, that under the New Testament, strangers and
Eunuchs, that is, Christians, shall keep the Sabbath.

2. First Answer: The words of the Prophet may be understood of the state of
the Church of the Jews, after the captivity of Babylon.

3. Second Answer, In the Old Testament the service of the New Testament is set
down in terms taken from the service under the Law.

4. Which if they should be literally expounded, Christians should be bound to
keep all the ceremonies of the Law.

5. Wherefore, this and such like passages, are to be expounded spiritually, of
the spiritual service of the Christian Church.

6. Another objection of the gate, which Ezekiel says, shall be opened on the
Sabbath day.

7. First Answer, the words of Ezekiel must be expounded mystically.

8. Second Answer, nothing can be inferred from thence, but that the Christian
Church shall have solemn days for Gods service.

9. Third Answer, The Sabbath may be said to represent the rest of eternal
life in heaven, and the six work days, the turmoiles of this life.

1 THey say to this purpose, that the 56. Chapter of Isaiah is manifestly
referred to the time of the New Testament, and that God declaring there, how he
would not any more put a difference between the strangers and the Jews, and
how the Eunuchs, the barren, and those that want Children shall no more be a
reproach, and shall not be excluded from the privileges of his house, as they
were under the Old Testament, says in plain terms, that those whom he
calls Eunuchs and sons of the stranger, shall keep his Sabbaths, verse 4,
6. From whence they make this inference, that God would have the Sabbath to be
kept by Christians under the New Testament, as well as by Jews under the Old
Testament.

2 To this I answer, that this argument has little or no strength: For it is
well known, that the Jews do refer it to the time that followed the
captivity of Babylon.

3 But not to debate about this question, whether this prophecy is to be
referred to the old, or to the New Testament, and to grant willingly that it is
to be understood of the days of the New Testament, it is a thing notorious,
that when God in the Old Testament speaks by his Prophets of the service that
should be yielded unto him under the New Testament, he expresses himself
ordinarily, in terms taken from the fashions and forms used in his service
under the Old Testament: so he says, that under the New Testament he should
have Altars every where, that in every place incense should be offered unto his
name, that from one new Moon to another all flesh should come to worship
before him, etc. And in this same Chap. 56. ver. 7. he says concerning these
Eunuchs, and the sons of the stranger which shall keep his Sabbaths, that
he will bring them to his holy mountain, and make them joyful in his house
of prayer, and that their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon his Altar.

4 If then of that which is said, that they shall keep his Sabbaths, they will
infer, that the Sabbath day is obligatory under the New Testament, as it was
under the Ancient, by the same reason any may infer, that the Temple of
Jerusalem, the Altar and the sacrifices should remain in use, namely seeing
God in the fourth verse speaks of his Sabbaths in the plural number, and it
is manifest, that besides the seventh ordinary day there was a great deal of
other Sabbaths ordained of God to the Jews, it may be as truly gathered, that
under the New Testament the faithful ought to keep all the Sabbaths of the
Jews, and the same days of Sabbaths that the Jews did keep, and
particularly the same seventh day, to wit, the last: which should be a
conclusion most absurd.

5 The truth is, that the Sabbath, according to the style of the Ancient
Testament, was taken of old for all the outward service of God, and God using
the same style or manner of speech according to his custom, in this prophecy
concerning the time of the New Testament, when he says, the Eunuchs, and the
sons of the stranger shall keep the Sabbath, by the Sabbath denotes all the
outward and solemn service which was to be rendered to him in that time of the
New Covenant; but joined with the spiritual service, signified in the second
verse by these other words; And keeps his hands from doing evil: And
consequently, he signifies, that that outward service should have its times
ordained in the Church, even as the Sabbath day was of old the time appointed
for his service. But that it was Gods intention to stint to the Church of the
New Testament a seventh day, or any other particular day whatsoever for a
Sabbath day, and that he has not left the determination thereof to the liberty
of the Church, that shall never be proved by the aforesaid passage.

6 This answer may serve for a sufficient reply to the passage of the 46.
Chapter of Ezekiel, where God continuing to represent unto the Prophet in a
high and magnificent vision, and difficult to be understood, of a most
glorious and sumptuous Temple, the state of the Church under the New Testament,
says in the first, and third verses, that the gate of the inner Court shall be
shut the six working days, but on the Sabbath it shall be opened, and the
people of the land shall worship at the entrance of this gate. From whence it
is fancied, that a necessity of keeping the Sabbath under the New Testament may
be inferred.

7 But it is evident, that in all this vision contained in the nine last
Chapters of Ezekiel, the state of the Christian Church, and of the Evangelicall
service, is designed in terms and phrases taken from the Temple and legal
service, which must not be understood literally, but mystically, if we will not
under the Gospel bring back, not only the Sabbath, but also a great deal of
other ceremonies, which are mentioned in that vision; As for example, The New
Moons, which in the aforesaid verses are joined with the Sabbath. For it is
said there, verse 1. that the gate shall be opened on the Sabbath day, and in
the day of the New Moon it shall be opened, and that the people of the Land
shall worship at the entry of this gate before the Lord on the Sabbaths, and
in the New Moons, verse 3. Which must be understood spiritually of the truth
figured by the Sabbaths and New Moons, and not properly of these things
themselves, which were but figures, that is, not that the faithful should
celebrate Sabbaths and New Moons, but that they should rest from their works
of iniquity, to practice the works of the spirit of Sanctification, and of
Gods true spiritual service, and should be renewed and illuminated for ever by
the Lord Jesus their true and only Savior, and by him have always free
access and entrance to the throne of grace.

8 All that can be, at the most, inferred of the forealleadged passage,
concerning the external service of the Christian Church, is, that the New
Testament shall have solemn days, wherein God shall be publicly served by
all his people, but in no wise that they should be the same which were stinted
under the Old Testament. For so we should be bound to observe the days of New
Moons, the last day of the week, and other holy days of the Jews mentioned
in the aforesaid place, and betokened in the plural number by the name of
Sabbaths.

9 Whereunto I add, that it may be said, that the Sabbath day, and the day of
the New Moon spoken of there, represents the time of eternal life in
heaven, where the faithful are in a perfect rest, and are new Creatures without
any blemish of sin, or defect of righteousness: As the six work days, are a
representation of the time of this present life, during which they travel, they
rove, and trot up and down upon earth, where so long as they sojourne, the
Prophet signifies, that the marvels of the glorious grace of God are always
shut unto them, but in heaven shall be opened unto them, by a full and
unconceivable manifestation, and perfect fruition of that joy, which is in the
face of God, and of those pleasures that are at his right hand for evermore,
whereby they shall worship and serve God perfectly for ever and ever. Amen.
This then is in meaning the same that we read of in the 66. Chapter of Isaiah
verse 23. where it is said, that in the new heavens and in the new earth, which
God should make, from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh,
(i. all the faithful) should come to worship before him. Of which passage I
have spoken before. Of all that has been said it is manifest, that all the
passages of this kind, which are to be found in the Prophets, are not to any
purpose, when they are produced to prove that which is debated about the
Sabbath day.

CHAPTER Ninth.
1. Answer to the seventh Reason.
1. Ob. Jesus Christ is not come to abolish the Law, whereof the Sabbath is a
part.

2. Answer, sometimes by the Law and the Prophets, are understood the moral
precepts only.

3. Sometimes the ceremonial only.

4. In Christ's words both are to be understood, but principally, the
ceremonial.

5. This is proved by the 18. verse.

6. Frivolous instance from Christ's words, Heaven and earth shall not pass,
etc.

7. The same is proved by the scope of Jesus Christ, in the foresaid words.

8. Falsity of a second instance, that the Laws expounded in the rest of the
Chapter are all moral.

9. Although it were true, it follows not, that Christ's words in the 17.
verse should be understood of the moral Law.

10. Christ's words rightly understood favor not the morality of the Sabbath.

11. Third instance from the 19. verse.

12. First Answer, Christ in that verse speaks of an annihilating of the
Commandments, and not of the abrogating of some of them.

13. Second Answer, by retorsion.

14. Third Answer: Christ speaks of the whole Law of Moses, and not of the
Decalogue only.

15. Fourth instance from Saint James words, Chapter 2. verse ten.

16. Uanity of this instance.

1 AS little to this purpose are the words of Christ in the fifth Chapter of
Saint Matthew verse 17. I am not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but
to fulfill them. From which words they make this conclusion, that seeing the
Commandment of the Sabbath day is a Commandment of the Law confirmed from
time to time by the Prophets, JESUS CHRIST has not abolished it. And therefore
the obligation to keep the Sabbath day lies upon us still, and shall dure to
the worlds end.

2 To this allegation of Christ's words I return this answer, that indeed
sometimes, to wit, when a moral matter is in hand, the Scripture by the Law
and the Prophets, understands only the precepts of the Law and of the
Prophets pertaining to this morality. As when in the twelfth verse of the
seventh Chapter of Saint Matthew, Christ says, All things whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: For this is the Law and
the Prophets.

3 But sometimes also, when the speech is of the fulfilling of things foretold
or figured of old, by the Law and the Prophets, are to be understood only the
prophesies, and the typike ceremonies of the ancient Testament, as in S.
Matthew 11. Chap. v. 13. S. Luke 24. verse 27. Acts 24. ver. 26. Acts 26. verse
22.

4 To apply this to the passage objected out of the fifth Chapter of Saint
Matthew, I say, that in it by the Law and the Prophets are to be understood,
not only the precepts concerning the moral duties of this life, but also the
ceremonies of the Law, as may be clearly seen by these words of our Savior
that are general, I am not come to destroy the Law, nor the Prophets, but to
fulfill them. Now the ceremonies are a part of the Law of Moses, are called in
the Scripture by the Name of the Law, and make a part of the Sermons of the
Prophets, as well as the moralities: The conjunction of the Law and of the
Prophets in a general matter, such as this is, shows that by the Law we must
understand all that is contained in the books of Moses, as by the Prophets all
things contained in their books. Now of the books of Moses and of the
Prophets the ceremonies make a notable portion.

5 I add to this, that the predictions, types and promises are here as much,
nay much more to be understood, then moral duties, as may be seen evidently
by these words of our LORD in the 18. verse following, Uerily I say unto you,
Till heaven and earth pass, one Jot, nor one title, one point, or one prick
of a letter, shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. It is
certain that these words Iota, Title or prick, are not to be in this sentence
taken properly, because letters, and titles or pricks of letters are not
capable of accomplishment; but by them Christ understands the least things
propounded in the Law. Having properly regard to all the things, whether great
or small, figured by the ceremonies of the Law, and foretold and promised by
Moses and the Prophets, whereof he confirmed by these words the future
accomplishment. Neither can these words of the 18. verse be so fitly applied to
the moral Commandments, as to the ceremonies, promises, and prophesies. This
sense, The heaven and earth shall pass, rather then whatsoever has been
figured, promised, and foretold by the Law and the Prophets, shall not be
effected and fulfilled, being manifestly more suitable to the foresaid words,
then this, The heaven and the earth shall rather pass, then the moral
Commandments shall not be kept and executed.

6 The instance made upon these words, Till heaven and earth pass, etc. is
vain, when they conclude, that there Jesus Christ speaks of things of the
Law that were to continue in their being, and oblige all men to observe and
keep them till the worlds end, which is not true of the ceremonies which soon
after expired by his death. For Jesus Christ does in no wise say, that
whatsoever is contained in the Law was to continue stable in force and vigor,
and to be kept till heaven and earth pass: But his meaning in this kind of
speech is the same that I have touched, to wit, that heaven and earth shall
pass more easily, and rather, than the Law shall fall short of a full
accomplishment, and the truth thereof shall fail to be ratified and exhibited
in all the things contained therein, the impossibility of this being denoted by
a comparison with that we have this explication in the 16. Chapter of S. Luke
verse. 17. where Christ's intention is thus expressed, It is easier for heaven
and earth to pass then one title of the Law to fail: where also the
Evangelist shows, of what points of the Law Jesus Christ did purposely
speak, to wit, of the types and prophesies. For in the sixteenth verse
immediately preceding he had said, The Law and the Prophets until John, where
we must understand the Verb prophefied, which S. Matthew adds in the
eleventh Chapter and 13. verse, saying, For all the Prophets and the Law
prophefied until John, that is, the ancient prophesies and figures, as having
respect to Jesus Christ, finished in the time of John Baptist, not in him, but
in Jesus Christ, who lived in the same time, and whom John seeing coming unto
him, showed with his finger, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sin of the world, Ioh. 1. verse. 29. After then that Christ had said, the
Law and Prophets prophesied until John, S. Luke adds these words following,
as spoken by Christ to that purpose, And it is easier for heaven and earth to
pass, then one title of the Law to fail, where by one title are to be
understood all the ceremonies, figures, and productions contained in the Law
and in the Prophets.

7 Again, the same is clearly seen by the intention and end of Jesus Christ
in the passage that is in question, which is to show, for the justification and
clearing of himself, that although he urged above all the observation of the
most weighty points of the Law, such as are the moral points, and blamed the
Scribes and Pharisees for tying themselves principally to the ceremonies, as to
Sacrifices, Purifications, Sabbaths, etc. which were of little importance in
comparison with moral duties, and exhorted his Disciples to be careful that
their righteousness should exceed the righteousness of these Hypocrites, and
for that cause, was by them accused as a Destroyer of the ceremonies commanded
by the Law, and authorized by the Prophets, nevertheless he was not come to
destroy them, but to fulfill them.

8 The instance that they make, saying, that the Laws which Jesus Christ
expounds in the verses following of the fifth Chapter of S. Matthew are all
moral, is too weak. For they are not all such. In them there is something
which has express regard to the ceremonies, and a comparison of them with the
moralities verse. 23. 24. And some other things which belong to the politic or
judicial Law, verse. 25. 31. 38.

9 But besides this, although they were all moral, that inforceth not by a
necessary proof, that in the seventeenth and eighteenth verses, Christ has
spoken of moral duties, or that the twentieth one, the twentieth two, and
verses following have so strait a connection with the 17, and 18. verses which
go before, that they speak all of the same subject and matter. For how
ordinary is it in the same sequel of a discourse to diversifie the particular
subjects, and to pass from one to another? And indeed our Lord JESUS CHRIST
passes most conveniently from the Ceremonies, which the Scribes and Pharisees
accused him falsely to destroy, to the moralities, which they destroyed in
effect: The tenor of his discourse being this, I am accused by the Scribes and
Pharisees to destroy the ceremonies and ordinances of the Law, because I blame
the superstitious usage, and preferring of them to moral duties, which are of
greater importance. But that is most false: For I destroy them not, but do
show their true usage, and am come to exhibit the truth of them in my person,
neither is there any of them, nor of the Prophesies that shall not be fulfilled
in me. But this accusation may be truly laid in the dish of the Scribes and
Pharisees; For they are the men which destroy the Law, yea, in things that in
it are of greatest moment, debasing and disrespecting it, as if it were nothing
in comparison of their traditions and ceremonial observations. Therefore, I
say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed theirs, ye shall in
no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For they make glosses upon the
moral Commandments which pervert their true sense, and in so doing, teach men
to break them. This then being evident, that in the foresaid 18. verse mention
is made of the Law, as much, nay much more as it contains the ceremonial
ordinances, then the moral, the argument taken from it remains without force
on the behalf of those that allege it, if they will not by the same means
render us necessary keepers of all other ceremonies of the Law, as well as of
the Sabbath day, which is not their intention.

10 Neither does that follow of the saying of Jesus Christ. For it is most
true, that he was not come to annihilate and destroy the ceremonies of the Law,
either by his Doctrine or by his Actions: Not by his Doctrine by declaring them
to be vain, idle and frustratory things: not by his Actions, by saying or
doing any thing contrary unto them, by casseering and abolishing them without
fulfilling the truth of things figured by them. The verb (...) used by the
Evangelist imports as much; for it signifies often to overthrow, and destroy,
and is here equivalent to the word (...) used by the Apostle in the same
subject, and to the same intention, Romans 3. verse. 31. saying, that through
faith the Law is not made void, but established, where by the Law, he
understands not only the moral Commandments, but also the Ceremonies,
figures, and prophesies, as appears by the 21. verse, where he speaks of
the righteousness of faith witnessed by the Law, which belongs to the whole
Law given by Moses, yea, properly to the ceremonial Law, which led men
directly to Christ, which the moral Law did not, but by an oblique and
indirect way; Christ, I say, was not come to destroy the Law of ceremonies, but
to fulfill them, which he did both by teaching what was the end they tended
unto, and by a real exhibition in himself of the body of their shadows, and
of the truth of their figures, which was no impediment unto him, why he should
not make them to cease, after he had fulfilled them: Nay, much otherwise, it
was necessary he should make them to cease, seeing they had no other end but
to figure and represent him, which was not a destroying of them, but rather the
true means whereby he made them to obtain their perfection, making them to
abut to their end, In which respect the Apostle in the tenth Chapter to the
Romans, verse. 4. calls Christ the end of the Law. Now the Sabbath day being a
ceremonial point of the Law enjoined in the 4th Commandment of the Decalogue,
in that wherein it was ceremonial, as has been showed before, Jesus Christ
ought not destroy it, but by fulfilling the truth that it figured, make it to
cease and expire, as all other legal ceremonies. And therefore, although Jesus
Christ in the foresaid passage had intended to speak only of the Law of the
ten Commandments, the objection taken from this place, should not be of any
moment and consquence.

11 Of this that we have said, arises an answer to the instance taken from
the ninteenth verse following in the same Chapter: Whosoever therefore shall
break (or rather shall destroy) one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: Of
which words, presupposing still that Jesus Christ in them intends to speak
only of the Commandments contained expressly in the Decalogue, they infer,
that seeing the Commandment of the Sabbath is one of them, Jesus Christ
condemns for ever the inobservation or transgression, and on the other part,
ordains and establishes the observation thereof.

12 Whereunto, granting unto them, for their greater advantage, that Jesus
Christ in these words has regard to the Commandments of the Decalogue only, I
answer, that he speaks of the dissolving, annihilating, and overthrowing of
these Commandments (For this the signification of the word (...) in the
original) And condemns all those that dare to do it. But to abrogate the
Sabbath day enjoined by the fourth Commandment, seeing it was a figure and
type, and that by fulfilling in himself, and in his faithful servants, the
truth of the thing figured by the outward Sabbath, to free them from the
necessity of the observation thereof, was not a dissolving and overthrowing of
it, neither on his part, nor on theirs, but rather an effectual ratification
thereof, as in the same sense he has not dissolved any of the legal figures,
but has fulfilled them all.

13 Secondly I say, that of necessity the broachers of this argument must
advow, that Jesus Christ does not blame in this place all inobservation of the
Sabbath, neither does he establish precisely and absolutely the observation
thereof for ever, according to all the terms, and the whole sense of the
fourth Commandment. For it should from thence follow, that he blames for ever
and ever the inobservation, and commands for evermore the observation and
sanctification of the last day of the week, by a legal service, in
remembrance of the Creation of Gods works in six days, and of his rest on
the seventh, because the Commandment carries with it that necessity, to which
is contrary the practice of the Christian Church. Therefore this limitation
must be added, that Christ's intention is, to forbid the transgression, and to
command for ever the observation of the Commandment touching the Sabbath, and
of all the rest, as far as it may and ought to oblige us according to the
terms of the Gospel. Now we have showed, that it obliges us not, as it
ordains one day of seven, or a certain seventh day, or a legal
sanctification, but so far only, as it commands, that Gods public service
be practiced for ever, according as it shall be established by him, and that an
ordinary day be appointed for that purpose. And therefore Jesus Christ in this
respect only, and no further, condemns the transgression, and injoyneth the
observation of the fourth Commandment.

14 Thirdly, Jesus Christ, in the place before alleged, has not regard to
the Decalogue only, but universally to all the Commandments of God, whether
moral or ceremonial, contained in the Law and in the Prophets, which he had
spoken of in the 17. verse, that is in all the books of the ancient Testament;
and, to repulse the false accusation that the Scribes and Pharisees laid to his
charge, declares, what was his mind concerning all these Commandments, to
wit, that there was not any one of them, nay not of those that are the least,
or may by men be esteemed, that ought to remain unprofitable, vain, and
without effect, and that the man, whatsoever he be, that either by teaching or
by practice shall despise and reject any of them, shall be despised and
rejected of God. That on his part he fulfilled them all, and extended and
settled the accomplishment of them for ever, to wit, of those that are moral by
obeying them all in his own person, and charging his Disciples with their
perpetual observation, and sanctifying them inwardly, that they may observe
them: Of those that are ceremonial, by performing and exhibiting the truth of
all things signified and figured by them, which truth he should make to have an
eternal continuance and efficacy toward all that are his, although he was to
make the use of the figures to cease, as the intention of God, and reason did
require. But that the Pharisees were the men, who on their part made void the
Commandments of GOD, both ceremonial and moral: The ceremonial, by adding
unto them over and above a thousand superstitious observations: The moral, by
corrupting them with false glosses and interpretations, and preferring unto
them the traditions of men, which he lays to their charge in diverse places,
and namely in the verses following of this fifth Chapter of Saint Matthew. Now
according to this sense, which is true and natural, it is evident, that they
which allege this passage can infer nothing of it for their purpose.

15 They pretend in vain to fortify and confirm it with the words of Saint
James in the second Chapter and tenth verse, where the Apostle speaking of the
Law of the Decalogue says, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all, because the same God who has
enjoined one of the points, has also enjoined all the rest. Whence they would
infer that the inobservation of the seventh day of Sabbath, which is a point
of the Law, makes a man guilty of the transgression of the whole Law, that
therefore we are obliged to the observation thereof.

For I answer in few words, that indeed Saint James says, that to fail, or to
commit a sin against any Commandment of the Law, makes him that commits
it guilty of the universal transgression of the Law. But I deny the
inobservation of the Sabbath, as it is commanded by the Law, to be under the
New Testament, a sin and a fault properly so called, because in so far as
it commands the Sabbath, it obliges not any more: For it was for the Jews,
and not for us. And therefore, not to observe the Sabbath according to the
tenor of the Law, is not a fault and a sin in any point, as Saint James
understands it. So if one should say, that he that has kept the whole word
of God, if he offend in one point thereof, should make himself guilty of all,
that saying should be true according to the meaning of Saint James: But if any
should infer upon this, that not to observe still, under the Gospel, all the
legal ceremonies, because they make a part, and are points of the Word of God,
is a trangression whereby a Christian is made guilty of all this word, and
therefore he is bound to keep them all, it should be an absurd illation; for
not to keep these ceremonies now, is not a fault nor sin to us, because they
oblige not any more. No man sins against a Law or word but in as much as it
obliges: But neither the word of God, as it commands the legal ceremonies,
nor the decalogue, as it commands the Sabbath, is any more obligatory to us
ward: wherefore we sin not now, by not observing these points, and therefore
we make not our ^^lves, in that behalf, guilty of the Law and word of God, who
is author of all the points of this Law, and of this word, but has not given
them all to all men, nor to continue in all times, but some of them only to
some men, and to have vigor and being for a certain time only.

CHAPTER Tenth.
Answer to the Eighth Reason.
1. Eight reason, Jesus Christ speaking to his Disciples, advised them to pray,
that their flight should not be on the Sabbath day, that is on our Sunday.

2. First answer, The Sabbath day is ever taken in the New Testament for the
Sabbath of the Jews, and is so here taken by Christ. Neither is our day of
public service any where in holy Scripture, called the Sabbath day.

3. True sense of Christ's words, and that they had relation to the Jews only.

4. Although he spoke them to his Disciples.

5. Second answer, Although he had spoken to his Disciples only, he might have
had respect, not to them, but to their brethren among the Jews that were weak
in faith.

6. Third answer, Although by the Sabbath, the Lords day were to be understood,
the morality of one of seven days in the wee^ cannot be inferred from thence.

1 Jesus Christ speaking in the 24. of Saint Matthew and twenty verse, to his
Disciples, of the desolation that was to come upon Judea, and namely upon
Jerusalem, said unto them, Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, nor
on the Sabbath day. Not in the winter, because then the ways are incommodious,
and there is neither driving, nor marching, but with difficulty. Not on the
Sabbath day, by reason of the holiness of that day, which being appointed and
set a part for Gods service, although it was lawful unto them to fly in it,
to save their lives, yet they should not be able to do it, but with grief,
and sore against their will, being constrained to spend, on trotting, toyling,
and much hurrying up and down, a day particularly consecrated to the public
exercises of Religion, and so should have a just occasion to pray to God to
keep them from being brought to such a necessity. Some allege this passage,
esteeming it to be pressing, and of great weight. For, say they, Jesus Christ
speaks to his Disciples of a thing that was to fall out forty years after
his Ascension, when all the ceremonies of the Law should be abolished in the
Christian Church, and yet notwithstanding, he speaks unto them of the
Religion of the Sabbath, as of a thing that they ought always to take to
heart, in so high a measure, that they should be sorry and thoroughly grieved to
be in that time of desolation constrained to flee on so holy a day, instead of
applying themselves to Gods service. Therefore the Sabbath day was not a
ceremony coming within the compass of those that he was to abrogate, but a
moral point, and of perpetual necessity: Otherwise he had not done well to
entangle their minds with an unnecessary Religion toward the Sabbath day in
the time of their flight, seeing it being abrogated by him, they might with as
little grieve, in respect to the day, get packing as fast as they could, trot
and toil on that day, as on another day.

2 I answer, that this argument is a silly one, and of no value. For Jesus
Christ speaks not in that place of Saint Matthew of the day of rest that
Christians were to observe after his Ascension, but of the Jewish Sabbath day,
as this word, Sabbath day, shows clearly, which his Disciples were far from
understanding other ways, then for the last day of the week observed among
the Jews. For it is certain that it signified nothing else at that time,
seeing there was not, as yet, any other day of rest in vigor, saving that
alone. And Jesus Christ had not at all made himself to be understood of them,
nay he had purposely given them occasion to mistake him, if by the Sabbath day
his intention was to denote another day then the last of the week, because
this alone carried that name, neither shall it be found in the whole
Scripture, that any other day is specified by that name.

3 The heavenly rest under the Gospel is once called by the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews Chapter 4. verse 9. by a name drawn from the Hebrew
word Sabbath, (...)
because it was figured by the Sabbath of the Jews. But our day, wherein we
apply our selves to Gods outward service, and to that intent do cease from our
ordinary labor, is always called in the New Testament The first day of the
week, or The Lords Day, and not the Sabbath which name the Apostles and first
believers had not failed to give unto it, if Jesus Christ had so qualified and
styled it. Now if they would never term it by such a name, although it might
have been in some sort attributed unto it, but only, The Lords Day, or The
first day of the week, to distinguish it from the day which was so called
among the Jews: For the same reason Jesus Christ in the foresaid place, if he
had minded to speak of the day, which Christians were to observe after his
death, he had entitled it by some other name then of the Sabbath day, to make a
distinction between it, and the day of the Jews.

Wherefore those which use this argument do most fondly suppose, without
proof or likeness of truth, that by the Sabbath Jesus Christ means the
Lords day. Now if it be understood of the Sabbath of the Jews, as it must, for
the foresaid reasons, and as all the interpreters, whom I have read and
perused, do take it, this argument, being urged according to the ratiotination
of those that have set it on foot, shall yield, against their intention, this
conclusion, that after the death and ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Sabbath day of the Jews ought to be yet kept in the Christian Church, and
that the faithful are obliged unto it by Religion and conscience, and ought
be heartily sorrowful, when being constrained to fly on it, to save their
lives in a great desolation, they should not be able to consecrate it to Gods
service.

3 The true sense of this passage is, that indeed our Lord Jesus andlt; Christ
commands his Disciples to pray to God, that their flight happen not on the
Jewish Sabbath day. Yet it was not his intention to make that day necessary
unto them, and to urge them with the observation thereof, nor also to imbrew
their spirits with a superstitious opinion, as if it were not lawful to fly
on that day for the saving of their lives from the day of desolation, although
they had been obliged to keep it still, seeing on both sides it is agreed on,
that a man may lawfully fly, and do all necessary things on any Sabbath day
whatsoever, without fear of breaking it. In this speech the Lord has regard
to this only, that because there was a Law amongst the Jews, forbidding them
to travel on the Sabbath day ordinarily, further then a certain number of
steps, to wit, two thousand, and that for a religious end, which was called a
Sabbath days journey, Acts 1. verse 12. he knew well, that many, not only of
the Jews, which were not converted to the faith, but also of those which had
professed the Gospel, moved with devotion and Religion toward the Sabbath,
for want of sufficient instruction, should be scrupulous to prepare things
necessary for their f^ight, and to flee far on that day, the desolation coming
upon them on a sudden, through fear to break Gods Commandment concerning
the Sabbath: as we see in the History of the Maccabees, that many of the Jews,
which were gone down into the secret places of the wilderness, the battle
being given them on the Sabbath day, chused rather to be slain with their
Wives, Children, and cattle, then to make resistance for the safety of their
lives, least they should profane the Sabbath day, 1 Maccab. 2. verse 32. etc.
There is another example of a like scruple in the second book, Chapter 6.
verse 11. And we read in Josephus, in the eight Chapter of the foureteenth
book of the Antiquities of the Jews, and in the first book of the Wars of
the Jews Chapter 5. that when the Romans under their general Pompeius,
beleagured the Temple of Jerusalem, the Jews, which were fled thither,
although they defended themselves on the Sabbath day, if they were assaulted,
yet they remained quiet and bonged not, if they were not assaulted; which when
the Romans had perceived, they set not on them, and threw nothing against them
on the Sabbath day, but prepared only things necessary for the assaults,
dressed terrasses and forts, brought near their engines, to make use of them
the next day, and the Jews of Religion and great devotion toward the Sabbath,
suffered them to do what they would, without disturbance. And Josephus
approves this Religion, or rather superstition, as if it had been conformable
to the ordinance of the Law, saying that the Law permits on the Sabbath day,
if the enemies come to wage battle, or give blows, to drive them back.

Many might have been entangled with the same superstition, during the
desolation whereof Christ speaks in the place before alleged. For although
that upon such an occasion as this was, to wit, to save their lives, they
should and might have been informed, that they had full liberty to work and
fly, yet the devotion so ancient, so usually practiced, so exactly and
scrupulously observed toward the Sabbath, specially in these times, as may be
seen in sundry places of the Gospel* this devotion, I say, was more than
sufficient to form many difficulties in their minds, and cast into many
perplexities, concerning the practice of this knowledge, even those that had
it. Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ foreseeing, that many, in the days of the
future desolation of Jerusalem, should be disquieted with such fears, should
make such difficulties, or at least conceive a great displeasure to be
constrained to work and travel on the Sabbath day, for the preserving of
their lives, advises them, to pray to God that their flight be not on that day.

4 If they reply, that Jesus Christ spoke these words to his Disciples, who
were infallibly to be well instructed before the desolation of Jerusalem
concerning the Evangelicall day of Sabbath, and concerning all things that may
be lawfully done on it, and therefore there was no occasion to fear, that they
should suffer themselves to be carried away with any Religion, or rather
superstition toward the Jewish Sabbath day, which before that time should be
abrogated.

To that objection I answer again, that verily Jesus Christ spoke to his
Disciples, who apparently were alone with him, but not in regard to them. For
he knew well, that about the time of the desolation of Jerusalem they should be
either dead, or far removed from Judea, among the other nations of the earth,
and therefore this danger was not to be feared on their behalf. Wherefore in
their persons he spoke to all the Jews, who were all to be in common partakers
of this desolation; or at least to all the faithful, who in that time should
be conversant in Judea, as if they had been present before him with his
Disciples: This is evident by these words in the 16. 17, 18, 19. Verses, Then
let them that be in Judea flee into the mountains: Let him which is on the
house top, not come down to take any thing out of his house: Neither let him
which is in the field, return back to take his clothes: and woe unto them
that are with child, and unto them that give suck in those days, etc. For
these are common advertisements to all that were to be ensnared in that danger,
and so is likewise this, Pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath day, which
must be understood as said to all the Jews, to whom the preceding warnings are
directed, amongst whom Jesus Christ knew that many Christians converted unto
him, and carried away with a Religious respect toward the Law, should still
have the opinion of the Sabbath which I have specified. Nay he knew, that
amongst the faithful Jews, the best instructed should tie themselves, for a
certain space of time, after his Ascension into heaven, to the observation of
certain legal ceremonies, and specially of the Sabbath, although of right
they were all made of no effect by his death, not for any conscience to
themward, nor through an acknowledgement of any obligation on their behalf to
the ceremonial Law, which had been a thing hurtful and dangerous, but simply
through love, to shun all occasions of giving offense to the other Jews, to
embrace all means of gaining them more easily to the faith, and to bury the
ceremonies with honor, which in that respect was lawful. So then for these
reasons he might well exhort them all to pray that there flight should not
befall on the Sabbath day; because those that are weak, and not so well
instructed, should not dare to fly, or should fly with scruple of conscience,
and the strong that had greater knowledge, should do it, although without
trouble of Conscience, yet not without some grief, remembering that on that day
they were accustomed, till then, to apply themselves to religious actions, and
foreseeing that their flight might be offensive, and make them odious to some,
that also they might be hindered in their flight, and preparatives for it, by
those which should superstitiously stick fast unto the prohibitions, not to
work, to run, and to toil on the Sabbath day.

5 I add, that although we should consider this Commandment of Christ, Pray
that your flight be not on the Sabbath day, as directed to the Disciples only,
and should advow, that being well instructed there was no cause why they should
fear to fly on the Sabbath day, and therefore no cause why they should pray
for their particular, that their flight should not happen on that day, we may
fitly say, that Jesus Christ commanded them to pray so, having regard, not to
them, but to others that he foresaw should be ignorant and weak, and to whom
the Sabbath day should be an impediment to fly. For although Christians strong
in the faith make no such difficulty, and in that respect have no cause to
fear for themselves, yet knowing that such difficulties to some other
ignorants and weak in faith will be a stumbling block, they ought to pray to
God, having regard to them, that the causes and occasions of such difficulties
happen not, if it be possible, and ^in this respect Jesus Christ might have
said to his Disciples, Pray that your flight from the desolation to come be not
on the Sabbath day, if not for your own sake, who, being well informed and
instructed in the faith, shall know that ye may flee on that day, and make no
difficulty for conscience sake, yet in regard of others, who shall be
distressed with the same necessity to flee with you, but who being altogether
ignorant of the liberty of the Gospel, as the Jews not as yet converted, or
the weak ones retaining, after their conversion and profession of the Gospel,
a religious respect toward the ceremonies of the Law of Moses, as many
Christians, who, for conscience sake toward the Sabbath will be scrupulous to
fly on it, for whom, in respect of their ignorance and weakness, you ought
to pray, that your common flight be not on that day. For ye are all members of
one body.

6 I say more, that although Jesus Christ by the Sabbath day had signified the
first day of the week, which after his Ascension was to be observed by all
Christians, and had commanded his Disciples to pray, that their flight should
not fall out on Sunday, least they should be compelled to employ, upon bodily
working, traveling, and hurrying up and down, a day, which otherwise they had
applied to GODs service, of that no man can conclude, neither that a seventh
day of rest is a moral point, nor also that Christ's mind was to injoyne the
observation of the first day of the week, but only, that he foresaw, that
after his Ascension the first day of the week should be kept by Christians, of
their own free will, through respect to his resurrection, which should befall
on that day, and that it should be loathsome and grievous unto them to weary
themselves with fleeing on a day wherein they were wont to rest from all
worldly employments, and to addict themselves to serve God in his house.

Verily although a day be not ordained of God to be stinted for his service,
yet if by the custom of the Church it be ordinarily employed for that use, a
true Christian will be heartily sorry that he should be forced by necessity to
busy himself in other exercises, then those which are proper to Gods service,
and he may with good reason make humble suit unto GOD, that he be not brought
to such a hard strait; And therefore CHRIST might advise his Disciples to pray,
that their flight should not befall on the Saturday, without any other
inference that can be gathered from thence, saving a future use and custom to
observe such a day in the Church, and not any obligation proceeding from him,
far less a natural and moral obligation toward a seventh day of the week
which is the point in question.

CHAPTER Eleven.
Answer to the Ninth Reason.
1. Ninth Reason, the Apostles kept the Sabbath.

2. First answer, they entered into the Synagogues of the Jews on the Sabbath
day, not for conscience sake, but for the commodity of the place, and time, to
convert the Jews.

3. Second answer, In this, and in the observation of other ceremonies, they
applied themselves to the infirmity of the Jews.

4. Passages alleged, to prove that the Apostles absolutely and simply did
keep the Sabbath of the Jews.

5. First Answer, Acts 13. ver. 42. (...), may be interpreted indifferently,
people, folk.

6. Second answer, the words (...), may be interpreted of the week between.

7. If we read (...), they signify in a day between the Sabbaths, this
answer is not refuted by the 44. verse.

8. Third Answer: The 44. Uerse may be truly translated, not of the next
Sabbath day, but of the next week.

9. Fourth Answer, in both verses the Sabbath being taken for the next Sabbath,
they prove not that which is intended.

10. The passage alleged, Acts 16. verse 12, 13. cannot be understood, but of
those that were Jews in Religion.

11. Whether they had a Synagogue or not, they met together out of the towns.

12. There they had a place appointed for prayer, etc. called (...), that is,
an Oratory, or place of prayer.

15. Where Saint Paul and his fellows joined with them, to seek to gain them
to Christ.

14. Why the Apostles, which taught sufficiently the abrogation of the Sabbath,
and of Holy days, did not preach against them, as they did against
Circumcision and other ceremonies.

15. Answer to the last Reason concerning the Sabbaticall River.

1 IT is with as little show, nay it is rather against themselves, that to
prove a necessary and perpetual obligation to keep the Sabbath, some make use
of that which is noted in diverse places of the Acts of the Apostles, as in the
Chapter 13. verse 14, 43, 44. and 16. verse 13. and 17. verse 2. and 18. verse
4. and other where, that the Apostles, after the Ascension of Jesus Christ,
kept the Sabbath, going to the Synagogues of the Jews, and expounding the
Scriptures there.

2 For this argument, if it were good for any thing, would prove, that under
the New Testament the Jewish Sabbath day, to wit, the last of the week, is to
be kept, because in the foresaid places mention is made of that day only.

But the going of the Apostles to the Synagogues on that day, came not from any
obligation of the law, tying them to the Sabbath, nor from any religious
respect to that day, as if it had been still a necessary point of Gods
service, but because it was the ordinary day of the congregations of the Jews,
whom they desired to convert, and it was expedient, for that end, that they
should be present at such times and places that the Jews did meet in, to wit,
on the Sabbath day and in their Synagogues, as, for the same reason, they
observed also the annual feasts, and endeavored to be at Jerusalem on such
days, as may be seen Acts 20. verse 16.

I add, that they applied themselves in this point, as in many other legal
ceremonies, to the infirmity of the Jews, Acts. 15. v. 3
29. Acts 16. verse 3. Acts 21. verse 24, 26. and 1 Cor. 9. ver. 20. to gain
them more easily to the faith, and to preserve them in it after their
conversion. For it is certain, that the faithful Christians, converted from
the Jewish Religion to the faith of Christ, kept still a great zeal for the
ceremonies, as it is said in the Acts Chap. 21. verse 20. and consequently for
the Sabbath day.

4 There be some who would have the Jewish Sabbath to be still kept in the
Christian Church, and to prove that the Apostles did particularly and carefully
observe the seventh day of the week without any occasion of condescent to the
Religion and devotion of the Jews toward the Sabbath, do allege the
thirteenth Chapter of the Acts verse 42, 43, 44. where it is said, that when
Paul and Barnabas were on the Sabbath day gone out of the Synagogue of the
Jews, the Gentiles besought them that they would preach the word unto them the
next Sabbath: which being granted unto them, the next Sabbath day, almost the
whole City, wherein were comprised more Gentiles than Jews, came together to
hear the Word of God. They allege also the sixteenth Chapter of the Acts
verse 13. where without any mention of Jews, or of Synagogue, it is said, that
Paul and Silas being in Philippi, a Town of Macedonia, where they sojourned
certain days, on the Sabbath went out of the City, by a river side, where
prayer was wont to be made, keeping the Sabbath amongst the Gentiles, without
any respect to the Jews.

5 To this I may answer without great difficulty. And first to the passage in
the Acts Chapter 13. verse 42. I might say, that this entreaty made to Paul and
Barnabas to preach the next Sabbath day, is not by all the interpreters
ascribed to the Gentiles, but to the Jews, who before, as may be seen in the
fifteenth verse, had entreated them to propound some word of exhortation. For
the word Gentiles, in some Greek editions, and in some versions, is not to be
found: Besides this, some are of opinion, that the word (...), may be taken,
not for the Gentiles, as they are distinguished from the Jews, but
indifferently for the multitude of people that was there present, in this
sense, and the folk or people besought Paul and Barnabas, which may be
referred to the Jews as well as to the Gentiles.

6 But not to stand upon that, I say Secondly, that the original Text does not
show manifestly, that the request made by the Gentiles to Paul and Barnabas
was, that they would preach unto them the next Sabbath day, for it may signify
in the intermedium of the Sabbath, that is, in any time between the Sabbath
wherein they had presently preached to the Jews, and the next Sabbath
following; For seeing the Sabbath was the day which the Jews reserved for
themselves, and which the Apostles employed amongst them for their instruction,
the Gentiles, belike, desired to take some other day for them, wherein, with
more commodity, they might hear the word. And verily, there is no likelihood
that Gentiles, not as yet instructed, neither in the Law, nor in the Gospel,
would ask, of their own head, the Sabbath day, rather than any other, and it
is more likely, that they did ask any other commodious day between the
Sabbath of the Jews, such as Paul and Barnabas should be pleased to appoint
unto them, whiles they were not busied with teaching the Jews. The words in
the original are (...), which many interpreters do translate, not the next
Sabbath day, as if the Gentiles had chused that day, but in the Sabbath or in
the week between, that is, in any day between, till the next Sabbath.

7 And there are some which probably esteem, that these words should be red
(...), and not (...), and that (...) should be taken for (...), and so (...),
for (...), which signify clearly, in any day whatsoever between the
Sabbaths. This interpretation is not sufficiently refuted by the allegation of
the 44. Verse, where it is clearly said, that the next Sabbath day came almost
the whole City together to hear the Word of God. For it is not necessary, that
this 44. Verse should declare the accomplishment of the request made by the
Gentiles in the 42. Verse: It is rather likely, that the Apostles having
already fulfilled it between the two Sabbaths, when the Sabbath day came,
wherein the Jews, according to their custom met together, and Paul, as his
manner was, preached unto them, as we may see Acts 17. verse 2. and Acts 18.
verse 4. the whole City being moved with curiosity, by the rumor spread abroad
of the former sermons made both to Jews and Gentiles, ran together in a
far greater number than before, to hear the word.

Thirdly, seeing the word (...), Sabbath, is sometimes taken 8 Luke 18. 12.
(...), I fast twice in the week. Act. 13. ver. 14. (...). And the next week.
both in the Old, and in the New Testament, not particularly for the Sabbath
day, but for the week, as in Leviticus 23. verse 15. and 25. verse 8. in Saint
Matthew 28. verse 1. in St. Luke 18. v. 12. wherefore may we not in the
foresaid passages understand, that the Gentiles, seeing it was the end of that
week, entreated Paul and Barnabas to preach unto them the next week verse 42.
and that they did so the next week, conformably to their desire, ver. 44.
without expression of the particular day of that week? So the sense shall be
this, And the next week came almost the whole City, etc.

But although we should grant, that both in the request of the Gentiles, verse
42. and in the accomplishment thereof, verse 44. the Sabbath day must be
understood, it follows not, neither that the Gentiles ought to observe that
day, nor that the Apostles had any regard unto it for Religion and conscience
sake, but only that the Gentiles of whom mention is made in the 42. Verse,
having been present at the Sermon which Paul and Barnabas made to the Jews on
the Sabbath day, and not having a particular day or time appointed to them for
the hearing of the word of the Gospel, because the Christian Religion was not
as yet received nor established in their Town, as the Jewish Religion was,
having her Sabbaths and Synagogues free, which the Apostles resorted unto,
entreated them, that they might hear them again on another Sabbath day, and
in the Synagogue of the Jews, because it was a most fit time and place for
them, by reason of the liberty that the Jews enjoined for the exercises of
their Religion, which Paul and Barnabas yielded unto, whereof the speech being
spread abroad through the Town, great multitudes trouped together on the next
Sabbath, through curiosity, and ran to the Synagogue of the Jews to hear
them. So it was not any devotion, neither of the Gentiles, nor of the Apostles
to the Sabbath, but the simple commodity, that moved them to make choice of it.

10 To the other passage cited out of the sixteenth Chapter of the Acts verse
12, 13. I say likewise, that Paul and Silas took occasion to observe the
Sabbath, because the Jews met together for the exercise of their Religion on
that day. For although it be not said, that those which resorted unto the place
of prayer were Jews, no more is it said, that they were Gentiles: But it may
be gathered out of the Text, that they were Jews, either by birth and of the
same nation, or by Religion, and religious communion, because they were persons
which ordinarily assembled together to call upon God on the Sabbath day verse
13. and who already served God, as amongst others it is said of Lydia, verse
14. with whom the Apostles made no bones to join themselves. Which cannot in
any wise be taken of Gentiles Infidels, and of their devotions to their Idols,
as is evident, nor also of the Gentiles converted to the Christian Religion,
seeing Paul, Silas and Timothy were but new arrived in that place, where the
word of the Gospel had not been as yet preached, as appears by the nine and
ten Uerses. Therefore of necessity they were Jews of Religion dwelling in
Philippi, and worshipping GOD according to the Law wherein they were instructed.

11 It imports not much, that no mention is made of a Synagogue where these
persons came together, but only that they went out of the City, by a River
side, where prayer was wont to be made. For it may be, they had no Synagogue,
because they were but few, or wanted means to build a Synagogue, or because in
that Town, which was a Roman Colony, they were not suffered to build one, and
therefore they assembled together near the River in some secret place out of
the way, not daring to meet openly in the Town. Peradventure also they had a
Synagogue, but, if that which is written (...). 80.
by some be true, that the manner of the Jews was to meet, not only in their
Synagogues in Towns, for the reading of the Law, but also out of Towns in the
fields, for the exercise of prayer, even so these persons mentioned in the
place aforesaid, went out of the Town by the River side for that end, and that
Paul and Silas made good use of that place and time of their holiest devotions,
as most commodious to go and to speak to them, because since their coming to
the Town, which was a few days before, undoubtedly they had not found the
opportunity to speak unto them there nor elsewhere.

12 Yea, according to the exposition of some learned men, the word (...) may be
taken in the thirteenth and sixteenth verse, for an house builded for the
exercises of prayer, and other religious actions accustomed among the Jews: As
also it was an ordinary Philo legate. ad Cerema. Iuvenall. Satyra 3. In qua te
qu^ro proseucha.
name, whereby were entitled these houses wherein the Jews did flock together
to read, and to pray; we may, keeping the signification of the word, call them
Oratories, or houses of prayer, as the Temple is called, Esa. 56. verse 7.

13 So then it is evident, that this place of the Acts, as the former, is most
conveniently expounded of the Jews, and therefore that for their sake only
Saint Paul and his fellows made choice of the Sabbath day to intertaine them
with Religious and wholesome speeches of the Gospel; Neither shall any place
be found, where the Apostles are said to have observed the Sabbath, but with
respect to the Jews, to whom they applied themselves, seeking fit times,
places, occasions to convert them, and not having any so fit as the Sabbath,
which they behoved to keep to come to their intent. For at another time they
could not have assembled the Jews so commodiously as they would, to preach
unto them the Gospel publicly, and loosing the Sabbath day, they had lost the
most favorable and advantageous commodities for the propagation and setting
forward of the Gospel. Whereunto they had a special regard, catching that
opportunity above all others, namely seeing to observe the seventh day, or any
other day, is in it self a thing indifferent under the Gospel, which has
only abolished the type and ancient obligation to that day, leaving to the
liberty of the Church to serve God on any day or days whatsoever which are or
shall be appointed by them.

14 Which is, to my opinion, the reason why they did not preach against the
Sabbath day, nor also against the other holy days of the Jews, so vehemently
as they did against other ceremonies, namely against circumcision, Acts 15. v.
1. Acts 21. v. 21. Gal. 5. ver. 2. But condescended to the one far more
easily then to the other: Because there cannot be under the New Testament any
lawful use of the circumcision, nor of other ceremonies like unto it, but very
good use might be made of the Sabbath day, and of other days, after the
manner before specified. Yet they have not concealed the abrogation of the
Sabbath and of the feasts, but have sufficiently spoken of it, as is manifest
by the prooffes before propounded. And therefore, of the custom they had to
keep the Sabbath day, cannot be enforced any obligation tying us to observe
it, no more than other ceremonies, to which they conformed themselves for a
time, because they did it only to become as Jews unto the Jews, as the
Apostle witnesses 1 Cor. 9. verse 20. having otherwise both in their
discourses and in their writings taught clearly and fully the abrogation of
all these things.

15 I scorn to rank among the foresaid reasons, or to honor with the name of
a reason that, which nevertheless is by some set on foot, and enforced as a
good reason, when they tell us of a certain river in Palestina, which,
according to the relation of some writers, ran regularly with swiftness
enough, and waters in a sufficient abundance in the six days of the week,
and on the Sabbath day vanishing away in his force left his channel empty and
dry: Or on the contrary, as the thing is related by others, vanished away, or
was dried up all the six days before the Sabbath, and on the Sabbath days
filled up his channel. Josephus makes mention of this river in this last
fashion, in the seventh book of the wars of the Jews Chapter 24. and says,
that the Emperor Titus passing that way remarked it. Plineas also makes
mention of it, but in the first fashion, in the 31. book of his natural
History, Chapter 2. and some Rabbis likewise: whereupon some seek to build
pretty allegories, to prove the observation of the Sabbath on a Seventh day of
the week.

But they take not heed, that in so arguing they imitate the Jews, who upon
the mavelous nature of this River called Sabbaticall, seek to infer the
perpetuity of their Sabbath day, wherein they are better grounded, then
Christians, who from thence infer simply the perpetuity of a seventh day. For
it was particularly on the last of seven days, and not on any other day of the
week, that this River rested, or flowed; and therefore we should be bound to
observe the seventh and last day of the week, if the changings of this River
could be a precedent to the matter in hand. But, if allegorizing were sound
Divinity, a conclusion might be made flat contrary to the former upon the
proprieties of this Sabbaticall River. For as Galatinus says, in the 9 Chapter
of the eleventh book of the secrets of the Catholic truth, the drying up of
this River and the want of water in it on the Sabbath day, betokened that the
Sabbath should be denied, and loose all obligatory virtue under the New
Testament. If it ran on the Sabbath day, it could not be a precedent of
rest. For running is not resting. But whether it be true that such a River has
been, or that it has never been, since it is not now, and is no where found
by the travelers that seek it, the cessation and bringing of it to naught,
teaches, that the Sabbath has ceased, and is abrogated.

And so having refuted all reasons that are put abroach for the morality and
perpetuity of the Sabbath, I end here the second part of this Treatise.

THE THIRD PART Of the original and institution of the first day of the week
for the day of Gods public service in the Christian. CHURCH.
CHAPTER First.
Establishment of the opinion most admittable concerning the original and
institution of the Lords day.
1. The first day of the week was kept from the beginning of the Christian
Church in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, not for any necessity in the
thing it self.

2. Not also by obligation of the fourth Commandment.

3. The state of the Question: whether this day be an institution of JESUS
CHRIST, or of his Apostles; or whether the faithful, of themselves, without
any Commandment, made choice of it.

4. The first opinion has no solid foundation: The second has.

5. First argument against the first opinion: There is no record in the whole
New Testament, that Christ or his Apostles ordained that day, etc.

6. Second argument, the first day of the week was not equally kept by all
Christians, till Constantine by an imperial Law tied them unto it, as also to
the sixth day, which we call Friday.

7. First observation upon the imperial Law of Constantine concerning the
first day of the week.

8. Second Observation upon the same Law, concerning the sixth day.

9. Whence it is clear, that both were of Ecclesiastical institution.

10. Third argument, the first Christians especially in the East observed for
the space of three hundred years and more, the seventh day of the week with
the first day.

11. Confirmation of this truth by the Council of Laodicea, and sundry
Fathers, etc.

12. Which show evidently, that the Christians in those days believed not that
the first day of the week was by CHRIST or his Apostles subrogated to the
Jewish Sabbath.

1 IT is plain, and generally agreed on, that the first day of the week was
kept from the beginning of the Christian Church, and that undoubtedly upon the
consideration of the Resurrection of CHRIST, which came to pass on that day.
Yet this observation was not grounded upon any necessity of the thing it self,
obliging Christians to keep that day of the week, rather than another. For,
as it has been showed before, it is impossible to explicate with show of
reason, either what moral necessity one day of seven has in it, more than
has another number, or wherefore it was necessary that the day of the week
that Christ rose in, should be kept in the Christian Church, rather than the
day wherein he was borne, or the day wherein he suffered on the Cross, or the
day wherein he ascended into heaven. Or if the day of his Resurrection must be
observed, why these others of his birth, death and Ascension ought not to be
also kept weekly. The resurrection of Christ might, did give occasion unto the
observation of that day, but that it was a cause obliging necessarily, and
having a fundamental relation, or that CHRIST by his Resurrection on that day
intended to sanctify it particularly to the Christian Church, cannot be
proved.

2 Neither also has the fourth Commandment obliged Christians to observe this
day. For it enjoined the last day of the week precisely, and not the first,
and in that respect was ceremonial, which also has been showed. And
therefore the observation of the first day of the week cannot be grounded upon
the terms thereof. For the foundation thereof should be absurd and
unreasonable, thus. God ordained under the Old Testament, as a point of
ceremony and of order for that time, the last day of the week, wherein he
rested from all his works: Therefore in virtue and through obligation of this
Commandment, men are bound under the New Testament to observe the first day of
the week, wherein God began to apply himself to the production of his works.
Who sees not the manifest absurdity of such an illation? Therefore this
observation of the first day of the week, must of necessity be attributed to
some other free and voluntary institution made concerning it in the New
Testament.

3 Here begins a new question, whether the institution thereof be divine, or
Apostolical; If it was our Lord Jesus Christ that ordained it after his
Resurrection, to be kept by all Christians during the whole time of the New
Testament, if the Apostles also enjoined it to all the faithful till the end
of the world, so that they are all bound to the observation thereof by the
institution of Christ, or of his Apostles: Or whether the faithful did not, of
themselves, without any commandment, through respect to the Resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ, keep the day wherein it came to pass, as also to make
a distinction thereby between them and the Jews, and to show that they were
made free from all Jewish observations, types and figures, amongst which was
the Sabbath day, and that they observed not a day in quality of type and
figure, but only for orders sake, and for Ecclesiastical government, to apply
themselves together to the exercises of Religion, and for that cause had
changed the seventh day of the Jews into another: which usage and custom, as
very fit and convenient, being begun first amongst a few, fair and softly
prevailed, and was established with the Christian Religion amongst all those
that embraced it, and since that time has continued in the Christian Church
till this day.

4 Although the first of these opinions were true, it cannot enforce the
morality of a seventh day of rest, but only, that the first day of the weeks
was instituted by JESUS CHRIST, or his Apostles, as a point of order,
whereunto, in such a case, the faithful should be bound by the necessity of a
divine and apostolical commandment. But I see not that this opinion has any
solid ground, whereas the second is well founded. For there is nothing found in
the New Testament concerning the observation of the first day of the week,
importing a commandment of Christ, or of his Apostles, neither is there any
such commandment inferred, but by remote and most weak consequences, and it
is more likely that all the places alleged to that purpose denote only a
simple usage among some Christians in those days, which by succession of time
has been settled, and is become universal.

5 Indeed, if Jesus Christ, or his Apostles by express commandment from him,
or by divine inspiration, had ordained that day, as a point so necessary, as it
is thought to be, I doubt not but their commandment should have been
expressly set down in the books of the New Testament, as are all other
ordinances of necessary things; and that in them we should find reprehension
against those that had neglected the observation of that day, as in them there
are reprehensions against all kind of sinners. But seeing there is no such
commandment to be found in them, that it cannot be gathered from them but by
consequences which are of no force, that no man is blamed in them for the
inobservation of that day, whereas under the Old Testament God taxed so often
and so sharply those that kept not his Sabbaths, this is to me a most firm
and assured proof, that neither JESUS CHRIST nor his Apostles have ordained it.

6 I add, that if had been an ordinance of Jesus Christ or of his Apostles,
undoubtedly the Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel, when they found
and established the Christian Churches had established the observation of this
day, as a point of the will of Jesus Christ, and of his service under the New
Testament, and it had been kept equally by all the Churches. For why had they
not received it, as well as the other points of the Christian Religion and
doctrine of the Gospel, since the same authority obliged them thereunto? Now
this is most true, that the observation thereof was not practiced throughout
them all, and became not universal and well settled, but by the commandments
and constitution of the Emperors.

There diverse imperial constitutions for the observation of the first day of
the week, Eusebius in the fourth book of the life of Constantine Chapter 16.
and after him Sozomene in the first book of his Ecclesiastical History, and
in the 8 Chapter, relates, that Constantine the first made a Law, and ordained
that on Sunday which is the first day of the week, and on Friday, all public
judgments should surcease, that all other affairs should be intermitted, that
on these days all should apply themselves to serve GOD by prayers and
supplications, and that so he reverenced Sunday, because on it Jesus Christ
rose from the dead, and Friday, because on it he was crucified.

7 This passage is considerable; For it shows, that Sunday was not observed
throughout all the Churches, but that it was used as a workday, and that on it
common pleas and public judgments were practiced, whence we may conclude,
with a great show of truth, that it was not an institution of Christ, nor of
his Apostles: For if it had been, questionless the observation thereof had
been better known and practiced, and Christians had thought themselves more
obliged unto it, for the commandment of Christ and of his Apostles, then for
any imperial constitution. The writers of that story telling also what reason
Constantine had to make a constitution concerning the observation of Sunday,
say simply, that he made it, because on it Jesus Christ rose from the dead,
which indeed has always been the foundation of this usage, but they say not,
that it was because Jesus Christ and his Apostles had ordained, which they
ought not to be silent of, if that had been true, and it had been needless to
allege any other reason.

9 This is also worthy to be marked, that Sozomen joyneth the Friday with the
Sunday, and says, that Constantine ordained that day, as well as this day: That
day, because on it Christ was crucified; this day, because on it Christ rose
again: Which shows plainly that the day of Christ's Resurrection is not of
it self more obligatory to make christians keep it, then is the day of his
passion upon the Cross, or of any other of his actions or sufferings: That the
one may yield as just and peremptory a cause thereof, as the other, that Christ
also had not given a commandment more express and more necessary for the one
then for the other, but had left all this to the liberty of the Church. For if
he had given a particular commandment concerning Sunday, it had bin in
Constantine a great temerity to ordain another day, in equal rank with that
which Christ had ordained, because he ought to think, that Christ had good
reasons for the institution of that day, which had not been valuable for any
other day, and that by the institution of one day in the week particularly,
and of no more, he would have all Christians to know, that no man ought to
attempt to institute any other, besides that which he had instituted.

9 Constantine had been guilty of far greater rashness and indiscretion, by
making Friday, which was of his institution, equal to Sunday, which Jesus
Christ had ordained, yet he did so, as is manifest by the words of Sozomen who
makes no ods between the ordinance made for Friday, and that which was made
for Sunday. But seeing Constantine in what he did, did nothing amiss, it is
evident thereby, that the observation of Sunday was not of divine institution,
but of usage and custom only, which was not received every where, nor well
practiced where it was received, because it was not esteemed necessary.
Wherefore Constantine by his constitution made it necessary, adding another
like unto it for Friday, all this is flat contrary to the assertion of those,
which to prove that Sunday is of divine institution, yield this reason of their
opinion that no humane authority can sanctify a day. And lo, Constantine
sanctified Friday, ordaining that it should be employed in exercises of
Religion only: whereof we shall speak again something hereafter, God willing.

10 Socrates in the fifth book and 21 Chapter of his Ecclesiastical story,
marketh sundry customs in the Churches about the day of their assemblies,
which some kept in one day of the week, some in another: And says expressly,
that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have not ordained any thing concerning holy
days, but have only given precepts of godliness, and of an holy life: And it
is most likely, that the Christian Churches, which in the beginning God
assembled among the Jews, kept not for a long while any other day, for the
exercise of their religion, saving the 7th and last day of the week: And it is
a thing most certain, that many Churches of the Gentiles, especially in the
last more than three hundred years after Christ, observed the Sabbath day of
the Jews with the Sunday, and made of the one a day of devotion, as well as of
the other.

Saint Ignatius Martyr, an hundred years after Jesus Christ, in 11 Council.
Laodicen. Can. 29. Non oportet Christianos judaizare, and in Sabbatho vacare,
sed operari eos in eadem die, dominicum praeponendo eidem diei. Si hoc eis
placet, vacent tanquam Christiani. Quod si inventi fuerint judaizare anathema
sint.
his Epistle to the Magnesians, exhorts the Christians to observe the
Sabbath, not after the manner of the Jews, which there he describes, but
after a spiritual and holy manner, such as he sets down, and adds, that
after they had observed the Sabbath, they should also observe the first day of
the week. The Council which met in Laodicea, in the fourth age after Christ,
ordained, that Christians must not keep the Sabbath day, and rest in it after
the manner of the Jews, which shows, that till then they observed it. Nay,
according to the translations which we have, the Council did not forbid them
absolutely to keep the Jewish Sabbath, but permitted it unto them, if they
would, with this caveat, that it were not after the fashion of the Jews, and
that they should prefer Sunday before it.

Saint Athanasius, in the homily of the seed, says of himself, and of other
faithful Christians, that they assembled together on the Sabbath day, not
through malady of spirit, for Iudaisme, but to worship the Lord of the Sabbath.
Gregory of Nisse calls these two days, to wit, the Sabbath day and the Lords
day, brethren. Sozomene in the seventh book and 19 Chapter of his History
says, that at Constantinople, and almost in all other parts of the Eastern
Church, the ecclesiastical assemblies met together on the Sabbath day, and on
the day following. Socrates in the sixth book and eight Chapter of his History,
calls the Sabbath day and the Sunday the weekly feasts wherein Christians
came together in the Churches: and in the foresaid 21 Chap. of the fifth book,
amongst many diverse customs of the Churches of these times, concerning their
assemblies and exercises of Religion, he alleges a frequent and common
observation of the Sabbath.

12 Which shows, that the Churches believed not Sunday to be of divine
institution, and subrogated to the Sabbath by our Lord Jesus Christ. For if
they had believed any such thing, they had not observed another day: But
knowing they had no particular commandment for any day of devotion, they
observed both the Sab-

because it had been a long while a solemn day of devotion ordained of God to
the Jews, and Sunday, because it was made honorable by the Resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

This that we say shall be better seen; by the consideration of the reasons
which are broached to prove, that the institution of the first day of the week
to be a holy day, is of God himself, of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles.

CHAPTER Second.
Answer to the first Reason, taken from some Texts of the Old Testament, to
prove the divine institution of the first day of the week.
1. Answer to the Reasons taken from the Circumcision administered on the eight
day, and from the inscription of certain Psalms, etc.

2. Reasons taken out of the 110 Psalm 3. ver. and of the 118. Psalm verse 24.

3. Answer, In the hundred and tenth Psalm no mention is made of any
particular day.

4. Nor also in the hundred and eighteenth Psalm.

5. And although there were, a day of rest in every week cannot be enforced
from thence.

6. No more then the words of Isaiah Chapter 9. and of the Angels Luke 2. verse
10, 11. can enforce a weekly observation of a day, in remembrance of Christ's
birth.

1 IT were a loss of time to stay here upon the refutation of the reasons
taken from the ancient circumcision, which was celebrated on the eight day, and
which some say to have been a figure of the spiritual circumcision that we
were to obtain by our Lord Jesus Christ one the first day of the week which
is as the eight day, succeeding immediately to the seventh and last day
thereof: Nor also of these which are overthwartly wrested out of these Psalms,
which have in their titles or inscription (...) Hascheminith, Psalm. 6. v. 1.
Psa. 12. ver. 1. etc.
that is super octava, upon the octave, as if in these titles mention were made
of the first day after the seventh, which is Sunday. For although these reasons
have been alleged by some of the ancients, they broached them rather as
allusions and allegories, then as solid proofs to rely upon. Wherefore leaving
them, I go forward to the consideration of two others, which have greater
likeness of truth.

2 They would feign take advantage of the hundred and 10. Psalm, and of the 3.
ver. as also of the hundred and 18. Psalm, and of the 24 v. thereof, as if in
these places there were a prophecy, that Sunday, or the day of the
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, should be observed in the Christian
Church. In the hundred and 10 Psalm. verse 3. mention is made of a day wherein
Christ should raise an army in a holy pomp, and his people should be a willing
people. In the hundred and 18 Psalm verse 24. the people is exhorted to
rejoice and be glad in the day which the Lord had made, day wherein the stone,
which the builders refused, should become the head stone of the corner verse
22. Stone which is Christ. Now Christ in his ignominious death was like a stone
rejected by the builders, that is, by the governors and rulers of the Jews;
and it was by his glorious Resurrection, that he became the head stone of the
corner, Act. 4. ver. 10, 11.

3 To this I answer, that no certain argument can be drawn from the two
foresaid allegations. For who dare affirm, that in them a particular day is
denoted, and not rather indefinitely the time of the publication of the
Gospel, and gathering together of the Christian Church, which was done by the
Apostles after the Resurrection of Christ? It is said in the hundred and tenth
Psalm ver. 2. that the Lord should send out of Sion the Scepter of Christ's
strength; the meaning of which words is, that out of Jerusalem he should send
forth, and spread every where the preaching of the Gospel, to wit, by the
Apostles and other Ministers, and that in the day, that is, in the time wherein
he should raise his army, that is gather together his Church, she should be a
free, voluntary and forward people. Now the first assembling of the Christian
Church happened not in one day, more than in another, but the Apostles applied
themselves to that work every day, preaching the Gospel, wherefore we must
not understand in that place of the Psalm any particular day, but the whole
time wherein this work was done by the Apostles, and their Disciples.

4 I say the same of the hundred and eighteenth Psalm. For Jesus Christ is not
become the head stone of the corner simply by his Resurrection, but in as much
as after his Resurrection, he has, by the preaching of the Gospel, built up
the faithful upon himself, as so many lively stones, to be a spiritual
house, as we may see in the first epistle of Saint Peter Chapter 2. verse 4, 5,
6, 7. And therefore this day which the Lord has made, and wherein the Psalmist
exhorts the faithful to rejoice, is not a particular day, but all this time,
blessed and sanctified by the LORD, wherein should begin and go forward this
great work of the preaching of the Gospel for the edifying in all places of
the Church upon Jesus Christ: for this is ordinary both in Scripture and in the
common language, when mention is made of a day wherein a thing is a doing, or
shall be done, to understand, not always necessarily a certain particular
day, but indefinitely the time of such a thing, which may be such that it
cannot be performed in one particular day, but requires a continuation of
time. So the Apostle applying to the Christians of his time the words of God in
Isaiah Chapter 49. 8. says, Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, Now is
the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. verse 2. This time, and this day is now also in
our time, and shall be till the worlds end. Such was the work whereof mention
is made in the foresaid Psalm, a work which has ever been a doing since
Christ's Ascension into heaven, and shall not be performed till he come visibly
from heaven, to judge the quick and the dead.

5 But granting that the Psalmist speaks of a particular day, which God
ordained then for the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and wherein it was
afterward fulfilled, it follows not, that he would bind the faithful under
the New Testament to make weekly of that day a day of rest. For he exhorts
them only to rejoice and be glad for it, as for a day wherein a great thing,
and belonging to their salvation should be performed, which they may well do,
according to the exhortation of the Psalmist, although they make not that day
every week a day of rest. For they may and ought to rejoice every day
privately at home, and also publikelie in the congregation as often as they
meet together to serve GOD.

6 And if the question be of the stinting of a solemn day for the
commemoration of this great work, the exhortation of the Psalmist obliges
them not more particularly to one ordinary day in the week, then to a yearly
day. Esaias in the ninth Chapter prophesies, that the faithful shall rejoice
with a great joy for the day wherein the child was borne, and the Son was
given, and the Angels of GOD on that day brought to the Shepherds good tidings
of great joy, which should be to all people, because unto them was borne that
day in the City of David a Savior, which is CHRIST the LORD, Luke 2. verse 10,
11. And yet these words enforce not, that the day of CHRIST'S birth must
necessarily be observed as a day of rest, and far less as an ordinary day
every week. And the Church which has thought fit to make commemoration
thereof on a set day, was pleased to appoint for that purpose one day only in
the whole year. Neither can there a greater obligation then this be inferred
of the foresaid passage, for the day of the Resurrection. For we may, yea we
ought to rejoice for the day of the Nativity of Christ, of his passion, of his
Ascension, and likewise of his Resurrection, but for all that, we are not bound
to make of them Sabbath days. And so the foresaid places conclude nothing.

CHAPTER Third.
Answer to the second Reason, whereby they seek to prove, that Sunday was
sanctified by our Lord Jesus Christ for Gods service.
1. Second Reason, Christ forty days before the Ascension spoke to his
Apostles of things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and therefore of the
Sabbath.

2. Answer, by the kingdom of God are to be understood the essential points
of our Christian Religion.

3, Not the circumstances thereof, which are left to the liberty of the Church.

4. Nullity of the instance urged from the commandment given to Moses
concerning the Sabbath.

5. The Church had authority to sanctify Sunday, as well as other holy days,
for Gods service.

1 THey allege out of the New Testament, that our Lord Jesus Christ, after
his Resurrection, was forty days with his Disciples, speaking unto them of the
things pertaining to the kingdom of God, Act. 1. verse 3. that is, to the
training and government of the Christian Church, which is often called the
kingdom of God, as Acts 19. verse 8. Acts 28. verse 23. Col. 4. verse. 11.
etc. To which government, say they, did pertain the determination of one day,
wherein the Evangelicall service ought to be publicly celebrated to God. For
as God, when he gave the ancient Covenant by Moses, and taught him how he
would have his Church to be trained, had a particular care to name unto him a
certain day for his service, even so our Lord Jesus Christ, when he taught the
New Covenant to his Apostles, and how under it he would have his Church to be
governed by them, and by their successors, has not omitted to appoint unto
them a certain day for his public service.

2 I answer, that this argument is not founded, but upon uncertain
conjectures, and so concludes nothing necessarily. By the kingdom of God is
meant ordinarily in the New Testament, the word of the Gospel, the Christian
Religion, the state and condition of the Church; and is so taken in the places
before alleged. Wherefore, when it is said in the first of the Acts verse 3.
that Jesus Christ spoke to his Apostles of things belonging to the kingdom of
God, it is likely, that the meaning of these words is, that Jesus Christ spoke
unto them of things pertaining to the Gospel, to the Religion, and to the
government of the Church, and thence may be inferred, that he declared and
prescribed unto them all things that are of the substance of the Gospel, of
the Religion, and of the essential matter of his service, such as is the
preaching of the points of faith and of doctrine, and the administration of the
Sacraments of the New Testament, things that God himself ordains
necessarily, and will never leave to the liberty of men, to dispose of as they
think fit, but will have all men in these points to depend on his declaration
and ordinance. As also they are most expressly declared in the New Testament, as
being established by our Lord Jesus Christ.

3 But as for the circumstance of a particular and ordinary time, for the
practicing of these exercises, no man can infer of the foresaid Text, that
Jesus Christ prescribed it to his Apostles, yea it is most likely, that he
resigned that care to the wisdom of his faithful servants, because there
being no necessity nor essential importance of such a determination of one
day, it is more agreeable to the state of liberty, which the Scripture
assigns to the Christian Church under the Gospel, that Jesus Christ would
have it to depend on her liberty and wisdom, rather than prescribe it
himself.

4 Under the old testament God ordained by Moses a set day for the Sabbath,
because it was the time of bondage, as also he prescribed for a mark of that
bondage an exact cessation from all servile works, yea of the least on that
day, and besides, ordained unto them diverse other days and times for his
service, as also a particular place for the public exercise thereof, a
Tabernacle, a City, a Temple, etc.

5 Now if under the New Testament he has left altogether to the first liberty
and wisdom of the Church the determination of places, such as she shall
think fit, as also of diverse other times and days, which she may ordain,
and has ordained in effect, for the celebration of the remembrance of sundry
benefits which God has vouchsafed upon us through our Lord Jesus Christ, and
for the solemnization of them by the godly exercises of Religion, I see no
reason, why we may not say, that he has likewise left unto her Christian
wisdom the determination of the day of his service, which is more common and
ordinary, specially seeing in the whole New Testament there is not at all any
express mention of a particular day instituted and ordained by him for that
end; which the Evangelists and Apostles had not, as it were with one accord,
been silent of, if it were true, that our Lord Jesus Christ had ordained such
a day.

CHAPTER Fourth.
Answer to the third reason brought to prove the foresaid opinion.
1. Third Reason, Jesus appeared to his Disciples the same day of his
Resurrection at evening, and eight days after, which was the first day of the
week, as also on that day the Apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost.

2. First Answer, Christ appeared to his Disciples in the beginning of the
second day of the week.

3. This is proved by the distinction of the day, in a day Natural,
Artificial, and Civil.

4. It is proved by the creation, that the Jews began the natural or civil
day by the evening.

5. Refutation of those which say, that by the evening must be understood the
time after noone, and by the morning the time before noone.

6. The same is proved by an express commandment given to the Jews, to begin
the natural day, and the celebration of the Sabbath of at on(...).

7. R^utation of the reply made against this argument.

8. It is proved also, by the commandment given them, to begin the eating of
the Passover, and of unleavened bread at the end of the 14. day, of the first
month.

9. Saint Matthew and Saint Mark speak figuratively, when they call the day
wherein things necessary for the Passover were prepared, the first day of
unleavened bread.

10. The same likewise is proved by the observation of the Sabbath in the days
of Nehemiah.

11. And by the practice of Joseph and Nicodemus when they buried the body of
our Savior.

12. First argument brought by some, out of the Old Testament, to prove, that
the natural day among the Jews, and consequently the Sabbath day, began in
the morning, and ended with the night.

13. Refutation of that argument.

14. Second argument taken out of the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel ver.
39. answered.

15. Third Argument out of the 28 Chap. of S. Matthew, ver. 1.

16. Answer to this Argument.

17. Fourth argument out of the 20. Chapter of the Acts ver. 7. and 11.
answered.

18. It follows of all the foresaid answers, and besides is more fully
proved, that JESUS CHRIST appeared to his Disciples, after his Resurrection, on
the second day of the week.

19. Second Answer, although Jesus after his Resurrection, had appeared twice
to his Disciples on the first day of the week, that proves not the
sanctification of that day for Gods service.

20. This is proved by diverse arguments and reasons.

21. The descending of the Holy Ghost on the first day of the week* inforceth
not the observation of that day.

THere is no greater force in the observation gathered out of the twentieth
Chapter of Saint John verse 19. and 26. where it is said, that Jesus the same
day of his Resurrection at evening, being the first day of the week, appeared
to his Disciples where they were assembled, and after eight days the doors
being shut, he came and stood in the midst of them, to wit, on the (...)
pretend to have been the day of Pentecost, wherein he sent down from heaven
(...) Holy Ghost upon the Apostles: from which places they infer, that by
this practice he has sanctified that day, for the preaching of his Gospel,
and the administration of his service.

2 To this I answer, first, that it may be debated, if it be said in the
foresaid passage of Saint John, that our Lord Jesus Christ appeared to his
Disciples on the first day of the week, and not rather, after the first day
already ended, and the second begun. Although the first interpretation was
true, and that it was the first day of the week wherein Christ showed himself
to his Disciples after his Resurrection, it carries not with it any
consequence prejudicial to my opinion, as shall be seen hereafter; Yet I will
confirm the second interpretation as only true, and take this occasion to
speak of the distinction of days, fetching from thence the grounds of my
reasoning.

3 The day is ordinarily distinguished into a Natural day, and an Artificial
day. The natural day is composed of four and twenty hours, which is the time
of the daily circuit of the Sun, arising, going down, and returning to the
place where he arose, in which day is comprehended all the time of light, and
all the time of darkness. The day is so taken ordinarily both in Scripture
and in all common languages, when mention is made simply of days: As for
example, when we say a month has thirty days, such a thing shall be done or
come to pass within so many days; Abraham, Isaac, Jacob died being full of
days, we understand all the time of their continuance, as well of the night,
as of the day.

The Artificial day continues as long as the Sun is upon the horizon of
every place, and by his light affords commodity to men to go forth to their
labor, and to work in their arts, professions, and trades.

The natural day, although amongst all people it be composed of four and
twenty hours, yet it varieth in the distinction of the beginning and end
thereof. For some take the beginning thereof at midde day, and count the
continuance thereof till the next midde day. Others from midde-night till the
next midde night. Some from the rising of the Sun till his next rising
again; and some from the sun setting till the next setting. This diverse
supputation amongst diverse people, proceeding from a civil constitution,
adds to the distinction of the day in artificial and natural, a third
member, to wit, The civil day, which is the same with the natural day, in
regard of the continuance of four and twenty hours, but is diversely counted
in diverse places in regard of the beginning and of the end thereof.

4. Now among the Jews, this natural or eivill day began by the evening, and
ended at the next evening. Moses distinguishes it so, when he relates the
story of the Creation. For he ends always the works of each day, in these
words, so was the evening, so was the morning, which was the first, the second,
the third day, etc. Where by the evening, he understands the whole night,
which begins by the evening, and by the morning the whole day which
begins by the morning, considering the evening and the morning, the night
and the day, or the light, as integrant parts of the natural day, and the
evening or the night as the first part which goes before the other part, which
is the time of light. As indeed this distinction is grounded on that order and
course of proceeding which God kept in the Creation, making the darkness to
go before the light, as may be seen in the first Chapter of Genesis ver. 1,
and 2.

5 Some do reply, that Moses, when he says, so was the evening, so was the
morning, etc. by the evening understands the whole time after noone, and by
the morning the whole time of light in the same day, from the dawning till
midde day, or the before noone. This reply is not grounded on reason. For if
that were true, Moses had not fix times put constantly the evening before the
morning, there being no convenient order that could move him thereunto seeing in
all respects whereby one thing is first, and goes before another, the
aforenoone goes before the afternoon. He might in the 5. v. name conveniently
the light before the darkness, the day before the night, because he had not
regard there to any natural dependence and following of the one upon the other,
but only to the order of dignity, whereby the day is first in regard to the
night: But when he says, without varying, in the six days of the week, so
was the evening so was the morning, it is evident, that he has regard to the
order of the Creation, wherein darkness was first in time before the light, and
the night went before the day, and that so by the evening he understands the
night which is foremost, and by the morning the day that follows, which
evening and morning make one natural day.

6 Now as in the creation GOD observed this order, to make the night go before
the day, and to compare the natural day of the darkness and of the light;
even so he prescribed the same observation to the Jews, commanding them to
begin their natural day by the night, and to celebrate their Sabbaths or
solemn days of rest from the beginning of such a night, till the beginning of
the next night. This is manifest by the 23. chapter of Leviticus verse. 32.
where God commanded them, that in the ninth day of the seventh month, at even,
from even unto even, they should celebrate as a solemn Sabbath, the Feast of
atonement, which was to be on the tenth day of the month, verse. 27. And so the
tenth day began by the night, and continued till the night following. And such
was consequently the order of all the days of the week, from night to night.

7 There is no force, no weight at all in the answer broached against this,
when it is said, that this feast of atonement consisted not in one day alone,
but in a part of two days, to wit, of the ninth, and of the tenth, because it
is said in the 27. verse. On the tenth day of the seventh month there shall be
a day of atonement, and in the 32. verse. In the ninth day of the month at
even, from even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath; whence they would
feign infer, that both the ninth and the tenth day entered into this Feast.
For it is clear, by the 28, 29, 30. verses, that the day of atonement
consisted only in one day; seeing in these verses mention only is made of one
d^y. Ye shall do no work in that same day, for it is a day of atonement;
Whatsoever soul shall not be afflicted in that same day, whatsoever soul does
any work in that same day: which had not been so often set down, if two
days had entered into the composition of this Feast. The same is apparent by
the sixteenth chapter of the same book, verse. 29, 30, 31. where the foresaid
feast of atonement being the only matter handled in them, no mention is made
but of one day, to wit, of the tenth of the seventh month; and the ninth day
is not so much as mentioned, whereas it had not been omitted, if it had
pertained to that Feast. Besides, it is without all likeness, and as I
believe, without example, that God would have any Feast to begin at the end of
one day, and to continue and end in a part of another day, and so establish
Holy Days by halves. Now the 27. verse. teaches us which was the day of this
Feast, to wit, the tenth day of the seventh month; and the 32. verse. shows
how long it ought to continue, to wit, the whole tenth day; beginning at the
end of the ninth day, and continuing as long as the tenth day should last, from
one even unto the next even. So the ninth day is not mentioned as a part of the
Feast, but as the term that it was to begin at; like as the even following is
mentioned, as the other term that it was to end at. In the ninth day of the
month at even: that is, at the end of the ninth day ye shall begin the Feast,
and it shall last from even unto even; that is, during the whole tenth day.
Like as in the twelfth chapter of Exodus, 18. verse. God ordains, that on the
fourteenth day of the first month, at even they should eat unleavened bread
until the one and twentieth day of the month at even: Where the fourteenth
day is not specified as one of the days of unleavened bread: for so there
should have been eight, whereas it is expressly said, verse. 15. and every
where, that they were but seven. But it is named in the end and extremity
thereof, as the term that the Feast of unleavened bread began at, and the one
and twentieth day finishing at even, as the term it ended at.

8 This observation of the days of unleavened bread, which made up the Feast
of the Passover, is of great validity to confirm our intention. For as it is
written, Exodus 12. v. 6. 8. 14, 15. Levit. 23. v. 5, 6. Number. 28. v. 16, 17.
Near to the end of the fourteenth day of the first month; that is, between
the declining of the Sun after midday, and the setting thereof; the Paschall
Lamb was killed and roasted, and eaten at even with unleavened bread, at the
entrance of the night. The use of unleavened bread in the eating of the Lamb,
began precisely with the fifteenth day, which was the first solemn day of the
Feast, and lasted seven whole days to wit, till the one and twentieth day at
even, which was also another Feast Day, holy and solemn, as the fifteenth was.
For it was not lawful during those seven days to have leavened bread, neither
in the day nor in the night, which also was comprised in the appellation of
days: Whence this infallible conclusion is gathered, that the natural day
among the Jews began at even, and ended at the next even; seeing the first day
of the Feast of unleavened bread, which was the fifteenth day, began at
evening, when the Paschall Lamb was eaten, and the last day thereof, which was
the one and twentieth, ended at even, as it began at even.

9 For whereas in S. Matthew Chap. 26. ver. 17. and S. Mark Chap. 14. v. 12.
and S. Luke Chap. 22. v. 7. the day wherein the Paschall Lamb was prepared and
roasted, is called the first day of unleavened bread, that is said figuratively
because of the immediate co^junction of the time wherein the Lamb was prepared,
with the time wherein it was eaten with unleavened bread: For it was prepared at
the end of one day, and eaten at the beginning of the next day. Or because the
same day wherein the Lamb was prepared, the Jews put away leaven and leavened
bread out of their houses, and prepared unleavened bread for the day following:
Or also, because amongst the Romans, of whom the Jews did at that time depend,
the natural day began by the light, and the night was the last part thereof,
whereunto it may be, the Evangelists had regard.

But otherwise, to speak properly according to the ordinance of the Law, it is
most certain, that the day wherein the Lamb was roasted and prepared, was not the
first day of unleavened bread. For that was the 14. day between the two evens,
this was the 15. day at the entrance thereof: On that day leavened bread might
be eaten, on this day, and on the days following all leaven was most strictly
forbidden. That was not a day of rest, but of travel, and of preparation, as
it is often called in the Gospel, Mat. 27. v. 62. Mar. 15. v. 42. Luke 23. v.
54. Ioh. 19. v. 14, 31. because on it were all things prepared for the feast
following, as to search and put away all leaven, and leavened bread out of
their houses, to kill, to slay, to roast the Lamb, etc. Nay we see that on that
day, the Jews caused the Lord Jesus to be crucified, and two thieves with him,
and vexed themselves extremely all that day to come to their intent: This was a
great and solemn Sabbath, wherein it was not lawful to do any manner of
work.

10 Let us add to that has been said, the practice of the observation of the
Sabbath, which we read in the thirteenth Chapter of Nehemiah. It is said there
ver. 15, 16, 17, 19, 20. that because all manner of ware was brought into the
City of Jerusalem, and sold on the Sabbath day, Nehemiah commanded, that as
soon as the Sun should withdraw it self from the gates of the City, before
the Sabbath, the gates should be shut, and that they should not be opened till
after the Sabbath, so that the Merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged
without Jerusalem once or twice, from whence we gather manifestly, the Sabbath
began at the going down of the Sun, and that the night made the first part
thereof. For if the Sabbath had not begun then, wherefore did Nehemiah command
so carefully, to shut the gates, as soon as the sun should withdraw his beams
from them, and it should begin to be dark? And if, not the night preceding the
day, but the night following had made a part of the Sabbath, surely the
Merchants had been of necessity constrained to remain two nights out of
Jerusalem, whereas it is only said, that they past the night once or twice
without the Town, to wit, the night after Nehomiah had given order that the
gates should be shut, as soon as the Sun should retire from them, and therefore
that night with the day following composed the Sabbath, which ending on the
next even at the setting of the sun, Nehemiah commanded that they should be
opened again v. 19. a commandment being necessary for the opening of them then
at that time, because the night returning, it was the time to keep them barred
and locked, seeing they were already shut. If the Sabbath had ended with the
end of the night, it had not been needful, that Nehemiah should command to
open the gates after the Sabbath. For it was usual to open them after the
night was ended, and a particular commandment for that was needless. But
although I had omitted these reasons which I have alleged, the words of the
original show plainly and of themselves, what we say. These they are v. 19.
(...) (Causher Tsallou Shahare Ieroushalaim liphne Hasshabbat) that is, as the
gates of Jerusalem were darkened before the face, or in the presence of the
Sabbath, or before the Sabbath: For the ordinary signification of this word
(...) Liphne, is before the face, in the presence. And therefore seeing the
gates were darkened before the face, or in presence of the Sabbath, it
follows that when the sun was setting, the Sabbath was coming, and began at
that same instant to show it self, if I may speak so.

11 Likewise, we read in St. John Chap. 19. v. 40, 41, 42. that Joseph of
Arimathea and Nicodemus, having obtained leave of Pilate to take away the body
of Jesus as soon as he was dead, took it, wrapped it in a winding sheet, with
spices, as the manner of the Jews was to bury, and laid it in a new Sepulcher,
which was in a Garden, in the same place where he was crucified, and laid it
there, because of the Jews preparation day, for the Sepulcher was nigh at
hand, that is, the night being at hand, the beginning of the Sabbath being
nigh, and coming apace with the night, and the day of preparation, which
preceded the Sabbath, drawing nigh the evening and making have to finish, they
carried not far the body of Jesus, but laid it in a Sepulcher hard by, after
they had wound it in linen clothes with aromaticall and fragrant drugs only,
without any imbalming at that time, because they had no leisure to anoint and
imbalme him, by reason of the neerenesse of the Sabbath, which was unto them an
high day of Sabbath, as it is called in the one and thirtieth verse of the same
Chapter, for as much as at that time the extraordinary Sabbath of the first day
of the feast of unleavened bread occurred with the ordinary Sabbath of the
week. For the same reason the Jews ver. 31. that the bodies of those that
were crucified should not remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath day, besought
Pilate that they might be taken away betimes, that is before the end of the
day, as the Text shows plainly.

Now if the Sabbath had not begun in the evening, but only in the morning, the
Jews should not have had a cause to urge the taking away of the bodies from
the Cross so quickly, nor Joseph and Nicodemus to bury the body of Jesus so
speedily, and to interre it in the same place where he was crucified, which
the Text shows they did on a sudden: For the Jews should have had all the
evening and all the night following to procure the taking away of the bodies,
Joseph and Nicodemus should have likewise had time enough to imbalme,
transport, and interre at leisure the body of the LORD, where they should
think fit. This is distinctly observed by Saint Luke Chapter 23. verse 53, 54.
where he says, that the day wherein Joseph laid the body of Jesus in a
Sepulcher was the preparation, and the Sabbath (...), that is, drew on, was a
coming, or at hand. Which term (...), signifies properly to shine, but is
taken improperly by the Evangelist, and signifies to arrive, to draw near. Or
he has regard unto to the evening star, which was nigh rising: Or rather to the
lamps which on the evening of that day, were lighted betimes, and a little
before the Sabbath, as also great fires were kindled, that at the coming of
the Sabbath they should not have any such thing to do. Josephus in the 16.
book of the antiquities of the Jews, Chapter 10. relates a decree of
Augustus Caesar, that the Jews should not be bound to appear in judgment on
the Sabbath day, nor on the parasceue, or day of preparation before the
Sabbath, after nine hours, that is, about three after Noone, because soon
after that hour at evening, their Sabbath day began. Of all this it is most
clear, that the Sabbath began by the evening, and the night was the first part
thereof.

12 Against that I have laid down, some arguments are opposed, to prove, that
even amongst the Jews the natural day, and consequently the Sabbath Day began
by the break of day, and the night made the last part thereof.

First, they allege out of Exodus, chap. 10. v. 13. That the Lord brought an
East wind upon the Land of Egypt all that day, and all that night, and when
it was morning the East wind brought the Locusts: and out of the book of
Numbers, chap. 11. v. 32. that The people stood up all that day, and all that
night, and all the next day, and they gathered the Quails. In which places
they pretend, that the night, which is put between two days, is joined with
the first day as a part thereof, and separed from the second.

13 But these places and other such like that may be found, are nothing to the
purpose. For they speak of the artificial day, distinguished from the night,
which is expressly named, without any declaration, whether it pertained to the
day preceding, or to the day following, to make with it the natural day. The
placing of the day before the night, is according to the order of the things
related in these books, and as they came to pass. For the East wind began to
blow in the day, and continued all night, to bring the Locusts: and the people
begun by the day, and continued all night the gathering of Quails. Moreover,
when the day is considered distinctly and severally from the night, the day, as
being of greatest dignity, is named first, without regard to the precedence of
either in the order of nature, and in the natural day.

14 It is written in the Gospel of Saint John, 1 chap. 39, verse. that two
disciples of John Baptists, went and saw where Jesus dwelt, and abode with him
that day: for it was about the tenth hour: from whence they infer, that seeing
these disciples entered into Christ's lodging at the tenth hour, that is, two
hours before the going down of the Sun, according to the counting of the
Jews, and it is said, that they abode there that day, we must understand, that
they abode also the night, to the intent they might be instructed by the Lord;
which was not possible to be done in two hours: wherefore the night was the
last part of the natural day.

But this ratiocination is of small weight. For what necessity can move us to
say, that these two Disciples abode longer with Christ, than the two last
hours of the day, preceding the setting of the Sun. The particle for, from
whence it is inferred, They abode with him that day: For it was about the tenth
hour, is not properly in (...).
the Original, which is better translated by and, than by for: And it was
about the tenth hour; which may be fitly understood after this manner, that
being come to Christ's lodging at the tenth hour, they abode with him the
remnant of that day, and about night went home, and tarried no longer with the
Lord. It is true that in the space of two hours, nay, not if they had stayed
the whole night, they could not be sufficiently instructed by the Lord. But
also it was not then only that they came to him, and abode with him: for they
might have returned afterward now and then; as indeed Andrew, who was one of
the two, and brother to Simon Peter, became one of his ordinary and domestical
Disciples.

15 They make use also of the twenty eighth chapter of S. Matthew, verse. 1.
Where it is said, that in the evening, or in the latter end of the Sabbath, as
it began to dawne toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalen, and
the other Mary to see the Sepulcher; the words of the Original are, (...).
from whence they would infer, that the Sabbath ended about the morning, when it
begins to shine; and then began therewith the first day of the week.

16 Whereunto I answer, that the Evening, or the latter end of the Sabbath,
whereof mention is made in this place, must be understood of the evening
properly so called, when the Sun sets: which time is in this place
specified, as the end of the Sabbath day, or of the whole week. For the word
(...), has both significations. Besides that the word (...) is fit to show as
much: For it cannot be conveniently taken for an end of time confined unto the
morning; the conference of the other Evangelists demonstrate it more forceebly.
For S. Mark in the 16. chapter, 1, 2. verses, says, that When the Sabbath was
past, Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought sweet
smelling spices, that they might come and anoint Jesus; and being come very
early in the morning (to wit from home) they came to the Sepulcher when the Sun
was risen: or if these words very early in the morning, betoken also the time
of their coming to the Sepulcher; and signify the same that is signified by
the words following, when the Sun was risen: we must understand these last
words, not as if the Sun was already ascended upon the horizon; but only that
it was risen, in regard of the first appearing of his shining beams above the
horizon, at the break of day: so both shall be true, that the Sun was risen,
and that they came to the Sepulcher very early in the morning. And this shall
agree very well with the words of S. John, chap. 20. verse. 1. Upon the first
day of the week, when it was yet dark: and with these of S. Luke, chap. 24.
verse. 1. Uery early in the morning the women came unto the Sepulcher; where it
is added, that they brought with them the sweet odours which they had prepared:
from whence I infer, that the Sabbath ended in the evening, at the going down
of the Sun: since after the Sabbath was ended, these women bought sweet smelling
spices, and prepared them to anoint the body of Jesus, as S. Mark says
expressly. To whom is not repugnant S. Luke in the 23. chap. 56. verse. Where he
says, that the women after they had beheld the Sepulcher, and how the Lords
body was laid, returned, and prepared odours, and ointments, and rested the
Sabbath day according to the Commandment; which words seem to import, that
they prepared their spices before the Sabbath. For the order and coherence of
these words do not design the like order and coherence of things, but they
must be understood after this manner; being returned they prepared their
odours, And, or rather But, they rested the Sabbath day; to wit, first, and
before this preparation; as appears by the conference of the 54. verse. where
it is said, that when the body of Christ was laid in the tomb, and the women
beheld where it was laid, the Sabbath (...), drew on, that is, was at hand, and
ready to begin, as has been said before. So that it was impossible to them to
prepare any kind of thing for the inbalming of Christ before the Sabbath.
Whence it follows, that since then it was evening, the end of the same Sabbath
fell upon the dawning or evening of the night following; and so was both the
end of the last day of the week preceding, and the beginning of the night
following, whereby the first day began. And that was the time betokened by the
(...) mentioned by Saint Matthew, and the night preceding the first day of the
week, which he names afterward, did belong to the said first day, making with
it the natural and civil day of the Jews, and did not belong to the Sabbath.
For if it had pertained to the Sabbath, and the first day of the week
following the Sabbath had begun in the morning, since it is constant that before
the Sabbath they prepared not their aromaticall drugs, when should they have
found the opportunity and leisure to prepare them? They durst not do it on the
Sabbath day, for it was a day of rest, and of cessation from all work. As also
S. Luke says, Chap. 23. verse. 56. That they rested the Sabbath day according
to the Commandment. After the Sabbath upon the first day of the week they
could not do it, granting that this day began in the morning; For very early
in the morning, as it was yet dark, they went with their spices already bought
and prepared: And therefore we must of necessity say, that they bought their
spices in the evening, after the Sun was set, and the Sabbath ended, that
during the night, which was the beginning of the first day of the week, they
prepared these drugs, and that in the morning of the same day they came to
imbalme Jesus.

Which being so, we must interpret the words of S. Matthew after such a sort,
that they may agree with the sayings of the other Evangelists. And it is in no
wise necessary to join the evening or the latter end of the Sabbath, with the
beginning of the light of the first day of the week, as if the one and the
other had met together in one time, and at once, as is pretended. There is
between these two the intervall of a night, which pertained to this first day
of the week, and we may translate the words (...), which is the same with
(...), as S. Mark speaks, that is, in the evenining, at the extremity, or
latter end of the Sabbath, this extremity being already come and past: or in
the evening, that is, in the night (the first part thereof being taken for the
total) after the Sabbath, (...), to wit, (...), at that same hour or time
which began to shine, yet with a little remnant of the nights darkness: (...),
to be the first day of the week, that is, the first day of light, the first
artificial day, which is a part of the natural day: Or we may take these
words, (...), for (...), in the time that was to shine in the first day of the
week. For it was not S. Matthews intent to specify unto us the immediate
conjunction of the first day of the week with the Sabbath finishing, but only
at what point of time the woman came to the Sepulcher, to wit, at the first
glimpse of the light of the first day of the week: and he made mention of the
evening, or of the latter end of the Sabbath, in respect that the Sabbath had
hindered them till then to apply themselves to this pious and charitable work
which they had intended.

17 Moreover, they produce a passage out of the twentieth chapter of the Acts,
verse. 7. 11. where it is said, that the Disciples in Troas being come together
upon the first day of the week, to break bread, Paul preaching unto them,
continued his speech until midnight, and after he had broken bread, and eaten,
continued to talk unto them even till the break of day. In which words they
pretend that the night is mentioned, as the last part of the first day of the
week.

But first, nothing obliges us to grant, that the night there mentioned, ought
to be referred to the first day of the week. For we may affirm as well, that
it pertained to the second day, and made the beginning thereof: The words of
the Text are very well verified, if we say, that the first day of the week,
and toward the end thereof, the Disciples were assembled, and their assembly
having begun about the end of the first day, continued a good while with and
after the beginning of the second day, Paul, because he was to depart on the
morning after the first day, taking this occasion to extend his discourse
within the night following, which was the beginning of another day.

There is no weight in the objection they make against this exposition, saying,
that if it were true, Paul had remained longer then seven days at Troas, to
wit, a part of an eight day, against that which is said in the sixth verse. For
they presuppose without any ground, that Paul was not precisely but seven days
at Troas, which the Text says not, but only that he abode there seven days,
which should be very well expressed so, although he had remained there a part
of the eighth day, which might have been past under silence, and not counted
with the days going before, because it was not a full and whole day, but only
a part of a day. And putting the case, that it should come within the compass
of the seven days of the Apostles aboade at Troas; we may say, it was taken
for the seventh and last day. For it is not told exactly on what day Paul came
to Troas, nor that he abode there full seven days, but only in general, seven
days. Now although he had been there but a part of the first, and a part of
the last of seven, it may be well said, that he was there seven days.

Secondly, granting that the night mentioned in the foresaid place, was the
last part of the first day of the week, nothing can be proved from thence, but
this only, that after the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, the faithful
among the Gentiles celebrating in their congregations the first day of the
week, in remembrance of the said resurrection, began it in the morning about
the time that Christ rose, as, perhaps the nations of whom they were, began the
day by the morning; but it follows not, that such was the beginning of the
day among the Jews.

18 These things being thus cleared, it shall follow, that when Jesus Christ
did show himself to his Disciples in the time mentioned, in the 20. of S.
John, verse. 19. it was not in the first day of the week, but after it, in the
second day. The conference of the twenty four of Saint Luke shows, that at
least it was midnight when Jesus Christ appeared first unto them. For it is
said in that chapter, that the same day of his resurrection he drew near to
the two Disciples that were going to Emmaus, went with them, came thither with
them toward evening, the day being far spent, and that they supped there; That
after the Lord had left them, vanishing away out of their sight, they rose up
the same hour, returned to Jerusalem, distant from Emmaus threescore stades,
that is, a three hours journey; entered where the Apostles were, told them all
the things that had happened unto them in the way, and in the Village; that
after this Jesus stood in the midst of them: therefore it was far in the night:
whence it follows, that seeing among the Jews the day ended at evening, and
another day began; the first day of the week was then finished many hours
before, and the second day was well forward. The words of the Text say nothing
that is not consonant to this. These they are, (...), that is, the evening or
the end of the first day of the week being come, in the same sense that (...)
is taken in the foresaid place of Matthew, Chap. 28. verse 1. the Disciples
being assembled, and the doors shut for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and
stood in the midst of them: which words have no other sense but this, that at
the evening of the first day, which was also the end thereof, the Disciples
being assembled, and having shut themselves up in a certain place, Jesus
Christ a while after appeared unto them. So of that has been said it is
manifest, that the opinion of Christ's appearing to his Disciples on the first
day of the week, is not grounded on a sure foundation.

20 But although it were generally agreed on, that Jesus Christ appeared the
first time to his Disciples on the first day of the week, and the second time
eight days after, I say, that his appearing to his Disciples at two diverse
times since his Resurrection on the first day of the week, cannot enforce, by
any good consequence, that his intention was to authorize that day, and to
sanctify it to be a day of rest. To prove this with some show of reason, it
were necessary, that Jesus Christ, during the whole time of his abode on earth
after his Resurrection, should have showed himself unto them regularly and
constantly on each first day of the week, and not in any other day. For if he
appeared not unto them every first day of the week, we may infer quite
contrary, that it was not his purpose to sanctify that day unto them, more
than another: And if he appeared unto them on other days, it may be said, with
as good reason, that he consecrated them to be Sabbaths, as that he sanctified
the first day of the week to be a Sabbath.

21 Now we read nothing of his appearing to his Disciples on each first day of
the week constantly and regularly after his Resurrection, till his Ascension.
Nay it is written in the first Chapter of the Acts verse 3. that after his
passion he showed himself alive unto them, by many infallible proofs, being
seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the
kingdom of God, whereby we see clearly, that he showed himself on many
other days then the first of the week. For Saint Luke had not said, that he
was seen of them forty days by many infallible proofs, if he had not been
seen of them but five or six days of these forty. And there is no
appearance, that he was forty days on earth after his Resurrection, to show
himself only every first day of the week, and to withdraw himself, remaining
solitary and apart, all the days between.

In the one and twentieth Chapter of Saint John ver. 4. we see that he showed
himself to them on a day when they were gone a fishing, commanded them to
continue their fishing, and did then a notable miracle, neither is it said,
that it was the first day of the week: And if it was, they wrought on it, and
kept it not holy.

Moreover, when it is said in the twentieth Chapter of Saint John verse 26.
that eight days after the first day of the week wherein he first appeared unto
them, he showed himself again to his Disciples, a question may be made, if it
was on another first day of the week. For this should be true, if in the
number of eight be included the first day of the week, and the eight day
following: But if they be not included and if we take the words of the Apostle,
that after eight days fulfilled and past, Jesus showed himself unto them, as
the words (...), bear that sense, then it was not on another first day of the
week, but one the next day after that he stood in the midst of them. And so
the argument built upon this sand shall fall to the ground.

20 Neither does the sending of the Holy Ghost upon the Disciples and Apostles
assembled on Pentecost day evince a divine institution of the LORDS day,
granting that it was also on the first day of the week. For by what
consequence shall it follow, that by this miracle JESUS CHRIST intended to make
that day an ordinary day of rest, and of Gods service? Seeing by the same
reason it will follow, that all the days, wherein Christ did some solemn
action, have been established and ordained to be stinted and ordinary Sabbaths
in every week: which is not so.

CHAPTER Fifth.
Answer to the Fourth Reason.
1. Fourth Reason: The first day of the week was kept by the Apostle, and the
Disciples at Troas, Acts 20. ver. 7.

2. First Answer: The words may be taken of a certain day, and not of the
first day of the week, etc.

3. Second Answer, taking them for the first day of the week, it follows
not, that that day was an ordinary Sabbath, but only was kept by occasion of
the Apostles departure on the next morrow.

4. Third Answer, it may be that day is named, because of the miracle done on
it, and not to show that it was a Sabbath day, seeing the Apostle did preach
every day wheresoever he sojourned.

5. Nullity of the instance, they assembled to break bread, that is to
celebrate the Lords Supper. 1. Because that breaking of bread may be taken for
a common refection.

6. 2. Because the Christians did every day celebrate the Lords Supper, without
respect to Sunday.

7. Fourth Answer, nothing can be gathered from the meeting of the Disciples at
night, to prove the sanctification of the day that went before.

8. Fifth Answer, supposing the first day of the week was kept at Troas, it
follows not that it was kept in all other Churches.

9. Sixth Answer, putting the case, That it was kept every where, it follows
not that Christ or his Apostles had ordained it.

THey allege again out of the twentieth Chapter of the Acts verse 7. that
Paul being come to Troas, and the Disciples being assembled to break bread,
that is, to celebrate the Lords Supper, upon the first day of the week, St.
Paul came to their assembly, and preached unto them, continuing his speech
until midnight, being ready to depart on the morrow, etc. Where they note that
this meeting of the faithful of Troas on the first day of the week, is
propounded there, as a thing ordinary and accustomed, and not as occasioned
extraordinarily by the Apostles arrival to the Town. For it is said in the
sixth verse, that he and his company abode there seven days; and in the seventh
verse, that upon the first day of the week, which was the seventh day
preceding his departure on the day following, the Disciples being come together
he preached unto them. Which shows manifestly, that he stayed expressly till
that first day of the week, as being the ordinary day of the meeting of the
faithful: Otherwise having been already amongst them five or six days
before, he might have taken as well another day, as that day.

2 To this I answer, first, that there is no necessity to grant, that the
assembly of the faithful of Troas mentioned in the foresaid Chap. met on the
first day of the week. For the terms of the original, which are (...), may
be as well translated, on a certain day of the week, or on a Sabbath day, on a
day which was a Sabbath. Because (...) is taken in holy Scripture sometimes for
the week, sometimes for the Sabbath day in the week, and (...) sometimes for
one, sometimes for the first. (...) is taken so in a like construction, (...),
On a certain day, Lu. 5. v. 17. Luke 8. ver. 22. Luke 20. v. 1. And the
Article (...) is superfluous, Col. in Loc. Eras. in Pasaph^^^.
as it is often elsewhere, Romans 5. v. 15. and 1 Cor. 9. v. 19. and 2 Cor. 2.
verse 6. and 2 Cor. 9. verse 21. This sense is approved, not only as
admittable, but also as more probable than any other, by great Divines. And
although we should explain (...) by first, we may translate, upon the first
day of Sabbath, to wit, which occurred in these seven days that Paul was in
Troas, and which was the last of seven, so according to this sense an argument
may be brought for the Jewish Sabbath day, rather than for the Sunday of
Christians.

3 But Secondly, although we should grant, that the words should be translated
upon the first day of the week, as the same phrase is taken, Luke 24. verse 1.
John 20. verse 1. Which interpretation I yield unto willingly, it is to no
purpose in this question, because upon the meeting of the faithful of Troas
the first day of the week, to hear the word of God, it follows not that the
observation of this day was ordinary and regular for the end which is supposed.
It may be they did this indifferently on that day, as they did in all other
days, as they had occasion. It may be also, that they came together on the
night of that day, because Saint Paul was ready to depart on the next morrow,
and they desired to see him, to hear him, to receive the Communion with him,
and recommending him to God bid him the last farewell: As he likewise was
desirous to speak unto them, and to intertaine them immediately before his
departure, which in such an occasion was very convenient and requisite. Of such
an action done for particular causes, can any reasonable man, with the least
show of reason, infer a general custom tied ordinarily to that day amongst
all Christians?

4 It may be likewise, that this their meeting on the first day of the week is
marked, as an occasion only of the narration which is made incontinently after,
of the disaster that befell the young man Eutychus, who being fallen into a
deep sleep in the place of the assembly where Paul preached, sunk down with
sleep from the third loft, and being taken up dead, was miraculously raised to
life by the Holy Apostle: But is not specified, to denote an order accustomed
by that Church to meet together every week on that day. And indeed, seeing
Paul in the visitation of the Churches took not heed to the observation of
particular days, but as long as he abode among them, was careful to preach
and instruct them every day, least he should loose the time and leisure that he
had, and which ordinarily was not long in each place, as we may see, Acts 19.
verse 9. and Acts 20. verse 16, 31. who shall believe, that having tarried six
days at Troas, he or the Disciples let slip six of them without any meeting
to hear him? Now if they came together in the former days, as well as on the
first day of the week, as it is more seeming to be true, the argument taken
from their meeting on the first day of the week is utterly undone.

5 If it be said, that they met together on this day, as being a day more
solemn then the rest, and because also they came to break bread, that is to
receive the Lords Supper, the argument is of no value: For the breaking of
bread that mention is made of in that place, may be taken, not for the Lords
Supper, but for a common refection, and one of the feasts of charity which in
those days were frequent amongst the faithful, as we see in Saint Jude verse
12. It may be so taken in the second Chap. of the said book of the Acts, as
many interpreters in both these places understand it so. And it seems that
the conference of the 42 verse with the 46 in the second Chapter, and of the
seventh verse with the eleventh requires it.

6 Moreover, seeing it is most certain that the Apostolic and primitive
Church did most frequently celebrate the holy Supper, yea in many places daily,
as may be seen in the foresaid verses of the second Chapter of the Acts, if
they be understood of the Lords Supper, and in the 118 Epistle of Saint
Augustine, second Chapter, no man can infer of the meeting of the faithful
of Troas on the first day of the week, to communicate to the Lords Supper,
that day to have been more solemn unto them then any other day of the week.
And it may be, they delayed the communion till that day, rather than till
another, because Saint Paul was to take his journey on the morrow after,
judging they should do well to end their conversation with him, which they had
enjoyed during seven days, by the celebration of this Sacrament, which is a
band of friendship and of brotherly conjunction, and so to testify their
mutual love and Christian respects, and by that means take and give a full
assurance, that their separation and absence in the body, which was to happen
the next day, should never be able to disunite it.

7 Add unto this, that no mention being made in the foresaid passage, but of a
meeting in night time, which began at the even of this first day of the week,
without telling us on what exercises the day was employed by the faithful, I
cannot see how an inference can be made upon a meeting by night, that the day
preceding that night was then, and ought to be for ever sanctified for a
Sabbath day.

8 Further, supposing it was an ordinary custom in Troas to keep the first
day of the week, it follows not, that it was then observed every where
abroad. We find in other places of the Acts, as, amongst others, in the 11 Chapter
v. 26 and in the 14. Chapter v. 23, 27. mention made of many meetings of the
faithful, whereof the day is not particularized, and if we consider well the
circumstances of these places, it is likely, that it was as well on others
days of the week, as on the first, and that in those days Christians made no
difference of days. Nay in the book of the Acts we find often, that the
faithful held their assemblies on the Sabbath day of the Jews, Acts 13. verse
14, 44. Act. 16. verse 13. Act. 17. verse 2. etc.

9 But to grant willingly that the Churches after they were once established,
were wont to keep the first day of the week, that concludes not this day to
have been appointed by Christ by or his Apostles, but only that it was
observed by use and custom, at the first through respect to the resurrection
of the Lord: which custom grew up afterward into a constitution of the
Church, binding all Christians unchangeably to the observation of it.

CHAPTER Sixth.
Answer to the fifth Reason.
1. Fifth reason from the fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, where the observation of the first day of the week is commanded
by the Apostle.

2. First answer. The Apostles words may be understood of a certain day, or of
each day of the week.

3. He does not establish a general and continual order, but a particular
collection for that time only.

4. Second answer. The same words may be interpreted of every Sabbath day of
the Jews.

5. Third answer. Although they should be expounded of the first day of the
week, they enforce not an Apostolical injunction concerning that day.

6. Because his injunction is of the collection only, and not of the day.

7. This is clearly proved by the words the of Text.

8. Fourth answer. Albeit the Apostles had enjoined the keeping of that day, it
follows not that they received it of the Lord, because it was only a point
of order left to their wisdom, and all order is in it self imitable.

9. An instance from the fourth Chapter to the Philippians and the ninth verse.

10. Refuted by three answers.

THey argue also from the sixteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians verse. 1, 2. where the Apostle says, Concerning the collection for
the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye:
Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you put aside by himself, as
God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. Where they
pretend to have found clearly an Apostolical Ordinance, injoyning the
observation of the first day of the week for the exercises of religion. For in
these words mention is made of the keeping of it for the collections, which
could not be levied so commodiously, as in the ordinary day of Ecclesiastical
assemblies. Now, as they say, the Apostle ordained nothing but what he had
received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. verse. 23. Therefore seeing he ordained to
observe the first day of the week, this day must needs be an Ordinance of
Christ and of his Apostles.

2. Whereunto I answer, as before; First, that these words of the Original,
(...), signify not necessarily upon the first day of the week, or on each
first day, but may signify indefinitely, on a day, on a certain day, or in
each day of the week, as they are interpreted by some Divines: And so the
Apostles Heming. in loc.
exhortation shall have this sense, that the Corinthians on a certain day of
the week at their choice, or on every day of the week, should keep in store
by themselves a part of the goods that God had liberally bestowed upon them,
that the whole sum which should be gathered amongst them, might be laid out
for the subvention of the faithful of Jerusalem, which at that time was
required of them, and be ready at his coming.

3. For this is worthy to be noted, that the Apostle does not establish in
these words a general and continual order of collections to be received, and
practiced in all the Christian Churches, for the entertainment of their poor,
and publicly levied in their meetings and congregations, but only a
particular collection, which he enjoined to the Church of the Corinthians, and
to some other Churches of the Gentiles, for the poor strangers of Judea, which
collection he himself was to come and to receive, after he had sent before him
some of the brethren to put it in order: Whereof he advised the Corinthians
aforehand, that they might prepare it before his coming, and that nothing more
were to be done at his coming. This is manifest by the second, third, and
fourth verses of this Chapter: by the eighth and ninth Chapters of the second
Epistle, and by the fifteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, verse. 25.
He required also, that it should be prepared, not by a public distribution in
the Ecclesiastical assemblies, but by a particular separation, that every one
should make a portion of his goods at home, and by himself: For such is the
meaning of the words in the original, (...), Let every one of you lay aside by
himself, putting in store, as God has prospered him: which words do signify
a particular and domestical reservation, and not a public distribution, which
consequently was to be done indifferently in any day whatsoever, according as
every one should have the commodity, till the Apostles coming, and was to
cease, after he (at his coming) had received the whole sum that these
contributions should amount unto. And so of this passage cannot be gathered the
observation of any day, and far less of the first day of the week, for
Ecclesiastical meetings, whereof, according to this Exposition, which has a
great likeness of truth, no mention is made in it.

4 But secondly, although the Apostle had intended to stint the Corinthians to
a particular day, wherein they were to put a part, every one with himself, a
portion of their goods, to go and distribute it that same day in their
Ecclesiastical assemblies; for all that, it appears not that he meant by
that day the first day of the week; For these words (...), may be translated
in this other Calvin in loc. Idem Instit. lib. 2 ca. 8. sect. ^33. Aretias in
loc.
sense, On a Sabbath day, or on every Sabbath day, as excellent interpreters
allege, and approve this exposition; and has nothing for the divine
institution of our Sunday.

5 Thirdly, put the case that the Apostle speaks of the first day of the
week, as of a day appointed for Ecclesiastical meetings, and in them for Gods
service, and for public collections, no other thing can be proved from thence,
saving that it was a custom received in the Church of Corinth, in the Churches
of Galatia, and probably in others, to meet together on the first day of the
week, but in no wise that the Apostle had given them an injunction concerning
that day. It is true, that in the foresaid words mention is made of an
injunction given by the Apostle, but of the collections only, not of the time
wherein they were to be made, which time the Apostle supposes only, as
received and observed among them on the first day of the week, but commands
it not.

6 For the words are, Concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given
order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye, 1 Cor. 16. verse. 1. where we
see the injunction has reference to the collections, as to the end thereof,
and by no means to the day that they were to be levied in. He says again in
the next verse, Upon the first day of the week let every man lay aside by
himself, and put in store, etc. where also the injunction is of the
collection, and the day is not named by way of commandment, but only as
supposed to be ordinary for the ecclesiastical meetings, and consequently for
the collections.

7 I say therefore, that it appears not, that the Apostles have instituted
the first day of the week. But although they had ordained it, it should not
follow, that they had received of the Lord an express commandment so to do.
It is true, that in matters concerning the doctrine of the Gospel, and things
essential to Gods service, they have taught nothing, but what they received of
the Lord, as the Apostle protested, 1 Cor. 11. verse. 23. and as Christ had
given them the commandment, Matthew. 28. verse. 20. But as for things which are
wholly of order, they had power to dispose and ordain of them with Christian
wisdom, as they should think fit.

8 Of that has been said we may see the vanity of the argumentation framed by
some Divines, upon the words of the Apostle to the Philippians, chap 4. verse.
9. The things which ye have both learned and received, and beard, and seen in
me, do them. They saw in him the observation of the first day of the week,
which we call Sunday: therefore he wills them to keep also that day.

9 Whereunto I answer, first, that by a like ratiocination they may conclude,
that the Apostle would have the faithful to observe and celebrate all the
days of the week, but namely the Sabbath of the Jews: for he was heard and
seen often preaching all the days of the week, but principally every Sabbath
day: for his manner was to do so, Acts 17. verse. 2.

Secondly, that the foresaid argumentation may have some value, it must
presuppose, that it was an order established by the Apostle, and observed
regularly by him, to celebrate the first day of the week. For to believe, that
whatsoever he was seen to do sometimes accidentally and by occasion, the
faithful ought necessarily to do it always, were a too great impertinency.
For he was seen shave his head, according to the ceremony of the Mosaicall
Nazareat. Number. 6. verse. 18. Acts 18. verse. 18. Acts 21. verse. 24. 26. and
circumcise Timothy Acts 16. v. 3. But such a presupposition has no foundation,
as has been showed.

Thirdly, the Apostle himself betokens by the connection of the 9. verse. with
the 8. going before, what things he would have the Philippians to do by
imitation of his example, and according to his instructions, to wit, whatsoever
things are true, honest, just, pure, loveable, of good report, if there be any
virtue, or any praise; that is, these things properly which are a part of
godliness toward God, and of love toward the neighbor. But to observe for
Gods service the first day of the week, rather than an other day, is not of
that nature, as being a thing merely indifferent, and established by custom
only. It is also a conjecture without appearance, that the Apostle among the
things which he designeth in the ninth verse, meant to comprise the observation
of Sunday.

CHAPTER seventh.
Answer to the sixth Reason.
1. Sixth Reason. Mention is made in the Revelation, Chap. 1. verse. 10. of the
Lords day.

2. Answer. It may be so called in two other respects, rather than that which
is pretended.

3. Instance. It is called the Lords day, because he ordained it, as for that
cause the Sabbath is called the Lords rest, the Eucharist the Lords Supper.

4. Nullitie of this instance.

5. Many excellent Divines of the Protestant Churches speak of the first day
of the week, as of a custom of the Church, not as a commandment of Christ.

1 IT is said in the first Chapter of the Revelation and the tenth verse, That
John was in the Spirit on the Lords day: whence also they would feign infer,
that the first day of the week, which has obtained the name of The Lords day,
was instituted by the Lord Jesus, or by his Apostles to be a day dedicated to
the exercices of godliness.

2 But from hence we cannot conclude a divine or Apostolical institution of
that day, for S. John might make mention of that day, in respect of the Lords
rising on such a day, and not to signify that it ought to be appointed, or was
already set a part more solemnly than any other day, for Gods service, and for
the commemoration of Christ's benefits, and especially of his Resurrection.

Yea although he had qualified it with this title, in respect of the
consecration thereof, which was ordinary at that time, and in consideration
whereof it had commonly the name of The Lords day amongst Christians in their
times, as it has had many hundred years sithence in the Christian Church,
which honors the first day of the week with the name of the Lords day, it
follows not, that this consecration did proceed from the institution of
Christ, or of his Apostles; Seeing it might be founded in the only practice
and custom brought in among the faithful. Just. Martyr. Apol. 2. Ignat. ad
Magnes. Aug. epist. 119. Idem de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 30. Idem de verb. Apost.
ser. 15, etc.
The ancient Fathers speaking of the observation of Sunday, give no other
reason thereof, saving the Lords Resurrection on that day, and not any
commandment of the Lord, which they had not forgotten, if there had been any.

3 Certain Divines, without any show of good reason, will hold us in hand,
that the first day of the week is called The Lords day, even as the seventh
day is called The Lords rest, and the holy Supper, The Supper, or the Table of
the Lord, to wit, not only in consideration of their end, which is, to be a
memorial, that of Gods rest after the Creation, this of Christ's death, but
also of their institution, which is from the Lord himself.

4 It is true indeed, that the one and the other are so called in these two
respects. But this is also most true, that we have in holy Scripture an
express declaration, that God of old gave to the Jews the seventh day,
because on it he rested, and would have it to be a sign that he was the Lord
that sanctified them. It is true also, that Jesus Christ instituted the holy
Supper in the room of the ancient Passover, to be a memorial of his death,
not a simple memorial, but a Sacrament exhibitive and confirmative of the
benefits flowing from his death, which it could not be, but by an express
institution from himself, necessary in all Sacraments, because otherwise they
cannot be Sacraments.

It is not so of this day which is called The Lords day. For we find not any
institution or subrogation thereof in room of the ancient Sabbath day, neither
by the Lord himself, norby his Apostles: And it may be the faithful called it
the Lords day, in regard of that solemn action of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
on it he rose from the dead, an action whereof they thought fit to make in it
an ordinary and weekly commemoration. The place. where the holy assemblies
meet together, is called in Greek (...), in Dutch, (and Scots) Kirk, by
abbreviation (in English, Church) as if we should say, The Lords place, albeit
there be no such place of the Lords institution, but only of the Churches, who
gives that name to the Temples, because they are consecrated to the Lords
service. And wherefore, I pray, might not likewise the first day of the week
be called (...), the day of the Lord, seeing the Church has appointed it to
the honor and service of the Lord, which she might do, without any necessity
of a divine institution by Jesus Christ our Lord, or by his Apostles?

This was the meaning of many of our most excellent Divines, 5. Calvin Inst. l.
2. c. 8. sect. 34. Bullinger. in Apoc. ca. 1. verse. 10. Vrsin. in Exposit.
decalo. Aret. loc. commun. de Sabbatho. Zanch. de operib. Redempt. l. 1. in 4.
Praecept. Paraeus in Genesis c. 2. Simler. in Exodus c. 20.
which speak of the observation of the first day of the week, as of an
observation proceeding, not from some apostolical commandment, which is not
to be found in the Gospel, but from a custom introduced and received in the
Christian Churches: custom which in it self is free, and without obligation
of conscience: They acknowledge also, that the argument drawn from the
appellation of the Lords day, is weak. Their testimonies I might recite in this
place and oppose them to the testimonies taken from others that are of a
contrary opinion. But my intention is to dispute by reasons, and not by
authorities of men, which in this point are different.

CHAPTER Eighth.
Answer to the seventh Reason.
1. Seventh Reason. The first day of the week is to be sanctified, in
remembrance that Christ on it ended the work of our Redemption.

2. First answer. This assertion is false.

3. Second answer. Christ fulfilled our redemption by his death meritoriously.

4. Third answer. He has fulfilled it by actual execution after his ascension.

5. Fourth answer, Declaring the use of Christ's Resurrection.

6. A notable difference between the day of Christ's Resurrection and the day
of Gods rest.

7. The day of Christ's Resurrection has no advantage above the day of his
Passion, etc.

8. The true cause of the first observation thereof.

9. All that is said of the first day of the week being granted, it follows
not, that it has any natural obligation to be kept.

1 OF that has been said in the former Chapters, it is apparent, that the
passages, whereby our Opponents pretend to prove, that the Lord, either
immediately by himself, or by his Apostles, has instituted the first day of
the week for his solemn service, do not prove any such thing: But they take
another argument from that which is constant by the story of the Gospel; which
is, that the first day of the week Jesus Christ rose again from the dead: as
if this day, for this only cause, that Christ's Resurrection happened on it, had
been sanctified unto us, and obliges us to a religious and solemn
observation thereof. For, say they, Christ rising from death to life on the
first day of the week, came victorious out of the great combat which he had
sustained, and rested from the dolorous and painful travels which he had
suffered in his death, and so ended the work of the redemption of the Church,
and re-established it into a new estate. So the day that he rose in, was a new
day, which he brought, as it were, from the Sepulcher for her sake. And
therefore if the day wherein God rested from the Creation of the world was to
be sanctified under the Old Testament, in remembrance and to the honor of that
work, so long as there was not another more excellent then it; by the same
reason, yea far more, the day wherein Christ rising has accomplished the
wonderful work of redemption, which is a second Creation of a new world,
far more excellent than the first, was to be sanctified under the New
Testament, in remembrance, and to the honor of this great work, and the other
day to give place unto it.

2 I have already said diverse things pertaining to the solution of this
argument. But I add over and besides, and for better illustration, that it is
grounded upon an attribution given to the Resurrection of Christ, of things,
which being exactly considered, shall be found, that they belong not unto it,
neither particularly, nor properly, as to have fulfilled the work of our
redemption, and second Creation, and to have re-established the world, or the
Church in the world, into a new estate.

3 Which things, if we speak of fulfilling them by merit, or of purchasing the
right to perform them really, have been fulfilled by the death and passion of
Christ, which is the price of our redemption, whereby both the state of grace
here below, and of glory in heaven is purchased unto us.

4 But if we speak of fulfilling them by actual execution, they have been
performed by the virtue of Christ's Divinity, after his Ascension into heaven,
from whence he sent the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles, to beget and assemble his
Church here beneath in all the parts of the world, by their ministry.

5 The Resurrection has no other correspondency to the meritorious fulfilling
of those things, but of a token and mark, evident, certain and necessary,
that Christ by his death has merited them unto us, having paid a most
sufficient price for our redemption, which had not appeared to be, yea, on the
contrary, had seemed not to be, and indeed had not been at all, if Christ had
remained in the grave of death, and had not risen again: Even as the coming
of a debtor out of prison, is a demonstration that he has paid, although it
be not the payment it self. But if he did remain always in prison, that
were an evident sign that he has not satisfied. We must take in this sense
the Apostles words saying; Romans 4. verse 25. that Christ died for our sins,
and rose again for our justification, that is, to demonstrate that
justification is purchased unto us by his death, and withal to confer and
apply it unto us efficaciously. To which efficacious collation and application
of all that was purchased by the death of Christ, and to the actual
accomplishment of the second Creation, and of the re-establishment of the
Church into a new estate, his Resurrection has no correspondency, but as a
necessary antecedent thereunto. For it was necessary he should rise, as also
ascend into heaven, that from thence he might operate that great and notable
alteration.

6 Wherein is seen a manifest difference between the day of Christ's
Resurrection, and the seventh day that God rested in from the work of
Creation. For this day followed the Creation finished and entirely effected,
and it was a rest from it already done and accomplished: But that day cannot be
called the day of rest from the second Creation, saving only as it was merited
by the death of Christ: For it goes and that many days before the actual
execution thereof, since Christ began not properly to frame and establish the
Church of the New Testament till many days after he rose again. Wherefore
there is by no means the like reason to keep the day of Christ's Resurrection,
as there was to keep the Sabbath Day.

7 Yea the day of the Resurrection in it self has no advantage beyond the
days of Christ's Passion, or Ascension, or of Pentecost, wherein came to pass
the solemn sending of the Holy Ghost, whereby it was more worthy to be observed
then they. For it was inferior to the day of Christ's passion and death, in
regard of the merit to purchase, and to the day of Pentecost, in regard of the
efficacy to communicate the spiritual and heavenly gifts. The Ascension day is
conform and equal unto it in the same correspondency, both to the
acquisition, and to the execution of the establishment of the Church.

8 The preferring of it by the faithful to all other days, to be kept
ordinarily as a solemn day, came not from any worthier prerogative that it
has in it self, but because on it began to shine upon the faithful a new
light of joy and comfort. The death and burial of Christ had filled their
hearts with sorrow, and abated their hope, because it seemed to them, that his
death, and the Sepulcher had taken him away, and ravished him out of the world
for evermore. No wonder, for they knew not in the beginning the nature nor the
consequences of that great humiliation, as is apparent by the discourse of the
two Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24. verse 21.

After then that he rose again, showing himself to be the Son of God with
power, Romans 1. v. 4. and that their hopes were revived by his Resurrection,
they thought fit to observe solemnly and weekly the day thereof, which began
their joy, showing unto them the first beams of the rising of the Sun of
righteousness, rather than others which afterward increased it much by a
greater manifestation of his glorious brightness, though they were not less
unworthy to be kept and as frequently: And further they did it to change the
ancient day of the Law, into a new day of the Gospel. In which change, that
there was a convenient reason it cannot be denied: The thing I deny is, that
there was any necessary reason thereof.

10 Yea although all that in the objection is attributed to the day of the
Resurrection did belong unto it properly and particularly, it should not follow
that in virtue thereof, and by a natural consequence, the said day ought to be
observed, rather than any other. For if the day that God rested in from the
work of the Creation, had no natural obligation in it, tying men to the
observation thereof, but it was Gods Commandment only that bound them to that
duty, no more can the day wherein Christ rested, though in another respect
which is not so proper, from the work of redemption, oblige us of it self to
observe it. To tie our consciences to such an observation, it must needs have a
divine institution, whereby God has commanded us to observe it, which, I say,
is not to be found.

CHAPTER Ninth.
Answer to the eighth Reason.
1. Eight Reason, from the excellency of things done on the first day of the
week.

2. First Answer. Besides that this assertion is uncertain, it proves nothing.

3. Second Answer, it is grounded upon a superstitious opinion of the
perfection and mystical signification of the number of seven.

4. Seeing there is no certainty in the observation of numbers, and the
Scripture makes mention of other numbers observed in many things.

5. Whence no solid argument can be gathered, and are disclamea by many which
dispute for the authority and preeminence of the first day of the week.

6. In what sense the number of seven is called mysterious, and that there is
no mystery in it under the New Testament.

1 SOme fetch an argument from diverse solemn things recited in holy
Scripture, which they mark to have been done on the first day of the week,
as that on it the light was created, the pillar of a cloud covered at first the
people of Israel, Manna rained from heaven upon them, Aaron and his children
began to exercise the Priesthood, God at first blessed his people solemnly,
gave the Law on the Mount Sinai, CHRIST was borne, baptized, turned water into
Wine, fed five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, shall come from
heaven to judge the quick and the dead.

2 But, it is most uncertain, that all these things were done on the first day
of the week. For the Scripture says no such thing: Besides this, although all
these things had been done on the first day of the week, it shall never
follow by any necessary argument, that for such a cause the first day of the
week ought to be solemnized under the New Testament. Diverse other things very
solemn may be found, which God and Jesus Christ effected in other days of the
week, whereof we might conclude with as great probability, that under the New
Testament the day wherein they were performed ought to be solemnized.

3 This argument is like to another that is produced, to prove the necessity of
the observation of one day of seven, when it is said, that this number of seven
is perfect and mysterious, and has been observed in the Scripture in diverse
things, which some have searched with great curiosity, but with no profit.

4 For there is no certainty to be found in this observation of numbers. Some
for some reason find a great perfection in one number, and others for other
reason give the preference of perfection to another number. The Mathematicians
do hold the number of six for the most perfect, and the first of perfect
numbers. And if the Scripture points out unto us the number of seven observed
in many things, she does the like in other numbers. The author of
Ecclesiasticus Chapter 33. verse 15. and Chapter 42. verse 24. says, That God
in all his works has observed the number of two and made them all double,
coupling two and two, one against another. We mark that God in the beginning
made the two principal parts of the world, heaven and earth, two great lights
the Sun and the Moon, of all living creatures the Male and Female, in
wedlock two in one flesh. There were two Tables of the Law, two Cherubims upon
the Ark, two precious stones wherein were graved the names of the twelve
Children of Israel, and put upon the shoulders of the Ephod. Every day two
Lambs were offered in Sacrifice to God, there be two Testaments, two great
Commandments, two ordinary Sacraments of the Jewish, and as many of the
Christian Church. He that would search particularly all things subsisting in
this number of two, or of three, or of four, might devise thereupon a thousand
mysteries.

5 In sum, such arguments have no solidity. Many also which dispute for the
necessity of the Sabbath in one of seven days, and for the divine authority of
the first day of the week, disclaim them, acknowledging freely, that Christ
had no respect to these fair actions which are pretended to have been done on
the first day of the week under the Old Testament, and was not moved by them
to institute that day for Gods service under the New Testament: That also these
mysteries of the number of seven have no certainty, and were not the cause of
the institution of one of the seven days of the Week, to be a day of rest,
and that God had no regard unto them in that institution.

6 For rather, if the number of s^v^n be in the Scripture a mystical number,
which I would not deny absolutely, seeing that among all other numbers it is
used in it to denote perfection and perpetuity, it must be Gods observation
thereof from the beginning, when he rested on the seventh day, that made it
mysterious, and the cause why God uses it, rather than any other day, in holy
Scripture, to denote perfection, for as much as he ordained and established the
seventh day wherein he rested, for figure and type of the heavenly, perfect,
and eternal rest which he has prepared for all those that are his: But this
consideration is of no force to make the number of seven or the seventh day to
be mysterious under the New Testament, and to be kept as a day of rest. For the
types and mystical figures of the heavenly rest, which God had established
under the ancient Testament, bind not Christians under the New Testament,
seeing all old things are past away, and behold, all things are become new, 2
Cor. 5. ver. 17.

CHAPTER Tenth.
Answer to the allegations of some pretended instances, conjectures, and
inconveniences.
1. First instance. The observation of the first day of the week has as solid
foundations in the Scripture, as has the Baptism of little Children.

2. First Answer. Baptism is commanded in the New Testament to all those that
are in the Covenant, wherein little Children are comprised.

3. But there is no commandment in the New Testament to observe one of the
seven days of the week.

4. Second Answer, although our Savior has substituted Baptism to the
Circumcision, he has not put any set day in the room of the Jewish Sabbath.

5. Third Answer, the observation of the first day of the week from the
beginning, inforceth not a divine institution thereof, no more than the
observation of Easter, and of other holy days, which are of as old date.

6. Second instance, of diverse judgments upon those that have neglected or
contemned the observation of the first day of the week, answered.

7. Third instance, Man is naturally averse from the sanctification of the
first day of the week.

8. Answer, showing that he is sluggish and backward in Gods service, not in
keeping of days.

9. Fourth instance, of diverse inconveniences that shall follow, if the
observation of the first day of the week be not a divine institution.

10. Answer to the first inconvenience, that the Church should be Lady and
Mistress of the Sabbath, if it depend on her institution, showing how the
Church may and may not sanctify a day for Gods service.

11. First Answer to the second inconvenience, that she may appoint as many or
as few days for Gods service as pleases her. showing that both extremities
must be avoided.

12. Second Answer, The Church has not failed in either of them.

13. Third Answer, The Church in her reformation has taken order with the
multiplication of holy days, and brought them within a little compass.

14. Answer to the third inconvenience, that the Church might change the Lords
day into another, showing that she might have done so in the beginning.

15. The fourth inconvenience, that the appointing of a day for Gods public
service enjoined in the fourth Commandment, should depend on the Church, is no
inconvenience.

16. Saving in case no day were appointed, which is not to be feared.

17. Answer to the fifth inconvenience, that many men will neglect the keeping
of the first day of the week, if they be persuaded that it is not a divine
institution, showing, that profane men will, religious men will not.

18. This Answer is confirmed by daily experience.

1 ALL the foresaid arguments, taken in some sort from the Scriptures, being
most weak, as is clear by what has been said, it is to no purpose that some
of those with whom we are indifferent, dare say, that the keeping of Sunday
has as good a foundation, and prop in the Scripture, as has the baptizing of
little Children.

2 For although we find no express commandment in the New Testament to
baptism little Children, no more than to keep Sunday or the first day of the
week for a seventh day of rest, yet we find baptism expressly ordained by
Jesus Christ, to be a seal of the covenant of grace, and of Gods promises
contained therein, which because they appertain to little children, as S.
Peter says, Act. 2. verse 39. and that in a manner so express, that St. Paul
affirms the Children of faithful Parents to be holy, 1 Cor. 7. ver. 14. we
conclude very pertinently, that the seal of these promises, which is Baptism,
pertains to them.

3 But we find not any ordinance in the Gospel to observe the seventh day,
neither in general, nor in particular, neither I say, one of the seven days
of the week in general, nor in particular the first day, or any other
comprised in the order of seven. The Commandment to observe the seventh day
under the Old Testament was ceremonial as was Gods ordinance concerning
circumcision, and had in the Law of the decalogue the same respect that
circumcision has in the covenant of grace. And as our Lord Jesus Christ
leaving the covenant of grace, firm and steady, has abolished the sign of
circumcision; even so leaving the Law stable in the principal substance
thereof, which is the whole morality thereof, he has abolished the ceremony of
the seventh day established in it of old.

4 Yet although he thought fit to put in the place of circumcision, which was
ministered to little children, and which he has abolished, the holy Sacrament
of Baptism, which consequently ought to be ministered to infants, he has not
judged convenient to do the like, by establishing another stinted day in the
room of the seventh Jewish day, which he has abrogated. For if he had
esteemed it convenient, he had left us an institution thereof as express as
of Baptism, which he has not done, but was pleased to leave to the wisdom
and liberty of the Church the appointing of a time for his service.

5 As indeed the Church from her first beginnings, and as it were from her
cradle, has observed Sunday. But of this practice and custom so long
continued, some do infer too rashly, that the keeping of Sunday is an
institution of Jesus Christ or of his Apostles. For by the same reason may be
inferred, that the keeping of Easter, and of some other holy days under the
Gospel, is a divine institution, because it has been practiced in the Church
from her first age, not long after the times of the Apostles. To which
conclusion these disputers will not consent unto, because our Lord Jesus Christ
has made us free from the necessity of keeping feasts, by any divine
obligation as is evident by the texts of Saint Paul alleged and explaind in
the first part of this treatise. The truth is, that custom has introduced, and
ever fithence has entertained that day, and some other holy days in the
Church, without any commandment of Jesus Christ, or of his holy Apostles,
which also Socrates has recorded in the fifth book of his ecclesiastical
History Chapter 21.

6 They produce also examples of diverse judgments of God upon sundry persons,
who neglected or contemned the Lords day, whence they would prove, that God
thereby has ratified the observation thereof, as ordained by him. Whereunto I
answer, that undoubtedly God may have punished many for the profanation of the
Lords day, not because he has ordained and commanded it, but because
(according to the order of the Church) this day has been appointed for the
excrcises of Religion, which he has commanded. All persons which set at
naught the preaching of the Word, the administration of the Sacraments, public
and common Prayers in the assemblies of the faithful, and the order of the
Church, whereby these holy actions are ordinarily practiced on the first day of
the week, deserve (in the righteous judgment of God) to be punished with
exemplary and public plagues: and when the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against their ungodliness, the cause of their punishment (to speak
properly) is the careless disregard of the holy Congregations, of the
religious and fruitful exercises practiced in them, and of the order of the
Church, and not any necessity proceeding from a commandment given of God, to
observe the first day of the week, rather than another day.

They urge also the backwardness which is naturally in men to the
sanctification of the Lords day, which is our Sabbath day. All wicked men are
altogether averse unto it, and the faithful and truly regenerate too remiss
and restie. Of this they infer, that the commandment concerning the Sabbath
is moral, and the Lords day is a divine institution, considering the great
contradiction and opposition of the flesh against it.

8 But it is easy to answer this argument. For this rebellion and
stubbornness of the flesh, is not simply against Sunday, no more than against
another day, but against the keeping and applying of Sunday to serve God, to
hear his Word, to power out prayers before him, to meditate on godliness and
other exercises of religion, whereunto the natural man has no inclination, no
more in other days, than on the day that is stinted for them. For otherwise,
to to observe a day for passing the time in sporting, in gaming, or in worldly
solemnities, the flesh is too too forward to that. Whence it follows, that
verily Gods service, true religion, and godliness in it self is a moral
thing established of God, seeing the flesh is so averse unto it. But it is not
necessary, that the keeping of a certain day of Sabbath, as of Sunday, should
be of the same nature, because the flesh has no aversion to that, saving in as
much as the observation of such a day is ordained for Gods service.

9 But say they, if one of seven days (and namely Sunday) be not under the new
Testament necessary to be kept by divine institution, but only by the order of
the Church, it shall follow, that the Church has authority of her self to
sanctify a day for Gods service,

That if she has that authority, she may ordain as many, and as few days as
pleases her, make all the days, or the most part of the days of the week
Sabbath days, or only one of ten, or of fifteen, or of a whole year, if she
will.

That particularly,





10 I answer, that none of these inconveniences is to be feared. As for the
first, That the Church should have authority to sanctify a day for Gods
service, if so be God has not appointed one, I see no inconvenience in it. It
is true, that it is Gods prerogative exclusively to all men and Angels, to
sanctify a thing, if sanctification be taken for a real and inherent
sanctification, by impression of holiness in the thing, or if a thing is to be
sanctified, to be an essential part, and properly so called, of Gods service.
For God will be served according to his Ordinances, and not according to the
ordinances of men. But this is not the sanctification that we treat of here,
for a day is not susceptible of such an impression of holiness. And to speak
properly, it makes no part of Gods service under the new Testament, but is
only an accidental circumstance thereof, whereof God has left the
determination to the liberty of the Church. For in that he has not in himself
given an express, and particular Ordinance concerning it; he has testified
that he did leave that power to his Church, teaching her only in general to
do it conveniently.

And indeed, does not she sanctify places, when she appoints, and sets
them apart, that in them God may be served? Does she not sanctify times, other
than Sunday, ordaining fasting days, when necessity does require it; and feast
days, which she causes to be solemnized in remembrance of the Birth, Passion,
Ascension of Jesus Christ, and of the sending of the holy Ghost, etc. All
Christians hold this sanctification to be indifferent, and no man brings her
authority in question in that respect, neither does any blame the holy use of
those days, providing she carry her self wisely, and keep a due proportion
and fit moderation in her stinting of them. Why then might she not in the same
manner, after Jesus Christ had abolished the Jewish Sabbath, sanctify the
first day of the week, to be an ordinary day of Gods service, in remembrance,
that on it Christ rose from the dead? Wherein she takes not upon her a masterie
that belongs not unto her. It is true, that she is not Mistress of the
Sabbath, to change a day that God has ordained, and to dispense at her
pleasure with the keeping thereof. But since there is no day ordained of God to
the Christian Church for his service, and that which he had ordained of old
being expired, she has as great authority to appoint a day for Gods service,
as to ordain other circumstances and helps thereof.

11 To the second inconvenience, I say, that the two extremities of excess and
defect are to be avoided in this point: For there must be, neither so many Holy
days ordained, that the faithful be inthralled and surcharged with them, as
with an onerous yoke, which they are not able to bear, Act. 15. verse. 10. nor
so few, that they become unto them an occasion to give themselves over unto
profaneness and irreligion. It is certain, that a day ordinary and frequent
is necessary for many good and excellent uses, as for the maintenance of the
true religion and godliness, of union and Christian society among the faithful,
for the celebration of the Name of God, and conservation of the remembrance of
his benefits toward us, by hearing the same Word, receiving the same
Sacraments, and above all, by Common Prayers, and other points of Divine
Service, which being practiced in the same time and place with an holy
affection, by many faithful encouraging and exhorting one another, both by
word and by example, are of great efficacy and avail much with God. If there
were not such a day, these exercises not being practiced ordinarily, these
duties would also easily decay by little and little, and men would become
slack and fainthearted in the performance of them: As on the contrary, if this
day returned too often, and the one upon the heel of the other, that might be
troublesome to the faithful, and would not only incommodate them in their
temporal affairs, which God is well pleased they apply themselves unto, but
also would make the exercises of religion to be grievous and loathsome unto
them, by reason of their infirmities in this life.

12 Therefore the Church ought not to sin in this point, neither by excess,
nor by defect, and far less through defect than through excess, but having
the establishing of Gods public service committed to her wisdom, ought to
refrain from establishing, either an excessive number of days, lest she
should render the yoke too heavy; or too few, as one in a fortnight, in a
month, in a year, or in many years, lest she should seem to be slightly
affected to devotion, and careless of Gods service. For days so rare, and so
distant, should not be sufficient for the entertainment of the ends above
specified, which be so necessary for her edification.

Also God has so governed her by his providence, that although Jesus Christ
has given her no ordinance for a particular day, yet we see that from her
beginnings she has always kept at least one in the week, to wit, Sunday, not
through an opinion that in a seventh day there was some greater moment and
efficacy for the entertainment of godliness, and for the obtaining of Gods
blessing, then in another number, but judging it a fit and convenient thing to
keep the distinction of weeks, which was already accustomed and usual in the
Church, and to consecrate to God as many days, at least, as did the Church of
the Jews; that is one of seven in ordinary, and some others extraordinarily,
returning and following the one the other afar off, as from year to year in
remembrance of some things considerable, either in the person of Jesus Christ,
or of some of his most excellent servants.

13 This has by time grown to a great abuse, through the multiplication of
too many and diverse feasts, serving almost for no use, but for idleness and
riot: This we see in the Roman Church, which has ordained an excessive number
of Holy days, not only to the honor of God, but also of Angels, of he and
she Saints of Paradise; yea, of sundry which having never been men on earth,
cannot be Saints in heaven: to which days they oblige men's consciences, as to
days more holy, and more capable to sanctify the actions of religion done in
them, than all other days; nay, as more holy than those things which God has
commanded, founding that attempt (but most fondly) upon the fourth
Commandment. Therefore the Church, in her reformation, has most justly
redressed this abuse, and has reduced the observation of the time of Gods
service, either to Sunday only in the week, or besides to a few more, more
rare in their revolution, and consecrated to the honor of God alone, to be
observed only for orders sake, and for ecclesiastical government, that in
them her children may apply themselves more particularly, then they do on
other days, to Gods service, but without tying the consciences of the
faithful farther than to the order of the Church; not urging the Holy days
obligatorie immediately on Gods part.

14 To the third inconvenience, that she may change Sunday into another day, if
the stinting of a day depend on her. I answer, that happily she might in the
beginning have made choice of another number than of seven, and in the number
of seven of another than the first, which is Sunday. For although it be true,
that since the resurrection of Christ, no action has, or shall be done so
important as this, which came to pass on the first day of the week, it
follows not, that the remembrance of that action was of necessity to be
celebrated once in the week, and that a day should be appointed for that end,
more than for the remembrance of others of the Lords wonderful actions, or
that the Church was tied by necessity to appoint the first day of the week for
that purpose, rather then another day, upon the sole consideration, that it
happened on that day, which in it self is not more obligatory now, than it was
then; because the celebration of Christ's actions, in any day whatsoever, is (in
it self) a thing indifferent, and the Lord does not require, that we tie our
selves to the days wherein they were performed. And so this consideration was
no hinderance, why in the beginning the Church might not have made choice of
another day then Sunday.

But seeing Sunday is established by a long custom, for the regular and
ordinary day of Gods service, seeing the faithful Christians kept it in the
beginning, through respect to the resurrection of Christ, and so it is become
usual every where by degrees, seeing also time has confirmed this custom,
and it has been ratified by Imperial constitutions, and diverse
ecclesiastical ordinances, I esteem it should be an imprudent and impudent
course to attempt the changing thereof into another day.

15 The fourth inconvenience, that particular men shall have nothing enjoined
of God unto them in the fourth Commandment, nor in any other part of
Scripture, concerning the time of Gods public service, saving that they
observe the time prescribed in the Church, according to the will of those that
are in authority, is not an inconvenience, but is in effect the whole substance
of the Commandment, in regard of particular men, to whom God having enjoined
in the three former Commandments, to serve him particularly every day, and
upon all occasions, in the fourth he injoyneth them to do it publicly
together, and to observe the time appointed for that purpose by ecclesiastical
discipline.

16 The inconvenience to be feared should be, in case no order at all were
established in the Church for the time of Gods public service, and every
particular man were left to his own choice, which should cause a disordered
diversity. But this were to forge fears, where there is no cause. For order
has been taken with that in the Christian Church from her beginning, and it
has been fortified by use and custom, so that particular men, if they happen
to come to places where there is no Church, no discipline ordered, will not
omit, being religiously disposed and fearing God, to observe the day which the
Christian Church has chused and practiced since so many ages. And as God, when
he commands a frequent resorting to the holy assemblies, gives no injunction
to particular men, but in dependancy upon the order which shall be established
in the Church for such meetings, even so he tieth them to the same dependancy,
when he ordains that a certain time be appointed for the said public
meetings.

17 For the fifth and last inconvenience, some fear least particular men
should presume to observe any other day at their leisure, and neglect the
keeping of Sunday, if they be taught that they are not bound unto it by Gods
command. Whereunto I answer, that if these particulars be profane men, which
make light of the exercises of godliness, and of the order of the Church, in
all likelihood they will do worse, and keep no day at all. But for such
unruly wights we need to disquiet our selves too much. For it is not in our
power to prevent and hinder all the abuses and profanations which they would
commit, although they were persuaded that Sunday is a divine institution. He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: Nay although R^. (...). v. 11.
they might be recalled, it is not reasonable, that to rescue them we should
speak or write any thing against truth.

If they be men which take to heart religion and godliness, and carry a due
respect to the order of the Church, no such unrulinesse is to be feared of
them: For because the preaching of the word, the administration of the
Sacraments, public and common prayers are means ordained of God for the
maintenance of godliness and of true Religion, and Sunday is established by
the order of the Church for the practice of these exercises, they will make
great account of that day, and observe it, not for its own sake, knowing that
it is not in it self more esteemeable, nor more belonging to Gods service then
another day, not also through opinion that God has particularly sanctified it
by his ordinance, and that their conscience is in that respect more tied unto
it then to another day; but because they have a special regard to the order of
the Church, which being very good and profitable, they know they are bound to
submit themselves unto it, seeing God has commanded it, although in general
terms, yet most expressly in his holy word. They will also fear to contemn
that day, and in so doing to sin, not in consideration of any dignity of that
the day has of it felfe, or that God has given it, whereby it should oblige
more than another day, and make the contempt thereof more blame worthy; but in
consideration of Gods service whereunto it is applied by the ordinance and
custom of the Church. So then a particular Church will conform her self to
the order of all other Churches, and the particular members of each Church will
submit themselves to the order received in it, and so all shall religiously
celebrate Sunday, because by the order of the Church, it has been observed so
long and in all places where the Gospel was preached, for the public exercise
of Gods service.

18 To show that the foresaid inconvenience is not so much to be feared, it is
a thing common and well known, that our Churches ordain upon diverse
occasions extraordinary days of fasting, and of particular prayers, and
command the whole people to come together for that end in these days, which
are otherwise common and work days.

There are also in many Churches yearly feasts enjoined by the order and
discipline of the Church, as of the Nativity, Passion and Ascension of Christ,
etc. wherein the people is gathered together to hear the word of God, and all
the parts of divine service. Do they not know that God has not bound them by
special commandment to the observation of such days, and that their
conscience is not tied unto them in that name? And yet we see not any of them
under that pretense neglect the keeping of those days, or presume to ordain
others at their pleasure. Some profane men may attempt such a thing, but honest
men which love the Word of God, and the exercises of godliness, will submit
themselves to the order of the Church, and observe such days, not as I have
said, for any particular commandment that God has given concerning them,
seeing in this respect they know they are free, yet through respect and
affection toward the order of the Church, and true devotion toward the holy
exercises whereunto she has thought fit to apply such days.

It is even so of Sunday, between which and these other days there is not in
effect any difference in regard of a necessity to keep them, saving that
Sunday is more ordinary and frequent then these others are, which being joined
to the antiquity and generality of the observation thereof ever since the
beginning of the Christian Church, has worthily purchased unto it the
precedence of credit and respect, to all other days which may be
extraordinarily now appointed by the Church for the exercises of Religion.

This is all that I have to say concerning the institution and setting a part
of Sunday for Gods service, which has been the matter of the third part of
this treatise.

The end of the third Part.
THE FOVRTH PART: Concerning the observation of the Sabbath day under the
Ancient Testament, and of Sunday under the New Testament.
CHAPTER First.
What was the observation of the Sabbath day under the Ancient Testament.
1. The two chief points of this fourth and last part.

2. All servile works of profit, or of recreation were forbidden on the
Sabbath day.

3. Yea the least unnecessary works, as to go out of doors, to gather Manna.

4. To prepare it on that day.

5. Commandment was given to the people to prepare it the day before.

6. Refutation of the contrary opinion.

7. How it came to pass that the Manna, being kept according to the
Commandment, did not stink.

8. Other examples of small things which it was not lawful to do on the
Sabbath day.

9. Works lawful on that day were the works of the ceremonial Law.

10. Works of love, of mercy and of compassion.

11. Works of urgent necessity.

12. Whence it is evident, that the observation of the Jewish Sabbath was very
precise and exact.

1 HAving declared sufficiently the nature of the Sabbath day, which was the
maine point in this question; I will dispatch briefly the last point
concerning the observation thereof, by a holy rest and cessation of all servile
works commanded of God, and will show, how far the Jews were bound unto it
under the ancient Testament, and how far, or whether Christians are obliged
unto it under the New Testament: For this also is called in question.

2 This is of it self clear enough by that has been already said in the
three first parts. Nevertheless to give a more full declaration and
satisfaction, I say, that we know sufficiently what was the observation of the
Sabbath day under the Old Testament, seeing God had both in general and
particular ordered it by his laws. In general he commanded a most exact rest
and cessation, and declared it by a redoubling of the words which he makes use
of in this point, saying sometimes that the seventh day is a Sabbath, or Rest
of Rest, Exodus 16. verse 23. Exodus 31. verse 15. Exodus 35. ver. 2. Leviticus 23.
verse 3. that is, a day wherein he would have them to rest most precisely from
all works, as it is said in the same places, which works he otherwhere
intitleth servile works, Leviticus 23. verse 7, 8, 21, 25. Numbers 28. verse
25. that is, appertaining to their temporal and ordinary callings, which they
were wont to do on the six former days of the week, either for profit, or
for recreation, and other uses simply civil, domesticke, earthly; which he
particularizeth in diverse places, as for example, to husband the ground, to
reap, to cut grapes, to tread wine presses, Exodus 34. verse 21. Nehem. 13.
verse 13. to buy and to sell, Nehem. 10. verse 31. hold markets and faires for
buying and selling of wares, meat, drink, to Cart, to carry burdens, Nehe.
13. verse 15, 16, 17, 18. Ierem. 17. verse 21, 22, 23, 24. to go out of their
houses for any end whatsoever besides their resorting to the holy convocations,
as to go a voyage, and to do such like actions, Exodus 16. verse 29.

3 This ordinance to do no manner of work on the Sabbath day, was so precise,
that God forbad them to do the least works, even those which might be done
without travel or distraction. For example, they were interdicted not only to
make long and painful voyages and courses, but also to go out of doors to
walk, although softly, without urgent necessity, as to go out for to gather
Manna when they were in the Wilderness, Exodus 16. ver. 27. which they might
have done without pains, because it was to be found at their doors, and they
were not to go far, nor to take more pains than to stoop a little, nor
bestow above a very short time, and that betimes in the morning, because when
the Sun waxed hot it melted, neither could that have hindered them from
sanctifying the Sabbath with all the exercises of Gods service.

4 Nevertheless, God forbad them that light and small work, and least they
should take that little and small diversion, purposely he rained not down
Manna upon them on that day, but the day before gave them bread for two days,
and when some of the people went out to see, if there was any on the Sabbath
day, they were eagerly blamed, as breakers of the Sabbath verse 27, 28. And
thereupon God commanded them to abide every man in his place, and that no man
should go out of his place on that day to gather Manna verse 29. Likewise
concerning that measure which they had gathered the day before, for the Sabbath
day, he enjoined them also, to bake and prepare it on the sixth day, and to
beware to delay and put off the preparing thereof to the seventh day, least
they should profane the Sabbath. This is expressly set down in these words,
Exodus 16. verse 23. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord:
Bake that which you will bake to day, and sees that ye will sees, and that
which remains over, lay up for you to be kept until the morning. The sense
of which words is evident, that as God on the day before the Sabbath rained
Manna for two days, so they should prepare it on the same day for two days,
baking that which they would bake, seething that they would sees, and frying
that they would prepare so, and after they had eaten of it sufficiently for
that day, they should lay up the rest so prepared, to be kept until the next
day.

5 For if, as some do esteem, God would have suffered them to prepare on the
Sabbath day that which remained over, and the sense of the foresaid words were
only, that on Friday they should prepare and made ready such a portion as they
should think sufficient for the meat of that day, and keep the overplus to be
prepared the next day, God had not given them on Friday bread for two days,
and had not forborne to rain down Manna upon them on the Sabbath day. For it
had been far less pains unto them to gather on the seventh day the measure
that was needful unto them, then to make it ready afterward. Neither is it
likely, that after he had forbidden them, and had taken from them the means to
gather any on the Sabbath hay, he gave them liberty to bake, sees, fry and
prepare it on that day. Therefore when he sent them twice as much Manna the day
before the Sabbath, he did it manifestly, that they might both gather and
prepare double portion the same day, and refrain from preparing any on the
Sabbath day.

6 And wherefore had Moses advised them so carefully on Friday, rather than on
the other days to bake that which they had to bake, but to tell them that the
same day they ought to bake the double measure which they should gather? For
otherwise this advertisement had been to no purpose, because they were wont
every day to bake the portion which they had gathered for the day, knowing that
without a warner. But they could not well know, without information, that they
were bound to prepare on the same day the two portions which they had gathered
for two days. And to show yet more clearly, that what they laid up for the
next day they kept it baken, Moses said not unto them, bake to day that which
ye have laid up, but only, Eat that to day, For to day is the Sabbath unto the
Lord, verse 25. which reason was as valuable to hinder them from preparing, as
from gathering it, the one being no more necessary then the other. For as GOD
gave them the means to gather double measure on the sixth day, so had they on
the sixth day the means and leisure to bake and prepare that double measure, and
were not constrained by any necessity to reserve a part, or to prepare and bake
it on the Sabbath day.

It is objected against this, that if they had laid by the Manna prepared and
baken till the next day after, it had not been a wonder, that it did not
stink, neither was there any worm therein, where nevertheless is related as
a marvel, verse 24. seeing baking and seething hinder all stink and breeding
of worms. But this objection has no weight, and is not to be regarded. For
although the Manna so prepared might naturally remain sound and wholesome
until the next day, yet by Gods Almighty power and righteous judgment, it had
stunke and bred worms, if it had been kept otherwise then he had expressly
commanded: For undoubtedly, the Manna unbaken and unprepared might have been
kept on any other day of the week, till the next day, without corruption or
any noisome smell. The only cause why it stunke, and bred worms, was Gods
prohibition to leave of it till the morning, ver. 19, 20. which prohibition,
proceeding from so powerful and righteous a Lawgiver, was of such force, that
it had stunke, and bred worms being kept till the next morning of any day
whatsoever, although the Israelites had done their utmost endeavor, by baking,
seething, frying, and by all other possible means to keep it from
putrefaction. And therefore it is well noted to the purpose, that being laid up
baken and prepared on Friday for Saturday, it stunke not, because that being
done according to Gods commandment, he restrained his judgment, which he had
displayed in another day, if they had kept it till the next morning.

8 Moreover, God gave another prohibition to his people, saying, Ye shall
kindle no fire thorowout your habitations on the Sabbath day, Exodus 35. verse.
3. although it was an action of little importance, soon done, and bringing no
disturbance to Gods service. A man went out, and gathered sticks on the
Sabbath day, for his present necessity, as it is to be presumed. For this he
was, by Gods express command, stoned to death, as a manifest transgressour of
the Commandment concerning the Sabbath, Numb. 15. verse. 32, 33, 34, 35. To
say, that he was stoned, not so much for gathering sticks on the Sabbath, as
for doing it through a too bold contempt of that day, is a supposition
uncertain, and it is far more likely that he did it through negligence and
unadvisednesse, than through contempt and presumptuous audacitie: and that this
unwariness, whereof he made an open declaration, or some other apparent
excuse, wherewith he shielded himself, and which was thought to be true, or
also the manifest slightness of the action was unto them a cause of doubting,
if they should put him to death, according to the Ordinance of the Law, Exodus
31. verse. 14, 15. And so much the rather, that God showed indulgence to those
which through error sinned against his Commandments, as may be seen in the
same fifteenth Chapter of Numbers, verse 22, 23, 24. And therefore it was
thought necessary in this occasion to consult the mouth of the Lord, who
ordained, that this man should be stoned to death by the whole multitude: This
he commanded to conciliate so much more credit and reverence to his Law
touching the Sabbath, to give to understand, that it had particular reasons
wherefore it ought to be exactly observed, and that the lightest faults against
the rest of the seventh day were not pardonable, and to make (by this example
of severity) the Israelites so much the more fearful to violate the Sabbath,
and careful to abstain in it from all servile works, even from the least.
And indeed, God in the denunciation of the punishments against the
transgressors of this Law, had not said, that he only who should profane and
vilipend the Sabbath, but more generally, that he who should do any work
therein should be put to death, and so cut off from among his people, as may
be seen in the foresaid 35. Chapter of Exodus, verse 2. Also some of the
contrary opinion to this which I defend, acknowledge that it is so, and
thereupon vouch, that in this rigor of the Law, condemning a man to die for
gathering sticks on the Sabbath day, there was some ceremony added to the
morality of the Commandment concerning this day, and enjoined to the Jews in
that time of infancy, and that it obliges us no more than other ceremonies
annexed at that time to moralities: Whereof speech shall be again made
hereafter.

Mary Magdalene, and Mary mother of James, durst not work on that day, to
imbalme Christ's body, but delays to do it, and to buy the spices necessary
thereto, till it was past, though they might have done it in a short space,
resting on that day, according to the Commandment, Mark. 16. verse. 1. Luke 23.
ver. 56. and thinking themselves bound to the precise observation of the said
Commandment, because they knew not that it was abolished by our Lord Jesus
Christ.

9 So it is evident, that the observation of the Sabbath was to the Jews most
precise and exact. Neither was it lawful unto them to do any outward and
corporal works, saving those that were necessary for the outward and
ceremonial service which GOD required on that day, as to the Levites and
Priests, to kill and dress the beasts for the Sacrifices, and to burn the fat
upon the Altar, Numb. 28. verse. 9. Matthew. 12. verse. 5. to particular men to
circumcise their children, John 7. verse. 22, 23. to walk a certain space from
home to the place of Gods service, where there was an holy convocation ordained
of God on the Sabbath day, Levit. 23. verse. 3. which may be gathered out of the
second book of the Kings, Chap. 4. verse. 23. Where the husband of the
Shunamite asked her, wherefore she would go to the Prophets, seeing it was
neither new Moon, nor Sabbath: which shows, that it was lawful to go on
the Sabbath day to the places where Gods Prophets abode to teach the people, Or
the Priests to minister to the Lord in things belonging to his service. And
this distance of way was by tradition limited and stinted to two thousand
common steps, as may be gathered out of the twelfth verse of the first chapter
of the Acts, where the distance between the mount of Olives and the town of
Jerusalem (which was of so many steps) is called A Sabbath days journey: which
tradition and ordinance concerning a Sabbath days journey, which is not
formally prescribed in the Law, some are of opinion that it had its original
from the injunction given to the Israelites in the second Chapter of Numbers
and the second verse, to pitch under their standards about the Tabernacle of
assignation over against it, or a little far off from it. And in the third
Chapter of Joshua, verse 3, and 4. which do explicate this distance, to go
after the Arc of the Covenant, keeping between them and it the space of two
thousand cubits by measure, which journey by consequent they were of necessity
to make every Sabbath day during their abode in the wilderness, to come to the
Tabernacle of assignation where the Arc was, and to assist there to the holy
convocation; which by Gods command was solemnized on that day, Levit. 23. verse.
3. which afterward the Doctors of the Jews took and established for a rule of
the journey, which a man might make on the Sabbath day for Gods service, and
for holy and religious ends. There be some who say, that they extended this
license of two thousand cubits, to walk for recreation and pastime. But this
has no ground in the Law, as I conceive.

Moreover, they were also permitted on the Sabbath day to do works of
charity, mercifulness, and compassion; necessary to themselves, or to their
neighbors, yea and to their beasts also. As to fly, and to fight, to save
their lives, and to defend themselves in time of war. As Eliah threatened by
Iezebel fled for his life, and went forty days and forty nights unto Horeb,
wherein there were many Sabbaths, 1 Kings 19. v. 3, 8. As the Jews decreed to
defend themselves on the Sabbath day, if their enemies came to make battle
with them on that day, 1 Maccab. 2. v. 41. having learned wisdom by the
example of their brethren, who being assaulted on the Sabbath, chused most
unadvisedly to dye rather than to make resistance for their lives, v. 36, 37,
38. As, according to the opinion of some, it was on the Sabbath day that the
Israelites fought against Ierico, Ios. 6. verse 15, 16, 20, 21. and against the
Syrians, 1 King. 20. verse 29. but this is not evident enough. As also to care,
dress, cure, heal sick folks, which Christ taught the Jews to be lawful,
and did often himself, as we see in diverse places of the Gospel: As to lay
hold on a poor beast, and lift it out of the pit, that it was fallen into on
the Sabbath day, Mat. 12. ver. 11, 12. lead it to watering, give it food, and
do unto it all other necessary things, Luke 13. ver. 15.

11 An important and urgent necessity, which could not be foreseen, prevented,
hindered, and admitted no delay, made lawful unto them on the Sabbath day,
actions which otherwise had been unlawful; As although they were forbidden to
prepare meat to eat it on the Sabbath day, yet if a man could not get meat to
prepare, or was deprived of all possible means to prepare the meat he had, nor
find meat made ready on the Sabbath day, and that he were in danger to starve,
I esteem that rather than he should suffer incommodity in his health, or
danger in his life, God was well pleased that he should prepare some on the
Sabbath for his sustentation. For upon this ground Jesus Christ maintained
against the Pharisees the action of his Disciples, who being an hungered in
following him plucked ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands,
Mat. 12. verse 1. Luke 6. verse 1. likewise, although they were forbidden to
kindle the fire on the Sabbath day, yet if they had been pinched with some
urgent necessity, I doubt not but to kindle the fire had been acceptable to
God. I esteem, that the like judgment is to be made of all other actions of
the like nature, although otherwise forbidden on the Sabbath day.

21 These reasons taken from Gods service, when external and corporal actions
pertained unto it, from charity and compassion or from some great and urgent
necessity, being excepted, it was not lawful to do any works of common and
ordinary labor, nay not the least, during either the time of Gods service in
his house, either before or after it, publicly or privately in the whole space
of 4. and twenty hours between the two evenings, as is evident by the
prohibitions, so express, so particular, so frequent made concerning that
matter. Philo in the second book of the life of Moses, says, that it was not
lawful to the Jews to pluck on the Sabbath day a bough, a fruit, a leaf of
a tree. And all the Rabbis of the Jews, which writ of the observation of the
Sabbath, go far beyond whatsoever is exact and precise in the Law of God,
forbidding actions far lighter, and of far lesser moment, then all those
that are particularized in the Law.

CHAPTER Second.
What is the obligation of Christians to the observation of Sunday for the
manner of it.
1. They are not bound by a Divine prohibition, and for conscience sake to
abstain from any servile work.

2. First Reason, the fourth Commandment binds them not thereunto.

3. Second Reason, the order of the Church neither does, nor can oblige their
conscience to a Jewish abstinence.

4. Third Reason, Those of the contrary opinion urge not the riged abstinence
of the Jews, from all manner of work.

5. Wherefore they should not urge any abstinence at all, contrary to Christian
liberty.

6. For Christian liberty extends it self equally to all, and is not
restrained by the fourth Commandment.

1 AS for Christians living under the New Testament, they are not obliged to
such an observation of their Sunday, as the Jews were to their Sabbath day.
And I believe not, any work external, corporal, servile of their ordinary
callings, lawful on another day, to be unlawful on that day, by a divine
prohibition, and obligation of conscience, to abstain from it in consequence
of such a prohibition.

2 This resulteth by necessary consequence from that has been said before.
For if the fourth Commandment, in as much as it prescribes a certain day of
rest, to wit, a seventh day, or the last of seven, binds them not, as has
been showed; there is no reason why it should rather oblige them in the exact
prohibition of all work on the Sabbath day, because this was as well a part of
the ceremonies and government of the Jewish Church, as was the appointment of a
seventh day of Sabbath.

3 If they keep not their Sunday by Gods Commandment, but according to the
order and use of the Church, as I have also proved, no more are they bound by
Gods Commandment, to cease on Sunday from all their ordinary works, but only
as far as the use and order of the Church established for the public
exercise of Gods service on that day does require it, without any further
obligation of their conscience. Now this order cannot and should not oblige
them to an abstinence like unto that of the Iew^s under the O^d Testament. For
it were needful for this, that God himself had substituted Sunday to the
Sabbath day, and posted over to that day the rigorous right of this day,
commanding the same abstinence in the one and in the other; which is not. The
substitution of one day to the other was done by the Church, and the reasons of
an abstinence so precise on the Jewish Sabbath, which were wholly typical,
having no place at all in the New Testament, the said abstinence ought not to
be any more in vigor, neither ought our Sunday to usurp the same rigor of
authority over us, to make us refrain from all kind of work, which the
Sabbath day possessed over the Jews, by Gods express commandment.

4 The same is easily proved by good reason, grounded upon things which those
against whom we dispute are constrained to advow. For if Christians were
obliged also to an abstinence of outward and servile works, which to the Jews
were unlawful on the Sabbath day, it must be in consideration and by virtue of
the prohibitions given to the same Jews in the fourth Commandment, and in
other places of the Old Testament, to do such works on that day; seeing
otherwise, to do them is not a sin, if we consider the thing absolutely in
it self. This power of the fourth Commandment is extended to all Christians
by those that are contrary to the opinion which I maintain. And nevertheless,
they avouch almost all of them, that under the Gospel we are delivered from
the rigor of an exact observation, such as was the observation that the Jews
were subjected unto, that we have greater liberty, that we may on our Sabbath
day kindle the fire, make meat ready, not only for our ordinary refection, but
also for feasts and bankets, so they be not too sumptuous, go abroad for other
ends then for Gods service, as to walk, and do other such things, and that
without the case of urgent necessity, which sometimes made them lawful to the
Jews themselves. They call such actions works of Christian liberty, which
they acknowledge to be permitted to Christians, although they were not
permitted to the Jews, as were the works of godliness, mercy, and urgent
necessity, whereof there is no difficulty but they may be done on the Sabbath
day. This only they require, that these works of Christian liberty be done
without scandal, without any disturbance of Gods service, and without any
hinderance to the Sanctification of the Sabbath.

5 Now it is most true, that we are delivered from the necessity of this so
rigid observation. But I ask them, wherefore we shall be permitted to do
some works which were prohibited to the Jews on the Sabbath day, as to kindle
the fire, prepare and dress meat, walk abroad without necessity, and not
other works, which were not forbidden more severely than the former, as to
plough, sow, reap, carry burdens, etc. The one and the other were alike
unlawful to the Jews, in virtue of the interdiction given in the fourth
Commandment, and reiterated so often elsewhere. If this interdiction tyeth
still our hands under the New Testament, and suffers us not to do these last
works and other such like, I would feign know, upon what ground they hold,
that it releaseth and suffers us to do these former works? What reason have
they to extend our Christian liberty to the one, and not to the other, seeing
there is no relaxation given us for the one more expressly than for the other?
Seeing also means may be found to do the last, as well as the first, without
scandal, and without any let by either to the Sanctification of the Sabbath
day?

6 Therefore we must of necessity confess, that they are equally permitted, or
equally forbidden, seeing the fourth Commandment makes no distinction. Now
they advow that some works are permitted to us, which were by the fourth
Commandment forbidden to the Jews, and are works of Christian liberty.
Whence I conclude, that all other works are also of the same nature, that we
have liberty to do them all on our Sunday, and that as the fourth Commandment
obliges not Christians to keep the seventh day which it prescribes so
precisely, no more does it oblige them to do no manner of work on that day.
For these two parts of the Commandment are alike precise, and the one is of as
great authority as the other.

CHAPTER Third.
Answer to a reply made to the argument of the precedent Chapter.
1. A general reply, that the works forbidden particularly, had reference
only to the abode of the people in the wilderness.

2. First Answer, The Commandment to tarry at home on the Sabbath day was
perpetual.

3. Second Answer, The prohibition to prepare meat was perpetual.

4, The first reply to this Answer refuted.

5. The said reply is not well grounded on the example of a Pharisee, who
called Christ to eat bread on the Sabbath day.

6. Confirmation of the refutation of the said reply by the Scriptures.

7. By the testimony of Saint Augustine, and of Saint Ignace, and by reason.

8. The second reply taken from equality, yea from odds of reason refuted.

9. A mystery hid in the prohibition to cook meat on the Sabbath day, etc.

10. Third Answer, the prohibition to kindle fire was perpetual, and not
referred to the building of the Tabernacle.

11. If it was referred thereto, it was only by application.

12. If it was not lawful to kindle fire for the uses of the Tabernacle, far
less for other uses.

13. Confirmation of this answer by reason, and by the testimony of Philo.

14. Fourth Answer, The particular prohibitions were explications of the
general prohibition of the fourth Commandment.

15. Fifth and last Answer, God has no where made an exception of any work on
the weekly Sabbath, as he did on the Sabbath of the Passover.

1 SOme of the contrary opinion have seen the difficulty propounded in the
former Chapter, to wit, that there is no reason to say, that some works which
the Jews were forbidden to do, as well as all other, by the fourth Commandment
are permitted, but the rest are not permitted, if it be true that the
prohibition of the fourth Commandment obliges us, as they pretend. Therefore
they say, that these works, which, as they confess, we are permitted to do,
as to kindle the fire, and to make meat ready on the Sabbath day, were
permitted to the Jews as well as unto us, and are not comprised in the
prohibition of the fourth Commandment, and that the particular prohibitions
which are made in Exodus Chapter 16. and 35. were temporal, had respect only
to the time of the peoples sojourning in the wilderness, and were grounded on
reasons particular to that time.

2 But this is an affirmation without ground, and without all likelihood. For
to speak of the injunction given them, to tarry every man in his place, and
not to go out of it on the Sabbath day, Exodus 16. verse. 29. it is true, that
it was given them by occasion of the Manna, to the intent that they should not
go forth to seek any, yet undoubtedly it was extended also to all other
things of the like nature, to wit, to all bodily and earthly ends, God by that
one example forbidding them to apply themselves to the seeking of them, there
being a like reason for all. I say, bodily and earthly, because a spiritual
and heavenly end was excepted by the third verse of the three and twenty
Chapter of Leviticus, and there was no other end but such a one, which might be
an exception from the said prohibition. Will any man say, that during their
abode in the wilderness, they might freely and without offense go about other
worldly businesses, the gathering of Manna excepted? This goes beyond all
semblance of truth: And therefore, if this was not left to their liberty, the
prohibition of the sixteenth Chapter of Exodus had a farther regard than to the
Manna only. Now if they were restrained in the wilderness, and durst not go
forth for earthly imploiments, as to gather Manna, what reason can be alleged,
why in the land of Canaan they were free to come and to go, and trouble
themselves with the care and pursuit of the bread that perishes, and of other
things of this world?

3 The same judgment ought to be made of the prohibition to to cook and
dress meat in the wilderness on the Sabbath day, which meat was Manna:
wherefore ought not this prohibition to have place in the land of Canaan for
all other meats? The Israelites had they not leisure in Canaan to prepare their
meat the day before the Sabbath, as much, nay more than they had for the Manna
in the wilderness? Nevertheless, the day before the Sabbath, which was the
sixth day of the week, God said to them concerning the Manna, Bake that which
ye will bake, and seethe that which ye will seethe, and all that remains lay
it up to be kept till the morning for you. And why? To morrow, says he, is the
rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, Exodus 16. verse. 23. words which show,
that the observation of the Sabbath day by him prescribed unto them, with
respect not only to their pilgrimage in the wilderness, but also to their
abode in Canaan, was the cause why he rained not Manna upon them, and suffered
them not to prepare any on that day, and by his law forbade them universally in
their generations to cook and prepare any meat on the Sabbath day. For if it
were a thing that he left to their libert^ by the Law, wherefore did he not
rain Manna upon them on the Sabbath day? Or if he gave them not any, lest
they should go forth and gather it on that day, and if he obliged them to
gather twice as much the day before, giving them that day bread for two days,
verse. 29. which necessity forced them to do, seeing the next day there was not
any to be found in the fields, wherefore did he not, at least, suffer them to
defer till the Sabbath day, the cooking of that portion which they had
gathered and laid up for that day, rather than to injoyne them, as he did, to
make ready twice as much the day before, and so take from them all occasion of
preparing it on the Sabbath day, which they might have done easily, although
there was none to be found in the fields that day? Certes he did betoken, that
not only the seeking and gathering, but also the cooking and preparing of meat
on that day displeased him, because it was a day ordained by him to rest in:
which is a perpetual reason for all the days and times that the Law of Moses
was to continue.

4 To say, that God commanded both to gather, and to prepare the Manna the day
before, and to keep it till the Sabbath day, because he would manifest his
miraculous power in preserving from corruption the Manna, which else had bred
worms, and stunke, Exodus 16. verse. 20. from one of these days to the other,
is an unsufficient answer. For first, the same miracle had been although the
Manna had been kept crude and unbaked, to be sodden and prepared the next day.
Secondly, God might have done, if it had pleased him, the same miracle in
respect to another day, as well as to the Sabbath day. Wherefore then did he it
for the Sabbath day, but to ordain to the Israelites the cessation from all
works, and amongst others from making meat ready on the Sabbath day in their
generations? Also we see no examples of preparing of meat on the Sabbath day
among them.

5 To prove that they did, is unfitly alleged the first verse of the
fourteenth chapter of S. Luke, where it is said, that Jesus Christ entered into
the house of one of the chief Pharisees, on the Sabbath day, to eat bread,
that is, to take his refection. For it is not said, that this Pharisee had
caused the repast to be made ready on the same Sabbath day, which he had never
done, seeing the Pharisees found sault with the simple action of Christ's
Disciples, who on the Sabbath day going through the corn fields, plucked some
ears of corn, and did rub them in their hands to eat them, Luke 6. verse. 1.

6 Which is again a most manifest argument, that in those days the Jews
prepared not any meat on the Sabbath day, and also that it was not permitted by
the Law. For if it had been permitted, the accusation of the Pharisees against
Christ's Disciples had wanted all ground and color of reason, when they said
unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath days? Luke
6. verse. 1. And it had not been needful, that Christ should have alleged, to
defend them, that the hunger wherewith they were pinched, and their present
need of sustenance, excused their action, even as a like cause excused the
action of David, and of those that were with him, when being an hungered they
took and ate the Shewbread, which was not lawful to eat but for the Priests
only: as also that God will have mercy, and not Sacrifice, Matthew. 12. verse. 3,
4, 5. For he might have answered in one word, that the action of his Disciples
to prepare meat, was not at all forbidden by the Law, and that there was no
semblance of reason to blame it; whereas by his answer he supposes, that
indeed it was forbidden ordinarily, as well as to eat of the Shewbread to all
others but Priests, and he maintains not his Disciples to be excusable, but
by their present necessity, which made lawful that which otherwise had been
unlawful unto them. For if that whereby he defended them had been lawful
otherwise than in case of necessity, what need had he to excuse them upon
their present necessity. S. Austin in the fourth chapter of the sixth book
against the Manichees, says that the Jews on their Sabbath gather not any
kind of fruit in the field, that they mince and cook no meat at home.

7 Also S. Ignace Martyr in his Epistle to the Magnesians, teaching how the
Sabbath is to be observed, and that by opposition to the fashions of the Jews,
amongst other things says, that it ought not to be kept by eating meats
prepared and kept the day before, ((...)) which shows, that the Jews
prepared not their meat on the Sabbath day, but the day before, which for this
cause they have called (...), that is, Preparation, Mar. 15. 42. because on it
they prepared all that was needful for the Sabbath following: As also the same
name for the same reason is given to the day that went immediately before the
first day of the unleavened bread of the Passover. This abstinence from making
ready all kind of meat on the Sabbath day, was undoubtedly the cause that
moved some Pagans to believe and say, that the Jews fasted on that day, Moses
septimum diem more gentis Sabbatum appellatum in omne avum jejunio sacravit.
as we see in the one and thirtieth Book of the History of Justin, and in the
life of Augustus Caesar written by Suetonius, Ne Iudaeus quidem tam diligenter
Sabbatis jejunium servat.
chap. 76.

8 The inference which is made from equality, or rather odsof reason, that since
the Law permitted the Jews to lead their cattle to the water on the Sabbath
day, as is clear by the testimony of S. Luke 13. 15. it permitted them also to
prepare their own meat, is of no value. For there is not a like necessity of
the last, as of the first. A man must every day water his beast, that it may be
fed and entertained, but it is not necessary that a man prepare meat every day
for himself: for he may in the day before prepare meat enough for the day
following. The inference that can be lawfully and in equal terms made of the
foresaid permission concerning a man's beast, is, that far more should a man
be licensed to eat and drink on the Sabbath day, if he be an hungered, or a
thirst, and give meat and drink to another that is very hungry or dry, yea and
to make meat ready too in an urgent and present necessity of hunger and thirst,
in case there were not any already prepared to be found, which I would not deny
but the Law did permit. But it follows not hereof, that it was permitted to
make an ordinary preparation of meat on the Sabbath day, as on other days, and
to defer the preparation thereof, which might have been wisely done the day
before, till the Sabbath day, which is the point in question, and which I have
clearly showed before to be expressly forbidden by the Law, Exodus 16. 23. Which
ordained not for the time only of the abode of the people in the wilderness,
but also for all their generations in time to come, that all works necessary
for the Sabbath should be prepared before it came.

9 Wherein may be considered a type and a mystery, God giving to understand
thereby, that during the time of this life, we ought to prepare good works, to
the end we may enjoy the profit and utility issuing of them, and eat their
fruit, as the Scripture speaks, in the eternal Sabbath of the life to come,
and not to differ from day to day, till that great Sabbath come, the
preparing of our lamps, and filling them with abundance of oil, left we
knock and cry in vain, Lord, Lord open unto us, Matthew. 25. 1. etc. Mat. 7.
verse. 22, 23.

10 As for the prohibition to kindle fire on the Sabbath day, Exodus, 35. verse.
3. it is clear, that it speaks, not only what the Israelites were to do in
the wilderness, but also in Canaan. The words are plain, Ye shall kindle no
fire thorowout (or, in any of) your habitations upon the Sabbath day; which
words thorowout, or in any of your habitations, ought to be referred rather to
the land of Canaan, (...)
than to the wilderness, because it was in Canaan that they were to have their
habitations and seats, as is implied by the word in the original, whereas in
the wilderness they sojourned only in tabernacles: And it is very
unreasonable to imagine, that because immediately after mention is made of the
building of the Tabernacle of God, this prohibition to kindle fire on the
Sabbath day had respect only unto it, as if God had forbidden only to kindle
fire for preparing and fitting their tools, and employing them on that day
about that work. For although the speech of the building of the Tabernacle
follows immediately after the prohibition to kindle fire, yet it follows
not, that there is any connection between these things, and that they are
relative one to another: Nay they seem rather to be dis-joyned and severed in
the text it self. For after the injunction to kindle no fire, these words are
added, And Moses spoke unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,
etc. which may very well denote a discourse depending on the former, made upon
another matter, and perhaps also in another time.

11 But although this last discourse had been made in dependence upon the
other, and the other relatively unto it, that is, though Moses had forbidden in
the third verse to kindle fire for the use of the Artificers and handicrafts
men that were to build the Tabernacle, whereof he speaks afterward, lest the
Israelites should surmise, that it was lawful unto them for to do it, for the
hastening and setting forward of that excellent edifice, which God had
appointed to be his house, it should be nothing else but an application of a
prohibition, in it self general, to a particular subject, whereunto it
extended it self as unto others; even as the prohibition of the second verse
to do any work on the Sabbath day, under the pain of death, is undoubtedly in
the meaning thereof general, although Moses had in that place referred it
particularly to the edifice of the Tabernacle. Yea, Moses of set purpose had
applied the one and the other to the particular subject or the building of the
Tabernacle, to make better known, and to infer from thence the generality
and extent of both.

12 For if it were forbidden to work, and to kindle fire on the Sabbath day
for the edifying of the Tabernacle, far more was it forbidden for all other
work, since scarce could there be any more important than that, and which could
so well deserve a particular license to labor and kindle fire to do it, as
which had no other regard, saving the accelerating and rearing up of the house
of God.

13 The prohibition to cook meat on the Sabbath, whereof I have spoken before,
shows that this kindling of fire, should be referred unto it; to wit, that it
was not lawful to kindle any to make meat ready, which must be also understood
of all other ends of the same nature. This is confirmed by Philo the Jew, who
in the Book of Abraham's Pilgrimage, and in the third Book of the life of
Moses, among the works which it is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day,
puts these two, to dress meat, and kindle the fire.

14 I add, that the fourth Commandment of the Law, was to the Israelites the
cause of their abstinence and cessation on the Sabbath day, when they were in
the wilderness. So was it in Canaan also, and after the same manner as it was
in the wilderness. The particular prohibitions given afterward unto them, and
which they received, were only explications, illustrating the sense and the
end of the Commandment. Now since the words of the Commandment are general,
In it thou shall not do any work, with what show of truth can it be said,
that the works to bake and cook meat, to kindle the fire, and such like, were
not forbidden by these words, but only by particular and special
commandments, and that for the time of the abode of the Israelites in the
wilderness, seeing there is no place to be found, where they are excepted from
this general term, Any work, expressly set down in the Commandment, and
where license is given to the Israelites to do them in the land of Canaan?

15 If God had meant that it was lawful to the Jews to kindle fire, dress
meat, and travel on the Sabbath day, questionless he had made an exception
and particular declaration thereupon, as he did concerning the two Sabbaths, the
first and the last of the feast of the Passover. For he forbade also to do
any work on these two days. But he excepted the preparation and dressing of as
much meat as every man must eat, Exodus 12. verse. 16. and he permitted them
after they had roasted and eaten the Paschall Lamb in the evening, to return
to their home the next morning, Deuteronomy. 16. verse. 7. Undoubtedly the same is to
be understood of the Sabbaths of other feasts, but not of the ordinary Sabbath
properly so called, wherein God required a rest more exact, because this day
was ordained to be a particular type of the spiritual and heavenly rest, as we
have declared before, and shall touch it again hereafter.

CHAPTER Fourth.
Confirmation and illustration of the matter set down in the precedent
Chapters.
1. All kind of works forbidden by the Law of Moses on the Sabbath day, are
in themselves lawful to Christians on the Sunday.

2. First Reason. Cessation from all works on the Sabbath was a part of the
Ceremonial Law, and of Gods service.

3. And not a help and furtherance only of the said service.

4. Second Reason. It was a type and figure of the heavenly rest.

5. Which our Sunday is not.

6. Third Reason. Gods service under the New Testament consists not in
observation of days, but in actions of godliness and righteousness, etc.

7. This is proved by application of the Apostles words, Romans 14. verse. 17.

8. And most clearly by his warning given to the Collossians, Chap. 2. verse,
16.

9. Abstinence of works is necessary in the Christian Church in any day
whatsoever, as it is a help to Gods public service.

10. The public service being ended on Sunday, Christians may use lawful
recreations, etc.

11. It is proved by reason, that they may do the like between the hours of
Divine Service.

12. Fourth Reason. There is no injunction in the new Testament concerning a
cessation from such recreations and works.

13. Fifth Reason. The two Disciples went to Emmaus on the same day that Christ
rose, and Christ meeting them, gave them no instruction to the contrary.

14 Sixth Reason. The faithful of Troas did work on Sunday till night.

15. Seventh Reason. The first injunction not to work, etc. on Sunday, came
from Christian Emperors.

16. Constantine the first permitted many works on Sunday.

17. Which shows, that the Christians of those days took not Sunday to be
an institution of Jesus Christ.

1 THerefore seeing those against whom this Treatise is made yield unto us,
that certain outward and servile works are under the New Testament permitted
on the Sabbath day, which, as I have clearly showed, were forbidden to the
Jews by the Law; I conclude again, that all other works forbidden by the Law
on the Sabbath day, are likewise permitted to us after the public and solemn
service of God, and that the prohibition of the Law to do any work on the
Sabbath day, concerns us not. Surely if it pertained to us, as containing a
point necessary of Gods service, as well under the New, as under the Old
Testament, I see no reason why we should not be as exact in this Service under
the New Testament, as the Jews were under the Law: Nay, we should be far
more affectionate to do, as well, or more precisely, with an equal or greater
care than the Jews were, all things belonging to the true service of God,
commanded by him.

2 But here is the point, which will furnish us with a new reason, why it is
neither necessary, nor likely, that although the Jews were bound to abstain
from all manner of work on their Sabbath day, we should be bound to a like
cessation on our Sabbath: seeing the time of the Old Testament was a time
wherein Gods service consisted in Ceremonies, Elements, and Rudiments, which
were servile, childish, weak and beggarly, as the Apostle says, Gal. 4. verse.
3. 9. Col. 2. verse. 20. The observation of a certain day of Sabbath, rather
than of another, and on it a cessation from all outward works, made in it
self a part of that service, and was not ordained by accident, as a help to
Gods service, required only for that end, but as being of it self properly a
point of religion, and of Gods service, and an essential duty of the Sabbath
day: For which cause it was so exactly enjoined with an interdiction, even of
the smallest and least things, as to gather and prepare Manna, to kindle fire,
to walk a few steps abroad, and such like, which was not lawful for any
person to do, although he were alone, and out of danger, by doing them, to
give offense to any man: Although also they might have been done, as it were,
in a moment of time, without any diversion of the mind to think on better
things; as on God, on godliness, and on other holy exercises, because that not
to do such works was at that time a part of Gods service, and that which
belonged to Gods service could not be too exactly recommended and observed.

3 For otherwise, if the substance of Gods service had not at that time
consisted, partly in this exact cessation from all works, and if it had been
enjoined, but as a help and furtherance of that service, such little works,
which were of no pains, and of less distraction, had not been forbidden,
because, in effect, they are no let to a true spiritual Sabbath. And when the
Jews were come back to their houses, from the place of their holy
convocations, it is evident, to consider the matter according to the state we
live in under the Gospel, that they might easily compass these actions, and
other such like, without any prejudice thereby to true godliness, and to the
sanctification of their hearts. But as they were bound to serve God on the
Sabbath day by diverse sacrifices, offerings, perfumings with-incense, and other
ceremonial and bodily exercises, for which they had need of a carnal
holiness and purity, and to restrain themselves from a great deal of
ceremonial pollutions, as to touch a dead man, or any meat declared to be
unclean, etc. and as Gods service consisted in keeping themselves unspotted
with such things, even so an exact refraining from all outward and servile
works made a part of that Sabbaticall holiness and pureness, whereof I have
spoken. If they had put their hand to any ordinary work, that work had
polluted them: And all the legal works of the Sabbath, such as were the
sacrifices, etc. had been in some sort profaned by the common works of other
days, if they had been done on that day. Therefore they were bound by
necessity to abstain exactly from them all.

4 I add, that as I have said formerly, the Sabbath was given them expressly,
to be unto them a type figurative of the spiritual rest, whereby a man rests
from all iniquity, and namely of the heavenly, wherein there shall be a perfect
cessation, not only from all sin, but also from all bodily labors, that the
Saints may give themselves wholly to glorify God. And therefore, that the
figure might correspond (the nearest that could be) to the truth, the sign to
the thing signified, and to represent to the Jews, and give them to
understand, that they ought to abstain from all kind of sin the most
precisely and exactly as possibly they could, because sins are verily
opposite to Gods service, and pollute all the actions thereof, and that in
heaven they should enjoy an entire and perfect rest, a most precise cessation
from all bodily works and employments was enjoined them. And these are, in my
judgment, the true reasons of that injunction.

5 Now these reasons concern us not under the New Testament. We have no day
of rest ordained of GOD, to be unto us a type and figure of the spiritual and
heavenly rest; And if sometimes our Sunday, which is our day of rest, be
employed to represent the heavenly rest, as it is by some of the ancient
Fathers, it follows not that the end of the institution thereof was to be a
figure and a type, seeing it is not so much as a divine institution. Wherefore
the Fathers have called it so by application and allusion only, grounded upon
some outward resemblance.

6 No more does Gods service under the Gospel, to speak properly, consist in
the observation of any particular day more then of another, nor in the
abstinence of outward works on it. And as one of the contrary opinion,
speaking of the prohibition given to the Israelites, to kindle the fire on the
Sabbath day, has vouched and said, that it was unto them a childish
restriction and instruction, and as for us who are Christians, and who live
also in countries far colder than was Judea, that we have a greater liberty
than they had, to kindle the fire, and that the said prohibition tieth us not,
saving in the equity thereof; to teach us, that we must not abuse our liberty
to the intertainement of a carnal license, and hinderance of Gods service.
Verily there is the same reason of all other outward works, which God
prohibited so exactly to the Jews on the Sabbath day, for that was also a
puerile instruction; we have a liberty to do them that they had not on that
day, and nothing obliges us, but the equity of these prohibitions; to wit,
that we must not do these works licenciously, making of them a pretense to
neglect Gods service. Indeed, we are bound to serve God under the New
Testament, as much, yea much more than the Jews under the Old Testament,
because we are far more beholden unto him than they were: But this obligation
is to a more spiritual service, which is such essentially, consisting in the
careful practice of actions of true godliness, holiness and righteousness:
But we are not obliged after the same manner as they were, to serve him with a
rudimentall, material and servile service, to which appertained this
abstinence so exactly prescribed, of all works on a certain day, and which
was one of the points of the unsupportable yoke of the ceremonial Law. And as
we are made free from these actions which the Jews were obliged to perform
on the Sabbath day, with twice as much as on other days, such as were double
sacrifices, double meat and drink offerings, etc. Number. 28. 9. by which things
God fashioned them to the outward and typical sanctification of the Sabbath;
it follows, that we are even so made free from the necessity of forbearing
absolutely all works, because this did belong also to these weak and beggarly
rudiments of the world.

As the Apostle says, that the kingdom of God, that is, the state of the
Gospel, is not meat and drink, Romans 14. verse. 17. So may we say, that it
consists neither in baking, nor in not baking meat; neither in kindling, nor in
not kindling the fire; neither in carrying, nor in not carrying burdens. For
the Gospel establishes no holiness in the abstinence of such actions upon
one day more than upon another day, and declares no man guilty for doing them,
but leaves in the one and in the other the conscience free.

8 When the same Apostle says in the Epistle to the Colossians Chapter 2.
verse 16. that we ought not to be tied by our conscience to Sabbaths, no more
than to meat and drink, by Sabbaths he understands not only certain days,
but also a scrupulous abstinence and cessation from outward works in those
days, which also is properly denoted by the word Sabbath, and obliges us no
more than the days do.

9 Neither is it required of us immediately by God, but as it is a help to
further us on any day whatsoever in the practice of Gods true service, as in
hearing of his word when it is read or preached, in receiving the Sacraments
that he has instituted, in calling upon his Name, in meditating on him and on
his graces, that so we may strengthen our selves in godliness: And, on the
contrary, in case the busying of our selves about such works, should be unto
us a let and disturbance in these our heavenly exercises. So that the
obligation whereby we are bound under the Gospel to these essential points of
Gods service, and the time wherein they are exercised, being excepted, all
honest works remain equally lawful on all the days of the week, to apply
our selves unto them, without scruple and trouble of conscience. Neither is it
a sin to do all corporal works, that are lawful, in one day, yea on
Sunday, as well as on another day.

10 And as on other days of the week it is not ill done, yea it is rather
well done, to bestow a part of them to preach and hear the word of God, to
minister and receive the Sacraments, to pray and to sing Psalms, not only
privately, but also publicly in the eyes of the world, according to the order
of the Church, and as occasions shall be offered; also on Sunday, to my
opinion, it is not a sin to a true Christian after service done to God in his
Temple, to give himself to some honest exercises, and well ruled recreations of
this present life. Neither can I see any greater inconvenience, or that a
Christian is more guilty, if, after he has heard the Word of God, prayed and
called upon his Name, and practiced the other duties of Gods public service in
the holy congregation of his people, so if it be according to the order
received in the Church whereof he is a member, he go to plough and husband the
ground, or to do any other exercise of his lawful trade, then if he kindle
the fire, or cook meat for his refection.

11 And considering that the spirit of man can hardly be continually bent the
space of a whole day to any serious and important action, such as are namely
the holy actions of Gods service, without some intervall of relaxation, if
between the hours that are imparted to this service publicly or privately,
on the Sabbath day, he employ some other hours to do the actions of his
temporal calling, or other works of the same nature, by way of diversion and
refreshment, I cannot conceive that God should be displeased therewith, because
Gods service and godliness are not hindered nor indammaged thereby. For I ask,
after a man has heard Gods service, read the Word of God, called upon his holy
Name, or ended devoutely any other religious action, during a pretty space of
time, and the vigor of his spirit slacken, so that he is not able to persevere
in his attention and devotion any longer, he diverts himself, and sits
quiet for a while, without doing any thing, to take his breath as it were and
return to his devotion afresh with greater force, does he sin by this
cessation? I think not. Now if he sins not, when he sits idle, and
does nothing, why shall it be said, that he sins, if he do some bodily
work, seeking thereby some diversion and refreshment, rather than by a mere
cessation from all kind of action? To do nothing at all shall it be more
acceptable to GOD, then to do a work that is honest and lawful in it self?
This shall it profane the day of holy exercises rather than that? I see no
apparent reason in such an opinion: which moves me to esteem, that the
liberty to do the foresaid works on the Sabbath day, was entirely taken from
the Jews, for some ceremonial reasons, and that it was upon them a servile
yoke in the ancient time of servitude, as has been declared before.

12 This is a most enforcing consideration upon this purpose, that in the whole
Scripture of the New Testament, there is no injunction at all concerning such
an abstinence and refraining from all outward works, as is urged and laid upon
Christians on their Sunday, conformably to the cessation that was imposed upon
the Jews on their Sabbath day. Verily, if Christ had required it under the New
Testament as a thing necessary to his service, and if his intention had been
to bind us unto it, undoubtedly he had given, or commanded his Apostles to
give an express injunction concerning it, which because he has not done, I
infer that he had no such intention.

13 Nay on the contrary, the liberty to work on Sunday is rather authorized by
the example and practice of Christ, and of the first faithful. For in Saint
Luke Chapter 24. we see that on the same day that Christ rose in, which was the
first and most illustrious Sunday of all, he met with two of his Disciples
going from Jerusalem to Emmaus, and that questionless for the ordinary
affairs of this present life, seeing it was not an holy day among the Jews:
Which voyage was of three leagues, or thereabout. He went with them, he spoke
unto them of the mysteries of salvation, as he would have done in any other
day, if he had lighted upon them, according to his ordinary custom of every
day during his conversation here below in the flesh, and as all Pastors are
bound to do at all occasions that God offers unto them. But he advised them
not, that in time to come they should observe that day, as a Sabbath day, and
abstain from voyaging, or doing on it any other toylesome and painful work.
And indeed after he had left them at Emmaus, they returned thence the same day
to Jerusalem, as the Lord did also, going other three leagues. Now if it had
been the intention of Jesus Christ to ordain the first day of the week for a
Sabbath day, and to enjoin to all Christians a leaving and discontinuance of
all ordinary work on that day, it is likely, that he would not have forgotten
to warn his two Disciples thereof on that first day, and thetwo Mary's to whom
he showed himself early in the morning of that same day, and by the other
Disciples, to whom he sent them, had made them practice the observation of that
day, and he had showed them the example of that observation in his own person,
which he did not then, Neither do we find that he did it at any other occasion.

14 In the twentieth of the Acts we perceive, although uncertainely, as I have
showed before, some observation of the first day of the week by the faithful
of Troas. They met not together till about the evening of that day; For mention
is made of an upper Chamber, of many lights, of Saint Paul's long preaching
until midnight, and thereafter till break of day. Apparently they made choice
of the night time, and of an upper chamber, for fear of the Infidels, even as
the Apostles on the first day of the week that CHRIST rose in, were assembled
at evening, and held the doors shut for fear of the Jews, John twenty verse
19. Now who doubts, but all that day from the Sun rising till the evening,
that they came together to break bread, they were busied, as in the other
days of the week, about the ordinary exercises of their trades, handicrafts,
and callings, as having liberty to work on that day, like as on all other
days, besides the care they had to shun all giving of discontent to the
Infidels amongst whom they lived, and the drawing, by an unnecessary cessation,
a most certain persecution upon themselves? There is no question to be made,
but that all Christians in the places of their residence among Jews or
Gentiles did the like.

15 This is also a reason considerable in this question, that albeit Cod. lib.
3. Tit. 12. l. 3. Theod. Ibid. l. 10. Leo and Authemius.
among the Laws of Christian Emperors there be sundry, which forbid the
ordinary occupations of trades and handicrafts on Sunday, as to keep a Court
of pleading, and to go to Law, to open the shops for buying and selling, to
act stage plays in play houses and public places, to hold Markets and faires,
etc. which Laws were made, to prevent in time to come the contempt of the
exercises of Religion used on that day, and to establish an order in the state
and in the Church which they most judiciously and religiously thought to be
more recommendable, decent, and well suting to the holy actions whereunto it
was appointed, yet all these Laws show, that, before they were published,
Christians were wont, saving the hours of the public exercises of Religion,
to apply themselves on that day to all the ordinary works of this present life.

Yea, there be many other Laws of other Emperors, and amongst 16 Cod. lib. 3.
Tit. 12. l. 3. and l. 5. Valent. and l. 8. Valent. and l. 9. Honor. and Theod.
others of Constantine that great and holy Emperor, which permit on Sunday
some of these ordinary employments, as to laborers, to sow the ground, to
weed, to reap, to plant and set Vineyards, if need be; to Bakers to bake
bread, to Masters to give liberty to their slaves, to Judges to put to death
malefactors: which undoubtedly these Christian Emperors had never permitted by
their Laws, if it had been in their time a received opinion in the Church,
that the observation of Sunday, and cessation from all works in it, was
necessary by virtue of a Commandment of our Lord Jesus Christ.

17 But knowing certainly, that no days are instituted of God under the New
Testament; that Sunday was not kept by a commandment from heaven, but by the
use and custom of the Church; That a discontinuance and intermission so exact
of all works pertained to the Ecclesiastical policy and regiment of the
Jews, and is no where and in no wise commanded in the Gospel, they made no
bones to permit diverse occupations, which might seem to have some pretext of
necessity, yet were not of such importance, but that they might have been done
before Sunday, or put off till the next day following it.

CHAPTER Fifth.
Declaration of diverse absurdities and difficulties ensuing upon the contrary
opinion.
1. The opinion is, that Christians are bound to refrain from all works
during the 24. hours of Sunday.

2. First absurdity, this opinion brings back the servitude of the Jewish
ceremonies.

3. Second absurdity. No man can tell where must be the beginning of the said
24. hours.

4. Diverse disputations thereupon amongst the authors of this opinion.

5. Third absurdity, it troubles the conscience, leaving it without
information concerning the employment of that time, and the doing of
unnecessary works therein.

6. As also about the doing of charitable and necessary works.

7. Fourth absurdity. Confusion of the Doctors in the explication of this
opinion.

8. First, they consent not in the explication of Christian abstinence from
bodily works on Sunday.

9. Secondly, they distinguish works of necessity, into those that are of
present, and those that are of imminent necessity, and permit the first only,
whereby they trouble tender consciences.

10. They contradict their distinction by suffering some handicrafts men to
work on Sunday.

11. As also by the permission of many actions which have no present necessity.

12. Likewise by forbidding some works in an apparent danger, as to gather
corn, etc.

13. Great absurdity and inconvenience of this prohibition.

14. The Commandment, Exodus 34. v. 21. to rest on the Sabbath day in earing
time, etc. serves not their turn.

15. They hold that it is not lawful for a man to receive any reward for his
necessary labor done on Sunday.

16. Great inconveniences and absurdities of this opinion.

17. Answer to their objection about servile works forbidden in the fourth
Commandment.

18. They hold also that servants ought not to serve their masters on Sunday.

19. This doctrine crosses their other decisions.

20. They entangle themselves in the distinction of bankets.

21. Absurdity of the^r rigid prohibition of all kind of recreation to all men
on the Sabbath day.

22. How far Christians are bound to abstain from work on that day.

23. How working is not, or may be an hindrance of our sanctification

24. We ought to leave our works on Sundays during the time of service.

25. Saving in some important necessity.

26. Objections taken from the care of worldlings, etc.

27. Answer concerning the care of worldlings.

28. How we ought to make the Sabbath our delight.

29. Our Sunday is improperly called the Sabbath day:

THose against whom we dispute do hold, that our Sunday, called also by them
the Sabbath day, which is the name given in the Scriptures to the day that the
Jews hallowed weekly, obliges us to keep it during the whole space of four
and twenty hours, by a religious abstinence from all manner of works, during
all that time, conformably to the observation of four and twenty hours
practiced by the Jews on their Sabbath day.

2 This opinion is absurd, and brings back under the New Testament a
ceremony, which is merely servile and Jewish. For times and places were in
themselves to the Jews a part of the legal and ceremonial service, as has
been showed before: And therefore they were precisely named and stinted unto
them. When God appointed unto them Sabbath days, he would that they should
rest as long as the day lasted; that is, four and twenty hours, even as when
he granted unto them days of work, he permitted them to work night and
day, which may be gathered out of Leviticus, Chap. 23. verse. 32. where God
said unto them, From Even unto Even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. In Hebrew,
ye shall rest your Sabbath: To rest all that time was unto them a part of the
observation and hallowing of that day. But under the New Testament the times
appointed in the Church make no part of Gods service, and are not observed, but
relatively to the public exercises of Religion and of godliness which are
established to be practiced in them. And therefore that practice being ended
they oblige not necessarily.

3 And indeed, if Christians were bound, for conscience sake, to observe
exactly full four and twenty hours, by abstinence from all works, they should
be in a mavelous great trouble and vexation of mind. For ere ought else be
done, they must know certainly where they shall begin the sanctification of
the four and twenty hours of that day, if it must be from Even unto the next
Even, beginning the day at the setting of the Sun, as under the Law; or from
the morning unto the next morning, beginning the day at the rising of the
Sun. For if they be not clearly informed of that, they may sin by working,
during a part of the time which makes a part of Sunday.

4 The Authors and Fautors of the foresaid opinion cannot give a certain
resolution of this Point. For they are at variance among themselves about it.
Some deem, that we must begin our Sunday by the evening, and continue it unto
the next evening, like to the fashion of the Jews, who rekoned so the hours
of their Sabbath. And so is this time stinted by the Author of the 251. Sermon
de Tempore in S. Augustines works. Others will have it to begin by the
morning, at the same time that our Lord Jesus Christ rose from the dead, and to
end at the next morning; and there are some which hold, that the Jews ordered
so their Sabbaths. We find others who believe, that God obliged not his people
on the Sabbath day to a cessation from all works, saving from the rising till
the going down of the Sun. The one and the other have arguments for their
opinions, but which want a sufficient perspicuitie to give a full satisfaction
and resolution to a Christian, about the time when he must begin to forbear
all bodily and servile works, least he should profane the Sabbath day, by
doing them in a part thereof.

5 And so he shall be perpetually troubled in his mind with that difficulty,
and far more with the exact abstinence which is required of him. An
unnecessary walk, a bodily action about something concerning this present
life, which he has done by occasion, will disquiet him. If he has put his
hand, how little soever, to the doing of any temporal and earthly thing,
without urgent necessity, if he have given but one stitch with a needle, has
fastened a button to a garment, if he has swung a broom about his chamber,
wiped a vessel, dusted his apparel, or done any other thing which he might
have done the day before, or put off till the next day, he shall stagger and
make a question, whether he has broken the Sabbath, or not.

6 Yea, although the defenders of this opinion avouch, that it is lawful to
eat, drink, sleep on the Sabbath day, because these are works of charity,
and are necessary to every man for his subsistence; yet seeing the
sanctification of the Sabbath consists not in such actions, and they are not
permitted but in case of present necessity, I know not, if, according to their
maxims, a person that can well enough, and without incommoditie, be without
meat, drink, sleep all that day, or at least can well enough away with less
meat, drink and sleep, must not be grieved and pestered in his spirit, and
fear lest he has profaned and broken the Sabbath, in bestowing too much time
to eat, drink, and sleep, and giving to his refection and sleep a portion of
time which he might have set a part for religious actions; As, if he has been
half an hour at table, whereas a quarter of an hour might have been
sufficient; If he has slept six or seven hours, when a nap of three or four
hours might have served his turn. In sum, no bodily thing can be done,
which shall not afford an hundred difficulties, and matter of great doubts and
scruples of conscience: Experience shows often in many which are made to
believe that it is not lawful to do any work on the Sabbath day, according
to the precise terms of the fourth Commandment, pitiful carkes, strange
scruples and troubles of conscience, a superstitious preciseness, tending to
the detriment, not only of the quietness and peace of God that should be in
their souls, but also of the families whereof they are members, and of the
Commonwealth wherein they live.

7 Nay, the Doctors that are the broachers and teachers of this opinion,
entangle themselves and their followers in the explication of the works that
are permitted or forbidden on the Sabbath day. They prescribe so many
limitations upon diverse actions of temporal callings, that may be done so,
but not so, after this manner, not after that manner, in that respect, not in
this respect, that to pause on their minced distinctions, is to run into a
labyrinth of most intricate difficulties, and inextricable vexations of spirit.
Verily I believe, that the observation of the Jewish Sabbath day, was not so
onerous and full of difficulties, as is the observation of Sunday, wherewith
many of these Doctors seek to master and bring under the consciences of
Christians.

8 To verify that I have said by some instances. First, the foresaid Doctors
agree not among themselves about the obligation of Christians, to abstain from
all bodily and worldly works, whether it be as exact and precise under the New
Testament, as it was ordinarily to the Jews under the Old Testament; whether
we be in the same servitude that they were in; or if they in that respect
enjoyed the same liberty that we possess under the Gospel. For there be some
among them that deny it, and do say, that the rigorous observation of the
Sabbath, prescribed of old to the Jews, is abrogated, and the prohibitions to
kindle the fire, to make meat ready, and other such like, which they
acknowledge to have been perpetual during the whole time of the Old
Testament, and comprised in the general prohibition of the fourth
Commandment, not to do any work, did belong to the pedagogie and bondage of
the Law. Others advance so far, that they apply them to us also, saying, that
we are obliged to that precise abstinence as well as they, that there is no
work of so great consequence for our temporal estate, that we may lawfully
do it, and that it is more expedient that our temporal estate be indammaged,
than the Sabbath violated. Likewise, that there is no work so slight, and of
so little and so short occupation about the affairs of this world, which is
not prohibited to all Christians: As for example, they hold that a workman has
not the liberty to array his loomes and tools, and set them in some order on
Sunday at night, that he may set them on work the next morning. Others again
affirm, that we are obliged to a rest as precise as the Jews were ordinarily,
and there is no reason why we should not be as precise and circumspect in this
respect, as they were. But that the particular prohibitions, to kindle fire, to
bake, and make meat ready, were extraordinary, and for a short while; to wit,
during the time of the pilgrimage of the Israelites in the wilderness, and not
perpetual for the whole time of the Old Testament, nor comprised in the
prohibition of the fourth Commandment. Behold a variety of opinions, capable
to pester a man with great perplexities.

9 Secondly, when they speak of works of necessity, which they acknowledge
and teach to be permitted on the Sabbath day, they distinguish necessity into
present necessity, and into imminent necessity, and say, that the works of
present necessity are only permitted, as to quench the fire when a house is
burning: for then God gives us commission, and establishes us, as his
ministers, to bring the best remedy we can to a present evil. But as for the
other necessity, which is not present, and whose event is in Gods hand, we
must leave unto him the care to prevent it with such remedies as his wisdom
shall think expedient, and not trouble our selves with it.

This also is a distinction able to entangle and disquiet a tender conscience.
For how shall a Christian settle his mind upon this distinction of present and
imminent necessities? Some will take for present necessity, that which is
imminent only: others will esteem that to be imminent only, which indeed is
present. For example, when a house begins to be set on fire, but in such a
sort, that there is no assured evidence that it shall continue, and endammage
the house, but perhaps shall, perhaps not, and shall quickly die of it self,
he that sees the fire begin to burn, shall not know how to take this
necessity, whether he ought to believe, that undoubtedly his house shall be
presently consumed, if he take not order suddenly to extinguish the fire, and
upon this run, work, do what he can, as in a present necessity: Or if he
ought to presume, that the fire will cease of it self, which may happen, and
therefore leave that to Gods providence, as an imminent necessity. Likewise, if
a man begin to perceive a beam, a cheuron, or some other thing in his house
cleft, and fear lest it break, and breaking fall, and falling bring a notable
damage to the house, and to all that are in it, what shall he do? The
necessity is not evidently present. For it be may that the beam shall subsist
yet a pretty while, and no harm ensue thereupon; it may be also that it burst
and fall the same day, and the house be overthrown, and those that are in it
hurt or killed. In this perplexity the poor man shall not know whether he
shall call the Carpenters, and do with all speed his best endeavors to
prevent this uncertain mischief, or leave the redress thereof to Gods
providence. For if the necessity be only imminent, as it seems to be,
according to the foresaid distinction he must forbear to do any thing unto
it, lest he break the Sabbath. As also in time of war; how shall we get a
firm and assured resolution, if we may lawfully work, and prepare all things
necessary for our defense on the Sabbath day? For it may be, there is no
certitude that we shall be assaulted by the enemy, that there is nothing but
some suspicion of his approaches, that the danger is only apparent, and not
imminent: Yea, although we should see the enemy hard by, and in a manifest
resolution to set on, may not God by his All-wise, and All-mighty providence,
form and oppose unto him a thousand obstacles, dissipate all his counsels,
disappoint all his enterprises and attempts, although we have no hand in it?
Must we in this case be careless, stand still, and look on? There is a great
number of such examples: yea, we shall find few necessities that are
undoudtedly present, and which may not be considered as imminent only. For if
in a danger, which is only apparent and imminent, we ought to rely on Gods
providence for the preventing and hindering thereof, as he shall think most
expedient, and not set our hands to work to help our selves on the Sabbath
day; In a present evil which is only begun, and is in the beginning of no
great moment, may we not think and say, that we must commit to God the care
to stay the progression thereof, and not undertake to stay it our selves by our
pains and endeavors, because that should be injurious to his providence, as
if he could not, or would not help us, in case he think fit so to do.

10 Again, how does that consent with their deportments toward some Artisans,
whose trades and handicrafts are, as they say, of such a nature and quality,
that they require some travel and oversight every day? Do they not give them
license for such employments on the Sabbath day, with this proviso, that they
do them early in the morning, or at night very late, after all public
exercises are finished? For they give not this permission, but in regard of
some damage that these workmen may receive, if they work not at all on Sunday:
And yet that damage is not present, is not to be feared but in the time to
come, and withal is not infallible, unrepairable, and remediless. Do they
not say elsewhere, that no man ought to object the loss of some temporal
gain, and make it a pretense to work on the Sabbath day, seeing such a loss
is not to be parallelled with the loss of the glory of God, which is violated
by the breaking of the Sabbath? Now, what can all these Tradesmen allege, but
the loss of some temporal profit? Wherefore then make they an unequal
distinction, and permit some travel to them, rather than to others?

11 Moreover, how agrees the foresaid distinction of present and imminent
necessity, with their doctrine concerning the nourishment, the application of
remedies, and other actions of charity, and of necessary compassion toward
men and beasts, which they avouch may be done on the Sabbath day? And yet in
these things there is not always present necessity. For although a man take no
sustenance for himself, should not give any to other, should not give
physic, or apply some other remedy to a sick man, it may be the body should
not be enfeebled, nor receive any detriment thereby; and in case it did, it
might be easily repaired by taking food and physic the next day. I would
feign know why in this case, rather than in others, a necessity or a danger
apparent only, and not present, shall it license any man to work? They
acknowledge, that on the Sabbath day is permitted, not only that which is
absolutely necessary for the entertainment of the creature, but also whatsoever
is useful for a convenient and comfortable mainetenance thereof, as to
prepare, give, take meat, apply a medicine to our selves or to another,
although there be not in it any present necessity. If this doctrine be true, it
is not a present necessity that licenseth a man to work, but also an imminent
evil, the event and issue whereof is only apparent, in case it be not
prevented in time. Will they say, that more is permitted in things that
concern immediately a man's person, as nourishment and medicaments, than in
things that are more remote? But there is to be found a great deal of imminent
necessities in these things that come not so nigh to man's person, which if they
be anticipated by a prompt remedy, it shall be as much, yea more convenient,
and bring greater comfort to a man; than if he should eat and drink in his
present hunger, and take physic without delay when he is sick: And the
danger of delay in these present necessities should not be so great, as in
those others that are only imminent.

12 I will allege to this purpose, an example of a thing, which the precise
Defenders of a cessation from all works on the Sabbath day, stand much upon;
That is, to gather corn, to lay it up, or to do some other work for the
preservation thereof on the Sabbath day, in an imminent necessity, I mean, in
an apparent danger, that if this be not done, the corn shall be endammaged,
shall rot, and become unprofitable. Lo, the day is fair, dry, and commodious,
the corn may be saved if it be gathered and laid up on this day, and a great
loss to the owner prevented. This they will not suffer to be done. Nay, when
the corn is already cut, they cannot abide that it be transported from the
floor to the barn, saying, that the care thereof must be wholly committed to
Gods providence, who will keep it, if he think it expedient; and that we
must rather choose to let the corn rot and perish upon the ground, than to
break and profane the Sabbath day. But, I pray, in what fashion will they
adjust this, and match it fitly with their other positions, that the works of
necessity are permitted on the Sabbath day, which, according to their own
interpretation, are such, that if they be not done man shall be endammaged?
Also, that it is lawful to do all things requisite, not only for the
entertainment that is absolutely necessary, but also that is agreeable and
comfortable to the creature; so that time may be taken before, between, or
after the public exercises. Now is not this a thing of great comfort to a
poor Christian, that his corn perish not, as in all likelihood it shall, if
he take not order at that same instant for the preservation thereof? If it be
said, that this damage is not infallible, I reply, that they should have much
ado (as I have before) to explicate what infallibility and certitude they
require, and that hardly shall they find any danger which may be called
infallible, and for the preventing whereof they may put their hands to work on
the Sabbath day. For Gods providence may anticipate evils before they come, or
arrest them in their beginning, or repair all their damages if he suffer them
to come.

13 I ask, shall it not be lawful to a man in his pinching hunger, or of his
family, to gather on the Sabbath day of his own wheat, to carry it home, and
to prepare of it as much as they shall need, he having no other means, but
that alone, to nourish himself and them in this extremity? Undoubtedly, all
Christians will confess, that he may; yea, that although (to speak
absolutely) they might want it for a day, yet the only conveniencie to take
meat when they are hungry, will permit them do it. Now if it be lawful to
gather corn, to carry it home, or to do some other work to satisfy an
hungry and barking stomach, although this present evil be not such, that it
should for a days fasting cause a great detriment without a present remedy:
why shall it not be lawful to seek (by the same means) a present remedy
for the hunger to come, the danger whereof is apparent, and far greater, if
it be not remedied out of hand, than of present hunger? For if the corn of man
(wherewith he and his family were to be fed many months together) rot, and
perish; he shall have leisure enough to be hunger-starved far longer, and
with greater damage, than if he suffered hunger one day. Will they say, that
he must leave that to Gods providence, and trust that he will keep his corn,
or shall recompense the loss thereof, and supply his wants with competent food
by some other means? But why ought he not much more to abstain from seeking
remedies to his present hunger, wherewith he is pinched on that day, relying
upon Gods providence, trusting assuredly, that he will preserve him from being
dammaged by that hunger, or in case he receive any damage, will repair it;
namely, considering he sees the danger to be lesser, as being but of one day,
which is soon pas^ and the remedy more prompt and easy then in the other?

14 The passage of the 32. Chapter of Exodus verse. 21. whereof they make a
buckler, where God commands the people of Israel to rest in the seventh day,
both in earing time, and in the harvest does not prove that they pretend. For
first, we may understand, that he forbids only in earing time, and in the
harvest, to take liberty to work on the Sabbath day, as they were wont on all
other days of the week, but extends not the prohibition to the extraordinary
necessity of an imminent danger, as if he forbade in such a case to transport
the corn from the field only to the floor, or from the floor to the barn,
whereof he speaks not, which notwithstanding is the case or matter that is
broached for a divine truth. For if other prohibitions of the Law concerning
other kinds of labor are as precise, or more in the terms that they are set
down in, as this is, receive by urgent necessities some modifications,
wherefore not this also? Secondly, if the foresaid prohibition had sway in the
necessity that has been supposed, I return the answer, that is made by some
of them against whom I dispute, upon the prohibitions to kindle fire, to cook
meat on the Sabbath day, etc. that they pertained to the bondage of the Law,
which is most true.

15 Furthermore, when they speak of bodily and worldly works which some
necessity permits, yea obliges us to do on the Sabbath day; they say, that
they must be done through mere charity and compassion for the preservation of
the creatures which have need of our help, and not as works of our callings
whereby we win our living; for this cause, that we must do them without any
respect to any gain and profit that may come to us thereby, and which we
cannot lawfully receive, being bound to do all things on that day freely and
of mere good will. For example, if a Surgeon or Apothecarie give remedies
to their patients on that day, that they must not gain the value of a
farthing, and if they take any money, it must be only for the just and true
price of the remedies, and not for the employment of their industry and
painful labor about the patient. Likewise, that he who waters his beast, or
gives it physic, should have only before his eyes the health and relief
thereof, and in no wise the utility and service that he has received, and may
receive hereafter of it, which is the end wherefore he feeds an^ entertaineth
it in other times.

16 This indeed is a distinction and limitation very subtle, and is besides
inveloped with many difficulties. It is true, that when a man is bound to these
and such like works on the Sabbath day, he ought to do them through Christian
love and compassion; and so ought he to do all his works toward his
neighbors in all the days of the week: But that he ought to do them without
any regard to his own profit and commodity, that goes beyond the reach of my
apprehension and understanding. For if he may do them in charity and
compassion toward persons that are not so near unto him, or toward beasts,
why may he not do them through charity and love to himself and to his
family? May he not be in such a condition and estate, that he has not
sufficiently wherewith to entertain himself and his family? The beast which
he feeds, is, perhaps, the only means whereby he gets his living.
Therefore when God offers unto him the occasion, yea lays upon him the
necessity, to do some work, why may he not, when he intends and has before
his eyes the relief of his neighbor, or of his beast, think on his own
profit which depends on that work, and proceeds from it, and judge, that God
by the occasion of this work which he has put in his hands, affords unto him
the means to gain something for himself, and for the maintenance of his
wife, children, and servants? It may be that he works for rich folks, which
will not take his pains for naught, should think they receive a great injury
and affront, if he offered to give them freely, and hold him to be a fool.
What shall he do in this case? They are constrained to answer, that in such a
case he may take the fees of his labor, but with this addition, that receiving
them with one hand, he must with the other give them to the poor, to testify
that what he has done, he has done it only for the Lord. But what if he be
poor himself, having no more than is needful, or not so much as is
behoofefull for him and his family? What if the hire which he has received
be notable, and more worth then he shall be able to win in many days
following, as if a Physician or a Leech that is poor, received on the Sabbath
day of a rich patient a liberal and ample salarie of his industry and pains,
must he give it all to the poor? In these places where we live, and where we
are constrained to go a great way out of the towns of our abode, to the
places appointed for the public exercises of our Religion, there be coachmen
that carry many persons by land in their coaches, which they let out for a
certain hire: And boatmen which do the like by water in their boats. This is
so necessary, that without these helps, these persons cannot go to hear
Service, and to call upon God in the Congregation of the faithful. These
coachmen and boatmen are they bound by Christian charity to carry them for
naught, to give them freely the usage of their coaches, boats, and labor, and
to refuse all gain, although it countervaileth all the profit they can make of
their labor in the whole week, and the whole year affords not unto them so
notable, so certain, and so present wages? Or must they be content to take no
more then will suffice for the reparation of the damages of their coaches and
boats, which would be a thing of little consideration?

Now if it be lawful to receive money on the Sabbath day, for recompense of a
thing which I have furnished to another, and of the damage that I have
received by the furnishing of it, why may I not also receive a reward of my
pains? There are Trades whose gain consists in things which they give, and
others whose gain depends simply on their travel and pains, their pains
and industry being the whole matter whereupon their gain is formed, and
answerable to the things furnished by others.

They will, perhaps, answer, that he who furnishes something, has bought it
first, and it is reasonable that he be rewarded. But what if he has not bought
it? If a Surgeon or Apothecarie, for example, has drugs that were given
him, or simples and physical herbs which he has gathered in his garden, on
the mountains, or in the fields, and he has bestowed only his pains to
gather and prepare them, and to make of them by his industry diverse
compositions and medicaments for the use of his patients, must he give on the
Sabbath day these drugs and medicaments for naught? He must, if all Christians
be obliged to give their travel and pains freely, and bestow their labor
upon their neighbors through mere and simple charity.

But I demand, Why may not he rather that has employed his labor upon
another, receive of him that which he gives; taking it, not as a reward, but
as a benevolence? For the giver, to relieve him of all scruple of conscience,
may say truly, that he gives it in that quality. And indeed, if a man may give
his money freely to one who has not done or wrought any thing for him, and if
this man may receive it without sin, I see no reason why he may not, yea
ought not to give money to one that has bestowed his travel on him, or for
his benefit, and why this man may not take it.

Moreover, what if after a man has wrought upon the Sabbath day, and other
days successively, and he for whom he has wrought procrastinate his pay till
all be done, and then satisfy him for all those days works together, as
commonly Chirurgions, Apothecaries, Physicians are never otherwise paid; that
is, never till the disease of their patient is come to an end, either by health
or death: shall he in such a case separate the labor of the Sabbath day from
the labor of other days, and if in the hire or reward that is given him, the
salarie of the seventh days work be comprised, must he defaulk the Sabbath
days work, and refuse to take any thing for it? I would be glad to know on
what ground all these distinctions are founded.

17 They allege, that God in his Ordinances concerning the Sabbath, has
forbidden us to do in it our works, and servile works, and that all works
which we do for our profit and utility are our works and servile works, even
as servants work for their hire; which they say to be signified by the Hebrew
word (...) employed Habad.
in the fourth Commandment, and translated by this general word to do, as
likewise by this Noune, (...) which we translate Melacah.
work, although it signify not all kind of work, but that only which is
done for gain and worldly profit: By which words God has intimated, that he
forbids to do any thing whatsoever for that end. But this is too much
subtilizing about words, which signify generally all travel, work, function
about any thing, and done to any end whatsoever. Is not Gods work betokened by
this name Melacah, Genes. 2. verse. 2, 3. Is not the offering of sacrifices
called by this Verb, Habad, Esa. 19. verse. 21. and the function of the Levites
about holy things, 2 Chronicles. 13. verse. 10. Besides this, I say, that indeed God
prohibited on the Sabbath day all work for gain, but even as he forbade all
other bodily work, which was not done for gain; to wit, to make an ordinary
course and custom of it, as in other days, and when there was no necessity.
But as (in case of necessity) he permitted the labor that brought no gain,
even so he prohibited not the work that might bring gain to the worker, nor
the gain that might come of the work.

18 Thirdly, when they speak of servants, and others that are under authority,
they say, that their servitude and subjection is not a sufficient warrant unto
them, to work on the Sabbath day by the authority of their superiors, to
whom, when they receive any such commandment, they ought to answer, that they
are first the servants of Almighty God, who is the King of Kings, LORD of
Lords, maker of heaven and earth, whom they ought to obey, rather than men, and
suffer to be railed upon, and buffeted rather than to do any work on that day.

19 But how does this consent with their decisions concerning messengers and
posts? For they say, that being dispatched and sent away quickly by the
Magistrates, they may run and make have on the Sabbath day, without inquiry
of the necessity of that laborious voyage, which they are put unto, because
simple subjects ought not to make inquiry of the affairs of their Princes and
Lords, which often it is not expedient that they should know? For why may not,
by the same reason, a domestical servant do some work to obey his Master
without searching curiously upon what necessity his Master lays this work
upon him? For the Master may have good reasons and great importance to his
family of this command, which it is not expedient his servant should be privy
unto, nor that he should be inquisitive and curious to know them before he
obey. For this should draw with it a most dangerous consequence.

Again this permission that they give to posts to ride hard, and make have for
the affairs of the Country, how does it agree with the difference that they
have made between present and imminent necessity, permitting no work for
this, but for that only? For the necessities, for which posts are hastened,
and they post so speedily, are seldom present, and are often but imminent,
having regard only to something that may happen in time to come.

20 Fourthly, when they give their advise concerning bankets, they distinguish
between solemn bankets, and those that are bankets of friendship, and more
moderate. And forbidding the first, they permit the last.

But they ought to have determined first, which bankets are to be called
solemn, which not, how many courses of meat must be prepared, how many
persons, and of what quality must be invited, to make a solemn banquet. Also a
man shall be vexed in his mind, not knowing, if to invite so many persons, and
to make ready so much meat, and so many services, will make his banquet
solemn, or not. Besides that in regard of some persons of great riches and
quality, such as are Kings, Princes, Lords, etc. it is not a solemn feast,
which in respect of some other persons of lesser means, authority and
dignity, may carry that name. Now if these persons of great note and quality
are suffered to make such banquets, which in regard of their degree and means
are not solemn, yea are nothing but their ordinary diet; why may not other
persons of inferior condition and means make them also, although to them they
be solemn? For there is not greater distraction from Gods service to the
persons whom the one put on work for the preparing of their feast, which to
them is solemn, than to those whom the other set about the dressing of their
feast, which to them is ordinary, and not solemn.

If a great man may have a great number of servants busied about the dressing
of his ordinary refection, and if his table be every day well furnished, by
reason of the eminency of the noble stock that he is come of, and of his
dignity, and withal not break the Sabbath; why may not a man of a meaner
condition have (extraordinarily) as many people for a solemn banquet, which he
has occasion to make on the Sabbath day? And seeing a solemn banquet may be
made by a great number of servants in as short time, as a banquet that is not
solemn may be prepared by a lesser number, I see no cause why a man shall
commit a greater sin, if he set on work twenty servants to dress a solemn
banquet, than if he set four or five only about the dressing of one that is
not solemn. For twenty shall not toil and have more ado, they shall make as
speedy an end of their business, and so shall not be more distraught and
withdrawn from Gods service, than four or five, and may equally (before or
after their work) get leisure to apply themselves unto it. And as for the
persons invited, thirty persons in a solemn feast may have done as soon, and
be as little diverted from the exercises of the Sabbath, as six or seven in a
feast that is not solemn. A thing that many together cannot do lawfully,
cannot be lawful to a few: or if it be lawful to few, it is also to many.

But I wonder, how those which have made this distinction of banquets, can have
the heart to make use of it, seeing they teach otherwhere, that it is not
lawful to do on the Sabbath day, but things of present necessity, and not
those that are simply of imminent necessity, or at the most, they suffer only
those that are requisite for a comfortable entertainment of the person, as to
prepare meat for his refection. For banquets, howsoever named and qualified,
are not requisite for that day, for the entertainment either necessary, or
comfortable of men; they may be put off till some other day without harm or
displeasure to any man by this delay, and cannot easily be kept without much
hurrying up and down, and diverse discourses, which are not suitable to such a
day, which they will have to be so precisely and exactly observed.

I wonder far more, why they are not scrupulous to suffer weddings on that
day: For seeing they will have all men's thoughts, words, and actions to be
spiritual and holy all that day, and suffer not any that are natural and
worldly, otherwise than in a present and urgent necessity, seeing also there is
no necessity to marry on Sunday, that this may be done as well on any other
day, and that the thoughts, words, and actions of weddings, can hardly have the
qualities which they require; would it not be more suitable to their maxims, to
forbid them absolutely on that day?

21 Fifthly, as for plays, games, pastimes, recreations, which are honest and
lawful, they forbid them altogether and absolutely on the Sabbath to all men,
without exception of those that are sick, saying, that to those which are
dangerously sick, it is fit time to pray, and not to play, and spend time on
gaming: And as for those that are not dangerously sick, they need not these
pastimes, and may apply themselves to hear, read, confer of things of
instruction and consolation, and seek in these holy exercises their recreation.

Wherein they speak, as if the one and the other might not be done
successively, and a sick man, or any other person, after an honest and short
pastime, were not capable to seek this spiritual recreation, although they be
not incompatible, and that God improveth not the succession of the one to the
other on our Sabbath day. I add, that by this prohibition they overthrow their
former position, that it is lawful to do on the Sabbath day things, not only
absolutely necessary for the entertainment of the creature; but also
comfortable and agreeable unto it. Now some honest play or pastime taken by a
man, and namely by a sick man, may be very useful for his comfort and
recreation, and often much more, than if the best meats and drinks, and most
comfortative cordials were given him, if he stand not absolutely in present
need of them; Nay, they may make him far better disposed afterward for Gods
service, than the best restoratives of the best furnished Apothecaries.

If then it be lawful unto him, and to others also, to bestirre themselves to
prepare for him, and make him take these things, why may he not likewise take
some pastime, which are far more necessary unto him? And although he has no
need of them by absolute necessity, may they not be needful unto him for his
commodity and comfort, as well as food and medicaments? If it be said, that he
may defer his pastime till another day, I answer, that so he may prolong,
without any peril, the preparing of meat or of medicaments.

22 But not to say longer upon the rehearsal of the intricate difficulties
which occur in their explications of works that are permitted on the Sabbath
day, and of the conditions and terms whereupon they are permitted; I say,
that there is no kind of works, but they may be done as lawfully on that day,
as on any other, and that as in the fourth Commandment the Ordinance to keep
the Sabbath day obliges Christians in this only, that because God must be
served publicly in the Congregations of his people, by the exercises of
religion which he has ordained, it is necessary, that some time be appointed
for that use, but not that it ought to be one day rather than another by
virtue of that command, or that the day appointed ought to be kept during four
and twenty hours, which God has not in any case prescribed to his people of
the New Testament, as he did to his people of the Old Testament. But being
pleased to injoyne unto them the exercises of religion wherewith he will be
served, he has left to their liberty the determination of some days, and of
the continuance of the time wherein they are to be practiced.

I say likewise, that the commandment to do no work on the day consecrated
to Gods service, obliges in this regard only, and no more; to wit, that as
much as the public exercises of this service, when they are practiced in the
Church, do require; we must forbear all ordinary employments and works,
that with tranquillity of mind, and stillnesse of body, we may bend all our
forces to these exercises; resort unto the holy assemblies, and glorify the
Lord our God there in the company of the faithful.

23 I grant willingly, that all travel about corporal and terrestrial works
is forbidden, in as much as it is an impediment and hinderance to the service
of God. And therefore an honest and religious man must observe publicly all
the time of holy exercises observed in the Church on the Holy Days appointed
for that end, whereof he has for rule, the Order of the Church. This time
excepted, the remnant of the day is his to dispose of it discreetly and
conscientiously, and to do on it all manner of work which is lawful on other
days, according to the Order of the Church wherein he lives.

24 And since Sunday has been appointed by the Order of the Church, for the
prime day wherein these exercises are ordinarily to be practiced, all are bound
in regard of them, to cease from all other works, during the whole time that
they are practiced in the Church publicly, without purposing to do, or give
willingly any worldly business to be done on that day, capable to make the
least diversion from so holy and necessary a duty, and to dispose in such sort
all their ordinary affairs of this life before Sunday come, that they be not,
when it is come, an hinderance to sanctify it: And so to show that they are
full of love and respect to those blessed exercises of religion, and to the
Order of the Church, from which they should never be absent without reasons of
great consequence, whereof every ones conscience ought to judge by the rules of
godliness, and of Christian prudence.

25 I say without most important and weighty reasons. For considering that Gods
external service, for which a day of rest is appointed, is not the principal
service that God requires, and that it ought to give place to the works of
true godliness and love, according to Gods own words, I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice, Hos. 6. verse. 7. Matthew. 12. verse. 7. It is certain, there may
be many lawful reasons taken from true charity which we owe to our selves, or
to our neighbors, whereby we may be dispensed with in the practice of Gods
outward service on the Sabbath day, and licensed to do on it bodily und
servile works, in stead of that service.

26 But against this liberty which I maintain all Christians have to work, or
to cheer up themselves on Sunday, in the manner before specified, it is
objected; That worldlings, when they are lured with some worldly advantage, and
when they seek or look for some gain on market, or fair days, take heed lest
they loose so good an occasion, shun all games and pastimes, that may withdraw
or divert them from their gain, make always pleasure to plie and give place
to profit. And therefore far less ought Christians on the Lords day, which
is, as it were, the great Market Day for their souls, wherein they have need to
prepare to themselves a great spiritual gain, and make all their provisions,
to seek or take any leisure for the occupations and pastimes of this life;
namely, seeing our diligence cannot be so great, our care so vigilant, our
labor so profitable, but that we have much more profit to be made, than all
the profit we have purchased already. But if we make of the Sabbath our
delight, according to Gods exhortation in Esa. chap. 58. verse. 13. we shall
find neither leisure nor place for worldly affairs.

27 To the which I answer, that the care of worldlings, lest they should be
any ways diverted from their traffic, and from the search of gain on
market-dayes, by any game or pastime, is nothing to the purpose. It is true,
that we ought to be more careful of the spiritual food of our souls, than
they are of the temporal profit of their bodies. But this argument is made, as
if Sunday were only Gods Market Day, to speak so, wherein we may purchase
unto us that profit, as if (it being past) our hope of the acquisition thereof
on another day of the week were utterly lost; and as if a small and short
occupation or recreation of this world, taken on that day, could bereave us of
so great a good: which foundation being sandy, the building upon it falls to
the ground.

28 We ought to make of the Sabbath our delight, but not in the same sense as
the Jews, that is, not of an external and ceremonial, but of a spiritual
Sabbath, which the Prophet betokens in the place quoted; that is, Not to
follow our own ways, and not to do our own will, which is the daily Sabbath
of the New Testament. For God has not ordained unto us a corporal one, saving
in some respects specified before, which is much different from the Sabbath
which the Jews were obliged to observe.

29 It is manifest of that has been said, that our Sunday may in some sort be
called a day of Sabbath or of rest, because we ought, for the public
exercises of religion on it, give over all our ordinary works. But it cannot
be absolutely qualified with this name, and with regard to an abstinence as
precise as was required on the Jewish Sabbath day. Moreover, as we have
observed heretofore, this name of Sabbath day, is the proper name of the
ancient day of the Jews, and not of the new day of Christians, wherefore it
were better done to abstain from denoting it by the qualification of that
name, and to call it only, The Lords day, or Sunday, seeing these names have
been appropriated unto it by the Christian Church.

CHAPTER Sixth.
A more particular explication, how the faithful ought to carry themselves in
the observation of Sunday.
1. Duty of the Governors of the Church, and of all particular Christians
about the ordering and practice of Gods service.

2. The faithful ought to submit themselves to the order of the Church, and to
keep the days appointed for Gods service, by the public practice thereof in
the Congregation.

3. How they ought to carry themselves where there is no Church.

4. How where there is a Church, during the service.

5. How after the service.

6. The sanctification of Sunday is grounded on the holiness of the exercises
practiced in it, and is so considered by the faithful.

7. Profane men, because they have no heart to Gods service, contemn the Lords
day.

8. Godly men do quite contrary.

GOd for the edification and entertainment of his Church here below, injoyneth
to those that have charge of her government, to offer up prayers and
thankesgivings, to preach the Gospel, to minister the Sacraments, to assemble
the faithful together, to establish good order in the Church; and to
particular Christians to pray devoutly, to love Gods word, to keep it, receive
the Sacraments, frequent carefully the holy assemblies, obey in things
belonging to order and discipline those that have rule over them, and submit
themselves unto them, not to be contentious against the good customs of the
Church, and to do this, not each of them for himself only, but also to
procure that all persons subject to their government, their subjects, their
children, their servants do the same.

All Christians, when they know that there are holy convocations for the
hearing of the Word, and the practice of other religious exercises, and that
the Order of the Church has appointed unto them set days, as in every week a
Sunday, are bound by these injunctions to resort carefully unto them, and to
take pains that their inferiors (over whom they have authority) follow their
example: And if indeed they love the word of God, and the exercises of
godliness, to show it by a diligent frequenting, and serious practice of them,
as of a thing which God has enjoined to all, and for the things sake, to
observe the day wherein it is practiced, although God has not prescribed nor
appointed it, and it has no other foundation but the Order of the Church,
whereunto nevertheless God has commanded in general all men to submit
themselves, 1 Cor. 14. verse. 40. For it is not for the days sake that we ought
to practice and respect the holy exercises which ordinarily are done on it; but
it is these exercises that make the day considerable, and give credit,
authority, and respect unto it: The exercises are to be much esteemed for
themselves, and for Gods sake, who has expressly enjoined them: The day is not
honored and accounted of, but for their sake, in as much as the Church is
pleased to do them on it.

Yet, if a Christian were brought to that extremity, that he must remain in a
place, where there is no Church, nor order established for the public
exercises of religion; nevertheless, because Sunday has been always used in
the Christian Church for a day of divine service, and all religious exercises,
he ought not to forbear to apply himself unto them privately on that day,
with greater assiduity than on other days: And because, where there is an
order and discipline established, the Rulers of the State, and of the Church,
to prevent all disorders, and stir up greater respect to the exercises of
religion which are practiced on Sunday, have thought fit to forbid on that day
the public and ordinary works of the other days of the week, he shall do
well to refrain on it from the ordinary works of his worldly trade and
calling, to obey these high powers that God has subjected him unto.

It is then the order of the Church principally that must be to every Christian
the rule of the abstinence and cessation from ordinary works that he is to
observe on Sunday, or on another day. That is, he must not apply himself to
such works without great necessity, during all the time wherein this order
calls upon him to resort to the house of God, to come to the holy assemblies,
not to sit idle, not to busy himself about bodily occupations, when he ought
to be in the congregation, hearing the word of God with attention, praying, and
singing with heart and mouth to the Lord in the company of his faithful
brethren.

If divine service be publicly practiced before and after noone in the Church,
whereof he is a member, he must not soothe himself with a fond opinion, that
he has done his duty when he has been present at either of them, and
forsaken one of the two, to bestow it on some other thing. That time ordained
by the Church being expired, and the whole service of that day finished, when
he is come home, and is alone, he is free to do what he will, so it be honest
and lawful; to work, or to refresh himself, for in that he sins not
against God, and transgresses not his Commandments. If he will pass the rest
of the day in actions of religion, he shall do well; if he will spend it on
other ordinary and common actions of this life, he shall not do ill; with
this proviso, that he be careful to prepare himself by religious meditations
for the public and holy exercises before they begin, and take time to call
them to mind after they are ended, that so he may make them faithful and
profitable to his soul, feel in his heart their efficacy, and show it by an
holy conversation in the whole sway of his life. Otherwise the wicked one shall
come, and catch away that which was sown in his heart, Matt. 13. v. 19.

6 All that can, and should be propounded to teach us how we ought to
sanctify the Lords day, must be grounded upon the necessity, holiness, and
utility of the religious exercises of divine service, upon the respect due unto
them, and upon the authority of the Church commanding upon these grounds. This
is the only reason of the sanctification of that day; In this is the strength
of all the arguments whereby Gods servants ought to stir up devotion in the
hearts of their hearers; And not in the nature of the day wherein God is
publicly served, not also in any obligation whereby the conscience is tied
unto it. Those that fear God, and have respect unto his Commandments, will
not omit the observation of this day, although they be informed that it
obliges them not, neither of it self, nor also by a divine commandment, more
than another day. For it is not the day that they regard, but the great need
they have to be instructed, comforted, fortified in the knowledge of God, in
the love of his glorious Majesty, in true godliness, by the exercises which
God has ordained to that end, not only particular at home, which they may do
at all times, as they shall have occasion, but also public in the Church, in
any day whatsoever the Church shall appoint.

7 On the other side, those that have not the love God, and of the exercises of
religion in their hearts, will never be moved to give their mind with more
affection and assiduity to Gods service, by believing, that Sunday is a day of
Gods own institution. For if they make no account of that which is the
principal, and the end, which God has enjoined, and urges so carefully, what
reckoning can they make of a thing, which, putting the case it were a divine
institution, could not enjoy that prerogative, saving as a help and a means
tending to that end?

If they should cover their forsaking of Gods service and of the holy exercises
on Sunday, with this pretext, that it is not a divine institution; should they
not discover a manifest profaneness, for as much as that under a slight and
frivolous pretense, they should disdain that which they cannot be ignorant of,
but that God has ordained it; to wit, the holy convocations, the communion of
the faithful in them, his word, his Sacraments, the public calling upon his
name? Such profane ones must be left to the judgment of God, who will find
them out in his own time.

8 As for the true faithful, the glory of God, and their own salvation being
their principal end, they will always keep religiously and chearefully all
things whereby they come to their end: First, the means which essentially and
by Gods ordinance belong unto it, such as are the exercises of religion
particular and public: Next, those which being in themselves indifferent, and
having no obligatorie power over the conscience by a divine commandment, are
notwithstanding lawfully established by the Church for orders sake, and to set
forth the former by ordinary practice, such as is the institution of Sunday. By
which behavior, they shall draw upon themselves from the Father of lights, the
blessing of grace during their abode in these low parts of the earth, and of
glory in heaven, through the precious merits of our only Savior and Redeemer
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory,
and praise for ever and ever.

AMEN.
A CONFIRMATION OF THE THINGS CONTAINED IN THE PRECEDING TREATISE, BY humane
Authorities.
THat the world may not think, that in my tenets and proofs, I have only set
down that, which in my own judgment I thought to be warrantable by the word
of God, and reason, which are the chiefest foundations, on which we ought to
build; I thought it not unfit, for the further confirmation of the premises,
to add, as an Appendix to my former Discourse, some Passages of learned
Writers, both ancient and modern, especially of the reformed Churches, who
were first, both in time, and worth, and who deservedly have great credit and
authority amongst us. In quoting the Passages, I shall reduce them to the
chief heads of my Treatise.

PASSAGES
Concerning the nature and beginning of the Sabbath.
JUSTIN Martyr in Dialogo cum Tryphone Iudaeo. (...). All the forenamed
righteous men (Adam, Abel, etc.) and after them Abraham also did please God,
though they observed no Sabbath.

Irenaeus l. 4. adv. Haeres. c. 30. speaking of Circumcision, and of the
Sabbath, (which he makes to be types and figures of the same nature) says,
Quia non per haec justificatur homo, sed in signo data sunt populo, ostendit,
quod ipse Abraham fine circumcisione, and sine observatione Sabbatorum credidit
Deo, and reputatum est illi in justitiam; That man is not justified by these
things, but that they were given him for signs, and tokens, is manifest from
this, that Abraham not being yet circumcised, nor observing the Sabbaths,
believed in God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. And a little
after: Reliqua omnis multitudo eorum qui ante Abraham fuere justi, and
Patriarcharum qui ante Moysem fuerunt, sine his quae praedicta sunt, and sine
lege Moysis justificati sunt. All the company of them, who before Abraham were
just, and of the Patriarchs that were before Moses, were justified without
observing the things above-specified, and without Moses Law.

Tertullian also libro advers. Iudaeos cap. 2. in fin. jointly speaking of
Circumcision, and of the Sabbath, says, Cum neque circumcisum, neque
Sabbatizantem Deus Adam instituerit, consequenter quoque sobolem ejus Abel
offerentem sibi sacrificia, incircumcisum, nec Sabbatizantem laudavit, accepta
ferens quae offerebat in simplicitate cordis. Noe quoque incircumcisum, sed and
non Sabbatizantem de diluvio liberavit. Enoch justissimum, non circumcisum, nec
Sabbatizantem de hoc mundo transtulit. Melchisedech summi Dei Sacerdos
incircumcisus and non Sabbatizans ad Sacerdotium Dei allectus est. That God
created Adam, neither circumcised, nor observing the Sabbath, and afterward
also he praised his son Abel sacrificing unto him, although he was neither
circumcised, nor kept the Sabbath, accepting of those things which in the
singleness of his heart he offered. He delivered also from the Deluge Noe, who
was neither circumcised, nor an observer of the Sabbath. He translated just
Enoch out of this world, who neither was circumcised, nor observed the Sabbath.
Melchisedech also was made high Priest of the great God, though neither
circumcised, nor a keeper of the Sabbath. Abraham indeed was circumcised, but
he was accepted of God before he was circumcised, nor did he at all observe
the Sabbath. And in the fourth Chapter, Doceant Adam Sabbatizasse, aut Abel
hostiam Deo sanctam offerentem Sabbati religionem placuisse, aut Enoch
translatum, Sabbati cultorem fuisse, aut Noe Arcae fabricatorem propter
diluvium immensum, Sabbatum observasse: aut Abraham in observatione Sabbati
Isaac filium suum obtulisse, aut Melchisedech in suo sacerdotio, legem Sabbati
accepisse. Let them prove to us, that Adam did observe the Sabbath, or that
Abel, when he offered up his sacrifice to God, observed the Sabbath, or that
Enoch who was translated from this world, or that Noe the builder of the Arc
against the deluge, were observers of it: or that Abraham observing it offered
up his son Isaac, or that Melchisedech during his Priesthood received any
laws concerning the Sabbath. And a little after he infers, that this
Commandment of the Sabbath was temporal, and ought not to be observed under
the New Testament, no more than circumcision, and the Leviticall sacrifices.

Eusebius l. 1. c. 5. Hist. Eccles. proves, that the Fathers before Moses were
in effect Christians, though they carried not the name: for, (...). They cared
not for the Circumcision of the body, because nor we neither: Nor for the
observation of Sabbaths, because nor we neither.

And in his first Book De demonstrat. Evangelica c. 6. showing, That the
Patriarchs before Moses did not observe the ceremonies of the Mosaicall Law,
amongst them, in express terms, he ranketh the observation of the Sabbath,
and says of Melchisedech, (...) (...). Moses makes mention of Melchisedech,
Priest of the most High God, who was neither circumcised in the flesh, nor
anointed with a compound ointment (Exodus 30. 25.) according to the prescript of
Moses Law, nor knew any such thing as a Sabbath, nor heard any thing at all of
those Laws, which afterward by Moses were given to the whole people of the
Jews. And a little after of Job, he says, (...); What shall we say of most
blessed Job, that thrice unblamable, just, and religious man? How came he to
that height of holiness and righteousness that was in him? Was it by
observing the Mosaicall Law? No truly. But was it then by keeping the Sabbath
day, or any other of the Jewish rites and ceremonies? How could that be, seeing
he was before Moses, and the making of his Laws?

S. August. tom. 3. l. despiritu and liter. c. 14. In december praeceptis in
lapideis tabulis digito Dei scriptis, Dicatur mihi quid non sit observandum a
Christiano, excepta Sabbathi observatione, etc. In the ten Commandments
written by the finger of God in Tables of stone, let them tell me, what is not
to be observed by a Christian, except the command of the Sabbath? And a little
after. An propter unum praeceptum, quod ibi de Sabbato positum est, dictus est
Decalogus litera occidens, quoniam quisquis illum diem nunc usque observat
sieut litera sonat, carnaliter sapit? Is the Decalogue called a killing letter,
for that one precept of it concerning the Sabbath, because whosoever observes
that day according to the literal sense, is carnally wise. And afterward,
ranking the Sabbath with circumcision, and the other ceremonies, he calls
them all typical Sacraments: And cap. 15. having said that the grace revealed
under the New Testament, was veiled and covered under the old, he adds, that
to that veil and covering did pertain the precept concerning the Sabbath,
which is in the Decalogue, which also he calls typical, and shows in what
consists the type and figure, and says, the Jews observed the Sabbath as a
shadow.

And tom. 4. l. quaest. in Exodus quaest. 172. Moses after he came down from
the mount the second time, Exodus 34. Ex december praeceptis hoc solum (de Sabbato)
praecepit, quod figurate ibi dictum est: alia quippe novem sicut praecepta
sunt, etiam in Novo Testamento observanda minime dubitamus. Illud autem unu^ de
Sabbato usque adeo figurata diei septimi observatione apud Israelitas velatum
est, and in mysterio praeceptum fuit, and quodam Sacramento figurabatur, ut
hodie a nobis non observetur, sed solum quod significabat, intueamur. Of all
the ten Commandments he repeated to the people this only of the Sabbath,
which is there set down for a figure: for we do not doubt, but that the other
nine are also to be observed under the New Testament, just as they were
commanded. But that of the Sabbath was amongst the Israelites so far veiled
with a figurative observation of a seventh day, and mystically commanded, and
prefigured by a certain sign, that at this day we observe it not, but only
look upon that which it signified.

And tom. 4. in exposit. ex. ad Galat. in cap. 3. about the beginning. Opera
legis sunt tripartita: Nam partim in Sacramentis, partim vero in moribus
accipiuntur. Ad Sacramenta pertinent, circumcisio carnis, Sabbatum temporale,
Neomeniae, sacrificia atque omnes hujusmodi innumerae observationes. Ad mores
autem, non occides, non Moechaberis, non falsum testimonium dices and talia
caetera. The works of the Law are of two sorts, for they consist partly in
signs and types, partly in moral actions. In types, such are circumcision of
the flesh, the temporal Sabbath, New moons, sacrifices and such like
innumerable observations. In moral actions, as, thou shall not kill, thou
shall not commit adultery, and such like others.

And tom. 3. de Genes. ad liter. l. 4. c. 13. Iam tempore gratiae revelatae,
observatio illa Sabbati, quae unius diei vacatione figurabatur, ablata est ab
observatione fidelium. Now that grace is revealed, that observation of the
Sabbath, which figuratively consisted in one days rest, was taken away from
the observation of the faithful.

To which Passages, the Answer that some men make, that the fore-quoted Fathers
speak of a ceremonial keeping of the Sabbath, and mean only that the first
Patriarchs did not observe the Sabbath with such ceremonies, as the Jews
afterward did: This answer (I say) has not so much, as any show of truth; for
if they had meant nothing else but that, they had never spoke in so direct and
express terms as they do. Moreover, they expressly distinguish betwixt the
Sabbath and the other ceremonies of Moses Law, and flatly affirm, that the
Patriarchs did neither observe the Sabbath, nor the other Jewish ceremonies.

Besides the testimonies of the Fathers, which above have been, and of our own
Doctors, which presently hereafter shall be cited: If you will give any credit
to Jewish Writers, there are some of the old Rabbis (as Galatin reports, l.
11. de secret. veritatis Catholic. c. 9. and 10.) who writing upon these words,
Genes. 2. And God blessed the seventh day; And upon these, Exodus 16. 29. See,
for that the Lord has given you the Sabbath: say, that Abraham observed not
the Sabbath, that the Law of the Sabbath was given but to the Jews only, and
not to other nations, and that they are not obliged to keep the Sabbath. Rabbi
Solomon Iarchi in his Comment. on Genesis 2. 2. God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it. God blessed it (says he) in the Manna, because on the rest of
the days of the week there fell one Homer for every person, and on the sixth
day there fell a double proportion. He sanctified it in the Manna, because on
it none at all fell: and this is written with reference to the time to come. In
which words he manifestly refers the blessing and sanctifying mentioned Genesis
2. 2. to the time that the Israelites were in the desert.

Amongst our own Writers I will begin with Calvin, who Institut. l. 2. c. 8.
sect. 28. speaks thus of the fourth Commandment; Umbratile veteres nuncupare
solent, quod externam diei observationem contineat, quae in Christi adventu cum
reliquis figuris abolita fuerat: quod vere quidem ab illis dicitur. Ancient
Writers are wont to call this Command a typical one, because it contains an
external observation of a day, which, with the rest of the types and figures
at the coming of Christ were abolished: in which they speak truth: Ibidem
sect. 34. Neque sic tamen septenarium numerum moror, ut ejus servituti
Ecclesiam astringam. Neque enim Ecclesias damnavero, quae aliis conventibus
suis solennes dies habeant, modo a superstitione absint: Quod erit, si ad solam
observationem disciplinae, and ordinis been compositi referantur. I do not so
regard the number of seven days, as to tie the Church precisely to it: for I
should not condemn those Churches, who should make choice of other days for
their public assemblies, so they did it without superstition: which is done,
if the observation of those days be only for discipline and good orders sake.
And a little after: Ita evanescunt nugae Pseudoprophetarum qui Iudaica opinione
populum superioribus seculis imbuerint; nihil aliud afferentes nisi abrogatum
esse quod ceremoniale erat in hoc mandato (id vocant sua lingua diei septimae
taxationem) remanere autem quod morale est, nempe unius diei observationem in
hebdomada. Atque id nihil aliud est, quam in Iudaeorum contumeliam diem mutare,
diei sanctitatem eandem animo retinere: Siquidem manet nobis etiamnum par
mysterii in diebus significatio, quae apud Iudaeos locum habebat. So are
refuted the foolish conceits of some false Doctors, who in former ages
possessed the minds of the vulgar with a Jewish opinion, saying nothing for
themselves but this, that what was ceremonial in this command (which in their
expression they call the taxation of a seventh day) is abrogated, but that the
moral part of it, namely, the observation of one day in seven, remains still
in force unto this day. Which is nothing else but to change the day in contempt
of the Jews, and to retain the same opinion of the holiness of the day. For
if so be the same mystery is implied to us in the number of the days, which
was implied to the Jews; And whosoever will take the pains to read over all that
he says in the fore-quoted Chapter, shall find, that his opinion is, that the
principal end for which at first a seventh day was appointed for rest, was to
be a type and figure of a spiritual rest, that the Sabbath is abrogated, that
the fourth Commandment does only oblige us so far, that there must be set
times set a part for the public service of God; that if it were possible to
make every day a Sabbath day, and so take away all difference of days, it were
a thing much to be desired: but seeing this cannot be done, it behooveth that
there be one appointed from among the rest, and that this is all which is
obligatorie in the fourth command in regard of us. And writing on the sixteenth
of Exodus verse. 5. The seventh day (says he) was consecrated before the
promulgation of the Law, although it is uncertain whether this day of rest was
observed by the Fathers, which seems probable, but I would not contest in
this.

Item on the twentieth of Exodus expounding the fourth Commandment. That the
Commandment was ceremonial S. Paul tells in plain terms, calling it a
shadow of things, whose body is in Christ. We must see therefore how Christ
has exhibited to us that, which was a figure. And afterward. From these
words, For God in six days created the heaven and the earth, and rested the
seventh day. This probable conjecture is inferred, that the holiness of the
Sabbath was before the Law.

Bullinger Sermonum decade 2. Sermon. 4. Scimus Sabbatum esse ceremoniale
quatenus conjunctum est cum sacrificiis and reliquis Iudaicis ceremoniis, and
quatenus alligatum est tempori: Caeterum quatenus Sabbato religio and piet as
propagatur, and justus or do retinetur in Ecclesia, perpetuum and non
ceremoniale est. We know that the Sabbath is ceremonial, so far as it is
joined with the sacrifices and the rest of the Jewish ceremonies, and so far
as it is tied to a certain time. But so far as by the Sabbath, religion and
piety is advanced, and good order preserved in the Church, the observation of
it is everlasting, and not ceremonial.

Musculus in locis Commun. in praeceptum 4. Deus diem exprimit, quo
sanctificandum sit Sabbatum, unum videlicet de septem diebus, eumque nec primum
nec secundum, etc. sed postremum. 1. septimum. God does specify the day, in
which the Sabbath is to be sanctified, namely, that it is one of seven, and
that neither the first, nor the second, etc. but the last. that is, the seventh.

Item, Legale Sabbatum non erat natura sua ita comparatum, ut esset perpetuum.
Erat enim, non verum, sed umbratile; non perfectum, sed elementarium ac
paedagogicum, adeoque imperfectum, and populo elementario accommodatum. Quare
Novi Testamenti tempore desiit, ut spiritus libertati locus esset. Christus est
corpus, cujus adventu recte cessarunt umbrae. The legal Sabbath, considered in
it self, was not appointed to be of a perpetual duration: for it was not a
true one but only typical: not perfect, but elementary and pedagogicall, and
by consequent imperfect and appropriated to an elementary and rude people.
Therefore it was most reasonable that it should have end under the New
Testament, that the Christian liberty of the spirit might have place. Christ is
the body at whose coming it behooved all shadows to vanish away.

Call. 2. Item Observantia legalis Sabbati non perinde imposita reliquis
nationibus, atque Israelitis. Etenim non extat praeceptum Dei, quod gentes ad
hanc septimi diei observationem astringat, sicut ad illam Israelitae manifesta
lege obstringuntur. Quare convinci non potest, quod septimi diei Sabbatum ante
hanc legem, vel ante diluvium ab Adamo ad Noe usque, vel post diluvium a Noe ad
Mosem usque, vel per Abraham, vel posteros ejus servatum fuerit: unde and
quidam Hebraeorum fatentur, non esse scriptum de Abrahamo, quod Sabbatum
observarit. Quin etiamsi de patribus, qui ante legem vixerunt, certo constaret
quod Sabbati hujus religionem servarint: haud tamen quisquam mortalium illorum
exemplo ad consimilem alligaretur observantiam, nisi dicturi sumus esse nobis
and pecudes immolandas, propterea quod patres ante and post diluvium de
pecoribus sacrificasse leguntur. The observation of the legal Sabbath was not
so imposed upon other nations, as upon the Jews: for there is no divine
precept that obliges the Gentiles to this keeping of a seventh day, as the
Jews by an express law are tied to do. Wherefore it cannot be proved that a
seventh days rest was observed before the Law, either before the deluge from
Adam to Noe; or after the deluge, from Noe to Moses; or by Abraham and his
posterity. Hence it is that some of the Jewish Writers do confess, that it is
no where written of Abraham that he observed the Sabbath. But grant that there
were any certain proof, that the Fathers who lived before the Law did keep
the Sabbath. Notwithstanding, it does not follow that any man by their example
should be tied to the same, except we will also conclude, that we must now
sacrifice beasts, because we read the Fathers before and after the flood did so

Item, Decalogus hic quatenus pertinet ad legem Israeli per Mosem in Monte Sina
divinitus datam, pertinet ad solos Israelitas. This Decalogue so far as it
has reference to the Law given to the Jews from God by Moses in mount Sinai,
does only pertain to the Jews.

Item, Qui baptizatus est in Christum servatorem, and spiritum gratiae accepit,
profecto non sive grandi Christi gratiae injuria jugo se legis serviliter
subjicit, si se legalis Sabbati servandi debitorem esse judicat. He who was
baptized in Christ's name, and has received the spirit of grace, does not
without putting a gross affront upon the same spirit, slavishly subject
himself to the yoke of the Law, if he thinks himself bound to keep the
legal Sabbath.

Item, Ad legem pertinet, ut aliquo die vacetur sacris ritibus, and exercitiis.
Hactenus non debemus Sabbati, id est, quietis sanctificationem abjicere, quae
usque adeo naturali lege traditur, ut and universae gentes stativas quasdam
ferias, universo populo communes, and rebus sacris obeundis consecratas
habuerunt. Ad legem vero Mosaicam referendum est, quod non primus, non
secundus, non tertius, etc. sed septimus dies sacro otio express and legaliter
deputatur. Ista legalis septimi diei deputatio and consecratio neminem
mortalium constringit praeter Iudaeos: idque non nisi ad tempus usque Novi
Testamenti, quo Lex Mosis una cum sacerdotio Christo sacerdoti cessit. Quare
haud est praeter rationem, quod Apostolus tantopere and Legis and Sabbati
legalis observantiam rejicit, etc. It is a branch of the law of nature that
some day be set apart to the performing of holy rites and sacrifices. And thus
far we are not to reject the sanctifying of a Sabbath, a day of rest, which by
the law of nature is so clearly taught us, that even all nations have had set
holy days, general through the whole people, and consecrated to holy
exercises. But it is by Moses Law, that not the first, not the second, not the
third, etc. but the seventh day is expressly and legally appointed for a holy
rest. That legal appointing and consecrating of a seventh day does oblige no
people under heaven but the Jews, and that for a certain time, till the time
of the New Testament, under which Moses Law and Priesthood gave place to Christ
our Savior. Wherefore it is not without reason, that the Apostle is so zealous
for the cancelling of the Law and the legal Sabbath, etc.

Ursin. in Tractat. Theolog. de praecept. 4. Praecepti hujus duae sunt parts,
quarum una est moralis, sive perpetua, videlicet, ut sanctificetur Sabbatum; id
est, aliquod tempus certum tribuatur ministerio Ecclesiae, sive publico Dei
cultui. Altera ceremonialis ac temporaria, videlicet, ut tempus illud sit dies
septimus. There are two parts of this Commandment, one moral and perpetual;
namely, that a Sabbath be sanctified; that is to say, some set time is to be
appointed to divine service, or the public worship of God. Another ceremonial
and temporary, namely, that that time should be a seventh day.

Item. Cum igitur Sabbathum septimi diei typus fuerit, admonens populum, and de
suo officio, seu de pietate erga Deum, and de beneficio Dei erga populum per
Christum praestando, una cum aliis ceremoniis adventu Christi, per quem est
impletum, quod illa significabant, abrogatum est. Quod etiam Paulus testatur
Col. 2. Seeing therefore a seventh days rest was a type remembering the people
both of their duty, or piety toward God; and also of Gods bountifulness
toward them, which in Christ was to be manifested, both it and the other
ceremonies at the coming of Christ were abolished, by whom was fulfilled that
which they signified. Which also S. Paul Col. 2. does testify.

Item. Decalogus est perpetuus, quatenus est Moralis: Appendices autem, sive
determinationes moralium praeceptorum significationis causa, usque ad Messiam
servandae. The Decalogue is perpetual so far as it is moral: but the
appurtenances and determinations of the moral precepts (such as is that of the
Sabbath) are, because of that which they typifie, to last till Christ.

Et capite de lege divina Quaest. 1. Quae sint parts legis divinae. Leges
morales (inquit) non sunt certis circumstantiis definitae, sed sunt generales,
ut tempus aliquod esse dandum ministerio, etc. Leges vero ceremoniales and
forenses sunt speciales, sive circumstantiarum determinatio, quae observandae
sunt in ritibus vel actionibus externis, Ecclesiasticis and politicis, ut,
septimum diem esse tribuendum ministerio, etc. The moral Laws are not limited
by circumstances, but are general and indefinite, as, that some time is to be
assigned to divine service, etc. But the ceremonial and judicial laws are
special, or are the very determination of the circumstances, which are to be
observed in outward rites or actions, whether Ecclesiastical or civil, as
that a seventh day is to be assigned to divine service, etc.

Viret. on the fourth Commandment toward the end, We must distinguish, as is
fit, betwixt the ceremony of this precept, and that which it retains of the
law of nature imprinted in every man's heart: for setting apart the ceremony of
it, yet notwithstanding our conscience bears witness unto us (if we hold
this for a certain truth, that there is a God to whom we owe honor and glory)
that it is necessary that we hearken to his word, and that both we and all ours
be careful of the ministry of the same which he has ordained.

Zanchius in explicat. 4 praecept. Apostolus ad Col. 2. 17. aperte ait praeter
alia ceremonialia, Sabbatum etiam fuisse umbram rerum futurarum, corpus autem,
hoc est, veritatem earum rerum esse in Christo. The Apostle Col. 2. 17. says
in plain terms, that besides the other ceremonies, the Sabbath also was a
shadow of things to come, but that the body, that is to say, the truth of them,
was in Christ.

Item. Mandatum quartum ceremoniale est, quatenus talem diem, nempe septimum
diem, quem Sabbatum vocant, exercitio divini cultus destinat, and praescribit.
Ita ad solos Indaeos pertinuit nsque ad Christum. Per Christum autem una cum
aliis ceremoniis abrogatm fuit. The fourth Commandment is ceremonial, so far
as it appoints and prescribes for divine worship such a day, namely, a
seventh day, which is called the Sabbath. And thus considered, it pertained to
the Jews only till Christ's time. But by Christ it was abrogated, together
with the rest of the ceremonies.

Item. Although elsewhere he declares his opinion to be, that the Sabbath has
been celebrated since the beginning of the world, notwithstanding, here he
speaks of it, as of a thing questionable, as of a private opinion of certain
men. Quomodo autem sanctificavit? (inquit) non solum decreto and voluntate, sed
and re ipsa: quia illum diem (ut non pauci volu^^, and probabile est) mandavit
primis hominibus sanctificandum. How did he sanctify it (speaking of the
Sabbath?) Not only by his decree and purpose, but really, and in very deed:
because he commanded our first parents to hallow it, as is the opinion of a
great many, and it is also probable. And afterward disputing against the
Sabbatarians, who will have all Christians obliged to the observation of the
seventh day, because the fourth Commandment is moral, and concerns all
nations, which they prove thus, because (say they) from the beginning before
Moses Law was given, God sanctified it, and the Patriarchs kept it holy. To
which he answers, Quod ^iunt, Patres ante legem diem septimum sanctificasse:
quanquam hoc non facili and aperte demonstrari potest ex S. literis sicut and
Tertullian. adv. Indaeos contendit, ego tamen non contradixerim. Sed quod
inferunt esse igitur natural, ita ut etiam ad nos pertineat, tam facile
sequitur, si dicas: Patres ante legem offerebant animalia, item
circumcidebantur: Ergo utrumque natural est, and ideo utrumque etiam a nobis
praestari debet. As for that which they affirm, that the Fathers before the
Law kept holy the seventh day: although this cannot easily and clearly be
proved out of Scripture, which also Tertullian. adv. Iudaeos does maintain,
notwithstanding I for my part will not gainesay it. But the consequence which
thence they infer, that therefore this Law is moral and concerns us also,
is as pertinent, as if you should argue thus, The Fathers before the Law did
offer the sacrifices of beasts, and were also circumcised: therefore both are
moral, and are to be performed by us also.

Item. Non ita morale est, quin etiam sit ceremoniale mandatum hoc de Sabbato.
Morale est, quatenus natura docet, and piet as postulat, ut aliquis dies
destinetur quieti ab operibus servilibus, quo divino cultui vacare possit
Ecclesia: Ceremoniale est, and ad Iudaeos particulariter pertinens, quatenus
septimus fuit praescriptus and non alius. This precept of the Sabbath is not so
moral, but that also it is ceremonial. It is moral thus far, in that
nature teaches us, and piety binds us to it, that some one day be appointed
to a rest from servile works, that the Church may more freely give it self to
the worship of God. It is ceremonial, and peculiarly belongs to the Jews,
so far as a seventh day is prescribed by it and no other.

Item. Substantia hujus praecepti quatenns ad nos quoque pertinet, and
confirmatum a Christo, non est ut diem septimum sanctificemus: sed ut
sanctificemus diem Sabbati, hoc est, quieti destinatum, quisquis ille sit. The
substance of this command, so far as it concerns us also, and was confirmed
by Christ, is not that we keep holy a seventh day: But that we sanctify a
Sabbath day, that is to say, a day of rest, whatsoever day it be.

Item. Praeceptum hoc quartum morale est, quatenus hoc mandatur ^ura
religionis, and exercitium etiam externi divini cultus: and ut certo tempore
conveniat Ecclesia ad audiendum verbum Dei, ad publicas preces, ad debita
sacrificia facienda, ad collectiones faciendas. Id quod etiam confirmavimus:
quoniam apud omnes gentes semper recepta fuit haec consuetudo, ut certis diebus
convenirent omnes ad Deum celebrandum, colendum, invocandum. Mosaicum autem and
ceremoniale fuit, ad solos Iudaeos pertinens, quatenus talis dies, septimus
nimirum, fuit illis praescriptus: and quatenus illis etiam praescripti fuerunt
certi ritus, quibus Deum die Sabbati colerent: atque eatenus etiam fuisse
abrogatum. Ergo ut certo tempore conveniat Ecclesia, cum scilicet potest, ad
Deum celebrandum, ex Dei est institutione in animis cujusque inscripta. This
fourth command is moral, so far as by it is recommended unto us the care of
religion, and the exercise of Gods external worship: and that at a set time
the Church assemble together to hear the word of God, to public prayers, to
offer up due sacrifices, and to make gatherings for the poor. Which also we
have proved, because it is a custom received amongst all nations, that on
certain days there be public assemblies to praise, worship, and call upon
God. But it is Mosaicall, and ceremonial, pertaining to the Jews only in
this respect, that such a day, namely a seventh, was prescribed unto them: and
in this also, that they had certain rites prescribed unto them, by which they
were to worship God on the Sabbath day: and in this regard it was also
afterward abrogated. That therefore the Church meet together at some certain
time, to wit, when it can conveniently, is Gods institution engraved in every
man's mind. And in the very close of his explication of the fourth command,
treating of the abrogation of the Sabbath, he says thus, Prima cansa, ob quam
institutum est Sabbatum, est, ut figuraret cessationem, eamque perpetuam ab
operibus nostris, scilicet a peccatis patrandis, and quietem in Domino,
sinentes scilicet Deum operari opera S. S. in nobis. Et quantum ad hanc causam,
quia erat tantum figura alterius Sabbatismi, erat ceremoniale praeceptum:
ideoque and abrogatum est, sicut and caeterae figurae, adveniente Christo
figurato: ad praesentiam veritatis, id est, Christi, evanuit figura, id est,
Sabbatum, Col. 2. Quatenus vero institutum est, ut status dies esset, quo ad
legem audiendam, and ceremonias peragendas conveniret populus: vel saltem quem
operum Domini meditationi peculiariter darent omnes; abrogatum non est. Nam and
apud nos locum habet, ut statis diebus ad audiendum verbum, ad Sacramenta
percipienda conveniamus. The first cause for which the Sabbath was instituted,
was to typifie a perpetual cessation from our works, that is, our sins, and
also our rest in the Lord, suffering him to work in us the works of his holy
Spirit: and in regard of this cause, because it was only a figure of another
Sabbath or rest, it was ceremonial: and therefore was abrogated, as likewise
the rest of the types, at the coming of Christ who by them was typified: when
the truth, that is, Christ appeared; the shadow, that is, the Sabbath vanished
away, Col. 2. But in that respect, that it was instituted to be a set day, for
the Church to meet together on, to hear the Law, to perform the ceremonies
prescribed, or at least to meditate on the works of God, it is not abolished.
For it is thus in force even amongst us, that on appointed days we assemble
together to hear the Word and receive the Sacraments. In many places also of
this his exposition of the fourth command, he affirms, that the Law
concerning the Sabbath was only given to the Jews, and not to other nations,
and they were not bound to the observation of it.

Lib. 6. de oper. sex dierum. c. 1. having said, that the seasons of the year,
the new and full moons are times common for all people; for the distinction of
which, God has given to all the Sun and the Moon, and appointed them their
courses, he adds; Alterum est genus eorum temporum, seu (...) quae peculiaria
sunt certis gentibus, and quae quisque sibi ex toto anni tempore ad certa
actionum genera deligit; ut quod Deus voluerit, ut ipsius populus sex diebus
operaretur: septimo autem, qui Sabbatum dicitur, quiesceret ab iis operibus and
vacaret cultui divino. Item quod voluerit Calendas observari and certis
temporibus and non aliis festa celebrari Paschae, Pentecostes, etc. Haec erant
(...) populi Israelitaci. Voluit and vult ut singulae gentes habeant stata
tempora, quibus cultum praestent Deo, sed libera cuique genti esse voluit.
There is another kind of appointed times, which are peculiar to certain
nations, and which every one does make choice of for himself out of the whole
year for certain actions. As that God would have his own people the Jews to
work six days, but to rest from those works on the seventh day, which is
called the Sabbath, and give themselves to divine worship. Also that he would
have them to observe the first days of every month, and feasts of Easter,
Pentecost, etc. to be kept at certain times and no other. He would, and
wills that every nation have appointed times for his worship, but he has
left them to the liberty of every nation to be appointed by them.

Danaeus Ethic. Christian. l. 2. c. 10. speaking of the fourth Commandment,
Quatenus hoc praeceptum ceremoniale fuit, hodie cesset: sed quatenus externa
quaedam verae pietatis exercitia fieri praecipit, praeceptum continent haec
verba. This precept so far as it was ceremonial, is now of no force: but so
far as it appoints some outward actions of true piety to be performed, the
words still contain a precept.

Item. Fuisse ceremoniarum partem Sabbatum, apparet ex eo, quod appellatur
signum faederis veteris inter Deum and Iudaeos icti, Exodus 31. 17. and cum
Sanctuario conjungitur, Levit. 19. 30. item and Paulus inter ceremonias
enumerat, Col. 2. 16. Heb. 4. 9. Dupliciter Sabbatum fuit ceremoniale, quatenus
fuit 1. cessatio severa ab omni opere servili and corporali. 2. Septima dies
nominatim and diserte a Deo praescripta erat, non autem tertia, quarta, quinta,
aut sexta. It is manifest that the Sabbath was a part of the ceremonies,
because it is called a sign of the old Covenant betwixt God and the Jews,
Exodus 31. 17. and it is joined with the Sanctuary, Levit. 19. 30. Also S. Paul
reckons it amongst the ceremonies, Col. 2. 16. Heb. 4. 9. The Sabbath in a
double respect was ceremonial; first, in that it was an absolute and precise
cessation from all servile or bodily work. Secondly, in that a seventh day was
expressly by God commanded, not a third, fourth, fifth, or sixth.

Item. Sabbatum significat ab omni opere vitioso, and ab omni peccato
abstinendum esse. Erat Sacramentum Iudaeis vitae quietisque aeternae, in quo
non modo ab omnibus peccatis liberatio contingit, sed etiam cessatio ab omnibus
operibus, etc. The Sabbath did signify that we must abstain from all wicked
works, and from sin. It was a Sacrament to the Jews of life and rest
eternal, in which we shall not only be freed from all our sins, but also we
shall rest from our labors, etc.

PASSAGES
Concerning the Lord's Day (commonly called Sunday) its institution, and how
far it obliges us.
ANcient Writers when they speak of the Lord's Day, put this for the ground and
reason of the observation of it, that Christ did rise again on that day; But
they say not, that Christ ordained it.

Ignatius in epist. ad Magnes. (...). All that love Christ, let them keep the
Lord's Day, as a festival day; which was the day of his Resurrection.

Justin. Martyr. Apolog. 2. versus finem. (...). On Sunday we have our public
meetings, because it was the first day, that was, in which God having changed
the darkness, and Chaos, or confused Mass (in Heb. 20. (...)) made the world,
and because Jesus Christ our Savior on the same day rose again from the dead.

Augustine. tom. 2. ep. 119. quae est ad Ianuarium cap. 13. Dies Dominicus non
Iudaeis, sed Christianis Resurrectione Domini declaratus est, and ex illo
habere caepit festivitatem suam. The Lord's Day was declared so to be, not to
the Jews, but to Christians by the Resurrection of the Lord, and with
reference to him (or since that time) it began to be a holy day.

Idem l. 22. de civ. Dei. c. 30. Dominicus dies Christi resurrectione est
sacratus, aeternam non solum spiritus, verumetiam corporis requiem
praefigurans. The Lord's Day became sacred by the Resurrection of Christ, and
prefigureth the eternal rest, not only of the spirit, but also of the body.

Idem. Tom. 10. Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost. Domini Resuscitatio consecravit nobis
Dominicum diem. Qui vocatur Dominicus dies, ipse videtur proprie ad Dominum
pertinere: quia eo die Dominus resurrexit. The Resurrection of the Lord has
consecrated to us the Lord's Day. That which is called the Lord's Day, seems to
belong to the Lord properly: because the Lord that day rose again.

Idem Sermon. 251. de tempore; (which notwithstanding; and the most of the
Sermons De tempore, are suspected not to be his) Dominicum diem Apostoli and
Apostolici viri ideo religiosa solemnitate habendum sanxerunt, quia in eadem
Redemptor noster a mortuis resurrexit. The Apostles and Apostolical men have
therefore appointed the Lord's Day to be kept with a religious solemnity,
because on it our Redeemer rose again from the dead.

S. Augustine. in expos. in Joan. Tract. 120. Una Sabbati est, quem jam diem
Dominicam propter Domini Resurrectionem mos Christianus appellat. The first day
of the week is that which Christians usually call the Lord's Day, from the
Resurrection of our Lord.

Calvin. Institut. l. 2. c. 8. sect. 33. Dies Dominici citra Iudaismum a nobis
observantur: quia longo intervallo differimus in hac part a Iudaeis. Non enim
ut ceremoniam arctissima religione celebramus, qua putemus mysterium spirituale
figurari: sed suscipimus ut remedium retinendo in ecclesia ordini necessarium.
We observe the Lords days without Iudaizing, because in this particular we
much differ from the Jews: for we do not celebrate it as a ceremony with a
precise observation, by which we think a spiritual mystery is typified; but
we use it as a remedy necessary to keep good order in the Church.

Item. Quod ad evertendam superstitionem expediebat, sublatus est Iudaeis
religiosus dies: quod decoro, ordini, paci in Ecclesia retinendis necessarium
erat, alter in eum usum destinatus est. Quanquam non sine delectu Dominicum
quem vocamus diem veteres in locum Sabbathi subrogarunt, etc. The day which the
Jews religiously observed, was abrogated, which was expedient to take away
superstition: Another was substituted in its place, which was necessary to
retain decency, good order, and peace in the Church. Nor was it hand over
head that the Primitive Church made choice of that which we call the Lord's Day
in stead of the Sabbath, etc.

Item Com. in ep. ad Gal. 4. 10. Quando discernitur dies a die religionis
causa, quando feriae pars divini cultus esse censentur: tum dies perpera^
observantur. Nos hodie cum habemus dierum discrimen, non induimus necessitatis
laqueu^ conscientiis, non discernimus dies, quasi alius alio sit sanctior, non
constituimus illic religione^ and cultu^ Dei, sed tantum ordini and concordiae
consulimus. Ita libera est apud nos and omni superstione pura observatio. When
a distinction is made betwixt days out of devotion, when a feast or holy day
is esteemed a part of Gods worship, those days are observed amiss. We in
having now a distinction betwixt days, do not put a snare of necessity upon
men's consciences, we make not such a distinction, as if one day were holier
than another, nor in this do we place religion, or Gods worship: but in so
doing provide for the good order and peace of the Church. And so such
observation of days amongst us is free and pure from all superstition.

Bullinger. Decad. 2. Sermon. 4. Vetus Ecclesia diem mutavit Sabbati, ne
videretur Iudaizare, and ceremoniis affixa haerere: and caetus otiaque
celebravit prima Sabbati, quam Ioannes appellat Dominicam haud dubie propter
gloriosam Domini resurrectionem. Et quamvis nullibi legatur praecepta in
Apostolicis literis Dominica dies, quia tamen quarto hoc praecepto primae
tabulae praecipitur cura religionis and exercitium externi cultus diligenter,
alienum a pietate and charitate Christiana foret, Dominicam nolle sanctificare:
praesertim cum sine tempore stato and citra otium sanctum cultus ille externus
constare non possit. Idem sentiendum arbitror de pauculis quibusdam Christi
Domini feriis, aut fostis, quibus peragimus memoriam Nativitatis,
Incarnationis, Circumcisionis, Passionis, Resurrectionis, Ascensionis in
Coelum, and missionis S. spiritus in Discipulos Domini nostri Jesus Christi. The
ancient Church changed the Sabbath day, lest it should seem to Iudaize, and be
addicted to Jewish ceremonies: and kept its assemblies, and rested on the first
day of the week, which S. John calls the Lord's Day, without doubt because of
the glorious Resurrection of the Lord. And although it is no where read in the
writings of the Apostles, that the Lord's Day was commanded to be kept holy,
notwithstanding because in this fourth Commandment of the first table is
enjoined the care of religion, and a diligent plying of Gods external worship;
It were a thing much contrary to piety and Christian charity, not to sanctify
the Lord's Day: especially seeing that external worship cannot be performed
without a set time, and without a holy rest.

Bullinger. in Apocalypsin cap. 1. v. 10. Hanc diem ut sacram loco Sabbathi in
memoriam resurgentis Domini delegerunt sibi Ecclesiae, in qua sacros and
celebres coetus agerent. Ibid. Sponte vero Ecclesiae receperunt illam diem: Non
legimus eam ullibi praeceptam. Ac Ecclesiae viderunt omnino necessarium esse
certum tempus, in quo conveniant sancti: delegerunt ergo diem Resurrectionis:
neque de his odiosius contenderunt inter se, ut postea factum in Ecclesia
testantur historiae. The Churches of free choice received and set apart this
day, in stead of the Sabbath, in remembrance of the Lords Resurrection, that in
it they might have their holy and solemn meetings. For we read not that it
is commanded any where: but the Churches saw that it was necessary that a
certain time should be stinted for the holy meetings of the Saints of God: and
therefore they chose the day of the Resurrection. Neither did they strive
eagerly about this, as Histories bear witness that they did afterward.

Musculus in locis Commun. in Mandatum quartum. Christiani relicto Iudaico
Sabbato sacrum otium eo die servant, quo Servator non solos Israelitas, sed
universum genus mortalium non de domo Aegyptiacae servitutis, sed de potestate
and regno Satanae liberatos eduxit. The Christians forsaking the Jewish
Sabbath, keep their holy rest on that day on which our Savior did bring
forth, not the Israelites only, but all mankind; not out of the house of
Egyptian servitude, but from the power and kingdom of Satan.

P. Martyr in his common places, which were collected out of the rest of his
works, cap. 7. Quod is dies magis quam ille eligatur ad Dei externum cultum,
liberum fuit Ecclesiae per Christum, ut id consuleret, quod magis ex re
judicaret. Nec illa pessime judicavit, si memoriam instaurationis perfectae, id
est, Resurrectionis Christi, in observatione diei Dominici praetulit huic
absolutioni mundanae fabricae. The Church had liberty by Christ, to make choice
of one day, rather than of another, for Gods external worship, to do therein
what she thought fittest. Nor was her choice ill in preferring, by observing
the Lord's Day, the remembrance of our perfect redemption, that is, of Christ's
resurrection, before the remembrance of the finishing of the world.

Item. Quod unus dies certus in hebdomada cultui divino mancipetur, stabile and
firmum est: an vero hic vel alius constituatur, temporarium est ac mutabile.
That one day of the week be consecrated to Gods worship, is an ordinance of
perpetual force: but whether this or that be appointed, is temporary and may
be changed.

Item. Quando facta sit haec mutatio, in sacris literis expressum non habemus.
In Apocalypsi tamen Ioannis Dominici diei expressam mentionem habemus, and
verisimile est, aliquamdiu primos Christianos morem Iudaicum retinuisse: ut in
die Sabbati convenirent: postea vero, ut videmus, res mutata est. It is not
expressed in holy Writ when this change (of the Sabbath into the Lord's Day)
was. Notwithstanding, in S. John's Revelation there is express mention of the
Lord's Day, and it is likely that for a while the first Christians retained the
Jewish custom in meeting together on the Sabbath day: but afterward (as we
see) the day was changed.

Ursinus Tract. Theol. in quartum praeceptum. Cum non minus alio die meditatio
ac celebratio operum Dei possit fieri, quam septimo. Sicut initio propter
causam accommodatam primis temporibus, defignavit Deus ministerio diem
septimum, sic deinde propter causam accommodatam Messiae temporibus, legem eam
abrogavit, and liberum Ecclesiae reliquit alios dies eligere, quae propter
causam probabilem delegit diem primum quo facta est Christi resuscitatio.
Seeing one can meditate on, and celebrate the works of God, as well on another
day, as on the seventh. As in the beginning, for a reason proper to the first
times, God appointed for his public worship a seventh day; so afterward, for
a reason proper to the times of Christ's exhibition, he abrogated that Law, and
left it to the power of the Church to choose other days, which for a probable
reason made choice of the first day, on which Christ rose again.

Item. Differt observatio Dominici diei a Sabbatho Iudaico, primo, quod
Sabbatum septimi diei, tanquam partem cultus divini oeremonialem, non licebat
Iudaeis omittere, aut mutare propter expressum Dei mandatum: Ecclesia vero
Christiana, sive primum, sive alium diem tribuit ministerio, salva sua
liberate etiam aliter agendi, si sint probabiles causae, hoc est, sine ulla
opinione necessitatis aut cultus. Secundo, Sabbatum vetus erat typus, five
umbra rerum in Novo Testamento per Christum implendarum: In Novo autem
Testamento illa significatio cessavit, and ordinis at que decori tantum ratio
habetur, sine quo ministerium Ecclesiae aut nullum aut saltem non been
constitutum esse potest. The observation of the Lords day differs from the
Jewish Sabbath; First, because it was not lawful for the Jews to omit the
Sabbath, or rest of the seventh day, as being a ceremonial part of divine
worship, nor to change it, because of Gods express command for the keeping of
it. But the Christian Church appoints for divine service a day, whether the
first or another, reserving still to her self the liberty to do otherwise, if
by good reasons she be induced thereunto; that is to say, she allotteth such a
day to the service of God, without any opinion of necessity or worship.
Secondly, the old Sabbath was a type or shadow of things which under the New
Testament were to be fulfilled by Christ: But under the New Testament that type
ceased, and only regard is had of good order and decency, without which,
divine service either cannot subsist at all, or not well.

And in his Exposition of the second Commandment, speaking of Ecclesiastical
laws, which determine the circumstances necessary or profitable for the
observation of the moral precepts of the first Table, and which are no part of
Gods service, and do not oblige the conscience, but in case of scandal,
amongst the rest (says he) Dies Dominicus ab Ecclesia est substitutus Sabbato
in usum ministerii, etc. The Lord's Day was substituted in lieu of the Sabbath
for Gods service, etc.

Idem in Explicatione Catechet. in praecept. 4. Sabbatum ceremoniale est
duplex, aliud Ueteris, aliud Novi Testamenti. Vetus erat astrictum ad diem
septimum, and ejus observatio erat necessaria, and cultus Dei. Novum pendet ex
arbitrio Ecclesiae, quae elegit diem primum propter certas causas, and is est
observandus ordinis causa: sed fine opinione necessitatis, quasi ab Ecclesia
oporteat eum observari, and non alium. The ceremonial Sabbath is twofold, one
of the New, another of the Old Testament: That was restrained to the seventh
day, and the observation of it was necessary, and a part of Gods worship. This
depends from the will of the Church, which made choice of the first day for
certain causes, and it is to be observed for good orders sake: but without any
opinion of necessity, as if it behooved the Church to observe it, and no other.

Item. Oportet non minus nunc in Christiana, quam olim in Iudaica Ecclesia esse
aliquem certum diem quo verbum Dei doceatur, and Sacramenta public
administrentur. Interim non sumus alligati, ut diem septimanae 3, 4, 5. vel
quemcunque alium habeamus. Apostolicaigitur Ecclesia, ut se a Iudaica Synagoga
discerneret, pro liberate sibi a Christo donata pro septimo die elegit primam
propter probabilem causam, quia eo die facta est Christi Resurrectio. It
behooveth as well now in the Christian Church, as before in the Jewish, that
there be some certain day, on which the word of God may be taught, and the
Sacraments publicly administered. But we are not tied to have Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, or any other for this set day. The Apostolical Church
therefore, to make a distinction betwixt her self and the Jewish Synagogue,
according to the liberty given her by Christ, in stead of the seventh day chose
the first for a probable reason, because on that day Christ rose again.

Uiet on the fourth command toward the end. The Primitive Christians did not
change the day, only with regard to a difference to be made betwixt Jews and
Christians, for thus the matter were not much mended, to have changed only the
day, and have retained the superstition, which the Jews fasten to it: But they
had regard to the Resurrection of our Lord, which is the true accomplishment of
the spiritual rest, which we hope for, etc.

Bucer. in Matthew. cap. 12. v. 1. loc. de feriis. Hinc factum, non dubito, ut
communis Christianorum consensu Dominicus dies conventibus Ecclesiae publicis,
ac requiei publicae dicat us sit ipso statim Apostolorum tempore. I doubt not,
but that by the common consent of Christians, the Lord's Day has been
appointed for the public meetings of the Church, and for public rest, even in
the Apostles days.

Zanchius in praecep. 4. in Tractatu de feriis. Praeceptum de die Dominico
sanctificando ab Apostolis expressum non habemus: Apostolicam tamen traditionem
esse minime dubitamus. We have no express command from the Apostles to
sanctify the Lord's Day: notwithstanding, we doubt not but that it is an
Apostolical tradition. And having alleged some proofs out of Scripture to
that purpose, he adds, Exsacris literis colligitur non inepte ab Apostolis
profectum esse, ut omisso Sabbato, dies Dominicus fuerit in illius locum
substitutus. It is not impertinently gathered from holy writ that the
substitution of the Lord's Day in place of the Sabbath proceeded from the
Apostles. Acknowledging, as appears by his words [not impertinently] that
those proofs were but weak. But afterward in express terms he avoucheth,
that the said day is appointed for Gods service without putting any tie upon
the conscience. Hoc (inquit) liquet ex sacris literis. Nullibi enim legimus,
Apostolos hoc cuipiam mandasse: tantum legimus, quid soliti fuerunt facere
Apostoli and fideles in illo die. Liberum igitur reliquerunt. Accedit, quod
Apostolus ad Gal. c. 4. and ad Col. 2. non vult servari a fidelibus praecepta
Dei de Sabbatis, aliisque festis Mosaicis: quia nolebat fidelium conscientias
illis praeceptis astringi: quanto minus igitur voluerunt Apostoli obstringi
conscientias sanctificando diei Dominico, qui nullum habebat Domini mandatum.
Liberum est igitur illud etiam tempus, hoc est, nullius obligans conscientiam:
sed ita tamen liberum, ut omnino iste dies sanctificandus sit, nisi charit as
aliud postulet. This (says he) is manifest from Scripture. For we read no
where that the Apostles gave this command to any man: we read only, what the
Apostles and the faithful were wont to do on that day. They therefore left it
free. Moreover, the Apostle Gal. 4. and Col. 2. will not have the faithful to
observe Gods precepts concerning Sabbaths, and other Mosaicall Holy days:
because he would not have the consciences of the faithful obliged to those
precepts: how much less would the Apostles have their consciences obliged to
keep holy the Lord's Day or Sunday, for which we have no command from God.
Therefore that time also is free, that is to say, tieth no man's conscience. But
notwithstanding it is so free, that altogether it behooveth us to sanctify
this day, if charity does not require the contrary.

Item. Quis prohibuit, quin Ecclesia, ficut diem septimum transtult in diem
Dominicum: sic etiam illos reliquos dies festos in alios transfer potuerit?
What hinders, but that the Church as it removed the seventh day to the
Lord's Day, may also change the rest of the feasts of the Jews into other days?

Item. At the very end of the explication of the fourth command. In locum
Sabbati subrogatus est dies Dominicus, quia eo die evanuit Sabbatum quatenus
figura erat, quo Christus resurrexit: ut ergo racondemur evanuisse per
Resurrectionem Christi, Ecclesia non retinuit Sabbatum, sed diem Dominicum. The
Lord's Day was substituted in place of the Sabbath, because on that day on which
Christ rose again, the Sabbath was abolished so far as it was a figure. That
therefore we may remember that it was abolished by the Resurrection of Christ,
the Church has retained not the Sabbath, but the Lords day.

Bourgoin Minister of Geneva in his Histor. Eccles. written in French, lib. 2.
of feasts. It is not written, when it was, that the Christians difunited
themselves from the Jews, and began to keep holy the Lord's Day.

Item. After the Apostles some did celebrate the Sabbath, others the Lord's Day.
And lib. 4. Of public assemblies. There is no great certainety at what times
it was that Christians had their public assemblies, and yet less, in what
places.

Item. The Christians serving of God was tied neither to certain times nor
places, but rather by that which Justin Martyr has said of the Lord's Day, it
is likely, that necessity or custom assigned them to the time, and that
conveniencie designed the place.

Danaeus in Ethic. Christian. in praecep. 4. Libertatem suam in die octava
eligenda ostendunt Christiani, and se a Iudaicis ceremoniis Christi beneficio
liberatos. Porro neque praecise octava dies ab omnibus Ecclesiis pro solenni
(...) facienda observata est, sed ab aliis Ecclesiis tertia dies, id est,
Martis: ab aliis quarta, id est, Mercurii, vel alia ut tradit Socrates
Scholasticus in lib. 5. c. 22. Dies autem Dominica, quae and Solis dicitur,
postea communi omnium Ecclesiarum consensu sub Imperatoribus Christianis
statuta est, quia videbatur haec etiam Apostolorum temporibus probata. The
Christians in making choice of the eighth day, do show the liberty they have,
and that by Christ they are freed from the ceremonies of the Jews. But neither
was the eighth precisely observed by all Churches for the keeping of their
solemn assemblies, but by some Churches the third day, that is, Tuesday: by
others the fourth: that is, Wednesday, or some others, as Socrates reports,
Hist. l. 5. c. 22. But the Lord's Day, which is also called Sunday, by the
unanimous consent of all Churches under the reigns of Christian Emperors we
pitch upon, and the rather because it seemed to have been approved of, even in
the Apostles times.

PASSAGES
Concerning the Observation of the Sabbath in regard of a resting from the
works of our ordinary vocations.
S. Augustine. tom. 6. Contra faustum Manichaeum l. 6. c. 4. Cessationem
Sabbatorum jam quidem supervacuam ducimus ad observandum, ex quo spes revelata
est nostrae quietis aeternae. Now we think the observation of Sabbaths to be
superfluous, since the hope of our eternal rest was revealed.

Contra Adimantum c. 16. Sabbati quietem non observamus in tempore, sed signum
temporale intelligimus, and ad aeternam quietem quae illo signo significatur,
aciem mentis intendimus. The Sabbaths rest we observe not in time, but we
understand that it was a temporary sign, and we fasten our eyes upon that
eternal rest, which is represented by that sign.

And Tom. 2. epist. 119. ad Ianuar. c. 12. Observare diem Sabbati non ad
literam jubemur, secundum ocium ab opere corporali, sicut observant Iudaei. We
are not commanded to observe the Sabbath day according to the letter, by a rest
from bodily work, as the Jews observe it.

Calvin. in ep. ad Colos. c. 2. v. 16. Atqui, dicet quispiam, nos adhuc
retinemus aliquam dierum observationem. Respondeo, nos dies nequaquam servare,
quasi in feriis aliqua sit religio, aut quasi fas non sit tunc laborare: sed
respectum haberi politiae and ordinis, non dierum. But some will say, we till
this day retain some observation of days. I answer, we do not observe days
as if there were any holiness in them, or as if it were not lawful then to
work, but we have regard to the good government and order of the Church, not
to days.

Uiret on the fourth command toward the end. If I had that authority which
Magistrates have, I would take this course; If I could not keep men in better
order, either they should labor in the service of God, or in some other work
which is not hurtful, or altogether unprofitable. It were much better that
those who spend their means in gaming and hunting Tavernes, did labor
according to the Commandments. Notwithstanding, I think it better to give
order that that whole day be employed, as much as shall possible, in Gods
service, and in works of mercy: for if it were permitted to work on this day,
as on other, it were to be feared that by little and little they would come to
make no difference betwixt this and working days, etc. From whence it is
manifest, that he did not think that a labor honest and lawful in it self,
was unlawful on the Lord's Day; but only that it was expedient that the
Magistrate suffer not men to labor on this, as on other days, to prevent
inconveniences.

Zanchius in praecep. 4. quaest. 3. de festis, blames the Papists in that,
Gravius accusatur and punitur in papatu, si quis in die Paschatis aut
Nativitatis Domini. vel dio Dominico agrum coluerit, etiamsi eo id fecerit
tempore, quo non occupantur in Templo, quam si quis eodem die perpotet,
inebrietur, chore as ducat, etc. Amongst them he is more sharply accused and
punished, who on Easter, Christmas, or the Lord's Day labors his ground,
although he do it not in time of Divine service, than he who tippleth, is
drunk, and danceth on those days. By which words he implies clearly enough,
that he did not disprove an honest labor on Sunday, so it be not done in time
of Divine service.

Item. Opera servilia per se non prohibentur in die festo, sed eatenus tantum
prohibentur, quatenus in cultu divino, una cum reliquis fratribus exercere to
possis and occupari impediunt. Servile works are prohibited on a Holy day, not
because they are evil in themselves, but because they hinder us from joining
with our brethren in Gods worship. And a little after he quoteth and approves
of that, which Constantine wrote to Helvid us, that He should suffer the
Contrymen, if necessity did so require, to labor their grounds on the
Lord's Day, to sow, and to do other things necessary. And adds moreover,
Quanto magis licet haec opera servilia praestare, si ita possis illis vatare,
ut interim tamen ab exercitio divini cultus minime per illa voceris? How much
more lawful is it to do these servile works, if so they may be done, that
they be no disturbance to thee, nor avocation from the exercise of Gods worship?

Danaeus in praecept. 4. Nobis Christianis non tanta tamve severa and rigida
cessatio imposita est: Non and ex lege Constantini licet and serere and metere
die Dominico, si commodum sit? Et ita videmus quae sit libert as Christiana.
Upon us Christians is imposed, not so great nor such an exact, and rigid
cessation and rest, as was upon the Jews: for even by Constantin's law it is
lawful both to sow and to reap on the Lord's Day, if there be cause for it.
And so we see what is our Christian liberty.

Item. Libere hodie and solum quantum ad communem Ecclesiae aedificationem
pertinet, ab operibus nostris cessamus, ut Dei cultui inserviamus, and ut
neminem offendamus. On this day we rest from our works freely and so far
only, as the common edification of the Church requires, that on it we may
give our selves to the worship of God, and give no scandal to any.

Item. Omnino operari die Dominica nos Christiani non vetamur, modo a Dei (...)
propterea non avocemur, neque a publicis concionibus and precibus, neque a
meditatione verbi Dei: modo item proximis offendiculum non praebeamus. We
Christians are not forbid to work at all on the Lord's Day, so that it be no
distraction unto us from Gods worship, from public meetings, and prayers, nor
from meditating on the word of God: and that we scandalize not our neighbor.

Many other passages to the same purpose might be alleged out of our own
Writers, but these which I have transcribed out of the Books, which I had by
me, shall suffice, to confirm the most part of that which I have avouched, and
to show that the learned men that have flourished in our Churches, were not
of the opinion of them, who at this day so obstinately adheere to the religion
of the Sabbath, that indeed they fall into a direct superstition.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. lin. 8. which moral, read which positive. p. 4. l. 2, 3. r. but this
is whereof. l. 25. hands and sorts, r. kind of laws. p. 13. l. 9. r. to be
as. l. 16. r. hundred. p. 29. l. 24. dew. r. due. p. 36. l. 14. owe. r. own.
p. 47. l. 19. 20. r. at least. l. 32. wecke. r. weak. p. 55. l. 23. figue. r.
sign p. 68. l. 34. r. established. p. 76. l. 4. r. which was done but many. p.
81. l. 10. r. or if rehearsing that. p. 85. l. 12. (...). r. (...). p. 87. l.
16. r. practiced. l. 24. mediation. r. meditation. p. 109. l. 19. r.
understood. p. 142. l. 6. far better. r. far greater. p. 149. l. 11. r. the
Jews did, are bound to serve God, which, etc. p. 158. l. 2, 3. emplary. r.
exemplary. p. 176. l. 9. productions. r. predictions. l. 16. r. in comparison
of moral. p. 185. l. 20. bonged not. r. did not stir. p. 188. l. 35.
Saturday. r. Sunday. p. 196. l. 7. Plineas. r. Plinius. p. 200. l. 32. r. that
if it had been. p. 201. h 5. r. there be diverse. p. 205. l. 2. r. (...). p.
217. l. 25. (...). p. 224. l. 36. (...). r. (...). p. 232. l, 35. dele and. p.
235. l. 13. loveable. r. lovely. p. 246. l. 29. baptism. r. baptize. p. 262.
l. 5. r. so much the rather because God. p. 263. l. 27, 28. r. a little way
from it. p. 266. l. 12. riged. r. rigid. p. 274. in mar. (...). p. 279. l. 2.
r. unspotted from such. p. 280. l. 11. r. do them which they had. p. 282. l.
16. r, slackens. l. 26. r. shall thus profane. p. 291. l. 7, 8. r. work and
do. p, 302. l. 2, 3. improveth. r. disalloweth. p. 306. l. 16. contious. r.
contentious. p. 316. l. 38. aliis. r. alios. p. 317. l. 24. r. thus, holiness
of the day, if so be the same. p. 319. l. 4. r. Gal. 2. l. 38. sive. r. sine.


