THE HISTORY OF SAMSON:

Written By FRA: QVARLES.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN MARRIOTT, in S. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleetstreet. 1631.

(...) for the time, but quickly leaves us to our former darkness: The
overtaken Lantern is the true Friend; which, though it promise but a faint
light, yet it goes along with us, as far as it can, toward our Journies end:
The offered Link is the mercenary Friend; which, though it be ready enough to
do us service, yet that service has a servile relation to our bounty. Sir;
in the middle rank I find you, hating the first, and scorning the last; to
whom, in the height of my undissembled assection, and unfeigned thankfulness, I
commend my self, and this book, to receive an equal censure, from your
uncorrupted judgment: In the Bud, it was yours; it blossomd, yours; and now,
your favor able acceptance confirms the fruit yours: All I crave, is, that
you would be pleased to interpret these my intentions to proceed from an ardent
desire, that has long been in labor to express the true affections of him

That holds it an honor

to honor you

FRA: QVARLES.

TO THE READER.
THE tyranny of my Affairs was never yet so imperious, but I could steal some
hours to my private Meditations; the fruits of which stolen time I here
present thee with, in the History of Samson: Wherein, if thy extreme severity
check at any thing, which thou conceivest may not stand with the majesty of
this sacred Subject; know, that my intention was not to offend my brother: The
wisest of Kings, inspired by the King of Wisdom, thought it no detraction
from the gravity of his Holy Proverbs, to describe a Harlot like a Harlot, Her
whorish Attire; her immodest Gesture, her bold Countenance; her flattring
Tongue; her lascivious Embraces; her unchaste Kisses; her impudent Invitations:
If my descriptions in the like kind, offend; I make no question but the
validity of my Warrant will give a reasonable satisfaction: He that lifts not
his feet high enough, may easily stumble: But on the contrary, If any be, whose
worse then Sacrilegious minds shall profane our harmless intentions with
wanton conceits, to such I heartily wish, a Procul ite; Let none such look
farther then this Epistle, at their own perils: If they do, let them put off
their shoes, for this is holy Ground: Foul hands will muddle the clearest
waters: and base minds will corrupt the purest Text: If any offense be taken,
it is by way of stealth, for there is none willingly given: I write to Bees,
and not to Spiders: They will suck pleasing honey from such flowers: These may
burst with their own poison: But you, whose well-seasond hearts are not
distempered with either of these extremities, but have the better relish of a
Sacred understanding; draw near, and read.

I Sing the illustrious, and renowned story
Of mighty Samson; The eternal glory
Of his Heroicke acts: His life, His death:
Quicken my Muse with thy diviner breath,
Great God of Muses, that my prosperous rimes
May live and last to everlasting times;
That they unborne may, in this sacred story,
Admire thy goodness, and advance thy glory.
THE HISTORY OF SAMSON.
SECT. 1.
ARGUMENT.
A holy Angel does salute
The wife of Manoah, and enlarge
Her barren womb with promised fruit
Of both their loins. The Angels charge.
WIthin the Tents of Zorah dwelt a man
Of Jacobs seed, and of the Tribe of Dan;
Known by the name of Manoah; to whom
Heaven had denied the treasure of the womb;
His Wife was barren; And her prayres could not
Remove that great reproach, or cleanse that blot
Which on her fruitless name appeared so foul,
Not to increase the Tribe of Dan one soul:
Long had she, doubtless, stroven with heaven, by prayres
Made strong with tears and sighs; Hopes and despaires
No doubt had often tortured her desire
Upon a Rock, composed of frost and fire:
But Heaven was pleased to turn His deafned ears
Against those prayres made strong with sighs and tears:
She often praid; but prayres could not obtain:
Alas; she prayed, she wept, she sighed in vain:
She prayed, no doubt; but prayres could find no room;
They proov'd, alas, as barren as her womb.
Upon a time (when her unanswered prayre
Had now given just occasion of despair,
(Even when her bedrid faith was grown so frail,
That very Hope grew heartlesse to prevail)
Appear'dan Angel to her; In his face,
Terror and sweetness labored for the place:
Sometimes, his Sun-bright eyes would shine so fierce,
As if their pointed beams would even pierce
Her soul, and strike th'amaz'd beholder dead:
Sometimes, their glory would dispeirce, and spread
More easy flames; and, like the Star, that stood
Over Bethlem, promise and portend some good:
Mixed was his bright aspect; as if his breath
Had equal errands both of life and death:
Glory and Mildness seemed to contend
In his fair eyes, so long, till in the end,
In glorious mildness, and in milder glory,
He thus salutes her with this pleasing story.
Woman; Heaven greets thee well: Rise up, and fear not;
Forbear thy faithless tremblings; I appear not
Clad in the vestments of consuming fire;
Cheer up, I have no warrant to enquire
Into thy sins; I have no Vyals here,
Nor dreadful Thunderbolts to make thee fear:
I have no plagues t'inflict; nor is my breath
Charged with destruction; or my hand, with death.
No, no; cheer up; I come not to destroy;
I come to bring thee tidings of great joy:
Rowze up thy dull belief; for I appear,
To exercise thy Faith, and not thy Fear:
The Guide, and great Creator of all things,
Chief Lord of Lords, and supreme King of Kings,
To whom an Host of men are but a swarm
Of murmring Gnats; whose high prevayling arm
Can crush ten thousand worlds, and at one blow
Can strike the earth to nothing, and ore-throw
The Losts of Heaven; he that has the keys
Of wombes; to shut, and open them, when he please;
He that can all things, that he will, this day,
Is pleased to take thy long reproach away:
Behold; thy wombe's enlarged; and thy desires
Shall find success: Before long time expires,
Thou shall conceive: Eretwise five months be run,
Be thou the joyful mother of a son;
But see, thy wary palate do forbear
The juice of the bewitching Grape; Beware,
Lest thy desires tempt thy lips to wine,
Which must be faithful strangers to the Vine.
Strong drink thou must not taste, and all such meat
The Law proclaims unclean, refrain to eat:
And when the fruit of thy restored womb
Shall see the light, take heed no Rasor come
Upon his fruitful head; For from his birth,
Soon as the womb entrusts him on the earth,
The child shall be a Nazarite, to God;
By whose appointment, he shall prove a Rod,
To scourge the proud Philistians; and recall
Poor suffering Israel from their slavish thrall.
MEDITAT. 1.
HOw impudent is Nature, to account
Those acts her own, that do so far surmount
Her easy reach! How purblind are those eyes
Of stupid mortals, that have power to rise
No higher then her laws, who takes upon her
The work, and robbes the Author of his honor!
See thou the fruitful Womb? How every year
It moves thy Cradle; to thy slender cheer,
Invites another Ghest, and makes thee Father
To a new Son, who now, perchance, had rather
Bring up the old, esteeming propagation
A thanklesse work of Supererogation:
Perchance, the formal Midwife seems to thee
Less welcome now; then she was wont to be:
Thou standst amazed, to hear such needless Joy,
And car'st as little for it, as the Boy
That Is newly borne into the world; nay worse,
Perchance, thou grumblest, counting it a curse
Unto thy faint estate, which is not able
TO increase the bounty of thy slender Table:
Poor miserable man what ere thou be,
I suffer for thy crooked thoughts; not thee:
Thou take thy children to be gifts of nature;
Their wit, their flowring beauty, comely stature,
Their perfect health; their dainty disposition,
Their virtues, and their easy acquisition
Of curious Arts, their strength's attained perfection
You attribute to that benign complexion,
Wherewith your Goddess, Nature has endowed
Their well-disposed Organs; and are proud;
And here your Goddess leaves you, to deplore
That such admired perfections should be poor:
Advance thine eyes, no less then wilful blind,
And, with thine eyes, advance thy drooping mind:
Correct thy thoughts; Let not thy wondering eye
Adore the servant, when the Master's by:
Look on the God Nature: From him come
These underprized blessings of the womb:
He makes thee rich, in children; when his store
Crowns thee with wealth, why make thou thy self poor?
He opes thee womb: why then should thou repine?
They are his children, mortal, and not thine:
We are but Keepers; And the more he lends
To our tuition, he the more commends
Our faithful trust: It is not every one
Deserves that honor, to command his Son:
She counts it as a fortune, that is allowed
To nurse a Prince: (What nurse would not be proud
Of such a Fortune?) And shall we repine,
Great God, to foster any Babe of thine;
But it is the Charge we fear: Our stock's but small;
If heaven, with Children, send us wherewith all
To stop their craving stomachs, then we care not:
Great God!
How have thou cracked thy credit, that we dare not
Trust thee for bread? How is it, we dare not venture
To keep thy Babes, unless thou please to enter
In bond, for payment? Art thou grown so poor,
To leave thy famisht Infants at our door,
And not allow them food? Can thou supply
The empty Ravens, and let thy children dye?
Send me that stint, thy wisdom shall think fit,
Thy pleasure is my will; and I submit:
Make me deserve that honor thou have lent
To my frail trust, and I will rest content.
SECT. 2.
ARGUMENT.
The Wife of Manoah attended with fearful Hope, and hopeful Fear,
The joyful tidings recommended to her amazed Husbands ear.
THus, when the great Ambassador of heaven
Had done that sacred service, which was given
And trusted to his faithful charge, he spread
His ayre-dividing pineons, and fled:
But now, the affrighted woman apprehends
The strangeness of the Message; recommends
Both it, and him, that did it, to her fears;
The news was welcome to her grateful ears,
But what the newesman was, did so increase
Her doubts, that her strange hopes could find no peace;
For when her hopes would build a Tower of joy,
O, then her fears would shake it, and destroy
The maine foundation; what her hopes, in vain,
Did raise, her fears would ruinate again:
One while, she thought; It was an Angel sent;
And then, her fears would teach her to repent
That frightfull thought: But when she deeply waigh'd
The joyful message, then her thoughts obay'd
Her first conceit; Distracted, with confusion,
Sometimes she feared it was a false delusion,
Suggested in her too believing ears;
Sometimes she doubts, it was a Dream, that bear
No weight but in a slumber; till at last,
Her feet, advised by her thoughts, made have
Unto her husband; in whose ears she brake
This mind-perplexing secret thus, and spoke;
Sir.
As my discur sive thoughts did lately muse
On those great blessings, wherewith heaven does use
To crown his children, here; among the rest,
Me thoughts no one could make a wife more blessed,
And crown her youth, her age with greater measure
Of true content, then the unprized treasure
Of her chaste womb: but as my thoughts were bent
Upon this subject, being in our Tent,
And none but I, appeared before mine eyes
A man of God: His habit, and his guise
Was such as holy Prophets use to wear,
But in his dreadful looks there did appear
Something that made me tremble; In his eye,
Mildness was next with awefull Majesty;
Strange was his language, and I could not choose
But fear the man, although I liked his news;
Woman (said he) Cheer up, and do not fear;
I have no vialls, no nor Judgments here;
My hand has no Commission, to enquire
Into thy sins; nor am I clad in fire:
I come to bring thee tidings of such things,
As have their warrant from the King of Kings;
Thou shall conceive, and when thy time is come,
Thou shall enjoy the blessings of thy womb;
Before the space of twice five months be run,
Thou shall become the parent of a Son,
Till then, take heed, thou neither drink, nor eat
Wines, or strong drink, or Law-forbidden meat,
For when this promised child, shall see the light,
Thou shall be mother to a Nazarite:
While thus he spoke, I trembled: Horrid fear
Usurped my quivering heart; Only mine ear
Was pleased to be the vessel of such news,
Which Heaven make good; and give me strength to use
My better Faith: The holy Prophets name
I was afraid to enquire, or whence he came.
MEDITAT. 2.
ANd do thou not admier? Can such things
Obtain less privilege, then a Tale, that brings
The audience wonder, entermixt with pleasure?
Is It a small thing, that Angels can find leisure
To leave their blessed seats; where, face to face,
They see their God, and quit that heavenly place,
The least conception of whose joy, and mirth,
Transcends the united pleasurs of the earth?
Must Angels leave their Thrones of glory thus,
To watch our footsteps, and attend on us?
How good a God have we! whose eyes can wincke,
For sear they should discover the base sincke
Of our loathed sins: How does he stop his ear,
Lest, when they call for Justice, he should hear?
How often, Ah, how often does He send
His willing Angels, hourly to attend
Our steps; and, with his bounty, to supply
Our helpless wants, at our false-hearted cry?
The bounteous Ocean, with a liberal hand,
Transports her laden treasure, to the land;
Inriches every Port, and makes each town
Proud with that wealth, which now she calls her own;
And what return they for so great a gain,
But sinckes and noisome Gutters, back again?
Even so (great God) thou send'st thy blessings in,
And we return thee, Dunghills of our Sin:
How are thy Angels hacknei'd up and down
To visit man? How poorly do we crown
Their blessed labors? They with Joy, dismount,
Laden with blessings, but returneth' account
Of Filth and Trash: They bring the unvalued prize
Of Grace and promised Glory, while our eyes
Disdain these heavenly Factors, and refuse
Their proferd wares; affecting, more, to choose
A Grain of pleasure then a Iemme of glory;
We find no treasure, but in Transitory
And earth-bred Toys, while things immortal stand
Like Garments, to be sold at second hand:
Great God; Thou know, we are but flesh and blood;
Alas! we can interpret nothing, good,
But what is evil; deceitful are our Joys;
We are but children, and we whine for Toys:
Of things unknown there can be no desire;
Quicken our hearts with the celestial fire
Of thy discerning Spirit, and we shall know
Both what is good, and good desire too:
Vouchsafe to let thy blessed Angel come,
And bring the tidings, that the barren womb
Of our Affections is enlarged; O when
That welcome news shall be revealed, then,
Our souls shall soon conceive, and bring thee forth
The firstlings of a new, and holy birth.
SECT. 3.
ARGUMENT.
Manoah's wonder turns to Zeal;
His zeal, to prayre: His prayres obtain
The Angel that did late reveal
The joyful news, returns again.
NOw when the amazed woman had commended
Her tongue to silence, and her tale was ended;
Perplexed Manoah, ravished at the news,
Within himself, he thus began to muse;
Strange is the message! And as strangely done!
Shall Manoah's loins be fruitful? Shall a Son
Bless his last days? Or shall an Issue come
From the chill closset of a barren womb?
Shall Manoah's wife give suck? and now, at last,
Find pleasure, when her prime of youth is past?
Shall her cold womb be now, in age, restored?
And was it a man of God, that brought the word?
Or was it some false delusion, that possessed
The weakness of a lonely woman's breast?
Or was it an Angel, sent from heaven, to show
What Heaven has will, as well as pow're, to do?
Till then thou must refrain to drink, or eat,
Wines, and strong drink, and Law-forbidden meat?
Evil Angels rather would instruct to riot,
They use not to prescribe so strickt a Diet;
No, no; I make no further question of it,
'Twas some good Angel, or some holy Prophet.
Thus, having mused a while, he bowed his face
Upon the ground; and (prostrate in the place,
Where first he heard the welcome tidings) prayed,
(His wonder now transformed to Zeal) and said:
Great God; That have engaged thy self, by vow,
When ere thy little Israel begs, to bow
Thy gracious ear; O harken to the least
Of Israel's sons, and grant me my request:
By thee, I live, and breathe: Thou did become
My gracious God, both in, and from the womb;
Thy precious favors I have still possessed,
And have depended on thee, from the Breast:
My simple Infancy has bin protected,
By thee; my Childhood taught, my youth corrected,
And sweetly chastned with thy gentle Rod;
I was no sooner; but thou were my God:
All times declare thee good; This very hour
Can testify the greatness of thy power,
And promptness of thy Mercy, which have sent
This blessed Angel to us, to augment
The Catalogue of thy favors, and restore
Thy servants womb, whose hopes had even given ore
TO expect an Issue: What thou have begun,
Prosper, and perfect, till the work be done:
Let not my Lord be angry, if I crave
A boon, too great for me to beg, or have;
Let that blessed Angel, that thou sent'st, of late,
Reblesse us with his presence, and relate,
Thy will at large, and what must then be done,
When time shall bring to light this promised son.
About that time, when the declining Lamp
Trebles each shadow; when the evening dampe
Begins to moisten, and refresh the land,
The Wife of Manoah (under whose command
The weaned Lambs did feed) being lowly seated
Upon a Shrubbe (where often she repeated
That pleasing news, the subject of her thought)
Appeared the Angel; he, that lately brought
Those blessed tidings to her: up she rose;
Her second fear had warrant to dispose
Her nimble footsteps to unwonted haste;
She runs with speed, (she cannot run too fast)
At length, she finds her husband; In her eyes,
Were Joy and Fear; whilst her lost breath denies
Her speech, her trembling hands make signs;
She puffes and pants; her breathless tongue disjoynes
Her broken words: Behold, behold (said she)
The man of God, (if man of God he be)
Appeared again: These very eyes beheld
The man of God: I left him in our field.
MEDITAT. 3.
Heaven is Gods Magazen; wherein, he has
Stored up his Vials both of love, and wrath;
Justice and Mercy, wait upon his Throne;
Favors and Thunderbolts attend upon
His sacred Will and Pleasure; Life and Death
Do both receive their influence from his breath;
Judgments attend his left; at his right hand
Blessings and ever lasting Pleasures stand:
Heaven is the Magazen; wherein, he puts
Both good and evil: Prayre is the key, that shuts
And opens this great Treasure; It Is a key,
Whose wards are Faith, and Hope, and Charity.
Would thou prevent a judgment, due to sin?
Turncbut the key, and thou may lock it in:
Or would thou have a Blessing fall upon thee?
Open the door, and it will shower on thee.
Can Heaven be false? Or can the Almighties tongue,
That is all very truth, do Truth that wrong,
Not to perform a vow? His lips have sworn,
Sworn by himself, that if a Sinner turn
To him, by prayre; his prayre shall not be lost
For want of ear; nor his desire, crossed:
How is it then, we often ask and have not?
We ask, and often miss, because we crave not
The things we should: his wisdom can foresee
Those blessings, better, that we want, than we.
Have thou not heard a peevish Infant baule
To gain possession of a knife? And shall
The Indulgent nurse be counted, wisely kind,
If she be moved to please his childish mind?
Is it not greater wisdom, to deny
The sharp-edg'd knife, and to present his eye
With a fine harmless Puppit? We require
Things, often, unfit; and our too fond desire
Fastens on goods, that are but glorious ills,
Whilst Heaven's high wisdom contradicts our wills,
With more advantage; for we often receive
Things that are far more fit, for us, to have:
Experience tells; we seek, and cannot find:
We seek and often want, because we bind
The Giver to our times; He knows we want
Patience; and, therefore he suspends his grant,
To Increase our Faith; that so we may depend
Upon his hand: He loves to hear us spend
Our childish mouths: Things easily obtained,
Are lewly prized; but what our prayres have gained
By tears, and groans, that cannot be expest,
Are far more dear, and sweeter, when possessed.
Great God! whose power has so often prevailed
Against the strength of Princes, and have quail'd
Their prouder stomachs; with thy breath, discrown'd
Their heads, and thrown their scepters to the ground,
Striking their swelling hearts with cold despair,
How art thou conquered, and overcome by Prayre!
Infuse that Spirit, Great God, into my heart,
And I will have a Blessing, ere we part.
SECT. 4.
ARGUMENT.
Manoah desires to know the fashion
And breeding of his promised son;
To whom the Angel makes relation
Of all things needful to be done.
With that, the Danite rose; being guided
By his perplexed wife, they, both divided.
Their heedlesse paces, till they had attained
The field, wherein the Man of God remained:
And, drawing nearer to his presence, stayed
His weary steps, and, with obeisance, said:
Art thou the man whose blessed lips foretold
Those joyful tidings? Shall my tongue be bold,
Without the breach of manners, to request
This boon, Art thou that Prophet, that possessed
This barren woman with a hope, that She
Shall bear a Son? He answered, I am He:
Said Manoah, then: Let not a word of thine
Be lost; let them continue to divine
Our future happiness: Let them be crowned
With truth; and thou with honor, to be found
A holy Prophet: Let performance bless
And speed thy speeches with a fair success:
But tell me, Sir; When this great work is done,
And time shall bring to light this promised Son,
What sacred Ceremonies shall we use?
What Rites? What way of breeding shall we choose
TO observe? What holy course of life shall he
Be trained in? What shall his Office be?
Whereat the attentive Angel did divide
The portall of his lips, and thus replide:
The Child, that from thy fruitful loins shall come
Shall be a holy Nazarite, from the womb;
Take heed; that womb, that shall enclose this Child;
In no case be polluted or defilde
With Law-forbidden meats: Let her forbear
To taste those things that are forbiddenthere.
The bunckbacke Camill, shall be no repast
For her; Her palate shall forbear to taste,
The burrow haunting Conie, and decline
The swiftfoot- Hare, and miredelighting Swine;
The griping Goshauke; and the towering Eagle;
The party-collour'd Pie must not inveigle
Her lips to move; the brood devouring Kite;
The croaking Raven; The Oule that hates the light;
The steele-digesting Bird; The laisie Snaile;
The Cuckoo, ever telling of one tail;
The fish-consuming Osprey, and the Want,
That undermines; the greedy Cormorant;
The indulgent Pelican; the predictious Crow;
The chattring Storke, and ravenous Vulter too;
(...) Of all good Counsels; and, from whom, proceeds
A living Spring, to water all our needs;
How willing are his Angels to descend
From of their throne of Glory, and attend
Upon our wants! How often return they back
Mourning to Heaven, as if they grieved for lack
Of our employment! O, how prone are they
To be assistant to us, every way!
Have we just cause to joy? They Will come and sing
About our beds: Does any judgment bring
Just cause of grief? They Will fall agreeving too;
Do we triumph? Their joyful mouths will blow
Their louder Trumpets; Or do fears affectus?
They Will guard our heads from danger, and protectus:
Are we in Prison, or in Persecution?
They Will fill our hearts with joy, and resolution:
Or do we languish in our sickly beds?
They Will come and pitch their Tents about our heads;
See they a sinner penitent, and mourn
For his bewailed offenses, and return?
They clap their hands, and join their warbling voices
They sing, and all the Quire of heaven rejoices.
What is in us poor Dust and Ashes, Lord,
That thou should look upon us, and afford
Thy precious favors to us, and impart
Thy gracious Counselcs? What is our desert,
But Death, and Horror? What can we more clame,
Then they, that now, are scortehing in that flame,
That has nor moderation, rest, nor end?
How does thy mercy, above thought, extend
To them thou love! Teach me (great God) to prize
Thy sacred Counsels: Open my blind eyes,
That I may see to walk the perfect way;
For as I am, Lord, I am apt to stray
And wander to the gulf of endless woe:
Teach me what must be done, and help to do.
SECT. 5.
ARGUMENT.
Manoah desires to understand,
But is denide, the Angels name!
He offers by the Angels hand:
The Angel vanishes in a flame.
SO said, The son of Israel, (easly apt
To credit, what his soul desired, and rapt
With better hopes, which served him as a guide
To his belief, o'rejoy'd) he thus replide;
Let not the man of God, whose Heavenly voice
Has blessed mine care, and made my soul rejoice,
Beyond expression, now refuse to come
Within my Tent, and honor my poor home
With his desired presence; there to taste
His servants slender diet, and repast
Upon his Rural fare: These hands shall take
A tender Kidde from out the flocks, and make,
(Without long tarriance) some delightful meat,
Which may invite the man of God to eat:
Come, come (my Lord) And what defect of food
Shall be, thy servants welcome shall make good:
Where to the Angel (who as yet had made
Himself unknown) reanswer'd thus, and said.
Excuseme: Though thy hospitable love
Prevail to make me stay, it cannot move
My thankful lips to taste thy liberal cheer;
Let not thy bounty urge in vain; Forbear
To strive with with whom, thy welcome cannot lead
To eat thy Kid; or taste thy profer'd bread;
Convert thy bounty to a better end,
And let thy undefiled hands commend
A burnt oblation to the King of Kings;
TO is he, deserves the thanks; his servant brings
But that bare message with his lips enjoyne;
His be the glory of the Act, not mine.
Said then the Israelite; If my desire
Be not to over rash, but may conspire
With thy good pleasure, let thy servants ear
Be honored with thy name; that whensoere
These blessed tidings (that possess my heart
With firm belief,) shall in due time impart
Their full perfection, and desired success
To my expecting eye, my soul may bless
The tongue that brought the message, and proclaim
An equal honor to his honored name.
To whom, the Angel (whose severer brow
Sent forth a frown) made answer; Do not thou
Trouble thy busy thoughts with things, that are
Above thy reach; Enquier not too far;
My name is clothed in mists; TO is not my task,
To make it known to thee; nor thine, to ask:
(...) The generous Spaniell, loves his Masters eye,
And licks his fingers, though no meat be by;
But Man, ungrateful Man, that is borne, and bred
By Heavens immediate power; maintained and fed
By his providing hand; observed, attended
By his indulgent grace; preserved, defended
By his prevailing arm; this Man, I say,
Is more ungrateful, more obdure then they:
By him, we live and move; from him, we have
What blessings he can give, or we can crave:
Food for our Hunger; Dainties, for our pleasure;
Trades, for our buisnes; Pastimes, for our leisure;
In grief, he is our Joy; in want, our Wealth;
In bondage, Freedom; and in sickness, Health;
In peace, our Counsel; and in war, our Leader;
At Sea, our Pilot; and, in Suites, our Pleader;
In pain, our Help; in Triumph, our Renown;
In life, our Comfort; and in death, our Crown;
Yet Man, O most ungrateful Man, can ever
Enjoy the Gift, but never mind the Giver;
And like the Swine, though pampered with enough,
His eyes are never higher then the Trough:
We still receive: Our hearts we seldom lift
To heaven; But drown the giver in the Gift;
We taste the Skollops, and return the Shells;
Our sweet Pomgranats, want their silver Bells:
We take the Gift; the hand that did present it,
We often reward; forget the Friend, that sent it.
A blessing given to those, will not disburse
Some thanks, is little better then a curse.
Great giver of all blessngs; thou that art
The Lord of Gifts; give me a grateful heart:
O give me that, or keep thy favors from me:
I wish no blessings, with a Vengeance to me.
SECT. 6.
ARGUMENT.
Affrighted Manoah and his wife
Both prostrate on the naked earth:
Both rise: The man despaires of life;
The woman cheares him: Samsons birth.
When time, (whose progress moderates and outweares
The extremest passions of the highest Fears)
By his benignant power, had reinlarg'd
Their captive senses, and at length, discharged
Their frighted thoughts, the trembling Couple rose
From their unquiet, and disturbed repose:
Have you beheld a Tempest, how the waves
(Whose unresisted Tyranny out-braves
And threats to grapple with the darkened Skies)
How like to moving Mountains they arise
From their distempred Ocean, and assail
Heavens Battlements; nay when the winds do fail
To breathe another blast, with their own motion,
They still are swelling, and disturb the Ocean:
Even so the Danite and his trembling wife,
Their yet confused thoughts, are still at strife
In their perplexed breasts, which entertained
Continued fears, too strong to be refrained:
Speechless they stood, till Manoah that brake
The silence first, disclosed his lips and spoke;
What strange aspect was this, that to our sight
Appeared so terrible, and did affright
Our scattering thoughts? What did our eyes behold?
I fear our lavish tongues have bin too bold:
What speeches past between us? Can recall
The words we entertained the time withal?
It was no man; It was no flesh and blood;
Me thought, mine ears did tingle, while he stood,
And commun'd with me: At each word, he spoke
Me thought, my heart recoiled; his voice did shake
My very Soul, but when as he became
So angry, and so dainty of his name,
O, how my wonder-smitten heart began
To fail! O, then I knew, it was no man:
No, no; It was the face of God: Our eyes
Have seen his face: (who ever saw't, but dies?)
We are but dead; Death dwells within his eye,
And we have seen't, and we shall surely die:
Where to the woman, (who did either hide,
Or else had over come her fears) replide;
Despairing Man; take courage, and forheare
These false predictions; there is no cause of fear:
Would Heaven accept our offerings, and receive
Our holy things; and, after that, bereive
His servants of their lives? Can he be thus
Pleased with our offerings, unappear'd with us?
Has he not promised that the time shall come,
Wherein the fruits of my restored womb
Shall make thee Father to a hopeful Son?
Can Heaven be false? Or can these things be done
When we are dead? No, no; His holy breath
Had spent in vain, if he had meant our death:
Recall thy needless fears; Heaven cannot lie;
Although we saw his face, we shall not dye.
So said; they brake off their discourse, and went,
He, to the field; and she into her Tent:
Thrice forty days not full complete, being come,
Within the enclosure of her quickened womb,
The babe began to spring; and, with his motion,
Confirmed the faith, and quickened the devotion
Ofhis believing parents, whose devout
And heaven-ascending Orizans, no doubt,
Were turned to thanks, and heart-rejoycing praise,
To holy Hymns, and heavenly Roundelaies:
The child grows sturdy; Every day gives strength
Unto his womb fed limbs; till at the length,
The apparent mother, having past the date
Of her accoumpt, does only now awaite
The happy hour, wherein she may obtain
Her greatest pleasure, with her greatest pain.
When as the fair directresse of the night
Had thrice three times repaired her wained light,
Her womb no longer able to retain
So great a guest, betrayed her to her pain,
And for the toilesome work, that she had done,
She found the wages of a newborn Son:
Samson, she called his name: The child encreast,
And hourly sucked a blessing with the breast;
Daily his strength did double: He began
To grow in favor both with God and Man:
His well attended Infancy was blessed
With sweetness; in his Childhood, he expressed
True seeds of Honor, and his youth was crowned
With high and brave adventures, which renowned
His honored name; His courage was supplide
With mighty strength: His haughty spirit defide
An host of men: His power had the praise
'Bove all that were before, or since his days:
And to conclude, Heaven never yet conjoined
So strong a body, with so stout a mind.
MEDITAT. 6.
HOw precious were those blessed days, wherein
Souls never startled at the name of Sin!
When as the voice of Death had never yet
A mouth to open, or to clame a debt!
When bashful nakedness forbear to call
For needless skinns to cover Shame withal
When as the fruit-encreasing earth obay'd
The will of Man without the wound of Spaide,
Or help of Art! When he, that now remains
A cursed Captive to infernal chains,
Sat singing Anthems in the heavenly Quire,
Among his fellow Angels! When the Bryer,
The fruitless Bramble, the fast growing weed,
And downie Thistle had, as yet, no seed!
When labor was not known, and man did eat
The earths fair fruits, unearned with his sweat!
When wombes might have conceived without the stain
Of sin, and brought forth children, without pain!
When Heaven could speak to man's unfrighted care,
Without the sense of sin-begotten fear!
How golden were those days? How happy than
Was the condition and the State of man!
But Man obay'd not: And his proud desire
Cing'd her bold feathers in forbidden fire:
But Man transgrest; And now his freedom feels
A sudden change: Sin follows at his heels:
The voice calls Adam: But poor Adam flees,
And, trembling, hides his face behind the trees:
The voice, whilere, that ravished with delight
His joyful ear, does now, alas, affright
His wounded conscience, with amaze and wonder:
And what, of late, was music; now, is Thunder:
How have our sins abused us! and betrayed
Our desperate souls! What strangeness have they made
Betwixt the great Creator, and the work
Of his own hands! How closely do they lurk
To our distempred souls, and whisper fears
And doubts into our frighted hearts and ears!
Our eyes cannot behold that glorious face,
Which is all life, unruin'd in the place:
How is our natures changed? That very breath
Which gave us being, is become our death:
Great God! O, whither shall poor mortals fly
For comfort? If they see thy face, they dye;
And if thy life-restoring countenance give
Thy presence from us; then we cannot live:
How necessary is the ruin, than,
And misery of sin-beguiled Man!
On what foundation shall his hopes rely?
See we thy face, or see it not, we dye:
O, let thy word (great God) instruct the youth
And frailty of our faith; Thy word is truth:
And what our eyes want power to perceive,
O, let our hearts admier, and believe.
Which entertained my pleased thoughts, appeared
A sairer object; which, has so endeared
My very soul, (with sadness so distressed)
That this poor heart can find no ease, no rest;
It was a Virgin; in whose Heavenly face,
Vnpattern'd Beauty, and diviner Grace
Were so conjoined, as if they both conspired
To make one Angel; when these eyes inquired
Into the exc'lence of her rare perfection,
They could not choose but like, and my affection
Is so inslamed with desire, that I
Am now become close prisoner to her eye;
Now if my sad Petition may but find
A fair success, to ease my tortured mind;
And if your tender hearts be pleased to prove
As prone to pity mine; as mine, to love;
Let me, with joy, exchange my single life,
And be the husband of so fair a wife.
Whereto, the amazed parents, (in whose eye
Distaste and wonder percht) made this reply;
What strange desire, what unadvised request
Has broken loose from thy distracted breast?
What! are the daughters of thy brethren grown
So poor in Worth, and Beauty? Is there none
To please that overcurious eye of thine,
But the issue of a cursed Philistine?
Can thy miswandring eyes choose none, but her,
That is the child of an Idolater?
Correct thy thoughts, and let thy soul rejoice
In lawful beauty: Make a wiser choice:
How well this counsel pleased the tired ears
Of love-sicke Samson; O, let him that bears
A crossed affection judge: Let him discover
The woeful case of this afflicted lover:
What easy pensell cannot represent
His very looks? How his stern Brows were bent?
His drooping head? his very port and guise?
His bloodlesse cheeks, and deadness of his eyes?
Till, at the length, his moving tongue betrayed
His sullen lips to language, thus; and said: Sir.
The extreme affection of my heart does lead
My tongue, (that is quickened with my love) to plead
What, if her parents be not circumcised?
Her issue shall; and she, perchance, advised
To worship Israells God; and, to forget
Her fathers house; Alas; she is, as yet,
But young; her downy years are green, and tender;
She Is but a twigge, and time may easly bend her
To Embrace the truth: Our counsels may control
Her sinful breeding, and so save a soul:
Nay; who can tell, but Heaven did recommend
Her beauty to these eyes, for such an end?
O loose not that, which Heaven is pleased to save,
Let Samson then obtain, as well as crave:
You gave me being, then prolong my life
And make me husband to so fair a wife.
With that, the parents joined their whispering heads;
Samson observes; and, in their parley, reads
Some Characters of hope; The mother smiles;
The father frowns; which, Samson reconciles
With hopeful fears; She smiles, and crowns
His hopes; which, He deposes with his frowns:
The whispring ended; jointly they displaid,
A half resolved countenance, and said,
Samson, suspend thy troubled mind a while,
Let not thy over charged thoughts recoile:
Take heed of Shipwreck; Rocks are near the Shore:
We Will see the Virgin, and resolve thee more.
MEDITAT. 7.
LOve is a noble passion of the heart;
That, with it very essence does impart
All needful Circumstances, and effects
Unto the chosen party it affects;
In absence, it enjoies; and with an eye.
Filled with celestial fire, does espy
Objects remote: It joys, and smiles in grief;
It sweetens poverty; It brings relief;
It gives the Feeble, strength; the Coward, spirit;
The sick man, health; the undeserving, merit;
It makes the proudman, humble; and the stout
It overcomes; and treads him under foot;
It makes the mighty man of war to droope;
And him, to serve, that never, yet, could stoop;
It is a Fire whose Bellows are the breath
Of heaven above, and kindled here beneath:
It Is not the power of a man's election
To love; He loves not by his own direction;
It is nor beauty, nor benign aspect
That always moves the Lover, to affect;
These are but means: Heavens pleasure is the cause;
Love is not bound to reason, and her Laws
Are not subjected to the imperious will
Of man: It lies not in his power to nill:
How is this Love abused! That Is only made
A snare for wealth, or to set up a trade;
TO enrich a great man's Table, or to pay
A desperate debt; or merely to allay
A base and wanton lust; which done, no doubt,
The love is ended, and her fire out:
No; he that loves for pleasure, or for pelf,
Loves truly, none; and, falsely, but himself:
The pleasure past, the wealth consumed and gone,
Love has no subject now to work upon:
The props being fallen, that did support the roof,
Nothing but Rubbish, and neglected Stuff,
Like a wild Chaos of Confusion, lies
Presenting useless ruins to our eyes:
The Oil that does maintain loves sacred fire,
Is virtue mixed with mutual desire
Of sweet society, begun and bred
In The soul; nor ended in the marriage bed:
This is that dew of Hermon, that does fill
The soul with sweetness, watring Sions hill;
This is that holy fire, that burns and lasts,
Till quenched by death; The other are but blasts,
That faintly blaze like Oyle-for saken snusses,
Which every breath of coffeehouse puffs
And quite extinguishes; and leaves us nothing
But an offensive subject of our loathing.
SECT. 8.
ARGUMENT.
He goes to Timnah: As he went,
He slew a Lion, by the way;
He sues; obtaines the Maids consent:
And they appoint the marriage day.
WHen the next day had, which his morning light,
Redeemed the East from the dark shades of night;
And, with his golden rays, had overspred
The neighbring Mountains; from his loathed Bed,
Sicke-thoughted Samson rose, whose watchful eyes,
Morpheus that night had, with his leaden keys,
Not power to close: His thoughts did so incumber
His restless soul, his eyes could never slumber;
Whose softer language, by degrees, did wake
His fathers sleepe-bedeafned ears, and spoke;
Sir; Let your early blessings light upon
The tender bosom of your prosperous Son,
And let the God of Israel repay
Those blessings, double, on your head, this day:
The long-since banished shaddows make me bold
To let you know, the morning waxes old;
The Sunbeames are grown strong; their brighter hiew
Have broke the Mists, and dride the morning dew;
The sweetness of the season does invite
Your steps to visit Timnah, and acquit
Your last nights promise:
With that, the Danite and his wife arose,
Scarce yet resolved, at last, they did dispose
Their doubtful paces, to behold the prize
Of Samsons heart, and pleasure of his eyes;
They went; and when their travel had attained
Those fruitful hills, whose clusters entertained
Their thirsty palats, with their swelling pride,
The musing lover being stepped a side
To gain the pleasure of a lonely thought,
Appeared a full aged Lion, who had sought,
(But could not find) his long desired prey;
Soon as his eye had given him hopes to pay
His debt to nature, and to mend that fault
His empty stomach found, he made assault
Upon the unarmed lovers breast, whose hand
Had neither staff, nor weapon, to withstand
His greedy rage; but he whose mighty strength
Or sudden death must now appear, at length,
Stretched forth his brawny arm, (his arm supplide
With power from heaven) and did, with ease, divide
His body limme from limme, and did betray
His Flesh to fowls, that lately sought his prey:
This done; his quick redoubled paces make
His stay amends; his nimble steps oretake
His leading parents; who by this, discover
The smoke of Timnah: Now the greedy Lover
Thinks every step, a mile; and every pace,
A measured League, until he see that face,
And find the treasure of his heart, that lies
In the fair Casket of his Mistress Eyes,
But, all this while, close Samson made not known
Unto his parents, what his hands had done:
By this, the gate of Timnah entertaines
The welcome travelers: The parents pains
Are now rewarded with their sons best pleasure:
The Virgin comes; His eyes can find no leisure,
To own another object: O, the greeting
The impatient lovers had at their first meeting!
The Lover speaks; She answers; He replies;
She blushes; He demands; She denies;
He pleads affection; She doubts; He sues
For nuptial love; She questions; He renewes
His earnest suite: Importunes; She relents;
He must have no denial; She consents:
They pass their mutual loves: Their joined hands
Are equal earnests of the nuptial bands:
The parents are agreed; All parties pleased;
The day's set down; the lovers hearts are eased;
Nothing displeases now, but the long stay
Betwixt the appointment, and the marriage day.
MEDITAT. 8.
It Is too severe a censure: If the Son
Take him a wife; the marriage fairly done,
Without consent of parents, (who perchance
Had raised his higher price, knew where to advance
His bettered fortunes to one hundred more)
He lives, a Fornicator; She, a Whore:
Too hard a censure! And it seems to me,
The parent's most delinquent of the three:
What; if the better minded Son do aim
At worth? What, if rare virtues do inflame
His rapt affection? What, if the condition
Of an admired, and dainty disposition
Has won his soul? Where as the covetous Father
Finds her Gold light, and recommends him, rather,
TO an old worn widow, whose more weighty purse
Is filled with gold, and with the Orphans curse;
The sweet exubrance of whose full-mouthed portion
Is but the cursed issue of extortion;
Whose worth, perchance, lies only in her weight,
Or in the bosom of her great estate;
What, if the Son, (that does not care to buy
Abundance at so dear a rate) deny
The soule-detesting profer of his Father,
And in his better judgment chooses, rather,
To match with meaner Fortunes, and desert?
I think that Mary chose the better part.
What noble Families (that have out grown
The best records) have quite binoverthrowne
By wilful parents, that will either force
Their sons to match, or haunt them with a curse!
That can adapt their humors, to rejoice,
And fancy all things, but their childrens choice!
Which makes them, often, timorous to reveal
The close desiers of their hearts, and steal
Such matches, as, perchance, their fair advice
Might, in the bud, have hindered in a trice;
Which done, and past, O, then their hasty spirit
Can think of nothing, under Disinherit;
He must be quite discarded, and exilde;
The furious father must renounce his child;
Nor Prayre nor Blessing must he have; bereiven
Of all; Nor must he live, nor die forgiven;
When as the Fathers rashness, often times,
Was the first causer of the Childrens crimes.
Parents; be not too cruel: Children do
Things, often, too deep for us to enquire into:
What father would not siorme, if his wild Son
Should do the deed, that Samson here had done?
Nor do I make it an exemplar act;
Only, let parents not be too exact,
To curse their children, or to dispossess
Them of their blessings, Heaven may chance to bless:
Be not too strict: Fair language may recure
A fault of youth, whilst rougher words obdure.
SECT. 9.
ARGUMENT.
Samson goes down to celebrate
His marriage, and his nuptial feast:
The Lion, which he slew of late
Has honey in his putrid breast:
WHen as the long expected time was come,
Wherein these lingering Lovers should consumme
The promised marriage, and observe therites,
Pertaining to those festival delights,
Samson went down to Timnah; there, to enjoy
The sweet possession of his dearest joy;
But as he past those fruitful Vineyards, where
His hands, of late, acquit him of that fear
(Wherewith the feirce assaulting Lion quail'd
His yet unpracticed courage) and prevailed
Upon his life; as by that place he past,
He turned aside, and borrowed of his have,
A little time, wherein his eyes might view
The Carkas of the Lion which he flew;
But when his wandering footsteps had drawn near
The unlamented hearse, his wandering ear
(...) MEDITAT. 9.
HOw high, unutterable, how profound,
(Whose depth the line of knowledge cannot sound)
Are the decrees of the Eternal God!
How secret are his ways -- and how untrod
By man's conceit, so deeply charged with doubt!
How are his Counsels past our finding out!
O, how unscrutable are his designs!
How deep, and how unsearchable are the Mines
Of his abundant Wisdom! How obscure
Are his eternal Judgments! and how sure!
Lists he to strike? The very Stones shall fly
From their unmoved Foundations, and destroy:
Lists he to punish? Things that have no sense,
Shall vindicate his Quarrel, on the Offense:
Lists he to send a plague? The winters heat
And summers damp, shall make his will complete:
Lists he to send the Sword? Occasion brings
New Iealousies betwixt the hearts of Kings.
Wills he afamine? Heaven shall turn to brass,
And earth to Iron, till it come to pass:
With stocks, and stones, and plants and beasts fulfill
The secret Counsel of his sacred will,
Man, only wretched Man, is disagreeing
To do that thing, for which he has his being
Samson must down to Timnah; In the way,
Must meet a Lion, whom his hands must slay;
The Lyo'ns putrid Carkas must enclose
A swarm of Bees; and, from the Bees, arose
A Riddle; and that Riddle must be read
And by the reading, Choler must be bred,
And that must bring to pass Gods just designs
Upon the death of the false Philistines:
Behold the progress, and the royal Gests
Of Heavens high vengeance; how it never rests,
Till, by appointed courses, it fufill
The secret pleasure of his sacred will.
Great Savior of the world; Thou Lamb of Sion,
That hides our sins: Thou art that wounded Lion:
O, in thy dying body, we have found
A world of honey; whence we may propound
Such sacred Riddles, as shall, underneath
Our feet, subdue the power of Hell and Death;
Such Mysteries, as none but he, that plough'd
With thy sweet Hayfer's, able to uncloud;
Such sacred Mysteries, whose eternal praise
Shall make both Angels, and Archangells raise
Their louder voices; and, in triumph, sing,
All Glory and Honor to our highest King,
And to the Lamb, that sits upon the throne;
Worthy of power and praise is he, alone,
Whose glory has advanced our key of mirth;
Glory to God, on high; and peace, on Earth.
SECT. 10.
ARGUMENT.
The Bridegroom, at his nuptial Feast,
To the Philistians, does propound
A Riddle: which they all addressed
Themselves, in counsel, to expound.
NOw, when the glory of the next days light
Had chased the shadows of the tedious night,
When coupling Hymen, with his nuptial bands,
And golden Fetters, had conjoined their hands;
When jolly welcome had, to every Guest,
Exposed the bounty of the marriage Feast;
Their now appeased stomachs did enlarge
Their captive tongues, with power to discharge
And quit their Table-duty, and disburse
Their store of enterchangeable discourse,
The ingenious Bridegroom turned his rolling eyes
Upon his guard of Bridemen, and applies
His speech to them: And, whilst that every man
Lent his attentive ear, he thus began;
My tongue's in labor, and my thoughts abound;
I have a doubtful Riddle, to propound;
(...) MEDITAT. 10.
THere is a time, to laugh: A time, to turn
Our smiles to tears: There is a time to mourn:
There is a time for joy; and a time for grief;
A time to want; and a time to find relief;
A time to bind; and there is a time to break;
A time for silence; and a time to speak;
A time to labor; and a time to rest;
A time to fast in; and a time to feast:
Things, that are lawful, have their times and use;
Created good; and, only by abuse,
Made bad: Our sinful usage does unfashion
What heaven has made, and makes a new creation:
Joy is a blessing: but too great excess
Makes Joy, a Madness, and, does quite unblesse
So sweet a gift; And, what, by moderate use;
Crowns our desiers, banes them in the abuse:
Wealth is a blessing; But too eager thurst
Of having more, makes what we have, accursed:
Rest is a blessing; But when Rest withstands
The healthful labor of our helpful hands,
It proves a curse; and stains our guilt, with crime,
Betraies our irrecoverable time:
To feast and to refresh our hearts with pleasure,
And fill our souls with the overflowing measure
Of heavens blessed bounty, cannot but commend
The precious favors of so sweet a friend;
But, when the abundance of a liberal diet,
Meant for a blessing, is abused by Riot,
The abused blessing leaves the gift, nay worse,
It is transformed, and turned into a curse:
Things that afford most pleasure, in the use,
Are ever found most harmfull in the abuse:
Use them like Masters; and their tyrannous hand
Subjects thee, like a slave, to their command:
Use them as Servants; and they will obey thee;
Take heed; They Will either bless thee, or betray thee.
Could our Forefathers but revive, and see
Their Childrens Feasts, as now a days they be;
Their studied dishes; Their restoring stuff,
To make their wanton bodies sin enough;
Their stomacke-whetting Sallats, to invite
Their wastfull palats to an appetite;
Their thirst-procuring dainties, to refine
Their wanton tastes, and make them strong, for wine:
Their costly viands, charged with rich perfume;
Their Viper-wines, to make old age presume
To feel new lust, and youthful flames agin,
And serve another prentiship to sin;
Their time-betraying Music; their base noise
Of odious Fiddlers, with their smooth-faced boys,
Whose tongues are perfect, if they can proclaim
The Quintessence of baseness, without shame;
Their deep mouthed curses; New invented Oaths,
Their execrable Blasphemy, that loathes
A mind to think on; Their obsceaner words;
Their drunken Quarrels; Their unsheathed swords;
O how they would bless themselves, and blush, for shame,
In our behalfs, and have from whence they came,
To kiss their graves, that hid them from the crimes
Of these accursed and prodigious times.
Great God; O, can thy patient eye behold
This height of sin, and can thy Vengeance hold?
SECT. 11.
ARGUMENT.
The Philistines cannot unsolve
The Riddle: They corrupt the Bride;
She wooes her Bridegroom to resolve
Her doubt, but goes away denyde.
NOw when three days had run their hours out,
And left no hope for wit-forsaken doubt
To be resolved, the desperate undertakers
Conjoined their whispring heads; (being all partakers
And joynt-advisers in their new-laid plot)
The time's concluded: Have ye not forgot
How the old Tempter, when he first began
To work the unhappy overthrow of man,
Accosts the simple woman; and reflects
Upon the frailty of her weaker Sex;
Even so these cursed Philistians (being taught
And tutord by the self same spirit) wrought
The self same way; Their speedy steps are bent
To the fair Bride; Their have could give no vent
To their coarcted thoughts; their language made
A little respite; and, at length, they said;
Fairest of Creatures: Let thy gentle heart
Receive the crown, due to so fair desert;
We have a Suit, that must attend the leisure
Of thy best thoughts, and joy-restoring pleasure;
Our names, and credits linger at the stake
Of deep dishonor: If thou undertake,
With pleasing language, to prevent the loss,
They must sustain, and draw them from the dross
Of their own ruins, they shall merely owe
Themselves unto thy goodness, and shall know
No other patron, and acknowledge none,
As their redeemer, but thy love alone:
We cannot read the Riddle, where unto
We have engaged our goods, and credits too;
Entice thy jolly Bridgroome, to unfold
The hidden Mystery, (what can he withhold
From the rare beauty of so fair a brow?)
And when thou know it, let thy servants know:
What? do thou frown? And must our easy trial,
At first, read Hieroglyphickes of denial?
And art thou silent too? Nay, we will give ore
To tempt thy bridal fondness any more:
Betray your lovely husbands secrets? No,
You Will first betray us, and our Land: But know,
Proud Samsons wife, our furies shall make good
Our loss of wealth and honor, in thy blood:
Where fair entreaties spend themselves, in vain,
There fire shall consume, or else constrain:
Know then, false hearted Bride, if our request
Can find no place within thy sullen breast,
Our hands shall vindicate our lost desire,
And burn thy Fathers house, and thee, with fire:
Thus having lodged their errand in her ears,
They left the room; and her, unto her fears;
Who thus bethought; Hard is the case, that I
Must or betray my husbands trust, or dye;
I have a Wolf by the ears; I dare be bold,
Neither with safety, to let go, nor hold:
What shall I do? Their minds if I fulfill not,
It Is death; And to betray his trust, I will not:
Nay, should my lips demand, perchance, his breath
Will not resolve me: Then, no way, but death:
The wager is not great; Rather the strife
Were ended in his loss, then in my life;
His life consists in mine, If ought amiss
Befall my life, it may endanger his:
Wagers must yield to life; I hold it best,
Of necessary evils, to choose the least:
Why doubt I then? When Reason bids me do;
I Will know the Riddle, and betray it too:
With that, she quits her chamber, with her cares,
And in her closset locks up all her fears,
And, with a speed untainted with delay,
She found that breast, wherein her own heart lay;
Where resting for a while, at length, did take
A fair occasion to look up, and spoke:
Life of my soul, and loves perpetual treasure,
If my desires be suiting to thy pleasure,
My lips would move a Suite; My doubtful breast
Would feign prefer an undenyde request:
(...) When strength of wit, and secret power of fraud
Grow dull, constraint must conquer, and applaud
With ill got victory; which, at length obtaind,
Alas, how poor a trifle have we gaind!
How are our souls distempered; to engrosse
Such fading pleasures! To ore-prize the dress,
And under-rate the gold! for painted Joys,
To sell the true; and heaven it self for Toys!
Lord; clarify mine eyes, that I may know
Things that are good, from what are good in show:
And give me wisdom, that my heart may learn
The diffrence of thy favors, and discern
What Is truly good from what is good, in part;
With Martha's trouble, give me Mary's heart.
SECT. 12.
ARGUMENT.
The Bride she begs, and begs in vain:
But like to a prevailing wooer,
She sues, and sues, and sues again;
At last he reads the Riddle to her.
WHen the next morning had renewed the day,
And the early twilight now had chased away
The pride of night, and made her lay aside
Her spangled Robes, the discontented Bride
(Whose troubled thoughts were tired with the night,
And broken slumbers long had wished for light)
With a deep sigh, her sorrow did awake
Her drowsy Bridegroom, whom she thus bespake;
O, if thy love could share an equal part
In the sad griefs of my asflicted heart,
Thy closed eyes had never, in this sort,
Bin pleased with rest, and made thy night so short;
Perchance, if my dull eyes had slumbred too,
My dreams had done, what thou denide to do:
Perchance, my Fancy would have bin so kind,
TO unsolve the doubts of my perplexed mind,
I was a small suite, that thy unluckie Bride
Must light upon: Too small, to be denyde:
Can love so soon --? But ere her lips could spend
The following words, he said, suspend, suspend
Thy rash attempt, and let thy tongue dispense
With forced denial: Let thy lips commence
Some greater Suite, and Samson shall make good
Thy fair desiers, with his dearest blood:
Speak then, my love; thou shall net wish, and want;
Thou can not beg, what Samson cannot grant:
Only, in this, excuse me: and refrain
To beg, what thou, perforce, must beg in vain.
Inexorable Samson: Can the tears
From those fair eyes, not move thy deafned ears?
O can those drops, that trickle from those eyes
Upon thy naked bosom, not surprise
Thy neighboring heart? and force it to obey?
O can thy heart not melt, as well as they?
Thou little think thy poor afflicted wife
Importunes thee, and wooes thee for her life:
Her Suit's as great a Riddle to thine ears,
As thine, to hers; O, these distilling tears
Are silent pleaders, and her moistred breath
Would feign redeem her, from the gates of death?
May not her tears prevail? Alas, thy strife
Is but for wagers; Here Is, poor Soul, for life.
Now when this day had yielded up his right
To the succeeding Empress of the night,
Whose soone-deposed reign did reconvay
Her crown and Scepter to the newborn day,
The restless Bride (fears cannot brook denial)
Renewes her suite, and attempts a further trial;
Entreats; conjures; she leaves no way untride:
She will not; no, she must not be denide:
But he (the portalls of whose marble heart
Was locked and barred against the powerful art
Of often repeated tears) stood deaf and dumb;
He must not, no, he will not be overcome.
Poor Bride! How is thy glory overcast!
How is the pleasure of the nuptials past,
When scarce begun! Alas, how poor a breath
Of joy, must puff thee to untimely death!
The day's at hand, wherein thou must untie
The Riddles tangled Snarle, or else must die;
Now, when that day was come wherein the feast
Was to expire; the Bride, (whose pensive breast
Grew sad to death) did once more undertake
Her too resolved Bridegroom thus, and spoke:
Upon these knees, that prostrate on the floor,
Are lowly bended, and shall never give ore
To move thy goodness, that shall never rise,
Until my Suite finds favor in thine eyes,
Upon these naked knees, I here present
My sad request: O let thy heart relent;
A Suitor sues, that never sued before;
And she begs now, that never will beg more:
Have thou vowed silence? O remember, how
Thou art engaged by a former vow;
Thy heart is mine; The secrets of thy heart
Are mine; Why art thou dainty to impart
Mine own, to me? Then, give me leave to sue
For what, my right may challenge as her due;
Unfold thy Riddle then, that I may know,
Thy love is more, then only love, in show:
The Bridegroom, thus enchanted by his Bride,
Vnseal'd his long-kept silence, and replide:
Thou sole, and great commandresse of my heart,
Thou have prevailed; my bosom shall impart
The sum of thy desiers, and discharge
The faithful secrets of my soul, at large;
Know then, (my joy) Upon that very day,
I, first, made known my'affection, on the way,
I met, and grappled with a sturdy Lion,
Having nor staff nor weapon, to rely on,
I was enforced to prove my naked strength;
Unequal was the match; But, at the length,
This brawney arm, receiving strength from him
That gave it life, I tore him limme from limme,
And left him dead: Now when the time was come,
Wherein our promised nuptials were to sum,
And perfect all my joys, as I was coming
That very way, a strange confused humming,
Not distant far, possessed my wondering ear;
Where guided by the noise, there did appear
A Swarm of Bees, whose busy labors filled
The Carcass of that Lion which I killed,
With Combs of Honey, wherewithal I fed
My lips and thine: And now my Riddle's read.
MEDITAT. 12.
THe soul of man, before the taint of Nature,
Bore the fair Image of his great Creator;
His understanding had no cloud: His will
No cross: That, knew no Error; This, no ill:
But man transgrest; And by his woeful fall,
Lost that fair Image, and that little all
Was left, was all corrupt: His understanding
Exchanged her object; Reason left commanding;
His Memory was depraved, and his will
Can find no other subject now, but Ill:
It grew distemperd, left the righteous reine
Of better Reason, and did entertain
The rule of Passion, under whose command,
It suffered Ship-wracke, upon every Sand:
Where it should march, it evermore retires;
And, what is most forbid, it most desires:
Love makes it see too much; and often, blind;
Doubt makes it light, and waver like the wind;
Hate makes it fierce, and studious; Anger, mad;
Joy makes it careless; Sorrow, dull and sad;
Hope makes it nimble, for a needless trial;
Fear makes it too impatient of denial.
Great Lord of humane souls; O thou, that art
The only true refiner of the heart;
Whose hands created all things perfect good,
What can thou now expect of flesh and blood?
How are our leprous Souls put out of fashion!
How are our Wills subjected to our passion!
How is thy glorious Image soiled, defaced,
And stained with sin! How are our thoughts displaced!
How wavering are our hopes, turned here and there
With every blast! How carnal is our fear!
Where needs no fear, we start at every shade,
But fear not, where we ought to be afraid.
Great God! If thou will please but to refine
Our hearts, and reconforme our wills, to thine,
Thou Wilt take a pleasure in us, and poor we
Should find as infinite delight in Thee;
Our doubts would cease, our fears would all remove,
And all our passions would turn Joy, and Love;
Till then, expect for nothing that is good:
Remember, Lord, we are but Flesh and Blood.
SECT. 13.
ARGUMENT.
The Philistines, by her advice,
Expound the Riddle: Samson killed
Thirty Philistians, in a trice;
Forsakes his Bride: His Bed's defilde.
NO sooner was the Brides attentive ears
Resolved and pleased; but her impetuous fears
Calls in the Bridemen; and, to them betrayed
The secret of the Riddle thus, and said:
You Sons of Thunder; It Was not the loud noise
Of your provoking threats, nor the soft voice
Of my prevailing fears, that thus addressed
My yielding heart to grant your forced request;
Your language needed not have bin so rough
To speak too much, when less had bin enough:
Your speech at first, was honey in mine ear;
At length, it proved a Lion, and did tear
My wounded soul: It sought to force me to
What your entreaties were more apt to do:
Know then (to keep your lingering ears no longer
From what ye long to hear;) There Is nothing stronger
Then a fierce Lion: Nothing more can greet
Your pleased palats, with a greater sweet,
Then Honey: But more fully to expound,
In a dead Lion, there was Honey found.
Now when the Sun was welking in the West,
(Whose fall determines both the day, and Feast)
The hopeful Bridegroom (he whose smiling brow
Assured his hopes a speedy Conquest now)
Even thirsting for victorious Triumph, brake
The crafty silence of his lips, and spoke:
The time is come, whose latest hour ends
Our nuptial Feast, and fairly recommends
The wreathe of Conquest to the victors brow;
Say; Is the Riddle read? Expound it now;
And, for your pains, these hands shall soon resign
Your conquered prize: If not; The prize is mine:
With that, they joined their whispring heads, and made
A Speaker; who, in louder language, said;
Of all the sweets, that ere were known,
There Is none so pleasing be,
As those rare dainties, which do crown
The labor of the Be:
Of all the Creatures in the field;
That ever man set eye on,
There Is none, whose power does not yield
Unto the stronger Lion.
Whereto the offended Challenger, whose eye
Proclaimed a quick Revenge, made this reply:
No Hony's sweeter then a woman's tongue;
And, when she list, Lions are not so strong:
How thrice accursed are they, that do fulfill
The lewd desiers of a woman's will!
How more accursed is he, that does impart
His bosom secrets to a woman's heart;
They plead like Angels, and, like Crocadiles,
Kill with their tears; They murder with their smiles:
How weak a thing is woman? Nay how weak
Is senseless Man, that will be urged to break
His counsels in her ear, that has no power
To make secure a secret, for an hour!
No; victors, no: Had not a woman's mind
Bin faithless, and unconstant, as the wind,
My Riddle had, till now, a Riddle bin;
You might have mused; and mist; and mused agin,
When the next day had heaved his golden head
From the soft pillow of his Seagreene bed;
And, with his rising glory, had possessed
The spacious borders of the enlightened East,
Samson arose; and, in a rage, went down
(By heaven directed) to a neighbring town;
His choler was inflamed; and, from his eye
The sudden flashes of his wrath did fly;
Palenesse was in his cheeks; and, from his breath,
There flew the fierce Ambassadors of death;
He heaved his hand; and where it fell, it slew;
He spent, and still his forces would renew;
His quick-redoubled blows fell thick as thunder;
And, whom he took alive, he tore in sunder:
His arm nere mist; And often, at a blow,
He made a Widow, and an Orphane too:
Here, it divides the Father from the child;
The husband, from his wife; there, it dispoild
The friend on's friend, the sister of her brother;
And, often, with one man, he would thrash another:
Where never was, he made a little flood,
And where there was no kin, he joined in blood,
Wherein, his ruthlesse hands he did imbrue;
Thrice ten, before he scarce could breathe, he slew;
Their upper Garments, which he took away,
Were all the spoils the victor had, that day;
Where with, he quit the wagers that he lost,
Paying Philistians, with Philistians cost;
And thus, at length, with blood he did assuage,
But yet not quench the fire of his rage,
For now the thought of his disloyal wife,
In his sad soul, renewed a second strife,
From whom, for fear his fury should recoile,
He thought most fit to absent himself awhile;
Unto his fathers Tent, he now returned;
Where, his divided passion raged, and mourned;
In part, he mourned; and, he raged, in part,
To see so fair a face; so false a heart:
But mark the mischief that his absence brings;
His bed's defiled, and the nuptial strings
Are stretched and cracked: A second love does smother
The first; And she is wedded to another.
MEDITAT. 13.
Was this that womb, the Angel did enlarge
From barrenness? And gave so strickt a charge?
Was this that womb, that must not be defiled
With unclean meats, lest it pollute the child?
Is this the Nazarite? May a Nazarite, then,
Embrue and paddle in the bloods of men?
Or may their vows be so dispensed withal,
That they, who scarce may see a funeral,
Whose holy footsteps must beware to tread
Upon, or touch the carcass of the dead?
May these revenge their wrongs, by blood? May these
Have power to Kill, and murder where they please?
It Is true: A holy Nazarite is forbid
To do such things as this our Nazarite did:
He may not touch the bodies of the dead,
Without pollution; much less, may shed
The blood of man, or touch it, being spilt,
Without the danger of a double guilt:
But who art thou, that art an undertaker,
To question with, or plead against thy Maker?
May not that God, that gave thee thy creation,
Turn thee to nothing, by his dispensation?
He that has made the Sabbath, and commands
It shall be kept with unpolluted hands;
Yet, if he please to countermand agin,
Man may securely labor, and not sin;
A Nazarite is not allowed to shed
The blood of man, or once to touch the dead;
But if the God of Nazarites, bids kill
He may; and be a holy Nazarite still:
But stay! Is God like Man? Or can he border
Upon confusion, that is the God of order?
The Persian Laws no time may contradict;
And are the Laws of God less firm and strict?
An earthly Parent wills his child to stand
And wait; within a while, he gives command
(Finding the weakness of his Son oppressed
With weariness) that he sit down and rest;
Is God unconstant then; because he pleases
To alter, what he wild us, for our eases?
Know, likewise, O ungrateful flesh and blood,
God limits his own glory, for our good;
He is the God of mercy, and he prizes
Thine Asses life, above his Sacrifices;
His Sabbath is his glory, and thy rest;
He Will lose some honor, ere thou lose a Beast:
Great God of mercy; O, how apt are we
To rob thee of thy due, that art so free
To give unaskt! Teach me, O God, to know
What portion I deserve, and tremble too.
SECT. 14.
ARGUMENT.
Samson comes down to reenjoy
His wife: Her father does withstand:
For which, he threatens to destroy
And ruin him, and all the land.
But Samson, (yet not knowing what was past,
For wronged husbands ever are the last
That hear the news) thus with himself bethought;
It cannot be excused: It was a fault,
It was a foul one too; and, at first sight,
Too great for love, or pardon to acquit:
O, had it bin a stranger, that betrayed
Reposed secrets, I had only laid
The blame upon my unadvised tongue;
Or had a common friend but done this wrong
To bosom trust, my patience might out-worne it;
I could endured, I could have easily borne it;
But thus to be betrayed by a wife,
The partner of my heart; to whom my life,
My very soul was not esteemed dear,
Is more then flesh, is more then blood can bear:
But yet alas, She was but green, and young,
And had not gained the conquest of her tongue;
Vnseasond vessels, often, will find a leake
At first; but after, hold: She is but weak,
Nay, cannot yet write woman; which, at best,
Is a frail thing: Alas young things will quest
At every turn; Indeed, to say the truth,
Her years could make it but a fault of youth:
Samson, return; and let that fault be set
Upon the score of youth: forgive; forget:
She is my wife: Her love has power to hide
A fouler error; Why should I divide
My presence from her? There Is no greater wrong
To love, then to be silent over long:
Alas, poor soul! No doubt, her tender eye
Has wept enough; perchance she knows not why
I Am turned so great a stranger to her bed,
And board: No doubt, her empty eyes have shed
A world of tears; perchance, her guiltless thought
Conceives my absence as a greater fault
Then that, of late, her harmless Error did;
I Will go and draw a reconciling Kid
From the fair flock; My feet shall never rest,
Till I repose me in my Brides fair breast;
He went; but ere his speedy lips obtained
The merits of his have, darkness had stained
The cristall brow of day; and gloomy night
Had spoild and rifled heaven of all his light:
H'approach'd the gates; but, being entered in,
His careless welcome seemed so cold and thin,
As if that silence meant, it should appear,
He was no other, then a stranger, there;
In every servants look, he did epsy
An easy Copy of their Masters eye;
He called his wife, but she was gone to rest;
Unto her wonted chamber he addressed
His doubtful steps; till, by her father, staid,
Who taking him aside a little, said.
Son;
It was the late espousals that do move
My tongue to use that title; not, thy love:
It Is true; there was a Marriage lately past
Between my Child, and you; The knot was fast
And firmly tied, not subject to the force
Of any power, but death, or else divorce.
For ought I saw, a mutual desire
Kindled your likings, and an equal fire
Of strong affection, joined both your hands
With the perpetual knot of nuptial bands;
Mutual delight, and equal loyes attended
Your pleased hearts, until the feast was ended;
But then, I know no ground, (you know it best)
As if your loves were measured by the Feast,
The building fell, before the house did shake,
Loves fire was quenched, ere it began to slake;
All on a sudden were your joys disseis'd;
Forsook your Bride, and went away displeased;
You left my child to the opprobrious tongues
Of open censure, whose mabitious wrongs,
(Maligning her fair merits) did defame
Her wounded honor, and unblemisht name;
I thought, thy love, which was so strong, of late,
(...) He thus began to attempt his first conclusion;
The patient Angler, first, provides his bait,
Before his hopes can teach him to awaite
The enjoyment of his long expected prey;
Revengefull Samson, ere he can appay
His wrongs with timely vengeance, must intend
To gain the Instruments, to work his end,
He plants his Engines, hides his snares about,
Pitches his Toiles, finds new devices out,
To tangle wily Foxes; In few days,
(That land had store) his studious hand betrays
A leash of hundreds, which he thus imployes,
As Agents in his ragefull enterprise;
With tough, and force-enduring thongs of Lether,
He joins and couples tail, and tail together,
And every thonge bound in a Brand of Fire,
So made by Art, that motion would inspire
Continual flames, and, as the motion ceast,
The thrifty blaze would then retire and rest
In the close Brand, until a second strife
Gave it new motion; and that motion, life:
Soon as these coupled Messengers received
Their siery Errand, though they were bereiv'd
Of power to make great have, they made good speed;
Their thoughts were diffring, though their tails agreed:
The One drags and draws to The East; the other, West;
One fit, they run; another while they rest;
TO one skulks and snarles, the to other tugges and hales;
At length, both flee, with fire in their tails,
And in the top and height of all their speed.
The One stops, before the the other be agreed;
The other pulls, and drags his fellow back,
Whilst both their tails were tortured on the rack;
At last, both weary of their warm Embassage,
Their better ease discride a fairer passage,
And time has taught their wiser thoughts to join
More close, and travel in a straighter line:
Into the open Champion they divide
Their straggling paces (where the ploughmans pride
Found a fair Object, in his rip'ned Corn;
Whereof, some part was reapt; some, stood unshorne)
Sometimes, the fiery travelers would seek
Protection beneath a swelling Reeke;
But soon that harbor grew too hot for stay,
Affording only light, to run away;
Sometimes, the full-ear'd standing-wheat must cover
And hide their shames; and, there the flames would hover
About their ears, and send them to enquire
A cooler place; but, there, the flaming fire
Would scorch their hides, and send them singed away;
Thus, doubtful where to go, or where to stay,
They range about; Flee forward; then retire,
Now here, now there; Where ere they come, they fire;
Nothing was left, that was not lost, and burned;
And now, that fruitful land of Iewry's turned
A heap of Ashes; That fair land, while ere
Which filled all hearts with joy, and every ear
With news of plenty, and of blessed increase,
(The joyful issue of a happy peace)
See, how it lies in her own ruins, void
Of all her happiness, disguised, destroyed:
With that the Philistines, whose sad relief
And comfort's deeply buried in their grief,
Began to question (they did all partake
In the irrecoverable loss) and spoke,
What cursed brand of Hell? What more then Devil,
What envious Miscreant has done this evil?
Whereto, one sadly standing by, replide;
It was that cursed Samson (whose fair Bride
Was lately ravished from his absent breast
By her false father) who before the feast
Of nuptial was a month expired, and done,
By second marriage, owned another son;
For which, this Samson heaved from off the henge
Of his lost reason, studied this revenge;
That Timnits falsehood wrought this desolation;
Samson the Actor was, but he, the occasion:
With that, they all consulted, to proceed
In height of Justice, to revenge this deed;
Samson, whose hand was the immediate cause
Of this foul act, is stronger then their laws;
Him, they refer to time; For his proud hand
May bring a second ruin to their land;
The cursed Timnite, he that did divide
The lawful Bridegroom from his lawful Bride,
And moved the patience of so strong a foe,
To bring these evils, and work their overthrow,
To him they have; and, with resolved desire
Of blood, they burn his house, and him with fire.
MEDITAT. 15.
Do thou not tremble? Does thy troubled ear
Not tingle? nor thy spirits faint to hear
The voice of those, whose dying shriekes proclaim
Their tortures, that are broyling in the flame?
She, whose illustrious beauty did not know
Where to be matched, but one poor hour ago;
She, whose fair eyes were apt to make man err
From his known faith, and turn Idolater;
She, whose fair cheeks, inricht with true complexion,
Seemed beauties storehouse of her best perfection;
See, how she lies, see how this beauty lies,
A foul offense, unto thy loathing eyes;
A fleshly Cinder, lying on the floor.
Stark naked, had it not bin covered ore
With bashful ruins, which were fallen down
From the consumed roof, and rudely thrown
On this halfe-roasted earth. O, can thou read
Her double story, and thy heart not bleed?
What art thou more then she? Tell me wherein
Art thou more priviledg'd? Or can thy sin
Plead more t'excuse it? Art thou fair and young?
Why so was she: Were thy temptations strong?
Why, so were hers: What can thou plead, but she
Had power to plead the same, as well as thee?
Nor was it her death alone, could satisfy
Revenge; her father, and his house must dye:
Unpunished crimes do often bring them in,
That were no less then strangers to the sin:
Ely must dye; because his fair reproof
Of too foul sin, was not austere enough:
Was vengeance now appeased? Has not the crime
Paid a sufficient Intrest for the time?
Remove thine eye to the Philistian fields;
See, what increase their fruitful harvest yields:
There Is nothing there, but a confused heap
Of ruinous ashes: There Is no corn, to reap:
Behold the poison of unpunisht sin;
For which the very earth's accursed agin:
Famine must act her part; her griping hand,
For one man's sin, must punish all the Land:
Is vengeance now appeased? Has sin given ore
To cry for plagues? Must vengeance yet have more?
O, now th'impartiall sword must come, and spill
The blood of such, as Famine could not kill:
The language of unpunisht sin cries loud,
It roares for Justice, and it must have blood:
Famine must follow, where the Fire begun;
The Sword must end, what both have left undone.
Just God; our sins do dare thee to thy face;
Our score is great; our Ephah fill's apace;
The leaden cover threatens, every minut,
To close the Ephah, and our sins, within it.
Turn back thine eye: Let not thine eye behold
Such vile pollutions: Let thy vengeance hold:
Look on thy dying Son; There shall thou spy
An Object, that is more fitter for thine eye;
His sufferings (Lord) are far above our sins;
O, look thou there; Ere Justice once begins
T'unsheathe her Sword, O, let one precious drop
Fall from that pierced side; and that will stop
The ears of vengeance, from that clamorous voice
Of our loud sins, which make so great a noise;
O, send that drop, before Revenge begins,
And that will cry far louder then our sins.
SECT. 16.
ARGUMENT.
He makes a slaughter; Does remove
To Etans rock; where, to repay him
The wrongs that he had done, they move the men of Judah to betray him.
THus when th'accurs'd Philistians had appaid
The Timnits sin, with ruin; and betrayed
The Unjust Offenders to their fierce desire,
And burned their cursed Family with fire;
Samson, the greatness of whose debt denide
So short a payment; and whose wrongs yet cride
For further vengeance, to be further laid
Upon the sinne-conniving Nation, said,
Unjust Philistians, you that could behold
So capital a crime, and yet withold
This well-deserved punishment so long,
Which made you partners in their sin, my wrong;
Had ye at first, when as the fault was young,
Before that Time had lent her clamorous tongue
So great a strength, to call for so much blood;
O, had your early Justice but thought good
To strike in time; nay, had you then devised
Some easier punishment, it had sufficed;
But now it comes too late; The sin has cried,
Till heaven has heard, and mercy is denied:
Nay, had the sin but spared to roar so loud,
A drop had served, when now a Tide of blood
Will hardly stop her mouth:
Had ye done this betimes! But now, this hand
Must plague your persons, and afflict your land:
Have ye beheld a youth-instructing Tutor,
(Whose wisedom's seldom seen, but in the future)
When well deserved punishment shall call
For the delinquent Boy; how, first of all,
He preaches fairly; then, proceeds austerer
To the foul crime, whilst the suspicious hearer
Trembles at every word, until, at length,
His language being ceased, the unwelcome strength
Of his rude arm, that often proves too rash,
Strickes home, and fetches blood at every lash.
Even so stout Samson, whose more gentle tongue,
In easy terms, does first declare the wrong,
Injustice did, then tells the evil effects
That man's connivence, and unjust neglects
Does often bring upon the afflicted land;
But, at the last, upheaves his ruthlesse hand;
He hewes, he hacks, and, fury being guide,
His unresisted power does divide
From top to toe; his furious weapon cleft,
Where ere it struck: It slew; and never left,
Until his flesh-destroying arm, at length,
Could find no subject, where to employ his strength:
Here stands a headstrong Steed, whose fainting guider
Drops down; another dragges his wounded rider:
Now here, now there his frantic arm would thunder,
And, at one stroke, cleaves horse and man in sunder,
In whose mixed blood, his hands would often embrue,
And where so ere they did but touch, they slew:
Here Is no employment for the Surgeons trade,
All wounds were mortal that his weapon made;
There Is none was left, but dying, or else dead,
And only they, that escaped his fury, fled;
The slaughter ended, the proud victor past
Through the afflicted land, until, at last,
He comes to Judah; where, he pitched his Tent,
At the rock Etan: There, some time he spent;
He spent not much, Till the Philistian band,
That found small comfort in their wasted land,
Came up to Judah, and there, pitched not far
From Samsons Tent; Their hands were armed to war:
With that, the men of Judah, struck with fear,
To see so great an Army, straight drew near,
To the sad Camp; who, after they had made
Some signs of a continued peace, they said;
What new designs have brought your royal band
Upon the borders of our peaceful land?
What strange adventures? What disastrous weather
Drove you this way? What business brought you hither?
Let not my Lords be angry, or conceive
An evil against your Servants: What we have,
Is yours: The peaceful plenty of our land
And we, are yours; and at your own command:
Why, to what purpose are you pleased to show us
Your strength! Why bring you thus an army to us?
Are not our yearly Tributes justly paid?
Have we not kept our vows? Have we delaid
Our faithful service, or denied to do it,
When you have pleased to call your servants to it?
Have we, at any time, upon your trial,
Shruncke from our plighted faith, or proved disloyal?
If that proud Samson have abused your Land,
It Is not our faults; Alas, we had no hand
In his designs: We lent him no relief;
No aid; No, we were partners in your grief.
Where to the Philistines, whose hopes relyde
Upon their fair assistance, thus replyde:
Fear not, ye men of Judah; Our intentions
Are not to wrong your peace: Your apprehensions
Are too-too timorous; Our designs are bent
Against the common Foe, whose hands have spent
Our lavish blood, and robbed our wasted Land
Of all her joys: It Is he, our armed band
Expects, and follows: He is cloysterd here,
Within your Quarters: Let your faiths appear
Now in your loyal actions, and convay
The skulking Rebel to us, that we may
Revenge our blood, which he has wasted thus,
And do to him, as he has done to us.
MEDITAT. 16.
IT was a sharp revenge: But was it just?
Shall one man suffer for another? Must
The Childrens teeth be set on edge, because
Their Fathers ate the grapes? Are Heavens laws
So strict? whose lips did, with a promise, tell,
That no such law should pass in Israel:
Because the injurious Timnites treacherous hand
Commits the fault, must Samson scourge the land?
Sin is a furious Plague; and it infects
The next inhabitant, if he neglects
The means to avoid it: It Is not because he sins
That thou art punished: No, it then begins
TO infect thy soul; when, thou a stander by,
Reproves it not: or when thy careless eye
Slights it as nothing: If a sin of mine
Grieve not thy wounded soul, it becomes thine.
Think ye that God commits the Sword of power
Into the hands of Magistrates, to scower
And keep it bright? Or only to advance
His yet unknown Authority? Perchance,
The glorious Hilt and Scabberd make a show
To serve his turn; have it a blade, or no,
He neither knows, nor cares: Is this man fit
TO obtain so great an honor, as to sit
As Gods Lieutenant, and to punish sin?
Know leaden Magistrates, and know agin,
Your Sword was given to draw, and to be did
In guilty blood; not to be laid aside,
At the request of friends, or for base fear,
Lest when your honor's ended with the year,
Ye may be baffled: it is not enough that you
Find, bread be weight; or that the waights be true:
It Is not enough, that every foul disorder
Must be referred to your more wise Recorder:
The charge is given to you: You must return
A fair account; or else, the Land must mourn:
You keep your Swords too long a season in,
And God strikes us, because you strike not sin:
Y' are too remiss, and want a Resolution:
Good Laws lie dead, for lack of execution:
An Oath is grown so bold, that it will laugh
The easy Act, to scorn: Nay, we can quaffe
And reele with privilege: and we can trample
Upon our shame shrunk cloakes, by your example:
You are too dull: Too great offenses pass
Untouched; God loves no service from the Ass;
Rouse up; O use the Spur, and spare the Bridle;
God strikes, because your Swords, and You are idle;
Grant, Lord, that every one may mend a fault;
And then our Magistrates may stand for naught.
SECT. 17.
ARGUMENT.
The faithless men of Judah went
To make him subject to their bands:
They bound him by his own consent,
And brought him prisoner to their hands.
SO said: The men of Judah (whose base fear
Taught them to open an obedient ear
To their revengefull and unjust request)
Accept the treacherous motion, and addressed
Their slavish thoughts, to put in execution
The subject of their servile resolution:
With that, three thousand of their ablest men
Are soon employed; To the fierce Lions den
They come, (yet daring not approach too near)
And sent this louder language to his ear;
Victorious Samson, whose renowned facts
Have made the world a Register of thy Acts,
Great Army of men, the wonder of whose power
Gives thee the title of a walking Tower,
Why have thou thus betrayed us to the hand
Of the cursed Philistines? Thou know our Land
Does owe it self to thee; There Is none can clame
So great an intrest in our hearts: Thy name,
Thy highly honored name, for ever, bears
A welcome Accent in our joyful ears;
But now the times are dangerous, and a band
Of proud Philistians quarter in our land;
And; for thy sake, the tyranny of their tongues
Has newly threatened to revenge thy wrongs
Upon our peaceful lives: Their lips have vowed
And sworn to salve their injuries with our blood;
Their jealous fury hollowes in our ears,
They Will plague our land, as thou have plagued theirs,
If we refuse to do their fierce command,
And bring not Samson prisoner to their hand;
Alas, thou know our servile necks must bow
To their imperious Yoke; Alas, our vow
Of loyalty is past: If they bid, do;
We must; or loose our lands, and our life's too;
Were but our life's in hazard, or if none
Should feel the smart of death, but we alone,
We Would turn thy Martyrs, rather then obey'm,
We Would dye with Samson sooner then betray'm;
But we have wifes, and children, that would be
The subjects of their rage, as well as we:
Wherefore, submit thy person, and fulfill
What we desire so much against our will:
Alas, our griefs in equal poisure lie;
Yield, and thou dyest: Yield not, and we must dye:
Whereto, sad Samson, whose fair thoughts did guide
His lips to fairer language, thus replide;
Ye men of Judah, what distrustful thought
Of single Samsons violence has brought
So great a strength, as if you meant t'orethrow
Some mighty Monarch, or surprise a Foe!
Tour easy errand might as well bin done
By two or three, or by the lips of one;
The meanest child of holy Isreal's seed
Might conquered Samson, with a bruised reed:
Alas, the boldness of your welcome words
Need no protection of these staves and Swords:
Brethren; the intention of my coming hither
Was not to wrong you, or deprive you, either
Of lives, or goods, or of your poorest due;
My self is cheaper to my self, then you;
My coming is on a more fair design,
I come to crush your tyranous foes, and mine,
I come to free your country, and recall
Your servile shoulders from the slavish thrall
Of the proud Philistines; and, with this hand,
To make you freemen in your promised Land;
But you are come to bind me, and betray
Your faith full Champion to those hands, that lay
Perpetual burdens on, which daily vex
Your galled shoulders, and your servile necks:
The wrongs these cursed Philistines have done
My simple innocence, have quite outrun
My easy patience: If my arm may right
My too much injured suffrance, and requite
What they have done to me, it would appease
My raging thoughts, and give my tortures ease;
But ye are come to bind me: I submit;
I yield; And if my bondage will acquit
Your newborn fears, It Is well: But they that do
Attempt to ruin me, will ransack you:
First, you shall firmely' engage your plighted troth,
By the acceptance of a sacred oath,
That, when I shall be prisoner to your bands,
I may not suffer violence by your hands:
With that, they drawing nearer to him, laid
Their hands beneath his brawny thigh, and said,
Then let the God of Jacob cease to bless
The tribe of Judah, with a fair success,
In ought they put their cursed hand unto,
And raze their seed, If we attempt to do
Bound Samson violence; And if this curse
Be not sufficient, heaven contrive a worse:
With that, the willing prisoner joined his hands,
To be subjected to their stronger bands:
With treble twisted cords, that never tried
The twitch of strength, their buisie fingers tied
His sinewy wrists, which being often wound
About his beating pulse, they brought him bound
To the forefront of the Philistian band,
And left him captive in their cursed hand.
MEDITAT. 17.
O What a Pearl is hidden in this Field,
Whose orient luster, and perfections yield
So great a treasure, that the Eastern Kings,
With all the wealth, their colder Climate brings,
Nere saw the like: It is a pearl whose glory
Is the diviner subject of a Story,
Penned by an Angels quill; not understood
By the too dull con ceitof flesh and blood!
Unkind Iudeans, what have you presented
Before our eyes? O, what have you attented!
He that was borne on purpose, to release
His life, for yours; to bring your Nation peace;
To turn your mournings into joyful Songs;
To fight your Battles; To revenge your wrongs;
Even him, alas, your cursed hands have made
This day your prisoner; Him have you betrayed
To death: O; he whose sinowy arm had power
To crush you all to nothing, and to shower
Down strokes, like thunderbolts, whose blasting breath,
Might, in a moment, pufft you all to death,
And made ye fall before his frowning brow,
See, how he goes away, betrayed by you!
Thou great Redeemer of the world! Whose blood
Has power to save more worlds, then Noah's flood
Destroyed bodies; thou, O thou that art
The Samson of our souls, How can the heart
Of man give thanks enough, that does not know
How much his death-redeemed soul does owe
To thy dear merits? We can apprehend
No more then flesh and blood does recommend
To our confined thoughts: Alas, we can
Conceive thy love, but as the love of man:
We cannot tell the horror of that pain
Thou bought us from, not can our hearts attain
Those joys that thou have purchased in our name,
Nor yet the price, thou paidst: Our thoughts are lame,
And crazed; Alas, things mortal have no might,
No means to comprehend an Infinite:
We can behold thee cradled in a Manger,
In a poor Stable: We can see the danger
The Tetrarch's fury made thee subject to;
We can conceive thy poverty; We know
Thy blessed hands (that might bin freed) were bound;
We know, alas, thy bleeding brows were crowned
With prickling thorn; Thy body torn with whips;
Thy palms impeirc'd with ragged nails; Thy lips
Saluted with a Traitors kiss; Thy brows
Sweating forth blood: Thy oftrepeated blows;
Thy fastening to the cross; Thy shameful death;
These outward tortures all come underneath
Our dull conceits: But, what thy blessed soul
(That bore the burden of our guilt, and Scroule
Of all our sins, and horrid pains of Hell)
O, what that soul endured, what soul can tell!
SECT. 18.
ARGUMENT.
He breaks their bands; And with a Bone,
A thousand Philistians he slew:
He thirsted, fainted; made his moan
To heaven: He drinks, His spirits renew.
THus when the glad Philistians had obtained
The sum of all their hopes, they entertained
The welcome prisoner with a greater noise
Of triumph then the greatness of their joys
Required: Some, with sudden death, would greet
The new come Guest; whilst others, more discreet,
With lingering pains, and tortures more exact,
Would force him to discover, in the Fact,
Who his Abettors were: others gainsaid
That course, for fear a rescue may be made:
Some cry, It Is fittest, that the offender bleed
There, where his cursed hands had done the deed:
Others cried, No, where Fortune has consigned him,
Wee'lk: H him: Best; to kill him, where we find him:
Thus variously they spent their doubtful breath,
At last, they all agreed on sudden death;
There Is no contention now, but only who
Shall strike the first, or give the speeding blow:
Have ye beheld a single thread of flax,
Touched by the fire, how the fire crackes
With ease, and parts the slender twine in sunder,
Even so, as the first arm began to thunder
Upon the Prisners life, he burst the bands
From his strong wrists, and freed his loosned hands;
He stooped; from off the blood-expecting grass,
He snatched the crooked jaw bone of an Ass;
Wherewith, his fury dealt such downright blows.
So often redoubled, that it overthrowes
Man after man; And being ring'd about
With the distracted, and amazed rout
Of rude Philistians, turned his body round,
And in a circle dings them to the ground:
Each blow had proof; for, where the jaw bone mist,
The furious Champion wounded with his fist:
Betwixt them both, his fury did uncase
A thousand souls, which, in that fatal place,
Had left their ruined carkeises, to feast
The slesh-devouring foul, and ravenous beast:
With that, the Conqueror, that now had fed
And surfeited his eye upon the dead
His hand had slain, sat down; and, having flung
His purple weapon by, triumphed, and sung;
SAmson rejoice: Be filled with mirth;
Let all Iudaea know,
And tell the Princes of the earth
How strong an arm have thou:
How has thy dead inricht the land,
And purpled ore the grass,
That had no weapon in thy hand,
But the Iaw-bone of an Ass!
How does thy strength, and high renown
The glory of men surpass!
Thine arm has struck a thousand down, with the jaw bone of an Ass:
Let Samsons glorious name endure,
Till time shall render One,
Whose greater glory shall obscure
The Glory thou have won.
His Song being ended, rising from the place
Whereon he lay, he turned his ruthlesse face
Upon those heaps his direful hand had made,
And opening of his thirsty lips, he said:
Great God of Conquest, thou by whose command
This heart received courage, and this hand
Strength, to revenge thy quarrels, and fulfill
The secret motion of thy sacred will;
What, shall thy Champion perish now with thirst?
Thou know, I have done nothing, but what first
Was warranted by thy command: T was thou
That gave my spirit boldness, and my brow
A resolution: This mine arm did do
No more, then what thou did enjoyne it to:
And shall I dye for thirst? O thou that saved
Me from the Lions rage, that would have raved
Upon my life: by whom I have subdued
Thy cursed enemies, and have imbrued
My heaven-commanded hands, in a spring-tyde
Of guilty blood; Lord, shall I be denyde
A draught of cooling water, to allay
The tyranny of my thirst? I, that this day
Have labored in thy Vineyard; rooted out
So many weeds, whose losty crests did sprout
Above thy trodden Vines; what, shall I dye
For want of water, thou the Fountain by?
I know that thou were here, for had thou not
Supplyde my hand with strength, I never had got
So strange a victory: Has thy servant taken
Thy work in hand, and is he now forsaken?
Have thou not promised that my strengthened hand
Shall scourge thy Foemen, and secure thy Land
From slavish bondage? will that arm of thine
Make me their slave, whom thou have promised, mine?
Bow down thy ear, and hear my needful cry;
O, quench my thirst, great God, or else I dye:
With that, the jaw, wherewith his arm had laid
So many sleeping in the dust, obayde
The voice of God, and cast a tooth, from whence
A sudden spring arose, whose confluence
Of crystal waters, plentiously disburst
Their precious streams; and so allaid his thurst.
MEDITAT. 18.
THe jaw bone of an Ass? How poor a thing
God makes his powerful instrument to bring
Some honor to his name, and to advance
His greater glory! Came this bone, by chance,
To Samsons hand? Or could the Army go
No further? but must needs expect a foe
Just where his weapon of destruction lay?
Was there no fitter place, for them to stay,
But even just there? How small a thing 'thad bin
(If they had been so provident) to win
The day with ease? Had they but taken thence
That cursed Bone, what color of defense
Had Samson found? Or how could he withstood
The necessary danger of his blood?
Where Heaven does please to ruin, humane wit
Must fail, and deeper policy must submit:
There, wisdom must be fooled, and strength of brain
Must work against it self, or work in vain:
The tracke, that seems most likely, often leads
To death; and where security most pleads,
There, dangers, in their fairest shapes, appear,
And give us not so great a help, as fear:
The things we least suspect, are often they,
That most effect our ruin, and betray:
Who would have thought, the silly Asses bone,
Not worth the spurning, should have overthrown
So stout a Band? Heaven, often times, thinks best,
To overcome the greatest with the least:
He gains most glory in things, that are most slight,
And wins, in honor, what they want in might:
Who would have thought, that Samsons deadly thurst
Should have bin quenched with waters, that did burst
And flow from that dry bone? Who would not think,
The thirsty Conqueror, for want of drink,
Should first have dyed? What mad man could presume
So dry a tooth should yield so great a Rheum?
God does not work like Man; nor is he tied
To outward means: His pleasure is his Guide,
Not Reason: He, that is the God of Nature,
Can work against it: He that is Creator
Of all things, can dispose them, to attend
His will, forgetting their created end:
He, whose Almighty power did supply
This Bone with water, made the Red sea; dry:
Great God of Nature; It Is as great an ease
For thee to alter Nature, if thou please,
As to create it; Let that hand of thine
Show forth thy power, and please to alter mine:
My sins are open, but my sorrow's hid;
I cannot drench my couch, as David did;
My brains are marble, and my heart is stone:
O strike mine eyes, as thou did strike that bone.
SECT. 19.
ARGUMENT.
He lodges with a harlot: wait
Is laid, and guards are pitched about:
He bears away the City-gate
Upon his shoulders, and goes out.
THus when victorious Samson had unliv'd
This host of armed men; and had revived
His fainting spirits, and refresht his tongue
With those sweet crystal streams, that lately sprung
From his neglected weapon, he arose
(Secured from the tyranny of his Foes
By his Heaven-borrow'd strength) and boldly came
To a Philistian City, known by the name
Of Azza; where, as he was passing by,
The careless Champion cast his wandering eye
Upon a face, whose beauty did invite
His wanton heart to wonder and delight:
Her curious hair was crisp'd: Her naked breast
Was white as Ivory, and fairly dressed
With costly Jewels: In her glorious face,
Nature was hidden, and dissembled grace
Damaskt her rosy cheeks: Her eyes did spark,
At every glance, like Diamonds in the dark;
Bold was her brow; whose frown was but a foil
To glorify her better-pleasing smile;
Her pace was careless, seeming to discover
The passions of a discontented Lover:
Sometime, her opened Casement gives her eye
A twinkling passage to the passer by;
And, when her fickle fancy had given ore
That place, she comes, and wantons at the door;
There Samson viewed her, and his steps could find
No further ground; but (guided by his mind)
Cast Anchor there: Have thy observing eyes
Ere marked the Spiders garb, How close she lies
Within her curious web; And by and by,
How quick she hasts to her entangled Fly;
And, whispring poison in his murmring ears,
At last, she tugges her silent guest, and bears
His hampred body to the inner room
Of her obscure and solitary Home;
Even so this snaring beauty entertaines
Our eye-led Samson, tamperd with the chains
Of her imperious eyes; and he, that no man
Could conquer; now lies conquered by a woman.
Fair was his welcome, and as fairely' expressed
By her delicious language, which professed
No less affection, then so sweet a Friend,
Could, with her best expressions, recommend:
Into her glorious chamber she directs
Her welcome guest, and with her fair respects
She entertaines him; with a bountious kiss,
She gives him earnest of a greater bliss;
And with a brazen countenance, she brake
The way to her unchaste desires, and spoke;
Mirror of mankind, thou selected flower
Of Loves fair knot, welcome to Flora's bowrs;
Cheer up, my Love; and look upon these eyes,
Wherein my beauty, and thy picture lies;
Come, take me prisner, in thy folded arms;
And boldly strike up sprightly loves alarmes
Upon these ruby lips, and let us try
The sweets of love: Here Is none but thee and I:
My beds are softest down, and purest lawne
My sheets; My vallents, and my curtains drawn
In gold and silks of curious dye: Behold,
My Coverings are of Tap stry, inricht with gold;
Come, come, and let us take our fill of pleasure;
My husbands absence lends me dainty leisure
To give thee welcome: Come, let us spend the night
In sweet enjoyment of unknown delight.
Her words prevailed: And, being both undrest,
Together went to their defiled rest:
By this, the news of Samsons being there
Possessed the City, and filled every ear:
His death is plotted; And advantage lends
New hopes of speed: An armed guard attends
At every gate, that when the breaking day
Shall send him forth, the expecting Forces may
Betray him to his sudden death; and so,
Revenge their Kingdoms ruin at a blow:
But lustful Samson (whose distrustful ears
Kept open house) was now possessed with fears:
He hears a whispering; and the trampling feet
Of people passing in the silent street;
He, whom undaunted courage lately made
A glorious Conqueror, is now afraid;
His conscious heart is smitten with his sin;
He cannot choose but fear, and fear agin:
He fears; and now the terrible alarmes
Of sin do call him from the unlawful arms
And lips of his luxurious Concubine;
Bids him, arise from dalliance, and resign
The usurpation of his lukewarm place
To some new sinner, whose less dangerous case
May lend more leisure to so foul a deed:
Samson, with greater and unwonted speed
Leaps from his want on bed; his fears do press
More haste, to cloth; then lust did, to undresse:
He makes no tarryance; but, with winged have,
Bestrides the streets; and, to the gates, he past,
And through the armed troops, he makes his way;
Bears gates, and bars, and pillars all away;
So escaped the rage of the Philistian Band,
That still must owe his ruin, to their land.
MEDITAT. 19.
HOw weak, at strongest, is poor flesh and blood!
Samson, the greatness of whose power withstood
A little world of armed men, with death,
Must now be foiled with a woman's breath:
The mother, sometimes, lets her infant fall,
To make it hold the surer by the wall:
God lets his servant, often, go amiss,
That he may turn, and see how weak he is:
David that found an overflowing measure
Of heavens high favors, and as great a treasure
Of saving grace, and portion of the Spirit,
As flesh and blood was able to inherit,
Must have a fall, to exercise his fears,
And make him drown his restless Couch with Tears:
Wise Solomon, within whose heart was planted
The fruitful stocks of heavenly Wisdom, wanted
Not that, whereby his weakness understood
The perfect vanity of flesh and blood:
Whose hand seemed prodigal of his Isaacks life,
He durst not trust Gods providence with his wife:
The righteous Lot had slidings: Holy Paul
He had his prick; and Peter had his fall:
The sacred Bride, in whose fair face remains
The greatest earthly beauty, has her stains:
If man were perfect, and entirely good,
He were not Man: He were not flesh and blood:
Or should he never fall, he would, at length,
Not see his weakness, and presume in strength:
Ere children know the sharpness of the Edge,
They think, their fingers have a privilege
Against a wound; but, having felt the knife,
A bleeding finger, sometime, saves a life:
Lord, we are children; and our sharpe-edg'd knives,
Together with our blood, lets out our lives;
Alas, if we but draw them from the sheath,
They cut our fingers, and they bleed to death.
Thou great Surgeon of a bleeding soul,
Whose sovereign baulme, is able to make whole
The deepest wound, Thy sacred salve is sure;
We cannot bleed so fast, as thou can cure:
Heal thou our wounds; that, having salv'd the sore,
Our hearts may fear, and learn to sin no more;
And let our hands be strangers to those knives,
That wound not fingers only; but our lives.
Of your true servant; who, would never rest,
Till she had done the deed: But know, my Lords,
If the poor frailty of a woman's words
May shake so great a power, and prevail,
My best advised endeavors shall not fail
To be imploi'd: I Will make a sudden trial;
And quickly speed, or find a foul denial:
MEDITAT. 20.
INsatiate Samson! Could not Azza smother
Thy flaming lust; but must thou find another?
Is the old grown stale? And seeks thou for a new?
Alas, where Two's too many, Three's too few:
Man's soul is infinite, and never tires
In the extension of her own desires:
The sprightly nature of his active mind
Aims still at further; Will not be confinde
To the poor dimensions of flesh and blood;
Something it still desiers; Covets good;
Would feign be happy, in the sweet enjoyment
Of what it prosecutes, with the employment
Of best endeavors; but it cannot find
So great a good, but something's still behind:
It, first, propounds; applauds; desiers; endeavors;
At last, enjoyes; but (like to men, in Feavours,
Who fancy always those things that are worst)
The more it drinks, the more it is a thirst:
The fruitful earth (whose nature is the worse
For sin; with man partaker in the curse)
Aims at perfection; and would feign bring forth
(As first it did) things of the greatest worth;
Her colder womb endeavors (as of old)
To ripen all her Metalls, unto Gold;
O, but that sic-procured curse has child
The heat of pregnant Nature, and has filld
Her barren seed, with coldness, which does lurk
In her faint womb, that her more perfect work
Is hindered; and, for want of heat, brings forth
Imperfect metals, of a baser worth:
Even so, the soul of Man, in her first state,
Received a power, and a will to that
Which was most pure, and good; but, since the loss
Of that fair freedom, only trades in dross;
Aims she at Wealth? Alas, her proud desire
Strives for the best; but failing to mount higher
Then earth, her error grapples, and takes hold
On that, which earth can only give her, Gold
Aims she at Glory? Her ambition flies
As high a pitch, as her dull wings can rise;
But, failing in her strength, she leaves to strive.,
And takes such honor, as base earth can give:
Aims she at Pleasure? Her desires extend
To lasting joys, whose pleasures have no end;
But, wanting wings, she grovells on the Dust,
And, there, she lights upon a carnal Lust:
Yet nerethelesse, the aspiring Soul desires
A perfect good; but, wanting those sweet sires,
Whose heat should perfect her unrip'ned will,
Cleaves to the apparent Good, which Good is ill;
Whose sweet enjoyment, being far unable
To give a satisfaction answerable
To her unbounded wishes, leaves a thrist
Of reenjoyment, greater then the first.
Lord; When our fruitless fallowes are grown cold,
And out of heart, we can enrich the mould
With a new heat; we can restore again
Her weakened soil; and make it apt, for grain;
And will thou suffer our faint souls, to lie
Thus unmanur'd, that is thy Husbandry?
They bear no other bulk, but idle weeds,
Alas, they have no heart, no heat; Thy seeds
Are cast away, until thou please to inspire
New strength, and quench them with thy sacred fire:
Stir thou my Fallowes; and enrich my mold;
And they shall bring thee' increase, a hundred fold.
SECT. 21.
ARGUMENT.
False Delila accosts her Lover:
Her lips endeavor to entice
His gentle nature to discover
His strength: Samson deceives her thrice.
Soon as occasion lent our Champions ear
To Delila, which could not choose but hear,
If Delila but whispered; she, whose wiles
Were neatly baited, with her simple smiles,
Accosted Samson; Her alluring hand
Sometimes would stroke his Temples; sometime, span'd
His brawny arm; Sometimes, would gently gripe
His sinewy wrest; Another while, would wipe
His sweating brows; Her wanton fingers played,
Sometimes, with his fair locks; sometimes, would brai'd
His long dishevelled hair; her eyes, one while,
Would steal a glance upon his eyes, and smile;
And, then, her crafty lips would speak; then, smother
Her broken speech; and, then, begin another:
At last, as if a sudden thought had brake
From the fair prison of her lips, she spoke;
How poor a Grisle is this arm of mine!
Me thinks, it is nothing, in respect of thine;
(...) Of having: Wealth will rouse thy heart less friends;
Make thee a potent Master of thy Ends;
'T will bring thee honor; make thy suites at Law
Prosper at will; and keep thy Foes in awe:
Art thou Ambitious? He will kindle fire,
In thy proud thoughts, and make thy thoughts aspire;
He Will come, and teach thy honor how to scorn
Thy old acquaintance, whom thou have outworne:
He Will teach thee how to Lord it, and advance
Thy servants fortunes, with thy Countenance:
Would thou enjoy the pleasures of the flesh?
He Will bring thee wanton Ladies, to refresh
Thy drooping soul: He Will teach thine eyes to wander;
Instruct thee how to woo; He Will be thy Pander:
He Will fill thy amorous soul with the sweet passion
Of powerful Love: He Will give thee dispensation,
To sin at pleasure; He will make thee Slave
To thy own thoughts: He Will make thee beg and crave
To be a drudge: He Will make thy treacherous breath
Destroy thee, and betray thee to thy death.
Lord; if our Father Adam could not stay
In his upright perfection, one poor day;
How can it be expected, we have power
To hold out Seige, one scruple of an hour:
Our Arms are bound with too unequal bands;
We cannot strive; We cannot loose our hands:
Great Nazarite, awake; and look upon us:
Make have to help; The Philistines are on us.
SECT. 22.
ARGUMENT.
She sues again: Samson replies
The very truth: Her lips betray him:
They bind him; They put out his eyes,
And to the prison they convay him.
With that; the wanton, whose distrustful eye,
Was fixed upon reward, made this reply;
Had the denial of my poor request
Proceeded from the inexorable breast
Of one, whose open hatred sought to endanger
My haunted life; Or had it bin a stranger,
That wanted so much nature, to deny
The doing of a common courtesy;
Nay, had it bin a friend, that had deceived me,
An ordinary friend, It nere had grieved me:
But thou, even thou my bosom friend, that art
The only joy of my deceived heart;
Nay thou, whose hony-dropping lips soloften
Did plead thy undissembled love, and soften
My dear affection, which could never yield
To easier terms; by thee, to be beguild?
How often have thou mocked my slender suite
With forged falsehoods? Had thou but bin mute,
I nere had hoped: But being fairly led
Toward my prompt desires, which were fed
With my false hopes, and thy false-hearted tongue,
And then beguilde? I hold it as a wrong:
How can thou say thou love me? How can I
Think but thou hat'st me, when thy lips deny
So poor a Suite? Alas, my fond desire
Had slak'd, had not denial blown the fire:
Grant then at last, and let thy open breast
Show that thou love me', and grant my fair request:
Speak, or speak not, thy Delila shall give ore
To urge; her lips shall never urge thee more:
To whom, the yielding lover thus betrayed
His heart, being tortured unto death, and said;
My dear; my Delila; I cannot stand
Against so sweet a pleader; In thy hand
I here entrust, and to thy breast impart
Thy Samsons life, and secrets of his heart;
Know then my Delila, that I was borne
A Nazarite; These locks were never shorn;
No Raisor, yet, came ere upon my crown;
There lies my strength; with the^, my strength is gone:
Were they but shaven, my Delila; O, then,
Thy Samson should be weak as other men;
No sooner had he spoken, but he spread
His body on the floor, his drowzy head
He pillow'd on her lap; until, at last,
He fell into a sleep; and, being fast,
She clipped his locks from off his careless head.
And beckning the Philistians in, she said;
Samson awake; Take strength and courage on thee;
Samson arise; The Philistines are on thee:
Even as a Dove, whose wings are clipped, for flying,
Flutters her idle stumps; and still, relying
Upon her wonted refuge, strives in vain,
To quit her life from danger, and attain
The freedom of her ayre-dividing plumes;
She struggles often, and she often presumes
To take the sanctuary of the open fields;
But, finding that her hopes are vain, she yields:
Even so poor Samson (frighted at the sound,
That rowz'd him from his rest) forsook the ground;
Perceiving the Philistians there at hand,
To take him prisoner, he began to stand
Upon his wonted Guarde: His threatening breath
Brings forth the prologue to their following death:
He rowz'd himself; and, like a Lion, shook
His drowzy limbs; and with a cloudy look,
(Foretelling boystrous, and tempestious weather)
Defied each one, defied them all together:
Now, when he came to grapple, he upheav'd
His mighty hand; but, now (alas, bereaved
Of wonted power) that confounding arm,
(That could no less then murder) did no harm;
Blow was exchanged, for blow; and wound for wound:
He, that, of late, disdained to give ground,
Flies back apace; who, lately, stained the field
With conquered blood, does now begin to yield;
He, that, of late, brake twisted Ropes in twain,
Is bound with Pack thread; He, that did disdain
To fear the power of an Armed Band,
Can now walk prisoner in a single hand:
Thus have the treacherous Philistines betrayed
Poor captive Samson: Samson now obay'd:
Those glowing eyes, that whitled death about,
Where ere they viewed, their cursed hands put out;
They led him prisoner, and convai'd him down
To strong-wall'd Azza (that Philistian town,
Whose gates his shoulders lately bore away)
There, in the common Prison, did they lay
Distressed Samson, who obtained no meat,
But what he purchased with his painful sweat;
For, every day, they urged him to fulfill
His twelve hours task, at the laborious Mill;
And, when his wasted strength began to tire,
They Would quicken his bare sides, with whips of Wire:
Filled was the town with Joy, and Triumph: All,
From the high-Prince, to the Cobbler, on the stall,
Kept holy day, whilst every voice became
Hoarse, as the Trumpe of newes-divulgeing fame;
All tongues were filled with shouts: And every care
Was grown impatient of the whisperer;
So general was their Triumph, their Applause,
That children shouted, ere they knew a cause:
The better sort betook them to their knees;
Dagon must worshipped be: Dagon, that frees
Both Sea, and Land, Dagon, that did subdue
Our common foe: Dagon must have his due:
Dagon must have his praise; must have his prize:
Dagon must have his holy Sacrifice:
Dagon has brought to our victorious hand
Proud Samson: Dagon has redeemed our land:
We call to Dagon; and our Dagon hears;
Our groans are come to holy Dagons ears;
To Dagon, all renown and Glory be;
Where is there such another God as He?
MEDITAT. 22.
HOw is our story changed? O, more then strange
Effects of so small time! O, sudden change;
Is this that holy Nazarite, for whom
Heaven showed a Miracle, on the barren womb?
Is this that holy Thing, again whose birth,
Angels must quit their thrones, and visit Earth?
Is this that blessed Infant, that began
To grow in favor so, with God and man?
What, is this he, who (strengthened by heavens hand)
Was borne a Champion, to redeem the Land?
Is this the man, whose courage did contest
With a fierce Lion, grappling breast to breast;
And in a twinkling, tore him quite in sunder?
Is this that Conqueror whose Arm did thunder
Upon the men of Askalon, the power
Of whose bent fist, slew thirty in an hour?
Is this that daring Conqueror, whose hand
Thrasht the proud Philistines, in their wasted land?
And was this He, that with the help of none,
Destroyed a thousand with a silly Bone?
Or He, whose wrists, being bound together, did
Break Cords like flax, and double Ropes like third?
Is this the man whose hands unhinged those Gates,
And barethem thence, with pillars, bars, and Grates?
And is he turned a Mill-horse now? and blind?
Must this great Conqueror be forced to grind
For bread and water? Must this Hero spend
His latter times in drudgery? Must he end
His weary days in darkness? Must his hyer,
Be knotted cords, and torturing whips of wire?
Where heaven withdrawes, the creatures power shakes;
What miserie's wanting there, where God for sakes?
Had Samson not abused his borrowed power,
Samson, had still, remained a Conqueror:
The Philistines did act his part; No doubt,
His eyes offended, and they plucked them out:
Heaven will be just: He punishes a sin,
Often, in the member, that he finds it in:
When faithless Zacharias did become
Too curious, his lips were stricken dumb:
Samson whose lustful view did overprize
Unlawful beautye's punished in his eyes;
Those flaming eyes seduced his wanton mind
To act a sin; Those eyes are stricken blind;
The beauty he invaded, did invade him,
And that fair tongue, that blessed him so, betrayed him:
That strength, intemperate lust employed so ill,
Is now a driving the laborious Mill;
Those naked sides, so pleased with lusts desire,
Are, now, as naked, lasht with whips of wire:
Lord; should thou punish every part in me
That does offend, what member would be free?
Each member acts his part; They never lin
Until they join, and make a Body' of sin:
Make sin my burden; Let it never please me;
And thou have promised, when I come, to ease me,
SECT. 23.
ARGUMENT.
They make a feast. And then to crown
Their mirth, blind Samson is brought thither:
He pulls the mighty Pillars down;
The Building falls: All slain together,
THus when the vulgar Triumph (which does last
But seldom, longer then the news) was past,
And Dagons holy Altars had surceast
To breath their idle fumes: they called a feast,
A common Feast; whose bounty did bewray
A common joy, to gratulate the day;
Whereto, the Princes, under whose command
Each province was, in their divided land;
Whereto, the Lords, Leiutenants, and all those,
To whom the supreme Rulers did repose
An under-trust; whereto, the better sort
Ofgentry, and of Commons did resort,
With mirth, and jolly triumph, to allay
Their sorrows, and to solemnize the day;
Into the common Hall they come: The Hall
Was large and fair; Her arched roof was all
Builded with massy stone, and over laid
With ponderous Lead; Two sturdy Pillars stayed
Her mighty Rafters up; whereon, relied
The weighty burden of her lofty pride.
When lusty diet, and the frollicke cup
Had roused and raised their quickened spirits up,
And brave triumphing Bacchus had displaid
His conquering coullers, in their cheeks, they said;
Call Samson forth; He must not work to day;
It Is a boon feast; We Will give him leave to play;
Does he grind bravely? Does our Millhorse sweat?
Let him lack nothing; What he wants in meat,
Supply in lashes; He is strong and stout,
And, with his breath can drive the Mill about:
He works too hard, we fear: Go down and free him;
Say, that his Mistress, Delila would see him:
The sight of him will take our hours short,
Go fetch him then, to make our Honors sport:
Bid him provide some Riddles; Let him bring
Some songs of Triumph: He that is blind, may sing
With better boldness: Bid him never doubt
To please: What matter, though his eyes be out?
It Is no dishonor, that he cannot see;
Tell him, the God of Lov's as blind, as he:
With that they brought poor Samson to the Hall;
And as he past, he gtopes to find the wall;
His pace was slow; His feet were lifted high;
Each tongue would taunt him; Every scornful eye
Was filld with laughter; Some would cry aloud,
He walks in state: His Lordship is grown proud:
Some bid his Honor, Hail; whilst others cast
Reproachful terms upon him; as he past;
Some would salute him fairly, and embrace
His wounded sides; then spit upon his face:
Others would cry; For shame forbear to abuse
The high and great Redeemer of the Jews:
Some gibe and floute him with their taunts and quips,
Whilst others flurt him on the starting lips:
With that; poor Samson, whose abundant grief,
Not finding hopes of comfort, or releife,
Resolved for patience: Turning round, he made
Some shift to feel his Keeper out, and said;
Good Sir: my painful labor in the Mill
Has made me bold (although against my will)
To crave some little rest; If you will please
To let the Pillour but afford some ease
To my worn limbs, your mercy should relieve
A soul, that has no more, but thanks, to give:
The keeper yielded: (Now the Hall was filld
With Princes, and their People, that beheld
Abused Samson; whilst the Roof retained
A leash of thousands more, whose eyes were chained
To this sad Object, with a full delight,
To see this flesh-and-blood-relenting sight;
With that, the prisoner turned himself and prayed
So soft, that none but heaven could hear, and said;
My God, my God: Although my sins do cry
For greater vengeance, yet thy gracious eye
Is full of mercy; O, remember now
The gentle promise and that sacred vow
Thou made to faithful Abram, and his seed,
O, hear my wounded soul, that has less need
Of life, then mercy: Let thy tender ear
Make good thy plentious promise now, and hear;
See, how thy cursed enemies prevail
Above my strength; Behold, how poor and frail
My native power is, and, wanting thee,
What is there, Oh, what is there (Lord) in me?
Nor is it I that suffer; My desert
May challenge greater vengeance, if thou were
Extreme to punish: Lord the wrong is thine;
The punishment is just, and only mine:
I am thy Champion, Lord; It is not me
They strike at; Through my sides, they thrust at thee:
Against thy Glory it is, their Malice lies;
They aimed at that, when they put out these eyes:
Alas their blood bedabbl'd hands would fly
On thee, were thou but clothed in flesh, as I:
Revenge thy wrongs, great God; O let thy hand
Redeem thy suffering honor, and this land:
Lend me thy power; Renew my wasted strength,
That I may fight thy battles; and, at length,
Rescue thy Glory; that my hands may do
That faithful service, they were borne unto:
Lend me thy power, that I may restore
Thy loss, and I will never urge thee more:
Thus having ended, both his arms he laid,
Upon the pillours of the Hall; and said;
Thus, with the Philistines, I resign my breath;
Andlet my God find Glory in my death:
And having spoke, his yielding body strained
Upon those Marble pillour, that sustained
The pondrous Roof; They cracked; and, with their fall,
Down fell the Battlements, and Roof, and all;
And, with their ruins, slaughtered at a blow,
The whole Assembly; They, that were below,
Received their sudden deaths from those that fell
From off the top; whilst none was loft, to tell
The horrid shreekes, that filld the spacious Hall,
Whose ruins were impartial, and slew all:
They fell; and, with an unexpected blow,
Gave every one his death, and Burial too:
Thus died our Samson; whose brave death has won
More honor, then his honored life had done:
Thus died our Conqueror; whose latest breath
Was crowned with Conquest; triumphed over death:
Thus died our Samson; whose last drop of blood
Redeemed heavens glory, and his Kingdom's good:
Thus died heavens Champion, and the earths bright Glory;
The heavenly subject of this sacred story:
And thus the impartial hand of death that gathers
All to the Grave, reposed him with his fathers;
Whose name shall flourish, and be still in prime,
In spite of ruin, or the teeth of Time;
Whose fame shall last, till heaven shall please to free
This Earth from Sin, and Time shall cease to be.
MEDITAT. 23.
Wages of sin, is death. The day must come,
Wherein, the equal hand of death must sum
The several Items of man's fading glory,
Into the easy Total of one Story:
The brows that sweat for kingdoms and renown,
To gloryfie their Temples with a Crown;
At length, grow cold, and leave their honored name
To flourish in the uncertain blast of fame:
This is the height that glorious mortals can
Attain; This is the highest pitch of Man:
The quilted Quarters of the Earths great Ball,
Whose unconfined limits were too small
For his extreme Ambition, to deserve,
Six foot of length, and three of breadth must serve:
This is the highest pitch that Man can fly;
And after all his Triumph, he must die:
Lives he in Wealth? Does well deserved store
Limit his wish, that he can wish no more?
And does the fairest bounty of increase
Crown him with plenty; and, his days with peace?
It is a right hand blessing; But supply
Of wealth cannot secure him; He must die:
Lives he in Pleasure? Does perpetual mirth
Lend him a little Heaven upon his earth?
Meets he no sullen care; no sudden loss
To cool his joys? Breathes he without a cross?
Wants he no pleasure, that his want on eye
Can crave, or hope from fortune? He must dye:
Lives he in Honor? Has his fair desert
Obtained the freedom of his Princes heart?
Or may his more familiar hands disburse
His liberal favors, from the royal purse?
Alas, his Honor cannot soar too high,
For palefac'd death to follow: He must dye:
Lives he a Conqu'rour? And does heaven bless
His heart with spirit; that spirit, with success;
Success, with Glory; Glory, with a name,
To live with the Eternity of Fame?
The progress of his lasting fame may vye
With time; But yet the Conqueror must dye:
Great, and good God: Thou Lord of life and death;
In whom, the Creature, has his being; breath;
Teach me to under prize this life, and I
Shall find my loss the easier, when I dye;
So raise my feeble thoughts, and dull desire,
That when these vain and weary days expire,
I may discard my flesh, with joy, and quit
My better part, of this false earth; and it
Of some more sin; and, for this Transitory
And teadious life, enjoy a life of Glory.
The end.

