AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.

BY THE SIEVR DE LA SERRE, Historiographer of France.

Newly turned out of Franch into English, by FRANCIS HAWKINS, dravving on to
the tenth year of his age.

A PARIS, Chez NICOLAS and IEAN de la COST, au mont S. Hilaire, al'Escu de
Bretagne.

M.DC.XXXVIII.

portrait of Francis Hawkins Francois Hawkins tirant a l'aage des dix ans.
Francis Hawkins about the age of Ten years.


See here the effigies of a Child whose wit
So far outstripps his years and ruderthronge
That at Ten years he does teach with whats' fit
For their behavour from a foreign tongue
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD SAKVILE. EARL OF DORSET, One of his
Majestye's most Honorable Privy Council, Knight of the Noble Order of the
Garter, and Lord Chamberlain to the Queene's Majesty, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
Truly; though I am under tender years: yet my ambition sore's so high, as to
call your Excellence the Patron of this my Treatise. My lovv degree, then mine
age, to censure strictly, alas, suite not properly, to offer up aught in this
nature unto your Honor: Deigne though in your benignity, to connive at this my
boldness: for which I cannot produce express defense: unless this may agree
with your propitiousness, that it may not seem unto you amiss, to be
honored by each one, even from shrub to Cedar.

Right honorable, I take my most submissiue leave Your honor's devoted
Servant, FRANCIS HAWKINS.

THE PREFACE.
GENTLE READER,
The first Treatise I presented the with, was of good behavior. I had thy
candor, favor, and honor, as a benign receiver, of that my labor: which
encouraged me to wait on the again, with another of an higher strain, and
of a rarer nature, also of a more useful matter. It was a Formulair of
Compliments to be expressed by voice, and Missiue Letters, the one, and the
other reduced under their proper Titles.

In my Preface there annexed, I said; that I would present thee with another
Piece, and make my Posy one, compiled of three. Behold here my just tender.
Though this each where agree not with thine ear: yet may thou herein
discover these times vice even in perspicuous cipher. Fare-vvell.



AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The first Days Work.
AWAKE ye, Ladies, awake ye, at the dreadful sound or this Trompet. It Is the
summon of your appearance in the name of God, to that inevitable judgment, such
is it, to which all human Nature must obey, must bow: It Is a judgment that
astonisheth the most innocent, and causes the most just to sighe, yea rather
through fear to tremble.

Awake ye, forsake your, though nice coutches speedily, come ye out of them,
as if they were no other, then your graves, where the worm of your consciences
does devour ye; Hear attentively the last time, the final decree of your
safety or loss, your lives, or deaths.

Open your eyes to this doleful light of the Sun, which this day sends his
beams so bright into your chambers, which I may well enstile doleful; for
who well knows, whether each stream of this Planet, be not a funeral
torch, which surroundeth your beds, as your first coffins: since that our lives
have not in proper one sole moment: Surely, it were to much purpose to number
your years, the bells call on ye to the burial of one of your company, much
younger alas! then are ye.

How is it possible! that in the proper posture wherein ye lie, ye once
reflect not on your deaths, on your last end? Behold ye stretched forth at
lenght, to your uttermost extents, in that self same linnens, which likely will
serve ye in lieu of your winding sheets. It Is well indeed, that ye can
breath as yet, this witness of your lives is the sign of your deaths: since
that each respiratio^ does denote a minute of the clock of your lungs, until
the last breath, the last sigh, make ye know, the last hour of your retreits.
And as all your other actions necessarily return thither; can ye be sensible
of life, without feeling your selves to dye, and dying void of thinking, that
the self same day which by grace has been lent ye, may by justice be your
very last: where you must render a strict account of each moment, which have
fore-run even from your births?

At the lenght; behold ye risen: but wherewith do you entertain your
precious time; ye make your address unto your lookinglass, and give your
selves the first, therein, by ye the day is given over to the good morrow, to
all the enchantments of your fair face, alas! It were requisite, that some
one, or other, should whisper in your ears, as it was formerly to the wife of
Mithridates, Sooner, or later death will attend on you, it will come
inevitably: Is it credible, that your bloods even frozen with fear, and
horror, become not changed into very ice, where ruins may be plainly
discovered by the enticements whereby ye appear idolatresses? This mighty, as
unhappy graced by beauty, made caresses, and homage, as do too many others of
ye to her face, in her lookinglass, alas! even when she was told: that she
must dye, there was news indeed!

How is it now Ladies? does not one daily sing the self same song unto ye?
were ye happy of the least memory, it would certainly cause ye to reflect
seriously, that there are very many of your companions dead; and I can assure
ye, that ye trace them apace.

Are ye confident to gaze on your faces with self delights in your
lookinglasses ever: since that beauty does flitt daily, daily fade, and gives
it is adieu? Ye admire with eyes idolatress, not weighing seriously, that your
selves are the sacrifices laid upon the Altar. This world at the mercy of the
Divine justice, the officer of which is Time, does though by slow paces, usher
ye to death, where ye must endure eternal pains for your offenses.

What curiosity see ye? what rare gemmes contemplate ye on in the
lookinglasse, that there ye stay so long? Makes it show unto ye, that your
foreheads are as smooth as glass? alas! The one, and other has deceived ye
far: Your foreheads coutch their wrinkles under the veil of your own arts,
for ye daily paint them; And besides, your lookinglass, which flattreth ye,
by a new devise of the cunning artificer, who to oblige ye does decypher ye
such as ye would be, not the same ye are: what novelty admire ye now? your
eyes? It would ever grieve me, if they ouerflow not in tears, to deplore their
miseries.

Is it your mouths? It suffiseth me to know: that they can not utter words of
more validity: then are these which declare, and divulg the truth of your
calamityes. And for your tinctures, delicateness, they impose on me charitable
silence fearing to wrong them by the sole air of my breath.

Can I not impose silence with patience, on my self as yet, that ye may rest
in peace, since that ye are seriously entertained so; Where there are found
more dreams: then grounds, then reasons, which I must needs believe? Were ye
awakened: then would resound the direful Trompet, which call's ye to the day
of Doom: where each one must appear in proper person, and answer for
himself in particular.

Set before ye now the confusion, and disorder ye shall be brought unto. Is
it not likely, that ye will blush for shame: as often as ye have laid white
on your faces? will they not become pale with fear, as often as ye have laid
on them, red? therein, ye will betray your selves, publicly discovering the
secrets of your guilty slights.

I excuse Narcissus in the fable, where as it is found that there he became his
own enamoured, the adorer of himself. How was he deceived? Alas poor
Narcissus! thou never did discover thy self in that guise, and manner: But
how can one pardon ye? or in any wise conniue at the errors found in ye, of
the like nature? Can ye make the least question of your defects: since that
ye are fully fraught with them? And for your forgettfulness of your miseryes:
it is strange! What ye fe'ele a thousand times a day, can not butt make ye
confess: that ye are not pasted of aught else, nor formed of any other matter.

Awake ye then speedily, redeem your selves out of this earthly sloth,
wherewith your souls are burthned, are indeed heavily oppressed, and lending
an attentive ear unto the dreadful sound of this Trumpett, which summoneth
the Universe to judgment, ponder seriously* that it gives not a vain warning:
since that each moment, an infinity of souls, come thither in troops. See in
what case ye would be found: if death should surprise ye even then: when
your faces are painted, your phantasyes charged with vanities, and your souls
soyled with a thousand kinds of crimes: Oh God of justice, who will not fear
thee, at the day of thy vengeance?

Believe me Ladies; since that your death's are inevitable: since that ye must
expressly dye indeed: sollicitously note your daily demeanours. It seemth to
any one, who observes the care which ye employ on your faces: that you live
for them only. The fairest of your company, who yesterday dyed suddenly to
day affrighted her vassals, and though ye be tender to maintain her former
beauty: yet I assure me: that ye defye to come nigh her without stopping your
noses.

Enstyle ye those horrors graces which appear on her face? those her eyes
suncke? those her wanne lips? I tell ye truly; that hew of death, that it is
tincture, would as it where even make me hate your sex: were I not a fruit
of the same tree; The roots, and body of the tree, are of the self same stamp;
The leaves and flowers, are of the self same nature, there is not a pin to
choose.

To apply my self more nigh unto ye, I will state it thus; that there is
amongst ye one, who is the flower, the mirror, the wonder of this age, what
honor, what lucre, what return of profitt will hence accrue unto her? were it
that one sing her praises in each tongue: there will not be found aught; but
air in diverse fashions. Should one erect, and consecrat unto her Altars: she
must be the sacrifice, for having been the Idol. Were it that she could
impose laws to all mortals: she can not exempt her self from being subject
to all their miseryes. Were that courtly Fortune led her by the hand, to the
height of thrones: the self same may occasion her to fall, into the precipice
of a lamentable prison, there to dye through grief; as it was to Darius his
wife. I Will go further; namely; that herrenowned beauty, had the vant in the
judgment of many ages; what then? where may be found her aduantag therein? A
thousand honors will be ascribed unto her. What will the world render unto
her, where she is no more, nor ever shall be? and likely she shall then burn
in Hell, there so remain eternally. Her body I say, shall be food for worms.
Her soul, for the flames, and sometimes her name, and fame shall be celebrated
here below. Where lies the honor now? My spirits do suffer, in these
contemplations, through their conceived fear, and astonishment.

Ladies; in what a miserable condition are they; who solely have beauty, for
their share, for their part? What rate set ye on beauty alone? I say it is no
other: then to have a gay posy of flowers, wherewith one may deck, and dress
one's self trimmely in the morning, during the space that they are fresh: butt
about noone, indeed so soon one leaves the regard as well of the flowers: as
stem: even so, at the approach of night, this admired object, (the self same
meant) is misprised of the Universe.

Truly what soever is said; I find nothing good but Virtue: the rest passes
by, and vanishes. One of tall, and comely stature stoopeth. A clear voice
changes. And a polite wit sometimes loses it self through Vanity. Virtue is
it, which is solely stable, solely permanent on it is one ground, never giving
us over to our ruin.

Be ye then Ladies, since so ye will needs have it, as fair as was Cypris
said to be in the fable: yet ye will gain but an apple for your recompense.
Admit ye be as beautiful, as was Lucretia famed to be in the History, yet
dyed she through grief. All the beautyes, who have appeared on the earth,
since the instant of it is having being, make but a hillock of it is gross dust.
It Is virtue solely which lead's us beyond our tombs.

But whither go ye now so well accoutred, so neately dressed? If it be to
Confession, to make that desseigne your good morrows; since that it is the first
Sunday of the month: then reflect how ye have prepared your selves. In lieu
of examining your consciences before a Crucifixe; ye have been curious to
enquire the state, and being of your faces before a lookinglass.

Ye go to crave pardon for your offenses, and a new trangress ye, in the
same which calls for justice. Ye part I say from the Confession chair to the
Altar, there to receive your Savior with souls more disposed to offend here
after: then resolved to repent of what is passed in your former lives. Is not
this to cry for vengeance against your selves.

Me thinckst I see the rare saint Francis to appear with that perfect
charity, which enflamed him on earth, and by the self same fire wherewith the
Seraphins are surrounded, and entertained happily in Heaven, and yet he
thought himself unworthy to take upon him the order of Preisthood: Yet will ye
be so audacious, so shameless, as to receive your own Creator with impure
mouths, and profane hearts; the sole thought of this crime, does put my
spirits out of frame, caused through confusion, and astonishment.

AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The second Days Work.
I Warn ye Ladies, in the name of God, for it is himself who gives ye
notice: that ye neither know the day, nor hour, when this Trumpet, which
calls ye to his judgment will give the last summon. How is it with ye?
Thinck ye it not amiss, to pass the moity of your ages in dreams, and folyes?
Ye sleep with souls as black, as Hell; what repose can ye enjoy at the eve
of your everlasting restlesness? The Heaven; though insensible, quaketh for
horror, at the clamor, the great noise of this Trumpet. The earth; though
immooveable, does thence tremble for fear; The Angels themselves in their
purity, and all the Saints jointly in their innocence, are toutched with
astonishment; allthough they are not capable of fear: and yet ye sleep,
during the time of this public alarum's being: which fright's all Nature.
Awake ye speedily, and prepare your selves to render an account, even of the
least idle word which ye have let fall.

Ah! how out of frame ye are; when ye wake, it seems to me: that ye have
set by to dye in show, ye will dye now in earnest. Let me see how it is with
ye? Ye are at a bay for fear, and dread. Oh! how profitable would these
agonyes be found unto ye: if ye would oftentimes undergo the pains to
apprehend lively God's judgments: but your spirits avers'd from so serious
thoughts, are the cause of your missprise thereof, without reflecting on your
loss thereby, that is a pity, alas!

I perceive, that ye are risen to dress your selves, and ye are never unready
to deck your bodies repleat with infections: but forbear a while I pray: then
look out of the window; there is a spectacle for ye to meditate on, that
stinking carcass, which is carried to be buried, the same with whom two days
since, ye contested with for beauty, it is now as ye see, borne to the tomb;
and ye will follow it thither: it is but a pace before ye; it is not known as
yet wether ye arrive all three together thither: This dreadful Trumpet
sounds daily, and ye trace the ground incessantly, and run the self same
race. Observe a right how it does agree to judgment: that ye be seen buried
in the way, one while; to frisle your hairs for to hide your nitts; another
time; to make white your teeth, those little bones: whose least infected,
ruineth your graces, and thus much is in favor of your bodies: which
apparently do putrify; and hence the worms expect their prey in this world,
and the infernal spirits in the other. What is the benefitt which your souls
do reap by the graces of your faces? Thinck ye; that at the hour of your
deaths, your Confessor will demand of ye, how many ye have enthralled,
enchained, and made your slaves? No no, but at larg, namely; how long it has
been, that ye have employed your time in so unhappy a being at such rate, in
so commiserable a state: There is no further talk of your excellent persons
your rares faces; their graces shall possess no places, no more shall they
domineere: your souls only shall plead their causes, God grant that they
want not plea to obtain their suites.

O how fair is the employment of this second days entertainment! it is passed
off in admiring, and tricking your selves, meaning thereby to tempt and attrap
weak persons to idolatrise! But, alas! I find ye far, more simple yet. It
does appear, that ye labor only to advance and advantadg the fiends of
Hell: since at the days end, they carry with them away all your spoils.
Further; hereunto adjoine their conquestes of your selves. It Is confessed,
that ye are ritchely clothed, that there can not be added aught to the
stately curiosity which serve, as a new luster to your enticements: But whither
bend ye your way so nicely decked? if it be to a Comedy.

Ah! how Cleopatra, that young Princess, represents a doleful personage, on
the stage the Theather of her marriage, in the Tragedy of King Philip her dear
husband's death, for she dyed, by the same stroke of misfortune, which carried
that great Monark to his tomb. She was as fair as are ye. How comes it to
pass: that ye are happyer? She was as young as ye. What reason have ye not to
apprehend her misery, her missfortune sensibly?

The Trumpet which cited ye to death, and judgment, sounds incessantly,
thither does each one make their recours in troops, and croudes. Who can
assure ye, that ye shall not appear there this very day: since that ye make
your way as fast as the rest? Is that a reposed life, is it to possess
tranquillity, to perceive your selves dye without your being prepared for
death? will ye expose those things to so great a peril: Which ye can not
loose but once? Ye live not but for Eternity: for the life of this world is
not properly a life: and yet ye let pass your time without reflecting, once
thinking of Eternity, which will last as long as God Almighty.

What? will it not turn to your reproach: that on Earth ye shall be found to
have done nothing else, but dress, and deck your bodies of earth? Oh! what a
rare exercise would it be: if so your souls were of the same matter! Oh! the
sweet entertainment: if it were not expressly necessary to dye! if so one
were to live for ever: but; daily to live the eve of an eternal loss, and
passing all the time, to the dressing, and decking of your carcasses; by
consequence it must follow: that Hell will be your recompense.

Notwithstanding what herein is fore delivered; behold ye pass your time, in
seeing a Comedy at the Burgugnion house: but know ye not, that ye there act
your parts, and are at the end, of each interclude, giving occasion of laughter
and scorn to all the sage Democrites, for the vain employments of your times?
yet it is expedient, that I extract your gains, out of your losses. Atleast
think ye, during this your entertainements of time; that the world is a
Theater, where even new ye represent those persons whom God has endowed for
Eternity: Do ye well or ill; ye shall not appear but this time solely on
the Theater, ye play your parts for ever, the Angels, and the Devils are
your lookers on, expecting the end of the last act, whence ye are to receive
praises, or reproaches, I mean recompense, or chastisement.

Ye have a fair petition to deliver, descended from the Theather into your
sepulcher. Oh! give us leave to rise again, we will live better then in
former times we have. The intercludes are passed. The play is ended. The
candells are extinguished, each one shall receive his guiderdon, according to
his merit, and for an Eternity. O fearful judgment! But what'is more dreadful
yet, is that the Trumpet does summon ye thither amongst the disorder wherein
ye live: I leave ye to consider here on seriously.

AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The third Days Work.
HAPPY are they, who rest in our Lord Ladies then (...) ye: for (...) to the
(...) I find ye, your (...) are as black as poss^^^ (...) though your faces
(...) white. Behold ye are bridled under the chinne, as are little infants
with a mask lined with waxed linen to fright them.

Oh! how would ye be amazed, if ye must necessarily appear before God
Allmighty within a moment, to undergo the sentence of his judgment? Which of
either, ought to be more dear unto ye the beauty of your bodies, or your
souls healthes? Your bodies, conceived of corruption, and borne under the
imperfection in which they live, can they eleuate themselves, to make
comparison with (...), created by the hand (...) ^llmighty, through his (...)
charity, and for his (...)

Yet and again, Oh! prodigalls of misery, of infirmity, of mere weakness
indeed; who misprise nothing else but your souls safety; and are not
passionatly tender for aught else, but for your bodies. Them you adorn
oftentimes, with new clothes, with nice robes; without weighing: that they
consume all which they toutch; and ruin all which deck them. Ye do well to
bestow on them hair to adorn their bald heads, with a perrewig. The wrinckles
on their foreheads, make appear atlenght, the borrowed gally pot of roses, to
show us clearly, the thorns wherewith their age is stated in.

Conserve your beautyes with the art of limbeck, renew your teeth each year,
hidet your limber, and flaggy breasts under a handkercher, allsoe shroud
somewhat, which may make them seem round, and hard: the default of such
vprisings would be valiew'd as a most apparent deformity; It would destroy
all, Then; and Time, who trayleth along all things, who spares none, makes an
other breach, such a ruin; which can never be repaired: I refer it to your
quickened, to your more lively spirits hitherto drowned with sleep, to the
recovery of your better reason long since strayed; Whither this condition of
life, which ye lead on Earth, can conduct ye to Heaven?

The third hour is even at hand, at it is period, in all which time, ye have
been mervaillously serious, but in what? to put on your new clothes, and your
bands according to the fashion: May I be bold to enquire of ye what therein
ye mean? If it be to show your selves at the Revells, and there to dance,
make not have. It was told me: that she, who moved for that meeting, is
surprised by a continual fever, and the small pox. Alas! what a chang of
Medaile: Yet fail not to visit her. Her affrighting malady, will teach ye to
despise the baits, inticements, and beautyes which ye valiew so highly.
Yesterday morning she contended for the golden apple, with the fairest found
amongst ye; this evening the curtain of her bed is drawn to hide her, for
fear, least that she hurt her adorers: Oh rare Beauty! It Is to flatter thee
too much, to compare thee to the wind, and to the smoke: for thou art (as it
seems unto me) much less in valiew.

The Revells yet go on, I mean the dancing to which Nature even from your
cradles invited ye, and to which, Time is the violin: for by it is continual
motion, it trayleth us all together, to our sepulcher.

I much doubt, least the air of this dance be dissonant to your ears: but
how soever; ye must dance to it, there is no gainesay. Further; it is time must
be kept strictly, it is all in cadence, it is musically composed indeed. Oh!
observe well it is burden, there has been much care employed on it: Each thing
flitteth, and glydeth without ceasing, beauty leads in chief, as the most
frail most brittle. Ye may plainly see your shares, your lotts: yet must ye
of necessity pass the residue of the day in somewhat, which may seem to please
ye: but I pray ye what is it? Ye are even now very busy; Ye court your
selves in the lookinglass, as did the wife of Nero: Oh! said this Princess,
that I might dye first: rather then have the least diffigure on my face; she
considered not what then she did, how she lived, nor what she said: when
she daily made this prayer: that each moment, of each hour insensibly
deprived her, and robbed her, of parcel, of her rare beauty.

Ladies, it is not expedient, that ye crave earnestly on Heaven, for that
dessigne: since that, all the instants of your lives, are so many secret
thieves, who subtlely rob ye of the principal, and most curious enticing
draughts of your faces, I say subtlely beginning in the bud, dawning, or rather
call it Sunrising of your age: yet thereof, ye take noe heed. By serious
attention on their actions, is raised suspicion; and hence are they partly
detected to be thieves: but in the evening they are expressly found no less,
then public Pirates, who carry with them all away, together with your selves.

Oh! is it not even so, what I now relate? that these trueths ought to be
sensible unto ye; in such sort, and manner: as that ye should not ever
meditate on aught else: since of such like serious, and tender speculations
depend your safetyes? for if ye present unto your selves this variability,
this incessant circumvolution, wherewith all things here below are chained,
and to be buried one after an other within this whirlepoole of Time, which
devoureth all, and that ye turning the other side of this medaile, would
ponder: that souls only are eternal, would it be even possible, that ye
shall not be fully taken up with the love of Eternity?

It Is more then six thousand years, since the Creation of this World, and it
scarcely seems to be one day. It Is very true; that what is passed, is
suddenly forgott: But Ladies; this Eternity, where God is the limit, and
measure, is it which solely ought to entertain all your affections, all your
desires, and apportion all your hopes.

Be ye pleased that even now I show ye the means. It Is always to lend the
ears of your phantasyes most attentively, to this dreadful Doomes Trumpet;
where the share of your happy Eternity, or unhappy, is to be seen
determinatly. Hope not a jot for favor there. Justice will bear the Scepter:
Trust not to your consanguinityes or affinityes, your virtues will be your
fastest friends; Ye have a great catch of them indeed, ye have a rare plea,
to say: that ye are the daughters of a Prince, the wifes of Kings, and the
mothers of Emperors: all these circumstances serve you to your sepulchers.
Your works solely accomplish all your honors: or your infamyes, all your
felicityes: or your miseryes.

Oh! Ladies, how it is to be great persons, and happy on earth: yet there to
pretend not aught. Those who are borne, who are destined for Heaven, naturally
have such a disgust of Earth: that thereon they spinne out their time: as if
they had no being there at all, still lifting up their spirits, and their
thoughts to this Eternity: as to the only good, the sole Sanctuary. The
fruition of it, is able to satisfy their desires compleately.

O Eternity! thou art singularly gracious unto me: that thou receivest
favorably my good intentions, my well meanings. I will never cease to meditate
on thee. Oh Eternity! how benign have thou been to me in particular, well may
I say; in making me apply, all the abilityes, all the facultyes of my soul,
on the meditation, of thy longanimity; in so much: that I shall never have
other object then Thee, no other sight then speculating on Thee. Does it not
follow necessairily, that I love thee entirely: If I abhor all that flies
thee, that forsakes thee? If I seriously misprise each transitory: am not I
constrained to esteem thee perfectly? Let no man speak to me but of
Eternity: each crime, not returning to the same, displeases me, nay rather;
does me notable injury. In a word; if therebee any taken sensibly with aught,
by how much the greater it is: the more does it is excess menace us of it is
privation. Presuppose Ladies, that in this world ye be both fair, and rich;
It Is much. But I pray tell me, what is their permanence? Had I to dispose of
an age: I would allow ye to enjoy the full term of it: But at the last moment;
what would remain unto ye? What would accrue unto ye? your beautyes would
not subsist: but in your own transitory times, and your treasures though now
possessed, shall be far from ye, as constrained to abandon them for ever.
Your cases are thus; all the goods of Fortune which ye enjoyed, changing their
names, propertyes, and natures will afflict ye, to think of. It Is truly
even so: that it is solely Eternity, which can quench our hearts continual
thirst.

AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The fourth Days Work.
WHAT said the wife of Rosidates to her self, with a voluble tongue, and very
nimble, as passionate indeed when she heard the doleful Trumpet sound at her
door, signifying unto her the decree of her death, by the command of her
brother King Hertodorus.

Oh! Ladies, how much more dreadful is that Trumpet which does summon ye to
God Allmightyes judgment. This Rosidates lived, and dyed a Heathen: but ye,
who are destined for Heaven, will ye pass your times on Earth, solely for
Hell? It will soon be noone by the watch of your lives, as well as by the
town clock it self: Where is your days work? If in such sort ye pass the rest
thereof carelessly, either sleeping, or besotting your selves, it will be found
at lenght: that ye lived here in this world no otherwise, then dreaming, and
that in the other there, ye shall live perpetually awakened, amidst the heates
of eternal flames, everlasting fire.

Perceived ye not clearly, that the Sun the other day, blamed ye notably,
and such like slothful people as are ye? but ye never the less, will make it
as your happiness to sleep and drouse. This starr, which measures the moments
of your lives, leaves not a whitt to run his wonted race, his course to traile
ye to your graves.

Rouse your selves up. Remember ye not, that ye are invited to a solemn
feast of marriage? I must needs wait on ye; be it but only to observe your
carriadge. I Will take notice of your vanities, and give account unto the world
how fantastical ye are. Take ye your time to dress your selves; in the mean
while, I Will contemplate somewhat, and also exercise my patience.

Let me approach unto ye nigher. To what use are those gally potts of pomada,
those boxes of powder, those violls of distilled waters, and those papers of
vermillion, which I see upon your cabinets by your night dothes? Is it a part
of art, which ye put in practice, to make ye seem more fair then ye are,
in despite of Heaven, and Nature? Oh! what bitter. Oh! what salt tears will
these vanities extract from ye Ladies. Be it, that your Ladishipps have the
least leisure lent ye to repent ye.

It Is to be granted: that your bodies do daily require the charity of pomada,
of rare odor, to cover the defects of your teints. Your tresses can not hide
their greasiness without powder. Your tawny-dusky faces after they have been
made happy by the Alimbeck, expect the vermillion; least that their dead color
appear not at all: but ye observe not that ye labor to fill pots, which are
perced; as did the Danaides.

Where shall one find Pomada, which may agree with ye, and contend with your
stenches? What is that powder, that can dry the clammy great of your heads?
What water can serve the fullness of your desires? And what vermillion can make
appear on your cheeks, which Nature has not planted there? Thence ye
discover plainly: that your actions contain in them solely vanities, for
their objects. They rest unto ye for your recompense. Oh what brave conquests!
ye look not after aught but airery toys; your heads are full of crotchetts.
Ye like nothing, but what is smoke, witness the tears discovered on your
eyes. See what'is the fruit of the course of your lives, behold the guiderdon
which does attend ye at the end of your race.

Oh! how precious was the Pomada of Saint Elizabeth, who made use of it to
parfume the feet, of whom? of the indigent! the poor! Oh! how odoriferous was
the powder, and the ashes where Saint Marie the Egyptienne covered her head,
the day of her penitence! Oh! how the tears of her repentance where rapt, and
possessed with Devine virtue; in so much as, her body, and her soul in an
instant were embellished! Oh! how strange it is; the blush of her shame for her
sin, was far more lively: then what ye daily use. Grant me this boon for
my pains hither to seen, no less I beseech ye; to break your lookinglass,
which daily flatter ye; nor ever take to ye other, then such as I deliver
unto ye here.

Yet; thus much said, ye will keep on your wonted ways. Now ye are
dressed. Now at the feast, and suddenly will all varietyes of sweetmeates be
served in: there is the end. What I would put into your minds, is; that all
solemnityes have but their times. On Earth, a feast is not to be had: but of
the fruits of its own garden; and as these fruits, have nothing proper, but
their corruption: even so that aliment from day to day, does naught else, but
increase your infections; they can never satisfy your appetits. The succeeding
day, ye will sensibly find the vanities of your pleasures had at table: since
that they vanish with the table cloth it self.

Likewise; seriously ponder, when ye are amidst your jollityes: that the self
same hours which ye have employed in the pampering of your carcasses, are
registered in the scrole of their ruin, since that whither ye eat, or laugh,
Time leads ye to your tomb.

These are the banquetts of Cleopatra, which are solemnly celebrated: though
in ships even floting: hence learn we, that each where we chang fortune,
through the perpetual decline of our lives, all our actions tend thither, what
destroys us, is ours in proper.

But to go on; in conclusion; behold your return unto your houses, the dance
is ended, likewise the feast. Oh Ladies! meditate a little space, but
attentively I beseech ye humbly on this passage, this phantasyes, All these
pastimes, these wordly pretty toys symbolize, are of the like nature with
these dances, and feasts, each of them flitte incessantly, it is sure that
death approatcheth nigh howerly. Were all your days spent in the solemnityes,
which frequently are found, when so that marriages are pompously celebrated.
Oh! how direful would your last day appear unto ye! since then must ye
render account of your time past in laughter, and dance! Reflect a while how
many are the dances, and feasts wherein you have entertained your times; hence
take counsel secretly of your memoryes, then use your judgments, and see,
what is left unto ye: ye shall never have other for your pleasures! And what?
will it not be reproach unto ye: that ye sold your portions for nothing,
which ye pretended for Heaven? I have heard say, that Lysimachus did exchang
his Crown for a glass of water: but when? Ladies, observe then; it was so with
him at that time, when he was even as it were reduced to ashes, by the same
heat of thirst, which burned his entrailles, in so much as being in such
plight, in rendering his dying spirit he changed naught else but wind, but
breath for water.

But to see how remissely ye give over your pretensions of eternal
consolations, of everlasting joys for toys, such I may truly term them,
which bear no other titles; then of mere deprauations, of your phantasyes, of
your imaginations. Where is that self affection whence ye seem to become so
passionate? Is it not to hate your selves: that you affect not aught else: but
what does flit? it is not it? when ye dye, what will be left ye of your
passed time, but a present grief, and too late; such; whose anguishes will
never cease?

Ye never dream of other thing: then to enquire after new pastimes, to the
ruin of your times. Alas! Nor consider ye aright: that Time does ruin ye?
for in seeking to pass it, ye must find death. How so? is it possible: that
ye strive to pass over it, which so swiftly glideth by ye, as do your
phantasyes, light though they be, they can not over take it. And what more
seriously, ye ought to ponder, is, that all the time of your lives, has for
its term, its limit a sole moment, on which, though such, does depend for ever,
and a day your calamityes, or your felicityes; that is a misery in torment:
which has no end, this a bliss in glory: which will be permanent, beyond all
ages, illimited indeed.

Oh! how precious are the contemplations, of the last period of our lives! How!
is it so? that thou art not as inseparable to our souls: as is the shadow to
the body? Oh! how sweet is the memory of our death! Why is it so? that our
memory is not for the most part, in such sort all taken up with thee: as that
it never forget thee? Oh Divine is the meditation on Eternity! Art thou not as
sensible of our souls, as our respiration is of the preservation of our
hearts? How David likes me well, when he cried out aloud, that he had often
meditated, and that seriously indeed on the days for ever: where God Allmighty
is solely the light! Oh fair days! I wonder not: that ye have no night: the
Sun which shows it self on ye is bright, and borrows not it is light: no.
Oh days most happy! say no more; or thus: I am not one whit astonished, if so
be it that ye remain for ever: the Planet which gave ye a being,
possesses Eternity in chief, in proper. Truly, my soul is extasyed, rapt as
it were, in this sweet contemplation, with such singular content, it is in such
guise as that really it has no desire to be otherwise.

Ladies, in a word, it is so; that ye must arrive to the days end, and return
thither from whence ye came in the morning: for it is but one days journey.
Ye have a fine time of it to be lazing. The Sun, who sends forth his
beams for ye, will that ye go as fast as does he.

Dance, laugh, sleep until noone day; the ship of your lives leaves not
it is course, it sayleth evermore, incessantly on the sea of it is proper
miseryes, only by the wind of your respirations; it cannot stay it self:
until it arrive, at the haven of the sepulcher: Ladies, it is the haven to
which Doomes Trumpet does summon ye. Take ye heed, least it be not found a
rock unto ye: where ye may encounter too dreadful a shock, the calamity
thereby is for Eternity, and repentance unprofitable. In good earnest, at what
time soever I think of Eternity: nothing that is wordly, does please me. I am
not bold to say so much: that each parcel of the Universe made such by a
Sovereign power and absolute from it, having it is soul, it is being, it is
life, is not in it self admirable, and adorable in it is Creator: but; as there
are so many objects of change, or of corruption; my heart not well appeased,
sigheth after the fountain of the lesser springs as after it which is only
capable to quench the thirst of my desirs. Ladies, would ye but distaste the
word's pleasures, ye have a ready way to fill your best thoughts, on the
delights of Eternity: for such is the inequality: that common sense will lead
ye will suffice, to make ye misprise them, and earnestly desire these.



AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The fifth Days Work.
COME to my aid, my Lord, cried out Saint Hierome a thousand times a day: I
dye for fear at the resound of that Trumpet, which does summon me to thy
judgment.

Ah, Ladies; if this glorious Saint, amydst the deserts, and amydst the
austerityes of a life, all devoted to penance, found himself reduced at a bay,
at a stand for fear, and dread: can ye frame with the vanities of the world:
when ye do but once meditate on the necessity of your deaths, from which
there is not one exempt? This innocent does tremble at it! and are ye not aught
sensible of it? This harmeless quakes! persist ye senseless? This just man, I
say again cried out incessantly for help, and succor: though he where so
pure! yet will ye not be awakened: though infirm, by the example of his
astonishment? Can ye take rest in the ships of your bodies, and on the world's
tempestuous sea's: without fore discerning that Time, who is the Pilott, puts
ye one the shore of your sepulcher? Awake your selves then suddenly, and as
your lives are but dreams, at your waking dream again what trades ye intend
to use, whilst ye are in this long Eternity, to which ye make your howerly
approatch.

God has given ye, and each one of ye, since the time, wherein ye have been
of reason a pencill in your hands, as to Zeuxis, that renowned Painter, who
painted according to his belief, n'aught else but Eternity; this is a pattern
for ye, such; as it shows ye: that all your works should have for object,
and aim, no other thing. In sum; all which ye meditate on, say, and do, is
painted in oil colors of Eternity. I would ye understood me aright, all
approaches nay ends correspondent, to the good, or ill, either to the glory
of your happy Eternity, or to your unhappy Eternity.

If ye dye, as ye live, namely in bed until midday, what can I say? but that
if so you play your time away, your laziness will depaint ye, and lively
express ye for Eternity: where endlesly ye shall suffer pains.

Allthough each one swill as he will; it is but for his time, his days course,
and at his own expense. But one judges not of price of the good, or ill, or
default in business, merchandise, else where, then in the other world. Prepare
your selves to undergo the judgment.

Ye will even suddenly appear dressed, and tricked according to the fashion
of the time, and court: and how is it? Your feathers falling on your ears,
vermillion on your cheeks, and flies on your chinnes. These are not in vain
undoubtedly, their dessignes are to entrappe some one, or other: but at the
daye's course run, it will then appear unto ye clearly: that ye have made
your selves whoopes, taking not the least notice of aught else, but vanity; as
if ye had not thereof too much.

I wait on ye at your sally from dinner, to your coatch, it is to assist you
tenderly, and with humble respect indeed, it is my duty, and to attend you
seriously with my thoughts, in your walks, with intention to observe, whither
your times intertainements prove more useful: then delightful.

It Is necessary that I exercise my patience a while, until the horses be
harnessed, and put to the caroche: allsoe, ye must hauey our time to look on
your selves again, while ye attire your selves with hoodes, and maskes. But
oh! what simple imaginations entertain your spirits therein? There you
instruct your eyes the art to tyrannize, and with strange craft, to hurt many
hearts, not reflecting aught; that your souls receive a stain, through the
vain lightness, which thence remain in them: It Is there I say, where you
invent new lessons to allurements; so far as to teach men, to make your
selves beloved, and ferred at once, and the self same time; and covertly
pretend: that ye attend no end, while therein none, alas! none. Observe these
rare dessignes; what do ye meditate on oftener? Let it be that your black
eyes with their vyes do much hurt to day; to morrow, one drop of rume indeed,
will make them red, which will serve to cure the smarts, of those your former
darts. How happily do your courteous sweetness, with your graces, acquire
love, and fear jointly. Whosoever they be, that seem to dye for ye, they
love ye not: it is; for what? for their interess, not to be spoken of here
further. Thus much yet will I say: that they who court ye as sincere lovers,
ground them selves on the express ruins, the utter destructions of your
reputations; and ye take it well, to make them fear ye. They care for
nothing more: then to pass their times, in that entreprise, their delights,
their sports.

But it seems no less unto me: then that ye take your way to the race, to
the place in use now a days. Oh! how vainly hunt you after toys in this your
walk, as to a public fair where merchandise is set forth for each to buy?

Would ye not say, tkat this young simple fondling, clothed in green, who is
like unto tapistry, which ye have seen frequently, hung before a door, has
employed about her face all her whitening? She thinks, that in beauty she
does surpass, the Universe. Alas! for pity. I speak plainly to her now, not
taking any notice, that her self-loue daily puts on a hood to see at random
her defects. She, who would be the beloved'st of many, in each does move
pity for such her folly. My opinion of her, is no other: then that she is a
gloweworme, who gives light to many from a dunghill, the surface of which is
all covered with snow.

What character shall this proud piece bear? What may one's censure be here
of this giddy one, who being possessed of n'aught else but of a bosom, makes
a shameless bravado, as if the rest of her carcass, were to be let or sold
out right? Oh peace a while! what will prove her confusion: when the day has
run its race? when she must needs shut up her shopp, having not met with any
customer who^soeuer, not one admirer of her treasure? Modesty is it, which has
enticements not found else where; there-in only.

I pray ye stay not a jot, come hither speedily, be the spectatours of this
fond toye, this Foppe. Whose best draughts through age, are become void of
moss, and hence borrow for the stage, the artifice of so many flies, as if they
could nippe some one or other, though such be her age; a strange passage: but
commiserable: for it is even ten years since that beauty bid her the last
adieu: and if she daily employ all her study for it is recovery: what folly
would it appear, to wear time present, for to call time passed, again: yet
might she be happy in her disasters; were it so; that though she suffer
shipwreck: yet that at lenght she take hold of virtue, to redeem her self
from danger, nay rather, from utter loss.

Have ye but a little patience to view the Lady who comes in a coatch all
guilt; by her countenance, and demeanor, I guess: that she does esteem her
self, to be the I dole of each one, who behold her with attention, not
reflecting aught on Time, her new coatch-man, who waits on her, it is he, who
bears her in the same carre of triumph, to the altar of her sepulcher, there
to be offered up with shame together, with all her adorers.

But she that is there, how missbee-seemingly does she lend her ear, and
attentively, to the pratlings of a giddy humorist, who courts her, and yet;
what is much more indiscreet; she believes all the lies the braine-sick
delivers unto her. Me think I plainly hear him swear: that she has
the rarest aspect, and most admiredst eyes, that ever did appear in this
hemisphere, and solely on the confidence, she has given to her lookinglass,
she does believe him.

In the meane-while; here are found brave assurances, rare cautions indeed. Ah
how is it now? does she not know, that the first oath of an amorous, is to
observe not one during the time of his passion? And further it is the common
fashion of lover's speeches, it is their air, to say to their Mistresses: that
they are mervailously fair, even to perfection, these are their customary
ways, now a days: and yet most unhappily; it is to be deplored truly, ye
ordinarily believe them, nor reflect ye aught: that your first betrayer, is
your lookinglass, it alas, for pity!

Yet will I grant, that she is rarely endowed, and singulerly graced with
beauty: there is the seat of her vanity. Could there be added sense, and life
unto her counterfaite, her picture; she would thereby by many a degree surpass
the Prototype, the Original: for that luster may be conserved as her proper:
this has nothing in peculiar, but the necessity of decay. In so much; that
when one persuadeth her, that she is mervailously fair, she should take
these as ordinary discourses: since her beauty passes by, is of like nature
to the praises, which are given her, mere air.

Will you have more of her? It Is true; that she has the fairest eyes, that
ever the world beheld: but when? when they are clear, after dinner, and why
not before? I Will give ye an answer; The mornings entertainment is to take
care of her gummy eyes, or eyebrowes. There can not be seen a nose better
shaped, then is hir's: I confess it: but she must have supplied unto her, a
clean handkercher, and that every day. I must likewise ingenuously aver;
that her mouth is very little, and pretty: but it is too straight a passage for
her stinking breath. Her complexion is delicate, even to perfection, it is
evidently seen: but thus much is said, to the end, that she might apprehend
all things. The Sun, the Fire, the Air it self, are her enemies, which make
a perpetual war against her, until Time has done his work, whereby she
may be hidden under earth.

She has an excellent wit, doubt ye not thereof a whit: for she utters
rare, and curious passages; it were much better: that she would apply her self
to piety, to goodness. One does enquire of works: rather then of words. What
is it to purpose, if she have a fair manner, and demeanor in speech, the
true measure of her deeds shall judge her. She sing's admirably well. Had she
n'aught else but her voice; she could not enthralle otherwise: then by the
ear: they who have not affairs wherewith to entertain their times, in
passing by for their pleasure, would give ear unto her: but when she makes
an end of her songs, they begin to meditate on something. I Will say no more. If
so it happen, that there be praises of her, given unto her, they will return
the air which she has lent them. Judge ye whither she will be well content.
In sum; let her be rich as was Semiramis, and more fair then Hellen. The
one confessed on her Epitaph, which she caused to be engraved on her
tombstone; that she never possessed aught in proper, when she had her
treasure: but corruption, and misery. The other; after she had entrapped
insensible hearts by her subtle charms, struck pity unto her greatest enemies
only hearing of her misfortunes. Ladies, flatter not your selves. One sighe of
repentance for your vanities, will yield ye more glory, and more benefit: then
all the tears ye can make your enthralled slaves poor forth. In the mean
while night warns ye to retreit: behold your days journey at an end; now
render account unto your lookinglass, of the number of your conquests. But in
earnest how treat ye with it? It Is true, that ye have made many an one
sighe; if ye be proud thereof, the air will remain with ye; n'aught else
have they returned unto ye. They have said true: that ye are very fair: it is
enough for ye to show your selves, at the window, and there to remain a
while, in the evening's air to give ear to the harmonious Salute, the
serenade in fashion: which is offered up unto ye; longer ye will not be:
least your cheeks be swollen by defluxion. Judge ye then, without flattring
your selves, whether one can love ye long: since that solely your beautyes are
the causes that ye are esteemed of at all.

How many have I seen of these Idolatressess of their own beautyes, who after
they had made publicly profession to enthrall the hearts of the most
insensible, have come atlenght to such distress, to such misery through their
deformity: that they were so far from being beloved: as that they proved
rather an affright to the world, rather despised, then pitty'd. Truly, Ladies,
if ye knew to how many accidents your beautyes are subject, it would be unto
ye perpetually, rather the object of your neglect, and misprise: then of your
wonder. I deny not, but that it is one of the maister-pieces of Nature: yet the
self same is become a stepdame, giving it self over to a thousand sorts of
mischeifes. It Is true indeed, there is not aught more Divine on Earth, nor more
enchanting: but this Divinity is alike to that, which one does attribute to
Alexander the Great, whose blood trickling out of his veins, shamefully
profaned all the Aultars which were dedicated unto him: such are these
charms, they are mere illusions which deceive, and abuse weak souls.

Verily, Ladies, ye must come to this point; that is; to believe, that virtue
solely has allurements, and graces, which are approved by Time, and Death. All
the inticements, and all the charms of Nature are by degrees despoiled,
together with it self. And though it seems to conserve it self: yet by it is
proper ruin finding it is establishment in it is decay. Time cease not to
abbreuiate from hour to hour the term of the others reign, whilst he does
consume himself. In such sort; that for your comfort, all that ye see, does
vanish with your sight. All what ye hear, does disperse it self with the
air, wherewith your ears are filld, and so for the rest, without that there
be aught found permanent on Earth.

Ladies, it is solely Eternity, which changes not, it is it which does remain
as long as your souls, and your souls, as long as it. Wheresoever ye take
your courses, it is immenisty will fill all, and it will be the bounds of your
affairs what soever they be: After one hundred thousand years, it will not
be an instant of Time's permanence, after one hundred thousand millions of
years, that instant of which I speak unto ye, will not be though expired.
How! Lord, shall I persever to offend thee ever? know I not, that thou art just
to all Eternity, and hence is it, that thou punishest sinners with torments,
which have no limits. To burn eternally! Oh how the fire which brought Saint
Laurence to ashes, does invite me to meditate on eternal flames, on, to be
deprived Lord, for ever, of the pleasures had in glory! Oh! how the burden of
thy cross is sweet, and light: if it be compared with the pains of our
privation, which never will have end: I can say no more, I can go no further.
It Is necessary, that I meditate on this so serious a subject.

AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The sixth Days Work.
It Is read; that the Tyrians were forty days, whithout shutting their eyes,
for rest: the continual alarum's were such under which they lived; where they
saw themselves, together with their town become cenders.

Oh! Ladies, how can ye close up an eye, within the trenches of perpetual
fear, misery, and calamity, where the direful sound of this Trumpet for
judgment, does hold the most stout, the most bold in awe, and dread. This
here, does not menace one sole burning to ashes: but rather; a thousand
death's together. Further; the torments are to be for ever. Then, rouse your
selves; and since ye can not gainesay this eternal necessity to dye: dye
valiantly with arms in your hands. The benefit thereby had, is companion of
glory.

Amidst all the tortures, which cruelty has invented ever, it is esteemed that
thereis never any of more rigor: then that it of watching. What an unquietness
is it to sleep never? But if so be it, that for having slept too much in this
world, ye prove condemned to watch incessantly in the other: what affliction
say I, is it, to be kept awake. I mean not on your down beds, your delicate
coutches well made, and in curious order: but rather on beds of fire, of
flames, which by Devine virtue, will burn without consuming ye? I tremble for
fear, yea even to horror, each time wherein, I meditate heeron.

I find not any thing of less worth in life: then is sleep; and they who have
compared it to death; therein have found as pregnant reason: as proportion.
It Is true; we daily dye; but when the new death of fleep does sursurprise us,
can not we say: that we dye twice, at once? Our souls have somewhat to do,
to handle in their follies, the life of dreams, wherewith they are then all
taken up, it is a kind of death unto them as prooveth the light of reason, which
does only rule their facultyes: in so much as that; they who sleep much, are
more sottish then others, and also more subject to a sudden death, as if so
that their continual action dying twice, did confer unto this heavy
accident. I return unto ye.

At lenght, God be thanked, ye are awakened. How mean ye to pass the rest
of the days journey? I am assured, that ye ought to have leisure to be
dressed; atleast consider amidst these vain entertainements, the deplorable
manner of life ye live under, day, and night, namely; to cloth, and unclothe
your miserable carcasses; whilst Time has prepared each one's sepulcher.

I Will tell ye yet again; that the trade under which ye are ever apprentises,
is a lamentable state, and being. Live ye not a strange life, to change your
clothes very often? there is each day somewhat to say; for the manner of them,
differ: in so much as, what is now in fashion, hardly will suite with ye, and
serve your turns to morrow, so certain is the world in it is inconstancy* as
are your humors.

Ladies; there are not found other clothes which change not fashion: but your
winding sheets; they always are the same: but; as each one chooses the
colour's they best like of; if your mournful one's, agree not with your
present humors, yet accustom your selves thereunto, taking your measures of
them each night in your beds: the ground therein to be found, and the
necessity, will render unto ye in the end, an object, which will suite with
ye, not distaste ye a jot. Ah, no.

I neither enquire whither, nor to what places ye direct your steps, your
paces in your carotches; the weither is so fair: that it inviteth ye to go
abroad, and take the air. I will attend ye with my thoughts, according to my
wonted manner; to know the subject, and ground of your time's enternainement,
what it may prove to be.

Behold ye in a curious garden, there seated nigh a fountain, under the
shadow of many trees, whose branches on their tops are joined together, or
very nigh. Your intentions in so doing are to lend your gracious ears a while
unto the nightingale: but the letter's sense of her warblings, I must declare
unto ye; she tells ye in her language, in her manner, such as it is: that
it is good to salute the Sun each morning, likewise in the evening. To tender
unto the Moon some curious music or other. These maling Planetts desist not
by the influences of their course, to give a speedy end unto her Kingdom; in
such sort, that her shouts, her turns, her divisions, her quaverings, and
redoublings are so many griefs on the unhappiness of her state: since that
she has no voice: but to invite the world to her funeral rites, hence is
she constrained to dye the sooner, through the necessity of her singing.

Likewise the Turtell, who seeks in vain her companion, lamenteth her
misfortune in an other tune: which does show unto ye: that Time is greedily
gaping, after the ruin of each thing. And though that the Echo, be but a
sound, a voice; Time being unable to make it cease, by degrees devoureth the
rocks, which give it a rebound. No, no Ladies; Time does not forbear any
thing. What though Time were decev'd once; as it is mentioned in the fable,
when Orpheus required of Him Euridices? Time has had memorable reveng, as may
be seen in the Historyes of all the Poets, who to that end gave him their
counsels.

But how well are ye placed? it seems to me; that it is to meditate at your
ease, and repose on that all, which God Allmighty has created here below, and
that it all does participate of the same nature that do the flowers, and
fountains which ye see, since that all glideth like to the swiftness of their
waves, passages, their currants.

Yes, Ladies, the World is a garden of flowers, various in their graces, their
beautyes, colors, and their odours: but all these according to Nature, are of
the same matter. I Will declare my self more clearly. God Allmighty in the space
of his Creation, planted all what soever ye admire here below, in the garden
of the Universe, namely; flowers of diverse colors, also of valiew: but all of
the same matter: for; there is not one of them exempt from corruption. These
truly are the flowers disclosed in the morning, displayed at midday, faded in
the evening, and of which Time, who is the gardener, croppeth what he will,
and then, when it best pleases him.

Certes, Ladies, the world is a fountain, and whatsoever it is composed of are
its waves, which properly have nothing in their nature, but swiftness passing
by. This is essential, to what soever that is here below. Ye may please your
selves, to cast your eyes, on all the objects, which ye find every where about
ye. There is not one only, which does not return ye the like adieu which
ye give them: since that ye run the same race all together, though
diversely, and by different ways, and manner, into the gulphe of the tomb.

For all that hitherto has been said; make unto ye, a posy of flowers: but
in gathering those flowers-deluces, those roses, those pincks, and
gilly-flowers, thinck that Time likewise, is daily busy in the gardens of your
faces, there cropping sometimes; the flower-deluce of your paintings; other
times; the roses of your cheeks; then; the gilly-flowers of your lips:
Whereof he composeth a nosegay of your inconstancyes. Ye sensibly apprehend
this verity, other proofs are not requisite.

How now, Ladies? All these will fade in your sights, like a flower. All
these will glide before your selves as waves, and ye as if insensible, will
not stir a jot, no, not a jot, never, nor reflect the least on the necessity
of dying: from which, God Almighty after the delivery of the law, would not
exempt himself, no, not himself. But if the sole thought of death amaze ye;
meditate a little, how our sweet Savior has the first quenched, the thirst
within the Chalice, which he presented, to the end; that at once he might
take from ye both fear, and bitterness, acquitt ye of such like weakness.
Death is not terrible: but to the impious. It Is true; that it oftentimes
astonisheth the most just, through apprehensions of Gods judgment: but by
degrees, this fear becomes weaker, through the faculty of their reason,
having much more hope of mercy: then fear of justice, their consciences, will
them so; in such manner, that in their agonyes, Nature is sole Author of the
fears, wherewith they are shaken. Truly; I know not where I am herein. But
what is that which I hear? it is the great bell of the town, which gives ye
notice: that the gates thereof will speedily be shut.

Ladies, why lend ye not likewise the ears of your imaginations to the noise
of this Trumpet of judgment, which never cease, and does advertise ye: that
the gates of Paradise are at the point of being shut for all Eternity, and
that ye shall never enter there: if ye change not your lives. Ah Eternity:
how thou do rejoice me, and jointly astonish me.

See Ladies at lenght, your days journey has it is end, and it wlll be found
to be well spent for your turns: if so that ye have made your benefits of
these important trueths, which I have set before your eyes.

Even so will pass all the other jorneys of your days, to your loss, and
confusion: if at least, you take noe notice of this truth: that they run
their race they, pass by. Reflect seriously with your souls on that
meditation; and it will prove impossible: that speedily ye make not an accrue
of good deeds, an amass, in favor of your souls. They have nothing proper to
them selves: but them only. They will be all their treasures; all their
greatness, and all their felicities, whereof God shall be the object, the end,
the measure.

If ye knew, Ladies, the true hearts content, which on enjoys, who has
lived well; when so one comes to one's stand, abbay, one's last end, one's
death, ye would labor with all care, from this instant forward in your
conversions on which ye would be more intent. If ye doubt the least of this
truth, and yet, alas! enquire of your selves, how it was with ye, at your
last sickness. The anxietyes ye had, for your offenses, likely increased your
greifs; and further; set before your eyes the joys, and unspeakable conforts,
wherewith an innocent life might have co^sol'd hearts. Truly, I can not
conceive, that there is aught more pleasant, more delightful, assuredly
there is nothing in the Universe more delicious.

AN ALARVM FOR LADIES.
The Seventh, and last Days Work.
LADIES, how is it with ye? I yet awaken ye again, I am the same this very
day in God's name: since that he gives leave that this Alarm come to your
hands to look on, so long as your ears will dispose them selves to hear
attentively the harmony therein to be found for the benefit of your souls. I
speak to day, as a day of repose, wherein ye ought to meditate of happy
Eternity, which is proposed unto ye for your reward: but; as it is the last
entertainment, which I am to have with ye; it' is expedient; that I make
ye partakers of my solitude; knowing through long experience the profits
which hence ye will receive, be it, that ye follovv my counsel.
Represent your selves, make your approatch: for God has provided, from all
Eternity; that this little book, should fall into your hands, either for your
benefits, or for your utter losses for your profits; to your benefits; if ye
observe the instructions which I give, and which God himself has inspired me
with: To your losses; if ye shall misprise, what is herein delivered: this
very book does convince ye of voluntary blindness, and declare the admirable
favors, which the infinite bounty shall hereby have shown unto ye for your
safety: it is in ye as yet to choose. I Will tell ye then, for your
instructions, how profitably ye are to pass your journey. From the time ye
are awakened, let your hearts be as sensible of the new present, which God
has given ye this new day: as your eyes are pleased, in admiration of his
light. Then; without merchandising with your beds, what time ye will
further assign to your selves, for your sluggisness get out of them, and as
soon as ye are on your knees before a Crucifix, make that it your
lookinglasses; it is there where ye may indeed become in love with your selves,
weighing your valiew by the price of that blood, which has bought ye: O rare
miroir! Oh! lookinglass to admire indeed!

Render thanks unto your Savior, that ye were borne, and for your
instructions in the Christian, Apostolic, and Roman Faith, as the only way
of safety. Then; offering up unto Him all the cogitations, the words, and
actions of the journey ye are now about, beseech Him submissiuely to
illuminate the one, and animate the other, to govern these, and to be the
object of them all together: so far forth, as what ye shall think, and say,
may be received by Him gratefully.

Let the end of this prayer be, the beginning of your necessary affairs to
cloth your selves: but entertain the least time therein that ye can, without
trouble, or curiosity. I forbid ye not the powder: since ye are no other; But
expressly the pomada, and vermillion: For; though these are harmeless in
themselves: yet they may prove pernicious, indeed not blameless through the
ills which they may produce, and; as ye shall have been found accomplices of
crimes: so likewise by consequence of pains.

As soon as ye are dressed, prepare your selves to go to Mass, where ye
shall persever to render thanks to God, for an infinity of his gracious favors
conferred on ye, nor ever let your spirits be diverted aught from this
principal, and Divine object: which ye took your selves unto, as well by
reasons: as by recognizance. Present your selves in such manner; that though
God be in each place, our Savior, is both in body, and soul on the same
Altar, where ye offer up your prayers: It ought to cause ye, to be humbly
grave, and wary, even to the not daring once to turn your heads without
necessity, nor speak one single word, unless compulsarily. At return from
Church, each one has somewhat to entertain their times with according to
their qualityes, never to be found idle, expecting dinner time: where
gormandizing, will be remarked for an offense so disgraceful in a young
Gentlewoman: as enormous before God. She, who therein can not command her
self, is a slave all her life.

Are ye invited to a feast, go thither: but so, that it prove a banquet for
ye, as neither eating, nor drinking beyond your ordinary custom: hence ye
will find, that your bodies will be the more sound, more healthy, and your
souls more innocent. If after it, ye take a walk; divert your selves from
such discourses, where no body is interess'd: but if one of the company, does
speak ill of another, all though it be in jest, turn the discourse, in a
fair manner, and to the end: that ye may never accustom your ears to
well-like aspersions, laid on any for defects; it being, that ye your selves
are too much charged with them.

If ye pass the afternoon within your doors, each one of ye, will employ
your selves with your needle, or read some devout book, to entertain ye more
profitably, during the afternoon. I say your book of devotion: as for the
eloquent speeches, the Romances, and for the Comedyes; they are toys, mere
fables: which discover in the end, the undoubted folies of them, who so have
been their advancers, and given them esteem, therein have they employed their
times, exceeding ill.

Be it a holy day; then let this Alarm wherewith I present ye, hinder ye
from sleep, howsoever at the Sermon, and do not ye imitate such, who are
devout in fashion, who are weary on good friday, to hear of the passion,
without considering: that this our Devine Savior, who has suffered those, for
your selves, had more patience in his torments: then have those impious had, to
hear only the recital, which has been made. Oh Lord! for what other crimes
do thou reserve the thunderbolts of thy justice.

When the hour, of your rests does call on ye, before ye be unclothed make
your recourse to consult, to advise seriously, and most attentively the last
time, the self same lookinglass, it is the Crucifix, fix your eyes on it, and
there examine your consciences, humbly beseeching God's mercy's pardon for all
your trespasses, which ye have done, during this days journey, and that ye
may have grace, to retain your selves from sin; that ye may not fall
therein again. There are ye to resolve so: then with the same action; offer
up unto him, all your desires, and hopes concerning the repose, and tranquillity
of your lives: so that he justify the one through his benignity, and the other
through his infinite power: but rather; humbly resign your wills to his.
Observe it well: that he, who knows to compose him felf well to God's will,
is the wisest of the Universe.

It Is that only science, Ladies, which can seat ye in repose. Build not the
height of your desseignes, on the greatness of your familyes, nor on the favor
of your friends. I have seen, says the Prophet, Lords of the Earth, elevated
beyond the height of the Cedars of Libany; but a dreadful story to recite,
next day have vanished from mine eyes, and hardly could I find one, who
conseru'd so much as the memory of his having been. The Favorites of the World,
are of the same nature, they solely pass it by. Their fortune is a sudden
flash of lightning, which far surpasses thunder with it is inevitable fall,
in sort such: that if God lay not the first stone to all your buildings, all
will fall; there will not be found aught, but ruin.

Desire then never aught: but what is of God; that is to say; that what soever
are your affairs, ye fully refer them all to his Sovraignity, and without
murmur to his Devine Providence: since that the ordering of all, does properly
appertain to him. Wish ye to be Religious, or to be married? take unto ye
that restraint of humility, and obedience: my Lord, thy will be done. It Is
the prayer which he has taught ye; judge ye whether it ought to be
acceptable unto him, and whether profitable to ye: End your examinations by a
prayer to the Virgin, as well for her particular merit, from whence the flash
through admiration of it is light so bright, dazeleth the sight of all the
quires of Angell's: as also, for your safety; since she is Advocate, and all
puissant Mediatress, who so has this Virgin in assistance, will never perish.

A PARTICVLAR ADVISE
For direction of a one's life.
NEVER be confident in aught but in God: all freindshipps of the World,
retain parcel of it is variable Nature: such an one to day would dye for ye,
who to morrow, were ye disceased, would not so much as honor ye, attired in
morning: Interess is ever found in affections, be they never so pure. Become
ye ill favored, poor, or old, all your great friends, and who so were last
evening your loyal lovers will even vanish this very morning, and if ye send
for them, none of them, will be found at home for ye. Ladies, it is only God,
who is a perfect lover, and such like friend indeed. Will ye have proofs of
his goodness? He dyed for ye before ye were borne. Require ye testimonies
of his mercy? daily he conferred grace on ye. Love then him only. Ladies,
confide in none but in him, and ye shall never be deceived.

Offer up your selves in all places, for God does replenish the Universe. He is
every where, in such sort, that he is witness of your actions, to the end,
that this consideration, might retain ye in the duetye ye owe unto so
Saintly, and adorable Majesty. The most consonant prayer, which ye can offer
up to God, is for your enemies: since he himself has given ye the pattern,
then; when he was nailed on the Cross; where having nothing but His speech
free, served himself thereof, to crave pardon for those vilains, who brought
him to that being; that misery. Oh unheard of charity! our sweet Savior
called out for mercy for them, the self-same, who gave him gaul, and vinaiger
to squench his thirst.

Even then, when in the dead of winter, ye are in your beds shelters, free
from could weather, and other domages which might endanger life, set before
ye, how many poor there be at this very instant, who have but a little
dunghill-straw, for their beds sheets, and coverlids, without hope, that to
morrow they shall be provided better. Then; consider somewhat further,
elevate your spirits to an higher pitch; behold; that God has given unto ye
degrees, exempt from such like miseryes, moved by nothing else; but his
goodness, and bounty conferred on ye. Truly they are benignityes, which
justly exact eternal, and grateful notice; I wonder not aught that
unthankful hence be punished for ever. Take heed, that ye prove not of the
number.

Offer up your selves again as having been the same from all Eternity, whom
ye are now in the judgment of God Allmighty. And what ye ought to ponder more
sensibly, is; that amidst the infinity of souls, his power Allmighty does
create daily, he has selected yours, to be instructed in that Religion,
wherein solely ye may find your safetyes. I am confused, nay rather extased,
jointly each time, I consider on such venerable truethes, and adorable.

What a wonder of goodness is it, that God has loved ye within himself in
your nothing, before all ages I say loved ye, even to the conferring on ye a
thousand sorts of benignityes, of which many other's of your sex are
deprived. Adore ye; adore ye, Ladies, this Devine Providence, which in such
manner has ordained in your favor without your retributes, without your
deserts.

Be not ye proud of the admirable qualityes, which ye possess above your
companions: least that God punnish ye, and take vengeance on ye for it. If
ye be very fair: be ye likewise very humble, to the end, that the world
may honor ye: when ye can not be beloved more. How many have I known, who
in one self same day, were highly pris'd, mervailously esteemed of, and jointly
admired for piety by all the world. Humility in Ladies has more winning grace
in it self: then all the gifts of Nature joined together.

In all your good deeds; let not Paradise be the sole object, and scope of
your works: for as interessed, and mercenary, ye would loose parcel of their
merits: but say with Saint Augustine; Lord, were it even so, that thou had
not a Paradise to bestow, I would not desist to love thee solely: for thou art
perfectly amiable; and further, by means of loving thee, I feel to my
advance, the delights of the self same Paradise, which thy mercy makes me to
hope for. My Lord, following on, also; I should not cease to fear thee, had
thou not a Hell to punish me: since that each time I offend thee, I find my
self incessantly tormented, and I begin to suffer the pains wherewith thy
justice does menace me. Ladies, good is to be beloved for it self, and, as
God Allmighty is the fountain thereof, ye must forbid your hearts that they
never sighe, but for the love of him if so ye will that the very Angels be
passionate in your behalfs.

Be not ye one of those faint-hearted, who wax pale; and wanne for fear,
when one tells ye of death; nay far otherwise; like of the discourse well,
and the meditations thereon, to the end that ye may accustom your selves
betimes, to pass that over fairly; which ye must undergo of necessity,
namely; finish the work, which ye have begun, from the first moment of your
lives, and wherein ye go on incessantly. Oh how terrible is death to them who
never have meditated thereon!

Let then each of ye show your selves oftentimes, unto your selves in some
private retire: and enquire where ye shall be hence fifty years to come,
more, or less, and elevate your spirits on this serious subject. Ye see what
it delivers: It Is true, that then the same bodies; which now have souls, and
on which even now set so great a valiew will become no other then hillockes of
dung, where the worms will make their seat. But what will become of your
souls? wherewith will they entertain their times during this long Eternity?
Is it that they must burn in Hell in expiation of their crimes? At these last
words break your silence, and if ye be in a retired place, where ye can not
be heard, cry, out aloud, and boldly with Saint Augustine, say. Lord, burn, cut
in pieces, and reduce into powder, this miserable body of mine, I abandon it
before the fury of thy justice; so that thou pardon my soul in the other.
Ladies, Oh! what mervailes would these words produce recited often, for the
assuring of your safetyes: but in it, experience will make ye sensible of much
more then can I heereon deliver.

I end here with this last advise, which I offer up unto ye, as one of the
most importants, and of most benefit: that ye take unto ye a particular
devotion to the Virgin, daily saluting her with some Hymn in her praise. On
whom one of the devout cries out; that the Angels bow unto, the Heaven
humbles it self unto, and that all Nature trembles with honor, and fear
before this incomparable Marie; since that her womb served for a cradle to her
Creator, her breasts for nouriture, and her arms for a rest. Truly; she who
perfectly knows to honor her; is not aught wanting, in what she ought to
understand, for the good of her safety.

FINIS.

