Certain short Questions and Answers.

Very profitable and necessary for young Children, and such as are desirous to
be instructed in the principles of the Christian Faith. ()

AT LONDON Printed by Henry Middleton, for Thomas Man. 1580.

Certain short Questions and Answers, very profitable and necessary for young
Children, and such as are desirous to be instructed in the principles of the
Christian Faith.
Question. WHat is GOD?

Answer. A Spirit.

Question. Why do thou not say he is Almighty, Eternal, Omnipotent,
Invisible, containing all, and not contained?

Answer. All this I do confess. But I answer simply as Christ says: John 4.
The substance of God is Spiritual, and not Carnal.

Question. How is Man then said to be the Image of God?

Answer. It is spoken of the principal part of Man, which is his Soul,
which the Apostle says is created in the true likeness of God, in
righteousness and holiness: so is it like God, being both immortal and
spiritual a God is.

Question. Then is the Soul of man of one nature and substance with God?

Answer. No, it is a substance spiritual, created of God, infused into man,
and it is immortal.

Question. How is God to be worshipped?

Answer. In Spirit and Truth.

Question. How in Spirit?

Answer. With a devout mind, a faithful heart, in a spiritual manner, not
with earthly affection.

Question. How then must he be worshipped in Truth?

Answer. That is, according to his holy will in his Word, not according to
man's fantasy.

Question. How if in worshipping of God we be not myndfull of him in our
Prayers?

Answer. Then it is vain (says Christ) to worship him with our lips and
our hearts far from him, and without we pray in Spirit, Prayer preuayles
not, neither does it pearce the ears of God.

Quest. Then a faithful and devout mind is specially required in prayer?

Ans. It is so, which God for Christ's sake grant unto us.

Quest. What is Christ?

Answer. Perfect God, and perfect man.

Quest. How do thou know he is God?

Ans. Because he is equal with his father.

Quest. How know thou he is equal with his father?

Ans. Because he says, I and the Father are one, also Paul says, He being
equal with his Father, took upon him the shape of a servant.

Quest. How do thou know that he is man?

Ans. Because he took natural flesh of the virgin Mary, and was conceived by
the holy Ghost without sin, and in that natural body dyed a most paynefull
death to redeem us from our sins (as the Apostle says:) He came into the
world to save sinners.

Question. What is the Catholic Church?

Answer. It is a congregation of all faithful men, dispersed throughout the
whole world, amongst whom the pure word of God is preached, and the sacraments
are ministered, according to Christ's institution.

Question. Art thou the child of God?

Answer. I am.

Question. By Nature, or by Grace?

Answer. Not by Nature, for so we are the children of Gods wrath.

Quest. Now know thou that thou art the child of God by Grace?

Ans. Because he has given the earnest of his spirit into our hearts, which
cries Abba Pater, which spirit witnesses to our spirit, that we are the
sons of God.

Question. Is not this presumption for a sinner to say he is Gods son?

Ans. It is no presumption so to say, so it be holy presumption to call our
selves Gods children, from the testimony of a good conscience, seeing Christ
has willed us in prayer to call his Father our Father.

Question. Of what substance is the holy Ghost?

Answer. A Spiritual substance as God is.

Question. Of what Nature?

Answer. Being God, one of nature with God.

Question. Then the holy Ghost is God?

Answer. He is so.

Question. The^ there be three Gods, as God the Father, God the Son, and God
the holy Ghost?

Answer. No, the distinction is in person, not in deity, as the Catholic
faith teaches us. The conclusion therefore is, that God ye Father is our
Creator, Christ in his person is our Redeemer, the holy Ghost who proceeds
from both, is our sanctifyer, and proceeds from them, even as light and
heat from the Son, and yet so lightneth the whole World, that it remains
still with God, and is very God.

Question. What is a Sacrament?

Answer. It is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as for example, the
water wherewith the child is baptized, is the visible sign of the invisible
grace of God, by whose grace these our sins be cleansed by Christ's blood, so
likewise the Sacrame^tal Bred and Wine do signify to us ye body of Jesus
Christ naturally and truly, his body broken, and his blood shed upon ye cross
for our salutio^.

Question. According to this definition, Sacraments be infinite. Let me know
why Baptism and the Lords Supper are only allowed Sacraments in the Church?

Answer. Because they be commanded by Gods word, and have promises of grace
and salvation annexed unto the^.

Question. Do Sacraments of themselves confer grace?

Answer. No, but God does by them exhibit graces unto us, for John says, We
Baptize with Water, we minister the outward signs, but it is Christ which
does Baptize with the holy Ghost: and by the outward Elements by us ministered
we do confirm the inward grace which is given by God.

Quest. What be those graces that be conferred from God to us by these
sacraments?

Ans. Regeneration of life, increase of spiritual blessings, forgiveness of
sins, and life everlasting.

Quest. Then of necessity all are not saved which participate Baptism and the
Lords Supper?

Ans. So many are saved as are partakers of the invisible graces, whereof the
Sacraments are visible signs.

Quest. How if a child borne of believing parents, be prevented with death
before Baptism, and so receive not the visible sign?

Answer. It is most requisite that we endeavor to offer them to public
Baptism by all means lawful, otherwise if we be hindered by some necessity
not to be shunned, yet we ought to persuade our selves that they are saved by
the invisible grace, because the children of faithful believing parents, are
received in the covenant, and may be sanctified in their mothers wombes.

Question. Then what needs Baptism?

Answer. It is of great necessity for the commandments sake, contained in
the eight and twentieth of Matthew: and to refuse it, is to despise the
ordinance of God, for although he work sometime without all means, yet must
not we cease to use the means appointed, when we are in a Christian Church,
and may have them, that is, to Baptize the whole World in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Question. Have you no further reason for the use of Baptism?

Answer. That is said, is sufficient: yet I do say further, it is the pledge
of Gods covenant made with us, and the visible sign of our adoption that we
are his by Grace and Faith in Christ, and the visible mark, whereby we are
known from the uncircumcised sort.

Question. What is Faith?

Answer. It is a sure trust in God, and in Jesus Christ our Lord, and a
certainty of things promised by God, which can not otherwise be discerned,
than with the eye of Faith.

Question. Whence comes Faith?

Answer. It is the gift of God, as Paul says in the second to the Ephesians. By
grace you are saved through Faith, not of our selves, it is the gift of GOD.

Question. Does Faith only justify a man?

Answer. It does Justify.

Question. How is a justifying faith known from a dead faith?

Answer. By the fruits and works which are with faith that justifies.

Question. What is Faith without good life?

Answer. It is dead.

Question. What are works without Faith?

Answer. They be sin, be they never so glorious before men.

Question. How come men by faith?

Answer. In the tenth to the Romans it is showed, that Faith comes by
hearing the Word of God.

Question. Can a man be saved without faith in Christ?

Answer. No, for Christ says, He that believes not, is condemned already.

These Questions are briefly collected out of the former, for the help of such
as in a short sum are desirous to learn by heart the chief principles of
Christian Religion.
Question.

WHat is God?

Answer.

God is a Spirit.

Quest. How must he be woorshipped?

Ans. In Spirit and truth.

Quest. What is Jesus Christ?

Ans. Christ is perfect God and perfect Man.

Quest. How know you he is God?

Ans. Because he is equal with his Father.

Quest. How know you he is Man?

Ans. Because in our nature he redeemed us from our sins.

Quest. What is ye Catholic Church?

Ans. All faithful people dispersed throughout the whole world.

Quest. Art thou the son of God?

Ans. I am.

Quest. Art thou the son of God by nature, or by grace?

Ans. By grace.

Quest. How do thou know that thou art the son of God by grace?

Ans. The spirit does witness to our spirit that we are the sons of God.

Quest. Of what substance is the holy ghost?

Ans. A spiritual substance.

Quest. Of what nature?

Ans. Of one with God.

Quest. Then the holy ghost is God?

Ans. He is so.

Quest. Then there be three Gods, as God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost.

Ans. No, the distinction is in persons, not in deytie, as the Catholic Faith
teaches us. The conclusion, then God the Father is our creator, Christ in his
person our Redeemer, the holy Ghost who proceeds from both our sanctifier,
and proceeds from the^ as light and heat from the son, and so lightneth yt
whole world, and remains still in God, and is very God. Qu. What is a
sacrament?

Answer. It is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as for example, the
water wherewith the child is baptized, is the visible sign of the invisible
grace of God, by whose grace these our sins he cleansed by Christ's blood: so
likewise the sacramental bread and wine do signifye to us ye body of Jesus
Christ naturally and truly, both his body broken, and his blood shed upon the
cross for our salvation.

Question. Do not these Sacraments of themselves confer grace?

Answer. No, we (says S. John) Baptize with water, we minister the outward
signs, but it is Christ which does Baptize with the holy Ghost, and by the
outward Elements by us ministered we do confirm the inward grace, which is
given by God.

Quest. Then of necessity al are saved which participate Baptism and the
Lords Supper?

Ans. So many are saved as are partakers of the invisible graces, whereof the
sacraments are visible signs.

Quest. How if a child borne of believing parents be prevented with death
before Baptism, and so receive not the visible sign?

Ans. It is most requisite that we do preserve it to public Baptism by all
means lawful, if not, yet they be saved by invisible grace, because the
children of faithful believing parents are sanctified in their mothers wombes.

Quest. Then what need Baptism?

Ans. It is of great necessity for the commandments sake, Math. 28. and to
refuse it, is to despise yt ordinance of God, for although he work sometime
without all means, yet we must not cease to use the means appointed, that
is, to baptize the whole world in the name of the father, the son, and the
holy ghost.

Quest. What is Faith?

Ans. It is a sure trust in God, and Jesus Christ our Lord.

Quest. Whence comes Faith?

Ans. It is the gift of God.

Quest. Does Faith only justify a man?

Ans. It does justify.

Quest. How is a justifying Faith known from a dead Faith?

Ans. By the fruits and works which are with faith that iustifyeth.

Quest. What is faith without good life?

Ans. It is dead.

Quest. What are works without faith?

Ans. They be sin, be they never so gorgeous before men.

Quest. How come men by faith?

Ans. In the tenth to the Romans, Faith comes by hearing the word of God.

Quest. Can a man be saved without Faith in Christ?

Ans. No, for Christ says, He that believes not, is condemned already.

FINIS.

