DIVINE POEMES Reuised, and Corrected with Additions By the Author Fra: Quarles.

Printed for John Marriott in St Dunstons Church yard (...)



DIVINE POEMS: Containing The History of JONAH. ESTER. JOB. SAMPSON.

SIONS SONETS. ELEGIES.



Written and newly augmented, BY FRA: QVARLES.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for I. MARRIOT, and are to be sold at his Shop in St.
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY of King CHARLES.
SIR,
WHen your Landed Subject dies, and leaves none of his Blood to inherit, the
Laws of this your Kingdom finds the King heir: In this Volume are contained
several Poems lately dedicated to diverse of your Nobility, whom they have
outlived; So that the Muses (who seldom or never give honor for life's) have
found them all for the King, which (have here gathered together, and prostrated
before the feet of your Sacred Majesty. Indeed one of them I formerly dedicated
and presented to your self. So that now they are become doubly yours, both by
Escheate, and as Survivour. And if you please to own me as your servant, your
Majesty has another Title good, by which I most desire they should be known
yours: I will not sin against the common good so much as to expect your
Majesty's serious eye upon them: If when your Crown shall be most favorable
to your Princely brows, you please to afford a gracious hearing, they will
with the help of some benevolous Reader, and your Royal acceptance (I hope)
relish in your sacred ears, and receive honor from your accustomed goodness,
far above their merits, or the expectation of

Your true-hearted and loyal Liegeman, FRA: QVARLES.

To the READER.
I List not to tire thy patient ears with unnecessary Language, (the abuse of
Complement^) My mouth's no Dictionary: it only serves as the needful
Interpreter of my Heart.

I have here sent thee the first fruits of an abortive Birth. It is a dainty
Subject, not Fabulous, but Truth it self.

Wonder not at the Title ( A FEAST FOR WORMS:) for it is a Song of Mercy:
What greater FEAST than Mercy? And what are Men but WORMS?

Moreover, I have gleaned some few Meditatations, obvious to the History; Let
me advise thee to keep the Taste of the one, whilst thou read the other,
and that will make thee relish both, the better.

Understanding Reader, favor me: Gently expound, what it is too late to
correct.

He leva le Golpe, Dios sea con ella. Farewell.
THE PROPOSITION of this first Work.
^TIs not the Record of great Hectors glory,
Whose matchless Valor makes the World a Story;
Nor yet the swelling of that Romans name,
That only Came, and Looked, and Overcame;
Nor One, nor All, of those brave Worthies nine,
(Whose Might was great, and Acts almost divine,
That live'd like Gods, but died like Men, and gone)
Shall give my Pen a Task to treat upon:
I sing the praises of the KING of Kings.
Out of whose mouth a two-edged Smiter springs,
Whose Words are Mystery, whose Works are Wonder,
Whose Eyes are Lightning, and whose Voice is Thunder;
Who like a Curtain spreads the Heavens out,
Spangled with Stars, in Glory round about:
It Is He, that cleft the furious waves in twain,
Making a Highway passage through the Maine,
It Is He, that turned the waters into Blood,
And smote the Rocky stone, and caused a Flood;
It Is He, that is justly armed in his Ire,
Behind with Plagues, before with flaming Fire,
More bright than midday Phoebus, are his Eyes,
And whosoever sees his Visage, dies.
I sing the Praises of Great Iudahs Lion,
The fragrant Flower of Iesse, the Lamb of Sion,
Whose Head is whiter than the driven Snow,
Whose visage does like flames of Fire glow:
His Loins begirt with golden Belt, his Eyne
Like Titan, ridinst in his Southern Shine,
His Feet like burning Brass, and as the noise
Of surgie Neptunes roaring in hi^ Voice,
This is that Paschall Lamb whose dearest Blood
Is soveraig^e Drink, whose Flesh is saving Food:
His precious Blood, the Worthies of the Earth
Did drink, which (though but borne of mortal birth)
Returned them Deities: For who drinks This,
Shall be received into Eternal Bliss;
Himselfe's the Gift, which He himself did give,
His Stripes heal us, and by His Death we live;
He acting God and Man, in double Nature,
Did reconcile Mankind, and Man's Creator.
I, here is a Task indeed; If Mortals could
Not make a Verse, yet Rocks and Mountains would:
The Hills shall dance, the Sun shall stop his Course,
Hearing the subject of this high Discourse:
The Horse, and Gryphin, shall together sleep,
The Wolf shall fawn upon the silly Sheep,
The crafty Serpent, and the fearful Heart,
Shall join in Consort, and each bear a part,
And leap for Joy; when my Urania sings,
She sings the praises of the King of Kings.
The Introduction.
THat Ancient Kingdom, that old Assure swayd,
Showed two great Cities: Ah! but both decayed,
Both mighty Great, but of unequal growth;
Both great in People, and in Building, both;
But ah! What hold is there of earthly good?
Now Grass grows there, where these brave Cities stood.
The name of one, great Babylon was hight,
Through which the rich Euphrates takes her flight
From high Armenia to the ruddy Seas,
And stores the Land with rich Commodities.
The other Ninus, Nineveh the Great,
So huge a Fabric, and well-chosen Seat
Don Phoebus fiery Steeds (with Maines becurl'd,
That circundates in twice twelve hours the world)
Never saw the like: By great King Ninus hand,
'Twas raised and builded, in the Assy^ians Land.
On one hand, Lycus washed her fruitful sides,
On the other, Tygris with her hasty ^ides.
Begirt she was with walls of wondrous might,
Creeping twice fifty foot in measured height.
Upon their breadth (if ought we may rely
On the report of Sage Antiquity,)
Three Chariots fairly might themselves display,
And rank together in a Ba^tell ray:
The Circuit that her mighty Bulk embraces
Contains the mete of sixty thousand (...):
Within her well-fenc'd walls you might discover
Five hundred stately Towers, thrice told over;
Whereof the highest draws up the eye,
As well the low'st, an hundred Cubits hie;
All rich in those things, which to state belong,
For beauty brave, and for munition strong:
Duly, and daily this great Work was tended
With ten thousand Workmen; begun and ended
In eight years space: How beautiful! how fair
Thy Buildings! And how foul thy Vices are!
Thou Land of Assure, double then thy pride,
And let thy Wells of Joy be never dried,
Thou have a Palace, that is renowned so much,
The like was never, is, nor will be such.
Thou Land of Assure, treble then thy W^^,
And let thy Tears (do as thy Cups) overflow;
For this thy Palace of so great renown,
Shall be destroyed, and sacked, and battered down.
But cheer up, Niniveh, thine inbred might
Has means enough to quell thy Foemans spite:
Thy Bulwarks are like Mountains, and thy Wall
Disdaines to stoop to thundering Ordnance call:
Thy watchful Towers mounted round about,
Keep thee in safety, and thy Foe-men, out:
I, But thy Bulwarks aid cannot withstand
The direful stroke of the Almighties hand;
Thy Wafer-walls at dread Iehovahs blast
Shall quake, and quiver, and shall down (...).
Thy watchful Towers shall asleep be found,
And nod their drowsy heads down to the ground:
Thy Bulwarks are not Vengeance-proofe; thy Wall,
When Justice brandisheth her Sword, must fall:
Thy lofty Towers shall be dumb, and yield
To high Revenge* Revenge must win the field;
Vengeance cries loud from heaven, she cannot stay
Her Fury, but (impatient of delay)
Has brimm'd her (...) full of deadly B^ne:
Thy Pal^ce shall be burnt, thy People slain;
Thy Heart is hard as Flint, and swollen with pride,
Thy murderous Hands with guitlesse blood are died;
Thy silly Babes do starve for want of Food:
Whose tender Mothers thou have drencht in Blood:
Women with child, lie in the streets about,
Whose Brains thy savage hands have dashed out:
Distressed Widows weep, (but weep in vain)
For their dear Husbands, whom thy hands have slain:
By one man's Force, another man's devoured,
Thy Wives are ravished, and thy Maids deflowered;
Where Justice should, there Tort and Bribes are placed:
Thy' Altars defiled, and holy things defaced:
Thy Lips have tasted of proud Babels Cup,
What thou have left, thy Children have drunk up:
Thy bloody sins, thine Abels guiltless blood,
Cries up to heaven for Vengeance, cries aloud;
Thy sins are seire, and ready for the fire,
Here rouse, (my Muse) and for a space, respire.
TO THE MOST HIGH, HIS HVMBLE SERVANT IMPLORES HIS FAVOVrable Assistance.
O All sufficient God, great Lord of Light,
Without whose gracious aid, and constant sprite,
No labors prosper, (howsoever begun)
But fly like Mists before the morning Sun:
O raise my thoughts, and clear my Apprehension,
Infuse thy Spirit into my weak invention:
Reflect thy Beams upon my feeble Eyes,
Show me the Mirror of thy Mysteries;
My Art-lesse Hand, my humble Heart inspire,
Inflame my frozen tongue with holy fire:
Ravish my stupid Senses with thy Glory;
Sweeten my Lips with sacred Oratory:
And (thou O FIRST and LAST) assist my Quill,
That first and last, I may perform thy will:
My sole intent's to blazon forth thy Praise;
My ruder Pen expects no crown of Bays.
Suffice it then, Thine Altar I have kissed:
Crown me with Glory; Take the Bays that list.
A FEAST FOR WORMS.

By Fra: Quarles.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN MARRIOT. 1633.

A FEAST FOR WORMS.
THE ARGUMENT.
The word of God to Jonah ^^me,
Commanded Jonah to pro^lame
The ^engeance of his M^jestie,
Against the sins of (...).
Sect. 1.
The Eternal Word of God, whose high Decree
Admits no change, and cannot frustrate be,
Came down to Jonah, from the heavens above,
Came down to * Jonah, heavens anointed Dove;
Jonah, the flower of old (...) youth,
Jonah, the Prophet, Son, and Heir to Truth,
The blessed Type of him, that ransomed us,
That Word came to him, and bespake him thus:
" Arise; trusse up thy loins, make all things meet,
" And put thy Sandals on thy hasty feet,
" Gird up thy reins, and take thy staff in hand,
" Make no delay, but go, where I command;
" Me pleases not to send thee (Jonah) down,
" To sweet Gath-Hepher, thy dear native Town,
" Whose tender paps, with plenty overflow;
" Nor yet unto thy brethren shall thou go,
" Amongst the Hebrews, where thy spr^dden fame
" Fore-runnes the welcome of thine honored name*
" No, I Will not send thee thither: Up, arise,
" And go to Niniveh, where no Allies,
" Nor consanguinity prese^ves thy blood;
" To Ni^iveh, where strangers are withstood:
" To Niniveh, a City far removed
" From thine acquaintance, where thou art not beloved
" I send thee to Mount Sinay, not Mount Sion,
" Not to a gentle Lamb, but to a Lion:
" Nor yet to Lydia, but to bloody Pashur,
" Not to the Land of Canaan, but of Ashur,
" Whose language will be riddles to thine ears,
" And thine again will be as strange to th^irs*
" Isay, to Niniveh, the worlds great Hall,
" The Monarchs seat, high Court Imperial.
" But terrible Mount Sinay ^ill affright thee,
" And Pashurs heavy hand is bent to smite thee*
" The Lions rore, the people'^ strong and stout,
" The Bulwarks stand a front to keep thee out.
" Great Ashur minaces with whip in hand,
" To entertain thee (welcome) to his land.
" What then? Arise, be gone; stay not to think:
" Bad is the cloth, that will in wetting shrink.
" What then, if cruel Pashur heap on strokes?
" Or Sinay blast thee with her sulfurous smokes?
" Or Ashur whip thee? Or the Lions rent thee?
" P^sh, on with courage; I, the Lord have sent thee*
" Away, away, lay by thy foolish pity,
" And go to Niniveh, that mighty City:
" Cry loud against it, let thy dreadful voice
" Make all the City echo with the noise:
" Not like a Dove, but like a Dragon go,
" Pronounce my judgment, and denounce my Woe:
" Make not thy bed a fountain ^all of tears,
" ^o weep in secret for her sins. Thine ears
" S^all hear such things, will make thine eyes run over,
" ^hine eyes shall smart with what they shall discover:
" Spend not in private, those thy zealous drops,
" But hew, and back; spare neither trunk nor l^ps:
" Make heaven, and earth rebound, when thou discharges*
" Plead not (like Paul) but roar (like Boanarges:)
" Nor let the beauty of the buildings bleare thee,
" Let not the terrors of the Rampires fear thee;
" Let no man bribe thy fist, (I well advise thee)
" Nor foul means force thee, nor let fair entice thee:
" Ram up thine ears: Thy heart of stone shall be;
" Be deaf to them, as they are deaf to me:
" Go, cry against it. If they ask thee why?
" Say, heavens great Lord commanded thee to cry:
" My Altars cease to smoke; their holy fires
" Are quenched, and where prayers should, their sin aspires*
" The fatness of their fornication fryes
" On coals of ragi^g l^st, and upward flies,
" And makes me seek: I hear the mournful gro^es
" And heavy sighs of such, whose aching bones
" Th'oppressor grindes: Alas, their griefs implore me,
" Their prayers, preferred with tears, plead loud before (...)*
" Behold, my sons, they have oppressed, and killed,
" And bathed their hands within the blood they spilled:
" The steame of guiltless blood makes suit unto me,
" The vo^^e of many bloods is mounted to me;
" The vile prophaner of my sacred Names,
" He tears my titles, and my honor maim^s,
" Makes Rhet'rick of an oath, swears and forsweares,
" Recks not my Mercy, nor my Judgment fears:
" They eat^, they drink, they sleep, they tire the ^igh^
" (...) ^alliance, and unclean delight.
" Heavens winged Herald Iona^, up and go
" To mighty Niniveh, Denounce my woe.
" Advance thy voice, and when thou have advan^^^ it,
" Spare Shrub, nor Cedar, but cry out against it:
" Hold out thy Trumpet, and with louder breath*
" Proclaim my sudden coming, and their death.
The Authors Apology.
IT was my morning Muse; A Muse whose spirit
Transcend^ (I fear) the fortunes of her merit;
Too bold a Muse, whose feathers (yet in blood)
She never bathed in the Pyrenean Flood;
A Muse unbreath'd, unlikely to attain
An easy honor, by so stout a Train;
Expect no lofty Hagard, that shall fly
A lessning pitch, to the deceived eye;
If in her Downy Soreage, she but ruff
So strong a Dove, may it be thought enough;
Bear with her; Time and Fortune may require
Your patient sufferance, with a fairer flight.
The general Application.
TO thee ( Mal^id^) now I turn my Quill;
That God is still that God, and will be still.
The painful Pastors take up Ionah's room:
And thou the Ninivite, to whom they come.
Medit. 1.
HOw great's the love of God unto his creature?
Or is his Wisdom, or his Mercy greater?
I know not whether: O th'exceeding love
Of highest God! that from his Throne above
Will send the brightness of his grace to those
That grope in darkness, and his grace oppose:
He helps, provides, inspires, and freely gives,
As pleased to see us ravell out our lives;
He gives us from the heap, He measures not,
Nor deals (like Manna) each his stinted lot,
But daily sends the Doctors of his Spouse,
(With such like oil as from the Widows cruse
Did issue forth) in fullness, without wasting,
Where plenty still was had, yet plenty lasting.
I, there is ^are in heaven, and heavenly sprights,
That guides the world, and guards poor mortal wights,
There is; else were the miserable state
Of Man, more wretched and unfortunate
Than salvage beasts: But O th'abounding love
Of highest God! whose Angels from above
Dismount the Tower of Bliss, fly to and fro,
Assisting wretched Man, their deadly foe.
What thing is Man, that Gods regard is such?
Or why should heaven love rechlesse Man so much?
Why? what are men? but quickened lumps of earth?
A Feast for Worms; a bubble full of mirth;
A Looking glass for grief; A flash; A minute;
A painted Toombe, with putrefaction in it;
A map of Death; A burden of a song;
A winters Dust; A worm of five foot long:
Begot in sin; In darkness nourisht; Born^
In sorrow; Naked; Shiftlesse, and forlorn:
His first voice (heard) is crying for relief;
Alas! He comes into a world of grief:
His Age is sinful; and his Youth is vain;
His Life's a punishment; His Death's a pain;
His Life's a hour of Joy; a world of Sorrow;
His death's a winters night, that finds no morrow:
Man's Life's an Hower-glasse, which being run,
Concludes that hour of joy, and so is done.
Jonah must go; nor is this charge confinde
To Jonah, but to all the world enjoined;
You Magistrates, arise, and take delight
In dealing Justice, and maintaining Right;
There lies your Niniveh: Merchants arise,
And mingle conscience with your Merchandise:
Lawyers arise, make not your righteous Laws,
A trick for gain; Let Justice rule the cause:
Tradesmen arise, and plye your thriving shops,
With truer hands, and eat your meat with drops:
Paul to thy Tents, and Peter to thy Net,
And all must go that course, which God has set.
Great God awake us, in these drowsy times,
Lest vengeance find us, sleeping in our Crimes,
Increase succession in thy Prophets liew,
For lo, thy Harvest's great, and workmen few.
THE ARGUMENT.
But Jonah toward Tharsis went,
A Tempest does his course prevent:
The Mariners are sore oppressed,
While Jonah sleeps and takes his rest.
Sect. 2.
But Jonah thus bethought: The City's great,
And mighty Ashur stands with deadly threat;
Their hearts are hardued, that they cannot hear:
Will green wood burn, when so unapt's the seire?
Strange is the charge: Shall I go to a place
Unknown and foreign? Aye me! hard's the case,
That righteous Isr^el, must be thus neglected,
When Miscreants and Gentiles are respected:
How might I hope my words shall there succeed,
Which thrive not with the flocks I daily feed?
I know my God is gentle, and en^linde,
To tender mercy, apt to change his mind
Upon the least repentance: Then shall I
Be deemed as false, and shame my Prophecy.
O heavy burden, of a doubtful mind!
Where shall I go, or which way shall I wind?
My heart like Ianus, looks to and fro;
My Credit bids me, Stay; my God bids, Go:
If Go; my labor's lost, my shame's at hand:
If stay, Lord! I transgress my Lords command:
If go; from bad estate, to worse, I fall.
If stay, I slide from bad, to worst of all.
My God bids go, my credit bids me stay:
My guilty fear bids fly another way.
So Jonah straight arose, himself bedight
With fit acoutrements, for hasty flight:
In stead of staff, he took a Shipmans weed;
In stead of going, lo^, he flies with speed.
Like as a Hawke (that overmatcht with might)
Doing sad penance for th'unequall fight,
(Answ^ring the Falkners second shout) does flee
From fist; turns tail to foul, and takes a tree:
So Jonah baulks the place where he was sent
(To Nineveh) and down to Iaffa went:
He sought, enquired, and at last, he found
A welcome Ship, that was to Tharsis bound,
Where he may fly the presence of the Lord:
He makes no stay, but straightway goes aboard,
His hasty purse for bargain finds no leisure,
(Where sin delights, there is no account of treasure)
Nor did he know, nor ask, how much his Fare:
He gave: They took: all parties pleased are:
(How thriftlesse of our cost, and pains, are we,
Great God of heaven and earth, to fly from thee!)
Now have the sailors drunk their parting cup,
They go aboard; The S^^les are hoisting up;
The Anchor's wayd; the keele begins to obey
Her gentle Rudder; leaves her quiet Key,
Divides the streams, and without wind or oar,
She easly glides along the moving shore:
Her swelling Canvace gives her nimbler motion,
Sh'outstrips the Tide, and hies her to the Ocean:
Forth to the deep she launches, and outbraves
The prouder billows, rides upon the waves;
She plies that course, her Compass has enjoindher,
And soon has left the lessned land behind her;
By this, the breath of heaven began to cease;
Calm were the Seas; the waves were all at peace;
The flagging mainsaile flapt against her yard,
The useless Compass, and the idle Card
Were both neglected: Upon every side
The gamesome Porpisce tumbled on the Tide.
Like as a Mastis^e, when restrained a while,
Is made more furious, and more apt for spoil,
Or when the breath of man, being bard the course,
At length breaks forth, with a far greater force,
Even so the mi^der breath of heaven, at last,
Lets fly more fierce, and blows a stronger blast;
All on a sudden darkened was the Sky
With gloomy clouds; heavens more refulgent eye
Was all obscured: The air grew damp and cold,
And strong mouthed B^reas could no longer hold:
Eolus lets loose his uncontrouled breath,
Whose language threatens nothing under death:
The Rudder fails; The ship's at random driven;
The eye no object ownes, but Sea and Heaven:
The Welkin storms, and rages more and more,
The rain powers down; the heavens begin to rore
As they would split the massy Globe in sunder,
From those that live above, to those live under;
The Pilot's frighted; knows not what to do,
His Art's amazed, in such a maze of woe;
Faces grow sad: Prayers and complaints are rise;
Each one's become an Orator for life:
The Winds above, the waters underneath,
Join in rebellion, and conspire death.
The Seamens courage now begins to quail*
Some ply the plump, whilst others strike the ^aile,
Their hands are busy, while their hearts despair,
Their fears and dangers move their lips to prayer:
They praid, but winds did snatch their words away,
And lets their prayers not go to whom they pray:
But still they pray, but still the wind and weather
Do turn both ship and prai'rs they know not whether:
Their gods were deaf, their danger waxed greater;
They cast their wares out, and yet never the better:
But all this while was Jonah drowned in sleep,
And in the lower deck was buried deep.
Medita. 2.
But stay: this was a strange and uncouth word:
Did Jonah fly the presence of the Lord?
What mister word is that? He that repleats
The mighty Universe, whose lofty seat's
The Imperial Heaven, whose footstool is the face
Of massy Earth? Can he from any place
Be barred? or yet by any means, excluded,
That is in all things? (and yet not included)
Could Jonah find a resting any where
So void, or secret, that God was not there?
I stand amazed, and frighted at this word:
Did Jonah fly the presence of the Lord?
Mount up to Heaven, and there thou shall discover
The exc'lent glory of his kingly power:
Bestride the earth beneath (with weary pace)
And there he bears the Olive branch of Grace:
Dive down into th'extreme Abisse of Hell,
And there in Justice does the Almighty dwell.
What secret Cloister could there then afford
A screene'twixt faithless Jonah, and his Lord?
^onah was charged, to take a charge in hand;
But Jonah turned his back on Gods command;
Shook off his yoke, and wilfully neglected,
And what was strictly charged, he quite rejected:
And so he fled the power of his Word;
And so he fled the presence of his Lord.
Good God! how poor a thing is wretched man?
So frail, that let him strive the best he can,
With every little blast he is overdon:
If mighty Cedars of great Leban^n,
Cannot the danger of the Axe withstand,
Lord! how shall we, that are but bushes, stand:
How fond, corrupt, how senseless is mankind?
How faining deaf is he? How wilful blind?
He stops his ears, and sins: he shuts his eyes,
And (blindfold) in the lap of danger flies:
He sins, despaires; and then to stint his grief,
He chooses death, to baulke the God of life.
Poor wretched sinner, travel where thou will,
Thy travel shall be burdened with thy guilt:
Climb tops of hills, that prospects may delight thee,
There will thy sins (like wolves and bears) afright thee,
Fly to the valleys, that those frights may shun thee,
And there, like Mountains, they will fall upon thee:
Or to the raging Seas, (with Jonah) go;
There will thy sins like stormy Neptune flow.
Poor shiftlesse Man! what shall become of thee?
Wher'ere thou fly'st, thy griping sin will flee.
But all this while, the ship where Jonah sleeps,
Is tossed and torn, and battered on the Deeps,
And well-nigh split upon the threatening Rock,
With many a boistrous brush, and churly knock:
God help all desperate voyagers, and keep
All such as feel thy wonders on the deep.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Pilot thumps on Ionah's breast,
And rowzeth Jonah from his rest:
They all cast Lotts, (being sore afrighted)
The sacred Lot on Jonah lighted.
Sect. 3.
THe amazed Pilot finding no success,
(But that the storm grew rather more than less,
For all their toilsome pains, and needless prayers*
Despairing both of life, and goods) repaires
To Ionahs drowsy Cabin; mainly calls;
Calls Jonah, Jonah; and yet louder yawles;
Yet Jonah sleeps; and gives a shrug, or two,
And snores, (as greedy sleepers use to do.)
The woeful Pylot jogs him, (but in vain.)
(Perchance he dreams an idle word, or twain*)
At length he tugs and pulls his heavy coarse,
And thunders on his breast, with all his force:
But (after many yawnes) he did awake him,
And (being both affrighted) thus bespake him:
" Arise, O Sleeper; O arise and (...),
" There Is not a twiny thred'twixt death, and thee:
" This darkesome place (thou measur'st) is thy grave,
" And sudden Death rides proud on yo^der wave;
" Arise, O sleeper, O arise, and pray;
" Perhaps thy God will hear, and not say, Nay:
" Repair the loss of these our ill spent hours,
" Perchance thy God's more powerful than ours;
" Heavens hand may cease, and have compassion on us,
" And turn away this mischief it has done us.
The sturdy Saylors (weary of their pain)
Finding their bootlesse labor lost, and vain,
Forbear their toilesome task and wrought no more,
Expecting Death, for which they looked before;
They call a parley, and consult together,
They count their sins, (accusing one another)
That for his sin, or his, this ill was wrought:
In fine, they all prove guilty of the fault:
But yet the question was not ended so:
One says, 'Twas thine offense; but he says, No,
But 'twas for thy sake, that accuses me;
R^sht forth a third (the worser of the three)
And swore it was another, which (he hearing)
Denied it (...), and said, 'Twas thine for swearing:
In came a fifth, accusing all; (replying
But little else) they all chid him for lying;
One said it was, another said 'twas not:
So all agreed, to stint the strife by Lot:
Then all was whist* and all to prayer went;
(For such a business a fit complement)
The Lot was cast; t'pleas'd God by Lots to tell,
The Lot was cast; the Lot on Jonah fell,
Medita. 3.
O Sacred subject of a Meditation!
Thy Works (O Lord) are full of Admiration,
Thy judgments all are just, severe, and sure,
They quite cut off or else by lancing, cure
The festring sore of a rebellious heart,
Lest-foule infection taint the immortal part.
How deep a Lethargy does this disease
Bring to the slumbring soul, through careless ease*
Which once being wak't, (as from a golden dream)
Looks up, and sees her grief^s the more extreme.
How seeming sweet's the quiet sleep of sin?
Which when a wretched man's once nuzzled in,
How soundly sleeps he, without fear, or wit?
No sooner do his arms infolded knit
A drowzy knot upon his careless breast,
But there he snorts, and snores in endless rest;
His eyes are closed fast, and deaf his ears,
And (like Endymion) sleeps himself in years;
His sense-bound heart relents not at the voice
Of gentle warning, neither does the noise
Of strong reproof awake his sleeping ear,
Nor louder threatenings thunder makes him hear;
So deafe's the sinners ear, so numbed his sense,
That sinne's no corrosive, breeds no offense;
For custom brings delight, deludes the heart,
Beguiles the sense, and takes away the smart.
But stay; Did one of Gods elected number,
(Whose eyes should never sleep, nor eye lids ^lu^ber)
So much forget himself? Did Jonah fleepe,
That should be watchful, and the Tower keep?
Did Jonah (the selected mouth of God)
In stead of roaring judgments, does he nod?
Did Jonah sleep so sound? Could he sleep then,
When (with the sudden sight of Death) the men
(So many men) with yelling shrikes, and cries,
Made very heaven report? Were Ionah's eyes
Still closed, and he, not of his life bereaven?
Hard must he wink that shuts his eyes from heaven.
O righteous Israel, where, O, where art thou?
Where is thy Lamp? thy zealous Shepherd now?
Alas! the ravenous Wolves will worr' thy Sheep;
Thy Shepheard's careless, and is fallen asleep;
Thy wandering flocks are frighted from their fold,
Their Shepherd's gone, and Foxes are too bold:
They, they whose smooth-faced words become the altar,
Their works dissent, and first begin to faulter;
And they that should be watchlights in the Temple
Are snuffes, and want the oil of good example;
The chosen Watchmen that the tower should keep
Ate waxen heavy-ey'd, and fallen asleep.
Lord if thy watchmen wink too much, awake the^*
Although they slumber, do not quite forsake them;
The flesh is weak, say not (if dullness seize
Their heavy eyes) sleep henceforth: take your ^ase:
And we poor weaklings, when we sleep in sin,
Knock at our drowzy hearts, and never lin,
Till thou awake our sin-congealed eyes;
Lest (drowned in sleep) we sink and never rise.
THE ARGUMENT.
They question Jonah whence he came,
His Country, and his peoples Name.
He makes reply: They moan their woe,
And ask his counsel what to do.
Sect 4.
AS when a Thiefe's appr'hended on suspect,
And charged for some supposed malefact,
A rude concourse of people, straight accrewes,
Whose itching ears even smart to know the news.
The guilty prisoner (to himself betrayed)
He stands dejected, trembling and afraid:
So Jonah stood the Sailers all among,
Enclosed round amid the ruder throng.
As in a Summers evening you shall hear
In Hives of Bees (if you lay close your ear)
Confused buzzing, and seditious noise,
Such was the murmr of the Sailors voice.
" What was thy sinful act, that causes this,
" (Says one) wherein have thou so done amiss?
" Tell us, What is thine Art (another says)
" That thou professest? Speak man, Whences awayes,
" From what Confines ca^^'st thou? (A third replies)
" What is thy Country? And of what allies?
" What, art thou borne a Jew? or Gentile? whether?
" ((...) he could lend an answer unto either)
" A fourth d^^ands; Where has thy breeding been?
All what they asked, they all asked over again:
In fine, their ears (impatient of delay)
Becalmed their tongues to hear what he could say.
So (...) (humbly rearing up his eyes)
Breaking his long-kept silence, thus replies:
" I am an Hebrew, son of Abraham,
" From whom my Land did first derive her name,
" Within the Land of Jury was I borne,
" My name is Jonah, ^etchelesse and forlorn*
" I am a Prophet: ah! but woe is me,
" For from before the face of God I flee;
" From whence (through disobedience) I am driven:
" I sear Jehovah, the great God of Heaven:
" I fear the Lord of Hosts, whose glorious hand
" Did make this stormy Sea, and massy Land.
So said, their ears with double ravishment,
Still hung upon his melting lips, attent,
Whose dreadful words their hearts so near impierc^t,
That from themselves, themselves were quite divers^*
As in a sowltry Summers evening tide,
(When lustful Phoebus re-salutes his Bride,
And Philomela 'gins her caroling)
A Herd of Dear are browzing in a Spring,
With eger appetite, misdeeming naught,
Nor in so deep a silence fearing ought:
A sudden crack, or some unthought-of sound,
Or bounce of Fowlers Piece, or yelpe of Hound,
Disturbs their quiet peace with strange amaze
Where (senseless half) through fear, they stand a^ gaze
So stand the Seamen, (as with Ghosts affrighted,)
Entraunc'd with what this man of God recited:
Their tired limbs do now wax faint, and lither,
Their hearts did yern, their knees did smite together.
Congealed blood usurpt their trembling hearts,
And left a faintness in their feeble parts:
Who (trembling out distracting language,) thus:
" Why have thou brought this mischief upon us?
" What humor led thee to a place unknown,
" To seek foreign Land, and leave thine own?
" What faith had thou, by leaving thine abode,
" To think to fly the presence of thy God?
" Why have thou not obeyed (but thus transgrest)
" The voice of God, whom thou acknowledgest?
" Art thou a Prophet, and do thou amiss?
" What is the cause? and why have thou done this?
" What shall we do? The tempest lends no ear
" To fruitless that, nor dot the b^llowes hear,
" Or mark our language: Waves are not a^tent:
" Our goods they fl^at, our needless pains are spent,
" Our Barke's not weather proof: no Fort's so stout,
" To keep continual siege and battry out.
" The Lot accuses thee, thy words condemn thee,
" The ^^ves (thy deaths men) strive to overwhelme thee:
" What she we do? Thou Prophet, speak, we pray thee:
" Thou fear'dst the Lord; Alas! we may not stay thee:
" Or shall we save thee? No, for thou do fly
" The face of God, and so deserv's^ to dye:
" Thou Prophet, speak, what shall be done to thee,
" That angry Sea* may calm, and quiet be?
Medita. 4.
GIve leave a little to adjoyne your text,
And ease my soul, my soul with doubts perplex^.
Can he be said to fear the Lord, that flies him?
Can word confess him, when as deed denies him?
My sacred Muse has rounded in mine ear,
And read the mystery of a twofold fear:
The first, a servile fear, for judgments sake;
And thus hells Firebrarnds do fear and quake:
Thus Adam feared, and fled behind a tree:
And thus did bloody Cain fear and flee.
Unlike to this there is a second kind
Of fear, extracted from a zealous mind,
Full fraught with love, and with a conscience clear
From base respects: It is a filial fear;
A fear whose ground would just remain, and level,
Were neither Heaven, nor Hell, nor God, nor devil*
Such was the fear that Princely David had;
And thus our wretched Jonah feared, and fled:
He fled ashamed, because his sins were such;
He fled ashamed, because his fear was much.
He feared Jehovah, other feared he none:
Him he acknowledged; him he feared alone:
Unlike to those who (being blind with error)
Frame many gods, and multiply their terror.
The Egyptians, god Apis did implore.
God Assas the Chaldeans did adore:
Babel to the Devouring Dragon seeks;
The Arabians, Astaroth; Juno, the Greeks;
The name of Belus, the Assyrians hallow,
The Troian^, Vesta; Corinth, wise Apollo;
The Arginians sacrifice unto the Sun;
To light-foot Mercury bows Macedon;
To god Volunus, Lovers bend their knee:
To Pavor, they that faint and fearful be:
Who pray for health, and strength, to Murcia those*
And to Victoria, those that fear to lose:
To Muta, they that fear a woman's tongue:
To great Lucin^, women great with young:
To Esculapius, they that live oppressed:
And such to Quies, that de^ier rest.
O blinded ignorance of antique times,
How blent with error, and how stuffed with crimes
Your Temples were! And how adulterate!
How clogged with needless gods! How obstinate!
How void of reason, order, how confuse!
How full of dangerous and foul abuse!
How sandy were the grounds, and how unstable!
How many Deities! yet how unable!
Implore these gods, that list to howl and bark,
They bow to Dagon, Dagon to the Arc:
But he to whom the seal of mercy's given,
Adores Jehovah, the Great God of Heaven:
Upon the mention of whose sacred Name,
Meek Lambs grow fierce, and the fierce Lions tame:
Bright Sol shall stop, and heaven shall turn his course:
Mountains shall dance, and Neptune slake his force:
The Seas shall part, the fire want his flame,
Upon the mention of I^hovah's Name:
A Name that makes the roof of Heaven to shake,
The frame of Earth to quiver, Hell to quake:
A Name, to which all Angels blow their Trumps:
A Name, puts frolic man into his dumps,
(Though never so blythe) A Name of high renown:
It mounts the meek, and beats the lofty down;
A Name, divides the marrow in the bone;
A Name, which out of hard, and flinti^ stone
Extracteth hearts of flesh, and makes relent*
Those hearts that never knew what mercy meant,
O Lord! how great's thy Name in all the Land:
How mighty are the wonders of thy hand?
How is thy glory placed above the heaven?
To tender mouths of Sucklings thou have given
Coercive power, and boldness to reproove,
When elder men do what them not behoove.
O Lord,! how great's the power of thine hand?
O God! how great's thy Name in all the Land!
THE ARGUMENT.
The Prophet does his fault discover,
Perswade^ the men to cast him over:
They row, and toil, but do no good,
They pray to be excused from blood.
Sect. 5.
SO Jonah framed this speech to their demand,
" Not that I seek to traverse the command
" Of my dear Lord, and out of mind perverse,
" To Avoid the Ninivites, do I amer^e
" My self: Nor that I ever heard you threat,
" (Unless I went to Niniveh (the great)
" And do the message sent her from the Lord)
" That you would kill, or cast me over-boord,
" Do, I, do thi^; It Is my deserved fine:
" You all are guiltless, and the fault is mine:
" It Is I, 't^^ I alone, it is I am he:
" The tempest comes from heaven, the cause from me;
" You shall not lose a hair ^or this my s^^,
" Nor perish for the fault that mine has bin;
" Lo, I the man am here: L^, I am he,
" The root of all* End your reven^e on me;
" I fled The Eternal God; O, let me then
" (Because I fled my God) so fly from men:
" Redeem your lives with mine; Ah, why should I,
" Not guiltless, live; and you not guilty, die?
" I am the man, for whom these billows dance,
" My death shall purchase your deliverance;
" Fear not to cease your fears; but throw me in;
" Alas! my soul is burdened with my sin,
" And God is just, and bent to his Decree,
" Which certain is, and cannot altered be;
" I am proclaimed a Traitor to the King
" Of heaven an earth: The winds with speedy wing
" Acquaint the Seas: The Seas mount up on high,
" And cannot rest, until the Traitor die;
" Oh, cast me in, and let my life be ended;
" Let Death make Justice mends, which Life offended;
" Oh, let the swellin^ waters me enbalme;
" So shall the Waves be still, and Sea be calm.
So said, the amazed Mariners grew sad,
New Love abstracted, what old Fear did add;
Love called Pity: Fear called vengeance in;
Love viewed the Sinner* Fear beheld the Sin;
Love cried out, Hold; for better saved than spil'd;
But Fear cried, Kill; O better kill, than killed:
Thus plunged with Passions they distracted were
Betwixt the hopes, and doubts of Love and Fear;
Some cried out, Save: if this foul deed we do,
Vengeance that haunted him, will haunt us too:
Others cried, No; May rather death befall
To one (that has deserved to dye) then all:
Save him (says one) Oh save the man that thus
His dearest blood has profer'd to save us;
No, (says another) vengeance must have blood,
And vengeance strikes most hard, when most withstood.
In fine (say all:) Then let the Prophet die,
And we shall live; For Prophets cannot lie.
Loath to be guilty of their own, yet loath
To haste poor Ionahs death, with hope, that both
The approaching evils might be at once prevented,
With prayers and pains reutter'd, reattented,
They tried new ways, despairing of the old,
Love quickens courage, makes the spirits bold;
They strove, in vain, by toil to win the shore,
And wrought more hard than er^e they did before:
But now, both hands and hearts begin to quail,
(For bodies wanting rest, must faint and fail;)
The Seas are angry, and the waves arise,
Appeased with nothing but a Sacrifice;
Gods vengeance stormeth like the raging Seas,
Which naught but Jonah (dying) can appease:
Fond is that labor, which attempts to free,
What Heaven has bound by a divine decree:
Jonah must die, Heaven has decreed it so,
Jonah must die, or else they all die too;
Jonah must die, that from his Lord did fly;
The Lot determines, Jonah then must die;
His guilty word confirms the sacred Lot*
Jonah must die then, if they perish not.
" If Justice then appoint (since he must die,
" Said they) us Actors of ^is Tragedy,
" (We beg not (Lord) a warrant to offend)
" O pardon bloodshed, that we must intend;
" Though not our hands, yet shall our hearts be clear;
" Then let not stainlesse consciences bear
" The ponderous burden of a Murders guilt,
" Or pay the price of blood that must be spilt;
" For (...), (dear Lord) it is thine own decree,
" And we sad ministers of Justice be.
Meditat. 5.
But stay a while; this thing would first be known:
Can Jonah give himself, and not his own?
That part to God, and to his Country this
Pertaines, so that a slender third is his;
Why then should Jonah do a double wrong,
To deal himself away, that did belong
The least unto himself? or how could he
Teach this, ( Thou shall not kill) if Jonah be
His life's own Butcher? What, was this a deed
That with the Calling he professed, agreed?
The purblinde age (whose works (almost divine)
Did merely with the oil of Nature shine,
That knew no written Law, nor Grace, nor God,
To whip their conscience with a steely rod,)
How much did they abhor so foul a fact?
When (led by Natures glimpse), they made an act,
Selfe-murderers should be denied to have
The charitable honor of a Grave:
Can such do so, when Jonah does amiss?
What, Jonas, Isr'els Teacher! and do this?
The Law of Charity does all forbid,
In this thing to do that which Jonah did;
Moreo're, in charity, it is thy behest,
Of dying men to think, and speak the best;
The mighty Samson did as much as this;
And who dare say, that Samson did amiss,
If heavens high Spirit whispered in his ear
Express command to do it? No wavering fear
Drew back the righteous Abram's armed hand
From Isaacks death, secured by heavens command.
Sure is the knot that true Religion ties,
And Love that is rightly grounded, never dies;
It seems a paradoxe beyond belief,
That men in trouble should prolong relief;
That Pagans (to withstand a Strangers Fate)
Should be neglective of his own estate.
Where is this love become in later age?
Alas! it is gone in endless pilgrimage
From hence, and never to return (I doubt)
'Till revolution wheel those times about:
Chill breasts have starved her here, and she is driven
Away; and with Astraea fled to heaven.
Poor Charity, that naked Babe is gone,
Her honey's spent, and all her store is done;
Her winglesse Bees can find out never a bloome,
And crooked A^^ does usurp her room:
Nepenthe's dry, and Love can get no drink,
And cursed Ar^en^e flows above the brinke.
Brave Mariners, the world your names shall hallow,
Admiring that in you, that none dare follow;
Your friendship's rare, and your conversion strange,
From Paganism to zeal? A sudden change!
Those men do now the God of heaven implore,
That bowed to Puppets, but an hour before;
Their zeal is fervent, (though but new begun)
Before their egge-shels were done off, they run:
And when bright Phoebus in a Summer tide,
(New ris^n from the bosom of his Bride)
Enveloped with misty fogges, at length
Breaks forth, displaies the mist, with Southern strength;
Even so these Mariners (of peerlesse mirror)
Their faith b'ing veiled within the mist of error,
At length their zeal chased ignorance away,
They left their Puppets, and began to pray.
Lord how unlimited are thy confines,
That still pursu'st man in his good designs!
Thy mercy's like the dew of Hermon hill,
Or like the Ointment, dropping downward still
From Aarons head, to beard; from beard to foot:
So do thy mercies drench us round about:
Thy love is boundless; Thou art apt and free,
To turn to Man, when Man returns to thee.
THE ARGUMENT.
They cast the Prophet over board:
The storm alay'd: They fear the Lord;
A mighty Fish him quick devoures,
Where he remained many hours.
Sect. 6.
EVen as a member, whose corrupted sore
Infests, and rankles, eating more and more,
Threatening the bodies loss (if not prevented)
The wise surgeon (all fair means attented)
Cuts off, and with advised skill does choose,
To lose a part, then all the body lose;
Even so the feeble Sailors (that address
Their idle arms, where heaven denies success)
Forbear their thrivelesse labors, and devise
To root that Evil, from whence their harms arise:
Treason is in their thoughts, and in their ears
Danger revives the old, and adds new fears;
Their hearts grow fierce, and every soul applies
T'abandon mercy from his tender eyes:
They cease t'attempt what heaven so long withstood,
And bent to kill, their thoughts are all on blood:
They whisper often, each word is Deaths Alarm;
They hoyst him up; Each lends a busy arm,
And with united powers they entombe
His outcast body in Thetis angry womb:
Whereat grim Neptune wiped his fomy mouth,
Held his tridented Mace upon the South;
The winds were whist, the billows danced no more,
The storm allayed, the heavens left off to rore,
The waves (obedient to their pilgrimage)
Gave ready passage, and surceast their rage,
The sky grew clear, and now the welcome light
Begins to put the gloomy clouds to flight:
Thus all on sudden was the Sea tranquil,
The Heavens were quiet, and the Waves were still*
As when a friendly Creditor (to get
A long forborne, and much-concerning debt)
Still plies his willing debtor with entreats,
Importunes daily, daily thumps, and beats
The battered Portals of his tired ears,
Bedeafing him with what he knows, and hears;
The weary debtor, to avoid the sight
He loathes, shifts here, and there, and every night
Seeks out Protection of another bed,
Yet ne'rethelesse (pursued and followed)
His ears are still laid at with louder volley
Of harder Dialect; He melancholy,
Sits down, and sighs, and after long foreslowing,
(TO avoid his presence) pays him what is owing*
The thankful Creditor is now appeased,
Takes leave, and goes away content, and pleased.
Even so these angry waves, with restless rage,
Accosted Jonas in his pilgrimage,
And thundered Judgment in his fearful ear,
Presenting Hubbubs to his guilty fear:
The waves rose discontent, the Surges beat,
And every moments death, the billows threat,
The weather-beaten Ship did every minuit
Await destruction, while he was in it:
But when his (long expected) corpse they threw
Into the deep, (a debt, through trespass, due)
The Seagrew kind, and all her frowns abated,
Her face was smooth to all that navigated.
'Twas sinful Jonah made her storm and rage,
'Twas sinful Jonah did her storm assuage.
With that the Mariners astonished were,
And feared Jehovah with a mighty fear,
Offering up Sacrifice with one accord,
And vowing solemn vows unto the Lord.
But he whose word can make the earth's foundation
Tremble, and with his Word can make cessation,
Whose wrath does mount the waves, and toss the Seas,
And make the^ calm and smooth, when e're he please:
This God, (whose mercy runs on endless wheel,
And pulls (like Jacob) Justice by the heel)
Prepared a Fish, prepared a mighty Whale,
Whose belly was both prisonhouse, and bail,
For retchlesse Jonah. As the two leaf'd door
Opens, to welcome home the fruitful store,
Wherewith the harvest quits the Plowmans hope,
Even so the great Leviathan set open
His beame-like Jaws, (prepared for such a boon)
And at a morsel, swallowed Jonah down,
'Till dewy-check't Aurora's purple dye
Thrice dappell'd had the ruddy morning sky,
And thrice had spread the Curtains of the morn,
To let in Titan, when the day was borne,
Jonah was Tenant to this living Grave,
Embowel'd deep in this stupendous Cave.
Meditat. 6.
LO, Death is now, as always it has bin,
The just procured stipend of our sin:
Sin is a golden Causie, and a Road
Garnisht with joys, whose paths are even and broad
But leads at length to death, and endless grief,
To torments, and to pains, without relief.
Justice fears none, but makes all afraid,
And then falls hardest, when it is most delaid,
But thou reply'st, thy sins are daily great,
Yet thou sittst uncontrold upon thy seat;
Thy wheat does flourish, and thy barnes do thrive,
Thy sheep increase, thy sons are all alive,
And thou art buxom* and have nothing scant,
Finding no want of any thing, but want,
Whilst others, whom the ^quint-ey'd world counts holy,
Sit sadly drooping in a melancholy,
With brow dejected, and downe-hanging head,
Or take of alms, or poorly beg their bread:
But young man, know there is a Day of doom,
The Feast is good, until the reckoning come.
The time runs fastest, where is least regard,
The stone that's long in falling, falls hard;
There is a dying day, (thou prosperous fool)
When all thy laughter shall be turned to Doole,
Thy roabes to torturing plagues, and fell tormenting,
Thy whoops of Joy, to howles of sad lamenting:
Thy tongue shall yell, and yawle, and never stop,
And wish a world, to give for one poor drop,
To flatter thine intolerable pain;
The wealth of Pluto could not then obtain
A minutes freedom from that hellish rout,
Whose fire burns, and never goes out:
Nor house, nor land, not measured heaps of wealth,
Can render to a dying man, his health:
Our life on earth is like a thread of flax,
That all may touch, and being roucht, it craks.
As when an Archer shoots for his sport,
Sometimes his shaft is gone, sometimes, it is short,
Sometimes o'th left hand, wide, sometimes o'th right
At last, (through often trial) hits the White;
So death sometimes with her uncertain Rover,
Hits our Superiors (and so shoots over)
Sometimes for change, she strikes the meaner sort,
Strikes our Inferiors (and then comes short)
Sometimes upon the left hand wide she goes,
And so (still wounding some) she strikes our foes;
And sometimes wide upon the right hand bends,
There with Imperial shafts, she strikes our friends;
At length (through often trial) hits the White,
And so strikes us into Eternal night.
Death is a Calendar composed by Fate,
Concerning all men, never out of Date:
Her days Dominicall, are writ in blood;
She shows more bad days, than she shows good:
She tells when days, and months, and terms expire,
Meas'ring the lives of mortals by her squire.
Death is a Pursivant, with Eagles wings,
That knocks at poor men's door, and gates of Kings.
Worldling, beware betime; death sculks behind thee
And as she leaves thee, so will Judgment find thee.
THE ARGUMENT.
Within the bowels of the Fish,
Jonah laments in great anguish;
God heard his prayer, at whose command,
The Fish disgorg'd him on the Land.
Sect 7.
THen Jonah turned his face to heaven, and prayed
Within the bowels of the Whale, and said,
" I cried out of my balefull misery
" Unto my God, and he has heard my cry;
" From out the paunch of hell I made a noise,
" And thou have answered me, and heard my voice:
" Into the Deeps and bottom thou have thrown me,
" Thy Surges, and thy Waves have past upon me.
" Then Lord (aid I) from thy refulgent sight
" I am expelled, I am forsaken quite,
" Nay'thelesse while these my wretched eyes remain,
" Unto thy Temple will I look again.
" The boystrous Waters compast me about,
" My body threats to let her prisoner out,
" The boundless depth enclosed me, (almost dead)
" The weeds are wrapped about my fainting head,
" I lived on earth rejected at thine hand,
" And a perpetual prisoner in the Land;
" Yet thou will cause my life t'ascend at length,
" From out this pit, O Lord, my God, my Strength.
" When as my soul was overwhelmed and faint,
" I had recourse to thee, did thee acquaint
" With the condition of my woeful case,
" My cry came to thee, in thine holy Place,
" Who so to Vanities themselves betake,
" Renounce thy mercies, and thy love for sake:
" To thee I Will sacrifice in endless days,
" With voice of thanks, and ever-sounding praise:
" I Will pay my vows; for all the world records
" With one consent, Salvation is the Lords.
But he (whose word's a deed, whose breath's a law;
Whose just command implies a dreadful awe,
Whose Word prepared a Whale upon the Deep,
To tend, and wait for Ionah's fall, and keep
His outcast body safe, and soul secure)
This very God (whose mercy must endure,
When heaven, and earth, when sea, and all things fail)
Disclosed his purpose, and bespake the Whale,
To redeliver Jonah to his hand;
Whereat the Whale disgorg'd him on the land.
Medita. 7.
I Well record, a holy Father says,
" He teaches to deny, that faintly prays:
The suit surceases, when desire fails,
But whosoever prays with fervency, prevails;
For Prayr's the key that opes the eternal gate,
And finds admittance, whether earl' or late;
It forces audience, it unlockes the ear
Of heavens great God (though deaf) it makes him hear.
Upon a time Babel (the worlds fair Queen
Made drunk with choler, and enraged with spleen)
Through fell disdain, derraigned war against them
That tender homage to Jerusalem:
A maiden-fight it was, yet they were strong
As men of War; The Battle lasted long,
Much blood was shed, an spilt on either side,
That all the ground with purple gore was did:
In fine, a Soldier of Jerusalem:
Ch^^^ssa hight, (the Almner of the Realm)
Chilled with an ague, and unapt to fight,
Into Iustitia's Castle too her flight,
Whereat great Babets Queen commanded all,
To lay their siege against the Castle wall;
But poor Tymissa (not with war acquainted)
Fearing Charissa's death, fell down, and fainted;
Dauntlesse Prudentia reared her from the ground,
Where she lay (pale and senseless) in a swound,
She rubbed her temples, and at length awaking
She gave her water, of Fidissa's making,
And said, Cheer up, (dear sister) though our foe
Has taken us Captives, thus besieged with woe,
We have a King puissant, and of might,
Will see us take no wrong, and do us right,
If we possess him with our sad complaint,
Cheer up, we will send to him, and him acquaint.
Tymissa (new awaked from swound) replies,
Our Castle is begirt with enemies,
And troops of armed men besiege our walls,
Then suer Death, or worse than death befalls
To her, (who ere she be) that stirs a foot,
Or rashly dares attempt to venture out,
Alas! what hope have we to find relief,
And want the means that may divulge our grief?
Within that place a jolly Matron dwell'd,
Whose looks were fixed and sad; her left hand held
A pair of equal balances; her right
A two-edged sword, her eyes were quick and bright,
Not apt to squint, but nimble to discern;
Her visage lovely was, yet bold and stern;
^^r name Iustitia; to her they make
Their moan, who, well advised, them thus bespake:
Fair Maidens, more beloved then the light,
^rue the suffrance of your woeful plight,
^ut pitty's fond alone, recures no grief,
^ut fruitless falls, unless it yield relief.
Cheer up, I have a Messenger in store,
Whose speed is much, but faithful trust is more,
Whose nimble wings shall cleave the flitting skies,
And scorn the terror of your enemies,
^ratio hight, well known unto your King,
Your message she shall do, and tidings bring,
Provided that Fidissa travail with her,
And so (on Christ's name) let them go together.
With that Fidissa having taken her errant,
And good Oration with Iustitia's Warrant,
In silence of the midnight took her flight,
Arriving at the Court that very night;
But they were both as flames of fire hot,
For they did fly as swift, as Cannon shot,
But they (left sudden cold should do them harm)
Together clung, and kept each other warm:
But now, the kingly gates were sparr'd, and locked,
They called, but none made answer the^ they knocked
Together j^yning both their force in one,
They knocked again; Yet answer there was none;
But they that never learned to take denial,
With importunity made further trial;
The King heard well, although he list not speak,
Till they with strokes the gate did wel-nie break:
In fine, the brazen gates flew open wide;
Oration moov'd her suit; The King replide,
^ratio was a fair, and welcome guest;
So heard her suit, so granted her request.
Frail man, observe; In thee the practice lies,
Let sacred Meditation moralize:
Let Prayer be servent, and thy Faith entire,
And heaven, at last, will grant thee thy desire.
THE ARGUMENT.
The second time was Jonah sent
To Niniveh: now Jonah went:
Against her crying (...) cried,
And her destruction prop^^^y'd.
Sect. 8.
ONce more the voice of heavens high-Co^mander,
(Like horrid claps of heav'ns-dividing thunder
Or like the fall of waters breach (the noise
B^ing heard far distant off) such was the voice)
Came down from heaven to Jonah, new-borne-Ma^,
To rebaptized Jonah, and thus began;
Am I a God? Or art thou ought but Dust?
More than a man? Or are my Laws unjust?
Am I a God, and shall I not command?
Art thou a man, and d^r'st my Laws withstand?
Shall I (the motion of whose breath shall make
Both earth, and Sea, and Hell, and Heaven quake)
By thee (fond man) shall I be thus neglected;
And thy presumption escape uncorrected?
Thy faith has saved thee (Jonah:) Sin no more;
Lest worse things happen after, than before;
Arise; let all the assembled powers agree
To do th'Embassage I impose on thee;
Trifle no more; and, to avoid my sight,
Think not to baulke me with a second flight.
Arise, and go to Niniveh (the great)
Where broods of Gentiles have taken up their seat,
The great Queen regent mother of the L^nd,
That multiplies in people like the sand;
Away, with wings of time, (I Will not essoyne thee)
Denounce these fiery Judgments, I enjoyne thee.
Like as a youngling that to school is sent,
(Scarce weaned from his mothers blandishment
Where he was cockerd with a stroking hand)
With stubborn heart denies the just command
His Tutor wills: But being once corrected,
His homebred stomack's curbed, or quite ejected:
His crooked nature's changed, and mollifi'd,
And humbly seeks, what stoutly he denied;
So Ionah's stout, perverse, and stubborn heart,
Was hardened once, but when it felt the smart
Of heavens avenging wrath, it straight dissolved,
And what it once avoided, now resolved,
To Effect with speed, and with a careful hand
Fully replenished with his Lords Command,
To Niniv^h he flies like a Roe,
Each step the other strives to overgoe;
And as an Arrow to the mark does fly,
So (bent to flight) flies he to Niniveh.
Now Niniveh a might City was,
Which all the Cities of the world did pass,
A City which over all the rest aspires
Like midnight Phoebe amongst the lesser fires;
A City, which (although to men was given)
Better beseem'd the Majesty of Heaven:
A City Great to God, whose ample wall,
Who undertakes to mete with paces, shall
Bring Phoebus thrice to bed, ere it be done,
(Although with dawning Hesperus begun.
When Jonas has approacht the City gate,
He made no stay to rest, nor yet to bait,
No supple oil his fainting head anoints,
Stays not to bathe his weather-beaten joints,
Nor smoothed his countenance, nor slick' his skin,
Nor craved he the Hostage of an Inn,
To ease his aching bones (with travel sore)
But went as speedy, as he fled before;
The Cities greatness made him not refuse,
To be the trump of that unwelcome news
His tongue was great with; But (like thu^ders noise)
His mouth flew open, and out there rusht a voice.
When dewy-cheek't Aurora shall display
Her golden locks, and summon up the day
Twice twenty times, and rest her drowzy head
Twice twenty nights, in aged Tithons bed,
Then Niniveh this place of high renown,
Shall be destroyed, and sacked, and batterd down.
He sat not down to take deliberation,
What manner people were they, or what Nation,
Or Gent', or Salvage; nor did he enquier
What place were most convenient for a Crier,
Nor like a sweet-lipt Orator did steare,
Or tune his language to the peoples ear,
But bold, and rough, yet full of Majesty,
Lift up his trumpet, and began to cry,
When forty times Don Phoebus shall fulfill
His Iournall course upon th'Olympian Hill,
Then Niniveh (the Worlds great wonder) shall
Startle the Worlds foundation with her fall.
The dismal Prophet stands not to admire,
The Cities pomp, or peoples quaint attire,
Nor yet (with fond affection) does pity
The approaching downfall of so brave a City,
But dauntlesse he his dreadful voice extends,
Respectlesse, whom this bolder cry offends,
When forty days shall be expired, and run,
And that poor Inch of time drawn out and done,
Then Niniveh (the Worlds Imperial throne)
Sall not be left a stone, upon a stone.
Meditat. 8.
But stay; Is God like one of us? Can he
When he has said it, alter his Decree?
Can he that is the God of Truth, dispense
With what he vowed? or offer violence
Upon his sacred Justice? Can his mind
Revolt at all? or vary like the wind?
How comes this alteration then that He
Thus limiting the' effect of his Decree
Upon the expiring date of forty days,
He then performs it not? But still delays
His plagues denounc't, and Judgment still forbeares,
And stead of forty days gives many years?
Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall perish?
Yet forty years, and Niniveh does flourish:
A change in man's infirm, in God it is strange;
In God, to change his Will, and will a Change,
Are diverse things: When he repents from ill,
He wills a change; he changes not his Will;
The subject's changed, which secret was to us,
But not the mind, that did dispose it thus;
Denounced Judgment God does often prevent,
But neither changes counsel, not intent:
The voice of he^^en does seldom threat perdition
But with express, or an implied condition,
So that, if Niniveh return from ill,
God turns his hand, he does not turn his Will.
The stint of Niniveh was forty days,
To change the By as of her crooked ways:
To some the time is large, To others, small;
To some it is many years; And not at all
To others; Some an hour have, and some
Have scarce a minute of their time to come:
Thy span of life (Malfid^) is thy space,
To call for mercy, and to cry for grace.
Lord! what is man, but like a worm that crawles
Open to danger every foot that falls?
Death creepes (unheard) and steals abroad (unseen)
Her darts are sudden, and her arrows keen,
Uncertain when, but certain she will strike,
Respecting King and Beggar both alike;
The stroke is deadly, come it soon, or late,
Which once being struck, repenting's out of date;
Death is a minute, full of sudden sorrow:
" Then live to day, as thou may die to morrow.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Ninivites believe the word,
Their hearts return unto the Lord;
In him they put their only trust:
They mourn is Sackcloth, and in dust.
Sect. 9.
SO said; the Ninivites believed the Word,
Believed Jonas, and believed the Lord;
They made no pause, nor jested a^ the news,
Nor slighted it, because it was a Iew's
Denouncement: No, nor did their gazing eyes
(As taken captive with such novelties)
Admire the strangers garb, so quaint to theirs,
No idle chat possessed their itching ears,
The whilst he spoke: nor were their tongues on fire
To rail upon, or interrupt the Crier,
Nor did they question whether true the message,
Or false the Prophet were, that brought th'embassage
But they gave faith to what he said; relented,
And (changing their mis-wandred ways) repented;
Before the searching Air could cool his word,
Their hearts returned, and believed the Lord;
And they, whose dainty lips were cloyed while ere
With cates, and viands, and with wanton cheer,
Do now enjoyne their palats not to taste
The offall bread, (for they proclaimed a Fast)
And they, whose looset bodies once did lie
Wrapped up in Robes, and Silks of Princely Dye,
Lo now, in stead of Robes, in rags they mourn,
And all their Silks do into Sackcloth turn,
They read themselves sad Lectures on the ground,
Learning to want, as well as to abound;
The Prince was not exempted, nor the Peer,
Nor yet the richest, nor the poorest there;
The old man was not freed, (whose hoary age
Had even almost outworne his Pilgrimage;)
Nor yet the young, whose Glass (but new begun)
By course of Nature had an age to run:
For when that fatal Word came to the King,
(Convay'd with speed upon the nimble wing
Of flitting Fame) he straight dismounts his Throne,
Forsakes his Chair of State he sat upon,
Disrobed his body, and his head discrown'd,
In dust and ashes groveling on the ground,
And when he reared his trembling corpse again,
(His hair all filthy with the dust he lay in)
He clad in pensive Sackcloth, did depose
Himself from State Imperial, and chose
To live a Vassal, or a baser thing,
Then to usurp the Scepter of a King:
(Respectlesse of his pomp) he quite forgate
He was a Monarch mindlesse of his State,
He neither sought to rule, or be obay'd,
Nor with the sword, nor with the Scepter swayed.
Meditat. 9.
IS fasting then the thing that God requires?
Can fasting expiate, or slake those fires
That sin has blown to such a mighty flame?
Can sackcloth cloth a fault? or hide a shame?
Can ashes, cleanse thy blot? or purge thy' offense?
Or do thy hands make heaven a recompense,
By strowing dust upon thy bryny face?
Are these the tricks to purchase heavenly grace?
No, though thou pine thy self with willing want;
Or face look thin, or Carkas never so gaunt,
Although thou worser weeds then sackcloth wear:
Or naked go, or sleep in shirts of hair,
Or though thou choose an ash-tub for thy bed,
Or make a daily dunghill on thy head,
Thy labor is not poys'd with equal gains,
For thou have naught but labor for thy pains:
Such holy madness God rejects, and loathes,
That sinkes no deeper, than the skin, or clothes:
It Is not thine eyes which (taught to weep by art)
Look red with tears, (not guilty of thy heart)
It Is not the holding of thy hands so hye,
Nor yet the purer squinting of thine eye;
It Is not your mimick mouths, your antic faces,
Your Scripture phrases, or affected Graces,
Nor prodigal up-banding of thine eyes,
Whose ga^^^full bals do seem to pelt the skies;
It Is not the strict reforming of your hair
So close, that all the neighbor skull is bare;
It Is not the drooping of thy head so low,
Nor yet the lowering of thy sullen brow,
Nor wolvish howling that disturbs the air,
Nor repetitions or your tedious prayer;
No, no, it is none of this, that God regards;
Such sort of fools their own applause rewards,
Such puppet-plaies, to heaven a^e strange, and quaint,
Their service is unsweet, and foully taint,
Their words fall fruitless from their idle brain;
But true repentance runs in other strain;
Where sad contrition harbors, there the heart
Is truly'acquainted with the secret smart
Of past offenses, hates the bosom sin
The most, which most the soul took pleasure in;
No crime unsifted, no sin unpresented
Can lurk unseene; and seen, none unlamented;
The troubled soul's amazed with dire aspects
Of lesser sins committed, and detects
The wounded Conscience; it cries amain
For mercy, mercy, cries, and cries again;
It sadly grieves, and soberly laments,
It yernes for grace, reformes, returns, repents;
I, this is incense, whose accepted savor
Mounts up the heavenly Throne, and finds favor:
I, this is it, whose valor never fails,
With God it stoutly wrestles, and prevails:
I; this is it, that pearces heaven above,
Never returning home (like Noab's Dove)
But brings an Olive leaf, or some increase,
That works Salvation, and Eternal Peace.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Prince and people fasts, and prays;
God heard, accepted, liked their ways:
Upon their timely true repentance,
God rever'st, and changed his sentence.
Sect. 10.
THen suddenly, with holy zeal inflamed,
He caused a general Act to be proclaimed,
By sage advice, and counsel of his Peers;
" Let neither man, or child, of youth, or years,
" From greatest in the City, to the least,
" Nor Herd, nor pining Flock, nor hungry beast,
" Nor any thing that draws air, or breath,
" On forfeiture of life, or present death,
" Presume to taste of nourishment, or food,
" Or move their hungry lips to chew the cud;
" From out their eyes let Springs of water burst,
" With tears (or nothing) let the^ slake their thirst:
" Moreo're, let every man (what e're he be)
" Of higher quality, or low degree,
" D'off all they wear (excepting but the same
" That nature craves, and that which covers shame)
" Their nakedness with sackcloth let them hide,
" And mue the vest'ments of their silken pride;
" And let the brave cariering Horse of War,
" (Whose rich Caparisons, and Trappings are
" The glorious Wardrobe of a Victors show)
" Let him disrobe, and put on sackcloth too;
" The Ox (ordained for yoke) the Ass (for load)
" The Horse (as well for race, as for the road)
" The burthren-bearing Camel (strong and great)
" The fruitful Kine, and every kind of Neat,
" Let all put sackcloth on, and spare no voice,
" But cry aloud to heaven, with mighty noise;
" Let all men turn the bias of their ways,
" And change their fiercer hands to force of praise:
" For who can tell, if God (whose angry face
" Has long bin waining from us) will embrace
" This slender pittance of our best endeavor?
" Who knows, if God will his intent persever?
" Or who can tell, if he (whose tender love
" Transcends his sharper Justice) will remove
" And change his high decree, and turn his sentence
" Upon a timely, and unfain'd repentance?
" And who can tell, if heaven will change the lot,
That we, and ours may live, and perish not?
So God perceived their works, and saw their ways,
Approved the faith, that in their works did blaze,
Approved their works, approved their works the rather
because their faith and works went both together:
He saw their faith, because their faith abounded;
He saw their works, because on faith they grounded
He saw their faith, their works, and so relented,
H'approv'd their works, their faith, and so repented;
Repented of the plagues they apprehended;
Repented of the evil, that he intended:
So God the vengeance of his hand withdrew,
He took no forfeiture, although 'twere due;
The evil, that once he meant, he now forgot,
Cancelled the forfeit bond, and did it not.
Medita. 10.
SEe, into what an ebb of low estate
The soul that seeks to be regenerate,
Must first descend, before the ball rebound,
It must be thrown with force against the ground;
The seed increases not in fruitful ears,
Nor can she rear the goodly stalk she bears,
Unless bestrow'd upon a mould of earth,
And made more glorious by a second birth:
So man, before his wisdom can bring forth
The brave exploits of truly noble worth,
Or hope the granting of his sins remission,
He must be humbl'd ^^rst in sad contrition.
The plant (through want of skill, or by neglect)
If it be planted from the Suns reflect,
Or lack the dew of seasonable showers,
Decays, and bears neither fruit, nor flowers:
So wretched Man, if his repentance has
No quickening Sunshine of a lively Faith,
Or not bedewed with showers of timely tears,
Or works of mercy (wherein Faith appears)
His prayers and deeds, and all his forced groans,
Are like the howles of dogs, and works of Drones.
The wise Surgeon, first (by letting blood)
Weakens his Patient, ere he does him good;
Before the Soul can a true comfort find,
The body must be prostrate, and the mind
Truly repentive, and contrite within.
And loathe the fawning of a bosom sin.
But Lord! Can Man deserve? Or can his best
Do Justice equal right, which he transgrest?
When Dust and Ashes mortally offends,
Can Dust and Ashes make eternal mends?
Is Heaven unjust? Must not the recompense
Be full equivalent to the offense?
What mends by mortal Man can then be given
To the offended Majesty of Heaven?
O Mercy! Mercy! on thee my Soul relyes,
On thee we build our Faith, we bend our eyes;
Thou fill'st my empty strain, thou fill'st my tongue;
Thou art the subject of my Swan-like song;
Like pinioned prisoners at the dying tree,
Our lingering hopes attend and wait on thee;
(Arrain'd at Justice bar) prevent our doom;
To thee with joyful hearts we cheerly come;
Thou art our Clergy; Thou that dearest Book,
Wherein our fainting eyes desire to look;
In thee, we trust to read (what will release us)
In bloody Characters, that name of JESUS.
What shall we then return the God of heaven?
Where nothing is (Lord) nothing can be given;
Our souls, our bodies, strength, and all our powers,
(Alas!) were all too little, were they ours:
Or shall we burn (until our life expires)
An endless Sacrifice in Holy fires?
My Sacrifice shall be my HEART entire,
My Christ the Altar, and my Zeal the Fire.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Prophet discontented pray*
To God, that he would end his days;
God blames his wrath so unreprest,
Reproves his unadvised request.
Sect 11.
But this displeasing was in Ionah's eyes,
His heart grew hot, his blood began to rise,
His eyes did sparkle, and his teeth struck fire,
His veins did boil, his heart was full ire:
At last brake forth into a strange request,
These words he prayed, and mumbl'd out the rest;
Was not, O was not this my though! (O Lord)
Before I fled? Nay was not this my word,
The very word, my jealous language vented,
When this mis-hap might well have been prevented?
Was there, O was there not a just suspect,
My preaching would procure this effect?
For Lord, I knew of old, thy tender love;
I knew the power, thou gav'st my tongue, would move
Their Adamantine hearts; I knew 'twould thaw
Their frozen spirits and breed relenting awe;
I knew (great God) upon their true repentance,
That thou determin'dst to reverse thy sentence;
For well I knew, thou were a gracious God,
Of long forbearance, slow to use the Rod;
I knew, the power of thy Mercies bent
The strength of all thy other works outwent;
I knew the tender kindness, and how loath
Thou were to punish, and how slow to wrath;
Turning by Judgments, and thy plagues preventing,
Thy mind rever sing, and of ev'll repenting:
Therefore (O therefore) upon this persuasion,
I fled to Tarshish, there to make evasion,
To save thy credit ( Lord) to save mine own:
For when this blast of zeal is over-blowne,
And sackcloth left, and they surcease to mourn,
When they (like dogs) shall to their vomit turn,
They Will vilipend thy Sacred Word, and scoff it,
Saying, was that a God, or this a Prophet?
They Will scorn thy judgments, and thy threats despise,
And call thy Prophets, Messengers of lies.
Now therefore (Lord) bow down attentive ear,
(For ah my burthen's more than flesh can bear)
Make speed (O Lord) and banish all delays,
TO extinguish now the Taper of my days:
Let not the minutes of my time extend,
But let my wretched hours find an end;
Let not my fainting spirits longer stay
In this frail mansion of distempered clay:
The threads but weak, my life depends upon,
O, cut that thread, and let my life be done;
My breast stands fair, strike then, and strike again,
For naught but dying can assuage my pain:
O may I rather dye, than live in shame;
Better it is to leave, and yield the game,
Than toil for what, at length, must needs be lost;
O, kill me, for my heart is sore imbost:
This latter boon unto thy servant give;
For better it is for me, to dye than live.
So wretched Jonah: But Jehovah thus;
What boot's it so to storm outrageous:
Becomes it thus my servants heart to swell:
Can anger help thee, Jonah? do thou well?
Medita. 12.
HOw poor a thing is man! How vain's his mind!
How strange, how base! and wavering like the wind
How uncouth are his ways! how full of danger!
How to himself, is he himself a stranger!
His heart's corrupt, and all his thoughts are vain,
His actions sinful, and his words profane,
His will's depraved, his senses are beguiled,
His reason's dark, his members all defiled,
His hasty feet are swift and prone to ill,
His guilty hands are ever bent to kill,
His tongue's a sponge of venom, (or of worse)
Her practice is to swear his skill to curse;
His eyes are fire-bals of lustful fire,
And outward helps to inward foul desire,
His body is a well-erected station,
But full of folly and corrupted passion:
Fond love; and raging lust; and foolish fears;
Griefs overwhelmed with immoderate tears;
Excessive joy; prodigious desire,
Unholy anger, red and hot as fire;
These daily clog the soul, that is fast in prison,
From whose increase this lucklesse b^ood is risen,
Respectlesse pride, and lustful idleness,
Base ribbauld talk, and loathsome drunkenness,
Faithless Despair, and vain Curiosity;
Both false, yet double-tongu'd Hypocrisy;
Soft flattery, and haughty-ey'd Ambition;
Heart-gnawing Hatred, and squint-eyed Suspicion,
Selfe-eating En^y, envious Detraction,
Hopeless distrust, and too-too sad Dejection;
Revengefull Malice, hellish Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and light Inconstancy;
Daring Presumption, wry-mouthed Derisson,
Damned Apostasy, Fond superstition,
What heedfull watch? Ah what continual ward?
How great respect, and howerly regard,
Stands man in hand to have; when such a brood
Of furious hel-hounds seek to suck his blood?
Day, night, and hour, they rebel and wrestle,
And never cease, till they subdue the Castle.
How slight a thing is man? how frail and brittle?
How seeming great is he? How truly little?
Within the bosom of his holiest works,
Some hidden Embers of old Ada^ lurkes,
Which oftentimes in men of purest ways,
Burst out in flame, and for a season blaze
Lord, teach our hearts, and give our souls directions,
Subdue our passions, curb our stout affections,
Nip thou the bud, before the bloome begins:
Lord, shield thy servants from presumptuous sins.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Booth for shelter Iona^ made;
God sent a Gourd for better shade;
But by the next approaching light,
God sent a Worm consumed it quite.
Sect. 12.
SO Jonah (sore oppressed, and heavie-hearted)
From out the Cities circuit straight departed,
Departed to the Eastern borders of it,
Where sick with anguish sat this sullen Prophet;
He built a Booth, and in the Booth he sat,
(Until some few days had expired their date
With over-tedious pace) where he might see,
What would betide to threatened Nineveh.
A trunk that wants sap, is soon decayed;
The slender Booth of boughs and branches made,
Soon yielding to the Sun's consuming Ray,
Crumbled to dust, and early dried away:
Whereat, the great Jehovah spoke the word,
And over Ionah's head there sprang a Gourd,
Whose roots were fixed within the quickening earth,
Which gave it nourishment, as well as birth;
God raised up a Gourd, a Gourd should last,
Let wind, or scorching Sun, or blow or blast:
As coals of fire raked in embers lie
Obscure, and undiscerned by the eye;
But being stirred, regaine a glimmering light,
Revive, and glow, burning afresh and bright;
So Jonah 'gan to cheer through this relief,
And joyful was, devoyded all his grief;
He joy'd to see that God had not forgot
His drooping servant, and forsook him not;
He joy'd, in hope the Gourds strange wonder will
Persuade the people, he is a Prophet still;
The fresh aspect did much refresh his sight;
The herball savor gave his sense delight;
Thus Jonah much delighted in his Gourd,
Enjoyed the pleasures that it did afford,
But, Lord! what earthly thing can long remain!
How momentany are they! and how vain!
How vain is earth, that man's delighted in it!
Her pleasures rise, and vanish in a minit:
How fleeting are the joys, we find below,
Whose tides (uncertain) oftener ebb than flow!
For see! this Gourd (that was so fair, and sound)
Is quite consumed, and eaten to the ground;
No sooner Titan had up-heav'd his head,
From off the pillow of his Saffron bed,
But heaven prepared a silly, silly worm,
(Perchance brought thither by an Eastern storm)
The worm that must obey, and well knew how,
Consumed the Gourd, nor left it root, nor bough;
Consumed it straight within a minutes space,
Left naught, but (sleeping) Jonas in the place.
Medit. 12.
THe pleasures of the world, (which soon abate)
Are lively Emblemes of our own estate,
Which (like a Banquet at a Fun'rall show)
But sweeten grief, and serve to flatter woe.
Pleasure is fleeting still, and makes no stay,
It lends a smile or twain, and steals away:
Man's life is fickle, full of winged haste,
It mockes the sense with joy and soon does waste:
Pleasure does crown thy youth, and Iuls thy wants;
But (sullen age approaching) straight avaunts:
Man's life is joy, and sorrow seeks to banish,
It does lament and mourn in age, and vanish.
The time of pleasure's like the life of Man;
Both joyful, both contained in a span;
Both highly prized, and both on sudden lost,
When most we trust them, they deceive us most;
What fit of madness makes us love them thus*
We leave our lives, and pleasure leaves us:
Why, what is pleasure? But a golden dream,
Which (waking) makes our wa^ts the more extreme?
And what is Life? A bubble full of care,
Which (pricked by death) straight empties into air:
The flowers (clad in far more rich array,
Than e're was Solomon) do soon decay;
What thing more sweet, or fairer then a flower?
And yet it bloomes, and fades within an hour;
What greater pleasure then a rising Sun?
Yet is this pleasure every evening done:
But thou art heir to Croesus, and thy treasure
Being great, and endless, endless is thy pleasure;
But thou (thou Croesus heir) consider must,
Thy wealth, and thou, came from, and goes to dust;
Another's noble, and his name is great,
And takes his place upon a lofty seat;
True it is, but yet his many wants are such,
That better 'twere he were not known so much.
Another binds his soul in Hymen's knot,
His Spouse is chaste, unblemisht with a spot,
But yet his comfort is bedasht, and done,
His grounds are stockt, and now he wants a son
How fickle and unconstant's Man's estate!
Man fain would have, but then he knows not what;
And having, rightly knows not how to prize it,
But like that foolish Dunghill-cock imployes it;
But who desires to live a life content,
Wherein his Cruze of joy shall never be spent,
With fierce pursuit, let him that good desire,
Whose date no change, no fortune can expire.
For that is not worth the craving, to obtain
A happiness, that must be lost again;
Nor that, which most do covet most, is best;
Best are the goods, mixed with contented rest;
Gasp not for honor, wish no blazing glory,
For these will perish in an ages story;
Nor yet for power; power may be carved
To fools, as well as thee, that have deserved.
Thirst not for Lands nor Money; wish for none,
For wealth is neither lasting, nor our own:
Riches are fair inticements to deceive us;
They flatter, while we live, and dying, leave us.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jonas desires to die, the Lord
Rebukes him, be maintains his word,
His anger he does justify,
God pleads the cause for Ninevie:
Sect. 13.
WHen ruddy Phoebus had with morning light
Subdued the East, and put the stars to flight,
Heavens hand prepared a servent Eastern wind,
Whose drought together with the Sun combined,
The one as bellows blowing to others fire,
With strong united force, did both con^pire
To make assault upon the fainting head
Of helpless Jonah, that was well nigh dead,
Who turning often, and tossing to and fro,
(As they that are in torments use to do)
And (restless) finding no success of ease,
But rather that his tortures still increase;
His secret passion to his soul betrayed,
Craving no sweeter boon then death, and said,
O kill me (Lord) or lo, my heart will rive;
For better it is for me to dye than live.
So said, The Lord did interrupt his passion,
And said, How now, is this a seemly fashion?
Does it become my servants heart to swell?
Can anger help thee? Jonah, do thou well?
Is this a ^it speech? or a well-plac'd word?
What, art thou angry (Jonah) for a Gourd?
What, if the Arabians with their ruder train,
Had killed thine Oxen, and thy Cattle sl^ine?
What if consuming fire (fallen from heaven)
Had all thy servants of their lives bereaven,
And burnt thy sheep? What, if by strong oppression
The Chaldees had usurped unjust possession
Upon thy Camels? Or had Boreas blown
His full-mouthed blast, and cast thy houses down,
And sl^ine thy sons amid their jollities?
Or had thou lost thy Vineyard full of trees?
Had thou been ravished of thine only Sheep,
That in thy tender bosom used to sleep?
How would thine ^asty spirit then bin stirred,
If thou art angry, Jonah, for a Gourd?
To which, thus Jonah vents his idle breath,
Lord, I do well to vex unto the death;
I blush not to acknowledge, and profess
Deserved rage, I Am angry, I ^onfesse;
'I would make a spirit that is through frozen,
To blaze like flaming Pitch, and fry like Rozen:
Why do thou ask that thing that thou can ^ell?
Thou know I Am angry', and it beseemes me well.
So said; the Lord to Jonah thus respake;
Do thou bemoane, and such compassion take
Upon a Gourd, whose seed thou did not sow,
Nor moved thy busy hands to make it grow,
Whose beauty, small; and value was but slight,
Which sprang, as also perished in a night?
Had thou (O dust and ashes) such a care,
Such inbred pity, 'a trifling plant to spare?
Had thou, (O hard and incompassionate,
To wish the razing of so brave a State)
Had thou (I say) compassion to bewail
The extirpation of a Gourd so frail?
And shall not I (that am the Lord of Lords)
Whose Fountain's never dry, but still affords
Sweet streams of mercy, with a fresh supply,
To those that thirst for grace: What shall not I,
(That am the God of mercy, and have sworn
To pardon sinners, whensoe're they turn?
(I say) shall I disclaim my wonted pity,
And bring to ruin such a goodly City,
Whose hearts (so truly penitent) implore me,
Who day and night power forth their souls before me?
Shall I destroy the mighty Ninevie,
Whose people are like sands about the Sea?
Among which are six score thousand Babes (at least)
That bang upon their tender Mothers breast,
Whose pretty smiles could never yet descry
The dear affection of their mothers eye?
Shall I subvert, and bring to desolation
A City, (nay, more aptly termed a Nation)
Whose walls boast less their beauty than their might?
Whose hearts are sorrowful, and souls contrite?
Whose Infants are in number, so amounting?
And beasts, and cottell endless, without counting?
What, Jonah, shall a Gourd so move thy pity?
And shall not I spare such a goodly City?
Meditatio ultima.
MY heart is full, my vent is too too straight;
My tongue's too trusty to my poor conceit*
My mind's in labor, and finds no redress;
My heart conceives, my lips cannot express;
MY organs suffer, through a maine defect;
Alas! I want a proper Dialect,
To blazon forth the tithe of what I muse;
The more I meditate, the more accrewes;
But Io, my faultring tongue must say no more,
Unless she step where she has trod before.
What? sha^^ I then be silent? No, I Will speak
(Till tongue be tired, and my lungs be weak)
Of dearest mercy, in as sweet a strain,
As it shall please my ^use to lend a vain;
And when my voice shall stop within her source,
And speech shall faulter in this high Discourse,
My tired tongue (unsham'd) shall thus extend,
Only to name, Dear Mercy, and so end.
Oh high Imperial King, heavens Architect!
Is Man a thing befitti^g thy ^espect?
Lord, thou art Wisdom, and thy ways are holy,
But Man's polluted, full of filch, and folly;
Yet is he (Lord) the tabricke of thy hand,
And in his Soul he bears thy glorious Brand,
However defaced with the rust of Sin,
Which has abused thy stamp, and eaten in;
It Is not the frailty' of Man's corrupted nature,
Makes thee ashamed to acknowledge Man thy Creature;
But like a tender Father, here on earth,
(Whose Child by nature, or abortive birth,
Does want that sweet and favorable relish,
Wherewith, her creatures, Nature does imbelish)
Respects him nerethelesse; even so thy Grace
(Great God) extends to Man; though sin deface
The glorious pourtraiture that man does bear,
Whereby he loathed and ugly does appear,
Yet thou, (within whose tender bowels are
Deep gulfes of Mercy, sweet beyond compare)
Regard'st, and ^ov'st (with reverence ^e it said)
Nay seem to dote on Man; when he has straid,
Lord, thou have bro^ght him to his Fold again;
When he was lost, thou did not then disdain
To think upon a vagabond, and give
Thy dearest Son to dye, that he might live.
How poor a mite art thou content withal,
That ^an may ^cape his downe^approching fall?
Though base we are, yet thou do not abhor us,
But (as our Story speaks) art pleading for us,
To save us harmless from our Foe-mans jaws;
Art thou turned Orator to plead our cause?
How are thy Mercies full of admiration!
How sovereign! how sweet's their application!
Fatning the Soul with sweetness, and repayring
The rotten ruins of a Soul despairing.
Lo here (Malfido) is a Feast prepared;
Fall to with courage, and let naught be spared;
Taste freely of it, Here Is no Misers Feast;
Eat what thou can, and pocket up the rest:
These precious Viands are Restoritie,
Eat then; and if the sweetness make thee dry,
Drink large Carouses out of Mercies Cup,
The best lies in the bottom, Drink all up:
These Cates are sweet Ambrosia to thy Soul,
And that which fills the brim of Mercies bowl,
Is dainty Nectar; Eat and drink thy fill;
Spare not the one, nor yet the other spill;
Provide in time: Thy Banquet is begun,
Lay up in store against the Feast be done:
For lo, the time of banqueting is short,
And once being done, the world cannot restor't;
It is a feast of Mercy, and of Grace;
It is a Feast for all, or high, or base:
A feast for him that begs upon the way,
As well for him that does the Scepter sway;
A feast for him that howerly bemoanes
His dearest sins, with sighs, and tears and groane^;
A feast for him, whose gentle heart reformes;
A feast for MEN; and so a FEAST FOR WORMS*
Dear liefest Lord, that feast'st the World with grace,
Extend thy bounteous hand, thy glorious face:
Bid joyful welcome to thy hungry guest,
That we may praise the Master of the Feast;
And in thy mercy grant this boon to me,
That I may dye to sin, and live to thee.
S. AMBROSE. Misericordia est plenitudo omnium virtutum.
FINIS.
THE GENERAL USE OF this HISTORY.
WHen as the ancient world did all imbark
Within the compass of good Noah's Arc,
Forth to the new-washt earth a Dove was sent,
Who in her mouth returned an Olive plant,
Which in a silent language this related:
How that the waters were at length abated,
Those swelling waters, is the wrath of God,
And like the Dove, are Prophets sent abroad;
The Olive-leafe's a joyful Type of peace,
A faithful sign Gods vengeance does decrease;
They salve the wounded heart, and make it whole,
They bring glad tidings to the drooping soul,
Proclaiming grace to them that thirst for Grace,
Mercy to those that Mercy will embrace.
Malfido, thou, in whose distrustful breast
Despair has brought in sticks to build her nest,
Where she may safely lodge her lucklesse brood,
To feed upon thy heart, and suck thy blood,
Beware betimes, lest custom and permission
Prescribe a title, and so claim possession.
Despairing man, whose burden makes thee stoop
Under the terror of thy sins, and droop
Through dull despair, whose too too sullen grief
Makes heaven unable to apply relief;
Whose ears are dulled with noise of whips and chains;
And yels of damned souls, through tort'red pains,
Come here, and rouse thy self, un^eele those eyes,
Which sad Despair closed up; Arise, Arise,
And go to Nineveh, the worlds great Palace,
Earths mighty wonder, and behold the Ballace,
And burden of her bulk, is naught but sin,
Which (wilful) she commits, and wallowes in;
Behold her Images, her fornications,
Her crying sins, her vile abominations;
Behold the guiltless blood that she did spill,
Like Spring-tides in the streets, and reeking still:
Behold her scorching lusts, and taint desire
Like sulfurous Aetna, blaze, and blaze up higher;
She rapes, and rends, and thieves, and there is none
Can justly call the thing he has, his own;
That sacred Name of God, that Name of wonder,
In stead of worshipping, she tears in sunder;
She Is not enthralled to this Sin, or another,
But like a Leper's all infected over;
Not only sinful, but in sins subjection,
She Is not infected, but a mere infection.
No sooner had the Prophet (Heavens great Spy)
Begun an onset to his louder Cry,
But she repented, sighed, and wept, and tore
Her curious hair, and garments that she wore,
She sat in ashes, and with Sackcloth clad her,
All drencht in brine, that grief cannot be sadder;
She calls a Fast, proclames a prohibition
To man and beast; (sad tokens of contrition)
No sooner prayed, but heard; No sooner groaned,
But pitied; No sooner grieved but moan'd;
Timely Repentance speedy grace procured,
The sore that is salvd in time, is easily cured:
No sooner had her trickling tears ore-flowne
Her blubbered cheeks, but heaven was apt to moan
Her pensive heart, wiped her suffused eyes,
And gently strok'd her cheeks, and bid her rise;
No faults were seen as if no fault had bin,
Dear Mercy made a Quittance for her sin.
Malfido, rouse thy leaden spirit, bestirre thee;
Hold up thy drouzy head, here is comfort for thee
What if thy zeal be frozen hard? What then?
Thy Saviors blood will thaw that frost again:
Thy prayers that should be servent, hot as fire,
Proceed but coldly from a dull desire;
What then? Grieve inly, But do not dismay,
Who hears thy prayers, will give thee strength to pray:
Though left a while, thou art not quite given ore,
Where Sin abounds, there Grace aboun^eth more:
This, this is all the good that I can do thee,
To ease thy grief, I here commend unto thee
A little book, but a great Mystery,
A great delight, A little History;
A little branch slipped from a saving tree,
But bearing fruit as great, as great might be;
A small abridgement of thy Lords great love;
A message sent from heaven by a Dove:
It is a heavenly Lecture, that relates
To Princes, Pastors, People, all Estates
Their several duties.
Peruse it well, and bind it to thy breast,
The rests the Cause of thy defect of rest:
But read it often, or else read it not:
Once read, is not observed, and soon forgot,
Nor is it enough to read, but understand,
Or else thy tongue, for want of wit's profaned,
Nor is it enough to purchase knowledge by it;
Salve heales no sore, unless the party' apply it;
Apply it then; which if thy flesh restraines,
Strive what thou can, and pray for what remains.
The particular Application.
THen thou, that art oppressed with sad Despair,
Here shall thou see the strong effect of prayer:
Then pray with faith* and (servent) without ceasing
(Like Jacob) wrestle, till thou get a blessing.
Here shall thou see the type of Christ thy Savior;
Then let thy suits be through his name and favor,
Here shall thou find repentance and true grief
Of sinners like thy self, and their belief;
Then suit thy grief to theirs, and let thy soul
Cry mightily, until her wounds be whole.
Here shall thou see the meekness of thy God,
Who on Repentance turns, and burns the Rod;
Repents of what he purposed, and is sorry;
Here may ye hear him stoutly pleading for ye:
Then thus shall be thy meed, if thou repent,
In stead of plagues and direful punishment,
Thou shall find mercy, love, and Heavens applause,
And God of Heaven (himself) will plead thy cause.
Here have thou the^ compiled within this treasure,
First, the Almighties high and just displeasure
Against foul sin, or such as sinful be,
Or Prince, or poor, or high or low degree.
Here is descri'd the beaten Road to Faith:
Here may thou see the force that Preaching has
Here is described in (brief but) full expression,
The nature of a Convert, and his passion:
His sober Diet, which is thin and spare;
His clothing, which is Sackcloth; and his Prayre
Not faintly sent to heaven, nor spatingly,
But piercing, ^ervent, and a mighty cry:
Here may thou see how Prayer, and true repentance
Do strive with God, prevail, and turn his sentence
From strokes to stroking, and from plagues infernal*
To boundless Mercies, and to life Eternal.
Till Zephyr lend my Bark a second Gale,
I slip mine Anchor, and I strike my sail.
FINIS.
O dulcis Salvator Mundi! ultima verba quae tu dixisti in Cruce, sint ultima
mea verba in Luce; and quando amplius effari non possum, exaudi tu cordis mei
desiderium.
A HYMN to GOD.
WHo gives me then an Adamantine quill?
A marble tablet? And a David's skill?
To blazon forth the praise of my dear Lord
In deepe-grav'n Characters, upon record
To last, for times etc^nall process, suer,
So long, as Sun, and Moon, and Stars endure:
Had I as many mouths, as Sands there are,
Had I a nimble tongue for every Star,
And every word I speak, a Character,
And every minutes time ten Ages were,
To chaunt forth all thy praise it no'te avail,
For tongues, and words, and time and all would fail:
Much less can I, poor Weakling, tune my tongue,
To take a task befits an Angels song;
Sing what thou can* when thou can sing no more
Weep then as fast, that thou can sing no more,
Beblurre thy book with tears, and go thy ways,
For every blurre will prove a book of praise.
Thine eye that viewes the moving Spheres above
Let it give praise to him that makes them move:
Thou riches have; Thy hands that hold, and have them,
Let them give praise to him, that freely gave them:
Thine arms defend thee; then for recompense,
Let them praise him, that gave thee such defense:
Thy tongue was given to praise thy Lord, the Giver;
Then, let thy tongue praise highest God for ever:
Faith comes by hearing, and thy Faith will save thee;
The^ let thine cars prais him that hearing gave thee:
Thy beart is begged by him whose hands did make it,
My Son, Give me thy Heart; Lord, free^y take it:
Eyes, ^ands, and arms, tongues, ears and hearts of men
Sing praise, and let the people say, Amen.
Tune you your Instruments, and let them vary,
Praise him upon them in his Sanctuary,
Praise him within the highest Firmament,
Which shows his Power, and his Government;
Praise him for all his mighty Acts are known,
And suit thy praises to his high Renown,
Praise him with Trump victorious, shrill, and sharp,
With Psaltry loud, and many-stringed Harp,
With sounding Timbrell, and the warbling Flute,
With (Musicks full Interpreter) the Lute;
Praise him upon the Maiden Virginalls,
Upon the Clerick Organs, and Cymballs,
Upon the sweet Majestic Vyalls touch,
Double your joys, and let your praise be such;
Let all, in whom is life and breath, give praise
To heavens eternal God, in endless days;
Let every Soul, to whom a voice is given,
Sing Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Heaven;
For lo, a Lamb is found, that undertook
To break the seven-fold-Seale, and open the BOOK^,
O let my life add number to my days,
To show thy glory, and to sing thy praise;
Let every minute in thy praise be spent,
Let every head be bare, and knee be bent
To thee (dear Lamb,)* Who ere thy praises hide,
Closed be his Lips, and tongue for ever ty'de.
Hallelujah. Gloria DEO in excelsis.
ELEVEN PIOUS Meditations.
1.
WIthin the holy Legend I discover
Three special Attributes of God; his Power,
His Justice, and his Mercy, All uncreated,
Eternal all, and all unseparated
From Gods pure Essence, and from thence proceeding;
All very God, All perfect, All exceeding:
And from that selfsame text three names I gather
Of great lehova; Lord, and God, and Father;
The first denotes him mounted on his Throne,
In Power, Majesty, Dominion;
The second shows him on his kingly Bench,
Rewarding Evil with equal punishments;
The third describes him on his Mercy-seat,
Full great in Grace; and in his Mercy, great;
All three I worship, and before all three
My heart shall humbly prostrate, with my knee;
But in my private choice, I fancy rather,
Then call him Lord, or God, to call him Father.
2.
IN hell no Life, in heaven no Death there is,
In earth both Life and Death, both Bale and Blis*
In Heaven's all Life, no end, nor new supplying;
In hell's all Death, and yet there is no dying;
Earth (like a partial Ambidexter) does
Prepare for Death, or Life, prepares for both;
Who lives to sin, in Hell his portion's given,
Who dies to sin, shall after live in Heaven.
Though Earth my Nurse be, Heaven, be thou my Father,
Ten thousand deaths let me endure rather
Within my Nurses arms, then One to Thee;
Earths honor with thy frowns is death to me:
I live on Earth, as on a Stage of sorrow;
Lord, if thou please, end the Play to morrow:
I live on Earth, as in a Dream of pleasure,
Awake me when thou will, I wait thy leisure:
I live on Earth, but as of life bereaven,
My life's with thee, for (Lord) thou art in Heaven.
3.
NOthing that ever was made was made for nothing
Beasts for thy food, their skins were for thy clothing,
Flowers for thy smell, and ^earbs for Cure good
Trees for thy shade, Their Fruit for pleasing Food:
The showers fall upon the fruitful ground,
Whose kindly Dew makes tender Grass abound,
The Grass springs forth for beasts to feed upon,
And Beasts are food for Man: but Man alone
Is made to serve his Lord in all his ways,
And be the Trumpet of his Makers praise:
Let Heaven be then to me obdure as brass,
The Earth as iron, unapt for grain or grass,
Then let my Flocks consume, and never steed me,
Let pinching Famine want wherewith to feed me,
When I forget to honor thee, (my Lord)
Thy glorious Attributes, thy Works, thy Word.
O let the Trump of thine eternal Fame,
Teach us to answer, Hallowed be thy Name.
4.
GOd built the World, and all that therein is
He framed, yet how poor a part is his?
Quarter the Earth, and see, how small a rome
Is styled with the name of Christian dome;
The rest (through blinded ignorance) rebels,
O're-runne with Pagans, Turks, and Infidels:
Nor yet is all this little quarter his,
For (though all know him) half know him amiss,
Professing Chr^^^ for lucre, (as they l^st)
And serve the triple Crown of An^^^hrist;
Yet is this little handful much made lesser,
There Is many L^^ertines, for one Pr^fessour:
Nor do Professors all profess aright,
'Mong' whom there often lurks an Hypocrite.
O where, and what is thy Kingdom (blessed God)
Where is thy Scepter? where is thine iron Rod?
Reduce thy reck'nings to their total sum,
O let thy Power, and thy kingdom come.
5.
MAN in himselfe's a little World, Alone,
His Soul's the Court, or high Imperial throne
Wherein as Empress sits the Vnderstan^ing
Gently directing, yet with awe Commanding:
Her Handmaid's will: Affections, Maids of Honor,
All following close, and duly waiting on her:
But Sin, that always envied man's Condition,
Within this Kingdom raised up Division;
Withdrawn the Will, and bribed the false Affection,
That This, no order has; nor That Election;
The Will proves Traitor to the Understanding;
Reason has lost her power, and left commanding,
She Is quite deposed, and put to foul disgrace,
And Tyrant Passion now usurps her place.
Vouchsafe (Lord) in this little World of mine
To reign, that I may reign with Thee in thine:
And since my Will is quite of good bereaven,
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven.
6
WHo live to sin, are all but thieves to hear^
And Earth; They steal from God, and take ungive^,
Good men they rob, and such as live upright,
And (being bastards) share the freemans Right:
They Are all as owners, in the owners stead,
And (like to Dogs) devour the childrens bread;
They have, and lack, and want that they possess,
Unhappy most, in their most happiness:
They are not goods, but riches, that they wast,
And not being goods, to ev'ls they turn at last.
(Lord) what I have, let me enjoy in thee,
And thee in it, or else take it from me;
My store or want, make thou, or fade, or flourish,
So shall my comforts neither change, nor perish;
That little I enjoy, (Lord) make it mine,
In making me (that am a Sinner) thine;
It Is thou or none, that shall supply my need,
Great God, Give us this day our daily bread.
7.
THe quick conceited Schoolmen do approve
A difference 'twixt Charity and Love:
Love is a virtue, whereby we explain
Our selves to God, and God to us again:
But Charitie's imparted to our Brother,
Whereby we traffic, one man with another:
The first extends to God; The last belongs
To Man, in giving right, and bearing wrongs;
In number, they are twain, In virtue one;
For one not truly being, to other's none.
In loving God, if I neglect my Neighbor,
My love has lost his proof, and I my labor:
My Zeal, my Faith, my Hope, that never fails me,
(If Charity be wanting) naught a vailes me.
(Lord) in my Soul, a spirit of Love create me,
And I will love my Brother, if he hate me:
In naught but love, let me envy my betters;
And then, Forgive my debts, as I my detters.
8.
I Find a true resemblance in the growth
Of Sin, and Man; A like in breeding, both;
The Soul's the Mother, and the Devil, Syer;
Who lusting long in mutual desire
Enjoy their Wills, and join in Copulation;
The Seed that fills her womb, is foul Tentation;
The sins Conception, is the Souls consent;
And then it quickens, when it breeds content;
The birth of Sin is finished in the action,
And Custom brings it to its full perfection.
O let my fruitless Soul be barren rather,
Then bring forth such a Child for such a Father:
Or if my Soul breed Sin (not being wary)
Let not her womb bring forth, or else miscarry;
She is thy Spouse (O Lord) do thou advise her,
Keep thou her chaste, Let not the Fiend entice her:
Try thou my heart, Thy Trials bring Salvation.
But let me not be led into temptation.
9.
FOrtune (that blind supposed Goddess) is
Still rated at, if ought suceed amiss;
It Is she (the vain abuse of Providence)
That bears the blame, when others make the offense;
When this man's barn finds not her wonted store,
Fortun's cond^mn'd, because she sent no more;
If this man dye, or that man live too long,
Fortun's accused, and she has done the wrong;
Ah foolish Dolls and (like ^our Goddess) blind!
You make the fault, and call your Saint unkind;
For when the cause of Ev'll begins in Man,
The Effect ensues from whence the cause began;
Then know the reason of thy discontent,
Thy ev'll of Sin, makes the Ev'll of punishment.
(Lord) hold me up, or spur me when I fall;
So shall my Ev'll be just, or not at all:
Defend me from the World, the Flesh, the Devil,
And so thou shall deliver me from Evil.
10.
THe Priestly Skirts of A'rons holy coat
I kiss; and to my morning Muse devote:
Had never King, in any age, or Nation,
Such glorious Robes, set forth in such a fashion,
With Gold, and Gemmes, and Silks of Princely Dye,
And Stones befitting more than Majesty:
The Persian Sophies, and rich Shaeba's Queen
Had never the like, nor ever the like had seen;
Upon the Skirts (in order as they fell)
First, a Pomegranat was, and then a Bell;
By each Pomegranat did a Bell appear;
Many Pomegranats, many Bells there were;
Pomegranats nourish, Bells do make a sound;
As blessings fall, Thanksgiving must rebound.
If thou will cloth my heart with A'rons tyer,
My tongue shall praise, as well as heart desire.
My tongue, and pen, shall dwell upon thy Story,
(Great God) for thine is Kingdom, Power, Glory.
11.
THe Ancient Sophists, that were so precise,
(and oftentimes (perchance) too curious nice)
Aver, that Nature has bestowed on Man,
Three perfect Souls: When this I truly scan,
Me thinks, their Learning swathed in Error, lies;
They were not wise enough, and yet too wise;
Too curious wise, because they mention more
Then one; Not wise enough, because not four;
Nature, not Grace, is Mistress of their Schools;
Grace counts them wisest, that are veriest Fools:
Three Souls in man? Grace does a fourth allow,
The Soul of Faith: But this is Greek to you:
It Is Faith that makes man truly wise; It Is Faith
Makes him possess that thing he never has.
This Glorious Soul of Faith bestow on me,
(O Lord) or else take thou the other three:
Faith makes men less then Children, more then Men,
It makes the Soul cry Abba, and Amen.
The End.
PENTELOGIA.

Morstua, Mors Christi, Fraus Mundi, Gloria Coeli,
Et D^lor Inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Thy death, the death of Christ, the worlds te^tation;
Heavens joy, hels torment, be thy meditation.


LONDON, Printed for JOHN MARRIOT. 1632.

Mors tua. 1.
ME thinks, I see the nimble-aged Sire
Pass swiftly by, with feet unapt to tire;
Upon his head an Hower-glasse he wears,
And in his wrinkled hand a Sithe he bears,
(Both Instruments, to take the lives from Men)
The one shows with what, the other shows when.
Me thinks I hear the doleful Passing Bell,
Setting an onset on his louder knell;
(This moody music of impartial Death
Who dances after, dances out of breath.)
Me thinks I see my dearest friends lament,
With sighs, and tears, and woeful dryriment,
My tender Wife, and Children standing by,
Dewing the Deathbed, whereupon I lie:
Me thinks, I hear a voice (in secret) say,
Thy glass is run, and thou must die to day.
Mors Christi. 2.
ANd am I here, and my Redeemer gone?
Can He be dead, and is not my life done?
Was he tormented in excess of measure,
And do I live yet? and yet live in pleasure?
Alas! could Sinners find out never a one,
More fit than Thee, for them to spit upon?
Did thy cheeks entertain a Traylors lips?
Was thy dear body scourged, and torn with whips?
So that the guiltless blood came trickling after?
And did thy fainting brows sweat blood and water?
Were thou (Lord) hanged upon the Cursed Tree?
O world of grief! And was all this for me?
Burst forth, my tears, into a world of sorrow,
And let my nights of grief find never a morrow;
Since thou art dead (Lord) grant thy servant room,
Within his heart, to build thy heart a Tomb.
Fraus Mundi. 3.
WHat is the World? a great exchange of war^,
Wherein all sorts, and sexes cheapning art,
The Flesh, the Devil sit, and cry, What lack ye?
When most they fawn, they most intend to rack ye
The wares, are cups of Joy, and beds of Pleasure,
There Is goodly choice, down weight, and flowing me^sure,
A soul's the price, but they give time to pay,
Upon the Deathbed, on the dying day.
Hard is the bargain, and unjust the measure,
When as the price so much out-lasts the pleasure:
The joys that are on earth, are counterfaits;
If ought be true, it is this, They Are true deceits:
They flatter, fawn, and (like the Crocodile)
Kill where they laugh, and murder where they smile*
They daily dip within thy Dish, and cry,
Who has betrayed thee? Master, Is it I?
Gloria Coeli. 4.
When I behold, and well advise upon
The Wisemans speech, There Is naught beneath the Sun,
But vanity, my soul rebels within,
And lothes the dunghill prison she is in:
But when I look to new Jerusalem,
Wherein's reserved my Crown, my Diadem,
O what a Heaven of bliss my Soul enjoyes,
On sudden rapt into that heaven of Joys!
Where ravished (in the depth of meditation)
She well discernes, with eye of contemplation,
The glory' of God, in his Imperial Seat,
Full strong in Might, in Majesty complete,
Where troops of Powers, Virtues, Cherubims,
Angels, Archangels, Saints, and Seraphims,
Are chaunting praises to their heavenly King,
Where Hallelujah they for ever sing.
Dolor Inferni. 5.
LEt Poets please to torture Tanialus,
Let griping Vultures gnaw Prometheus,
And let poor Ixion turn his endless wheel,
Let Nemesis torment with whips of steel;
They far come short, to express the pains of those
That rage in Hell, enwrapt in endless woes;
Where time no end, and plagu^s find no exemption;
Where cries admit no help, nor place redemption;
Where fire lacks no flame, the flame no beat,
To make their torments sharp, and plagues complea^*
Where wretched Souls to tortures bound shall be^,
Serving a world of years, and not be Fre^;
Where nothing's heard but yells, and sudden cries;
Where ^ier never flakes, nor Worm e're dies:
But where this Hell is placed (my Muse) stop there;
Lord, show me what it is, but never where.
Mors tua. 1.
CAn he be fair, that withers at a blast?
Or he be strong, that ayery Breath can cast*
Can he be wise, that knows not how to live?
Or he be rich, that nothing has to give?
Can he be young, that is feeble, weak, and wan?
So fair, strong, wise, so rich, so young is m^n:
So fair is Man, that Death (a parting Blast)
Blasts his fair flower, and makes him Earth at last;
So strong is Man, that with a gasping Breath
He totters, and bequeathes his strength to Death,
So wise is Man, that if with Death he strive,
His wisdom cannot teach him how to live;
So rich is Man, that (all his Debts b'ing paid)
His wealth's the winding sheet wherein he is laid:
So young is Man, that (broke with care and sorrow)
He Is old enough to day, to Dye to morrow:
Why brag'st thou the^, thou worm of five-foot long*
The art neither fair, nor strong, nor wise, nor rich nor (...)*
Mors Christi. 2.
I Thurst; and who shall quench this eager Thurst?
I grieve; and with my grief my heart will burst;
I grieve, because I thurst without relief;
I thurst, because my Soul is burnt with grief;
I thurst; and (dried with grief) my heart will dye;
I grieve, and thurst the more, for Sorrow's dry:
The more I grieve, the more my thurst appears:
Would God I had not grieved out all my tears;
I thurst; and yet my griefs have made a Flood;
But tears are salt; I grieve, and thurst for blood;
I grieve for blood, must send relief;
I thurst for blood, for blood for blood must ease my grief;
I thurst for sacred blood of a dear Lamb;
I grieve to think from whence that dear blood came;
'Twas shed for me, O let me drink my fill,
Although my grief remain entier still:
O sovereign power of that Vermilian Spring,
Whose virtue, neither heart co^ceives, nor tongue can sing.
Fraus Mundi. 3.
I Love the World (as Clients love the Laws)
To manage the uprightness of my Cause;
The World loves me, as Shepherds do their flocks,
To rob, and spoil them of their fleecy locks;
I love the World, and use it as mine Inn,
To bait, and rest my tired sarkeise in:
The World loves me: For what? To make her (...)*
For filthy sin, she sels me timely shame;
She Is like the Basiliske, by whose sharp eyes
The living object, first discovered, dies;
Forth from her eyes empoysoned beams do dur^^
Dies like a Basiliske, discerned first;
We live at jarres as froward Gamesters do,
Still guarding, nor regarding others foe;
I love the World, to serve my turn, and leave her,
It Is no deceit to co^zen a Deceiver;
She Will not miss me; I, less the world shall miss,
To lose a world of grief, to enjoy a world of Bl^sse.
Gloria Coeli. 4.
EArth stands immov'd, and fixed; her situation
Admits no local change, no alteration,
Heaven always moves, renewing still his place,
And ever sees us with another Face;
Earth stands fixed, yet there I live oppressed;
Heaven always mooves, yet there is all my rest:
Enlarge thy self, my Soul, with meditation,
Mount there, and there bespeake thy habitatio^;
Where joies are full, and pure, not mixed with mourni^^
All endless, and from which is no returning;
No theft, no cruel murder harbors there,
No hoary-headed- Care, no sudden Fear,
No pinching want, no (griping-fast) oppression,
Nor Death the stipend of our first transgression:
But dearest Friendship, Love, and lasting Pl^^sure,
Still there abides, without or stint, or measure;
Fullness of Riches, comf^^^t sempeternall,
Excess without a surfeiting; And Life Eternal.
Dolor Inferni. 5.
THe Trump shall blow, the dead (awaked) shall rise,
And to the Clouds shall turn their wondering eyes;
The heavens shall open, the Bridegroom forth shall come,
To judge the World, and give the World her doom:
Joy to the Just, to others endless smart;
To those the Voice bids Come; to these, Depart;
Depart from Life, yet (dying) live for ever;
For ever dying be, and yet Dye never;
Depart like Dogs, with Devils take your lot;
Depart like Devils, for I know you not;
Like Dogs, like Devils go, Go howl and bark;
Depart in darkness, for your deeds were dark;
Let r^aring be your Music, and your Food
Be flesh of Vipers, and your drink, their blood;
Let Fiends afflict you, with Reproach and Shame,
Depart, depart into Eternal Flame:
If Hell the Guerdon then of Sinners be,
(Lord give me Hell on earth, (Lord) give me heaven with thee.
-- vv -- vv -- Iam de^ine Tibia versus.
FINIS.
Hadassa.

Horat. Ode 6. ^onamur tenues, grandia; nec pudor,
^mbellisque Lyrae Musapotens vetat.
By Fra. Quarles.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN MARRIOT. 1632.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
A Sober vein best suits Theology: If therefore thou expect'st such Elegancy
as takes the times, affect some subject as will bear it. Had I labored with
over-abunda^ce of fictions, or flourishes, perhaps they had exposed me,
censurable, and disprized this sacred subject: Therefore I rest more sparing in
that kind.

Two things I would treat of: First, the matter, secondly, the manner of this
History.

As for the matter, (so far as I have dealt) it is Canonical, and indicted by
the holy Spirit of God, not liable to error, and needs no blanching.

In it, Theology sits as Queen, attended by her handmaid Philosophy; both
concurring to make the understanding Reader a good Divine, and a wise Moralist.

As for the Divinity; it discovers the Almighty in his two great Attributes;
in his Mercy, delivering his Church; in his Justice, confounding her enemies.

As for the Morality; it offers to us the whole practick part of Philosophy,
dealt (...) into Ethics, Politics, and Oeconomick^.

1. The Ethical part (the object whereof is the manners of a private man) ranges
thro^^^ the whole book, and empties it self (...) the Catalogue of Moral
virtues, either th^^ that govern the body; as Fortitude, Ch^^ 9. 2. and
Temperance, Chap. 1. 8. or tho^^ which direct the soul, either in outwa^^
things, as Liberality, Chap 1. 3. Magnif^cence, Chap. 1. 6. Magnanimity, Chap.
2. ^* and Modesty, Chap. 6. 12. or in conversatio^ as Justice, Chap. 7. 9.
Mansuetude, Chap 5* etc.

2. The Political part (the object whereof* public Society) instructs,
first, in the behavior of a Prince to his Subject; in punish^^ his vice, Chap
7. 10. in rewarding of virtue Chap. 8. 2. 15. Secondly, in the behavior (...)
the Subject to his Prince; in observing (...) Laws, and discovering his
enemies, Ch^^ 2. 22. Thirdly, the behavior of a Subject, (...) a Subject; in
mutuality of love, Chap. 4. 7. (...) propagation of peace, Chap. 10. 3.

3. The Oeconomical part (the object wh^^^ of is private Society) teaches,
first, the (...) riage of the Wife, to her Husband: in (...), Chap. 1. 22. of
the Husband to his Wife, is ruling, Chap. 1. 22. Secondly, of a Father to his
Child, in advising, Chap. 2. 7, 10. of a Child to his Father, in observing,
Chap. 2. 20. Thirdly, of a Master to his Servant, in commanding, Chap. 4. 5. of
a Servant to his Master, in effecting his command, Chap. 4. 6.

Furthermore, in this history, the two principal faculties of the soul are
(nor in vain) employed.

First, the Intellect, whose proper object is Truth. Secondly, the Will, whose
proper object is good, whether Philosophical, which the great Master of
Philosophy calls Wisdom: or Theological, which we point at now, hoping to
enjoy hereafter.

Who the Pen-m^n of this sacred History was, or why the name of God (as in few
other parts of the Bible) is unmentioned in this, it is immateriall and
doubtful. For the first, it is enough for anuncurious questioner to know, it
was indicted by the Spirit of God: for the second, let it suffice, that that
Spirit willed not here to reveal his name.

As for the Manner of this history (consisting in the Periphrase, the
adjournment of the Story, and interposition of Meditations) I I hope it has
not injured the Matter: For in this I was not the least careful, to use the
light of the best Expositors, not daring to go un-led, for fear of stumbling.
Some say, Divinity in Verse is incongruous and unpleasing: such I refer to
the Psalms of David, or the Song of his son Solomon, to be corrected. But
in these lewd times, the salt, and soul of a Verse, is obscene scurrility,
without which it seems dull, and livelesse: And though the sacred History
needs not (as humane do) Poetry, to perpetuate the remembrance (being by Gods
own mouth blessed with Eternity) yet Verse (working so near upon the soul, and
spirit) will often times draw those to have a history in familiarity, who
(perchance) before, scarce knew there was such a Book.

Reader, be more than my hasty pen styles thee: Read me with advice, and
thereafter judge me, and in that judgment censure me. If I jangle, think my
intent thereby, is to to^^ better Ringers in* Farewell.

THE INTRODVCTION.
WHen Zedechia (He whose hapless hand
Once held the Scepter of Great Iudahs Land
Went up the Palace of Proud Babylon,
(The Prince Serajah him attending on,)
A dreadful Prophet, (from whose blasting breath
Came sudden death, and nothing else but death)
Into Serajah's peaceful hand betook,
The sad Contents of a more dismal Book:
Break open the leaves, those leaves so full of dread,
Read (son of thunder) said the Prophet, read;
Say thus, say freely thus, The Lord has spoke it,
It Is done, the world's unable to revoke it;
Woe, woe, and heavy woes ten thousand more
Betide great Babylon, that painted whore;
Thy buildings, and thy ^ensive Towers shall
Flame on a sudden, and to cinders fall,
None shall be left to wail thy grief with Howles:
Thy streets shall peopled be with Bats and Owls:
None shall remain to call thy places void,
None to possess, nor ought to be enjoyed;
Naught shall be left for thee to term thine own,
But helpless ruins of a hapless town:
Said then the Prophet, When thy language has
Emptied thy Cheeks of this thy borrowed Breath,
Close then the Book, and bind a stone unto it,
That done, into the swift Euphrates throw it,
And let this following speech explane withal
The Hieroglyphick^ of proud Babels fall.
Thus, thus shall Babel, Thus shall Babels glory,
Of her destruction leave a Tragic story:
Thus, thus shall Babell fall, and none relieve her,
Thus, thus shall Babel sink, Thus sink for ever.
And fallen she is. Thus aftertimes made good
That sacred Prophecy, confirmed in blood.
Great Royal Dreamer, where is now that thing
Thou so much vaunted'st of? where, O soveraig^^ King,
Is that great Babel, that was raised so high,
To show the highness of thy Majesty?
Where is thy Royal offspring to succeed
Thy Throne, and to preserve thy Princely seed
Till this time? Sleeping, how could thou fore^^^
That thing, which waking thou thoghtst never would be^
And thou Belshazzar, (full of youthful fire,
Unlucky Grandchild to a lucklesse Sire)
On thee the sacred Oracles attended,
For with thy life, great Babels Kingdom ended:
What made thy Spirit tremble, and thy hair
Bolt up? what made thee (fainting) gasp for air*
A simple Word upon a painted Wall?
What Is that to thee? If ought, what harm at all?
Could words affright thee? O preposterous wit,
To fear the writing, not the hand that writ!
The Hand that writ, it self (unseene) did shroud
Within the gloomy bosom of a Cloud;
The Hand that writ, was bent, (nor bent in vain)
To part the Kingdom, and the King in twain,
The Hand that writ, did write the sentence down*
And now stands armed to depose the Crown;
The hand that writ, did threaten to translate
Thy Kingdom (Babel) to the Persian state;
The Effect whereof did brook no long delays,
For when Belshazzar had spun out his days,
(Soon cut by that Avengers fatal knife,)
Proud Babels Empire ended with his life.
As when that rare Arabian Bird does rest
Her bedrid carkase in her Spicy nest,
The quick-devouring fire of heaven consumes
The willing sacrifice in sweet perfumes,
From whose sad cinders (balm'd in fun'rall spices)
A second Phoenix (like the first) arises;
So from the Ruins of great Babels Seat;
The Medes and Persians Monarchy grew great:
For when Belshazzar, last of Babels Kings,
Yielded to death, (the sum of mortal things)
Like earth-amazing thunder from above,
And lightnng from the house of angry Jove,
Or like to billows in the Euboean Seas,
Whose swelling, naught but shipwreck can appease,
So bravely came the fierce Darius on,
Marching with Cyrus into Babylon,
Two Armies Royal stoutly following,
The one was Medes, the other Persia's King:
As when the Harvester with bubling brow.
(Reaping the intrest of his painful Plough,)
With crooked Sickle now a shock does sheare,
A handful here, and then a handful there,
Not leaving, till he naught but stubble leave;
Here lies a new fallen rank, and there a sheave;
Even so the Persian Host it self bestur'd,
So fell great Babel by the Persian Sword,
Which warm with slaughter, and with blood imbrued,
Never sheathed till wounded Babel fell subdued.
But see! These brave Ioynt-tenants that survived
To see a little world of men unliv'd,
Must now be parted: Great Darius dies,
And Cyrus shares alone the new-got prize;
He fights for Heaven, Heavens foemen he subdues:
He builds the Temple, he restores the Jews,
By him was Zedechias force disjoynted,
Unknown to God he was, yet Gods Anointed;
But mark the malice of a wayward Fate;
He whom success crowned always fortunate,
He that was strong to atchieve, bold to attempt,
Wise to foresee, and wary to prevent,
Valiant in war, successful to obtain,
Must now be slain, and by a Woman slain.
Accursed be thy sacrilegious hand;
That of her Patron robbed the holy Land;
Cursed be thy dying life, thy living death,
And cursed be all things that proud ^omyris has,
O worst that death can do, to take a life,
Which (lost) leaves Kingdoms to a Tyrants knife:
For now, alas! degenerate Cambyses
(Whose hand was filled with blood, whose heart with vices
Sits crowned King, to vex the Persian state,
With heavy burdens, and with sore regrate.
O Cyrus, more unhappy in thy son,
Then in that stroke wherewith thy life was done!
Cambyses now fits King, now Tyrant (rather:)
(Unlucky Son of a renowned Father)
Blood cries for Blood: Himself revenged has
His bloody Tyranny with his own death;
That cruel sword on his own flesh does feed,
Which made so many loyal Persians bleed,
Whose woeful choice made an indiff^rent thing,
To leave their lives, or lose their Tyran King:
Cambyses dead, with him the latest drop
Of Cyrus blood was spilt, his death did stop
The infant source of his brave Syers worth,
Ere aftertimes could spend his rivers forth.
Tyrant Cambyses being dead and gone,
On the reversion of his empty Throne,
Mounts up a Magus with dissembled right,
Forging the name of him, whose greedy night
Too early did perpetuate her own,
And silent death had snatched away unknown.
But when the tidings of his Royal cheat
Times loyal Trumpe had famed, th'usurped seat
Grew too-too hot, and longer could not bear
So proud a burden on so proud a Chair;
The Nobles sought their freedom to regaine,
Not resting till the Magi all were slain;
And so renowned was that happy slaughter,
That it solemnized was for ever after;
So that what pen shall write the Persian story,
Shall treat that Triumph, and write that days glory*
For to this time the Persians (as they say)
Observe a Feast, and keep it holy day;
Now Persia lacks a king, and now the State
Labors as much in want, as it of late
Did in abundance; Too great calmes do harm
Sometimes as much the Seaman, as a storm;
One while they think t'erect a Monarchy;
But that (corrupted) breeds a Tyranny,
And dead Cambyses, fresh before their eyes,
Afrights them with their new-scap'd miseries;
Some to the Nobles would commit the State,
In change of Rule, expecting change of fate;
Others cried, no; More Kings then one, incumber;
Better admit one Tyrant, than a number:
The rule of many does disquiet bring;
One Monarch is enough, one Lord, one King:
One says, Let Us rule our selves; let us all be Kings:
No, says another, that confusion brings;
Thus modern danger bred a careful trouble,
Double their care is, as their fear is double;
And doubtful to resolve of what conclusion,
To bar confusion, thus they bred confusion;
At last (and well advised) they put their choice
Upon the verdict of a Iuries voice;
Seven is a perfect number, then by seven,
Be Persia's Royal Crown, and Scepter given;
Now Persia, do thy plagues or joys commence;
God give thy Jury sacred evidence:
Fearful to choose, and faithless in their choice,
(Since weal or woe depended on their voice,)
A few from many they extracted forth,
Whose even poys'd valor, and like equal worth
Had set a Non plus on their doubtful tongues,
Vnweeting where the most reward belongs,
They this agreed, and thus (advised) bespake;
Since purblinde mortals, of themselves, can make
No difference 'twixt good, and evil* nor know
A good from what is only good in show,
But, with unconstant frailty, does vary
From what is good, to what is clean contrary;
And since it lies not in the brain of man,
To make his drooping state more happy, than
His unprospitious stars allot, much less
To lend another, o^ a state success,
In vain you, therefore shall expect this thing,
That we should give you fortune, with a King:
Since you have made us means to propagate
The joyful welfare of our headless State,
(Bound by the tender service that we bear
Ou^ native soil, far than our lives more dear,)
We sifted have, and boulted from the Rest,
Whose worst admits no badnesse, and whose best
Cannot be bettered:
When Chaunticleere, (the Belman of the morn)
Shall summon twilight, with his bugle horn,
Let these brave Hero's, dressed in warlike wise,
And richly ^ounted on their Pa^feries,
Attend our rising Sun-gods ruddy face,
Within the limits of our Royal place,
And he whose lusty Stallion first shall neigh,
To him be given ^he doubtful Monarchy,
The choice of Kings lies not in mortals b^east,
This we; The Gods, and Fortune do the rest.
So said, the people tickled with the motion,
Some tossed their caps some fell to their devotion,
Some clap their joyful hands, some shout, some sing,
And all at one cried out, A King, A King.
When Phoebus Harbinger had chased the night,
And tedious Phosphe brought the breaking light,
Complete in arms, and glorious in their train,
Came these brave Heroes, prancing over the plain,
With mighty streamers came these blazing stars,
Po^tending Wars, (and nothing else but Wars;)
Into the royal Palace now they come:
There sounds the martial Trump, here beats the Drum,
There stands a Steed, and champes his frothy steel
This strokes the ground, that scorns it with his heel;
One snorts, another puffs out angry wind;
This mounts, before; and that curvets, behind;
By this, the fomy Steeds of Phaeton
Puff too, and spurn the Eastern Horizon:
Whereat the Nobles, prostrate to the ground,
Adored their God (their God was early found.)
Forthwith, from out the thickest of the crowd,
In depth of silence, there was heard the loud,
And lustful language of Darius Horse,
Who in the dialect of his discourse,
Proclaimed his rider King; whereat the rest
(Patient to bear what cannot be redrest)
Dismount their lofty steeds, and prostrate bring
Their humbled bodies to their happy King;
God save the King, they jointly say; God bless
Thy prosperous actions with a due success;
The people clap their sweaty palms, and shout,
The bonfires smoke, the bells ring round about,
The minstrels play, the Parrats learn to sing,
(Perchance as well as they) God save the King,
Assuerus now is invested in the throne,,
And Persia's ruled by him, and him alone;
Prove happy Persia: Great Assuerus prove
As equal happy in thy peoples love.
Enough; And let this broken breviate
Suffice to shadow forth the downfall state
Of mighty Babel, and the conquest made
By the fierce Medes, and Persians conquering blade*
Whose just succession we have traced down,
Till great Assuerus wear the Persian Crown;
Him have we sought, and having found him, rest;
To morrow go we to his royal Feast.
FINIS.
TO THE HIGHEST: His Humble Servant Implores his gracious aid.
THou great Directer of the Hearts of men,
From whence I propagate what e're is mine,
Still my disquiet thoughts, Direct my Pen
No more mine own, if thou adopt it thine:
O be thy Spirit ^ll in All to me,
That will implore no aid, no Muse but thee:
^e thou the Load-starre to my wandering mind,
^ew rigged, and bound upon a new Adventure:
^fill my Canvas with a prosperous wind;
^nlock my Soul, and let thy Spirit enter:
So bless my Talent with a fruitful Lone,
That it, at least, may render two for one.
Unworthy I, to take so high a Task;
Unworthy I, to crave so great a Boon,
Alas! unseason'd is my slender Caske,
My Winters day has scarcely seen her (...)
But if the Childrens Bread must be denied,
Yet let me lick the Crummes that fall be^^^^
THE HISTORY OF ESTER.
THE ARGUMENT.
The King Assuerus makes two Feasts,
Invites his great and meaner guests:
He makes a Statute to repress
The loathsome sin of Drunkenness.
Sect. 1.
WHen great Assuerus (under whose Command
The worlds most part did in subjectio^ stand,
Whose Kingdom was to East and West confined,
And stretched from Ethiopia unto Ind',)
When this brave Monarch had with two years power
Confirmd himself the Persian Emperor;
The peoples patience nilling to sustain
The hard oppression of a third years reign,
Softly began to grumble, sore to vex,
Feeling such Tribute on their servile necks;
Which when the King (as he did quickly) hears,
(For Kings have tender, and the nimblest ears)
Partly to blow the coals of old affection,
Which now are dying through a forced subjection*
Partly to make his Princely might appear,
To make them fear for love, or love for fear,
He made a Feast: He made a Royal Feast,
Fit for himself, had he himself been Guest;
To which he calls the Princes of his Land,
Who (paying tribute) by his power stand;
To which he calls his servants of Estate,
His Captains, and his Rulers of the State,
That he may show the glory of his store,
The like unseene by any Prince before;
That he may boast his Kingdoms beauty forth,
His servant Princes, and their Princely worth;
That he may show the Type of Sov'raignty
Fulfilled in the honor of his Majesty:
He made a Feast, whose Date should not expire,
Until seven Moons had lost and gained their (...)
When as this Royal tedious Feast was ended,
(For good more common it is, it is more co^mende^
For meaner sort he made a second Feast;
His Guests were from the greatest to the least
In Susa's place; Seven days they did resort
To Feast in the Palace Garden of the Court;
Where in the midst, the house of Bacchus stands
To entertain when Bounty claps her hands;
The Tap'stry hangings, were of diverse hue,
Pure white, and youthful Green, and joyful (...)
The maine supporting Pillars of the Place
Were (...) ^arble of the purest race;
The (...) were rich right Princely to behold,
Of b^aten Silver, and of burnish't Gold.
The ^^vement was dis^olour'd Porphyry,
And during Marble, colored diversely;
In lavish Cups of oft-refined gold,
Came Wine unwisht, drink what the people (...)
The Golden vessel, did in number pasle,
Great choice of Cups, great choice of wine the (...)
And since Abuse attends upon Excess,
Leading sweet Mirth to loathsome Drunkenne^^
A temperate Law was made, that no man might
Enforce an undisposed Appetite:
So that a sober mind may use his pleasure,
And measure drinking, though not drink by measure.
Medit. 1.
NO man is borne unto himself alone;
Who lives unto himself, he lives to none:
The World's a body', each man a member is,
To add some measure to the public bliss;
Where much is given, there much shall be required,
Where little, less; for riches are but hyr'd;
Wisdom is sold for sweat; Pleasures for pain;
Who lives unto himself, he lives in vain;
To be a Monarch is a glorious thing;
Who lives not full of Care, he lives no King;
The boundless glory of a King is such,
To sweeten Care, because his Care is much;
The Sun (whose radiant beams reflect so bright)
Comforts and warmes, as well as it gives light,
By whose example Phoebe (though more dim)
Does counterfeit his beams, and shines from him:
So mighty Kings are not ordained alone
To perch in glory on the Princely Throne,
But to direct in Peace, command in War
Those Subjects, for whose sakes they only are;
So loyal Subjects must adapt them to
Such virtuous actions as their Princes do:
So shall his people, even as well as He,
Princes (though in a lesser volume) be.
So often as I fix my serious eye
Upon Assuerus Feast, me thinks, I spy
The Temple dance, me thinks my ravished ear,
(Rapt with the secret music that I hear)
Attends the warble of an Angels tongue,
Resounding forth this sense-bereaving Song;
Vashti shall fall, and Ester rise,
Sion shall thrive, when Haman dies.
Blessed are the meetings, and the Banquets blessed,
Where Angels caroll music to the Feast;
How do our wretched times degenerate
From former ages! How intemperate
Has lavish custom made our bedrid Age,
Acting obscoene Scenes on her drunken Stage!
Our times are guided by a lewder lot,
As if that world another world begot:
Their friendly feasts were filled with sweet sobrie^
Ours, with unclean delights, and base ebriety;
Theirs, the unvalued prise of Love intended;
Ours seek the cause whereby our Love is ended;
How in so blind an Age could those men see!
And in a seeing Age, how blind are we!
THE ARGUMENT.
The King sends for the Queen; the Queen
Denies to come; His hasty spleen
Inflames, unto the Persian Laws
He leaves the censure of his cause.
Sect. 2.
TO add more honor to this royal Feast,
That Glory may with Glory be increast,
Vashti the Queen (the fairest Queen on earth)
She made a Feast, and put on jolly mirth,
To bid sweet welcome with her Princely cheer
To all her Guests; Her Guests all, women were.
By this, the Royal bounty of the King
Has well-nigh spent the seven days banqueting.
Six ioviall days have run their hours out,
And now the seventh revolves the Week about,
Upon which day, (the Queens unlucky Day)
The King, with jollity enticed away,
And gently having slipped the stricter reins
Of Temperance, (that over-mirth restraines)
Rose up, commanded that without delay,
(However the Persian custom do gainsay
That men and married Wives should feast together)
That fair Queen Vashti be conducted thither,
For him to show the sweetness of her face,
And peerless beauty mixed with Princely Grace;
To wound their wanton hearts, and to surprise
The Princes with the Artill'ry of her eyes.
But fairest Vashti* (in whose scornful Eyes
More haughty pride, then heavenly beauty lies)
With bold denial of a flinty breast,
Answered the longing of the Kings request;
And (filled with scorn) returned this message home
Queen Vashti cannot, Vashti will not come,
Whereat, as Boreas with his blustering,
(When sturdy Aries ushers in the Spring)
Here fells an aged Oak, there cleanes a Tree,
Now holds his full-mouthed blast* now lets it flee,
So storms the King; now pale, now fiery red,
His color comes and goes, his angry head
He sternly shakes, spits his enraged spleen,
Now on the messenger, now on the Queen:
One while he deeply weighs the foul contempt,
And then his passion bids his wrath attempt
A quick revenge; now creep into his thought
Such things as aggravate the peevish fault;
The place the persons present, and the time
Increase his wrath, increase his Ladies Crime.
But soon as Passion had restored the Reyne
To righteous Reason's government again;
The King (unfit to judge his proper Cause)
Referred the trial to the Persian Laws:
He called his learned Counsel, and displayed
The nature of his Grievance thus, and said*
By virtue of a Husband, and a King,
(To make complete our Royal banq^etting)
We gave command, we gave a strict command,
That by the office of our Eunuchs band,
Queen Vashti should in state attended be
Into the presence of our Majesty,
But in contempt she slacks our dread bebest
Neglects performance of our dear Request,
And (through disdain) disloyally denied,
Like a false subject, and a faithless bride:
Say then (my Lords) for you (being truly wise)
Have brains to judge, and judgments to advise;
Say, boldly (say) what do the Laws assign?
What punishment? or what deserved Fine?
Assuerus bids, the mighty King commands;
Vashti denies, the scornful Queen withstands.
Medit. 2.
EVil manners breed good Laws: and that is the (...)
That e're was made of bad: The Persian fea^
(Finding the mischief that was grown so rife)
Admitted not with men a married wife.
How careful were they in preserving that,
Which we so watchful are to violate!
O Chastity the Flower of the soul,
How is thy perfect fairness turned to foul!
How are thy Blossoms blasted all to dust,
By sudden Lightning of untamed Lust!
How have thou thus defiled thy Ivory feet!
Thy sweetness that was once, how far from sweet!
Where are thy maiden-smiles, thy blushing cheek?
Thy Lamb-like countenance, so fair, so meek?
Where is that spotless Flower, that while-ere
Within thy lilly bosom thou did wear?
Has wanton Cupid snatched it? Has his Dart
Sent courtly tokens to thy simple heart?
Where do thou bide? the Country half disclaimes thee;
The City wonders when a body names thee.
Or have the rural woods engrost thee there,
And thus fore-stall'd our empty markets here?
Sure thou art not, or kept where no man shows thee;
Or changed so much, scarce man or woman knows thee.
Our Grandame Eve, before it was forbid,
Desired not the fruit, she after did:
Had not the Custom of those times ordained
That women from men's feasts should be restrained,
Perhaps (Assuerus) Vashti might have dyed
Unsent for, and thy self been undenyed:
Such are the the fruits of mirth's and wine's abuse,
Customs must crack, and love must break his truce,
Conjugall bands must loose, and sullen Hate
Ensues the Feast, where Wine's immoderate.
More difficult it is, and greater skill
To bear a mischief, 'than prevent an ill:
Passion is natural, but to bridle Passion,
Is more divine, and virtues operation:
To do amiss, is Natures act; to err,
Is but a wretched mortals Character;
But to prevent the danger of the ill,
Is more then Man, surpassing humane skill:
Who plays a happy game with crafty slight,
Confirms himself but fortunes Favorite;
But he that husbands well an ill-dealt game,
Deserves the credit of a Gamesters name;
Lord, if my Cards be bad, yet lend me skill
To play them wisely' and make the best of ill.
THE ARGUMENT.
The learned Counsel ple^d the case;
The Queen degr^ded from her place?
Decrees are sent throughout the Land,
That Wives obey, and men command.
Sect. 3.
THe righteous Counsel (having heard the cause)
Adviz'd a while, with respite of a pause,
Till Memucan (the first that silence brake)
Vnseal'd his serious lips, and thus bespake:
The Great Assuerus Sov'raigne Lord and King,
(To grace the period of his banqueting)
Has sent for Vashti; Vashti would not come,
And now it rests in us to give the doom.
But left that too much rashness violate
The sacred Justice of our happy state,
We first propound the height of her offense,
Next, the succeeding inconvenience,
Which through the circumstances does augment,
And so descend to th'equall punishment;
The Offense propounded, now we must relate
Such circumstances that might aggravate,
And first the Place, (the Palace of the King,)
And next the Time, (the Time of Banqueting)
Lastly, the Persons, (Princes of the Land)
Which witness the contempt of the command;
The Place, the Persons present, and the Time,
Make ^oule the fault, make foul the Ladies crime;
Nor was her fault unto the King alone,
But to the Princes, and to every one,
For when this speech divulged about shall be,
Vashti the Queen withstood the Kings Decree,
Women (that soon can an advantage take
Of things, which for their private ends do make)
Shall scorn their coward husbands, and despise
Their dear requests within their scornful eyes,
And say, if we deny your h^sts, then blame not,
Assuerus sent for Vashti, but she came not;
By Vashties pattern others will be taught;
Thus her example's fouler then her fault:
Now therefore if it like our gracious King,
(Since he refers tous the censuring)
Let him proclaim (which untransgressed be)
His royal Edict, and his just Decree,
That Vashti come no more before his face,
But leave the titles of her Princel^^ place:
Let firm divorce unloose the Nuptial knot,
And let the name of Queen be quite forgot,
Let her estate and Princely dignity,
Her Royal Crown, and seat assigned be
To one whose sacred Virtue shall attain
As high perfection, as her bold disdain;
So when this Royal Edict shall be famed,
And through the several Provinces proclaimed,
Disdainful ^ives will learn, by Vashties fall,
To answer gently to their Husbands call.
Thus ended Memucan; the King was pleased;
(His blustering passion now at length appeased)
And soon applied himself to undertake,
To put in practice what his Counsel spoke:
So, into every Province of the Land,
He sent his speedy Letters, with command,
That Husbands rule their wives, and bear the sway,
And by subjection teach their Wives to obey.
Meditat. 3.
When God with sacred breath did first inspire
The new-made earth with quick, and holy fire,
He (well advising, what a goodly creature
He builded had, so like himself in feature)
Forthwith concluded by his preservation
T'eternize that great work of Man's creation;
Into a sleep he cast this living clay,
Locked up his sense with drouzy Morpheus key,
Opened his fruitful flank, and from his side,
He drew the substance of his helpful Bride,
Flesh of his flesh, and bone made of his bone
He framed Woman, making two of one;
Thus broke in two, he did anew ordain
That these same two should be made One again:
Till singling Death this sacred knot undo,
And part this new-made One, once more in two.
Since of a Rib first framed was a Wife,
Let Ribs be Hi'roglyphicks of their life:
Ribs coast the Heart, and guard it round about,
And like a trusty Watch keep danger out;
So tender wives should loyally impart
Their watchful care to fence their Spouses heart:
All members else from out their places rove,
But Ribs are firmly fixed, and seldom move:
Women (like Ribs) must keep their wonted home,
And not (like Dinah that was ravished) rome:
If Ribs be over-bent, or handled rough,
They break; If let alone, they bend enough:
Women must (unconstrained) be plyant still,
And gently bending to their Husbands will,
The sacred Academy of man's life
Is holy wedlock in a happy Wife.
It was a wise man's speech, Could never they
Know to command, that knew not first to obey:
Where Is then that high command? that ample fam^
Your sex, to glorify for their honored name,
Your noble sex in former days achieved?
Whose sounding praise no aftertimes outlived.
What brave exploits, what well deserving glory;
The subject of an everlasting story,
Their hands achieved? they thrust their Scepters then
As well in Kingdoms, as in hearts of men;
And sweet obedience was the lowly staire,
Mounted their steps to that commanding chair.
A Woman's rule should be in such a fashion,
Only to guide her household, and her passion:
And her obedience never's out of season,
So long as either Husband lasts, or Reason:
Ill thrives the hapless Family, that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.
I know not which live more unnatural lives,
Obeying Husbands, or commanding Wives.
THE ARGUMENT.
Assuerus pleased; his servants motion
Propounded, gain his approbation.
Esters descent, her Jewish race:
Her beauties, and her perfect grace.
Sect. 4.
WHen Time (that ends all things) did assuage
The burning Fever of Assuerus rage,
And quiet satisfaction had assigned
Delightful lu'lips to his troubled mind,
He called his old remembrance to account
Of Vashti, and her Crimes that did amount
To th'summe of her divorcement: In his thought
He weighed the censure of her heedlesse fault:
His fawning servants willing to prevent him,
Lest too much thought should make his love repent him,
Said thus: (If it shall please our gracious Lord
To crown with audience his servants word)
Let strict inquest, and careful Inquisition
In all the Realm be made, and quick provision
Throughout the Medes and Persians all along
For comely Virgins, beautiful and young,
Which (curiously selected) let them bring
Into the Royal Palace of the King;
And let the Eunuchs of the King take c^re
For Princely Robes, and Vesture, and prepare
Sweet Odors, choice Perfumes, and all things meet,
To add a greater sweetness to their sweet;
And she, whose perfect beams shall best delight,
And seem most gracious in his Princely sight;
To her be given the conquest of her face,
And be enthroned in scornful Vashties place.
The project pleased the King, who straight requires
That strict performance second their desires:
Within the walls of Shusa dwelt there one,
By breeding and by birth a Jew, and known
By th'name of Mordecai, of mighty kin,
Descended from the Tribe of Benjamin,
(Whose neck was subject to the slavish yoke,
When Ieconiah was surpised and took,
And carried captive into Babels Land,
With strength of mighty Neb'chadnezzars hand;)
Within his house abode a Virgin bright,
Whose name was Ester or Hadassa hight,
His brothers daughter, whom (her parents dead)
This Jew did foster, in her fathers stead;
She wanted none, though father the had none,
Her Uncles love assumed her for his own?
Bright beams of beauty streamed from her eye,
And in her cheek sat maiden modesty;
Which peerless beauty lent so kind a relish
To modest Virtue, that they did imbellish
Each others ex'lence, with a full assent,
In her to boast their perfect complement.
Medita. 4.
THe strongest Arteries that knit and tie
The members of a mixed Monarchy,
Are learned Counsels, timely Consultations,
Rip'ned Advice, and sage Deliberations;
And if those Kingdoms be but ill be-blest,
Whose Rule's committed to a young man's breast:
Then such Estates are more unhappy far,
Whose choicest Counselors but Children are:
How many Kingdoms blessed with high renown,
(In all things happy else) have placed their crown
Upon the Temples of a childish head,
Until with ruin, King, or State be sped!
What Massacres (begun by factious jarres,
And ended by the spoil of civil wars)
Have made brave Monarchies unfortunate,
And razed the glory' of many' a mighty State?
How many hopeful Princes (ill advised
By young, and smooth-faced Counsel) have despised
The sacred Oracles of riper years,
Till dear Repentance wash the Land with tears?
Witness thou lucklesse, and succeeding Son
Of (Wisdoms Favorite) great Solomon;
How did thy rash, and beardlesse Counsel bring
Thy fortunes subject to a stranger King?
And laying burdens on thy peoples neck,
The weight hung sadly on thy bended back.
Thou second Richard, (once our Britain King,
Whose Syr's, and Grandsyr's fame the world did ring
How was thy gentle nature led aside,
By green advisements, which thy State did guide,
Until the title of thy Crown did crack,
And fortunes (as thy Fathers name) were black?
Now glorious Britain, clap thy hands, and bless
Thy sacred fortunes; for thy happiness
(As does thy Island) does it self divide,
And sequester from all the world beside;
Blessed are thy open Gates with joyful peace,
Blessed are thy fruitful Barnes with sweet increase,
Blessed in thy Counsel, whose industrious skill,
Is but to make thy fortunes happy still;
In all things blessed, that to a State pertain;
Thrice happy in my dreaded Sovereign,
My sacred Sov'raigne, in whose only breast,
A wise Assembl' of Privy Counsels rest,
Who conquers with his Princely heart as far
By peace, as Alexander did by War,
And with his Olive branch more hearts did board,
Than daring Caesar did, with Cesars sword:
Long may thou hold within thy Royal hand,
The peaceful Scepter of our happy Land:
Great Judah's Lion, and the Flower of Iesse.
Preserve thy Lions, and thy Flowers bless.
THE ARGUMENT.
Fair Virgin, brought to Hege's hand,
The custom of the Persian Land;
Esters neglect of rich attire,
To whet the wanton Kings desire.
Sect. 5.
ANd when the lustful Kings Decree was read
In every ear, and Shire proclaimed, and spread,
Forthwith unto the Eunuch Hege's hand
The Bevy came, the pride of beauties band,
Armed with joy, and warring with their eyes,
To gain the conquest of a princely prize;
But none in peerlesse beauty shined so bright,
As lovely Ester did in Hege's sight:
In loyal service he observed her;
He sent for costly Oils, and fragrant Myrrh,
To ^it her for the presence of the King:
(...) Tyres, and change of vesture did he bring*
Seven comely maids he gave to tend upon her,
To show his service, and increase her honor:
But she was watchful of her lips, and wise,
Disclosing not her kindred, or alyes:
For trusty Mardoche^s tender care
Gave hopeful Ester Items to beware
To blaze her kin, or make her people known,
Lest for their sake, her hopes be overthrown.
Before the Gates he to and fro did pass,
Wherein enclosed the Courtly Ester was,
To understand how Ester did behave her,
And how she kept her in the Eunuchs favor,
Now when as Time had fitted every thing,
By course, these Virgins came before the King.
Such was the custom of the Persian soil,
Six months the Virgins bathed in Myr^h and Oil,
Six months perfumed in change of odours sweet,
That perfect lust, and great excess may meet;
What costly Robes, rare Jewels, rich attire,
Or curious Fare, these Virgins did desire,
'Twas given, and freely granted, when they bring
Their bodies to be prostrate to the King:
Each Virgin keeps her turn, and all the night
They lewdly lavish in the Kings delight,
And soon as ^orning shall restore the day,
They in their bosoms bear black night away,
And (in their guilty breasts, as are their sins
Close prisoners) in the house of Concubines
Remain, until the satiate King shall please
To lend their pampered bodies a r^lease.
Now when the turn of Ester was at hand,
To satisfy the wanton Kings command,
She ^ought not (as the rest) with brave attire,
To lend a needless spur to unchaste Desire,
Nor yet endeavors with a whorish Grace,
T'adulterate the beauty of her face:
Nothing she sought to make her glory braver,
But simply took what gentle Hege gave her:
Her sober ^^sage daily wan her honor:
Each wandering eye inflamed, that looked upon her.
Meditat. 5.
WHen God had with his Al-producing Blast,
Blown up the bubble of the World, and placed
In order that, which he had made in measure,
As well for necessary use, as pleasure:
Then out of earthy mould he framed a creature
Far more Divine, and of more glorious feature
Than erst he made, indu'd with understanding,
With strength, victorious, and with awe commanding,
With Reason, Wit, repleate with Majesty,
With heavenly knowledge, and Capacity,
True emblem of his Maker: Him he made
The sov'raigne Lord of all; Him all obay'd;
Yielding their lives (as tribute) to their King;
Both Fish, and Bird, and Beast, and every thing:
His body's reared upright, and in his eye,
Stand radient beams of awful sov'raignty;
All Creatures else po^e downward to the ground,
Man looks to heaven, and all his thoughts rebound
Upon the Earth (where tides of pleasures mecro)
He treads, and daily tramples with his feet;
Which read sweet Lectures to his wandering eyes,
And teach his lustful heart to moralize:
Naked he lived, naked to the world he came;
For he had then nor fault to hide, nor shame:
His state was level, and he had free will
To stand or fall, unforc't to good or ill;
Man had (such state he was created in)
Within his power, a power not to sin:
But Man was tempted, yielded, sinned, and fell,
Abused his free will, lost it, then befell
A worse succeeding state; who was created
Complete, is now become poor, blind, and naked;
He Is drawn with headstrong bias unto ill,
Bereft of active power to will, or nill;
A blessed Saint's become a balefull Devil,
His free-will's only stinted now to evil:
Pleasure's his Lord, and in his Ladies eyes
His Crystal Temple of devotion lies:
Pleasures the white, whereat he takes his level,
Which (too much wronged with the name of evil)
With best of blessings takes her lofty seat,
Greatest of goods, and seeming best of great:
What Is good, (like Iron) rusts for want of use,
And what is bad is worsed with abuse;
Pleasure, whose apt, and right ordained end
Is but to sweeten labor, and attend
The frailty' of man is now preferred so hie,
To be his Lord, and bear the sov'raignty,
Ruling his slavish thoughts, ignoble actions,
And gains the conquest of his best affections,
Sparing no cost to bolster up delight,
But force vain pleasures to unwonted height:
Who adds excess unto a lustful heart,
Commits a costly sin, with greater Art.
THE ARGUMENT*
Ester's beloved, wedded, crowned;
A Treason Mordecai betrayed;
The Trailors are pursued, and ^ound,
And for that treason well appaid.
Sect. 6.
NOw, now the time is come, fair Ester must
Expose her beauty to the Letchers lust;
Now, now must Ester stake her honor down,
And hazard Chastity to gain a Crown;
Gone, gone she is, attended to the Court,
And spends the evening in the Princes sport:
As when a Lady, (walking Flora's Bower)
Picks here a Pincke, and there a Gilly-flowre,
Now plucks a Vi'let from her purple bed,
And then a Primerose, (the years maidenhead)
There, nips the Bryar; here, the Lovers Pauncy,
Shifting her dainty pleasures, with her Fancy,
This, on her arm; and that, she li^ts to wear
Upon the borders of her curious hair,
At length, a Rose-bud (passing all the rest)
She plucks, and bosoms in her Lilly breast:
So when Assuerus (tickled with delight)
Perceived the beauties of those virgins bright,
He liked them all, but when with strict revye,
He viewed (...) face, his wounded eye
Sparkl'd, whilst Cupid with his youthful Dart,
Transfixt the Center of his feeble heart;
Ester is now his joy, and in her eyes,
The sweetest flower of his Garland lies:
Who now but Ester? Ester crowns his bliss,
And he is become her prisoner, that was his:
Ester obtaines the prize, her high desert
Like Di'mond's richly mounted in his heart;
Io, now Io Hymen sings; for she
That crowns his joy, must likewise crowned be:
The Crown is set on Princely Esters head,
Ester sits Queen, in scornful Voshties stead.
To consecrate this Day to more delights,
In due solemnizing the nuptial rites,
In Esters name, Assuerus made a Feast,
Invited all his Princes, and releast,
The hard taxation, that his heavy hand
Laid on the subjects of his groaning Land;
No rights were wanting to augment his joys,
Great gifts confirmed the bounty of his choice:
Yet had not Esters lavish tongue descri'd
Her Jewish kin, or where she was aly'd;
For still the words of Mordecai did rest
Within the Cabin of her Royal breast,
Who was as pliant (being now a Queen)
To sage advice, as ere before sh'ad been.
It came to pass, as Mardochaeus sat
Within the Portall of the Princes gate,
He overheard two servants of the King,
Closely combined in hollow whispering:
(Like whistling Notus that foretells a rain)
To breathe out treason against their Sovereign:
Which, soon as loyal Mardochaeus heard,
Forthwith to Esters presence he repaired;
Disclosed to her, and to her care commended
The Traitors, and the treason they intended:
Whereat, the Queen (impatient of delay)
Betrayed the Traitors, that would her betray,
And to the King unbosom'd all her heart,
And who her Newes-man was, and his desert.
Now all on hurly-burly was the Court,
All tongues were filled with wonder and report:
The watch was set, pursuit was made about,
To guard the King, and find the Traitors out,
Who found, and guilty found, by speedy trial,
(Where witness speaks, what boots a bare denial)
Were both hanged up upon the shameful tree:
(To bear such fruit let trees never barren be:)
And what success this happy Day afforded,
Was in the Persian Chronicles recorded.
Meditat. 6.
THe hollow Concave of a humane breast
Is Gods Exchequer, and therein the best,
And sum of all his chiefest wealth consists,
Which he shuts up, and opens when he lists:
No power is of man: to love or hate,
Lies not in mortals breast, or power of Fate:
Man wants the strength to sway his strong affections
What power is, is from Divine directions;
Which often (unseene through dullness of the mind)
We nick name, Chance, because our selves are blind
And that is the cause, man's first beholding eye
Often loves, or hates, and knows no reason why.
'Twas not the brightness of Rebecca's face,
Or servants skill that wan the virgins grace:
'Twas not the wish, or wealth of Abraham,
Or Isacks fortune, or renowned name,
His comely personage, or his high desert,
Obtained the conquest of Rebecca's heart:
Old Abra'm wished, in secret God directed;
'Twas Abra'm used the means; 'twas God effected:
Best marriages are made in heaven; In heaven,
The hearts are joined; in earth the hands are given,
First God ordaines, then man confirms the Love,
Proclaming that on earth was done above.
'Twas not the sharpness of thy wandering eye,
(Great King Assuerus) to pick Majesty
From out the sadness of a Captives face;
'Twas not alone thy choosing, nor her grace;
Who mounts the meek, and beats the lofty down,
Gave thee the heart to choose, gave her the Crown:
Who blessed thy fortunes with a second wife,
He blessed thy fortunes with a second life;
That breast that entertained so sweet a Bride,
Stood fair to Treason, (by her means descride;)
With double fortunes, were thou doubly blessed,
To find so fair, and escape so foul a guest.
Thou aged father of our years and hours,
(For thou as well discoverst, as devoures)
Search still the entrails of thy just Records,
Wherein are entered the diurnall words
And deeds of mortal men; Bring (thou) to light
All trech'rous projects, manned by craft, or might;
With Towr's of Brass, their faithful heart's imbosse
That bear the Christian colors of the Cross.
And Thou Preserver of all mortal things,
Within whose hands are placed the hearts of Kings;
By whom all Kingdoms stand, and Princes reign
Preserve thy CHARLES, and my dear Sovereign;
Let Traitors plots, like wandering Atoms, fly,
And on their heads pay ten-fold usury;
His bosom tuter, and his safety tender:
O be thou his, as he is thy Faiths Defender:
That thou in him, and he in thee may rest,
And we of both may live and die possessed.
THE ARGUMENT.
The line of Haman, and his race;
His fortunes in the Princes grace:
His rage to Mordecai expressed,
Not bowing to him, as the rest.
Sect 7.
Upon a time, to Persias Royal Court,
A foreign Stranger used to resort,
He was the issue of a royal breed,
The off-cast offspring of the cursed seed
Of Amelck, from him descended right,
That sold his birthright for his Appetite;
(...) his name; His fortunes did improve,
Increast by favor of the Princes love:
Full great he grew, preferred to high command,
And placed before the Princes of the Land:
And since that honor, and due reverence
Belong where Princes give preeminence;
The King commands the servants of his State,
To suit respect to Hamans high estate,
And do him honor, fitting his degree,
With veiled bonnet; and low bended knee:
They all observed; but aged Mordecai
(Whose stubborn joints neglected to obey
The seed which Heaven with infamy had branded)
Stoutly refused what the King commanded;
Which when the servants of the King had seen,
Their fell disdain mixtwith an envious spleen,
Inflamed; They questioned how he durst withstand
The just performance of the Kings Command:
Daily they checked him for his high disdain,
And he their checks did daily entertain
With silent slight behavior, which did prove
As full of care, as their rebukes of love.
Since then their hearts (not able to abide
A longer sufferance of his peevish pride)
(Whose scorching fires, passion did augment,)
Must either break, or find a speedy v^nt:
To Haman they th'unwelcome news related,
And what they said, their malice aggravated.
Envy did open her Snake-devouring Jaws,
Foamed frothy blood, and bent her unked Paws
Her hollow eyes did cast out sudden flame,
And pale as ashes looked this angry Dame,
And thus bespake! Art thou that man of might,
That Impe of Glory? Times great Favorite?
Has thy deserved worth restored again
The blemished honor of thy Princely strain?
Art thou that Wonder, which the Persian State
Stands gazing at so much, and poynting at?
Filling all wo^dring eyes with Admiration,
And every loyal heart with Adoration?
Art thou that mighty He? How haps it then
That wretched Mordecai, the worst of men,
A captive slave, a superstitious Jew,
Slights thee, and robs thee of thy righfull due?
Nor was his fault disguised with Ign^^^ce,
(The unfee'd Advocate of sin) or Chance,
But backed with Arrogance and fo^le Despite:
Rise up, and do thy suffering honor right.
Up (like his deep Revenge) rose Haman then,
And like a sleeping Lion from his Den,
Roused his relentlesse Rage; But when his eye
Confirmed the news Report did testify,
His Reason straight was heaved from off his henge,
And Fury rounded in his ear, Revenge,
And (like a rash Adviser) thus began:
There Is nothing (Haman) is more dear to man,
And cooles his ^oyling veins with sweeter pleasure,
Than quick revenge; for to revenge by leisure,
Is but like feeding, when the stomacke's past,
Pleasing nor eager appetite, nor taste:
^et when delay returns Revenge the greater,
Like poynant sa^ce, it makes the meat the sweeter:
It fi^s not the honor of thy personage,
Nor stands it with thy Greatness, to engage
Thy noble thoughts, to make Revenge so poor,
To ^e revenged on one alone: thy sore
Needs many plasters: make thy honor good,
Not with a drop, but with a world of blood:
Borrow the Sy^^e of Time, and let thy Passion
Mow down thy Jewish Foe, with all his Nation.
Medita. 7.
FIghts God for cursed Amalek? That hand
That once did curse, does now the curse withstand:
Is God unjust? Is Justice fled from heaven;
Or are the righteous Balances uneven?
Is this that Just Iehova's sacred Word,
Firmly enrolled within the Laws Record,
I Will fight with Amalek, destroy his Nation,
And from remembrance blurre his Generation?
What, shall his curse to Amalek be void?
And with those plagues shall Israel be destroyed:
Ah, sooner shall the sprightfull flames of fire
Descend and moysten; and dull earth, aspire,
And with her dryness quench fair Titans heat,
Then shall thy words, and just Decrees retreat:
The Day, (as weary of his burden) tyres;
The Year (full laden with her months) expires:
The heavens (grown great with age) must soon decay,
The pondrous earth in time shall pass away;
But yet thy sacred words shall always flourish,
Though days, and years, and heaven, and earth do perish:
How perkes proud Haman then? What prosperous fate
Exalts his Pagan head? How fortunate
Has favor crowned his times? Has God decreed
No other Curse upon that cursed seed?
The mortal eye of man can but perceive
Things present; when his heart cannot conceive,
He Is either by his outward senses guided,
Or, like a Quere, leaves it undecided:
The fleshly eye that lends a feeble sight,
Fails in extent, and has no further might
Than to attain the object: and there ends
His office; and of what it apprehends,
Acquaints the understanding, which conceives,
And descants on that thing the sight perceives,
Or good, or bad; unable to project
The just occasion, or the true effect:
Man sees like man, and can but comprehend,
Things as they present are, not as they end;
God sees a Kings heart in a shepherds breast,
And in a mighty King, he sees a Beast:
It Is not the spring tide of an high estate
Creates a man (though seeming) Fortunate:
The blaze of Honor, Fortunes sweet excess,
Do undeserve the name of Happiness:
The frowns of indisposed Fortune makes
Man poor, but not unhappy. He that takes
Her checks with patience, leaves the name of poor,
And lets in Fortune at a backer door.
Lord, let my fortunes be or rich, or poor:
If small, the less account; if great, the more.
THE ARGUMENT.
Unto the King proud Haman sues,
For the destruction of the Jews:
The King consents, and in his name
Decrees were sent to effect the same.
Sect. 8.
NOw when the year had turned his course about
And fully worn his weary hours out,
And left his circling travel to his heir,
That now sets onset to the ensuing year,
Proud Haman (pained with travel in the birth,
Till after-time could bring his mischief forth)
Casts Lots, from month to month, from day to day,
To pick the choycest time, when Fortune may,
Be most propitious to his damned plot;
Till on the last month fell the unwilling Lot:
So Haman guided by his Idol Fate,
(Cloaking with public good his private Hate)
In plaintiff terms, where Reason forged a relish
Unto the King, his speech did thus imbellish:
Vp^^ the limits of this happy Nation,
There flotes a skum^e, an off-cast Generation,
Dispersed, despised, and noisome to the Land,
And Refractory to the Laws, to thy Command.
Not stooping to thy Power, but despising
All Government, but of their own devising,
Which stirs the glowing embers of division,
The hateful mother of a States perdition,
The which (not soon redrest by Reformation)
Will ruine-breed to thee, and to thy Nation,
Begetting Rebels, and seditio^s broils,
And fill thy peaceful Land, with bloody spoils:
Now therefore, if it please my gracious Lord,
To right this grievance with his Princely sword,
That Death, and equal Justice may o'rewhelme
The secret Ruiners of thy sacred Realm,
Unto the Royal Treasure of the King,
Ten thousand silver Talents w^ll I bring.
Then gave the King, from off his heedlesse hand
His Ring to Haman, with that Ring command,
And said: Thy proffered wealth possess,
Yet ^e thy just Petition ne'rthelesse
Entirely granted. L^e, before thy face
Thy vassals lie, with all their rebel race;
Thine be the people, and the power thine,
TO allot these Rebels their deserved Fine.
Forthwith the Scribes were summoned to appear*
Decrees were written, sent to every Shire;
To all Lieutenants, Captains of the Band,
And all the Provinces throughout the Land,
Styled in the name and person of the King,
And made authentic with his Royal Ring;
By speedy Post men were the Letters sent;
And this the sum is of their sad content:
ASSVERVS REX.
Let every Province in the Persian Land,
(Upon the Day prefixed) prepare his hand,
To make the Channels flow with Rebels blood,
And from the earth to root the Jewish brood:
And let the s^finesse of no partial heart,
Through melting pity, love, or false desert,
Spare either young or old, or man, or woman,
But like their faults, so let their plagues be common.
Dicreed, and signed by our Princely Grace,
And given at Sushan, from our Royal Place.
So Haman filled with joy (his fortunes blessed
With fair success of his so foul request)
Laid care aside to sleep, and with the King,
Consumed the time in jolly banqueting:
Mean while the Jews, (the poor afflicted Jews
Perplexed, and startled with the new-bred news)
With drooping heads, and selfe-imbracing arms,
Wept forth the Dirge of their ensuing harms.
Medita. 8.
OF all diseases in a public weal,
No one more dangerous, and hard to heal,
(Except a tyrant King) then when great might
Is trusted to the hands, that take delight
To bathe, and paddle in the blood of those,
Who^ jealousies, and not just cause oppose:
(...) as haughty power is conjoynd
Unto (...) will of a distempered mind,
What ^^re it can, it will, and what it will,
It in it (...), has power to fulfill:
What! (...) then can linger, unattemted?
What base attempts can happen, unprevented?
Statutes must break, good Laws must go to wrac^
And (like a Bow that is overbent) must crack:
Justice (the life of Law) becomes so furious,
That (over-doing right) it proves injurious:
Mercy (the Steare of Justice) flies the City,
And falsely must be termed a foolish Pity,
Mean while the gracious Princes tender breast
(Gently possessed with nothing but the best
Of the disguised dissembler) is abused
And made the cloak, wherewith his fault's excused:
The radient beams that warm, and shine so bright,
Comfort this lower world with heat and light,
But drawn, and recollected in a glass,
They burn, and their appointed limits pass:
Even so the power from the Princes hand,
Directs the subject with a sweet command,
But to perverse fantasticks if conferred,
Whom wealth, or blinded Fortune has preferred,
It spurs on wrong, and makes the right retire,
And sets the grumbling Commonwealth on fire:
Their foul intent, the Common good pretends,
And with that good they mask their private ends,
Their glorie's dim, and cannot b'understood,
Unless it shine in pride, or swim in blood:
Their will's a Law, their mischief Policy,
Their frowns are Death, their power Tyranny:
Ill thrives the State that harbors such a man,
That can, what e're he wills; wills what he can.
May my ungarnisht quill presume so much,
To glorify it self, and give a touch
Upon the Island of my Sovereign Lord?
What language shall I use, what new-foun^^ord,
TO abridge the mighty volume of of his worth,
And keep me blameless, from th'untimely birth
Of (false reputed) flattery? He lends
No cursed Haman power, to work his Ends
Upon our ruin, but transferres his grace
On just desert, which in the ugly face
Of foul detraction, (untouched) can dare,
And smile, till black-mouthed Envy blush, and tare
Her Snaky fleece. Thus, thus in happy peace
He rules, to make our happiness increase,
Directs with love, commands with Princely awe,
And in his breast he bears a living Law:
Defend us thou, and heavens thee defend,
And let proud Haman have proud Hamans end.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Jews and Mordecai lament,
And wail the height of their distresses:
But Mordecai the Queen possesses,
With cruel Hamans foul intent.
Sect* 3.
NOw when as (...) (the daughter of the earth
Newly dis-burthen'd of her plumed birth)
From off her Turrets did her wings display,
And pearcht in the sad cares of Mordecai,
He rent his garments, wearing in their stead
Distressed sackcloth: on his fainting head
He strowed Dust, and from his showring eyes
Ran floods of sorrow, and with bitter cries
His grief saluted heaven; his groans did borrow
No Art to draw the true pourtraict of sorrow:
Nor yet within his troubled breast alone,
(Too small a stage for grief to trample on)
Did Tyrant sorrow act her lively Scene,
But did enlarge (such grief admits no mean)
The lawless limits of her Theater
In The hearts of all the Jewish Nation, where
(With no dissembled Action) she expressed
The lively Passion of a pensive breast.
Forthwith he posteth to the Palace gate,
T'acquaint Queen Ester with his sad estate,
But found no entrance: for the Persian Court
Gave welcome to delights, and youthly sport,
To jolly mirth, and such delightful things:
Soft raiment best befits the Courts of Kings:
There lies no welcome for a whining face,
A mourning habit suits no Princely Place:
Which when the Maids, and Eunuchs of the Queen
(Unable of themselves to help) had seen,
Their Royal Mistress straight they did acquaint
With the dumb-shew of her sad Cousins plaint;
Whereat (till now a stranger to the cause)
Perplexed, and forced by the tender Laws
Of dear affection, her gentle heart
Did sympathize with his conceived smart:
She sent him change of raiment to put on,
To veil his grief; But he received none:
Then (sore dismayed, impatient to forbear
The knowledge of the thing she feared to hear)
She sent her servant to him, to importune,
What sudden Chance, or what disast'rous fortune
Had caused this strange and ill-apparell'd grief,
That she (if in her lies) may send relief:
To whom his sorrows made this sad Relation,
And this, the tenor of his Declaration:
Hamans (that cursed Hamans) haughty pride
(Because my (...) deservedly denyde
To make (...) Idol of his greatness) has
Incenst the fury of his jealous wrath,
And profer'd lavish bribes to buy the blood
Of me, and all the faithful Jewish brood:
In, here the copy, granted by the King,
Sul'd in his name, confirmed with his Ring,
(...) of the which, into his hands,
(...) Haman has ingrost our lives, our lands:
(...) tell the Queen, it rests in her powers
To help; the case is ^ers as well as Ours:
(...) tell my cousin Queen, it is her charge,
To use the means, whereby she may enlarge
H^^ aged kinsmans life, and all her Nation;
Preferring to the King her supplication.
Meditat. 9.
WHo hopes t'attain the sweet Elysian Lays,
To reap the harvest of his wel-spent days,
Must pass the joylesse streams of Acaron,
The scorching waves of burning Phlegeton,
And sable billows of the Stygian Lake:
Thus sweet with sour, each mortal must partake.
What joyful Harvester did ere obtain
The sweet fruition of his hopeful gain,
Until his hardy labors first had past
The Summers heat, and stormy Winters blast?
A sable night returns a shining morrow;
And days of joy ensue sad nights of sorrow:
The way to bliss lies not on beds of Down,
And he that had no Cross, deserves no Crown:
There Is but one Heaven, one place of perfect ease,
In man it lies, to take it where he please,
Above, or here below; And few men do
Enjoy the one; and taste the other too;
Sweating, and constant labor wins the Goal
Of Rest; Afflictions clarify the soul,
And like hard Masters, give more hard direction^,
Tut'ring the nonage of uncurb'd affections:
Wisdom (the Antidote of sad despair)
Makes sharp Afflictions seem not as they are,
Through patient sufferance, and does apprehend,
Not as they seeming are, but as they end:
To bear Affliction with a bended brow,
Or stubborn heart, is but to disallow
The speedy means to health; salve heales no sore,
If mis-apply'd, but makes the grief the more:
Who sends Affliction, sends an end; and He
Best knows what is best for him, what is best for me:
It Is not for me to carve me where I like;
Him pleases when he list to stroke or strike:
I Will neither wish, nor yet avoid Tentation,
But still expect it, and make preparation:
If he think best, my Faith shall not be tryde,
(Lord) keep me spotless from presumptuous pride:
If otherwise; with trial, give me care,
By thankful patience, to prevent Despair;
Fit me to bear what e're thou shall assign;
I kiss the Rod, because the Rod is thine.
How-ere, let me not boast, nor yet repine,
With trial, or without (Lord) make me thin^.
THE ARGUMENT.
Her aid implored, the Queen refuses
To help them, and her self excuses:
But (urged by Mordecai) consents
To die, or cross their foes intents.
Sect. 10.
NOw when the servant had returrn'd the words
Of wretched Mordecai, like pointed swords
They near impierc't Queen Esters tender heart,
That well could pity, but no help impart;
^allac'd with grief, and with the burden foyld,
(Like Ordnance over-charg'd) she thus recoyl'd:
G^^, Hatach, tell my wretched kinsman thus,
The case concerns not you alone, but us:
(...) the subject of proud Hamans hate,
As well as you; our life is pointed at
As well as yours, or as the meanest Jew,
N^^ can I help my self, nor them, nor you:
You know the Custom of the Persian State,
No King may break, no subject violate:
How may I then presume to make access
^^fore the offended King? or rudely press
(V^call'd) into his presence? How can I
Expect my suit, and have deser^'d to dye?
May my desiers hope to find success,
When to ^ffect them, I the Law transgress?
Th^se thirty days uncalled for have I bin
(...) my Lord; How dare I now go in?
G^^, Hatach, and return this heavy news
(...) the truth of my vnforc'd excuse.
Whereof when Mordecai was full possessed,
His troubled Soul he boldly thus expressed:
Go, tell the fearful Queen; too great's her fear,
Too small her zeal; her life she rates too dear:
How poore's th'adventure, to engage thy blood,
To save thy peoples life, and Churches good?
To what advantage can thou more expose
Thy life than this? Thou Have but a life to lose;
Think not, thy Greatness can excuse our death,
Or save thy life, thy life is but a breath
As well as ours, (Great Queen) thou hop'st in rain,
In saving of a life, a life to gain:
Who knows if God on purpose did intend
Thy high preferment for this happy end?
If at this needful time thou spare to speak,
Our speedy help shall (like the morning) break
From heaven, together with thy woes; and he
That succors us, shall heap his plagues on thee.
Which when Queen Ester had right well perused*
And on each wounding word had sadly mused,
Startled with zeal, not daring to deny,
She roused her faith, and sent this meek reply:
Since heaven it is endowes each enterprise
With good success, and only in us lies
To plant, and water; let us first obtain
Heavens high assistance, lest the work be vain:
Let all the Jews in Susa summoned ^e,
And keep a solemn three days Fast, and we,
With all our servants, and our maiden train,
Shall fast as long, and from our thoughts abstain:
Then to the King (uncalled) will I repair,
(Howe'r my boldness shall his Laws contraire,)
And bravely welcome Death before mine eye,
And scorn her power: If I dye, I dye.
Meditat. 10.
AS in the winged Commonwealth of Bees,
(Whose careful Summer-providence foresees
Th'approching fruitless Winter, which denies
The crown of labor) some with laden thighs
Take charge to bear their waxy burdens home;
Others receive the welcome load; and some
Dispose the wax; others, the plot contrive;
Some build the curious Comb, some guard the Hive
Like armed Sentinels; others distreine
The purer honey from the wax; some train,
And discipline the young, while others drive
The sluggish Drones from their deserved Hive:
Thus in this Commonwealth (untaught by Art)
Each winged Burger acts his busy part;
So man (whose first creation did intend,
And chiefly pointed at no other end,
Then (as a faithful Steward) to receive
The Fine and quit-rent of the lives we live)
Must suit his dear endeavor to his might;
Each one must lift, to make the burden light,
Proving the power, that his gifts afford,
To raise the best advantage for his Lord,
Whose substitute he is, and for whose sake
We live and breath; each his account must make,
Or more, or less; and he whose power lacks
The means to gather honey, must bring wax:
Five Talents double five; two render four;
Where Is little, little's craved, where much, there is more:
Kings by their Royal privilege may do,
What unbefits a mind to search into,
But by the force of their prerogatives,
They cannot free the custom of their lives:
The silly Widow (from whose wrinkled brows
Faint drops distill, through labor that she owes
Her needy life, must make her Audite too,
As well as Kings, and mighty Monarks do:
The world's a Stage, each mortal Acts thereon,
As well the King that glitters on the throne,
As needy beggars: Heaven Spectator is,
And marks who acts well, and who amiss.
What part befits me best, I cannot tell:
It matters not how mean, so acted well.
THE ARGUMENT.
Unto the King Queen Ester goes,
He unexpected favor shows,
Demands her suit, she does request
The King and Haman to a Feast.
Sect. 11.
WHen as Queen Esters solemn 3. days Fast
Had feasted heaven with a sweet repast,
Her lowly bended body she unbow'd,
And (like fair Titan breaking from a cloud)
She rose, and with her Royal Robe she clad
Her livelesse limbs, and with a face as sad
As grief could paint, (wanting no Art to borrow
A needless help to counterfeit a sorrow,)
Softly she did direct her feeble pace
Unto the inner Court, where for a space,
She boldly stood before the Royal Throne,
Like one that would, but durst not make her moan:
Which when her princely husband did behold,
His heart relented, (Fortune helps the bold)
And to express a welcome unexpected,
Forth to the Queen his Scepter he directed;
Whom (now imboldned to approach secured)
In gracious terms, he gently thus conjured:
What is it Queen Ester would? What sad request
Hangs on her lips, dwells in her doubtful breast?
Say, say, (my life's preserver) what is the thing,
That lies in the performance of a King,
Shall be denied? Fair Queen^, what e're is mint
Unto the moity of my Kingdome's thine*
So Ester thus: If in thy Princely eyes
Thy loyal Servant has obtained the prize
Of undeserved favor, let the King
And Haman grace my this dayes-banquetting,
To crown the dainties of his handmaids Feast,
Humbly devoted to so great a Guest.
The motion pleased, and fairly well succeeded:
(To willing minds, no twice entreaty needed)
They came; but in Queen Esters troubled face,
(Robbed of the sweetness of her wonted grace)
The King read discontent; her face divined
The greatness of some further suit behind.
Say, say, (thou bount^ous harvest of my joys)
(Said then the King) what dumpish grief annoyes
Thy troubled soul? Speak, Lady, what is the thing
Thy heart desires? By th'onour of a King,
My Kingdoms half, requested, I Will divide
To fair Queen Ester, to my fairest Bride.
L^ then the tenor of my dear request,
(Replied the Queen,) unto a second Feast,
Thy humble Suitor does presume to bid
The King, and Haman, as before she did:
Now therefore if it please my gracious Lord,
To daig^e his Royal presence, and afford
The peerlesse treasure of hi^ Prince^y Grace,
To dry the sorrows of his Handmaids face,
Then to my Kingly, and thrice-welcome Guest
His servant shall unbosome her Request.
Medita. 11.
HE that invites his Maker to a Feast,
(Advising well the greatness of his Guest)
Must purge his dining chamber from infections,
And sweep the Cobwebs of his lewd affections,
And then provide such Cates, as most delight
His Palate, and best please his Appetite:
And such are holy works and pious deeds,
These are the dainties whereon heaven feeds:
Faith plays the Cook, seasons, directs, and guides;
So man finds meat, so God the Cook provides:
His drink are tears, sprung from a midnight cry,
Heaven sips out Nectar from a sinners eye;
The dining chamber is the soul oppressed;
God keeps his revells in a Sinners breast:
The music that attends the Feast, are groans,
Deep-founding sighs, and loud lamenting mone^:
Heaven hears no sweeter music, than complaints;
The Fasts of sinners, are the Feasts of Saints,
To which heaven dains to stoop, and heavens hie King
Descends, whilst all the quire of Angels sing,
And with such sense-bereaving Sonets fill
The hearts of wretched men, that my rude quill
(Dazeld with too much light) it self addressing
To blaze them forth, obscures the^ in th'expressing:
Thrice happy man, and thrice-thrice happy Feast,
Graced with the presence of so great a Guest;
To him are freely given the privy keys
Of heaven and earth, to open when he please,
And lock when e're he li^t; In him it lies
To open the showring floodgates of the skies,
Or shut them at his pleasure; in his hand
The Host of heaven is put; if he command,
The Sun (not daring to withstand) obeyes,
Out-runnes his equal hours, flies back, or stays,
To him there is naught uneasy to atchieve;
Heel rouse the graves, and make the dead alive.
Lord, I Am unfit to invite thee to my home,
My Ca^es are all too coorse, too mean my Room*
Yet come and welcome: by thy power Divine,
Thy Grace may turn my Water into Wine.
THE ARGUMENT.
Good Mordecai's unreverence
Great Hamans haughty pride offends:
H'acquaints his wife with the offense;
The counsel of his wife and friends.
Sect. 12.
THat day went Haman forth; for his swollen breast
Was filled with joys, and heart was full possessed
Of all the height Ambition could require,
To satisfy her prodigal Desire.
But when he passed through the Palace Gate,
(His eyesore) aged Mardocheus sat,
With head unbar'd, and stubborn knee unben^,
Unapt to fawn, with slavish blandishment:
Which when great Haman saw, his boiling breast
(So great disdain unable to digest)
Ran over; his blood grew hot, and new desires
Incenst, and kindled his avenging fires:
Surcharged with grief* and sick with malcontent
Through his distempered passion, home he went;
Where (to assuage the swelling of his sorrow
With words, the poorest helps distress can borrow)
His wife, and friends he summoned to partake
His cause of discontent, and thus be spoke:
See, see, how Fortune with a lib'rall hand,
Has with the best, and sweetest of the Land,
Crowned my desiers, and has timely blown
My budded hopes, whose ripeness has out-growne
The limits, and the height of expectation,
Scarce to be had, but in a Contemplation:
See, see, how Fortune (to enlarge his breath,
And make me living in despite of Death)
Has multiplied my loins, that after-Fame
May in my flock preserve my blood, my Name.
To make my honor with my fortunes even,
^ehold, my gracious Lord the King has given
And trusted to my hand the sword of Power;
Or life, or death lies where I laugh or lowre:
Who stands more gracious in my Princes eye?
How frowns the King, if Haman be not by?
Ester the Queen has made the King her Guest,
And (wisely weighing how to grace the Feast
With most advantage) has (in policy)
Invited me: And no man else but I
(Only a fit Companion for a King)
May taste the secrets of the banqueting.
^ Yet what availes my wealth, my place, my might*
How can I relish them? with what delight?
What pleasure it in dainties, if the taste
Be in it self distempered? Better fast:
In many sweets, one sour offends the palate,
One loa^^some weed annoyes the choycest Sallat:
What are my riches, what my honored Place?
What are my Children? or my Princes Grace,
So long as cursed Mordecai survives?
Whose very breath in^ects, whose life deprives
My life of bliss, and visage sternely strikes
Worse venom to mine eyes then Basiliskes.
When Haman then had launc'd his ripned grief*
In bloody terms, they thus applied relief:
Erect a Gibbet, fifty Cubits hie,
Then urge the King (what will the King deny
When Haman sues?) that slavish Mordecai
Be hanged thereon; his blood will soon allay
The heat of thine; his cursed death shall fame
The highn^sse of thy power, and his shame;
So when thy suit shall find a fair event,
Go banquet with the King, and live content.
The Council pleased: The Gibber fairly stands*
Soon done, as said: Revenge finds nimble hands.
Meditat. 12:
SOme Ev'ls I must approve, al Goods, I dare not*
Some are, and seem not good; some seem and are not:
In choosing goods my heart will make the choice,
My flattring eye shall have no casting voice;
No outward sense may choose an inward bliss,
For seeming Happiness least happy is:
The eye (the chiefest Cinque-port of the Heart)
Keeps open doors, and plays the Traitors part,
Lets painted pleasures in, to bribe The Affections,
Which masks foul faces under false complexions;
It has no power to judge, nor can it see
Things as they are, but as they seem to be.
There Is but one happiness, one perfect bliss;
But how obtained, or where, or what it is,
The world of nature never could apprehend,
Grounding their labors on no other end
Than bare opinion, diversely affecting
Some one thing, some another, still projecting
Prodigious fancies, till their learned Schools
Lent so much knowledge as to make them fools:
One builds his bliss upon the blaze of glory:
Can perfect happiness be transitory?
In strength, another sums Felicity:
What horse is not more happy far than he?
Some pile their happiness on heaps of wealth:
Which (sick) they would loath, if gold could purchase health:
Some, in the use of beauty place their end;
Some, in th'enjoyment of a Courtly friend:
Like wasted Lamps, such happinesses smother;
Age puffs out the one; and wants, the other.
The happiness, whose worth deserves the name
Of chief, with such a fire does inflame
The breasts of mortals, that heaven thinks it fit
That men should rather think than taste of it;
All earthly joys some ^ther aim intend,
This, for it selfe's desired, no other end:
Those, (if enjoyed) are crossed with discontent,
If not in the pursuit, in the event:
This (truly good) admits no contrariety,
Without defect, or yet a loathed ^aciety.
The least is more than my desert can claim,
(Thankful for both) at this alone I aim.
THE ARGUMENT.
The King asks Haman, what respects
Befits the ^an that he affects;
And with that honor does appay
The good deserts of Mordecai.
Sect. 13.
NOw when as Morpheus (S^rjeant of the night)
Had laid his mace upon the dawning light,
And with his Iustlesse limbs had closly spread,
The sable Curtains of his drouzy Bed,
The King slept not, but (indisposed to rest)
Disguised thoughts within his troubled breast
Kept midnight Revells.
Wherefore (to recollect his random thought)
He gave command the Chronicles be brought,
And read before him; where, with good attention,
He marked how Mordecai (with fair prevention)
Of a foul treason against his blood intended)
His life, and state had loyally defended;
Whereat the King (impatient to repay
Such faithful service with the least delay)
Gently demands what thankful recompense,
What worship or deserved reverence,
Equivalent to such great service, has
Justly repaid this loyal Liege-mans faith?
They answered, None: Now Haman (fully bent
To give the vessel of his poison, vent)
Stood ready charged with full Revenge, prepared
To beg his life, whom highly to reward
The King intends: Say (Haman) quoth the King,
What worship, or what honorable thing
Best fits the person, whom the King shall place
Within the bounty of his highest Grace?
So Haman thus be thought, Whom more than I
Deserves the Sunshine of my Princes eye?
Whom seeks the King to honor more than me?
From Hamans mouth, shall Haman honored be?
Speak freely then, And let thy tongue proclaim
An honor suting to thy worth, thy name:
So Haman thus: This honor, this respect
Be done to him the King shall most affect,
In Robes Imperial be his body dressed,
And bravely mounted on that very Beast
The King bestrides; then be the Crown of State
Placed on his lofty brows; let Princes wait
Upon his Stirrup, and in triumph lead
This Impe of Honor, in Assuerus flead;
And to express the glory of his name.
Like Heralds, let the Princes thus proclaim;
" This peerlesse honor, and these Princely rites
" Be done to him in whom the King delights.
Said then the King, (O sudden change of Fate)
Within the Portall of our Palace Gate
There sits a Jew whose name is Mordecai,
Be^he the man; Let no per^erse delay
Protract; But what thy lavish tongue has said,
Do thou to him: So Haman sore dismayed;
His tongue (tied to his Roof) made no reply,
But (neither daring answer, not deny)
Perforce obeyed, and so his Page became,
Whose life he sought to have bereaved with shame:
The Rites solemnized, Mordecai returned
Unto the Gate; Haman went home and mourned,
(His visage muffled in a mournful vale)
And told his wife this melancholy Tale;
Whereat amazed, and startled at the news,
Despairing, thus she spoke: If from the Jews
This Mordecai derive his happy line,
His be the palm of victory, not thine;
The highest heavens have still conspired to bless
That faithful seed, and with a fair success
Have crowned their just designs: If Mordecai
Descend from thence, thy hopes shall soon decay,
And melt like wax before the midday Sun.
So said, her broken speech not fully done,
Haman was hasted to Queen Esters Feast;
To mirth and joy, an indisposed Guest.
Medita. 13.
There Is nothing under heaven more glorifies
The name of King, or in a subjects eyes
Winnes more observance, or true loyalty,
Than sacred Justice, shared equally:
No greater glory can belong to Might,
Than to defend the feeble in their right;
To help the helpless and their wrongs redress;
To curb the haughty-hearted, and suppress
The proud; requiting every special deed
With punishment, or honorable meed:
Herein Kings aptly may deserve the name
Of gods, enshrined in an earthly frame;
Nor can they any way approach more nigh
The full perfection of a Deity,
Than by true Justice, imitating heaven
In nothing more, than in the poizing eaven
Their righteous balance: Justice is not blind,
As Poets feign; but, with a sight refined,
Her Lyncian eyes are cleared, and shine as bright
As do their errors, that deny her sight;
The soul of Justice rests in her eye,
Her contemplation's chiefly to descry
True worth, from painted shows; and loyalty,
From false, and deep dissembled treachery;
A noble Statesman, from a Para^ite;
And good, from what is merely good in sight:
Such hidden things her piercing eye can see:
If Justice then be blind, how blind are we!
Right fondly have the Poets pleased to say,
From earth the fair Astraea's fled away,
And in the shining Baudrike takes her seat,
To make the number of the Signs complete:
For why? Astraea does repose and rest
Within the Zodiake of my Sov'raignes breast,
And from the Cradle of his infancy
Has trained his Royal heart with industry,
In depth of righteous lore, and sacred thewes
Of Justice School; that this my Haggard Muse
Cannot contain the freeness of her spright,
But make a Mounty at so fair a flight,
(Perchance) though (like a bastard Eagle daz'd
With too great light) she wink, and fall amazed:
Heaven make my heart more thankful, in confessing
So high a bliss, than skillful, in expressing.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Queen brings Hamans accusation;
The King's displeased, and grows in possion:
Proud Hamans treachery descried;
The shameful end of shameless pride.
Sect. 14.
FOrthwith to satisfy the Queens request,
The King and Haman came unto her Feast,
Whereat the King (what then can hap amiss?)
Became her suitor, that was humbly his,
And fairly thus entreating, this bespake:
What is it Queen Ester would? and for her sake,
What is it the King would not? prefer thy suit,
Fair Queen: Those that despair, let them be mute;
Clear up those clouded beams (my fairest Bride)
My Kingdoms half (requested) I Will divide.
Whereat the Queen, half hoping, half afraid,
Disclosed her trembling lips, and thus she said:
If in the bounty of thy Princely Grace,
Thy sad Petitioner may find a place
To shrow ^her most unutterable grief,
Which (if not there) may hope for no relief;
If in the treasure of thy gracious eyes,
(Where mercy and relenting, pity lies)
Thy hand-^aid has found favor, let my Lord
Grant me my life (my life so much abbord,
To do him service) and my peoples life,
Which now lie open to a Tyrants knife:
Our lives are sold, it is I, it is guiltless I,
Thy loyal Spouse, thy Queen and ^ers must dye:
The spotless blood of me, thy faithful Bride,
Must swage the swelling of a Tyrants pride:
Had we been sold for drudges, to attend
The busy Spindle; or for slaves, to spend
Our weary hours, to deserve our bread,
So as the gain stood but my Lord in stead,
I had been silent, and never spent my breath:
But neither he that seeks it, nor my death,
Can to himself the least advantage bring,
(Except revenge) nor to my Lord the King.
Like to a Lion rouzed from his rest,
Raged then the King, and thus his rage exprest^
Who is the man that dares attempt this thing?
Where is the Traitor? What? am I a King?
May not our subjects serve, but must our Queen
Be made the subject of a vis^aines spleen?
Is not Queen Ester bosomed in our heart?
What Traitor then dares be so bold, to part
Our heart and us? Who dares attempt this thing?
Can Ester then be slain, and not the King?
Replied the Queen, The man that has done this,
That cursed Haman, wicked Haman is.
Like as a Felon shakes before the Bench,
Whose troubled silence proves the Evidence,
So Haman trembled when Queen Ester spoke,
Nor answer, nor excuse his guilt could make:
The King, no longer able to digest
So foul a treachery, forsook the Feast,
Walked in the Garden, where consuming rage
Boiled in his heart, with fire (unapt t'asswage,)
So Haman pleading guilty to the fault,
Besought his life of her, whose life he sought.
When as the King had walked a little space,
(So rage and choler often shift their place)
In he returned, where Haman fallen flat
Was on the bed whereon Queen Ester sat;
Whereat the King new cause of rage debares,
(Apt to suppose the worst, of whom he hates)
New passion adds new fuel to his fire,
And faines a cause, to make it blaze the higher:
Is It not enough for him to seek her death,
(Said he) but with a Letchers tainted breath,
Will be enforce my Queen before my face?
And make his Brothell in our Royal Place?
So said, they veiled Hamans face, as he
Unfit were to be seen, or yet to see:
Then said an Eunuch sadly standing by
In Hamans Garden, fifty Cubits high,
There stands a Gibbet, built but yesterday,
Made for thy loyal servant Mordecai,
Whose faithful lips thy life from danger freed,
And merit leads him to a fairer meed.
Said then the King, It seems just and good,
To shed his blood, that thirsted after blood;
Who plants the tree, deserves the fruit; it is fit
That he that bought the purchase, hansell it:
Hang Haman there; It is his proper good;
So let the Horseleach burst himself with blood:
They straight obeyed: Lo here the end of Pride:
Now rests the King appeased, and satisfied.
Meditat. 14.
Cheer up, and caroll forth your silver ditie,
(Heavens winged quiristers) and fill your City earth:
(The new Jerusalem) with jolly mirth:
The Church has peace in heaven, has peace on
Spread forth your golden pinions, and cleave
The fl^tting skies; dismount, and quite bereave
Our stupid senses with your heavenly mirth,
For lo, there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
Let Hallelujah fill your warbling tongues,
And let the air, composed of saintly songs,
Breathe such celestial Sonnets in our ears;
That whosoever this heavenly music hears,
May stand amazed, and (ravished at the mirth)
Cha^t forth, there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth;
Let mountains clap their joyful, joyful hands,
And let the lesser hills trace over the lands
In equal measure; and resounding woods
Bow down your heads, and kiss your neighboring floods:
Let peace and love exalt your key of mirth;
For now there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
You holy Temples of the highest King^
Triumph with joy; Your sacred Anthemes sing;
Chant forth your Hymns, and heavenly roundelaies,
And touch your Organs on their louder keys:
For Haman's dead, that da^ted al your mirth,
And now there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
Proud Haman's dead, whose life disturbed thy rest,
Who sought to cut, and sear thy Lilly breast;
The ravenous Fox, that did annoyance bring
Unto the Vineyard, ^s taken in a Spring.
Seemed not thy Spouse unkind, to hear thee weep
And not redress thee? Seemed he not asleep?
No, (Sion) no, he heard thy bitter prayer,
But let thee weep, for weeping makes thee fair.
The morning Sun reflects, and shines most bright,
When Pilgrims grope in darkness all the night:
The Church must conquer, e're she gets he prize,
But there is no conquest, where is no enemies:
The day is thine; In triumph make thy mirth,
For now there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
What man's so dull, or in his brains undone,
To say, (because he sees not) There Is no Sun?
Weak is the faith, upon a sudden grief,
That says, (because not now) There Is no relief:
God's bound to help, but loves to see men sue:
Though datelesse, yet the bond's not present due,
Like to the sorrows of our childbed wives,
Is the sad pilgrimage of humane lives:
But when by throes God sends a joyful birth,
Then find we peace in heaven, and peace on earth^
THE ARGUMENT.
Upon the Queen and Mordecai
Dead Hamans wealth and dignity
The King bestows: to their discretion
Referres the Jews decreed oppression.
Sect. 15.
THat very day, the King did freely add
More bounty to his gift: What Haman had
Borrowed of smiling Fortune, he repaid
To Esters hand, and to her use convaid:
And Mordecai found favor with the King;
Upon his hand he put his Royal Ring,
Whose Princely power proud Haman did abuse,
In late betraying of the guiltless Jews;
For now had Ester to the King descried
Her Jewish kin, how near she was allied
To Mardocheus, whom (her father dead)
His love did foster in her fathers' stead.
Once more the Queen prefers an earnest suit,
Her humble body lowly prostitute
Before his Royal feet, her cheeks o'reflowne
With marish tears, and thus her plain'full moan,
Commix't with bitter singults, she expressed:
If in he Cabin of thy Prin^ely breast
Thy loyal servant (undeserved) has found
A pl^ce wherein her wishes might be crowned
With fair success; If in thy gracious ^ight
I pleasing, or my cause seem just, and right,
Be speedy letters written, to reverse
Those bloody Writs which Haman did disperse
Throughout thy Provinces, whose sad content
Was the subversion of my innocent
And faithful people; Help, (my gracious Lord)
The time's prefixed, wherein the impartial Sword
Must make this massacre, the day's at hand,
Unless thy speedy Grace send countermand:
How can I brook within my tender breast,
To break the bonds of Natures high behest,
And see my people (for whose sake I breath)
Like stalled Oxen, bought and sold for death?
How can I see such mischief? how can I
Survive, to see my kin, and people dye?
Said then the King; Lo cursed Haman has
The execution of our highest wrath,
The equal hire of his malicious pride;
His wealth to thee I gave; (my fairest Bride)
His honor (better placed) I have bestowed
On him, to whom my borrowed life has ow^d
Her five years breath, the trusty Mordecai,
Our loyal kinsman: Let his hand pourtray
Our pleasure, as best likes him, and th^e;
Let him set down, and be it our D^cree,
Let him confirm it with our Royal Ring,
And we shall sign it with the name of King:
For none may alter, or reverse the same
That Is sealed and written in our Princely name.
Medita. 15.
TO breathe,'s a necessary gift of nature,
Whereby we may discern a living Creature
From plants, or stones: It Is but a mere degree
From Vegetation; and this, has she
Like equally shared out to brutish beasts
With man, who less observes her due behests
(Sometimes) than they; and often, by accident,
Do less improve the gift in the event:
But man, whose organs are more fairly dressed,
To entertain a far more noble Guest,
Has, through the excellence of his Creation,
A Soul Divine; Divine by inspiration;
Divine through likeness to that power Divine,
That made and placed her in her fleshly shrine;
From hence we challenge life's prerogative;
Beasts only breath; It Is man alone does live;
One end of man's Creation, was Society,
Mutual Communion, and friendly Piety:
The man that lives unto himself alone,
Subsists and breaths, but lives not; Never one
Deserved the moity of himself, for he
That Is borne, may challenge but one part of three;
Triparted thus; his Country clames the best;
The next his Parents; and himself the least.
He husbands best his life, that freely gives
It for the public good; he rightly lives,
That nobly dies: it is greatest mastery,
Not to be fond to live, nor fear to dye
On just occasion; He that (in case) despises
Life, earnes it best; but he that over-prizes
His dearest blood, when honor bids him die,
Steals but a life, and lives by Robbery.
O sweet Redeemer of the world, whose death
Deserved a world of lives! Had Thy dear breath
Beone dear to Thee; Oh had Thou but denied
Thy precious Blood, the world for ever had died:
O spoil my life, when I desire to save it,
By keeping it from Thee, that freely gave it.
THE ARGUMENT.
Letters are sent by Mordecai,
That all the Jews, upon the day
Appointed for their death, withstand
The fury of their ^oe-mens hand.
Sect. 16.
FOrthwith the scribes were summoned to appear;
To every Province, and to every Shire
Letters they wrote (as Mordecai directed)
To all the Jews, (the Jews so much dejected)
To all Liev-tenants, Captains of the Band,
To all the States, and Princes of the Land,
According to the phrase, and diverse fashion
Of Dialect, and speech of every Nation;
All which was styled in the name of King,
Signed with his hand, sealed with his Royal Ring;
Lo here the tenor of the Kings Commission;
Whereas of late, (at Hamans urged petition,)
Decrees were sent, and spread throughout the Land,
To spoil the Jews, and with impartial hand,
(Upon a day prefixed) to kill and slay;
We likewise grant upon that very day,
Full power to the Jews, to make defense,
And quit their lives, and for a Recompense,
To take the spoils of those they shall suppress,
Showing like mercy to the merciless.
By posts, as swift as Time, was this Decree
Commanded forth; As fast as Day they flee,
Spurred on, and hast'ned with the Kings Command
Which straight was noys'd, and published through the Land.
As warning to the Jews, to make provision
To entertain so great an opposition.
So Mordecai (disburthned of his grief,
Which now found hopeful token^ of relief)
Departs the presence of the King, addressed
In royal Robes, and on his lofty Crest
He bore a Crown of Gold, his body spread
With Lawne, and Purple deeply colored:
Filled were the Jews with triumphs, and with noise,
(The common Heralds to proclaim true joys:)
Like as a prisner muffled at the tree,
Whose life's removed from death scarce one degree
His last prayer said, and hearts confession made,
(His eyes possessing deaths eternal shade)
At last unlooked for comes a slow Reprieve,
And makes him (even as dead) once more alive:
Amazed, he rends deaths muffler from his eyes,
And (overjoyed) knows not he lives, or dies;
So joy'd the Jews, whose lives, this new Decree
Had quit from death and danger, and set free
Their gasping souls, and (like a blazing light)
Dispersed the darkness of the approaching night;
So joy'd the Jews: and with their solemn Feasts
They cha^'d dull sorrow from their pen^ive brests^
Mean while the people (startled at the news)
Some grieved, some envied, some (for fear) turned Jews.
Meditat. 16.
AMong the noble Greeks, it was no shame
To lose a Sword; It but deserved the name
Of wars disastrous fortune; but to yield
The right and safe possession of the Shield,
Was foul reproach, and manlesse cowardice,
Far worse than death to him that scorned to prize
His life before his Honor; Honor's won
Most in a just defense; Defense is gone,
The Shield once lost, the wounded Theban cried,
How fares my Shield? which safe, he smiled and died:
True honor bides at home, and takes delight
In keeping, not in gaining of a Right;
Scorns usurpation, nor seeks she blood,
And thirsts to make her name not great, as good:
God gives a Right to man; To man, defense
To guard it given; but when a false pretense
Shall ground her title on a greater Might,
What does he else but war with heaven, and fight
With Providence? God se^s the Princely Crown
On heads of Kings, Who then may take it down?
No juster quarrel, or more noble Fight,
Than to maintain, where God has given a Right;
There Is no despair of Conquest in that war,
Where God's the Leader; Policy's no bar
To his designs; no Power can withstand
His high exploits; within whose mighty Hand
Are all the corners of the earth; the hills
His fensive bulwarks are, which when he wills,
His lesser breath can bandy up and down,
And crush the world, and with a wink, can drown
The spacious Universe in suds of Clay;
Where heaven is Leader, heaven must win the day:
God reapes his honor hence; That combat's safe,
Where he is a Combatant, and ventures half:
Right's not impaired with weakness, but prevails
In spite of strength, when strength and power fails:
Frail is the trust reposed on Troops of Horse;
Truth in a handful, finds a greater force.
Lord maile my heart with faith, and be my shield,
And if a world confront me I Will not yield.
THE ARGUMENT.
The bloody Massacre: The I^wes
Prevail: their ^atall sword subdues
A world of men, and in that ^ray,
Hamans ten cursed sons they slay,
Sect. 17.
NOw when as Time had rip'ned the Decree,
(Whose Winter fruit unshaken from the tree
Full ready was to fall) and brought that Day,
Wherein pretended mischief was to play
Her tragic Scene upon the Jewish Stage,
And spit the venom of her bloody rage
Upon the face of that dispersed Nation,
And in a minute breathe their desolation;
Upon that day (as patients in the fight)
Their scattered force the Jews did reunite,
And to a head their straggling strength reduced,
And with their fatal hand (their hand disused
To bathe in blood) they made so long recoyle,
That with a purple stream, the thirsty soil
O'rflowd: and on the pavement (drowned with blood)
Where never was before, they raised a flood:
There lies a headless body, there a limme
Newly dis-joynted from the trunk of him
That there lies groaning; here, a gasping head
Cropped from his neighbors shoulders; there, half dead
Full heaps of bodies, whereof some curse Fate,
Others blaspheme the name of Heaven, and rate
Their undisposed Stars; with bitter cries,
One pities his poor widow-wife, and dies;
Another bannes the night his sons were borne,
That he must dye, and they must live forlorn;
Here (all besmeard in blood congeald) there lies
A throng of carcases, whose livelesse eyes
Are closed with dust, and death: there, lies the Sire
Whose death the greedy heir did long desire;
And here the son, whose hopes were all the pleasure
His aged father had, and his life's treasure:
Thus fell their foes, some dying, and some dead,
And only they that escaped the slaughter, fled;
But with such strange amazement were affrighted,
(As if themselves in their own deaths delighted)
That each his force against his friend addressed,
And sheathed his sword within his neighbors breast;
For all the Rulers (being sore afraid
Of Mardocheus name) with strength, and aid
Supplied the Jews: For Mardecheus name
Grew great with honor, and his honored Fame
Was blazed through every Province of the Land,
And spread as far, as did the Kings Command:
In favor he increast; and every how'r
Did add a greater greatness to his power:
Thus did the Jews triumph in victory,
And on that day themselves were doomed to dye,
They slew the appointed actors of their death,
And on their heads they wore that noble wreath,
That crowns a Victor with a Victors prize;
So fled their foes, so did their enemies:
And on that day at Susan were imbrued
In blood, five hundred men whom they^ subdued;
The cursed fruit of the accursed Tree
That impious Decad, Hama^s progeny,
Upon that fatal day, they overthrew,
But took no spoil, nor substance, where they slew.
Medit. 17.
I Lately mused; and musing stood amazed,
My heart was bound, my sight was overdaz'd
To view a miracle: could Pharo fall
Before the face of Israel? Could her small
And ill-appointed handful then prevail,
When Pharo's men of war, and Charr'ots fail?
These stood like Giants; those like Pigmy brats:
These soared like Eagles; those like swarms of gnats:
On foot these marched; those rod on troops of horse
These never better armed; they, never worse;
Strong backed with vengeance and revenge were they;
These, with despair, themselves, themselves betray;
They close pursued; these (fearful) fled the field;
How could they choose, but win? or these, but yield?
Sure it is, nor man, nor horse, nor sword availes,
When Israel conquers, and great Pharo fails:
Poor Israel had no man of war, but One;
And Pharo having all the rest, had none;
Heaven fought for Israel, weakened Pharo's heart,
Who had no Counter-god to take his part:
What meant that cloudy Pillar, that by day
Did usher Israel in an unknown way?
What meant that fi'ry Pillar, that by night
Appeared to Israel, and gave Israel light?
'Twas not the secret power of Moses Rod,
That charmed the Seas in twain; 'twas Moses God
That fought for Israel, and made Pharo fall;
Well thrives the Fray where God's the General:
It Is neither strength, nor undermining slight
Prevails, where heavens engaged in the fight.
Me list not ramble into antique days,
To manne his theme, lest while Ulysses strayes,
His heart forget his home Penelope:
Our prosperous Britain makes sufficient Plea
To prove her bliss, and heavens protecting power,
Which had she mist, her glory in an hour
Had fallen to Cinders, and had past away
Like smoke before the wind; Which happy Day,
Let none but base-bred Rebels ever fail
To consecrate; and let this Age entaile
Upon succeeding times Eternity,
Heavens highest love, in that days memory.
THE ARGUMENT.
The sons of Haman (that were slain)
Are all hanged up: The Jews obtain
Freedom to fight the morrow after;
They put three hundred more to slaughter.
Sect. 18.
WHen as the fame of that days bloody news
Came to the King, he said; Behold, the Jews
Have won the day, and in their just defense,
H^^e made their wrong, a rightful recompense;
Five hundred men in Susan they have stain,
And that remainder of proud Hamans strain,
Their hands have rooted out; Queen Ester, say,
What further suit (wher^in Assuerus may
Express the bounty of his Royal hand)
Res^s in thy bosom: What is thy demand?
Said then the Queen: If in thy Princely sight
My boon be pleasing, or thou take delight
To grant thy servants suit, Let that Commission
(Which gave the Jews this happy days permission
To save their lives) to morrow stand in force,
For their behal^es that only make recourse
To God, and thee, and let that cursed brood
(The sons of Haman, that in guilty blood
Lie all ingoar'd, unfit to taint a Grave)
Behang'd on Gibbets, and (like co-^eires) have
Like equal shares of that deserved shame,
Their wretched father purchased in his name:
(...) The King was pleased, and the Decree was given
From Susan, where betwixt the earth and Heaven,
(Most undeserving to be owned by either)
These cursed ten (like twins) were borne together:
When Titan (ready for his journall chase)
Had roused his dewy locks, and Rosy face
Inricht with morning beauty, up arose
The Jews in Susan, and their bloody blows
So roughly dealt, that in that dismal day
A lease of hundreds fell, but on the prey
No hand was laid: so, sweet and jolly rest
The Jews enjoyed, and with a solemn Feast,
(Like joyful Victors dispossessed of sorrow)
They consecrated the ensuing morrow;
And in the Provinces throughout the Land,
Before their mighty and victorious hand,
Fell more than seventy thousand, but the prey
They seized not; and in memory of that day,
They solemnized their victorious Guests,
With gifts, and triumphs, and with holy Feasts.
Medit. 18.
THe Doctrine of the School of Grace dissents
From Natures (more uncertain) rudiments,
And are as much contrayr, and opposite
As Yea, and Nay, or black, and purest white:
For nature teaches, first to understand,
And then believe; but Grace does first command
Man to believe, and then to comprehend;
Faith is of things unknown, and must intend,
And soar above conceit; What we conceive,
We stand possessed of, and already have:
But faith beholds such things, as yet we have not,
Which eye sees not, ear hears not, heart conceives not.
Hereon, as on her groundwork, our salvation
Erects her pillars; From this firm foundation,
Our souls mount up the new Jerusalem,
To take possession of her Diad eme;
God loves no sophistry; Who argues least
In graces School, concludes, and argues best;
A woman's Logic passes there; For it is
Good proof to say, It Is so, because it is;
Had Abraham adviz'd with flesh and blood,
Bad had his faith been, though his reasons good*
If God bid do, for man to urge a Why?
Is, but in better language, a deny:
The fleshly balances of our conceits
Have neither equal poysure, nor just weights.
To weigh, without impeachment, Gods design;
There Is no propor^ion betwixt things Divine,
And mortal: Lively faith may not depend,
Either upon the occasion, or the end.
The glorious Suns reflected beams suffice
To lend a luster to the feeblest eyes,
But if the Eye too covetous of the light,
Boldly outface the Sun, (whose beams so bright
And undispers'd, are too-too much refined
For view) is it not justly stricken blind?
I dare not task stout Samson for his death;
Nor wandering Jonah, that bequeathed his breath
To raging Seas, when God commanded so;
Nor thee (great Queen) whose lips did overflow
With streams of blood; nor thee (O cruel kind)
To quench the f^er of a woman's mind,
^ith flowing rivers of thy subjects blood;
from bad beginnings, God creates a good,
(...) happy end: What I cannot conceive,
^^^d, let my soul admier, and believe.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Feast of Purim consecrated:
The occasion why 'twas celebrated;
Letters were writ by Mordecai,
To keep the memory of that Day.
Sect. 19.
SO Mardocheus throughout all the Land
Dispersed his Letters, with a strickt command
To celebrate these two days memory
With Feasts, and gifts, and yearly jollity,
That after ages may record that day,
And keep it from the rust of time, ^ that they
Which shall succeed, may ground their holy mirth
Upon the joys, those happy days brought forth,
Which changed their sadness, and black nights of sorrow,
Into the brightness of a gladsome morrow;
Whereto the Jews (to whom these letters came)
Gave due observance, and did soon proclaim
Their sacred Festivalls, in memory
Of that days joy, and joyful victory:
And since the Lots,^ (that Haman did abuse,
To know the dismal day, which to the Jews
Might fall most fatal, and, to his intent,
Least unpropitious)^ were in the event
Crossed with a higher Fate, than blinded Chance,
To work his ruin, their deliverance:
They therefore in remembrance of the Lot
(Whose hop'd-for sad event succeeded not)
The solemn feasts of Purim did invest,
And by the name of Purim called their Feast;
Which to observe with sacred Complement,
And ceremonial rites, their souls indent,
And firmly' inroll the happy memory
In The hearts of their succeeding Progeny,
That time (the enemy of mortal things)
May not with hovering of his nimble wings,
Beat down the dear memorial of that time,
But keep it flowring in perpetual prime.
Now, lest this shining day in times progress
Perchance be clouded with forgetfulness,
Or lest the gauled Persians should debate
The bloody slaughter, and re-ulcerate
In after-dayes, their former misery,
And blurre the glory of this days memory,
The Queen and Morde^ai sent Letters out
Into the Land, dispersed round about
To re-confirme, and fully ratify
This feast of Purim, to eternity;
That it to after-ages may appear,
When sinners bend their hearts, heaven bows his ear.
Medit. 19.
ANd are the Laws of God defective then?
Or was the Paper scant, or dull the Pen
That wrote those sacred lines? Could imperfection
Lurk closly there, where heaven has given direction
How comes it then new feasts are celebrated,
Vnmention'd in the Law, and uncreated
By him that made the Law complete, and just,
Not to be changed as brain-sicke mortals lust?
Is ^ot heavens deepest curse with death to boot,
Denounced to him that takes from, or ads to it?
True it is; the Law of God's the rule and squire,
Whereby to limit Man's uncurb'd desire,
And with a gentle hand does justly paize
The balances of his unbevell'd ways,
True it is accursed, and thrice accursed be he
That shall detract, or change such Laws, as be
Directive for his Worship, or concern
His holy Service^ these we strictly learn
Within our constant breast to keep inshrin'd,
These in all seasons, and for all times bind:
But Laws (although Divine) that do respect
Thy public rest, and properly direct,
As Statutes politic, do make relation
To times and persons, places, and occasion:
The brazen Serpent, which, by Gods command,
Was builded up, was by the Prophets hand
Beat down again, as impious, and impure,
When it became an Idol, not a Cure.
A moral Law needs no more warranty,
Then lawful givers, and convenience,
(Not crossing the Divine:) It lies in Kings,
To act, and to inhibit all such things
As in his Princely wisdom shall seem best,
And most vantagious to the public rest,
And what before was an indifferent thing,
His law makes good or bad: A lawful King
Is Gods Liev-tenant; in his sacred ear
God whispers often, and keeps his presence there^
To break a lawful Princes just Command,
Is brokage of a sin, at second hand.
THE ARGUMENT.
Assuerus Acts upon Record:
The just man's virtue, and reward.
Sect. 20.
ANd Assuerus stretched his heavy hand,
Laying a Tribute both on Sea, and Land;
What else he did, what Trophies of his fame,
He left for time to glorify his Name,
With what renown and grace, he did appay
The faithful heart of loyal Mordecai;
Are they not kept in endless memory,
Recorded in the Persian History?
For Mordecai possessed the second seat
In all the Kingdom, and his name is great;
Of God and man his-vertues were approved,
Of God and man, much honored and beloved;
Seeking his peoples good, and sweet prosperity,
And speaking joyful peace to his posterity.
Meditat. 20.
THus thrives the man, thus prosper his endevors
That builds on faith, and in that faith persevers:
It is no loss, to lose; no gain, to get,
If he that loses all, shall win the Set:
God helps the weakest, takes the losers chair,
And setting on the King, does soon repair
His loss with vengeance; He Is not always best
That takes the highest place, nor he the least
That sits beneath: for outward fortunes can
Express (how great, but) not how good's the man;
Whom God will raise, he humbles first a while;
And where he raises, often he means to spoil.
It matters not (Lord) what my fortunes be,
May they but lead or whip me home to thee.
Here the Canonical History of Queen ESTER ends.
JOB MILITANT:

Horat. car. lib. 1. ode 17. -- Dijs, piet as mea,
Et Musa, cordi est. --
By Fra. Quarles.

LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER. 1632.

The Proposition of the WORK.
Would thou discover in a curious Map,
That Island, which fond worldlings call Mishap,
Surrounded with a sea of briny tears,
The rockie dangers, and the boggie Fears,
The storms of Trouble, the afflicted Nation,
The heavy soil, the lowly situation?
On wretched Job then sp^nd thy weeping eye,
And see the color painted curiously.
Would thou behold a Tragic Scene of sorrow,
Whose woeful Plot the Author did not borrow
From sad invention? The sable Stage,
The lively Actors with their equipage?
The Music made of Sighs, the Songs of Cries,
The sad Spectators with their watery Eyes?
Behold all this, comprised here in one;
Expect the Plaudit, when the Play is done.
Or would thou see a well built Pinace tossed
Upon the swelling Ocean, split (almost)
Now on a churlish Rock; now, fiercely striving
With laboring Winds; now, desperately driving
Upon the boiling Sands, her storme-rent Flags,
Her Mainmast broke, her Canvas torn to rags,
Her Treasure lost, her men with lightning slain,
And left a wrecke to the relentlesse Maine?
This, this and more, unto your moistened Eyes,
Our patient Job shall lively moralize.
Would thou behold unparalleld distress,
Which minds cannot out-think, nor tongs express
Full to the life, the Anvill, whereupon
Mischief does work her masterpiece, for none
To imitate; the dire Anatomy
Of (curiously-dissected) Misery;
The face of Sorrow, in her sternest looks,
The rufull Arg'ment of all Tragic books?
In brief, Would tender eyes, endure to see
(Summed up) the greatest sorrows, that can be?
Behold they then, poor Job afflicted here,
And each Beholder spend (at least) his Tear.
TO THE GREAT TETRAGRAMMATON, LORD PARAMOVNT OF HEAVEN AND EARTH: His Humble
Servant dedicates himself, and implores the Enfranchising of his Muse.
1
GReat God th'indebted praises of thy glory,
If Man should smother, or his Muse wax faint
To number forth; the stones would make complaint,
And write a never-ending Story,
And, not without just reason, say,
Men's hearts are more obdure than they.
2
Dismount from Heaven (O thou diviner Power)
Handsell my slender Pipe, breath (thou) upon it,
That it may run an everlasting Sonnet,
Which envious Time may not devour:
Oh, let it sing to After-dayes
(When I am Dust) thy louder Praise.
3
Direct the footsteps of my sober Muse
To tread thy glorious path: For be it known,
She only seeks thy Glory, not her own,
N^rrouzed for a second use;
If otherwise, O! may she never
Sing more, but be struck dumb for ever.
JOB MILITANT:
THE ARGUMENT.
Jobs Lineage, and Integrity,
His Issue, Wealth, Prosperity,
His childrens holy Feast: His wise
Forecast, and zealous Sacrifi^e.
Sect. 1.
NOt far from Casius, in who^e bounteous womb,
Great Pompeys dust lies crowned with his tomb,
Westward, betwixt Arabia and Iudaea,
Is situate a Country, called Idumaea,
There dwelt a man (brought from his Lineage,
That for his belly, swopt his Heritage,)
His name was Job, a man of upright Will,
Just, fearing Heaven, eschewing what was Ill,
On whom his God had heapd in highest measure,
The bounteous Riches of his boundless Treasure,
As well of Fortune, as of Grace, and Spirit,
Goods for his Children, Children to inherit;
As did his Name, his wealth did daily wexe,
His Seed did germinate in either Sex
A hopeful Issue, whose descent might keep
His righteous Race on foot; seven thousand sheep
Did pay their Summer-tribute, and did add
Their Winter blessings to his Fold: He had
Three thousand Camels, able for their load,
Five hundred Asses, furnished for the road,
As many yoke of Oxen, to maintain
His household, for he had a mighty Train;
Nor was there any in the East, the which
In Virtue was so rare, in Wealth so rich.
Upon a time, his Children (to improve
The sweet affection of their mutual love)
Made solemn Feasts; each feasted in his turn,
(For there is a time to mirth, as well as mourn)
And who, by course, was Master of the Feast,
Unto his home invited all the rest.
Even as a Hen (whose tender brood forsake
The downy closet of her Wings, and take
Each its affected way) marks how they feed,
This, on that Crum; and that, on to other Seed;
Moves, as they move; and stays, when as they stay,
And seems delighted in their infant-play:
Yet (fearing danger) with a busy eye,
Looks here and there, if ought she can espy,
Which unawares might snatch a booty from her,
Eyes all that pass, and watches every commer.
Even so the affection of this tender Sire,
(B'ing made more fervent, with the selfsame ^^re
Of dearest love, which flamed in their breasts,
Preserved (as by fuel) in those Feasts)
Was ravished in the height of joys, to see
His happy Childrens ten-fold unity:
As was his joy, such was his holy fear,
Lest he, that plants his Engines every where,
Baited with golden Sins, and re-insnares
The soul of Man, turning his Wheat to Tares,
Should season Error with the taste of Truth,
And tempt the frailty of their tender youth.
No sooner therefore had the dappled sky
Opened the Twilight of her waking eye,
And in her breaking Light, had promised day,
But up he rose, his holy hands did Iay
Upon the sacred Altar (one by one)
An early Sacrifice for every Son:
For who can tell, (said he?) my Sons (perchance)
H^ve slipped some sin; which neither Ignorance
Pleaded, nor want of heed, nor youth can cure.
Sin steals, unseene, when men sleep most secure:
Meditat. 1.
WAnt is the badge of poverty: Then he
That wants most, is the most poor, say we.
The wretch, that hunger drives from door to door,
Aiming at present Alms, desires no more.
The toiling Swain, that has with pleasing trouble
Cockt a small fortune, would that fortune double,
Which dearly bought with slavery, then (alas)
He would be deemed a Man, that is well to pass:
Which got, his mind's now tickled with an itch,
But to deserve that glorious style of Rich.
That done, h'enjoyes the crown of all his labor,
Could he but once out-nose his right-hand-neighbour^
Lives he at quiet now? Now, he begins
To wish that Vs'ry were the least of sins:
But great, or small, he tries, and sweet's the trouble
And for its sake, he wishes all things double,
Thus wishing still, his wishes never cease,
But as his Wealth, his Wishes still increase.
Wishes proceed from want: The richest then,
Most wishing, want most, and are poorest men:
If he be poor, that wants much, how poor
Is he, that has too much, and yet wants more?
Thrice happy he, to whom the bounty of heaven,
Sufficient, with a sparing hand, has given:
It Is Grace, not Gold, makes great; sever but which,
The Rich man is but poor, the Poor man rich.
The fairest Crop, of either Grass, or Grain,
Is not for use, undew'd with timely rain.
The wealth of Croesus, were it to be given,
Were not thank-worthy, if unblest by Heaven.
Even as fair Phaebe, in Diameter,
(Earth interposed betwixt the Sun and her)
Suffers Eclips, and is disrobed quite
(During the time) of all her borrowed Light;
So Riches, which fond Mortals so embrace,
If not enlightened with the Beams of Grace,
B'ing interposed with too gross a Care,
They lie obscured; and no riches are.
My stint of Wealth lies not in my expressing,
With Jacobs Store (Lord) give me Jacobs Blessing;
Or if, at night, thou grant me Lazars Boon,
Let Dives Dogs licks all my sores at noone.
Lord, pare my wealth, by my Capacity,
Lest I, with it, or it suit not with me.
This humbly do I sue for, at thy hand,
Enough, and not too much, for my command.
Lord, what thou lend'st, shall serve but in the place
Of reckoning Counters, to sum up thy Grace.
THE ARGUMENT.
Satan appears, and then professes
Himself man's Enemy, confesses
Gods love to Job, malignes his Faith,
Gains power over all he has.
Sect. 2.
Upon a time, when heave^s sweet quire of Saints
(Whose everlasting Hallelujah chaunts
The highest praise of their celestial King)
Before their Lord did the presentment bring
Of the execution of his sacred Will,
Committed to their function to fulfill:
Satan came too (that Satan, which betrayed
The soul of man, to Deaths eternal shade,
Satan came too) and in the midst he stands,
Like to a Vulture amongst a herd of Swans.
Said, then, the Eternal; From what quarter now
Has business brough thee? (Satan) whence come thou?
The Lord of Heaven (said the Infernal) since
Thou have entitled me the Worlds great Prince,
I h^ve been practicing mine old profession,
And come from compassing my large Possession,
Tempting thy sons, and (like a roaring Lion)
Seeking my prey, disturb the peace of Sion;
I come from s^wing Tares among thy Wheat;
To him, that shall dissemble Peter's seat,
I have been plotting, how to prompt the death
Of Christian Princes, and the bribed breath
Of cheapned Justice, has my fire inflamed
With spirit of boldness, for a while, unsham'd.
I come from planting strife, and stern debate,
'Twixt private man and man, 'twixt State and State,
Subverting Truth with all the power I can,
Accusing Man to God, and God to Man:
I daily s^w fresh Schisms among thy Saints;
I buffet them, and laugh at their complaints;
The Earth is my Dominion, Hell's my Home,
I round the World, and so from thence I come.
Said then The Eternal: True, thou have not failed
Of what thou say; thy spirit has prevailed
To vex my little Flock; Thou have been bold
To make them stray, a little, from their Fold.
B^t say; In all thy hard Adventures, has
Thine eye observed Job my Servants faith?
Has open force, or secret fraud beset
His Bulwarks, so impregnable, as yet?
And have thou (without envy) yet beheld,
How that the World his second cannot yield?
Have thou not found, that he is of upright will,
Just, fearing God, ^schewing what is ill?
True Lord, (replied the Fiend) thy Champion ^^th
A strong and fervent (yet a crafty) Faith,
A forced love needs no such great applause,
He loves but ill, that loves not for a cause.
Have thou not heaped his Garners with excess?
Inricht his Pastures? Does not he possess
All that he has, or can demand from Thee?
His Coffers filled, his Land stocked plenteou^^y?
Has not thy love surrounded him about,
^And ^edg'd him in, to fence my practice out?
But small's the trial of a Faith, in this,
^f thou supp^rt him, it is thy strength, not his^
Can then my power, that stands by thy permission,
Encounter, where Thou make an Opposition?
Stretch forth thy Hand, and smite (...) what he has,
And prove thou then the temper of his Faith;
Cease cock'ring his fond humor, veil thy Grace,
No doubt, but he will blaspheme thee to thy f^^c.
L^e, (said The Eternal) to thy cursed hand,
I ^ere commit his mighty Stock, his Land,
His hopeful Issue, and Wealth, though nere so much;
Himself, alone, thou shall forbear to touch.
Medita. 2.
SA^an begged once, and found his prayers reward:
We often beg, yet often return, unheard.
If granting be the effect of love, then we
Conclude our selves, to be less loved than he:
True, Satan begged, and begged his shame, no less;
'Twas granted; shall we envy his success?
We beg, and our request's (perchance) not granted;
God knew, perhaps, it were worse had than wanted.
Can God and Belial both join in one will;
The one to ask, the other to fulfill?
Sooner shall Stygian darkness blend with light,
The Frost with Fire, sooner day with Night.
True, God and Satan willed the selfsame Will,
But God intended Good; and Satan, Ill:
That Will produced a several conclusion;
He aimed at Man's, and God at his confusion*
He that drew Light from out the depth of Shade,
And made of Nothing, whatsoever he made,
^an out of seeming Evil, bring good Events;
God works Good, though by ill Instruments.
As in a Clock, one motion does convay
And carry diverse wheels a several way:
Yet altogether, by the great wheels force,
Direct the hand unto his proper course:
Even so, that sacred Will, although it use
Means seeming contrary, yet all conduce
To one effect, and in a free consent,
They bring to pass heavens high decreed intent.
Takes God delight in humane weakness, then?
What glory reapes he from afflicted men?
The Spirit gone, can Flesh and Blood endure?
God burns his Gold, to make his Gold more pure,
Even as a Nurse, whose childs imperfect pace
Can hardly lead his foot from place to place,
Leaves her fond kissing, sets him down, to go,
Nor does uphold him, for a step or two:
But when she finds that he begins to fall,
She holds him up, and kisses him withal:
So God from man sometimes withdrawes his hand
A while, to teach his Infant faith to stand;
But when he sees his feeble strength begin,
To fail, he gently takes him up again.
Lord, I Am a child; so guide my paces, than,
That I may learn to walk an upright man:
So shield my Faith, that I may never doubt thee,
For I shall fall, if e're I walk without thee.
THE ARGUMENT.
The frighted M^ssengers tell Job
His fourfold loss: He rends his Ro^e,
Submits him to his Makers trust,
Whom he concludes to be just.
Sect. 3.
Upon that very day, when all the rest
Were frollicke at their elder Brothers fea^t,
A breathless man, pricked on with winged fear,
With staring eyes distracted here and there,
(Like kindled Exhalations in the Air
At midnight glowing) his stiffe-bolting hair,
(Not much unlike the pens of Porcupines)
Crossing his arms, and making woeful signs,
Purboyl'd in sweat, shaking his fearful head,
That often looked behind him, as he fled,
He ran to Job, still ne'rethelesse afraid,
His broken blast breathed forth these words, and said:
Alas, (dear Lord) the whiles thy servants plied
Thy painful Plough, and whilst, on every side
Thy Asses fed about us, as we wrought,
There sallyed forth on us (suspecting naught
Nor ought intending, but our cheerful pain)
A rout of rude Sabaeans, with their Train
Armed with death, and deaf to all our Cries,
Which, with strong Hand, did in an hour suprize
All that thou had, and whilst we strove, in vain)
To guard them, their impartial hands have slain
Thy faithful Servants, with their thir^ty Sword;
I only escaped, to bring this woeful word.
No sooner had he closed his lips, but see!
Another comes, as much aghast as he:
A ^lash of fire (said he) new fallen from heaven,
Has all thy servants of their lives bereaven,
And burnt thy She^pe; I, I alone am he
That's left unslaine, to bring the news to thee.
This Tale not fully told, a third ensues,
Whose lips in labor with more heavy News,
Brake thus; The forces of a triple Band,
Brought from the fi^rce Caldaeans, with strong hand
Has seized thy Camels, murdered with the sword
Thy servants all, but me, that brings thee word.
Before the air had cooled his hasty breath,
Rusht in a fourth, with visage pale as Death:
The while (said he) thy children all were sharing
Mirth, at a feast of thy first Sons preparing,
Arose a Wind, whose errand had more have,
Than happy speed, which with a full-mouth blast
Has smote the house, which has thy children reft
Of all their lives, and thou art childlesse left;
Thy children all are slain, all slain together,
I only escaped to bring the tidings hither.
So said, Behold the man, whose wealth did flow
Like to a Springtide, one bare hour ago,
With the unpattern'd height of fortunes blessed,
Above the greatest Dweller in the East;
He that was Sire of many sons but now,
Lord of much people, and while-e're could show
Such Herds of Cattle, He, whose fleecy stock
Of Sheep could boast seven thousand, in a flock,
See how he lies, of all his wealth dispoil'd,
He now has neither Servant, Sheep, nor Child.
Like a poor man, arose the patient Job,
(Stunned with the news) and rent his purple Robe,
Shaved the hair from off his woeful head,
And prostrate on the floor he worshipped:
Naked, ah! Poor and naked did I come
F^rth from the closet of my mothers womb;
And shall return (alas) the very same
To the earth as poor, and naked as I came:
God gives, and takes, and why should He not have
A privilege, to take those things he gave?
We men mistake our Tenure often, for He
Lends us at will, what we miscall as Free;
He reassumes his own, takes but the same
He lent a while. Thrice blessed be his Name.
In all this passage, Job, in heart, nor Tongue,
Thought God unjust, or charged his hand with wrong.
Medita. 3.
THe proudest pitch of that victorious spirit
Was but to win the World, whereby t'inherit^
The ayrie purchase of a transitory
And glozing Title of an ages Glory;
Would thou by conquest win more fame tha^ He?
Subdue thy self; thy selfe's a world to thee:
Earth's but a Ball, that Heaven has quilted over
With wealth and Honor, banded on the floor
Of fickle Fortunes false and slippery Court,
Sent for a Toy, to make us Children sport,
Man's satiate spirits, with fresh delights supplying,
To still the Fondlings of the world, from crying,
And he, whose merit mounts to such a Joy,
Gains but the Honor of a mighty Toy.
But would thou conquer, have thy conquest crowned
By hands of Seraphins, trimph'd with the sound
Of heavens loud Trumpet, warbled by the shrill
Celestial quire, recorded with a quill,
Plucked from the Pinion of an Angels wing,
Confirmed with joy, by heavens Eternal King?
Conquer thy self, thy rebel thoughts repel,
And chase those false affections that rebel.
Has Heaven dispoil'd what his full hand had give^ thee?
Nipt thy succeeding Blossoms? or bereaven thee
Of thy dear latest hope, thy bosom Friend?
Does sad Despair deny these griefs an end?
Despair's a whispring Rebel, that within thee,
Bribes all thy Field, and sets thy self agin thee:
Make keen thy Faith, and with thy force let flee,
If thou not conquer him, he will conquer thee:
Advance thy Shield of Patience to thy head,
And when grief strikes, twill strike the striker dead^
The patient man, in sorrow spies relief,
And by the tail, he couples Joy with Grief.
In adverse fortunes be thou strong and stout,
And bravely win thy self, Heaven holds not out
His Bow, for ever bent. The disposition
Of noblest spirits, does, by opposition
Exasperate the more: A gloomy night
Whets on the morning, to return more bright;
A blade well tri^d, deserves a treble price,
And Vertu's purest, most opposed by Vice:
Brave minds, oppressed, should (in despite of Fa^^)
Look greatest, (like the Sun) in lowest state.
But ah! shall God thus strive with flesh and blood*
Receives he Glory from, or reapes he Good
In mortals Ruin, that he leaves man so
To be or'ewhelm'd by his unequal Foe?
May not a Potter, that from out the ground,
Has framed a Vessel, search if it be sound?
Or if by for bushing, he take more pain
To make it fairer, shall the Pot complain?
Mortal, thou art but Clay: Then shall not he,
That framed thee for his service, season thee?
Man, close thy lips; Be thou no undertaker
Of Gods designs, Dispute not with thy Maker.
Lord, it is against thy nature to do ill;
Then give me power to bear, and work thy Will;
Thou know what is best, make thou thine own conclusion
Be glorified, although in my confusion.
THE ARGUMENT.
Satan the second time appears,
Before The Eternal, boldly dares
Malign Iob^ tried Faith afresh,
And gains th'afflicting of his Flesh.
Sect. 4.
ONce more, when heave^s harmonious queristers
Appeared before his Throne, (whose Ministers
They are, of his concealed will) to render
Their strict account of Justice, and to tender
Th'accepted Sacrifice of highest praise,
(Warbled in Sonnets* and celestial Lays)
Satan came too, bold, as a hungry Fox,
Or ravinous Wolf amid the tender Flocks,
Satan, (said then The Eternal) from whence now
Has thy employments driven thee? whence come thou?
Satan replies: Great God of heaven and earth,
I come from tempting, and from making mirth:
To hear thy dearest children whine, and roar:
In brief, I come, from whence I came before.
Said then The Eternal, Have thou not beheld
My servants Faith, how, like a sevenfold shield,
It has defended his integrity
Against thy fiery Darts? Has not thine Eye,
(Thine envious eye) perceived how pu^ely just
He stands, and perfect, worthy of the trust
I lent into his hand, persisting still
Just, fearing God, eschewing what is ill?
'Twas not the loss of his so fair a Flock,
Nor sudden rape of such a mighty Stock;
'Twas neither loss of Servants, nor his Sons
Untimely slaughter, (acted all at once)
Could make him quail, or warpe so true a Faith,
Or stain so pure a Love; say (Satan) has
Thy hand (so deeply counterfeiting mine)
Made him mistrust his God, or once repine?
Can there in all the earth, say, can there be
A man so Perfect, and so Just, as He?
Replies the Tempter, Lord, an outward loss
Hopes for repair, it is but a common cross:
I know thy servant's wise, a wise forecast,
Grieves for things present, not for things are past;
Perchance the tumor of his sullen heart,
Brooks loss of all, since he has lost a part;
My self have Servants, who can make true boast,
They gave away as much, as he has lost:
Others (which learning made so wisely mad)
Refuse such Fortunes, as he never had;
A Faith's not tried by this uncertain Tuch,
Others, that never kn^w thee, did as much:
Lend me thy Power then, that I might once
But Sacrifice his Flesh, afflict his Bones,
And pierce his Hide, but for a moments space,
Thy Darling then would curse thee to thy Face*
To which, The Eternal thus: His body's thine,
To plague thy fill, withal I do confine
Thy power to her ^ists: Afflict and tear
His flesh at pleasure: But his life forbear.
Meditat. 4.
BOth Goods, and body too; Lord, who can stand?
Expect not Jobs uprightness, at my hand,
Without Jobs aid; The temper of my Passion,
(Untamed by thee) can brook no Jobs Temptation,
For I am weak, and frail, and what I can
Most boast of, proves me but a sinful man;
Things that I should avoid, I do; and what
I am enjoined to do, that do I not.
My Flesh is weak, too strong in this, alone,
It rules my spirit, that should be ruled by none
But thee; my spirit's faint, and has been never
Free from the fits of fins quotidian Fever.
My powers are all corrupt, corrupt my Will,
Marble to good, and Wax to what is ill;
Eclipsed is my reason, and my Wit;
By interposing Earth 'twixt Heaven, and it:
My mem'ri's like a Scarce of Lawne (alas)
It keeps things gross, and lets the purer pass.
What have I then to boast, What Title can
I challenge more than this, A sinful man?
Yet do I sometimes feel a warm desire,
Raise my low Thoughs, and dull affections higher
Where, like a soul entranc't, my spirit flies,
Makes leagues with Angels, and brings Deities
Half way to heaven, shakes hands with Seraphims
And boldly mingles wings with Cherubims,
Frem whence, I look askauns adowne the earth,
Pity my self, and loath my place of birth:
But while I thus my lower state deplore,
I wake, and prove the wretch I was before.
Even as the Needle, that directs the hour,
(Touched with the Loadstone) by the secret power
Of hidden Nature, points upon the Pole;
Even so the wavering powers of my soul,
Touched by the virtue of thy Spirit, flee
From what is Earth, and point alone to Thee.
When I have faith, to hold thee by the Hand,
I walk securely, and me thinks I stand
More firm than Atlas; But when I forsake
The safe protection of thine Arm, I quake
Like wind-shakt Reeds, and have no strength at all,
But (as a Vine, the Prop cut down) I fall.
Yet wretched I, when as thy Justice lends
Thy glorious Presence from me) straight am friends
With Flesh and blood, forget thy Grace, fly from it,
And, like a Dog, return unto my vomit;
The fawning world to pleasure then invites
My wandering eyes; The flesh presents delights
Unto my yielding heart, which think those pleasures*
Are only bus'nes now, and rarest treasures,
Content can glory in, whilst I, secure,
Stoop to the painted plumes of Satan's Lure:
Thus I captived, and drunk with pleasures Wine,
Like to a madman, think no state like mine,
What have I then to boast, what title can
I challenge more than this, A sinful man?
^ feel my grief so enough, nor can I be
^edrest by any, but (Great God) by thee.
^oo great thou art to come within my Roof,
^ay but the word, Be ^^^le, and it is enough;
^ill then, my tongue shall never (...), mine Eyes
^^e're cloze, my lowly bended knees never rise*
^ill then my soul shall never want early sobs,
My cheeks no tears, my Pensive breast no throbs,
My heart shall lack no zeal, nor tongue expressing,
^le strive like Jacob till I get my Blessing:
Say then, Be clea^e, I Will never stop till then,
Heaven never shall rest, till Heaven shall say, Amen
THE ARGUMENT.
Job, smote with Ulcers, grovelling lies,
Plunged in a Gulf of Miseries,
His Wife to blasphemy does tempt him,
His three Friends visit, and lament him.
Sect. 5.
LIke as a Truant-Scholler (whose delay
Is worse than whipping, having leave to play)
^^kes haste to be enlarged from the Iayle
^his neglected School, turns speedy tail
^^on his tedious book (so ill befriended)
^^fore his Masters Iie be full ended:
So thanklesse Satan, full of winged haste,
Thinking all time, not spent in Mischief, waste,
Departs with speed, less patient to forbear
The patient Job, then patient Job to bear.
Forth from the furnace of his Nostrell, flies
A sulpherous vapor, (which by the envious eyes,
Of this foul Fiend inflamed) possessed the fair
And sweet complexion of The Abused Air,
With Pestilence, and (having power so far)
Took the advantage of his worset Star,
Smote him with Ulcers (such as once befell
The Egyptian Wizzards) Ulcers hot and fell,
Which like a searching Tetter uncorrected,
Left no part of his body unaffected,
From head to foot, no empty place was found
That could b'afflicted with another wound:
So noisome was the nature of his grief,
That (left by friends, and wife, that should be chief
Assister) he (poor he) alone remained,
Grovelling in Ashes, being (himself) constrained,
With pot-sheards to scrape off those rip'ned cores,
(Which dogs disdained to lick) from out his sores,
Which when his wife beheld, adust, and keen,
Her passion waxt, made strong with scorn and spleen*
Like as the Winds, imprisoned in the earth,
And barred the passage to their natural birth,
Grow fierce; and nilling to be longer pent,
Break in an Earthquake, shake the world, and vent*
So brake she forth, so forth her fury brake,
Till now, pent in with shame, and thus she spoke.
Fond Saint, thine Innocence finds timely speed,
A foolish Saint receives a Saintly meed;
Is this the just man's recompense? Or has
Heaven no requital for thy painful Faith,
(...) then this? What, have thy zealous Qualmes,
^^^^ious Fastings, and thy hopeful Alms,
Thy private groans, and often bended knees,
No other end, no other thanks, but these?
(...) man submit thee to a kinder fate,
(...) to be righteous at so dear a rate:
It Is Heaven, not Fortune that thy weal debarres;
C^^se Heaven then, and not thy wayward flarres:
It Is God that plagues thee, God not knowing why;
C^^se then that God, revenge thy wrongs and dye.
(...) then replied: God loves where ^e chas^iz'd,
Thou speak like a fool, and ill adviz'd;
^^^gh we to lick the sweet, and shall we lowre,
If ^e be pleased to send a little sour?
(...) I so weak, one blast or two, should chill me;
I Will trust my Maker, though my Maker kill me.
When these sad tidings filled those itching ears
Of Earths black babbling daughter (she that hears
And vents alike, both Truth and Forgeries,
And utters, often, cheaper then she buys)
She spread the pinions of her nimble wings,
Advanc'^ her Trumpet, and away she springs,
And fills the whispering Air which soon possessed
The spacious borders of th'enquiring East,
Upon the summon of such solemn News,
Whose truth, malignant Fame could not abuse,
His woeful friends came to him, to the end,
To comfort, and bewail their wretched friend.
But when they came far off they did not know,
Whether it were the self same friend or no,
(Brim-fill'd with briny woe) they wept and tore
(^^express their grief) the garments that they wore
Seven days and nights they sat upon the ground,
But spoke not, for his sorrows did abound.
Medit. 5.
SAy, is not Satan justly styled than,
A Tempter, and an enemy to Man?
What could he more? His wish would not extend
To death, lest his assaults, with death should end:
Then what he did, what could he further do?
His Hand has seized both goods and body too.
The hopeful Issue of a holy strain,
In such a dearth of holiness, is slain.
What has the Lazar left him, but his grief,
And (what might best been spared) his foolish wife?
Cold mischief bin more hard (though more in kind)
To nip the flowers, and leave the weeds behind
Woman was made a Helper by Creation,
A Helper, not alone for Propagation,
Or fond Delight, but sweet Society,
Which Man (alone) should want, and to supply
Comforts to him for whom her Sex was made,
That each may joy in eithers needful aid:
But fairest Angels, had the foulest fall;
And best things (once abused) prove worst of all,
Else had not Satan been so foul a Fiend,
Else had not Woman proved so false a Friend.
Even as the treachrous Fowler, to entice
His silly winged Prey, does first devise
To make a Bird his stale, at whose false call,
Others may chance into the selfsame thrall:
Even so, that crafty snarer of Mankind,
Finding man's righteous Palate not inclined
To taste the sweetness of his gilded baits,
Makes a collateral Su^e, and slily waits
Upon the weakness of some bosom friend,
From whose enticement, he expects his end.
Ah righteous Job, what cross was left unknown?
What grief may be described, but was thine own*
Is this a just man's case? What does befall
To one man, may as well betide to all.
The worst I Will look for, that I can project,
If better come, it is more then I expect;
If otherwise, I Am armed with Preparation;
No sorrow's sudden to an expectation.
Lord, to thy Wisdom I submit my Will,
I will be thankful, send me good or ill;
If good, my present State will pass the sweeter;
If ill, my Crown of glory shall be greater.
THE ARGUMENT.
Orewhelm'd with grief, Job breaks forth
Into impatience: Bans his birth,
Professes, that his heart did doubt
And fear, what since has fallen out.
Sect. 6.
WOrn bare with grief, the patient Job betrayed
His seven-daies silence, cursed his day, and said:
O that my Day of birth had never bin,
N^^ yet the Night, which I was brought forth in!
Be it not numbered for a Day, let Light
Not make a difference 'twixt it and Night;
Let gloomy Shades (then Death more sable) pass
Upon it, to declare how fatal 'twas:
Let Clouds ore-cast it, and as hateful make it,
As life's to him, whom Tortures bid, forsake it:
From her next day, let that black Night be cut,
Nor in the reckning of the Months, be put:
Let Desolation fill it, all night long,
In it, be never heard a Bridal song:
Let all sad Mourners that do curse the light,
When light's drawn in begin to curse this night?
Her evening Twilight, let foul darkness stain;
And may her midnight expect light in vain;
Nor let her infan^ Day (but newly borne)
Suffer't to see the Eyelids of the morn,
Because my Mothers Womb it would not cl^ze,
Which gave me passage to endure these Woes:
Why dyed I not in my Conception, rather?
Or why was not my Birth, and death together?
Why did the Midwife take me on her knees?
Why did I suck, to feel such griefs as these?
Then had this body never been oppressed,
I had enjoyed the eternal sleep of rest;
With Kings, and mighty Monarchs, that lie crowned
With stately Monuments, poor I had found
A place of Rest, had borne as great a sway,
Had been as happy, and as rich as they:
Why was not I as an abortive birth,
The ^e're had known the horrors of the earth?
The silent Grave is quiet from the fear
Of Tyrants: Tyrants are appeased there:
The grinded Prisner hears not (there) the noise,
Nor harder threatenings of th'Oppressors voice:
^oth rich and poor are equaled in the Grave,
Servants no Lords, and Lords no Servants have:
What needs there light to him that's comfortless?
Or life to such as languish in distress,
(...) long for death, which, if it come by leisure,
They ransack for it, as a hidden treasure?
What needs there Life to him, that cannot have
A B^^ne, more gracious, then a quiet Grave?
Or else to him, whom God has walled about,
That would, but cannot find a passage out?
When I but taste, my sighs return my food,
The flowing of my tears have raised a flood;
When my estate was prosperous, I did fear,
Le^t, by some heedlesse slip, or want of care,
I might be brought to Misery, and (alas!)
What I did then so fear is come to pass:
But though secure, my soul did never slumber,
Yet do my Woes exceed both Weight, and Number.
Meditat. 6.
SO poor a thing is Man. No Flesh and blood
Deserves the style of Absolutely Good:
The righteous man sins often; whose power's such,
To sin the least, sins (at the least) too much:
The man, whose Faith disdained his Isaacks life,
Dissembled once, a Sister, for a Wife:
The righteous Lot, being drunk, did make (at once)
His Daughters both half sisters to their sons:
The royal Favorite of heaven, stood
Not guiltless of Adultery and Blood,
And he, whose hands did build the Temple, does
Bow down his lustful knees to Ashtaroth
The sinful Woman was accused, but none
Was found, that could begin to fling a stone:
From mudled Springs, can Crystal water come?
In some things, all men sin; in all things, some.
Even as the soil, (which Aprils gentle showers
Have filled with sweetness, and inricht with flowers)
Reares up her suckling plants, still shooting forth
The tender blossoms of her timely Birth,
But, if denied the beams of cheerly May,
They hang their withered heads, and fade away:
So man, assisted by the Almighties Hand,
His Faith does flourish, and securely stand,
But left a while, forsook (as in a shade)
It ^^nguishes, and nipt with sin does fade:
No Gold is pure from Dross, though often refined;
The strongest Cedar's shaken with the wind;
The fairest Rose has no prerogative,
Against the fretting Canker-worme, The Hive
No honey yeeld^ unblended with the wax,
The finest Linen has both soil and bracks:
The best of men have sins; None lives secure,
In Nature nothing's perfect, nothing pure.
Lord, since I needs must sin, yet grant that I
Forge no advantage by infirmity:
Since that my Vesture cannot want a stain,
Assist me, lest the tincture be in Grain.
To thee (my great Redeemer) do I fly,
It is thy Death alone, can change my Dye;
Tears, mingled with the Blood, can scower so,
That Scarlet sins shall turn as white as Snow.
THE ARGUMENT.
Rash Eliphaz reproves, and rates,
And falsely censures Job; Relates
His Vision; shows him the event
Of wicked men: Bids him repent.
Sect. 7.
THen Eliphas, his pounded tongue repliev'd,
And said, should I conte^d, thou wold'st be grievd;
Yet what man can refrain, but he must break
His angry silence, having heard thee speak?
O sudden change! many have thou directed,
And strengthened those, whose minds have bin dejected;
Thy sacred Thewes, and sweet Instructions, did
Help those were falling, raised up such as slid:
But now it is thy case, thy soul is vexed,
And can not help thy self, thy self perplexed;
Thou love thy God but basely for thy profit,
Fear him in further expectation of it;
Judge then: Did Record ever round thine ear,
That God forsook the heart that was sincere?
But often have we seen, that such as plow
Lewdness, and mischief, reap the same they sow:
So have proud Tyrants from their thrones bin cast,
With all their offspring, by the Almighties Blast;
And they whose hands have bin imbrew'd in blood,
Have with their Issue dyed, for want of Food:
A Vision lately appeared before my sight,
In depth of darkness, and the dead of night,
Unwonted fear usurpt me round about,
My trembling bones were sore, from head to foot:
Forthwith, a Spirit glanced before mine eyes,
My brows did sweat, my moistened hair did rise,
The face I knew not, but a while it staid,
And in the depth of silence, thus it said,
Is man more just, more pure then his Creator?
Amongst his Angels, (more upright by nature
Then man) he has found Weakness; how much more
Shall he expect in him, that is walled ore
With mortal flesh and blood, founded, and floor'd
With Dust, and with the Worms to be devoured?
They rise securely with the Morning Sun,
And (unregarded) dye ere Day be done;
Their glory passes with them as a breath,
They die (like Fools) before they think of death.
Rage then, and see who will approve thy rage,
What Saint will give thy railing Patronage?
Anger destroys the Fool, and he that has
A wrathful heart, is slain with his own wrath;
Yet have I seen, that Fools have often been able
To boast with Babel, but have fallen with Babel:
Their sons despairing, roar without relief
In open ruin, on the Rocks of Grief:
Their harvest (though but small) the hungry eat,
And robbers seize their wealth, though never so great;
But wretched man, were thy Condition mine,
I Would not despair as thou do, nor repine,
But offer up the broken Sacrifice
Of a sad soul, before his angry eyes,
Whose works are Miracles of admiration,
He mounts the meek, amidst their Desolation*
Confounds the worldly wise, that (blindfold) they
Grope all in darkness, at the noone of day:
But guards the humble from reproach of wrong,
And stops the current of the crafty Tongue.
Thrice happy is the man his hands correct:
Beware lest Fury force thee to reject
The Almighties Trial; He that made thy wound
In Justice, can in Mercy make it sound:
Fear not though multiplied afflictions shall
Besiege thee; He, at length, will rid them all;
In Famine he shall feed, in War defend thee,
Shield thee from slander, and in griefs attend thee,
The Beasts shall strike with thee eternal Peace,
The Stones shall not disturb thy fields Increase;
Thy House shall thrive, replenisht with Content,
Which, thou shall rule, in prosperous Government,
The number of thy Offspring shall abound,
Like Summers Grass upon a fruitful Ground,
Like timely Corn well ripened in her Ears,
Thou shall depart thy life, struck full of years:
All this, Experience te^ls: Then ( Job) advise,
Thou have taught many, now thy self be wise.
Meditat. 7.
THe perfect Model of true Friendship's this:
A rare affection of the soul, which is
Begun with ripened judgment, does persever
With simple Wisdom, and concludes with Never.
It Is pure in substance, as refined Gold,
That buyeth all things, but is never sold:
It is a Coin, and most men walk without it;
True Love's the Stamp, I^hovah's writ about it;
It rusts unused, but using makes it brighter,
Against Heaven high treason it is, to make it lighter.
It Is a Gold Chain, links soul and soul together
In perfect Unity, ties God to either.
Affliction is the touch, whereby we prove,
Whether't be Gold, or gilt with fained Love.
The wisest Moralist, that ever dived
Into the depth of Natures bowels, strived
With the Augur of Experience, to bore
Men's hearts so far, till he had found the Ore
Of Friendship, but, despairing of his end,
My friends (said he) there is no perfect Friend.
Friendship's like Music, two strings tuned alike,
Will both stir, though but only one you strike.
It is the quintessence of all perfection
Extracted into one: A sweet connection
Of all the Virtues Moral and Divine,
Abstracted into one. It is a Mine,
Whose nature is not rich, unless in making
The state of others wealthy by partaking:
It bloomes and blossoms both in Sun and shade,
Does (like the Bay in winter) never fade:
It loves all, and yet suspecteth none,
Is provident, yet seeks not her own:
It Is rare it self, yet makes all things common,
And is judicious, yet it judges no man.
The noble Theban, being asked which
Of three (propounded) he supposed most rich
In virtues sacred treasure, thus replied:
Till they be dead, that doubt cannot be tryde.
It is no wisem^ns part to weigh a Friend,
Without the gloss and goodness of his End:
For Life, without the death considered, can
Afford but half a Story of the Man.
It Is not my friends affliction, that shall make
Me either Wonder, Censure, or Forsake:
Judgment belongs to Fools; enough that I
Find he is afflicted, not enquier, why:
It is the hand of Heaven, that selfsame sorrow
Grieves him to day, may make me groan to morrow
Heaven be my comfort; In my highest grief,
I will not trust to Man's, but Thy relief.
THE ARGUMENT.
Job counts his sorrows, and from thence
Excuses his impatience;
Describes the shortness of Man's Time,
And makes confession of his Crime.
Sect. 8.
But wretched Job sigh't forth these words, and said,
Ah me! that my Impatience were weighed
With all my Sorrows, by an equal hand,
They would be found more pondrous then the sand
That lies upon the new-forsaken shore:
My griefs want utterance, and have stopped their door:
And wonder not heavens shafts have struck me dead*
And God has heapt all mischiefs on my head:
Will Asses bray, when they have grass to eat?
Or lowes the Ox, when as he wants no meat?
Can palates find a relish in distaste?
Or can the whites of Eggs well please the taste?
My vexed soul is daily fed with such
Corruptions, as my hands disdain to touch.
Alas! that Heaven would hear my hearts request*
And strike me dead, that I may find some rest:
What hopes have I, to see my end of grief,
And to what end should I prolong my life?
Why should not I wish Death? My strength (alas)
Is it like Marble, or my flesh like Brass?
What power have I to mitigate my pain?
If e're I had, that power now is vain;
My friends are like the Rivers, that are dry
In heat of Summer, when necessity
Requires water; They amazed stand
To see my grief, but lend no helping hand.
Friends; beg I succor from you? Craved I
Your Goods, to ransom my Captivity?
Show me my faults, and wherein I did wrong
My Patience, and I will hold my tongue;
The force of reasonable words may moove,
But what can Rage or Lunacie reproove?
Rebuke you (then) my words to have it thought
My speech is frantic, with my grief distraught?
You take a pleasure in your friends distress,
That is more wretched than the fatherless:
Behold these sores: Be judged by your own eyes,
If these be counterfeited miseries;
Balance my words, and you shall find me free
From these foul crimes wherewith ye branded me
And that my speech was not distained with sin,
Only the language sorrow treated in.
Is not man's day prefixed, which, when expired,
Sleeps ^e not quiet as a servant hired?
A servants labor does, at length, surcease,
His Day of travel finds a Night of peace;
But (wretched) I with woes am still oprest,
My midday torments see no Even of Rest;
My nights (ordained for sleep) are filled with grief,
I look (in vain) for the next days relief:
With dust and worms my flesh is hid, my sorrows
Have plowed my skin, and filth lies in her furrows:
My days of joy are in a moment gone,
And (hopeless of returning) spent and done:
Remember (Lord) my life is but a puff,
I but a man, that is misery enough;
And when pale death has once sealed up my sight,
I never shall see the pleasures of the light,
The eye of Man shall not discover me,
No, nor thine (Lord) for I shall cease to be;
When mortals dye, they pass (like clouds before
The Sun) and back return they never more;
To His earthly house he never shall come agin,
And then shall be, as if he never had bin:
Therefore my tongue shall speak while it has breath
Prompted with grief, and with the pangs of death:
Am I not weak and faint? what needst thou stretch
Thy direful hand upon so poor a wretch?
When as I think that night shall stop the streams
Of my distress, thou frightst me then with dreams;
So that my soul does rather choose to dye,
Than be involved in such misery;
My life's a burden, and will end: O grieve
No longer him, that would no longer live.
Ah! what is Man, tha^ thou should raise him so
High at the first, then sink him down so low?
What Is man? thy glory's great enough without him:
Why do thou (thus) disturb thy mind about him?
Lord, I have sinned (Great Helper of Mankind)
I am but Dust and Ashes, I have sinned:
Against the^ (as a mark) why have thou fixed me?
How have I trespast, that thou thus afflict'st mo?
Why, rather, did thou not remove my sin,
And salve the sorrows that I raved in?
For thou have heapt such vengeance on my head;
That when thou seekst me thou will find me dead.
Meditat. 8.
The Egyptians, amidst their sollemne Feasts,
Used to welcome, and present their Guests
With the sad sight of Man's Anatomy,
Served in with this loud Motto, All must dye.
Fools often go about, when as they may
Take better vantage of a nearer way.
Look well into your bosoms; do not flatter
Your known infirmities: Behold, what matter
Your flesh was made of: Man, cast back thine eye
Upon the weakness of thine Infancye;
See how thy lips hang on thy mothers Breast,
Bawling for help, more helpless then a Beast,
Liv'st thou to childhood? then, behold, what toies
Do mock the sense, how shallow are thy joys.
Come thou to downy years? see, how deceits
Gull thee with golden fruit, and with false baits
Slily beguile the prime of thy affection.
Art thou attained at length to full perfection
Of ripened years? Ambition has now sent
Thee on her frothy errand, Discontent
Pays thee thy wages. Do thy grizly hairs
Begin to cast account of many cares
Upon thy head? The sacred lust of gold
Now fits thy spirit, for fleshly lust, too cold,
Makes thee a slave to thine own base desire,
Which melts and hardens, at the selfsame Fire.
Art thou de^repit? Then thy very breath
I^ grievous to thee, and each griefe's a death:
Look where thou list, thy life is but a span,
Thou art but dust, and, to conclude, A Man.
Thy life's a Warfare, thou a Soldier art,
Satan's thy Foe-man, and a faithful Heart
Thy two-edged Weapon, Patience thy Shield,
Heaven is thy Chiefetain, and the world thy Field.
To be afraid to dye, or wish for death,
Are words and passions of despairing breath:
Who does the first, the day does faintly yield,
And who the second, basely flies the field.
Man's not a lawful Stearsman of his days,
His bootlesse wish, nor hastens, nor delays:
We are Gods hired Workmen, he discharges
Some, late at night, and (when he list) inlarges
Others at noone, and in the morning some:
None may relieve himself, till he bid, Come:
If we receive for one half day, as much
As they that toil till evening, shall we grutch?
Our life's a Road, in death our Journey ends,
We go on Gods Embassage, some he sends
Galled with the ^^otting of hard Misery,
And others, pacing on Prosperity:
Some lagge, whilst others gallop on, before;
All go an end, some faster, and some slower.
Lead me that pase (great God) that thou think best,
And I will follow with a dauntlesse breast:
Which (ne'rethelesse) if I refuse to do,
I shall be wicked, and yet follow to.
Assist me in my Combat with the flesh,
Relieve my fainting powers, and refresh
My feeble spirit: I will not wish to be
Cast from the world; Lord, cast the world from me.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bildad, man's either state expresses,
Gods Mercy and Justice Job confesses;
He pleads his cause, and begs relief,
Foild with the burden of his grief.
Sect. 9.
SO Bildads silence (great with tongue) did break,
And, like a heartlesse Comforter did speak:
How long will thou persist to breathe thy mind
In words that vanish as a storm of wind;
Will God forsake the innoc^nt, or will
His Justice smite thee, undeserving ill?
Though righteous death thy sinful sons has rent
From thy sad bosom, yet if thou repent,
And wash thy ways with undissembled tears,
Tuning thy troubles to the Almighties ears,
The mercy of his eyes shall shine upon thee:
And shoure the sweetness of his blessings on thee:
And though a while thou plunge in misery,
At length heel crown thee with prosperity:
Run back, and ^earne of sage Antiquity,
What our late births, to present times, deny,
See how, and what (in the worlds downy age)
Befell our Fathers in their Pilgrimage;
If Rushes have no mire, and Grass no rain,
They cease to flourish, droop their heads, ^ waine:
So fades the man* whose heart is not upright,
So perishes the double Hypocrite;
His hopes are like the Spiders web, to day
That Is flourishing, to morrow swept away:
But he that is just is like the flowting tree,
Rooted by Crystal Springs, that cannot be
Scorcht by the noone of day, nor stird from thence,
Where, firmly fixed, it has a residence;
Heaven^never fails the soul that is upright,
Nor offers arm to the base Hypo^rite:
The one, he blesses with eternal joys,
The other, his avenging hand destroys.
I yield it for a truth, (sad Job replied)
Compared with God, can man be justified?
If man should give account what he has done,
Not of a thousand can he answer one:
His hand's all-Power, and his heart all pure,
Against this God, what man can stand secure?
He shakes the Moun^aines, and the Sun he bars
From circling his due course, shuts up the Stars,
He spreades the Heavens, and rides on the Flood,
His works may be admired, not understood:
No eye can see, no heart can apprehend him:
Lists he to spoil? what is he can reprehen^ him?
His Will's his Law. The smoothest pleader has
No power in his lips, to slake his Wrath,
Much less can I plead fair immunity,
Which could my guiltless tongue attain, yet I
Would kiss the Footstep of his Iudgement-seat:
Should he receive my cry, my griefe's so great,
It would persuade me, that he heard it not,
For he has torn me with the five-fold knot
Of his sharp Scourge, his plagues successive are,
That I can find no ground, but of Despair.
If my ^^old lips should dare to justify
My self, my lips would give my lips the lie.
God owes his mercy, nor to good, nor bad;
The wicked often he spares, and often does add
Grief to the just man's grief, woes after woes;
We must not judge man, as his Market goes.
But might my prayers obtain this boon, that God
Would cease those sorrows, and remove that Rod,
Which moves my patience; I would take upon me,
T'implead before him, your rash judgment on me,
Because my tender Conscience does persuade me,
I Am not so bad, as your bad Words have made me.
My life is tedious, my distress shall break
Into her proper Voice, my griefs shall speak;
(Just judge of Earth) condemn me not, before
Thou please to make me understand wherefore
Agrees it with thy Justice, thus to be
Kind to the wicked, and so harsh to Me?
See thou with fleshly eyes? or do they glance
By favor? Are they closed with Ignorance?
Liv'st thou the life of man? Do thou desire
A space of time to search, or to enquire
My sin? No, in the twinkling of an eye
Thou see my heart, see my Immunity
From those foul crimes, wherewith my friends at pleasure
Tax me, yet thou afflict'st me, in this Measure:
Thy hands have formed, and framed me, what I am,
When thou have made, will thou destroy the same?
Remember, I am built of Clay, and must
Return again (without thy help) to Dust.
Thou did create, preserve me, have indu'd
My life with gracious blessings often renewed
Thy precious favors on me: How were thou,
Once, so benign, and so cruel now?
Thou hunt'st me like a Prey, my plagues increase,
Succeed each other, and they never cease.
Why was I borne? Or why did not my Tomb
Receive me (weeping) from my mothers womb*
I have not long to live; Lord grant that I
May see some comfort, that am soon to dye.
Meditat. 9.
HE that is the truest Master of his own,
Is never ^esse alone, than when alone;
His watchful eyes are placed within his heart;
His skill, is how to know himself* his Art,
How to command the pride of his Affections,
With sacred Reason: how to give directions
Unto his wandering Will; His conscience checks hi^
More looser thoughts; His (...) sins, she vexes
With frights, and fears within her own precincts,
She rambles with her Whips of wire, never (...)
At smallest faults, like as a tender Mother
(How e're she loves her darling) will not (...)
His childish fault* but she (her self) will rather
Correct, than trust him to his angry Fat^^er:
Even so, the tender Conscience of the wise,
Che^ks her beloved soul, and does chastise,
And Judge the crime it self, lest it should stand
As liable to a severer hand.
Fond soul beware, who e're thou art, that spies
Another fault, that thou thine own chastise,
Lest, like a foolish man, thou judge another,
In those selfe-crimes, which in your breast you smother^
Who undertakes to dreine his brothers eye
Of noisome Humors, first, must clarify
His own, lest when his brothers blemish is
Removed, he spy a fouler Blame in his.
It is beyond the extent of Man's Commission,
To judge of Man: The secret disposition
Of Sacred Providence is locked, and sealed
From man's conceit, and not to be revealed,
Until that Lamb break open the Seal and come,
With life and death, to give the world her doom.
The groundwork of our faith must not rely
On bare Events; Peace and Prosperity
Are goodly favors, but no proper Mark,
Wherewith God brands his Sheep: No outward bark
Secures the body to be sound within.
The Rich man lived in Scarlet^ dyed in Sin.
Behold the afflicted man; affliction moves
Compassion; but no confusion proves.
A gloomy Day brings often a glorious Even:
The Poor man died with sores, and lives in heaven.
To good and bad, both fortunes Heaven does share
That both, an after-change, may hope, and fear.
I Will hope the best, (Lord) leave the rest to thee,
Lest while I judge another, thou judge me;
It Is one man's work to have a serious sight
Of his own sins, and judge himself aright.
THE ARGUMENT.
Zophar blames Job; Job equal makes
His wisdom unto theirs: He takes
In hand to plead with God; and then
Describes the frail estate of men.
Sect. 10.
THen Zophar from deep silence, did awake
His words, with louder language, and bespake:
Shall Pratlers be unanswe'rd, or shall such
Be counted just, that speak, for babbling much?
Shall thy words stop our mouths, he that has blamd
And scoft at others, shall he die unsham'd?
Our cares have heard thee, when thou have excused
Thy self of evil, and thy God accused:
But if thy God should plead with thee at large,
Thou Would reap the sorrows of a double charge.
Can^t thou, by deep inquiry, understand
The hidden Justice of the Almighties hand?
Heavens large dimensions cannot comprehend him;
What e're he do, what is he can reprehend him?
What refuge have thou then, but to present
A heart, inricht with the sad compliment
Of a true convert, on thy bended knee,
Before thy God, t'attone thy God and thee?
Then doubt not, but he will rear thee from thy sorrow,
Disperse thy Clouds, and like a shining Morrow,
Make clear the Sunbeams of Prosperity,
And rest thy soul in sweet Security.
But he, whose heart obdur'd in sin, persists,
His hopes shall vanish, as the morning Mists.
But Job, even as a Ball against the ground
Banded with violence, did thus rebound:
You are the only wisemen, in your breasts
The hidden Magazen of true Wisdom rests,
Yet (though astund with sorrows) do I know
A little, and (perchance) as much as you;
I Am scorned of my Friends, whose prosperous state
Surmises me (that have expired the date
Of earths fair Fortunes) to be cast away
From heavens regard, think none beloved, but they;
I am despised, like a Torch, that is spent,
Whiles that the wicked blazes in his Tent:
What have your wisdoms taught me, more tha^ that
Which birds and beasts (could they but fpeak) would chat?
Digests the Stomach, e're the Pallat tastes?
O weigh my Words, before you judge my case.
But you refer me to our Fathers days,
To be instructed in their wiser Lays*
True, length of days brings Wisdom; but, I say,
I have a wiser teaches me, than they:
For I am taught, and tutored by that Hand,
Whose unresisted power does command
The limits of the Earth, whose VVisdome schools
And trains the simple, makes the learned fools:
His hand does raise the poor, deposes Kings;
On him, both Order, and the change of things
Depend; he searches, and brings forth the light
From out the shadows, and the depth of night.
All this, mine own Experience has found true,
And in all this, I know as much as you.
But you aver, If I should plead with God,
That he would double his severer Rod.
Your tongue belies his Justice, you apply
Amiss, your Medicine, to my Malady;
In silence, you would seem more wise, less weak;
You having spoke, now lend me leave to speak.
Will you do wrong, to do Gods Justice right?
Are you his Counsel? Need you help to fight
His quarrels? Or expect you his applause,
Thus (bribed with self-conceit) to plead his cause?
Iudgement's your Fee, when as you take in hand
Heavens cause, to plead it, and not Heaven command.
If that the foulness of your censures could
Not fright you, yet, me thinks, his greatness should,
Whose Justice you make Patron of your lies;
Your slender Maxims, and false Forgeries
Are substanc't like thedust that flies besides me;
Peace then, and I will speak, what e're betides me:
My soul is on the rack, my tears have drowned me,
Yet will I trust my God, though God confound me;
He, He Is my Tower of strength; No hypocrite
Stands, unconfounded, in his glorious sight:
Balance my words; I know my case would quit
Me from your censures, should I argue it.
Who takes the Plaintifes pleading? Come, for I
Must plead my right, or else perforce must die.
With thee (great Lord of Heaven) I dare dispute,
If thou will grant me this my double Suit;
First, that thou slake these sorrows that surrou^d me;
Then, that thy burning Face do not confound me;
Which granted, then take thou thy choice, let me
Propound the question, or, else answer Thee.
Why do thou thus pursue me, like thy Foe?
For what great sin do thou afflict me so?
Break'st thou a withred Leaf, thy Justice does
Sum up the reckonings of my sinful youth:
Thou keep'st me prisoner, bound in fetters fast,
And, like a threadbare garment do I wast.
Man borne of Woman, has but a short while
To live, his days are fleet, and full of toil;
He Is like a Flower shooting forth and dying,
His life is as a Shadow, swiftly flying.
Ah! b'ing so poor a thing; what needst thou mind him?
The number of his days thou have confined him;
Then add not plagues unto his Grief, O give
Him peace, that has so small a time to live:
Tree's that are felled, may sprout again, man never;
His days are numbered, and he dies for ever;
He Is like a Mist, exhaled by the Sun,
His days once done, they are for ever done.
O that thy Hand would hide me close, and cover
Me in the Grave, till all thy Wrath were over!
My desperate sorrows hope for no relief,
Yet will I wait my Change. My day of grief
Will be exchanged for an Eternal day
Of joy: But now, thou do not spare to lay
Full heaps of vengeance on my broken soul,
And writ^st my sins upon an ample scrowle;
As ^ountaines (being shaken) fall, and Rocks
(Though firm) are worn, and rent with many knocks:
So strongest men are batterd with thy strength,
Loose ground, returning to the Ground at length:
So mortals die, and (being dead) never mind
The fairest fortunes that they leave behind.
While man is man (until that death bereave him
Of his last breath) his griefs shall never leave him.
Meditat. 10.
Does History then, and sage Chronologi^,
(The Index, pointing to Antiquity,)
So firmly grounded on deep Judgment, guarded,
And kept by so much Miracle, rewarded
With so great glory, serve, but as slight Fables,
To edge the dullness of men's wanton Tables,
And claw their itching ears? Or do they, rather
Like a conci^e Abridgement, serve to gather
Man's high Adventures, and his transitory
Achievements to express his Makers glory?
Acts, that have blown the lowdest Trumpe of Fame
Are all, but humors, purchas't in His name.
Is he, that (yesterday) went forth, to bring
His Fathers Asses home, (to day) crowned King?
Did he, that now on his brave Palace stood,
Boasting his Babels beauty, chew the cud
An hour after? Have not Babes been crowned,
And mighty Monarchs beaten to the ground?
Man undertakes, heaven breathes success upon it;
What good, what evil is done, but heaven has done it?
The Man to whom the world was not ashamed
To yield her Colors, he that was proclaimed
A God in humane shape, whose dreadful voice
Did strike men dead like Thunder, at the noise;
Was rent away, from his Imperial Throne,
Before his flower of youth was fully blown,
His race was rooted out, his Issue slain,
And left his Empire to another strain.
Who that did e're behold the ancient Rome,
Would rashly, given her glory such a doom,
Or thought her subject to such alterations,
That was the Mistress, and the Queen of Nations?
Egypt, that in her walls, had once engrost
More Wisdom, than the world besides, has lost
Her senses now: Her wisest men of State,
Are turned, like Puppets, to be pointed at:
If Romes great power, and Egypts wisdom can
Not aid themselves how poor a thing is Man?
God plays with Kingdoms, as with Tennis-balls,
Fells some that rise, and raises some that falls:
Nor policy can prevent, nor secret Fate,
Where Heaven has pleased to blow upon a State.
If States be not secure, nor Kingdoms, than
How helpelesse (Ah!) how poor a thing is Man!
Man's like a flower, the while he has to last,
He Is nipt with frost, and shook with every blast,
He Is borne in sorrow, and brought up in tears,
He lives a while in sin, and dies in fears.
Lord, I Will not boast, what e're thou give unto me,
Lest e're my brag be done, thou take it from me.
No man may boast but of his own, I can
Then boast of nothing, for I am a Man.
THE ARGUMENT.
Rash Eliphaz does aggravate
The sins of Job, malign's his fl^te,
Whom Job reproving, justifies
Himself, bewailes his miseries.
Sect. 11.
Does vain repining ( Eliphaz replies)
Or words, like wind, beseem the man that is wise?
Ahsure, thy faithless heart rejects the fear
Of heaven, do not acquaint thy lips with prayer:
Thy words accuse thy heart of Impudence,
Thy tongue (not I) brings in the Evidence:
Art thou the first of men? Do Mysteries
Unfold to thee? Art thou the only wise?
Wherein has Wisdom been more good to you
Then us? What know you, that we never knew?
Reverence, not Censure, fits a young man's eyes,
We are your Ancients, and should be as wise;
It't not enough, your Arrogance derides
Our counsels, but must scorn thy God besides?
Angels (if God in quier) strictly must
Not plead Perfection: then can man be just?
It is a truth received, these aged eyes
Have seen't, and is confirmed by the wise,
That still the wicked man is void of rest,
Is always fearful; falls when he fears least,
In trouble he despaires, and is dejected,
He begs his bread, his death comes unexpected,
In his adversity, his griefs shall gaul him,
And, like a raging Tyrant, shall in th^all him,
He shall advance against his God, in vain,
For Heaven shall crush and beat him down again,
What i^ his Garners thrive, and goods increase?
They shall not prosper, nor he live in peace,
Eternal horror shall beg^^t him round,
And vengeance shall both him and his confound,
Amidst his joys, despair shall stop his breath,
His sons shall perish, with untimely death;
The double soul shall die, and in the hollow
Of all false hearts, fal^e hearts themselves shall swallow.
Then answered Job, All this, before I knew,
They want no grief, that find such friends as you?
Ah, cease your words, the fruits of ill spent hours!
If heaven should please to make my fortunes yours,
I would not scoff you, nor with taunts torment ye,
My lips should comfort, and these eyes lament ye:
What shall I do, speak not, my griefs oppress
My soul, or speak (alas) they are never thelesse;
Lord I am wasted, and my pangs have spent me,
My skin is wrink^ed, for thy hand has rent me,
Mine enemies have smit me in disdain,
Laughed at my torments, jested at my pain:
I swelled in wealth, but (now) alas, am poor
And (feld with woe) lie grovelling on the floor,
In dust and sackcloth I lament my sorrows,
Thy Hand has trencht my cheeks with water furrows,
Nor can I comprehend the cause, that this
My smart should be so grievous as it is:
Oh earth! if then an Hypocrite I be,
Cover my cries, as I do cover thee,
And witness Heaven, that these my Vows be tru^
(Ah friends!) I spend my tears to Heaven, not you.
My time's but short, (alas!) would then that I
Might try my cause with God before I dye.
Since then I languish, and not far from dead,
^et me a while with my Accusers plead
(Before the Judge of heaven and earth) my right:
Have they not wronged, and vexed me day and night?
Who first, lays down his Gage, to meet me? Say,
I doubt not (Heaven being Judge) to win the day:
You Will say perchance, we will recompell your word,
E're simple truth should unawares afford
Your discontent; No, no, forbear, for I
Hate less your Censures, then your flattery;
I am become a Byword, and a Tabor,
To set the tongues, and ears of men, in labor,
Mine eyes are dim, my body's but a shade,
Good men that see my case, will be afraid,
But not confounded; They will hold their way,
And in a bad, they will hope a better day;
Recant your errors, for I cannot see
One man that is truly wise among you Three;
My days are gone, my thoughts are mis-possest,
The silent night, that heaven ordained for rest,
My day of travel is, but I shall have
E're long* long peace, within my welcome grave;
My nearest kindred are the worms, the earth
My mother, for she gave me first my birth;
Where are my hopes then? where that future joy,
Which you fals-prophecy'd I should enjoy?
Both hopes, and I alike, shall travel thither,
Where, closed in dust, we shall remain together.
Meditat. 11.
THe Moral Poets, (nor unaptly) feign,
That by lame Vulcans help, the pregnant brain
Of sovereign love, brought forth, and at that birth,
Was borne Minerva, Lady of the earth.
O strange Divinity! but sung by rote;
Sweet is the tune, but in a wider note.
The Moral says, All Wisdom that is given
To hood-wink't mortals, first proceeds from heaven
Truth's error, Wisedom's but wise insolence,
And light's but darkness, not derived from thence;
Wisedom's a strain, transcends Morality,
No Vertu's absent, Wisdom being by.
Virtue, by constant practice, is acquired,
This (this by sweat unpurchas't) is inspired:
The masterpiece of knowledge, is to know
But what is good, from what is good in show,
And there it rests: Wisdom proceeds, and chooses
The seeming evil, the apparent good refuses;
Knowledge descries alone; Wisdom applies,
That makes some fools; this, makes none but wise:
The curious hand of knowledge does but pick
^are simples, wisdom pounds them, for the sick;
In my afflictions knowledge apprehends,
Who is the Author, what the Cause, and Ends,
It finds that Patience is my sad relief,
And that the hand that caused, can cure my grief:
To rest contented here, is but to bring
Clouds without rain, and heat without a Spring:
What hope arises hence? The Devils do
The very same: They know, and tremble too;
But sacred Wisdom does apply that good,
Which simple knowledge barely understood:
Wisdom concludes, and in conclusion, proves,
That wheresoever God corrects, he loves:
Wisdom digests, what knowledge did but taste,
That deals in futures; this, in things are past:
Wisdome's the Card of knowledge, which, without
That Guide, at random's wreck't on every doubt:
Knowledge, when wisdom is too weak to guide her
Is like a headstrong horse, that throws the rider:
Which made that great Philosopher avow,
He knew so much, that he did nothing know.
Lord, give me Wisdom to direct my ways,
I beg nor riches, nor yet length of days:
O grant thy servant Wisdom, and with it,
I shall receive such knowledge as will fit
To serve my turn: I wish not Phoebus waine,
Without his skill to drive it, lest I gain
Too dear an Honor: Lord, I will not stay,
To pick more Manna, then will serve to day.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bildad, the whilst he makes a show
To strike the wicked, gives the blow
To Job: Jobs misery, and faith;
Zophar makes good what Bildad says.
Sect. 12.
SAid Bildad then, When will ye bring to end
The speeches whereabout ye so contend?
Weigh eithers words, lest ignorant confusion
Debar them of their purposed conclusion:
We came to comfort, fits it then that we
Be thought as beasts, or fools accounted be?
But thou, Job, (like a madman) would thou force
God, to desist his order, and set course
Of Justice? shall the wicked, for thy sake
(That would not taste of evil) in good partake?
No, no, his Lamp shall blaze, and dye, his strength
Shall fail, and shall confound it self, at length
He shall be hampred with close hidden snares,
And dogged, where e're he starts, with troops of fears;
Hunger shall bite, destruction shall attend him,
His skin shall rot, the worst of deaths shall end him:
His fear, shall be a thousand linkt together,
His branch above, his root beneath shall wither,
His name shall sleep in dust, in dust decay,
Odious to all, by all men chas't away,
No Son shall keep alive his House, his Name,
And none shall thrive, that can alliance clame,
The after-age shall stand amazed, to hear
His fall, and they that see it, shall shake for fear:
Thus stands the state of him that does amiss,
And (Job) what other is thy case, then this?
But Job replied, how long, (as with sharp swords)
Will ye torment me, with your pointed words?
How often have your biting tongues defamed
My simple Innocence, and yet unsham^d?
Had I deserved these plagues, yet let my g^iefe
Express it self, though it find no relief;
But if you needs must wear your tongues upon me
Know, It Is the hand of God has overthrown me;
I roar, unheard; his hand will not release me;
The more I grieve, the more my griefs oppress me,
He has despoyl'd my joys, and goes about
(My branches being lopt) to story the Root;
His plagues, like soldiers trench within my bones
My friends, my kindred fly me all at once,
My neighbors, my ^amiliars have forgone me,
My household stares, with strangers eyes, upon me:
I call my servant, but his lips are dumb,
I humbly beg his help, but he will not come:
My own wife loathes my breath though I did make
^y solemn suit, for our dead childrens sake:
The poor, whose wants I have supplied, despise me,
And he that lived within my breast, denies me:
My bones are hide-bound, there cannot be found
One piece of skin, (unless my gums) that is sound.
Alas! complaints are barren shadows, to
Express, or cure the substance of my woe.
Have pity, (oh my friends) have pity on me,
It Is your Gods hand and mine, that lies upon me,
Vex me no more. O let your anger be
(If I have wronged you) calmed with what ye see;
O! that my speeches were engraven, then,
In Marble Tablets, with an iron Pen:
For sure I am, that my Redeemer lives,
And though pale death consume my flesh, and gives
My Carkas to the worms yet am I sure,
Clad with this self-same flesh (but made more pure)
I shall behold His glory; These sad eyes
Shall see his Face, how-e're my body lies
Mouldred in dust; These fleshly eyes, that do
Behold these Sores, shall see my Maker too.
Unequal hearers of unequal grief,
You Are all engaged to the selfe^same belief;
Know there is a Judge, whose voice will be as free,
To judge your words, as you have judged me.
Said Zoph^r then, I purposed to refrain
From speaking, but thou mov'st me back again:
For having heard thy haughty spirit break
Such hasty terms, my spirit bids me speak:
Has not the change of Ages, and of Climes,
Taught us, as we shall our succeeding times,
How vain's the triumph, and how short the blaze,
Wherein the wicked sweeten out their days?
Though for a while his Palms of glory flourish,
Yet, in conclusion they grow sere, and perish:
His life is like a Dream, that passes over,
The eye that saw him, never shall see him more*
The Son shall flattter, whom the Sire oppressed,
And (poor) he shall return, what he did wrest;
He shall be bayted with the sins, that have
So smiled upon his Childhood, to his Grave;
His plenty (purchas't by oppression) shall
Be honey, tasted* but digested, Gall;
It shall not bless him with prolonged stay,
But evilly come, it soon shall pass away;
The Man, whose griping has the poor oppressed,
Shall neither thrive in state, nor yet find rest
In soul, naught of his fullness shall remain,
His greedy Heir shall long expect in vain;
Soak't with extorted plenty, others shall
Squeeze him, and leave him dispossessed of all;
And when his joys do in their height a bound,
Vengeance shall strike him groaning, to the ground
If Swords forbear to wound him, Arrows shall,
Returning forth, anointed with his Gall;
No shade shall hide him, and an unblowne Fire
Shall burn both him and his. Heaven, like a Crier
Shall blaze his shame, and Earth shall stand his foe,
His wandering Children shall no dwelling know;
Behold the man's estate, whom God denies,
Behold thine own, pourtraicted to thine Eyes.
Meditat. 12.
CAn mercy come from bloody C^in? Or has
His angry Brow a smile? or can his wrath
Be quenched with ought, but righteous Abels blood?
Can guilty Prisoners hope for any good
From the severer Judge, whose dismal breath
Dooms them to die, breaths nothing else but death
Ah righteous Judge! wherein has Man to trust?
Man has offended, and thy Laws are just;
Thou frownest like a Judge, but I had rather,
That thou would smile upon me like a Father,
What if thy Esau be austere and rough?
Thou have a Jacob that is smooth enough:
Thy Jacobs tender Kid brings forth a blessing,
While Esaus tedious Ven'zon is a dressing.
Thy face has smiles, as well as frowns, by turns;
Thy fire gives light as well as burns?
What if the Serpent stung old Adam dead:
Young Adam lives, to break that Serpents head?
Justice has struck me with a bleeding wound,
But Mercy poures in Oil, to make it sound.
The milk-white Lamb confounds the roaring Lion,
Blasted by Sinah, I am healed by Sion:
The Law finds guilty, and Death Judgment gives,
But sure I am, that my Redeemer lives.
How wretched was man's case, in those dark days
When Law was only read? Which Law dismayes
And, taking vantage, through the breach of it,
The Letter kills, and can no way admit
Release by pardon; for by Law we dye.
Why then hoped man, without a reason Why?
Although there was no Sun, their Morning eyes
Saw by the Twilight, that the Sun would rise.
The Law was like a mistie Looking-glass,
Wherein the shadow of a Savior was,
Treats in a darker strain by Types and Signs,
And what should pass in after-dayes, divines.
The Gospel says, that he is come and dead,
And thus the Riddle of the Law is read.
Gospel is Law, the Mystery being sealed;
And Law is Gospel, being once revealed.
Experience tells us when as birth denies
To man (through Natures oversight) his eyes,
Nature (whose curious works are never vain)
Supplies them, in the power of his Brain:
So they, whose eyes were barred that glorious sight
Of the Messiah's day, received more Light,
(Inspired by the breath of Heaven) then they,
That heard the tidings of that happy day.
The man, that with a sharp contracted eye,
Looks in a clear Perspective-Glasse, does spi^
Objects remote, which to the sense appear
(Through help of the Perspective) seeming near.
So they that lived within the Laws Dominion,
Did hear far off, a bruit and buzzed Opinion,
A Savior one day should be borne; but he
That had a Perspective of Faith, might see
That long-expected day of joy as clear,
As if the triumph had been then kept there.
Lord, so direct me in thy perfect Way,
That I may look, and smile upon that Day:
O! bathe me in his blood, sponge every stain,
That I may boldly sue my Counter-paine:
O! make me glorious in the doom he gives,
For sure I am, that my Redeemer lives.
THE ARGUMENT.
Earths happiness is not Heavens brand:
A rash recounting of Job's crimes:
Job trusts him to the Almighties hand:
God ties his Judgments, not to Times.
Sect. 31.
THen Job replyde: O, let your patience prove,
You came (not to afflict me but) in Love.
O! bear with me, and hear me speak at leisure,
My speech once ended, mock, and scoff your pleasure
Myst'ries I treat, not Toys; If then I range
A thought beyond my self, it is not strange;
Behold my case, and stand amazed, forbear me!
Be still, and in your deeper silence hear me.
Search you the hearts of men (my Friends) or can
You judge the Inward, by the Outward Man?
How haps the wicked then, so sound in health,
So ripe in years, so prosperous in wealth?
They multiply, their house is filled with Peace,
They pass unplagu'd, their fruitful flocks increase
Their children thrive in joyful melody,
Prosperous they live, and peacefully they dye;
Renounce us (God) say they (if God there be,)
What need we knowledge of thy Word or Thee?
What is the Almighty, that we should adore him?
What hoots our prayer, or us to fall before him?
It Is not by chance, their vain Prosperity
Crowns them with store, or Heaven; not knowing why:
But you affirm, That in conclusion they
Shall fall; But not so sudden, as you say:
But can ye limit forth the space, confine
How long, or when their lamps shall cease to shine?
Will any of you undertake to teach
Your Maker, things so far above your reach?
The bad man lives in plenty, dies in peace:
The good, as do his hours, his griefs increase;
Yet both the good and bad alike shall have,
Though lives much differing, yet one common grave
I know your mining thoughts; You will demand,
Where is the wickeds power? And where stand
Their lof^y buildings? Are they to be seen?
Enquire of wandering Pilgrims that have been
Experienced in the Road; and they' lrelate
The Princely greatness of their Tow^'s and State:
Live any more secure then they? Or who
Dare once reprove them, for the deeds thy do?
He lives in power, and in peace he dies,
Attended in his pompeous Obsequies.
How vain are then the comforts of your breath,
That censure goodness, or by Life or Death?
Said Eliph^z; What then remains? Thy tongue
Has quit thy self, accused thy God of wrong.
Gains he by man's uprightness? Can man add
To his perfection, what he never had?
Fears he the strength of Man? does he torment him
Lest that his untamed power should prevent him?
What need I wast this breath? Recall thy senses,
And take the Inventory of thy' offenses:
Thou tookst the poor man's Pawn, nor have thou fed
Thy needy Brother, with thy prosperous Bread;
Thy hands perverted Justice, and have spoiled
The hopeless Widow, with her helpless child.
Hence spring thy sorrows (Job) It Is Justice, then
Thou shouldst-bee plagued, that thus plagued other men;
Is heaven just? Can heavens just Creator
Let pass (unpunisht) Sins of so high nature?
Has not experience taught, that for a while,
The Wicked may exalt their Crests, and smile,
Blown up with Insolence: But in conclusion
They fall, and good men laugh at their confusion?
Job, add not sin to sin, cease to beguile
Thy self, thinking to quench thy fire with Oil;
Return thee to thy God, confess thy crimes;
Return, and he will crown thy after times
With former Blessings, and thy Riches shall
Be as the Sand: for God is all in all;
His face shall welcome thee, and smile upon thee,
And cease that mischief his just hand has done thee*
He shall be pleased with thy holy Fires,
And grant the issue of thy best Desires.
Job answered then: Although my soul be faint,
And griefs weigh down the scale of my complaint,
Yet would I plead my cause (which you defamed)
Before my Maker, and would plead, unsham'd;
Could I but find him, I would take upon me,
To quite the censures you have passed on me,
His Justice has no limits, is extended
Beyond conceit, by man vnapprehended,
Let Heaven be Vmpire, and make Arbitration,
Betwixt my guiltless heart, and your taxa^ion,
My Embrion thoughts and words are all enrolled,
Pure will he find them, as refined Gold;
His steps I followed, and uprightly stood;
His Laws have been my guide, his words my food;
Has he but once decreed? (alas!) there is none
Can bar: for what he wills, must needs be done;
His Will's a Law: If he have doomed that I
Shall still be plagued, it is bootlesse to reply.
Hence comes it, that my sore afflicted spright
Trembles, and stands confounded at his sight;
His hand has struck my spirits in a maze,
For I can neither end my Griefs nor days.
Why should not times in all things be forbid,
When to the just, their time of sorrow's hid?
Some move their Land marks, rob their neighbor flocks;
Others in gage* receive the widows ox,
Some grind the poor, while others seek the prey;
They reap their Harvest, bear their grain away;
Men press their Oil, and they distraine their store,
And rend the Gleanings from the hungry poor.
The City roares, the blood which they have spent,
Cries (unrevenged) for equal punishment;
Early they murder, and rob late at night,
They trade in Darkness, for they hate the Light*
They sin (unpunisht) thriving, uncontrold,
And what by force they got, by force they hold.
O friends! repeal your words, your speeches bring
No lawful issue, prove not any thing:
Your deeper wisdoms argue in (effect)
That God does, or not know, or else neglect:
Conclude with me, or prove my words untrue,
I must be found the liar, or else you.
Meditat. 13.
THe wisest men that Nature ere could boast,
For secret knowledge of her power, were lo^t,
Confounded, and in deep amazement stood,
In the discovery of the Chiefest Good:
Keenly they hunted, beat in every bracke,
Forwards they went, on either hand, and back
Returned they counter; but their deep-mouthed art,
(Though often challenged sent, yet) never could start
In all the Enclosures of Philosophy,
That Game, from squat, they term, Felicity:
They jangle; and their Maxims disagree,
As many men, so many minds there be.
One digs to Pluto's Throne, thinks there to find
Her Grace* raked up in Gold: another mind
Mounts to the Courts of Kings, with plumes of honor,
And feathered hopes, hopes there to seize upon her;
A third, unlocks the painted Gate of Pleasure,
And ransacks there, to find this peerlesse Treasure.
A fourth, more sage, more wisely melancholy,
Persuades himself, her Deity's too holy
For common hands to touch, he rather chooses,
To make a long days journey to the Muses:
To Athens (gown'd) he goes, and from that School
Returns unsped, a more instructed fool.
Where lies she then? Or lies she any where?
Honors are bought and sold, she rests not there,
Much less in Pleasures has she her abiding,
For they are shared to Beasts, and ever sliding;
Nor yet in Virtue, Virtue's often poor,
And (crushed with fortune) begs from door to door,
Nor is she sainted in the Shrine of wealth;
That, makes men slaves, is unsecur'd from stealth;
Conclude we then, Felicity confists
Not in exterior Fortunes, but her lists
Are boundless, and her large extension
Out-runnes the pace of humane apprehension;
Fortunes are seldom measured by desert,
The fairer face has often the fouler heart;
Sacred Felicity does never extend
Beyond it self: In it all wishes end:
The swelling of an outward Fortune can
Create a prosperous, not a happy man;
A peaceful Conscience is the true Content,
And Wealth is but her golden Ornament.
I care not so my Kernel relish well,
How slender be the substance of my shell;
My heart b^ing virtuous, let my face be wan,
I am to God, I only seem to man.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bildad shows man's impurity;
Job se^teth forth the Almighties power,
Pleads still his own integrity:
Gods Wisdom no man can discover.
Sect. 14.
SAid Bildad then, With whom do thou contest,
But with thy Maker, that lives ever blessed?
His power is infinite, man's light is dim;
And knowledge darkness not derived from him?
Say then, who can be just before him? No man
Can challenge Purity, that is borne of Woman.
The greater Torch of heaven in his sight,
Shall be ashamed, and lose his purer light;
Much less can man, that is but living Dust,
And but a ^airer Worm, be pure and just.
Whereat Job thus: Does heavens high judgment stand
To be supported by thy weaker hand?
Wants he thy help? To whom do thou extend
These these thy lavish lips, and to what end?
No, He Is Almighty, and his Power does give
Each thing his Being, and by him they live:
To him is nothing dark, his sovereign hands
Whirle round the restless Orbs, his power commands
The even^pois'd Earth; The water-pots of heaven
He empties at his pleasure, and has given
Appointed lists, to keep the Waters under;
The trembling skies he strikes amazed, with thu^der:
These, these the Trophies of his Power be,
Where is there e're a such a God as He?
My friends, these ears have heard your censures on me,
And heave^s sharp hand does weigh so hard upon me*
So languishing in grief, that no defense
Seems to remain, to shield my Innocence:
Yet while my soul a gasp of breath affords
I Will not distrust my Maker, nor your words
Deserve, which heaven fo^fend, that ever I
Prove true, but I Will plead guiltless till I dye,
While I have breath, my pangs shall never persuade me
To wander, and revolt from Him that made me.
E're such thoughts spring from this confused bre^t,
Let death and tortures do their worst, their best.
What gains the Hypocrite, although the whole
Worlds wealth he purchase, with the prize on's soul?
Will heaven hear the voice of his disease?
Can he repent, and turn, when e're he please?
True, God does sometime plague with open shame
The wicked, often blurres he forth his Name
From out the earth, his children shall be slain,
And who survive shall beg their bread in vain;
What if his gold be heapt, the good man shall
Possess it, as true Master of it all;
Like Moths, their houses shall they build, in doubt
And danger, every hour to be cast out;
Besieged wi^h want, their lips make fruitless moan
Yet (wanting succor) be relieved by none;
The worm of Conscience shall torment his breast,
And he shall rore, when others be at rest,
Gods hand shall scourge him, that he cannot fly,
And men shall laugh, and hiss, to hear him cry.
The purest metal's hid within the mould,
Without is gravel, but within is Gold;
Man digs, and in his toil he takes a pleasure,
He seeks, and finds within the turfe, the treasure;
He never rests unsped, but (underneath)
He mines, and progs, though in the fangs of death:
No secret, (how obscure soever) can
Earths bosom smother, that is unfuond by man;
But the Divine, and high Decrees of Heaven,
What mind can search into? No power's given
To mortal man, whereby he may attain
The rare discovery of so high a strain:
Dive to the depth of darkness, and the deepes
Renounce this Wisdom: The wide Ocean keeps
Her not enclosed; It Is not the purest Gold
Can purchase it, or heaps of silver, told;
The Pearls, and peerlesse Treasures of the East,
Refined Gold, and Gemmes, are all, the least
Of nothings, if compared with it, as which,
Earths mass of treasure, (summed) is not so rich;
Where rests the wisdom then? If men enquire
Below, they find her not; or if they (higher)
Soar with the Prince of Fowls, they still despair,
The more they seek, the further off they are.
Ah friends! how more than men? how Eagle-eyd
Are you, to see, what to the world beside
Was da^ke? To you alone (in trust) was given
To search into the high Decrees of Heaven:
You read his Oracles, you understand
To riddle forth man's fortunes by his hand;
Your wisdoms have a privilege to know
His secret Smiling from his angry Brow:
Let shame prevent your lips, recant, and give
To the Almighty his prerogative,
To him, the searching of men's hearts belong,
Man's judgment sinks no deeper than the tongue*
He overlookes the World, and in one space
Of time, his Eye is fixed on every place:
He waighes the Waters, balances the Air,
What e're has Being, did his hands prepare;
He wills that Mortals be not over-wise,
Nor judge his Secrets with censorious eyes.
Medit. 14.
It Is Virtue to fly Vice: there is none more stou^
Than he that ventures to pick virtue out
Betwixt a brace of Vices: Dangers stand,
Threatening his ruin upon either hand;
His Card must guide him, lest his Pinnace run
Upon Charybdis, while it Scylla shun:
In moderation all Virtue lies;
It Is greater folly to be over-wise,
Than rudely ignorant: The golden mean,
Is but to know enough; safer to lean
To Ignorance, than Curiosity,
For lightning blasts the Mountains that are high^
The first of men, from hence deserved his fall,
He sought for secrets, and found death, withal:
Secrets are unfit objects for our eyes,
They blind us in beholding* He that tryes
To handle water, the more hard he strains
And gripes his hand, the less his hand retains:
The mind that is troubled with that pleasing itch
Of knowing Secrets, having flowne a pitch
Beyond it self, the higher it ascends,
And strives to know, the less it apprehends:
That secret Wiseman, is an open Fool,
Which takes a Counsell-chamber, for a School.
The eye of Man desires no farther light,
Than to descry the object of his sight:
And rests contented with the Suns reflection,
But (laboring to behold his bright complexion)
If it presume t'out-face his glorious Light,
The beams bereave him, justly, of his sight:
Even so the mind should rest in what is revealed,
But overcurious, if in things conceald
She wades too far, beyond her depth, unbounded,
Her knowledge will be lost, and she confounded.
Far safer it is, of things unsure, to doubt,
Than undertake to riddle secrets out.
It was demanded once, What God did do
Before the World he framed? Whereunto
Answer was made, He built a Hell for such,
As are too curious, and would know too much.
Who flies with Icarus his feathers, shall
Have Icarus his fortunes and his fall.
Anoble Prince, (whose bounteous hand was bent,
To recompense his servants faith, and vent
The earnest of his favors,) did not profer,
But wild him boldly to prevent his offer:
Thankful, he thus replied, Then grant unto me,
(...), With-^old thy Princely secrets from me.
That holy Man, in whose familiar ear
Heaven often had thundered, might not come too near:
The Temple must have Curtains; mortal hearts
Must rest content to see his Hinder-parts.
I care not (Lord) how far thy Face be off,
If I but kiss thy Hand, I have enough.
THE ARGUMENT.
Job wishes his past happiness,
Shows his state present, does confess
That God's the Auth^r of his grief,
Relates the pureness of his life.
Sect. 15.
OH! that I were as happy as I was,
When Heavens bright favors shone upon my face,
And p^sperd my affairs, inricht my joys,
When all my sons could answer to my voice;
Then did my store, and thriving flocks increase,
Offended Justice sought my hands, for peace;
Old men did honor, and the young did fear me,
Princes kept silence (when I spoke) to hear me;
I heard the poor, relieved the widows cry,
Orphans I succored, was the blind man's eye,
The Cripples foot, my helpless brothers drudge,
The poor man's Father, and th'oppressors I^dge;
I then supposed, that my days long Lease
Would pass in plenty, and expire in peace;
My Roots were fixed, and my Branches sprung,
My Glory blazed, my Power grew daily strong;
I speaking, men stood mute, my speeches moved
All hearts to joy, by all men were approved:
My kindly words were welcome, as a latter
Rain, and were Oracles in a doubtful matter.
O sudden change! I Am turned a laughing-(...)
To boys, and those that su'd to tend my flock,
And such, whose hu^gry wa^ts have taught their hands
To scrape the earth, and dig the barren lands
For hidden roots, wherewith they might appeas^
Their Tyran 'stomacks, these, (even very these)
Flout at my sorrows, and disdaining me,
Point with their fingers, and cry, This is he:
My honor's foiled, my troubled spirit lies
Wide open to the worst of injuries;
Where ere I turn, my sorrow, new, appears,
I Am vexed abroad with flouts, at home with fears*
My soul is faint, and nights that should give ^ase
To tired spirits, make my griefs increase*
I loath my Carkeise, for my ripened sores
Have changed my garments color with their cores^*
But what is worst of worsts, (Lord) often I
Have cried to thee, a stranger to my cry,
Though perfect Clemency thy nature be,
Though kind to all, thou art unkind to me.
I nere waxt pale, to see another thrive,
Nor e're did let my' afflicted brother strive
With tears, alone: but I (poor I) tormented,
Expect for succor, and am unlamented:
I mourn in silence, languish all alone,
As in a Desert, am re^iev'd by none:
My sores have died my skin with filth, still turning
My joys to grief, and all my mirth to mourning.
My Heart has past Indentures with mine Eye,
Not t^ behold a Maid, for what should I
Expect from heaven but a deserved reward,
Earned by so foul a sin? for death's prepared,
And flames of wrath are blown for such: Does H^
No^ know my actions, that so well knows me?
If I have lent my hand to slye deceit,
Or if my steps have not been purely strait,
What I have sown, then let a stranger eat,
And root my Plants untimely from their seat.
If I with Lust have e'^e distained my life,
Or been defiled with another Wife,
In equal Justice let my Wife be known
Of all, and let me reap as I have sown:
For Lust, that burns in a sinful breast,
Till it has burnt him too, shall never rest.
If e're my haste did treat my Servant ill,
Without desert, making my power my Will,
Then how should I before Gods Judgment stand,
Since we were both created by one Hand?
If e're my power wronged the Poor man's cause,
Or to the Widow, lengthned out the Laws:
If e're (alone) my lips did taste my bread,
Or shut my churlish doors, the poor unfed,
Or bent my hand to do the Orphane wrong,
Or saw him naked, unapparell'd long;
In heaps of Gold, if e're I took delight,
Or gave Heavens worship to the heavenly Light,
Or e're was flattred by my secret Will;
or joyed in my Adversaries Ill;
Let God accurse me from his glorious Seat,
And make my plagues (if possible) more great,
Oh! That some equal hearer now were by,
To judge my righteous cause: Full sure am I,
I shall be quitted by the Almighties hand.
What, therefore, if censorious tongues withstand
The judgment of my sober Conscience?
Compose they Ballads on me, yet from thence
My simple Innocence shall gain renown,
And on my head, I Will wear them, as my Crown:
To the Almighties care will I reveal
My secret ways; to him, alone, appeal:
If (to conclude) the Earth could find a tongue,
T^impeach my guiltless hands of doing wrong:
If hidden Wages (earned with sweat) do lie
Raked in her furrows, let her womb deny
To bless my Harvest, let her better Seeds
Be turned to Thistles, and the rest, to Weeds.
Medita. 15.
THe man whose soul is undistain'd with Ill,
Pure from the check of a distempred Will,
Stands only free from the distracts of Care,
And flies a pitch above the reach of Fear:
His bosom dares the threatening Bow-mans arm,
His wisdom sees, his Courage fears no harm;
His breast lies open to the re^king Sword;
The darts of swarthy Maurus can afford
Less dread, than danger* to his well prepared
And settled mind, which (standing on her guard)
Bids Mischief do the worst she can, or will,
For he that does no ill, deserves no ill.
Would any strive with Samson for renown,
Whose brawny arm can strike most pillars down*
Or try a fall with Angels, and prevail?
Or with a Hymn unhinge the strongest Iayle?
Would any from a pr^^ner prove a Prince?
Or with slow speech best Orators convince?
Preserve he then, unstained in his breast,
A milke^white Conscience; let his soul be blessed
With simple Innocence: This seven fold shield
No dart shall pierce, no sword shall make it yield*
The si^ewy Bow, and deadly headed Lance,
Shall break in shivers and the splinters glaunce
Aside, returning back, from whence they came,
And wound their hearts with an eternal shame.
The just and constant mind, that perseveres
Unblemished with false pleasures, never fears
The bended threatenings of a Tyrants brow,
Death neither can disturb, nor change his Vow;
Well guarded with himself, he walks along,
When, most alone, he stands a thousand strong.
Lives he in weal, and full Prosperity?
His wisdom tells him, that he lives to dye.
Is he afflicted? Sharp afflictions give
Him hopes of Chang, and that he dies, to live.
Is he reviled and scorned? He sits, and smiles,
Knowing him happy, whom the world reviles.
If Rich, he gives the Poor, and if he live
In poor estate, he finds rich friends to give:
He lives and Angel in a mortal form;
And having past the brunt of many a storm,
At last ariveth at the Haven of Rest,
Where that just Judge, that rambles in his breast,
Joining with Angels, with an Angels voice,
Chaunts forth sweet Requie^s of Eternal joys.
THE ARGUMENT.
Elihu Job reproves, reproves
His Friends alike; he pleades the case
With Job in Gods behalf, and moves
Him to recant, and call for Grace.
Sect. 16.
THus Job his ill* defended Cause adjournes,
And silence lends free liberty of turns,
To his unjust Accusers, whose bad cause
Has left them grounded in too large a pause,
Whereat Elihu (a young stander-by,)
Whose modest ears, upon their long reply
Did wait, his angry silence did awake,
And (craving pardon for his Youth) bespake.
Young Standers-by do oftentimes see more
Than elder Gamesters: You Are to blame all four:
T'ones cause is bad, but with good proofs befriended,
The others just and good, but ill defended:
Though reason makes the man, Heaven makes him wise,
Wisdom in greatest Clerks not always lies:
Then let your silence give me leave to spend
My judgment, whilst your heedfull ears attend.
I have not heard, alone, but still expected
To hear what more your spleenes might have objected
Against your woeful Friend, but I have found
Your reasons built upon a sandy ground.
Flourish no Flags of Conquest: Understand,
That he is afflicted by the Almighties hand:
He has not failed to cross your accusations;
Yet I (though not with your ^oule exprobations)
Will cross him too. I Am full, and I must speak,
Or like unvented vessels, I must break;
And with my tongue, my heart will be relieved,
That swells, with what my patience has conceived:
Be none offended, for my lips shall tread
That ground (without respect) as Truth shall lead;
God hates a flattering language: then how can I
Vnliable to danger, flatter any?
Now, Job, to thee I speak, O, let my Errant
Be welcome to thine ^ares, for truth's my warrant*
They are no slender trifles that I treat,
But things digested with the sacred heat
Of an inspired knowledge; It Is no rash
Discharge of wrath, nor wits conceited flash;
I Will speak, and hear thee speak as free, for I
Will take no vantage of thy Misery.
Thy tongue did challenge to maintain thy cas^
With God, if he would veil his glorious face:
Be I the man (though clad with clay and dust,
And mortal like thy self) that takes the trust
To represent his Person: Thou do term
Thy self most just, and boldly do affirm,
That Heaven afflicts thy soul without a reason.
Ah Job! these very words (alone) are treason
Against the Almighties will: Thou ought rather
Submit thy passion to him, as thy Father,
Than plead with him, as with thy Peer. Is he
Bound to reveal his secret Will to thee?
God speaks often to man, not understood,
Sometimes in dreams, at other times thinks good
To thunder Judgment in his drowzy ear;
Sometimes, with hard afflictions scourge, does tear
His wounded soul, which may at length give eas^
(Like sharper Physic) to his foul Disease:
But if (like pleasing Iulips) he afford
The me^ke Expounders of his sacred Word,
With sweet persuasions to recure his grief,
How can his sorro^es wish more fair Relief?
Ah, then his body shall wax young and bright;
Heavens face that scorcht before, shall now delight,
His tongue with Triumph, shall confess to men,
I was a Leper, but am clear again.
Thus, thus that Spring of Mercy oftentimes
Does speak to man, that man may speak his crimes?
Consider, Job; my words with judgment weigh;
Which done (if thou have ought) then boldly say;
If otherwise, shame not to hold thy peace,
And let thy wisdom with my words increase.
And you, you Wisemen that are silent here,
Vouchsafe to lend my lips your ripened ear^,
Let Us call a parley, and the cause decide;
For Job pleads guiltless* and would feign be tried;
Yet has his boldness term^d himself upright,
And tax't the Almighty for not doing right;
His Innocence with Heaven does he plead,
And that unjustly he was punished:
O Purity by Impudence suborned!
He scorned his Maker, and is justly scorned:
Far be it from the heart of man, that He
Who is all Justice, yet unjust should be.
Each one shall reap the harvest he has sown,
His meed shall measure what his hands has done*
Who is it can claim the Worlds great Sovereignty?
Who raised the Rafters of the Heavens, but He?
If God should breathe on man, or take away
The breath he gave him, what were man but Clay*
O, let thy heart, th'unbridled tongue convince!
Say; Dare thy lips defame an earthly Prince?
How dare thou then malign the King of Kings,
To whom great Princes are but poorest things?
He kicks down kingdoms, spurns th'emperial crown
And with his blast, puffes mighty Monarchs down.
It Is vain to strive with him, and if he strike,
Our part's to bear, not fondly to mislike,
(Misconstruing the nature of his drift)
But husband his corrections to our thrift.
If he afflict, our best is to implore
His ^lessing with his Rod, and sin no more.
What if our torments pass the bounds of measure?
It unbefits our wills, to stint his pleasure,
Judge then, and let th'impartiall world advise,
How far (poor Job) thy judgment is from wise:
Nor are these speeches kindled with the fire
Of a distempred spleen, but with desire
T'inrich thy wisdom, lest thy fury tie
Presumption to thy rash infirmity.
Meditat. 16.
FOr mortals, to be borne, wax old, and dye,
Lies not in Will, but bare Necessity,
Common to beasts, which in the self degree,
Hold by the selfsame Patient, even as we:
But to be wi^e is a diviner action
Of the discursive Soul, a pure abstraction
Of all her powers, united in the Will,
Aiming at Good, rejecting what is Ill:
It is an Influence of inspired breath,
Vnpurchased by birth, unlost by death,
Entailed to no man, no, not free to all,
Yet gently answers to the eager call
Of those, that with inflamed affections seek,
Respecting tender youth and age alike;
In depth of days, her spirit not always lies,
Years make man Old, but heaven returns him Wise;
Youths Innocence, nor riper ages strength
Can challenge her as due; (Desired) length
Of days, produced to decrepit years,
Filled with experience, and grizly hayres,
Can claim no right; the Almighty never engages
His gifts to times, nor is he bound to Ages;
His quickening Spirit, to sucklings often reveals,
What to their doting Grandsires he conceales,
The virtue of his breath can unbenumme
The frozen lips, and strike the speaker dumme:
Who put that moving power into his tongue,
Whose lips did right the chaste Susanna's wrong,
Upon her wanton false Accusers death?
What secret fire inflamed that fainting breath
That blasted Pharo? Or those ruder tongues,
That schoold the faithless Prophet for the wrongs
He did to sacred Justice? matters not
How slight the mean be in it self, or what
In our esteems, so wisdom be the message;
Ambassadors are worthied in th'Embassage:
God sowes his harvest to his best increase,
And glorifies himself how e're he please.
Lord, if thou will, (for what is hard to thee?)
I may a Factour for thy glory be,
Then grant that (like a faithful servant) I
May render back thy stock with Usury.
THE ARGUMENT.
God reapes no gain by man's best deeds
Man's misery from himself proceeds:
Gods Mercy and Justice are unbounded;
In works of Nature man is grounded.
Sect. 17.
ELihu, thus his pausing lips again
Disclosed, and said, (rash Io^) do thou maintain
A rightful cause, which in conclusion, must
A vow thee blameless, and thy God unjust?
Thy lawless words implying, that it can
Advantage none to live an upright man?
My tongue shall school thee, and thy friends, that would
(Perchance) refell thy reasons, if they could:
Behold thy glorious Makers greatness, see
The power of his hand; say then, can He
Be damaged by thy sin, or can He raise
Advantage, by the uprightness of thy ways?
True, the afflicted languish often in grief,
And roar to heaven (unanswered) for relief,
Yet is not Heaven unjust, for their fond cry
Their sin bewailes not, but their misery.
Cease then to make him guilty of thy crimes,
And wait his pleasure, that is not bound to times,
Nor hears vain words. The sorrows thou art in
Are slight, or nothing, balanced with thy sin:
Thy lips accuse thee, and thy foolish tongue,
To right thy self, has done the Almighty wrong.
Hold back thine answer, let thy flowing stream
Find passage, to surround my fruitful Theme;
I Will raise my thoughts, to plead my Makers case,
And speak, as shall befit so high a place:
Behold the Almighitie's meek as well as strong,
Destroys the wicked, rights the just man's wrong,
Mounts him to honor; If by chance he stray,
Instructs, and shows him where he lost his way:
If he return, his blessing shall increase,
Crowning his joys with plenty and sweet peace;
If not, the intailed sword shall never depart
His stained house, but pierce his hardened heart;
Ah sinful Job! these plagues had never bin,
Had thou been guiltless (as thou boasts) of sin:
But thy proud lips against their Maker plead,
And draw down heaps of vengeance on thy head:
Look to thy self, seek not to understand
The secret causes of the Eternals hand;
Let wisdom make the best of misery,
Know who inflicts it, ask no reason why:
He will's beyond thy reach, and his Divine
And sacred knowledge far surpasses thine,
Ah! rather, praise him in his works, that lie
(Wide open to the world) before thine eye;
His meaner Acts, our highest thoughts o'retops,
He pricks the clouds, stils down the rain by drops,
Who comprehends the lightning, or the thunder?
Who sees, who hears the^, unamaz'd with wonder?
My troubled heart chils in my quivering breast,
To relish these things, and is dispossessed
Of all her powers: who ever heard the voice
Of the angry heavens, unfrighted at the noise?
The beast by nature daz'd with sudden dread,
Seeks out for covert to secure his head:
If God command, the dusky clouds march forth
Into a Tempest; From the freezing North
He beckens Frost, and Snow; and from the South
He blows Whirlewinds with his angry Mouth.
Presumptuous Io^! if thou can not aspire
So high, to comprehend these things, admire.
Know thou the progress of the rambling clouds?
From mortal eyes, when gloomy darkness shrouds
The lamps of heaven? know thou the reason why?
Can thou unriddle heavens Philosophy?
Know thou the unconstant nature of the weather?
Or whence so many Winds proceed* and whither
Were thou made privy, or a stander^by,
When God stretched forth his spangled Canopy?
Submit thy self, and let these sec^ets teach,
How far his Myst'ries do surmount thy reach:
For He Is Almighty, and his sacred will
Is just, nor renders an unearned ill*
His works are objects for no soaring eyes,
But wheresoever he looks, he finds none wise.
Meditat. 17.
THe World's an Index to Eternity,
And gives a glance of what our cleerer eye,
In time shall see at large; nothing's so slight,
Which in it nature sends not forth some light,
Or Memorandum of his Makers Glory:
No Dust so vile, but pens an ample story
Of the Almighties power, nor is there that,
Which gives not man just cause to wonder at.
Cast down thine eyes, behold the pregnant earth,
(Her self but one) produces at one birth
A world of diverse natures: From a seed
Entirely one, things hot and cold proceed,
She suckles with one milk, things moist, and dry,
Yet in her womb is no repugnancy
Or shall thy reason ramble up so high,
To view the Court of wild Astronomy?
Behold the Planets, round about thine ears,
Whirling like firebals in their restless Spheres,
At one selfe-instant moving several ways,
Still measuring out our short* and shorter days.
Behold the parts whereon the World consists,
Are limited in their appointed lists,
Without rebellion unapt to vary,
Though being many, diverse and contrary:
Look where we list, above, b^neath, or under,
Our eyes shall see to learn, and learn to wonder;
Their depth shall drown our judgments, and their height
Besides his wits, shall drive the prime conceit:
Shall then our daring minds presume to aspire
To heavens hid Myst'ries? shall our thoughts inquir^
Into the depth of secrets, unconfounded,
When in the shore of Nature they were drowned?
Fond man be wise, strive not above thy strength,
Tempt not thy Bark beyond her Cables length;
And, like Prometheus, filch no sacred fire,
Lest Eagles gripe thee: Let thy proud desire
Suit with thy fortunes; Curious minds, that shall
Mount up with Phaeton, shall have Phaetons fall.
Vnb^nd thy bow betimes, lest thou repent
Too late, for it will break, or else stand bent.
I Will work at home, never cross the scorching Line,
In unknown lands, to seek a hidden Mine:
Plain Bullion pleases me, I not desire
Dear Igno^s from th'Elixars techy fire;
I Will spend my pains (where best I may be bold)
To know my self, wherein I shall behold
The world abridg'd, and in that world my Maker,
Beyond which task, I wish no Undertaker.
Great God, by whom it is, what-e're is mine,
Make me thy Viceroy in this World of thine,
So clear mine eyes, that I may comprehend
My slight beginning, and my sudden end.
THE ARGUMENT.
God questions Job, and proves that man
Cannot attain to things so high,
As divine secrets, since he can
Not reach to Natures; Jobs reply.
Sect. 18.
FOrth from the bosom of a murmuring Cloud,
Heavens great ^ehovah did, at length unshroud
His Earths-amazing language (equally
Made terrible with Fear and Majesty)
(Challenged the Duel) he did undertake
His grumbling servant, and him thus bespake,
Who, who art thou, that thus do pry in vain,
Into my secrets, hoping to attain,
With murmuring, to things concealed from man?
Say (poreblinde mortal) Who art thou that can
Thus clear thy crimes, and dare (with vain applause)
Make me defendant in thy sinful cause?
Ioe, here I am; Engrosse into thy hands
Thy soundest weapons: Answer my demands:
Say, where were thou, when these my hands did lay
The worlds foundation? can thou tell me? Say,
Was earth not measured by this Arm of mine?
Whose hand did aid me? was I helped by thine?
Where were thou, when the Planets first did blaze,
And in their spears sang forth their Makers praise?
Who is it that tames the raging of the Seas,
And swathes them up in mists, when e're he please?
Did thou divide the darkness from the Light?
Or know thou whence Aurora takes her flight?
Did ere enquire into the Seas Abyss,
Or marked the Earth of what a bulk she is?
Know thou the place whence Light or Darkness spring^
Can thy deep age unfold these secret things?
Know^st thou the cause of Snow or hail, which are
My fierce Artill'ry in my time of war?
Who is it that rends the gloomy Clouds in sunder,
Whose sudden rapture strikes forth fire and thunder?
Or who bedewes the earth with gentle showers,
Filling her pregnant soil with fruits and flowers,
What father got the rain? from what chill womb
Did frosts, and hard-congealed Waters come?
Can thou restrain fair Maja's course, or stint her*
Or sad Orion ushering in the Winter?
Will scorching Cancer at thy summons come?
Or Sunburned Autumn with he fruitful womb?
Know thou Heavens course above, or do thou know
Those gentle influences here below?
Who was it inspired thy soul with understanding?
And gave thy spirit the spirit of apprehending?
Do thou command the Cisternes of the Sky
To quench the thirsty soil; or is it I?
Nay, let thy practice to the earth descend,
Prove there, how far thy power does extend;
From thy full hand will hungry Lions eat?
Feed'st thou the empty Ravens that cry for mea^e^
Sett'st thou the season, when the fearful Hind
Brings forth her painful birth? Have thou assigned
The Mountaine-Goate her Time? Or is it I?
Can thou subject unto thy soveraigntie
The untamed Unicorn? Can thy hard hand
Force him to labor on thy fruitful land?
Did thou enrich the Peacock with his Plume?
Or did that Steele-digesting Bird assume
His downy Flags from thee? Did thou endow
The noble Stallion with his strength? Can thou
Quail his proud courage? See, his angry breath
Puffes nothing forth, but fears^ summed up in death
Mark with what pride his horny hoofes do tabor
The hard resounding Earth; with how great labor*
How little ground he spends: But at the noise
And fierce Alar'm of the hoarse Trumpets voice
He breaks the ranks amidst a thousand Spears
Pointed with death, undaunted at the fears
Of doubfull war, he rushes like a Ranger,
Through every Troop, and scorns so brave a danger^*
Do lofty Haggards cleave the flitting Air,
With Plumes of thy devising? Then how dare
Thy ravenous lips thus, thus at random run
And countermaund what I the Lord have done?
Think thou to learn (fond Mortal) thus, by diving
Into my secrets, or to gain by striving*
Plead then: No doubt but thine will be the Day;
Speak (peevish Plaintiff) if th'aft ought to say.
Io^ then replyde: (Great God, I am but Dust,
^y heart is sinful, and thy hands are just;
I am a Sinner (Lord,) my words are wind,
My thoughts are vain, (Ah Father) I have sinned:
Shall dust reply? I spoke too much before,
I Will close these lips, and never answer more.
Meditat. 18.
O Glorious Light! A light unapprehended
By mortal eyes! O Glory, never ended,
Nor ere created, whence all Glory springs
In heavenly bodies, and in earthly things!
O power Immense, derived from a Will
Most just and able to do all, but ill!
O Essence pure, and full of Majesty!
Greatness (it self) and yet no quantity;
Goodness, and without quality; producing
All things from out of Nothing, and reducing
All things to nothing; past all comprehending
Both first and Last, and yet without an ending,
Or yet beginning; filling every Creature,
And not (it self) included; above Nature,
Yet not excluded; of it self subsisting,
And with it self all other things, assisting;
Divided, yet without division;
A perfect three, yet Three, entirely one;
Both One in Three, and Three in One, together;
Begetting, and begotten, and yet neither;
The Fountain of all Arts, confounding Art;
Both all in All, and all in every part;
Still seeking Glory, and still wanting none;
Though just, yet reaping, where thou never have (...)
Great Majesty, since Thou art every where,
O, Why should I misdoubt thy Presence here?
I long have sought thee, but my ranging heart
Never quests, and cannot see thee where thou art:
There Is no Defect in thee, thy light has shined,
Nor can be ^id (great God) but I am blind.
O clear mine eyes, and with thy holy fire
Inflame my breast, and edge my dull desire:
Wash me with Hysope, cleanse my stained thoughts,
Renew my spirit, blurre forth my secret faults;
Thou take no pleasure in a Sinners death,
For thou art Life, thy Mercy's not beneath
Thy sacred Justice: Give thy servant power
To seek aright, and (having sought) discover
Thy glorious Presence; Let my blemished Eye
See my Salvation yet before I die.
O, then my Dust, that is bowell'd in the ground,
Shall rise with Triumph at the welcome sound
Of my Redeemers earth-awaking Trumpe,
Vnfrighted at the noise; no sullen Dumpe
Of selfe-confounding Conscience shall affright me,
For he is my Judge, whose dying blood shall quite me.
THE ARGUMENT.
God speaks to Job the second time:
Job yields his sin, repents his crime:
God checks his friends, restores his health,
Gives him new issue, double wealth.
Sect. 19.
ONce more the mouth of Heaven rapt forth a voice,
The troubled Firmament was filled with noise,
The Rafters of the darkened Sky did shake,
For the Eternal thundered thus, and spoke:
Collect thy scattered senses, and advise,
Rouse up (fond man) and answer my replies.
Will thou make Comments on my Text, and must
I be unrighteous, to conclude thee, just?
Shall my Decrees be licenced by thee?
What, can thou thunder with a voice like Me?
Put on thy Robes of Majesty; Be clad
With as bright glory (Job) as can be had;
Make fierce thy frowns, and with an angry face
Confound the Proud, and his high thoughts abase,
Pound him to Dust: Do this, and I will yield,
Thou art a God, and need'st no other shield.
Behold, the Castle-bearing Elephant,
That wants no bulk, nor does his greatness want
An equal strength. Behold his massy bones,
Like bars of Iron; like congealed stones,
His knottie sinews are; Him have I made,
And given him natural weapons for his aid;
High mountains bear his food, the shady boughs
His Covers are, Great Rivers are his Troughes,
Whose deep Carouses would to standers-by,
Seem at a watring to draw Jordan dry:
What skillful huntsman can, with strength out-dare him?
Or with what engines can a man ensnare him?
Have thou beheld the huge Leviathan,
That swarthy Tyrant of the Ocean? Can
Thy bearded hook impierce his Gils, or make him
Thy landed Prisner? Can thy angles take him?
Will he make suit for favor from thy hands,
Or be enthralled to thy fierce commands?
Will he be handled as a bird? or may
Thy fingers bind him for thy childrens play?
Let men be wise, for in his looks he has
Displayed Banners of untimely death.
If Creatures be so dreadful, how is he
More bold then wise, that dares encounter Me?
What hand of Man can hinder my design?
Are not the Heavens, and all beneath them mine?
Diffect the greatness of so vast a Creature,
By view of several parts sum up his feature:
Like Shields his scales are placed, which neither art
Knows how to sunder, nor yet force can part.
His belching rucks forth flames, his moving Eye
Shines like the glory of the morning sky;
His cragg^e sinews are like wreaths of brass,
And from his mouth, quick flames of fire pass
As from an Oven, the temper of his heart
Is like a Nether-milstone, which no Dart
Can pierce, secured from the threatening Spear;
Afraid of none, he strikes the world with fear:
The Bow-mans brawny arm sends shafts in vain,
They fall like stubble, or bound back again:
Stones are his pillow, and the Mud his Down,
In earth none greater is, nor equal none,
Compared with him, all things he does deride,
And well may challenge to be King of Pride.
So said, the amazed Job bent down his eyes
Upon the ground, and (sadly) thus replies.
I know (great God) there is nothing hard to Thee,
Thy thoughts are pure, and too too deep for me:
I am a fool, and my distempered wits,
Longer out-stray'd my Tongue, than well befits;
My knowledge slumbred, while my lips did chat,
And like a Fool, I spoke I knew not what.
Lord, teach me Wisdom, lest my proud Desire,
Singe her bold feathers in thy Sacred fire;
Mine ear has often been rounded with thy Story,
But now these very eyes have seen thy glory.
My sinful words I not (alone) lament,
But in the horror of my soul repent;
Repent with Tears in sackcloth, mourn in Dust;
I am a sinful man, and Thou art just.
Thou Eliphaz. that makst my sacred Word,
An Engine of Despair (said then the Lord)
Behold full Vyolls of my wrath attends
On thee, and on thy two too-partiall Friends;
For you have judged amiss, and have abused
My Word to work your ends, falsely accused
My righteous Servant: Of you all there is none
Has spoke uprightly, as my Job has done.
Haste then (before my kindling fire begin
To flame) and each man offer for his sin,
A sacrifice, by Job my servants hand,
And for his sake, your Offerings shall withstand
The wages of your sins; for what can I,
If Job, my servant, make request, deny?
So straight they went, and (after speedy pardon
Desired and had) the righteous Job (for guerdon
Of his so tedious Grief) obtained the health
Of a sound body, and increase of wealth;
So that the second Harvest of his store,
Was double that which he enjoyed before.
Ere this was blazed in the Worlds wide Ears,
(The frozen breasts of his familiars,
And cold Allies, being now dissolved in Grief,)
His backward friends came to him with relief,
To feed his wants, and with sad shouring eyes,
To moan his (yet supposed) Miseries:
Some brought him sheep to bless his empty Fold,
Some precious Earings, others, Rings of Gold.
God blessed his loins, from whence there sprang again
The number of his children that were slain,
Nor was there any in the Land so rare
In virtue as his daughters, or so fair.
Long after this he lived in peace, to see
His childrens children to the fourth degree,
Till at the lenth, cut short by Him that stays
For none, he died in peace, and full of Days.
Meditat. 19.
EVill's the defect of Good, and as a shade,
That Is but the ruins of the light decayed:
It has no being, nor is understood,
But by the opposition of Good.
What then is man? whose purest thoughts are pressed
For Satan's war, which from the tender breast,
With Infant silence, have consented to
Such sinful Deeds, as (babes) they could not do?
What then is man, but Nothing, being Evil,
His Lunatike affections do unlevell,
What Heaven created by just Weight and measure;
In pleasures sink, he takes a swine like Pleasure;
His span of life, and beauties like a Flower,
Fair flourishing, and fading in an hour.
He breaks into the world with tears, and then
Departs with Grief, not knowing how, nor when.
His life's a Bubble full of seeming Bliss,
The more it lengthens, the more short it is;
Begot in darkness, he is brought forth, and cries
For succor, passes ore the stage, and dies;
Yet, like a Moale, the earth he undermines,
Making the World, the Forge of his designs:
He plots, complots, for esees, prevents, directs,
He hopes, he fears, he doubts, pursues, effects;
Each has his plot, each one his course does bend,
Each has his project, and each one his end.
Thus restless man does still his soul molest
To find out (that which has no being) Rest;
Thus travels sinful man in endless toil;
Taking a pleasure in his own turmoyle.
Fond man, first seek to purchase that divine
And sacred prize, and all the world is thine:
Great Solomon made suit for Wisdom, and he found
Not (barely) Wisdom, but that Wisdom crowned
With Diadems of wealth, and fair increase
Of Princely Honor, with long days of Peace.
(With safe respect, and awful reverence
To Myst'ries) Meditation does commence
An earnest doubt: Was Jobs dispoiled Flock
Restored double: Was his former Stock
Renewed with double vantage? Did heaven add
To all his fortunes double what he had?
Yet those sweet Emblemes of his dearest love,
(His sons) whom death untimely did remove
From off the face of the unthankful earth,
Why likewise sprang not they in double birth?
Bruit beasts that perish once, are lost for ever,
Their substance, and their All consumes together*
Once having given a farewell to the light.
They dye, and with them is perpetual night:
But man, (unorgan'd by the hand of Death)
Dies not, is but transplanted from beneath,
Into a fairer soil, or as a stranger,
Brought home secure from the worlds pleasing danger:
Jobs flocks were lost, and therefore double given,
His Issue's equal shared 'twixt Earth and Heaven,
One half in heaven are glorious in their doom,
Engaged as Pledges till the other come.
Great God! my Time's but short, and long my way,
My Heart has lost her Path, and gone astray,
My spirit's faint and frail, my soul's imbost,
If thou help not, I am for ever lost;
Though Dust and Ashes, yet I am thy Creature,
However my sins are great, thy Mercie's greater:
Of nothing did thou make me, and my sin
Has turned me back to nothing, once agin:
Create me a new heart, (great God) inspire
My cold affections with thy sacred fire:
Instruct my Will, and rectify my Ways,
O teach me (Lord) to number out my Days.
The Digestion of the whole HISTORY.
1 In Prosperity.
THou, whose lank fortunes heaven has swelled with store,
Make not thy self, by over-wishing, poor,
Husband that good, which else, abuse makes bad,
Abstracting, where thy base desire would add:
Lines flowing from a Sophoclean quill,
Deserve no Plaudit, being acted ill.
2 In Adversity.
Has heaven withdrawn the talent he has given thee
Has envious Death of all thy Sons bereaven thee?
Have soul Diseases foiled thee on the floor?
He earnes no sweet, that never tasted sour:
Thou art a Scholar; if thy Tutor do
Pose thee too hard, he will instruct thee too.
3 In Tentation.
Art thou opposed to thine unequal Foe?
March bravely on; thy General bids thee go;
Thou art heavens Champion to maintain his right;
Who calls thee forth, will give thee strength to fight.
God seeks, by conquest, thy renown, for He
Will win enough: Fight thou, or Faint, or Flee.
4 In Slander.
If Winter fortunes nip thy Summer Friends,
And tip their tongues with Censure, that offends
Thy tender Name, despair not, but be wise,
Know Heaven selecteth, whom the world denies:
Thou have a milke-white This^y that is within (...),
Will take thy part when all the world's ^gi^ thee.
5 In Re-advancement.
Art thou advanced to thy supreme desire?
Be still the same; Fear Lower, aim no higher:
Man's Play has many Scenes, but in the last,
Heaven knits up all, to sweeten all that is past:
Affliction is a Rod, to scourge us home,
An 'a painful earnest of a Heaven to come,
The end.
THE HISTORY OF SAMSON:

By Fra. Quarles.

LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER, for I. MARRIOTT, in S. Dunstans Churchyard
in Fleet Street. 1632.

To the READER.
THe tyranny of my affairs was never yet so imperious, but I could steal some
hours to my private Meditations; the fruits of which stolen time I here
present thee with, in the History of Samson: Wherein if thy extreme severity
check at any thing which thou conceivest may not stand with the Majesty of this
sacred Subject; know, that my intention was not to offend my brother: The
wisest of Kings inspired by the King of Wisdom, thought it no detraction from
the gravity of his Holy Proverbs, to describe a Harlot like a Harlot, Her
whorish Attire; her immodest Gesture; her bold Countenance; her flattering
Tongue; her lascivious Embraces; her unchaste Kisses; her impudent Invitations:
If my descriptions in the like kind, offend; I make no question but the
validity of my Warrant will give a reasonable satisfaction: He that lifts not
his feet high enough, may easily stumble: But on the contrary, if any be, whose
worse then sacrilegious minds shall profane our harmles intentions with wanton
conceits, to such I heartily wish, a Procul Ite; Let none such look farther
then this Epistle, at their own perils: If they do, let them put off their
shoos, for this is holy Ground: Foul hands will muddle the clearest waters:
and base minds will corrupt the purest Text: If any offense be taken, it is by
way of stealth, for there is none willingly given: I write to Bees, and not to
Spiders: They will suck pleasing honey from such flowers: These may burst with
their own poison: But you, whose well-seasond hearts are not distempered with
either of these extremities, but have the better relish of a Sacred
understanding, draw near, and read.

I Sing the illustrious, and renowned Story
Of mighty Samson; The eternal glory
Of his Heroicke acts: His life, His death:
Quicken my Muse with thy diviner breath,
Great God of Muses, that my prosperous Ri^es
May live and last to everlasting times;
That they unborne may, in this sacred Story,
Admire thy goodness, and advance thy glory.
THE HISTORY OF SAMSON.
THE ARGUMENT.
A holy Angel does salute
The wife of Manoah, and enlarge
Her barren womb with promised fruit
Of both their loins. The Angles charge.
Sect. 1.
WIthin the Tents of Zorah dwelt a man
Of Jacobs seed, and of the Tribe of D^n,
Known by the name of Maenoah; to whom
Heaven had denied the treasure of the womb;
His Wife was barren; And her prayers could not
Remove that great reproach, or cleanse that blot
Which on her fruitless name appeared so foul,
Not to increase the Tribe of Dan one soul:
Long had she, doubtless, stroven with heaven by prair's
Made strong with tears and sighs; hopes and despaires
No doubt had often tortured her desire
Upon a Rack, composed of frost and fire:
But Heaven was pleased to turn his deafned ears
Against those prai'rs made strong with sighs and tears:
She often prayed; but prayers could not obtain:
Alas, she prayed, she wept, she sighed in vain:
She prayed, no doubt; but prayers could find no room;
They proved, alas, as barren as her womb.
Upon a time (when her unanswered prayer
Had now given just occasion of despai^e,
(Even when her bedridden faith was grown so frail,
That very Hope grew hartlesse to prevail)
Appeared an Angel to her; In his face,
Terror and sweetness labored for the place:
Sometimes his Sunbright eyes would shine so fierce
As if their pointed beams would even pierce
Her soul, and strike th'amaz'd beholder dead:
Sometimes, their glory would disperse, and spread
More easy flames; and, like the Star, that stood
Over Bethlem, promise and portend some good:
Mixed was his bright aspect; as if his breath
Had equal errands both of life and death:
Glory and Mildness seemed to contend
In his fair eyes so long, till in the end,
In glorious mildness, and in milder glory,
He thus salutes her with this pleasing story.
Woman; Heaven greets thee well: Rise up, and fear (...);
Forbear thy faithless tremblings; I appear not
Clad in the vestments of consuming fire;
Cheer up, I have no warrant to enquire
Into thy sins; I have no Vyals here,
Nor dreadful Thunderbolts to make thee fear:
I have no plagues to inflict; nor is my breath
Charged with destruction; (...) my hand with death.
No, no; cheer up, I come not to destroy;
I come to bring thee tidings of great joy*
Rowze up thy du^ beliefe^ for I ap^eare,
To exercise thy Faith, and not thy Fear:
The G^iae, and great Creator of all things,
Chief Lord of Lords, and supreme King of Kings,
To whom an Host of men are but a swarm
Of ^urm'^ing Guats, whose high prevailing arm
Can crush ten thousand world^, and at one blow
Can strike the earth to nothing, and ore-throw
The Lofts of Heaven; He that has the Keys
Of (...), to shut, and open them when he please;
He that can all things, that he will, this day,
Is pleased to take thy long reproach away:
Behold; thy womb's enlarged; and thy desires
Shall find success: Before long time expires,
Thou sh^l^ conceive: Ere twice five months be run*
Be thou the joyful mother of a son;
But see, thy wary palate do forbear
The juice of the bewitching Grape; Beware,
Le^^ thy defiers tempt thy lips to wine,
Which must be faithful strangers to the Vine.
Strong drink thou must not taste, and all such meat
The Law proclaims unclean, refrain to eat:
And when the fruit of thy restored womb
S^^ll see the light, take heed no Rasor come
(...) his fruitful head; for from his birth,
(...) as the womb entrusts him on the earth,
The child shall be a Nazarite, to God;
(...) whose appointment, be shall prove a Rod,
To scourge the proud Philistians; and recall
P^re suffering Israel from their slavish thrall*
Meditat. 2.
HOw impudent is Nature to account
Those acts her own, that do so far surmo^^^
Her easy reach! How purblinde are those eyes
Of stupid mortals, that have power to rise
No higher then her laws, who takes upon her
The work, and robs the Author of his honor!
See thou the fruitful Womb? How every year
It moves thy Cradle; to thy slender cheer
Invites another Ghest, and makes thee Father
To a new Son, who now, perchance, had rather
Bring up the old, esteeming propagation
A thanklesse work of Supererogation:
Perchance the formal Midwife seems to thee
Less welcome now; than she was wont to be:
Thou standst amazed to hear such needless Joy,
And car'st as little for it, as the Boy
That Is newly borne into the world; Nay worse,
Perchance, thou grumblest, counting it a curse
Unto thy faint estate, which is not able
T'encrease the bounty of thy slender Table:
Poor miserable man what ere thou be,
I suffer for thy crooked thoughts; not thee:
Thou take thy children to be gifts of nature;
Their wit, their flowring beauty, comely stature,
Their perfect health; their dainty disposition,
Their virtues, and their easy acquisition
Of curious Arts, their strengths attained perfection
You attribute to that benign complexion,
Wherewith your Goddess Nature has endowed
Their well-disposed Organs; and are proud;
And here your Goddess leaves you, to deplore,
That such admired perfections should be poor:
Advance thine eyes, no less then wilful blind,
And with thine eyes, advance thy drooping mind*
Correct thy thoughts; Let not thy wondering eye
Adore the servant, when the Master's by:
Look on the God of Nature: From him come
These underprized blessings of the womb:
He makes thee rich in children; when his store
Crowns thee with wealth, why make thou thy self poor?
He opes the womb: why then should thou repine?
They are his children, mortal, and not thine:
We are but Keepers; And the more he lends
To our tuition, he the more commends
Our faithful trust; It is not every one
Deserves that honor, to command his Son;
She counts it as a fortune, that is allowed
To nurse a Prince; (What nurse would not be proud
Of such a Fortune?) And shall we repine,
Great God, to foster any Babe of thine?
But it is the Charge we fear: our stock's but small;
If heaven, with Children, send us wherewithal
To stop their craving stomachs, then we care not;
Great God!
How have thou cracked thy credit, that we dare
Trust thee for bread? How is it, we dare not venture
To keep thy Babes, unless thou please to enter
In bond, for payment? Art thou grown so poor,
To leave thy famisht Infants at our door,
And not allow them food? Can thou supply
The empty Ravens, and let thy children die?
Send me that stint, thy wisdom shall think fie,
Thy pleasure is my will; and I submit:
Make me deserve that honor thou have lent
To my frail trust, and I will rest content.
THE ARGVMENT^
The wife ^ Manoah attended
with fearful Hope, and h^pefull Fear,
The joyful tidings recommended
to her amazed Husbands care.
Sect. 2.
THus, when the great Ambassador of Heaven
Had done that sacred service, which was given,
And trusted to his faithful charge, he spread
His air dividing pinions, and fled:
But now, the affrighted woman apprehends
The strangeness of the Message; recommends
Both it, and him, that did it, to her fears;
The news was welcome to her grateful ears,
But what the newesman was did so encrea^e
Her doubts, that her strange hopes could find no peace;
For when her hopes would build a Tower of joy,
O, then her fears would shake it, and destroy
The maine foundation; what her hopes in vain
Did raise, her fears would ruinate again:
One while, she thought; It was an Angel sent:
And then her fears would teach her to repent
That frighfull thought; but when she deeply waigh'd
The joyful message, then her thoughts obay'd
Her first conceit; Distracted, with confusion,
Sometimes she feared it was a false delusion,
Suggested in her too believing ears;
Sometimes she doubts it was a Dream, that bears
No weight but in a slumber; till at last,
Her feet, advised by her thoughts, made haste
Unto her husband; in whose ears she brake
This minde-perplexing secret thus, and spoke;
Sir,
As my discursive thoughts did lately muse
On those great blessings, wherewith heaven does use
To crown his children, here; among the rest,
Me thoughts no one could make a wife more blessed,
And crown her youth, her age with greater measure
Of true content, than the unprized treasure
Of her chaste womb: but as my thoughts were bent
Upon this subject, being in our Tent,
And none but I, appeared before mine eyes
A man of God: His habit, and his guise
Was such as holy Prophets use to wear,
But in his dreadful looks there did appear
Something that made me tremble; In his eye
Mildness was mixed with awful Majesty;
Strange was his language, and I could not choose
But fear the man, although I liked his news;
Woman (said he) Cheer up, and do not fear,
I have no Vials, nor no Judgments here,
My hand has no Commission, to enquire
Into thy sins; nor am I clad in fire:
I come to bring thee tidings of such things,
As have their warrant from the King of Kings*
Thou shall conceive, and when thy time is come,
Thou shall enjoy the blessings of thy womb;
Before the space of twice five months be run,
Thou shall become the parent of a Son;
Till then, take heed, thou neither drink, nor eat
Wines, or strong drink, or Law-forbidden meat,
For when this promised child shall see the light,
Thou shall be mother to a Nazarite.
While thus he spoke, ^ trembled: Horrid fear
Usurped my quivering heart; Only mine ear
Was pleased to be the vessel of such news,
Which Heaven make good; and give me strength to use
My better Faith: The holy Prophets name
I was afraid t'enquire, or whence he came.
Meditat. 2.
ANd do thou not admier? Can such things
Obtain less privilege, tha^ a Tale, that brings
The audience wonder, enter mixed with pleasure?
Is It a small thing, that Angels can find leisure
To leave their blessed seats; where face to face,
They see their God, and quit that heavenly place,
The least conception of whose joy, and mirth,
Transcends the united pleasures of the earth?
Must Angels leave their Thrones of glory thus,
To watch our footsteps, and attend on us?
How good a God have we! whose eyes can wink,
For fear they should discover the base finke
Of our loathed sins; How does he stop his ear,
Lest, when they call for Justice, he should hear?
How often, Ah, how often does He send
His willing Angels, hourly to attend
Our steps; and, with his bounty, to supply
Our helpless wants, at our false-hearted cry?
The bounteous Ocean, with a liberal hand,
Transports her laden treasure, to the land;
Inriches every Port, and makes each town
Proud with that wealth, which now she calls her own;
And what return they for so great a gain,
But sinckes and noisome Gutters, back again?
Even so (great God) thou sendst thy blessings in,
And we return thee, Dunghils of our Sin:
How are thy Angels hacknei'd up and down
To visit man? How poorly do we crown
Their blessed labors? They with Joy, dismount,
Laden with blessings, but return the account
Of Filth and Trash: They bring th'unvalued prize
Of Grace and promised Glory, while our eyes
Disdain these heavenly Factours, and refuse
Their proferd wares; affecting, more, to choose
Agraine of pleasure than a Iemme of glory;
We find no treasure, but in Transitory
And earth-bred Toi^s, while things immortal stand
Like Garments, to be sold at second hand:
Great God; Thou know, we are but flesh and blood;
Alas! we can interpret nothing, good,
But what is evil, deceitful are our Joys;
We are but children, and we whine for Toys:
Of things unknown there can be no desire;
Quicken our hearts with the celestial fire
Of thy discerning Spirit, and we shall know
Both what is good, and good desire too:
Vouchsafe to let thy blessed Angel come,
And bring the tidings, that the barren Womb^
Of our affections is enlarged; O when
That welcome news shall be revealed, then,
Our souls shall soon conceive, and bring thee forth
The firstlings of a new, and holy birth.
THE ARGUMENT.
Manoah's wonder turns to zeal;
his z^ale, to prayer: His prayers obtain:
The Angel that did late reveal
the joyful news, returns again.
Sect. 3.
NOw when the amazed woman had commended
Her tongue to silence, and her tale was ended;
Perplexed Manoah, ravished at the news,
Within himself, he thus began to muse;
Strange is the message! And as strangely done!
Shall Manoah's loins be fruitful? Shall a Son
Bless his last days? Or shall an Issue come
From the chill closet of a barren womb?
Shall Manoah's wife give suck? and now, at last
Find pleasure, when her prime of youth is past?
Shall her cold womb be now, in age, restored?
And was it a man of God, that brought the word?
Or was it some false delusion, that possessed
The weakness of a lonely woman's breast?
Or was it an Angel, sent from heaven, to show
What Heaven has will, as well as power, to do.
Till then thou must refrain to drink, or eat,
Wines, and strong drink, and Law-forbidden meat?
Evil Angls rather would instruct to riot,
They use not to prescribe so strict a Diet;
No, no, I make no further question of it,
'Twas some good Angel, or some holy Prophet,
Thus, having mused a while, he bowed his face
Upon the ground; and (prostrate in the place,
Where first he heard the welcome tidings) prayed,
(His wonder now transformed to zeal) and said:
Great God; that have engaged thy self, by v^w,
When e're thy little Israel begs, to bow
Thy gracious ear, O harken to the least
Of Israel's sons, and grant me my request:
By thee: I live, and breathe: Thou did become
My gracious God, both in, and from the womb;
Thy precious favors I have still possessed,
And have depended on thee, from the Breast:
My simple Infancy has bin protected
By thee, my Childhood taught, my youth corrected,
And sweetly chastned with thy gentle Rod;
I was no sooner, but thou were my God:
All times declare thee good; this very hour
Can testify the greatness of thy power,
And promptness of thy Mercy, which have sent
This blessed Angel to us, to augment
The Catalogue of thy favors, and restore
Thy servants womb, whose hopes had even given ore
TO expect an issue: What thou have begun,
Prosper, and perfect, till the work be done:
Let not my Lord be angry, if I crave
Aboone, too great for me to beg, or have:
Let that blessed Angel, that thou sent'st, of late,
Reblesse us with his presence, and relate
Thy will at large, and what must then be done,
When time shall bring to light this promised son.
About that time, when the declining Lamp
Trebles each shadow; when the evening dampe
Begins to moisten, and refresh the land,
The Wife of Manoah (under whose command
The weaned Lambs did feed) being lowly seated
Upon a Shrubbe (where often she repeated
That pleasing news, the subject of her thought)
Appeared the Angel; he, that lately brought
Those blessed tidings to her: up she rose;
Her second fear had warrant to dispose
Her nimble footsteps to unwonted haste;
She runs with speed, (she cannot run too fast)
At length, she finds her husband; In her eyes,
Were Joy and Fear; whilst her lost breath denies
Her speech to him, her trembling hands make signs;
She puffes and pants; her breathless tongue disjoynes
Her broken words: Behold, behold, (said she)
The man of God, (if man of God he be)
Appeared again: These very eyes beheld
The man of God: I left him in our field.
Meditat. 3.
Heaven is Gods Magazen; wherein, he has
Stored up his Vials both of love, and wrath;
Justice and Mercy, wait upon his Throne;
Favors and Thunderbolts attend upon
His sacred Will and Pleasure; Life and Death
Do both receive their influence from his breath;
Judgments attend his left; at his right hand
Blessings and everlasting Pleasures stand:
Heaven is the Magazen; wherein, he puts
Both good and evil; Prayer is the key, that shuts
And opens this great Treasure; It Is a key,
Whose wards are Faith, and Hope, and Charity.
Would thou prevent a judgment, due to sin?
Turn but the key, and thou may lock it in:
Or would thou have a Blessing fall upon thee?
Open the door, and it will shower on thee.
Can Heaven be false? or can the Almighties tongue,
That is all very truth, do truth that wrong,
Not to perform a vow? His lips have sworn,
Sworn by himself, that if a Sinner turn
To him, by prayer; his prayer shall not be lost
For want of ear; nor his desire, crossed:
How is it then we often ask and have not:
We ask, and often miss, because we crave no^
The things we should: his wisdom can foresee
Those blessings, better, that we want, than we^
Have thou not heard a peevish Infant baule
To gain possession of a knife? And shall
The indulgent nurse be counted wisely kind,
If she be moved to please his childish mind?
Is it not greater wisdom, to deny
The sharp-edg'd knife, and to present his eye
With a fine harmless Puppit? We require
Things, often, unfit; and our too fond desire
Fastens on goods, that are but glorious ills,
Whilst Heavens high wisdom contradicts our wills,
With more advantage, for we often receive
Things that are far more fit, for us, to have:
Experience tells; we seek, and cannot find:
We seek, and often want, because we bind
The Giver to our times: He knows we want
Patience; and, therefore he suspends his grant,
TO increase our faith, that so we may depend
Upon his hand; he loves to hear us spend
Our childish mouths: Things easily obtained,
Are lowly prized; but what our prayers have gained
By tears, and groans, that cannot be expressed,
Are far more dear, and sweeter, when possessed.
Great God! whose power has so often prevailed
Against the strength of Princes, and have quail'd
Their prouder stomaks; with thy breath, discrown'd
Their heads, and thrown their Scepters to the ground,
Striking their swelling hearts with cold despair,
How art thou conquered and overcome by Prayer!
Infuse that Spirit, Great God, into my heart,
And I will have a blessing ere we part.
THE ARGUMENT.
Manoah desires to know the fashion
And breeding of his promised son;
To whom the Angel makes relation
Of all things needful to be done.
Sect. 4.
WIth that the Danite rose; and being guided
By his perplexed wife, they, both divided
Their heedlesse paces, ^ill they had attained
The field, (...) the (...) of God remained:
And, drawing ^eerer to h^s presence, stayed
His weary steps, and, with obeisance, said:
Art thou the (...) blessed lips ^oretold
Those joyful (...)? Shall my tongue be bold,
Without the breach of manners to request
This boon, Art tho^^ that Prophet, that possessed
This barren woman, with a hope, that She
Shall bear a Son? He answered, I am He:
Said Manoah, then; Let not a word of thine
Be lost; let them continue to divine
Our future happiness: let them be crowned
With truth; and thou with honor, to be found
A holy Prophet: Let performance bless
And speed thy speeches with a fair success:
But tell me, Sir; when this great work is done,
And time shall bring to light this promised Son,
What sacred Ceremonies shall we use?
What Rites? What way of bleeding shall we choose
TO observe? What holy course of life shall be
Be trained in? What shall his Office be?
Whereat the attentive Angel did divide
The portall of his lips, and thus replide.
The Child, that from thy fruitful loins shall come
Shall be a holy Nazarite, from the womb;
Take heed; that womb, that shall enclose this Child,
In no case be polluted or defilde
With Law-forbidden meats: Let her forbear
To taste those things that are forbidden there.
The bunch-back Camel shall be no repast
For her; Her palate shall forbear to taste
The burrow haunting Cony, and decline
The swiftfoote-Hare, and mire-delighting Swine;
The griping, Goshauke; and the towering Eagle;
The party-colored Pie must not inveigle
Her lips to move; the brood-devouring Kite;
The croaking Raven; the Owl that hates the light;
The steele-digesting Bird; the last Snaile;
The Cuckoo, ever telling of one tale;
The fish-consuming Osprey, and the Want,
That undermines; the greedy Cormorant;
The indulgent Pelican; the predictious Crow;
The chattring Storke, and ravenous Vulter too;
The thorn-backt Hedgehogge, and the prating lay;
The Lapwing, flying still the other way;
The lofty-flying Falkon, and the Mouse,
That finds no pleasure in a poor man's house;
The suck-egge Weasell, and the winding Swallow,
From these she shall abstain,, and not unhallow
Her opened lips with their polluted flesh;
Strong drink she must forbear, and to refresh
Her lingering palate, with lu^-breeding Wine;
The Grape, or what proceeds from the Vine,
She must not taste, for fear she be defilde,
And so pollute her wombe-enclosed Child:
When time shall make her mother of a Son,
Beware, no keen-edg'd Raisor come upon
His b^llowed Crown: the hair upon his head
Must not be cut: His bountious locks must spread
On his broad shoulders: From his first drawn breath
The Child shall be a Nazarite, to his death.
Meditat. 4.
WHat shallow judgment, or what easy brain
Can choose but laugh at those, that strive in vain
To build a Tower, whose ambitious Spire
Should reach to heaven? what fool would not admire
To see their greater folly? who would raise
A Tower, to perpetuate the praise
And lasting Glory of their renowned Name,
What have they l^ft but Monuments of shame?
How poor and slender are the enterprises
Of man; that only whispers and advises
With heedlesse flesh and blood, and never makes
His God, of counsel, where he undertakes!
How is our God and we of late fallen out!
We rather choose to languish in our doubt,
Then be resolved by him; We rather use
The help of hell-bred wizzards, that abuse
The style of wise men^ then to have recourse
To him that is the Fountain and the sourse
Of all good Counsels, and from whom, proceeds
A living Spring, to water all our needs;
How willing are his Angels to descend
From off their throne of Glory, and attend
Upon our wants! How often return they back
Mourning to heaven, as if they grieved for lack
Of our employment! O how prone are they
To be assistant to us, every way!
Have we just cause to joy? They Will come and sing
About our beds: Does any judgment bring
Just cause of grief? they will fall a grieving too;
Do we triumph? their joyful mouths will blow
Their louder Trumpets, Or do fears affect us?
They Will guard our heads from danger, and protect us:
Are we in prison, or in Persecution?
They Will fill our hearts with joy, and resolution:
Or do we languish in our sickly beds?
They Will come and pitch their Tents about our heads;
See they a sinner penitent, and mourn
For his bewailed offenses, and return?
They clap their hands, and join their warbling voices,
They sing, and all the Quire of Heaven rejoices.
What is in us poor Dust and Ashes, Lord,
That thou should look upon us, and afford
Thy precious favors to us, and impart
Thy gracious Counsels? what is our desert,
But Death, and Horror? What can we more clame,
Then they, that now are scorching in that flame,
That has nor moderation, rest, nor end?
How does thy mercy, above thought extend
To the^ thou love! Teach me (great God) to prize
Thy sacred Counsels: open my blind eyes,
That I may see to walk the perfect way;
For as I am, Lord, I am apt to stray
And wander to the gulf of endless woe:
Teach me what must be done, and help to do.
THE ARGUMENT.
Manoah desires to understand,
but is denied the Angels name:
He offers by the Angels hand:
the Angel vanishes in a flame.
Sect. 5.
SO said, The son of Israel, (easly apt
To credit, what his soul desired, and rapt
With better hepes, which served him as a guide
To his belief, o'rejoy'd) he thus replide;
Let not the man of God, whose Heavenly voice
Has blessed mine ear, and made my soul rejoice,
Beyond expression, now refuse to come
Within my Tent, and honor my poor home
With his desired presence; there to taste
His servants slender diet, and repast
Upon his Rural fare: These hands shall take
A tender Kidde from out the flocks, and make,
(Without long tarriance) some delighfull meat
Which may invite the man of God to eat:
Come, come (my Lord) and what defect of food
Shall be, thy servants welcome shall make good:
Whereto the Angel (who as yet had made
Himself unknown) reanswer'd thus, and said*
Excuse me: Though thy hospitable love
Prevail to make me stay, it cannot move
My thankful lips to taste thy liberal cheer;
Let not thy bounty urge in vain; Forbear
To strive with whom thy welcome cannot lead
To eat thy Kid, or taste thy profer'd bread;
Convert thy bounty to a better end,
And let thy undefiled hands commend
A burnt oblation to the King of Kings;
It Is he, deserves the thanks; his servant brings
But that bare message which his lips enjoyne;
His be the glory of the Act, not mine.
Said then the Israelite, If my desire
Be not too over-rash, but may conspire
With thy good pleasure, let thy servants ear
Be honored with thy name; that whensoere
These blessed tidings (that possess my heart
With firm belief) shall in due time impart
Their full perfection, and desired success
To my expecting eye, my soul may bless
The tongue that brought the message, and proclaim
An equal honor to his honored name.
To whom, the Angel (whose severer brow
Sent forth a frown) made answer; Do not thou
Trouble thy busy thoughts with things, that are
Above thy reach; Enquier not too far;
My name is clothed in mists; It Is not my task,
To make it known to thee; nor thine, to ask:
With that, the Danite took a tender Kid,
And said; my Lord, The Tribe of Dan's forbid
To burn an offering; Only Levites may,
And holy Prophets, If thou please to lay
The sacrifice on yonder sacred Stone,
I Will fetch thee fire, for fire there is none,
Forheare thy needless pains, the Angel said,
Heaven will supply that want; With that, he laid
The offering on; and, from the stone, there came
A sudden fire, whose high ascending flame
Burnt and consumed th'accepted Sacrifice;
Now whilst th'amaz'd beholders wondering eyes
Were taken Captives with so strange a sight
And whilst the new-wrought miracle did affright
Their tre^bling hearts, the Man of God (whose name
Must not b'inquired) vanished in the flame,
And left them both unable to expound
Each others fears; both grovelling on the ground.
Meditat. 5.
A Thankful heart has earnd one favor twice;
But he that is ungrateful, wants no vice:
The beast, that only lives the life of Sense,
Prone to his several actions and propense
To what he does, without the advice of will,
Guided by nature, (that does nothing ill)
In practicke Maxims, proves it a thing hateful,
T'accept a Favo^r, and to live ungrateful:
But man, whose more diviner soul has gained
A higher step to reason: nay, attained
A higher step then that, the light of grace,
Comes short of them; and in that point, more base
Then they most prompt and perfect in that rude,
Unnatural, and high sin, Ingratitude:
The Stall-fed Ox, that is grown fat, will know
His careful feeder, and acknowledge too:
The prouder Stallion, will at length epsy,
His Masters bounty, in his Keepers eye:
The ayre-dividing Faulkon, will requite
Her Faulkners pains, with a well pleasing flight:
The generous Spaniell, loves his Masters eye,
And licks his fingers, though no meat be by;
But Man, ungrateful Man, that is borne, and bred
By Heavens immediate power; mai^tain'd and fed
By his providing hand; observed, attended
By his indulgent grace; preserved, defended
By his prevailing arm; this Man, I say,
Is more ungrateful, more obdure than they:
By him, we live and move; from him, we have
What blessings he can give, or we can crave:
Food for our hunger; Dainties, for our pleasure;
Trades, for our buisnes; Pastimes, for our leisure;
In grief, he is our Joy; in want, our Wealth;
In bondage, Freedom; and in sickness, Health;
In peace, our Counsel; and in war, our Leader;
At Sea, our Pilot; and, in Suites, our Pleader;
In pain, our Help; in Triumph, our Renown;
In life, our Comfort; and in death our Crown;
Yet Man, O most ungrateful Man, can ever
Enjoy the Gift, but never mind^ the Giver;
And like the Swine, though pampered with enough,
His eyes are never higher than the Trough:
We still receive: our hearts we seldom lift
To heaven; but drown the giver in the Gift;
We taste the Skollops, and return the Shells;
Our sweet Pomgranats want their silver Bells:
We take the Gift; the hand that did present it,
We often reward; forget the Friend that sent it,
A blessing given to those, will not disburse
Some thanks, is little better then a curse.
Great giver of all blessings; thou that art
The Lord of Gifts; give me a grateful heart:
O give me that, or keep thy favors from me:
I wish no blessings, with a Vengeance to me.
THE ARGUMENT.
Affrighted Manoah and his Wife
Both prostrate on the naked earth:
Both rise: The man despaires of life;
The woman cheares him: Samsons birth.
Sect. 6.
WHen time, (whose progress mod'rates and out wears
The Extremest passions of the highest fears)
By his benignant power, had re-inlarg'd
Their captive senses, and at length discharged
Their frighted thoughts, the trembling couple rose
From their unquiet, and disturbed repose:
Have you beheld a Tempest, how the waves
(Whose unresisted Tyranny out-braves
And threats to grapple with the darkened Skies)
How like to moving Mountains they arise
From their distempred Ocean, and assail
Heavens Battlements; nay when the winds d^e fail
To breathe another blast, with their own motion,
They still are swelling, and disturb the Ocean:
Even so the Danite and his trembling wife,
Their yet confused thoughts, are still at strife
In their perplexed breasts, which entertained
Continued fears, too strong to be refrained:
Speechless they stood, till Manoah that brake
The silence first, disclosed his lips and spoke;
What strange aspect was this, that to our sight
Appeared so terrible, and did affright
Our scattering thoughts? What did our eyes behold?
I fear our lavish tongues have bin too bold:
What speeches past between us? Can recall
The words we entertained the time withal?
It was no man; It was no flesh and blood;
Me thought, mine ears did ^ngle, while he stood,
And commun'd with me: At each word be spoke,
Me thou^ht, my heart recoiled; his voice did shake
My very Soul, but when as he became
So angry, and so dainty of his name,
O, how my wonder-smitte^ heart began
To fail! O, then I kn^w, it was no man:
No, no; It was the face of God: Our eyes
Have seen his face: (who ever saw't, but dies?)
We are but dead; Death dwells within his eye,
And we have seen't, and we shall surely die:
Where to the woman, (who did either hide,
Or else had overcome her fears) replide;
Despairing Man; take courage, and forbear
These false predictions; there is no cause of fear:
Would Heaven accept our offerings, and receive
Our holy things; and, after that, bereive
His servants of their lives? Can he be thus
Pleased with our offerings, unappeas'd with us?
Has he not promised that the time shall come,
Wherein the fruits of my restored womb
Shall make thee father to a hopeful Son?
Can Heaven be false? Or can these things be done
When we are dead? No, no, his holy breath
Had spent in vain, if they had meant our death:
Recall thy needless fears; Heaven cannot lie;
Although we saw his face, we shall not dye.
So said; they brake off their discourse, and went,
He, to the field; and she into her Tent:
Thrice forty days not full complete, being come,
Within th'enclosure of her quickened womb,
The Babe began to spring; and, with his motion,
Confirmed the faith, and quickened the devotion
Of his believing parents, whose devout
And heaven-ascending Orizans, no doubt,
Were turned to thanks, and heart-rejoycing praise,
To holy Hymns, and heavenly Roundelaies:
The child grows sturdy; Every day gives strength
Unto his wombe-fed limbs; till at the length
Th'apparent mother, having past the date
Of her account, does only now awaite
The happy hour, wherein she may obtain
Her greatest pleasure, with her greatest pain.
When as the fair directresse of the night
Had thrice three times repar'd her wained light,
Her womb no longer able to retain
So great a guest, betrayed her to her pain,
And for the toilsome work, that she had done,
She found the wages of a newborn Son:
(...), she called his name: the child encreast,
And hourly sucked a blessing with the breast,
Daily his strength did double: He began
To grow in favor both with God and Man:
His well attended Infancy was blessed
With sweetness; in his Childhood, he expressed
True seeds of honor; and his youth was crowned
With high and brave adventures, which renowned
His honored name, His courage was supplied
With mighty strength: His haughty spirit defide
And host of men: His power had the praise
love all that were before, or since his days:
And to conclude, Heaven never yet conjoined
So strong a body, with so stout a mind.
Meditat. 6.
HOw precious were those blessed days, wherein
Souls never startled at the name of Sin!
When as the voice of death had never yet
A mouth to open, or to clame a debt!
When bashful nakedness forbear to call
For needless skins to cover shame withal;
When as the fruit-encreasing earth obay'd
The will of Man without the wound of spade,
Or help of Art! When he, that now remains
A cursed Captive to infernal chains,
Sat singing Anthems in the heavenly Quire,
Among his fellow Angels! When the Bryer,
The fruitless Bramble, the fast growing weed,
And downy Thistle had, as yet, no seed!
When labor was not known, and man did eat
The earths fair fruits, unearned with his sweat!
When wombs might have conceived without the stain
Of sin, and brought forth children, without pain!
When Heaven could speak to man's unfrighted ear
Without the sense of Sin-begotten fear!
How golden were those days? How happy than
Was the condition and the State of man!
But Man obeyed not: And his proud desire
Cing'd her bold feathers in forbidden fire:
But Man transgrest; And now his freedom feels
A sudden change: Sin follows at his heels:
The voice calls Adam: But poor Adam flees,
And trembling hides his face behind the trees:
The voice, whilere, that ravished with delight
His joyful ear, does now, alas, affright
His wounded conscience with amaze and wonder:
And what, of late, was music; now, is Thunder.
How have our sins abused us! and betrayed
Our desperate souls! What strangenes have they made
Betwixt the great Creator, and the work
Of his own hands! How closely do they lurk
To our distempred souls, and whisper fears
And doubts into our frighted hearts and ears!
Our eyes cannot behold that glorious face,
Which is all life, unruin'd in the place:
How is our nature changed? That very breath
Which gave us being, is become our death:
Great God! O, whither shall poor mortals fly
For comfort? If they see thy face, they dye;
And if thy life-restoring countenance give
Thy presence from us; then we cannot live:
How necessary is the ruin, than,
And misery of sin-beguiled Man!
On what foundation shall his hopes rely?
See we thy face, or see it not, we dye:
O let thy Word (great God) instruct the youth
And frailty of our faith; Thy Word is truth:
And what our eyes want power to perceive,
O, let our hearts admier, and believe.
THE ARGUMENT.
Samson at Timnah falls in love
And fancies a Philistian maid:
He moves his parents: They reprove
His sinful choice: dislike, dissuade.
Sect. 7.
NOw when as strong limbed Samson had disposed
His trifling thoughts to children, and disclosed
His bud of childhood, which being overgrowne,
And blossom of his youth so fully blown,
That strength of nature now thought good to seek
Her entertainment on his downy cheek,
And with her manly bounty did begin
To uneffeminate his smoother chin,
He went to Timnah; whither, did resort
A great concourse of people, to disport
Themselves with pastime; or, perchance, to show
Some martial Feats (as they were wont to do)
Scaffolds were builded round about, whereon
The Crown of eye-delighted lookers on
Were closely pil'd: As Samsons wandering eye
Was ranging up and down, he did espy
A comely Virgin, beautiful and young,
Where she was seated midst the gazing throng:
The more he viewed, the more his eye desired
To view her face; and as it viewed, admired;
His heart, inflamed; his thoughts were all on fire;
His passions all were turned into desire;
Such were his looks, that she might well discry
A speaking lover in his sparkling eye:
Sometimes his reason bids his thoughts beware,
(...) he be caught in a Philistian snare;
And then, his thwarting passion would reply
Fear not to be a prisoner to that eye:
Reason suggests; It Is vain, to make a choice,
Where parents have an overruling voice:
Passion replies, That fear and filial duty
Must serve affection, and subscribe to beauty:
Whilst Reason faintly moved him to neglect,
Prevailing passion urged his soul t'affect:
Passion concludes; Let her enjoy thy heart:
Reason concludes; But let thy tongue impart
Thy affection to thy parents, and discover
To them, thy thoughts: With that the wounded lover
(Whose quicke-divided paces had out-runne
His lingering heart) like an observant son,
Repaires unto his parents; fully made
Relation of his troubled thoughts, and said,
Sir*
(...) day, at Timnah, to these wretched eyes,
(...) taken captive with the novelties
(...) entertained my pleased thoughts, appeared
(...) object; which, has so endeared
(...) very soul, (with sadness so distressed)
That this poor heart can find no ease, no rest;
It was a Virgin; in whose Heavenly face,
V^pattern'd Beauty, and diviner Grace
Were so conjoined as if they both conspired
(...) Angel; when these eyes inquired
(...) the excellence of her rare perfection,
(...) not choose but like, and my affection
Is so inflamed with desire, that I
Am now become close prisoner to her eye;
Now if my sad Petition may but find
A fair success to ease my tortured mind;
And if your tender hearts be pleased to prove
A^ prone to pity mine, as mine to love;
Let me, with joy, exchange my single life,
And be the husband of so fair a wife.
Whereto, the amazed parents, (in whose eye
Distaste and wonder percht) made this reply*
What strange desire, what vnadvis'd request
Has broken loose from thy distracted breast?
What! are the Daughters of thy brethren grown
So poor in Worth, and Beauty? Is there none
To please that overcurious eye of thine,
But the issue of a cursed Philistine?
Can thy miswandring eyes choose none, but her,
That is the child of an Idolater?
Correct thy thoughts, and let thy soul rejoice
In lawful beauty: Make a wiser choice:
How well this counsel pleased the tired ears
Of love-sicke Samson: O, let him that bears
A crossed affection, judge: Let him discover
The woeful case of this afflicted lover:
What easy pencill cannot represent
His very looks? How his stern brows were bent?
His drooping head? his very port and guise?
His bloodlesse cheeks, and deadness of his eyes?
Till, at the length, his moving tongue betrayed
His sullen lips to language, thus; and said: Sir,
The Extreme affection of my heart does lead
My tongue, (that is quickened with my love) to plead
What, if her parents be not circumcised?
Her issue shall; and she, perchance, advised
I^ worship Isreal's God, and, to forget
(...) fathers house; Alas, she is as yet,
(...) young; her downy years are green (...) tender;
(...) but a twigge, and time may (...)
^^brace the truth: O^r counsels (...)
(...) breeding, and so save a soul:
(...) who can tell, but Heaven did recommend
(...) beauty to these eyes, for such an end?
(...) not that which Heaven is pleased to save,
(...) Samson then obtain, as well as crave:
(...) gave me being, then prolong my life
And make me husband to so fair a wife.
With that the parents joined their whispering heads;
(...) observes; and, in their parley, reads
(...) Characters of hope; The mother smiles;
The father frowns; which, Samson reconciles
^^th hopeful fears; She smiles, and smiling crowns
(...) hopes; which, He deposes with his frowns:
(...) whispring ended; jointly they displaid,
^^alfe resolved countenance, and said,
Samson, suspend thy troubled mind a while,
(...) thy ^ver-charged thoughts recoile:
(...) of Shipwreck; Rocks are near the Shore;
(...) the Virgin, and resolve thee m^re.
Meditat. 6.
LOve is a noble passion of the heart;
That, with it very essence does impart
All needful Circumstances, and effects
Unto the chosen party it affects;
In absence, it enjoyes; and with an eye
Filled with celestial fire, does espy
Objects remote: It joys, and smiles in grief;
It sweetens poverty; It brings relief;
It gives the Feeble, strength; the Coward, spirit;
The sick man, health; the undeserving merit;
It makes the proud man, humble; and the stout
It ouercomes; and treads him underfoot;
It makes the mighty man of war to droope;
And him, to serve, that never, yet, could stoop;
It is a fire, whose Bellows are the breath
Of heaven above, and kindled here beneath:
It Is not the power of a man's election
To love; He loves no^ by his own direction;
It is nor beauty, nor ^enigne aspect
That always moves the Lover, to affect;
These are but means: Heavens pleasure is the cause*
Love is not bound to reason, and her Laws
Are not subjected to the imperious will
Of man: It lies not in his power to nill:
How is this Love abused! That Is only made
A snare for wealth, or to set up a trade;
To Enrich a great man's Table, or to pay
A desperate debt; or merely to allay
A base and wanton lust; which done, no doubt,
The love is ended, and her fire out:
No; he that loves for pleasure, or for pelf,
Loves truly, none; and, falsely, but himself:
The pleasure past, the wealth consumed and gone,
Love has no subject now to work upon:
The props being fallen, that did support the roof,
Nothing but rubbish, and neglected Stuff,
^^ke a wild Chaos of Confusion, lies
Presenting useless ruins to our eyes:
The Oil that does maintain loves sacred fire,
Is virtue mixed with mutual desire
Of sweet society, begun and bred
(...) soul; nor ended in the marriage bed:
This is the dew of Hermon, that does fill
The soul with sweetness, watring Sions hill;
This is that holy fire, that burns and lasts,
Till quenched by death* The other are but blasts
That faintly blaze like Oyle-forsaken snuffes
Which every breath of coffeehouse puffs
(...) quite extinguishes; and leaves us nothing
(...) an offensive subject of our loathing.
THE ARGUMENT.
He goes to Timnah: As he went,
he slew a Lion, by the way;
He sues; obtaines the Maids consent:
and they appoint the marriage day.
Sect. 8.
WHen the next day had, with his morning light,
Redeemed the East from the dark shades of night;
And, with his golden rays, had overspred
The neighboring Mountains; from his loathed Bed,
Sick-thoughted Samson rose, whose watchful eyes,
Morpheus that night had, with his leaden keys;
Not power to close: his thoughts did so incumber
His restless soul, his eyes could never slumber;
Whose softer language, by degrees did wake
His fathers sleepe-bedeafned ears, and spoke;
Sir; Let your early blessings light upon
The tender bosom of your prosperous Son,
And let the God of Israel repay
Those blessings, double, on your head, this day:
The long-since banished shadows make me bold
To let you know, the morning waxes old;
The Sunbeames are grown strong; their brighter (...)
Have broke the Mists, and dride the morning dew;
The sweetness of the season does invite
Your steps to visit Timnah, and acquit
Your last nights promise:
With that the Danite and his wife arose,
Scarce yet resolved, at last they did dispose
Their doubtful paces, to behold the prize
Of Samsons heart, and pleasure of his eyes;
They went, and when their travel had attained
Those fruitful hills, whose clusters entertained
Their thirsty palats, with their swelling pride,
The musing lover being stepped aside
To gain the pleasure of a lonely thought,
Appeared a full aged Lion, who had sought
(But could not find) his long desired prey;
Soon as his eye had given him hopes to pay
His debt to nature, and to mend that fault
His empty stomach found, he made assault
Upon th'unarmed Lovers breast, whose hand
Had neither staff, nor weapon, to withstand
His greedy rage; but he whose mighty strength
Or sudden death must now appear, at length,
Stretched forth his brawny arm, (his arm supplide
With power from heaven) and did, with ease, divide
His body limme from limme, and did betray
His flesh to fowls, that lately sought his prey:
This done; his quick redoubled paces make
His stay amends; his nimble steps ore take
His leading parents; who by this, discover
The smoke of Timnah: Now the greedy Lover
Thinks every step, a mile; and every pace
A measured League, until he see that face,
And find the treasure of his heart, that lies
In the fair Casket of his Mistress Eyes;
But, all this while, close Samson made not known
Unto his Parents, what his hands had done:
By this, the gate of Timnah entertaines
The welcome travelers: The parents pains
(...) now rewarded with their sons best pleasure*
The Virgin comes; His eyes can find no leisure,
To own another object: O, the greeting
The Impatient lovers had at their first meeting!
The Lover speaks; She answers; He replies;
She blushes; He demands; She denies;
He pleads affection; She doubts; He sues
For nuptial love; She questions; He renewes
His earnest suite: Importunes; She relents;
He must have no denial; She consents:
They pass their mutual loves: Their joined hands
Are equal earnest of the nuptial bands:
The parents are agreed; All parties pleased;
The day's set down; the lovers hearts are eased,
Nothing displeases now, but the long stay
Betwixt th'appointment, and the marriage day.
Meditat. 8.
It Is too severe a censure: If the Son
Take him a wife; the marriage fairly done,
Without consent of parents, (who perchance
Had raised his higher price, knew where to advance
His bettered fortunes to one hundred more)
He lives, a Fornicator; She, a Whore:
Too hard a censure! And it seems to me,
The Parent's most delinquent of the three:
What; if the better minded Son do aim
At worth? What, if rare virtues do inflame
His rapt affection? What, if the condition
Of an admired, and dainty disposition
Has wen his soul? Whereas the covetous Father
Finds her Gold light, and recommends him, rather,
T'an old worn widow, whose more weighty purse
Is filled with gold, and with the Orphans curse;
The sweet exubrance of whose full mouthed portion
Is but the cursed issue of extortion;
Whose worth, perchance, lies only in her weight,
Or in the bosom of her great estate;
What, if the Son, (that does not care to buy
Abundance at so dear a rate) deny
The soule-detesting profer of his Father,
And in his better Judgment chooses, rather,
To match with meaner Fortunes, and desert?
I think that Mary chose the better part,
What noble Families (that have out-growne
The best records) have quite bin overthrown
By wilful parents, that will either force
Their sons to match, or haunt them with a curse!
That can adapt their humors, to rejoice,
And fancy all things, but their childrens choice!
Which makes them, often, timorous to reveal
The close desiers of their hearts, and steal
Such matches, as, perchance, their fair advice
Might, in the bud, have hindered in a trice;
Which done, and past, O, then their hasty spirit
Can think of nothing, under Disinherit;
He must be quite discarded, and exilde;
The furious father must renounce his child;
Nor Prayer nor Blessing must he have; bereiven
Of all; Nor must he live, nor die forgiven;
When as the Fathers rashness, oftentimes,
Was the first causer of the Childrens crimes.
Parents* be not too cruel: Children do
Things, often, too deep for us t'enquire into:
What father would not storm, if his wild Son
Should do the deed, that Samson here had done?
Nor do I make it an exemplar act;
Only, let parents not be too exact
To curse their children, or to dispossess
Them of their blessings, Heaven may chance to bless:
Be not too strict: Fair language may recure
A fault of youth, whilst rougher words obdure.
THE ARGUMENT.
Samson goes down to celebrate
his marriage and his nuptial feast:
The Lion, which he ^lew of late
has honey in his putrid breast.
Sect. 9.
When as the long expected time was come,
Wherein these lingering Lovers should consumme
The promised marriage, and observe the rites,
Pertaining to those festival delights,
Samson went down to Timnah; there, to enjoy
The sweet possession of his dearest joy;
But as he past those fruitful Vineyards, where
His hands of late, acquit him of that fear
(Wherewith the fierce assaulting Lion quail'd
His yet unpracticed courage) and prevailed
Upon his life; as by that place he past,
He turned aside, and borrowed of his have
A little time, wherein his eyes might view
The Carkas of the Lion which he slew;
But when his wandering footsteps had drawn near
The unlamented hearse, his wondering ear
Perceived a murmuring noise, discerning not
From whence that strange confusion was, or what;
He stays his steps, and hearkens; still the voice
Presents his ear, with a continued noise;
At length, his gently moving feet apply
Their paces to the Carkas, where his eye
Discernes a Swarm of Bees, whose laden thighs
Reposed their burdens, and the painful prize
Of their sweet labor in the hollow Chest
Of the dead Lion, whose unbowell'd breast
Became their plenteous storehouse, where, they laid
The blessed increase of their laborious Trade;
The fleshly Hive was filled with curious Combs,
Within whose dainty waxe-divided rooms,
Were shops of honey, whose delicious taste
Did sweetly recompense th'adjourned haste
Of lingering Samson, who does now repay
The time he borrowed from his better way,
And with renewed speed, and pleasure, flies,
Where all his soule-delighting treasure lies;
He goes to Timnah, where his heart does find
A greater sweetness, than he left behind;
His hasty hands invites her gladder eyes
To see, and lips to taste that obvious prize
His interrupted stay had lately took,
And as she tasted, his fixed eyes would look
Upon her varnisht lips, and, there, discover
A sweeter sweetness to content a Lover:
And now the busy Virgins are preparing
Their costly Jewels, for the next days wearing;
Each lap is sill'd with Flowers, to compose
The nuptial Girland, for the Brides fair brows;
The cost^neglecting Cooks have now encreast
Their pastry dainties to adorn the feast;
Each willing hand is labring to provide*
The needful ornaments to deck the Bride.
But now, the crafty Philistines, for fear
Lest Samsons strength, (which startled every ear
With dread and w^nder) under that pretense,
Should gain the means, to offer violence;
And, through the show of nuptial devotion,
Should take advantages to breed commotion,
Or lest his popular power, by coaction
Or fair entreats, may gather to his faction
Some loose and discontented men of theirs,
And so betray them to supected fears;
They therefore to prevent ensuing harms,
Gave strict command, that thirty men of arms,
Under the ma^ke of Bridemen, should attend
Until the nuptial ceremonies end.
Meditat. 9.
HOw high, unutterable, how profound,
(Whose depth the line of knowledge cannot sound)
Are the deerces of the Eternal God!
How secret are his ways, and how untrod
By man's conceit, so deeply charged with doubt!
How are his Counsels past our finding out!
O, how unscrutable are his designs!
How deep, and how unsearchable are the Mines
Of his abundant Wisdom! how obscure
And his eternal Judgments! and how sure!
Lists he to strike? the very Stones shall fly
From their unmoved Foundations, and destroy:
Lists he to punish? Things that have no sense,
Shall vindicate his Quarrel, on The Offense:
Lists he to send a plague? The winters heat
And summers damp, shall make his will complete:
Lists he to send the Sword? Occasion brings
New Iealousies betwixt the hearts of Kings:
Wills he a famine? Heaven shall turn to brass,
And earth to Iron, till it come to pass:
Both stocks, and stones, and plants, and beasts fulfill
The secret Counsel of his sacred will,
Man, only wretched Man, is disagreeing
To do that thing, for which he had his being:
Samson must down to Timnah; in the way
Must meet a Lion, whom his hands must slay;
The Lions putrid Carkas must enclose
A swarm of Bees; and, from the Bees, arose
A Riddle; and that Riddle must be read,
And by the reading, Choler must be bred,
And that must bring to pass Gods just designs
Upon the death of the false Philistines:
Behold the progress, and the royal Gests
Of Heavens high vengeance; how it never rests,
Till, by appointed courses, it fulfill
The secret pleasure of his sacred will.
Great Savior of the world; Thou Lamb of Sion,
That hides our sins; That art the wounded Lion*
O, in thy dying body, we have found
A world of honey; whence we may propound
Such sacred Riddles, as shall, underneath
Our feet, subdue the power of Hell and Death;
Such Mysteries; as none but he, that plough'd
With thy sweet Hayfer's able to uncloud;
Such sacred Mysteries, whose eternal praise
Shall make both Angels, and Archangels raise
Their louder voices, and, in triumph, sing,
All Glory and Honor to our highest King,
And to the Lamb, that sits upon the throne;
Worthy of power and praise is he, alone,
Whose glory has advanced our key of mirth;
Glory to God, on high; and peace, on Earth.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Bridegroom, at his nuptial Feast,
to the Philistians, does propound
A Riddle: which they all addressed
themselves, in counsel to expound.
Sect. 10.
NOw, when the glory of the next days light
Had chased the shadows of the tedious night,
(...) coupling Hymen with his nuptial bands,
(...) g^lden Fetters, had conjoined their hands;
(...) jolly welcome had to every Guest,
^^pos'd the bounty of the marriage Feast;
(...) now appeased stomachs did enlarge
(...) captive tongues, with power to discharge
(...) quit their Table-duty, and disburse
(...) store of enterchangeable discourse,
(...) ^^genious Bridegroom turned his rolling eyes
(...) his guard of Bridemen, and applies
^^^peech to them: And, whilst that every man
(...) his attentive ear, he thus began;
My t^ngue's in labor, and my thoughts abound;
(...) a doubtful Riddle, to propound;
(...) if your joined wisdoms can discover,
(...) our seven days feasting be past over;
(...), thirty Sheets, and thirty new supplies
^^^^^^ment shall be your deserved prize:
(...) be seven days feast shall be dissolved,
(...) darkened Riddle be resolved,
Ye shall be all engaged to resign
The like to me, the vict'rie being mine:
So said; the Bridemen, whose exchanged eyes
Found secret hopes of conquest, thus replies:
Propound thy Riddle: Let thy tongue dispatch
Her cloudy errand: We accept the match:
With that, the hopeful Challenger convai'd
His Riddle to their harkening ears, and said;
The Riddle.
Our food, in plenty, does proceed
from him that used to eat;
And he, whose custom was to feed
does now afford as meat;
A thing that I did lately meet,
as I did pass along,
Afforded me a dainty sweet,
yet was both sharp and strong:
The doubtful Riddle being thus propounded,
They muse; the more they mused, the more confounded*
One rounds his whispring neighbor in the ear,
Whose laboring lips deny him leave to hear:
Another, trusting rather to his own
Conceit, sits musing, by himself, alone:
Here, two are closely whispring, till a third
Comes in, nor to the purpose speaks a word:
There, sits two more, and they cannot agree
How rich the clothes, how fine the Sheets must be
Yonder stands one that, musing, smiles; no doubt,
But he is near it, if not found it out;
To whom another rudely rushes in,
And puts him quite beside his thought agin:
(...), three are Whispring, and a fourths intrusion
Spoils all, and puts them all into confusion:
^^re sits another in a Chair, so deep
(...) thought, that he is nodding fast asleep:
The more their busy fancy do endever,
The more they err; Now, farther off, than ever:
(...) when their wits, spurred on with sharp desire,
Had lost their breath, and now began to tire,
They ceased to tempt conceit beyond her strength*
And, weary of their thoughts, their thoughts at length
Present a new exploit: Craft must supply
Defects of wit; Their hopes must now rely
Upon the frailty of the tender Bride;
She must be moved; Persuasions may attain;
If not, then rougher language must constrain:
She must diclose the Riddle, and discover
The bosom secrets of her faithful Lover.
Medita. 10.
THere is a time, to laugh: A time, to turn
Our smiles to tears: There is a time to mourn:
There is a time for joy, and a time for grief,
A time to want, and a time to find relief,
A time to bind, and there is a time to break,
A time for silence, and a time to speak,
A time to labor, and a time to rest,
A time to fast in, and a time to feast:
Things, that are lawful, have their times, and use;
Created good; and, only by abuse,
Made bad: Our sinful usage does unfashion
What heaven has made, and makes a new creation;
Joy is a blessing: but too great excess
Makes Joy, a madness, and, does quite unblesse
So sweet a gift; And, what, by moderate use;
Crowns our desiers, banes them in the abuse:
Wealth is a blessing; But too eager thurst
Of having more, makes what we have, accursed:
Rest is a blessing; But when Rest withstands
The healthful labor of our helpful hands,
It proves a curse; and stains our guilt, with crime,
Betraies our irrecoverable time:
To feast and to refresh our hearts with pleasure,
And fill our souls with th'overslowing measure
Of heavens blessed bounty, cannot but commend
The precious favors of so sweet a friend;
But, when the abundance of a liberal diet,
Meant for a blessing, is abused by Riot,
The Abused blessing, leaves the gift, nay, worse,
It is transformed, and turned into a curse:
Things that afford most pleasure, in the use,
Are ever found most harmfull in the abuse:
Use them like Masters; and their tyrannous hand
Subjects thee, like a slave, to their command;
Use them as Servants; and they will obey thee;
Take heed; they'^ either bless thee, or betray thee.
Could our Fore fathers but revive, and see
Their Childrens Feasts, as now a days they be:
Their studied dishes, Their restoring stuff,
To make their wanton bodies sin enough;
Their stomack-whetting Sallats, to invite
Their wastfull palate to an appetite;
Their thirst-procuring dainties, to refine
Their wanton tastes, and make them strong, for wine;
Their costly viands, charged with rich perfume;
Their Viper-wines, to make old age presume
To feel new lust, and youthful flames agin,
And serve another prentiship to sin:
Their time-betraying Music; their base noise
Of odious Fiddlers; with their smooth-faced boys,
Whose tongues are perfect, if they can proclaim
The Quintessence of baseness without shame;
Their deepe-mouth'd curses, new invented oaths,
Their execrable Blasphemy, that loathes
A mind to think on; their obsceaner words,
Their drunken Quarrels, their unsheathed swords:
O how they would bless themselves, and blush, for shame,
In our behalfs, and have from whence they came,
To kiss their graves, that hid them from the crimes
Of these accursed and prodigious times.
Great God; O, can thy patient eye behold
This height of sin, and can thy vengeance hold?
THE ARGUMENT.
The Philistines cannot unsolve
the Riddle: They corrupt the Bride;
She wooes her Bridegroom to resolve
her doubt, but goes away denyde.
Sect. 11.
NOw when three days had run their hours out,
And left no hope for wit-forsaken doubt
To be resolved, the desperate undertakers
Conjoined their whispring heads; (being all partakers
And joynt-advisers in their new-laid plot)
The time's concluded: Have ye not forgot
How the old Tempter, when he first began
To work the unhappy overthrow of man,
Accosts the simple woman; and reflects
Upon the frailty of her weaker Sex;
Even so these cursed Philistians (being taught
And tutored by the self same spirit) wrought
The self same way; Their speedy steps are bent
To the fair Bride; Their haste could give no vent
To their coarcted thoughts; their language made
A little respite; and, at length, they said;
Fairest of Creatures: Let thy gentle heart
Receive the crown, due to so fair desert;
We have a Suite, that must attend the leisure
Of thy best thoughts, and joy-restoring pleasure;
Our names, and credits linger at the stake
Of de^pe dishonor: If thou undertake,
(...) pleasing language, to prevent the loss,
They must sustain, and draw them from the dross
Of their own ruins, they shall meercly owe
Themselves unto the goodness, and shall know
No other Patron, and acknowledge none,
As their redeemer, but thy love alone:
We cannot read the Riddle, whereunto
We have engaged our goods, and credits too;
(...) thy jolly Bridgroome; to unfold
The hidden Mystery, (what can he withhold
(...) the rare beauty of so rare a brow?)
And when thou know it, let thy servants know:
What? do thou frown? And must our easy trial*
At first, read Hierogly ^hickes of denial?
And are thou silent too? Noy, we will give ore
T^ (...) thy Bridal fondness any more:
Betray your lovely husbands secrets? No,
(...) first betray us, and our land: but know,
Proud Samsons wife, our furies shall make good
(...) loss of wealth and honor, in thy blood:
^^ere fair entreaties spend themselves in vain,
There f^^r shall consume, or else constrain.
Kn^w then, falsehearted Bride, if our request
(...) find no place within thy sullen breast,
(...) hands shall vindicate our lost desire,
And burn thy fathers house, and thee with fire:
Thus having lodged their errand in her cares;
They left the room* and her, unto her fears;
Who thus bethought; hard is the case, that I
Must or betray my husbands trust, or dye;
I have a Wolf by the ears: I dare be bold,
Neither with safety, to let go, nor hold:
What shall I do? Their minds if I fulfill not,
^Tis death; And to betray his trust, I will not:
Nay, should my lips demand, perchance, his breath
Will not resolve me,: Then, no way, but death:
The wager is not great; Rather the strife
Were ended in his loss, than in my life;
His life consists in mine, If ought amiss
Befall my life, it may endanger his:
Wagers must yield to life; I hold it best,
Of necessary evils, to choose the least:
Why doubt I then? when Reason bids me do;
I Will know the Riddle, and betray it too:
With that, she quits her chamber, with her cares,
And in her closset locks up all her fears,
And, with a speed untainted with delay,
She found that breast, wherein her own heart lay;
Where resting for a while, at length, did take
A fair occasion to look up, and spoke:
Life of my soul, and love perpetual treasure,
If my desires be suiting to thy pleasure,
My lips would move a Suite; My doubtful breast
Would feign prefer an undeny'd request:
Speak then (my joy): Let thy fair lips expound
That dainty Riddle, whose dark pleasure crowned
Our first days feast; Enlighten my dull brain,
That, ever since, has mused, and mu'sd in vain;
Who, often smiling on his lovely Bride,
That longs to go away resolved, replied;
Joy of my heart, let not thy troubled breast
Take the denial of thy small request,
As a defect of love: excuse my tongue
That must not grant thy suite without a wrong
To resolution, daring not discover
The hidden Mystery, till the time be ^ver;
Cease to importune then, what cannot be;
My parents know it not, as well as thee:
(...) ought but this, thy Suite shall overcome me;
Excuse me then, and go not angry from me.
Meditat. 11.
HOw apprehensive is the heart of Man
Of all, and only those poor things that can
Lend him a minutes pleasure, and appay
His sweat but with the happiness of a day!
How can he toil for trifles, and take pain
For fading goods, that only entertain
His pleased thoughts with poor and painted shows,
Whose joy has no more truth, than what it owes
To change! How are the objects of his musing
Worthless, and vain, that perish in the using?
How reasonable are his poor desires,
The height of whose ambition, but aspires
To flitting shadows, which can only crown
His labor, with that nothing, of their own!
We feed on husks, that might as well ataine
The fatted Calfe, by coming home again:
And, like to Esan, while we are suppressing
Our present wants, neglect and lose the blessing:
How wise we are for things, whose pleasure cooles
Like breath* For everlasting joys, what Fools!
How witty, how ingeniously wise,
To save our credits, or to win a prize!
We plot; Our brows are studious: First we try
One way; If that succeed not, we apply
Our doubtful minds to attemt another course:
We take advice; consult; our tongues discourse
Of better ways; and, what our failing brains,
Cannot effect with fair and fruitless pains;
There, crooked fraud must help, and sly deceit
Must lend a hand, which by the potent sleight Of right-forsaking Bribry must betray
The prize into our hands, and win the day,
Which if it fail (it does but seldom fail)
Then open force, and fury must prevail:
When strength of wit, and secret power of fraud
Grow dull, constraint must conquer, and appla^d
With ill got victory; which at length obtained,
Alas, how poor a trifle have we gained!
How are our souls distempered; to engrosse
Such fading pleasures! To ore-prize the dross,
And under-rate the Gold* for painted Joys,
To sell the true, and heaven it self for Toys!
Lord; clarify mine eyes, that I may know
Things that are good, from what are good in show*
And give me wisdom, that my heart my learn
The diffrence of thy favors, and discern
What Is truly good, from what is good in part;
With Martha's trouble, give me Mary's heart,
THE ARGUMENT.
The Bride she begs, and beg sin vain:
But like to a prevailing wooer,
She sues, and sues, and sues again;
At last he reads the Riddle to her.
Sect. 12.
WHen the next morning had renewed the day,
And the early twilight now had chased away
The pride of night, and made her lay aside
Her spangled Robes, the discontented Bride
(Whose trobled thoghts were tired with the night,
And broken slumbers, long had wished for light)
With a deep sigh her sorrow did awake
Her drowsy Bridegroom, whom she thus bespake:
O, if thy love could share an equal part
In the sad griefs of my afflicted heart,
Thy closed eyes had never, in this sort,
^in pleased with rest, and made thy night so short:
Perchance, if my dull eyes had slumbred too,
My dreams had done, what thou denied to do:
Perchance, my Fancy would have bin so kind,
Tunsolve the doubts of my perplexed mind,
It Was a small suite, that thy unluckie Bride
Must light upon: Too small to be denyde:
Can love so soon --? But ere her lips could spend
The following words, he said, suspend, suspend
Thy rash attempt, and let thy tongue dispense
With forced denial: Let thy lips commence
Some greater Suite, and Samson shall make good
Thy fair desiers with his dearest blood:
Speak then, my love; thou shall not w^sh, and want;
Thou can not beg, what Samson cannot grant:
Only, in this, excuse me: and refrain
To beg, what thou, perforce, must beg in vain.
In exorable Samson: Can the tears
From those fair ^yes, not move thy deafned ears?
O can those drops, that trickle from those eyes
Upon thy naked bosom, not surprise
Thy neighboring heart? and force it to obey?
O can thy hear^ not melt as well as they?
Thou little think thy poor afflicted wife
Importunes thee, and woes thee for her life:
Her Suit's as great a Riddle to thi^e ears,
As thine, to hers; O, these distilling tears
Are silent pleaders, and her moistened breath
Would feign redeem her, from the gates of death?
May not her tears prevail; Alas, thy strise
Is but for wagers; Here Is, poor Soul, for life.
Now when this day had yielded up his right
To the succeeding Empress of the night,
Whose soone-deposed raignc did reconvay
Her crown and Scepter to the newborn day,
The restless Bride (fears cannot brook denial)
Renewes her suit, and attempts a further trial;
Entreats; conjures; she leaves no way untride:
She will not, no, she must not be denyd:
But he (the portalls of whose marble heart
Was locked and barred against the powerful art
Of often repeated tears,) stood deaf and dumb;
He must not, no, he will not be ore-come.
Poor Bride! How is thy glory overcast!
How is the pleasure of the Nuptials past,
When scarce begun! Alas, how poor a breath
Of joy, must puff thee to untimely death!
The day's at hand, wherein thou must untie
The Riddles tangled Snarle, or else must dye:
Now, when that day was come wherein the feast
Was to expire; the Bride, (whose pensive breast
Grew sad to death) did once more undertake
Her too resolved Bridegroom thus, and spoke:
Upon these knees, that prostrate on the floor,
Are lowly bended, and shall never give ore
To move thy goodness, that shall never rise,
Until my Suit find favor in thine eyes,
Upon these naked knees, I here present
My sad request: O let thy heart relent;
A Suitor sues, that never sued before;
And she begs now, that never will beg more:
Have thou vowed silence? O remember, how
Thou art engaged by a former vow;
Thy heart is mine; The secrets of thy heart
Are mine; Why art thou dainty to impart
Mine own, to me? Then, give me leave to sue
For what, my right may challenge as her due;
Unfold thy Riddle then, that I may know,
Thy love is more; then only love in show:
The Bridegroom, thus enchanted by his Bride,
Vnseal'd his long-kept silence, and replyde:
Thou sole, and great commandresse of my heart,
Thou have prevailed; my bosom shall impart
The sum of thy desiers, and discharge
The faithful secrets of my soul, at large;
Know then, (my joy) Upon that very day,
I, first, made known my'affection, on the way,
I met, and grappled with a sturdy Lion,
Having nor staff nor weapon, to rely on,
I was enforced to prove my naked strength;
Unequal was the match, but at the length,
This brawny Arm receiving strength from him
That gave it life, I tore him limme from limme,
And left him dead: Now when the time was come,
Wherein our promised nuptials were to sum,
And perfect all my joys, as I was coming
That very way, 'a strange confused humming,
Not distant far, possessed my wondering ear,
Where guided by the noise, there did appear
A swarm of Bees, whose busy labors filled
The Carcass of that Lion which I killed
With Combs of Honey, wherewithal I fed
My lips and thine: And now my Riddle's read.
Medita. 12.
THe soul of man, before the taint of Nature,
Bore the fair Image of his great Creator;
His understanding had no cloud: His will
No cross: That, knew no Error; This, no ill:
But man transgrest; And by his woeful fall,
Lost that fair Image, and that little all
Was left, was all corrupt; His understanding
Exchanged her object; Reason left commanding;
His Memory was depraved, and his will
Can find no other subject now; but Ill:
It grew distemperd, left the righteous reine
Of better Reason, and did entertain,
The rule of Passion, under whose command,
(...) fuffered Ship-wracke, upon every Sand:
Where it should march, it evermore retires;
And, what is most forbid, it most desires:
(...) makes it see too much, and often, blind;
(...) makes it light, and waver like the wind:
(...) makes it fierce, and studious; Anger, mad;
(...) makes it careless; Sorrow, dull and sad;
(...) makes it nimble, for a needless trial;
(...) makes it too impatient of denial.
^^eat Lord of humane souls; O thou, that art
The only true refiner of the heart;
Those hands created all things perfect good,
What can thou now expect of flesh and blood?
How are our leprous Souls put out of fashion!
(...) are our Wills subjected to our passion!
How is thy glorious Image soiled, defaced,
And stained with sin! How are our thoughts displaced!
How wavering are our hopes, turned here and there
With every blast! How carnal is our fear!
Where needs no fear, we start at every shade,
But fear not, where we ought to be afraid.
Great God! If thou will please but to refine
Our hearts, and reconforme our wills, to thine,
Thou Wilt take a pleasure in us, and poor we
Should find as infinite delight in Thee;
Our doubts would cease, our fears would al romove,
And all our passions would turn Joy, and Love;
Till then, expect for nothing that is good:
Remember, Lord, we are but Flesh and Blood.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Philistines, by her advice,
expound the Riddle: Samson killed
Thirty Philistians, in a trice;
forsakes his Bride: His Bed's defilde.
Sect. 13.
NO sooner was the Brides attentive ears
Resolved, and pleased; but her impetuous fears
Calls in the Bridemen; and to them betrayed,
The secret of the Riddle thus, and said:
(...) Sons of Thunder; It Was not the loud noise
(...) provoking threats, nor the soft voice
(...) prevailing fears, that thus addressed
(...) ^^^lding heart to grant your forced request;
(...) language needed not have bin so rough
(...) too much, when less had bin enough:
(...) speech at first was honey in mine ear;
(...), it proved a Lion, and did tear
(...) wounded soul: It sought to force me to
(...) your entreaties were more apt to do:
(...) then (to keep your lingering ears no longer
(...) what ye long to hear;) There Is nothing stronger
Then a fierce Lion: Nothing more can greet
(...) pleased palats, with a greater sweet,
Then Honey: But more fully to expound,
(...) a dead Lion, there was Honey found.
Now when the Sun was welking in the West,
Whose fall determines both the day, and Feast)
The hopeful Bridegroom (he whose smiling brow
Assured his hopes a speedy Conquest now)
Even thirsting for victorious Triumph, brake
The crafty silence of his lips, and spoke:
The time is come whose latest hour ends
Our nuptial Feast, and fairly recommends
The wreathe of Conquest to the vict^rs brow:
Say, is the Riddle read? Expound it now;
And, for your pains, these hands shall soon resign
Your conquered prize: If not, The prize is mine:
With that, they joined their whispring heads, and made
A Speaker; who in louder language, said;
Of all the sweets that ere were known,
There Is none so pleasing be,
As those rare (...) which do cr^wne
The labor of the Be:
Of all the creatures in the field;
That ever man set eye on,
There Is none, whose power does not yield
Unto the stronger Lion.
Whereto the offended Challenger, whose eye
Proclaimed a quick Revenge, made this reply:
No Hony's sweeter then a woman's tongue;
And, when she list, Lions are not so strong:
How thrice accursed are they, that do fulfill
The lewd desiers of a woman's will!
How more accursed is he, that does impart
His bosome-secrets to a woman's heart;
They plead like Angel, and, like Crocadiles,
Kill with their tears; They murder with their smiles:
How weak a thing is woman? Nay how weak
Is senseless Man, that will be urged to break
His counsels in her ear, that has no power
To make secure a secret, for an homer!
(...), Victors, no: Had not a woman's mind
(...) faithless, and unconstant, as the wind,
Mr Riddle had, till now, a Riddle bin;
(...) might have mused, and mist; and mused (...),
When the next day had heaved his golden head
From the soft pillow of his Sea-greene bed;
And, with his rising glory, had possessed
The spacious borders of th'enlightened East,
Samson arose, and in a rage, went down
(By heaven directed) to a neighbring town:
His choler was inflamed and from his eye
The sudden flashes of his wrath did fly,
Palenesse was in his cheeks, and from his breath,
There flew the fierce Ambassadors of death;
He heaved his hand, and where it fell, it flew:
He spent, and still his forces would renew:
His quick-redoubled blows fell thick as thunder:
And, whom he took alive, he tore in sunder:
His arm nere mist: And often, at a blow,
He made a Widow, and an Orphane too:
Here, it divides the Father from the child,
The husband from his Wife: there, it dispoild
The friend on's friend, the Sister of her brother:
And, often, with one man, he would thrash another:
Where never was, he made a little flood,
And where there was no Kin, he joined in blood,
Wherein, his ruthlesse hands he did imbrue:
Thrice ten, before he scarce could breath, he flue:
Their upper Garments, which he took away,
Were all the spoils the Victor had, that day:
Wherewith, he quit the wagers that he lost,
Paying Philistians, with Philistians cost:
And thus, at length, with blood he did assuage,
(...) yet not quench the fire of his rage,
For now the thought of his disloyal wife,
In his sad soul, renewed a second strife,
From whom, for fear his fury should recoile,
He thought most fit t'absent himself a while;
Unto his fathers Tent, he now returned;
Where, his divided passion raged, and mourned;
In part, he mourned; and, he raged, in part,
To see so fair a face; so false a heart:
But mark the mischief that his absence brings;
His bed's defiled, and the nuptial strings
Are stretched and cracked: A second love does smother
The first; And she is wedded to another.
Meditat. 13.
WAs this that womb, the Angel did enlarge
From barrenness? And gave so strict a charge?
was this that womb, that must not be defiled
With unclean meats, lest it pollute the child?
Is this the Nazarite? May a Nazarite, then,
E^brue and paddle in the bloods of men?
Or may their vows be so dispensed withal,
That they, who searce may see a funeral,
Whose holy footsteps must beware to tread
Upon, or touch the carcass of the dead?
May these reve^ge their wrongs, by blood? may these
Have power to kill, and murder where they please?
It Is true: A holy Nazarite is forbid
To do such things as this our Nazarite did:
He may not touch the bodies of the dead,
Without pollution; much less, may shed
The blood of man, or touch it, being spilt,
Without the danger of a double guilt:
But who art thou, that art an undertaker,
To question with, or plead against thy Maker?
May not that God, that gave thee thy creation,
Turn thee to nothing, by his dispensation?
He that has made the Sabbath, and commands
It shall be kept with unpolluted hands;
Yet if he please to countermand agin,
Man may securely labor, and not sin;
A Nazarite is not allowed to shed
The blood of man, or once to touch the dead;
But if the God of Nazarites, bids kill
He may; and be a holy Nazarite still:
But stay! Is God like Man? Or can he border
Upon confusion, that is the God of order?
The Persian Laws no time may contradict;
And are the Laws of God less firm and strict?
An earthly Parent wills his child to stand
And wait, within a while he gives command
(Finding the weakness of his son oppressed
With weariness) that he sit down and rest;
Is God unconstant then, because he pleases
To alter, what he wild us, for our eases?
Know, likewise, O ungrateful flesh and blood,
God limits his own glory, for our good:
He is the God of mercy, and he prizes
Thine Asses life above his Sacrifices;
His Sabbath is his glory, and thy rest;
He Will lose some honor, ere thou lose a Beast:
Great God of mercy; O, how apt are we
To rob thee of thy due, that art so free
To give unaskt! Teach me, O God, to know
What portion I deserve, and tremble too.
^That hear the news) thus with himself besought;
It cannot be excused: It was a fault,
It was a foul one too; and, at first sight,
(...) great for love, or pardon to acquit:
^, ^ad it been a stranger, that betrayed
^^posed secrets, I had only laid
The blame upon my unadvised tongue;
Or bad a common friend but done this wrong
To besome trust, my patience might out warn it*
I could endured, I could have easily borne it;
(...) this to be betrayed by a wi^e,
The par^ner of my heart; to whom my life,
(...) very soul was not estee^ed dear,
It (...) than flesh, is more than blood can bear:
(...) yet alas, She was but green and young,
And had not gained the conquest of her tongue;
^^season'd vessels, wi^^ find a leake
At first; but after hold: She is but weak;
^^y, cannot yet write woman; which, at best,
(...) a frail thing: Alas young, things will quest
At every turn; Indeed, to say the truth,
Her years could make it but a fault of youth:
Samson, return; and let that fault be set
Upon the score of youth: forgive, forget:
(...) is my wife: Her love has power to hide
A fouler error; Why should I divide
My presence from her? There Is no greater wrong
(...) love, than to be silent over long:
(...), poor soul! No doubt, her tender eye
(...) wept enough; perchance she knows not why
(...) turned so great a stranger to her bed,
And board: Nodoubt, her empty eyes have shed
A ^^^ld of tears; perchance, her (...) thought
(...) my absence (...) a greater fault
Then that of late, her harmless error did;
I Will go and draw a reconciling Kid
From the fair flock; My feet shall never rest,
Till I repose me in my Brides fair breast;
He went, but ere his speedy lips obtained
The merits of his haste, darkness had stained
The cristall brow of day; and gloomy night
Had spoiled and rifled heaven of all his light:
H' approacht the gates; but being entered in,
His careless welcome seemed so cold and thin,
As if that silence meant, it should appear,
He was no other, than a stranger there;
In every servants look, he did epsy
An easy Copy of their Masters eye;
He called his wife, but she was gone to rest;
Unto her wonted chamber he addressed
His doubtful steps; till by her father, staid,
Who taking him aside a little, said:
Son,
It was the late espousals that do move
My tongue to use that title; not thy love:
It Is true; there was a Marriage lately past
Between my child and you; The knot was fast
And firmly tied, not subject to the force
Of any power, but death, or else divorce:
For ought I saw, a mutual desire
Kindled your likings, and an equal fire
Of strong affection, joined both your hands
With the perpetual knot of nuptial bands;
Mutual delight, and equal joys attended
Your pleased hearts, until the feast was ended;
But then I know no ground, (you know it best)
As if your loves were measured by the Feast,
The building fell, before the house did shake,
(...) fire was quenched, ere it began to slake;
All on a sudden were your joys dis^eis^d;
F^rsooke your Bride, and went away displeased;
(...) left my child to the oppro^rions tongues
Of open censure, whose malicious wrongs
(Maligning her fair merits) did defame
Her wounded honor, and unblemisht name;
I thought, thy love, which was so strong, of late,
Had on a sudden, turned to perfect hate:
At length, when as your longer absence did
C^^firme my thoughts; and time had quite forbid
Our hopes to expect a reacdesse of love,
Thinking some new affection did^ ^emove
Your heart, and that some second choice might smother
The first, I matched your Bride unto another;
If (...) have done amiss, the fault must be
Imputed yours, and not to her, nor me;
But if your easy loss may be redeemed
With her fair Sister (who; you know's esteemed
More beautiful than she, and younger too)
She shall be firmly joined by nuptial vow,
And, by a present contract, shall become
Thy faithful spouse, in her lost sisters room:
With that poor^ Samson, like a man entranced,
And newly wakened, thus his voice advanced;
Presumptuus Philistine! That do proceed
From the base loins of that accursed seed,
Blanded for slaughter, and marked out for death;
And utter ruin; this my threatening breath
Shall blast thy nation; This revenging hand
Shall crush thy darkasse, and thy cursed land;
^^le give thy flesh to Ravens; and ravinous Swine
Shall take that rank and tainted blood of thine
For wash and swill, to quench their eager thirst,
Which they shall suck, and guzzle till they burst;
I Will burn your standing Corn with flames of fire,
That none shall quench; I Will drag ye in the mire
Of your own bloods, which shall ore-flow the land
And make your pasture barren as the sand;
This ruthlesse arm shall smite and never stay,
Until your land be turned a Golgotha;
And if my actions prove my words untrue,
Let Samson die, and be accursed, as you.
Medit. 14.
GOd is the God of peace: And if my brother
Strike me on one cheek, must I turn the other?
God is the God of mercy; And his child
Must be as he his, Merciful and mild;
God is the God of Love: But sinner know,
His love abused, he is God of vengeance too.
Is God the God of vengeance? And may none
Revenge his private wrongs, but he alone?
What means this frantic Nazarite to take
Gods office from his hand, and thus to make
His wrongs amends? Who warranted his breath
To threaten ruin, and to thunder death?
Curious Inquisitor; when God shall strike
By thy stout arm, thy arm may do the like:
His Patent gives him power to create
A deputy; to whom he does collate
Assistant power, in sufficient measure,
To exercise the office of his pleasure;
A lawful Prince is Gods Lieutenant here:
As great a Majesty as flesh can bear,
He is endued with all; In his bright eye
(Clothed in the flames of Majesty) does lie
Both life and death; into his royal heart
Heaven does inspire, and secretly impart
The treasure of his Laws; Into his hand
He thrusts his sword of Justice and Command:
He is Gods Champion; where his voice bids, kill,
He must not fear t'imbrew his hands, and spill,
Abundant blood; Who gives him power to do,
Will find him guiltless, and assist him too:
O, but let flesh and blood take heed, that none
Pretend Gods quarrel, to revenge his own;
Malice and base Revenge must step aside,
When heavens uprighter Battles must be tried.
Where carnal glory, or ambitious thurst
Of simple conquest, or revenge, does burst
Upon a neighboring Kingdom; there to thrust
Into another Crown, the warre's not just;
It Is but a private quarrel; and bereft
Of lawful grounds; It Is but a Princely theft:
But where the ground's Religion; to defend
Abused faith, let Princes, there, contend,
With dauntles courage: May their acts be glorious;
Let them go, prosperous; and return victorious:
What if the grounds be mixed? Fear not to go;
Were not the grounds of Sampsons Combat so?
Go then with double courage and renown,
When God shall mix thy quarrels with his own:
It Is a brave conflict; and a glorious Fray,
Where God and Princes shall divide the Prey.
THE ARGUMENT.
He burns their standing corn; makes void
Their Land: The Philistines enquire
The cause of all their evil; destroyed
The Timnite, and his house with fire.
Sect. 15.
AS ^agefull Samsons threatening language ceast,
His resolution of revenge increast;
Vengeance was in his thoughts, and his desire
Wanted no fuel to maintain her fire:
Passion grew hot and furious, whose delay
Of execution, was but taking day
For greater payment: His revengefull heart
Boild in his breast; whilst Fury did impart
Her ready counsels, whose imperious breath,
Could whisper nothing, under blood, and death:
Revenge was studious, quickened his conceit,
And s^rew'd her Engines to the very height:
At length, when time had rip'ned his desires,
And puffing rage had blown his secret fires
To open flame, now ready for confusion,
He thus began to attempt his first conclusion;
The patient Angler, first provides his bait,
Before his hopes can teach him to awaite
The enjoyment of his long expected prey;
Revengefull Samson, ere he can appay
His wrongs with timely vengeance, must intend
To gain the Instruments, to work his end;
He plants his Engines, hides his snares about,
Pitches his Toiles, finds new devices out,
To tangle wily Foxes; In few days,
(That land had store) his studious hand betrays
A leash of hundreds, which he thus imploye
As Agents in his rashfull enterprise;
With tough, and force-enduring thongs of Leth,
He joins and couples tail, and tail together,
And every thong bound in a Brand of fire,
So made by Art, that motion would inspire
Continual flames, and as the motion ceast,
The thriftie blaze would then retire and rest
In the close brand, until a second strife
Gave it new motion; and that motion, life:
Soon as these coupled Messengers received
Their fiercy Errand, though they were bereiv'd
Of power to make great have, they made good speed;
Their thoughts were diffring, though their tails agreed:
TO one drags and draws to the East; the other, West;
One fit, they run, another while they rest;
TO one skulks and snarles, the to other tugges and hales;
At length, both flee, with fire in their tails,
And in the top and height of all their speed,
TO one stops before the other be agreed;
The other pulls, and dragges his fellow back,
Whilst both their tails were tortured on the rack;
At last both weary of their warm Embassage,
Their better ease discride a fairer passage,
And time has taught their wiser thoughts to join
More close, and travel in a straiter lin^:
Into the open Champion they divide
Their straggling paces (where the ploughmans pride
Found a fair object, in his rip'ned Corn;
Whereof, some part was reapt; some, stood unshorne)
Sometimes the fiery travelers would seek
Protection beneath a swelling Reeke;
But soon that harbor grew too hot for stay,
Affording only light, to run away;
Sometimes, the full-ear'd standing^wheat must cover
And hide their flames; and there the flames would hover
About their ears, and send them to enquire
A cooler place; but there the flaming fire
Would scorch their hides; and send the^ sindg'd away;
Thus doubtful where to go, or where to stay,
They range about; flee forward, then retire;
Now here, now there, where ere they come, they fire:
Nothing was left, that was not lost, and burned;
And now, that fruitful land of Iewry's turned
A heap of Ashes; That fair land, while ere
Which filled all hearts with joy, and every ear
With news of plenty, and of blessed increase,
(The joyful issue of a happy peace)
See, how it lies in her own ruins, void
Of all her happiness, disguised, destroyed:
With that the Philistines, whose sad relief
And comfort's deeply buried in their grief,
Began to question (they did all partake
In th'irrecoverable loss) and spoke,
What cursed brand of Hell? What more than Devil,
What envious Miscreant has done this evil?
Whereto one sadly standing by, replide;
It was that cursed Samson (Whose fair Bride
Was lately ravished from his absent breast
By her false father) who before the feast
Of nuptial was a mo^th expired, and done,
By second marriage, owned another Son;
For which this Samson heaved from off the henge
Of his lost reason, studied this revenge;
That Timnits falsehood wrought this desol^tion;
Samson the Actor was, but he, the occasion:
With that they all consulted to proceed
In height of Justice, to revenge this deed;
Samson whose hand was the immediate cause
Of this foul act, is stronger than their laws;
Him, they refer to time; For his proud hand
May bring a second ruin to their land;
The cursed Timnite, he that did divide
The lawful Bridgroome from his lawful Bride,
And moved the patience of so strong a foe,
To bring these evils, and work their overthrow,
To him they haste; and with resolved desire
Of blood, they burn his house, and him with fire.
Meditat. 15.
Do thou not tremble? does thy troubled care
Not tingle? nor thy spirits faint to hear
The voice of those, whose dying shriekes proclaim
Their tortures, that are broyling in the flame?
She, whose illustrious beauty did not know
Where to be matched, but one poor hour ago;
She, whose fair eyes were apt to make man err
From his known faith, and turn Idolater;
She, whose fair cheeks, inricht with true complexion,
Seemed Beauties storehouse of her best perfection;
See how she lies, see how this beauty lies,
A foul offense, unto thy loathing eyes;
A fleshly Cinder, lying on the floor
Stark naked, had it not been covered ore
With bashful ruins, which were fallen down
From the consumed roof, and rudely thrown
On this half roasted earth. O; can thou read
Her double story, and thy heart not bleed?
What art thou more than she? Tell me wherein
Art thou more priviledg'd* Or can thy sin
Plead more to excuse it? Art thou fair and young?
Why so was she: Were thy temptations strong?
Why so were hers: What can thou plead, but she
Had power to plead the same, as well as thee?
Nor was 't her death alone, could satisfy
Revenge; her father, and his house must die:
Unpunished crimes do often bring them in,
That were no less than strangers to the sin:
Ely must die; because his fair reproof
Of too foul sin, was not austere enough:
Was vengeance now appeased? Has not the crime
Paid a sufficient Intrest for the time?
Remove thine eye to the Philistian fields*
See what increase their fruitful harvest yields:
There Is nothing there, but a confused heap
Of ruinous Ashes: There Is no corn to reap:
Behold the poison of unpunisht sin:
For which the very earth's accursed again:
Famine must act her part; her griping hand,
For one man's sin must punish all the land:
Is vengeance now appeased? Has sin given ore
To cry for plagues? Must vengeance yet have more?
O, now the impartial sword must come; and spill
The blood of such, as famine could not kill:
The language of unpunisht sin cries loud,
It roares for Justice, and it must have blood:
Famine must follow, where the fire begun;
The sword must end, what both have left undone.
Just God! our sins do dare thee to thy face;
Our score is great, our Ephah fills apace;
The leaden cover threatens every minut,
To close the Ephah, and our sins within it.
Turn back thine eye: Let not thine eye behold
Such vile pollutions: Let thy vengeance hold:
Look on thy dying Son, there shall thou spy
(...) object, that is more fitter for thine eye;
(...) sufferings (Lord) are far above our finnes:
(...), look thou there; Ere Justice once begins
^T' unsheath her sword: O let one precious drop
Fall from that pierced side, and that will stop
The ears of vengeance, from that clamorous voice
Of our loud sins, which make so great a noise:
O, send that drop, before Revenge begins,
And that will cry far louder than our sins.
THE ARGUMENT.
He makes a slaughter; Does remove
To Etans rock, where to repay him
The wrongs that he had done, they move
The men of Judah to betray him.
Sect. 16.
THus when th'accurs'd Philistians had appaid
The Timnies sin, with ruin: and betrayed
The Unjust Offenders to their fierce desire,
And burned their cursed Family with fire:
(...) the greatness of whose debt denied
So short a payment: and whose wrongs yet cride^
For further vengeance, to be further laid
Upon the sinne-conniving Nation, said,
Unjust Philistians, you that could behold
(...) a crime, and yet withold
(...) well deserved punishment so long;
(...) made you partners in their sin, my wrong;
Had ye at first, when as the fault was young,
Before that Time had lent her clamorous tongue
So great a strength to call for so much blood;
O, hid your early Justice but thought good
To strike in time; nay, had you then devised
Some easier punishment, it had sufficed;
But now it comes too late; The sin has cried,
Till heaven has heard, and mercy is denied:
Nay, had the sin but sp^r'd to roar so loud,
A drop had served, when now a Tide of blood
Will hardly stop her mouth:
Had ye done this betimes! But now, this hand
Must plague your persons, and afflict your land:
Have ye beheld a youth-instructing Tutor,
(Whose wisdome's seldom seen, but in the future)
When well deserved punishment shall call
For the delinquent Boy; how, first of all,
He preaches fairly; then proceeds austerer
To the foul crime, whilst the suspicious hearer
Trembles at every word, until at length,
His language being ceased, the unwelcome strength
Of his rude arm, that often proves too rash,
Strikes home, and fetches blood at every lash:
Even so stout Samson, whose more gentle tongue,
In easy terms, does first declare tho wrong,
Injustice did, then tells the evil effects
That man's connivence, and unjust neglects
Does often bring upon the afflicted land;
But, at the last, upheaves his ruthlesse hand;
He hewes, he hacks, and fury being guide,
His unresisted power does divide
From top to toe; his furious weapon cleft,
Where ere it struck: It slew, and never left,
Until his flesh-destroying arm, at length,
Could find no subject, where to employ his strength:
Here stands a headstrong Steed, whose fainting guider
Drops down; another drags his wounded rider:
Now here, now there his frantic arm would thunder
And at one stroke, cleaves horse and man in sunder,
In whose mixed blood, his hands would often embrue,
And where so ere they did but touch, they slew:
Here Is no employment for the Surgeons trade,
All wounds were mortal that his weapon made;
There Is none was left, but dying, or else dead,
And only they, that escaped his fury, fled;
The slaughter ended, the proud victor past
Through the afflicted land, until at last,
He comes to Judah; where he pitched his tent,
At the rock Etan: There some time he spent;
He spent not much, till the Philistian band,
That found small comfort in their wasted land,
Came up to Judah and there pitched not far
From Samsons tent; their hands were armed to war:
With that the men of Judah, struck with fear,
To see so great an Army, strait drew near,
To the sad Camp; who, after they had made
Some signs of a continued peace, they said;
What new designs have brought your royal band
(...) the borders of our peaceful land?
(...) strange adventures? What disastrous weather
(...) you this way? What business brought you hither?
(...) my Lords be angry, or conceive
(...) evil against your Servants: What we have,
(...): The peaceful plenty of our land
(...) we, are yours, and at your own command:
(...), to what purpose are you pleased to show us
(...) strength! Why bring you thus an Army to us?
(...) our yearly tributes justly paid?
Have we not kept our vows? have we delaid
Our faithful service, or denied to do it,
When you have pleased to call your servants to it?
Have we, at any time, upon your trial,
Shrunk from our plighted faith, or proved disloyal?
If that proud Samson have abused your land,
It Is not our faults; Alas, we had no hand
In his designs: We lent him no relief;
No aid; No, we were partners in your grief.
Whereto the Philistines, whose hopes relyde
Upon their fair assistance, thus replyde:
Fear not ye men of Judah; Our intentions
Are not to wrong your peace: Your apprehensions
Are too toe-timerous; Our desires are bent
Against the common Foe, whose hands have spent
Our lavish blood, and robbed our wasted land
Of all her joys: It Is he, our armed band
Expects, and follows: He is cloystred here,
Within your Quarters: Let your faiths appear
Now in your loyal actions, and convay
The skulking Rebel to us, that we may
Revenge our blood, which he has wasted thus,
And do to him, as he has done to us.
Meditat. 16.
IT was a sharp revenge: But was it just?
Shall one man suffer for another? Must
The childrens teeth be set on edge, because
Their fathers ate the grapes? Are heavens laws
So strict? whose lips did, with a promise, tell,
That no such law should pass in Israel:
Because the injurous Timnits treacherous hand
(...) the fault, must Samson scourge the land?
(...) is a furious plague, and it infects
(...) next inhabitant, if he neglects
(...) means to avoid it: It Is not because he sins
(...) thou art punished: No, it then begins
^^fect thy soul; when, thou a stander by,
^proves it not: or when thy careless eye
(...) it as nothing: If a sin of mine
(...) not thy wounded soul, it becomes thine.
(...) ye that God commits the Sword of power
(...) the hands of Magistrates, to scower
(...) keep it bright? Or only to advance
(...) yet unknown Authority? Perchance,
(...) glorious Hilt and Scabberd make a show
(...) serve his turn, have it a blade, or no,
(...) neither knows, nor cares: Is this man fit
(...) obtain so great an honor, as to fit
(...) Gods Lieutenant, and to punish sin?
(...) leaden Magistrates, and know agin,
(...) Sword was given to draw, and to be did
(...) guilty blood, not to be laid aside
(...) the request of friends, or for base fear,
(...) when your honor's ended with the year,
(...) may be baffled: it is not enough that you
(...) bread be weight, or that the waights be true:
(...) not enough, that every foul disorder
(...) be referred to your more wise Recorder:
(...) charge is given to you: You must return
(...) account, or else, the Land must mourn:
(...) keep your swords too long a season in,
(...) God strikes us, because you strike not sin:
(...) too remiss, and want a Resolution:
(...) Laws lie dead for lack of execution:
(...) Oath is grown so bold, that it will laugh
The easy Act, to scorn: Nay, we can quaffe
And reele with privilege: and we can trample
Upon our shame-shrunke cloakes, by your example:
You are too dull: too great offenses pass
Untouched; God loves no service from the Ass;
Rouse up, O use the spur, and spare the bridle,
God strikes, because your swords, and you are idle;
Grant Lord that every one may mend a fault;
And then our Magistrates may stand for naught.
THE ARGUMENT.
The faithless men of Judah went
To make him subject to their bands:
They bound him by his own consent,
And brought him prisoner to their bends.
Sect. 17.
SO said: The men of Judah (whose base fear
Taught them to open an obedient ear
To their revengefull and unjust request)
Accept the treacherous motion, and addressed
Their slavish thoughts, to put in execution
The subject of their servile resolution:
With that, three thousand of their ablest men
Are soon employed; To the fierce Lions den
They come, (yet daring not approach too near)
And sent this louder language to his ear;
Victorious Samson, whose renowned facts
Have made the world a Register of thy acts;
Great Army of men, the wonder of whose power
Gives thee the title of a walking Tower,
(...) have thou^thus betrayed us to the hand
Of the accur'd Philistines? Thou know our Land
Does owe it self to thee; There Is none can clame
So great an interest in our hearts: Thy name,
Thy highly honored name, for ever, bears
A welcome Accent in our joyful ears;
But now the times are dangerous, and a band
Of proud Philistians quarter in our land,
And for thy sake, the tyranie of their tongues
Has newly threatened to revenge the wrongs
Upon our peaceful lives: Their lips have vowed
And sworn to salve their injuries with our blood;
Their jealous fury hollowes in our ears,
They Will plague our Land, as thou have plagued theirs,
If we refuse to do their fierce command,
And bring not Samson prisoner to their hand;
Alas, thou know our servile necks must bow
To their imperious. Yoke; Alas, our vow
Of loyalty is past: If they bid, do;
We must; or lose our lands, and our life's too,
Were but our life's in hazard, or if none
Should seele the smart of death, but we alone,
We Would turn thy Martyrs, rather than obey'm,
We Would die with Samson sooner than betray'm;
But we have wifes, and children, that would be
The subjects of their rage, as well as we:
Wherefore submit thy person, and fulfill.
What we desire so much against our will:
Alas our griefs in equal poisure lie;
Yield, and thou dyest: yield not, and we must die:
Whereto sad Samson, whose fair thoughts did guide
His lips to fairer language, thus replide;
^e men of Judah, what distrustful thought
Of single Samsons violence has brought
So great a strength, as if you meant to ^rethrow
Some mighty Monarch, or suprise a Foe!
Your easy errand might as well bin done
By two or three, or by the lips of one;
The meanest child of holy Isreal's seed
Might conquered Samson with a bruised reed:
Alas, the boldness of your welcome words
Need no protection of these slaves and swords:
Brethren, the intention of my coming hither
Was not to wrong you, or deprive you, either
Of lives, or goods, or of your poorest due;
My self is cheaper to my self, than you;
My coming is on a more fair design,
I come to crush your tyranous foes, and mine,
I come to free your country, and recall
Your servile soldiers from the slavish thrall
Of the proud Philistines; and with this hand,
To make you freemen in your promised Land;
But you are come to bind me, and betray
Your faithful Champion to those bands, that lay
Perpetual burdens on, which daily vex
Your galled shoulders, and your servile necks:
The wrongs these cursed Philistines have done
My simple innocence, have quite outrunne
My easy patience: If my arm may right
My too much injured sufferance, and requite
What they have done to me, it would appease
My raging thoughts, and give my tortures ease;
But ye are come to bind me: I submit;
I yield; And if my bondage will acquit
Your newborn fears, It Is well: But they that do
Attempt to ruin me, will ransacke you:
First, you shall firmly engage your plighted tr^th,
By the acceptance of a sacred ^ath,
That when I shall be prisoner to your bands,
I may not suffer violence by your hands:
With that, they drawing nearer to him, laid
Their hands beneath his brawny thigh, and said,
Then let the God of Jacob cease to bless
The tribe of Judah, with a fair success,
In ought they put their cursed hand unto,
And raze their seed, If we attempt to do
Bound Samson violence; And if this curse
Be not sufficient, heaven contrive a worse:
With that the willing prisoner joined his hands,
To he subjected to their stronger bands:
With treble twisted cords, that never tried
The twitch of strength, their busy fingers tied
His sinewy wrists, which being often wound
About his beating pulse, they brought him bound
To the forefront of the Philistian band,
And left him captive in their cursed hand.
Meditat. 17.
O What a pearl is hidden in this field,
Whose orient luster, and perfections yield
So great a treasure, that the Eastern Kings,
With all the wealth, their colder Climate brings,
Nere saw the like: It is a pearl whose glory
Is the diviner subject of a story,
Pend by an Angels quill; not understood
By the too dull conceit of flesh and blood!
Unkind Iudeans, what have you presented
Before your eyes? O, what have you attented!
He that was borne on purpose, to release
His life for yours, to bring your Nation peace;
To turn your mournings into joyful Songs;
To fight your Battles; to revenge your wrongs;
Even him, alas, your cursed hands have made
This day your prisoner; Him have you betrayed
To death: O, he whose snowy arm had power
To crush you all to nothing, and to shower
Down strokes like thunderbolts, whose blasting breath
Might in a moment, puffed you all to death,
And made ye fall before his frowning Brow,
See how he goes away, betrayed by you!
Thou great Redeemer of the world! whose blood
Has power to save more worlds, than Noah's flood
Destroyed bodies; thou, O thou that art
The Samson of our souls, How can the heart
Of man give thanks enough, that does not know
How much his death-redeemed soul does owe
To thy dear merits? We can apprehend
No more than flesh and blood does recommend
To our confined thoughts: Alas, we can
Conceive thy love, but as the love of man:
We cannot tell the horror of that pain
Thou bought us from; nor can our hearts attain
Those joys that thou have purchased in our name,
Nor yet the price thou paidst: our thoughts are la^e,
And crazed; Alas, things mortal have no might,
No means to comprehend an Infinite:
We can behold thee cradled in a Manger
In a poor Stable: We can see the danger
The Tetrarch's fury made thee subject to;
We can conceive thy poverty; We know
Thy blessed hands (that might bin freed) were bound,
We know, alas, thy bleeding brows were crowned
With pricking thorn; Thy body torn with whips;
Thy palms impeirc'd with ragged nails; Thy lips
Saluted with a Traitors kiss; Thy brows
Sweating forth blood: Thy often repeated blows;
Thy fastening to the cross; Thy shameful death;
These outward tortures all come underneath
Our dull conceits: But, what thy blessed soul
(That bore the burden of our guilt, and Scroule
Of all our sins, and horrid pains of Hell)
O, what that soul endured, what soul can tell!
THE ARGUMENT.
He breaks their bands; And with a bone
A thousand Philistians he slew:
He thirsted; fainted; made his moan
To Heaven: He drinks, his spirits renew.
Sect. 18.
THus when the glad Philistians had obtained
The sum of all their hopes, they entertained
The welcome prisoner with a greater noise
Of triumph than the greatness of their joys
Required: Some, with sudden death would greet
The new come Guest; whilst others, more discreet,
With lingering pains, and tortures more exact,
Would force him to discover, in the Fact,
Who his Abettors were: others gainsaid
That course, for fear a rescue may be made;
^ome cry, ' It Is fittest that the Offender bleed
(...), where his cursed hands had done the deed:
Others cried, No, where Fortune has consigned him,
We Will kill him: Best; to kill him, where we find him:
Thus variously they spent their doubtful breath,
At last they all agreed on sudden death;
There Is no contention now, but only who
Shall strike the first, or give the speeding blow:
Have ye beheld a single thread of flax,
Touched by the fire, how the fire crackes
With ease, and parts the slender twine in sunder,
Even so, as the first arm began to thunder
Upon the Prisners life, he burst the bands
From his strong wrists, and freed his loosned hands;
He stooped; from off the bloud-expecting grass,
He snatched the crooked jaw bone of an Ass;
Wherewith, his fury dealt such downright blows
So often redoubled, that it overthrowes
Man after man; And being ring'd about
With the distracted, and amazed rout
Of rude Philistians, turned his body round,
And in a circle dings them to the ground:
Each blow had proof; for, where the jaw bone mist,
The furious Champion wounded with his fist:
Betwixt them both, his fury did uncase
A thousand souls, which in that fatal place,
Had left their ruined carkeises, to feast
The flesh-devouring foul, and ravenous beast:
With that, the Conqueror, that now had fed
And surfeited his eye upon the dead
His hand had slain, sat down; and having flung
His purple weapon by, triumphed, and sung;
SAmson rejoice: Be filled with mirth;
Let all Judea know,
And tell the Princes of the earth
How strong an arm have thou:
How has thy dead enricht the land
And purpled ore the grass,
That had no weapon in thy hand,
But the jaw bone of an Ass!
How does thy strength and high renown
The glory of men surpass!
Thine arm has struck a thousand down,
With the jaw bone of an Ass:
Let Samsons glorious name endure,
Till Time shall render One,
Whose greater glory shall obscure
The glory thou have wone.
His song being ended, rising from the place
Whereon he lay, he turned his ruthlesse face
Upon those heaps his direful hand had made,
And opening of his thirsty lips, he said:
Great God of conquest, thou by whose command
The heart received courage, and this hand
Strength, to revenge thy quarrels, and fulfill
The secret motion of thy sacred will;
That, shall thy Champion perish now with thirst?
Thou know, I have done nothing, but what first
Was warranted by thy command: 'Twas thou
That gave my spirit boldness, and my brow
A resolution: It Is mine arm did do
No more, than what thou did enjoyne me to:
And shall I die for thirst? O thou that saved
Me from the Lions rage, that would have raved
Upon my life: by whom I have subdued
Thy cursed enemies, and have imbrued
My heaven-commanded hands, in a spring-tyde
Of guilty blood; Lord, shall I be denyde
A draught of cooling water to allay
The tyranny of my thirst? I, that this day
Have labourd in thy Vineyard; rooted out
So many weeds, whose lofty crests did sprout
Above thy trodden Vines; what, shall I dye
For want of water, thou the fountain by?
I know that thou were here, for had thou not
Supplyde my hand with strength, I never had got
So strange a vict'rie: Has thy servant taken
Thy work in hand, and is he now forsaken?
Have thou not promised that my strengthened hand
Shall scourge thy Foe-men, and sccure thy Land
From slavish bondage? will that arm of thine
Make me their slave, whom thou have promised mine?
Bow down thy ear, and hear my needful cry;
O, quench my thirst, great God, or else I dye:
With that the jaw, wherewith his arm had laid
So many sleeping in the dust, obeyde
The voice of God, and cast a tooth, from whence
A sudden spring arose, whose confluence
Of crystal waters, plenteously disburst
Their precious streams; and so allaid his thurst.
Meditat. 18.
THe jaw bone of an Ass? how poor a thing
God makes his powerful Instrument to bring
Some honor to his name, and to advance
His greater glory! came this bone, by chance,
To Samsons hand? Or could the Army go
No further? but must needs expect a foe
Just where his weapon of destruction lay?
Was there no fitter place, for them to stay,
But even just there? How small a thing 't had bin
(If they had been so provident) to win
The day with ease? Had they but taken thence
That cursed bone, what color of defense
Had Samson found? Or how could he withstood
The necessary danger of his blood?
Where Heaven does please to ruin, humane wit
Must fail, and deeper policy must submit:
There, wisdom must be fooled, and strength of brain
Must work against it self, or work in vain:
The tracke that seems most likely, often leads
To death; and where security most pleads,
There, dangers, in their fairest shapes, appear,
And give us not so great a help, as fear:
The things we least suspect are often they,
That most affect our ruin, and betray:
Who would have thought, the silly Asses bone,
Not worth the spurning, should have overthrown
So stout a band? Heaven oftentimes thinks best,
To overcome the greatest with the least:
He gains most glory in things, that are most slight,
And winnes in honor, what they want in might:
Who would have thought that Samsons deadly thurst
Should have bin quenched with waters, that did burst
And flow from that dry bone? who would not think
The thirsty Conqueror, for want of drink,
Should first have died? what mad man could presume
So dry a tooth should yield so great a Rheum?
God does not work like man; not is he tied
To outward means: His pleasure is his guide,
Not Reason: He, that is the God of nature,
Can work against it: He that is Creator
Of all things, can dispose them, to attend
His will, forgetting their created end:
He whose Almighty power did supply
This bone with water, made the red Sea dry:
Great God of nature, It Is as great an ease
For thee to alter nature, if thou please,
As to create it; Let that hand of thine
Show forth thy power, and please to alter mine:
My sins are open, but my sorrow's hid;
I cannot drench my couch, as David did;
My brains are marble, and my heart is stone:
O strike mine eyes, as thou did strike that bone.
THE ARGUMENT.
He lodges with a Harlot: Wait
Is laid, and guardes are pitched about^*
He beeres away the City gate
Upon his shoulders, and goes out.
Sect. 19.
THus when victorious Samson had unliv'd
This host of armed men; and had revived
His fainting spirits, and refresht his tongue
With those sweet crystal streams, that lately spru^g
From his neglected weapon, he arose
(Secured from the tyranny of his Foes
By his Heaven-borrowed strength) and boldly came
To a Philistian City, known by th'name
Of Azza; where, as he was passing by,
The careless Champion cast his wandering eye
Upon a face, whose beauty did invite
His wanton heart to wonder and delight:
Her curious hair was crisp'd: Her naked breast
Was white as Ivory, and fairly dressed
With costly Jewels: In her glorious face,
Nature was hidden, and dissembled grace
Damaskt her rosy cheeks: Her eyes did spark,
At every glance, like Diamonds in the dark;
Bold was her brow; whose frown was but a foil
To glorify her better-pleasing smile;
Her pace was careless, seeming to discover
The passions of a discontented Lover:
Sometime, her opned Casement gives her eye
A twinkling passage to the passer by;
And, when her fickle fancy had given ore
That place, she comes, and wantons at the door;
There Samson viewed her, and his steps could find
No further ground; but (guided by his mind)
Cast Anchor there: Have thy observing eyes
Ere marked the Spiders garb, How close she lies
Within her curious web; And by and by,
How quick she hastes to her entangled Fly;
And whispring poison in her murmuring ears,
At last, she tugges her silent guest, and bears
His Hampred body to the inner room
Of her obscure and solitary Home;
Even so this snaring beauty entertaines
Our eye-led Samson, tampred with the chains
Of her imperious eyes; and he, that no man
Could conquer; now lies conquered by a woman:
Fair was his welcome, and as fairly expressed
By her delicious language, which professed
No less affection than so sweet a friend,
Could, with her best expressions, recommend:
Into her glorious chamber she directs
Her welcome guest, and with her fair respects
She entertaines him; with a bountious kiss,
She gives him earnest of a greater bliss;
And with a brazen countenance, she brake
The way to her unchaste desires, and spoke;
Mirror of mankind, thou selected flower
Of loves fair knot, welcome to Flora's hour;
Cheer up my Love; and look upon these cyes,
Wherein my beauty, and thy picture lies;
Come take me prisner, in thy folded arms;
And boldly strike up sprightly loves alarmes
Upon these rubey lips, and let us try
The sweets of love; Here Is none but thee and I:
My beds are softest down, and purest lawne
My sheets; my Vallents and my curtains drawn
In gold and silks of curious di^: Behold,
My covrings are of Tap'stry, 'inricht with gold;
Come, come, and let us take our fill of pleasure;
My husbands absence lends me dainty leisure
To give thee welcome: Come, let us spend the night
In sweet enjoyment of unknown delight.
Her words prevailed: And being both undrest,
Together went to their defiled rest:
By this the news of Samsons being there
Possessed the City, and filled every ear:
His death is plotted; And advantage lends
New hopes of speed: An armed guard attends
At every gate, that when the breaking day
Shall send him forth, the expecting forces may
Betray him to his sudden death; and so
Revenge their kingdoms ruins at a blow:
But lustful Samson (whose distrustful ears
Kept open house) was now possessed with fears:
He hears a whispering; and the trampling feet
Of people passing in the silent street;
He whom undaunted courage lately made
A glorious Conqueror, is now afraid;
His conscious heart is smitten with his sin;
He cannot choose but fear, and fear agin:
He fears; and now the terrible alarmes
Of sin do call him from th'unlawfull arms
And lips of his luxurious Concubine;
Bids him, arise from dalliance, and resign
The usurpation of his lukewarm place
To some new sinner, whose less dangerous case
May lend more leisure to so soul a deed:
Samson, with greater and unwonted speed
Leapes from his wanton bed: his fears do press
More haste to cloth; than lust did, to undresse:
He makes no tarryance; but with winged have,
Bestrides the streets; and to the gates he past,
And through the armed troops, he makes his way;
Bears gates, and bars, and pillars all away;
So escaped the rage of the Philistian band,
That still must owe his ruin, to their land.
Medit. 19.
HOw weak, at strongest, is poor flesh and blood!
Samson, the greatness of whose power withstood
A little world of armed men, with death,
^ust now be foiled with a woman's breath:
The mother, sometimes lets her infant fall,
To make it hold the surer by the wall:
God lets his servant often go amiss,
That he may turn, and see how weak he is:
David that found an overflowing measure
Of heavens high favors, and as great a treasure
Of saving grace, and portion of the Spirit,
As flesh and blood was able to inherit,
Must have a fall to exercise his fears,
And make him drown his restles couch with tears:
Wise Solomon, within whose heart was planted
The fruitful stocks of heavenly wisdom, wanted
Not that, whereby his weakness understood
The perfect vanity of flesh and blood:
Whose hand seemed prodigal of his Isaacs life,
He durst not trust Gods providence with his wife:
The righteous Let had slidings: Holy Paul
He had his prick; and Peter had his fall:
The sacred Bride, in whose fair face remains
The greatest earthly beauty, has her stains:
If man were perfect, land entirely good,
He were not man: he were not flesh and blood:
Or should he never fall, he would at length,
Not see his weakness, and presume in strength:
Ere children know the sharpness of the Edge,
They think, their fingers have a priveledge
Against a wound; but having felt the knife,
A bleeding finger, sometime saves a life:
Lord, we are children, and our sharpe-edg'd knives,
Together with our blood, lets out our lives;
Alas, if we but draw them from the sheath,
They cut our fingers, and they bleed to death.
Thou great Surgeon of a bleeding soul,
Whose sovereign baulme, is able to make whole
The deepest wound, Thy sacred salve is sure;
We cannot bleed so fast, as thou can cure:
Heal thou our wounds, that, having salv'd the sore
Our hearts may fear, and learn to sin no more;
And let our hands be strangers to those knives,
That wound not fingers only, but our lives.
THE ARGUMENT.
He falls in league with Delila:
The Nobles bribe her to discover
Her Samsons strength, and learn the way
To bind her arme-prevailing Lover.
Sect. 20.
NOt far from Azza, in a fruitful Valley
Close by a brook, whose silver streams did da^ley
^ith the smooth bosom of the wanton sands,
those winding current parts the neighbring lands,
And often washes the beloved sides
^her delightful banks, with gentle tides;
^^re dwelt a Beauty, in whose Sunne-bright eye,
(...) sat in throned; and full of Majesty,
(...) forth such glorious eye-surprizing rays,
(...) she was thought the wonder of her days:
(...) name was called Delila, the fair;
^^ther did amorous Samson often repair,
(...) with the piercing flame of her bright eye,
(...) so long; that like a wanton fly
(...) ^urnt his lustful wings, and so became
(...) slavish prisner to that conquering flame:
She asked, and had: There Is nothing was too high
For her, to beg; or Samson to deny:
Who now, but Delila? What name can raise
And crown his drooping thoughts, but Delila's?
All time's misspent, each hour is cast away,
That Is not employed upon his Delila:
Gifts must be given to Delila: No cost,
If sweetest Delila but smile, is lost:
No joy can please; no happiness can crown
His best desires, if Delila but frown:
No good can bless his amorous heart, but this,
He Is Delila's, and Delila is his:
Now, when the louder breath of fame had blown
Her newes-proclaiming Trumpet, and made known
This Lovers passion, to the joyful ears
Of the cowed Philistines; their nimble feats
Advised their better hopes, not to neglect
So fair advantage, which may bring to effect
Their best desires, and right their wasted Land
Of all her wrongs, by a securer hand:
With that, some few of the Philistian Lords
Repair to Delila; with baited words
They tempt the frailty of the simple maid,
And, having sworn her to their counsel, said:
Fair Delila; Thou can not choose but know
The miseries of our land: whose ruins show
The danger, whereinto not we, but all,
If thou deny they helpefull hand, must fall:
Those fruitful fields, that offered, but of late,
Their plenteous favors to our prosperous state;
See, how they lie a ruinous heap, and void
Of all their plenty; wasted, and destroyde:
Our common foe has sported with our lives:
Has slain our children, and destroyed our wives:
(...) poor distressed land does groan
Under that mischief that his hands have done;
^^dowes implore thee, and poor Orphans tongues
^all to fair Delila, to right their wrongs:
(...) lies in thee, to help; Thy helpefull hand
May have the Glory to revenge thy land;
For which our thankful Nation shall allow
Not only honor; but reward; and thou,
From every hand that is present here, shall gain
(...) a thousand Sicles for thy pain:
To whom, fair Delila, whom reward had tied
To satisfy her own desires, replied;
My Lords;
My humble service I acknowledge due,
(...), to my native country; next, to you:
If Heaven, and Fortune, have enricht my hand,
With so much power, to relieve our Land,
When ere your honors please to call me to it,
(...) Delila shall die, or do it:
Say then (my Lords) wherein my power may do
This willing Service to my land, or you.
Thou know, ( say they) No forces can withstand
The mighty strength of cursed Samsons hand;
(...) ruins Armies, and does overthrow
(...) greatest Bands, nay, kingdoms at a blow;
The limits of his, more then manly, powers
Are not confined, nor is his Arm like ours:
His strength is more then man; his conquering Arm
Has, sure, the assistance of some potent charm;
(...), nothing but the glory of thine eyes,
(Wherein a far more strong enchantment lies;)
(...) overthrow: He Is prisoner to thine eye,
(...) can thou ask, what Samson can deny:
(...) sweetness of thy language has the Art,
To dive into the secrets of his heart;
Move Samson then: unbarre his bolted breast,
And let his deafned ears attain no rest,
Until his eye-inchanted tongue replies,
And tells thee, where his hidden power lies:
Urge him to whisper in thy private ^are,
And to repose his magic mystr'y, there;
How, by what means, his strength may be betrayed
To b^nds, and how his power may be allaid;
That we may right these wrongs, which his proud hand
Has rudely offered to our ruinous land:
In this, thou shall obtain the reputation
To be the sole redeemer of thy Nation,
Whose wealth shall crown thy loyalty with a meed
Due to the merits of so fair a deed:
Whereto, fair Delila (whose heart was tied
To Samsons love, for her own ends;) replied;
My honorable Lords: If my success
In these your just employments prove no less
Then my desiers, I should think my pains
Rewarded in the Action: If the raines
Of Samsons headstrong power were in my hands,
These lips should now performance: Your commands
Should work obedience, in the loyal breast
Of your true servant; who would never rest,
Till she had done the deed: But know, my Lords,
If the poor frailty of a woman's words
May shake so great a power, and prevail,
My best advised endeavors shall not fail
To be employed: I Will make a sudden trial;
And quickly speed, or find a soul denial.
Meditat. 20.
INsatiate Samson! Could not Azza smother
Thy flaming Lust; but must thou find another?
Is the old grown stale? And seekst thou for a new?
Alas, where Two's too many, Three's too few:
Man's soul is infinite, and never tires
In the extension of her own desires:
The sprightly nature of his active mind
Aims still at further; Will not be confinde
To th'poore dimensions of flesh and blood;
Something it still desiers: Covets good,
Would feign be happy, in the sweet enjoyment
Of what it prosecutes, with the employment
Of best endeavors; but it cannot find
So great a good, but something's still behind:
It first propounds, applauds, desires, endeavors;
At last enjoyes; but (like to men, in Feavours,
Who fancy always those things that are worst)
The more it drinks, the more it is a thirst:
The fruitful earth (whose nature is the worse
For sin; with man partaker in the curse)
^^mes at perfection: and would feign bring forth
(As first it did) things of the greatest worth;
^er colder womb endeavors (as of old)
To ripen all her Metals, unto Gold;
O, but that sin-procured curse has chilled
The heat of pregnant Nature, and has filld
Her barren seed, with coldness, which does lurk
In her ^aint womb, that her more perfect work
Is hindered; and, for want of heat, brings forth
Imperfect metals, of a baser worth:
Even so, the soul of Man, in her first state,
Received a power, and a will to that
Which was most pure, and good; but, since the loss
Of that fair freedom, only trades in dross;
Aims she at Wealth? alas, her proud desire
Strives for the best; but failing to mount higher
Than earth, her error grapples, and takes hold
On that, which earth can only give her, Gold:
Aims she at Glory? Her ambition flies
As high a pitch, as her dull wings can rise;
But, failing in her strength, she leaves to strive,
And takes such Honor, as base earth can give;
Aims she at Pleasure? her desires extend
To lasting joys, whose pleasures have no end;
But, wanting wings, she grovels on the Dust,
And, there, she lights upon a carnal Lust;
Yet nerethelesse, th'aspring Soul desires
A perfect good; but, wanting those sweet fires,
Whose heat should perfect her unrip'ned will,
Cleaves to th'apparent Good, which Good is ill;
Whose sweet enjoyment, being far unable
To give a satisfaction answerable
To her unbounded wishes, leaves a thirst
Of re-enjoyment, greater than the first.
Lord; When our fruitless fallowes are grown cold;
And out of heart, we can enrich the mould
With a new heat; we can restore again
Her weakened soil; and make it apt for grain;
And will thou suffer our faint souls; to lie
Thus unmanur'd, that is thy Husbandry?
They bear no other bulk, but idle weeds,
Alas, they have no heart, no heat; Thy seeds
Are cast away, until thou please t'enspire
New strength, and quench them with thy sacred fire:
Stir thou my Fallowes, and enrich my mould,
And they shall bring thee'encrease, a hundred fold.
THE ARGUMENT.
False Delila accosts her Lover:
her lips endeavor to entice
His gentle nature to discover
his strength: Samson deceives her thrice.
Sect. 21.
Soon as occasion lent our Champions ear
To Delila, which could not choose but hear,
If Delila but whispered; she, whose wiles
Were neatly baited with her simple smiles,
Accosted Samson; Her alluring hand
Sometimes would stroke his Temples; sometime span'd
His brawny arm Sometimes, would gently gripe
His sinewy wrest; Another while, would wipe
His sweating brows; Her wanton fingers played,
Sometimes, with his fair locks; sometimes, would brai'd
His long dishevelled hair; her eyes, one while
Would steal a glance upon his eyes, and smile;
And, the^, her crafty lips would speak; then, smother
Her broken speech; and, then, begin another:
At last, as if a sudden thought had brake
From the fair prison of her lips, she spoke;
How poor a Grisle is this arm of mine!
Me thinks, it is nothing, in respect of thine;
I Would rather feel the power of thy Love,
Than of thy hand; In that, my heart would prove
The stouter Champion, and would make thee yield,
And leave thee captive in the conquered field.
The strength of my affection passes thine,
As much as thy victorious arm does mine;
The greatest conquest, then, is due to me;
Thou conquer'st others, but I conquer thee:
But say, my love, is it some hidden charm,
Or does thy stock of youth enrich thy arm
With so great power, that can overthrow,
And conquer mighty Kingdoms, at a blow?
What cause have I to joy! I need not fear
The greatest danger, now my Samson's here:
I fear no Rebels now; me thinks, thy power
Makes me a Princess, and my house, a Tower:
But say, my Love, if Delila should find thee,
Lost in a sleep, could not her fingers bind thee?
Me thinks they should: But I would scorn to make
So poor a Conquest: When thou art broad awake,
Teach me the trick: Or if thou will deny me;
Know, that my own invention shall supply me,
Without thy help: I Will use a woman's charms,
And bind thee fast, within these circled Arms:
To whom, the Champion, smiling, thus replied;
Take the green Osyers that were never dried,
And bind thy Samsons wrists together, then,
He shall be fast, and weak as other men:
With that, the Philistines, that lay in wait
Within an ears command, commanded strait,
That Osyers should be brought: wherewith she tied
Victorious Samsons joined hands, and cried;
Samson make haste; and let thy strength appear:
Samson take heed; the Philistines, are here:
He starts, and as the flaming fire cracks
The slender substance of th'untwisted flax,
(...) ^witcht in sunder his divided bands,
(...) in a moment freed his fastened hands;
(...) that offended Delila bewrai'd
(...) frown, half sweetened with a smile, and said;
Think thou, thy Delila does go about
(...) ^rappe thy life? Or, can my Samson doubt
^wrod^ ledge a secret in the loyal breast
(...) faithful Delila, that finds no rest,
(...) happiness, but in thy heart, alone,
(...) Joy I prize far dearer then my own?
(...) then should thou deceive me, and impart
S^ ^oule a falsehood, to so true a heart?
Come, grant my suite, and let that faithless tongue
Make love amends which has done love this wrong:
To whom dissembling Samson thus replied,
Take twisted ropes, whose strength was never tried,
And tie these closed hands together; then,
I shall be fact, and weak as other men:
With that, she bound him close; and having made
The knot more suer, then her love's, she said;
Samson arise; and take thy strength upon thee;
Samson make have; the Philistines are on thee:
He straight arose, and as a striving hand
Would break a Sisters thread, he cracked the band
That bound his arms, he cracked the bands insunder;
But frowning Delila, whose heart did wonder
No less then vex, being filled with discontent,
She said; False lover, If thy heart had meant,
What thy fair tongue had formerly professed,
Thou nere had kept thy secrets from my breast:
Wherein has Delila bin found unjust,
Not to deserve the honor of thy trust?
Wherein, have I been faithless of disloyal?
Or what request of thine, are found denial?
Had I but bin so wise, as to deny,
Samson might begged, and mis^, as well as I:
But it is my fortune, still, to be most free
To those, as are the ^est reserved to me:
Be not ungrateful, Samson; If my breast
Were but as false, as thine is hard, I Would rest
To tempt thy silence, or to move my suite*
Speak then, but speak the truth; or else be mute.
To whom, fond Samson: If thy hands would tie
These locks to yonder Beam, they will diserie
My native we^knesse: and thy Samson, then,
Would be as poor in strength, as other men:
So said; her busy fingers soon obeyed;
His locks being platted to the beam, she said:
Samson bestirre thee; and let thy power appear:
Samson take heed; the Philistines are here:
With that he quits the place (whereon he lay,
Fallne fast asleep) and bore the Beam away.
Meditat. 21.
SEe, how the crafty Serpent, twists and winds
Into the breast of man! What paths he finds,
And crooked by-ways! With how sweet a bait
He hides the hook of his inveterate hate!
What suger'd words, and eare-delighting Art
He uses, to supplant the yielding heart
Of poor deceived man, who stands and trusts
Upon the broken staff of his false ^^^sts!
He tempts; allures; suggests; and, in conclusion,
Makes Man the Pander to his own confusion:
The fruit was fair and pleasing to the eyes,
Apt to breed knowledge, and to make them wise;
Must they not taste so fair a fruit, not touch?
Yes, do: Twill make you Gods, and know as much
As he that made it: Think you, you can fall
Into deaths hands? Ye shall not dye at all:
Thus fell poor man: his knowledge proved such,
Better 'thad bin, he had not known so much:
Thus this old Serpent takes advantage still
On our desiers, and distemperd will:
Art thou grown Covetous? would thou feign be rich?
He comes and strikes thy heart with the dry itch
Of having: Wealth will rouse thy heartles friends;
Make thee a potent Master of thy Ends;
'Twill bring thee honor; make thy suites at Law
Prosper at will; and keep thy Foes in awe:
Art thou Ambitious? He will kindle fire
In thy proud thoughts, and make thy thoughts aspire;
^ee'l come and teach thy honor how to scorn
(...) old acquaintance, whom thou have outworne:
(...) teach thee how to Lord it, and advance
(...) servants fortunes, with thy Countenance:
Would thou enjoy the Pleasures of the flesh?
(...) bring thee wanton Ladies, to refresh
(...) drooping soul: He Will teach thine eyes to wander;
(...) thee how to woo; He Will be thy Pander:
(...) fill thy amorous soul with the sweet passion
(...) powerful Love: He Will give thee dispensation,
(...) sin at pleasure; He will make thee Slave
(...) thy own thoughts: he will make thee beg and crave
(...) be a drudge: he will make thy treacherous breath
(...) thee, and betray thee to thy death.
Lord; if our Father Adam could not stay
(...) his upright perfection, one poor day;
How can it be expected, we have power
To hold out Seige, one scruple of an hour:
Our Arms are bound with too unequal bands;
We cannot strive; We cannot loose our hands:
Great Nazarite, awake; and look upon us:
Make haste to help; The Philistines are on us.
THE ARGUMENT.
She sues again: Samson replies
The very truth: Her lips betray him:
They bind him; They put out his eyes,
And to the prison they convey him.
Sect. 22.
WIth that; the wanton, whose distrustful eye,
Was fixed upon reward, made this reply;
Had the denial of my poor request
Proceeded from th'inexorable breast
Of one, whose open hatred sought t'endanger
My haunted life; Or had it bin a stranger,
That wanted so much nature, to deny
The doing of a common courtesy;
Nay, had it bin a friend that had deceived me,
An ordinary friend, It nere had grieved me:
But thou, even thou my bosom friend, that art
The only joy of my deceived heart;
Nay thou, whose hony-dropping lips so often
Did plead thy undissembled love, and soften
My dear affection, which could never yield
To easier terms; By thee, to be beguild?
How often have thou mocked my slender suite
With forged falsehood? Had thou but been mute,
I^ere had hoped: But being fairly led
Toward my prompt desiers, which were fed
With my false hopes, and thy false-hearted tongue,
And then beguild? I hold it as a wrong:
How can thou say thou love me? How can I
Think but thou hat'st me, when thy lips deny
So poor a Suite? Alas, my fond desire
Had slak'd, had not denial blown the fire:
Grant then at last, and let thy open breast
(...) that thou love me', and grant my fair request:
Speak, or speak not, thy Delila shall give ore
To urge; her lips shall never urge thee more:
To whom the yielding Lover thus betrayed
His heart, being tortured unto death, and said;
My dear, my Delila; I cannot stand
Against so sweet a pleader; In thy hand
There entrust, and to thy breast impart
In Samsons life, and secrets of his heart;
(...) then my Delila, that I was borne
^Nazarite; These locks were never shorn;
(...) Raisar, yet, came ere upon my crown;
There lies my strength, with the^, my strength is gone:
(...) they but shaven, my Delila; O, then,
In Samson should be weak as other men;
No sooner had he spoken, but he spread
His body on the floor, his drowzy head,
(...) pillow'd on her lap; until, at last,
He fell into a sleep; and, being fast,
She clipped his locks from off his careless head,
And beckning the Philistians in, she said;
Samson awake; Take strength and courage on thee;
Samson arise; The Philistines are on thee:
Even as a Dove, whose wings are clipped, for flying,
Flutters her idle stumps; and still's relying
Upon her wonted refuge, strives in vain,
To quit her life from danger, and attain
The freedom of her ayre-diuiding plumes;
She struggles often, and she often presumes
To take the sanctuary of the open fields;
But, finding that her hopes are vain, she yields;
Even so poor Samson (frighted at the sound,
That roused him from his rest) forsook the ground;
Perceiving the Philistians there at hand,
To take him prisoner, he began to stand
Upon his wonted Guard: His threatening breath
Brings forth the prologue to their following death:
He rowz'd himself; and, like a Lion, shook
His drowzy limbs; and with a cloudy look,
(Foretelling boystrous, and tempestuous weather)
Defied each one, defied them all together:
Now, when he came to grapple, he upheav'd
His mighty hand; but, now (alas, bereaved
Of wonted power) that confounding arm,
(That could no less then murder) did no harm
Blow was exchanged, for blow; and wound for wound
He, that, of late, disdained to give ground,
Flies back apace; who, lately, stained the field
With conquered blood, does now begin to yield;
He, that, of late, brake twisted Ropes in twain,
Is bound with Packthred; He, that did disdain
To fear the power of an Armed Band,
Can now walk prisoner in a single hand:
Thus have the treacherous Philistines betrayed
Poor captive Samson: Samson now obay'd:
Those glowing eyes, that whirled death about,
Where ere they viewed, their cursed hands put out
They led him prisoner, and convai'd him down
(...) strong-wall'd d' Azza (that Philisti^^ town,
Those gates his shoulders lately bore away)
^^ere, in the common Prison, did they lay
^^stressed Samson, who obtained no meat,
(...) what he purchased with his painful sweat;
(...), every day, they urged him to fulfill
(...) twelve hours task, at the laborious Mill;
(...), when his wasted strength began to tire,
^^ey'd quicken his bare sides, with whips of Wire:
^^ll'd was the town with Joy, and Triumph: All,
from the high-Prince, to the Cobbler, on the stall,
^ept holy day, whilst every voice became
^oarse, as the Trumpe of newes-divulging fame;
(...) tongues were filled with shouts: And every ear
^^as grown impatient of the whisperer;
(...) general was their Triumph, their Applause,
That children shouted ere they knew a cause:
The better sort betook them to their knees,
Dagon must worshipped be: Dagon, that frees
^oth Sea, and Land, Dagon, that did subdue
(...) common ^oe: Dagon must have his due:
Dagon must have his praise; must have his prize:
Dagon must have his holy Sacrifice:
Dagon has brought to our victorious hand
^roud Samson: Dagon has redeemed our land:
(...) call to Dagon: and our Dagon hears;
(...) groans are (...) to holy Dagons ears;
To Dagon, all renown and Glory be;
Where is there such another God as He?
Medita. 22.
HOw is our story changed? O, more then strange
Effects of so small time! O, sudden change;
Is this that holy Nazarite, for whom
Heaven showed a Miracle on the barren womb?
Is this that holy Thing, against whose Birth
Angels must quit their thrones, and visit Earth?
Is this that blessed Infant, that began
To grow in favor so with God and man?
What, is this he, who (strengthn'd by heavens hand)
Was borne a Champion, to redeem the Land?
Is this the man, whose courage did contest
With a fierce Lion, grapling breast to breast;
And in a twinkling, tore him quite in sunder?
Is this that Conqueror, whose Arm did thunder
Upon the men of Askalon, the power
Of whose bent fist, slew thirty in an hour?
Is this that daring Conqueror, whose hand
Thrasht the proud Philistines in their wasted land?
And was this He, that with the help of none,
Destroyed a thousand with a silly Bone?
Or He, whose wrists, being bound together, did
Break Cords like flax, and double Ropes like third?
Is this the man whose hands unhinged those Gates,
And bare them thence, with pillars, bars and Grates?
And is he turned a Mill-horse now? and blind?
Must this great Conqueror be forced to grind
For bread and water? Must this Hero spend
His latter times in drudgery? Must he end
His weary days in darkness? Must his hyer,
Be knotted cords, and torturing whips of wire?
^^ere heaven withdraws, the creaturs power shakes*
(...) miserie's wanting there, where God forsakes?
(...) Samson not abused his borrowed power,
(...) had still, remained a Conqueror:
(...) Philistines did act his part; No doubt,
(...) eyes offended, and they plucked them out:
(...) will be just: He punishes a sin,
(...) in the member, that he finds it in:
^^en faithless Zacharias did become
(...) curious, his lips were stricken dumb:
(...) whose lustful view did overprize
^^lawfull beautie's punished in his eyes;
(...) flaming eyes seduced his wanton mind
(...) act a sin; Those eyes are stricken blind;
(...) beauty he invaded, did invade him,
(...) that fair tongue, that blessed him so, betrayed him:
(...) strength, intemperate lust employed so ill,
(...) a d^iving the laborious Mill;
(...) naked sides, so pleased with lusts desire,
(...) now, as naked, lasht with whips of wire:
Lord, should thou punish every part in me
(...) does offend, what member would be free?
(...) member acts his part; They never lin
(...) they join, and make a Body' of fin:
(...) sin my burden; Let it never please me;
(...) thou have promised, when I come, to ease me.
THE ARGUMENT.
They make a feast. And then to crown
Their mirth, blind Samson is brought thither:
He pulls the mighty pillars down;
The Building falls: All slain together.
Sect. 23.
THus when the vulgar Triumph (which does last
But seldom, longer then the news) was past,
And Dagons holy Altars had surecast
To breath their idle fumes: they called a feast,
A common Feast; whose bounty did bewray
A common joy, to gratulate the day;
Whereto, the Princes, under whose command
Each province was, in their divided land;
Whereto, the Lords, Leiutenants, and all those,
To whom the supreme Rulers did repose
An under-trust; whereto, the better sort
Of gentry, and of Commons did resort,
With mirth, and jolly triumph, to allay
Their sorrows, and to solemnize the day;
Into the common Hall they come: The Hall
Was large and fair; Her arched roof was all
Builded with massy stone, and over-lai'd
With ponderous Lead; Two sturdy Pillars stayed
Her mighty Rafters up; whereon, relied
The weighty burden of her lofty pride.
When lusty diet, and the frollicke cup
Had roused and raised their quickened spirits up,
(...) brave triumphing Bacchus had displaid
(...) conquering colors, in their cheeks, they said,
(...) Samson forth; He must not work to^ day;
(...) feast; We Will give him leave to play;
(...) bravely? Does our Mill-horse sweat?
(...) lack nothing; What he wants in mea^e,
(...) in lashes; He is strong and stout,
(...) his breath can drive the Mill about:
(...) too hard, we fear: Go down and free him;
(...) that his Mistress, Delila would see him:
(...) of him will take our hours short;
(...) him then to make our Honors sport:
(...) provia^ some Riddles; Let him bring
(...) of Triumph: He that is blind, may sing
(...) better boldness: Bid him never doubt
(...) What matter though his eyes be out?
(...) dishonor, that he cannot see;
(...), the God of Love's as blind, as he:
(...) that they brought poor Samson to the Hall;
(...) as he past, he gropes to find the wall;
(...) pa^^ was slow, His feet were lifted high;
(...) tongue would taunt him Every scornful eye
(...) filld with laughter; Some would cry aloud,
(...) in state: His Lordship is grown proud:
(...) bid his honor, ^asle, whilst others cast
^prochfull terms upon him; as he past,
(...) would salute him fairly, and embrace
(...) wounded sides, then spit upon his face:
(...) would cry; For shame for hear to abuse
(...) high and great redeemer of the Jews:
(...) gibe and flout him with their taunts and quip^*
(...) others flurt him on the starting lips;
(...) that poor Samson, whose abundant grief,
(...) hopes of comfort or relief,
Resolved for patience: Turning round, he made
Some shift to feel his Keeper out, and said;
Good Sir, my painful labor in the Mill
Has made me bold (although against my will)
To crave some little rest; If you will please
To let the Pillour but afford some ease
To my worn limbs, your mercy should relieve
A soul that has no more but thanks, to give:
The keeper yielded: (Now the Hall was filld
With Princes, and their People, that beheld
Abused Samson; whilst the Roof retained
A leash of thousands more, whose eyes were chain^^
To this sad Object, with a full delight,
To see this flesh-and-blood-relenting sight;
With that the prisoner turned himself and prayed
So soft, that none but heaven could hear, and said^
My God, my God: Although my sins do cry
For greater vengeance, yet thy gracious eye
Is full of mercy; O, remember now
The gentle promise and that sacred vow
Thou made to faithful Abram, and his seed,
O, hear my wounded soul, that has less need
Of life, then mercy: Let thy tender ear
Make good thy plenteous promise now, and hear;
See, how thy cursed enemies prevail
Above my strength; Behold, how poor and frail
My native power is, and, wanting thee,
What is there, Oh, what is there (Lord) in me?
Nor is it I that suffer: My desert
May challenge greater vengeance, if thou were
^xtreme to punish: Lord, the wrong is thine;
The punishment is just, and only mine:
I am thy Champion, Lord; It is not me
They strike at; Through my sides they thrust at thee:
(...) thy Glory it is, their Malice lies;
(...) at that when they put out these eyes:
(...) their blood-b^dabl'd hands would fly
(...) thou but clothed in flesh, as I:
(...) thy wrongs, great God; O let thy hand
(...) thy suffering honor, and this land:
(...) ^e thy power; Renew my wasted, strength,
(...) fight thy b^ttels; and at length,
(...) thy glory; that my hands may do
(...) faithful service they were borne unto:
(...) thy power, that I may restore
(...), and I will never urge thee more:
(...) having ended, both his arms he laid,
(...) the pillours of the Hall; and said;
(...), with the Philistines, I resign my breath;
(...) let my God find Glory in my death:
(...) having spoke, his yielding body strained
(...) those Marble pillours, that sustained
(...) pondrous Roof; They cracket; and, with their fall,
(...) fell the Battlements. and Roof, and all;
(...) with their ruins, slaughtered at a blow,
(...) whole Assembly; They, that were below,
(...) their sudden deaths from those that fell
(...) off the top; whilst none was left, to tell
(...) horrid shreckes, that filld the spacious Hall,
(...) ruins were impartial, and slew all:
(...) fell; and, with an unexpected blow.
(...) every one his death, and burial too:
Thus di'd our Samson; whose brave death has won
(...) honor, then his honored life had done:
(...) di'd our Conqueror; whose latest breath
(...) crowned with Conquest; triumphed over death;
(...) di'd our Sampson; whose last drop of blood
^deem'd heaven's glory, and his Kingdome's good:
Thus di'd heavens Champion, and the earths bright Glory;
The heavenly subject of this sacred Story:
And thus th'impartiall hand of death that gathers
All to the Grave, reposed him with his fathers;
Whose name shall flourish, and be still in prime,
In spite of ruin, or the teeth of Time;
Whose fame shall last, till heaven shall please to free
This Earth from Sin, and Time shall cease to be.
Medita. 23.
WAges of sin, is death. The day must come,
Wherein, the equal hand of death must sum
The several Items of man's fading glory,
Into the easy total of one Story:
The brows that sweat for Kingdoms and renown,
To glorify their Temples with a Crown;
At length, grow cold, and leave their honored name
To flourish in th'uncertaine blast of Fame:
This is the height that glorious Mortals can
Attain; This is the highest pitch of Man:
The quilted Quarters of the Earths great Ball,
Whose unconfined limits were too small
For his extreme Ambition to deserve,
Six foot of length, and three of breadth must serve:
This is the highest pitch that Man can fly;
And after all his Triumph, he must die:
Lives he in Wealth? Does well deserved store
Limit his wish, that he can wish no more?
And does the fairest bounty of increase
Crown him with plenty; and, his days with peace^
It is a right hand blessing; But supply
Of wealth cannot secure him; He must die;
Lives he in Pleasure? Does perpetual mirth
(...) him a little Heaven upon his earth?
^eets he no sullen care, no sudden loss
(...) cool his joys? Breathes he without a cross?
^ants he no pleasure, that his wanton eye
(...) crave, or hope from fortune? He must dye:
(...) he in Honor? Has his fair desert
^^tain'd the freedom of his Princes heart?
(...) may his more familiar hands disburse
(...) liberal favors, from the royal purse?
(...), his Honor cannot soar too high,
(...) palefac'd death to follow: He must dye:
Lives he a Conqu'rour? And does heaven bless
(...) heart with spirit, that spirit, with success;
Success, with Glory; Glory, with a name,
To live with the Eternity of Fame?
The progress of his lasting fame may vye
With time; But yet the Conqueror must dye:
Great, and good God: Thou Lord of life and death;
(...) whom, the Creature has his being, breath;
Teach me to underprize this life, and I
Shall find my loss the easier, when I dye;
So raise my feeble thoughts, and dull desire,
That when these vain and weary days expire,
I may discard my flesh with joy, and quit
My better part, of this false earth; and it
Of some more sin; and, for this transitory
And tedious life, enjoy a life of Glory.
The end.
SIONS SONETS. Sung By SOLOMON the KING; And PERIPHRAS'D

By Fra. Quarles.

LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER. 1632.

To the READERS.
REaders, now you have them. May the end of my pains be the begin^ing of your
pleasures. Excuse me for ^haring so high, else give me leave to excuse my
self; Indeed I flew with Eagles feathers; otherwise I had not flowne or fallen.
It is the Song of Songs, There present you with: The Author, King SOLOMON, the
wisest of Kings; The matter mystical, the divinest of subjects, The Speakers,
CHRIST, the Bridegroom; the CHVRCH, the Bride; The end, to invite you all to
the wedding.

Farewell.
AN EPITHALME TO THE BRIDEGROOM.
HOsanna to the Highest. Joy betide
The heavenly Bridegroom, and his holy Bride:
Let Heaven above be filled with songs,
Let Earth triumph below;
For ever silent be those tongues,
That can be silent now.
You Rocks, and Stones, I charge you all to break
Your flinty silence, if men cease to speak.
You, that profess that sacred Art,
Or now, or never show it,
Plead not, your Muse is out of heart
Here Is that creates a Poet.
Be ravished Earth, to see this contract driven,
'Twixt sinful Man, and reconciled Heaven.
Dismount you Quire of Angels; come,
With Men, your joys divide;
Heaven never showed so sweet a Groom,
Nor Earth, so fair a Bride.
SIONS SONETS.
BRIDE. SONET. I.
1.
O That the bounty of those lips divine,
Would seal their favors, on these lips of mine,
That by those welcome Sensible graves.
kisses, I might see
The mutual love, betwixt my Love and me,
For truer bliss, no worldly joy allows,
Than sacred Kisses, from so sweet a Spouse,
With which, no earthly pleasures may compare,
Rich Wines are not so delicate as they are.
2.
NOr Myrrh, nor Cassia, nor the choice perfume^
Of unctious Narde, or Aromaticke fumes
Of hot Arabia, do enrich the Air
With more delicious sweetness, than the fair
Reports, that crown the merits of thy Name,
With heavenly Laurels of eternal fame;
Which makes the Pure in heart.
Virgins fix their eyes upon thee
And all that view thee, are enamored one thee.
3.
O Let the beauty of thy Su^-like face
Inflame my soul, and let thy glory chase
Disloyal thoughts: Let no^ the World allure
My chaste desires, from a Spouse so pure;
But when as time shall place me on thy The Kingdom of Heaven.
Throne,
My fears shall cease, and interrupt by none,
I shall transcend the style of Transitory,
And full of Glory, still be filled with glory.
4.
But you, my curious (and too nice) allies,
That view my fortunes, with too narrow eyes,
You say my face is Through apparent infirmities.
black, and foul; it is true;
I Am beauteous, to my Love, though black to you;
My censure stands not upon your esteem,
He sees me as I Glorious in him.
am; you, as I seem;
You see the Clouds, but he discernes the Sky;
Know, it is my Weakness of the flesh.
mask that looks so black, not I.
5.
WHat if Afflictions do dis-imbellish
My natural glory, and deny the relish
Of my adjourned beauty, yet disdain not
Her, by whose necessary loss, you gain not;
I wa^ enforced to swelter in Afflictions.
the Sun,
(...) (...) to Idolatrous superstitions.
keep a strangers Vine, left mine alone;
^eft mine own, and kept a strangers Vine;
(...) fault was By reason of my ^^^^nesse.
mine, but was Being seduced by false Prophets.
not only mine.
6.
O Thou, whose love I prize above my life,
More worthy far to enjoy a fairer wife,
Tell me, to what cool shade do thou resort?
^here graze thy Sheep, where do thy lambs disport
(...) from the scorching of this Persecutions.
sowltry weather?
(...) tell thy Love, and let thy Love come thither:
(...) (gentle Shepherd) fits it thee, to cherish
^hy private Flocks, and let thy true Love By Idolatry.
perish?
BRIDEGROOM. SONET. II.
ILlustrious Bride, more radiant and more Through my merits and thy
sanctification.
bright,
Then the eye of Noon, thrice fairer then the light;
Thou dearest offspring of my dying blood,
^ad treasure of my soul, why have thou stood
^arching so long in those ambitious beams?
Come, come and cool thee in these silver The Doctrine of the true Prophets.
streams!
^nshade thy face, cast back those golden Locks,
And I will make thee Teacher of my Congregations.
Mistress of my Flocks.
2.
O Thou, the Center of my choice desires,
In whom I rest, in whom my soul respires;
Thou art the flower of beauty, and I prize thee
Above the world, how e're the world despise thee:
The blind imagines all things black by kind;
Thou art as beautiful, as they are blind:
And as the fairest troops of Pharoes steeds
Exceed the rest, so Thou the rest exceeds.
3.
THy Thy most visible parts.
cheek (the garden where fresh beauty pla^^^
Her choicest flowers) no adorning wants;
There wants no relish of Sanctification.
diviner grace,
To sum compleatnesse, in so sweet a face;
Thy Neck, without a blemish, without blot,
Than pearl's more orient, clear from stain or spot;
Thy Gemms and Jewels, full of curious art,
Imply the sacred treasures of thy heart.
4.
THe Sun-bright glory of thy resounding fame,
Adds glory, to the glory of thy Name;
The more's thy honor (Love) the more thou striv'st
To honor me; thou gainest what thou giv'st:
My Father (whom our Contract has made thine)
Will give thee large endowments of The riches of his holy Spirit.
divine,
(...) everlasting treasure; Thus by me
Thou shall be rich, that am thus rich, in thee.
BRIDE. SONET. III.
OH, how my soul is ravished with the joys
That spring like fountains from my tru-loves voice
(...) cordial are his lips! How sweet his tongue!
Each word, he breathes, is a melodious song;
(...) absent (ah) how is my glory dim!
(...) have no beauty, not derived from Him;
What e're I have, from Him alone, I have,
And he takes pleasure in those gifts he gave*
2.
AS fragrant Myr^h, within the bosom hid,
Sents more delicious, than (before) it did,
And yet receives no sweetness from that breast,
That proves the sweeter for so sweet a guest;
Even so the favor of my dearest Spouse,
Thus prized and placed in my heart, endowes
My ardent soul with sweetness, and inspires
With heavenly ravishment, my rapt desires.
3.
WHo ever smelt the breath of morning flowers,
New sweet'nd with the dash of twilight shoures,
Of pounded Amber, or the flowring Thyme,
Or purple violets, in their proudest prime,
Or swelling Clusters, from the Cypress tree?
So sweet's my Love; I far more sweet is He:
So fair, so sweet, that Heavens bright eye is dim,
And flowers have no sent, compared with Him.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET. IIII.
O Thou, the joys of my sufficed heart,
The more thou think me fair, the more thou art;
Look in the Crystal Mirrours of mine eyes,
And view thy beauty; there thy beauty lies:
See there, th'unmated glory of thy Face,
Well mixed with Spirit, and divinest grace;
The eyes of Doves, are not so fair, as The holy Prophets.
thine:
O, how those eyes, inflame these eyes of mine!
BRIDE. SONET V.
MOst radiant, and refulgent Lamp of light,
Whose midday beauty, yet never found a night,
It Is thou, it is only thou art fair; from Thee
Reflect those Thy holy Spirit.
rays, that have enlightened me,
And as bright Cinthia's borrowed beams do shine
From Titan's glory, so do I, from thine;
So daily flourishes our fresh delight,
In daily In giving grace and receiving glory.
giving, and receiving light.
2.
NOr does thy glory shine to me alone;
What place, wherein thy glory has not shone
But O, how fragrant with rich odor, smells
That The Congregation of Saints.
sacred House, where thou my true Love dwells?
(...) is it strange: How can those places be
(...) filled with sweetness, if possessed with thee!
(...) heart's a Heaven, for thou art in that heart,
(...) presence makes a Heaven, where e're thou art.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET VI.
THou sovereign Lady of my select desires,
(...) I, I am He, whom thy chaste soul admires:
(...) Rose, for smell, the Lily to the eye,
(...) so sweet, is not so fair as I:
(...) veiled beautie's not the glorious prize
Of common sight: In inward graces.
within, my beauty lies,
(...) ne'rethelesse, (...) is outword glory.
my glory were but small,
(...) should want, to honor thee with all.
2.
NOr do I boast my excellence alone,
But thine (dear spouse) as who^, the world has none
(...) to faith, so pure in love, as whom
(...) not a Bride, so fits so chaste a Grome;
(...) as the fairest Lily does exceed
(...) fruitless Bramble, or the foulest weed,
(...) (my love) do thou exceed the rest,
^^^fect beauty of a loyal breast.
BRIDE. SONET VII.
^Ooke how the fruitful tree (whose lade^ bough^
With swelling pride, crown Autumnes smiling (brows)
Surpasses idle shrubs, even so in worth,
My love transcends the worthies of the earth:
He was my shore, in shipwreck; and my shelter,
In storms; my shade, when I began to swelter;
If hungry, he was Food; and if oppressed
With wrongs, my Advocate; with toil, my rest.
2
I Thirsted; and full charged to the brinke,
He gave me The holy Scriptures.
bowls of Nectar, for my drink
And in his sides, he broacht me (for a sign
Of dearest love) a Sacramental wine;
He freely gave; I freely drank my fill;
The more I drank, the more remained still:
Did never Soldier, to his Colors prove
More chaste, than I, to so entire a Love.
3.
O How his beauty sets my soul on fire!
My spirits languish, with extreme desire;
Desires exceeding limits, are too lavish,
And wanting means to be effected, ravish;
Then let thy Thy sweet promises.
breath, like flaggons of strong wine
Releeve and comfort this poor heart of mine;
For I am sick, till time (that does delay
Our Marriage) bring our joyful Marriage day.
4.
TIll then, O let my dearest Lord, by whom,
These pleasing pains of my sweet sorrows com^
(...) for me his vows, and with his due resort,
(...) me, to make the sullen time seem short:
(...) his sweet presence, may I still be blessed,
(...) barred from whom, my soul can find no rest;
(...) let all times be prosperous, and all places
(...) witness to our undefiled Embraces.
5.
ALl you, whose seeming favors have professed
The true affection of a loyal breast,
^^ge you all by the true love you bear
(...) friendship, or what else ye count most dear,
^isturbe ye not my Love, O do not reive
(...) of his joys, that is so apt to grieve;
(...) not to break his quiet slumbers, lest
(...) rouse a raging Lion from his rest.
(...) not his spirit with your sins.
6.
Hark, hark, I hear that thrice-celestial voic^
Wherein my spirits, rapt with joys, rejoice;
^^ice, that tells me, my beloved's nie;
(...) the Music, by the Majesty:
(...) he comes; It Is not my (...) imperfections of my present state.
blemished face
(...) slack the swiftness of his winged pace;
^^old he comes; His Trumpet does proclaim;
^^comes with speed; A truer love never came.
7
BEhold the fleetnesse of his nimble feet:
The Roe-Bucke, and the Heart were never so fleet,
The word I spoke, flew not so speedy from me,
As He, the treasure of my soul comes to me,
He stands behind my wall, as if in doubt
Of welcome: Ah, this The weakness of my flesh.
Wall debarres him out;
O, how injurious is this Wall of sin,
That bars my Lover out, and bolts me in!
The BRIDE in the person of the BRIDEGROOM. SONET VIII.
Hark, hark, me thinks I hear my true love say
Break down that envious bar and come away
Arise (my dearest Spouse) and dispossess
Thy soul of doubtful fears, nor overpresse
Thy tender spirits, with the dull despair
Of thy demerits: (Love) thou art as fair,
As Earth will suffer: Time will make thee clearer,
Come forth (my love) then whom, my life's ne^^ dearer
2.
COme forth (my joy,) what bold affront of fear
Can fright thy soul, and I, thy Champion here
It Is I that call, it is I, thy Bridegroom, calls thee,
Be^ide it me, what ever evil befalls thee:
The winter of thy sharp Afflictions gone:
Why fear thou cold, and art so near the Sun
(...) thy Sun, if thou be cold, draw nearer:
(...) forth (my Love) then who^ my life's not dearer^
3.
COme forth (my dear) the spring of joys invite thee,
The The Elect.
flowers contend for beauty to delight thee
Their sweet ambition's only, which might be
(...) sweet, most fair, because most like to thee:
(...) Angels.
Birds (sweet Heralds of so sweet a Spring)
^arble high notes, and Hymeneans sing:
^^ing, with joy, to enjoy so sweet a Hearer:
Come forth (my love) the^ who^ my life's not dearer.
4
THe prosperous The Congregation of the faithful.
Vlne, which this dear hand did plant
Tenders due service to so sweet a Saint:
(...) hidden Clusters swell with sacred pride,
(...) To offer up the first (...) of obedience.
kiss the lips of so, so fair a Bride:
(...) in their leafes, they lurk, fearing to be
Discryde by any, till first seen by thee:
The clouds are past, the heavens cannot be clearer
Come forth (dear love) the^ who^ my lif's not dearer.
5.
MY Dove, who^ daily ^ Persecutions.
dangers teach new shifts,
That like a Dove, do haunt the secret clifts
Of solitary Rocks: How e're thou be
Reserved from others, be not strange to me,
Call me to rescue, and this brawnie Arm
Shall quell thy Foe, and fence thy soul, from harm;
Speak (Love,) Thy voice is sweet; what if thy face,
Be drencht with tears; each teare's a several grace.
6.
ALl you that wish prosperity and peace,
To crown our contract, with a long increase
Of future joys, O shield my simple Love
From those that seek her ruin, and remov
The base Opposers of her best designs;
Destroy the Foxes, that destroy her Vines;
Her Vines are fruitful, but her tender grapes
Are spoiled by Foxes, clad in humane shapes.
The BRIDE in her own person. SONET IX.
WHat greater joy can bless my soul, the^ this
That my beloved's mine, and I am his!
Our souls are knit; the world cannot untwine
The joyful union of his heart, and mine;
In him, I live; in him, my soul's possessed
With heavenly solace, and eternal rest:
Heaven only knows the bliss, my soul enjoyes,
Fond earth's too dull, to apprehend such joys.
2.
THou sweet perfection of my full delights,
Till that bright The day of Judgment.
Day, devoted to the rites
Of our solemnized Nuptials, shall come,
Come live with me, and make this heart thy Home:
(...) me not: Although my face appear
(...) and cloudie, yet my heart is (...) sanctification.
clear;
(...) haste: Let not the swift-foot Roe-bucke flee
(...) following Hounde so fast, as thou to me.
3.
^ Thought my Love had taken up his rest,
Within the (...) my soul.
secret Cabin of my breast;
(...) thought the closed curtains did immure
(...) gentle slumbers, but was too secure;
(...) (driven with love) to the false bed I By strict examination.
stepped
(...) view his slumbring beauty, as he slept,
(...) he was gone; yet plainly there was seen
The curious dint, where he had lately been,
4.
^^patient of his absence, thus bereaven
Of him, than whom, I had no other heaven,
(...) a while; not able to digest
So great a loss, to lose so fair a Guest:
I left no path untrac'd; no Amongst the wisest worldlings.
place ^nsought;
No secret Cell unsearcht; no way unthought;
I asked the shade, but shadows could not hide him;
I asked the World, but all the world denied him.
5.
MY jealous Love, distemp'red with distraction,
Made fierce with fear, unapt for satisfaction,
Aplyes fresh fuel, to my flaming fires,
With Eagles wings supplies my quick desires
Up to the walls I trampled, where I spide
The The Ministers of the word.
City watch, to whom with tears I cryde,
Ah gentle Watchmen, you aloft descry
What Is dark to us; did not my love pass by?
6
AT length, when dull despair had gained the ground
Of tired hopes, my faith fell in a swound;
But He, whose sympathising heart did find
The tyrant passion of my troubled mind,
Forthwith appeared: What Angels tongue can let
The world conceive our pleasures, when we met?
And till the joys of our espoused hearts
Be made At the resurrection.
co^pleat, the world never more shall part's.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET X.
NOw rests my love: Till now, her tender breast
Wanting her joy, could find no peace, no rest:
I charge you all by the true love you bear
To friendship, or what else you count most dear,
Disturb her not, but let her sleep her fill;
I charge you all upon your life's, be still,
O may that laboring soul, that lives oppressed
For me; in me, receive eternal rest.
2.
WHat curious face is this? what mortal birth
Can show a beauty, thus Through sanctification by my merits
unstained with earth!
What glorious Angel wanders thus alone,
From earths foul dungeon, to my fathers throne!
(...) is my love; my love that has denyde
The world, for me; It is my fairest Bride:
(...) fragrant is her breath! How heavenly fair
Her Angel face! Each glorifying the Air.
BRIDE. SONET XI.
O How I Am ^y heavenly contemplation.
ravished with eternal bliss!
Who e're thought heaven a joy co^par'd to this?
^ow do the pleasures of this glorious Face
Add glory to the glory of this place!
(...), how Kings Courts surmou^t poor Shepherds cells,
So this, the pride of Salom on excells,
(...) wreathes of glory crown his royal Head,
And troops of Angels wait upon his bed.
2.
THe Court of Princely Solomon was guarded
With able men at arms; their faith rewarded
^ith fading honors, subject to the fate
Of Fortune, and the jealous frowns of State;
(...) here the harmonious quire of heaven attend,
Those prize is glory, glory without end,
^^mixt with doubtings, or degenerous fear;
(...) greater Prince, than Solomon is here!
3.
THe Bridal bed of Princely Solomon,
(Whose beauty amazed the greedy lookers on,
Which all the world admired to behold)
Was but of Cedar; and her Sted of gold;
Her pillars silver, and her Canopie
Of silks, but richly stained with purple die;
Her curtains wrought in works, works rarely led
By the needles art, such was the bridal bed.
4.
SVch was the bridal bed, which Time, or Age
Durst never warrant from th'opprobrious rage
Of envious fate; Earths measure's but a minit;
Earth fades; all fades upon it; all within it;
O, but the glorie' of this diviner place,
No age can injure, nor yet Time deface;
Too bright an object, for weak eyes to bide,
Or tongues to express: Who ever saw't but did?
5.
WHo e're beheld the royal Crown, set on
The nuptial brows of Princely Solomon?
His glorious pomp, whose honor did display
The noysed triumphs of his Marriage day?
A greater Prince, than Solomon is here,
The beauty of whose Nuptials, shall appear
More glorious far transcending his, as far
As heavens bright lamp out-shines th'obscurest star
BRIDEGROOM. SONET XII.
HOw orient is thy Through the gifts of my spirit.
beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
Thy veiled The modesty and purity of thy judgment.
eyes outshine heavens greater light,
Unconquered by the shadie Cloud of night;
Thy curious Ornaments of necessary Ceremonies.
Tresses dangle, all unbound
With unaffected order, to the ground:
How orient is thy beauty! how divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth to thine!
2.
THy Ivory Sincere Ministers.
Teeth in whiteness do out-goe
The down of Swans, or winters driven snow
Those even proportions lively represent
The harmonious Music of unite consent,
Whose perfect whiteness, Time could never blot,
Nor age (the Canker of destruction) rot:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
3.
THe rubie Portalls of thy balanced Doctrine of thy holy Prophets.
words,
Send forth a welcome relish, which affords
A heaven of bliss, and makes the earth rejoice,
To hear the Accent of thy heavenly voice;
The maiden blushes of thy Cheeks, proclaim
A shame of guilt, but not a guilt of shame;
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine! Modest graces of the spirit.

4.
THy Magistrates.
neck (unbeautifyde with borrowed grace)
Is whiter than the Lillies of thy face,
(...) whiter may; for beauty, and for power,
It Is like the glory of David's princely Tower:
What vassal spirit could despair, or faint,
Finding protection from so sure a Saint?
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to Thine!
5.
THe deare-bought fruit of that forbidden Tree,
Was not so dainty, as thy Apples be,
These curious Apples of thy snowy The old and new Testaments.
breasts,
Wherein a Paradise of pleasure rests;
They breathe such life into the ravished The sanctified and zealous Reader.
Eye,
That the inflamed beholder cannot The second death.
dye:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to Thine!
6.
MY dearest Spouse, I Will I will withdraw my bodily presence.
hie me to my home,
And till that long-expected The day of judgment.
day shall come,
The light whereof, shall chase the night that shrouds
Thy veiled beauty, in these envious Infirmities of the flesh.
clouds;
Till then, I go, and in my Throne, provide
A glorious welcome, for my fairest Bride;
Chapplets of conquering Palm, and Laurel boughs
Shall crown thy Temples, and adorn thy brows.
7.
WOuld beauty feign be flattered with a grace
She never had? May she behold thy face:
Envy would burst, had she no other task,
Than to behold this face without a mask;
No spot, no venial blemish could she find,
To feed the famine of her ranc'rous mind;
Thou art the flower of beauties Crown, and they are
Much worse than foul, that think thee less than fair.
8
Fear not (my Love) for when those sacred bands
Of wedlock shall conjoyne our promised hands,
I Will come, and quit thee from this tedious This vale of misery.
place,
Where thou art forced to sojourne for a space;
No foreign Angle of the utmost Lands,
Nor seas Abyss shall hide thee from my hands;
No night shall shade thee from my curious eye,
I Will rouse the graves, although grim death stand by.
9.
ILlustrious beams shot from thy flaming Thine eye of Faith.
eye,
Made fierce with zeal, and sovereign Majesty
Have scorcht my soul, and like a fiery dart
Transfixt the Center of my wounded heart;
The Virgin swetnesse of thy heavenly grace
Has made mine eyes glad prisoners to thy face;
The beauty of thine eye balls has bereft
Me of my heart: O sweet, O sacred theft!
10.
O Thou, the dear Inflamer of mine eyes,
Life of my soul, and hearts eternal prize,
How delectable is thy love! How pure!
How apt to ravish, able to allure
A frozen soul, and with thy secret fire,
TO affect dull spirits with extreme desire.
How do thy joys (though in their greatest dearth)
Transcend the proudest pleasures of the earth!
11.
THy lips (my dearest spouse) are the full treasures
Of sacred Divine Harmony.
Poesy, whose heavenly measures
Ravish with joy the willing heart, that hears,
But strike a deafness in rebellious ears:
Thy words, like milk and Honey, do requite
The seasoned soul, with profit and delight:
Heavens higher Palace, and these lower places
Of dungeon-earth are sweetened with thy graces.
12.
MY Love is like a Garden, full of flowers,
Whose sunny banks, and choice of shady bowres
Give change of pleasures, pleasures walled about
With Armed Angels, to keep Ruin out;
And from her The two Testaments.
breasts ( Riddles to profane Readers.
enclosed from the ill
Of looser eyes) pure Celestial comforts.
Crystal drops distill,
The fruitful sweetness of whose gentle showers
Enrich her flowrs with beautie', and banks with flowrs
13.
MY Love is like a Paradise beset
With rarest gifts, whose fruits (but tender yet)
The world never tasted, dainties far more rare
Than Edens tempting Apple, and more fair:
Myrrh, Alloes, Incense, and the Cypress tree
Can boast no swetnesse, but is breathed from thee;
Dainties, for taste, and flowers, for the smell
Spring all from thee, whose sweets, all sweets excel.
BRIDE. SONET XIII.
O Thou (my dear) whose sweets, all sweets excel
From whom my fruits receive their taste, their smell
How can my thriving ^he faithful.
plants refuse to grow
Thus quickened with so sweet a The Sun of righteousness.
Sun as thou?
How can my flowers, which thy Ewers nourish
With showers of living waters, choose but flourish?
O thou, the spring, from whence these waters burst.
Did ever any taste thy streams, and thurst?
2.
AM I a Garden? May my flowers be
So highly honored to be smelt by thee;
Inspire them with thy sacred breath, and then
Receive from them, thy borrowed breath again,
Frequent thy Garden, whose rare fruit invites
Thy welcome presence, to his choice Delights;
Taste where thou list, and take thy full repaste,
Here Is that will please thy smell, thine eye, thy taste.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET XIIII.
THou sacred Center of my soul, in whom
I rest, behold thy wisht-for Love is come;
Refresht with thy delights, I have repasted
Upon thy Obedience.
pleasures; my full soul has tasted
Thy Strong works of Faith.
rip'ned dainties, and has freely been
Pleased with those fruits, that are (as yet) but The new fruits of the Spirit.
green
All you that love the honor of my Bride,
Come taste her Vineyards, and be deifi'de,
BRIDE. SONET XV.
IT was a To^ much security.
night, a night as dark, as foul,
As that black Error, that entranced my Soul,
When as my best beloved came and knocked
At my My heart.
dull gates, too too securely locked;
Vnbolt (said he) these churlish doors (my Dove,)
Let not false The pleasures of the Flesh.
slumbers bribe thee from thy Jove;
Hear him, that for thy gentle sake came hither,
Long injured by this Thy hard-hearted unkindness.
nights ungentle weather.
2.
Heard the voice, but the perfidious pleasure
Of my sweet slumbers, could not find the leisure
^ope my drowsy doors; my Spirit could speak
^ords fair enough, but ah, my flesh was weak,
(...) fond excuses taught me to betray
(...) sacred vows to a secure delay:
^^^^dious slumbers, how have you the might
(...) blind true pleasures, with a false delight!
3.
WHen as my Love, with often repeated knocks
Could not avail, shaking his dewy locks,
^^^ly displeased, he could no longer bide
(...) slight neglect, but went away denyde;
(...) sooner gone, but my dull soul discerned
(...) drowzie error; my grieved Spirit ^^pented.
yearn'd
(...) find him out; these seiled eyes that slept
(...) soundly, fast, awaked, much faster wept.
4.
THus raised, and roused from my deceitful rest*
^op'd my doors, where my departed Guest
(...) been; I thrust the churlish Portals from me
That so deny'de my dearest Bridegroom to me;
(...) when I smelt of my returned hand,
(...) soul was rapt, my powers all did stand
^^azed at the The sweetness of his graces.
sweetness they did find,
Which my neglected Love had left behind.
5.
I Opened my door* my Myrrhe^ distilling door,
But ah, my Guest was gone, had given me over:
What curious pen, what Artist can define
A matelesse sorrow? Such, ah, such was mine;
Doubts, and despair had of my life deprived me
Had not strong hope of his return revived me,
I sought, but he refused to appear;
I called, but he would not be heard, nor hear.
6.
THus, with the tyranny of grief distraught,
I ranged a round, no place I left unsought,
No care unasked; The False teachers.
watchmen of the City
With their false doctrines.
Wounded my soul, without remorse of pity
To virgin tears; They taught my feet to stray,
Whose steps were apt enough to lose their way;
With taunts and scorns they checked me, and derided
And called me Whore, because I walked unguided.
7.
YOu hallowed Virgins, you, whose tender hearts
Ere felt the impression of Divine Love.
Loves secret darts,
I charge you all, by the dear faith you owe
To Virgin pureness, and your vestall vow,
Commend me to my Love, if ere you meet him,
O tell him, that his lovesick spouse does greet him;
O let him know, I languish with desire
T^ enjoy that heart, that sets this heart on fire.
VIRGINS. SONET. XVI.
O Thou the fairest flower of mortal birth,
If such a beauty may be borne of earth,
^^gell or Virgin, which? or both in one,
^^gell by beauty, Virgin by thy moan,
^^y, who is He that may deserve these tears,
^hese precious drops? Who is it can stop his ears
(...) these fair lips? Speak Lady, speak at large,
^ho is it? For whom giv'st thou so strict a charge?
BRIDE. SONET XVII.
MY Love is the perfection of delight,
Roses, and Doves are not so red, so white;
^^patern'd beauty summoned every grace
(...) the composure of so sweet a face;
(...) body is a Heaven, for in his breast
^he perfect Essence of a God does rest;
^he brighter eye of Heaven did never shine
^^an another glory, so divine.
2.
HIs His Dietie.
Head is far more glorious, to behold,
Than fruitful Ophyres often refined gold,
It Is the rich Magazen of secret treasure,
^hence Graces spring in unconsined measure;
(...) curled and dagling His Humanity.
Tresses do proclaim
N^zarite, on whom never Razor came.
Whose Raven-blacke color gives a curious relish
To that which beauty did so much imbellish.
3.
LIke to the eyes of Doves are his fair His judgments and care of his Church.
eyes,
Wherein stern Justice, mixed with mercy, lies;
His eyes are simple, yet Majesticall,
In motion nimble, and yet chaste withal,
Flaming like fire, and yet burn they not,
Unblemished, undistained with a spot,
Blazing with precious beams, and to behold,
Like two rich Diamonds in a frame of gold.
4.
HIs cheeks are like two fruitful beds ore-grown
With Aromaticke flowers newly blown,
Whose odours, beauty, please the smell, the sight,
And doubling pleasures, double the delight:
His The discovery of him in his word.
lips are like a crystal spring, from whence
Flow sweetened streams of sacred Eloquence,
Whose drops into the ear distilled, do give
Life to His promises.
the dead, true joys to Those that die to sin.
them that live. That live to righteousness.

5.
HIs hands are decked with rings of His actins.
gold; the rings
With costly Jewels, fitting none but Kings. With pureness.

Which (of themselves though glorious, yet) receive
More glory from those fingers, than they give;
His His secret counsels.
breasts like Ivorie, circled round about
With Inwardly glorious.
veins, like Sapphires, winding in and out,
Whose beauty is (though darkened from the eye)
Full of divine, and secret Majesty.
6.
HIs His ways constant, firm, and pure.
legs like purest Marble, strong and white,
Of curious shape, (though quick) unapt for flight:
His Feet (as gold that is often refined) are
Like his upright proceedings, pure and fair;
His His whole carriage.
Port is Princely, and his Stature tall,
And, like the Cedar, stout, yet sweet withal:
O, who would not repose his life, his bliss,
upon a Base so fair, so firm as this?
7
HIs mouth! but stay, what need my lips be lavish
In choice of words, when one alone will ravish?
(...) shall, in brief, my ruder tongue discover
The speaking Image of my absent Lover?
Then let the curious hand of Art refine
The race of Virtues moral, and divine,
From whence, by heaven let there extracted be
^ perfect Quintessence; even such is He.
VIRGINS. SONET XVIII.
THrice fairer than the fairest, whose sad tears,
And smiling words, have charmed our eyes, our ears;
Say, whither is this prize of beauty gone,
More fair than kind, to let thee weep alone?
Thy tempting lips have whet our dull desire,
And till we see him, we are all on fire:
We Will find him out, if thou will be our guide:
The next way to the Bridegroom, is the The Church is the way to Christ.
Bride.
BRIDE. SONET XIX.
IF error lead not my dull thoughts amiss,
My Genius tells me, where my true Love is;
He Is busy lab^ring on his Congregation of the faithful.
flowery banks,
Giving graces.
Inspiring sweetness, and Receiving glory.
receiving thanks,
Watring those plants, whose tender roots are Despairing souls.
dry,
And pruning such, whose Crests aspire Not yet thoroughly humbled.
too high,
Transplanting, grafting, reaping fruits from some,
And covering others, that are Strengthening the weak in spirit.
newly come.
2.
WHat if the frailty of my feebler part,
Locked up the Portalls of my drowsy heart?
He knows, the weakness of the flesh incumbers
The Unwilling spirit, with sense-bereaving slumbers,
My hopes assure me, in despite of this,
That my Beloved's mine, and I am his:
My hopes are firm (which time shall never remove)
That he is mine, by faith; I, his, by love.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET XX.
THy timely grief, (my teares-baptized Love)
Co^pels mine ears to hear; thy tears, to move;
Thy blubbered beauty, to mine eye appears
More bright than 'twas: Such is the The force of repentance.
strength of tears:
^eautie, and Terror, meeting in thine eye,
Have made thy face the Throne of Majesty,
Those awful beams, the proudest heart will move
To love for fear, until it fear for love.
2.
Repress those flames, that furnace from thine eye,
They ravish with too bright a Tyranny;
Thy fires are too-too fierce: O turn them from me,
They pierce my soul, and with their rays overcome me,
Thy curious * Tresses dangle, all unbound,
^ith unaffected order, to the ground:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth to thine!
3.
THy Ivory Sincere Ministers.
Teeth in whiteness do out-goe
The down of Swans, or Winters driven snow,
Whose even proportions lively represent
The harmonious Music of unite consent;
Whose perfect whiteness, Time could never blot,
Nor age (the envious Worm of Ruin) rot:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth to thine!
4
THy Temples, are the Temples of chaste love,
Where beauty sacrificed her milke-white Dove,
Upon whose Azure paths, are always found
The heaven-borne Graces dancing in a round:
Thy maiden Thy visible parts.
Blushes gently do proclaim
A shame of guilt, but not a guilt of shame:
How orient is thy be^^ty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth to thine! Modesty, and zeal.

5.
YOu, you brave spirits, whose imperial hand
Enforces, what your looks cannot command,
Bring forth your pampered Queens, the lustful prize
And curious wrecks of your imperious eyes;
Surround the Circle of the earth, and levy
The fairest Virgins in Loves fairest bevie;
Then take from each, to make one perfect grace,
Yet would my Love outshine that borrowed face.
6.
I Thou art she, corrivalld with no other,
Thou glorious Daughter of thy glorious Mother
The new lerusalem, whose virgin birth
Shall deifie the The pure in heart.
Virgins of the earth:
The Virgins of the earth have seen thy beauty,
And stood amazed, and in a prostrate duty
Have sued to kiss thy hand, making thine eyes
Their Lamps to light them, til the Bridegroom rise.
7.
Hark, how the virgins hallowed with thy fire,
And wonder-smitten with thy beams, admire,
Who, who is this (say they) whose cheeks resemble
^^^ora's blush, whose eye heavens lights dissemble?
Whose face is brighter than the silent Lamp
That lights the earth, to breathe her nightly damp;
Upon whose brow sits dreadful Majesty,
The frown whereof commands a victory.
8
Fair Bride, why was thy troubled soul dejected
When I was absent? was my faith suspected,
Which I so firmly plighted? Could thou think
My love could shake, or such a vow could shrink?
I did but walk among my tender Plants,
To smell their odours, and supply their wants,
To see my Stocks, so lately grifted, sprout,
Or if my vines began to burgen out.
9.
THough gone was I, My Spirit.
my heart was in thy breast,
Although to thee (percha^ce) an unknown guest
'Twas that, that gave such wings to thy desire,
TO enjoy thy love, and set thy soul on fire;
But my return was quick, and with a mind
More nimble (yet more constant) than the wind,
I came, and as the winged shaft does fly
With undiscerned speed; even so did I.
10.
Return, (O then return) thou child of Peace
To thy first joys, O let thy tears surcease;
Return thee to thy Love; let not the Security.
night
With flattering Worldly pleasures.
slumbers, tempt thy true delight:
Return thee to my bosom, let my breast
Be still thy Tent; Take there eternal rest;
Return, O thou, in whose enchanted eye
Are darts enough, to make an army fly.
11.
Fair Daughter of the highest King, how sweet
Are the unaffected graces of thy Thy ways.
Feet!
From every step, true Majesty does spring,
Fitting the Daughter of so high a King:
Thy Wast is circled with a The girdle of truth.
Virgin Zone,
Imbellisht round with many a precious The precious gifts of the Spirit
Stone.
^^erein thy curious Workman did fulfill
(...) utmost glory of his diviner skill.
12.
THy Thereby there is a receipt of spiritual Conceptions.
Navell, where thy holy Embrion does
Receive sweet nourishment, and heavenly growth
^^ke a Crystal spring, whose fresh supply
^^living waters, Sun, nor Drought can dry:
(...) Increase of the faithful.
fruitful Womb is like a winnow'd heap
(...) purest grain, which heave^s blessed hand did reap,
^^th Lillies fenced: True Emblem of rare treasure
Those grain denotes increase; whose Lillies pleasure.
13.
THy dainty The old and new Testament.
Breasts, are like fair twins, both swelling
In equal Majesty; in hue excelling
(...) new-falne snow upon the untroden mountains,
From whence there flows, as from exub'rous fountains
^^^ers of heavenly Nectar, to allay
The holy thirst of souls: Thrice happy they,
^^d more than thrice, whose blessed affections bring
Their thirsty palats to so sweet a Spring.
14.
THy Magistrates.
Neck does represent an Ivory Tower,
In perfect pureness, and united power,
Thine Teachers.
Eyes (like pooles at a frequented gate
For every commer, to draw water at)
Are common treasures, and like crystal glasses,
Shwes each his lively visage, as he passes.
Thy Glorious in all parts.
Nose, the curious Organ of thy Sent,
Wants nothing more, for use, for ornament.
15.
THy The Ceremonies of the Church.
Tyres of gold (inricht with glorious gems,
Rare Diamonds, and princely Diadems)
Adorn thy brows, and with their native worth
Advance thy glory, and set thy beauty forth:
So perfect are thy Graces, so divine,
And full of heaven, are those fair looks of thine,
That I Am inflamed with the double fire
Of thy full beauty, and my fierce desire.
16.
O Sacred Symmetrie! O rare connection
Of many perfects, to make one perfection!
O heavenly Music, where all parts do meet
In one sweet strain, to make one perfect sweet!
O glorious members, whose each several feature
Divine, compose so, so divine a Creature!
Fair soul, as all thy parts united be
Entire, so summed are all my joys in thee.
17.
THy curious Fabric, and erected stature
Is like the generous Palm, whose lofty nature,
In spite of envious violence, will aspire,
Then most suppressed, the more it mou^ts the higher:
Thy lovely breasts, (whose beauty reinvites
My often remembrance to her often delights)
Are like the swelling Clusters of the vine;
So full of sweetness are those breasts of thine.
18.
AR^ thou my Palm? My busy hand shall nourish
Thy fruitful roots, and make thy branches flourish:
(...) thou my vine? My skillful arm shall dress
Thy Despairing souls.
dying plants; my living springs shall bless
Thy Young Converts.
infant Buds; my blasting breath shall quell
Opposers of the Truth.
Presumptuous weeds, and make thy clusters swell:
And all that love thee, shall attain the favor
To taste thy sweetness, and to smell thy savor.
19.
THose Oracles that from thy lips proceed,
With sweet Evangels, shall delight and feed
(...) attentive ear, and like the Trumpets voice
(...) faint hearts, but make brave spirits rejoice:
Thy breath, whose Dialect is most divine,
^^cends quick flames, where ember'd sparks but shine;
(...) strikes the Pleaders Rhet'ricke with derision,
And makes the dullest soul a Rhetorician.
BRIDE. SONET XXI.
MY faith, not merits, has assured thee, mine;
Thy Love, not my desert has made me, thine:
Unworthy I, whose drowsy soul rejected
Thy precious favors, and (secure) neglected
Thy glorious presence, how am I become
A Bride besitting so divine a Groom!
It is no merit, no desert of mine,
Thy love, thy love alone, has made me thine.
2.
SInce then the bounty of thy dear election
Has styled me thine, O let the sweet reflection
Of thy illustrious beams, my soul inspire,
And with thy spirit, inflame my hot desire;
Unite our souls; O let thy Spirit rest
And make perpetual home within my breast;
Instruct me so, that I may gain the skill,
To suite my service to thy sacred will.
3.
COme, come (my souls preserver) thou that art
The United joys of my united heart,
Come, let us visit with the morning light,
Our prosperous Congregation of the faithful.
Vines; with mutual delight
Lt's view those grapes, whose clusters being By affliction.
pressed
Shall make rich wines, to serve your Marriage feast,
That by the thriving plants it may appear,
Our joys perfecting Marriage draws near.
4.
BEhold, my new Young Convers.
disclosed flowers present
Before thy gates, their tributary sent;
Reserve themselves for Garlands, that they may
Adorn the Bridegorme, on his Marriage day:
My Assemblies.
Garden's full of Faithful.
Trees, and every Tree
Laden with Faith and good works.
fruit, which I devote to thee;
Eternal joys betide that happy guest,
That tastes the dainties of the Bridegroomes feast.
5.
O Would to God mine eyes (these fainting eyes,
Whose eager appetite could never devise
A dearer object, might but once behold
My Love (as I am, clad in fleshly mold,
That each may corporally converse with other
As friend with friend; as sister with her brother,
O how mine eyes could welcome such a sight!
How would my soul dissolve with o're-delight!
6.
THen should this hand conduct my fairest Spouse,
To taste a banquet at my mothers The universal Church.
house;
Our fruitful Garden should present thine eyes
With sweet delights; her trees should sacrifice
Their early fruits to thee; our tender Vine
Should cheer thy palate with her unprest wine;
Thy hand should teach my living Plants to thrive;
And such, as are a dying, to revive.
7.
THen should my soul enjoy within this breast,
A holy Sabbath of eternal Rest;
Then should my cause that suffers through despite
Of error, and rude Ignorance, have right;
Then should these Tears and sorrows.
streams, whose tides so often rise,
Be ebbed away, from my suffused eyes;
Then should my spirits filled with heavenly mirth,
Triumph over Hell, and find a heaven on earth.
8.
ALL you that wish the bountiful increase
Of dearest pleasures, and divinest peace,
I charge you all (if ought my charge may move
Your tender hearts) Not to vex and grieve his holy Spirit.
not to disturb my Love;
Vex not his gentle Spirit, nor bereave
Him of his joys, that is so apt to grieve;
Dare not to break his quiet slumbers, lest
You rouse a raging Lion from his rest.
9.
WHo ever loved, that ever loved as I,
That for his sake renounce my self, deny
The worlds best joys, and have the world forgone?
Who ever loved so dear, As I have done?
I sought my Love, and found him In humility.
lowly laid
Beneath the tree of Love^ in whose sweet shade
He rested; there his eye sent forth the fire,
That first enflamed my amorous desire.
10.
MY dearest Spouse, O seal me on thy heart
So sure, that envious Earth may never part.
Our joined souls; let not the world remove
My chaste desiers from so choice a Love;
(...) O, my love's not slight, her flames are serious
^as never death so powerful, so imperious:
(...) jealous zeal is a consuming fire,
(...) burns my soul, through fear and fierce desire.
11.
^Ires may be quenched; and flames, though never so great,
With many drops shall faint, and lose their heat:
(...) these quick fires of love, the more suppressed,
^he more they flame in my inflamed breast;
^ow dark is Honor! how obscure and dim
(...) bright glory, but compared with him!
(...) ^oule is Beauty! what a toil is Pleasure*
(...) poor is Wealth! how base a thing is treasure!
12.
Have a The Church of the Gentiles then uncalled.
Sister, which by thy divine
(...) bounteous Grace, our Marriage shall make thine;
(...) is mine own, mine only Sister, whom
(...) Mother bare the youngest of her womb:
She Is yet a Vncall'd to the truth.
child, her beauty may improve,
Her breasts are small, and yet too green for love;
When time and years shall add perfection to her,
Say (dearest Love) what honor will thou do her?
BRIDEGROOM. SONET. XXII.
IF she be fair, and with her beauty, prove
As chaste, as loyal to her virgin-Love,
As thou have been, then in that high degree
I Will honor her, as I have honored thee:
Be she as constant as her Vestall vow,
And true to her devoted faith, as thou,
I Will crown her head, and fill her hand with power,
And give a Kingdom to her for a Dower.
BRIDE. SONET. XXIII.
When time shall ripen these her green desires,
And holy Love shall breathe her heavenly fires
Into her Virgin breast, her heart shall be
As true to love, as I am true to thee:
O, when thy boundless bounty shall conjoyne
Her equall-glorious Majesty, with mine,
My joys are perfect, then, in sacred bands
Wedlock shall couple our espoused hands.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET. XXIIII.
I Am thy Gardener, Thou my fruitful Vine,
Whose rip'ned clusters swell with richest Wine,
The Vines of So^omon were not so fair,
His Grapes were not so precious, as thine are;
His Vines were subject to the vulgar will
O^ hired ^ands, and mercinary skill;
Corrupted Carles were merry with his Vines,
And at a price returned their bartered wines.
2.
But mine is a Vineyard, which no ruder hand
Shall touch, subjected to my sole command,
My self with this laborious arm, will dress it,
(...) presence with a busy eye shall bless it;
^^rincely So^omon, thy thriving Vine
(...) not so saire, so bountiful as mine;
(...) greedy sharers claim an earned hire,
(...) mine is reserved, and to my self entire.
3.
O Thou, that dwell In the great Congregation.
where the eternal fame
Of my renown so glorifies my name,
(...) Bride, in whose celestial tongue,
(...) sacred Spells t'enchant the ruder throng;
^et thy lips, like a perpetual story;
^^ulge my graces, and declare my glory;
Direct those hearts, that error leads astray,
Dissolve the The penitent.
Wax, but make obdure the The presumptuous.
Clay.
BRIDE. SONET XXV.
MOst glorious Love, and honorable Lord,
My heart's the vowed servant of thy Word,
But I am weak, and as a tender Vine.
Shall fall, unpropt by that dear hand of thine:
Assist me therefore that I may fulfill
What thou commandst, and then command thy will;
O leave thy Sacred Spirit in my breast,
As earnest of an everlasting Rest.
The end.
SIONS ELEGIES. Wept BY JEREMY THE PROPHET; And PERIPHRAS'D By FRA. QVARLES.

LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER. 1632.

To the READER.
IF the ruins of Troy, Rome, Thebes, or Carthage have been thought a subject,
worthy the employment of more serious Pens, to entaile the remembrance thereof
(...) Posterity, how much more worthy the pains ^^livelier pen then mine, is
this ancient, most (...), and never enough to be lamented deso^^^^^, and
Captivity of Jerusalem; Jerusalem, (...) holy City of GOD; Jerusalem, the type
of (...) Catholic Church?

After eighteen months siege, in the eleventh (...) of Zedekiah, the ninth
day of the fourth (...), (which was the eighteenth year of Ne^^hadonozor over
Babylon) the Princes of ^^bylon surprised and took this brave City of
^^^usalem: presently after which, Nabuzaradan (...) General of the Babylonian
Army (comman^^^ by Nebuchadonozor) spoiled the Temple, ^^ried away the Vessels
of Gold and Silver, that (...) consecrated to Gods service, and the great (...)
given by King Solomon, and burned the ^^^ple, the first day of the next month,
which was one and twenty days after the surpriz^^ (...) 470. years six
months, and ten days after the foundation thereof; 1062. years, six
months* ten days after the departure of the people out of Egypt; ^950.
years, six months, ten days after the Deluge: and 3513. years, six
months, ten days after the Creation of Adam. Thus, and then, was this City
of Jerusalem taken and for seventie years, remained the jews in this
Captivity: And this, in Brief, is the general occasion why, and the time
when these Lamentations were compased. Reader, I tender to thy consideration
two things: First, the Penman: Secondly, the Art and Method of this Threnodia
As for the first, It was penned by Jeremy the Prophet, the son of Hilkiah, a
Priest: and undoubt^dly endighted by the Spirit of God; some think it was
written, when the Prophet was in prison: others, when he was with Godoliah at
Maspath: but whether at the one place or at the other, it is not much material
to discourse.

Secondly, as touching the Art and Method, it is short and concise, as being
most natural to so lamentable a subject. Cicero says, Lamentationes debent
esse concisae^ and breves* quia ^ito lachryma exarescit, and difficile est
auditores aut lectores, in illo affectu summae commiserationis, diu tenere. The
Method is truly elegious, not bound to any ordinary set form, but wildly
depending upon the sudden subject, that new griefs present, and indeed the
deepest sorrows cannot be, but distracted from all rules of method, the
neglect of which, is venial in such ejulations as these, as which, in all the
Scriptures, there is none so copious, none so ardent; concerning which Gregory
Nazianzene confesses, Threnos Ieremiae nunquam a se siccis oculis lectos esse.
Yet some think there is a Method kept, but too fine and intricate, for our
gross apprehensions: touching this point, Saint Ambrose lib. 8. Epist. adjust.
says, Demus, eas secundum artem non scripsisse, at certe secundum gratiam
scripsisse fatendum est, quae omnem artem long superat, and with this, I rest.

You shall observe, that the four first Chapters of these Lamentations carry a
strict order, in the Original, for every Verse throughout every Chapter begins
with a several letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, except the third Chapter,
wherein the first and every third Verse only is tied to a Letter, and
continues the Alphabet through; which for me the Prophet used, partly for
Eloquence, partly for Memory sake; meaning either literally thus, that it ought
to be perfect as the Alphabet, in memory; or Hieroglyphically thus, that as the
Alphabet is the Radix of all words, so the miseries of the Jews, were the
combination of all miseries.

For the same Causes, I likewise here in my Periphrase, have observed the same
form, and continue the Alphabet in English, as the Prophet did in the Hebrew,
desirous to be his shadow, as much as I can.

It appears by the strictness of the Order, that these Lamentations were
Originally writ in verse and as some think in Sapphicks, but many of our
learned Neotericks deny, that any writings of the Jews carry, now, any direct
or certain Laws of Poesy, though (they confess) some ruinous Accents, here
and there discovered, makes them imagine, they writ some things in verse; but
now, it seems that God, in dispersing them, has likewise dissolved, and
struck dumb their music.

Farewell.
TO THE TRVE THEANTHROPOS, Jesus Christ, THE SAVIOVR OF THE WORLD: His Servant
implores his favorable assistance.
THou Alpha and Omega, before whom,
Things past and present and things yet to come,
Are all alike; O prosper my designs,
And let thy spirit enrich my feeble lines;
Revive my passion; let mine eye behold
Those sorrows present, which were wept of old:
Strike sad my Soul, and give my Pen, the Art
To move; and Me, an understanding heart.
O, let the Accent of each word, make known,
I mix the Tears of Sion, with mine own:
Preserve all such, as bear true hearts to Sion.
We are thy Lambs, O, be thou still our Lion.
SIONS ELEGIES.
Threnodia. I.
ELEG. 1.
AH grief of Times! Ah, sable times of Grief,
Whose torments find a voice, but no relief!
Are these the buildings? These the tower and state,
That all the amazed Earth stood wondering at?
Is this that City, whose eternal Glory,
Could find no period, for her endless story?
And is she come to this? Her Buildings razed,
Her Towers burnt? Her Glory thus defaced?
O sudden Change! O world of Alterations!
She, she that was the Prince, the Queen of Nations
See, how she lies, of strength, of all, bereiv'd,
Now paying Tribute, which she once received.
ELEG. 2.
BEhold! her eyes, those glorious eyes, that were
Like two fair Suns, in one celestial Sphaere,
Whose radiant beams did, once, reflect so bright,
Are now eclipsed, and have lost their light,
And seem like Islands, about which appears
A troubled Ocean, with a Tide of Tears;
Her servant Cities (that were once at hand,
And bowed their servile necks to her command,)
Stand all aloof, as strangers to her moan,
And give her leave to spend her tears alone,
Her neighbors flatter, with a false relief,
And with a kiss, betray her to her grief.
ELEG. 3.
COmpast around with Seas of briny tears,
Judah laments, distraught with double fears;
Even as the fearful Partridge, to excuse her
From the fierce Gos-hawk, that too close pursues her,
Falls in a Covert, and her self does cover her,
From her unequal Foe, that sits above her:
Mean while the treason of her quick Retrivers,
Discovers novell dangers, and delivers
Her to a second fear, whose double fright
Finds safety nor in staying, nor in flight;
Even so is Judah vexed, with change of woes,
Betwixt her homebred, and her foreign Foes.
ELEG. 4.
DId not these sacred Cawsies, that are leading
To Sion, late seem paved, with often treading?
Now secret Dens, for lurking Thieves to meet,
Vnprest, unless with sacrilegious feet;
Sion the Temple of the highest God,
Stands desolate, her holy steps untrod;
Her Altars are defaced, her Virgin fires
Surcease, and with a stink, her snuff expires; cries,
Her Priests have changed their Hymus to sighs and cries,
Her Virgins weep forth Rivers from their eyes:
O Sion, thou that were the Child of mirth,
Art now the scorn, and Byword of the Earth*
ELEG. 5.
Increased in power, and high Chevisance
Of arms, thy Tyrant foem en do advance
Their crafty crests; He, he that was thy father,
And crowned thee once with blessings, now does gather
His troops to work thy end; him, who advan^'t thee
To be Earths Queen, thy sins have bent against thee
Strange spectacle of Grief! Thy tender fry,
Whom childhood taught no language, but their cry
To Express their infant grief, these, wretched these
By force of childish tears, could not appease
The ruthlesse sword, which deaf to all their cries,
Did drive them Captives from their mothers eyes.
ELEG. 6.
Fair Virgin Sion, where (ah) where are those
Pure cheeks, wherein the Lilly, and the Rose
So much contended lately for the place,
Till both compounded in thy glorious face?
How have thou blear'd those sun-bright eyes of thine
Those beams, the royal Magazens of divine
And sacred Majesty, from whose pure light,
The purblind worldlings did receive their sight,
Thy fearful Princes, leave their fencelesse towers,
And fly like Hearts, before their swift pursuers;
Like light-foot Hearts they fly, not knowing where,
Pricked on with Famine, and distracted Fear.
ELEG. 7.
Galled with her grief. Jerusalem recalls
To mind her lost delights, her Festivalls,
Her peaceful freedom, and full joys, in vain
Wishing, what Earth cannot restore again;
Succor she sought, and begged, but none was there
To give the Alms of one poor trickling tear;
The scornful lips of her amazed Foes,
Deride the grief, of her disastrous woes;
They laugh, and lay more ample torments on her,
Disdain to look, and yet they gaze upon her,
Abuse her Altars, hate her Offerings,
Profane her Sabbaths, and her holy Things.
ELEG. 8.
Had thou ( Jerusalem) O, had thy heart
Been loyal to his love, whose once thou were,
O, had the beams of thy unvailed eye
Continued pure; had thou been nice, to try
New pleasures, thus thy Glory never had wasted,
Thy Walls, till now, like thy Reproach, had lasted:
Thy Lovers, whose false beauties did entice thee,
Have seen thee naked, and do now despise thee;
Drunk with thy wanton pleasures, they are fled,
And scorn the bounty of thy loathed bed;
Lest to thy guilt (the servant of thy sin)
Thou sham'st to show, what once, thou gloriedst i^.
ELEG. 9.
Jerusalem is all infected over
With Leprosy, whose filth, no shade can cover,
Puffed up with pride, unmindfull of her end,
See how she lies, devoid of help, or friend.
Great Lord of Lords (whose mercy far transce^ds
Thy sacred Justice) whose full Hand attends
The cries of empty Ravens, bow down thine eare^
To wretched Sion, Sion drowned in tears;
Thy hand did plant her, (Lord) she is thy vine,
Confound her foes: they are her foes, and thine:
Show wonted favor to thy holy hill.
Rebuild her walls, and love thy Sion still.
ELEG. 10.
KNees, falsely bent to Dagon, now defile
Her wasted Temple rudely they dispoile
The Abused Altars, and no hand releeves;
Her house of prayer is turned a den of thieves
Her costly Robes, her sacred treasure stands,
A willing prey to sacrilegious hands,
Her Priests are slain, and in a lukewarm flood
Through every channel runs the Levites blood;
The hallowed Temple of the highest God,
Whose purer footsteps were not to be trod
With unprepared feet, before her eye,
Is turned a Grove, for base Idolatry.
ELEG. 11.
Lingering with Death and Famine, Judah groans,
And to the air, breathes forth her ayrie moanes,
Her fainting eyes wax dim, her cheeks grow pale,
Her wandering steps despair to speed, and fail,
She faints, and through her trembling lips, half dead,
She whispers often the holy name of bread:
Great God, let thy offended wrath surcease,
Behold thy servants, send thy servants peace,
Behold thy vassals, grovelling on the dust;
Be merciful (dear God) as well as just;
It Is thou, it is thou alone, that sent this grief,
It Is thou, it is thou alone, can send relief.
ELEG. 12.
MY tongu's in labor with her painful birth,
That finds no passage; Lord, how strange a dearth
Of words, concomitates a world of woes!
I neither can conceal, nor yet disclose:
You weary Pilgrims, you whom change of Climes
Have tought you change of Fortunes, and of Times,
Stay, stay your feeble steps, and cast your eyes
On me, the Abstract of all miseries.
Say (Pilgrims) say, if e're your eyes beheld
More truer Iliades; more unparalleld,
And matelesse evils, which my offended God
Reulcerates, with his enraged Rod.
ELEG. 13.
NO humane power could no envious Art
Of mortal man, could thus subject my heart,
My glowing heart, to these imperious fires:
No earthly sorrow, but at length expires;
But these my Tyrant-torments do extend
To infinites, nor having ease, nor end;
Lo, I the Prisoner of the highest God,
Inth^ailed to the vengeance of his Rod,
Lie bound in fetters, that I cannot fly,
Nor yet endure his deadly strokes, nor die:
My joys are turned to sorrows, backed with fears,
And I (poor I) lie pickled up in tears.
ELEG. 14.
O! How unsufferable is the weight
Of sin! How miserable is their state,
The silence of whose secret sin conceales
The smart, till Justice to Revenge appeals!
How ponderous are my crimes, whose ample scroul
Weighs down the pillars of my broken Soul!
Their sour, masqu'd with sweetness, overswai'd me
And with their smiling kisses, they betrayed me,
Betrayed me to my Foes, and what is worse,
Betrayed me to my self, and heavens curse,
Betrayed my soul to an eternal grief,
Devoid of hope, for e're to find relief*
ELEG. 15.
Perplexed with change of woes, where ere I turn
My fainting eyes, they find fresh cause to mourn
My griefs move like the Planets, which appear
Changed from their places, constant to their sphaere
Behold, the earth-confounding arm of Heaven,
Has cowed my valiant Captains, and has driven
Their scattered forces up and down the street,
Like worried sheep afraid of all they meet;
My younger men, the seed of propagation,
Exile has driven from my divided Nation;
My tender Virgins have not escaped their rage,
Which neither had respect to youth, nor age.
ELEG. 16.
QVicke change of torments! equal to those crimes,
Which past unthought-of, in my prosperous times
From hence proceed my griefs, (ah me) from hence
My Spring-tyde sorrows have their influence;
For these, my soul^ dissolves, my eyes lament,
Spending chose tears, whose store will never be spent;
For these, my fainting spirits droepe, and melt
In anguish, such as never Mortal felt;
Within the selfsame flames, I freeze, and fry,
I roar for help, and yet no help is nigh;
My sons are lost, whose fortunes would relieve me,
And only such triumph, that hourly grieve me.
ELEG. 17.
REnt from the glory of her lost renown,
Sion laments; Her lips (her lips o'reflowne
With floods of tears) she prompteth how to break
New languages, instructs her tongue to speak
Elegious Dialects; She lowly bends
Her dusty knees upon the earth, extends
Her brawnlesse arms to them, whose ruthlesse eyes
Are red, with laughing at her miseries;
Naked she lies, deformed, and circumvented,
With troops of fears, unpitied, unlamented,
A loathsome draine for filth, despised, forlorn;
The scorn of Nations, and the child of scorn.
ELEG. 18.
Sour wages issue from the sweets of sin,
Heavens hand is just, this treacherous heart has bin
The author of my woes: It Is I alone;
My sorrows reap, what my foul sins have sown;
Often they cry'de to heaven, e're heaven replied,
And vengeance never had come, had they never cride;
All you that pass, vouchsafe your gracious ears,
To hear these cries; your eyes, to view these tears;
They are no heat-drops of an angry heart,
Or childish passions of an idle smart,
But they are Rivers, springing from an eye,
Whose streams, no joy can stop, no grief draw dry.
ELEG. 19.
TVrne where I list, new cause of woe presents
My poor distracted soul with new laments;
Where shall I turn? shall I implore my friends?
Ah, summer friendship, with the Summer ends;
In vain to them my groans, in vain my tears,
For harvest friends can find no winter ears;
Or shall I call my sacred Priests for aid?
Alas! my pined Priests are all betrayed
To Death, and Famine; in the streets they cried
For bread, and whilst they sought for bread, they died
Vengeance could never strike so hard a blow,
As when she sends an unlamented woe.
ELEG. 20.
VOuchsafe (great God) to turn thy tender eyes
On me poor wretch: Oh, let my midnight cries
(That never cease, if never stopped with tears)
Procure audience from thy gracious ears;
Behold thy creature, made by change of grief,
The barest wretch, that ever begged relief;
See, see, my soul is tortured on thy rack
My bowels tremble, and my heart strings crack;
Abroad, the sword with open ruin frights me;
At home, the secret hand of Famine smites me;
Strange fires of grief! How is my soul oppressed,
That finds abroad, no peace, at home, no rest!
ELEG. 21.
WHere, where art thou, O sacred Lamb of peace,
That promised to the heavy laden, ease?
Thee, thee alone, my often bended knee
Invokes, that have no other help, but thee;
My foes (amazed at my hoarse complaining)
Scoff at my often repeated cries, disdaining
To lend their prosperous hand, they hiss and smile,
Taking a pleasure to behold my spoil:
Their hands delight to bruize my broken reeds,
And still persist, to prick that heart that bleeds;
But there is a Day (if Prophets can divine)
Shall scourge their sins, as they have scourged mine.
ELEG. 22.
YOu noy some weeds, that lift your crests so high,
When better plants, for want of moisture die?
Think you to flourish ever? and (unspide)
To shoot the flowers of your fruitless pride?
If plants be cropped, because their fruits are small,
Think you to thrive, that bear no fruit at all?
Look down (great God) and from their places tear
These weeds, that suck the juice, should make us bear
Vndew'd with showers, let them see no Sun,
But feel those frosts, that thy poor pla^ts have done.
O cleanse thy Garden, that the world may know
We are the seeds, that thy right hand did sow.
Threnodia II.
ELEG. 1.
ALas! my torments, my distracted fears
Have no commerce, with reasonable tears:
How has Heavens absence darkened the renown
Of Sions glory! with one angry frown.
How has the Almighty clouded those bright beams
And changed her beauties streamers, into streams!
Sion, the glory of whose refulgent Fame
Gave earnest of an everlasting name,
Is now become an indigested Mass,
And ruin is, where that brave glory was:
How has heaven struck her earth-admired name
From the height of honor, to the depth of shame;
ELEG. 2.
Beauty, nor strength of building could entice,
Or force revenge from her just enterprise;
Mercy has stopped her ears, and Justice has
Powered out full vialls of her kindled wrath;
Impatient of delay, she has struck down
The pride of Sion, kicked off Iuda's Crown;
Her streets unpeopled, and dispersed her powers,
And with the ground has levelled her high towers;
Her priests are slain, her captived Princes are
Vnransom'd prisoners; Slaves her men of war;
Nothing remains of all her wonted glory,
But sad memorialls of her tragic story.
ELEG. 3.
COnfused horror, and confounding shame,
Have blur'd the beauty, and renowned name
Of righteous Israel; Isreal's fruitful land,
Entailed by Heaven, with the usurping hand
Of uncontroled Gentiles, is laid waste,
And with the spoil so ruin is defaced;
The angry mouth of Justice blows the fires
Of hasty vengeance, whose quick flame aspires,
With fury to that place, which heaven did sever,
For Jacob and his holy seed for ever;
No part, no secret angle of the Land,
Which bears no mark of heavens enraged hand.
ELEG. 4.
^Arts, thrild from heaven, transfix my bleeding heart
And fill my soul with everlasting smart,
Whose festring wound, no fortune can recure;
The Almighty strikes but seldom, but strikes sure;
His finowy arm has drawn his steely bow,
And sent his forked shafts to overthrow
My pined Princes, and to ruinate
The weakened Pillars, of my wounded State;
His hand has scourged my dear delights, acquired
My soul, of all, wherein my soul delighted;
I am the mirror of unmasked sin,
To see her (dearly purchased) pleasures in.
ELEG. 5.
EVen as the Pilot, whose sharp Keele divides
The encountering waves of the Cicilian Tides,
Tossed on the list^ of death, striving to escape
The danger of deep mouthed Cha^ybdis rape,
Re^uts on Scy^^a, with a forced careere,
And wrecks upon a less suspected fear;
Even so poor I, contriving to withstand
My Foemans, fall into the Almighties hand;
So I, the child of ruin, to avoid
Less dangers, by a greater am destroyed:
How necessary, Ah! How sharp's his end,
That neither has his God, nor man, to friend!
ELEG. 6.
FOrgotten Sion hangs her drooping head,
Upon her fainting breast; Her soul is fed
With endless grief, whose torments had deprived her
Long since, of life, had not new pains revived her:
Sion is like a Garden, whose defense
Being broke, is left to the rude violence
Of wastefull Swine, full of neglected waste;
Nor having flower for smell, nor herb for taste;
Heaven takes no pleasure in her holy Feasts,
Her idle Sabbaths, or burnt fat of beasts;
Both State and Temple are despoiled, and fleec't
Of all their beauty; without Prince, or Priest.
ELEG. 7.
GLory, that once did Heavens bright Temple fill,
Is now departed from that sacred Hill;
See, how the empty Altar stands disguised,
Abused by Gentiles, and by heaven despised;
That place, wherein the holy One has taken
So sweet delight, lies loathed, and forsaken;
That sacred place, wherein the precious Name
Of great Iebovah was preserved, the same
Is turned a Den for Thieves; an open stage
For vice to act on; a defiled Cage
Of unclean birds; a house of privilege
For sin, and uncontrolled sacrilege.
ELEG. 8.
HEaven has decreed; his angry breast does boil,
His time's expired, and he is armed to spoil;
His secret Will adjourned the righteous doom
Of threatened Sion, and her time is come;
His hand is armed with thunder, from his eyes
A flame more quick than sulphrous Etna, flies;
Sion must fall: That hand which has begun,
Can never rest, till the full work be done.
Her walls are sunk, her Towers are overthrown,
Heaven will not leave a stone upon a stone:
Hence, hence the floods of roaring Judah rise,
Hence Sion fills the Cisternes of her eyes.
ELEG. 9.
Joy is departed from the holy Gates
Of dear Jerusalem, and peace retraits
From wasted Sion; her high walls, that were
An armed proof against the brunt of fear,
Are shrunk for shame, if not withdrawn, for pity,
To see the ruin of so brave a City;
Her Kings, and out-lawed Princes live constraind
Hourly to hear the name of Heaven profaned;
Manners and Laws, the life of government
Are sent into eternal banishment;
Her Prophets cease to preach; they vow, unheard:
They howl to heaven, but heaven gives no regard.
ELEG. 10.
KIng, Priest, and People, all alike are clad
In weeds of Sackcloth, taken from the sad
Wardrobe of sorrow, prostrate on the earth,
They close their lips, their lips estranged to mirth:
Silent they sit, for dearth of speech affords
A sharper Accent, for true grief, than words:
The Father wants a Son, the Son a Mother;
The Bride, her Groom: th the brother wa^ts a brother;
Some, Famine: Exile some: and some the sword
Has slain: All want, when Sion wants her Lord:
How art thou all in all! There Is nothing scant
(Great God) with thee, without thee, all things want.
ELEG. 11.
^Aunch forth my soul, into a sea of tears,
Whose balanced bulk, no other Pilot steares,
Then raging sorrow, whose uncertain hand,
Wanting her Compass, strikes on every sand;
Driven with a storm of sighs, she seeks the Haven
Of rest, but like to Noah's wandering Raven,
She scowres the Maine: and, as a Sea-lost Rover,
She roames, but can no land of peace discover:
Mine eyes are faint with tears, tears have no end,
The more are spent, the more remain to spend:
What Marble (ah) what Adamantine eye,
Can look on Sions ruin, and not cry?
ELEG. 12.
MY tongue? the tongues of Angels, are too faint
TO express the causes of my just complaint;
See, how the pale-faced sucklings roar for food,
And from their milkles mothers breasts, draw blood:
Children surcease their serious toys, and plead
With trickling tears, Ah mothers, give us bread:
Such goodly Barnes, and not one grain of corn?
Why did the sword escape's? Why were we borne
To be devoured and pined with famine? save us:
With quick relief, or take the lives, you gave us:
They cryde for bread, that scarce had breath to cry,
And wanting means to live, found means to dye.
ELEG. 13.
NEver, ah! never yet, did vengeance brand
A State, with deeper ruin, than thy Land;
Dear Sion how could mischief been more keen,
Or struck thy glory with a sharper spleen?
Whereto ( Jerusalem) to what shall I
Compare this thy unequalled misery?
Turn back to ages past; Search deep Records:
Theirs are, thine cannot be expressed in words:
Would, would to God, my lives cheap price might be
Esteemed of value, but to ransom thee;
Would I could cure thy grief; but who is able
To heal that wound, that is immedicable?
ELEG. 14.
O Sion, had thy prosperous soul endured
Thy Prophets scourge, thy joys had bin secured
But thou (ah thou) have lent thine itching ear
To such as clawed, and only such, would hear;
Thy Prophets, 'nointed with unhallowed oil,
Rubd where they should have launcht, and did beguile
Thy abused faith, their fawning lips did cry
Peace, peace, alas, when there was no peace nigh;
They quilted silken curtains for thy crimes,
Belyde thy God, and only pleased the times:
Dear Sion, oh! had thou but had the skill
To stop thine ears, thou had been Sion still.
ELEG. 15.
People, that travel through thy wasted Land,
Gaze on thy ruins, and amazed stand,
They shake their spleenfull heads, disdain, deride
The sudden downfall of so fair a pride;
They clap their joyful hands, and fill their tongues
With hisses, ballads, and with Lyrick songs;
Her torments give their empty lips new matter,
And with their scornful fingers, point they at her;
Is this (say they) that place, whose wonted fame
Made troubled earth to tremble at her name?
Is this that State? are these those goodly Stations?
Is this that Mistress, and that Queen of Nations?
ELEG. 16.
QVencht are the dying Embers of compassion,
For empty sorrow finds no lamentation:
When as thy Harvest flourisht with full ears,
Thy sleightest grief brought in a tide of tears;
But now, alas! thy Crop consumed, and gone,
Thou art but food, for beasts to trample on;
Thy servants glory in thy ruin, those
That were thy private friends, are public foes;
Thus, thus (say they) we spit our rankrous spleen,
And g^ash our teeth upon the worlds fair Queen;
Thrice welcome this (this long expected) day,
That crowns our conquest, with so sweet a prey.
ELEG. 17.
REbellious Judah! Could thy flattring crimes
Secure thee from the dangers of the times?
Or did thy summer Prophets ere foresay
These evils, or warned thee of a winters day?
Did not those sweet-lipt Oracles beguile
Thy wanton ears, with news of Wine, and Oil?
But heaven is just: what his deep counsel wild,
His prophets told, and Justice has fulfilled:
He has destroyed; no secret place so void,
No Fort so sure, that Heaven has not destroyed:
Thou land of Judah! How Is thy sacred throne
Become a stage, for Heathen to trample on!
ELEG 18.
SEe, see, th'accursed Gentiles do inherit
The Land of promise; where heavens Sacred Spirit
Built Temples for his everlasting Name,
There, there, th'usurping Pagans do proclaim
Their idle Idols, unto whom they gave
That stolen honor which heavnes Lord should have
Wink Sion; O let not those eyes be stained
With heavens dishonor, see not heaven profaned;
Close, close thine eyes, or if they needs must be
Open, like floodgates, to let water flee,
Yet let the violence of their flowing streams
Obscure thine open eyes, and mask their beams.
ELEG. 19.
TRust not thy eyelids, lest a flattering sleep
Bribe them to rest, and they forget to weep:
Power out thy heart, thy heart dissolved in tears,
Weep forth thy plaints, in the Almighties ears;
Oh, let thy cries, thy cries to heaven addressed,
Disturb the silence of thy midnight rest;
Prefer the sad petitions of thy soul
To heaven, never close thy lips till heaven condole
Confounded Sion, and her wounded weal;
That God that smit, oh, move that God to heal;
Oh, let thy tongue never cease to call, thine eye
To weep, thy pensive heart never cease to cry.
ELEG. 20.
VOuchsafe, oh thou eternal Lord of pity,
To look on Sion, and thy dearest City,
Confused Jerusalem, for thy DAVI^S sake,
And for that promise, which thy self did make
To halting Israel; lo, thy hand has forced
Mothers (whom law less Famine has divorced
From dear affection) to devour the bloomes,
And buds, that burgeond from their painful wombs;
Thy sacred Priests and Prophets, that while-ere
Did hourly whisper in thy neighboring ear,
Are fallen before the sacrilegious sword,
Even where, even whilst they did unfold thy word*
ELEG. 21.
WOunded, and wasted, by the eternal hand
Of heaven, I grovell on the ground; my land
Is turned a Golgotha; before mine eye,
Vnsepulchred my murthred people lie;
My dead lie rudely scattred on the stones,
My Cawsies all are paved with dead men's bones;
The fierce Destroyer does alike forbear
The maidens trembling, and the Matrons tear,
The imperial sword spares neither Fool, nor Wise,
The old man's pleading, nor the Infants cries:
Vengeance is deaf, and blind, and she respects
Nor Young, nor Old, nor Wise, nor Fool, nor Sex.
ELEG. 22.
Years heavy laden with their months, retire;
Months, gone their date of numbered days, expire;
The days, full houred, to their period tend;
And hours, chased with light-foot Minutes, end;
Yet my undated evils, no time will minish,
Though years and months, though days and hours finish:
Fears flock about me, as invited guests
Before the Portalls, at proclaimed feasts;
Where heaven has breathd, that man, that state must fall*
Heaven wants no thunderbolts to strike withal:
I am the subject, of that angry Breath,
My sons are slain, and I am marked for death.
Threnodia III.
ELEG. 1.
ALL you, whose unprepared lips did taste
The tedious Cup of sharp affliction, cast
Your wondering eyes on me, that have drunk up
Those dregs, whereof you only kissed the Cup:
I am the man, against whom the Eternal has
Discharged the louder volley of his wrath;
I am the man, on whom the brow of night
Has scowl'd, unworthy to behold the light;
I am the man, in whom the Almighty showe^
The dire example of unpattern'd woes;
I am that Prisoner, ransom cannot free;
I am that man, and I am only he.
ELEG. 2.
BOndage has forced my servile neck to fail
Beneath her load; Afflictions nimble flayle
Has thrasht my soul upon a floor of stones,
And quasht the marrow of my broken bones,
The assembled powers of Heaven enraged, are eager
To root me out: Heavens soldiers do beleager
My worried soul, my soul unapt for fleeing,
That yields o'reburthen'd with her tedious being
The Almighties hand has clouded all my night,
And clad my soul with a perpetual light,
A night of torments, and eternal sorrow,
Like that of Death, that never finds a morrow.
ELEG. 3.
Chained to the brazen pillars of my woes,
I strive in vain. No mortal hand can loose
What heaven has bound; my soul is walld about,
That hope can nor get in, nor fear get out;
When ere my wavering hopes to heaven address
The feeble voice of my extreme distress,
He stops his tired ears; without regard
Of Suit, or Suitor, leaves my prayers unheard.
Before my faint and stumbling feet he lays
Blocks, to disturb my best advised ways;
I seek my peace, but seek my peace in vain;
For every way's a Trap; each path's a Train.
ELEG. 4.
DIsturbed Lions are appeased with blood,
And ravenous Bears are mild, not wanting food,
But heaven (ah heaven!) will not implored be:
Lions, and Bears are not so fierce as He:
His direful vengeance (which no mean confines)
Has crossed the thriving of my best designs;
His hand has spoild me, that erewhile advanced me
Brought in my foes, possessed my friends against me;
His Bow is bent, his forked Rovers fly
Like darted haile-stones from the darkened sky,
Shot from a hand that cannot err, they be
Transfixed in no other mark, but me.
ELEG. 5.
Exiled from Heaven, I wander to and fro,
And seek for streams, as Stags new stricken do,
And like a wandering Heart I flee the Hounds,
With Arrows deeply fixed in my wounds;
My deadly Hunters with a winged pace,
Prick forwards, and pursue their weary chase,
They whoope, they hollow me, deride, and flout me,
That flee from death, yet carry death about me:
Excess of torments has my soul deceived
Of all her joys, of all her powers bereiv'd.
O curious grief, that have my soul brim-fill'd
With thousand deaths, and yet my soul not killed!
ELEG. 6.
Followed with troops of fears, I fly in vain,
For change of places breeds new change of pain;
The base condition of my low estate,
My exalted Foes disdain, and wonder at:
Turn where I list (these) these my wretched eyes,
They find no objects, but new miseries;
My soul, accustomed to so long increase
Of pains, forgets that she had ever peace;
Thus, thus perplexed, thus with my griefs distracted
What shall I do? Heavens powers are compacted
To work my 'eternall ruin; To what friend
Shall I make moan, when heaven conspires my end?
ELEG. 7.
GReat GOD! what help (ah me) what hope is left
To him, that of thy prescence is bereft?
Absented from thy favor, what remains,
But sense, and sad remembrance of my pains?
Yet has affliction opened my dull ear,
And taught me, what in weal I never could hear;
Her scourge has tutored me with sharp corrections
And swag'd the swelling of my proud affections;
Till now I slumbred in a prosperous dream,
From whence awaked, my griefs are more extreme;
Hopes newly quickened, have my soul assured,
That griefs discovered, are one half recur'd.
ELEG. 8.
HAd not the milder hand of mercy broke
The furious violence of that fatal stroke
Offended Justice struck, we had been quite
Lost in the shadows of eternal night;
Thy mercy Lord, is like the morning Sun,
Whose beams undo, what sable night has done;
Or like a stream, the current of whose course,
Restrained a while, runs with a swifter force;
Oh, let me swelter in those sacred beams,
And after bathe me in these silver streams;
To thee alone, my sorrows shall appeal;
Has earth a wound, too hard for heaven to heal?
ELEG. 9.
IN thee (dear Lord) my pensive soul respires,
Thou art the fullness of my choice desires;
Thou art that sacred Spring, whose waters burst
In streams to him, that seeks with holy thirst;
Thrice happy man, thrice happy thirst to bring
The fainting soul to so, so sweet a spring;
Thrice happy he, whose well resolved breast
Expects no other aid, no other rest;
Thrice happy he, whose downie age had bin
Reclaimed by scourges, from the prime of sin,
And early seasoned with the taste of Truth,
Remembers his Creator in his youth.
ELEG. 10.
KNowledge concomitates Heavens painful rod,
^ eaches the soul to know her self, her GOD,
Vnseiles the eye of Faith, presents a morrow
Of joy, within the ^ablest night of sorrow,
The afflicted soul abounds in barest need,
Sucks purest honey from the foulest weed,
Detests that good, which pamp'red reason likes,
Welcomes the stroke, kisses the hand that strikes;
In roughest Tides his well-prepared breast,
Untouched with danger, finds a^ haven of rest;
Has all in all, when most of all bereaven;
In earth, a hell, in hell he finds a Heaven.
ELEG 11.
Labor perfected, with the evening ends,
The lamp of heaven (his course fulfilled) descends
Can works of nature seek, and find a rest;
And shall the torments of a troubled breast,
Imposed by Natures all-commanding GOD,
Never know an end, never find a period?
Dear soul despair not, whet thy dull belief
With hope; heavens mercy will overcome thy grief
From thee, not him, proceeds thy punishment,
He Is slow to wrath, and speedy to relent;
Thou burnst like gold, consumest not like fuel;
O, wrong not Heaven, to think that Heaven is cruel.
ELEG. 12.
Mountains shall move, the Sun his circling course
Shall stop; Tridented Neptuae shall divorce
The embracing floods from their beloved Isles,
Ere heaven forgets his servant, and recoyles
From his eternal vow: Those, those that bruise
His broken reeds, or secretly abuse
The doubtful Title of a rightful Cause,
Or with false bribes adulterat the Laws,
That should be chaste, these, these, the Almighty has
Branded for subjects of a future wrath;
Oh, may the just man know, the Eternal hastens
His plagues for trialls; loves the child he chastens.
ELEG. 13.
NO mortal power, nor supernall might,
Not Lucifer, nor no infernal spright,
Nor all together joined in one commission,
Can think or act, without divine permission;
Man wills, Heaven breathes success, or not, upon it;
What good, what evil befalls, but heaven has done it?
Upon his right hand, Health and Honors stand,
And flaming Scourges on the other hand:
Since then the States of good or evil depend
Upon his will, (fond mortal) thou attend
Upon his Wisdom; Why should living Dust
Complain on Heaven, because that Heaven is just?
ELEG. 14.
O Let the balance of our even poised hearts
Weigh our afflictions with our just deserts,
And ease our heavy scale; Double the grains
We take from sin, Heaven takes from our pains;
Oh, let thy lowly-bended eyes not fear
The Almighties frowns, nor husband one poor tear;
Be prodigal in sighs, and let thy ^ongue,
Thy tongue estranged to heaven, cry all night long;
My soul thou leave, what thy Creator did
Will thee to do, have done what he forbid;
This, this has made so great a strangeness be
(If not divorce) betwixt thy GOD, and thee.
ELEG. 15.
Prepared to vengeance, and resolved to spoil,
Thy hand (just GOD) has taken in thy toil
Our wounded souls; That arm which has forgot
His wonted mercy, kills and spares not;
Our crimes have set a bar betwixt thy Grace
And us: thou have eclipst thy glorious face,
Have stopped thy gracious ear, lest prayers enforce done;
Thy tender Heart to pity and remorse:
See, see great GOD, what thy dear hand has
We lie like dross, when all the gold is gone,
Contemned, despised, and like to Atoms, fly
Before the Sun, the scorn of every eye.
ELEG. 16.
QVotidian fevers of reproach, and shame,
Have chilled our Honor, and renowned Name,
We are become the byword, and the scorn
Of Heaven and Earth; of heaven and earth forlorn;
Our captived souls are compast round about,
Within, with troops of fears; of foes, without;
Without, within, distressed; and, in conclusion,
We are the hapless children of confusion;
Oh, how mine eyes, the rivers of mine eyes
Overflow these barren lips, that can devise
No Dialect, that can express or borrow
Sufficient Metaphors, to show my sorrow!
ELEG. 17.
RIvers of marish tears have over-flowne
My blubbered cheeks my tongue can find no Tone
So sharp as silence, to bewail that woe,
Whose flowing Tides, an Ebb could never know:
Weep on (mine eyes) mine eyes shall never cease;
Speak on (my Tongue) forget to hold thy peace;
Cease not thy tears; close not thy lips so long,
Til heaven shall wipe thine eles, and hear thy tongue:
What heart of brass, what Adamantine breast
Can know the torments of my soul, and rest?
What stupid brain, (ah me!) what marble eye
Can see these, these my ruins, and not cry?
ELEG 18.
SO has the Fowler, with his slye deceits,
Beguiled the harmless bird; so with false baits,
The treacherous Angler, strikes his nibbling prey;
Even so my Foes, my guiltless soul betray;
So have my fierce pursuers, with close wiles
Inthralled me, and gloried in my spoils;
Where undermining plots could not prevail,
There mischief did with strength of arm assail;
Thus in afflictions troubled billows tossed,
I live; but it is a life worse had, than lost:
Thus, thus overwhelmed, my secret soul does cry,
I am destroyed, and there is no helper nigh.
ELEG. 19.
THou great Creator, whose diviner breath
Preserves thy Creature, joyst not in his death,
Look down from thy eternal Throne, that art
The only Rock of a despairing heart;
Look down from Heaven (O thou) whose tender ear
Once heard the trickling of one single tear;
How art thou now estranged from his cry,
That sends forth Rivers from his fruitful eye?
How often have thou, with a gentle arm,
Raised me from death, and bid me fear no harm:
What strange disaster caused this sudden change,
How were thou once so near, and now so strange!
ELEG. 20.
Vanquished by such, as thirsted for my life,
And brought my soul into a legal strife,
How often have thou (just GOD) maintained my cause
And crossed the sentence of their bloody laws?
Be still my God, be still that GOD thou were,
Look on thy mercy, not on my desert*
Be thou my Judge betwixt my foes and me;
The Advocate, betwixt my soul and Thee;
Against thee (great Lord) their arm they have advanced,
And dealt that blow to thee, that thus has glanced
Upon my soul; smite those that have smit thee,
And for thy sake, discharge their spleen at me.
ELEG. 21.
WHat squint-eyed scorn, what flout, what wrymouth'd scoff
That sullen pride e're took acquaintance of,
Has escaped the fury of my Foemans tongue,
To do my simple Innocence wrong?
What day, what hour; nay, what shorter season;
Has kept my soul secure, from the treason
Of their corrupted counsels, which dispensed
Days, nights and hours, to conspire my end?
My sorrows are their songs, and as slight fables,
Fill up the silence of their wanton tables;
Look down (just God) and with thy power divine
Behold my Foes; They be thy Foes, and mine.
ELEG. 22.
YEt sleeps thy vengeance? Can thy lustice be
So slow to them, and yet so sharp to me?
Dismount (just Judge) from thy Tribunal Throne,
And pay thy Foemen, the deserved lone
Of their unjust designs; Make fierce thy hand,
And scourge thou the^, as they have scourged my la^d
Break thou their Adamantine hearts, and pound the^
To dust, and with thy final curse confound them;
Let horror seize their souls; O may they be
The scorn of Nations, that have scorned thee;
O, may they live distressed, and die bereaven
Of earth delights, and of the joys of Heaven.
Threnodia. IIII.
ELEG. 1.
ALas! what alterations! Ah, how strange
Amazement flows from such an uncouth change
Ambitious Ruin! could thy razing hand
Find never a subject, but the Holy Land?
Thou sacrilegious Ruin, to attempt
The house of God! was not heavens house exempt
From thy accursed Rape? Ah me! Behold,
Sion, whose pavement of refulgent gold,
So lately did reflect, so bright, so pure,
How dim, how drossie now, (ah!) how obscure!
Her sacred stones lie scattered in the street,
For stumbling blocks before the Levites feet.
ELEG. 2.
BEhold her Princes, whose victorious brows
Fame often had crowned, with her Laurel bows,
See how they hide their shame-confounded crests,
And hang their heads upon their fainting breasts,
Behold her Captains, and brave men at arms,
Whose spirits fired at wars loud alarmes,
Like worried sheep, how flee they from the noise
Of Drums, and startle at the Trumpets voice!
They faint, and like amazed Lions, show
Their fearful heels, if Chaunticleere but crow;
How are the pillars ( Sion) of thy state
Transformed to^lay, and burnisht gold, so late!
ELEG. 3.
CAn furious Dragons hear their helpless brood
Cry out, and fill their hungry lips with food?
Has Nature taught fierce Tigers to apply
The breast unto their younglings empty cry?
Have savage beasts time, place, and natures helps,
To feed and foster up their idle whelps?
And shall the tender Babes of Sion cry,
And pine for food, and yet their mothers by?
Dragons, and Tigers, and all savage beasts
Can feed their young, but Sion has no breasts:
Distressed Sion, more unhappie far,
Than Dragons, savage Beasts, or Tigers are!
ELEG. 4.
DEath thou pursuest, if from death thou flee,
Or if thou turnst thy flight, Death follows thee:
Thy staff of life is broke; for want of bread,
Thy City pines, and half thy Land is dead;
The son to his father weeps, makes fruitless moan
The father weeps upon his weeping son:
The brother calls upon his pined brother,
And both come crying to their hungry mother:
The empty Babe, in stead of milk, draws down
His Nurses tears, well mingled with his own;
Nor change of place, nor time with help supplys thee
Abroad the Sword, famine at home destroys thee.
ELEG. 5.
Excess, and Surfeit now have left thy coast,
The lavish Guest, now wants his greedy Host,
No wanton Cook prepares his poynant meat,
To teach a saciate palate how to eat;
Now ^acchus pines and shakes his feeble knees,
And pamp'red Envy looks as plumpe, as He Is;
Discolored Ceres, that was once so fair,
Has lost her beauty, ^indg'd her golden hair;
Thy Princes mourn in rags, ashamed to infold
Their leaden spirits in a case of gold;
From place to place thy Statesmen wandering are;
On every dunghill lies a man of war.
ELEG. 6.
Foul Sodom, and incestuous Gomorrow,
Had my destruction, but never my sorrow;
Vengeance had mercy there; Her hand did send
A sharp beginning, but a sudden end;
Justice was mild, and with her hasty flashes
They fell, and sweetly slept in peaceful Ashes;
They felt no rage of an insulting Foe,
Nor Famins piching fury, as I do;
They had no sacred Temple to defile;
Or if they had, they would have helped to spoil;
They died but once, but I, poor wretched I,
Die many deaths, and yet have more to die.
ELEG. 7.
GOld from the Mint; Milk, from the uberous Cow;
Was never so pure in substance, nor in show,
As were my Nazarites, whose inward graces
Adorned the outward luster of their faces;
Their faces robbed the Lilly, and the Rose,
Of red and white; more fair, more sweet then those,
Their bodies were the magazines of perfection,
Their skins unblemished, were of pure complexion*
Through which, their Saphire-colour'd veins descride
The Azure beauty of their naked pride;
The flaming Carbuncle was not so bright,
Nor yet the rare discolored Chrysolite.
ELEG. 8.
HOw are my sacred Nazarites (that were
The blazing Planets of my glorious Sphaere)
Obscured and darkened in Afflictions cloud?
Astonished at their own disguize, they shroud
Their foul transformed shapes, in the dull shade
Of sullen darkness; of themselves afraid;
See, how the brother gazes on the brother,
And both affrighted, start, and fly each other;
Black as their Fates, they cross the streets unkend,
The Sire, his Son; The friend disclaimes his friend;
They, they that were the flowers of my Land,
Like withered Weeds, and blasted Hemlocke stand.
ELEG 9.
IMpetuous Famine, Sister to the Sword,
Left hand of Death, Child of the infernal Lord,
Thou Tort'rer of Mankind, that with one stroke,
Subject'st the world to thy imperious yoke:
What pleasure take thou in the tedious breath
Of pined Mortals? or their lingering death?
The Sword, thy generous brother's not so cruel,
He kills but once, fights in a noble Duel:
But thou (malicious Fury) do extend
Thy spleen to all, whose death can find no end;
Alas! my hapless weal can want no woe,
That feels the rage of Sword, and famine too.
ELEG. 10.
Kind is that death, whose weapons do but kill,
But we are often slain, yet dying still;
Our torments are too gentle, yet too rough,
They gripe too hard, because not hard enough;
My people tear their trembling flesh, for food,
And from their ragged wounds, they suck forth blood
The father dies, and leaves his pined Coarse,
T'inrich his Heir, with meat; The hungry Nurse
Broils her starved suckling on the hasty coals,
Devoures one half, and hides the rest in holes:
O Tyrant Famine! that compell'st the Mother,
To kill one hungry Child, to feed another*
ELEG. 11.
LAment, O sad Jerusalem, lament;
O weep, if all thy tears be yet unspent,
Weep (wasted Iud^h) let no drop be kept
Vnshed, let not one tear be left, unwept;
For angry heaven has nothing left undone,
To bring thy ruins to perfection:
No curse, no plague the fierce Almighty has
Kept back, to sum the total of his wrath;
Thy City burns; thy Sion is dispoyld;
Thy Wives are ravished, and thy Maids defiled;
Famine at home; the Sword abroad destroys thee;
Thou cry'st to heaven, and heaven his ^are denies thee.
ELEG. 12.
MAy thy dull senses (O unhappy Nation,
Possessed with nothing now, but desolation)
Collect their scattered forces, and behold
Thy novell fortunes, balanced with the old;
Could thou, o could thy prosperous heart co^ceive*
That mortal power, or art of State could reive
Thy' illustrious Empire of her sacred glory,
And make her ruins, the Thren^dian story
Of these sad times, and ages yet to be?
Envy could pine, but never hope to see
Thy buildings crushed, and all that glory ended,
Which Man so fortifyde, and Heaven defended.
ELEG. 13.
Never had the splendour of thy bright renown
Been thus extinguished ( ludah;) Thy fast Crown
Had never been spurned from thy Imperial brow,
Plenty had nursed thy soul, thy peaceful plough
Had filled thy fruitful Quarters with increase,
Had thou but known thy self, and loved peace;
But thou have broke that sacred truce, concluded
Betwixt thy God, and thee; vainly deluded
Thy self with thine own strength, with deadly feud
Thy furious Priests and Prophets have pursude
The mourning Saints of Sion, and did s^ay
All such, as were more just, more pure, then they,
ELEG. 14.
O How the Priests of Sion, whose pure light
Should shine to such, as grope in Errors night,
And blaze like Lamp^* before the darkened eye
Of Ignorance, to raise up those that lie
In dull despair, and guide those feet that strey,
Ay me! How blind, how dark, how dull are they*
Fierce rage, and fury drives them through the street,
And, like to mad men, stabbe at all they meet;
They wear the purple Livery of Death,
And live themselves, by drawing others breath;
Say (wasted Sion) could Revenge behold
So foul an acted Scene as this, and hold?
ELEG. 15.
PRophets, and sacred Priests, whose tongues whilere
Did often whisper in th'Eternalls ear,
Disclosed his Oracles, found ready passage
Twixt God, and Man, to carry heavens Embassage,
Are now the subjects of deserved scorn,
Of God forsaken, and of man forlorn;
Accursed Gentiles are ashamed to know,
What Sions Priests are not ashamed to do;
They see and blush, and blushing flee away,
Fearing to touch things, so defiled as they;
They hate the filth of their abomination,
And chase them forth, from their new conquered nation.
ELEG. 16.
QVite banished from the joys of earth, and smiles
Of heaven, and deeply buried in her spoils,
Poor Judah lies; unpitied, disrespected;
Exiled the World; of God, of Man rejected;
Like blasted ears among the fruitful wheat,
She roames dispersed, and has no certain seat;
Her servile neck's subjected to the yoke
Of bondage, open to th'impartiall stroke
Of conquering Gentiles, whose afflicting hand
Smites every nooke of her disguised Land;
Of Youth respectlesse, nor regarding Years,
Nor Sex, nor Tribe; like scourging Prince, and Peers*
ELEG. 17.
REnt, and deposed from Imperial state,
^y heavens high hand, on heaven we must await;
To him that struck, our sorrows must appeal;
Where heaven has smit^ no hand of man can heal;
In vain, our wounds expected man's relief,
For disappointed hopes renew a grief;
Egypt oppressed us in our fathers loins,
What hope's in Egypt? Nay, if Egypt joins
Her force with Judah, our united powers
Could nere prevail against such a foe as our's;
Egypt, that once did feel heavens scourge, for grieving,
His flock, would now refinde it, for reliving.
ELEG. 18.
SO, the quick-sented Beagles, in a view,
Over hill, and dale, the fleeing Chase pursue,
As swift-foot Death, and Ruin follow me,
That flees, afraid, yet knows not where to flee:
Flee to the fields? There, with the sword I meet;
And, like a Watch, Death stands in every street;
No covert hides from death; no Shade, no Cells
So dark, wherein not Death and Horror dwells:
Our days are numbered, and our number's done,
The empty Houre-glasse of our glorie's run:
Our sins are summed, and so extreame's the score,
That heaven could not do less, nor hell do more.
ELEG. 19.
TO what a downfall are our fortunes come,
Subjected to the suffrance of a doom,
Whose lingering torments Hell could not conspire
More sharp! than which, hell needs no other fire:
How nimble are our Foemen to betray
Our souls? Eagles are not so swift as they:
Where shall we flee? Or where shall sorrow find
A place for harbor? Ah, what prosperous wind
Will lend a gale, whose bounty never shall cease,
Till we be landed on the I Will of peace?
My foes more fierce than empty Lions are;
For hungry Lions, wooed with tears, will spare.
ELEG. 20.
Usurping Gentiles rudely have engrost
Into their hands those fortunes we have lost,
Devour the fruits that purer hands did plant,
Are plump and pampred with that bread we want,
And (what is worse than death) a Tyrant treads
Upon our Throne; Pagans adorn their heads
With our lost crowns; their powers have dis-jointed
The Members of our State, and Heavens Anointed
Their hands have crushed, and ravished from his throne,
And made a Slave, for Slaves to tread upon;
Needs must that flock be scattred and accursed,
where wolves have dared to seize the Shepherd first.
ELEG. 21.
Wax fat with laughing ( Edom;) with glad eyes
Behold the fullness of our miseries;
Triumph (thou Type of Antichrist) and feed
Thy soul with joy, to see thy brothers ^eed
Ruined, and rent, and rooted from the earth,
Make haste, and solace thee with early mirth;
But there is a time shall teach^thee how to weep
As many tears as I; thy lips, as deep
Shall drink in sorrows Cup, as mine have done,
Till then, cheer up thy spirits, and laugh on:
Offended Justice often strikes by turns;
Edom, ^eware, for thy next neighbor burns.
ELEG. 22.
YE drooping sons of Sion, O, arise,
And shut the floodgates of your flowing eyes,
Surcease your sorrows, and your joys attend,
For heaven has spoke it, and your griefs ^^al end;
Believe it Sion; seek no curious sign,
And wait heavens pleasure, as heaven waited thine;
And thou triumphing Ed^m, that do lie
In beds of Roses, thou, whose prosperous eye
Did smile, to see the Gates of Sion fall,
Shall be subjected to the selfe-fame thrall;
Sion, that weeps, shall smile; and Edoms eye,
That smiles so fast, as fast shall shortly cry.
The Prophet Jeremy his Prayer for the distressed people of Jerusalem, and
Sion.
GReat God, before whose all-discerning eye,
The secret corners of man's heart do lie
As open as his actions, which no Clowd
Of secrecy can shade; no shade can shroud;
Behold the Tears, O, hearken to the Cries
Of thy poor Sion; Wipe her weeping eyes,
Bind up her bleeding wounds, o thou that art
The best Surgeon for a broken heart:
See how the barbarous Gentiles have intruded
Into the Land of promise, and excluded
Those rightful Owners, from their just possessions,
That wander now full laden with oppressions;
Our Fathers (ah) their savage hands have slain,
Whose deaths our Widdow-mothers weep in vain;
Our Springs, whose Crystal plenty once disburst
Their bounteous favors, to quench every thirst;
Our liberal Woods, whose palsie-shaken tops,
To every stranger, bowed their yielding lops,
Are sold to us, that have no price to pay,
But sweat and toil, the sorrows of the day:
Oppressors trample on our servile necks,
We never cease to groan, nor they to vex;
Famine and Dearth, have taught our hands to extend
To Ashur, and our feeble knees to bend
To churlish Pharoe: Want of bread compells
Thy servants to beg Alms of Infidels;
Our wretched Fathers sinned, and yet they sleep
In peace, and have left us their sons to weep;
We, we extracted from their sinful loins,
Are guilty of their sins; Their Ossa joins
To our high Pelion; Ah! their crimes do stand
More firmly' entailed to us, than our Land:
We are the slaves of servants, and the scorn
Of slaves, of all forsaken, and forlorn;
Hunger has forced us to acquire our food,
With deepest danger of our dearest blood;
Our skins are wrinckled, and the fruitless ploughs
Of want have fallow'd up our barren brows:
Within that Sion which thy hands did build,
Our Wives were ravished, and our Maids defiled:
Our savage Foe extends his barbarous rage
To all, not sparing Sex, nor Youth, nor Age:
They hang our Princes on the shameful trees
Of death; respect no Persons, no Degrees:
Our Elders are despised, whose gray hayres
Are but the Index of their doting years;
Our flowring youth are forced to fulfill
Their painful taskes in the laborious Mill;
Our children faint beneath their loads, and cry,
Oppressed with burdens, under which they lie:
Sages are banished fo^^ Judicial Courts,
And youth takes no delight in youthful sports:
Our joys are gone, and promise no returning,
Our pleasure's turned to pain, our mirth to mourning;
Our hand has lost her sword; Our Head his Crown;
Our Church her glory; our Weal her high renown.
Lord, we have sinned, and these our sins have brought
This world of grief; (O purchase dearly bought!)
From hence our sorrows, and from hence our fears
Proceed; for this, our eyes are blind with tears;
But that (aye that) which my poor heart does count
Her sharpest torture, is thy sacred Mount,
Sacred Mount Sion; Sion, that divine
Seat of thy glory's razed; her tender Vine,
Laden with swelling Clusters, is destroyed,
And Foxes now, what once thy Lambs enjoyed.
But thou (O thou eternal God) whose Throne
Is permanent, whose glory's ever one,
Unapt for Change, abiding still the same,
Though Earth consume, and Heaven dissolve her frame,
Why do thou (ah!) why do thou thus absent
Thy glorious face? Oh, wherefore have thou rent
Thy Mercy from us? O! when will thou be
Atton'd to them, that have no trust but Thee.
Restore us (Lord) and let our souls possess
Our wonted peace; O, let thy Hand redress
Our wasted fortunes; Let thine Eye behold
Thy scattered Flock, and drive them to their Fold;
Can thou reject that people, which thy Hand
Has chose, and planted in the promised Land?
O thou (the Spring of mercy) will thou send
No ease to our Afflictions, no end?
The end.
AN ALPHABET OF ELEGIES, UPON The much and truly lamented death of that famous
for Learning, Piety, and true Friendship, Doctor AILMER, A great favourer, and
fast friend to the Muses, and late Archdeacon of LONDON: Imprinted in his
Heart, that ever loves his Memory.

Written by FRA: QVARLES.

Cum privilegio Amoris. Doloris.


Dignum laud virum Musa vetat more.

READERS*
GIve me leave to perform a necessary duty, which my affection owes to the
bles^ed memory of that reverend Prelate, my much ^onoured Friend, Doctor
Ailmer* He was one, whose life and death made as full and perfect a Story of
worth and goodness, as earth would suffer, and whose pregnant virtues deserve
as faithful a Register as earth can keep: In whose happy remembrance, I have
here ^^usted these Elegies to Time and your favors: Had he bin a Lamp to
light me alone, my pri^ate griefs had been sufficient; but being a Sun,
whose beams reflected on all; all have (...) interest in his memory: To which
end I recommend these memorialls to the public, in testimony of my
undissembled affection, and true piety that I owe to so great an example of
Virtue and Learning.

F. Q.

FUNERAL ELEGIES.
ELEG. 1.
All you whose eyes would learn to weep, draw near,
And hear, what none, without full tears, and hear*
Come marble eyes, as marble as your hearts,
I Will teach you how to weep a tear in parts;
And you false eyes, that never yet, let fall
A tear in earnest, come, and now ye shall
Send forth salt fountains of the truest grief,
That ever sought to Language, for relief:
But you, you tender eyes, that cannot bear
An Elegy, wept forth, without a tear.
I warn you hence; or, at the most, pass by,
Lest while you stay, you soon dissolve, and dye.
ELEG. 2.
But stay: (sad Genius) How do griefs transport
Thy exiled senses? Is there no resort
To forkt Parnassus sacred Mount? No word,
No thought of Helicon? No Muse implored?
I did invoke, but there was none replied;
The nine were silent, since M^^aenas died:
They have forsaken their old Spring: it is said,
They haunt a new one, which their tears have made:
Should I molest them with my loss? It Is known,
They find enough to re-lament their own:
I crave no aid, no Deity to infuse
New matter: Ah: True sorrow needs no Muse.
ELEG. 3.
CAll back (bright Phoebus) your sky-wandring steeds
Your day is tedious, and our sorrow needs
No Sun: When our sad souls have lost their light,
Why should our eyes not find perpetual night?
Go to the nether world, and let your rays
Shine there: Bestow on them our share of days;
But say not, Why: lest when report shall show
Such cause of grief, they fall a grieving too,
And pray the absence of your restless wayne,
Which then must be returned on us again,
Dear Phoebus grant my suit; if thou denie't,
My tears shall blind me, and so make a night.
ELEG. 4.
DEath, art thou grown so nice? can nothing please
Thy curious palate, but such Cates as these?
Or has thy ravenous stomach been o'represt
With common diet at thy last great feast? 1625
Or have thou fed so near that there is none
Now left but delicates to feed upon?
Or was this dish so tempting, that no power
Was left in thee, to stay another hour?
Or did thou feed by chance, and not observed
What food it was, but took as Fortune carved?
It Is done. Be it or Fortunes act or thine,
It fed the one, whose want made Millions pine.
ELEG. 5.
Envy now burst with joy, and let thine eyes
Strut forth with fatness: let thy collops rise
Pampred and plump: Feed full for many years
Upon our loss: Be drunken with our tears:
For he is dead, whose soul did never cease
To cross and violate your malicious peace:
He Is dead; but in his death has overthrown
More vices, than his happy life had done:
In life he taught to dye; and he did give
In death, a great example how to live:
Though he be gone, his fame is left behind:
Now leave thy laughing Envy, and be pined.
ELEG. 6.
FArewell those eyes, whose gentle smiles forsook
No misery, taught Charity how to look:
Farewell those cheerful eyes, that did e'rewhile*
Teach succored misery how to bless a smile:
Farewell those eyes whose mixed aspect, of late,
Did reconcile humility and state:
Farewell those eyes, that to their joyful guest,
Proclaimed their ordinary fare, a feast;
Farewell those eyes, the load-stars, late, whereby
The graces ^ail'd secure, from eye to eye:
Farewell dear eyes, bright Lamps; o who can tell
Your glorious welcome, or our sad farewell!
ELEG. 7.
Go glorious Saint! I knew 'twas not a shrine
Of flesh, could lodge so pure a soul as thine*
I saw it labor (in a holy scorn
Of living dust and ashes) to be sworn
A heavenly Quirifter: It sighed and groaned
To be dissolved from mortal, and enthroned
Among his fellow Angels, there to sing
Perpetual Anthems to his heavenly King:
He was a stranger to his house of Clay;
Scarce owned it, but that necessary stay
Miscalled it his: And only zeal did make
Him love the building for the builders sake.
ELEG. 8.
HAd virtue, learning, the Diviner Arts,
Wit, judgment, wisdom, (or what other parts
That make perfection, and return the mind
As great as Earth can suffer) been confined
To earth, had they the Patent to abide
Secure from change, our Ailmer never had died:
Fond earth, forbear and let thy childish eyes
Never weep for him* thou never knew'st how to prize
Shed not a tear, blind earth; for it appears
Thou never lov'dst our Ailmer by thy tears:
Or if thy floods must needs oreflow their brim,
Lament, lament thy blindness, and not him.
ELEG. 9.
I Wondered not to hear so brave an end,
Because I knew, who made it, could contend
With death, and conquer, and in open chase
Would spit defiance in his conquered face;
And did: Dauntlesse he trod him underneath,
To show the weakness of unarmed death:
Nay, had report, or niggard Fame denyde
His name, it had been known 'twas Ailmer did*
It was no wonder, to hear rumor tell,
That he which did so often, once did so well:
Great Lord of life, how has thy dying breath
Made man, who^ death had conquered, co^quer death*
ELEG. 10.
KNowledge (the depth of whose unbounded maine
Has bin the wreck of many a curious brain,
And from her (yet unreconciled) schools
Has filled us with so many learned fools)
Has tutored thee with rules that cannot err,
And taught thee how to know thy self, and her;
Furnished thy nimble soul, in height of measure,
With humane riches and divinest treasure,
From whence, as from a sacred spring, did flow
Fresh Oracles, to let the hearer know
A way to glory; and to let him see,
The way to glory, is to study thee.
ELEG. 11.
Look how the body of heavens greater light
In^iches each beholder with his bright
And glorious rays, until the envious West
Too greedy to enjoy so fair a guest,
Calls him to bed, where ravished from our sight,
He leaves us to the solemn frowns of night;
Even so our Sun in his harmonious sphere
Enlightened every eye, rapt every ear,
Till in the early sunset of his years
He did, and left us that survive, in tears;
And (like the Sun) in spite of death and fate,
He seemed greatest in his lowest state.
ELEG. 12.
MOlest me not, full sighs and flowing tears,
You storms and showers of nature: stop your ears,
Fond flesh and blood, against the strong temptation
Of fullen grief, and sense-bereaving passion:
Cease to lament; Let not thy slow paced numbers
Disturb his rest, that so, so sweetly slumbers;
The child of virtue is asleep, not dead;
He dies, alone, whom death has conquered:
Why should we shed a tear for him? or why
Lament we, whom we rather should envy?
He lives; he lives a life, shall never taste
A change, so long as Crowns of glory last.
ELEG. 13.
NO, no, he is not dead; The mouth of fame,
Honors shrill Herald, would preserve his name,
And make it live in spite of death and dust,
Were there no other heaven, no other trust.
He is not dead: The sacred Nine deny,
The soul that merits fame, should ever dye:
He lives; and when the latest breath of fame
Shall want her Trumpe, to glorify a name,
He shall survive and these self closed eyes,
That now lie slumbring in the dust, shall rise,
And filled with endless glory, shall enjoy
The perfect vision of eternal joy.
ELEG 14.
O But the dregs of flesh and blood! How close
They grapple with my soul, and interpose
Her higher thoughts; which, yet but young of wing,
They cause to stoop and strike at every thing;
Passion present^ before their weakened eye,
Judgment and better reason standing by:
I must lament, Nature commands it so:
The more I strive with tears, the more they flow;
These eyes have just, nay double cause of moan,
They weep the common loss; they weep their own:
He sleeps Indeed; then give me leave to weep
Tears fully answerable to his sleep.
ELEG. 15.
PArdon my tears, if they be too too free,
And if thou can not weep, I Will pardon thee,
Dull Stoic; If thou laugh to hear his death,
I Will weep, that thou were borne to spend that breath
Thou dry-brain'd Portick, whose Ahenian breast,
(Transcending passion) never was oppressed
With grief; O had your flinty Sect but lost
So rare a prize, as we lament and boast,
Your hearts had crossed your Tenet, and disburst
As many drops as we have done, or burst;
No marvel, that your marble brains could cross
Her laws, that never gave you such a loss.
ELEG. 16.
QVicke-sould Pythagoras, O thou that were
So many men, and did so often revert
From shades of death, (if we may trust to Fame)
With loss of nothing but thy buried name;
Had thou but lived in this our Ailmers time,
Thou would have did once more, to live in him;
Or had our Ailmer in those days of thine,
But did, and left so glorious, so divine
A soul as his, how would thy hasty br^st
Have gasp'd to entertain so fair a guest!
Which if obtained, had (no doubt) supplyde thee
With that immortal state thy Sire denyde thee.
ELEG. 17.
RAre soul, that now sits crowned in that Quire
Of endless joy, filled with celestial fire;
Pardon my tears that in their passion would
Recall thee from thy Kingdom, if they could;
Pardon, O pardon my distracted zeal;
Which, if condemned by reason, must appeal
To thee, whose now lamented death, whose end
Confirmed the dear affection of a friend;
Permit me then to offer at thy hearse
These fruitles tears, which if they prove to fierce
O pardon, you, that know the price of friends;
For tears are just, that nature recommends.
ELEG. 18.
SO may the fair aspect of pleased heaven
Conform my noone of days, and crown their even;
So may the gladder smiles of earth present
My fortunes with the height of jo^s, content;
As I lament, with unaffected breath,
Our loss (dear Ailmer) in thy happy death:
May the false tear, that is forced, or slides by Art,
That has no warrant from the soul, the heart,
Or that exceeds not natures faint commission,
Or dares (unvented) come to composition;
O, may that tear in stricter judgment rise
Against those false, those faint, those flattring eyes.
ELEG. 19.
THus to the world* and to the spacious ears
Of fame, I b^azon my unboasted tears;
Thus to thy sacred dust, thy Vrne, thy Hearse
I consecrate my sighs, my tears, my verse;
Thus to thy soul, thy name, thy just desert
I offer up my joy, my love, my heart;
That earth may know, and every ear that hears,
True worth and grief were parents to my tears:
That earth may know thy dust, thy Vrne, thy hearse
Brought forth and bred my sighs, my tears, my verse;
And that thy soul, thy name, thy just desert,
Invites, incites my joy, my love, my heart.
ELEG. 20.
Unconstant earth! why do not mortals cease
To build their hopes upon so short a lease?
Uncertain lease, whose term, but once begun,
Tells never when it ends, till it be done:
We dote upon thy smiles, not knowing why:
And whiles we but prepare to live, we dye:
We spring like flowers, for a days delight,
At noone, we flourish, and we ^ade at night:
We toil for kingdoms, conquer Crowns, and then
We that were Gods but now, now less than men:
If wisdom, learning, knowledge cannot dwell
Secure from change, vain bubble earth, farewell.
ELEG. 21.
Would thou, when death had done deserve a story
Should stain the memory of great Pompeyes glory?
Conquer thy self; example be thy guide;
Dye just as our selfe-conquering Ailmer did,
Woldst thou subdue more kingdo^es, gain mo crowns
Than that brave Hero Caesar conquered towns?
Then conquer death; Example be thy guide:
Die just as our death-conquering Ailmer did:
But woldst thou win more worlds, than he had done
Kingdoms, that all the earth has over-runne?
Then conquer heaven; example be thy guide;
Die just as our heaven-conquering Ailmer did.
ELEG. 22.
Years, fully laden with their months, attend
The expired times acquitance, and so end:
Months gone their dates of numbered days require
Bright Cyn^^ia's full discharge, and so expire;
Days deeply aged with hours, lose their light,
And having run their stage, conclude with night:
And hours chased with light-foot minutes, fly,
Tending their labor to a new supply;
Yet Ailmers glory never shall diminish,
Though years and months, though days and hours finish*
Yet Ailmers joys for ever shall extend,
Though years, and months, though days and hours end.
FINIS D^loris nullus*
His Epitaph.
Ask you, why so many a tear
Bursts forth; I Will tell you in your ear:
Compel me not to speak aloud,
Death would then be too too proud;
Eyes that cannot vye a tear,
Forbear to ask, you may not hear:
Gentle hearts, that overflow
Have only privilege to know:
In these sacred ashes, then,
Know (Reader) that a man of men
Lies covered: Fame and lasting glory
Make dear mention of his story:
Nature when she gave him birth,
Opened her treasure to the earth,
Put forth the model of true merit,
Quickened with a higher spirit:
Rare was his life; His latest breath
Saw, and scorned, and conquered death:
Thanklesse Reader, never more
Urge a why, when tears run ore:
When you saw so high a Tide,
You might have known, 'twas Ailmer did,
Obijt, Ian. vj. MDCXXV. Vivet post funera Virtus.

