Ieremiahs Tears,

OR A Sermon Preached in York-minster upon Trinity Sunday, in the year of our
Lord, 1604. when the sickness was begun in the City.

BY Thomas Pullein Vicar of Pontefract, sometime Chaplain of New College in
Oxford.

Oh that they were wise, then they would understand this: they would consider
their latter end. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard, for Clement
Knight. 1608.

* To the Honorable Robert Askwith, Lord Mayor of the City of York, and the
Right Worshipful his Grave Associates and Brethren the Aldermen, all
spiritual Graces, with wordly Prosperity in this life, and eternal happiness in
the life to come.
Having of long time conceived a purpose, (my good Lord) to give some public
Testimony of my Love to your Honorable City, the place of my birth, J began
now in the latter end of your Lordships year, to consider, that J could never
have a fitter opportunity, for the accomplishment of my desire. Whereupon,
being loath to use any further delay, in letting pass so good an occasion,
near lost already, I was forced in have, the time so requiring, to look up my
old Papers, to see if I could find any thing worthy to present unto your
Lordship. And while I was thus occupied, I bethought my self, of that Sermon
which heretofore I made in the City, when it was newly visited with the late
contagious sickness, being drawn thither at the earnest request of a Worshipful
friend. And this J thought the fittest, to publish at this time, for sundry
causes First, to put us in mind of the manifold, Gracious, and Fatherly
benefits, wherewith God has blessed us above all the Nations of the Earth, and
how we have abused the same. Secondly, to set before us the horrible sins we
have committed, with our monstrous unthankfulness against his Majesty.
Thirdly, to renew a fresh the remembrance of his severe Chastisements, lately,
but most justly inflicted upon us which we seem to have utterly forgotten. And
lastly, to admonish us, that if neither his blessings nor punishments will move
us to repent and amend our lives, he has yet more fearful judgments, to
astonish our rebellious hearts, and utterly to make an end of us, which though
we have escaped the plague, do still threaten our ruin and destruction. All
which points, I had rather should be observed out of the sermon it self, then
trouble this place with the repetition thereof. The reason why I have deferred
this unto the end of your year, was, because I had partly heard by general
report, and partly seen with mine own eyes, how honorably you have performed
your Office, and passed your year with as much credit and applause, as any of
your Predecessors, I could not but rejoice in your Lordships behalf, and for
a Testimony of my Gratulation, bring with me this pore present, to the
shutting up of your year, not doubting, but your Lordship will take the same
in good part.

And thus (honorable, and right Worshipful) commending this small exercise to
your diligent reading, and careful practice, with my hearty Prayers to the
Lord, for the continuance of his blessings upon your City, and that it will
please him to replenish the people under your Government with the knowledge of
his heavenly truth, and fervent love of his holy Gospel, framing their hearts in
obedience thereunto to their eternal Salvation, I humbly take my leave.
Pontefract, this first of January, 1607.

Your Lordships and Worships to command in the Lord Thomas Pullein.

Ornatissimis viris, omni doctrinarum genere imprimis conspicuis, D. Custodi,
Socijs, caeterisque Alumnis Collegij Noui apud Oxonienses debita vnicuique
obseruantia.
DVodecim plus minus elapsum est annorum interualum (doctissimi viri, et
fratres plurimum obseruandi) ex quo insignis vestrae domus, Capellanus, eforo
Collegij vestri, in vineam Dominime contulerim. Quales exinde labores
susceperim, non dignos seuseo, de quibus dicam. Hoc qualecunque opusculum, si
quid inde sit emersurum boni, Ciuitas illa, in qua natus fuerim et educatus,
cui labor etiam iste d^stinatus iampridem fuerat, optimo iure sibi vendicat: vt
vbi lucem ipse primum conspexerim, quod a me primo profectum est, primum etiam
in lucem prodeat. Si quid tandem vos interpellem, rogetis? dicam verbo: Nihil
mihi visum est indignius, quam vobis, vel inconsultis, velsaltem neglectis,
quicquam moum in publicum prodire. Quicquid enim mibi est, vobis acccptum fero,
vobisque animi qua maxim possum gratitudine refero. Nullius autum rei magis
sum cupidus, quam vt vos labores meos, sieve hos, sieve alios in posterum
fortassis edendos, in vestram tutelam suscipere, quod recte dictum fuerit aequi
consulere, si quid proficiendi studio deliquerim, indulgenter condonare
velitis. Deus in studia vestra incumbat Spiritus sui gratia, multosque e vestra
societate dignos operarios in messem suam, emittere dignetur. Valete viri
praestuntissimi, meque alumnum Collegij vestri, vestrum in sinum a linguis
mordacibus confugientem suscipite, fouete tueamini. Pontefracti, Calendis
Ianuarij. 1607 (*)

Vestra societati addictissimus Thomas Pulleinus.

Jeremiah 9. 1. Oh that mine head were full of Water, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of
my people.
AS God having tied Abraham's faith, and by trial found it sincere, in walking
obediently unto his will, did plant his Church in Abraham's posterity, being
holy branches of a holy tree: so this Church God would not leave destitute of
his further grace, but as in mercy he had freely chosen the same from among
the rest, so in his goodness he blessed it above the rest. He sent his Prophets
from time to time, as dilligent husbandmen to employ their Prayers both early
and late, for the dressing of his Vineyard, and to do all things which might
serve to make it fruitful: that as he had planted the same by himself, so he
might water it by his servants, and give the increase by his spirit.

Amongst these servants of God, whom the Lord had endued with the spirit of
Prophecy, some were employed specially among the Jews, consisting of the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin: some were sent to the ten Tribes of Israel,
which being revolted from the house of David, were now become a several
kingdom of themselves: some exercised a more joint function concerning both
the kingdom of Judah and Israel: and some Prophesied more specially
concerning foreign Nations. Of those Prophets, whose commission was to preach
unto the Jews, our prophet Jeremiah was neither the last nor the least: who
being endued with rare and excellent gifts of God; as namely with fervent
zeal, invincible courage, and unchangeable constancy, began for to
prophecy in a most corrupt and dangerous time, when the Book of the Law was
lost, and never a coppie thereof extant for the instruction of the people.
Whereof it is easy to gather, how much a do the prophet had with the way-ward
people, having no common rule to direct them, either for the worship of God, or
for the leading of their lives, (but every man living as himself liked best)
both corrupting the service of God with their Idolatrous inventions, and
defiling their conuersations with horrible sins. And after that, when the
Book of the Law was found, and publicly authorized by godly King Josiah, the
people for all that became not much more tractable, though for his time reduced
to some better order; yet afterward, like false-hearted Apostataes, they
utterly revolted to their old superstitions, and loosenes of life. And
strange it is to consider, what contradiction the holy prophet found among
that stif-necked people, who neither regarded the Lord that sent him, nor the
Embassage he delivered, nor the iminent calamities which were ready to fall
upon their heads.

None of all these things could make their stony hearts to repent, but on the
contrary, they raised up troubles and persecutions against the prophet,
shutting him sundry times in prison, and sundry times seeking his life, they
removed him from one dungeon to another, where his feet stuck fast in the
mire, in so much that he could not be gotten out, till he was drawn up with
ropes, as we see in the 37. and 38. chapters. And yet notwithstanding, he was
not dismayed, but patiently endured al these afflictions, and having constantly
continued in the faithful discharge of his prophetical function, for the
space of more then 40. years together, at length (as it is recorded of him) he
was stoned to death in Egypt, by those Jews that were fled thither for fear of
the Chaldaeans.

But now to approach nearer unto our text. When Isaiah that excellent prophet of
the Lord, who had bin vehement in rebuking the sins of the people, and had
labored most earnestly to bring them to repentance, could not prevail with
all his Travail, but lost his labor, and spent his strength in vain, having
continued prophesying about the space of threescore years: what hope could our
prophet Jeremiah conceive, who succeeded him, to prevail more with that
obstinate people, then his predecessor had done, being both servants of the
same Lord, both employed in the same affairs, and both aiming at one mark,
which was the repentance of the people, and their preservation from
destruction, depending upon their repentance? Our prophet therefore, as he was
later in time, and the destruction of the Jews nearer at hand, so his care was
the greater, to frame and compose himself in speaking to the Jews after such
a sort, as his speech might most deeply pierce the very sinnewes of their
hearts, and transfuse it self into the marrow of their souls: not that he
hoped to atchiue any greater matters with them, then Isay and Joel his
predecessors had done, but to make them inexcusable before God, and that
themselves might acknoledge the Lord to deal most justly with them, when they
should feel the rigor of his judgments, having bin thereof so often
forewarned. This therefore is the cheifest point in Jeremiah his doctrine to
be observed, that now no hope of pardon was left unto the Jews. they had so
long despised mercy, that now vengeance was come, and therefore they were to
look for nothing but to feel the weight of Gods heavy indignation. And for
this they were to thank themselves; for though God be full of patience and long
suffering, and is loath to punish sinners when they do offend, yet he will not
always suffer himself to be mocked; his justice will not always be sleeping,
but at length will rowze up it self like a ramping Lion, and who is able to
endure the fiercenes thereof. Though he give his people a long time to repent,
and send his servants to call them, to inuit them, to entreat them, and to woe
them, as a man does woe a Virgin, whom he would make his wife, promising that
he will be merciful to their sins, and not remember their iniquities, that he
will deal with them in the greatness of his love, and not in the rigor of his
judgment; that he will receive and embrace them, as his dear children, and
bestow al good things upon them both in this life, and in the life to come, if
they will amend their lives, and turn unto him; yet when they will not be
reformed, when they remain impenitent and incorrigible, and do harden their
hearts against al these loving and gracious admonitions, how can the lord do
less then make them know and feel, that as he has abundance of sweet
mercies laid up in store for them that fear him, so his treasure is not
without sharp arrows, swords, and al kind of weapons, to gore the hearts of al
his enemies? Seeing then the Jews were such, how could the prophet Jeremiah do
less, then sound out the trumpet of Gods wrath, and thunder out the
threatenings of Gods indignation against them? But what? did not Isay before
him, denounce the judgments of God against the Jews? Yes verily, but with
this difference: that Isaiah, as he was vehement, so with his threatenings he
always mingled words of comfort, and gave hope of pardon upon amendment: but
Jeremiah, when neither Isaiahs preaching would move them, nor the example of
their brethren (whom the Assyrians had carried away captives, having utterly
destroyed their kingdom) could work any remorse in their hearts, Jeremiah after
all this, seeing the Jews obstinatly given over to hardness of heart, he tells
them plainly, that he must not now dissemble with them, but as they were
obdurate in their malice, without hope to be reclaimed, so they must now
prepare themselves ever to bear the burden of Gods wrath, without hope to be
released.

And we may further say, that God by the prophet Isay did expostulate with the
Jews, he pleaded his cause against them, and brought them to their trial;
but by Jeremiah he conuinceth them, he finds them guilty, and gives sentence
against them, and that sentence was performed even in Ieremiahs time, who saw
with his own eyes the execution thereof.

Seeing then, that the decree was passed, their destruction determined, and the
sentence irreuocable: Admonitions were unprofitable, exhortations were
unfruitful, to pray for them was forbidden: Thou shall not pray for this
people, neither lift up cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me, for I
will not hear thee, says the Lord. Ier. 7, 16. This was the cause, that our
prophet here frames himself to mourn, lament, and bewail, the misery,
destruction, and calamity of the Jewish Nation: Oh that my head were full of
water, etc.

And because this City, and this land, has bin as much blessed of God as ever
Judah and Jerusalem was, and the Lords Gracious care to call you to
repentance, that ye might not perrish in your sins, has been as great over
you, as ever it was over them: and that so many excellent Preachers, endued
with such variety of gifts, have been sent unto you from so many places,
besides your ordinary Preachers, whom the Lord has placed among you (which
though they be few through your own fault, yet are they enough to make you
without excuse:) and al these have not ceased to cry and call on you, for the
amendment of your lives, to lay away your swearing, your drunkenness, your
Whoredom, your falsehood and deceit in buying, selling, and bargaining, your
profaning of Gods Sabboths, your contempt of his word, your biting, extorting,
and oppressing vsuries, besides infinite others your grievous and abominable
sins, and yet all in vain; insomuch that the Lord having laid his heavy hand
upon many places of this Land, to the destruction of many thousands, has
begun also to stretch it out upon this City, and is like to proceed
further, and not yet to make an end, according to that of the Prophet Isaiah 9,
12. The wrath of the Lord is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still. This is the cause, that has moved me, laying aside all matter both of
doctrine and exhortation, to make choice of this place of Scripture, the better
to occasion me to lament and bewail both the hardness of your hearts, and the
greatness of your punishment, and to say with the prophet Jeremiah, Oh that my
head, etc.

The Prophet in these words does signify, that as their sins were monstrous,
passing al measure, so the destruction was fearful, which the Lord was
determined to bring upon them, exceeding the measure of his ordinary
Judgments: and therefore, that he was not able sufficiently to bewail the
greatness thereof. For great sins procure great punishments, and great
punnishments are never without great sorrow and lamentation. Seeing therefore
the punnishments which God had prepared for the Jews, were such as they had
never felt before, so the Prophet desires to bewayl the same with such a
measure of Lamentation, as never had bin heard of before: that the greatness of
his mourning might (if it were possible) be fully answerable to the greatness
of their miseries. In these words we may observe two things: First, the
mourning of the prophet, and secondly, the object of his mourning. The mourning
in these words, Oh that mine head were full of Water, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night: the object of his mourning was, the
slaughter of the people: that I might weep day and night, for the slain of the
daughter of my people. His mourning he sets down in most patheticall and
significant terms. And this he does by way of a Rhetorical gradation; for he
that weepeth, sheds tears, and he that sheds tears, must have some inward
moisture that must be resolved into tears. The prophet therefore framing and
composing himself to weep, and in weeping to exceed measure, and to pass
moderation, that he might not be interrupted in the course of his weeping for
want of matrer to ministet suply of tears, he first wishes that his head were
full of water, or rather, that his head were resolved into water: for that
comes nearer the Haebrew original, Oh that some man would make my head to
become as water. In this great lamentatio^ the prophet seems to fear nothing
more, then that his head should be drawn dry, and that for lack of moisture, he
should be constrained in time to forbear weeping, for (as Seneca says) Nullus
dolor longus est, qui magna est.

The sorrow that is great cannot be long, for such is the infirmity of nature,
that nothing vehement or violent can be of long continuance. Seeing therefore,
that this sorrow was extraordinatie, because it did arise of an extraordinary
ocasio^, here he sets forth in extraordinary and hyperbolicall forms of
speech, rather expressing his desire, how he would have it to be, then any
hope he had that it could so be, and not so much declaring what was possible
and likely to be done, as what was meet and convenient to be done.

The thing therefore that our prophet desires is, first, that his head might
be full of water. It is not a small quantity of water that will content him, but
he would have it full of water. Nay, he would have it resolved into water, that
so long as it is a head, so long it might never be without water, to weep and
wail for the destruction of the people.

But why does he wish that his head were full of water, and not rather his
heart, seeing the heart is the seat of all the affections? Although the heart
is the seat of the affections, yet the head is the seat of all the senses,
both inward and outward. And the head as it is the highest part of the body,
so the mind which is the chiefest part of the soul, has erected her throne
therein, and keeps there her residence, and from thence as from a Watch Tower,
apprehends all things, understands al things, and discerns all things
that are brought unto her by the outward senses, which are her handmaids.

This is the place where the mind does sit as Queen and Governor, and
whatsoever it be she commands, prescribes, or directs, that the will and
affections are ready to execute. And for that cause it is said, Men's cuiusque
est quisque. The mind of every man is the man himself. This is that which first
aprehendeth the cause of grief and sorrow, and by and by Communicates the
same with the heart, which is presently moved either to embrace or dislike, as
the mind Judges the object to be good or evil: Like unto a Porter, who
keeping the gate does open it to his friend, and shuts it to his enemy. By this
the prophet in his Prophetical spirit, did foresee that horible and bloody
slaughter which should be committed by the host of the Chaldaeans in the City
of Jerusalem. And this did so deeply afflict and pierce his heart, that he could
not contain himself, but must needs break out into a most doleful
lamentation. And the better to continue and increase his sorrow by ministering
(as it were) food thereunto, he wishes that his head were full of water: for as
fire consumes wood and coals, and for want of wood or coals, the fire it
self will consume and be extinguished; so weeping exhausteth and draws out
tears, and when tears are consumed, without supply, weeping it self must
needs have an end. And therefore, that a fresh supply might never be wanting,
he wishes that his head might always abound with water. And for this purpose,
the head is a more fit member then the heart: First, because the object of the
affections is there apprehended and judged of, and according to that judgment
the heart is affected.

Secondly, for that the head is much larger, and of a more capacious figure.
Thirdly, because it is more apt to receive and hold water, both in regard of
the ventricles or receptacles of the brain within, and also for that it is
strongly fenced and environed (as it were) with a hard wall round about. And
lastly, for that the head has better means to express the grief and sorrow of
the heart, both by mourning with the voice, and by weeping with the eyes: And
thus I am come to the second point of the gradation, which is the second thing
that the prophet desires for the better expressing of his great sorrow.

He does not only wish that his head were full of water, but he declares the
cause thereof; which was, not to keep it still enclosed in his head, but that
from thence it might be derived and resolved into brinish tears, as faithful
witnesses of his inward grief. And to this end he wishes, that his eyes
might be as a Fountain, or (as it is in the Haebrewe Original) a vain of
tears, which might be always open and never stopped, always running and
never dry. When a man would seek a well, first he digges to get water, and
when he has found Water, his next care is, to draw it out, for such needful
uses, as occasion requires. Even so our Prophets desire is first; that he
might have in his body a springing well, that his head might be the conduit; and
for the better drawing of this water out, he wishes in the next place, that
his eyes might be as spouts or as conduit pipes to power forth this water. And
it could not be, but so many as had not hearts of flint, must needs be moved
with astonishment, to see and behold this great lamentation. And yet our
prophet is not content with this, but he adds, as the third step of the
gradation, that I might weep day and night. It cannot content him to have his
head full of Water, it cannot content him, that his eyes shed tears: but as
though this were no weeping, to express further, that all this comes from the
inward sense and sorrow of his heart, he wishes that he might weep, and not
simply weep, but weep so, that his eyes might never linne weeping, and his
eyelids might never close themselves to take any rest, but be always open to
weep day and night. Great was that mourning of the women of Bethelem, when
their children were slain by the cruelty of Herod, whereof our prophet
Jeremiah prophecieth Chap, 31. 15. which Testimonies is alleged by the
Euangelyst S. Matthew, in the second Chapter and the 8. verse, where he
applies the same to that slaughter of Herod: who seeing himself deluded by the
wise men, caused all the male children of Bethlehem to be slain, from two
years old and under, with intent to murder Christ, among the rest In Ramah
was a voice herd, mourning and weeping, and great lamencation: Rachael weeping
for her children, and would not be comforted, hecause they were not. But that
lamentation, although it was bitter, yet was it not to be compared with this of
our prophet, because that was only for the loss of some of their children, but
here the prophet bewayleth that miserable and fearful destruction which
should generally come upon all Judah and Jerusalem, as well young as old,
wherein there should scarce be any that should escape and not perish, either by
famine, sword, or by pestilence, or at least be carried into captivity. It is
much that David says of himself, Enery night wash I my head, and water my
couch with my tears, psalm. 6, 6. Oh worthy practice for a penitent soul to
imitate, touching every sinner that groneth under the burden of his sins, to
spend the nights not in sleeping, but in weeping, not in slumbring and
drowsynes, but in crying and calling to God for mercy, shedding the tears of
true repentance? Worthy also is that to be remembered, which is recorded of the
sinful woman in the gospel, Luke 7. who wept so abundantly, that she washed
the feet of Christ, with the tears that trickled down from her eyes. But this
mourning of our prophet exceeds the^ both, if not in greatness, yet in
continuance, whose tears distilling without intermissio^, as from the conduit
of a springing well, would be sufficient, not only to water his couch, or to
wash the feet of those that came nere him, but even in time to send forth
rivers of waters, like those whereof Ezechiel speaks, chap, 47. which coming
forth of the temple, were at the first measuring up to the anckles, at the
second measuring up to the loins, but at the third measuring, the waters were
become as a river, that could not be passed. But why does our prophet weep so
immoderatly? That by his sheding of many tears, some might drop out of their
eyes. For the prophet weeps not here for himself, but for the great misety that
should come upon the people. And though he was likely to sustain some part of
their affliction, because he dwelt among them, yet himself was but one, and
not one of the greatest; the state of the Monarchy rested in them, that is, in
the king, in the Nobles, and the rest of the people.

And therefore it was the public state that he bewailed, whereupon every
private man's condition depended: as for himself he made no reckoning, and
besides, he knew that God who had employed him in that Message, and had
preserved him hitherto from the bloody hands of the Jews, who had slain many
of the Lords Prophets, was also able to preserve him from the hands of the
Chaldaeans, or to give him favor in their eyes, that they might do him no
harm, as it came to pass afterward when the City was taken. Ier, 39, 11, 12.
Seeing then, the Prophet does weep for the people, stands it not with good
reason, that they should weep for themselves? when our Savior was led to be
Crucified, many Women of Jerusalem followed him weeping. But Jesus turned back
and said unto them, Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but weep for
your selves, and for your Children, Luke 23. 28.

He blames not their affection, but he speaks by way of comparison. He tells
them, that if they knew all, they had more cause to weep for themselves then
for him. They wept for him, because they loved him, but he went to die for
them, because he loved them. Judge which of these had the greater love?
Notwithstanding, such was the ingratitude of the Jewish Nation: such was their
impiety against God, their cruelty against his Prophets, and their impenitency
in their sins, that the Lord was determined utterly to root them out from
being a Nation, and for ever to cut them off from being a people. And this he
performed about forty years after, by Titus the son of Vespasian, the
Roman Emperor, who brought a final destruction upon the Jews. And this was
the cause, that when our Savior was come nere to Jerusalem, and beheld the
City, he wept for it, Luke 19. 41, And in another place he said, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Behold your
habitation shall be left unto you desolate. Mat. 23, 37. By this complaint it
appears that though our Savior mourned for the City of Jerusalem yet the
people of Jerusalem had the greatest cause to bewail their own misery.

Our prophet therefore in weeping for the people, he sets them a president and
rule to follow. It was their punishment that struck his heart with this inward
sorrow, and caused his eyes to shed tears, and therefore he frames himself
to weep, that by his weeping he might wring tears out of their eyes.

But ought not every man to be moved most, with that which most concerns
himself? Why then is our Prophet touched with a more lively sense of the
Jewish calamities, then the Jews that were to feel the smart thereof? Why
does he not wish that their heads were full of water, and their eyes fountains
of tears, that they might Weep day and night for the destruction that should
come upon themselves? Oh their hearts were hardened, and that makes our Prophet
to mourn the more. He had rebuked them for their sins, but they would not
amend. He had denounced Gods judgments, but they despised his threatenings.
When the false Prophets flattered them with Peace, Peace, to them they
harkened. It is said of our Savior Christ, concerning the Jews, that he did
mourn for the hardness of their hearts, Mark, 3. 5. And here our Prophet
Jeremiah, when nothing would prevail, he takes himself to mourning.

In this place we see, how needful it is, that faithful Pastors be placed
among the people when they are ignorant, to teach them: when they sin, to
admonish them: when admonitions will not serve, to terrify them with Gods
judgments: when nothing will preualle to mourn for them. The dumb dogs and the
idle Non-residents do none of these things, the one cannot, and the other will
not, and both of them have bin the destruction of many thousand souls, which
will one day be required at both of their hands. But what shall the faithful
ministers do? Shall they tell the Drunkards, what the prophet Isaiah says unto
them? Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to them that
continue until night, till the Wine do inflame them? Isa, 5, 11. Woe unto them
that are mighty to drink Wine, and to them that are strong to pour in strong
drink, ver, 22. And what the Prophet Ioell says. 1, 5. Awake ye Drunkardes,
and howl, and weep all ye drinkers of Wine, because of the new Wine: for it
shall be pulled from your mouth? Shall we tell the Adulterers, what our prophet
Jeremiah says of them? 5, 7.

Though I fed them to the full, yet they commit Adultery, and assemble
themselves by companies into the Harlots houses: they rise up in the morning
like fed horses, and every man neyeth after his neighbors wife. Shall I not
visit for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this? shall we say to the common and profane swearer, as the wise
man says, Ezechiel 23, 9. Accustom not thy mouth to swearing, for in it there
are many falls, neither take up for a custom the naming of the Holy one, for
thou shall not be unpunished for such things. And ver. 11. A man that uses
much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall never go
from his house? Or that which God himself says in the third commandment,
that the Lord will not hold that person guiltles that takes his name in vain?
Shall we cry out against deceit in buying and selling, against false weights
and measures, against deceitful and unprofitable wares: against extortion,
oppression, and such like. in condemning whereof the Scripture is vehement?
Shall we say to the Usurer in the name of the Lord, Thou shall take no usury
of thy Brother, thou shall seek no advantage against him, but thou shall fear
thy God, that thy Brother may live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money
to usury, nor lend him vitels for increase. Le, 25. 36 Or that which in another
place. Thou shall not give to usury unto thy Brother: as usury of money, usury
of meat, or usury of any thing that is put to usury, Deuteronomy, 23, 19.

But what avails it us to speak of these things? your Pulpits have sounded
with these exclamations: but all in vain. These sins have so bewitchedy our
minds, partly with pleasure, and partly with profitte, that they are become
like the deaf Adder, that stops her ears, and will not hear the voice of
the Charmer, Charm he never so wisely. They are so deeply rooted in your
hearts, through long continuance, that all their labor is in vain, which shall
endeavor to pluck them up. They have so lulled you asleep in the cradle of
security, that it is easier for us to raise up Lazarus out of his Grave, then
to bring you to any sense or feeling of your sins.

Seeing then, that all things are brought to this desperate state, the Lord
has at length begun to waken up his judgments, to see if he can Waken you out
of your sleep of sin. He has begun at length to stretch forth his punishing
hand upon this City, which as it has bin heavy upon those whom it has
touched, so it threatens destruction to many more.

Oh then, what remains for us, but with the Prophet Jeremy to weep and
lament? And herein, leave me not alone; but as Moses and all the congregation
of Israel wept before the door of the Tabernacle when the wrath of the Lord
was kindled against them. Numb, 25, 6. so it behooves you all to join with me
as Actors in this lamentation. And first, you that are the Fathers and
Governors of this City, as your sins are not the least (for I may not
flatter you) so it is your parts to be the foremost in this great humiliation.

But if you think the matter does not concern you, then I turn me unto the
Lawyers, the Merchants, and Artificers, with all the residue whose sins have
conspired together to bring down Gods wrath upon this City. And if they
refuse me, then where should I make my moan, but to the women who have good
reason to be partakers of this common sorrow, because their Pride, Vanity,
Lofty looks, Gayrish attire, Wanton gesture, and other vices, have not been
the least cause to suit this city with this fearful pestilence? And if they
disdain to mingle their tears with mine, then have I none to fly unto, but the
little children, that they at least with their crying and weeping, may help to
increase this doleful lamentation.

But if the hearts of all be hardened: if neither Men, Women, nor Children
will mourn with me, yet will I vvayle and mourn my self alone, and say
with the prophet, Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a Fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night.

And so I come to the second part, which is the object of the Prophets
mourning, that I might weep (for what?) for the slain of the daughter of my
people. There is a time to laugh, and a time to Weep: a time to sow, and a
time to reap, a time to commit sin, and a time to be punished for sin. The
Jews had laughed a long time in security, but afterward they mourned a long
time in misery.

They had a long time sown the Tares of disobedience, but now they were to
reap the fruit of wrath and vengeance. And as they had spent a long time in
running the race of sin, so the Lord at length found out his time to break
off their course, by pouring his heavy judgments upon them. The prophet here
bewayleth the slaughter of the people: he makes no mention of their sins, which
were the cause thereof. But in speaking of the effect, he implies the cause;
for had it not been for their sins, the host of the Chaldaeans had not come
amongst them, and then that slaughter had not bin committed.

Hereby he teaches them, that it had been in their power to have prevented
this lamentable effect, if they had repented of their sins, and accepted the
time of Grace, when it was offered unto them: but when they had despised mercy,
and had chosen to wallow still in their sins, now was the door of mercy shut,
and nothing but miserable destruction to fall upon them. This was the cause,
that our prophet cease to bewail their sins, and instead thereof, he
bewaileth the punishment which their sins had produced.

That I might weep for the slain. He says not, for those that were dead
among the people; for then, he might seem to insinuate, that this destruction
should be by some natural cause. But when he says for the slain, he shows it
was by violent death upon the sword of their enemy. And here consider the
destroyers, and the destroyed. The destroyers are described. Ier, 22, 23.
Behold, a people comes from the North-countrey, and a great Nation shall
arise from the sides of the earth. With Bow and shield shall they be weaponed:
they are cruel, and will have no compassion, their voice roareth like the sea,
and they ride upon horses, well appointed like men of war, against thee, O
daughter of Zyon. And Ier, 4, 13. Behold, he shall come up as the clouds, and
his Charicts shall be as a Tempest: his horses are lighter then Eagles. Woe
unto us, for we are destroyed. And Ier, 8, 16. The neying of his horses was
heard from Dan, the whole Land trembled at the neyghing of his strong horses:
for they are come, and have devoured the Land with all that is in it, the
City and those that dwell therein: The destroyers then were the hoaste of the
King of Babel, clad in glitering armor, with their bloody weapons their hands,
wounding, and slaying, and killing all that come in their Way, their Horses
besprinckled with blood, trampling upon the dead Carcasses, crushing their
flesh and their bones under their feet, while they lay gasping and panting,
and breathing out the Ghost.

The destroyed were the Jews, signified by these Words, the slain of the
daughter of my people. These are they whom the Prophet bevvayleth, having
their flesh mangled, their bodies dismembered, their limbs scattered up and
down, here a leg, and there a hand, and there a head, and their blood
running too and fro in the streets of Jerusalem.

But is the slaughter among us such a slaughter? Beloved, whether our sins may
provoke the Lord in his wrath to make such a slaughter of our people, I leave
that to your upright and due consideraon. But the svvord of the enemy has not
yet made such havoc among us. The Lord has taken the matter into his own
hand. He has sent his Angels to destroy even from Dan to Bersheba, from the
one end of the Land to the other, and the slaughter they have made is a great
slaghter. And the wrath of the Lord is not yet turned away, but his hand is
yet stretched out still. Our sins have made our eyes to see that verified
which the Lord threatens by the Prophet Moses, Deuteronomy, 32, 42. I will make mine
arrows drunk with the blood, and my sword shall eat flesh. If ever this
iudgementwere accomplished in this land, it is now executed in these our
days. The atrowes of the Lord are drunk with blood and his sword does not
cease devouring of man's flesh. O wretched people, that would not be warned in
time, to escape this fearful judgment of the Lord. You therefore that would
not follow our counsel, when we exhorted you in the name of the Lord to
forsake your sins and amend your lives: now must you hear us strike up the
drum of Gods wrath, and sound out the Trumpet unto the Lords battles. Oye
Angels, smite, slay, pursue, till the Lord shall command to make an end of
killing, and till it shall please him to give a sign of retrait. But so long as
your sins strike up the alarm, so long will the Angels of the Lord destroy.
First therefore must we sound the retrayte from sin, before the Lord will
sound the retrait from the battle.

But what? shall I put you in hope, that if ye presently repent and turn unto
the Lord, the lord will forthwith stay his hand, and slay no more? Beloved I
have no such commission. When the Jews had many years taken their full scope
to roue and range licentiously in their sins, despising the admonitions of
Isaiah, Joel, and the rest of that time: our Prophet Jeremiah coming after
them, finding no better entertainment then they had done, in the 4. chap. xii:
ver, he gyues sentence against them, which was too late to be reuersed. And
though sometimes he insert many excellent promises for the comfort of Gods
Church, that they might not utterly despair of mercy: yet those promises were
not to take place, till first they had felt the smart of their former
contempt; as we may see, Ier, 29, 10, etc. So the Lord having vouchsafed unto
us the preaching of his Gospel with all temporal blessings accompanying the
same, so long a time, and in so gracious a measure, as never nation under
heaven, has been so blessed of God, as this Land, and this City; now that
our sins have as much abounded against GOD, as his mercies have abounded
toward us, insomuch that the Lord could no longer withold his judgments:
how can we look that this wrath of the Lord should be so easily removed, which
we our selves have provoked, til first we have felt his scourge for our former
unthankfulness? And yet it stands you upon, even speedily to repent, and flee
unto the mercy of God in his son Christ, least you be not only cut off by
this sword of the Lord, but also perish for ever in the world to come.

The judgments of God are of two sorts, either general, prepared for the
destruction of all the world, or particular, for the punnishment of certain
Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, or towns. The general judgments are of two sorts:
First, the Element of Water, whereby the old world was destroyed.

But this is no more to be feared: for God has promised, that the world shall
no more be destroyed by a flood: and to that end he has set his rainebow in
the clouds, as a sign of his Covenant, Gen* 19, 13. The other general
judgment is by the element of fire. 2, Pet. 3, 7. The heavens and earth, which
are now, are kept by the same word in store, and reserved unto fire against
the day of judgment, and of the destruction of ungodly men. And a little after
verse, 10. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which
the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Element shall melte with
heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up, etc.
But this judgment god will not execute til the end of the world, when the
sins of al mankind shall be grown to full ripenes.

The particular judgments are of many sorts, but here we will not meddle with
those that concern particular persons, but such as are inflicted upon
particular Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, and Towns. And these are either
extraordinary and less usual, as fire and Brimstone; wherewith Sodom and
Gomorrah were destroyed, Gen, 19, 24. and Earthquakes, wherewith Antioch and
many other Cities were brought to extreme ruins, as we may read in the
Ecclesiastical histories: or common and ordinary, which are specialy three,
war, famine, and pestilence.

Al these are sharp arrows which the Lord shoots out against particular
Nations and Cities for the punishment of their sins. Of all these together
speaks our Prophet Iere, 14, 12. When they fast, I will not hear their cry,
and when they offer burnt offering, and an Obligation, I will not accept them:
but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the Pestilence.

Now which of all these judgments has the Lord sent upon this land? He has
caused wars to cease, he has not sent a famine amongst us, he has in mercy
laid upon us David's choice: who when he had sinned, the lord offered him to
chose which of these three he would, three months war, seven years famine, or
three days pestilence. Of three three evils David choosed the last, as the
least, and thus resolved: Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord, for his
mercies are great, and let me not fall into the hand of man. 2 Samuel 24, 14.
Seeing then we are in the hands of the Lord, why should we think much with the
Lords visitation? whose mercy does evidently appear in this, that when our
Sins had long cried to heaven for vengeance yet the Lord still forbear to punish
and now when our sins would suffer him to forbear no longer, yet it has
pleased him, without our desire, or desert, to lay on us the easiest of his
judgments: wherefore; he has not left us without hope, that the same mercy,
whereby he was moved to deal thus graciously with us in allotting unto us this
kind of punishment, the same will also move him not to be too rigorous in the
manner and order of inflicting thereof.

Oh but (you will say) that is a fearful judgment, and we had rather die of
any other sickness, then of the plague. Oh, but I must answer you, that you
must thank your selves, and your sins for it, which have deserved far
greater judgments. Shall we take liberty to our selves, to commit what sins it
pleases us, and shall we abridge the Lord of his liberty? Shall we not give
him leave to punish our sins with what kinds of punnishments it pleases him?
Seeing it could not stand with the course of Gods Justice, but that same
judgment must needs come upon this land, how could the Lord send an easier
judgment then this upon us? Would it not be more grievous, to have their
bodies pinched with famine, that for the satisfying of your hunger ye should
be forced to eat the flesh of your own children, as came to pass in the
siege of Samaria 2: King. 6 29. Would it not be more grievous, to see your
houses burnt, your goods spoiled, your wives and daughters ravished before your
faces, and afteral this, your selves to be slain with the sword of the enemy?
Al which calamities, besides infinite mo are incident to the broils of War.
What thing could have happened more grievous to Zedekiah King of Judah, then
being taken by the host of the Chaldaeans, to see his sons slain before
his eyes, and all the Nobles of Judah put to death, and after that to have
her own eyes put out, and after all that, to be bound in chains, and carried
captive to Babel? Ier, 39. All this might the Lord justly have brought upon us:
and therefore have not we good cause to admire and magnify his goodness, in
taking the Chastisement of our sins into his own hands, and not delivering
us over to the will and pleasure of our enemies.

And yet it cannot be denied, but that this is also a grievous judgment,
though easy in comparison of the other two: for it is accompanied with
terror, danger, and great discomfort. When we consider, how men and Women,
that were lusty and strong, are suddenly laid along in the dust of the earth.
Oh this is terible and fearful to those that be living! When we consider, how
the infection is derived from one to another by ways and means, neither
visible nor sencible, that no man knows where he shall be safe: Oh, this makes
the sickness exceeding dangerous! when we consider the misery of such a time, how
every man will be doubtful to accompany with his neighbor, for fear to take
harm, and careful to shun those that be infected: Oh, what great discomfort
is this to the visited persons, and what increase of fear to those that be
well? And heete you may consider the state of those that be infected: when this
coutagious sickness shall enter upon any of your bodies. First, it fills the head
full of pain, and then it weakneth the stomach, and makes it able to hold
nothing. And after when it has by little and little overcome nature, being not
longer able to withstand the force thereof, it does as a Captain, who having
won a City, forth with he spreads his Banners, and displaies his ensigns on
the top of the walls, in token of victory. So this cruel Tyrant when he has
gotten the maistery, displayes his Ensigns on the Walls of our bodies. He fills
the skin full of spots as the tokens of death, which at the first are red,
showing his cruelty: then they are bluish, showing death to approach: And
lastly, they grow black, whereby we are put in mind of those horrible torments
that follow after death in the fire of hell. And when they are dead, how shall
ye be buried? Which of your neighbors vvil accompany your corpse to the
grave? And thus, by the just judgment of GOD, those that have sinned wilfully,
are buried shamefully.

What profit have ye had then of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?
the end of those things is death. Rom, 6, 21. This (methinkes) should strike
your hearts with remorse, and move you to cry and call upon god, for mercy and
pardon of your heinous sins, with tears of true repentance.

But has the Lord brought upon us such a lamentable time? See then what
alteration the lord can make. Before, nothing was heard in this City, but
mirth and melody, music and dancing, nothing was used, but feasting and
banqueting, quaffing and carowsing: Come, where shall we drink the best
wine? where is the strongest Ale to be had? But now, no speech: but where is
the Sickness? What fresh houses be visited? How many are dead? Lo, this is
the change that the Lord has made. Before we followed Sin, because we would
not avoid it, but now we avoid sin because we cannot follow it. Before, we
spent the time in committing Sin, but now is the time come to suffer
punishment for your sin. What will now the Adulterers do? They must leave
hunting the Harlots houses, least the Angel of the Lord meet them by the way.
What will now the covetous Usurers do? Let him humble himself in prayer and
fasting, let him cry and call to God for mercy. Let him do as Zachaeus did,
Luke 19. even restore that which he had wrongfully gotten, that GOD may be
merciful unto his soul.

O* wretched man, what will thy wealth profit thee or thine, when the Lord
shall take away both thee and thine, and give thy substance unto strangers?
Oh, well had it been for thee, if thou had never taken penny Usury in all
thy life.

When you were before admonished of these Judgments in the name of the Lord,
you thought it came but from men, speaking out of the heat of their own
affections, but now the Lord has ratified and confirmed by his own hand from
heaven, that the threatninges denounced by his faithful Ministers against the
impenitent, are not of man but of God.

This is the note that Moses gives whereby a true Prophet may be discerned
from the false: When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not
spoken, etc. Deuteronomy, 18, 22. But when the word of the Prophet shall come to pass
(says Jeremy) then shall the Prophet be known that the Lord has sent him.
Ier, 28, 9. That some fearful Judgment was like to fall upon the la^d, every
man mighr see, that had but a heart to consider the ordinary proceedinges of
Gods former Judgments, and the horrible sins that were every where committed.

But what manner of judgment it would prove flesh and blood could not
discern, till now the Lord has revealed the same. And the judgment we see,
is the judgment of a plague: which yet is not alone. I would it brought not
poverty and famine with it. You are almost as a City besiedged: and there be
many flee from you, but who comes in?

The Country is now as much afraid of you as you have been heretofore
affraide of others. Now is the time for you that be rich, to make you friends
with the unrighteous Mammon: forsake not your poor neighbors, flee not from
them in their greatest distress. At least if you flee, relieve them with your
purses, and cease not to pray unto God for them. Spend something for his sake,
that spent his blood for you. But as for you, upon whom the charge of
Government does lie, whether you be the chief Magistrate, or such as are
Assistants unto him: the Lord has tied you to residence.

Your Christian Charity, to relieve the disstressed, your provident care to
prevent danger, your Godly wisdom to ser down good orders, your pains and
industry to see the same observed, and your Authority to punish the
disobedient, was never more needful then at this time. And if any of you
depart, be sure the hand of the Lord can follow you, whethersoever you go. And
well may you fear, that rather then ye should escape, death will enter in at
your Windows, as our Prophet says in the one and twenteth verse of this
Chapter.

The children of the Prophets said unto Elisha, 2. King, 4. 40. Mors in olla,
vir Dei. O thou man of God, death is in the pot. But well may you fear, that
there will be Mors in domo, mors in olla, mors in lecto, and mors vbique: Death
in the house, death in the pot, death in the bed, and death every where.

If it be Gods will, you shall be safe any where, if it be not Gods will, you
shall be safe no where. Well may you hope of Gods preservation and blessing, if
you faithfully serve him in the place where he has set you: And well may you
fear his wrath and vengeance, if ye flee from the charge which he has laid
(even in this time of visitation upon you.

But what need, have I to admonish you, whose wisdom and godly care does
evidently show it self this distressed time? I will only say this and so
conclude. If you would have your City flourish, be careful to furnish it
with store of Gods Preachers.

For assure your selves, that the more the Gospel is sincerely preached, the
more will sin decay, and the more will the true knowledge and fear of GOD be
planted and grafted in the hearts of the people. And this will be the only
means to remove the just vengeance and wrath of God from this City, and
procure his blessings to be powered upon you.

Thus much I thought good in discharge of the duty and love I bear this
City, as a Neighbor child to deliver unto you. The Lord bless the good
means ye use for preserving your City, and grant a gracious success
thereunto, that the infection, if it be his will, may spread no further: If ye
presently repent, and that unfeignedly, I doubt not, but God in mercy will
remove the plague if not, yet will I not cease to weep for you. (*)

Ephesians 3, 20. 21 Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, be
praise in the church by Christ Jesus, throughout all generations for ever,
Amen.



