CHVRCH-CVSTOMES VINDICATED: IN TWO SERMONS PREACHED AT Kingstone upon Thames:

THE ONE At the Primary Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God RICHARD
by the grace of God late L. B. of Winton, Anno 1628.

THE OTHER At the first Metropoliticall Visitation of the Most Reverend Father
in God WILLIAM by the grace of God Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury his Grace,
etc. July 9. 1635.

BY WILLIAM QUELCH B. D. and R. of East-horsly SURREY.

ROM: 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have received, and avoid them, etc.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Nathaniel Butter near S. Austins Gate at the
Sign of the Pyde Bull. 1636.

To the courteous Readers, especially my Brethren of the CLERGY;
Peace be multiplied, etc.
FOr this end I first set upon this work; and for the same I thought good to
set it forth: had it found the effect of my first desire; I had never thought
of a second publication: But when I understood upon later experience, by the
frivolous exceptions cast out against me, how much I had failed of my
expectation, I knew not which way to come off from private censure, unless I
should put my self and my poor endevors upon the trial of public censure.

To hear of contentions breaking out against the customs of the Church is no
news at all, neither must it stumble us: Ver. 19.
he that for the trial of his children suffers heresy, has his ends in the
least and smallest oppositions: and if it be the will and pleasure of God, by
the light skirmishes of some few to bring to pass a greater good, I shall
learn to magnify the wisdom of the Almighty, that turns the cavills of
contentious men to the further enlargement of his glory. Howsoever it be, thou
have the same that was first delivered, nothing is altered but the outward
dress, much less any word or sentence changed, which I could hear was
subject to exception. If thou light upon any thing worth the reading, thank not
me for my good will, who never intended to make it public, but thank the ill
will of those carping hearers, who put me upon it in mine own defense, and
think of me as of the poorest unworthy Minister of Christ Jesus, who shall be
ever ready upon all occasions to approve my self

Thine, in all Christian offices to be commanded, W. Q.

PErlegi has duas Conciones in 1. Ep. ad Cor. Cap. 11. ver. 16. in quibus nihil
reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quominus cum utilitate
publica imprimantur, ita tamen, ut si non intra quinque menses proxime
sequentes typis mandentur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis 14. Call. Martii. GUIL. BRAY Rmo. P. and D. D. Arch.
Cant. Sacel. Domesticus.

CHVRCH-CVSTOMES VINDICATED.
The first Sermon.
1 COR. 11.16. If any man lust to be contentious, We have no such Custom,
nor the Churches of God.


THE customs of the Church, through the stubborn humors of contentious men,
are grown so obsolete and out of custom in most places, that I fear I may
be thought to break the custom, while I seek to vindicate and defend her
customs.

But when I look back unto purer times, and find how the Church could stand
upon her customs in the very infancy and childhood of the Gospel, Aetatem
habet, Ipsu interrogate. Ioh. 9.23.
before the customs were come to age, I make no doubt but the same customs
being grown at length to man's estate, in the ripeness, and maturity of the
Church, may now have leave to speak for themselves, at least in their own
defense. Si quis videtur contentiosus; If any seem, etc.

Contentions and customs appear unto us at the first sight like two sturdy
and valiant Champions, ready to assault each other in a single combat:
Contention stands up like proud Goliath, swelling and powting against all the
customs of the Churches. 1 Samuel 17.4.
Custom stands up like little David to accept the challenge of Contention, and
bids defiance to the proud Philistime.

Upon the issue of this Skirmish hangs all the peace and liberty of the Church:
for if Contention win the day, and chance to prove master of the field, then
farewell the Church and all her customs; but if the Church prevail and get
the maistery, then down the wind goes contention, and down go they that love
contention.

You would be glad I trow to see the issue of this battle, stay but a while
and stand your ground; and when the Philistime has braved himself against the
armies of the living God, you shall see how little David shall knock him down,
as it were with a stone taken from the Churches Scrip. Non habemus
consuetudinem: Divis.
We have etc.

Contention is the first that makes the challenge, and if you desire to know
the ground of this deadly quarrel; you must be pleased to consider three
things.

1. Time and place where the quarrel first began, and that was Church; Church
of Corinth; Paul himself was yet alive.

2. The nature, and quality of this contention: for it was a poor and slender
quarrel against a Ceremony, and no more.

3. By whom the quarrel was begun, and that is implied here, to be (...) some
busy fellow of a wrangling humor, that loved contention more then peace.

Lo this you have for the notifying of contention: and then for the
Churches-customes you have three like circumstances.

1. The nature and quality of the customs, custom, but upon a decent and
reverend custom.

2. Who they are that maintain the customs; Churches of God.

3. Who were the founders of the customs; custom.

These are the chief heads both of this custom, and of that contention; and
when I shall come in the end to compare them both together, and to lay mouth to
mouth, eyes to eyes, and hands to hands: I mean such a grave and decent
custom, against such a slight and trifling quarrel: Kings 4.34.
the Churches of God that kept the custom against that one single Church that
broke the custom:3 the Apostles of Christ the founders of this custom,
against that one contentious man, the ringleader and broacher of innovation; I
shall think it fit to refer the cause to your own judgment, whether ye think
such a custom maintained by all the Churches, and allowed by the warrant of
the blessed Apostles, be not worthy to beat down such a fond and frivolous
quarrel but newly brought into the Church of Corinth, by that filly
sect-master that stands upon record for a contentious man.

Of all these I shall have fair occasion to speak something.

And first I must begin to deal with contention, a troublesome and turbulent
spirit I am like to find him, Contention what it is.
that loves wrangling as he loves his life, and can no more be tied to any
good order, then the waters of Nyle to the banks of their own channel.

He never appears to us in a still voice, as the Lord appeared unto Eliah; but
whenever he comes, he comes in a tempest, storming and blustering against all
good order, both of Church and State: Did you ever hear the pedigree of
Contention? There was a bastard begotten by anger, nursed by pride, and
maintained by wilful contradiction, and when they came to give him a name,
they bestowed upon him the name of Contention.

As was the name of the child so was his nature, for a soon as ever he began
to go, he went backward like the Sea-crab: as soon as ever he began to read,
he read backward like the Hebrews: as soon as ever he began to row, he
rowed backward evermore, against tide and stream.

Pity such a cross, disorderly mate should find harbor in any civil
society, Psalm. 122.3.
much less in the Church of God, which ought to be composed as a City at
unity. If contention must needs be, let it be sent to Bedlem, or Paris-garden
where it may converse with none but dogs and Bears, or men more wild then
those salvage creatures; never let it enter into Gods inheritance, lest the
fiends of hell take more delight in the quarrels of Gods people, then men are
wont to fancy to themselves when they see the quarrels of dogs and bears.

It were to be wished that these discords of schism and dissension, that make
music only for the devil, may never be heard in the Church of God: but I
fear me as long as the Church consists of men, and men consist of sundry
passions, we shall hardly be free from all contention. The devil is grown
such a cunning politician, that when he cannot rob us of our truth, he will
do the best he can to rob us of our peace; and when he cannot pluck up the
good wheat of wholesome doctrine that is sown in our field by the good
seeds-man, he does all that he can to mingle the wheat with the tares and
darnell of contention. Aug. epist. 48. Neque propter paleam relinquam aream
domini, neque propter pisces malos rumpimus retia.


And what though? shall we therefore forsake the good field, and renounce the
wheat of wholesome doctrine because we find it mingled with some cockle? Shall
we forsake the Church, and shipwreck the faith, and cast off the truth,
because we cannot have it clean from all kind of weeds? Nay rather, if we may
have the word and Sacraments as so cheap a rate, and pay nothing for it but a
little contention, let us never complain of a dear bargain.

Contention has been and will ever be the unwelcome companion of the Church
militant: Christ himself came not into the world to bring peace, Contention
has ever been in all Churches.
but to bring a sword: and if any Church upon earth can show me a perfect
charter of exemption from all contention, I should begin to think that we had
our heaven already upon earth, and that the militant Church were turned
triumphant.

Take a short survey of all the Churches, whether Jewish or Christian, Eastern
or Western, ancient or modern; and you shall not find any one of them that
ever could free themselves from this eating gangrene of contention.

I am sure the Jewish Church had no such privilege: for as long as she swarmed
with sundry sects of Pharisees, and Sadduces, and Essens, and Herodians, and
Hemerobaptists, In the Jewish Church. Vid. Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 13. Philo
Iud. Eusebius. and aliot. In the Christian Chur:
and Samaritans, and I know not what, that differed both in course of life, and
point of belief, how could she be free from all contentions?

But it may be in the Christian Church there was no contention for all that:
No? does Epiphanius reckon up no less then fourscore heresies raging in the
Church of God like the Bulls of Basan, and shall we believe there was no
contention all that while?

But, say they had some contentions in those times betwixt the Orthodox and the
heretics, yet I hope among the Orthodox themselves there was perfect union.
But whatsoever you may think of those times, as if they had rest from all
contention; yet if you knew the differences betwixt the best learned of those
ages: (.i.) Anicetus and Polycarpus, Chrysostom and Epiphanius, apud Eusebius.
eccl: hist. lib. 5. cap. 24. Hieron. part. 1. tract. 3. ep. 36, 37. etc. Ep.
Caeles. pap. ad quosdam Galliarum episcopos.
Jerome and Ruffinus, Stephanus and Cyprian, Victor and the Eastern Churches,
Prosper and the Doctors of France, and many hundreds more that might be named;
you would soon believe that the Churches in their times could hardly be free
from all contention.

But what if contention crept into the Church in after ages, yet I hope in the
Apostles time, and the Churches planted by their hands, we shall not hear of
the least murmuring, or whispering of contention: Surely if ever the Church
were free from all contention, it is most like to be in those days of
innocence; and yet if you look into 1. Cap. of this our Epist. and the 11. ver.
ye shall hear S. Paul complain of some contentions: It is reported to me by
those of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you.

To hear of contentions among the members of the Church was a small matter:
but if you look into the 22. Cap. of S. Luke ver. 24. Among the Apostles
themselves.
you shall hear of contention among the Apostles themselves; and if you look
into the 2. Gal. you shall hear of contention among the chief pillars of the
Church, S. Peter and Paul, and that about no mean point of Christian polity,
that concerned the abrogation of Jewish Ceremonies. Bellarm. 1. tom. cont. 4.
lib 4. Staplet. and alii.


It makes me wonder so much the more why the Church of Rome at this day should
stand so much upon the unity of the Church, and bear us in hand that their
unity and concord in religion is a certain badge and character of the true
Church. They have found that pearl it seems in the field of their Church,
which could never be found in former ages; and though we sell all that we
have, like the good Merchant in the Gospel, to get possession of that pearl,
they will make us believe we shall be gainers by the bargain.

It is a good purchase indeed to buy truth at what rate soever, but to buy
truth attended with unity, were a purchase in my mind beyond the rules of
Numeration.

But is this purchase to be had at Rome? Yes surely: for all the members of
their Church are so colligated and bound together in a kind of subjection and
subordination to one head, that you shall seldom hear of any contention among
them that ever breaks out into open flames.

A happy Church they must needs have, if things be answerable to their vaunts,
but if it do not appear upon just trial out of the best Records of their
own Church, Dr. Halls disswasive from Popery.
that they have contentions as well as we, as great as ours, as loud as ours;
I shall be ready to subscribe to the Church of Rome, and return again to her
communion.

Did you never hear of any difference betwixt the Thomists and the Scotists,
In the Church of Rome.
of any jarres between the Seculars and the Jesuits, of any quarrels among
the Cardinals themselves in the sacred conclave? what Church, what State in
the whole world that is not conscious of their dissentions? and if all these be
not proof enough that their peace comes short of ours, their dissension is more
then ours, let us appeal to Bellarmine himself, the chief Advocate of the
Roman cause, who reckons us more then 200 opinions diversely maintained pro and
con among the Doctors of their Church.

A goodly unity I durst to warrant you that shines in the midst of so many
quarrels, and a goodly Church by the same reason that must be known by this
jarring unity: if they have no better badge and livery of their Church then
such a counterfeit pretended unity, we shall never have cause I dare say either
to be fond of their church, or to be jealous of our own.

And yet it is a wonder to see with what a face of brass and impudence the
Romanists of these times are wont to upbraid us with the quarrels of our
Church, as if Rome had engrossed all the unity: Your Church, say they, Pacianus
citat. a Bellar. Christianus (inquit) est mihi nomen, Cat ^olicus cegnomen.
Ierom. cont. Lucifer. prope fi^em.
what is it but a beast of many heads, patched up with diverse and sundry
factions, while one adheres to Luther, another to Calvin, a third to Zuinglius,
another to Arminius, as if we delighted more to be called from names of men,
then to be called Christians from the name of Christ, or Catholics from the
faith professed by them.

For our parts be it known to all the world we hate to be called from the name
of any man be he what he will, yea though it be the name of Peter and Paul, we
are free enough from those contentions which S. Paul imputes to this Church of
Corinth; 1 Cor. 1.11 12, 13.
and though they impute unto us any other differences which have been always
incident to the purest Churches, they must not think to shake our faith by such
poor and slender exprobrations.

We know that these were the common darts which both the Heathens of old, and
the Turks of latter times were wont to cast against the Christian faith,
Chrysostom: in Act. Aphom. 33. et in ^od Gal. Cypr: de unitate ^^cles. Celsus
apud Origin. lib. cont. Celsum Cortugal. orat. habit. Rhod.
and if they can find no other arguments to confute us, but what they are feign
to borrow from Turks and Heathens, and such as equally concern both them and
us, they will make us think they are hardly driven.

Let them free themselves from their own contentions, and then they may the
better object ours; in the mean while as long as we see no other remedy, we
will set us down by the Church of Corinth, and patiently bear both her lot and
ours.

We can hardly look to be in better state then the Apostolic Churches, and if
they were feign to suffer contention, why should we grudge to bear the like?
our case can hardly be worse then theirs, for they had contentions in this ver.
schisms in the 18. ver. heresies in the 19. ver. and therefore if all these
should fall to our lot, (which God of his mercy turn away from us) yet we
have learned of the blessed Apostle not to think strange of any such trial, as
if some new thing were fallen upon us, but patiently to share in that common
calamity that equally belongs to all the Churches. When all is done, the Church
of Corinth shall be our apology, we suffer no more then she has done, and
seeing we are joined with her in the same cause, let us make inquiry a little
further, and perhaps we shall match her somewhat nearer in the special ground
and reason of contention.

Though every Church has some contention, Contention against a ceremony
yet every Church has not the same. There is a ( talis) for contention as well
as for custom; for one is like the Palmer-worme that eats nothing but the
leaves: another like the Caterpillar that destroys the fruit: and another like
the Canker that devoures the body of religion. Some quarrels are but light and
gentle waves that dally and play with the ship of Christ; others are proud and
lofty surges that crack the cordage of the ship; 1 Leve^ undae. 2 Majora
volumina. 3 Ignei globi.
and some are fiery balls that ascend to heaven, and threaten the safety of the
Church.

Of all the quarrels that ever were moved in the Church, you will think that
this in my text was one of the least: Nothing was opposed, for for ought we
find, but a bare ceremony, and the outward gesture in praying or prophesying
was the only cause of this sharp contention. Vid. ver. 2. and 3.


A poor occasion to make a difference when they were agreed upon the
substance: yet considering withal what mischief may grow upon the Church by
the least quarrel once begun, the Apostle thinks it meet to bestir himself,
and to quench the fire of contention, that it may not break out into greater
flames.

Our wise Apostle was not to learn that a ceremony of it self was of little
reckoning, but when a ceremony is enjoined by lawful authority, Quod minimum
est, minimu^ est, sed in minimo, te fidele^ essemagnum est. Aug. de doct. Chri.
lib. 4.
he knew well enough that obedience or disobedience in a small matter was not
to be counted a small matter.

There is the same reason of obedience or disobedience, whether in smaller or
in greater matters: for it is not the thing commanded that binds the conscience,
but the power from whence the commandment comes; be the thing commanded never
so great, it commends the obedience never the more: be the thing commanded
never so small, it cannot excuse the disobedience.

Christ commends the good servant because he was faithful in the least things,
Mat. 25.25
to teach us that faithfulness or unfaithfulness in the least things cannot
be counted the least thing: well may the least things aggravate the
unfaithfulness, but I am sure of that they cannot excuse it: and therefore as
the Lord himself does often punish the least unfaithfulness, Genesis 3.16, 17.
Number. 15.32.
whether in eating an apple, or gathering of sticks when it is forbidden, with
greater punishments then fouler sins, because it proceeds from mere
wilfulness: so the Apostles of Christ and their lawful successors may safely
punish the least contention against a ceremony, when they see it proceeds from
mere stubbornness, as well as some greater and fouler sins that spring from
weakness and infirmity.

More danger there is in this poor contention then the common sort of men do
commonly think, The danger of such a co^ntention Pro. 18.19.
not only because it kindles a fire among brethren of the sam faith and the
same religion, whose aemulous vyings and mutual contestations among themselves
cannot choose but aggravate and increase the flame, but also because it is
commonly grounded upon I know not what pretense of misguided conscience that
makes the quarrel the more presumptuous.

Other sins, whether of adultery, theft, or drunkenness, dare not appear in
open light: and if they do, you shall find them ready to plead guilty: but the
sin of schism that spurns men on against the orders of the Church, is so
bold and saucy of its own nature, Cypr. lib. 3. ep. 9. Haec sunt initia
haereticorum, ut sibi placea^t, et Praepositu^ superbo tumore contemnant. Psa.
55. ver. 12. and 13.
that it ever stands upon justification, and being vainly past up with
self-conceit, it dares outface all authority.

Other sins fight against the Church, not directly, but by way of
consequence; but this fights against her with downright blows: and therefore as
the Prophet David, in a figure of Christ, complains more grievously of the
plots of his nearest friends, then of all the treacheries of known foes; so the
Church of Christ his only Spouse has more cause to complain of the civil
uncivil wars of her own children, then of all the oppositions of foreign
enemies, that seek to bring her into bondage.

It Is a maxim agreed upon by weeping cross that contention goes before
destruction: there is no State nor Kingdom of the world but have made it true
by their own experience: and if the Church of God be divided against her self
by sundry factions, and her children like a rowted disordered Army begin to
fall upon their own fellows, what privilege have we more then others against
the general sentence of our Savior. A Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand. Mat. 12.25


Optatus said of the factions of the Donatists, that were not much unlike to
these contentions, that betwixtour yea, Inter licet nostrum, and non licet
vestram nuta^t and remiga^t ^nime Christianorum. Optat. cont. Parmen.
and your nay, the cause of Religion lies a bleeding; and have not we brought
it to the same pass by our domesticke quarrels among our selves, that betwixt
the conformity of some, and the inconformity of other some, many a Christian
soul stands unresolved, and means to continue a mere neutrall.

As long as the languages are confounded, the building of the Church can never
go forward; as long as the ship is tossed with waves, many are afraid to come a
shipboard, some that are without are loath to come in, and some that are within
are loath to continue; so the poor Church being suspected and forsaken on both
sides, is feign to complain with the Prophet Jeremy: Woe is me, that ever I
was made the cause of contention.

We cannot choose but see, unless we wilfully shut our eyes, Auximus Philippu^
nos ipsi Athenienses.
how much our adversaries are enriched by these contentions: how many good
professors upon these grounds have leapt aside into the tents of Popery: how
many quier and peaceable congregations have been torn and distracted into
sundry factions: how many zealous and painful laborers only for the cause of
their bare conformity are grown suspected to their own flocks: and which is
most to be lamented, many a faithful and learned Prelate that should be
counted worthy of double honor, is traduced as a favourer of Popish tyranny,
because he labors and strives (as S. Paul does here) to beat down these fond
and trifling quarrels.

Oh the day, that ever religion should be guilty of so much irreligion! Tanium
religio potiat suadere malerum?
Oh, that the Church should suffer martyrdom in a heap of vain unnecessary
quarrels! Have we not quarrels enough against the Church of Rome for her
Purgatory, Cumque superba soret Babylon spolianda trophaeis. etc. Luc: initio.
and Transubstantiation, and prayer for the dead, and invocation of Saints, and
adoration of Images, and pretended infallibility, and many other points of the
same alloy, but we must sheath our swords in our own bowels, and wilfully
invite our own destruction?

O ye sons of men, how long will you love vanity, how long will you dote
upon your own misery? Are we all agreed about the garment, and shall we
differ about the trimming? are we agreed about the freehold, and shall we
quarrel about the bounds? Away with those unkind, Certatum est totis etc. in
commune nefas. Philip. 2.
unhappy contentions that procure the loss and shame of both sides, If there
be any joy, if any love, if any compassion either to your selves, or to the
Church, or to the cause of reformation, fulfill my joy, and the joy of our
Apostle, and the joy of the Church, and the joy of Christ Jesus, and with it
the joy of your own souls, that we may hear no more of these fond
contentions.

It Is a shame to be seen in any quarrel against a ceremony, Co^tentio^ against
the bareing of the bead in praying and prophesying.
yet some ceremonies there are among the rest so nearely concerning the honor
of God, that a wilful and stubborn opposition cannot choose but aggravate and
increase the fault.

If ever contention against a ceremony could threaten to bring us within danger
of sin, I doubt this quarrel in my Text will trench hard upon it, because it
trenches so near upon Apostolic power.

The very Apostles of Christ had a hand themselves in this holy custom; for
among some other orders composed by them for the furtherance and decoration of
Gods service, they ordained this rule for all the Churches, Ver. 2. and 3.
that the men when they came to prayer or prophecy should uncover their heads,
and the women should veyle or cover their heads, as often as they appeared in the
congregation. Theophilact. Pet. Mart. and aliiin loc. Gualt in loc. probat hunc
Ethnicorum suisse more^: idque ex Plutarch. and Virgilio. Jdem Chrysostom.
graecoru^ fuisse institutum: and certum est hunc mo. rem hodie apud ^urcas
invaluisse.


That this injunction was in force in the Apostles time, for ought I find, no
man denies: yea some there be that give the reason of that Canon, that the late
converted Christians might not fashion themselves to the customs of the
Heathens, where the men were wont to sacrifice with their heads covered, and
the women with their heads bare, and their hair disheveld, as a greater sign
and pledge of holiness.

Whatsoever the reason were, I am sure of this, that the one member at least of
that reverend order, that I mean that concerns the men, is so fully ratifyed
and confirmed by the Canon of our Church, that no man may presume to cover his
head during the whole time of divine Service, Canon. 1^
without the breach of Church order.

For the women indeed we have no commandment in our Church, for nature it self
and the rules of modesty have taught them freely to yield conformity. But for
the men, at least some of them in some places, where they have been traind in
a course of schism, they are so loath to stoop to this Apostolic order, that
the Church is fain to interpose her power to bind the^ to it by a double bond.

That any man covers of wilful stubbornness against the Canon of the Apostle,
it were little charity to believe: for my part I rather impute it to mere
weakness; and could they be thoroughly resolved that the reason of this Canon
were yet in force, I presume there is none of them all of what sort soever, but
would think themselves bound to yield conformity.

They think perhaps that this Apostolic order may concern the Ministers of
the Church, Objectio^s against the bareing of the head, etc Ob. 1.
because it is laid upon fuch as pray and prophecy: but by their leave, if the
hearing of a Sermon be not prophesying as well as the preaching, and that in
the sense and meaning of our own Apostle, Ver. 4.
I desire to know how the same Apostle in the next words immediately following
could apply the same words of praying and prophesying as well to the women as
the men, Ver. 5.
when they were not allowed by his own rule either to speak or preach in the
congregation? 1 Cor. 14.34. and 35. Ob. 2.


But say it concern the people as well as the Ministers, as being equally
engaged in praying and prophesying, yet perhaps it may lay a tie upon the
people of those times, and not upon the Churches in after ages. Dr. Field, lib.
4. ca. 20
It Is true that all customs of what sort soever, are things dispensable in
their own nature, yea the very customs of the Apostles themselves are no
certain and perpetual rules to all Churches to abridge their liberty in
things indifferent. And what of that? will any man deny them a binding power
for the time being while they are allowed by the present Church, because the
Church has power to change when time and place shall so require? no surely,
but the stamp and impresse of the present Church must make them current for
the time being: and seeing this custom is allowed as you heard before, and
that under the seal of our own Church, let no man presume to strive against
it as long as it stands so allowed, unless he desire to seem contentious.

Perhaps you may say, this Apostolic Canon may not be suitable to these times,
Ob. 3.
for the Apostle seems to allow no covering at all, Ver. 4.
and if that should be strictly observed in this crazie age, we should soon
make the Churchyard full, and the Church empty. Well, be it so: and what of
that? were there not any weak in the Apostles time as well as now? yes surely:
why then no doubt the exception is employed, though it be not expressed in the
Text, to show that if we conform our selves as near as we can, and make use
of a coyfe or nightcap in stead of a hat (as our Church has dispensed with the
Apostles rule) Began. ut supra.
in case of weakness and infirmity, we shall never incur the Apostles censure,
nor seem to the Church to be contentious.

But the most of our people for ought I see are ready to uncover in the time of
prayer, Ob. 4.
only they stick at the strictness of some that require the baring of the
head in the time of preaching: belike they are willing to show reverence when
they speak unto God by their earnest prayers, but they think it too much to
show the like when God speaks to them by his sacred ordinance. Let me ask
them, is it not as great a favor to receive a blessing, as to crave it? and
shall we not receive the blessing with as much reverence when it is offered, as
we would crave it when it is wanting? Saint Paul for his part makes no odds
betwixt prayer and prophecy: and if any man think that the Canon of the Church
will not reach to both because it mentions no more but the whole service, let
him please to compare the words of the Canon to the rubric of the service
book, Immediately after the Nicen Creed.
and he shall find that the Sermon or exhortation is no other but a part of
divine Service.

There is no dispensation for ought I can see more for the Sermon then for the
prayer: Ob. 5. Cypr. ep. 73. Quale. est ut quia hoc Novatianus facere audet,
nos putemusnon esse saciendum.
neither can I believe for mine own part that any man of reason or sound
religion would ever stick at this reverend order, but that it is the use of the
Church of Rome, with which they dare not comply in outward ceremonies, for
fear of the danger of superstition. Indeed it is like enough this Apostolic
order has been abused, and scarce can you name any thing else that has not
been abused to superstition, yet when the thing it self is charged upon us by
the Apostle, August. debap.con. Don lib. 6 cap. 44 Jpsi gentiles sl quid rectum
babuerunt non improbarunt sanctipatres, et in hunc modum lib 3. ca 11.
and the superstition is brought upon it by the fault of men, we must not
presume for the fault of men to stir a duty of Saint Paul's prescribing, but we
must learn a better way of reformation, to mend the fault of our own
devising, and let the duty still remain.

To be wary of superstition is a good thing, but there is another extreme to
be avoided, which religion hates as well as that: and if we run so far from
superstition that we fall into profaneness, and think we have never driven
superstition far enough, unless we drive together with it all decent order
from the Churth of God, I fear we shall bring a mischief upon the cause of
religion, while we seek to avoid an inconvenience.

Say the Lord has forbidden superstition, Ageneral apology for the bareing of
the head in prayer and prophecy. Psalm. 2.11. Heb. 12.28. etc.
yet I trow he has commanded reverence all along, and if the baring of the
head in the house of God during the time of divine service be not a sign of
holy reverence, I am yet to learn what reverence means.

Sure we make it a sign of reverence in civil worship, for servants uncover
to their masters, children to their parents, subjects to their prince, yea and
to the chair of his state to, as a type and figure of his presence: and will
you refuse to give the same reverence in divine worship to the great King of
all the earth, when he claims it of you by the same titles of respect, Mal.
1.5.
If I be a father, where is my honor; if I be a Lord, where is my reverence?

You will not come into the court of a Prince as Chrysostom notes, but you will
compose your selves in gate, and eye, and habit, and gesture, Hom. 24. in Act.
and 36. in 1. Cor. Idem Martyr, in loc. and Erasm. de morum civil. in templo in
huc modum: Si quis regem hominem alloquuturus circumstante procerum corona nec
caput aperiat, nec genu flectat, non iam pro rustico sed pro insano haberetur.
least you may offend in any respect, and will ye come into the palace of the
great King with wandering eyes, and mincing feet, and heads covered, as if you
made no more of the house of God, then of a tavern or barbars shop?

I hear good Jacob crying out when the Lord appeared to him by the way to
Haran: Genesis 28.19, 20. Lev. 19 30 Exodus 30.18.
Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware; how fearful and
terrible is this place, this is no other but the house of God, and the gate of
heaven: and can not thou behold the presence of God in the assemblies and
congregations of his Saints, when thou speak to him by thy zealous prayers,
or he to thee by his sacred word?

I hear the Lord charging the Jews, that they should reverence his very
Sanctuary, as being the place where the Lord appeared; and shall not we
reverence his word, and his sacraments, and his oracles, and his ordinances,
when we appear before him in his holy Sanctuary?

Did the wise King give it in charge, that we should look to our feet when we
enter into Gods house, Eccl. 4.17.
and is there no regard to be had to our heads? Exodus 3.5.
Was Moses commanded to put off his shoes when he appeared before the Lord, and
do we think much to put off our hatts? 1 Samuel 5.5.
Did the Philistims give so much unto Dagon, and the Syrians so much to their
god Rimmon, 2 Kings 5.18.
and cannot we afford as much as they, to the great Creator of heaven and
earth?

Let me ask the question with divine Salvian, Wherefore do ye come to the
house of God, Anides ta^tum ingredimu ad placandum simul et exacerbandu^ etc.
anejusdemest officis indulgentiam poscere and iracundiam provocare?
if you show no more regard to his holy ordinances? Do ye come to pacify and
assuage his wrath, and do ye kindle and provoke his wrath? Is it the same
work both to honor God, and dishonor him too? To sue for his favor, and set
a bar against his favor? Will thou presume to offer unto God that surly
service, which thou would take in scorn from thine own servant? Must God
take that for an honor to himself, which thou thy self would take for a
foul dishonor? Must he account it a pacification, which thou thy self
would take for a provocation? Away with such a proud and saucy submission,
away with such a rude, unmannerly service; Let us never be guilty of such
dishonor unto God, Ver. 4 supr:
Let us never be guilty of such dishonor to our selves: If we stand not so
much upon our own honor, yet take heed how we betray the honor of God; if
we fear not so much the censure of men, Sigenus humanum and mortalia temaitis
arma, at sperate Deum. etc.
yet take heed how we fall into the hands of God: Let it never be said of the
Christian religion, that the heathens worship their own handy works with more
reverence and devotion, then we adore the maker of all things: let it never be
laid to the reformed Churches, that we have chosen to our selves an easy and
slovenly kind of service, Stapleton orat. quodl:
to the shame and dishonor of religion: If other Churches are guilty of that
fault, oh let not us suffer for their offense; if any of our peevish brethren
have offended, oh let not our mother bear the blame. She has done what she
can for the honor and reverence of her husband, for she has made a law to
bind her children, she has practiced that law in the godly examples of her
governors, she has censured the breach of it in some of her stubborn and
rebellious children; and if all this be not enough to persuade reverence, what
can she do more, but give them over to the just censure of her husband, who
will surely prove a sharp avenger upon the heads of those that love contention.

We have seen the ground of this vain contention, together with the time it
began to hatch; By who^ this contention was set a foot.
and now could we search a little further, and find out the author of this
quarrel, we might do a gracious work to the Church of God, to draw the
pedigree of Contention.

That some notorious schismatique began this quarrel, we may easily judge by
S. Paul's ( Si quis) no famous schism ever began without some head and
ringleader of the faction, yet because the head of this trifling faction, may
seem to be a man of unworthy parts, as most of that brood have ever been, the
Apostle would not vouchsafe to give him a name, for fear he should give him
too much honor. (...)


All the title he gives him here is ( contentiosus, a contentious man,) to
teach us that whosoever strives against the orders of the Church, specially
those that tend to reverence, he may enjoy the name of a contentious man, and
must not look for a better title.

Whatsoever may be thought of other ceremonies, yet. I am sure this quarrel in
my text will bear the title; Vide canon. 18. ut supr:
for when the Church allows a coife or nightcay in case of weakness and
infirmity, and men, shall wilfully refuse to enjoy that favor, to pick a
quarrel with the Church of God; what Advocate will undertake to plead their
cause that they may not stand upon record for contentious men?

I should be loath to say that the bare omission of this order, or any other
should conclude a man to be contentious; Nay, S. Paul himself does not go so
far, till he had showed the ground of this holy order: but if any shall
wilfully oppose themselves after lawful warning and instruction, then we have
our warrant from the blessed Apostle to write them down for contentious men.

To seem contentious is a small matter, but S. Paul himself goes a great
deal further, and sets him down to be (...), that is to say, a lover of
contention, as if he loved contention as he loved his life, and doted upon it
as the wanton dotes upon his mistress.

We know it is one thing to fall into contention, and another thing to fall in
love with contention it self: Psalm. 120.5, 6, 7.
David himself may fall into contention and singa [ Vae] to himself, when he
cannot avoid it, but to be enamored and besotted with the love of contention is
such a fearful sickness, and frenzy of the soul, that it seems to be past
all hope of cure. Pro. 17.19.


Where this love of contention is, there is much transgression, Nay there is a
whole swarm of ugly vices, Iam. 3.16.
there is envy, there is pride, there is tumult, there is malice, there is
revenge, there is murder, there is sedition, there is treason, there is
schism, there is heresy, there is all things; as if all the maladies of the
soul were epitomized and summed up in this word, ( contentious)

Take but a view of this one contention in my text, and see what bordering
mischief hangs upon it: the Apostle is so well acquainted with all the
neighborhood, The love of conte^tio^ tends to schism and that seldom ends
till it comes to heresy.
that in the compass of two Viz. 18, and 19.
verses he makes it shake hands with schism and heresy, as if they both took
head from the love of contention.

Perhaps the neighborhood of schism will hardly stagger us, for many think it
a title of honor, and when they suffer in that cause, they think they suffer
as a Christian: but S. Paul that was better acquainted with the nature of
schism, is bold to rank it with the foulest sins that can be named,
Adultery, Murder, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Gal. 5.19. and 20. Lib. 2. de bapt.
cont. Donat. ca. 6. Idem Optat. 1. lib. contr: Parmen: Quis dubitet celeratius
commissum quod gravius punitum.
and such like; and S. Augustine will tell us, if we can believe him, that
when it is put on with wilful violence, and maintained with heat of
pharisaicall pride, it proves no lesser sin in the sight of God, then either
Adultery, Theft, or Murder, and has been commonly revenged with greater
punishments.

If you are not stirred with the danger of schism that borders so near upon
the love of contention; what do you think of the nature of heresy that is
commonly entailed to the sin of schism?

Surely the Apostle had never coupled heresies and schisms both together, but
that he knew well enough that schism is nothing else but a green heresy
newly hatched in the Church of God, and heresy nothing else, but a grown
schism that is come to ripeness and perfection.

There is neither of them both but spring from the same fountain, for
contention is the head of both the factions, and as it spurs on the one with
earnest violence against the discipline of the Church; so it eggs on the other
with headstrong fury against the doctrine of the Church.

Though every contentious man be neither a schismatic, nor an heretic, yet
he has a disposition to be made both, he runs so fierce upon a full carere
of headstrong passion, like a man that gallops down a hill, that he can
hardly take up and stay his pace until he come to the bottom of heresy.

No man becomes an heretic on a sudden, but winds into it by certain
steps; and lo the stairs are set by the blessed Apostle: First contention, in
this verse; then schism in the 18. then heresy in the 19. to teach us that if
we desire to avoid heresy, we must first begin to cut off schism, and if we
desire to fly the danger of schism, we must first begin to strike at
contention.

These waters of contention must be stopped in the first breach, Pro. 17.14
that they may not turn to an inundation.

These Bab lonish brats must be dashed against the walls, Psalm. 137.9
that they may not grow to further mischief.

This Cockatrices egg must be cracked in the shell, that it may not bring
forth a flying serpent.

Oh who will take these foxes, these young foxes in the neast, that they may
not infest the tender grapes! Can. 2.19.


Oh who will quench these coals of dissension, that they may not increase to a
greater flame.

Stand to your tackle O ye Champions of the Lord, and let not the enemy get
ground upon you: If it be possible, as much as in you lies have peace with all
men: If discord arise betwixt man and man, let it never incroach upon Gods
inheritance, Behold how good and joyful it is brethren to live together in
unity: O blessed Peace, we are all thy clyents; nothing can comfort us without
thy company, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; Ps. 122.6, 7
they shall prosper that love thee, peace be within thy walls, and
plenteousnesse within thy palaces: for my brethren and companions sake, I
cannot choose but wish thy peace.

Let every one bestirre himself in the Lords work, as it were in a time of
common danger; one to speak for peace, another to labor for peace, another to
fight for peace, another to pray for peace, that so by the blessing of God upon
our joint endeavors, we may live to see the happy greeting and salutation of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 85.10
to the joy and comfort of all our hearts.

Mercy and truth shall meet together, righteousness and peace have kissed each
other. Truth shall bud ont of the earth, and righteousness shall look down
from heaven: The Lord shall show his loving kindness, and our land shall give
her increase: Righteousness shall go before him, and he shall direct our
goings in the way.

Even so be it: Lord say Amen.

CHVRCH-CVSTOMES VINDICATED.
The second Sermon.
1 COR. 11.16. If any man lust to be contentious, We have no such Custom,
nor the Churches of God.


IN this very place upon the like occasion about five years since, we made an
entrance upon this theme, and being now pressed again upon the same service,
I thought my self directed and led by the hand to the further explanation of
the same Scripture, that as I spoke before you at that time of the contentions.
of the Church that let themselves against the customs, so now I may speak
before you of the Churches customs, that strenuously oppose against contention.

What I then delivered concerning contention, I will not call to your mind
again, I desire that custom being defendant may have a fair and legal
hearing, as well as contention that was the plaintiff in the cause.

Whether any such spirits live amongst us that deserve the title of
contentious, I could not say, nor yet can: for my part I confess I know of
none, neither do I speak to gall any, I did but only put a case as S. Paul
does, Conditionalis propositio nihil ponit in esse.
(and a mere supposition inferrs nothing) but if any be, or hereafter may be,
though it be more then appears to me, yet you may know by the case put, how to
file their teeth, and muzzle their mouths, that they may not infest the flock
of Christ.

If you know of any contentious men what ever they be, How we may deal with
contentious men.
that live like the Salamander in the fire, and love to wrangle and spend their
breath against the decent orders and constitutions of the Church, you were best
to ask of the blessed Apostle, and he will teach you how to handle them.

You must be sure to use all gentle means, before you come to sharpness and
severity: for many will lead, that will not drive, and yield themselves to a
gentle entreaty, that will not be forced by compulsion.

You shall do well in the first place to set before them your own example,

You may take occasion to commend them for their zeal and strictness in some
thing else; Apostle has taught you, ver. 2.

You must not fail to instruct them in the meaning and signification of the
ceremonies, Apostle taught you, ver. 3.

What shall I say? you may persuade them by reason, by authority, by decency,
by nature it self, for none of these has Saint Paul omitted, and if all this
be not able to persuade (for who can persuade a contentious man, you shall not
persuade though you do persuade, not persuade his practice I mean, though you
persuade and convict his conscience) then you must bear him down with the
Churches custom, and tell him plainly to his face that the customs of the
Church must stand in force maugre the spite of contentious men.

The power of custom no doubt is great, and that of the Church not least of
all, but lest I may be thought to press the custom before I have taught you
to understand the custom, you shall give me leave to speak something
concerning the theorie of the custom, that so I may rise with the more force
to the practice and observation of the custom.

While I entreat of Church order, me thinks I am bound to keep order, and
because the nature of the subject will scarce afford any quaint order, I will
content my self with a plain method.

Three things there be that offer themselves.

1. The use of the Church in having of customs. 2. The right of the Church in
making of customs. 3. The power of the Church in pressing of customs.
For the custom, Custom what it is
first, to understand that thoroughly, you must please to look back to the 2.
ver. there the Apostle mentions some ordinances or traditions which he had
delivered to the Church of Corinth: 2. there he commends their zealous care,
because they had kept the most of them. 3. and then he condemns their halting
obedience, because they had failed in some particulars.

What those ordinances were is all the matter that concerns us, and because
there is mention made of one or two, and the Apostle tells the reason of them,
we must judge of the Lion by his paw, and guess that the rest were all of the
same stamp, being all commended at one time to one and the self same Church of
Corinth.

What our Apostle meant by his ordinances, ver. 2. and by his orders, ver. ult.
the same he means by his customs here: all matters of rite and outward
ceremony annexed to the preaching of the Word and administration of the
Sacraments, not as parts of Gods holy worship, but as appendices thereunto
only for the order of Gods house, and disposition of his service.

Such were the customs of the Church of Corinth, Such customs allowed in all
Churches.
and such customs as these were about time and place, and outward gesture,
whether it be kneeling, standing, bowing, crossing, uncovering, or whatsoever
else of the same alloy, as they were freely used in the Church of Corinth, so
they must needs be allowed in every age in all the assemblies of the Christians.

You shall never hear of any famous Church since the Apostles time that has
not freely enjoyed some customs of this kind; and you shall never read of any
learned orthodox father since the Apostles time that ever oppugned the use of
these customs. In the primitive Church. August. ep. 118. ad Ian. Amb. in 4.
Ephesians. Socra. hist. li. 5. ca. 22. z^zomen. li. 7. ca. 9. Tertul. de veland.
vir.


I could easily show you upon good authority that all the ancient Churches had
their several customs, and that while they enjoyed the same faith, and which
is more to be observed and admired, the difference and contrariety of their
customs did neither dissolve the bond of charity, nor disturb the unity of
religion.

The Apostolic Churches had their customs to, yea, for ought we know,
several customs, yet all by Saint Paul's free allowance: In the Apost.
churches.
for though he stover a little as good cause he had against a newfangled
custom of their own devising, which contentious men would feign keep up, yet
withal he seems to imply by way of concession, that they had some customs
of another kind, which he would not suffer to be borne down, by the heat of
wilful opposition.

Those customs what ever they were, were not only allowed to the Church of
Corinth, In all the Apost. churches.
but to all the Churches of that time, or at least to many of them; for the
Apostle does not speak in the singular number, as of one Church, but in the
plural number, as of many. And if the Churches in the purest times had all
their customs, and those in the Apostles time their customs to, I wonder why
the Churches in these times, and the Church of England among the rest, the
gracious Mother of us all, may not be quietly suffered to enjoy her customs.

Were the ceremonies and orders of the church an ornament to religion in the
Apostles days, and are they now become in these latter times a stain and
blemish to religion? had the Churches of God their earerings, their bracelets,
and their jewels in the nonage and childhood of religion, and must they now be
stripped of all in the growth and ripeness of the gospel? Alas poor mother,
what have thou done to be so shamefully used of thine own children? alas good
children, what do you mean to offer such wrong to your dear mother? Did
David bring a scorn upon his person when he uncovered himself before his
subjects, zSam. 6.20
and would not you bring a scorn upon your mother if you should uncover her
shame before all her children? Psutarch. Cat. Vtic.
Did Cato Vtican draw a scorn upon his justice when he went to his pretorian
seat without his robes, and may not we bring the like upon Gods service, if we
should repair to the seat of God in common garments? I beseech you for the
honor of God, for the honor of religion for the honor of your selves, think
upon your bold and rash adventures: it is not the custom she regards so much
as your obedience to the custom: and if you be so stiff and cruel to your
mother, that she may not enjoy her ancient customs, why should she allow your
ancient discipline (as you call it) which you can never demand upon better
warrant? You say the Apostles had the Discipline, but we are sure of this, they
had the customs, and if you seek to rob us of those rites which we know the
Apostles once delivered, why should we give way to your new pretended form of
Geneva discipline, which I doubt the Apostles never heard of? Show us that
warrant for your discipline, as we have showed you for our customs, and we
shall have cause to hearken to you: In the mean while we have right enough to
enjoy our ceremonies by the Apostles leave if not by yours; and though you
think it a ragge of Rome, and a relic of Popery and superstition; yet we
shall rejoice and triumph at all your taunts, as long as we can say with the
blessed Apostle, habemus consuetudinem, we have a custom, etc.

To have a custom is not much, Right of the Chu: in holding the customs
but all the matter is by what pretended right we hold the customs.

No man hears of the customs of the Church for the ordering and disposing of
Gods service, but presently he begins to examine our Patent, and to renew the
question of those Priests and Elders, Qua potestate? Mat. 21.23
By what authority do you these things, and who gave you that authority?

The Church I trow will do nothing without a warrant, and if she have that
warrant from her husband, bequeathed unto her in his Testament, read us the
Will and it suffices; But if she take her power from the will of man, or from
the favor of Princes, or from the authority of her governors; then you must
give us leave to put in a caveat, until it be tried by the Law.

Lo this is the plea of all the sectaries in the world, Nulla specie
illustriore s^duci pos sunt miseri Christians, etc. Calv. adver. Anabapt.
[Shew us your ceremonies in the word of God and we shall be willing to obey]
and it prevails the more with many a man, because it seems to give to the
written word: but if it appear upon just trial that the word of God (with
honor and reverence be it spoken) was never constituted as the judge for the
special designation of particular ceremonies; then we come upon them, Luke
11.22
like the strong man armed in the Gospel, that take away their weapons wherein
they trust, and liave them nothing to object.

Whilst I take upon me to make this good, Particular customs depend not upon
the immediate and express warrant of the word.
let no man think I dishonor the Scriptures; let shame and confusion fall to
my portion, if I cast any blurre upon that sacred volume: I know well that it
is the privilege of the Scripture to be the only rule of faith and manners,
and it was the only scope of the holy Apostles Ioh. 20.30
to leave a perfect record of all those things that might essentially conduce
to our salvation: For other accidental adventitious circumstances that were no
part of the service of God, but only an ornament to the service, it seemed not
good to the Spirit of God that they should pass by the same Patent.

Well may they pass in general terms (as many things are conveyed in every
deed under the name of the appurtenances) but they are never expressed in that
gracious Patent by any special intimation.

Well may they belong to those traditions which the Apostle delivered by word
of mouth, 2 These. 2.15.
but they can be no part of that holy tradition which he delivered to the
Church by his written Epistle.

Well may you refer them to those rituall orders which our Apostle promised
to compose when he came to Corinth, ver. ult.
but you cannot refer them to that heavenly doctrine of which the Apostle
says a little before; Accepi a Domina, ver. 23.
I have received from the Lord.

The truth is, all that I can find in the new Testament concerning ceremonies,
is nothing else but a general warrant, that you have in express terms: 1
Car. 14.40. 1 Cor. 14.40.
That all things be done decently, and According to order; but for the
special practisie and application of this order; whether this or that be more
agreeable to the rule, there the word is so mute and ^^lent, that you (...)
find the least title.

No doubt the Apostles composed some special orders: Calvin. Theophil. and a^^
in (...).
S. Paul (...) composed the Churches observed what he delivered; and if (...)
of those can be found in (...) Scriptures, why should we look for a special
warrant for the ordering and disposition of things indifferent.

If the Churches were bound to those strait conditions, The Church is not ti^d
to any. (...) such warrant in matter of custom.
there is none of them all for ought I can see, but have forfeited their
recognisance long ago, in as much as they have used some special customs
which were not expressed in the sacred Scriptures.

Cartwright himself, Page 22. sect. 1. and 2. apud Dr. Whitgift answer to the
defense, etc.
the great scourge of all our customs, while he seeks to bind us to the
special warrant of the word for all particulars, is forced to confess for the
Jewish Church, that she had many and sundry customs, at least twenty for our
one, about sacrificing, and preaching, and burying, and marrying, and fasting,
etc. which were no where expressed in the law of Moses. Vid. S. Bas. ep 63.
Cypr: l. 10. ep. 12. and l. 4 ep. 6. Epist. ad Vict. Rom apud E^. seb. l. 5.
cap. 25. and 26.


Whether the Christian Church had the same liberty no man can doubt that has
read any thing; for beside the records of the ancient Fathers, who give us some
hints of sundry customs about prayer, and baptism, and singing of Psalms,
and celebration of Easter, which I could never find in the word of God: Adver.
Praxeam and lib. de corona militis.
Tertullian for his part is resolute and peremptory upon his own knowledge,
that for matter of rite and outward order, Si legem expost^^es scriptu^^r (...)
i^venies nu^^am: If you look for the Law of the word of God, you shall be sure
to find none.

But to show this liberty of the Church in some particulars. Vid. Hila.
praefat. in Ps. Ie^o^^. advers. Lucifer. Just. Mart. lib. quaest. idem
confirmat. Synod. Ni^. can 20.


Where can you find in the holy Scriptures that we ought to pray standing on
the Lords day? yet that was the custom of the ancients for a certain season,
to preserve the memory of the resurrection.

Where can you show in the word of God that we ought to communicate every day?
yet that was the use in the ancient Church, Hieron. ep ad Lu^n. and Aug. ep. ad
Casulanum.
to keep the memory of the passion.

Where do you read in the word of God that you ought to receive the Communion
fasting? yet that was the universal custom of all the Church in Saint
Augustines time, Epist. 118. ad Ianuar.
to preserve the honor of the blessed Sacrament.

To be short, if you think the letter of the word be so requisite to every
custom, you were best to survey the writings of the Apostles, and see what
order you can find for standing holidays: what special warrant for set fasts
upon certain days: what express charge to keep the first day of the week for
the Christian Sabbath: Vid Dr. Field, li. ^. ca. 20. and Episc. Elien^^^ tract.
de Sab. pap. 98.
what express immediate warrant to christen or baptize a young Infant: I doubt
you will find no more but a general warrant for any of these, though they have
been constantly observed in all ages: and if every of these have been held by
custom, being only grounded upon the general warrant of the Scriptures, and
deduced from thence by good consequence without any special intimation, why
should we be tied to a special order for the ruling and disposing of every
ceremony?

If the special warrant of the Word be so necessary, you were best to blame
the Apostles of Christ, The Apostles never composed any set form of outward
rite. Instit. li. 4. ^a. 10. sect. 30.
because they forgot to entreat of particular rites: and if a general warrant
be not sufficient, you were best to blame the Churches of God, because they
took too much upon them.

For the Apostles, first, you cannot blame them; for Calvin himself can tell
you that they had no commission from the Lord to set down a form of outward
discipline; inasmuch as he foresaw how that depended upon the state of the
times, neither could he judge any one form to be agreeable to all people.

He knew well enough that the Church was subject to waxes and wanes, to fulls
and changes, and vicissitudes; and therefore as a rare and cunning workman can
hardly make a garment for the moon, as Plutarch notes, that should equally fit
her at all seasons, as well in the new as in the full, no more could the
Apostles judge any one form of unchangeable custom to be agreeable to all
times and the various conditions of all people. All particulars in this kind
depend upon the authority of the Church.


But then perhaps you will blame the Church because she presumes to run of her
self without a special commission for every custom: No surely, but where the
Word of God is dumb and silent, there the voice of the Church must be
attended: In this case the very silence of the word gives consent that the
cause belongs to another court: and seeing the word is silent concerning
ceremonies, and speaks nothing of them in explicit terms, where may we look
for a certain direction and resolution in that case, but from the power of the
Church, and from the authority of her pastors? Ep. ad Casulanum, In quibu^
(...) certi statuit script. m^s populi Dei and instituta majorum pro lege
temenda sunt.


Saint Augustine being asked his opinion concerning a custom used in his time,
takes occasion to answer in brief, not only for that, but for all others of
the same stamp, that where the Word of God determines no certainty, there the
custom of the Church, and the constitutions of her Pastors are to be taken for
a law.

That this was the general judgment of all the Churches in all ages, if any
man doubt, let him read the Canons of the Councels: Beza. lib. conf. fidei
Chri. ca. 5.
for why should the Councels be called together to order the government of the
Church, and to settle the form of outward discipline, but that they held it a
maxim in all ages, that the Church had power of things indifferent.

There is no Divine of our own side of any note that stick at this power,
Beza. conf. fidei. Gualt. praefat. in 2. Cor. Zuin. li. de bapt. Chem. loc.
com. tit. tradit. Mar. in 1 Cor. 1. Calv. com. in loc.
so it go no further: for besides the judgment of Beza, Bucer, Zuinglius,
Chemnitius, Peter Martyr, and generally all the Worthies of these latter times
that freely allow it with one consent, you shall take the opinion of Calvin,
one for all, who sets it down for a certain rule upon the light he drew from
this present Cap. that every Church of what place soever may safely compose
such a form of discipline, as may be most agreeable to it self, because the
Lord therein has prescribed no certainty.

The truth is, the Apostle himself is so clear in this, that no man can make
any further doubt: for when he seeks to suppress an upstart custom by a (non
habemus talem,) and grounds himself upon this reason, because they nor the
Churches had none such, what does he but infer by way of consequence, that
the practice of the Church; and determination of her Pastors, is warrant enough
for any ceremony.

It makes me wonder the more, and who does not wonder at the froward humor of
some peevish Novelists, that think all the practice of the Church in things
indifferent, to be nothing else but usurpation, and all her decent and reverend
customs that serve for the furtherance of GODs service to be nothing else but
a mere wilworship.

Their spite is so great against the present government, because it crosses
their selfe-will'd humors, that they will scarce allow that power to the
Church in the meanest things, that every Churchwarden and mean Artificer
would soon challenge, if they might be left to their own liberty.

Belike the Seers of the Lord are become blind, that they cannot discern the
meanest things; or else the stewards of the Lord are become unfaithful, that
they may not be trusted with the poorest ceremony.

But well fare the good and courteous Samaritan; he was not half so strait to
the good Inkeeper when he gave him the care of the wounded traveller in the
Gospel, so willing was he to enlarge his favor, that beside the two pence he
left to discharge the reckoning, he gave him leave to spend more, and to run
upon the score till his next return. Vid. Aug. de quaest. Euang. li. 2.
quaest. 59. Ambro. and Origin. in Luc. Maca. Cyrill. and alios in Cat. G^ae^.
patrum in Luc.


No doubt a large allowance given to a stranger, but if we be the wounded
travelers, as indeed we are, that unhappily miscarried in Adams sin, and if
the two pence he left us to discharge the reckoning may seem to allude, as
most expound it, to the two Tables of the Testament, I wonder what course we
may take to spend the overplus that he may allow it at his coming.

In necessary expenses for food or physic we need not spend above our two
pence: in points of faith and works of supererrogation, we must not spend above
our allowance: perhaps we may spend somewhat more to advance the honor of the
good Samaritan: and if we spend the overplus in his honor for the furtherance
and advancement of his service, I make no doubt when he comes again to take
the account of all our expenses, he will not stick to allow the overplus, with
an ego reddam, I will pay it.

But they may chance to say, Ob. Con. Trider. decret. 1. Se^^. 4. Paripietatis
affectu traditiones una cum libris veteris and novi Testamenti suscipimus.
this fair allowance given to the Church, may make too much for the Church of
Rome, that makes the voice of the Church, the voice of God, and equals the
power of her own traditions with the peerless authority of the written word.
And what if some offend in excess and lavishnesse, must we therefore offend in
defect and want? what if they give the Church too much, must we give too little
or nothing at all? what if they strain the power of the Church, even to points
of doctrine, and articles of faith, shall we abridge and scant her power, that
she may not reach to points of discipline? Nay rather let the Scripture enjoy
her right in matter of faith, and the Church her interest in matter of custom:
that is a privilege given to the Scripture, this a permission left unto the
Church: He that is Lord of all, may do what he will with his own goods,
whether he give more or less to the sacred Scripture, what is it to thee,
Sum quod tuum est, and vade. O Church, take thine own, and go thy way, thou
have power enough to use a ceremony, thou have power enough to make a ceremony;
let us now proceed a little further, and see what power thou have to press a
ceremony.

The making of a ceremony is not much, How the Church may urge her cust:
and the use of a ceremony least of all; all the matter is about the urging of
a ceremony, that may chance to urge a many of us.

But if you give us leave to make a custom, and give us no power to press the
custom, you do as much in effect, as if you gave us a gift with one hand, and
sought with the other to snatch it from us.

Saint Jerome gives counsel to Lucinius, Epist. ad Lucin.
that all the customs of the Church, that were no prejudice to the faith,
should be strictly observed: and S. Paul is so stiff for the custom here,
that he will not suffer it to be overborne by the stubborn humor of
contentious men.

Now if the customs had such a stroke in the first beginning and infancy of
the Gospel, when they could not be of many years standing, what power may
belong unto them in these latter times, being now confirmed by long use,
whereby they are become the more a custom?

There is no company nor society of men but stand upon the right of their own
customs, All men stand upon their own customs.
nay every parish, and private house is ready to lay claim to one or other;
and when the Church her self has taken up a custom that tends to the
furtherance of Gods service, may not she have power to stand upon it, and to
bind her children to conformity?

Could you but show for your Civil customs, what we can allege for our
Church-customs, good leave may you have to stand upon them; but I doubt, by
your favor, it will be long enough ere you can show the Apostles seal for the
warrant and justification of your customs.

Some customs you have, I must needs grant, which you may safely hold by the
same right, as being not determined by the written laws, of that nature are
your Ways, and Mounds, and fines, and quitrents, and suits, and services, and
commons, and releefes, and heriots, and 1000. more of the like kind, that must
be judged by the custom, because the Law therein has prescribed no certainty;
but when you set up customs of your own devising, which former ages never
heard of, to stint the Church to a kind of pension, and to justle out the
laws in that case provided, well may you force us to suffer such customs, but
you shall never persuade us to allow them.

The Lord foresaw in his own wisdom that such injurious customs were like to
grow upon his own law, Lev. 27.28. and 31.
and therefore he makes provision aforehand, that if any had a mind to buy out
their tithes for ready money, they should yield a fifth part over and above the
real value of the thing redeemed, to prevent ungodly compositions.

If any custom or composition of these times shall freely allow that fifth
part over, well may they hold and enjoy their customs, but if they come short
of that proportion, as commonly they do which are most urged, that scarce
allow one fifth for all the due; I trow every honest and well disposed heart
will first consult with his own conscience how his plea will hold in the inner
court, before he stand upon such a custom.

Such customs as these in their own nature, as being delivered to us by word
of mouth, beside the warrant of the word, are much alike to some Romish
traditions, which our adversaries seek to obtrude upon us: but if the word of
God be sufficient against the one, as I trow it is, I hope it may be thought as
sufficient against the other, and so the matter is soon agreed.

Consider I pray how God shall bless the labors of our hands, as long as we
seek to bind his hands? how shall he vouchsafe to enlarge us, as long as we
seek to straighten him? how can we look for a full increase, while we mean
to allow him no increase?

It is not for me to cry down these customs, wherein every one prete^ds some
interest, but if you stand so much upon these upstart customs, that tend to the
hinderance of religion; I trow there is no man can think ill of us, if we
plead hard for the ancient customs, that serve to the honor of religion, and
to the furtherance of Gods service.

You must needs know that Mos populi dei is a great deal more then Mos populi;
The Church may stad upon hers much more. Inst. l 4. ca. 10. sect. 30.
they are but only humane customs that proceed from man and tend to man; but
the customs of the Church, that serve for the furtherance of devotion, if you
please to believe Mr. Calvin himself, are not only humane, but also divine,
and so may the better be stood upon.

You say well (may some reply) so they be good and wholesome customs,
Objections against customs Ob. 1.
but if they breed offense to the people of God, and may not be kept with a
safe conscience, were they not better be taken away then maintained to breed
more offense?

To this objection let the wise Lawgiver make an answer: Sol. Nulla lex satis
commoda omni bus, idton tum quaritur, etc. Cat. apud Live. decad. lib. 4.
Singulos per dies n^vum aliquid affectant. Iren. lib. 1. Ob. 2. Sol.
There is no Law (says he) profitable and commodious unto all; that is the
thing to be enquired, whether it suit with the greater part; and if it be liked
of the most and better part, we must not alter a Law so generally allowed, to
give content to a few humorists, that will hardly be pleased with any Law.

But another will say, these pretended customs are a great impeachment to
Christian liberty.

If any man think so, let Inst. l. 4. c. 10. supr: Ob. 3.
Calvin answer (if they will take his word) That the outward orders of the
Church can lay no bond upon the conscience, as long as they are no fixed and
perpetual laws, but external rudiments of humane weakness and infirmity.

Whatsoever they are may another say, as long as they deal in things
indifferent, they may be used indifferently, and not pressed upon such as
cannot brook them.

I marry, Sol.
if every one should be left to his own will, when the Church has agreed
upon a rule, Resalioquin per se mediae mutant quodammodo natural, etc. These.
eccl. Belg. art. 6
we should have a goodly Church in a short time. Such a liberty (M. Calvin can
tell you) could not choose but cause great confusion, and that confusion and
disorder could not choose but breed sundry quarrels.

I, Ob. 4.
but they need not be urged for all that with such rigor and extremity, as if
they were equal to the law of God.

No, Sol. Obligatio si^^ coertione null^. Aug. Iura n^n ju^a dicenda s^^^.
God forbid it should come to that yet: they must be urged upon some to make
the bond so much the stronger. Give us a law without a binding power, and it is
like a bell without a clapper: every man will be ready to put it off like a
slipper or pantofle at his pleasure, so the Church her self and all her
customs shall become a scorn and byword to contentious men.

It may be some may urge further, Ob. 5.
if your customs were such as the Apostle stands upon, none would deny them a
binding power. Those it seems were framed by the Apostles, and generally
allowed by all the Churches; and if it were not so indeed, Saint Paul had never
employed so much by his (nos habemus, and Ecclesiae Dei) we have them, and the
Churches of God: whenever you make it appear that any of your customs were
either delivered by the Apostles, or universally received of all the Churches,
you shall find us ready to subscribe without more ado, that we may not be
thought to be contentious.

Whether any of our customs be such or no, Sol. Ambr. in 4. Ephesians. at least if
it were his ownwork. To. 3. tit. 7. cap. 63.
I dare not avouch upon any certainty: I hear St. Ambrose complain in his
time, that the Churches had swarved from the Apostolic customs; and
Waldensis likewise in his time, that the Apostolic traditions could hardly be
discerned from such as were merely ecclesiastical: yet if the rule of Saint
Augustine go for current, as it is allowed by some of our best Divines, Li. 4.
cont. Don. ca. 23. Zuing. de bapt. Field li 4. ca. 21.
that whatsoever has been generally observed in any age, and yet not
prescribed in any Council, may be certainly believed to be Apostolical. I see
no reason but some of our own customs which found such general allowance in
the days of our Fathers, whereof we can find no beginning, neither in the
Councels of the Church, nor in the writings of the Fathers, may safely pass
for Apostolical.

It were to be wished (if wishes might stand for good proofs) that all the
customs of the Church were only such, and that nothing might be used in any
one, but what were allowed by all the rest: when antiquity and universality
meet both together in the same custom, Aug. 118. ep. ad Jan. insolentissimae
est insaniae. etc.
they give such credit and countenance to the practice of the Church, that no
man can refuse to join with us without suspicion of distraction.

But what if our customs be not such, have we therefore no right to stand
upon any, unless they come home to Saint Paul's conditions? I warrant you
habemus talem will be sufficient for a ceremony, though we cannot say, habemus
candem: for neither the Doct. Field, li. 4. c. 20. ut sup.
Apostolic customs can bind us, nor any else that have been general,
unless the present Church give free allowance; and seeing we have the same
power in things indifferent, the same I say to frame a custom, the same if
need be to Tert. de vela^d. virg. Caetera quide disciplinae admittunt novitatem
correctionis. E^ Aug. ep. ad Jan. vel emedari oportet quod fi^bat, vel institui
quod non fiebat.
change a custom, let not us dispute any more either of the novelty or
particularity of the custom, but readily submit to the Churches order without
any further disputation.

Before the custom was ordained, it was free for every one to put in a caveat;
but when the rule is once settled, there is no further place for disputation: a
simple obedience without any special inquisition, in such a case, is most
absolute: and if the Church can hardly err, as you heard before, in the
ordination of a custom, why should I doubt that I should err in yielding
obedience to the custom?

No argument holds against a custom, Custom a good plea for matter of rite.
nay it is so far from that, that the Apostle makes the bare allegation of the
custom a special argument of it self against innovation.

Many arguments had he used in the former verses, some from Ver. 13. Ver. 7.
Ver. 14
decency, some from authority, some from nature, according as the nature of the
matter would best allow: and now being desirous to strike home, and to set a
bar against all reply, he brings them up to the Churches custom, that if the
rest of his arguments could not persuade, yet this might be sure to enforce
obedience.

Blessed Saint Paul, thou have now taught us an easy way to put an end to all
contention that ever shall arise concerning ceremonies, henceforth if any shall
seem contentious, we shall not need to beat him down either with Fathers, or
Councels, or Apostles, or Scriptures, no nor yet the authority of other
Churches; what shall we need to go about when Saint Paul has showed us a
nearer way, Acclamatio patrum in 1. Con. Nicen.
(...), let the custom prevail in the name of God, and let no man presume to
speak against it.

If any private man shall attempt in time to come to bring upon us a new
custom, either in praying, or preaching, or baptizing, or communicating, or
marying, or burying, whatsoever it be, or by whomsoever it be allowed, we
will say no more then S. Paul does, Non habemus talem, we have none such: You
may not set up a new custom.

On the other side, if any shall seek to put down the old, whether in standing,
or kneeling, or crossing, or bowing, or uncovering, or whatsoever else of the
same alloy, that has been either prescribed in our book of Canons, or
religiously continued in the reverend practice of our mother Churches, we shall
need to say no more then S. Paul implies, habemus talem, we have such a custom
allowed amongst us, and you have no power to put it down.

Indeed custom is a good plea for outward rite, Custom no good plea for
matter of doctrine.
but for the doctrine of Gods worship, that concerns the essence of religion,
we must not plead a bare custom. When any part of that gracious charter shall
be called in question by stubborn heretics, we must not follow the customs
of men, Cypr: ep. 63. and ad Pomp: 78. and ad Quint. 74.
but the truth of God; nor must we regard what men have done, but what Christ
has said for our direction. Ad legem and testimonia, to the law and the
testimonies must we go for trial, there must we seek for our direction; but
for matter of rites, and outward discipline, which are things in themselves
merely arbitrary, and no where expressed in the word of God: we can never use
a more strong demonstrative argument then S. Paul has used in the words of my
text, We have, or, we have not such a custom.

The very name of custom has some weight, because the allowance of the Church
is added to it, yet it is not the allowance of every Church, that takes up a
rite of her own head, contrary to the order of other Churches; but the
unanimous consent of sundry Churches agreeing in one, that gives the name and
force of a custom.

S. Paul does not stand upon the custom of one Church, much less does he urge
it against all the rest; but lo he stands upon the general use of the
Apostolic Churches, and urges the harmony of the most, against the private
use of the Church of Corinth; to teach us that if any question should arise in
time to come about the different orders of sundry Churches, that we could
hardly know which to follow, we should ever prefer the customs of the most,
and specially those which are most Apostolic, before the private orders of
some few that have degenerated from the rule.

You see the nature of S. Paul's customs, 1 Cor. 14.40. and 26.
and what power you have to stand upon them; a better custom you cannot have,
nor better authority to bear you out: I will but only add this one word
more, that your customs be decent and reverend customs, surnished with all
those special properties which S. Paul requires in every custom, and then you
come fully up to the Apostles (talis) you have a custom I warrant you against
all exception; and if any man seem to be contentious, you may safely plead it
in open Court (habemus talem) we have such a custom.

But I fear I shall exceed the time, and so break the custom while I stand so
long upon the Churches custom; but if I have tired the patience of any in
tracing this strange unusual argument, I desire the blame may rest upon them
whose wilful and stubborn oppositions have forced me to break my usual
custom.

For most of you, this labor might be spared, for I have seen your order and
approved it, but others there are of that cross and peevish spirit, that I
think if S. Paul himself would supply this place, he could hardly win them to
conformity.

Let the Church stand upon her customs while she will, the rulers of the
Church observe the custom, and all the Doctors of the Church both old and new
allow the custom, yet they resolve to hold their custom, their custom of
wilful contradiction.

If any custom at all go down with them, it must be the custom of some
foreign Church: Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and they are apt enough to
admire her customs; but for the customs of our own Church, Sr. George Paul
in the life of Archb: Whitgift. Apoc. 3.17 18, 19.
which all our neighbors so much renown; and our very adversaries themselves
account an honor to our reformation, they must not be allowed upon any terms.

Alas poor Mother, thou say thou art rich, and want nothing, and know
not that thou art poor, and naked, and miserable, and blind, that thou can
not judge of the least custom: Thou must buy thy gold of them if thou will be
rich, and thy raiment of them, if thou will be clothed, and thy eye salve of
them if thou will be cured of thy blindness; and yet the most of them will
freely confess (if they are not too ungrateful) that they themselves have
been debtors unto thee, not only for the light of heavenly truth, but for the
help of outward supportation.

Did the fame of thy children never spread beyond the Alps, or their glory
beyond the Lemanian lake? Why then should thy children despise thy customs,
and dote upon the love of foreign Churches, unless they mean to play the
parts of ungracious children, to discredit the womb that brought them forth,
and the pappes that brought them up.

For our parts, we are loath to discredit our neighbor Churches, such as have
joined with us in the reformation; whatsoever customs they have, we envy them
not, good leave may they have to stand upon them, and if any of us should
converse among them, we would not stick to use their customs.

The rule that S. Apud Aug. ep. ad Casulanu^. Quando Rome sum, etc. and ad
quamcunque aliam ecclesiam veneritis ejus m^^em servate, si pari scanda^um, nec
vultis, aec facere. ibid.
Ambrose gave to his friend S. Augustine, when he asked his opinion concerning
fasting on the Saturday, which was the custom at Rome, but not at Millaine,
that when he was at Rome, he used to fast, and when he was at Millaine he
used to eat; the same must we always observe in matter of Rite, as S.
Augustine teaches, If we will neither offer nor suffer scandal.

Let me give the counsel that Ier. ep. ad Lucin. Ego illud te breviter
admonendum puto, etc. Necalieru^ consuetudi. nem ali^ru^ contrario modo
subverti.
Jerome gave to his friend Lucinius, that thou keep the customs of the Church
inviolable, and suffer not the customs of one Church to be undermined, to
bring in the customs of another. Thou may easily offend either way, but
chiefly in opposing thine own Church: for if it be matter of scandal as you
heard before, to refuse the customs of foreign Churches whenever we chance
to communicate with them, how can we free our selves from cause of scandal,
when we spurn at the rites of our own Church, and refuse to conform to her
authorized customs?

I must say no more of these kind of men, for I doubt my doom is passed
already; I must go for a formalist, a time-server, and I know not what if I
plead so hard for the Churches custom; but if I suffer in this cause, S. Paul
may best answer for me, he has deceived me if I be deceived, and if he have a
share in this hard censure, I shall be well content to suffer with him,
although they should make me yet more vile.

Howsoever it be, I shall yet entreat for all that, and I will not entreat in
mine own name, but in the words of the blessed Apostle; 1 Cor. 1.10.
Now I beseech you brethren by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you all
speak one thing, and that there may be no schisms and dissentions among you.

Let no man strive against the customs of the Church, for that will turn to
his own confusion, these wars are like the wars of Saul and David, 1 Samuel
3.1
where the house of Saul grew still weaker, and the house of David gathered
strength.

It is hard to kick against these pricks, for you may sooner gall your own
feet by a foolish opposition, then you can blunt or spurn down the Churches
custom.

There is neither comfort nor gain in this rash adventure, but only the shame
of your own mother; but if you will yield your selves like dutiful children to
observe the custom, or like stout champions to plead the custom, you have the
warrant of the Apostle to defend you, and the countenance of your Mother to
encourage you, and the promise of your Father to reward you, even the Father of
peace, and the Father of all comfort, who shall sanctify you all throughout,
and keep you both in soul and body, and spirit, blameless until the day of
Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.

