JOB MILITANT: WITH MEDITATIONS DIVINE AND MORAL.

Horat. car. lib. 1. ode 17. -- Dijs, pietas mea,
Et Musa, cordiest. --
By FRA. QVARLES.

SAPIENTIA PACEM PAX OPVLENTIAM.

F K



LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for George Winder, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Saint Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1624.

TO THE HIGH AND THRICE ILLUSTRIOUS Prince, CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall and York, Albany and Rothsay, Marquess of Ormont, Earl of Rosse,
and Baron of Armanoch, High Seneschall of Scotland, Lord of the Isles, and
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
THrice-hopefull Earnest of a Royal Race,
Whom Art and Nature, to return Complete,
Have prayed the Aid of a Diuiner Grace,
Whereby thou art a Prince, as Good, as Great;
Nature and Art have both been proud e're since,
In their Composure of so Rare a Prince.
Rare Prince,
Oh! let the Influence of thy quickening Ray
Affect these faint, and indisposed Lines,
That they may flourish, as the Child of May,
And clime, like fresh Aurora's Eglentines;
That, by the smell, the World may know, this Flower
Has had the aspect of such a Sun, as You are.
Before the Luster of so pure a Light,
My prostrate heart (swollen big with Loyaltic)
Presents this Legend of a sad Delight;
Which if made Glorious with thy pleased Eyc,
My Works are crowned with like Honor, done
By Princely Caesar, and his Princely Son.
Your Highnesses, in Choice Affection, and Chaste Loyalty, Francis Quarles.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Present thee with a new work, a work difficult and intricate, wherein (I
confess) I had suffered shipwreck on the first shore, had I not been steared
by the better Pilots, by whose compass I have securely sailed, and
(weather-beaten,) I salute thee serious Reader.

I commend to thee here the History of Job, in part, Periphrased; in part,
Abridged. It is not of the nature of a Parable (whereon Historical Faith
depends not,) no feigned thing, or counterfeite Scene (as many rash heads
would,) but a true and faithful record of real passages, as appears by the
holy Scriptures, where the Spirit of God pleases Ezech. 14. 15, 20.
to mention the name of this our Job. And Saint James 5. 11.
Chrysostom in some of his writings, says; That his Sepulcher in his days
was to be seen in Arabia Foelix.

Who this Job was, and from what stock descended, it shall appear by the
consent of the most famous and ancient Writers, who absolutely derive him from
the Loins of Esau: Of which opinion is Origin in Epist. ad Iulium Affricanum.
Saint Augustine18. de Ciuit. Dei, 47. Saint Chrysostom, Concione, 2. de
Lazaro. Saint Gregory in praefat. and many more, besides the Septuagints, who
in these words (Post Balac autem Iobab qui vocatur Job) conclude, that Job is
but the contraction of Iobab, which Iobab is of the Lineage of Esau, as
appears in his Ambrosius et sedulius ad Roman 9. Prosper de pradict. part. 1.
c. 22. Eusebius lib. 1. de demonst. Euang cap 1. 14 Peronius lib. 1. de vitis
Prophetard. Volateranus lib. 13. sua antropologiae. Genesis 36.
Genealogy. But the adversaries to this opinion (who derive him from Abraham
by Keturah) object, that Esau and his Seed were accursed by God, therefore Job
could not (being so upright a man) spring from so tainted a Generation. To
which I answer, that, though Esau be said to be expulsus a primogenitura;
yet we read not, that he is exclusus a foedere. And when God in Justice
curses a Generation in general, yet his mercy (nevertheless) which is
endless, he may extend to some in that Offspring in particular.

Touching the time when these things were done, it is thought, that it was
before Moses penned the Law, and much about the days, when the Children of
Israel were captived by Pharaoh.

Who the Penman was, is not directly concluded, and to small purpose to be
enquired: Gregorius Romanus says, That it is in vain to enquire the Writer,
where it is certain, the holy Spirit is the Author; yet by some it is (nor
without some ground) imagined, that it was done by the pen of Moses, (when
he fled into Midian, after he slew the Egyptian,) in Hexameter Verses, from
the third Chapter, to the fifth verse of the last.

To conclude, Reader, I commit this my book to thy fairer disposition. As for
Censures, I am so ouer-bold, that I fear none, and I should be ouer-wise, if I
deserved none.

An si quis atro dente me petiuerit, Hor. Epod 6.
Inultus, vt flebo, puer? Farewell.
THE PROPOSITION OF THE WORK.
Would thou discover in a curious Map,
That Island, which fond worldlings call, Mishap,
Surrounded with a Sea of brinie Tears,
The rocky dangers, and the boggie Fears,
The storms of Trouble, the afflicted Nation,
The heavy soil, the lowly situation?
On wretched Job, then spend thy weeping eye,
And see the colors painted curiously.
Would thou behold a Tragic Scene of sorrow,
Whose woeful Plot, the Author did not borrow
From sad Invention? The sable Stage,
The lively Actors, with their Equipage?
The Music made of Sighs, the Songs of Cries,
The sad Spectators, with their watery Eyes?
Behold all this, comprised here in One,
Expect the Plaudit, when the Play is done.
Or would thou see a well built Pinnace tossed
Upon the swelling Ocean, split (almost)
Now, on a churlish Rock, now, fiercely striving
With laboring Winds, now, desperately driving
Upon the boiling Sands, her storme-rent Flags,
Her Maine-mast broke, her Canuas torn to Rags,
Her Treasure lost, her Men with Lightning slain,
And left a Wreck to the relentlesse Maine?
This, this and more, unto your moystned Eyes,
Our patient Job shall lively moralize.
Would thou behold vnparalell'd Distress,
Which minds cannot out-thinke, nor tongues express
Full to the life; The Anuill, whereupon
Mischief does work her Masterpiece, for none
To imitate; The dire Anatomy
Of (curiously dissected) Misery;
The face of Sorrow, in her stearnest looks,
The rufull Arg'ment of all Tragic books?
In brief, Would tender eyes endure to see
(Summed up) the greatest sorrows, that can be?
Behold they then, poor Job afflicted here,
And each Beholder spend (at least) his Tear.
THE GENERAL ARGUMENT OF THE HISTORY.
JOB, tried of God, by the loss of his Children, Goods and Health, is tempted
by his Friends to despair, and by his Wife to blasphemy; nevertheless,
continues patient for a while; but at last yields to Passion, curses his
birthday, and wishes death. His Wife and three Friends condemn him of
Hypocrisy; Job defends his speeches, Gods Justice, and his own Integrity,
blaming his Friends for handling Gods cause to an ill end, and for accusing him
without a cause. At length Elihu makes a modest agreement between them,
reprooues them al; him, for not handling a good cause well; and them, for
handling a bad cause, though well. He teaches Job Gods greatness by his
works, and that man ought not to plead with his Maker. In fine, God himself
out of a Cloud, confirms Elihu's words, by example from his works, puts Job
to silence, to confession and repentance, rebukes his three Friends, commands
reconciliation, restores Job his Health, doubles his former Wealth, and gives
him a second Issue of his body.

TO THE GREAT TETRAGRAMATON, LORD PARAMOVNT OF HEAVEN AND EARTH: HIS Humble
servant dedicates himself, And Implores the Enfranchising of his Muse.
1
GReat God, the indebted praises of thy Glory,
If Man should smother, or his Muse wax faint
To number forth; the Stones would make complaint,
And write a neuer-ending Story,
And, not without just reason, say,
Men's hearts are more chdure then they.
2
Dismount from Heaven (O thou Diuiner Power)
Handsell my slender Pipe, breathe (thou) upon it,
That it may run an everlasting Sonnet,
Which Envious Time may not deuower:
Oh, let it sing to After-dayes
(When I am Dust) thy louder Praise.
3
Direct the footsteps of my sober Muse
To tread thy glorious Path: For, be it known,
She only seeks thy Glory, not her own,
Nor rouzed for a second use;
If otherwise, O! may she never
Sing more, but be struck dumb for ever.
JOB MILITANT.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jobs Lineage and Integrity,
His Issue, Wealth, Prosperity,
His childrens holy Feast: His wise
Forecast, and zealous Sacrifice.
Sect. 1.
NOt far from Casius, in whose bountious womb, Chap. 1. 1.

Great Pompeys dust lies crowned with his Tomb,
Westward, betwixt Arabia and Iudaea,
Is situate a Country, called Idumaea,
There dwelt a Man (brought from His Linniage,
That for his belly, swopt his Heritage,)
His name was Job, a man of upright Will,
Just, fearing Heaven, eschewing what was Ill,
On whom his God had heap't in highest measure,
The bountious Riches, of his boundless Treasure,
As well of Fortune, as of Grace, and Spirit;
Goods for his children, Children to inherit;
As did his Name, his Wealth did daily wex,
His Seed did germinate in either Sex
A hopeful issue, whose descent might keep
His righteous Race on foot; seven thousand Sheep
Did pay their Summer-Tribute, and did ad
Their Winter Blessings to his Fold: He had
Three thousand Camels, able for their load,
Five hundred Asses, furnished for the Road,
As many Yoke of Oxen, to maintain
His household, for he had a mighty Train;
Nor was there any in the East, the which
In Virtue was so rare, in Wealth so rich.
Upon a time, his Children (to improve
The sweet affection of their mutual love)
Made solemn Feasts; each feasted in his turn,
(For there is a time to mirth, as well as mourn)
And who, by course, was Master of the Feast,
Unto his home invited all the rest.
Even as a Hen (whose tender brood forsakes
The downy clozet of her Wings, and takes
Each it is affected way) marks how they feed,
This, on that Crum; and that, on the other Seed,
Mooues, as they move; and stays, when as they stay,
And seems delighted in their Infant-play:
Yet (fearing danger) with a busy eye,
Looks here and there, if ought she can epsy,
Which (unawares) might snatch a booty from her,
Eyes all that pass, and watches every commer.
Even so the affection of this tender Sire
(Being made more fervent, with the selfsame fire
Of dearest love, which flamed in their breasts,
Preserved (as by Fuel) in those Feasts)
Was ravished in the height of Joys, to see
His happy Childrens ten-fold unity:
As was his Joy, such was his holy Fear,
Lest he, that plants his Engines euery-where,
Bayted with golden Sins, and re-insnares
The soul of man, turning his Wheat to Tares,
Should season Error with the taste of Truth,
And tempt the frailty of their tender youth.
No sooner therefore had the dappled sky
Opened the Twilight of her waking eye,
And in her breaking Light, had promised day,
But up he rose, his holy hands did lay
Upon the sacred Altar (one by one)
An early Sacrifice for every Son:
For who can tell, (said he?) my Sons (perchance) Job sacrifice^.

Have slipped some Sin, which neither Ignorance
Pleaded, nor want of heed, nor youth can cure.
Sin steals, unseen, when men sleep most secure.
Meditatio prima.
WAnt is the Badge of Poverty: Then he
That wants most, is the most poor, say we.
The Wretch, that Hunger drives from door to door,
Aiming at present Alms, desires no more.
The toyling Swain, that has with pleasing trouble,
Cockt a small fortune, would that Fortune double,
Which dearly bought with slau'ry, then (alas)
He would be deemed a Man, that is well to pass:
Which got, his mind's now tickled with an Itch,
But to deserve that glorious style of Rich.
That done, h'enioyes the Crown of all his labor,
Could he but once out-nose his right-hand-neighbour.
Lives he at quiet now? Now, he begins
To wish, that Vs'rie were the least of sins:
But great or small, he tryes, and sweet's the trouble,
And for it is sake, he wishes all things double. Hor. Car. lib. 3. Od. 24. --
improbae

Crescunt diuitiae, tamen

Curtae nescio quid semper abest rei.

Non qui parum habet est pauper,

Sed qui plus cupit. Sen ad Luc.

-- Multa petentibus

Desunt multa. Been est cut Deus obtulit

Parca, quod satis est, manu.

Hor car. lib. 3. Ode 16. Simile.



Thus wishing still, his wishes never cease,
But as his Wealth, his Wishes still increase.
Wishes proceed from Want: The Richest then,
Most wishing, want most, and are poorest men:
If he be poor, that wants much, how poor
Is he, that has too much, and yet wants more?
Thrice happy he, to whom the bounty of Heaven,
Sufficient, with a sparing hand, has given:
It Is Grace, not Gold, makes Great; sever but which,
The Rich man is but poor; the Poor man, rich.
The fairest Crop of either Grass, or Grain,
Is not for use, vndew'd with timely Rain.
The wealth of Croesus, were it to be given,
Were not thank-worthy, if unblessed by Heaven.
Even as fair Phoebe, in Diameter,
(Earth interposed betwixt the Sun and Her)
Suffers Eclipse, and is disrobed quite
(During the time) of all her borrowed Light;
So Riches, which fond Mortals so embrace,
If not enlightened with the Beams of Grace,
Being interposed with too gross a Care,
They lie obscured, and no Riches are.
My stint of Wealth lies not in my expressing,
With Jacobs Store (Lord) give me Jacobs Blessing;
Or if, at night, thou grant me Lazars Boon,
Let Dives Dogs lick all my sores at noone.
Lord, pare my Wealth, by my Capacity,
Lest I, with it, or it suite not with me.
This humbly do I sue for, at thy hand,
Enough, and not too much, for my command.
Lord, what thou lend'st, shall serve but in the place
Of reckoning Counters, to sum up thy Grace.
THE ARGUMENT.
Satan appears, and then professes
Himself man's Enemy, confesses
Gods love to Job, malignes his Faith,
Gains power over all he has.
Sect. 2.
Upon a time, when heavens sweet Quire of Saints, Chap 16.

(Whose everlasting Halleluiah chaunts
The highest praise of their celestial King)
Before their Lord, did the presentment bring,
Of the execution of his sacred Will,
Committed to their function to fulfill:
Satan came too (That Satan, which betrayed
The soul of man, to Deaths eternal shade,
Satan came too) and in the midst he stands,
Like to a Vulture amongst a Heard of Swans.
Said, then, the Eternal; From what quarter now, God questions Satan.

Has business brought thee? (Satan) Whence come thou?
Great Lord of Heaven (said the Infernal) since Satan's answer.

Thou have entitled me the Worlds Great Prince,
I have been practicing mine old profession,
And come from compassing my large Possession,
Tempting thy sons, and (like a roaring Lion)
Seeking my prey, disturb the peace of Sion;
I come from sowing Tares, among thy Wheat;
To him, that shall dissemble Peter's Seat,
I have been plotting, how to prompt the death
Of Christian Princes, and the bribed breath
Of cheapned Justice, has my Fire inflamed
With spirit of boldness, for a while, vnsham'd.
^^come from planting strife, and stern debate,
Twixt private man and man, 'twixt State and State,
^ubuerting Truth with all the power I can,
Accusing Man to God, and God to Man:
I daily sow fresh Schisms among thy Saints;
I buffet them and laugh, at their complaints;
The Earth is my Dominion, Hell's my Home,
I round the World, and so from thence I come.
Said then the Eternal: True, thou have not faild God speaks to Satan.

Of what thou say; Thy Spirit has prevailed
To vex my little Flock; Thou have been bold
To make them stray, a little, from their Fold.
But say; In all thy hard Adventures, has
Thine eye observed Job my Servants Faith?
Has open Force, or secret Fraud beset
His Bulwarks, so impregnable, as yet?
And have thou (without envy) yet beheld,
How that the World, his second cannot yield?
Have thou not found, that he is of upright Will,
Just, fearing God, eschewing what is Ill?
True Lord, (replide the Fiend) thy Champion has Satan's reply.

A strong and fervent (yet a crafty) Faith,
A forced love needs no such great applause,
He loves but ill, that loves not for a cause.
Have thou not heaped his Garners with excess?
Inricht his Pastures? Does not he possess
All that he has, or can demand, from Thee?
His Coffers filled, his Land stockt plentiously?
Has not thy Love surrounded him about,
And hedged him in, to fence my practice out?
But small's the trial of a Faith, in this,
If thou support him, it is thy strength, not his.
Can then my power, that stands by thy permission,
Encounter, where Thou make an Opposition?
Stretch forth thy Hand, and smite but what he has,
And prove thou then, the temper of his Faith;
Cease cock'ring his fond humor, veyle thy Grace,
No doubt, but he will blaspheme thee to thy Face.
Lo, (said the Eternal) to thy cursed hand, God licenses and limits Satan.

I here commit his mighty Stock, his Land,
His hopeful Issue, and Wealth, though never so much;
Himself, alone, thou shall forbear to touch.
Meditatio secunda.
SAtan begged once, and found his Prayers reward: Object.

We often beg, yet often return, unheard.
If granting be the effect of Love, then we Resol.

Conclude our selves, to be less loved, then he.
True, Satan begged, and begged his shame, no less;
'T was granted; Shall we envy his success?
We beg, and our request's (perchance) not granted;
God knew, perhaps, it were worse had, then wanted.
Can God and Belial both join in one Will;
The One to ask, the Other to fulfill? Object.

Sooner shall Stygian Darkness blend with Light,
The Frost with Fire, sooner Day with Night. Resol.

True, God and Satan wild the self same Will,
But God intended Good; and Satan, Ill:
That Will produced a several conclusion;
He aimed at Man's, and God, at his confusion.
He that drew Light, from out the depth of Shade,
And made of Nothing, whatsoere He made,
Can, out of seeming Evil, bring good Events; Volens agit Deus per malum
instrumentum. Simile.

God works Good, though by evil Instruments.
As in a Clock, one motion does convey,
And carry diverse wheels a sever all way:
Yet all together, by the great wheels force,
Direct the Hand unto his proper course:
Even so, that sacred Will, although it use
Means seeming contrary, yet all conduce
To one effect, and in a free consent,
They bring to pass heavens high decreed Intent.
Takes God delight in humane weakness, then?
What Glory reapes he from Afflicted men? Object.

The Spirit gone, can Flesh and Blood endure? Resp.

God burns his Gold, to make his Gold more pure:
Even as a Nurse, whose child's imperfect pace Simile.

Can hardly lead his foot from place to place,
Leaves her fond kissing, sets him down, to go,
Nor does uphold him, for a step, or two:
But when she sindes that he begins to fall,
She holds him up, and kisses him withal:
So God, from man sometimes withdrawes his Hand
A while, to teach his Infant-faith to stand;
But when he sees his feeble strength begin
To fail, He gently takes him up again.
Lord, I Am a child; so guide my paces, than,
That I may learn to walk an upright man:
So shield my Faith, that I may never doubt thee,
For I shall fall, if ere I walk without thee.
THE ARGUMENT.
The frighted Messengers tell Job
His fourfold loss: He rends his Robe,
Submits him to his Makers trust,
Whom he concludes to be lust.
Sect. 3.
Upon that very day, when all the rest
Were frollike at their elder Brothers feast, Chap. 1. v 13.

A breathless man, pricked on with winged fear,
With staring eyes, distracted here and there, The first Messenger.

(Like kindled Exhalations in the air
At midnight glowing) his stiffe-bolting hair,
Not much unlike the pens of Porcupines)
Crossing his arms, and making woeful signs,
Purboyld in sweat, shaking his fearful head,
That often looked behind him, as he fled,
He ran to Job, still ne'rethelesse afraid,
His broken blast breathed forth these words, and said,
Alas (dear Lord the whiles thy servants plide
Thy painful Plough, and whilst, on every side
Thy Asses fed about us, as we wrought,
There sallied forth on us (suspecting naught,
Nor ought intending, but our cheerful pain)
A rout of rude Sabaeans, with their Train
Armed with Death, and deaf to all our Cries,
Which, with strong Hand, did in an hour surprise
All that thou had, and whilst we strove (in vain
To guard them, their impartial hands have slain
Thy faithful servants, with their thirsty Sword;
I only escaped, to bring this woeful word.
No sooner had he closed his lips, but see!
Another comes, as much aghast as he: The second Messenger

A flash of Fire (said he) new fallen from Heaven,
Has all thy Servants of their lives bereauen,
And burnt thy Sheep; I, I alone am He,
That Is left unslain, to bring the News to thee.
This Tale not fully told, a third ensues, The third Messenger.

Whose lips, in labor with more heavy News,
Brake thus; The forces of a triple Band,
Brought from the fierce Caldaeans, with strong hand,
Has seyz'd thy Camels, murdered with the Sword
Thy servants all, but Me, that brings thee word.
Before the air had cooled his hasty Breath, The fourth Messenger.

Rusht in a fourth, with visage pale as death:
The while (said he) thy children all were sharing
Mirth, at a Feast of thy first sons preparing,
Arose a Wind, whose errand had more have
Then happy speed, which with a full-mouth Blast,
Has smote the house, which has thy children reft
Of all their lives, and thou art childlesse left;
Thy children all are slain, all slain together,
I only escaped to bring the Tidings hither.
So said, Behold the man, whose wealth did flow
Like to a springtide, one bare hour ago,
With the vnpattern'd height of Fortunes blessed,
Above the greatest Dweller in the East;
He, that was Sire of many Sons but now,
Lord of much People, and while-ere could show
Such Herds of Cattle, He, whose fleecy stock
Of Sheep could boast seven thousand, in a flock,
See how he lies, of all his Wealth dispoyl'd,
He now has neither Servant, Sheep, nor Child;
Like a poor man, arose the Patient Job,
(Stunned with the news) and rent his Purple Robe,
Shaued the hair from off his woeful head,
And, prostrate on the floor he worshipped:
Naked, ah! Poor and naked did I come
Forth from the clozet of my mothers Womb;
And shall return (alas) the very same
To the earth as Poor, and naked, as I came:
God gives, and takes, and why should He not have
A privilege, to take those things, he gave?
We men mistake our Tenure often, for He
Lends us at Will, what we miscall as Free;
He reassumes his own, takes but the same
He lent a while. Thrice blessed be his Name.
In all this passage, Job, in Heart, nor Tongue,
Thought God unjust, or charged his hand with wrong.
Meditatio tertia.
THe proudest pitch of that victorious spirit
Was but to win the World, whereby t'inherit Alexander.

The ayrie purchase of a transitory,
And glozing Title of an ages Glory;
Would thou, by Conquest, win more Fame then He?
Subdue thy self; Thy self's a World to thee:
Earth's but a Ball, that Heaven has quilted over
With Wealth, and Honor, banded on the floor
Of sickle Fortunes false and slippery Court,
Sent for a Toy, to make us Children sport,
Man's satiate spirits, with fresh delights supplying*
To still the Fondlings of the world, from crying,
And he, whose merit mounts to such a Joy,
Gains but the Honor of a mighty Toy.
But would thou conquer, have thy Conquest crowned
By hands of Seraphims, tryumph'd with the sound
Of Heavens loud Trumpet, warbled by the shrill
Celestial Quire, recorded with a Quill,
Plucked from the Pinion of an Angels wing,
Confirmed with Joy, by heavens Eternal King?
Conquer thy self, thy rebbel thoughts repel,
And chase those false Affections that rebel.
Has Heaven dispoyl'd what his full hand has given thee?
Nipt thy succeeding Blossoms? or bereauen thee
Of thy dear latest hope, thy bosom Friend?
Does sad Despair deny these griefs an end?
Despair's a whispring Rebbell, that, within thee,
Bribes all thy Field, and sets thy self agin thee:
Make keen thy Faith, and with thy force, let flee.
If thou not conquer him, he will conquer thee:
Advance thy Shield of Patience to thy head,
And when Grief strikes, 'twill strike the striker dead;
The Patient man, in sorrow, spies relief,
And by the tail, he couples Joy with Grief.
In adverse fortunes, be thou strong and stout,
And bravely win thy self, Heaven holds not out
His Bow, for ever bent. The disposition
Of noblest spirits, does, by opposition,
Exosperate the more: A gloomie night
Whets on the morning, to return more bright;
A Blade well tried, deserlies a trebble price,
And Vertu's purest, most oppo'd by Vice:
Brave minds, oppressed, should (in despite of Fate)
Look greatest, (like the Sun) in lowest state.
But ah! shall God thus strive with flesh and blood? Object.

Receives he Glory from, or reapes he Good
In mortals Ruin, that he leaves man so,
To be overwhelmed by his unequal Foe?
May not a Potter, that, from out the Ground, Res.

Has framed a vessel, search if it be sound?
Or if, by furbushing, he take more pain
To make it fairer, shall the Pot complain?
Mortal, thou art but Clay: then shall not He,
That framed thee for his service, season thee?
Man, cloze thy lips; Be thou no undertaker
Of Gods designs; Dispute not with thy Maker.
Lord, it is against thy nature to do ill,
Then give me power to bear, and work thy Will;
Thou know what is best, make thou thine own Conclusion,
Be glorified, although in my Confusion.
THE ARGUMENT.
Satan the second time appears,
Before the Eternal, boldly dares
Malign Jobs tried Faith afresh,
And gains the afflicting of his Flesh.
Sect. 4.
ONce more, when heavens harmonious Quiristers
Appeared before his Throne, (whose Ministers
They are, of his concealed will) to render
Their strict account of Justice, and to tender
The accepted Sacrifice of highest praise,
(Warbled in Sonnets, and celestial Lays)
Satan came too, bold, as a hungry Fox,
Or rauinous Wolf amid the tender Flocks,
Satan, (said then the Eternal) from whence now God questions Satan.

Has thy imployme^ts driven thee? whence come thou?
Satan replies: Great God of heaven and earth, Satan answer.

I come from tempting, and from making mirth:
To hear thy dearest children whine, and roar:
In brief, I come, from whence I came before.
Said then the Eternal, Have thou not beheld God replies to Satan.

My servants Faith, how, like a seuen-fold shield,
It has defended his Integrity
Against thy fiery Darts; Has not thine Eye,
(Thine envious eye) perceived how purely just
He stands, and perfect, worthy of the trust
I lent into his hand, persisting still
Just, fearing God, eschewing what is ill?
'T was not the loss of his so fair a Flock,
Nor sudden rape of such a mighty Stock;
'T was neither loss of Servants, nor his Sons
Untimely slaughter, (acted all at once)
Could make him quail, or warpe so true a Faith,
Or stain so pure a Love; say (Satan) has
Thy hand (so deeply counterfeiting mine)
Made him mistrust his God, or once repine?
Can there in all the earth, say, can there be
A Man so Perfect, and so Just, as He?
Replies the Tempter, Lord, an outward loss Satan's answer.

Hopes for repair, it is but a common cross:
I know thy seruant's wise, a wise forecast,
Gricues for things present, not for things are past;
Perchance, the tumor of his sullen heart,
Brooks loss of all, since he has lost a part;
My self have Servants, who can make true Boast,
They gave away as much, as he has lost:
Others (with learning made so wisely mad)
Refuse such Fortunes, as he never had;
A Faith's not tried by this uncertain Tuch,
Others, that never knew thee, did as much:
Lend me thy Power then, that I might once
But sacrifice his Flesh, afflict his Bones,
And pierce his Hide, but for a moments space,
Thy Darling, then, would curse thee to thy Face.
To which, the Eternal thus: His body's thine, Gods reply.

To plague thy fill, withal, I do confine
Thy power to her lists, Afflict and tear
His Flesh at pleasure: But his life forbear.
Meditatio Quarta.
BOth Goods, and Body too; Lord, who can stand?
Expect not Jobs uprightness, at my hand,
Without Jobs aid; The temper of my Passion,
(Untamed by thee) can brook no Jobs Temptation,
For I am Weak, and Frail, and what I can
Most boast of, proves me but a sinful Man;
Things that I should avoid, I do; and what
I am inioyn'd to do, that do I not.
My Flesh is weak, too strong in this, alone,
It rules my Spirit, that should be ruled by none
But thee; my spirits faint, and has been never
Free from the fits of sins Quotidian Fever.
My powr's are all corrupt, corrupt my Will,
Marble to Good, and Wax to what is Ill;
Eclipsed is my Reason, and my Wit;
By interposing Earth 'twixt Heaven, and it:
My Mem'ry's like a Searce of Lawne (alas)
It Keeps things gross, and lets the purer pass.
What have I then to boast, What Title can
I challenge more then this, A sinful man?
Yet do I (sometimes) feel a warm Desire,
Raise my low Thoughts, and dull affections, higher,
Where, like a soul entrans't, my spirit flies,
Makes leagues with Angels, and brings Deities
Half way to heaven, shakes hands with Seraphims,
And boldly mingles wings with Cherubims,
From whence, I look askaunce, adowne the Earth,
Pity my self, and loath my place of birth:
But while I thus my lower state deplore,
I wake, and prove the Wretch I was before.
Even as the Needle, that directs the Hour, Simile.

(Touched with the Loadstone) by the secret power
Of hidden Nature, points upon the Pole;
Even so the wavering powers of my Soul,
Touched by the virtue of thy Spirit, flee
From what is Earth, and point alone to Thee.
When I have says, to hold thee by the Hand,
I walk securely, and me thinks I stand
More sirme then Atlas; but when I forsake
The safe protection of thine Arm, I quake,
Like wind-shaki Reeds, and have no strength at all,
But (as a Vine, the Prop cut down) I fall:
Yet wretched I (when as thy Justice lends
Thy glorious Presence from me) straight am friends
With Flesh and Blood, forget thy Grace, fly from it,
And, like a Dog, return unto my Vomit;
The sawning world, to Pleasure then inuites
My wandering Eyes; The flesh presents Delights
Unto my yielding heart, which thinks those pleasures,
Her only bus'nes now, and rarest treasures,
Content can glory in, whilst I, secure,
Stoop to the painted plumes of Satan's Lure:
Thus I captived, and drunk with pleasures Wine,
Like to a mad man, think no state like mine.
What have I then to boast? What Title can
I challenge more then this, A sinful man?
I feel my Griefe's enough, nor can I be
Redrest by any, but (Great God) by thee.
Too great thou art, to come within my Roof,
Say but the word, Be whole, and it is enough;
Till then, my tongue shall never cease, mine Eyes
Never cloze, my lowly bended Knees never rise;
Till then, my Soul shall never want early sobs,
My cheeks no Tears, my pensive Breast, no Throbs,
My Heart shall lack no Zeal, nor tongue expressing.
I Will strive, like Jacob, till I get my Blessing:
Say then, Be clean, I Will never stop till then,
Heaven never shall rest, till Heaven shall say, Amen.
THE ARGUMENT.
Job, smote with Ulcers, groueling lies,
Plunged in a Gulf of Miseries,
His Wife to blasphemy does tempt him,
His three Friends visit, and lament him.
Sect. 5.
LIke as a Truant-Scholler (whose delay Chap. 2. 7.

Is worse then whipping, having leave to play) Simile.

Makes haste to be enlarged from the Iayle
Of his neglected School, turns speedy tail
Upon his tedious book (so ill befriended)
Before his Masters Ite be full ended.
So thanklesse Satan, full of winged Haste,
Thinking all time, not spent in Mischief, waste,
Departs with speed, less patient to forbear
The patient Job, then patient Job to bear.
Forth from the furnace of his Nostrell, flies Job smote with ulcers.

A sulpherous Vapor, which (by the envious eyes
Of this foul Fiend inflamed) possessed the fair,
And sweet complexion of the abused Air
With Pestilence, and (having power so far)
Took the advantage of his worser Star,
Smote him with Ulcers ( Ezod. 9. 10.
such as once befell
The Egyptian Wizzards,) Ulcers (...)
hot and fell,
Which like a searching Tetter uncorrected,
Left no part of his body unaffected,
From head to foot, no empty place was found,
That could b'afflicted with another wound:
So noy some was the nature of his Grief,
That (left by Friends, and Wife, that should be chief
Assister) he (poor he) alone remained,
Groueling in Ashes, being (himself) constrained,
With Pot-sheards, to scrape off those rip'ned Cores,
(Which Dogs disdayn'd to lick) from out his sores.
Which when his Wife beheld, adust, and keen,
Her passion waxt, made strong, with scorn and spleen;
Like as the Winds, imprisoned in the earth, Simiie.

And barred the passage to their natural birth,
Grow fierce; and nilling to be longer pent,
Break in an Earth quake, shake the World, and vent;
So brake she forth, so forth her Fury brake,
Till now, pent in with shame, and thus she spoke.
Fond Saint, thine Innocence finds timely speed, The speech of Jobs wife.

A foolish Saint receives a Saintly meed;
Is this the Just man's Recompense? Or has
Heaven no requital for thy painful Faith,
Other then this? What, have thy zealous Qualmes,
Abstemious Fastings, and thy hopeful Alms,
Thy private Groans, and often bended knees,
No other End, no other Thanks, but these?
Fond man, submit thee to a kinder Fate,
Cease to be righteous, at so dear a rate:
It Is Heaven, not Fortune, that thy Weal debarres;
Curse Heaven then, and not thy way ward Stars:
It Is God that plagues thee, God not knowing why;
Curse then that God, revenge thy Wrongs, and Dye.
Job then replied: God loves where he chastised,
Thou speak like a Fool, and ill advised;
Laugh we to lick the sweet, and shall we lowre,
If he be pleased to send a little sour?
Am I so weak, one Blast or two, should chill me;
I Will trust my Maker, though my Maker kill me.
When these sad tidings filled those itching ears
Of Earths black babbling Daughter (she that hears,
And vents alike, both Truth and Forgeries,
And vtters, often, cheaper then she buys)
She spread the pinnions of her nimble Wings,
Advanced her Trumpet, and away she springs,
And sils the whispring Air, which soon possessed
The spacious borders of the enquiring East,
Upon the summon of such solemn News,
Whose Truth, malignant Fame could not abuse,
His woeful Eliphaz, Tsophar, Buildad.
Friends came to him, to the end,
To comfort, and bewail their wretched Friend.
But when they came, far off, they did not know,
Whether it were the selfsame Friend, or no,
(Brim-fill'd with brinie Woe) they wept, and tore
(To Express their grief) the garments that they wore,
Seven days and nights they sat upon the ground,
But spoke not, for his sorrows did abound.
Meditatio Quinta.
SAy, is not Satan justly styled than,
A Tempter, and an Enemy to Man?
What could he more? His Wish would not extend
To Death, lest his assaults, with death, should end:
Then what he did, what could he further do?
His Hand has setz'd both Goods, and Body too,
The hopeful Issue of a holy Strain,
In such a dearth of holiness, is slain.
What has the Lazar left him, but his Grief,
And (what might best been spared) his foolish Wife?
Could Mischief been more hard (though more in kind)
To nip the Flowers, and leave the Weeds behind?
Woman was made a Helper by Creation,
A Helper, not alone for Propagation,
Or fond Delight, but sweet Society,
Which Man (alone) should want, and to supply
Comforts to him, for whom her Sex was made,
That each may joy in eithers needful aid:
But fairest Angels, had the foulest fall;
And best things (once abused) prove worst of all,
Else, had not Satan been so foul a Fiend,
Else, had not Woman proou'd so false a Friend.
Even as the treacherous Fowler, to entice Simile.

His silly winged Prey, does first devise
To make a Bird his stale, at whose false Call,
Others may chance into the selfsame Thrall:
Even so, that crafty Snarer of Mankind,
Finding man's righteous Palate not enclind,
To taste the sweetness of his gilded Baits,
Makes a collater all Suit, and slily waits
Upon the weakness of some bosom Friend,
From whose enticement, he expects his end.
Ah righteous Job, what Cross was left, unknown?
What Grief may be described, but was thine own?
Is this a lust man's case? What does befall
To one man, may as well betide to all.
The worst I Will look for, that I can project,
If better come, it is more then I expect;
If otherwise, I Am armed with Preparation;
No sorrow's sudden to an Expectation.
Lord, to thy VVisdome I submit my Will,
I will be thankful, send me Good, or Ill;
If Good, my present State will pass the sweeter;
If Ill, my Crown of Glory shall be greater.
THE ARGUMENT.
Orewhelm'd with grief, Job breaks forth
Into impatience: Bans his Birth,
Professes, that his heart did doubt,
And fear, what, since, has fallen out.
Sect. 6.
WOrne-bare with grief, the patient Job betrayed Chap 3. Job curses his
birthday.

His seuen-dayes silence, cursed his day, and said:
Oh that my Day of birth had never been,
Nor yet the Night, which I was brought forth in!
Be it not numbered for a Day, let Light
Not make a difference twixt it, and Night;
Let gloomy Shades (then Death more sable) pass
Upon it, to declare how fatal 'twas:
Let Clouds ore-cast it, and as hateful make it,
As life's to him, whom Tortures bid, forsake it:
From her next day, let that black Night be cut,
Nor in the reckning of the Months, be put:
Let Desolation fill it, all night long,
In it, be never heard a Bridal song:
Let all sad Mourners, that do curse the Light,
When light's drawn in, begin to curse this Night.
Her evening Twylight, let foul Darkness stain,
And may her Midnight expect Light, in vain;
Nor let her infant Day (but newly borne)
Suffer't to see the Eyelids of the morn,
Because my Mothers Womb it would not cloze,
Which gave me passage to endure these Woes:
Why died I not in my Conception, rather?
Or why was not my Birth, and Death together?
Why did the Midwife take me on her knees?
Why did I suck, to feel such Griefs, as these?
Then had this Body never been oppressed,
I had inioy'd the eternal sleep of rest;
With Kings, and mighty Monarchs, that lie crowned
With stately Monuments, poor I had found
A place of Rest, had borne as great a sway,
Had been as Happy, and as Rich as they:
Why was I not as an abortiue Birth,
That never had known the horrors of the earth?
The silent Grave is quiet from the fear
Of Tyrants: Tyrants are appeazed there,
The grinded Prisner hears not (there) the noise,
Nor harder threatenings of the Oppressors voice:
Both Rich and Poor are equaled in the Grave,
Servants no Lords, and Lords no Servants have:
What needs there Light to him that's comfortless?
Or Life to such as languish in distress,
And long for death, which, if it come by leisure,
They ransack for it, as a hidden Treasure?
What needs there Life to him, that cannot have
A Boon, more gracious, then a quiet Grave?
Or else to him, whom God has wal'd about,
That would, but cannot find a Passage out?
When I but taste, my Sighs return my Food,
The flowing of my Tears have raised a flood;
When my Estate was prosperous, I did fear,
Lest, by some heedlesse, or want of care,
I might be brought to Misery, and (alas!)
What I did then so fear, is come to pass:
But though, secure, my soul did never slumber,
Yet do my Woes exceed both Weight, and Number.
Meditatio sexta.
SO poor a thing is Man. No Flesh and Blood
Deserves the style of Hor lib. 2. car. ode. 16. Nihilest exom ni part beatum.
Absolutely Good:
The righteous man sins often; whose power's such,
To sin the least, sins (at the least) too much:
The Genesis 22. 10.
Man, whose Faith disdained his Isacks life,
Dissembled once, a Ibid. 20. 2.
Sister, for a Wife
The righteous Genesis 19. 33.
Lot, being drunk, did make (at once)
His Daughters, both, half sisters to their Sons:
The royal Favorite of heaven, stood
Not guililesse of 2 Samuel 11. 4, 15
Adultery, and Blood,
And he, whose hands did build the Temple, does
Bow down his lustful knees to 1 King 11 5.
Ashtaroth
The John 8 9.
sinful Woman was accused, but none
Was found, that could begin to sting a stone.
From muddled Springs, can Crystal Waters come?
In some things, all men sin, in all things, some.
Even at the soil, (which Aprils gentle showers
Have filled with sweetness, and inricht with flowers) Simile.

Reares up her suckling plants, still shooting forth
The tender blossoms of her timely Birth,
But, if denied the beams of cheerly May,
They hang their withred heads, and fade away:
So man, assisted by the Almighties Hand,
His Faith does flourish, and securely stand,
But left, awhile, forsook (as in a shade)
It languishes, and nipt with sin, does fade:
No Gold is pure from Dross, though often refined;
The strongest Cedar's shaken with the wind;
The fairest Rose has no prerogative,
Against the fretting Canker-worme; The Hiue
No honey yields, vnblended with the Wax,
The finest Linen has both soil and bracks:
The best of men have sins; None lives secure,
In Nature nothing's Perfect, nothing Pure.
Lord, since I needs must sin, yet grant that I
Forge no advantage by infirmity:
Since that my Vesture cannot want a Stain,
Assist me, lest the tincture be in Grain.
To thee (my great Redeemer) do I fly,
It is thy Death, alone, can change my Dye;
Tears, mingled with thy Blood, can scower so,
That Scarlet sins shall turn as white as Snow.
THE ARGUMENT.
Rash Eliphaz reproues, and rates,
And falsely censures Job; Relates
His Vision; shows him the event
Of wicked men: Bids him repent.
Sect. 7.
THen Eliphas, his pounded tongue replieu'd, Eliphaz speech Chap. 4.

And said, Should I co^te^d, thou would be grieved;
Yet what man can refrain, but he must break
His angry silence, having heard thee speak?
O sudden change! Many have thou directed,
And strengthened those, whose minds have been dejected,
Thy sacred Thewes, and sweet Instructions, did
Help those were falling, raised up such as slid:
But now it is thy case, thy soul is vexed,
And can not help thy self, thy self perplexed;
Thou lou'dst thy God, but basely for thy profit,
Fear him, in further expectation of it;
Judge then: Did Record ever round thine ear,
That God for sooke the heart, that was sincere?
But often have we seen, that such as plow
Lowdnesse, and Mischief, reap the same they sow?
So have proud Tyrants from their throanes bin cast,
With all their of spring, by The Almighty's Blast;
And they, whose hands have bin imbrew'd in blood,
Have with their Issue dyed, for want of Food:
A Vision lately' appeard before my sight, The Vision.

In depth of darkness, and the dead of night,
Unwonted fear usurped me round about,
My trembling bones were sore, from head to foot:
Forthwith, a Spirit glanced before mine eyes,
My Brows did sweat, my moystned Hair did rise,
The Face I knew not, but a while it stayed,
And in the depth of silence, thus it said,
Is man more Just, more pure then his Creator?
Amongst his Angels, (more upright by nature
Then Man) he has found Weakness, how much more
Shall he expect in him, that is walled ore
With mortal Flesh, and Blood, founded, and floor'd
With Dust, and with the Worms to be devoured?
They rise securely with the Morning Sun,
And (unregarded) dye ere Day be done;
Their Glory passes with them, as a Breath,
They dye (like Fools) before they think of death.
Rage then, and see who will approve thy rage, Chap. 5.

What Saint will give thy railing Patronage?
Anger destroys the Fool, and he that has
A wrathful heart, is slain with his own wrath;
Yet have I seen, that Fools have often been able
To boast with Babel, but have fallen with Babel:
Their sons despairing, roar without relief
In open Ruin, on the Rocks of Grief:
Their harvest (though but small) the hungry eat,
And robbers seize their wealth, though never so great:
But wretched man, were thy Condition mine,
I Would not despair, as thou do, nor repine,
But offer up the broken Sacrifice
Of a sad soul, before his angry eyes,
Whose Works are Miracles of admiration,
He mounts the Meek, amidst their Desolation,
Confounds the worldly wise, that (blindfold) they
Grope all in Darkness, at the noone of Day:
But guards the Humble from reproach of wrong,
And stops the current of the crafty Tongue.
Thrice happy is the man his Hands correct:
Beware, lest Fury force thee to reject
The Almighties Trial; He that made thy Wound
In Justice, can, in Mercy, make it sound:
Fear not, though multiplied Afflictions shall
Besiege thee; He, at length, will rid them all;
In Famine he shall feed, in War defend thee,
Shield thee from Slander, and in Griefs attend thee,
The Beasts shall strike with thee eternal Peace,
The Stones shall not disturb thy fields Increase;
Thy House shall thrive, replenisht with Content,
Which, thou shall rule, in prosperous Government,
The number of thy Offspring shall abound,
Like Summers Grass upon a fruitful ground,
Like timely Corn, well rip'ned in her Ears,
Thou shall depart thy life, struck full of years:
All this, Experience tells: Then (Job) advise,
Thou have taught many, now thy self be wise.
Meditatio septima.
THe perfect Model of true Friendship's this:
A rare Affection of the soul, which is The description of true friendship.

Begun with rip'ned Judgment, does persevere
With simple Wisdom, and concludes with Never.
It Is pure in substance, as refined Gold,
That buyeth all things, but is never sold:
It is a Coin, and most men walk without it;
True Love's the Stamp, Jehovah 's writ about it;
It rusts, vnvs'd, but using makes it brighter,
Against Heaven high Treason it is, to make it lighter.
It Is a Gold Chain, linkes soul and soul together Sali^s homo amico amicus
Ter. Phorm Act. 3. scn 3.

In perfect Unity, ties God to either.
Affliction is the Touch, whereby we prove,
Whether't be Gold, or guilt with fained Love.
The wisest Moralist, that ever diu'd
Into the depth of Natures bowels, strived
With the Augar of Experience, to bore
Men's hearts so far, till he had found the Ore
Of Friendship, but, despaying of his end,
My Friends (said he) there is no perfect Friend. Aristotle.

Friendship's like Music, two Strings tuned alike,
Will both stir, though but only one you strike.
It is the Quintessence of all Perfection
Extracted into one; A sweet connection
Of all the Virtues, Moral and Divine,
Abstracted into One. It is a Mine,
Whose nature is not rich, unless in making
The state of others wealthy by partaking:
It bloomes and blossoms, both in Sun and shade,
Does (like the Bay in winter) never fade:
It loves all, and yet suspecteth none,
Is provident, yet seeking not her own: 1. Cor. 13.

It Is rare it self, yet makes all things common,
And is judicious, yet it judges no man.
The Epaminond as.
noble Theban, being asked, which
Of Chahrias, or Jphicrates, or himself.
three (propounded) he supposed most rich
In virtues sacred Treasure, thus replied,
Till they be dead, that doubt cannot be tried.
It is no wise man's part, to weigh a Friend,
Without the gloss, and goodness of his End:
For Life, without the Death considered, can
Afford but half a story of the Man.
It Is not my friends Affliction, that shall make
Me either Wonder, Censure, or Forsake:
Judgment belongs to Fools; enough that I
Find he is afflicted, not enquier, Why:
It is the hand of Heaven, That selfsame Sorrow
Grieves him to Day, may make me groan to Morrow:
Heaven be my comfort; In my highest grief,
I will not trust to man's, but Thy relief.
THE ARGUMENT.
Job counts his sorrows, and from thence
Excuses his Impatience;
Describes the shortness of man's Time,
And makes confession of his Crime.
Sect. 8.
But wretched Job, sigh't forth these words, and said, Chap. 6.

Ah me! that my Impatience were waigh'd
With all my Sorrows, by an equal hand, Jobs speech.

They would be found more pondrous then the sand,
That lies upon the new-forsaken shore;
My Griefs want vtt'rance, and have stopped their Door:
And wonder not; Heavens shafts have struck me dead,
And God has heapt all Mischiefs on my head:
Will Asses bray, when they have grass to eat?
Or lowes the Ox, when as he wants no meat?
Can Pallates find a relish in distaste?
Or can the whites of Eggs well please the taste?
My vexed soul is daily fed with such
Corruptions, as my hands disdain to touch.
Alas! that Heaven would hear my hearts Requste,
And strike me dead, that I may find some Rest:
What hopes have I, to see my end of grief,
And to what end, should I prolong my life?
Why should not I wish Death? My strength, (alas)
Is it like Marble, or my flesh like Brass?
What Power have I to mitigate my Pain?
If e're I had, that Power now is vain,
My friends are like the Rivers, that are dry
In heat of Summer, when necessity
Requires water; They amazed stand
To see my Grief, but lend no helping hand.
Friends, beg I succor from you? Craved I
Your Goods, to ransom my Captivity?
Show me my faults, and wherein I did wrong
My Patience, and I will hold my tongue;
The force of reasonable words may move,
But what can Rage or Lunacy reprove?
Rebuke you (then) my words, to have it thought
My speech is frantic, with my grief distraught?
You take a pleasure in your friends distress,
That is more wretched then the Fatherless:
Behold these Sores: Be judged by your own eyes,
If these be counterfeited miseries;
Balance my words, and you shall find me free
From these foul crimes, wherewith ye branded me,
And that my speech was not distaind with sin,
Only the language, sorrow treated in.
Is not man's Day prefixed, which, when expyr'd, Chap 7.

Sleeps he not quiet, as a servant hired?
A servants labor does, at length, surcease,
His Day of travel finds a Night of peace,
But (wretched) I with woes, am still oppressed,
My midday torments see no even of Rest,
My nights (ordaind for sleep) are filled with grief,
I look (in vain) for the next days relief:
With Dust, and Worms my flesh is hid, my sorrow's
Have plough'd my skin, and filth lies in her furrows:
My days of joy are in a moment gone,
And (hopeless of returning) spent and done:
Remember (Lord) my life is but a puff,
I, but a man, that is Misery enough,
And when pale Death has once sealed up my sight,
I never shall see the pleasures of the light,
The eye of man shall not discover me,
No, nor thine (Lord) for I shall cease to be;
When mortals dye, they pass (like clouds before
The Sun) and back return they never more,
To His earthly house he never shall come agin,
And then shall be, as if he never had bin:
Therefore my tongue shall speak, while it has breath,
Prompted with grief, and with the pangs of death:
Am I not weak and saint? What need'st thou stretch
Thy direful hand upon so poor a Wretch?
When as I think that night shall stop the streams
Of my distress, thou fright'st me then, with dreams,
So that my soul does rather choose to dye,
Then be inuolued in such misery;
My life's a burden, and will end: O grieve
No longer him, that would no longer live.
Ah! what is Man, that thou should raise him so
High at first, then, sink him down so low?
What Is Man? Thy glory's great enough, without him:
Why do thou (thus) disturb thy mind about him?
Lord, I have sinned, (Great Helper of mankind)
I am but Dust and Ashes, I have sinned:
Against thee (as a mark) why have thou fixed me?
How have I trespas't, that thou thus afflict'st me?
Why, rather, did thou not remove my sin,
And salve the sorrows that I raued in?
For thou have heapt such vengeance on my head,
That when thou seek'st me, thou will find me dead.
Meditatio octaua.
THE Egyptians, amidst their solemn Feasts,
Used to welcome, and present their Ghests,
With the sad sight of Man's Anatomy,
Served in with this loud Motto, All must dye.
Fools often go about, when as they may
Take better vantage of a nearer way;
Look well into your bosoms; do not slatter
Your known infirmities: Behold, what matter
Your flesh was made of: Man, cast back thine eye,
Upon the weakness of thine Infancy;
See how thy lips hang on thy mothers Breast,
Bawling for help, more helpless then a Beast.
Live thou to Childhood? Then, behold, what toys
Do mock the sense, how shallow are thy joys:
Come thou to Downy years? see, how deceits
Gull thee with golden fruit, and with false baits,
Slily beguile the prime of thine affection:
Art thou attaind at length to full perfection
Of ripened years? Ambition now has sent
Thee on her frothy errand, Discontent
Pays thee thy Wages: Do thy grizly hairs
Begin to cast account of many cares
Upon thy head? The sacred lust of gold
Now fires thy spirit, for fleshly lust, too cold,
Makes thee a slave to thine own base desire,
Which melts and hardens, at the self same Fire:
Art thou Decrepit? Then thy very breath
Is grievous to thee, and each griefe's a Death:
Look where thou list, thy life is but a span,
Thou art but Dust, and, to conclude, A Man.
Thy life's a Warfare, Thou a Soldier art,
Satan's thy Foe-man, and a faithful Heart,
Thy two edged Weapon, Patience thy Shield,
Heaven is thy Chiefetaine, and the world thy Field.
To be Mahu est miles qui Imperate rem gemens sequitur. Sen.
afraid to dye, or wish for death,
Are words and passions of despairing breath:
Who does the first, the Day does faintly yield,
And who the second, basely flies the Field.
Man's not a lawful Steares-man of his days,
His bootlesse wish, nor hastens, nor delays:
We are Gods hired Workmen; He discharges
Some, late at Night, (and when he list) inlarges
Others at Noone, and in the Morning, some:
None may relieve himself, till He bid, Come:
If we receive for one half day, as much
As they that toil till Evening, shall we grutch?
Our life's a Road, in death our Journey ends,
We go on Gods Embassage, some, he sends
Called with the trotting of hard Misery, Hor. car. lib. 2. od. 3.

And others, pacing on Prosperity: Omnium versatur vrna, serius Ocyius sors
exitura.

Some lagge, whilst others gallop on, before;
All go an end, some faster, and some slower.
Epictet. Euchirid. cap. 77.
Lead me that pace (great God) that thou think best,
And I will follow with a dauntlesse breast:
Which (ne'rthelesse) if I refuse to do,
I shall be wicked, and yet follow too.
Assist me in my Combat with the flesh,
Relieve my fainting powers, and refresh
My feeble spirit: I will not wish to be
Cast from the world; Lord, cast the world from me.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bildad, man's either state expresses,
Gods Mercy' and Justice Job confesses;
He pleads his cause, and begs relief,
Foiled with the burden of his grief.
Sect. 9.
SO Bildads silence (great with tongue) did break, Bildads speech. Chap. 8.

And, like a heartlesse Comforter, did speak:
How long will thou persist to breath thy mind
In words, that vanish as a storm of wind?
Will God forsake the Innocent, or will
His Justice smite thee, undeserving ill?
Though righteous death thy sinful sons has rent
From thy sad bosom, yet if thou repent,
And wash thy ways with undissembled tears,
Tuning thy Troubles to the Almighties ears,
The mercy of his eyes shall shine upon thee,
And shower the sweetness of his Blessings on thee:
And though (a while) thou plunge in misery,
At length he will crown thee with prosperity:
Run back, and learn of sage Antiquity,
What our late births, to present times, deny,
See, how, and what (in the worlds downy age)
Befell our fathers in their Pilgrimage;
If Rushes have no mire, and Grass no rain,
They cease to flourish, droope their heads, and wayne:
So fades the man, whose heart is not upright,
So perishes the double Hypocrite;
His hopes are like the Spiders web, to day
That Is flourishing, to morrow swept away:
But he that is just, is like a flowring tree,
Rooted by Crystal springs, that cannot be
Scorcht by the noone of day, nor stirred from thence,
Where, firmly fixed, it has a residence,
Heaven never fails the soul that is upright,
Nor offers arm to the base Hypocrite:
The one, he blesses with eternal joys,
The other, his auenging hand destroys.
I yield it for a truth; (sad Job replied) Chap. 9. Jobs reply.

Compared with God, can man be iustifi'd?
If man should give account what he has done,
Not of a thousand, could he answer one:
His hand's all-Power, and his heart all pure,
Against this God, what flesh can stand secure?
He shakes the Mountains, and the Sun he bars
From circling his due course, shuts up the Stars,
He spreads the Heavens, and rides on the Flood,
His Works may be admired, not understood:
No eye can see, no heart can apprehend him,
Lists he to spoil? What Is he can reprehend him?
His Will's his Law. The smoothest pleader has
No power in his lips, to slake his Wrath,
Much less can I plead fair Immunitie,
Which could my guiltless Tongue attain, yet I
Would kiss the Footstep of his Iudgement-seate:
Should he receive my cry, my griefe's so great,
It would persuade me, that he heard me not,
For he has torn me with the fiue-fold knot
Of his sharp Scourge, his plagues successiue are,
That I can find no ground, but of Despair.
If my bold lips should dare to justify
My self, my lips would give my lips the lie.
God owes his mercy, nor to Good, nor Bad;
The wicked often he spares, and often does add,
Grief, to the Just man's grief, woes after woes;
We must not judge man, as his Market goes.
But might my prayers obtain this boon, that God
Would cease these sorrows, and remove that Rod,
Which moves my patience, I would take upon me,
T'impleade before him, your rash Judgment on me,
Because my tender Conscience does persuade me,
I Am not so bad, as your bad Words have made me.
My life is tedious, my distress shall break Chap. 10.

Into her proper Voice, my griefs shall speak;
(Just Judge of Earth) condemn me not, before
Thou please to make me understand wherefore.
Agrees it with thy Justice, thus to be
Kind to the Wicked, and so harsh to Me?
See thou with fleshly Eyes? Or do they glance
By favor? Are they closed with Ignorance?
Live thou the life of Man? Do thou desire
A space of time to search, or to enquire
My sin? No, in the twinkling of an eye,
Thou see my heart, see mine Immunitie
From those foul crimes, wherewith my friends, at pleasure
Tax me, yet thou afflict'st me, in this Measure:
Thy hands have formed, and framed me, what I am,
When thou have made, will thou destroy the same?
Remember, I am built of Clay, and must
Return again (without thy help) to Dust.
Thou did create, preserve me, have endu'd
My life with gracious blessings, often renewed
Thy precious Favors on me: How were thou,
Once, so benign, and so cruel now?
Thou hunt'st me like a Prey, my plagues increase,
Succeed each other, and they never cease.
Why was I borne? Or why did not my Tomb,
Receive me (weeping) from my Mothers Womb?
I have not long to live; Lord, grant that I
May see some comfort, that am soon to dye.
Meditatio nona.
HE that is the truest Master of his own,
Is never less alone, then when alone,
His watchful Eyes are placed within his Heart;
His Skill, is how to know himself; his Art,
How to command the pride of his Affections,
With sacred Reason: How to give Directions
Unto his wandering Will; His (...).
Conscience checks his
More looser thoughts; His louder sins, she vexes
With srights, and fears; Within her own precincts,
She rambles with her Juuenal. Sat. 13. Occultum qua tientean^ ^o tortore
slagcl^um.
Whips of wire, never winks
At smallest faults. Like as a tender Mother
(However she loves her darling) will not smother
His childish fault, but she (her self) will rather
Correct, then trust him to his angry Father:
Even so the tender Conscience of the wise,
Checks her beloved soul, and does chastise,
And judge the Crime her self, lest it should stand,
As liable to a seuerer Hand.
Fond soul, beware, who e're thou art, that spies
Another Fault, that thou thine own, chastize,
Lest, like a foolish man, thou judge another,
In those selfe-crimes, which in your breast you smother.
Who undertakes, to dreine his brothers eye
Of noisome Humors, first, must clarify
His own, lest when his brothers blemish is
Remoou'd, he spy a souler Blame in his.
It is beyond the extent of Man's Commission,
To judge of Man: The secret disposition
Of sacred Providence is Hor. car. lib. 3. Ode 29. Prudens sulturi temporis
exitum, caliginosa nocte, prenut Deus. Luk 16. 22.
locked, and sealed
From man's Conceit, and not to be revealed,
Until that Lamb break open the Seal, and come
With Life and Death, to give the World her Doom.
The Groundwork of our Faith, must not rely
On bare Events; Peace and Prosperity
Are goodly Favors, but no proper Mark,
Wherewith God brands his Sheep: No outward bark
Secures the body, to be sound within.
The Rich man lived in Scarlet, dyed in Sin.
Behold the afflicted man; Affliction mooues
Compassion; but no Confusion proves.
A gloomie Day brings often a glorious Even:
The Poor man dyed with sores, and lives in Heaven.
To Good and Bad, both Fortunes Heaven does share,
That both, an after-change, may hope, and fear.
I Will hope the best (Lord,) leave the rest to thee,
Lest, while I judge another, thou judge me;
It Is one man's Work, to have a serious sight
Of his own sins, and judge himself aright.
THE ARGUMENT.
Zophar blames Job; Job equal makes
His wisdom unto theirs: He takes
In hand to plead with God; and then
Describes the frail estate of men.
Sect. 10.
THen Zophar from deep silence, did awake Chap. 11. Zophars speech.

His words, with louder language, and be spoke:
Shall Prattlers be vnanswer'd, or shall such
Be counted just, that speak, for babbling much?
Shall thy words stop our mouths? He that has blamed
And scoft at others, shall he dye vnsham'd?
Our ears have heard thee, when thou have excused
Thy self of Evil, and thy God accused:
But if thy God should plead with thee at large,
Thoud'st reap the sorrows of a double Charge.
Can thou, by deep inquiry, understand
The hidden Justice of the Almighties hand?
Heavens large Dimensions cannot comprehend him;
What e're he do, what is He, can reprehend him?
What Refuge have thou then, but to present
A heart, inricht with the sad compliment
Of a true Convert, on thy bended knee,
Before thy God, t'attone thy God and thee?
Then doubt not, but he will rear thee from thy sorrow,
Disperse thy Clouds, and, like a shining Morrow,
Make clear thy Sunbeams of Prosperity,
And rest thy Soul in sweet Security:
But he, whose heart, obdur'd in sin, persists,
His Hopes shall vanish, as the morning Mists.
But Job, even as a Ball, against the ground Chap 12.

Banded with violence, did thus rebound:
You are the only Wisemen, in your breasts, Jobs reply.

The hidden Magazen of true Wisdom rests,
Yet (though astunn'd with sorrows) do I know
A little, and (perchance) as much as you;
I Am scorned of my Friends, whose prosperous state,
Surmises me (that have expyr'd the Date,
Of Earths fair Fortunes) to be cast away,
From Heavens regard, think none beloved, but they;
I am despised, like a Torch, that is spent,
Whilst that the wicked blazes in his Tent:
What have your wisdoms taught me, more then that,
Which Birds and Beasts (could they but speak) would chat?
Digests the Stomach, 'ere the Pallat tastes?
O weigh my Words, before you judge my Case.
But you refer me to our Fathers days,
To be instructed in their wiser Lays.
True, length of days brings Wisdom; but, I say,
I have a Wiser teaches me, then they:
For I am taught, and tutored by that Hand,
Whose unresisted power does command
The limits of the Earth, whose Wisdom schools
And trains the Simple, makes the learned, Fools:
His hand does raise the poor, deposes Kings;
On him, both Order, and the Change of things
Depend, he searches, and brings forth the light,
From out the shadows, and the depth of night.
All this, mine own Experience has found true, Chap 13.

And in all this, I know as much as you.
But you auerre; If I should plead with God,
That he would double his seuerer Rod.
Your tongue belyes his Justice, you apply
Amiss, your Medicine, to my Malady;
In silence, you would seem more Wise, less weak;
You having spoke, now lend me leave to speak.
Will you do wrong, to do Gods Justice right?
Are you his Counsel? Need you help to fight
His Quarrels? Or expect you his applause,
Thus (bribed with self-conceit) to plead his Cause?
Iudgement's your Fee, when as you take in hand
Heavens cause, to plead it, and not Heaven command.
If that the foulness of your Censures could
Not fright you, yet, me thinks, his Greatness should,
Whose Justice, you make Patron of your lies;
Your slender Maxims, and false Forgeryes,
Are substanc't, like the dust, that flies besides me;
Peace then, and I will speak, what ere betides me.
My soul is on the Rack, my tears have drowned me,
Yet will I trust my God, though God confound me;
He, He Is my Tower of strength; No hypocrite
Stands, unconfounded, in his glorious sight:
Balance my words; I know my case would quit
Me from your censures, should I argue it.
Who takes the Plaintiffes pleading? Come, for I
Must plead my Right, or else (perforce) must dye.
With thee (Great Lord of Heaven) I dare dispute,
If thou will grant me this my double Suit;
First, that thou slake these sorrows, that surround me,
Then, that thy burning Face do not confound me;
Which granted, then take thou thy choice, let me
Propound the Question, or, else, answer Thee.
Why do thou thus pursue me, like thy Foe?
For what great Sin do thou afflict me so?
Break'st thou a withred Leaf? Thy Justice does
Sum up the Reck'nings of my sinful Youth;
Thou keep'st me Prisoner, bound in fetters fast,
And, like a threadbare Garment, do I wast.
Man, borne of Woman, has but a short while Chap 14. The shortness of Man's life.

To live; his Days are fleet, and full of toil;
He Is like a Flower, shooting forth, and dying,
His Life is as a Shadow, swiftly flying.
Ah! being so poor a thing, what need'st thou mind him?
The number of his days, thou have confined him;
Then add not plagues unto his Grief, O give
Him peace, that has so small a time to live;
Trees, that are felled, may sprout again, Man never;
His days are numbered, and he dies for ever,
He Is like a Mist, exhaled by the Sun,
His days once done, they are for ever done.
O, that thy Hand would hide me close, and cover
Me in the Grave, till all thy Wrath were over!
My desperate sorrows hope for no Relief,
Yet will I wait my Change. My day of grief
Will be exchanged, for an eternal Day
Of Joy: But now, thou do not spare to lay
Full heaps of Vengeance on my broken soul,
And writest my sins, upon an ample scrowle;
As Mountains (being shaken) fall, and Rocks,
(Though firm) are worn, and rent with many knocks:
So strongest men are battered with thy Strength,
Loose ground, returning to the Ground at length:
So Mortals dye, and (being dead) never mind
The fairest Fortunes, that they leave behind.
While man is man (until that death bereave him
Of his last breath) his Griefs shall never leave him.
Meditatio decima.
Does History then, and sage Chronology,
(The Index, pointing to Antiquity,)
So firmly grounded on deep Judgment, guarded,
And kept by so much Miracle, rewarded
With so great Glory, serve, but as slight Fables,
To edge the dullness of men's wanton Tables,
And claw their itching ears? Or do they, rather,
Like a concise Abridgement, serve to gather
Man's high Adventures, and his transitory
Atchiuements, to express his Makers glory?
Acts, that have blown the lowdest Trumpe of Fame,
Are all, but Honors, purchac't in His name.
Is 1. Sam. 10. 1.
he, that (yesterday) went forth, to bring
His Fathers Asses home, (to day) crowned King?
Did Dan 4 30.
he, that now, on his brave Palace stood,
Boasting his Babels beauty, chew the cud
An hour after? Have not Babes been crowned,
And mighty Monarchs beaten to the ground?
Man undertakes, Heaven breathes success upon it;
What Good, what Malum poenae.
Evil is done, but Heaven has done it?
The Alexander.
Man, to whom the World was not ashamed,
To yield her Colors, he, that was proclaimed
A God, in humane shape, whose dreadful Voice
Did strike men dead, like Thunder, at the noise;
Was rent away, from his Imperial Throne,
Before his flower of Youth was fully blown,
His Race was rooted out, his Issue slain,
And left his Empire to another Strain.
Who, that did e're behold the ancient Rome,
Would rashly, given her Glory such a doom,
Or thought her subject to such Alterations,
That was the Terrarum Domina Gentium que Roma. Martial.
Mistress, and the Queen of Nations?
Egypt, that in her walls, had once engrost
More Wisdom, then the World besides, has lost
Her Senses now; Her wisest men of State,
Are turned, like Puppets, to be pointed at:
If Romes great power, and Egypts wisdom can
Not aid themselves, how poor a thing is Man?
God Plays with Kingdoms, as with Tennis-balls,
Fells some that rise, and rayses some that falls:
Nor Policy can prevent, nor secret Fate,
Where Heaven has pleased, to blow upon a State.
If States be not secure, nor Kingdoms, than
How helpelesse (Ah!) how poor a thing is Man!
Man's like a Flower, the while he has to last,
He Is nipt with frost, and shook with every blast,
He Is borne in sorrow, and brought up in tears,
He lives, a while in sin, and dies in fears.
Lord, I Will not boast, what ere thou give unto me,
Lest e're my brag be done, thou take it from me.
No man may boast, but of his own, I can Nemo gloriari debet, nisi de suo,
Sen. ad Lucil.

Then boast of nothing, for I am a Man.
THE ARGUMENT.
Rash Eliphaz does aggrauate
The sins of Job, malign's his state,
Whom Job reproving, iustifies
Himself, bewailes his miseries.
Sect. 11.
Does vain repining (Eliphaz replies) Chap. 15. Eliphaz his speech.

Or words, like wind, beseem the man that is (wise?
Ah sure, thy faithless heart reiects the fear
Of heaven, do not acquaint thy lips with prayre:
Thy words accuse thy heart of Impudence,
Thy tongue (not I) brings in the Evidence:
Art thou the first of men? Do Mysteries
Unfold to thee? Art thou the only wise?
Wherein has Wisdom been more good to you
Then us? What know you, that we never knew?
Reverence, not Censure, fits a young man's eyes,
We are your Ancients, and should be as wise;
Is It not enough, your Arrogance derides
Our counsels, but must scorn thy God besides?
Angels (if God inquier strictly) must
Not plead Perfection: then, can man be just?
It is a truth received, these aged eyes
Have seen't, and is confirmed by the wise,
That still the wicked man is void of rest,
Is always fearful, falls, when he fears least,
In troubles he despaires, and is dejected,
He begs his bread, his death comes unexpected,
In his adversity, his griefs shall gaul him,
And, like a raging Tyrant, shall inthrall him,
He shall advance against his God, in vain,
For Heaven shall crush and beat him down again;
What if his Garners thrive, and goods increase?
They shall not prosper, nor he live in peace,
Eternal horror shall begirt him round,
And vengeance shall both him and his confound,
Amidst his joys, despair shall stop his breath,
His sons shall perish, with untimely death;
The double soul shall dye, and in the hollow
Of all false hearts, false hearts themselves shall swallow.
Then answered Job, All this, before I knew, Chap. 16. Jobs answer.

They want no grief, that find such friends as you?
Ah, cease your words, the fruits of ill-spent hours!
If heaven should please to make my fortunes yours,
I would not scoff you, nor with taunts torment ye,
My lips should comfort, and these eyes lament ye:
What shall I do? Speak not, my griefs oppress
My soul, or speak (alas) they are never the less;
Lord, I am wasted, and my pangs have spent me,
My skin is wrinkled, for thy Hand has rent me,
Mine enemies have smit me in disdain,
Laughed at my torments, iested at my pain:
I swelled in wealth, but (now) alas, am poor,
And feld with woe) lie grou'ling on the floor,
In dust and sackcloth, I lament my sorrows,
Thy Hand has trencht my cheeks with water-furrowes,
Nor can I comprehend the cause, that this
My smart should be so grievous as it is:
Oh Earth! If then an Hypocrite I be,
Cover my cries, as I do cover thee,
And witness Heaven, that these my Vows be true,
(Ah friends!) I spend my tears to Heaven, not you.
My time's but short, (alas!) would then, that I
Might try my cause with God, before I dye.
Since then I languish, and not far from dead, Chap. 17.

Let me, a while, with my Accusers plead
(Before the Judge of heaven, and earth) my right,
Have they not wronged, and vexed me, day and night?
Who, first, lays down his Gage, to meet me? Say,
I doubt not (Heaven being Judge) to win the day:
You Will say, perchance, We Will recompell our word,
E're simple Truth should, unawares, afford
Your discontent; No, no, forbear, for I
Hate less your Censures, then your Flattery;
I am become a Byword, and a Taber,
To set the tongues, and ears of men, in labor,
Mine eyes are dim, my body's but a shade,
Good men that see my case, will be afraid,
But not confounded; They will hold their way,
And in a bad, they will hope a better day;
Recant your errors, for I cannot see
One man, that's truly wise, among you Three;
My days are gone, my thoughts are mis-possest,
The silent night, that heaven ordained for rest,
My day of travel is, but I shall have
Er'e long, long peace, within my welcome grave;
My nearest kindred, are the worms, the earth
My mother, for she gave me, first, my birth;
Where are my hopes then? where that future joy,
Which you false-prophecy'd I should enjoy?
Both hopes, and I, alike, shall travel thither,
Where, closed in dust, we shall remain together.
Meditatio vndecima.
THe Moral Poets, (nor unaptly) feign,
That by lame Vulcans help, the pregnant brain
Of soueraign The Father of the gods.
Jove, brought forth, and at that birth;
Was borne The Goddess of wisdom.
Minerua, Lady of the earth.
O strange Divinity! but sung by rote;
Sweet is the tune, but in a wilder note.
The Moral says, All Wisdom that is given
To hood-wink't mortals, first, proceeds from heaven:
Truth's error, Wisedom's, but wise insolence,
And light's but darkness, not derived from thence;
Wisdom's a strain transcends Morality,
No Vertu's absent, Wisdom being by.
Virtue, by constant practice, is acquired,
This (this by sweat vnpurchas't) is inspired:
The masterpiece of knowledge, is to know
But what is Good, from what is good in show, Tla^o in Me none.

And there it rests: Prudentia sola pralt and ducit ad recte saciendum.
Wisdom proceeds, and chooses
The Lipsius civil. doct. lib. 1. cap. 7
seeming Evil, the apparent Good refuses;
Knowledge deseru's, alone; Wisdom applies,
That, makes some fools, this, makes none but wise;
The curious hand of knowledge does but pick
Bare simples, Wisdom pounds them, for the sick;
In my affliction, knowledge apprehends,
Who is the Author, what the Cause, and Ends,
It finds that Patience is my sad relief,
And that the Hand that caused, can cure my grief:
To rest contented here, is but to bring
Clouds without rain, and heat without a Spring:
What hope arises hence? The Devils do
The very same: They know, and tremble too;
But sacred Wisdom does Non vt sciamus, quid sit virtus, perscrutamur, sed vt
boni essiciamur. Arist. Eth. 2. cap. 2.
apply that Good,
Which simple Knowledge barely understood:
Wisdom concludes, and in conclusion, proves,
That wheresoever God corrects, he loves:
Wisdom digests, what knowledge did but taste,
That deals in futures, this, in things are past:
Wisedom's the Card of Knowledge, which, without
That Guide, at random's wreckt on every doubt:
Knowledge, when Wisdom is too weak to guide her,
Is like a headstrong Horse, that throws the Rider:
Which made that great Socrates. Hoc vnum scit, me nihil scire.
Philosopher auow,
He knew so much, that he did nothing know.
Lord, give me VVisdome to direct my ways,
I beg nor riches, nor yet length of days,
O grant thy servant Wisdom, and with it,
I shall receive such knowledge as will fit
To serve my turn: I wish not Phoebus waine,
Without his skill to drive it, lest I gain
Too dear an Honor, Lord, I will not stay,
To pick more Manna, then will serve to day.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bildad, the whilst he makes a show
To strike the wicked, gives the blow
To Job: Jobs Misery, and Faith;
Zophar makes good what Bildad says.
Sect. 12.
SAid Bildad then, When will ye bring to end, Chap. 18. Bildads speech.

The speeches, whereabout ye so contend?
Weigh eithers words, lest ignorant confusion
Debar them of their purposed conclusion*
We came to comfort, fits it then that we
Be thought as beasts, or fools accounted be?
But thou, Job, (like a mad man) would thou force
God, to desist his order, and set course
Of Justice? Shall the wicked, for thy sake
(That would not taste of Evil) in Good partake?
No, no, his Lamp shall blaze, and dye, his strength
Shall fail, or shall confound it self, at length,
He shall be hampred with close hidden snares,
And dogged, where e're he starts, with troops of fears:
Hunger shall bite, destruction shall attend him,
His skin shall rot, the worst of deaths shall end him,
His fear, shall be a thousand linked together,
His branch, above, his root, beneath, shall wither,
His Name shall sleep in dust, with dust, decay,
Odious to all, by all men chas't away,
No Son shall keep alive his House, his Name,
And none shall thrive, that can alliance clame,
The after-age shall stand amazed, to hear
His Fall, and they that see it, shall shake for fear:
Thus stands the state of him that does amiss,
And (Job) what other is thy case, then this?
But Job replied, How long (as with sharp swords) Chap. 19. Jobs reply.

Will ye torment me, with your poynted words?
How often have your biting tongues defamed
My simple Innocence, and yet, vnsham'd?
Had I deserved these plagues, yet let my grief
Express it self, though it find no relief,
But if you needs must wear your tongues upon me,
Know, It Is the hand of God has overthrown me;
I roar, unheard; His Hand will not release me;
The more I grieve, the more my griefs oppress me:
He has dispoyld my joys, and goes about
(My Branches being lopt) to stroy the Root,
His Plagues, like soldiers, trench within my bones,
My friends, my kindred fly me all at once,
My neighbors, my familiars have forgon me,
My household stares, with strangers eyes, upon me:
I call my servant, but his lips are dumb,
I humbly beg his help, but he will not come,
My own wife loathes my breath, though I did make
My solemn suit, for our dead childrens sake:
The poor, whose wants I have supplied, despise me,
And he that lived within my breast, denies me,
My bones are hide-bound, there cannot be found
One piece of skin, (unless my gummes) that is sound,
Alas! complaints are barren shadows, to
Express, or cure the substance of my woe.
Have pity, (oh my friends) have pity on me,
It Is your Gods hand and mine, that lies upon me,
Vex me no more. O let your anger be
(If I have wronged you) calmed with what ye see;
O! that my speeches were engraven, then,
In Marble Tablets, with an iron Pen:
For sure I am, that my Redeemer lives,
And though pale death consume my flesh, and gives
My Carkas to the worms, yet am I sure,
Clad with this selfsame flesh (but made more pure)
I shall behold His glory; These sad eyes
Shall see his Face, how-e're my body lies,
Mouldred in dust; These fleshly eyes, that do
Behold these Sores, shall see my Maker too.
Unequal hearers, of unequal grief,
You Are all engaged to the selfsame belief,
Know there is a Judge, whose Voice will be as free,
To judge your words, as you have judged me.
Said Zophar then, I purposed to refrain Chap. 20. Zophar's speech.

From speaking, but thou mou'st me back again:
For having heard thy haughty Spirit break
Such hasty terms, my Spirit bids me speak:
Has not the change of Ages, and of Climes,
Taught us, as we shall our succeeding times,
How vain's the triumph, and how short the blaze,
Wherein the wicked sweeten out their days?
Though for a while his Palms of glory flourish,
Yet, in conclusion, they grow seire, and perish:
His life is like a Dream, that passes over,
The eye that saw him, never shall see him more:
The Son shall slatter, whom the Sire oppressed,
And (poor) he shall return, what he did wrest;
He shall be bayted with the Sins, that have
So smiled upon his childhood, to his Grave,
His Plenty (purchac't by oppression) shall
Be Honey, tasted, but digested, Gall;
It shall not bless him with prolonged stay,
But euilly come, it soon shall pass away;
The man, whose griping has the poor oppressed,
Shall neither thrive in state, nor yet find rest
In soul; naught of his fullness shall remain,
His greedy Heir shall long expect, in vain;
Soak't with extorted Plenty, others shall
Squeeze him, and leave him dispossessed of all;
And when his Joys do in their height abound,
Vengeance shall strike him groaning, to the ground,
If Sword forbear to wound him, Arrows shall
Returning forth, anointed with his Gall,
No shade shall hide him, and an vnblowne Fire
Shall burn both him, and his. Heaven, like a Crier,
Shall blaze his shame, and Earth shall stand his Foe,
His wandering Children shall no dwelling know;
Behold the man's Estate, whom God denies,
Behold thine own, pourtracted to thine Eyes.
Meditatio duodecima.
CAn mercy come from bloody Cain? Or has
His angry Brow a smile? Or can his Wrath
Be quenched with ought, but righteous Abels Blood?
Can guilty Prisoners hope for any Good
From the seuerer Judge, whose dismal Breath
Doomes them to die, breathes nothing else but Death?
Ah righteous Judge, wherein has Man to trust?
Man has offended, and thy Laws are Just;
Thou frownest like a Judge, but I had rather,
That thou would smile upon me like a Father*
What if thy Esau be austere and rough?
Thou have a Jacob that is smooth enough:
Thy Jacobs tender Kid brings forth a blessing,
While Esau's tedious Ven'zon is a dressing.
Thy face has smiles, as well as frowns, by turns;
Thy fire gives light, as well as burns.
What if the Serpent stung old Adam dead,
Young Adam lives, to break that Serpents Head?
Justice has struck me with a bleeding wound,
But Mercy Powr's in Oil, to make it sound.
The milke-white Lamb confounds the roaring Lion,
Blasted by Sinah, I am healed by Sion:
The Law finds guilty, and Death Judgment gives,
But sure I am, that my Redeemer lives.
How wretched was man's case, in those dark days, Object.

When Law was only read? which Law dismaies,
And, taking vantage, through the breach of it,
The Letter kills, and can no way admit
Release by Pardon; for by Law we dye.
Why then hoped man, without a reason Why?
Although there was no Sun, their Morning eyes,
Saw, by the Twilight, that the Sun would rise.
The Law was like a mistie Looking-glass,
Wherein the shadow of a Savior was,
Treates in a darker strain, by Types and Signs,
And what should pass in after-dayes, divines.
The Gospel says, That He is come, and dead,
And thus the Riddle of the Law is read.
Lex est Euangelium velatum, and Euangelium est lex reuelata. Simile.
Gospel is Law, the Mystery being sealed;
And Law is Gospel, being once revealed.
Experience tells us, when as Birth denies
To man (through Natures ouer-sight) his eyes,
Nature (whose curious works are never vain)
Supplies them, in the power of his Brain:
So they, whose eyes were barred that glorious sight
Of the Messiah's day, received more Light,
(Inspyred by the Breath of Heaven) then they,
That heard the tidings of that happy Day.
The man, that with a sharp contracted eye, Simile.

Looks in a clear Perspectiue-Glasse, does spy
Objects remote, which, to the sense, appear
(Through help of the Perspectiue) seeming near.
So they that lived within the Laws Dominion,
Did hear far off, a Bruit and buzzed Opinion,
A Savior (one day) should be borne; but he
That had a Perspectiue of Faith, might see
That long-expected Day of Joy as clear,
As if the Triumph had been then kept there.
Lord, so direct me in thy perfect Way,
That I may look, and smile upon that Day:
O! bathe me in his Blood, sponge every Stain,
That I may boldly sue my Counter-paine:
O! make me Glorious in the Doom he gives,
For sure I am, that my Redeemer lives.
THE ARGUMENT.
Earths happiness is not Heavens brand:
Arash recounting of Job's crimes:
Job trusts him to the Almighties hand:
God ties his Judgments, not to Times.
Sect. 13.
THen Job replyde: O, let your patience prove, Chap 21. Jobs answer.

You came (not to afflict me but) in Love.
O! bear with me, and hear me speak at leisure,
My speech once ended, mock, and scoff your pleasure;
Myst'ries I treat, not Toys; If then I range
A thought beyond my self, it is not strange;
Behold my case, and stand amazed, forbear me;
Be still, and in your deeper silence hear me.
Search you the hearts of man (my Friends) or can
You judge the Inward, by the Outward man?
How haps the Wicked then, so sound in Health,
So ripe in Years, so prosperous in Wealth?
They multiply, their House is filled with Peace,
They pass vnplagu'd, their fruitful Flocks increase;
Their Children thrive in joyful Melody,
Prosperous they live, and peacefully they dye;
Renounce us (God) say they (if God there be*
What need we knowledge of thy Word, or Thee?
What is the Almighty, that we should adore him?
What boots our prayer, or us, to fall before him?
It Is not by chance, their vain Prosperity
Crowns the^ with store, or Heaven, not knowing, why:
But you affirm, That in conclusion they
Shall fall. But not so sudden, as you say:
But can ye limit forth the space, confine,
How long, or when their Lamps shall cease to shine?
Will any of you undertake to teach
Your Maker, things so far above your reach?
The Bad man lives in plenty, dies in peace:
The Good, as do his hours, his griefs increase;
Yet both the Good and Bad alike shall have,
Though Lives much differing, yet one common grave.
I know your mining thoughts; You will demand,
Where is the wickeds Power? And where stand
Their lofty Buildings, are they to be seen?
Enquire of wandering Pilgrims, that have been
Experienced in the Road, and they will relate
The Princely greatness of their Towers, and State:
Live any more secure, then they? Or who
Dare once reprove them, for the Deeds they do?
He lives in Power, and in Peace he dies,
Attended in his pompeous Obsequies.
How vain are then the comforts of your breath,
That censure goodness, or by Life, or Death?
Said Eliphaz: What then remains? Thy tongue Chap. 22. Eliphaz his reply

Has quit thy self, accused thy God of Wrong.
Gains he by man's uprightness? Can man ad
To his Perfection, what He never had?
Fears He the strength of man? Does He torment him,
Lest that his untamed power should prevent Him?
What need I waste this breath? Recall thy senses,
And take the Inventory of thy Offenses:
Thou tookst the poor man's Pawn, nor have thou fed
Thy needy Brother, with thy prosperous Bread;
Thy hands perverted Justice, and have spoiled
The hopeless Widow, with her helpelesse Child.
Hence spring thy sorrows (Job;) It Is Justice, then,
Thou should be plagued, that thus plagued other me^.
Is Heaven Just? Can Heavens Just Creator
Let pass (unpunished) Sins of so high nature?
Has not Experience taught, that for a while,
The Wicked may exalt their Crests, and smile,
Blown up with Insolence: but in conclusion
They fall, and good men laugh at their confusion?
Job, add not sin to sin, cease to beguile
Thy self, thinking to quench thy fire with Oil;
Return thee to thy God, confess thy crimes;
Return, and he will crown thy aftertimes
With former Blessings, and thy Riches shall
Be as the Sand: for God is all in all;
His face shall welcome thee, and smile upon thee,
And cease that mischief, his just Hand has done thee;
He shall be pleased with thy holy Fires,
And grant the issue of thy best Desires.
Job answered then: Although my soul be faint, Chap. 23. Jobs speech.

And Griefs weigh down the Scale of my complant,
Yet would I plead my Cause (which you defamed)
Before my Maker, and would plead, vnsham'd;
Could I but find him, I would take upon me,
To quit the Censures you have passed on me.
His Justice has no limits, is extended
Beyond conceit, by man vnapprehended;
Let Heaven be Vmpire, and make Arbitration,
Betwixt my guiltless heart, and your taxation.
My Embrion thoughts and words are all enrolled,
Pure will he find them, as refined Gold;
His steps I followed, and uprightly stood,
His Laws have been my Guide, his Words my food;
Has he but once decreed? (alas!) there is none
Can bar: for what he wills, must needs be done;
His Will's a Law: If he has doomed, that I
Shall still be plagued, it is bootelesse to reply.
Hence comes it, that my sore afflicted spright
Trembles, and stands confounded at his sight;
His hand has struck my spirits in amaze,
For I can neither end my Griefs nor Days.
Why should not Times in all things be forbid, Chap. 24.

When to the Just, their time of sorrow's hid?
Some move their Land-markes, rob their neighbor
Others, in gage, receive the Widows Ox,
Some grind the Poor, while others seek the Prey; flocks;
They reap their Harvest, bear their Grain away;
Men press their Oil, and they distraine their Store,
And rend the Gleanings, from the hungry poor.
The City roares, the Blood, which they have spent,
Cries (unrevenged) for equal punishment;
Early they murder, and rob late at night,
They trade in Darkness, for they hate the Light;
The sin (unpunished) thriuing, vncontroll'd,
And what by Force they got, by Force they hold.
O Friends! Repeal your words, your speeches bring
No lawful Issue, prove not any thing:
Your deeper Wisdoms argue (in effect)
That God does, or not know, or else neglect:
Conclude with me, or prove my words untrue,
I must be found a Liar, or else you.
Meditatio tertiadecima.
THe VVisest men, that Nature e're could boast,
For secret knowledge of her power, were lost,
Confounded, and in deep amazement stood,
In the discovery of the Chiefest Good:
Keenely they hunted, beat in every Bracke,
Forwards they went, on either hand, and back
Returned they Counter; but their deepe-mouth'd Art,
(Though often challenged Sent, yet) never could start,
In all the Enclosures of Philosophy,
That Game, from squat, they term, (...), id est, (...).
Felicity:
They iangle, and their Maxims dis-agree,
As many men, so many minds there be.
One digs to Pluto's Throane, thinks there to find
Her Grace, raked up in Gold: Another mind
Mounts to the Courts of Kings, with Plumes of Honor,
And feathered Hopes, hopes, there, to seize upon her;
A third, vnlockes the painted Gates of Pleasure,
And ransacks there, to find this peerless Treasure.
A fourth, more sage, more wisely melancholy,
Persuades himself, her Deity's too holy,
For common hands to touch, he rather chooses,
To make a long days journey to the Muses:
To Athens (gown'd) he goes, and from that School
Returns vnsped, a more instructed fool.
Where lies she then? Or lies she any where?
Honors are bought and sold, she rests not there,
Much less in Pleasures has she her abiding,
For they are shared to Beasts, and ever sliding;
Nor yet in Virtue, Vertu's often poor,
And (crush't with Fortune) begs from door to door,
Nor is she sainted in the Shrine of wealth,
That makes men slaves, is vnsecur'd from stealth;
Conclude we then, Felicity consists
Not in exterior Fortunes, but her lists
Are boundless, and her large extension
Out-runnes the pace of humane apprehension;
Fortunes are seldom measured by desert,
The fairer face, has often the fouler heart;
Sacred felicity does never extend
Beyond it self: Arist. Eth. Felicit as propter se oppetitur.
In it all wishes end:
The swelling of an outward Fortune can
Create a prosperous, not a Non possidentem multa, vocaris Recte beatum Rectius
occupat nomen beati, qui, etc. Hor. car. lib. 4. od. 9.
happy man;
A peaceful Conscience is the true Content,
And wealth is but her golden Ornament.
I care not, so my Kernel relish well,
How slender be the substance of my shell;
My heart being virtuous, let my face be wan,
I am to God, I only seem to man.
THE ARGUMENT.
Bildad shows man's impurity;
Job sets forth the Almighties power,
Pleads still his own Integrity:
Gods Wisdom no man can discover.
Sect. 14.
SAid Bildad then, With whom do thou contest, Chap. 25. Bildads speech.

But with thy Maker, that lives ever blessed?
His Powr's infinite, man's light is dim,
And knowledge darkness, not derived from Him:
Say then, Who can be just before Him? No man
Can challenge Purity, that is borne of Woman.
The greater Torch of heaven in his sight,
Shall be ashamed, and lose his purer light;
Much less can man, that is but living Dust,
And but a fairer Worm, be pure and just.
Whereat Job thus: Does heavens high Judgment stand, Chap. 25. Jobs reply.

To be supported by the weaker hand?
Wants He thy help? To whom do thou extend
These, these thy lavish lips, and to what end?
No, He Is Almighty, and his Power does give
Each thing his Being, and by Him they live:
To him, is nothing dark, his sovereign Hands
Whirle round the restless Orbs, his Power commands
The even poys'd Earth; The Water-pots of heaven
He empties at his pleasure, and has given
Appointed lists, to keep the Waters under,
The trembling Skies he strikes amazed, with thunder:
These, these the Trophies of his Power be,
Where is there e're a such a God as He?
My friends, These ears have heard your censures on me, Chap. 27.

And Heavens sharp hand does weigh so hard upon me
So languishing in grief, that no defense
Seems to remain, to shield my Innocence:
Yet while my soul a gasp of breath affords,
I Will not distrust my Maker, nor your words
Deserve, which Heaven forfend, that ever I
Prove true, but I Will plead guiltless till I dye,
While I have breath, my pangs shall never persuade me
To wander, and revolt from Him, that made me.
Er'e such thoughts spring from this confused breast,
Let death and tortures do their worst, their best.
What gains the Hypocrite, although the whole
Worlds wealth he purchase, with the price on's soul?
Will Heaven hear the voice of his disease?
Can he repent, and turn, where-e're he please?
True, God does sometime plague with open shame
The wicked, often blurres he forth his Name
From out the earth, his children shall be slain,
And who survive, shall beg their bread in vain;
What if his Gold be heaped, the Good man shall
Possess it, as true Master of it All,
Like Moths, their houses shall they build, in doubt
And danger, every hour to be cast out,
Besieged with Want, their lips make fruitless moan,
Yet (wanting succor) be relieved by none.
The worm of Conscience shall torment his breast,
And he shall rore, when others be at rest,
Gods hand shall scourge him, that he cannot fly,
And men shall laugh, and hiss, to hear him cry.
The purest metall's hid within the Mould, Chap. 28.

Without, is gravel, but within, is Gold;
Man digs, and in his toil he takes a pleasure,
He seeks, and finds within the turfe, the Treasure,
He never rests, vnsped, but (underneath)
He mines, and progs, though in the fangs of death:
No secret, (how obscure soever) can
Earths bosom smother, that is unfound by man;
But the Divine, and high Decrees of heaven,
What mind can search into? No power's given
To mortal man, whereby he may attain
The rare discovery of so high a strain,
Diue to the depth of darkness, and the deepes,
Renounce this Wisdom: The wide Ocean keeps
Her not enclosed; It Is not the purest Gold
Can purchase it, or heaps of silver, told,
The Pearls, and peerless Treasures of the East,
Resined Gold, and Gemmes, are all, the least
Of nothings, if compared with It, as which,
Earths mass of treasure, (summed) is not so Rich;
Where rests this Wisdom then? If men enquire
Below, they find her not; or, if they (higher)
Soar with the Prince of Fowls, they still despair,
The more they seek, the further off they are.
Ah friends! how more then men? how Eagle-eyde
Are you, to see, what to the world beside
Was dark? To you, alone, (in trust) was given
To search into the high Decrees of Heaven:
You read his Oracles, you understand
To riddle forth man's Fortunes by his Hand,
Your wisdoms have a privilege to know
His secret Smiling, from his angry Brow:
Let shame prevent your lips, recant, and give
To the Almighty his Prerogative,
To him, the searching of men's hearts belong,
Man's judgment sinkes no deeper then the tongue;
He ouerlookes the World, and in one space
Of time, his Eye is fixed on every place:
He waigh'd the Waters, balanced out the Air,
What-e're has Being, did his Hands prepare;
He wills that Mortals be not ouer-wise,
Nor judge his Secrets with censorious eyes.
Meditatio quartadecima.
It Is Virtue to fly Vice: There Is none more stout,
Then he that ventures to pick Virtue out,
Betwixt a brace of vices: Dangers stand,
Threatening his ruin, upon either hand;
His Card must guide him, lest his Pinnace run
Upon Charibdis, while it Scylla shun:
In moderation all Virtue lies;
It Is greater folly to be ouer-wise,
Then rudely ignorant: The golden mean,
Is but to know enough; safer to lean
To Ignorance, then Cypr. in Symp.
Curiosity,
For Etiam de Deo vera dicere periculosum est. Ferumtque summos Fulmina mentes,
Hor. car. lib. 2. od. 10.
lightning blasts the Mountains that are high:
The first of men, from hence, deserved his fall,
He sought for secrets, and sought death, withal:
Boethius 3. de Cons. Philos. Non est fas homini cunctas diuini oper is
machinas, vel ingenio com prehendere, vel sermon explicare.
Secrets are unfit objects for our eyes,
They blind us in beholding: he that tryes
To handle water, the more hard he strains
And gripes his hand, the less his hand retains:
The mind that is troubled with that pleasing itch,
Of knowing Secrets, having flowne a pitch
Beyond it self, the higher it ascends,
And strives to Melius sciuntur, nesciendo, S Aug. lib. 2. de ord. Simile.
know, the less it apprehends:
That secret Wiseman, is an open Fool,
Which takes a Councel-chamber, for a School.
The eye of man desires no farther light,
Then to descry the object of his sight,
And rests contented with the Suns reflection,
But (laboring to behold his bright complexion)
If it presume t'outface his glorious Light,
The beams bereave him, justly, of his sight: Raymond Sebond, Theol. natural
cap. 24.

Even so the mind should rest in what is revealed,
But ouer-curious, if in things conceald,
She wade too far, beyond her depth, unbounded,
Her knowledge will be lost, and she confounded.
Melius est dubitare de incertis, quam litigare de occultis, S. Aug. lib. 8. de
Genesis ad liter. cap. 5.
Far safer it is, of things unsure, to doubt,
Then undertake to riddle secrets out.
It was demanded once, What God did do
Before the World he framed? Whereunto
Answer was made, He built a Hell for such,
As are too curious, and would Nec scire, sa^ est, omnia -- Hor. car. lib 4.
od. 4.
know too much.
Who flies with Icarus his father, shall
Have Icarus his fortunes and his fall.
A noble Prince, (whose bounteous hand was bent,
To recompense his servants faith, and vent
The earnest of his favors,) did not proffer,
But wil'd him, boldly, to prevent his offer:
Thankful, he thus replied, Then grant unto me
This boon, Withold thy princely secrets from me.
That holy Exodus 24. 2.
Man, in whose familiar ear
Heaven often had thundered, might not come too near:
The Temple must have Exodus 26. 2.
Curtains; mortal hearts
Must rest content to see his Ibid 33. 23.
Hinder parts.
I care not (Lord) how far thy Face be off,
If I but kiss thy Hand, I have enough.
THE ARGUMENT.
Job wishes his past happiness,
Shows his state present, Does confess
That God's the Author of his grief,
Relates the pureness of his life.
Sect. 15.
OH! that I were as happy as I was, Chap. 29.

When heavens bright favors shone upon my face,
And prospred my affairs, inrich't my joys,
When all my sons could answer to my voice;
Then did my store, and thriuing flocks increase,
Offended Justice sought my hands, for peace;
Old men did honor, and the young did fear me,
Princes kept silence (when I spoke,) to hear me,
I heard the poor, relieved the widows cry,
Orphans I succored, was the blind man's eye,
The Cripples foot, my helpless brothers drudge,
The poor man's Father, and th'oppressours Judge;
I then supposed, that my days long Lease
Would pass in Plenty, and expire in Peace,
My Roots were fixed, and my Branches sprung,
My Glory blazed, my Power grew daily strong;
I speaking, men stood mute, my speeches moved
All hearts to Joy, by all men were approou'd,
My kindly words were welcome, as a latter
Rain, and were Oracles in a doubtful matter.
O sudden change! I Am turned a laughing stock Chap. 30.

To boys, and those, that su'd to tend my Flock,
And such, whose hungry wants have taught their hands
To scrape the earth, and dig the barren lands,
For hidden roots, wherewith they might appease
Their Tyran'-stomakes, these, (even very these)
Flout at my sorrows, and disdaining me,
Point with their fingers, and cry, This is He:
My honor's foyld, my troubled spirit lies
Wide open to the worst of injuries,
Where-e're I turn, my sorrow, new, appears,
I Am vex't abroad, with slouts, at home, with fears,
My soul is faint, and nights that should give ease
To tired spirits, make my griefs increase,
I loathe my Carkas, for my rip'ned sores
Have changed my garments color with their cores:
But what is worst of worsts, (Lord) often I
Have cried to Thee, a stranger to my cry,
Though perfect Clemency, thy nature be,
Though kind to all, thou art unkind to me.
I never waxt pale, to see another thrive,
Nor e're did let my' afflicted brother strive
With tears, alone, but I (poor I) tormented,
Expect for succor, and am unlamented;
I mourn in silence, languish all alone,
As in a Desert, am relieved by none;
My sores have dyed my skin with filth, still turning
My Joys to Grief, and all my Mirth to Mourning.
My Heart has past Indentures with mine Eye, Chap. 31.

Not to behold a Maid: for what should I
Expect from Heaven, but a deserved reward,
Earnd by so foul a sin? for death's prepared,
And flames of wrath, are blown for such: Does He
Not know my Actions, that so well knows me?
If I have lent my hand to sly deceit, Jobs innocence.

Or if my steps have not been purely strait,
What I have sown, then let a Stranger eat,
And root my Plants untimely from their seat.
If I with Lust have e're distained my life,
Or been defiled with another Wife,
In equal Justice, let my Wife be known
Of all, and let me reap as I have sown:
For Lust, that burns in a sinful breast,
Till it has burnt him too, shall never rest.
If e're my haste did treat my Servant ill,
Without desert, making my Power, my Will,
Then how should I before Gods Judgment stand,
Since we were both created by one Hand?
If e're my power wronged the Poor man's Cause,
Or to the Widow, lengthened out the Laws:
If e're (alone) my lips did taste my bread,
Or shut my churlish doors, the poor unfed,
Or bent my hand to do the Orphane wrong,
Or saw him naked, vnapparell'd long;
In heaps of Gold, if e're I took delight,
Or gave Heavens worship, to the heavenly It was the Custom of that ignorant
Nation, to worship the Sun and Moon.
Light,
Or e're was flattred by my secret Will,
Or ioyed in my Adversaries Ill;
Let God accurse me from his glorious Seat,
And make my Plagues (if possible) more great.
Oh! That some equal hearer, now were by,
To judge my righteous Cause; Full sure am I,
I shall be quitted, by the Almighties hand.
What, therefore, if censorious tongues withstand
The Judgment of my sober Conscience?
Compose they Ballads on me, yet from thence,
My simple Innocence shall gain renown,
And on my head, I Will wear them, as my Crown:
To the Almighties Ear will I reveal
My secret Ways, to Him, alone, appeal:
If (to conclude) the Earth could find a tongue,
T'impeach my guiltless hands of doing wrong:
If hidden Wages (earned with sweat) do lie,
Raked in her furrows, let her Womb deny
To bless my Harvest, let her better Seeds
Be turned to Thistles, and the rest, to Weeds
Meditatio quintadecima.
THe man, whose soul is vndistain'd with Ill,
Pure from the check of a distemp'red Will,
Stands only free from the distracts of Care,
And flies a pitch above the reach of Fear:
His bosom dares the threatening Bow-mans arm,
His Wisdom sees, his Courage fears no harm,
His breast lies open to the reeking Sword;
The Darts of swarthy Maurus can afford
Less dread, then danger, to his well prepared
And settled mind, which (standing on her Guard)
Bids Mischief do the worst she can, or will,
For he that does no Ill, deserves no Ill.
Would any strive with Judge. 16. 30.
Samson for renown,
Whose brawny Arm can strike most pillars down?
Or try a fall with Genesis 32. 24.
Angels, and prevail?
Or with a Hymn, vnhinge the strongest Acts 16. 26.
Iayle?
Would any from a Prisoner, prove a Gen 41. 40.
Prince?
Or with Exodus 4. 10.
slow speech, best Orators convince?
Preserve he then, unstained in his breast,
A milke-white Conscience; let his soul be blessed
With simple Innocence: This seuenfold shield
No dart shall pierce, no sword shall make it yield;
The sinowy Bow, and deadly-headed Lance,
Shall break in shiuers, and the splinters glaunce
Aside, returning back from whence they came,
And wound their hearts with an eternal shame.
The Just and Constant mind, that perseueres
Unblemished with false pleasures, never fears
The bended threatenings of a Tyrants brow,
Death neither can disturb, nor change his Vow;
Well guarded with Himself, he walks along,
When, most alone, his stand's a Conscientia mill testes.
thousand strong
Lives he in Weal, and full Prosperity?
His wisdom tells him, that he lives, to die.
Is he Hor. car. lib. 4. Ode 9. -- Secund's Temporibus du^b^que reclus.
afflicted? Sharp Afflictions give
Him hopes of Change, and that that he dies, to live.
Is he Mat. 5. 11.
reuil'd and scorned? He sits, and smiles,
Knowing him V^^ nunquam tristis esse? Been viue Isod. Soliloq. lib. 11.
Happy, whom the World reuiles.
If Rich, he gives the poor; and if he live
In poor estate, he finds rich friends to give;
He lives an Angel in a mortal form;
And, having past the brunt of many a Storm,
At last, arriueth at the Haven of Rest,
Where that Just Judge, that rambles in his breast,
Joining with Angels, with an Angels voice,
Chaunts forth sweet Requiems of Eternal Joys.
THE ARGUMENT.
Elihu Job reprooues, reprooues
His Friends alike, he pleades the case
With Job in Gods behalf, and mooues
Him to recant, and call for Grace.
Sect. 16.
THus Job his ill-defended Cause adiournes, Chap. 32.

And silence lends free liberty of turns,
To his unjust Accusers, whose bad cause
Has left them grounded in too large a pause:
Whereat Elihu (a young Stander-by,
Whose modest ears, upon their long reply
Did wait) his angry silence did awake,
And (craving pardon for his Youth) bespake.
Young Standers-by do oftentimes see more, Elihus speech.

Then elder Gamesters: You Are too blame all four;
T'ones cause is Bad, but with good proofs befrie^ded,
The others Just and Good, but ill defended.
Though reason makes the man, Heaven makes him wise,
Wisdom in greatest Clerks not always lies:
Then let your silence give me leave to spend
My Judgment, whilst your heedfull Ears attend.
I have not heard, alone, but still expected
To hear, what more your spleenes might have objected,
Against your woeful Friend; but I have found
Your reasons, built upon a sandy ground.
Flourish no Flags of Conquest: Understand,
That he is afflicted by the Almighties hand:
He has not fayld to cross your accusations;
Yet I (though not with your foul exprobations)
Will cross him too. I Am full, and I must speak,
Or, like vnuented vessels, I must break,
And with my tongue, my heart will be relieved,
That swells, with what my patience has conceived:
Be none offended, for my lips shall tread
That ground (without respect) as Truth shall lead;
God hates a flattring language: then how can I
Vnliable to danger, flatter any?
Now, Job, to thee I speak, O, let my Errant Chap. 33. Elihu speaks to Job.

Be welcome to thine ears, fortruth's my warrant;
They are no slender Trifles that I treat,
But things digested with the sacred heat
Of an inspired knowledge; It Is no rash
Discharge of wrath, nor wits conceited flash;
I Will speak, and hear thee speak as free, for I
Will take no vantage of thy Misery.
Thy tongue did challenge to maintain thy case
With God, if he would veil his glorious Face:
Be I the man (though clad with clay and dust,
And mortal like thy self) that takes the trust
To represent his Person; Thou do term
Thy self most Just, and boldly do affirm,
That Heaven afflicts thy soul without a reason.
Ah Job! these very words (alone) are Treason
Against th'Almighti's will. Thou ought rather
Submit thy passion to him, as thy Father,
Then plead with him, as with thy Peer. Is he
Bound to reveal his secret Will to thee?
God speaks often to man, not understood,
Sometimes in Lucret. lib. 5. 1168. -- Persomnia sapeloquentes Aut morbo
delirantes, etc. Et celata diu in medium peccata dedisse.
Dreams, at other times thinks good,
To thunder Judgment in his drowzy ear;
Sometimes, with hard afflictions scourge, does tear
His wounded soul, which may at length give ease
(Like sharper Physic) to his foul Disease:
But if (like pleasing Iulips) he afford
The meek Expounders of his sacred Word,
With sweet persuasions to recure his grief,
How can his sorrows wish more fair Relief?
Ah, then his body shall wax young and bright;
Heauens-face that scortcht before, shall now delight,
His tongue with Triumph, shall confess to men,
I was a Leper, but am clear again.
Thus, thus that Spring of Mercy oftentimes
Does speak to man, that man may speak his crimes.
Consider, Job; My words with Judgment weigh;
Which done (if thou have ought) then boldly say;
If otherwise, shame not to hold thy peace,
And let thy VVisdome with my words increase.
And you, you Wise Men, that are silent here, Chap 34.

Vouchsafe to lend my lips your rip'ned care,
Let Us call a parlie, and the cause decide;
For Job pleades guiltless, and would feign be tried;
Yet has his boldness termed himself Upright,
And taxt The Almighty for not doing right;
His Innocence with Heaven does he plead,
And that unjustly he was punished:
O Purity by Impudence suborned!
He scorned his Maker, and is justly scorned:
Far be it from the heart of man, that He,
Who is all Justice, yet unjust should be.
Each one shall reap the Harvest he has sown,
His meede shall measure, what his hands have done.
Who is it, can claim the Worlds great Sovereignty?
Who raised the Rafters of the Heavens, but He?
If God should breathe on man, or take away
The breath he gave him, what were man, but Clay?
O, let thy heart, th'vnbridled tongue, convince!
Say; Dare thy lips defame an earthly Prince?
How dare thou then malign the King of Kings,
To whom, great Princes are but poorest things?
He kicks down kingdoms, spurns the Emperial crown,
And with his blast, puffes mighty Monarchs down.
It Is vain to strive with Him; and if He strike,
Our part's to bear, not (fondly) to mislike,
(Misconstruing the nature of his drift)
But husband his Corrections to our thrift.
If he afflict, our best is to implore
His Blessing with his Rod, and sin no more.
What if our torments pass the bounds of measure?
It vnbesits our wills, to stint his pleasure;
Judge then, and let the impartial world advise,
How far (poor Job) thy Judgment is from wise:
Nor are these speeches kindled with the fire
Of a distempred spleen, but with desire,
TO enrich thy wisdom, lest thy fury tie
Presumption to thy rash infirmity.
Meditatio sextadecima.
FOr mortals, to be borne, wax old, and die,
Lies not in Will, but bare Necessity,
Common to beasts, which, in the selfe-degree,
Hold by the selfsame Patent, even as we:
But to be Wise, is a diuiner action
Of the discursiue Soul, a pure abstraction
Of all her powers, united in the will,
Aiming at Good, rejecting what is Ill;
It is an Influence of inspired Breath,
Vnpurchased by birth, vnlost by death,
Entayl'd to no man, no, nor free to all,
Yet gently answers to the eager call
Of those, that, with inflamed affections, seek,
Respecting tender Youth and Age alike;
In depth of days, her spirit not always lies,
Years make man Old, but Heaven returns him Wise;
Youths Innocence, nor riper Ages strength
Can challenge her, as due; (Desired) length
Of days, produced to decrepit years,
Filled with experience, and grizly hairs,
Can claim no right; The Almighty never engages
His gifts to times, nor is He bound to Ages,
His quickening Spirit, to sucklings often reueales,
What to their doting Grandsires he conceales,
The virtue of his breath; can vnbenumme
The frozen lips, and strike the speaker dumme:
Who put that moving power into his tongue,
Whose lips did right the chaste Susanna's wrong,
Upon her wanton false Accusers death?
What secret fire inflamed that Exodus 4. 11.
fainting breath
That blasted Pharo? Or those ruder tongues,
That schooled the faithless Jonah 1. 10.
Prophet, for the wrongs
He did to sacred Justice? Matters not
How slight the means be in it self, or what
In our esteems, so wisdom be the message;
Ambassadors are worthyed in the Embassage:
God sowes his Harvest to his best increase,
And glorifies himself, how-e're he please.
Lord, if thou will, (for what is hard to thee?)
I may a Factor for thy glory be,
Then grant that (like a faithful servant) I
May render back thy stock with Usury.
THE ARGUMENT.
God reapes no gain by man's best deeds;
Man's misery from himself proceeds:
Gods Mercy and Justice are unbounded;
In works of Nature man is grounded.
Sect. 17.
ELihu, thus his pausing lips, again
Disclosed, and said, (Rash Job) do thou maintain Chap. 35.

A rightful Cause, which in conclusion, must
Auow thee blameless, and thy God unjust?
Thy lawless words implying, that it can
Advantage none, to live an upright man?
My tongue shall school thee, and thy friends that would
(Perchance) refell'd thy reasons, if they could:
Behold thy glorious Makers greatness, see
The power of his hand, say then, Can He
Be damaged by thy sin, or can He raise
Advantage, by th'vprightnesse of thy ways?
True, the afflicted languish often in grief,
And roar to Heaven (vnanswer'd) for relief,
Yet is not Heaven unjust, for their fond cry,
Their sin bewailes not, but their misery.
Cease then, to make him guilty of thy crimes,
And wait his pleasure, that is not bound to times,
Nor hears vain words. The sorrows thou art in,
Are slight, or nothing, balanced with thy sin:
Thy lips accuse thee, and thy foolish tongue,
To right thy self, has done The Almighty wrong.
Hold back thine answer; Let my flowing stream
Find passage, to surround my fruitful Theme, Chap. 36.

I Will raise my thoughts, to plead my Makers case,
And speak, as shall befit so high a place:
Behold The Almighty's Meek, as well as Strong,
Destroys the Wicked, rights the Just man's wrong,
Mounts him to honor; If by chance he stray,
Instructs, and shows him where he lost his way:
If he return, his blessings shall increase,
Crowning his joys with plenty and sweet peace;
If not, th'intailed sword shall never depart
His stained house, but pierce his hardened heart;
Ah sinful Job! these plagues had never bin,
Had thou been guiltless (as thou boasts) from sin:
But thy proud lips against their Maker plead,
And draw down heaps of vengeance on thy head;
Look to thy self, seek not to understand
The secret causes of the Eternals hand,
Let wisdom make the best of misery,
Know who inflicts it, ask no reason why:
His will's beyond thy reach, and his Divine
And sacred knowledge far surpasses thine.
Ah! rather, praise him in his works, that lie
(Wide open to the world) before thine eye;
His meaner Acts, our highest thought o'retops,
He pricks the Clouds, stils down the rain by drops;
Who comprehends the Lightning, or the Thunder?
Who sees, who hears them, vnamaz'd with wonder?
My troubled heart chils in my quiuering breast,
To relish these things, and is dispossessed
Of all her powers: Who ever heard the voice
Of the angry heavens, vnfrighted at the noise?
The beast by nature daz'd with sudden dread,
Seeks out for covert to secure his head:
If God command, the dusky clouds march forth
Into a Tempest; From the freezing North
He beckens Frost, and Snow; and from the South,
He blows Whirlewinds with his angry Mouth.
Presumptuous Job! if thou can not aspire
So high, to comprehend these things, admire.
Know thou the progress of the rambling Clouds?
From mortal eyes, when gloomy darkness shrouds
The Lamps of heaven, know thou the reason why?
Can thou vnriddle heavens Philosophy?
Know thou th'vnconstant nature of the Wether?
Or whence so many Winds proceed, and whither?
Were thou made privy, or a stander-by,
When God stretched forth his spangled Canopy?
Submit thy self, and let these secrets teach,
How far his Myst'ries do surmount thy reach:
For He Is Almighty, and his sacred will
Is just, nor renders an vnearned ill;
His works are objects for no soaring eyes,
But wheresoever he looks, he finds none wise.
Meditatio septimadecima.
THe World's an Index to Eternity,
And gives a glance of what our cleerer Eye,
In time, shall see at large; nothing's so slight,
Which, in its nature, sends not forth some light,
Or Memorandum of his Makers Glory:
No Dust so vile, but pens an ample story,
Of the Almighties power, nor is there that,
Which gives not man just cause to wonder at.
Cast down thine eyes, behold the pregnant Earth,
(Her self but one) produces at one birth,
A world of diverse natures: From a seed
Entirely one, things hot and cold proceed,
She suckles with one milk, things moist, and dry,
Yet in her womb is no repugnancy.
Or shall thy Reason ramble up so high,
To view the Court of wild Astronomy?
Behold the Planets, round about thine ears,
Whirling like fire-balles in their restless Spheres.
At one selfe-instant moving several ways,
Still measuring out our short, and shorter days.
Behold the parts, whereon the World consists, Boethius Cons. Philos.

Are limited in their appointed lists,
Without rebellion, unapt to vary,
Raymond Sebond. Theob. Natural. cap. 4.
Though being many, diverse, and contrary:
Look where we lift, above, beneath, or under,
Our eyes shall see to learn, and learn to wonder;
Their depth shall drown our judgments, and their height,
Besides his wits, shall drive the prime conceit:
Shall then our daring minds presume to aspire
To heavens hid Myst'ries? shall our thoughts inquire
Into the depth of secrets, unconfounded,
When in the shower of Nature they are drowned?
Fond man, be wise, strive not above thy strength,
Tempt not thy Bark beyond her Cables length;
And, like Prometheus, filch no sacred fire,
Lest Eagles gripe thee: Let thy proud desire
Suite with thy fortunes; Curious minds, that shall
Mount up with Phaeton, shall have Phaetons fall.
Unbend thy bow betimes, lest thou repent
Too late, for it will break, or else stand bent.
I Will work at home, never cross the scorching Line,
In unknown lands, to seek a hidden Mine:
Plain Bullion pleases me, I not desire
Dear Ingots from the Elixars piercing fire;
I Will spend my pains, (where best I may be bold)
To know my self, wherein I shall behold
The world abridg'd, and in that world, Raymond Sebond, Theol. natural cap. 1.
my Maker,
Beyond which task, I wish no Undertaker.
Great God, by whom it is, what-e're is mine,
Make me thy Viceroy in this (...).
World of thine;
So clear mine eyes, that I may comprehend
My slight Beginning, and my sudden End.
THE ARGUMENT.
Godquestions Job, and proves that man
Cannot attain to things so high,
As divine secrets, since he can
Not reach to Natures; Jobs reply.
Sect. 18.
FOrth from the bosom of a murmuring Cloud, Chap 38. God speaks to Job out of
a Cloud.

Heavens great Jehovah did, at length, vnshrowd
His Earths-amazing language
Made terrible with Fear and Majesty) equally
(Challenged the Duel) he did undertake
His grumbling servant, and him thus bespake,
Who, who art thou, that thus do pry in vain,
Into my secrets, hoping to attain,
With murmuring, to things, concealed from man?
Say (blear-eyed mortal) who art thou, that can
Thus clear thy crimes, and dare (with vain applause)
Make me defendant in thy sinful cause?
Lo, here I am; Engrosse into thy hands
The soundest weapons; Answer my demands:
Say, Where were thou, when these my hands did lay
The Worlds foundation? can thou tell me? Say,
Was Earth not measured by this Arm of mine?
Whose hand did aid me? Was I helped by thine?
Where were thou, when the Planets first did blaze,
And in their Spheres sang forth their Makers praise?
Who is it that tames the raging of the Seas,
And swathes them up in mists, when-e're he please?
Did thou divide the Darkness from the Light?
Or know thou whence Aurora takes her flight?
Did ere enquire into the Seas Abyss,
Or marked the Earth, of what a bulk she is?
Know thou the place whence Light or Darkness springs?
Can thy deep age unfold these secret things?
Know thou the cause of Snow, or Hail, which are
My fierce Artill'ry, in my time of war?
Who is it that rends the gloomy Clouds in sunder,
Whose sudden rapture strikes forth Fire, and Thunder?
Or who bedewes the Earth with gentle showers,
Filling her pregnant soil with fruits and flowers?
What Father got the Rain? from what chill womb
Did Frosts, and hard-congealed Waters come?
Can thou restrain fair Maia's course, or stint her,
Or sad Orion vshering in the Winter?
Will scorching Cancer at thy summons come,
Or Sunburned Autumn with her fruitful womb?
Know thou Heavens course above, or do thou know
Those gentle Influences here below?
Who was it inspired thy Soul with Understanding?
And gave thy Spirit, the spirit of Apprehending?
Do thou command the Cesternes of the Sky,
To quench the thirsty soil; or is it I?
Nay, let thy practice to the Earth descend, Chap. 39.

Prove there, how far thy power does extend;
From thy full hand will hungry Lions eat?
Feed'st thou the empty Ravens that cry for meat?
Sett'st thou the Season, when the fearful Hind
Brings forth her painful birth? Have thou assigned
The Mountain Goat her Time? Or is it I?
Can thou subject unto thy sovereignty,
The untamed Unicorn? Can thy hard hand
Force him to labor on thy fruitful land?
Did thou enrich the Peacock with his Plume?
Or did that Steele-digesting Bird assume
His downie flags from thee? Did thou endow
The noble Stallion with his Strength? Can thou
Quail his proud courage? See, his angry breath
Puffes nothing forth, but fears, summed up in death?
Mark with what pride his horny hoofes do tabor
The hard resounding Earth; with how great labor,
How little ground he spends: But at the noise
And fierce Alar'm of the hoarse Trumpets voice
He breaks the ranks, amidst a thousand Spears
Pointed with death, undaunted at the fears
Of doubtful war; he rushes like a Ranger,
Through every Troop, and scorns so brave a danger.
Do lofty Haggards cleave the flitting Air,
With Plumes of thy devising? Then how dare
Thy ravenous lips thus, thus, at random run,
And counter-maund what I the Lord have done?
Think thou to learn (fond Mortal) thus, by diuing
Into my secrets, or to gain by striving?
Plead then: No doubt, but thine will be the Day;
Speak (peevish Plaintiff) if thou have ought to say.
Job then replied: (Great God) I am but Dust, Jobs confession.

My heart is sinful, and thy hands are Just;
I am a Sinner (Lord,) my words are wind,
My thoughts are vain, (Ah Father) I have sinned:
Shall Dust reply? I spoke too much before,
I Will close these lips, and never answer more.
Meditatio octauadecima
O Glorious Light! A light, vnapprehended
By mortal Eyes! O Glory, never ended,
Nor e're created, whence all Glory springs
In heavenly bodies, and in earthly things!
O power Immense, derived from a Will
Most Just, and able to do all, but ill!
O Essence pure, and full of Majesty!
Greatness (it self) and yet no Quantity;
Goodness, and without Quality; producing
All things from out of Nothing, and reducing
All things to nothing; past all comprehending,
Both First and Last, and yet without an Ending,
Or yet beginning; filling every Creature,
And not (it self) included; above Nature,
Yet not excluded, of it Self subsisting,
And with it Self, all other things, assisting;
Divided, yet without division;
A perfect Three, yet Three, entirely One;
Both One in Three, and Three in One, together;
Begetting, and begotten, and yet neither;
The Fountain of all Arts, Confounding Art;
Both All in All, and All in every part;
Still seeking Glory, and still wanting none;
Though Just, yet reaping, where Thou never have sown!
Great Majesty, since Thou art every where,
O, Why should I misdoubt thy Presence here?
I long have sought Thee, but my ranging heart
Never quests, and cannot see thee where thou art:
There Is no Defect in thee, thy light has shined,
Nor can be hid (Great God,) but I am blind.
O, clear mine eyes, and with thy holy Fire
Inflame my breast, and edge my dull desire:
Wash me with Hysope, cleanse my stained thoughts,
Renew my spirit, blurre forth my secret faults;
Thou take no pleasure in a Sinners death,
For thou art Life, thy Mercy's not beneath
Thy sacred Justice: Give thy servant power
To seek aright, and (having sought) discover
Thy glorious Presence; Let my blemished Eye
See my salvation yet before I dye.
O, then my Dust, that is bowell'd in the ground,
Shall rise with Triumph at the welcome sound
Of my Redeemers earth-awaking Trumpe,
Vnfrighted at the noise; no sullen Dumpe
Of selfe-confounding Conscience shall affright me,
For He Is my Judge, whose dying Blood shall quite me.
THE ARGUMENT.
God speaks to Job the second time:
Job yields his sin, repents his crime.
God checks his Friends, restores his health,
Gives him new issue, double wealth.
Sect. 19.
ONcemore the Mouth of heaven rapt forth a voice, Chap. 40. God speaks to Job
out of a Cloud the second time.

The troubled Firmament was filled with noise,
The Rafters of the darkened Sky did shake,
For the Eternal thundered thus, and spoke:
Collect thy scattred senses, and advise,
Rouse up (fond man) and answer my replies.
Will thou make Comments on my Text, and must
I be unrighteous, to conclude thee, Just?
Shall my Decrees be licenced by thee?
What, can thou thunder with a Voice like Me?
Put on thy Robes of Majesty; Be clad
With as bright glory (Job) as can be had;
Make fierce thy frowns, and with an angry face
Confound the Proud, and his high thoughts abase,
Pound him to Dust: Do this, and I will yield,
Thou art a God, and need'st no other shield.
Behold, the Castle-bearing Elephant, The Eliphant.

That wants no bulk, nor does his greatness want
An equal strength. Behold his massy bones,
Like bars of Iron; like congealed stones,
His knottie sinews are; Him have I made,
And given him natural weapons for his aid;
High Mountains bear his food, the shady boughs
His Couerts are; Great Rivers are his Troughs,
Whose deep Carouses would, to standers-by,
Seem at a watring, to draw Jordan dry:
What skillful huntsman can, with strength, out-dare him?
Or with what Engines can a man ensnare him?
Have thou beheld the huge Leuiathan, Chap 41. The Whale.

That swarthy Tyrant of the Ocean? Can
Thy bearded hook impierce his Gils, or make him
Thy landed Prisoner? Can thy Angles take him?
Will he make suite for favor from thy hands,
Or be enthralled to thy fierce Commands?
Will he be handled as a Bird? Or may
Thy fingers bind him for thy childrens play?
Let men be wise, for in his looks, he has
Displayed Banners of untimely death.
If Creatures be so dreadful, how is he
More bold then wise, that dares encounter Me?
What hand of man can hinder my design?
Are not the Heavens, and all beneath them, mine?
Dissect the Greatness of so vast a Creature,
By view of several parts: Sum up his feature,
Like Shields, his Scales are placed, which neither Art
Knows how to sunder, nor yet Force can part,
His Belching rucks forth flames, his moving Eye
Shines like the glory of the morning Sky;
His craggie Sinews are like wreathes of brass,
And from his mouth, quick flames of fire pass,
As from an Oven, the temper of his Heart
Is like a Nether-milstone, which no Dart
Can pierce, secured from the threatening Spear;
Afraid of none, he strikes the World with fear:
The Bow-mans brawnie arm sends Shafts in vain,
They fall like Stubble, or bound back again:
Stones are his Pillow, and the Mud his Down;
In earth none greater is, nor equal, none,
Compared with him, all things he does deride,
And well may challenge to be King of Pride.
So said, the amazed Job bent down his eyes Chap. 42. Jobs Contrition.

Upon the ground, and (sadly) thus replies.
I know (Great God) there is nothing hard to Thee,
Thy thoughts are pure, and too too deep for me:
I am a Fool, and my distempered Wits,
Longer out-strayed my Tongue, then well befits;
My knowledge slumbred, while my Lips did chat,
And, like a Fool, I spoke I knew not what.
Lord, teach me Wisdom, lest my proud Desire,
Cinge her bold Feathers in thy sacred Fire;
Mine Ear has often been rounded with thy story,
But now these very Eyes have seen thy Glory.
My sinful Words I not (alone) lament,
But, in the horror of my Soul, repent Jobs repentance.

Repent with Tears in Sackcloth, mourn in Dust;
I am a sinful man, and Thou art Just.
Thou Eliphaz, that make my sacred Word, God reprooues Jobs three friends.

An Engine of Despair (said then the Lord)
Behold, full vyals of my Wrath, attends
On thee, and on thy two too-partiall Friends;
For you have judged amiss, and have abused
My Word to work your Ends; falsely accused
My righteous Servant: Of you all, there is none
Has spoke uprightly, as my Job has done.
Haste then (before my kindling Fire begin
To slame) and each man offer for his Sin,
A Sacrifice, by Job my servants hand,
And for his sake, your Offerings shall withstand
The Wages of your sins; for what can I,
If Job, my Servant, make request, deny?
So strait they went, and (after speedy pardon
Desired, and had,) the righteous Job (for guerdon
Of his so tedious Grief) obtained the health
Of a sound Body, and increase of Wealth;
So that the second Harvest of his store,
Was double that, which he enjoyed before.
Ere this was blazed in the Worlds wide Ears,
(The frozen breasts of his Familiars,
And cold Allies, being now dissolved in Grief,)
His backward Friends came to him with Relief,
To feed his Wants, and with sad showring eyes,
To moan his (yet supposed) Miseries:
Some brought him Sheep, to bless his empty Fold,
Some precious Earerings, others, Rings of Gold.
God blessed his loins, from whence there sprang again, The number of Jobs
children supplied.

The number of his children that were slain,
Nor was there any in the Land so rare
In virtue, as his Daughters, or so fair.
Long after this, he lived in peace, to see His long life.

His childrens children, to the fourth Degree,
Till at the length, cut short by Him, that stays
For none, he dyed in Peace, and full of Days. His peaceable death.

Meditatio vltima.
EVill's the defect of Good, and as a shade,
That Is but the Ruins of the Light decayed:
It has no Non ens and malum consunduntur.
Being, nor is understood,
But by the Non ens non intelligitur nisi per oppositionem Entis.
Opposition of Good.
What then is man? whose purest thoughts are pressed
For Satan's war, which from the tender breast,
With Infant silence, have consented to
Such sinful Deeds, as (babes) they could not do?
What then is man, but Nothing, being Evil,
His Lunatic affections do vnleuell,
What Heaven created by just Weight and Measure;
In Pleasures sincke, he takes a swinelike Pleasure;
His span of life, and beautie's like a Flower,
Fair flourishing, and fading in an hour.
He breaks into the World with Tears, and then
Departs with Grief, nor knowing How, nor When.
His life's a Bubble, full of seeming Bliss,
The more it lengthens, the more short it is;
Begot in darkness, he is brought forth, and cries
For succor, passes ore the Stage, and dies;
Yet, like a Moale, the earth he undermines,
Making the World, the Forge of his designs:
He plots, complots, foresees, preuents, directs;
He hopes, he fears, he doubts, pursues, effects;
Each has his Plot, each one his course does bend,
Each has his Project, and each one his end.
Thus restless man does still his soul molest,
To find out (that which has no Being) Rest;
Thus travels sinful man in endless toil;
Taking a pleasure in his own turmoyle.
Fond man, first seek to purchase that divine
And sacred Prize, and all the World is thine:
Great Solomon made suit for Wisdom, and he found
Not (barely) Wisdom, but that Wisdom, crowned
With Diademes of wealth, and fair increase
Of princely Honors, with long days of peace.
(With safe respect, and awful reverence
To Mystryes) Meditation does commence Object.

An earnest doubt: Was Jobs dispoyled Flock
Restored double? Was his former Stock
Renewed with double vantage? Did heaven add
To all his fortunes, double what he had?
Yet those sweet Emblemes of his dearest love,
(His sons) whom Death untimely did remove
From off the face of the unthankful earth,
Why likewise sprang not they in double birth?
Bruit beasts, that perish once, are lost for ever,
Their substance, and their All consume, together. Res.

Once having given a farewell to the light,
They dye, and with them is perpetual night:
But man, (vnorgan'd by the hand of Death)
Dies not, is but transplanted from beneath,
Into a fairer soil, or as a stranger,
Brought home, secure from the worlds pleasing Danger
Jobs Flocks were lost, and therefore double given,
His Issu's equal shared 'twixt Earth and Heaven,
One half in heaven, are glorious in their doom,
Engaged as Non amiss^ ^ed praen^^.
Pledges, till the other come.
Great God! my Time's but short, and long my Way,
My Heart has lost her Path, and gone astray,
My spirit's faint, and frail, my soul's imbost,
If thou help not, I am for ever lost;
Though Dust and Ashes, yet am I thy Creature,
How e're my sins are great, thy Mercy's greater:
Of Nothing did thou make me, and my sin
Has turned me back to Nothing, once agin:
Create me a new heart, (great God) inspire
My cold Affections with thy sacred Fire:
Instruct my Will, and rectify my Ways,
O teach me (Lord) to number out my Days.
The Digestion of the whole HISTORY.
1 In Prosperity.
THou, whose lanke fortunes heaven has sweld with
Make not thy self, by ouer-wishing, poor, (store,
Husband that Good, which else, Abuse makes Bad,
Abstracting, where thy base Desire would add:
Lines flowing from a Sophoclean Quill,
Deserve no Plaudit', being Acted ill.
2 In Adversity.
Has heaven withdrawn the Talent he has given thee?
Has envious Death of all thy Sons bereau'n thee?
Have foul Diseases foiled thee on the floor?
He earnes no sweet, that never tasted sour:
Thou art a Scholar; if thy Tutor do
Pose thee too hard, He will instruct thee too.
3 In Tentation.
Art thou opposed to thine unequal Foe?
March bravely on; Thy General bids thee Go,
Thou art Heavens Champion, to maintain his right;
Who calls thee forth, will give thee strength to fight.
God seeks, by Conquest, thy Renown, for He
Will win enough: Fight thou, or Faint, or Flee.
4 In Slander.
If Winter fortunes nip thy Summer Friends,
And tip their Tongues with Censure, that offends
Thy tender Name, despair not, but be wise,
Know Heaven selecteth, whom the World denies:
Thou have a milke-white Thisby, that is within thee,
Will take thy part, when all the world's again thee.
5 In Re-aduancement.
Art thou advanced to thy supreme Desire?
Be still the same; Fear Lower, aim no Higher:
Man's Play has many Scenes, but in the last,
Heaven knits up all, to sweeten All that is past:
Affliction is a Rod, to scourge us Home,
A painful Earnest of a Heaven to come.
FINIS.

