AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND VICTORIOUS PRINCE
GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS KING OF SWETHLAND etc. COMPOSED IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE FIRST
RUMORS OF HIS DEATH, AND NOW published and dedicated to the memorial of so
renouned a Prince.
WHat strange sad silence, does the world astound?
Why does not Fame's still eccho'ng trumpet sound?
She Is grown forgetful, or else hoarse, I fear;
That we, no more victorious sounds can hear.
'Twas but of late; when as the thundering noise,
Of doubled triumphs, conquests, and applause
Filled our Horizon, and the air did ring,
With shouts of praise, to Swedes victorious King.
Was this a dream, or fancied apparition;
And now is vanished like a fleeting vision?
Could all the world be thus deluded? No.
'Twas surely real, and no feigned show!
Those bloody battles, and those dismal fights,
We lately heard, were not like vap'rie sights,
Composed of airie breath, which to the eye,
Two dreadful Armies, grappling do descrie!
These! These were real, and thy direful steel,
(Victorious Prince!) shall after ages feel!
And those deep wounds, which in thy furious ire,
Thou did inflict by force of thundering fire,
Shall leave wide scarres, upon the German land;
Which shall for ever, to their terror stand!
This thou have done already; and amazed
Remotest kingdoms, where thy deeds are blazed.
But on a sudden, lo! thou do appear,
To stop, in middle of thy full careere!
All tongues are silent, and our greedy ears,
Hear nothing now; but terrors, doubts, and fears!
Or Fame her self is dead; or he that gave
Life unto Fame, is sunk into his grave!
Fame cannot die! Oh! can he die, whose look,
So many thousands dead at once has struck?
What mortal durst give him a wound, whose eye,
Has made grimme Death to start, and turn awrie?
Sure he is not dead! Swethlands for grief would roar;
And make their groans heard to our English shore;
If he were dead, whom they have prized more dear
Then their own proper lives, and did not fear
To run like Lions at their Princes words,
Upon the mouths of Canons, points of Swords!
He Is dead I fear! For can he living be,
And we no spoils, nor further conquests see?
Can he be living and not heard to thunder;
To batter cities, and trample kingdoms under?
Whose very soul, was fire Aethereall pure:
Such as no mortal bodies can endure!
His breath was direful smoke, and from his hands
Flew showers of iron-balls, that quelled whole lands!
Can that Sulphurious dust, more quick then wind,
Once touched with flame. in prison be combinde?
Not steel, nor iron, nor the hardest brass,
Can stay its fury for the shortest space!
Though mighty mountains pressed this living flame;
Yet would it tear them and an entrance frame,
His Hellish breath, and dismal noise to vent;
Nor would it cease, till all his fury spent.
Thus has it been with Europes Northern Star;
And Swedes Victorious Prince, made all for war:
Whose Spirit touched with fire from heaven, did blaze
Like to some Comet, sent for to amaze
And scourge us mortal wights: whose direful breath
Does shoot down vengeance, terrors, plagues, and death!
Had Turk, and Tartar, and the Triple crown
That awes the Christian world, and treads down,
Monarchs, as slaves, themselves in one combined;
This Heav'n-sent fury had, like lightning wind,
Shot through them all; and like to scattered corn,
Their feeble squadrons, had been rent, and torn:
Till his Celestial vigor were quite spent;
No Wars, no Ruins could his ire content!
But now his date is out, and his Commission
Is stopped from heaven with a new Prohition!
He Is dead! Oh bitter word! enough to make
Stones for to weep, and iron hearts to ache!
So soon, alas! In so unwisht an hour,
Is all our joy quelled, by some secret power!
Why do we not breath forth such doleful groans,
And power such melting tears; as should hard stones
Dissolve into salt drops; that they, and we,
Might so express one mournful Elegy!
What! are we spent and dry? I see no tears:
I hear no groans: no wailings pierce my ears!
Oh pardon me! I fear my faltring tongue,
Distract with troubled sorrow does you wrong!
It Is slender grief that does by weeping vent;
And `tis not much, that can by tears be spent!
But this, this sorrow, like a mortal wound,
Strikes deep, and does our senses quite astound:
Lies like a lump of lead, or heavy weight,
Upon our heart, and presses it so straight,
That neither sigh nor groan can issue thence;
But lies as dead, and quite bereft of sense!
Since then it is so: we cannot weep; let us borrow,
From others help, for to express our sorrow,
Ye glistring lamps above. ye Northern stars,
That roll about the Pole, your frozen Carres!
In Thetis waves, plunge over head and ears,
That you may have your fill, of brinish tears:
And by sad influence, make the heavens to lower;
And to the earth, send down a weeping shower!
But chiefly on that place, that cursed ground,
Where Adolph first received his mortal wound!
Let never grass, nor verdant herb grow there;
Nor any tree, nor ground it self appear.
Let it be all a lake, whose face may look,
Just like the color of the Infernal brook:
Like pichie Stix, or black-stream'd Acheron;
Or like Cocytus, or dark Phlegethon:
That it may seem to all, a mourning vail,
Which does the compass of that ground empale:
And let its murmuring waves, make such a noise,
As may express to us, the doleful voice
Of some, that cry, that roar, that shreik, that groan:
Of some, that mourn, that weep, that wail, that moan!
That after ages, to their children may
Tell this sad story, when they pass that way.
These fouls do mourn, for Swethlands conquering King:
But these, whose clamours fearfully do ring.
Are such, as in this place, died by his power;
And thus express, their horror to this hour!
Mean while (renowned Prince) sleep thou secure,
No further pains, nor travels to endure!
The dreadful Cannons, which so often did roar,
And thunder in thy ears; shall now no more
Disturb thy rest; nor force thee to arise
In sudden have, glut now with sleep thine eyes!
While that a quire of Angels in a ring,
Shall round about thee blessed music sing.
FINIS.

