An Elegy UPON MY DEAR BROTHER, THE JONATHAN OF MY HEART, Mr. John Wheeler,
Son to Sir EDMOND WHEELER Of Riding Court near Windsor, in the County of
Buckingham, deceased.

Angustia est mihi propter te frater mi Iehonathan; jucundus fuisti mihi valde;
Admirabilor fuit amor tuus mihi, amore foeminarum. 2. Sam. 1. 26.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for N. Alsop, and T. Nicholes; and are to be sold at
the Angel in Popes head Alley. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY ELIZABETH, Lady Wheeler.
Madam,
ALL that Job lost in his Affliction, he found double in his Readvancement: His
children were not doubled, therefore were not lost. This I speak not to spoil
the Complement of common comforters: I know (...) roone descants upon these
Marriages, I will neither recite nor avouch, but will conclude as Charoone does
in many things, nothing: Only my drift is, to make known, that this last
Marriage was consummated betwixt your incomparable brother (whose funerals I
here celebrate) and me; betwixt whom there was rather an Identity, then a
brotherhood; Frater, fere alter, Amicus, vere alter. The Elegy which David
wrote upon his Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 19. warrants me to do the like upon mine;
whose loves were both alike, both passing the love of women: What I have done,
is the Ensign of my true Affection, whose supporters are, an Honorable Lady,
and her noble Son: Accept it from his hands who is,

Yours in the true Complement of a faithful heart. Fra: Quarles.
An Elegy.
1
AWay, those Joys; away, those full delights,
The late vnbenders of my thoughtfull mind;
Which fed my Time with sweeter days and nights
Then were, at first, allotted to Mankind:
Go seek out those that feast;
Leave me to sadness: Sorrow is the Guest
Which I must entertain, and billet in my breast.
2
Break not the Peace of my composed Resolves
Rebellious fancy; cease to make resort
Into my settled Brows, whose thought revolves
Business of great import:
Invention, rest; till Servile Bribes entice
Some Bards corrupted Pen, to set a price
On some unworthy Lord, or paint his noble vice.
3
COme then, my Genius; Let the needless Care
Of quaint expressions pass:
The mourners garb is not to crispe the hair,
And true bread tears consult not with the Glass:
Lick not thy lines, nor scanne their careless feet,
Vnmeasur'd Grief and Measures seldom meet:
Neglected wrincles best beseem the Winding-sheete.
4
DRaw near you gentle heart, draw near,
Whilst I bedable my suffused eyes;
You shall not spend a tear;
You are my Guests, and these my Obsequies.
No need to beg a drop; my dearest Sim
And I will fill the Cisterne to the Brim:
Then let me beg my bread, if I beg tears for Him.
5
Even Him, to whose sweet Memory I owe
This sad Memorial of my dear Affection;
Whereby (who ever please to read) may know
The perfect President of youths Perfection:
But, ah, these too supicious times! Alas,
It will surpass
A good Believers Faith, to tell but what he was.
6
FOr me; let scorn and slight Opinion fill
My undervalu'd Rymes with disrepute;
Let every tongue deride my bafsled Quill,
And let my lines consume like Summer fruit,
When I turn Vices Advocate; or when
Affection, or base by-respects of Men,
Shall falsify the just Geometry of my Pen.
7
Goodness, and vettue, and heroic worth,
Sweetness of Nature, seconded with Arts;
A noble breast, and Birth;
Compleatnes both of Person, and of Parts:
Must be our Theme: We charge the mouth of Fame
To blow her louder Trumpet, and proclaim
His Merits, whom we monrne, and glorify his Name.
8
HE was an early Spring, and beautified
With all that Flora's bounty could bestow;
Life-breathing Zephyr took a pride
To see his Buds sprout forth, and flowers grow;
The Nymph Pomona feared the Lord of Time
Mistook his Tropic, to show fruit in prime
Before the Time of fruit, and in so cold a Clime.
9
Injurious Sisters, tell me why you made
His Twine so small, yet spun so short a twine?
Thread had been the Glory of your Trade,
Had you spun strong as well as fine:
But ah! what strength is able to withstand
The direful stroke of your imperious hand,
Which prayers can not entreat, nor power countermand?
10
Now, Readers, know, he was a Mark too fair
For Death to miss; His ripeness did invite
Her over-daynty Palate not to spare
My life's delight:
He was the flower of youth; the Joy of Art;
A faithful Partner of a faithful heart:
The very Soul of love, and friendships Counterpart.
11
LEarning divine and moral did enrich
His wealthy Soul with her abundant store:
There was no Excellence, in which
He was not half a Master, if not more:
Sometimes, the busy Quadrant, now and then,
Appelles Pencill, and Appollo's Pen
Imployd his skinfull hand: He studied Books and Men.
12
Music, the language of the eternal Quire,
Breathed in his soul celestial straynes,
And filled his Spirits with Seraphick fire,
Whose gentle flames calcined his ravished brynes;
And made him ripe for heaven: He did depart
More then a Scholar in that sacred Art,
His fancy, singers, voice, performed a Masters part.
13
NOble were all his Actions, strict and just,
Quick, but advised; and mild, yet full of spirit:
His heart was buxom, tender, full of Trust;
Prudently simple, free to men of merit:
His Resolutions weighd, reserved and strong,
His silence studious, sweet his tongue;
Less ready to require, then to conceive a wrong.
14
O, but those firm Indentures, sweetly past
Betwixt his soul and mine,
(Thy bands, o Hymen, are not half so fast;
Ours are too strong for death; death cancells thine)
O, how they urge my frailty! How they thresh
My wounded Soul, and tribulate my flesh!
And all my tears being sqent, they spueeze out tears afresh.
15
PAssion usurpes the kingdom of my Soul:
My heart is full and it must vent, or break:
Peace, Judgment, peace; O, shall I not condole
So dear a loss? Give losers leave to speak.
Thou know my tears are just
Shall, shall they not embalme the precious dust
Of my true bosom friend? They shall, they will, they must.
16
QVench not those flames which your own breath has blown
In my Affection;
O, limit not those Bon-fires which are grown
Beyond your reach; love burns without direction:
Nor tell me, what I know, that he sits crowned
With endless Joy: My sorrow does propound
The joys that I have lost, not those which he has found.
17
REason must stoop, and Judgment strike her sail:
His Joys befoole the wisdom of a Pen;
Fancy must flagge, and language must turn tail;
No, these are heights for Angels, not for men:
Alas the storms of passion
That burst from natures Clouds, have dispensation
To ease themselves by vent, and vent by lamentation.
18
SO vain, so frail, so poor a thing is Man!
A weather cock, that is turned with every blast;
His Griefs are Armefulls; and his mirth a span;
His Joys soon crossed, or past
His best delights are sauc'd with doubts and fears:
If had; we plunge in Care: If lost; in tears:
Let go, or hold, they bite; We hold a Wolf by the ears.
19
TIme, shake thy Glass, and let thy Minits fly,
Switcht on with Angels, till thy Sand be spent;
Till then, their's nothing certain, but to dye;
Or worse, to droyle in fears, or discontent:
Thy best of all thy Sweets are but a Snare;
Thy Honors, blasts of Air;
Thy wealth, but golden Trash; and trifles, full of care.
20
Undress thy self, my Soul, and dissinvest
Thy thoughts of all these Rags of flesh and blood;
Return thee to thy Rest;
O, there be Monsters lurk in Natures flood:
Close up thy springs; thy banks are to the brim:
Weep for thy self; my Soul, thou can not swim
In the dead Sea of tears; O, weep no more for Him.
21
WAnder no more in the distracted Path
Of Sense: The tears are lost which Passion vent;
O, rather seek the Pleasures that he has,
Whose death thine eyes lament;
He lives in joy; Thou show'st a weeping eye;
He sits in Glory; Thou sittst down to cry;
Thou either lou'dst him not, or giv'st his joys the Lie.
22
YOu, that are Partners in so great a loss,
Strive to be partners in so great a gain;
Pry not too much into his Dust, his Dross;
The hopes of Comfort there, are less then vain.
Cast up your better eyes,
And view that Palace, where his Glory lies,
Where Time cannot suppress, where Death cannot surprise.
FINIS.

