TO THE READER.
THrough two fields, Christian Reader, the way is directed: the one full of
Briers, has the perfest Path to Salvation, the other (more pleasant to the
vicious mind) leads to endless misorie: church with advice, and shun with
discretion. And to me thy unknown frtend, lend (I pray thee) us friendly
judgment, as I shall wish for thy prosporous estate: farewell.

Januarie has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 10. hours. The night is 14. hours.
1 A The Cyrcumcision of Christ. 2 b On which day Noe being in the Arc upon
the waters, began to see the tops of the high Mountains. 3 c 4 d 5 e 6 f The
Epiphany. 7 g The 10. day, Nabuchadonozor, assieged noce again Jerusalem, 2.
King. 15. 8 A 9 b 10 c The 11. day, Noe, forty days after he had seen the
tops of the Mountains, sent out the Raven, and after that the Dove, which
returned, Genesis 8. 11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g 15 A 16 b Ezechias, in his extreme
sickness, was healed by God, his life was prolonged by 15. years. 17 c 18 d 19
e 20 f The Sun to the wonder of all the world, returned his course backward
by 10. degrees. 4. King. 20. Esd. 38. 21 g 22 A 23 b 24 c The midde vvinter. 25
d The conversion of S. Paul. 26 e Jacob fled from his brother Esau, and went to
his uncle Laban, where after 7. years, he married Lea and Rachel, and by them,
and their handmayds had the 12. Patriarks. Genesis 29 27 f 28 g 29 A 30 b 31 c

February has 28. days. The Moon 29:
The day is 10. hours. The night is 14. hours.
1 d 2 e The purification of Mary. 3 f 4 g 5 A 6 b The holy man John the
Baptist, being sent of God as a messenger, or tidings bringer of our health and
salvation, began to prepare the way, against the coming of Christ. Mark. 1. 7
c 8 d 9 e 10 f 11 g 12 A 13 b Our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ, after he
was Baptized of John in Jordan, began to preach, and spread abroad the
kingdom of God. Mark. 1. 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A The 18. day, Noe put
out once again the Dove, which brought an Olyue branch. 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e 24
f S. Matthy Apos^tle. 25 g 26 A The Dove was sent the third time, and returned
no more to Noe. 27 b 28 c

March has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 12. hours. The night is 12. hours.
1 d 2 e 3 f The third day, the temple of lerusalem was wholly finished, and
consecrated. 1. Esd. 6. And that was 500. and 15. years before the birth of
our Lord, 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f The tenth day, Christ was on the other
side of Jordan, where he was advertised of Lazarus sickness. 11 g 12 A 13 b 14
c The 13. day, the Fast of Hester was celebrated, because that day was
appointed, to pat the jews to death. Hester. 3. 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A The
16. day, Lazarus was raised up again. John. 11. 20 b 21 c The 20. day, Christ
made his entrance into Jerusalem. 22 d 23 e The 24. day, he made his Supper,
and was taken. 24 f 25 g The annunciation of Mary. 26 A The 25. day, was
crucified 27 b The 26. day, he rested in the Sepulcher. 28 c 29 d The 27. day,
he rose again from death. 30 e 31 f

April has 30. days. The Moon 29.
The day is 13. hours. The night is 11. hours.
1 g Noe uncovered ye Ark. Ge^. 8 2 A The Tabernacle was prepared by Moses
Exodus 40. 3 b 4 c Jesus Christ, the 8. day after his resurrection, appeared
again to the Apostles, which were affembled where S. Thomas was present. 5 d 6
e 7 f 8 g 9 A The 10. the people of Israel went over Jordan dry footed. Ios
34. 10 b 11 c 12 d The 13. day, Assuerus gave out proclamation, 10 put all the
jews within his kingdom to death. Hester. 3. 13 e 14 f 15 g 16 A The 14. day,
was the celebration of the Passover. 17 b 18 c The 15. day, the people came
our of Egypt. Exo. 12. 19 d 20 e The 18. day, the people went over the red Sea
dry footed, and Pharao was drowned with all his host. 21 f 22 g 23 A 24 b 25
c S. Mark Evangelist. 26 d The 22. day, the people came to Mara, the waters
whereof of they could not drink, wherefore they murmured. Exodus 5. 27 e 28 f 29
g 30 A

May has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 16. hours. The night is 8. hours.
1 b Philip and Jacob. 2 c The Ascension of Christ into heaven, forty days
after his resurrection. Matthew. 16. 3 d 4 e 5 f God commanded Noe to carry
victuals into the Arc, Genesis 6. 6 g 7 A 8 b Term begins. 9 c They which
have not celebrated the Passcouer in the first month, did celebrate the 14.
day, Number. 19. 10 d 11 e 12 f 13 g The 14. Ezechias did first celebtate the
Passover. Par. 30 14 A 15 b The 15. the Children of Israel murmured after
flesh, and God sent the^ plenty of quails This was the 30 day after the
departure from Egypt. Exo. 16 16 c 17 d 18 e 19 f 20 g The 16. God made Manna
to rain down. Exo. 16. 21 A 22 b The 17. day, Noe entered into the Arc, Genesis
7. 23 c 24 d The 20. day, the people departed from mount Sina. Numb. 9. 25 e 26
f 27 g The 22. day, fire from above, consumed a part of the host of Israel.
Number. 12. 28 A 29 b 30 c The 27. day, Noe came forth of the Arc. 31 d

June has 30. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 16. hours. The night is 8. hours.
1 e This day this children of Israel came to mount Sina, and went thence the
third month, where they tarried almost a year. Exodus 9. 2 f 3 g 4 A 5 b 6 c
The 6. day, the temple of Diana in Ephesus was burned, the year before Jesus
Christ, 54. which temple was accounted the most excellent of all the heathen
Churches. 7 d 8 e 9 f 10 g 11 A 12 b 13 c 14 d 15 e 16 f 17 g The 23. day of
the month, King Assuerus gave out Proclamation in favor of the Jews, against
Haman and his conspiracy. Hester. 8. 18 A 19 b 20 c 21 d 22 e 23 f 24 g S.
John Baptist. 25 A 26 b The Ark of Noah was lifted up this day by the waters of
the flood. Genesis 8. 27 c 28 d 29 e S. Peter the Apostle. 30 f

July has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 15. hours. The night is 9. hours.
1 g The 9. of this month, the city of lerusalem was assieged by the space of
18, months, was finally taken by the King of Babylon. Ierem. 39. 2 A 3 b 4 c 5
d 6 e 7 f Dog days begins. 8 g The 50. day, after that the Israelites
were thus departed and were come to the mount of Sinay, the law of the ten
Commandments was to the^ given by almighty God, with a great and terrible
magnificence, at which time also God gave to them certain polnike gouernande,
and a special kingdom, in which nothing wanted, that appertai ned to the true
worshipping. 9 A 10 b 11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f 15 g 16 A 17 b 18 c 19 d 20 e 21 f
Mary Magdalen. 22 g 23 A 24 b S. James the Apostle. 25 c Of God and of who^
Christ in time to come should be borne. So that among his people always remained
the Church, and the true word of God, until after Christ had suffered. Exodus
19. and 20. 26 d 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A 31 b

August has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 14. hours. The night is 10. hours.
1 c Aaron dyed in the mounraine of Hor, being 1 2 3. years old, 40. years
after the coming out of Egypt. Numb. 20. and 33.38.39. 2 d 3 e 4 f 5 g 6 A
The same day Esdras entered into lerusalem, with a compame of jews, and was
received by those, which 80. years before, he went up thither with Zorobal
el, the year before the coming of lesus Christ. 457. Esd. 7. 7 b 8 c 9 d 10 e
11 f 12 g 13 A 14 b The 10. day, the Pemple of Jerusalem was set on fire by the
Soldiers of Titus, and has not since bin builded again, Josephus lib. 6.
chap. 26. 15 c 16 d 17 e 18 f 19 g 20 A Dog days end. 21 b 22 c 23 d 24 e
Bartholmevv Apostle. 25 f 26 g 27 A Religion as on this day was reformed,
according to Gods express truth in the most renoumed city of Geneua. 1535. 28
b 29 c 30 d 31 e

September has 30. days. The Moon 29.
The day is 12. hours. The night is 12. hours.
1 f Susanna the most chaste matron of the Hebrews, by two false Priests, was
accused of adultery, but by the possicie of young Daniel, she was purged, and
the Priests committed to the fire. Dan. 13. 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c 6 d 7 e 8 f 9 g The
ninth day of this month, lerusalem was put to fire and sword, and wholly
oucrthrowne, as Christ foretold them forty years before Josephus. lib. 7.
cap. 26. 10 A 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e 15 f Chrysostom being chased out of his
Church of Constantinople, as upon this day dyed. 16 g 17 A 18 b 19 c 20 d 21 e
Saint Matthew. 22 f 23 g 24 A The 25. Nehemias did finish the repayring the
walls of Jerusalem. Anno 300. before the Nativity of Christ. Nehem. 6. 25 b 26
c 27 d 28 e 29 f Saint Michael. 30 g

October has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 10. hours. The night is 14. hours.
1 A The Feast of Trumpets, commanded to the Jews. Leuit. 23. 2 b 3 c 4 d The
Jews fasted and wept for Gedaliah, Ierem. 47. 5 e 6 f 7 g 8 A 9 b 10 c Term
begins. 11 d The 10. day, was the feast of reconciliation, which was the
only day that God ordained to fast. 12 e 13 f 14 g 15 A The 15. day, the feast
of Tabernacles began, and lasted seven days. Leuit. 22. 16 b 17 c 18 d S. Luke
Evangelist. 19 e The 18. day, which was the 150, after the beginning of the
flood, the Arc rested upon the Mountain of Ararat in Armenia. Genesis 8. 20 f 21
g 22 A 23 b 24 c The 24. day, Titus gave forth 3000. Jews to the wild beasts.
Anno. 73. 25 d 26 e 27 f 28 g Simon and Jude. 29 A 30 b 31 c

November has 30. days. The Moon 29.
The day is 9. hours. The night is 15. hours.
1 d All Saints. 2 e The Emperor Constantinus, son of Constantine, dyed this
day 364, after the Nativity of Jesus Christ. 3 f 4 g 5 A 6 b The 10. day
happened the woeful slaughter of Verna, where Ladissan king of Hungary was
slain by the Turk, ann. 1445. Also as upon this day. Martin Luther was borne.
7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f 11 g 12 A 13 b The 15. day was the counterfeite Feast by
Jeroboam, after he had withdrawn the ten tribes of Israel, from the obedience
of Roboam their lawful King, which he ordained in Dan and Bethel, after he had
set up the golden Calves, to the intent the people should go no more to
worship in Jerusalem. 3. King. 22. 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d
23 e 24 f 25 g The 17. day of this month, Queen Elizabeth began her reign.
26 A 27 b 28 c Term ends. 29 d 30 e S And^evv Apostle.

December has 31. days. The Moon 30.
The day is 8. hours. The night is 16. hours.
1 f 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c 6 d 7 e 8 f 9 g 10 A 11 b Shortest day. 12 c The 15. the
year before ye nativity of Christ, 145. Antiochus the great, set up an idol
upon the Altar of the Lord in Jerusalem. 1. Match. 1 13 d 14 e 15 f 16 g 17 A 18
b 19 c 20 d 21 e Saint Thomas Apostle. 22 f Saint John Evangelist died in
Ephesus, being of the age of 89. years, under Traian 23 g 24 A 25 b The
Nativity of Christ. 26 c Saint Stephen Martyr. 27 d Saint John Euangelis^t. 28
e Jnnocents day. 29 f the Emperor, about thirty years after the destruction
of Jerusalem. 30 g 31 A

A rule to know, when the Terms begins and ends.
Hillarie Term begins the 23. day of Januarie, if it be not Sunday, then
the next day after: and ends the 12. of February.

Easter Term begins 18. days after Easter, and ends four days after
the Ascension day.

Trinity Term begins the next day after Corpus Christy day, and ends the
wednesday, fourteen days after.

Michaelmasse Term begins the 10. day of October, if it be not Sunday, and
ends the 28. day of November.

The degrees of Marriage.
con. No man may marry his Grandmother. af. Grandfathers wife. af. Wives
grandmother. con. Fathers sister. con. Mothers sister. af. Fathers brothers
wife. af. Mothers brothers wife. af. Wives fathers sister. af. Wives mothers
sister. con. Mother. con. Stepmother. af. Wives mother. con. Daughter. af.
Wives daughter. af. Sons wife. con. No woman ought to marry her Grandfather.
af. Grandmothers husband. af. Husbands grandfather. con. Fathers brother. con
Mothers brother. af. Fathers sisters husband. af. Mothers sisters husband. af.
Husbands fathers brother. af. Husbands mothers brother. con Father. con.
Stepsather. 1 Husbands father. con Son. af. Husbands son. af. Daughters
husband. con. No man may marry his Sister. af. Wives sister. af. Brothers
wife. con. Sons daughter. con. Daughters daughter. af. Sons sons wife.
af. Daughters sons wife. af. Wines sons daughter. af. Wines daughters
daughter. con. Brothers daughter. con Bisters daughter. af. Brothers sons
wife. af. Sisters sons wife. af. Wines brothers daughter. af. Wives sisters
daughter. con. No woman ought to marry her brother. af. Husbands brother. af.
Sisters husband. con. Daughters son. con Sons son. af. Daughters son.
af. Sons daughters husband. af. Daughter daughters husband. af. Husbands
sons son. af. Husbands daughters son. con. Brothers son. con. Sisters
son. af. Brothers daughters husband af. Sisters daughters husband. af.
Husbands daughters son. af. Brothers sisters son.

How a man shall behave himself in the Morning when he rises.
When thou risest in the morning, look that thou with all humblenes of mind,
kneel down, and lifting up thy heart. thy hands, and thine eyes into heaven,
unto God the father almighty, pray on this manner.

A Prayer for the Mcrning.
OAlmghty and most grntle God, wre thank thee for that sweet sleep and
comfortable rest that thou have gruen us this night. And forasnitich as thou
have commanded by thy holy word, that no man should he idle, but always
occupied in virtuous exercises, every man according to his callin.g We most
humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend upon us, daily defend us in
forrow, succor us, cheresh, comfort, and govern all our counsels, studies,
and labors. In such wise, that we may so spend this day, according to thy most
blessed will, without hurting of our neighbor, that we may diligently and
warely eschew, and audide all things that should displease thee, se thtem
always before our eyes, live in thy fear, and ever work that that may be
found acceptable before thy divine Majesty, unto the praise of thy holy name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

After thou have prayed on this manner (seeing that we be all sinnerse) it shall
be expedient (if thou have convenient leisure thereunto) to confess thy self
on this manner, unto God the father.

The confession of our sins unto God the father.
O Almighty God, and he auenly Father, and maker of heaven and earth I confess
my self unto thee, even from the very heart, that I am a milerable, wretched
and abominable sinner. And have wickedly transgressed all thy holy
commandments, and the druine precepts of thy godly will. The sins (alas)
which I have committed in my flesh against thee, are so great, and so
exceedingly increased, that they are no less innumerable the^ the sands of the
Sea: and they thrust me down, even as an intolerable burden. In these wicked
sins (oh Lord God) have I hitherto walked according to ye will of the Prince
of this world, whiles I did that was pleasant to the fleshand ill lusts,
through baine thoughts, the blindness of the heart, the outward pretense of
godliness, and feigned faith. This came to pass (oh wretch that I am) because
that I did never earnestly strive against the suggestions of Satan, nor the
concupiscences or desires of the world, nor yet the lusts of the flesh. But
filthily obeyed them a thousand times more then the motions of thy holy
Spirit, O Lord my God. It came to pass also, that I did set naught by thy
godly counsel, despised thy holy name, and feaed thy bengeance and heavy
vispleasure nothing at all. But whatsoever I have in this behalf offended thy
most godly majesty, it sore repents me, and the fault grieueth me, even unto
the very heart. And if it were not (O most merciful Father) that thou had
laid up mercy in the bowels, blood, and wounds of Jesus Christ thy Son, and
or Lord, for so many as unfeignedly repent, and truly believe, be their sins
never so great and many, I should see no other way, but throw my self down
headlong through despecation, into the bottomeies pit of hell. But forasmuch as
thou have set thy welbeloned Son Jesus Christ, to be our Mediator and mercy
stock and have promised grace, mercy, and forgiveness of sins, to as many as
ask it in his name, through faith in his bloood. Therefore, in this time of
grace and mercy, I miserable sinner come now unto thee, and desire thee my Lord
God, that thou will graund me through that our Lord Jesus Christ, a right and
true says. And for his lake forgive me all my sins, and make me to walk daily
more and more in a new heart, and in the fruits of the holy Ghost, tha^ I may
vtterl despise all the ungodly lusts of this world, and that I may be found
con^^^ent, pure of living, temperate, good, righteous, bonest, diligent in all
goodness, meek, merciful, modest, humble, and ready to forgive such as
offend me even from the very heart. And so live all the days of my life,
according to thy divine will, and true fear: that I may dye to the world, to
all sin, and to my self. And with a good confience, and merry heart, look
for the coming of the Lord and my Savior, Jesus Christ. To whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, for ever and ever. So be it.

Thou may (if thou will) after thy confession, say the Lords prayer. And so
commending thy self unto God, fall to some honest and virtuous exercise,
according to thy calling, but whatsoever thou doet, do it with pureness of
heart, and with singleness of eye. Yea, so do it, as though God were present
and looked upon thee, as undoubtedly he does.

When thou go to thy labor or work.
O Most kind and gentle heavenly Father, thou know and have also taught us,
how great the weakness of man is, so that no man (without thy good help) can
do any thing. Thus bouchsafe to send us thy holy spirit, that he may
strengthen, (...), and move our understanding and reason in all things, that we
this day outwardly shall go about and take in hand, or of that we inwardly
shall think or have in mind, to the intent that it may all be done to his
glory, and to the profit of our neighbor. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Lord God, Father ever lasting and full of pity, we acknowledge and
confess, that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy divine Matestie with confidence that thou will
hear our prayers and grant one requests, if we consider our own deseraings.
For our consciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against us, and we
know that thou art an upright Judge, which do not justify the sinnerse and
wicked men, but punishest the faults of all such as transgress thy
commandments. Yet most merciful father, since it has pleased thee to command
us to call upon thee in all our troubles and adversities, promising even then
to help us, when we feel our selves, as it were swal owed up of death and
desperation: we utterly renounce all worldly confidence, and flee to thy
sovereign goodness, as our only stay and refuge, beseeching thee not to call
to reme^berance our mauifold sins and wickedness, whereby we continually
provoke thy wrath and indignation against us: neither our negligence and
wickedness, which have neither worthily esteemed, nor in our lives
sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of the Gospel revealed unto us: but
rather to accept the obedience and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, who by
offering up his body in sacrifiee once for all, has made a sufficient
recompense for all our sins. Have mercy therefore upon us. O Lord, and forgive
us our offenses. and each us by the ^oly spirit, that we may rightly weigh
them, and earnestly repent for the same: and so much the rather, O Lord,
because that the reprobate and such as thou have forsaken, cannot praise thee,
nor call upon thy name, but the repenting heart, the sorrowful mind, the
conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy grace shall ever set forth
thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our
Creator, and we be the works of thy hands: yea, thou art our redeemer, and we
be the people whom thou have bought: thou art our God, and we thine
inheritance. Correct us not therefore in thine anger O Lord) neither according
to our deserts punish us, but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly affection,
that all the world may know, that at what time so ever a Sinner does repent
him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, thou will put away all his
wickedness out of thy remembrance as thou have promised by thy holy Prophets.

Finally, forasmuch as it has pleased thee, to make the night for man to rest
in, as thou have ordained him the day to travail: grant (O dear Father) that
we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch for the
time, that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our deliverance out of this
mortal life, and in the me and season, that we be not overcome by any
sautasies, dreams, or other temptations, but fully set our minds upon thee,
love thee, sear thee, and rest in thee, in such sort that our very sleep
also may be to the glory of thy name. Furthermore, that our sleep be not
excesssiue or over much after the insatiable desire of the flesh: but only
sufficient to content our weak nature, that we may be better be disposed to
live in all godly conversation, to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of
our Brethren, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name we make our humble
petitions unto thee, as he has taught us, saying: Our father which art in
Heaven, etc.

Almighty and everlasting God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to grant us perfect
continuance in thy lively faith, augmenting and increasing the some in us
daily, until me grow to the full measure of our persectiotn in Christ:
whereof we make our confession, saying: I beleene in God the Father almighty
etc.

The Lord bless us and save us: the Lord make his face to shine upon us: and
be merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us, and
grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and
the communion of the holy Ghost be with us and remain with us for ever. So be
it.

When a man is bound to ward any journey.
THis our life most merciful Lord, is nothing else but a pilgrimage and
throughfare: for we have here no abiding or dwelling place. We are come from
thee, and we must return again unto thee. But amongst or between all the
traps assaults, pits, and snares which the Devil has laid out, and spread
abroad for us, blinded in sin: Vouchsafe thou, O Lord Jesus Christ, to lead
us with thy right hand, for thou art a true, trusty, and a sure friend. Open
our eyes to the intent that we miss not the way, which thou thy self art, but
lead us through, and by thy self, unto thy Father, to the intent that all we
may be made one with thee and him, even like as hou art one with him.

O most merciful Lord, like as thou do send thine holy Angels to be
defenders of as many as serve and please thee with a simple, innocent and pure
heart, by the which they be led like as young children, oren, are lead of them
which are elder and stronger than they. And like as thou did vouchsafe to
send thine Angel Raphal to be a guide unto the Son of that rouerent man
Toby: Vouchsafe even so (O Lord) to send us the same Angel, (although we are
not so worthy as the same Toby was) that he may encourage and lead us through
that way, which is not pleasant unto us, but unto thee. So be it.

A Prayer for a Christian life.
MOst merciful and mighty God, take away from us all evil counsel, and then
our sins: suffer us not to run into an ungodly and wicked life, and sinally,
keep our minds far from the contempt of godliness, and scorning of virtue,
and in the stead of those evils, grant that we may continually be occupied in
thy law and sacred Scriptures, that we be not carried about like the wirked, as
light dust, and fruitles chafe, with every blast of affection and Docirine,
but rather that we as trees planted by the water brooks, indu^d with the life
of the spirit and faith, may also bring forth the fruits of good works: and
that whatsoever we take in hand may prosper, and tend to thy praise, and
glory of thy name and furtherance of our salvation: and at the last, when the
wicked shall all away in thy judgment, we may stedfasily stand and be made
perfect, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer in distress.
SEeing that (O almighty God) our wretch eduesh and poverty is right
greattherefore have we very much need of thy saiuation, for se long as we now
flee unto the^ to the intent thou should be our speedy succor and assured
defense, we call to rememberance our most grievous sins, corrupt life, and
leaud behavior, which neither we will hide, or yet if we were willing thereto,
could keep the same secret from thee. Thou right well perceiuest al our
naughtines, which we truly acknowledge and confess unto thy divine majesty:
we have grieuouslie sinned, we have done greatly amiss, we have bin marvelous
disobedient, very stubborn, and exceeding wilful against thee, who deserve
far more heinous displeasures, then these, which we now feel and suffer. But
bow thou down thy favorable look (O excellent father) and give care unto
our fervent Prayerse, have compassion upon us, that cry out daily unto thee,
and lift up our sorrowful eyes, and heavy minds toward thy most excellent
mercies seat, having this assured confidence, that thou art ready to forgive,
rich in loving kindness toward such as call upon thee, and exceeding mighty in
thy works, above all Gods, wilt not despise us in so great distress, and
tribulation. Thou art most puissat, thou show wonderful things, and thou
art God alone. Teach us therefore thy perfect ways, cause us to walk in thy
blessed truth: call back our wandering heart unto thee, that it may stand greatly
in fear of thy holy name. Thou verily have nobly made us partakerse of thy
excellent merey, but for as much as we were very ungrateful, the hosts of the
ungodly are risen up against us, and the forefrone of cursed men's battles
have a^^aulted us, who neither regar^e thee at all, nor make any account o^ thy
most blessed name and pure doctrine, indeuoucing al only by their most lewd
practices, through the same mean to destroy at one push both the true
worshinping of thee, and our Souls also.

Seeing that therefore thou art a very merciful God, long suffering, of great
love, and truth to trust unto, have an especial regard unto the children of
thy loving promise, be favorable, strengthen and defend them, advance thy
banner to our salvation, so that the cruel adversaries may be confouded, and
that all may right well see and evidently perceive thee only to be our most
good and loving God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the prosperous success of Christ's kingdom against the enemies
thereof.
OUR daily petition is (O Almighty God) that the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be augmented, and appear at length to be most perfect, which thing
we now also desire very instantly in our hearty praters and humble
supplications. Be always mindful thereof (O good God) of his fat and most
pleasant obsation, which he made for us upon the altar of the Cross, and
grant, that by the triumph of his most perfect victory and conquest, we may
take both Salvation and delightful pleasure. Although we deny not, but that
the same shall come to pass without our deserts, who have (through our manifold
wickedness) offended thee very many and infinite ways: yet for (thy tender
loving mercies sake) put them to shame and confusion, that repose all their
trust in Charets, horse, and worldly power: but raise and lift up to salvation
such as are wholly bent to depend upon thee, and bow down thy merciful and
favorable ears, to hear the fervent prayers and petitions which we make unto
thy divine majesty, for the mighty enlarging of our Lord Jesus Christ's
kingdom, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

A Prayer for comfort in persecution.
We perceive most merciful and mighty God, that not only Antichrist, but
also the power and strength of the whole world conspireth against thee and
against thy Christ: which think thy Gospel, and the redification of thy
Church to be an intolerable bondage and hard yoke. Wherefore they labor by all
means possible to break asunder the societies and congregations of the
faithful, and cast away all discipline. But for as much as thou sit in
heaven, and art not ignorant what the devil and wicked flesh goes about,
laugh thou to scorn their vain counsels, and bring their purposes to naught,
let them feel thine anger to be kindled against them, and make them astonished
at the fierceness of thine indignation, so that they may not be able to
destroy thy Church, over whom thou have appointed Jesus Christ our only
Savior, that in it he might reign by the word and Spirit, with inuinsible
might and power. Wherefore grant unto us, although unworthy and shrinking
children, such faith and constancy, that we may find him, and also confess
him, to be our only King, and that we may nothing doubt but that we be his
nation, people and heritage, being most assured of this, that he is of such
strength and power, that with his word, more strong then iron, he is able to
destroy whom he will, and break them in pieces like earthen pots. Therefore (O
God) turn the Kings and Princes of the world unto thee, that they may be wise
and understand, whereby they may unfeignedly acknowledge, embrace, and kiss the
Son, least when his anger shall once be kindled, they perish and be destroyed
for ever. And when it shall be thy good pleasure, make them blessed for
evermore, which commit themselves to thy governance (...) protection. So be it.

A Prayer for a true Subject.
AS it is thy godly appointment (O Lord God) that some should bear rule in
this world, to see thy glory set forth, and the common peace kept: so it is thy
pleasure again, that some should be subjects, and inferiors to other, in
their vocation, although before thee there is no respect of persons. And
forasmuch as it is thy godly will and pleasure, to appoint and set me in the
number of subjects: I beseech thee to give me a faithful and boedient heart
unto the higher powers, that there may be found in me no disobedience, no
unfaith fullness, no treasons, no falsehood, no dissimulation, no insurrection,
no commotion nor conspiracy, nor any kind of rebellion in word or deed,
against the civil Magistrates, but al faithful obedience, quietness,
subjection, humility, and whatsoever else becomes a subject: that I living
here in all lowlines of mind, may at the last day, through thy favor, be lifted
up into everlasting glory, where thou most mermcifull Father, with the Son and
the holy Ghost, live, and raignest very God for ever and ever. Amen.

For Fathers and Mothers.
THe fruit of the womb, and the multitude of children is thy gift and
blessing, O Lord God, given to this end, that they may live to thy glory, and
to the commodity of their neighbors. Forasmuch therefore as thou of thy
goodues have given me children: I beseech thee give me also grace to traiue
them up even from their cradles in thy nurture, and doctrine, in thy holy laws
and blessed ordinances, that from their very young age they may know thee,
believe in thee, fear, love, and obey thee, and dili\gently walk in thy
commandments all the days of their life, unto the praise of thy glorious
name: through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

Of Children.
THou have given a commandment in thy law (O heavenly Father) that Children
should honor their Fatherse and Mothers: I most humbly beseech thee therefore,
to breath thy holy spirit into my breast, that I may reverence and honor my
Father and Mother, not only with outward iestures of my body, but also with
the unfeigned affections of my heart, love them, obey them, map for them, help
them, and do for them both in word and deed, whatsoever lies in my power,
that thou seeing my unfeigned hartygoodwil toward my parents, may become my
loving heavenly Father, and number me among those thy children, whom from
everlasting thou have appointed to be heirs of thy glorious kingdom: through
thy well-beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Of Householders.
TO have children and servants is thy blessing, O Lord, but not to order them
according to thy word, deserves thy dreadful curse. Grant therefore, that as
thou have blessed me with an household, so I may diligently watch, that nothing
be committed of the same that might offend thy father lie goodness, and be an
occasion of turning thy blessing into cursing, but that so many as thou have
committed to my charge, may eschew all vice, embrace all virtue, live in thy
fear, call upon thy holy name, learn thy blessed commandments, hear thy
holy word, and avoiding idleness. diligently exercise themselves, every one
in his office, according to their vocation and calling, unto the glory of thy
most honorable name. Amen.

Of all Christians.
ALbeit, O Heavenly FAther, all we that unfeignedly profess thy holy religion,
and faithfully call on thy blessed name, are thy sons and heirs of
everlasting glory, yet as all the members of a body have not one office, so
likewise we being manx, and making one body, whereof thy dearly beloved Son
is the head, have not all one gift, neither are we all called to one office,
but as it has pleased thee to distribute, so receive we: we therefore most
humbly praythee, to send the Spirit of love and concord among us, that without
any disorder or debate, every of us may be conent with our calling, quietly
live in the same, study to do good unto all men, by the true and diligent
exercise thereof, without too much seeking of our private gain, and so order our
selves in all points, according to thy godly will, that by welldoing we may
stop the mouths of such foolish and ignorant people, as report us to be
evil dooers, and cause them through our good works, to glorify thee our Lord
God, in the ay of visitation. Amen.

A Prayer meet for all men, and to besaid at all times.
O Most merciful Father, grant me to cover with an ardent mind, those things
which may please thee, to search them wisely, to know them truly, and to fulfill
them perfectly, to the laud and glory of thy name, Order my living so, that I
may do thatwhich thou requirest of me, and give me grace, so that I may know
it, and have will and power to do it, and that I may obtain those things
which be most connenient to my soul. Cacious Lord make my way sure and
straight to thee, so that I fall not between prosperity and aduersirie, but
that in prosperous things, I may give thee thanks, and in adversity be
patient, so that I be not lift up with the one, nor oppressed with the other.
And that I may rejoice in nothing but that which moves me to thee, nor to be
sorry for any thing, but for those things which draw me from thee, desiring to
please no body, nor fearing to displease any besides thee: most loving father,
let all worldly things be vile unto me for thee, and be thou my most special
comfort above al. Let me not be merry with the joy that is without thee. And
let me desire nothing besides thee: let all labor delight me which is for
thee, and let all the rest weary we, which is not in thee. Make me to lift up
my heart oftentimes to thee: and when I fall, make me to think on thee, and be
sorry, with a steadfast purpose of amendment. Loving Lord, make me humble
without faining, merry without lightness, sad without mistrust, sober without
dulnes, true without doublenes, fearing thee without desperatio^, trusting in
thee with out presumption, telling my neighbors their faults meekly without
dissimmulatio^, teaching them with words and examples, without any mocking,
obedient without arguing, patient without grudging, and pure without
corruption: give me also I beseech thee, a waking spirit, that no curious
thought with draw me from thee. Let it be so strong, that no filthy affection
dram me backward, so stable, that no tribulation break it: grant me also to
know thee, diligently to learn a godly conversation to please thee: and
finally, hope to embrace thee, for the precious blood sake of that immaculate
Lamb, our only Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with thee, O Father and the holy
Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor and glory, world without end.
Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining of says.
O Merciful God, and dear Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in
whom as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him,
forasmuch as he often bids us to ask of thee, and thereto promises that
thou will hear us, and grant us that, which in his name we shall ask of
thee. Lo gracious Father, I am bold to beg of thy mercy, through thy Son
Jesus Christ, one sparkle of true faith, and certain persuasion of thy
goodness and love toward me in Christ, where through, I being assured of the
pardon of all my sins, by the mercies of Christ thy Son, may be thankful
to thee, love thee, and serve thee, in holiness and righteousness, all the
days of my life. So be it.

A Prayer for repentance.
MOst gracious God, and merciful father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and done wickedlie, and thorough thy goodness have received a
desire of repentance, whereto this long suffering does draw my hard heart: I
beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to work the same repentance
in me, and by thy Spirit, power and grace, to humble, mortify and tear my
conscience for my sins to salvation, that in thy good time, thou may
comfort and quicken me, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son. Amen.

A Prayer for remission of sins, and for the comfort and true feeling of Gods
savor and mercy.
OH Lord God and dear Father, what shall I say that feel all things to be in
manner with me, as in the wieked? Blindis my mind, crooked is my will, and
perverse concupiscener is in me, as a spring or stinking puddie. Oh how feign
is says in me? How little is my love to thee, or thy people? How great is
self-love? How hard is my heart, by the reason whereof I am moved to doubt of
thy goodness toward me, whether thou art my mercifufll father, and whether I
be thy child or no? Indeed worthily might I doubt, if that the having of
these were the cause, and not the fruit rather of thy Children. The cause, and
not the fruit rather of thy Children. The cause why thou art my Father, is the
mercy, goodness, grace and truth in Christ Jesus, the which cannot but
remain for ever. In respect whereof, thou have borne me this good will, to
bring me into thy Church by Baptism, and to accept me into ye number of thy
Children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient and innocent, and to call me
diverse times by the ministering of thy word, into thy kingdom, besides the
innumerable other benefits, always hither to powered upon me; all which thou
have done of this thy good will, that thou of thine own mercy, bear to me
in Christ, and for Christ, before the world was made. The which thing as thou
requirest straightly, that I should believe without doubting, so would thou
that in all my deeds, I should come unto thee, as to a father, and make my
moan without distrust of being heard in thy good time, as most shall make to my
comfort. Lo therefore to thee dear father, I come through thy Sonue our Lord,
Mediator and advocate Jesus Christ, who sits on the right hand making
intercession for me, and pray thee of thy great goodness and mercy in Christ
to be merciful unto me, that I may feel in deed thy sweet mercy as thy
Child. The time. O dear father I appoint not, but I pray thee, that I may
with hope, still expect and look for thy help. I hope that, as for a little
while thou have left me, thou will come and visit me, and that in thy great
mercy, whereof I have need, by reason of my great misery. Thou art wont for a
little season in thine anger to hide thy face from them whom thou love but
surely, oh redermer in eternal mercies, thou will show thy compassion. For
when thou leauest us, oh Lord thou do not lean us very long neither do
thou leave us to our own loss, but to our Iuere and advantage: Even that for
holy spirit, with bigger portion of thy power and virtue, may lighten and
theere us, that the want of feeling to our sorrow, may be recompensed
plentifully with the linely since of having thee to our eternal joy: and
therefore thou swearest, that in thine ever lasting mercy, thou will have
compassion on us Or which thing to the end we might be most assured, thine oath
is to be marked, for thou say, as I have sworn, that I will never bring any
more the Waters to drown the world. so have I sworn, that I will never more
be angry with thee, nor reprove thee. The Mountains shall remove, and the
Hills shall fall down, but my loving kindness shall not move, and the band of
my peace shallnot fail thee: Thou say, thou the Lord our merciful
redeemer. Dear Father, therefore I pray thee remember, even for thine own truth
and mercies sake, this promise and everlasting covenant, which in thy god time,
I pray thee to write in my heart, that I may know thee to be the only true God
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, that I may love thee with all my heart
for ever: that I may love thy people for thy sake: that I may be holy in thy
sight, through Christ, that I may always, not only strive against sin, but
also overcome the same, daily more and more as thy children do, above all
things desiring the sanctification of thy name, the coming of thy Kingdom,
the doing of thy will here on earth, as it is in heaven, etc. through Jesus
Christ our redeemer, Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

A Prayer for delinerance from sin, and to be restored to Gods grace and
favor again.
O Almighty and everlasting Lord God, which have made heaven and earth, and
all things therein contained: Ourcomprehensible unity: O always to be
worshipped most buissed Trmitie: I humbly beseeth thee and pray thee, by the
assumption, and crucified human^^^e of our I orde Irius Christ, that thou
would inclide and how down the great depth of thy deity, to the
bottomless priormy vriticie. Drive from me all kind of vice, wlikeduesse and
sin, and make in me a clean heart, and renew in me a right spirice, for thy
holy names sake. O Lord Jesus, I beseech thy goodness, for that exceeding
great love which drew thee out of thy Fathers bosom, into the womb of the
holy Virgin, and for the assumption of man's nature, wherein it has pleased
thee to save me, and to deliver me from eternal death, that thou would draw
me out of my self, into thee my Lord God, and grant this my love mya recover
again to me thy grace, to increase and make perfect in me that which is
wanting, to raise up in me that which is fallen, to restore to me, that which I
have lost, and to quicken in me, that which is dead and should live, that so I
may become can ormable unto thee in all my life and conversation, thou dwelling
in me, and I in thee, my heart being soupled with thy grae, and settled in thy
faith for ever. O thou my God ^oo^e and set at liberty my spirice from al
inferior things: govern my soul^, and so work, that both in soul and body,
I may be haly and live to thy glorite, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer necessart to be said at all times.
O Bountiful Lord Jesus O sweet Savior. O Christ the soune of God, have
vittie upon me, mercifully hear me and despise not my prayerse. Thou have
created me of nothing, thou have redcemed me from the hondage of sin, death,
and hell, neither with gold nor si^u^r, but with thy most pre^^us ^oote once
off^^ed upon the Cross, and th^^^ own blood shed once for all, for my
ransom: therefore cast me not away, wham thou by thy great wisdom have made:
bespise me not, whom thou have redeemed with such a precious treasure, nor
let my wickedness destroy that which thy goodness has builded: now whilst I
live, O Jesus, have mercy on me: for if I dye out of thy favor, it will be
too late afterward to call for thy mercy: whilst I have time to repent, look
upon me with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchsafe to look upon Peter
thine Apostle, that I may bewailmy sinful life, and obtain thy favor, and
dye therein: I reknowledge that if thou should deal with me according to
very justice, I have deserved everlasting death. Therefore I appeal to thy
high throne of mercy, trusting to obtain Gods favor, not for my merttes, but
for thy merits, O Jesus, who have given thy self an acceptable sacrifice to
the Father, to appease his wrath, and to bring all sinners truly repenting and
amending their evil life, into his favor again. Accept me (O Lord) among the
number of them that shall be saved, forgive me my sins, give me grace to
lead a godly and innocent life: grant me thy heavenly wisdom, inspire my
heart with faith hope, and charity, give me grace to be humble in prosperity,
patient in ^duersitie, obedient to my rulers, faithful unto them tha^ trust
me, dealing truel^ with all men: to live chast^^e in wedlock, to abhor
adultery, formcation, and all uncleanness, to do good after my poer to all
men, to hurt no man, that thy name may be glorified in me, during this present
life, and that I after ward may obtain eneriusting life: through the mercy
and merits of thy passion. So be it.

A Prayer for the vvrote congregation of Christ.
Show thy self goutle and gracious (O Almighty God) toward thy beloved
Church, for thy exceeding great glories sake, and mercy most magnificent, that
we may be miraculously delivered from the horrible fardle and cruel bondage of
our deadly sins: who have hitherto been bondslaues to the flesh, and wretched
prisoners of the Devil, and yet thou vouchsafest to release and forgive us the
whole number of our deadly iniquities, and covered all heinous offenses.
Notwithstanding therefore, we are now also very ungrateful, and such as be not
worthy of thy gracious benefits, our earnest request is, that thou would
withould thy self from thy wrathful indignation. Surely thou art justly angry
with us, but (for the glory of thy name) repress this fury which is stirred
up by reason of our grievous sins, and lead us into the siraite way of
perfice health for as much as it appertains not to thy loving kindness, to be
always offended with thy faithful servants, or to contiuue thy heavy wrath,
and sierce indignation, unto many generations. Deal with us after thy old
accustomed manner, and not according to our leand deserts, scatter abroad our
cruel enemies, and put them to flight whom thou (being provoked through our
great default) would that we should feel. Thou which in thy great wrath
do kill and being pacified, quickened again: show thy mercy and saving
health, like as thou have set destruction before our eles, to the intrut thou
would both terrify and chastise us. Grant that we (which have heretofore
been marvelous rebellions and very stubborn, may ever hereafter, give
obedient care to these ^^^ngs which thou ^p^akest, and willest us to do Let
thy ^nspeakeable loving mercy and famous truth be linked in us together, and
vouchsafe that peace and righteousness may with an vndissoluble band stick
fast in our hearts, that when as thou have delivered us from the hands of the
most outrageous Antichrist, and his cruel champions, we may yield unto thee
the plentiful fruits of holiness: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer upon the xiij. Psalm.
O Lord, how long will thou forget me for ever? O good God how long will thou
hide thy gracious countenance from me? How long shall I be carried and tossed
about, with heause and trouble some cogitations and thoughts? How long shall my
heart wither and dry up with sorrow? But now O my Lord God, consider me,
regard me with the eyes of thy mercy, he are me O Lord, lighten mine eyes,
and my understanding, O my God, least I be blinded with the reprobate, and
superish in my sins. I beseech thee most humbly, let not my enemies glory and
triumph among themselves, as though they had won the victory: let them not
rise up against me as if I were vanquished grant me Lord, that my heart may
^^^or^^ to thy saluation^ so that with own voice. I may sing praises and render
thanks to thee, for that through thy help, A aut redeemed and brought againt
into joy after my gricuous transgressions and sorrows. Amen.

A Prayer upon the xiiij Psalm.
O Lord delier me from al impiety and unrighteousness: deliver me from my
blind ignorance, that I may earnestly seek th^^, for we be al generally borne
in calami^^e and forgetfulness, and there is not one man, which can vnshackle
or deliver him self by his own propper strength and virtue, there is no help
but only by thy grace and power. O Lord, grant that I may call upon thee with
an unfeigned heart whenever I shall be tempted by these adversaries. Let
steadfastness of faith always go before me: let me not be troubled with fear
of any thing, save only of thy judgments, let all my trust, defense and
fortress be in thee, O Lord, Send, O good God, from thy celestial Syon, that
only protector, which shall deliver thy people from the horrible captivity of
a troublesome conscience, so that we may reidyce in him without ceasing. So be
it.

A Prayer upon the xv. Psalm.
O Lord purge me again, and justify me through faith from mine offenses, that
I may dwell in thy aberuacle, and continue blessed in thy holy Mountain.
Grant me (O Lord) this benefit, that I may confess thy truth without
hypocrisy, with an upright heart. Grant me that I deceive no person, neither by
wrong to circumuent any creature, Keep me from flattering the peruerle and
wicked men, that I may love and obey those which love God in renerence,
whatsoever occasion the wicked take thereby to slander me: let me not be
trouble some or burdenous to any man, but that I may serve all with unfeigned
affection, to edify my brethren through faith in Jesus Christ. Amen.

A moditarion upon the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven. We being gloriously formed unto ye image of
thy divine majesty, and created by thy gracious goodness, to most high honor:
how beit through sin, dissigured with vileness, deserving damnatie^, and yet by
Christ's death redeemed and restored unto grace, to be Citizens with saints of
the samilie of God, now altogether in Christian unity, as members of one
body, we pray, desire, and trust to obtain of thee our heavenly father,
according unto thy gracious goodness mighty power and faithful promise unto
us that ask abundance of thy grace.

That thy name may be hallowed. That thy divine power and glorious majesty may
be certainly known, and reverently honored. That the hearts of us men, by thy
word and prayer may be sanctified from all sin and vanity, so that we with all
that we have, serving thee in holiness and righteousness, may so shine before
men upon earth, that they may thereby be occasioned to honor thee our Father,
which art in heaven.

Thy kingdom come. That thy word may be so fruitfullie preached amongst us
thy people, that we may be thoroughly instructed, and taught to bridel our
sensual appetites by natural reason, and to submit our ^^^s and reasons unto a
godly spirit, and to try our spirits by the true Scriptures. So that within
us may raigue the kingdom of God, which is neither meat nor drink: which is
neither supersticious ceremoutes, voluptuons pleasures, nor vaiur glory, but
righteousness, peace and comfort in the holy Ghost, by the which we now
tasting of thy heavenly joys, may be made from henceforth weary of all
worldly vanities, continually looking and praying for the appearance and
coming of thy eternal and everlasting kingdom.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. In Heaven the Angels of reverent
love do thy will and commoundement, with comfortable courage, and joyful
pleasure. In hell the wicked Spirits through malice and envy, repining and
grudging, do torment and vex themselves whatsoever they be doing. And upon
earth, men being subject unto sin, do think it is a labor and pain to be
occupied in any thing that is good and godly. Wherefore we pray thee, that the
grace of thy heavenly spirit may so work in our earthly bodies, that we being
delivered from sin and vanity, may freely delight and take pleasure to do
thy will and commandment here on earth, as thy glorious Angels do in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread. We having great need and not able of our
selves to deserve any thing, beseech thee of thy fatherly goodness, to give
freely unto us all, so that none be hurt nor hindered this day, when we cry
unto thee, constrained by present need, not greedily craving (through vain
care against to morrow) our daily Bread, our daily and necessary food and
relief, both bodily and ghostly: and espeiallie, so that the spiritual food
of Christ's flesh, and his blood, by daily preaching of thy Gospel, and the
ministration of the Sacraments, may replenish our heart, and minds, with
continual remembrance of his death and passion, daily to be used for our
necessary and spiritual consolation.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. We
feeling and knowing our own sinifulnes, do desire thy merciful forgiveness of
our faults and trespasses, which we have committed against thee, so that we
freely forgiving al other that have offended us in any thing, whatsoever it be,
may be sure that mercy springing in thee, has proceeded unto us, and being
graciously offered of thee, has bin thankfully received of us, and being
charitably used of us toward other, shall most certainly be confirmed and
enlarged of thee toward us: so that by free mercy springing and proceeding
from thee, all faults may be freely forgiven. Even as those which other have
committed against us, so likewise those which we have done against thee.

And lead us not into temptation. Suffer not the Devil, by the abuse of thy
benefits, to lead us Cap\tiues into deceitful and damnable temptation,
drawing us by dainty meats unto greedy Gluetonie, by money and rithes unto
insatiable covetousness, and by wealth and prosperity unto pride and
vainglory, and by all thy godly and gracious gifts, unto every devilish and
abominable sin.

But deliver us from evil. Deliver our goods from abuse, our bodies from
corruption, our souls from damnation. Deliver us by Christ Jesus from the
bondage of sin, unto the liberty of the Gospel: so that from the danger of
the devil, and all his temptation, traming and enticing toward danmation, we
being delivered, may serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life.

For thine is the kingdom, the power and glory, for ever and ever, Amen. For
such is thy riches and regiment, power and authority, praise and excellency,
that whatsoever treasures, lands, and possessions, might, wisdom, and
superiority, dignity, honor and maieslie has been, is, or shall be in any
persons, times and places, the same of equity, duty, and necessity, begin,
continue, and end, so as the Eternity, Verity, and Majesty of thy only
kingdom, power and glory may best appear and be known, to be far past all
creatures ability, understanding, or capacity in thee only Lord God of
truth, without beginning, change, or decay eternally: yea, every other
kingdom, power and glory, be but slender shadows and shows, serving for this
transitoric time, to make us more mindful, and desirous of thy eternal
kingdom, power and glory. By reason whereof out hope and the promise of
eternal salvation, and glory in Christ be, Amen: that is to say, most
certain. So be it.

Almighty and euerlining God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to grant us perfect
continuance in thy lively faith, augmenting the same in us daily, till we
grow to the full measure of our perfection in Christ, whereof we make our
coufession, saying.

The Creed of the Apostles.
I Believe in God the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord. Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of
the Virgin Mary. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.
He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from death. He ascended
into heaven. And sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty. From
thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost. The holy eathelike Church. The communion of Saints. The forgiveness of
sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life everlasting. Amen.

The Confession of the Christian faith.
I Believe and confess my Lord God eternal, infinite, unmeasurable,
incomprehensible, and invincible, one in substance, three in person: Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, who by his almighty power and wisdom, has not only
of nothing created heaven, earth, and all things therein contained, and man
after his own Image, that he might in him be glorified, but also by his
Fatherly providence, governs, maintains, and preserves the same, according
to the purpose of his will: I believe also and confess Jesus Christ the only
Savior and Messiah, who being equal with God, made himself of no reputation,
but took on him the shape of a servant, and became man in all things like unto
us (sin except) to assure us of mercy and forgiveness. For when through our
Father Adams transgression we were become Children of perdition: there was no
means to bring us from that yoke of sin, and damnation, but only Jesus Christ
our Lord, who giving us that by grace, which was his by nature, made us (through
faith) the Children of God, who when the fullness of time was come, was
conceived by the power of the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary (according
to the flesh) and preached on earth the Gospel of salvation, till at length by
tyranny of the Priests, he was giltlesse condemned under Pontinus Pilaie, then
President of Jury, and most slanderously hanged on the Cross betwixt two
thieves, as a notorious trespasser, where taking upon him the punishment of our
sins, he delivered us from the curse of the law. And for as much as he being
only God, could not feel death, neither being only man could overcome death,
he joined both together, and suffered his humanity to be punished with most
cruel death: feeling in himself anger and severe judgment of God, even as if
he had been in the extreme torments of hell, and therefore cried with a loud
voice: My God, my God, why have thou for saken me: Thus of his free mercy
without compulsion, he offered up himself as the only sacrifice, to purge the
sins of all the world, so that all other sacrifices for sin are blasphemous,
and derogate from the sufficiency hereof. The which death, albeit it did
sufficiently reconcile us to God, yet the scriptures commonly do artribute our
regeneration to his resurrection: for as by rising again from the grave the
third day, he conquered death: even so the victory of our faith stands in
his resurrection, and therefore without the one, we cannot feel the benefit
of the other. For as by death sin was taken away, so our righteousness was
restored by his resurrection. And because he would accomplish al things, and
take possession for us in his kingdom, he ascended into heaven, to enlarge the
same kingdom, by the abundant power of his spirit: by whom we are most
assured of his continual intercession toward God the Father for us. And
although he be in heaven, as touching his corporal presence, where the father
has now set him on his right hand, committing unto him the administration of
all things, as well in Heaven above, as in the Earth beneath, yet is he present
with us his members, even to the end of the world, ini preserving and governing
us, with is effectual power and grace, who (when all things are fulfilled,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world began)
will come in the same visible form, in the which he ascended with an
unspeakable matestie, power and company, to separate the Lambs from the
Goats, the Elect from the reprobate. So that none, whether he be alive then,
or dead before, shall escape his judgment. Moreover, I believe and confess
the holy Ghost, God equal with the Father and the Son, who regenerateth and
sanctifies us, rules and guides us in all truth, persuading most assuredly
in our consciences, that we be the Children of God, Brethren to Jesus Christ,
and tellowe heirs with him in life everlasting. Yet notwithstanding it is not
sufficient to believe, that God is omnipotent and merciful: that Christ has
made satisfaction; or that the holy Ghost has his power and effect: except we
do apply the same benefits to our selves, which are Gods Elect. I believe
therefore, and confess one holy Church, which (as members of Jesus Christ, the
only head thereof) consent in faith, hope, and charity, using the gifts of
God: whether they be temporal, orspirituall, to the profit and furtherance of
the same.

Which church is not seen to man's eye, but only known to God, who of the lost
Sons of Adam has ordained some as bessels of wrath to damnation: and has
chosen others, as vessels of his mercy to be saved: the which also in due time
he calls to integrity of life, and godly conversation. to make them a
glorious church to himself. But that church which is visible and seen to the
eye, has three tokens or marks whereby it may be discedice. First, the word of
God contained in the old and new Testament, which as it is above the authority
of the same Church, and only sufficient to instruct us in all things concerning
salvation, so it is left for all degrees of men to read and understand. For
without this word, neither Church, counsel or decree can establish any point
touching Salvation. The second, is the holy Sacraments, to wit, of Baptism and
the Lords Supper: which Sacraments Christ has left unto us as holy signs and
seals of Gods promises: for as by Baptism once received, is signified that we
(as well infants as others of age and discretion) being strangers from God by
original sin, are received into his family and congregation, with full
assurance, that although this root of sin lie hid in us, yet to the elect it
shall not be impured. So the Supper declares, that God as a most provident
Father, does not only feed our bodies, but also spiritually nourishes our
Souls, with the graces and benefits of Jesus Christ, (which the Scripture
calls eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood) neither must we in the
administration of these Sacraments, follow man's fantasy, but as Christ
himself has ordained, so must they be ministered: and by such as by ordmarie
vocation be thereunto called. Therefore, whesoeuer reserueth or worshippeth
these Sacraments, or contrariwise contemns them in time and place, procures
to himself damnation.

The third mark of this Church, is Ecclesiastical discipline: which stands
in admonition and correction of faults. The finiall end whereof is
excommunication by the consent of the Church, determined, if the offender be
obstinate. And besides this Ecclesiastical censure: I acknowledge to belong to
this Church, a political Magistrate: who ministers to every man Justice,
desending the good, and punishing the evil, to whom we must render honor and
obedience in all things, which are not contrary to the word of God. And as
Moses, Ezechias, Josias, and other godly rulers, purged the Church of God, from
Superstition and Idolatry: so the defense of Christ's Church apperteineth to
the Christian Magistractes, against al Idolaters and Heretics, wherein
stands only remission of sins purchased by Christ's blood, to al them that
believe, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, and leads us to vain confidence
in Creatures, and trust in our own imaginations. The punishment whereof,
although God oftentimes deferreth in this life: yet after the general
resurrection, when our souls and bodies shall arise again to immortality,
they shall be damned to vnqueachable sire, and then we, which have forsaken all
man's wisdom, to cleave unto Christ, shall hear that joyful voice. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherice ye the kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world, and so shall go triumphing with him in body and
soul, to remain everlastingly in glory, where we shall see God face to face,
and shall no more need one to instruct another, for we shall all know him, from
the highest to the lowest: To whom with the Father, the Son and holy Ghost,
be all praise honor, and glory, now and for ever. So be it.

The Commandments of God given by Moses, and expounded by Christ.
The first Table.
THou shall have none other Gods bt me. Exo. 20. Deuteronomy. 6. I am the Lord thy
God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. Christ. Mat. 6. Hear Israel, Our Lord God is one Lord, and thou shall
love thy Lord God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind, and with all thy strength.

Matthew. 4. Thou shall worship thy Lord God, and him only shall thou serve.

ij. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water
under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the
Lord thy God am a ielous God, and visit the sins of the Father upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in t hem that love me, and keep my commandments.

John. 1. No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, has declared him Christ. John. 4. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. Acts
18. For as much as we are the generation of God, we ought not to think, that
the Godhead is like unto Gold, Silver or Stone, graven by craft, or imagination
of man. 1. Job. 5. Babes, keep you from Images.

Sap. 14. Cursed is the I dol that is made with hands: yea, both it, and he
that made it, because it was called God, whereas it is but a frail thing. For
the ungodly and his ungodliness are both like abominable unto God.

iij. Thon shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. For the Lord
will not hold him guiltles, that takes his name in vain.

Christ, Mattth. 5. Ye have heard how it was said unto them of old time: Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to the Lord. But
I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods seat, nor
yet by the earth, for it is his footestoole, neither by Jerusalem, for it is
the ciite of the great King: neither shall thou swear by thy head, because
thou caust not make one white hair. or a black. But let your communication be
yea, yea, and nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then that, comes of evil.
Eccl. 24. The man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with iniquity, and
the plague shall not be out of his house. Zachar. 5. The Prophet says, that
the curse of God shall rest in the house of fhim that swears falsty, and
consume it with the Timber and stones thereof.

iiij. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, thy son, and
thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates, for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

Christ, Matthew. 12. It is lawful to do a good deed on the Sabbath day.
Matthew. 2. For the son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day.

The Lord says by his Prophet Esaias, Esaias 26.58. hebrews 4. That his Sabbath
is hallowed and kept: when we rest and cease to do our own ways: when we in
word, thought and deed fulfill his will, and not ours: and when we suffer him
to do his works in us. That at the last we may come to that Sabbath and true
rest, even eternal life, which Christ the Lord of the Sabbath has obtained
for us by his blood.

The second Table.
v. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Christ, Matthew. 15. Honor thy Father and Mother: that is the first Commandment
that has any promise, that thou may be in good estate and live long on the
Earth. By this Commandment Christ teaches us not only to have our Father and
Mother in reverence, and to obey them, as he himself was so subject unto his
mother, he Virgin Mary. But also to minister unto their necessities. Match.
15. Mark 7. Eccles. 3. He that fears the Lord, honors his Father and
Mother, and does them service, as it were unto the Lord himself, Honor thy
Father in deed and word, and in all patience, that thou may have Gods
blessing, and his blessing shall abide with thee at the last. The blessing of
the Father buyldeth up the houses of the children: But the mothers curse,
rooteth the foundation, etc.

vj. Thou shall do no murder. Christ. Math. 5. Ye have heard how it was said
unto them of the old time. Thou shall not kill. Whosoever kills, shall be in
danger of judgment. But I say unto you: whosoever is angry with his Brother,
shall be in danger of judgment: Whosoever says to his brother, Racha, shall
be in danger of a Counsel. But whosoever says, thou fool, shall be
danger of hell fire. Item, ye have heard how it is said, thou shall love thy
neighbors and hate thine enemies: But I say unto you, love yor enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that do you
wrong, and persecute you: that ye may be the children of your Father which is
in Heaven. For he makes the Son arise on the evil, and on the good, and
sends his rame on the just and on the unjust.

vij. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Christ, Matthew. 5. Ye have heard how it was said to them of the old time: Thou
shall not commit adultery. But I say unto you: that whosoever looks on a
wife, lusting after her has committed adultlerie with her already in his
heart. 1. Cor. 6. know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ:
Shall I now take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot?
God forbid. Do you not know that he which coupleth himself with an Harlot, is
become one body? For they (says he) shall be two in one flesh. But he that is
joined unto the Lord is one spirit. Flee fornication: Every sin that a man
does is without the body, but he that is a fornicatour, sins against his
own body. Either know ye not, how that your bodies are the tempses of the
holy Ghost, which dwells in you, whom you have of God, and how that you are
not your own? For ye are dearly bought, therefore glorify God in your bodies
and in your Spirits, which are Gods. Hebr. 13. Let wedlock be had in price in
all points, and let the Chamber be vndefileld: for whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge.

viij. Thou shall not steal.

Christ, Matthew. 10. Steal not. Detraude no man. Matthew. 5. If any man will sue
thee at the law, and take thy coat from thee, let him have thy cloak also.
Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrow, turn not away. 1.
Corin. 6. Now is there utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one
with another. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why rather suffer ye not your
selves to be robbed? Nay, ye your selves do wrong and rob, and that the
brethren. Ephesians. 4. Let him that did steal, steal no more, but let him rather
labor with his hands same good thing, that he may have to give him that
needs.

jx. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Christ, Mark. 10. Bear no false witness. Matthew. 13. I say unto you, that of
every idle word which men shall have spoken, they shall give accounts at the
day of Judgment. Ephesians. 4. Wherefore put away lying, and speak every man the
truth to his neighbor: for as much as we are members one of another. Let no
filthy communication proceed out of your mouths: but that which is good, to
edify with all when need is, that it may have favor with the hearerse. Let
al bitterness, fierceness, and wrath, roaring and cursed speaking, be put
away from you. Ephe. 5. Let not frithinesse, foolish talking, nor jesting
(which are not comely) be once named among you: but rather giving of thanks.

x. Thou shall nor desire thy neighbors house: thou shall not desire thy
neighbors wife, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that
is thy neighbors.

Christ, Math. 7. Whatsoever ye would men should do to you, even so do ye to
them. Mark. 7. To love a man's neighbor as himself, is a greater thing then
all burnt Offerings and Sacrifices.

Matthew. 14. Be not overcome with just, for the care of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, Hebrews. 13. Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with that ye have already. 1. Tim. 6.
Godliness is great riches, so a man be content with that he has. For we
brought nothing into the world, and it is a plain case, that we carry nothing
out. When we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content. They that will
be rich, fall into temptations and suares, and into many foolish and noyseme
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destrucion. For Couetousnisse is the
root of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred form the faith,
and tangled themselves with many sorrows. Deuteronomy. 6. These words which I
command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall whet them in
thy Children, and shall talk of them, when thou art at home in thine house,
and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up, and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine head. And they shall be
papers of remembrance between thine eyes, and thou shall write them upon the
posses of thy house and upon thy gaies. Deuteronomy. 3. Take heed and hear all these
words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy
Children after thee for ever, when thou do that which is good and right in
the sight of the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 6.

See thou do that which is right, and in the sight of the Lord, that thou may
prosper. Deuteronomy. 12. He shall not de after al these things that we do here this
day, every man what see moth him good in his own eyes, but whatsoever I
command you, take hee^^e do, and put naught thereto, nor take ought thereiro^.
Deuter. 27. Curied be he that maintaynech not all the words of the law to do
them. Galat. 3. Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, in as much
as he was made accursed for us (for it is written: Cursed is every one that
hangs on tree) that the blessings of Abraham might come on the Gentiles,
through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith. Ierem. 31. This is the Testament that that I will make with the house of
Israel. After those days (say the Lord) I will put my Laws in their minds,
and in their hearts I will write them, and their sins and iniquities I will no
more remember. And I will be with my people.

The svveete and loving promises of almighty God in such as keep his
Commandments.
Deuteronomy. xxviij.
IF thou hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God to observe and
do all his Commandments: Blessed shall thou be in the town, and blessed in
the fields. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, the fruit of the ground,
and the fruit of thy Cattle, the fruit of thine Oxen, and the flocks of
sheep. Blessed shall thy Barnes be and thy siore, blessed shall thou be both
when thou go out, and blessed when thou come in.

The Oration of Job in his most grievous adversity and loss of goods.
Job. 1.

NAked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I turn again, and the
Lord has taken away, as it has pleased the Lord, so is it done, now blessed
be the name of the Lord.

A Prayer in prosperity.
I Give thee thanks O God Aloughtie, which not onty have endued me with the
gifts of nature, as reason, power, and strength, but also have plentifully
given me the substance of this world. I acknowledge (O Lord) that these are thy
gifts, and confess with holy Saint James that there is no perfect nor good
gift, but it comes from thee (O Father of light) which give freely and
castest no man in the teeth, I acknowledge with the Prophet Agge, that gold is
thine and Silver is thine, and to whom it pleases thee thou give it, to the
godly, that they may be the disposers and distributers thereof, and to the
ungodly, to heap up their damnation with all. Wherefore my most merciful God.
I humbly beseech and desire thee, to frame in me with the holy Spirit, a
faithful heart and ready hand, to distribuce these thy good gifts accoding to
thy will and pleasure, that I treasure not up here where thieves may rob, and
moths corrupt: but to treasure up thy heavenly kingdom, where neither Thief
may steal, nor moth defile, to mine own comfort (whom of thy mercy thou have
promised to reward therefore) to the good example of the humble and meek of the
Congregation, and to the glory of thy name. To whom with thy Son, and holy
Ghost be al honor and praise, world without end. Amen.

A godly prayer to be said in thy adversity and trouble.
O Lord GOD, without whose will and pleasure a Sparrowe does not fall on the
ground, saeing it is thy will and permission that I should be in this misery
and adversity, and seeing also thou do punish me with adversity and
trouble not to destroy me, and cast me away: but to call me to repentance,
and save me: for whom thou do love, him do thou chasten. Furthermore,
seeing afflictions and adversity works patience, and who so patiently
bears tribulation, is made like unto our Savior Christ the head: Finally,
seeing that in all tribulation and adversity, I am in assurance of comfort at
thy gracious hands, for thou commaundest me to call upon thee in time of
tribulation, and have promised to hear and succor me: grant me therefore, O
almighty God and merciful Father, in all trouble and adversity to be quiet,
without impatience, and mururing, without discouraging and desperation to
praise and magnify thee, to put my whole trust and confidence in thee, for
thou never forsakest them that trust in thee, but workest all for the best to
them that love thee, and seek the glory of thy name. Tot he he glocie for
ever: So be it.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the Communion.
O Father of mercy and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures do
knowledge and confess thee to be their governor and Lord, it becomes us the
workmanship of thine own hands, at all times to reverence and magnify thy
godly Maiesti.e First, for that thou have created us to thine own Image and
similitude, but chiefly, because thou have delivered us from that everlasting
death and damnation, into the which Satan drew mankind by the means of
sin: from the bondage whereof neither man nor Angel was able to make us
free: but thou (O Lord) rich in mercy, and infinite in goodness have provided
our redemption, to stand in thine only and well-beloved son, whom of very
love, thou did give to be made man, like unto us in all things, sine
xcepted, that in his body, he might receive the punishment of transgression by
his death, to make satisfaction to thy justice, and by his resurrection to
destroy him that was the author of death, so to bring again life to the world,
from which the whole spring of Adam was most justly exiled.

O Lord, we acknowledge that no creature was ble to comprehend the length and
the breadth, the deepenesse, and heigot of that most excessent love, which
moved thee to show mercy, where none was deserved, to promise and give life,
where death had gotten the victory, to receive us into thy grace when we could
do nothing, but rebel against thy majesty, O Lord, the blind dullness of our
corrupt nature, will nto suffer us sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample
benefits: yet nevertheless, at the commandment of Jesus Christ our Lord, we
present our selves to this thy Table (which he has left to be used in
remembrance of his death, until his coming again) to declare and witness
before the world, that by him alone we have received liberty and life: that by
him alone thou do acknowledge us to be thy children and heirs: that by him
alone we have entrance to the trone of thy grace: that by him alone, we are
possessed in our Spiritual kingdom, to eat and drink at his Table, with whom
we have our conversation present in Heaven, and by whom our bodies shall be
raised up again from the dust, and shall be placed with him in that endless
joy, which thou (O father of mercy) have prepared for thine elect before the
foundation of the world was laid. And these most inest imable benefits, we
acknowledge and confess to have received of thy free mercy and grace, by
chine only beloved son Jesus Christ. For the which therefore we thy
congregation, moved by the holy Spirice: render to thee all thanks, praise and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A thanks giving after the receiving of the holy Communion.
MOst merciful father, we render to thee all praise, thanks, honor, and
glory, for that it has pleased thee of thy great mercy to grant us miserable
sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the fellowship
and company of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou have delivered
to death for us, and have given him unto us, as a necessary food and
nourishment unto everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also (O heavenly
father) to grant us this request, that thou never suffer us to become so
unkind, as to forget so worthy benefits, but rather imprint and fasten them
sure in our hearts, that we may grow and inicrease daily more and more in true
faith which continually is exercised in all manner of good works: and so much
the rather (O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and rages of Satan:
that we may constantly stand and continue in the confession of the same, to the
advancement of thy glory, which art God over all things blessed for ever.
Amen.

A comfortable Prayer.
O Lord God almigbtie, and Father most merciful, there is none like thee in
heaven or in earth, which workest all things, for the glory of thy name, and
the comfort of thine elect. Thou did once make man ruler over all thy
creatures, and placed him in the garden of all pleasure, but how soon (alas)
did he in his felicity, forget thy goodness. Thy people Israel also in their
wealth, did evermore run astray, abusing thy manisld mercies: like as all flesh
contimually rages, when it has gotten liberty, and external prosperity.
But such is thy wisdom adjoined to thy mercies (dear Father) that thou
seek all means possible to bring thy children to the sure sense, and lively
feeling of thy fatherly favor. And therefore, when prosperity will not serve,
then sendest thou adversity, graciously correcting all thy Children whom thou
receiuest into thy household. Wherefore I wretched and miserable sinner, render
unto thee most humble and hearty thanks, that it has pleased thee to call me
home to thy fold, by thy fatherly correction at this present, whereas in
presperlite and adversity, I did neglect thy grease offered unto me. For the
which negligence and many other grievous sins, where of I now accuse my self
before thee, thou might most justly have given me up into a reprobate mind,
and induration of heart, as thou have done others. But such is thy goodness (O
Lorod) that thou seem5 to forget al my offenses, and have called me of thy
good pleasure from all idolatry, to profess thy name, and to suffer some
Cross amongst thy people for thy truth, and Gospel sake, and so to be thy
witness with the Prophets and Aposties, yea with thy dearly beloved son
Jesus Christ our head, to whom thou do, being here, fashion me like: that
in his glory, I may also be like him when he shall appear. O Lord God what am
I upon whom thou should show this great mercy? O most loving Lord forgive
me my unthankfulness, and all my sins, for Jesus Christ's sake. O heavenly
Father, increase thy holy Spirit in me, to teach my heart to cry Abba, dear
Father, assure me of thy eternal election in Christ, to reveal thy will more
and more toward me, to confirm me so in thy truth, that I may live and dye
therein, and that by the power of the same Spirit, I may boldly give an
account of my faith to all men, with humbleness and meekness, to the glory
of thy most holy name. Through Jesus Christ our Lor and only Savior. So be it.

A meditation for a woman with child, and specially when she enters in to
travel.
O Almighty and merciful Father, which of thy bountiful goodness have
fructified my womb, and of thy gracious blessing has created me a reasonable
creature, I most heartily thank thee, not only for this thy gracious gift, but
also for that thou have at all times, since I conceived, preserved me from all
perils, both of soul and body, and have so moderated all my nips, pinches,
throws, and pangs, that I have hitherto right well escaped them, I acknowledge
(O Lord) justly for our sinful transgression of thy commandments, thou
said unto the first woman, and in her to us all: I will increase thy sorrow
when thou art with child: with pain shall thou bring forth thy children. And
our pains therefore that we suffer in this behalf, are none other thing but a
worthy Cross laid upon us, by thy godly ordinance, to the which with heart
and mind, I humbly submit me, trusting surely, and being fully persuaded in my
faith, that thou call none into perrill and danger, but both thou canit and
wilt at convenient season deliver them. Thou (most gracious GOD) have
commanded us in all our trouble to call upon thee for aid and help: and not
only have commanded us, but also of thy merciful goodness have promised to
us good deliverance, saying: Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will
deliver thee. O good Lord, how greatly do these words comfort my heart, and
sustain my silly soul? Who would not greatly rejoice, that knows
certainly almighty God to be present with him in his trouble? Says not God
thus: Or ever they call (says he) I shall answer them, while they are yet but
thinking how to speak, I shall bear them, and in the Psalm, I am with him,
says God, in his trouble, out of which I will deliver them. What a comfortable
Lord is this? He is more ready to help, then we to call for help. He is more
ready to give grace, then we to ask it. There was never any yet, that with a
sure faith asked grace of this Lord, but he had it.

Christ says, ask and ye shall have. Every one the excenteth none. Verily,
verily, I say unto you (says Christ) whatsoever you shall ask my Father in my
name, he shall give it you. Our Savior Christ says this, and he is God. And
shall not I hearken to my Lord God his commandments and promis^s? Verily, I
will stick surely to it. For sure I am, that sooner shall heaven and earth
perish, then Gods promis. be vnpersourmep. For albeit every man naturally is a
liar and deceiver, yet God is always true and just in all his words and
promises. I will therefore make my suite unto him, whom I need not go far
to seek, for he is every where present iwth his elect, and is nigh unto al
them that call upon him faithfully. And thus I will pray unto him.

A prayer of a woman with Child.
FAther of mercy, and God of comfort and consolation, I thy poor handmaid,
humbly beseech thee, for Christ Jesus sake, and in his blessed and holy name
that thou will vouchsafe to torgiue me all my sins and trespasses, that I
have heretofore offended thy holy Majesty, either in thought, consent,
delectation, word or deed and that thou will hereafter during my life,
mercifully preserve me from transgressing of thy Commandments, and daily
increase in me perfect repentance for my sins, a sure purpose of amendment of
life, a diligent study to walk in thy commandments, increase in me also a
lively faith, a sure hope, and and ardent charity. Ingreffe in me humbleness
of heart, meekness of mind, cleanness of Conscience.

Grant me, that I may be wise, sad, sober, discreet, circumspect, and well
advised in all my sayings. And that I may strongly overcome all the temptations
of mine enemies the Devil, the world, and the flesh. And that whether by
sleeping, waking, eating, drinking, or whatsoever I doetall may be to thine
honor and glory.

Grant me also that I may humbly reverence, and faithfully love mine Husband,
and be obedient to all his honest, lawful, and godly requests. And chiefly of
all, grant me (O Lord) that I may fear and dread thee. For well assured I am,
that look how high the heaven is, in comparison of the Earth, and so great is
Gods mercy toward the^ that fear him. Look how wide the East is from the
West, so far has he set our sins from us, Yea, like as a Father pitieth
his own children, even so is the Lord merciful to them that fear him. And as
touching my deliverance of this burden and thy gracious gift, I am right well
assured, that unless thou prosper my travel, all women's help, and all
phificke is in vain: but my full trust is, that like as thou have created this
child in me, and have breathed into it the spirit of life, so at such time, as
shall be seen most meet to thy godly Majesty, thou both caust, and wilt
prosper the child's birth and my deliverance. In consideration whereof, I
humbly beseech thee of thy fatherly pity, so streng then me in this my
dangerous labor and travel: and so sustain me, that I may patiently bear
all the throws and pangs, and according to thy promise, suffer me not to be
tempted above my strength, but in the midst of my temptation, make a way to
come out, that I may bear it. Increase my faith, O most merciful Savior
Christ, that I may constantly believe thy word, which say, ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she
trauaileth has sorrow, for her hour is not come, but when she is delivered
of the child, she thinks no more of the anguish for joy that a man child is
borne into the world. I beseech thee the refore, in the dangerous time of my
crauell, grant me speedy deliverance, and joyful beholding of my child,
that I being a merry mother, may render unto thee honor, laud, praise and
thanks, for thine abundant mercy, and gracious gifts and benefits. And
finally, above all things, I beseech thy gracious goodness, to endue my child
with grace, that it may be one of the number of thine elect, Babtized, and
regenerated in the holy Ghost. And that at the years of discretion, it may
learn to know thee, and knowing thee, may trust surely in thy mercy, and
trusting in thy mercy, may heartile love thee, loving thee, may fear to
displease thee, and fearing to displease thee, may walk and continue in the
obedience of thy Commandments. And finally attain ^uerlasting joy and
felicity. Through ^ur Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and ^^igneth with thee,
and the holy Ghost, world without ^^^. So be it.

(...) she is delivered.
O My Lord GOD, I thank thee with all my heart, wit, understanding, and power,
for that thou have vouchsafed to deliver me out of the peril of this most
dangerous travel, and have sent into this world, out of my woeful womb this
child a creature of thine own fashioning, forming, and shape, like unto the
rest of the Children of thy creation, for which I am not able worthily enough
of my own fail nature, to give to thee condign thanks, praise, honor, and
glory, for thy so great benefits showed unto me, in pulling me out from the
pittes brincke of death, easing and releeuing all my woeful sorrows, laborious
panges, and most grievous throws, bitter anguishes, and unspeakable pains,
which I could never have ascaped, without thy most singular aid, help,
relief, and succor: wherefore, I thy most humble handemaide, with steadfast
and pure heart and hands, do power our before thee my Lord God and only
Savior, these my simple prayers of thanksgiving (the fruit of my faith,
hope, trust, charity, and assured confidence) which I have in thee as
certeining my self, that now thou have preserved me for a further trial of my
nocation and service toward thee, in this veil of tranu^corie life, wherein I
may have time, by thy divine permission and sufferance, to direct all my
steps in thy ways, and to honor and glorify thee in my soul, and body,
with condign thanks in rejoicing in thy holy name, according to thy most
blessed word, wherein thou have declared, that a woman as long as she is in
travel of her child bearing, she is forrowfull, heavy, and full of anguish,
and intolerable pames, but as soon as the chile is borne, she learneth
straighe ways to forget all her pains, not remembering them any longer, and
begins to rejoice, for that she has brought forth a child into the world.
Even so O Lord fares in with me, thy poor, humble, and obedient servant, now
rejoicing, in that it has pleased thee, to make me a glad mother, in bringing
forth this child, whom now I do present before the face of thy divine
majesty, with an earnest zeal of a godly spirit, and most pure affection,
praying and beseeching thee everlasting God, here to preserve this child,
according to thy most holy will, that it may enjoy the benefits, of all thy
heavenly Sacraments, to live, and serve thee in pureness of life, as a
faithful member of the Christian congregation, wherein thy name by it may be
glorified, honored, and praised world without end. So be it.

A prayer when a man commet home from his labor.
THere is nothing, O Lord, more like to thy holy nature, then a quiet mind.
Thou have called us out of the troublesome, disquietnesse of the world, into
that thy quiet rest and peace which the world cannot give, being such a peace,
that passes all men's understanding. Houses be ordained for us, that thereby we
might be defended from the in^urie of weather, (...) ^oyles of the (...).

O gracious father, grant that through thy great mercy my bo^^^ may ^^ier into
this house, from outward actions, but so that it may become luxome, and
obedient to the soul, and make no resistance against the same, that in soul
and body, I may have a godly quietness and peace, to praise thy holy name. So
be it.

Peace be in this house, and to all that dwell in the same.

Think what a return, and how merry a return it will be, to come to our
eternal, most quiet, and most happy home. Then will all grief and sorrow
cease. Whatsoever here is pleasant and joyful, the same is nothing but a very
shadow in comparison of that which is to come.

A prayer for the sick.
O LORD look down from heaven, behold, visit, and relieve this thy servant:
look upon him with the eyes of thy mercy, give him comfort and sure
confidence in thee, defend him from the danger of the enemy, and keep him in
perpetual peace and safety: through Jesus our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer for the sick
Hear us (...) ^^ghty and most ^^^^ifull GOD and Savior, entend thy
accustomed goodness to this thy Servant, which is grieved with sickness,
visit him (O Lord) as thou did Peter's wives mother, and the Captains
servant. Restore unto this ficke person his former health (if it be thy will)
or else give him grace to take thy visitation, that after this payuefull life
ended, he may dwell with thee in life everlasting. Amen.

Another prater for the sick.
O Lord Jesus Christ thou only Son of the heavenly Father, ou^ a^one Redeemer
and omni^^fficient Savior, we most humbly beseech thee, deliver this sick and
weak person, now being in great pains, and at the poyne to depart out of this
world, from all vglisome and terrible assaults and temptations of the Devil,
sin, and Hell. Deliver him (O Lord) as thou deliueredst Noe from the raging
waves of the Sea. Lot from the destruction of Sodom. Abraham from the fear of
the Chaldees. The Children of Israel, from the tyranny of Pharao, David from
the hand of Goliath, the three men from the violence of the fiery Furnace in
Babylon. Daniell from the mouth of the Lions, Jonas from the belly of the
Whalefish, and Peter from the prison of Herod. Even so, O gracious Lord,
deliver the soul of this person, both now and whenever he shall depart
hence, from all perrilland danger. Open unto him at the hour of death, the
door of Paradise, the gates of heaven, and the entry of everlasting life. O
Lord Jesus Christ, forgive him all his sins, and lead him with joy, into the
kingdom of thy heavenly father, even unto the bosom of Abraham, and appoint
him unto everlasting rest, that he may reiayce with thee, and with all the
elect Children of God, in everlasting life. Amen.

The stick man's Prayer.
LOrd hearken unto my prayer, and give ear to my most humble requests. O most
merciful God: O father of all mercies, the father of our Lord and samour Jesus
Christ, be merciful to me a sruner. Have piety on me, and quickly help me
noore wretch, for the most better passion, and most precious death of Jesus
Christ thy only begetten Son, and our alone redeemer, and Savior. Enter not
into judgment with thy setuant, O Lord, Haudle me not according to my deserts
and merits, neithere reward me afeer mine iniquities, but for thine infinite
and unmeasurable bounty and exceeding great mercy, receive me, and take me
into thy favor. I miserable and weak creature, am in thy hand, I am thy bound
servant and thy debtor, O most gentle God, O most favorable Father, forsake me
not, cast me not away, poor wretch that I am. For I am thine with all there
ever I can make. No man is able to strengthen me, no man is able to deliver
me, no man is able to help me, but thou alone. Thou art the true helper in
adversity. Thou art the most sure and present comforter of all necessity.
Thou alone art our helper, our Bulwark, our Fortress, and our most mighty
and strongly defended tower. Thou, O God, art our reiuge, thou art our helper
in all our tribulations. In thee O Lord, do I trust, let me not be confounded.
Let me never be put to shame, let me not be deceived of my hope, but preserve
me, for thy righteousness sake. Bow down thine ear unto me, make haste to
deliver me. Be my befender, O God, and my strong hold, thou shat may save
me. For thou art my strength, and my refuge, yea, thou art my God, and my
de^^^^ies are in thy hands.

Lighten thy countenance upon thy servant, and save me for thy mercies sake, O
Lord. And forasmuch (O sooecte father) as it is thy godly y^ ^as^^, to call me
now from this miserable life and wretched morld, I most ^ntirely beseech thee
to defend me, in this agony of death, that neither Satan nor his Ministers
prevail against me, but that I con^^^^e faithful and constant unto the end,
in the confession of thy holy name, looking for full remission of all my
sins, in the precious blood of thy weldeloued Son and my only Savior
Jesus Chrst, and that I departing in this faith, and perfect trust, may be
placed among thy blessed saints and heavenly Spirits, and so for ever and ever
remain with thee in glory. Grant this, O most merciful Father, for thy
dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our alone mediator and advocate. Amen.

My Testament.
THis I make my Testament and last Will, in the name of the eternal living
God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in whose name I was baptized.
In whom only I hope and believe to be saved. Amen.

First I bequeath my soul into thy hands, O God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Thou have first made me, and thou have given thy Son to become man, and dyed
for my sins, and for the sins of the people. O father for thy sons sake
have mereie upon me.

O Lord Jesus Christ, thou Son of God, thou have bought me with thy precious
blood by one oblation, sufficiently for all that believe in thee. O Christ, God
and man, which are in Heaven, have mercy upon me, and be thou my merciful
mediator for me unto thy Father, that I may be saved.

O holy Ghost, God conqual with the father and the son, have mercy upon me,
work thy diume power in me through thy gracious mipiration. Drame me unto Jesus
Christ, that I may find fanour, and be saved. Amen.

The second part.

As concerning my body: that I bequeathe unto the earth, from whence it came.

My Consission.
I Knowledge and confese with all my heart, that I am a sinner, yea, such a
sinner as has need of the grace, mercy, and favor of God. My faith joined
with hope. I believe that the Lord will have mercy upon me, for he has first
made me, and if it shall please him, he may save me: This I believe, whether I
live or dye, I am the Lords.

My hope.
I Hope that I shall find both grace and mercy for my sins of God the
Father, even for Jesus Christ's sake, in him I believe, he is my redeemer, he
lives for ever and ever: He makes intercession for sins.

So this I know, that now I am a corruptible body, but I hope through Christ to
rise an incorruptible body. Now a mortal body, but through Christ and his
merits, I hope to have, though now an earthly body, then an heavenly body.
For as many as shall be saved, shall shine in the kingdom of God, as bright as
the Sun. This my faith and hope I lay up in my mind, the mind of my Soul,
trusting only to be saved, through the merits of Jesus Christ, God and man,
which is in Heaven. From whence we look again, the which shall change our
vile body, and make it like his own most glorious body, whereby he is ablel
to subdue all things unto himself. O Christ have mercy upon me, thou have
redeemed me, O Christ save me.

A Prayer for the Sick.
OH how sick am I? My weakness increases more and more. Lord be merciful
unto me, and give me grace pacientlie and thankefullie to bear the cross,
and in the midst of this my sickness, always to say: Thy will O heavenly
Father be done, and not mine.

Another Prayer for the Sick.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them which dye in thy faith: I wretched sinner, give and
submic my self wholly to thy most blessed will. And I being sure, that the
thing cannot perish which is committed unto thy mercy, most humbly beseech
thee (O Lord) to give me grace, that I may now willingly leave this frail and
wicked flesh, in hope of the resurrection, which in better wise shall restore
it to me again: I beseech thee (O most merciful Jesus Christ) that thou will
by thy grace make strong my soul, against all temptations, and that thou will
cover and defend my with the Buckler of thy mercy, against all the assaults of
the Devil. I see and acknowledge, that there is in my self, no help of life
and fasuation, (...) my considence, hope, and trust, i^ in thy most merciful
goodness. I have no merits (...) good works which I may allege before thee.
Of sins and evil works, (alas) I see a grace heap, but through thy mercy I
trust to be of the number of them to whom thou will not impute their sins,
but take and accept me for righteous and just, and to be the inheritour of
everlasting glory. Thou (O most merciful Lord) waste borne for my sake. Thou
did suffer both hunger and thirst for my sake. Thou did preach, and
teach, thou did pray and fast for my sake. Thou did all good works and
deeds for my sake. Thou sufferedst most grievous pains and torments for my
sake. And finally, thou gave thy most precious body to dye, and thy most
blessed blood to be shed on the Cross for my sake.

Now most merciful Savior, let all these things profit me, which thou freely
have given me, which have given thy self for me: let thy blood cleanse and
wash away the spots and foulness of my sins. Let thy righteousness hide
and cover my unrighteousness. Let the merits of thy passion, and blood, be
the satisfaction for my sins. Give me Lord thy grace, that my faith, and
persuasion in thy blood waver not in me, but ever be firm and constant, that
the hope of thy mercy, and life everlasting never decay in me, that Charity
wax not cold in me: finally, that the weakness of my flesh, be not overcome
with the fear of death. Grant me also (O most merciful Savior) that when
death has shut up the eyes of my body: yet the eyes of my Soul may still
behold and look vnon thee, and that when death has taken away the use of my
tongue and speech yet that my heart may cry, and say unto thee, O Lord, into
thy hands I give and commit my soul. Lord Jesus take my Spirit.

A thanks giving to God for the departure of the faithful out of this world.
O How can we (most loving Father) render unto thee sufficient thanks for
thine inestimable goodness toward thy faithful servants? Whom thou calling
out of this wetched world, vouchsafe to place in thy heavenly Ringdome among
the glorious company of thy holy Angels, and blessed Saints. O full precious
is the death of the faithful, in thy sight. Blessed are the dead that dye in
the Lord. For they are at rest from their painful travels and labor. The
souls of the righteous, are in thy hand, O God, and the pain of death shall
not touch them. In the sight of the unwise they appear to dye, but they are in
peace. They shine as the sparks, that run through the red bush. They glister
as the shyning heaven. They are as the stars, world without end. They are as
the Angels of God, They are clad with white garments, and have golden Crowns
upon their heads. Tey do service day and night before the glorious Throne of
thy Divine Majesty. They neither hunger, nor thirst any more, neither does the
Sun, or any heat fall upon them, for the Lamb, which is in the midst of
the Throne, governs them, and leads them unto the living fountain of
waters. They follow the Lamb, whithersoeuer he goes. They have such joys,
as eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, neither is there any heart able to
think them, infinite and unspeakable are thy treasures (O Lord) which thou
have laid up for them, that depart in thy faith. For these thy fatherly
benefits toward the soul of the faithful, and for that it has pleased thee,
to call this our Christian brother, from this vale of misery, unto thy
heavenly kingdom we give unto thee most hearty thanks, humbly beseeching
thee, that thou will take like care for us, and so govern us, with thy holy
Spirit both in sickness, and in health, that we may live a good and godly life
in this present world, and whenever it shall be thy good pleasure to call us
hence, we may with strong faith in thee, and in thy son Christ Jesus our Lord,
commend both our bodies, and souls into thy merciful hands, and through thy
goodness be placed in thy glorious kingdom, among thy faithful chosen
people, and so for ever and ever, praise and magnify thee our heavenly Father,
to whom with thy dearly beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, and Savior, and
the holy Ghost that most sweet comforter, be all glory and honor, world
without end. Amen.

A Prayer of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the reward both of the
faithful and unfaithful.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the everliving God, by whom all things were
made, are ruled and governed, as of thy love for our redemption, thou did
nto disdain to be our mediacour, and to take upon thee our nature, in the
womb of a Virgin purely, and without sin, by the operation of the holy
spirit, that both thou might in thine own person, woonderfully beautify,
and exalt our nature and work the same in us also: first abolishing the
giltinesse of sin, by remission, then sin it self by death, and last of
all, death, by raising up again these our bodies, that they may be like unto
thine own glorious, and immortal body, according to the power, wherewith
thou art able to subject all things unto thee: as (I say) of the love for our
redemption, thou becamest man and that most poor, and afflicted upon earth, by
the space of three and thirty years at the least, in most humility, and
paydest the brice of our ransom, by thy most bitter death and passion, for the
which I most heartily give thanks to thee: so of the same by love toward us
in thy good time, thou will come again in the clouds of Heaven, with power
and great glory, with flaming fire, with thousands of Saints, with Angels of
thy power, with a mighty cry, shoure of an Archangel, and blast of a Trumpe,
suddenly as a lightning, which shmeth from the East, etc. when men think
least, even as a Thief in the night, when men be asleep, thou will so come, I
say, thus suddenly in the twinekling of an eye, all men that ever have been,
be, and shall be, with women and Children appearing before thy tribunal
judgment seat, to render account of all things, which they have thought,
spoken, and done against thy law, openly, and before all Angels, Saints, and
Devils, and so to receive the just reward of thy vengeance if that they have
not repented, and obeyed thy Gospel, and so depart from thee to the Devil and
his Angels, and all the wicked, which ever have been or shall be, into Hell
fire, which is unquenchable and of pains intolle rabble, easellesse, endless,
hopeless, even from the face of thy glorious and mighty power: but if they
have repented and believed thy Gospel: If they be found watching with their
Lamps and Dyle in their hands: if they be found ready apparelled, with the
wedding garment of innocence; if they have not hardened their hearts, and
hoorded up the Treasure of thy vengrance, in the day of wrath, to be revealed,
but have used the time of grace, the acceptable time, the time of salvation,
that is, the time of this life, in the which thou stretchest out thy hand, and
spreadest thine arms, calling and crying unto us, to come unto thee, which art
meek in heart, and lowly, for thou will ease all that labor and are heavy
ioden. If they hane visited the sick, and prisoners, comforted the
comfortless, fed the hungry, clothed the naked, lodged the harbourlesse. if
they have not laden their hearts with Gluttony and surfeiting, and
carfulness of this life. If they have not dug and hid their Talent in the
ground doing no good therewith, but have been faithful to occupy thy gifts
to thy glory, and here washed their garments in thy blood by hearty
repentance, then shall the Angels gather them together, not as the wicked,
which shall be collected as Faggoctes, and cast into thy fire, but as the good
wheat that is gathered into thy Barn: then shall they be caught up to meet
thee in the Clouds: then shall their corruptible body, put on incorruption:
then shall they be endued with immortalitte and glory: then shall they be with
thee, and go whither thou go. Then shall they hear: Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning.

Then shall they be set on Seats of Majesty, judging the whole world, then
shall they reign with thee for ever, then shall God be all in all with them,
and to them, then shall they enter and inherit heavenly Jerusalem, and the
glorious restfull land of Canaan, where it is always day and never night,
where is no manner of weeping, tears, infirmity, hunger, cold, sickness,
envy, malice nor sin: but all ways joy without sorrow, mirth without
measure, pleasure without pain, heavenly harmony, most pleasant melody,
saying and singing: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, etc. Finally, the eye
has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man, that they shall then inherit and most surely inio, although here they
be tormented, prisoned, burned, solicited of Satan, tempted of the flesh, and
entangled with the world, where through they are enforced to cry: Thy kingdom
come Lord Jesus, etc. How amiable are thy Tabernacles.

Like as the Heart desires the water brooks, etc. Now, let thy Servants
depart in peace: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: we mourn to
our selves, wating for the deliverance of our bodies, etc. O gracious Lord,
when shall I find such mercy with thee, that I may repent, believe, hope, and
look for these things, with the fruition of those he auenly joys, which thou
have prepared for all them that fear thee, and to rest with thee for ever more.

A prayer concerning life everlasting, the place where it is, and the
incomparable joys thereof.
THat there is an everlasting life none will deny, but such as will deny God.
For if he be true and just (which he must needs be, or else he is not God) then
can there not be but an eternal life. That he has both spoken it, and
promised it in Matthew. 25.1. Cor. 16. Hebr. 4.11. and 13.1. Peter. 1. it plainly
appears, and else where in very many places. So that to deny an everlasting
life, is to deny God, to deny Christ, and all that ever he did: also to deny
all duty and religion, to condemn of foolishness all good men, Martyrs,
Confessors, Evangelists, Prophets, Patriarchs. Finally, the denial of eternal
life, is nothing else but a denial of the immortality of the Soul, and so a
plain making of man nothing better then beasts. If it so be, let us then cate
and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Lord preserve us from the saduciall
and Epicuriall impiety, and grant us for thy mercies sake (dear God) that we
may be assuredly persuaded, that there is in deed an eternal life, and bliss
with thee, for them that put their trust in thee: amongst whom, account me for
thy mercies sake.

Again, this eternal life and the place appointed for them that be thy
servants, all men do grant to be with thee, because thou art every where:
therefore eternal life is every where.

For they by thy word do know, that in almuch as no man can see thee and
live, this eternal life and thy blessed presence is most pleasant, and had in
fruition after in an other world, whereunto by corporal death, they dodepart,
and are translated to a place above them, where thou dwell in a light,
whereunto no man can approach. Abraham's bosom (they read) was above, as the
place of the wicked was allow and beneath. Helias was caught up into Heaven,
and thy Son our dear Savior prayed, that where he is, those also might be,
which thou had given him, and might see his glory. Now here (dear Fatehr)
we learn by thy ppirit was ascended and taken up in his very body into
heaven, whether Stephen looking up and saw thy Christ standing on thy right
hand: to whom he prayed. Oh Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Grant, I beseech thee gracious God and Father, that I may have a clean
heart, more and more to see thee, and so in spirit to see and look often upon
this place, whither bring me at the length in body also I humbly pray thee.

Now, what a thing this everlasting life is, no man is able to conceive, much
less able to utter. For the peace of God which is eternal life, passes all
understanding. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither can
man's heart conceive those things, which thou (dear God) have prepared for them
that love thee. Whatsoever therefore can be spoken or imagined of the kingdom,
of the clearness, joy and felicity of the same, is nothing in comparison, as
we may see by the Prophets, which because they could not otherwise, under
corporal things have shadowed the same: so that the confidence of eternal
life what a thing it is, can in no wise be told. Howbeit somewhat we may be
brought into some sight of it, by earthly things, to think on this sort.

If God has given here so many things, in a strange place, how many are the
great good things that be at home? If in a prison are so many mercies how many
are they in the Palace? If the wicked have so many benefits, what is the
siore, prepared for thy servants, Oh Lord? If thy Children find such comforts
in the day of tears and mourning, what shall they find in the day of the
Marriage? If which beasts men being, have the use of innumerable blessings, Oh
how many are the blessings which they shall enjoy with thy Angels and with thee
thy self (O dear God) when they shall see thee, and have the fruition of
thee, in whom is fullness without lothing of all good and fair things, so that
nothing can be more desired, and that for evermore? This thy children do not
see, as they now believe it: I say, that even in their bodies, they shall see
it for ever, as Job said. They believe that they shall see thee, and their own
eyes behold thee, when these our corporal eyes, our bodies being raised shall
do their duties. Such a knowledge of thee, they believe to have, as shall not
be only intellectual, and by faith, as now it is: but even a full sight, and
fruition, yea a conjunction, and fellowship with thee. Now they see but in a
glass, even in a dark speaking: but then they shall see face to face. For
faith, though it be the substance of things hoped for, and a certain dark
sight of thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith and glorious
sight, which we shall see in the life to come, when faith and hope shall cease.
Now thy children know that they be thy Sons, though it yet appear not what
they shall be. We know (say they) that when our Christ, God, and man shall
appear, then shall we be like unto him, for we shall see him, even as he is.

Oh great prerogative, to see Christ is he is. Which is not to be considered so
much for the manhood, as for the godhead it self: as Paul does also write,
that when all things are subject unto the son, then shall he be subject unto
thee (dear Father also) so that God may be all in all. And therefore Christ
our Savior prayed for us, that we might know thee, the only true God: not
that our Christ thy Son is not with thee, the true coequall and substantial
God, but that we might know how that after the judgment, such a mystery of
his mediatorship, shall not be in heaven, as it is now in earth. Then thou
blessed Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, shall
be all in all: thou shall be the end of our desires: thou shall be looked upon
with out end, thou shall be loved without loathing, thou shall be praised
without weariness. Although lothsomnes be wont to follow fullness, yet our
fullness in the contemplation of thy pleasures, shall bring with it, now kind
at all of lothsomnesse. Society of joys shall be in the beholding of thee.
Pleasures are on thy right hand for ever. We shall be satisfted, when we arise
after thine Image, I mean in the resurrection. Oh dear father, show thy self
unto us, and we ask no more. Oh grant us with thy Saints in everlasting life
to praise with perpetual praises, thy holy name. Happy then, and happy
again were we, if that day were come, that we might sing with thy Angels,
Elders, and innumerable thousands, a new song, and say, thou Christ Jesus,
which wast stain, art worthy to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. In this blessed life all kind
of maladies, griefs, sorrows and evils, be sarre away, and all full of all
kind of mirth, joy and pleasure. Oh that we might see now, a little with Saiut
John, that holy City, now Jerusalem, descending from Heauan, prepared of God
as a Bride trimmed for her husband. Oh that we might now something hear the
great voice speaking out of the throne, behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he shall be
unto them their God, he will wipe away all tears from their eyes, and death
shall be no more, nor weeping, nor crying, nor sorrow, for the former things
are gone.

A prayer of death, and the commodity it brings.
WHat other thing do we daily in this present life, then heap sin upon
sin, and hoorde up trespass upon trespass. So that this day is worse
always then yesterday, by increasing of days so sins, and therefore thy
indignation, good Lord, against us, but when we shall be let go out of the
prison of this body, and so taken into thy blessed company, then shall we be
in most safety of immortality, and salvation, then shall come unto us, no
sickness, no need, no pain, no kind of evil to soul or body, but
whatsoever good we can wish, that shall we have, and whatsoever we loath, shall
be far from us. O dear Father, that we had faith to behold these things
accordingly. Oh that our hearts were persuaded thereof, and our affections
inflamed with the desire of them. Then should we live in longing for that which
now we must loathe. O help us, and grant that we being ignorant of things to
come, and of the time of our death, which to thee is certain, may so live, and
finish our journey here, that we may be ready, and then depart when our
departing may make most to thy glory and our comfort, through Christ. What is
this life, but a smoke, a vapor, a shadow, a warfare, a bubble of water, a
word, grass, a flower? That thou shall dye it is most certain, but the time,
no man can tell when. The longer in this life thou do remain, the more thou
sinnest, which will turn to thy more pain. By cogitation of death, our mynds
be often (in a manner) oppressed with darkness, because we do but remember
the light of the body, forgetting the light of the mind, and for thy
resurrection. Hereto remember the good things, that after this life shall
ensue, without wavering in certeintie of faith, and so shall the passage of
death be more desired. It is like a sailing over the Sea, to thy home and
country. It is like a medicine, or purgation to the health of soul and body:
it is the best Physician: it is like to a woman's travail. For as the child
being delivered, comes into a more large place then the womb, wherein it did
lie before, so mysoule being delivered out of the body, comes into a much
more larger and fayrer place, even into heaven.

A devout prayer to be said daily.
O Almighty and eternal God, which vouchsafest that we as it were heaueuly
Children, should every one of us call thee our heavenly Father. Grant that
among us be pureness and example of innocent life, thy most holy name may be
sanctified, that all other Nations beholding our goodness and virtuous deeds,
that thou workest in us, may be stirred to hallowe and glorify thee. Grant (O
Lord) that the kingdom of thy grace and mercy, may reign continually in our
hearts, so that we may be worthy to be partakers of the Realm of glory and
majesty. Grant that unto the very death, we refuse not to follow thy divine
will, and that we, according to the example of the celestial Citizens,
agreeing together quietly united in spirit, all controversy in opinions laid
apart, the lusts of the flesh being subdued, and the flattering assaults of
the world and the Devil overcome, never wrestle against thy most holy will,
but obey it in all things. Grant (O Lord) for our body needful sustenaunce,
that we may the more freely serve thee. Give us (we beseech thee O merciful
Father) that Hearuenly bread, the body of thy Son Jesus Christ, the very
food and health of our souls: give us the bread of thy divine precepts, that
we may truly walk, and live after them.

Give us the bread of thy heavenly word, which is the strong fortress and sure
defense of our Souls, that we being well fed and silled with this food, may
worthily run to the celestial feast, where as is no hunger. Grant (O Lord)
that we patiently bear and susfer our enemies, and such as hurt us, and
willingly to forgive the offenses committed against us, that so we may find
the Lord in forgiving us our trespasses, mild and merciful. Grant (O Lord)
that we be not utterly led into temptation, that there by we should be lost.
But in all perilles of temptation and in the midst of the stormy tempests
and tribulations, let us thy children, perceive and feel thy fatherly succor,
ready to help us, least that we be (overcome with the naughty crafts, and
deceites of the tempter) should be drawn into everlasting destruction, but
when we be well assayed, approved, and purged with the fire of temptation,
then let us finish our course, and so well and valiantly fight, that we may for
evermore live with thee in that heavenly City, where and against the which, no
manner temptation canpreuaile. Finally, grant most merciful Father, that we
through thy benign goodness, may be delivered from all evils present and to
come both in body and soul, and that at the last, that yoke of that foul
feend being shaken off, we may possess the heritage of the heavenly kingdom,
which thy Son with his precious blood bought for us thy children: and there
fore ever to have the fruition of celestial delectations, accompanied with
Angels and blessed Saints, through the help, benignity, and grace of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom, and to thee our father, and to the holy Ghost,
be all glory and honor, now and ever. Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Heavenly father God almighty, I pray and beseech thy mercy beningly to
behold me thy unworthy servant, that I may by thy gift of thy holy Spirit,
fervently desire thy kingdom, that I may known thy will and work thereafter.
Give me O Lord wisdom. Make me constant, patient and strong in thee. Keep me
Lord from the sleightie invasion of the old wily Serpent. Defend me from the
counsels and cursings of evil tongues, let thy mighty arm be my shield
against all the malignitie of the wicked world. Remember not O Lord mine
offenses: instruct, prepare me to repent and to be sorry for my sins. Make me
to love justice, and hate wrong, to do good, and abstain from all evils, that
I may be worthy to be called thy child. To thee be honor and glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.

A devout Prayer.
LORD hearken to my words, consider the thought of my heart. Behold how loud
I cry unto thee, let my just prayer enter into thy cares, which unfeignedly
comes from my heart. Hear me Lord, for I am poor and destitute of man's
help. Take care for my Soul, save me thy Servant which wholly trust in thee,
have mercy upon me (O Lord) for I will never cease crying to thee for help
For thou art mild and more merciful then any tongue can express, as often as
adversity assayleth me, I will cry and call for help unto thee, I will call
upon thee in the day time, and in the night my cry shall not be hid from thee,
O thou God of the heavens, and maker of the waters, and Lord of all creatures,
hear me a poor sinner calling upon thee and putting my whole trust in thy
mercy. Have mercy upon me for thy manifold mercies sake, forgive me al mine
offenses. Amen.

The Letanie.
O God the father of heaven have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father, etc.

O God the son, redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son, etc.

spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vaineglorie, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred and malice, and al vucharitablenesse.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord beliner us.

From lightning and tempest, from Plague, Pestilence and Famine, from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrien and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word, and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy Baptism, fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracious Queen and governor.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love and
that she may evermore have arfiance in thee, and ever leeke thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the Counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affretion, and to bring forth
the fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land, or by water,
all women laboring of child, all sick persons, and young children, and to
show thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use, the kindly fruits
of the earth, so that in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee, to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances and to indue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee, etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, etc.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The versicle.

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us, and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subteltie of
the devil, or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispearsed, that we thy servants being
hurt by no persecution, may evermore give thanks to thee in thy holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy name sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have derlared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorable with (...) hear our prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The versicle.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy name sake turn from us those evils that we most
righteouslie have deserved: And grant that in all out troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness,
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator
and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
the only ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne, behold all the
dwellers upon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor, to behold
our most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with
the grace of thy holy Spirit, that she may always incline to thy will, and
walk in thy way, indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant her in
health and wealth long to live, strength her, that she may vanquish and
overcome all her enemins. Adn finally after this life, she may attain
everlasting joy and felicity: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for Pastors and Ministers of the Church.
Almighty and everlasting God, which only workest great meruailes, send down
upon our Bishops and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge,
the healthful spirit of thy grace: and that they may truly pleas, thee, power
upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the
honor of our Advocate, and meditatour Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer of Chrysostom.
Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord, to
make our common supplication unto thee, and do promise that when two or three
be gatheren together in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

A prayer necessary for all persons.
O Merciful GOD, I a wretched sinner reknowledge my self bound to keep thy
holy commandments, but yet unable to perform them, and to be accepted for
just, without the righteousness of Jesus Christ thy only Son, who has
perfectly fulfilled the Law, to justify all them that believe and trust in
him. Therefore grant me grace, I beseech thee, to be occupied in doing of good
works which thou commaundest in holy Scripture, all the days of my life to
thy glory, and yet to trust only in thy mercy, and in Christ's merits, to be
purged from my sins, and not in my good works, be they never so many. Give
me grace to love thy holy word fervently, to search the scriptures
diligently, to read them humbly, to understand them truly, to live after them
effectually. Order my life so, O Lord, that it be always acceptable unto thee.
Give me grace, not to rejoice in any thing that displeases thee, but evermore
to delight in those things that please thee, be they never so contrary to my
desires. Teach me so to pray, that my petitions may be graciously heard of
thee. Keep me upright among diversity of opinions and judgments in the
world, that I never swerve from thy truth taught in holy Scripture. In
prosperity, O Lord, save me, that I wax not proud. In adversity help me,
that I neither despair, nor blaspheme thy boly Name, but taking it patiently,
to give thee thanks, and trust to be delivered after thy pleasure. When I
happen to fall into sin through frailty, I beseech thee to work true
repentance in my heart, that I may be sorry without desperation, trust in thy
mercy without presumption, that I may amend my life, and become truly
religious without hypocrisy, lowly in heart without fayning, faithful and
trusty without deceit, merry without lightness, sad without mistrust, sober
without slothfulness, content with mine own without covetousness, to tell my
neighbor his faults charitably without dissimulation, to instruct my
householde in thy Laws truly, to obey our Queen and all governors under her
unfeignedly, to receive all laws and common ordinances (which disagree not
from thy holy word) obedientlie, to pay every man that which I owe unto him
truly, to backebite no man, nor slander my neitghbour secretly, and to
abhor all vice, loving all goodness earn^s^ly. O Lord, grant me thus to to
do, for the glory of thy holy Name, Amen.

GOd preserve our Queen Elizabeth, God destroy all her enemies, God preserve
her most honorable Counselors.

God aid te Clergy in fetting forth of his truth. God preserve the Nobility
of this Realm, and all the Commons of the same. God defend the favorers of
the Gospel,. God change the hearts of our enemies, and send them a better
mind. The power ^f God destroy Autichrist with all his wicked kingdom. God
send the Gospel a joyful and free passage through the whole world. God send
unto all degrees such grace that they may walk worthily in their vocation and
calling. Amen.

FINIS.

