The mind of the Frontispeece.
This Bubble's Man: Hope, Fear, False Joy and Trouble,
Are those Four Winds which daily toss this Bubble.
Hieroglyphica haec de vita hominis perlegi, and digna censeo quae typis
mandentur.

Ian. 9. 1637. Tho: Wykes R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.

Hieroglyphikes of the life of Man.



LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for John Marriot. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE both in blood and virtue; and most accomplished LADY,
MARY, COVNTESS OF DORSET; LADY GOVERNESS to the most Illustrious, CHARLES,
Prince of great BRITAIN, and JAMES, Duke of YORK.
Excellent Lady,
I Present these Tapours to burn under the safe Protection of your honorable
Name: where, I presume, they stand secure from the Damps of Ignorance, and
blasts of Censure: It is a small part of that abundant service, which my
thankful heart owes your incomparable Goodness. Be pleased to honor it with
your noble Acceptance, which shall be nothing but what your own esteem shall
make it

Madam Your Lapps. most humble servant FRA: QUARLES.

To The Reader.
IF you are satisfied with my Emblems, I here set before you a second service.
It is an Egyptian dish, dressed on the English fashion: They, at their ^easts,
used to present a Deaths-head at their ^econd course; This will serve for both:
You need not fear a surfeit: Here is but ^^ttle; And that, light of digestion:
If it but ^lease your Palate, I question not your sto^ack: Fall too; and much
good may't do ^ou.

Covivio addit Minerval. E. B. Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Relligionem,
Exornat, celebrat, laudat, honorat, amat.
BENEVOLUS.
Sine Lumine inane.
Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. PSALM.
51. 5.
MAn is man's ABC: There is none that can
Read God aright, unless he first spell Man:
Man is the Stayres, whereby his knowledge climes
To his Creator; though it oftentimes
^tumbles for want of light, and sometimes tripps
^or want of careful heed; and sometimes slips
Through unadvised have; and when at length
^is weary steps have reached the top, his strength
Often fayles to stand; his giddy brains turn round,
And Phaeton like, falls headlong to the ground:
These stayres are often dark, and full of danger
To him whom want of practice makes a stranger
To this blind way: The Lamp of nature lends
But a false Light; and lights to her own ends:
These be the ways to Heaven; These paths require
A Light that springs from that diviner fire
Whose humane soule-enlightning sunbeames dart
Through the bright Crannies of the immortal part.
And here, thou great Original of Light,
Whose error-chaceing Beams do unbenight
The very soul of Darkness, and untwist
The Clouds of Ignorance; do thou assist
My feeble Quill; Reflect thy sacred Rays
Upon these lines, that they may light the ways
That lead to thee; So guide my heart, my hand,
That I may do, what others understand:
Let my heart practice what my hand shall write;
Till then, I am a Tapour wanting light.
This golden Precept, Know thy self, came down
From heavens high Court; It was an Art unknown
To flesh and blood. The men of Nature took
Great Iournies in it; Their dim eyes did look
But through a Mist; Like Pilgrims they did spend
Their idle steps, but knew no Iournies end:
The way to Know thy self, is first to cast
Thy frail beginning, Progress, and thy Last:
This is the Sum of Man: But now return
And view this Tapour standing in this Vrne:
Behold her Substance, sordid, and impure,
Useless and vain, and (wanting light) obscure:
It Is but a Span at longest, nor can last
Beyond that Span; ordained, and made to wast:
Even such was Man (before his soul gave light
To his vile substance) a mere Child of night;
Ere he had life, estated in his Vrne,
And marked for death; by nature, borne to burn:
Thus liveless, lightless, worthless first began
That glorious, that presumptuous thing, called Man.
St. AUGUST.
Consider o man what thou were before thy Birth, and what thou (...) from thy
birth to thy death, and what thou shall be after death: ^ou were made of an
impure substance, clothed and nourished in thy ^^thers blood.

EPIG. 1.
^^rbeare fond Tapour: What thou seek'st, is Fire:
^hy own distruction's lodged in thy desire:
^hy wants are far more safe than their supply:
^e that begins to live, begins to die.
Nescius vnde.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

And God said, Let there be light; and there was light. GENESIS 1. 3.
^His flame-expecting Tapour has, at length,
Received fire; and, now, begins to burn:
(...) has no vigor yet, it has no strength;
Apt to be puffed and quenched at every turn:
It was a gracious hand that thus endowed
This snuff with flame: But mark, this hand does shroud
^^^elfe from mortal eyes, and folds it in a Cloud.
2.
^^is man begins to live; An unknown flame
Quickens his finished Organs; now, possessed
^^th motion; and which motion does proclaim
An active soul, though in a feeble breast:
But how, and when infused, ask not my Pen;
Here flies a Cloud before the eyes of men:
^^^n not tell thee, how; nor can thou tell me, when.
3.
as it a parcel of celestial fire,
^nfus'd, by Heaven, into this fleshly mould?
(...) was it (think you) made a soul entire?
Then; was it new created? Or of old?
Or is it a propagated Spark, raked out
From Natures embers? While we go about.
reason, to resolve, the more we raise a doubt.
4.
^t be part of that celestial Flame,
^t must be even as pure, as free from spot
(...) that eternal fountain whence it came:
^f pure, and spotless; then, whence came the blot?
It self, being pure, could not it self defile;
Nor has unactive Matter power to soil
^^r pure and active Form, as Iarrs corrupt their Oil.
5.
Or, if it were created, tell me, when?
If in the first six days, where kept till now?
Or, if the soul were new created, then
Heaven did not all, at first, he had to do:
Six days expired, all Creation ceast,
All kinds, even from the greatest to the least
Were finished, and complete, before the day of Rest.
6.
But why should Man, the Lord of Creatures, want
That privilege which Plants and Beasts obtain?
Beasts bring forth Beasts, the Plant a perfect Plant;
And every like brings forth her like again:
Shall fowls, and fishes, beasts and plants convey
Life to their issue? And Man less than they?
Shall these get living souls? And Man, dead lumps of clay
7.
Must humane souls be generated then?
My water ebbs; behold, a Rock is nigh:
If Natures work produce the souls of men,
Man's soul is mortal: All that is borne must die.
What shall we then conclude? What sunshine will
Disperse this gloomy cloud? Till then, be still,
My vainly striving thoughts; Lie down, my puzzled quil^
ISODOR.
Why do thou wonder, o man, at the height of the Stars? or (...) depth of
the Sea? Enter into thine own ^oule, and wonder there.

The soul by creating is infused; by infusion, created.

EPIG. 2.
that art thou now the better by this flame?
^hou know not how, nor when, nor whence it came:
^oore kind of happiness, that can return
^o more account but this, to say, I burn!
Quo me cunque rapit.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

The wind passes over it and it is gone. PSALM. 103. 16.
NO sooner is this lighted Tapour set
Upon the transitory Stage
Of eye-bedarkning night,
But it is straight subjected to the threat
Of envious winds, whose wastfull rage
Disturbs her peaceful light,
And makes her substance wast, and makes her flame less bright.
2.
No sooner are we borne, no sooner come
To take possession of this vast,
This soule-afflicting earth;
But Danger meets us at the very womb,
And Sorrow with her full mouthd blast,
Salutes our painful birth,
To put out all our Joys, and puff out all our mirth.
3.
Nor Infant Innocence, nor childish tears,
Nor youthful wit, nor manly power,
Nor politic old age,
Nor virgins pleading, nor the widows prayers,
Nor lowely Cell, nor lofty Tower,
Nor Prince, nor Peer, nor Page
Can escape this common blast, or curb her stormy rage.
4.
Our life is but a pilgrimage of blasts;
And every blast brings forth a fear;
And every fear, a death;
The more it lengthens, ah, the more it wastes:
Were, were we to continue here
The days of long lif'd Seth,
Our sorrows would renew, as we renew our breath:
5.
Tossed too and fro, our frighted thoughts are driven
With every puff, with every Tide
Of self-consuming Care;
Our peaceful flame, that would point up to heaven,
Is still disturbed, and turned aside;
And every blast of Air
Commits such wast in man, as man can not repair.
6.
We Are all borne Detters, and we firmly stand
Obliged for our first Parents Det,
Besides our Interest;
Alas we have no harmeless Counterband,
And we are, every hou'r, beset
With threatenings of Arrest,
And till we pay the Det, we can expect no Rest.
7.
What may this sorrow-shaken life present
To the false relish of our Taste,
That Is worth the name of sweet?
Her minits pleasure's choakt with discontent,
Her glory foyld with every blast;
How many dangers meet
Poor man, betwixt the Biggin and the Winding sheet!
St. AUGUST.
In this world, not to be grieved, not to be afflicted, not to be in danger,
is impossible.

Ibid.
Behold; the world is full of troubles; yet, beloved; What if it were a
pleasing world? How would thou delight in her Calmes, that can so well
endure her storms?

EPIG. 3.
Art thou consumed with soule-afflicting crosses?
Disturbed with grief? annoyed with worldly losses
Hold up thy head; The Tapour lifted high
Will brook the wind, when lower Tapors dye.
Curando Labascit.
The whole need not the Physician. MAT. 9. 12.
Always pruning? always cropping?
Is her brightness still obscured?
Ever dressing? ever topping?
Always cureing? never cured?
Too much snuffing makes a waste;
When the spirits spend too fast,
They will shrink at every blast.
2.
You that always are bestowing
Costly pains in life's repairing,
Are but always overthrowing
Natures work, by overcaring:
Nature meeting with her Foe,
In a work she has to do,
Takes a pride to overthrow.
3
Nature knows her own perfection,
And her pride disdaines a Tutor,
Cannot stoop to Arts correction,
And she scorns a Coadjutor;
Saucy Art should not appear
Till she whisper in her ear:
Hagar flees, if Sara bear.
4
Nature works for the b^tter,
If not hindered, that she cannot;
Art stands by as her A bettor,
Ending nothing she began not;
If distemper chance to seize,
(Nature foiled with the disease)
Art may help her if she please.
5.
But to make a Trade of trying
Drugs, and Dosies, always pruning.
Is to dye, for fear of dying;
He Is untuned, that's always tuneing.
He that often loves to lack
Dear bought Drugs, has found a Knack
To foil the man, and feed the Quack.
6.
O the sad, the frail Condition
Of the pride of Natures glory!
How infirm his Composition!
And, at best, how Transitory!
When his Riot does impair
Natures weakness, then his care
Adds more ruin, by repair.
7.
Hold thy hand, healths Dear maintainer,
Life perchance may burn the stronger:
Having substance to sustain her,
She, untoucht, may last the longer:
When the Artist goes about
To redress her flame, I doubt,
Oftentimes he snuffes it out.
NICOCLES
Physicians of all men are most happy; what good success soever they have, the
world proclaims, and what faults they commit, the earth covers.

EPIG. 4.
My purse being heavy, if my Light appear
But Dim, Quack comes to make all clear;
Quack, leave thy trade; Thy Dealings are not right,
Thou take our weighty gold, to give us light.
Te auxiliante resurgo.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

And he will give his Angels charge over thee. PSALM. 91.
O How mine eyes could please themselves, and spend
Perpetual Ages in this precious sight!
How I could woo Eternity, to lend
My wasting day an Antidote for night!
And how my flesh could with my flesh contend,
That views this object with no more delight!
My work is great, my Tapour spends too fast:
It Is all I have, and soon would out, or wast,
Did not this blessed Screene protect it from this blast.
2
O, I have lost the Jewel of my soul,
And I must find it out or I must dye:
Alas! my sin-made darkness does control
The bright endeavors of my careful eye:
I must go search, and ransack every hole;
Nor have I other light to seek it by:
O if this light be spent my work not done,
My labor's worse than lost; my Iewel's gone,
And I am quite forlorn, and I am quite undone.
3.
You blessed Angels, you that do enjoy
The full fruition of eternal Glory,
Will you be pleased to fancy such a Toy
As man, and quit your glorious Territory,
And stoop to earth, vouchsafing to employ
Your cares to guard the dust that lies before ye?
Disdain you not these lumps of dying Clay,
That, for your pains, do oftentimes repay
Neglect, if not disdain, and send you grieved away?
This Tapour of our life's, that once was placed
In the fair Suburbs of Eternity,
Is now, alas, confined to every blast,
And turned a May Pole for the sporting Fly;
And will you, sacred Spirits, please to cast
Your care on us, and lend a gracious eye?
How had this slender Inch of Tapour been
Blasted, and blazed, had not this heavenly Screene
Curbed the proud blast, and timely stepped between!
5.
O Goodness, far transcending the report
Of lavish tongues! too vast to comprehend!
Amazed Quill, how far do thou come short
T'express expressions, that so far transcend!
You blessed Courtiers of the eternal Court,
Whose full-mouthed Hallelujahs have no end,
Receive that world of praises that belongs
To your great Sov'raigne; fill your holy tongues
With our Hosannas, mixed with your Seraphick Songs.
St. BERN.
If thou desire the help of Angels, flee the comforts of the world, and
resist the Temptations of the Devil.

He will give his Angels charge over thee? O what reverence, what ^^ve, what
confidence deserves so sweet a saying? For their presence, ^everence; for their
good will, love; for their tuition, confidence.

EPIG. 5.
My flame, art thou disturbed, diseased, and driven
To Death with storms of grief? Point thou to heaven:
One Angel, there, shall ease thee more, alone,
Then thrice as many thousands of thy own.
Tempus erit.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

To every thing there is an appointed time. ECCLES. 3. 1.
Time. Death. Time. BEhold the frailty of this slender snuff;
Alas it has not long to last:
Without the help of either Thief, or puff,
Her weakness knows the way to wast:
Nature has made her Substance apt enough
To spend it self, and spend too fast:
It needs the help of none,
That is so prone
To lavish out, untoucht; and languish all alone.

Death. 2.
Time, hold thy peace, and shake thy slow paced Sand;
Thy idle Minits make no way:
Thy glass exceeds her how'r, or else does stand,
I can not hold; I can not stay;
Surcease thy pleading, and enlarge my hand
I surfeit with too long delay:
This brisk, this boldfac'd Light
Does burn too bright;
Darkness adornes my throne; my day is darkest night.

Time. 3.
Great Prince of darkness, hold thy needless hand;
Thy Captiv's fast, and can not flee:
What arm can rescue? Who can countermand,
What power can set thy Prisoner free?
Or if they could, what close, what foreign land
Can hide that head, that flees from Thee?
But if her harmeless light
Offend thy sight,
What needst thou snatch at noone, what will be thine at night?

Death. 4.
I have outstaid my patience; My quick Trade
Grows dull and makes too slow return:
This long-lived det is due, and should bin paid
When first her flame began to burn:
But I have staid too long, I have delayed
To store my vast, my craving Vrne.
My Patent gives me power,
Each day, each how'r,
To strike the Peasants thatch, and shake the Princely Tower.

Time. 5.
Thou count'st too fast: Thy Patent gives no Pow'^
Till Time shall please to say, Amen.

Death. Can thou appoint my shaft?

Time. Or thou my How'r

Death. It Is I bid, do:

Time. It Is I bid, When.
Alas, thou can not make the poorest Flower
To hang the drooping head, till then:
Thy shafts can neither Kill,
Nor strike, until
My power give them wings, and pleasure arm thy will.

St. AUGUST.
Thou know not what Time he will come: Wait always, that because thou
know not the time of his coming, thou may be pre^ared against the time
he comes. And for this, perchance, thou know not the Time, because thou
may, be prepared against all times.

EPIG. 6.
Expect, but fear not Death: Death cannot Kill,
^ill Time. (that first must seal her Patent) will:
Would thou live long? Keep Time in high esteem;
Whom, gone, if thou can not recall, redeem.
Nec sine, nec Tecum.
Will Marshall sculpsit

His light shall be dark, and his candle shall be put out. JOB 18. 6.
What ails our Tapour? Is her luster fled,
Or foiled? What dire disaster bred
This Change? that thus she vailes her golden head?
2.
It was but very now, she shined as fair
As Venus star: Her glory might compare
With Cynthia, burnisht with her brothers hair.
3.
There was no Cave-begotten damp that might
Abuse her beams; no wind, that went about
To break her peace; no Puff, to put her out.
4.
^^ft up thy wondering thoughts, and thou shall spy
(...) Cause, will clear thy doubts, but cloud thine eye:
Subjects must veil, when as their Sov'raign's by.
5.
^anst thou behold bright Phoebus, and thy sight
^o whit impayr'd? The object is too bright;
^he weaker yields unto the stronger Light.
6.
^reat God, I am thy Tapour; Thou, my Sun;
from thee, the Spring of Light, my Light begun,
^et if thy Light but Shine, my light is done.
7.
(...) thou withdraw thy Light, my light will shine,
(...) thine appear, how poor a light is mine!
^y light is darkness, if compared to thine.
8
^hy Sunbeams are too strong for my weak eye;
(...) thou but shine, how nothing, Lord, am I!
^h, who can see thy visage, and not die!
9.
If intervening earth should make a night,
My wanton flame would then shine forth too bright;
My earth would even presume t'eclipse thy Light.
10
And if thy Light be shadowed, and mine fade,
If thine be dark, and my dark light decayed,
I should be clothed with a double shade.
11.
What shall I do? O what shall I desire?
What help can my distracted thoughts require,
That thus am wasting twixt a double Fire?
12.
In what a straight, in what a straight am I?
Twixt two extremes how my rackt fortunes lie?
See I thy face, or see it not, I die.
13.
O let the steame of my Redeemers blood,
That breaths fro' my sick soul, be made a Cloud,
T'interpose these Lights, and be my shroud.
14.
Lord, what am I? or what is the light I have?
May it but light my Ashes to their Grave,
And so from thence, to Thee? it is all I crave.
15.
O make my Light, that all the world may see
Thy Glory by it: If not, It seems to me
Honor enough, to be put out by Thee.
O Light inaccessible, in respect of which my light is utter darkness; so
reflect upon my weakness, that at all the world may behold thy strength: O
Majesty incomprehensible, in respect of which my glory is mere shame, so shine
upon my misery that all the world may behold thy glory.

EPIG. 7.
Will thou complain, because thou art bereiv'n
Of all thy light? Will thou vie Lights with Heaven?
Can thy bright eye not brook the daily light?
Take heed: I fear, thou art a Child of night.
Nec Virtus obscurapetit.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

Let your light so shine, that men seeing your good works may glorify your
Father which is in Heaven. MAT. 5. 16.
Was it for this, the breath of Heaven was blown
Into the nostrils of this Heavenly Creature?
Was it for this, that sacred Three in One
Conspired to make this Quintessence of Nature?
Did heavenly Providence intend
So rare a Fabric for so poor an end?
2.
Was Man, the highest Masterpiece of Nature,
The curious Abstract of the whole Creation,
Whose soul was copied from his great Creator,
Made to give Light, and set for Observation,
Ordained for this? To spend his Light
In a darke-Lanthorne? Cloystred up in night?
3.
Tell me, recluse Monastic, can it be
A disadvantage to thy beams to shine?
A thousand Tapours may gain light from Thee:
Is thy Lightless, or worse for lighting mine?
If, wanting Light, I stumble, shall
Thy darkness not be guilty of my fall?
4.
Why do thou lurk so close? Is it for fear
Some busy eye should pry into thy flame,
And spy a Thief, or else some blemish there?
Or being spied, shrink'st thou thy head for shame?
Come, come, fond Tapour shine but clear,
Thou needst not shrink for shame, nor shroud for fear.
5.
Remember, O remember, thou were set,
For men to see the Great Creator by;
Thy flame is not thy own: It is a Det
Thou ow'st thy Maker; And will thou deny
To pay the Interest of thy Light?
And skulk in Corners, and play least in sight?
6.
Art thou afraid to trust thy easy flame
To the injurious wast of Fortunes puff?
Ah, Coward, rouse; and quit thy self, for shame;
Who dies in service, has lived long enough:
Who shines, and makes no eye partaker,
Vsurps himself, and closely robbs his Maker.
7.
Take not thy self a Prisoner, that art free:
Why do thou turn thy Palace to a Iaile?
Thou art an Eagle; And befits it thee
To live immured, like a cloysterd Snaile?
Let Toies seek Corners: Things of cost
Gain worth by view: Hid Jewels are but lost.
8.
My God, my light is dark enough at lightest,
Increase her flame, and give her strength to shine:
It Is frail at best: It Is dim enough at brightest,
But it is her glory to be foyld by Thine.
Let others lurk; My light shall be
Proposed to all men; and by them, to Thee.
St. BERN.
If thou be one of the foolish Virgins, the Congregation is necessary for thee;
If thou be one of the wise Virgins, thou art necessary for the Congregation.

HUGO.
Monasticks make cloisters to enclose the outward man, O would to God they
would do the like to restrain the inward Man.

EPIG. 8.
Afraid of eyes? What still play least in sight?
It Is much to be presumed all is not right:
Too close endeavors, bring forth dark events:
Come forth, Monastic; Here Is no Parliaments.
Vt Luna Infantia torpet
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

He comes forth like a Flower and is cut down. JOB 14. 2.
1.
Behold
How short a span
Was long enough, of old,
To measure out the life of Man!
In those well tempered days his time was then
Surveyed, cast up, and found but threescore years and ten.
2.
Alas
And what is that?
They come and slide and pass
Before my Pen can tell thee, what.
The Posts of Time are swift, which having run
Their sev'n short stages 'ore, their short lived task is don.
3.
Our days
Begun, we lend
To sleep, to antic plays
And Toys, until the first stage end:
12. waining Moons, twice 5. times told, we give
To unrecover'd loss: We rather breathe, then live.
4.
We spend
A ten years breath,
Before we apprehend
What is to live, or fear a death:
Our childish dreams are filled with painted joys,
Which please our sense a while; and waking, prove but Toies.
5.
How vain,
How wretched is
Poor man, that does remain
A slave to such a State as this!
His days are short, at longest; few, at most;
They are but bad, at best; yet lavisht out, or lost.
6.
They be
The secret Springs,
That make our minits flee
On wheels more swift the^ Eagles wings:
Our life's a Clock, and every gasp of breath
Breathes forth a warning grief, til Time shall strike a death
7.
How soon
Our newborn Light
Attaines to full-ag'd noone!
And this, how soon to gray-hayr'd night!
We spring, we bud, we blossom, and we blast
E're we can count our days; Our days they flee so fast.
8.
They end
When scarce begun;
And ere we apprehend
That we begin to live, our life is don:
Man, Count thy days; And if they flee too fast
For thy dull thoughts to count, count every day thy last.
Our Infancy is consumtd in eating and sleeping; in all which time what differ
we from beasts, but by a possibility of reason, and a necessity of sin?

O misery of mankind, in whom no sooner the Image of God appears in the act of
his Reason, but the Devil blurres it in the corruption of his will!

EPIG. 9.
To the decrepit Man.
Thus was the first seav'nth part of thy few days
Consumed in sleep, in food, in Toyish plays:
Know thou what tears thine eyes imparted then?
Review thy loss, and weep them over again.
Proles tua, Maia, Iuventus.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

His bones are full of the sins of his youth. JOB 20. 11.
1.
THe swift-foot Post of Time has now begun
His second Stage;
The dawning of our Age
Is lost and spent without a Sun:
The light of Reason did not yet appear
Within the Horizon of this Hemispheare.
2.
The infant Will had yet none other guide,
But twilight Sense;
And what is gayn'd from thence
But doubtful Steps, that tread aside?
Reason now draws her Curtains; Her closed eyes
Begin to open, and she calls to rise.
3.
Youths now disclosing Bud peeps out, and shows
Her April head;
And from her grass green bed,
Her virgin Primerose early blows;
Whilst waking Philomel prepares to sing
Her warbling Sonets to the wanton Spring.
4.
His Stage is pleasant, and the way seems short,
All strow'd with flowers;
The days appear but hours,
Being spent in time-beguiling sport.
Here griefs do neither press, nor doubts perplex;
Here Is neither fear, to curb; nor care, to vex.
His downie Cheek grows proud, and now disdaines
The Tutors hand;
He glories to command
The proud neckt Steed with prouder Reins:
The strong breathed Horn must now salute his ear,
With the glad downfall of the falling Dear.
6.
His quicknos'd Army, with their deepmouth'd sounds,
Must now prepare
To chase the timorous Hare
About his, yet unmorgag'd, Grounds;
The ev'll he hates, is Counsel, and delay,
And fears no mischief, but a rainie day.
7.
The thought he takes, is how to take no thought
For bale, nor bliss;
And late Repentance is
The last dear Pen' worth that he bought:
He is a dainty Morning, and he may,
If lust' orecast him not, b'as fair a Day.
8.
Proud Blossom, use thy Time; Times headstrong Horse
Will post away;
Trust not the foll'wing day,
For ev'r^e day brings forth a worse:
Take Time at best: Beleeve't, thy days will fall
From good, to bad; From bad, to worst of all.
St. AMB.
Humility is a rore thing in a young man, therefore to be admired: When youth
is vigorous, when strength is firm, when blood is hot, when Cares are
strangers, when mirth is free, then Pride swells, and humility is despised.

EPIG. 10.
To the old Man.
Thy years are newly gray; His, newly Green;
His youth may live to see what thine has seen:
He is thy Parallel: His present Stage
And thine, are the two Tropicks of Man's Age.
Iam ruit in Venerem.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

Rejoice O young man, and let thy heart cheer thee, but know, etc. ECCLES. 11.
9.
HOw flux! how alterable is the date
Of transitory things!
How hurried on the clipping wings
Of Time, and driven upon the wheels of Fate!
How one Condition brings
The leading Prologue to an other State!
No transitory thing can last:
Change waits on Time; and Time is winged with have;
Time present's but the Ruins of Time past.
2.
Behold how Change has incht away thy Span,
And how thy light does burn
Nearer and nearer to thy Vrne:
For this dear wast what satisfaction can
Injurious time return
Thy shortened days, but this; the Style of Man?
And what is a Man? A cask of Care,
New tunn'd, and working; He Is a middle Staire
Twixt birth and death; A blast of full aged Air.
3.
His breast is Tinder, apt to entertain
The sparks of Cupids fire,
Whose new-blowne flames must now enquire
^ wanton Iuilippe out, which may restrain
The Rage of his desire,
Whose painful pleasure is but pleasing pain.
His life's a sickness, that does rise
from a hot Liver, whilst his passion lies
^xpecting Cordials from his Mistress eyes.
4.
His Stage is strowd with Thorns, and decked with Flowers;
His year sometimes appears
A Minit; and his Minits, years;
His doubtful Weather's sunshine, mixed with showers;
His traffic, Hopes and Fears:
His life's a Medly, made of sweets and sowers;
His pains reward is Smiles, and Pouts;
His diet is fair language mixed with ^louts;
He is a Nothing all composed of Doubts.
5.
Do; wast thy Inch, proud Span of living earth;
Consume thy golden days
In slavish freedom; Let thy ways
Take best advantage of thy frolic mirth;
Thy Stock of Time decaies;
And lavish plenty still foreruns a Dearth:
The bird that is flowne may turn at last;
And painful labor may repair a wast;
But pains nor price can call thy minits past.
SEN.
Expect great joy when thou shall lay down the mind of a Child, and deserve
the style of a wise man; for at those years childhood is past, but oftentimes
child shness remains, and what is worse, thou have the Authority of a Man, but
the vices of a Child.

EPIG. 11.
To the declining Man,
Why standst thou discontented? Is not he
As equal distant from the Top as thee?
What then may cause thy discontented frown?
He Is mounting up the Hill; Thou plodding down?
Vt Sol ardore Virilj.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

As thy days, so shall thy strength be, DEUTERONOMY. 33. 25.
The Post
Of swift foot Time
Has now, at length, begun
The Kalends of our middle Stage:
The numbered Steps that we have gone, do show
The number of those Steps we are to go:
The Buds and blossoms of our Age
Are blown, decayed, and gone,
And all our prime
Is lost;
And what we boast too much, we have least cause to boast.
Ah me!
There is no Rest,
Our Time is always fleeing:
What Rein can curb our headstro^g hours!
They post away: They pass we know not how:
Our Now is gone, before we can say, Now:
Time past and futur's none of ours;
That, has as yet no Being;
And This has ceast
To be:
What is, is only ours: How short a Time have We!
And now
Apolloes ear
Expects harmonious strains,
New minted from the Thracian Lyre;
For now the Virtue of the twiforkt Hill
Inspires the ravished fancy, and does fill
The veins with Pegasean fire:
And now, those sterill brains
That cannot show,
Nor bear
Some fruits, shall never wear Apollos sacred Bow.
Excess
And surfeit uses
To wait upon these days:
Full feed, and flowing cup, of wine
Conjure the fancy, forcing up a Spright,
By the base Magic of deboysd delight;
Ah pity twice borne Bacchus Vine
Should starve Apollo's Bays,
And drown those Muses
That bless
And calm the peaceful soul, when storms of cares oppres.
Strong light,
Boast not those beams
That can but only rise,
And blaze a while, and then away:
There is no Solstice in thy day;
Thy midnight glory lies
Betwixt the extrems
Of night,
A Glory foyld with shame, and foold with false delight.
Have thou climbd up to the full age of thy few days? Look backwards, and thou
shall see the frailty of thy youth; the foll of thy Childhood, and the waste of
thy Infancy: Look forwards; thou shall see, the cares of the world, the
troubles of thy mind, the diseases of thy body.

EPIG. 12.
To the middle aged.
Thou that art prauncing on the lusty Noone
Of thy full Age, boast not thy self too soon:
Convert that breath to wayle thy fickle state;
Take heed; thou wilt brag too soon, or boast too late.
Et Martem spirat et arma.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

He must increase, but I must decrease. IOH. 3. 30.
TIme voyds the Table: Dinner's done;
And now our days declining Sun
Has hurried his diurnall Load
To the Borders of the Western road;
Fierce Phlegon, with his fellow Steeds,
Now puffes and pants, and blows and bleeds,
And froths, and fumes, remembering still
Their lashes up the Olympic Hill;
Which, having conquered, now disdain
The whip, and champs the frothy reyn,
And, with a full Career, they bend
Their paces to their Iournies end:
Our blazing Tapour now has lost
Her better half: Nature has crossed
Her forenoone book, and cleard that score,
But scarce gives trust for so much more:
And now the generous Sap forsakes
Her seir-grown twig: A breath even shakes
The down-ripe fruit; fruit soon divorced
From her dear Branch, untouchd, unforced.
Now sanguine Venus does begin
To draw her wanton colors in;
And flees neglected in disgrace,
Whilst Mars supplies her lukewarm place:
Blood turns to Choler: What this Age
Loses in strength it finds in Rage:
That rich Ennamell, which of old,
Damaskt the downy Cheek, and told
A harmeless guilt, unaskt, is now
Worn off from the audacious brow;
Luxurious Dalliance, midnight Revells,
Loose Riot, and those venial evils
Which inconsiderate youth of late
Could plead, now wants an Advocate,
And what appeard in former times
Whispring as faults, now roar as crimes:
And now all ye, whose lips were wont
To drench their Currall in the Font
Of forkt Parnassus; you that be
The Sons of Phocbus, and can flee
On wings of Fancy, to display
The Flagge of high invention, stay:
Repose your Quills; Your veins grow sower,
Tempt not your Salt beyond her power:
If your palled Fancies but decline,
Censure will strike at every line
And wound your names; The popular ear
Weighs what you are, not what you were.
Thus hackney like, we tire our Age,
Spurgall'd with Change, from Stage to Stage.
See thou the daily light of the greater world? When attaind to the hig^est
p^tch of Meridian glory, it staieth not, but by the same degrees, it ascended,
it descends. And is the light of the lesser world more premanent? Continuance
is the Child of Eternity, not of Time.

EPIG. 13.
To the young Man.
Young man, rejoice; And let thy rising days
Cheer thy glad heart; Think thou these uphill ways
Lead to deaths dungeon? No: but know withal,
Arising is but Prologue to a Fall.
Invidiosa Senectus.
Will: Marshall. sculpsit.

Yet a little while is the light with you. IOH. 12. 35.
1.
THe day grows old; The low pitched Lamp has made
No less than treble shade:
And the descending damp does now prepare
T'uncurle bright Titans hair;
Whose Western Wardrobe, now begins t'unfold
Her purples, fringed with gold,
To cloathe his evening glory; when th'alarmes
Of Rest shall call to rest in restless Thetis arms.
2.
Nature now calls to Supper, to refresh
The spirits of all flesh;
The toyling ploughman drives his thirsty Teames,
To taste the slippery Streams:
The droyling Swineheard knocks away, and feasts
His hungry-whining guests:
The boxbill Ouzle, and the dappled Thrush
Like hungry Rivals meet, at their beloved bush.
3.
And now the cold Autumnall dewes are seen
To copwebbe every Green;
And by the low-shorne Rowins does appear
The fast-declining year.
The Sapless Branches d'off their summer Suits
And waine their winter fruits:
And stormy blasts have forced the quaking Trees
To wrap their trembling limbs in Suits of mossie Freeze.
4.
Our wasted Tapour, now has brought her light
To the next door to night;
Her sprightless flame, grown great with snuff, does tu^^
Sad as her neighboring Vrne:
Her slender Inch, that yet unspent remains,
Lights but to further pains,
And in a silent language bids her guest
Prepare his weary limbs to take eternal Rest.
5.
Now carkfull Age has pitched her painful plough
Upon the furrowed brow;
And snowie blasts of discontented Care
Has blancht the falling hair:
Suspicious envy mixed with jealous Spite
Disturb's his weary night:
He threatens youth with age: And, now, alas,
He ownes not what he is, but vaunts the Man he was.
6.
Gray hairs, peruse thy days; And let thy past
Read lectures to thy last:
Those hasty wings that hurried them away
Will give these days no Day:
The constant wheels of Nature scorn to tire
Until her work expire:
That blast that nipt thy youth, will ruin Thee;
That hand that shook the branch will quickly strike the Tree.
St. CHRYSOSTOM.
Gray hayres are honorable, when the behavior suits with gray hayres: But
when an ancient man has childish manners, he becomes more rediculous than a
child.

SEN.
Thou art in vain attained to old years, that repeatest thy youthfulness.

EPIG. 14.
To the Youth.
See thou this good old man? He represents
Thy Future; Thou, his Preterperfect Tense;
Thou go to labor, He prepares to Rest:
Thou break'st thy Fast; He suppes: Now which is best?
Plumbeus in terram.
Will Marshall sculpsit

The days of our years are threescore years and ten. PSALM. 90. 10.
1.
SO have I seen the illustrious Prince of Light
Rising in glory from his Crocean bed,
And trampling down the horrid shades of night,
Advancing more and more his conquering head,
Pause first; decline; at length, begin to shroud
His fainting brows within a cole black cloud.
2.
So have I seen a well built Castle stand
Upon the Tiptoes of a lofty Hill,
Whose active power commands both Sea and Land,
And curbs the pride of the Beleag'rers will;
At length her aged Foundation fails her trust;
And lays her tottring ruins in the Dust.
3.
So have I seen the blazing Tapour shoot
Her golden head into the feeble Air;
Whose shadow-gilding Ray, spread round about,
Makes the foul face of black-brow'd darkness fair,
Till at the length her wasting glory fades,
And leaves the night to her invet'rate shades.
4.
Even so this little world of living Clay,
The pride of Nature, glorified by Art,
Whom earth adores, and all her hosts obey,
Allied to Heaven by his Diviner part,
Triumphs a while, then droops, and then decaies,
And worn by Age, Death cancells all his days.
5.
That glorious Sun, that whilom shone so bright,
Is now even ravished from our darkened eyes;
That sturdy Castle, manned with so much might,
Lies now a Monument of her own disguize:
That blazing Tapour, that disdained the puff
Of troubled Air, scarce ownes the name of Snuff.
6.
Poor bedrid Man! where is that glory now,
Thy Youth so vaunted? Where that Majesty
Which sat enthroned upon thy manly brow?
Where, where that braving Arm? that daring eye?
Those buxom tunes? Those Bacchanalian Tones?
Those swelling veins? those marrow-flowing bones?
7.
Thy drooping Glory's blurrd, and prostrate lies
Groveling in dust; And frightfull Horror, now,
Sharpens the glaunces of thy gashfull eyes,
Whilst fear perplexes thy distracted brow:
Thy panting breast vents all her breath by groans,
And Death enervs thy marrow-wasted bones.
8.
Thus Man, that is borne of woman can remain
But a short time; His days are full of sorrow;
His life's a penance, and his death's a pain,
Springs like a flower to day, and fades to morrow?
His breath's a bubble, and his days a Span.
It Is glorious misery to be borne a Man.
CYPR.
When eyes are dim, ears deaf, visage pale, teeth decayed, skin withered;
breath tainted, pipes furred, knees trembling, hands fumbling; feet failing,
the sudden downfall of thy fleshly house is near at hand.

St. AUGUST.
All vices wax old by Age: Covetousness alone, grows young.

EPIG. 15.
To the Infant.
What he does spend in groans, thou spendst in tears:
Judgment and strength's alike in both your years;
He Is helpless; so art thou; What difference than?
He Is an old Infant; Thou, a young old Man.
THE END.

