Hadassa: OR THE HISTORY OF QVEENE ESTER: With Meditations thereupon, Divine
and Moral.

Horat. Ode 6. Conamur tenues, grandia; nec pudor,
Imbellisque Lyrae Musa potens vetat.
By FRA. QVARLES.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in
Saint Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleetstreet. 1621.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, RENOWNED FOR LEARNING, PIETY, AND ALL
GRACIOUS GOVERNMENT:
JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND,
DEFENDER OF THE FAITH.

FRANCIS QVARLES, HIS MOST HVMBLE SERVANT, and faithful Homager, dedicates,
presents, and consecrates these his labors, to receive honor from his
gracious countenance, and to be glorified by his approbation.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
A Sober vain best suits Theology: If therefore thou expectst such elegancy
as takes the times, affect some subject as will bear it. Audire fabulas, est
impedimentum cognitioni veritatis. Arist. 2. Metaphis.
Had I labored with ouer-abundance of * fictions, or flourishes, perhaps they
had exposed me, censurable, and disprized this sacred subject: Therefore I rest
more sparing in that kind.

Two things I would treat of: First, the matter, secondly, the manner of this
History.

matter, (so far as I have dealt) it is Canonical, and indighted by the holy
Spirit of God, not liable to error, and needs no blanching.

In it Theology sits as Queen, attended by her handmaid The excellence and
use of this History.
Philosophy; both concurring, to make the understanding Reader, a good Divine,
and a wise Moralist.

As for the Divinity, it discouers the Almighty in his two great Attributes; in
his Mercy, delivering his Church; in his Justice, confounding her enemies.

As for the Morality, it offers to us the wholly practicke part of Philosophy,
dealt out into Ethics, Politics, and Oeconomicks.

it self into the Catalogue of Moral virtues, either those that Heiland in
Eth. Mores instituu^t ad virtutem.
govern the body; as Fortitude, Chap. 9. 2. and Temperance, Chap. 1. 8. or
those which direct the soul, either in outward things, as Liberality, Chap. 1.
3. Magnificence, Chap. 1. 6. Magnanimity, Chap. 2. 20. and Modesty, Chap. 6.
12. or in conversation, as Justice, Chap. 7. 9. Mansuetude, Chap. 5. 2, etc.





Furthermore, in this History, the two principal faculties of the soul are
(nor in vain) employed.

First, the Intellect, whose proper object is Truth. Secondly, Arist. Eth 3.
Obiectum voluntatis non est nisi bonum. Arist. Eth. 10.
the Will, whose proper object is * Good, whether Philosophical, which that
great Master of Philosophy calls * Wisdom; or Theological, which we point at
now, hoping to enjoy hereafter.

Who the Penman of this sacred History was, or why the De dubijs non definies,
sed suspensam teneas sententiam; Seneca de formali vita.
name of God (as in few other parts of the Bible) is unmentioned in this, it is
immateriall, and doubtful. For the first, it is enough for an vncurious
questioner to know, it was indicted by the Spirit of God: for the second, let it
suffice, that, that Spirit willed not here to reveal his name.

Authoritatis quorum sum germanus) not daring to go vn-led, for fear of
stumbling. Some say, Divinity in Verse, is incongruous and unpleasing: such I
refer to the Psalms of David, or the Song of his son Solomon, to be
corrected. But in these lewd times, the salt, and soul of a Verse, is obscene
scurrility, without which it seems dull, and liuelesse: And though the sacred
History needs not (as humane do) Poetry, to perpetuate the remembrance, (being
by Gods own mouth blessed with Eternity) yet Verse (working so near upon the
soul, and spirit) will often times draw those to have a History in familiarity,
who (perchance) before, scarce knew there was such a Book.

Reader, be more than my hasty pen styles thee: Read me with advice, and
thereafter judge me, and in that judgment censure me. If I iangle, think my
intent thereby, is to toll better Ringers in. Farewell.

THE INTRODVCTION.
WHen Zedechia (He whose hapless hand
Once swaid the Scepter of Great Judah's Land)
Went up the Palace of proud Babylon,
(The Prince Seraiah him attending on,)
A dreadful Prophet, (from whose blasting breath Ierem. 52.

Came sudden death, and nothing else but death)
Into Seraiah's peaceful hand betook
The sad Contents of a more dismal Book:
Break epe the leaves, those leaves so full of dread,
Read (son of thunder) said the Prophet, read,
Say thus, say freely thus, The Lord has spoke it,
It Is done, the world's unable to revoke it;
Woe, woe, and heavy woes ten thousand more
Betide great Babylon, that painted whore;
Thy buildings, and thy fensiue Towers shall
Flame on a sudden, and to cinders fall;
None shall be left, to wail thy grief with Howles:
Thy streets shall peopled be with Bats, and Isay 13. 21.
Owls:
None shall remain, to call thy places void,
None to possess, nor ought to be enjoyed;
Naught shall be left for thee to term thine own,
But helpless ruins of a hapless town:
Said then the Prophet, When performance has
Emptied thy Cheeks of this thy borrowed Breath,(...)
Even so the Persian Host it self bestur'd,
So fell great Babel by the Persian sword,
Which warm with slaughter, and with blood imbrued,
Never sheathed, till wounded Babel fell, subdued.
But see! These brave Ioynt-tenants that suruiu'd
To see a little world of men vnliu'd,
Must now be parted: Great Darius dies, Darius dies.

And Cyrus shares alone, the new-got prize; Cyrus, King alone.

Carionis Chro. lib. 2. p. 81. 2. Chro. 36. 23.
He fights for Heaven, Heavens foemen he subdues:
Carionis Chro. lib. 2. p. 81. 2. Chro. 36. 23.
He builds the Temple, he restores the Jews,
By him was Zedechias force disioynted,
Unknown to God he was, yet Gods Anointed; Isay 4. 45.

But mark the malice of a wayward Fate;
He whom success crowned always fortunate,
He that was strong t'atchieue, bold to attempt,
Wise to foresee, and wary to prevent,
Valiant in War, successful to obtain,
Mustnow be slain, and by a Tomyris. Cyrus dies.
Woman slain.
Accursed be thy sacrelegious hand,
That of her Patron robbed the holy Land;
Cursed be thy dying life, thy living death,
And cursed be all things, that proud Tomyris has. Tomyris Queen of the
Massagetans.

O worst that Death can do, to take a life,
Which (lost) leaves kingdom's to a Tyrants knife:
For now, alas! degenerate Cambyses (vices) Cambyses King succeeded Cyrus

(Whose hand was filled with blood, whose heart with
Sits crowned King, to vex the Persian state,
With heavy burdens, and with sore regrate.
O Cyrus, more unhappy in thy Son,
Then in that stroke wherewith thy life was don!
Cambyses now sits King, now Tyrant (rather:)
(Unlucky Son of a renowned Father.)
Blood cries for Blood: Himself revenged has
His bloody Tyranny, with his own death; Cambyses dies.

That cruel Chro. Carionis. lib. 2. p. 89.
sword on his own flesh does feed,
Which made so many loyal Persians bleed,
Whose woeful choice made an indiff'rent thing,
To leave their lives, or lose their Tyran' King:
Cambyses dead, with him the latest drop*
Of Cyrus blood was spilt, his death did stop
The infant source of his brave Syers worth,
Ere aftertimes could spend his rivers forth.
Tyrant Cambyses being dead, and gone,
On the reuersion of his empty Throne, A Magus succeeds Cambyses.

Mounts up a Magus, which dissembled right,
Forging the name of him, whose greedy night Smerdis.

Too early did perpetuate her own,
And silent Death did snatch away unknown.
But when the tidings of this Royal cheat,
Times loyal Trumpe had famed, th'vsurped seat
Grew too too hot, and longer could not bear
So proud a burden on so proud a Chair:
The Nobles sought their freedom to regaine,
Not resting, till the Magi all-vvere slain; The Magi slain by the Persians.

And so renowned was that happy slaughter,
That it solemnized was for ever after;
So that what pen shall write the Persian story,
Shall treat that Triumph, and write that days glory;
For to this time the Persians (as they say) The feast is called (...), which
is the slaughter of the Magi.

Observe a Feast, and keep it holy day;
Now Persia lacks a King, and now the State
Labors as much in want, as it of late
Did in abundance; Too great calms do harm
Sometimes as much the Seaman, as a storm;
One while they think t'erect a Monarchy;
But that (corrupted) breeds a Tyranny,
And dead Cambyses fresh before their eyes,
Afrights them with their new-scap'd miseries;
Some to the Nobles would commit the State, Otanes.

In change of Rule, expecting change of fate;
Others cried no, more Kings then one incumber; Darius, Gobrias, Asphatines,
Hidarnes.

Better admit one Tyrant, than a number:
The rule of many does disquiet bring;
One Monarch is enough, one Lord, one King:
One says, Let Us rule our selves, let us all be kings;
No, says another, that confusion brings;
Thus modern danger bred a careful trouble,
Double their care is, as their fear is double;
And doubtful to resolve of what conclusion,
To bar confusion, thus they bred confusion;
At last (and well advised) they put their choice They put the choice of their
King to seven Electors.

Upon the verdit of a Iuries voice;
Seven is a perfect number; then by seven,
Be Persia's royal Crown, and Scepter given;
Now Persia, do thy plagues, or joys commence;
God give thy Jury sacred evidence:
Fearful to choose, and faithless in their choice,
(Since weal, or woe depended on their voice,)
A few from many they extracted forth,
Whose even poys'd valor, and like equal worth
Had set a Non plus on their doubtful tongues,
Vnweeting where the most reward belongs,
They this agreed, and thus (advised) bespake;
Since bleare-eyd mortals, of themselves, can make The speech of the Electors.

No difference 'twixt good, and evil, nor know
A good from what is only good, in show,
But, with unconstant frailty, does vary
From what is good, to what is clean contrary;
And since it lies not in the brain of man,
To make his drooping state more happy, than
His vnprospitious stars allot, much less
To lend another, or a state success,
In vain you therefore shall expect this thing,
That we should give you fortune, with a King:
Since you have made us means to propagate
The joyful welfare of our headless State,
(Bound by the tender service that we bear
Our native soil, far then our lives more dear)
We sifted have, and boulted from the Rest,
Whose worst admits no badnes, and whose best
Cannot be bettered:
When Chaunticleere, (the Belman of the morn)
Shall summon twilight, with his bugle horn,
Let these brave Hero's, dressed in warlike wise,
And richly mounted on their Palferies,
Attend our rising Sun-gods ruddy face,
Within the limits of our Royal place.
And he whose lusty The Persians did dedicate Horses to their God, which was
the Sun.
Stallion first shall neigh,
To him be given the doubtful Monarchy;
The choice of Kings lies not in mortals breast,
This we; the Gods, and fortune do the rest.
So said, the people, tickled with the motion,
Some tossed their caps, some fell to their devotion,
Some clapped their joyful hands, some shout, some sing,
And all at once cried out, A King, A King.
When Phoebus Harbinger had chased the night,
And tedious Phospher brought the breaking light,
Complete in arms, and glorious in their train,
Came these brave Heroes, prauncing over the plain,
With mighty streamers came these blazing stars,
Portending Wars, (and nothing else but Wars;)
Into the royal Palace now they come:
There sounds the martial Trump, here beats the Drum,
There stands a Steed, and champes his frothy steel,
This strokes the ground, that skorn's it with his heel,
One snorts, another pufs out angry wind,
This mounts before, and that curuets behind;
By this, the fomy Steeds of Phaeton
Puff too, and spurn the Eastern Horizon:
Whereat the Nobles, prostrate to the ground,
Adored their The Persian worshipped the Sun.
God, (Their God was early found.)
Heroditus in medio Tholiae Justin.
Forthwith, from out the thickest of the crowd,
In depth of silence, there was heard the loud,
And lustful language of Styled Assuerus, whom Metactines calls Artaxerxes.
Darius Horse,
Who in the dialect of his discourse,
Proclaimed his rider, King; whereat the rest
(Patient to bear what cannot be redrest)
Dismount their lofty Steeds, and prostrate bring
Their humbled bodies to their happy King;
God save the King, they jointly say, God bless
Thy prosperous actions with a due success;
The people clap their sweatty palms, and shout,
The bonfires smoke, the bells ring round about,
The minstrels play, the Parrats learn to sing,
(Perchance as well as they,) God save the King.
Assuerus now is invested in the throne, Ester* 1. 1.

And Persia's ruled by him, and him alone;
Prove, happy Persia's Great Assuerus, prove
As equal happy in thy peoples love.
Enough; And let this broken breuiate
Suffice to shadow forth the downfall state
Of mighty Babel, and the conquest made
By the fierce Medes, and Persians conquering blade;
Whose just succession we have traced down,
Till great Assuerus wear the Persian Crown;
Him have we sought, and having found him, rest:
To morrow go we to his royal Feast.
FINIS.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE HISTORY.
KIng Assuerus makes two feasts: to that, he inuites his Courtly ghests, to
this, the Citizens of Susa, whereunto he sends for Queen Vashti, who denies to
come; whereupon the King is angry, and referres the censure of her offense to
his Council, who give sentence that she should be degraded from her Princely
estate: Forthwith the King commands the fairest Virgins in the Land to be
brought before him, for him to take his choice, among whom Ester (the Orphane
of a Jew) is chosen, married, and Crowned Queen. Mordecai, Queen Esters
Uncle, discouers a treason, which was entered into the Records: Haman, the son
of Amedatha, is promoted into the Kings favor: the King commands his Subjects
to bow to him, which Mordecai alone refused to do: whereupon Haman is full of
wrath, and (directed by a lot) begs of the King to destroy all the Jews in his
Provinces upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month; which the King
granting, Haman sends Letters in the Kings name to make the Massacre upon that
day: The Queen understanding the plot, ventures in to the King, (uncalled:)
The King demanding the cause of her coming; she inuites him, and Haman to a
feast: They come: the King is pleased to demand her further suit; whereupon she
inuites them both to a second Feast. In the mean while Haman, advised by his
wife, builds up a Gallows for Mordecai, (intending at the Banquet to beg his
life.) That night, the King (indisposed to sleep) reads the Chronicles, where
he finds, that Mordecai discovered a Treason; which service the King
intending to reward, asks Haman (who then came to beg Mordecai's life) what
Worship best befits him that the King means to honor? Haman (supposing
himself the man) spoke largely: whereupon the King commands him to do that
very honor to Mordecai: So Haman goes home discomforted, and is straight sent
for to attend the King to the Queens Feast; where (in his presence) the King
vrges the Queen to move her suit; whereupon she humbly begs hers, and her
peoples life, which Haman sought to betray: whereat the King is enraged, and
commands Haman to be hanged on the Gallows which he built for Mordecai, and
gives his Estate to the Queen, and his Honor to Mordecai: The Queen
earnestly requests the King, that he would reuerse the letters which Haman had
devised for the Jews destruction: the King referres it to the Queen, and
Mordecai, who sent Letters in the Kings name, that the Jews should defend
themselves on the day that Haman had appointed for their slaughter; upon which
day the Jews slay in Susa five hundred men, and the ten sons of Haman, and
in the other Provinces 70000. Whereupon the Queen desires the King, that the
next day the Jews might likewise defend themselves from their enemies: and
that the dead sons of Haman may be hanged up; all which the King grants: so as
the Jews slew the next day in Susa, 300. men, and Hamans ten sons were hanged
up; whereupon the Feasts of Purim are instituted, and in the Kings name
confirmed for ever.

(...) Partly to blow the coals of old affection,
Which now are dying through a forced subjection;
Partly to make his Princely might appear,
To make them fear for love, or love for fear,
He made a Feast: He made a Royal Feast, The King makes a Feast to his Princes.

Fit for himself, had he himself bin Ghest;
To which he calls the Princes of his Land,
Who (paying tribute) by his power stand;
To which he calls his servants of Estate,
His Captains, and his Rulers of the State,
That he may show the glory of his store,
The like unseen by any Prince before;
That he may boast his Kingdoms beauty forth,
His servant Princes, and their Princely worth;
That he may show the Type of Sou'raignty,
Fulfilled in the honor of his Majesty:
He made a Feast, whose time did full extend
One hundred fourscore days before an end:
And when this royall-tedious Feast was ended,
(For good more common it is, it is more commended)
For meaner sort he made a second Feast; The King makes another Feast to the
common people.

His Ghests were from the greatest to the least
In Susa's place; Seven days they did resort
To Feast in the Palace Garden of the Court;
Where in the midst, the house of Bacchus stands, The description of the
banqueting house.

To entertain when Bounty claps her hands;
The Tap'stry hangings were of diverse hiew,
Pure White, and youthful Green, and joyful Blue,
The maine supporting Pillars of the Place
Were perfect Marble of the purest race;
The Beds were rich, right Princely to behold, Whereon they used to feast.

Of beaten Silver, and of burnish't Gold.
The Pauement was discolored Porphyry,
And during Marble, colored diversely;
In lavish Cups of oft-refined gold,
Came wine vnwisht, drink what the people would;
The Golden vessels did in number pass,
Great choice of Cups, great choice of Wine there was.
And since Abuse attends upon Excess, A Law against immoderate drinking.

Leading sweet Mirth to loathsome Drunkenness,
A temperate Law was made, that no man might
Enforce an undisposed Appetite:
So that a sober mind may use his pleasure,
And measure drinking, though not drink by measure. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio prima.
NO man is borne unto himself alone;
Who lives unto himself, he lives to none:
The World's a body, each man a member is,
To add some measure to the public bliss;
Where much is given, there much shall be required,
Where little, less, for Riches are but hyr'd; Hesiod.

Wisdom is sold for sweat, Pleasures for pain;
Who lives unto himself, he lives in vain;
To be a Monarch is a glorious thing;
Who lives not full of Care, he lives no King;
The boundless triumph of a King is such,
To sweeten Care, because his Care is much:
The Sun (whose radient beams reflect so bright)
Comforts, and warmes, as well as it gives light,
By whose example Phoebe (though more dim)
Does counterfeit his beams, and shines from him:
So mighty Kings are not ordained alone
To perch in glory on the princely Throne,
But to direct in Peace, command in War
Those Subjects, for whose sakes they only are;
So loyal Subjects must adapt them to
Such virtuous actions as their Princes do:
So shall his people, even as well as He,
Princes (though in a lesser volume) be.
When as I fix my sharpe-contracted eye
Upon Assuerus Feast, me thinks, I spy
The Temple dance, in my attentive ear
(Ravished with th'Heauenly music that I hear)
I well conceive this sence-bereauing song,
Like dainty warbling of an Angels tongue,
Vashti shall fall, and Ester rise,
Sion shall thrive, when Haman dies.
Blessed are the meetings, and the Banquets blessed*
Where Angels caroll music to the Feast;
How do our wretched times degenerate
From former Ages! How intemperate
Has lavish custom made our bedridden Age,
Acting obsceane Scenes on her drunken Stage!
Our times are guided by a lewder lot,
As if that world another world begot:
Their friendly Feasts were filled with sweet sobriety;
Ours, with obsceane delights, and foul ebriety.
Theirs, the unvalued prize of Love intended;
Ours seek the cause, whereby our Love is ended.
How in so blind an age could those men see!
And in a seeing Age, how blind are we!
Let poor men then divide their wants to me,
If not to them my wealth divided be.
THE ARGUMENT.
The King sends for the Queen, the Queen
Denies to come; His hasty spleen
Inflames, unto the Persian Laws
He leaves the censure of his cause.
Sect. 2.
TO add more honor to this Royal Feast, Chap. 1. 9. Queen Vashti makes a
Feast.

That Glory may with Glory be increast,
Vashti the Queen, (the fairest Queen on earth)
She made a Feast, and put on jolly mirth,
To bid sweet welcome with her Princely cheer
To all her Ghests; Her Ghests all, women were.
By this the Royal bounty of the King
Has well-nigh spent the seven days banqueting.
Six Iouiall days have run their hours out,
And now the seventh does wheel the week about,
Upon which day, (the Queens unlucky Day)
The King, with iollity enticed away,
And gently having slipped the stricter reins
Of Temperance, (that ouer-mirth restraines) The King sends for Queen Vashti.

Rose up, commanded that without delay,
(How-e're the Persian custom do gainsay(...)
How have thou thus defiled thy Yu'ry feet!
Thy sweetness that was once how far from sweet!
Where are thy maiden smiles? thy blushing cheek?
Thy Lamb-like countenance, so fair, so meek?
Where is that spotless flower that while-ere
Within thy lilly-bosome thou did wear?
Has wanton Cupid snatched it? Has his Dart
Sent courtly tokens to thy simple heart?
Where do thou bide? The Country half disclaimes thee;
The City wonders when a body names thee:
Or have the sounding Woods ingrost thee there,
And thus fore-stal'd our empty Markets here?
Sure thou art not, or hid where no man shows thee,
Or changed so much, scarce man or woman knows thee.
Our Grandame Eve, before it was forbid,
Desired not that Fruit, she after did:
Had not the Custom of those times ordained
That women from men's Feasts should be restrained,
Perhaps (Assuerus) Vasti might have stayed
Unsent for, and thy self been vndenayd:
Such are the fruits of myrths, and Wines abuse,
Customs must crack, and Love must break his Truce,
Anger, contentious Wrath, and wrathful Hate
Attend the Feast, where Wine's immoderate.
More difficult it is, and greater skill
To bear a mischief, than prevent an ill:
Passion is natural, but to bridle Passion,
Is more Divine, and virtues operation:
To do amiss, is Natures Act; to err,
Is but a wretched mortals Character:
But to prevent the danger of the Ill,
Is more than Man, surpassing humane skill*
Who plays a happy game with crafty sleyte,
Confirms himself but Fortunes Favorite;
But he that husbands well an ill-dealt Game,
Deserves the credit of a Gamesters name:
Lord, if my Cards be bad, yet lend me skill
To play them wisely', and make the best of ill.
THE ARGUMENT.
The learned Council plead the case,
The Queen degraded from her place,
Decrees are sent throughout the Land,
That wives obey, and men command.
Sect. 3.
THe righteous Council (having heard the Cause) Chap. 1. 16.

Aduiz'd awhile, with respit of a pause,
Till Memucan (the first that silence brake)
Vnseal'd his serious lips, and thus bespake:
The Great Assuerus sovereign Lord and King, Memucan's speech.

(To grace the period of his Banqueting)
Has sent for Vashti: Vashti would not come,
And now it rests in us to give the doom.
But lest that too much rashness violate
The sacred Justice of our happy state,
We first propound the height of her offense,
Next, the succeeding Inconvenience, (...)
Thus broke in two, he did anew ordain
That these same two should be made One again:
Till singling Death this sacred knot undo,
And part this new-made One, once more in two.
Since of a Rib first framed was a Wife,
Let Ribs be Hi'rogliphicks of their life:
Ribs coast the heart, and guard it round about,
And like a trusty Watch keep danger out;
So tender Wives should loyally impart
Their watchful care to fence their Spouses heart:
All members else from out their places roue,
But Ribs are firmly fixed, and seldom move:
Women (like Ribs) must keep their wonted home,
And not (like Dinah that was rauish't) rome: Genes. 34. 2.

If Ribs be ouer-bent, or handled rough, Costa dura est and difficiliter
flectitur: Sphinx. Ioh. Stig. in Poematis* Coniugium humanae diuina Academia
vitae est.

They break; If let alone, they bend enough:
Women must (vnconstrain'd) be plyent still,
And gently bending to their Husbands will.
The sacred Academy of man's life
Is holy wedlock in a happy Wife.
It was a wise man's speech, Could never they
now to command, that knew not first to obey:
Where Is then that high Command, that ample Glory,
Which for a pattern (left in endless story)
Your noble Sex in former days atchiu'd?
Whose sounding Fame no Aftertimes outliu'd.
What brave Command? How well-succeeding broils?
What stately Triumphs? What victorious spoils Hand vlla vnquam salua mansit
familia, parts priores vxor in qua gesserit. Euripid. in Androm.

Their hands achiu'd? They swayed their Scepters the^
As well in Kingdoms, as in hearts of men;
And sweet obedience was the lowly stayre
Mounted their steps to that Commanding chair:
A woman's Rule should be in such a fashion,
Only to guide her household, and her Passion:
And her obedience neuer's out of season,
So long as either Husband lasts, or Reason:
Ill thriues the hapless Family, that shows Non placet mihi ista domus, in
qua Gallina cantat, Gallus tacet.

A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.
I know not which live more ungodly lives,
(...).
Obeying Husbands, or commanding Wives.
THE ARGUMENT.
Assuerus pleased, His servants motion
Propounded, gain his approbation.
Esters descent, her Jewish race:
Her beautyes, and her perfect Grace.
Sect. 4.
When Time (that ends all things) did assuage Chap. 2. 1.

The burning Fever of Assuerus rage,
And quiet satisfaction had assigned
Delightful Iu'lyps to his troubled mind,
He called his old remembrance to account
Of Vashti, and her Crimes that did amount
To th'summe of their diuorcement: In his thought
He weighed the censure of her heedlesse fault:
His fawning servants willing to prevent him,
If too much thought should make his love repent him,
Said thus: (If it shall please our gracious Lord The Kings servants speech to
the King.

To crown with Audience his servants word)
Let strict Inquest, and careful Inquisition
In all the Realm be made, and quick provision
Throughout the Medes and Persians all among,
For comely Virgins, beautiful and young,
Which (curiously selected) let them bring
Into the Royal Palace of the King;
And let the Eunuchs of the King take care
For Princely Robes, and Vestures, and prepare
Sweet Odours, choice Perfumes, and all things meet,
To add a greater sweetness to their sweet;
And she, whose perfect beams shall best delight,
And seem most gracious in his Kingly sight;
To her be given the Conquest of her face,
And be enthroned in scornful Vashties place.
The project pleased the King, who made an Act The King pleased with the
speech. Mordecaies parentage.

To second what was said with soon effect.
Within the walls of Shusa dwelt there one,
By breeding, and by birth a Jew, and known
By th'name of Mordecai, 1. Sam. 9. 1.
of mighty kin,
Descended from the Tribe of Benjamin,
(Whose neck was subject to the slavish yoke,
When 2. Kin. 24. 15.
Ieconiah was surprised and took,
And carried captive into Babels Land,
With strength of mighty Neb'chadnezzars hand;)
Within his house abode a Virgin bright,
Whose name was Ester, or Hadassa hight, Esters parentage, virtue, and beauty.

His brothers Daughter, whom (her parents dead)
This Jew did foster, in her fathers stead;
She wanted none, though father she had none,
Her uncles love assumed her for his own;
Bright beams of beauty streamed from her eye,
And in her cheeks sat maiden modesty;
Which peerless beauty lent so kind a relish
To modest virtue, that they did imbellish
Each others ex'lence, with a full assent,
In her to boast their perfect complement. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio quarta.
THe strongest Arcteries that knit and tie
The members of a mixed Monarchy,
Are learned Councels, timely Consultations,
Rip'ned Advice, and sage Deliberations;
And if those Kingdoms be but ill be-blest,
Whose Rule's committed to a young man's breast;
Then such Estates are more unhappy far,
Whose choycest Counselors but Iuuines meribus.
Children are:
How many Kingdoms blessed with high renown,
(In all things happy else) have placed their Crown
Upon the temples of a childish head,
Until with ruin, King, or State be sped!
What Massacres (begun by factious iarres,
And ended by the spoil of civil wars)
Have made brave Monarchies unfortunate,
And razed the glory' of many' a mighty State?
How many hopeful Princes (ill-aduis'd
By young, and smooth-faced Council) have despised
The sacred Oracles of riper years,
Till dear Repentance washed the Land with tears!
Witness thou lucklesse, and succeeding Rehoboam. 1. King. 12. 8.
Son
Of (wisdoms Favorite) great Solomon;
How did thy rash, and beardlesse Council bring,
Thy fortunes subject to a stranger King?
And laying burdens on thy peoples neck,
The weight hung sadly on thy bended back.
Thou second Son to the black Prince.
Richard (once our Britain King,
Whose Syr's, and Grandsyr's fame the world did ring)
How was thy gentle nature led aside,
By green aduisements, which thy State did guide,
Until the title of thy Crown did crack,
And fortunes (like thy Fathers name) were black?
Now glorious Britain, clap thy hands, and bless
Thy sacred fortunes; for thy happiness
(As does thy Island) does it self divide,
And sequester from all the world beside;
Blessed are thy open Gates with joyful peace,
Blessed are thy heaped barnes with sweet increase,
Blessed in thy Council, whose industrious skill,
Is but to make thy fortunes happy still;
In all things blessed, that to a State pertain;
Thrice happy in my dreaded Sovereign,
My sacred Sovereign, in whose only breast,
A wise Assembl' of Privy Councels rest,
Who conquers with his princely Heart as far*
By peace, as Alexander did by War,
And with his Olife branch more hearts did board,
Then daring Caesar did, with Cesars sword:
Long may thou hold within thy Royal hand,
The peaceful Scepter of our happy Land:
Great Judah's Lion, and the Flower of Iesse,
Preserve thy Lines, and thy Flowers bless.
THE ARGUMENT.
Fair Virgins brought to Hege's hand,
The custom of the Persian Land;
Esters neglect of rich attire,
To whet the wanton Kings desire.
Sect. 5.
ANd when the lustful Kings Decree was read Chap. 2. 8.

In every ear, and Shire proclaimed, and spread,
Forthwith unto the Eunuch Hege's hand Virgins brought to the Eunuch Hege.

The Beuy came, the pride of beauties band,
Armed with joy, and warring with their eyes,
To gain the Conquest of a Princely prize;
But none in peerlesse beauty shined so bright, Hege affects Ester.

As lovely Ester did, in Hege's sight,
In loyal service he observed her;
He sent for costly Oils, and dainty Myrrh,
To fit her for the presence of the King:
Rich Tyres, and change of vesture did he bring;
Seven comely maids he gave, to tend upon her,
To show his service, and increase her honor:
But she was watchful of her lips, and wise,
Disclosing not her kindred, or alyes:
For trusty Mardocheus tender care
Gave hopeful Ester Items to beware
To blaze her kin, or make her people known,
Lest for their sake, her hopes be overthrown;
Before the Gates he to and fro did pass,
Wherein enclosed (the Courtly) Ester was,
To understand how Ester did behave her,
And how she kept her in the Eunuchs favor.
Now when as Time had fitted every thing,
By course these Virgins came before the King.
Such was the custom of the Persian soil, The Persian custom.

Six months the Maids embalmed in Myrrh and Oil,
Six other months perfumed in odours sweet,
That perfect lust, and great excess may meet;
What costly Robes, rare Jewels, rich attire,
Or, curious Fare, these Virgins did desire,
'Twas given, and freely granted, when they bring
Their bodies to be prostrate to the King:
Each Virgin keeps her turn, and all the night
They lewdly lavish in the Kings delight,
And soon as morning shall restore the day,
They in their bosoms bear black night away,
And (in their guilty breasts, as are their sins
Close prisoners) in the house of Concubines,
Even so are they, until the King shall please,
With lustful bail their bondage to release.
Now when the turn of Ester was at hand, Esters behavior.

To satisfy the wanton Kings command,
She sought not (as the rest) with brave attire,
To lend a needless spur to foul Desire,
Nor yet endeavors with a whorish Grace,
T'adulterate the beauty of her face:
Nothing she sought to make her glory brauer,
But simply took, what gentle Hege gave her:
Her sober visage daily wan her honor:
Each wandering eye inflamed, that looked upon her. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio quinta.
WHen God had with his All-producing Blast,
Blown up the bubble of the World, and placed
In order that, which he had made in measure,
As well for needful use, as joyful pleasure:
Then out of earthy mould he framed a Genes. 1. 26.
creature
Far more Divine, and of more glorious feature
Than erst he made, indu'd with understanding,
With strength victorious, and with awe commanding,
With Reason, Wit, replete with Majesty,
With heavenly knowledge, and Capacity,
True emblem of his Maker: Him he made
The sovereign Lord of all; Him all obay'd;
Yielding their lives (as tribute) to their King;
Both Fish, and Bird, and Beast, and every thing:
His body's reared upright, and in his eye,
Stand Radient beams of awful sou'rainty;
All Creatures else pore downward to the ground,
Man looks to heaven, and all his thoughts rebound:
Upon the Earth (where tides of pleasures meet)
He treads, and daily tramples with his feet;
Which read sweet Lectures to his wandering eyes,
And teach his lustful heart to moralize:
Genesis 2. 25.
Naked he lived, naked to the world he came;
For he had then nor fault to hide, nor shame:(...)
He liked them all, but when with strict reuye,
He viewed Esters face, his wounded eye The King favored Ester.

Sparkl'd, whilst Cupid with his youthful Dart,
Transfixt the Center of his feeble heart;
Ester is now his joy, and in her eyes,
The sweetest flower of his Garland lies:
Who now but Ester? Ester crowns his bliss;
And he is become her prisoner, that was his:
Ester obtaines the prize, her high desert
Like Di'mond's richly mounted in his heart;
Io, now Io Hymen sings; for she Ester made wife, and Queen.

That crowns his joy, must likewise crowned be:
The Crown is set on Princely Esters head,
Ester sits Queen in scornful Vashties stead.
To consecrate this Day to more delights, The Nuptials celebrated.

In due solemnizing the nuptial rites,
In Esters name, Assuerus made a Feast,
Invited all his Princes, and releast
The hard taxation, that his heavy hand
Laid on the groaning subjects of his Land;
No rites were wanting to augment his joys,
Great gifts confirmed the bounty of his choice:
Yet had not Esters (lavish) tongue descri'd
Her Jewish kin, or where she was aly'd;
For still the words of Mordecai did rest
Within the Cabin of her Royal breast,
That was as plyent (being now a Queen)
To sage advice, as ere before sh'ad been.
It came to pass, as Mardochaeus sat Mordecai ouerheares treason.

Within the Portall of the Princes gate,
He ouer-heard two servants of the King,
Closly combined in hollow whispering,
(Like whistling Notus that foretells a rain)
To breathe out treason against their Sovereign:
Which, soon as loyal Mardochaeus heard, Discouers it to the Queen.

Forthwith to Esters presence he repaired;
Disclosed to her, and to her care commended
The Traitors, and the treason they intended:
Whereat, the Queen (impatient of delay) The Queen discouers it to the King.

Betrayed the Traitors, that would her betray,
And to the King vnbosom'd all her heart,
And who her Newes-man was, and his desert.
Now all on hurly-burly was the Court,
Filled with the foulness of this sad report:
The watch was set, pursuit was sent about, The traitors pursued.

To guard the King, and find the Traitors out,
Who found, and guilty found, by speedy trial, Found, and tried.

(Where witness speaks, what boots a bare denial?)
Were both hanged up, upon the shameful tree: Hanged.

(To bear such fruit let trees never barren be*)
And what success this happy Day afforded,
Was in the Persian Chronicles recorded.
Explicit Hist.
Meditatio sexta.
THe hollow Concaue of a humane breast
Is Gods Exchequer, and therein the best,
And sum of all his chiefest wealth consists,
Which he shuts up, and opens when he lists:
No power is of man: To love, or hate,
Lies not in mortals breast, or power of Fate: (...)
Who was the issue of a Royal breed,
The off-cast offspring of the cursed seed
Of Amalek, from Esau.
him descended right,
That sold his birthright for his Appetite;
Haman his name; His fortunes did improve, Haman comes into favor with the
King.

Increast by favor of the Princes love:
Full great he grew, preferred to high command,
And placed before the Princes of the Land:
And since that honor, and due reverence
Attend, where Princes give preeminence;
The King commands the servants of his State,
To suit Respect to Hamans high estate,
And do him honor, fitting his degree,
With vayled Bonnet, and low bended knee:
They all observed; But aged Mordecai Mordecai refuses to reverence Haman.

(Whose stubborn ioynts-neglected to obey
The seed, which God with infamy had branded)
Stoutly refused what the King commanded;
Which, when the servants of the King had seen,
Their fell disdain, mixed with an envious spleen,
Inflamed; They questioned how he durst withstand
The just performance of the Kings Command:
Daily they checked him for his high disdain,
And he their checks did daily entertain
With silent slight behavior, which did prove
As full of care, as their rebukes of love.
Since then their hearts (not able to abide
A longer suffrance of his peevish pride)
(Whose scorching fires, passion did augment,)
Must either break, or find a speedy vent: The Kings servants complain of
Mordecai, to Haman.

To Haman they th'vnwelcome news related,
And what they said, their malice aggrauated.
Envy did open her Snake-deuouring Jaws,
Foamd frothy blood, and bent her vnked Paws,
Her hollow eyes did cast out sudden flame,
And pale as ashes looked this angry Dame,
And thus bespake! Art thou that man of might,
That Impe of Glory? Times great Favorite?
Has thy deserved worth restored again
The blemished honor of thy Princely strain?
Art thou that Wonder which the Persian State
Stands gazing at so much, and poynting at?
Filling all wondering eyes with Admiration,
And every loyal heart with Adoration?
Art thou that mighty He? How haps it then
That wretched Mordecai, the worst of men,
A captive slave, a superstitious Jew,
Slights thee, and robs thee of thy rightful due?
Nor was his fault disguised with Ignorance,
(The vnfee'd Advocate of sin) or Chance,
But backed with Arrogance and foul Despite:
Rise up, and do thy blemished honor right.
Up (like his deep Revenge) rose Haman then, Hamans passion.

And like a sleeping Lion from his Den,
Roused his relentlesse Rage; But when his eye
Confirmed the news Report did testify,
His Reason straight was heau'd from off his henge,
And Fury rounded in his ear, Revenge,
And (like a rash Aduiser) thus began:
There Is nothing ( Haman) is more dear to man,
And cooles his boiling veins with sweeter pleasure,
Than quick Revenge; for to revenge by leisure,
Is but like feeding, when the stomacke's past,
Pleasing nor eager appetite, nor taste: (...)
Lord, let my fortunes be or rich, or poor:
If small, the less account; if great, the more.
THE ARGUMENT.
Unto the King proud Haman sues,
For the destruction of the Jews:
The King consents, and in his name
Decrees were sent to effect the same.
Sect. 8.
NOw when the year had tum'd his course about, Chap. 3. 7.

And fully worn his weary hours out,
And left his circling travel to his heir,
That now sets onset to the ensuing year,
Proud Haman (pained with travel in the birth,
Till after-time could bring his mischief forth)
Cast Lots, from month to month, from day to day,
To pick the choycest time, when Fortune may
Be most prospicious to his damned plot;
Till on the last month fell th'vnwilling Lot:
So Haman guided by his Idol Fate,
(Cloking with public good his private Hate)
In plaintiff terms, where Reason lent the relish,
Unto the King, his speech did thus imbellish:
Upon the limits of this happy Nation, Hamans speech to the King.

There flotes a skumme, an off-cast Generation,
Dispersed; despised, and noisome to the Land,
And Refractory to the Laws, and thy Command,
Not stooping to thy Power, but despising
All Government, but of their own devising,
And stir the glowing embers of division,
The hateful mother of a States sedition,
The which (not soon redrest by Reformation)
Will ruin breed to thee, and to thy Nation,
Begetting Rebels, and seditious broils,
And fill thy peaceful Land, with bloody spoils: His request.

Now therefore, if it please my gracious Lord,
To right this grieuance with his Princely sword,
That Death, and due Destruction may be sent,
To take the Couie of this rabblement,
Unto the Royal Treasure of the King,
Ten thousand silver Talents will I bring.
Then gave the King, from off his heedlesse hand, The King grants Hamans suit.

His Ring to Haman, with that Ring, command,
And said: Thy proffered wealth possess,
Yet be thy just Petition ne'rthelesse
Entirely granted. Lo, before thy face
Thy vassals lie, with all their rebel race;
Thine be the people, and the power thine,
To doom the Traitors their deserved Fine.
Forthwith the Scribes were summoned to appear, The Decree was made.

Decrees were written, sent to every Shiere;
To all Lieutenants, Captains of the Band,
And all the Provinces throughout the Land,
Styled in the name and person of the King,
And made authentic with his Royal Ring;
By speedy Post-men were the Letters sent;
And this the sum is of their sad content:
Let every Province in the Persian Land, The Decree.

(Upon the The 13. day of the twelfth month, which was part of February, part
of March.
Day prefixed) prepare his hand,
To make the Channels flow with Rebels blood,
And from the earth to root the Jewish brood:
And let the softness of no partial heart,
Through melting pity, love, or fond desert,
Spare either young or old, or man, or woman,
But like their fault, so let their plagues be common;
Decreed, and sealed by our Princely Grace,
And given at Sushan, from our Royal Place.
So Haman filled with joy (his fortunes blessed
With fair succeeding of his foul request)
Laid care aside to sleep, and with the King,
Consumed the time in jolly banqueting:
Mean while, the Jews, (the poor afflicted Jews
Perplexed, and startled with the newbred news)
With drooping heads, and selfe-imbracing arms,
Wept forth the Dirge of their ensuing harms. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio octaua.
OF all diseases in a public weal,
No one more dangerous, and hard to heal,
(Except a tyrant King) then when great might
Is trusted to the hands, that take delight
To bathe, and paddle in the blood of those,
Whom iealousies, and not just cause oppose:
For when as haughty power is conioynd
Unto the will of a distempered mind,
What ever it can, it will, and what it will, Paling. Cui ius est, ius non
me^uit, ius obruitur vi.

It in it self, has power to fulfill:
What mischief then can linger, unattempted?
What base attempts can happen, vnpreuented?
Statutes must break, good Laws must go to wrack,
And (like a Bow that is ouerbent) must crack:
Justice (the life of Law) becomes so furious,
That (ouer-doing right) it proves injurious: Summum ius est summa iniuria.

Mercy (the Steare of Justice) flies the City,
And falsely must be termed, a foolish Pity:
Mean while the gracious Princes tender breast
(Gently possessed with nothing but the best
Of the disguised dissembler) is abused*
And made the cloak, wherewith his fault's excused:
The radient beams that warm, and shine so bright, Simile.

Comfort this lower world with heat, and light,
But drawn, and recollected in a glass,
They burn, and their appointed limits pass:
Even so the power from the Princes hand,
Directs the subject with a sweet command,
But to perverse fantasticks if conferred,
Whom wealth, or blinded Fortune has preferred,
It spurs on wrong, and makes the right retire,
And sets the grumbling Commonwealth on fire:
Their foul intent, the Common good pretends,
And with that good, they mask their private ends,
Their glorie's dim, and cannot b'vnderstood,
Unless it shine in pride, or swim in blood:
Their will's a Law, their mischief Policy,
Their frowns are Death, their power Tyranny:
Ill thriues the State, that harbors such a man,
That can, what ever he wills, wills, what he can.
May my vngarnisht Quill presume so much,
To glorify it self, and give a touch
Upon the Island of my Sovereign Lord?
What language shall I use, what newfound word,
T'abridge the mighty volume of his worth,
And keep me blameless, from th'vntimely birth
(Of false reputed flattery?) He lends
No cursed Haman power, to work his Ends
Upon our ruin, but transferres his grace
On just desert, which in the ugly face
Of foul Detraction, (untouched) can dare,
And smile till black-mouthed Envy blush, and tare
Her Snaky fleece. Thus, thus in happy peace
He rules, to make our happiness increase,
Directs with love, commands with Princely awe,
And in his breast he bears a living Law:
Defend us thou, and heavens thee defend,
And let proud Hamans have proud Hamans end.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Jews, and Mordecai lament,
And wayle the height of their distresses:
But Mordecai the Queen possesses,
With cruel Hamans soul intent.
Sect. 9.
NOw when as Fame (the daughter of the earth Chap. 4. 1.

Newly dis-burthen'd of her plumed birth)
From off her Turrets did her wings display,
And pearcht in the sad ears of Mordecai,
He rent his garments, wearing in their stead Mordecaies passion.

Distressed sackcloth: on his fainting head
He strowed Dust, and from his showring eyes
Ran floods of sorrow, and with bitter cries
His grief saluted heaven; his groans did borrow
No Art, to draw the true pourtraict of sorrow,
Nor yet within his troubled breast alone,
(Too small a stage for grief to trample on)
Did Tyrant sorrow act her lively Scene,
But did enlarge (such grief admits no mean)
The lawless limits of her Theater
In The hearts of all the Jewish Nation, where
(With no dissembled Action) she expressed
The lively Passion of a pensive breast. (...)
Above, or here below; And he that does
Enjoy the one, may never taste of both;
Sweating, and constant labor wins the Goal
Of Rest; Afflictions clarify the soul,
And like hard Masters, give more hard directions,
Tut'ring the nonage of vncurb'd affections:
Wisdom (the Antidote of sad despair)
Makes sharp Afflictions seem not as they are,
Through patient suffrance, and does apprehend,
Not as they seeming are, but as they end:
To bear Affliction with a bended brow,
Or stubborn heart, is but to disallow
The speedy means to health; salve heales no sore,
If misapplied, but makes the grief the more:
Who sends Affliction, sends an end; and He
Best knows what is best for him, what is best for me:
' It Is not for me to carue me where I like;
Him pleases when he list, to stroke or strike:
I Will neither wish, nor yet avoid Tentation,
But still expect it, and make Preparation:
If he think best my Faith shall not be tried;
(Lord) keep me spotless from presumptuous pride:
If otherwise; with trial, give me care,
By thankful patience, to prevent Despair;
Fit me to bear what ever thou shall assign;
I kiss the Rod, because the Rod is thine.
How-e'r, let me not boast, nor yet repine,
With trial, or without (Lord) make me thine.
THE ARGUMENT.
Her aydimplor'd, the Queen refuses
To help them, and her self excuses:
But (urged by Mordecai) consents
To die, or cross their foes intents.
Sect. 10.
NOw when the servant had returned the words Cahp. 4. 9.

Of wretched Mordecai, like poynted swords,
They near impierc't Queen Esters tender heart,
That well could pity, but no help impart;
Ballast with grief, and with the burden foyld,
(Like Ordnance ouer-charg'd) she thus recoyld:
Go, Hatach, tell my wretched kinsman thus, Esters message to Mordecai.

The case concerns not him alone, but us:
We are the subject of proud Hamans hate,
As well as you; our life is poynted at
As well as yours, or as the meanest Jew,
Nor can I help my self, nor them, nor you:
You know the Custom of the Persian State,
No King may break, no subject violate:
How may I then presume to make access
Before the offended King? or rudely press
(Vncall'd) into his presence? How can I
Expect my suit, and have deserved to dye?(...)
Must suit his dear endeavor to his might;
Each one must lift, to make the burden light,
Proving the power, that his gifts afford,
To raise the best advantage for his Lord,
Whose substitute he is, and for whose sake
We live and breathe; each his account must make,
Or more, or less; and he whose power lacks
The means to gather honey, must bring wax:
Five Talents double five, two render four;
Where Is little, little's craved, where much, there is more:
Kings by their Royal privilege may do,
What vnbefits a mind to search into,
But by the force of their Prerogatives,
They cannot free the custom of their lives:
The silly Widow, (from whose wrinkled brows
Faint drops distill, through labor that she owes
Her needy life,) must make her Audite too,
As well as Kings, and mighty Monarkes do:
The world's a Stage, each mortal acts thereon,
As well the King that glitters on the Throne,
As needy beggars: Heaven Spectator is,
And marks who acts well, and who amiss.
What part befits me best, I cannot tell:
It matters not how mean, so acted well.
THE ARGUMENT.
Unto the King Queen Ester goes,
He (unexpected) favor shows,
Demands her suit, she does request
The King and Haman to a Feast.
Sect. 11.
WHen as Queen Esters solemn three days Fast Chap. 54.

Had feasted heaven, with a sweet repast,
Her lowly bended body she vnbow'd,
And (like fair Titan breaking from a cloud)
She rose, and with her Royal Robes she clad
Her liuelesse limbs, and with a face as sad
As grief could paint, (wanting no Art to borrow
A needless help to counterfeit a sorrow,)
Softly she did direct her feeble pace
Unto the inner Court, where for a space,
She boldly stood before the Royal Throne,
Like one that would, but durst not make her moan:
Which when her gracious Lord did well behold,
His heart relented, (Fortune helps the bold)
And to express a welcome unexpected,
Forth to the Queen his Scepter he directed;
Whom (now imboldn'd to approach secured)
In gracious terms, he gently thus coniur'd:
What is it Queen Ester would? What sad request The Kings speech to the Queen.

Hangs on her lips, dwells in her doubtful breast?
Say, say, (my life's preserver) what is the thing,
That lies in the performance of a King,
Shall be denied? Fair Queen, what ever is mine
Unto the moyty of my Kingdom's thine.
So Ester thus: If in thy Princely eyes The Queen inuites the King to a feast.

Thy loyal servant has obtained the prize
Of undeserved favor, let the King
And Haman grace my this-dayes-banqueting,
To crown the dainties of his handmaids Feast,
Humbly devoted to so great a Ghest.
The motion pleased, and fairly well succeeded:
(To willing minds, no twice entreaty needed)
They came, but in Queen Esters troubled face,
Robbed of the sweetness of her wonted Grace,
The King read discontent; her face diuinde
The greatness of some further suit behind.
Say, say, (thou bounteous harvest of my joys) The Kings speech to the Queen.

(Said then the King) what dumpish grief annoyes
Thy troubled soul? Speak, Lady, what is the thing
Thy heart desires? By th'onour of a King,
My Kingdoms half, requested, I Will divide
To fair Queen Ester, to my fairest Bride. The Queen inuites the King, and
Haman to a second feast.

Lo then the tenor of my dear Request,
(Replide the Queen,) Unto a second Feast,
Thy humble suitor does presume to bid
The King, and Haman, as before she did:
Now therefore, if it please my Gracious Lord,
To daine his Royal presence, and afford
The peerlesse treasure of his Princely Grace,
To dry the sorrows of his Handmaids face,
Then to my Kingly, and thrice-welcome Ghest,
His servant shall vnbosome her Request. Expl. Hist.

Meditatio vndecima.
HE that inuites his Maker to a Feast,
(Aduising well the greatness of his Chest)
Must cleanse his dining room from foul infections,
And sweep the Cobwebs of his lewd Affections,
And then provide such Cates, as most delight
His Palate, and best please his Appetite:
And such are holy works, and pious deeds,
These are the dainties whereon heaven feeds:
Faith plays the Cook, seasons, directs, and guides;
So man finds meat, so God the Cook prouides:
His drink are tears, sprung from a midnight cry,
Heaven sips out Nectar from a sinners eye;
The dining Chamber, is the soul oppressed;
God keeps his Revels in a Sinners breast:
The music that attends the Feast, are groans,
Deepe-sounding sighs, and lowd-lamenting mones:
Heaven hears no sweeter music, than complaints;
The Fasts of sinners, are the Feasts of Saints,
To which heaven daynes to stoop, and heavens hie King
Transcends, whilst all the Quire of Angels sing,
And with such sense-bereauing Sonnets fill
The hearts of wretched men, that my rude Quill
(Dazeld with too much light) it self addressing
To blaze them forth, obscures them in th'expressing:
Thrice happy man, and thrice thrice happy Feast,
Graced with the presence of so great a Ghest;
To The power of a faithful man. Math. 16. 19. and 18. 18.
him are freely given the The power of a faithful man. Math. 16. 19. and 18.
18.
privy keys
Of heaven and earth, to open when he please,
And lock when-e'r he list; In him it lies
To open the showring floud-gates of the skies, 1. King. 18. 45.

Or shut them at his pleasure; In his hand
The Host of heaven is put; If he command,
The Sun (not daring to withstand) obeyes, 2. King 20. 9. Josh. 10. 12.

Out runs his equal hours, flies back, or stays,
To him there is naught uneasy to atchieue; 1. King. 17. 22. 2. King. 4. 35.
Act. 9. 40.

He Will rouse the graves, and make the dead alive.
Lord, I Am unfit t'inuite thee to my Home,
My Cates are all too course, too mean my Room:
Yet come and welcome; By thy power Divine,
Thy Grace may turn my water into Wine.
THE ARGUMENT.
Good Mordecai's irreverence
Great Hamans haughty pride offends:
H'acquaints his wife with the offense;
The counsel of his wife and friends.
Sect. 12.
THat day went Haman forth; his swollen breast Chap. 5. 9.

Was filled with joys, and heart was full possessed
Of all the height Ambition could require,
To satisfy her prodigal Desire.
But when he passed through the Palace Gate, Mordecai neglects his service to
Haman.

(His eyesore) aged Mardocheus sat,
With dauntlesse head vnbar'd, and knee unbent,
Unapt to fawn, with slavish blandishment:
Which when Great Haman saw, his boiling breast Haman discontented.

(So foul disdain unable to digest)
Ran over; his blood grew hot, and new desires
Incenst, and kindled his auenging fires:
Surcharged with grief, and sick with malcontent
Of his distempered passion, home he went;
Where (to assuage the swelling of his sorrow
With words, the poorest helps distress can borrow)
His wife, and friends he summoned to partake
His cause of discontent, and thus bespake:
See, see, how Fortune with a lib'rall hand, Hamans speech to his wife and
friends.

Has with the best, and sweetest of the Land,
Crowned my desires, and has timely blown
My budded hopes, whose ripeness has out-growne
The limits, and the height of expectation,
Scarce to b'inioyd, but in a Contemplation:
See, see, how Fortune (to enlarge my breath,
And make me living in despite of Death)
Has multiplide my loins, that after-Fame
May in my stock preserve my Blood, my Name.
To make my honor with my fortunes even,
Behold, my gracious Lord the King has given
And trusted to my hand the sword of Power;
Or life, or death lies where I laugh or lowre:
Who stands more gracious in the Princes eye?
How frowns the King, if Haman be not by?
Ester the Queen has made the King her Ghest,
And (wisely weighing how to grace the Feast
With most advantage) has (in policy)
Invited me: And no man else but I
(Only a fit Companion for a King)
May taste the secrets of the banqueting:
Yet what auailes my wealth, my place, my might?
How can I relish them? with what delight?
What pleasure is in dainties, if the Taste
Be in it self distempered? Better Fast:
In many sweets, one sour offends the Palate;
One loath some weed annoyes the choycest Sallat:
What are my riches? What my honored Place?
What are my children? or my Princes Grace,
So long as cursed Mordecai furuiues?
Whose very breath infects, whose life depriues
My life of bliss, and visage sternly strikes
Worse venime to mine eyes, than Basilisks.
When Haman then had lanc'd his rip'ned grief
In bloody terms, they thus applied relief:
Erect a Gibbet, fifty Cubits hie, The answer of Hamans wife and friends.

Then urge the King (what will the King deny
When Haman sues?) that slavish Mordecai
Be hanged thereon; his blood will soon allay
The heat of thine; His cursed death shall fame
The highness of thy power, and his shame;
So when thy suit shall find a fair event,
Go banquet with the King, and live content.
The Counsel pleased: The Gibbet fairly stands,
Soon done, as said: Revenge finds nimble hands. Expl. Hist.

Meditatio duodecima.
SOme Eu'ls I must approve, All Goods, I dare not,
Some are and seem not good; some seem, and are not:
In choosing Goods, my heart shall make the choice,
My flattring eye shall have no casting voice;
No outward sense may choose an inward bliss,
For seeming Happiness least happy is:
The eye (the chiefest Cink-port of the Heart)
Keeps open doors, and plays the Panders part
To painted pleasures, luring the Affections,
And maskes foul faces under false complections;
It has no power to judge, nor can it see
Things as they are, but as they seem to be.
There Is but one happiness, one perfect bliss;
But how obtaind, or where, or what it is,
The world of nature never could apprehend,
Grounding their labors on no other end
Then supposition, dinersly affecting
Some one thing, some another, still proiecting
Prodigious fancies, till their learned Schools
Lent so much knowledge, as to make them fools:
One builds his bliss upon the blaze of Glory,
Can perfect happiness be transitory?
In strength, another sums Felicity:
What horse is not more happy far than he?
Some pile their happiness on heaps of wealth,
Which (sick) they would loath, if gold could purchase health; (...)
Be done to him the King shall most affect;
In Robes Imperial be his body dressed,
And bravely mounted on that very Beast
The King bestrides; then be the Crown of State
Placed on his lofty brows; let Princes wait
Upon his Stirrup, and in triumph lead
This Impe of Honor, in Assuerus stead;
And to express the glory of his name,
Like Heralds, let the Princes thus proclaim,
This peerlesse honor, and these Princely rites
Be done to him, in whom the King delights.
Said then the King, (O sudden change of fate! The Kings reply.

Within the Portall of our Palace Gate
There sits a Jew, whose name is Mordecai,
Be he the man; Let no perverse delay
Protract; But what thy lavish tongue has said,
Do thou to him: So Haman, sore dismayed:
His tongue (tied to his Roof) made no reply,
But (neither daring answer, nor deny)
Perforce obeyed, and so his Page became,
Whose life he sought to have bereaved with shame:
The Rites observed, Mordecai returned
Unto the Gate, Haman went home and mourned,
(His visage muffled in a mournful vale)
And told his wife this melancholy Tale;
Whereat amazed and startled at the news,
Despairing, thus she spoke; If from the Jews Hamans wife speaks to him.

This Mordecai derive his happy line,
His be the Palm of victory, not thine;
The highest heavens have still conspired to bless
That faithful seed, and with afaire success,
Have crowned their just designs: If Mordecai
Descend from thence, thy hopes shall soon decay,
And melt like wax before the midday Sun.
So said, her broken speech not fully done,
Haman was hasted to Queen Esters Feast;
To mirth and joy, an indisposed Ghest. Expl. Hist.

Meditatio decimatertia.
There Is nothing under heaven more glorifies
The name of Kings, or in a subjects eyes
Winnes more observance, or true loyalty,
Than sacred Justice, shared equally:
No greater glory can belong to Might,
Than to defend the feeble in their right;
To help the helpless, and their wrongs redress,
To curb the haughty-hearted, and suppress
The proud; requiting every special Deed Solon. Praemio and poena conseruatur
resp.

With punishment, or honorable meed:
Herein Kings aptly may deserve the name
Of Gods, inshrined in an earthly frame;
Nor can they any way approach more nigh
The full perfection of a Deity,
Then by true Justice imitating heaven
In nothing more, than in the poyzing even
Their righteous balance: Justice is not blind,
As Poets feign, but with a sight refined
Her Lyncian eyes are cleared, and shine as bright
As do their errors, that deny her sight;
The soul of Justice rests in her eye;
Her Contemplation is to descry (...)
Thy hand maid has found favor; let my Lord
Grant me my life (my life so much abhorred,
To do him service) and my peoples life,
Which now lie open to a Tyrants knife:
Our lives are sold, it is I, it is guiltless I,
Thy loyal Spouse, thy Queen and hers must dye;
The spotless blood of me, thy faithful Bride,
Must sivage the swelling of a Tyrants pride:
Had we been sold for drudges, to attend
The busy Spindle, or for slaves, to spend
Our weary hours to deserve our bread,
So as the gain stood but my Lord in stead,
I had been silent, and never spent my breath:
But neither he that seeks it, nor my Death,
Can to himself the least advantage bring,
(Except Revenge) nor to my Lord the King.
Like to a Lion rouzed from his rest,
Raged then the King, and thus his rage expressed:
Who is the man, that dares attempt this thing? The Kings answer.

Where is the Traitor? What? Am I a King?
May not our subjects serve, but must our Queen
Be made the subject of a villains spleen?
Is not Queen Ester bosomed in our heart?
What Traitor then dares be so bold, part
Our heart, and us? Who dares attempt this thing?
Can Ester then be slain, and not the King?
Replied the Queen, The man that has done this, The Queens reply.

That cursed Haman, wicked Haman is:
Like as a Felon shakes before the Bench,
Whose troubled silence proves the Evidence,
So Haman trembled, when Queen Ester spoke,
Nor answer, nor excuse, his Guilt could make.
The King, no longer able to digest
So foul a Treachery, forsook the Feast,
Walked in the Garden, where consuming rage
Boiled in his heart, with fire (unapt t'asswage.)
So Haman pleading guilty to the fault,
Besought his life of her, whose life he sought.
When as the King had walked a little space,
(So rage and choler often shift their place)
In, he returned, where Haman fallen flat
Was on the bed, whereon Queen Ester sat;
Whereat the King new cause of rage debates,
(Apt to suppose the worst, of whom he hates)
New passion adds new fuel to his fire,
And faines a cause, to make it blaze the higher:
Is It not enough for him to seek her death, The Kings speech.

( Said he) but with a Lechers tainted breath,
Will he enforce my Queen before my face?
And make his Brothell in our Royal Place?
So said, they veiled Hamans face, as he
Unfit were to be seen, or yet to see:
Said then an *Eunuch sadly standing by, Harbona's speech to the King.

In Hamans Garden, fifty Cubits high,
There stands a Gibbet, built but yesterday,
Made for thy loyal servant Mordecai,
Whose faithful lips thy life from danger freed,
And merit leads him to a fairer meed.
Said then the King, It seems just and good, The King commands to hang Haman.

To shead his blood, that thirsted after blood;
Who plants the tree, deserves the fruit; it is fit
That he that bought the purchase, hansell it:
Hang Haman there; It is his proper good;
So let the Horseleach burst himself with blood:
They straight obeyed: Lo here the end of Pride:
Now rests the King appeased, and satisfi'de. Explicit. hist.

Meditatio decimaquarta.
Cheer up, and caroll forth your silver ditty,
(Heavens winged Quiristers) and fill your City
(The new Jerusalem) with jolly mirth:
The Church has peace in heaven, has peace on earth;
Spread forth your golden pinions, and cleave
The flitting skies; dismount, and quite bereave
Our stupid senses with your heavenly mirth,
For lo, there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
Let Haleluiah fill your warbling tongues,
And let the air, composed of Saintly songs,
Breathe such Celestial Sonnets in our ears;
That whosoe'r this heavenly music hears,
May stand amazed, and (rauish't at the mirth)
Chaunt forth, There Is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth;
Let Mountains clap their joyful, joyful hands,
And let the lesser Hills trace o'r the lands
In equal measure; and resounding Woods,
Bow down your heads, and kiss your neighboring floods:
Let peace and love exalt your key of mirth;
For lo, there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
You holy temples of the highest King,
Triumph with joy; Your sacred Anthemes sing;
Chaunt forth your Hymns, and heavenly Roundelayes,
And touch your Organs on their deeper keys:
For Haman's dead that daunted all your mirth,
And now there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
Proud Haman's dead, who (living) thee oppressed,
Seeking to cut, and sear thy Lilly breast;
The rau'ning Fox, that did annoyance bring
Unto thy Vineyard,'s taken in a Spring.
Seemed not thy Spouse unkind, to hear thee weep,
And not redress thee? Seemed he not asleep?
No, (Sion) no, he heard thy bitter prayer,
But let thee weep: for weeping makes thee fair.
The morning Sun reflects, and shines most bright,
When Pilgrims grope in darkness all the night:
The Church must conquer, ever she gets the prize,
But there is no conquest, where is no enemies:
The Day is thine; In triumph make thy mirth,
For now there is peace in heaven, there is peace on earth:
What man's so dull, or in his brains undone,
To say, (because he sees not) There Is no Sun?
Weak is the faith, upon a sudden grief,
That says, (because not now) There Is no relief:
God's* bound to help, but loves to see men sue: By promise.

Though datelesse, yet the bond's not present due.
Like to the sorrows of our Childbed wines,
Is the sad pilgrimage of humane lives:
But when by throes God sends a joyful birth,
Then find we Peace in heaven, and Peace on earth. (...)
Meditatio decimaquinta.
TO breathe,'s a necessary gift of nature,
Whereby she may discern a living Creature
From plants, or stones: It Is but a mere degree
From Vegitation; and this, has she
Like equally shared out to brutish beasts
With man, who less observes her due behests
(Sometimes) than they, and often by accident,
Do less improve the gift in the event:
But man, whose organs are more fairly dressed,
To entertain a far more noble Ghest,
Has, through the excellence of his Creation,
A Soul Divine; Divine by inspiration;
Divine through likeness to that power Divine,
That made and placed her in her mortal shrine;
From hence we challenge life's prerogative;
Beasts only breathe; It Is man alone does live;
The end of man's Creation, was Society,
Mutual Communion, and friendly Piety:
The man that lives unto himself alone,
Subsists and breathes, but lives not; Never one
Deserved the moity of himself, for he
That Is borne, may challenge but one part of three;
Triparted thus; his Country claims the best;
The next, his Parents; and Himself, the least.
He husbands best his life, that freely gives
It for the public good; He rightly lives;
That nobly dies: it is greatest mastery,
Not to be fond to live, nor fear to dye
On just occasion; He that (in case) despises
Life, earnes it best, but he that ouer-prizes
His dearest blood, when Honor bids him dye,
Steals but a life, and lives by Robbery.
O sweet Redeemer of the world, whose death
Deserved a world of lives! Had Thy dear breath
Been dear to Thee; Oh had Thou but denied
Thy precious Blood, the world for ever had died:
O spoil my life, when I desire to save it,
By keeping it from Thee, that freely gave it.
THE ARGUMENT.
Letters are sent by Mordecai,
That all the Jews, upon the day
Appointed for their death, withstand
The fury of their foe-mens hand.
Sect. 16.
FOrthwith the Scribes were summoned to appear: Chap. 8. 9.

To every Province, and to every Shiere
Letters they wrote (as Mordecai directed)
To all the Jews, (the Jews so much dejected)
To all Lieu-tenants, Captains of the Band,
To all the States and Princes of the Land,
According to the phrase, and diverse fashion
Of Dialect, and speech of every Nation;
All which was styled in the name of King,
And canonized with his Royal Ring:
Lo here the tenor of the Kings Commission;
Whereas of late, (through Hamans foul sedition,) The Kings commission.

Decrees were sent, and spread throughout the Land,
To spoil the Jews, and with impartial hand,
(Upon a day prefixed) to kill, and slay; * The 13. day of the twelfth month.

We likewise grant upon that very day,
Full power to the Jews, to make defense,
And quit their lives, and for a Recompense,
To take the spoils of those they shall suppress,
Showing like mercy to the merciless.
On posts, as swift as Time, was this Decree
Commanded forth; As fast as Day they flee,
Spurred on, and hast'ned with the Kings Command,
Which straight was noys'd, and published through ye Land,
As warning to the Jews, to make provision
To entertain so great an opposition.
So Mordecai (disburthen'd of his grief,
Which now found hopeful tokens of relief)
Departs the presence of the King, addressed
In Royal Robes, and on his lofty Crest
He bore a Crown of gold, his body spread
With Lawne, and Purple deeply colored:
Filled are the Jews with triumphs, and with noise The joy of the Jews*
Simile.

(The common Heralds to proclaim true joys:)
Like as a prisner muffl'd at the tree,
Whose life's removed from death scarce one degree,
His last prayer said, and hearts confession made,
(His eyes possessing deaths eternal shade)
At last (unlooked for) comes a slow Reprieue,
And makes him (even as dead) once more alive:
Amazed, he rends deaths Muffler from his eyes,
And (ouer-ioy'd) knows not he lives, or dies;
So joyed the Jews, whose lives, this new Decree
Had quit from death and danger, and set free
Their gasping souls, and (like a blazing light)
Dispersed the darkness of th'approching night;
So joyed the Jews: and with their solemn Feasts,
They chased dull sorrow from their pensive breasts:
Mean while, the people (startled at the news)
Some grieved, some enui'd, some (for fear) turned Jews. Expl. Hist.

Meditatio decimasexta.
AMong the Noble Greeks, it was no shame
To lose a Sword; It but deserved the name
Of Wars disastrous fortune; but to yield
The right and safe possession of the Shield,
Was foul reproach, and man-lesse cowardice,
Far worse than death to him that skorn'd to prize
His life before his Honor; Honor's won
Most in a just defense; Defense is gone,
The Shield once lost: The wounded Theban cried,
How fares my Shield? which safe, he smiled, and died*
True Honor bides at home, and takes delight
In keeping, not in gaining of a Right;
Scorns usurpation, nor seeks she blood,
And thirsts to make her name not great, as good:
God gives a Right to man; To man, defense
To guard it given; But when a false pretense
Shall ground her title on a greater Might,
What does he else but war with Heaven, and fight
With Providence? God sets the Princely Crown
On heads of Kings; Who then may take it down?
No iuster Quarrel, or more noble Fight,
Than to maintain, where God has given a Right;
There Is no despair of Conquest in that war,
Where God's the Leader; Policy's no bar
To his Designs; no Power can withstand
His high exployts; within whose mighty Hand
Are all the corners of the earth; the hills
His fensiue Bulwarks are, which, when he wills,
His lesser breath can bandy up and down,
And crush the world, and with a wink, can drown
The spacious Universe in suds of Clay;
Where Heaven is Leader, Heaven must win the Day:
God reapes his honor hence; That combat's safe,
Where he is a Combatant, and ventures half:
Right's not impaired with weakness, but preuailes Nil fortitudine indigemus,
si omnes iusti simus, Plutarch.

In spite of strength, when strength and power fails:
Frail is the trust reposed on Troops of Horse;
Truth in a handful, finds a greater force.
Lord, maile my heart with Faith, and be my Shield,
And if a world confront me, I Will not yield.
THE ARGUMENT.
The bloody Massacre: The Jews
Prevail: their fatal Sword subdues
A world of men, and in that fray,
Hamans ten cursed sons they slay.
Sect. 17.
NOw when as Time had rip'ned the Decree, Chap. 9. 1.

(Whose Winter fruit unshaken from the tree
Full ready was to fall) and brought that Day,
Wherein pretended mischief was to play
Her tragic Seane upon the Jewish Stage,
And spit the venom of her bloody rage,
Upon the face of that dispersed Nation,
And in a minute breathe their desolation;
Upon that day (as patients in the fight)
Their scattered force, the Jews did reunite,
And to a head their straggling strength reduced,
And with their fatal hand (their hand disused
To bathe in blood) they made so strong recoyle,
That with a purple stream, the thirsty soil
O'rflowd: and on the pauement (drowned with blood)
Where never was before, they raised a flood:
There lies a headless body, here a limme The Massacre.

Newly dis-ioynted from the trunk of him (...)
Heaven fought for Israel, weakened Pharo's heart,
Who had no Counter-god to take his part:
What meant that cloudy Pillar, that by day Exodus 13. 21.

Did usher Israel in an unknown way?
What meant that fi'ry Pillar, that by night
Appeared to Israel, and gave Israel light?
'Twas not the secret force of Moses Rod, Exodus 14. 16.

That charmed the Seas in twain; 'Twas Moses God
That fought for Israel, and made Pharo fall;
Well thriues the Fray where God's the General:
It Is neither strength, nor undermining slight
Preuailes, where heauen's engaged in the fight.
Me list not ramble into antique days,
To manne this Theme, lest while Ulysses strayes,
His heart forget his home Penelope:
Our jolly Britain finds sufficient Plea
To prove her bliss, and heavens protecting power,
Which had she mist, her glory, in an hour
Had fallen to Cinders, and had past away
Like smoke before the wind; Which happy Day, 5. Nouemb.

Let none but faithless Traitors ever fail
To consecrate, and let this Age entayle,
Upon succeeding times Eternity,
Heavens highest love, in that Days memory.
THE ARGUMENT.
The sons of Haman (that were slain)
Are all hanged up: The Jews obtain
Freedom to fight the morrow after;
They put three hundred more to slaughter.
Sect. 18.
WHen as the fame of that days bloody news Chap. 9. 11.

Came to the King, he said, Behold, the Jews The Kings speech to the Queen.

Have won the Day, and in their just defense,
Have made their wrong, a rightful recompense;
Five hundred men in Susan have they slain,
And that remainder of proud Hamans strain,
Their hands have rooted out; Queen Ester, say,
What further suit (wherein Assuerus may
Express the bounty of his Royal hand)
Rests in thy bosom: What is thy demand?
Said then the Queen: If in thy Princely sight The Queens Answer.

My boon be pleasing, or thou take delight
To grant thy servants suite, Let that Commisssion
(Which gave the Jews this happy days permission
To save their lives) to morrow stand in force,
For their behalfes that only make recourse
To God, and thee, and let that cursed brood
(The sons of Haman, that in guilty blood,
Lie all ingoar'd, unfit to taint a Grave)
Be hanged on Gibbets, and (like co-heires) have
Like equal shares of that deserved shame,
Their wretched father purchased in his name:
The King was pleased, and the Decree was given
From Susan, where 'twixt earth and heaven,
(Most undeserving to be owned by either)
These cursed ten (like twins) were borne together:
When Titan (ready for his Iournall chase)
Had roused his dewy locks, and Rosy face
Inricht with morning beauty, up arose
The Jews in Susan, and their bloody blows
So roughly dealt, that in that dismal day,
A lease of hundreds fell, but on the prey 300. in Susan slain by the Jews.

No hand was laid, so, sweet and jolly rest
The Jews enjoyed, and with a solemn Feast,
(Like joyful Victors dispossessed of sorrow)
They consecrated the ensuing morrow;
And in the Provinces throughout the Land,
Before their mighty, and victorious hand,
Fell more than seventy thousand, but the prey 75000. slain by the Jews in
the Provinces.

They seaz'd not, and in memory of that day,
They solemnized their victorious Gests,
With gifts, and triumphs, and with holy Feasts. Explicit hist.

Meditatio decimaoctaua.
THe Doctrine of the School of Grace discents
From Natures (more uncertain) rudiments,
And are as much contrayr, and opposite
As Yea, and Nay, or black, and purest white:
For nature teaches, first to understand,
And then believe; but grace does first command
Man to believe, and then to comprehend;
Faith is of things unknown, and must intend,
And so are above conceit; What we conceive,
We stand possessed of, and already have,
But faith concerns such things, as yet we have not,
Which eye sees not, ear hears not, heart conceiues not;
Hereon, as on her groundwork, our salvation
Erects her pillars; From this firm foundation,
Our souls mount up the new Jerusalem,
To take possession of her Diadem;
God loves no sophistry; Who argues least
In graces School, concludes, and argues best;
A woman's Logic passes here; For it is
Good proof to say, It Is so, because it is:
Had that old Abraham* Genesis 22. 10.
Patr'arch cours'd with flesh and blood,
Bad had his faith been, though his reasons good;
If God bid do, for man to question, Why?
Is but an interrogatiue deny:
The fleshly balances of our conceits,
Have neither equal poysure; nor just weights,
To weigh, without impeachment, Gods design;
There Is no proportion 'twixt things Divine,
And mortal: Lively faith may not depend,
Either upon the occasion, or the end.
The glorious Suns reflected beams suffice,
To lend a luster to the feeblest eyes,
But if the Eye too covetous of the light,
Boldly outface the Sun, (whose beams so bright
And vndispers'd, are too-too much refined
For view) is it not justly stricken blind?
I dare not task stout Samson for his death; Judge. 16. 30.

Nor wandering Jonah, that bequeathed his breath
To raging Seas, when God commanded so; Iona. 1. 12. Ester 9. 13.

Nor thee (great Queen) whose lips did ouerflow
With streams of blood; nor thee (O cruel kind) Ester 9. 14.

To slake the vengeance of a woman's mind,
With flowing rivers of thy subjects blood;
From bad beginnings, God creates a good,
And happy end: What I cannot conceive,
Lord, let my soul admire, and believe.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Feast of Purim consecrated:
The Occasion why 'twas celebrated;
Letters wrote by Mordecai,
To keep the memory of that Day.
Sect. 19.
SO Mardocheus throughout all the Land Chap. 9. 20. Mordecai sends letters to
celebrate a Feast yearly.

Dispersed his Letters, and with them, command
To celebrate these two days memory
With Feasts, and gifts, and yearly iollity,
That after ages may record that day,
And keep it from the rust of time, that they
Which shall succeed, may ground their holy mirth
Upon the joys, those happy days brought forth,
Which changed their sadness, and black nights of sorrow,
Into the brightness of a gladsome morrow;
Whereto the Jews (to whom these Letters came)
Gave due observance, and did soon proclaim
Their sacred Festiuals, in memory
Of that days joy, and joyful victory:
And since the Lots (that Haman did abuse, The original of the feasts of Purim.

To know the dismal day, which to the Jews
Might fall most fatal, and, to his intent,
Least vnprospitious) were in the event
Crossed with a higher Fate, than blinded Chance,
To work his ruin, their deliverance:
They therefore in remembrance of the Lot
(Whose hop'd-for sad event succeeded not)
The solemn Feasts of * Purim did inuest, Interp. Lo^^.

And by the name of Purim called their Feast;
Which to observe with sacred Complement,
And ceremonial rites, their souls indent,
And firmly'inroll the happy memory
Ith'hearts of their succeeding progeny,
That time (the enemy of mortal things)
May not, with hou'ring of his nimble wings.
Beat down the dear memorial of that time,
But keep it flowring in perpetual prime.
Now, lest this shining day in times progress Ester, and Mordecai send letters
to confirm the feasts of Purim.

Perchance be clouded with forgetfulness,
Or left the gaulled Persians should debate
The bloody slaughter, and re vlcerate
In aftertimes, their former misery,
And blurre the glory' of this days memory,(...)
THE ARGUMENT.
Assuerus Acts upon Record:
The just man's virtue, and reward.
Sect. 20.
ANd Assuerus stretched his heavy hand, Chap. 10. 1.

And laid a Tribute, both on Sea, and Land;
What else he did, what Trophies of his fame,
He left for Time to glorify his Name,
With what renown, and grace, he did appay
The faithful heart of loyal Mordecai;
Are they not kept in endless memory,
Recorded in the Persian History?
For Mordecai possessed the second seat The greatness and virtue of Mordecai.

In all the Kingdom, and his name was great;
Of God and man his virtues were approved,
By God and man, both honored, and beloved;
Seeking his peoples good, and sweet prosperity,
And speaking joyful peace to his posterity. Expl. Hist.

Meditatio vltima.
THus thriues the man, Thus prosper his endeavors,
That builds on faith, and in that faith perseuers*
It is no loss, to lose; no gain, to get,
If he that loses all, shall win the Set:
God helps the weakest, takes the losers chair,
And setting on the King, does soon repair
His loss with vengeance; He Is not always best
That takes the highest place, nor he the least
That sits beneath: for outward fortunes can
Express (how great, but) not how good's the man:
Whom God will raise, he humbles first a while;
And where he raises, often he means to foil.
It matters not (Lord) what my fortunes be,
May they but lead, or whip me home to thee.
FINIS.

