THE SPY Discovering the Danger of ARMINIAN HERESY and SPANISH TREACHERY:
Written by I. R.

Possibile est Satyras non scribere?

(...).

Printed at Strasburgh 1628.

TO ^ll zealous Professor^ and true hearted Patriots in Great Britain.
MY blus^ing disabilities have at length adventured to pass the pikes of
censure, unprovided of any other arms, or ornaments, then sincere loyalty,
devoted to my King and Countries service; rather then my King and Country
should be (for want of a timely discovery of those dangers, wherein they have
been cunningly and intricately entangled) thrust blindfold upon the pikes of
forreyne enemies, or the poyniards of domestic traitors. Sooner had these
naked raptures visited the world, had this age afforded but an Exo. ^* 17.
Egyptian midwife to forward them. Feign would they have fluttred abroad the
last Parliament, but the supercilious looks of over-awing greatness had so
danted these degenerous times, that none durst adventure, to give wings to
their desire. Howsoever, I hope, their flight home, from a forreyne Country
will not now be unseasonable. The rain was ceased, and the windows of heaven
were shutt, when Noah sent forth his returning raven; but the inundation
remained. All the fabric falls not, as soon as ever the foundation sinckes:
but the mystery of iniquity runs on so many wheels, that it is to be feared,
the removal of one (though it may slacken) can ^^^^^erly hinder the motion.
Yet unless all be d^red, the danger may be (indeed) partly abated, can not be
wholly avoided. If any censure me for presenting so grave a subject, treading
in measure; they may consider that the whole book is but an explanation of the
Frontis-piece: and such expressions square best with a* metricall proportion.
As for statelynes of style, my scantling of time permitted me not (had I
affected that, more then plainnes, in so serious a matter) to be so refyn'd.
Whatsoever the acceptance be, it proceeds from a well meaning heart. And J
beseech God, that with the oracles of our Laws, and ornaments of our state,
(especially with him that is the chief of both) they may work the same
effects, for the preventing of imminent danger, and providing for the public
safety, that I desire. Whose consultations that they may have free proceeding
for the establishing such wholesome Laws, as may tend to the advancement of
Gods glory, his Majesty's honor, the Gospells increase, and the Kingdomet
welfare, I will daily offer up my most earnest supplications before the throne
of grace.

Strasborgh Aug. 23. sty. vet.

Your affectionate though afflicted Servant and Countreyman, J. R.

THE SPY.
MVST I turn mad, like Solo^ mentia (...) mulan* insolitis tibi v^^ sibus
(capitis (...)) persuasit Atheniensib (...) Mega^^s^^ (...) b^llu infer Just
l^
Solon and write rimes,
When Certain^ bitter invectiue oration^ of de (...) nes against Phil. of
Macedon and (...) Cicero ((...) mitation of him) against M* Antonius
Philippicks would better fit the times?
Yes, Yes, I must. For what soever they be
In press, or pulpit, dare of speech be free
In truth's behalf; and vent their grieved mind*
In phrase more serious, or some graver kind,
(Though, at the common good, they only aim,
And be as strictly Careful to shun blame
As wisdom can devise): they cannot escape
The malice of the age. Some mouths must gape
(Whose guilty Conscience tells them, this was pend
To lash at us) their sland'rous breath to spend
In their disgrace; and bring them into hate
As movers of sedition in the state.
As if truth's friend, must needs be Englands foe.
These rimes, I hope, shall not be censured so
Councels, of old, encouraged such men still
(Till those made Councillors did curb their will)
Who boldly would, for public safety, utter
What, now, the best, in private, dare not mutter
Under the Fleetes damnation. Nay it is feared,
That their advise in Council is not heard
Who pass their kewes enioyn'd, or else come short.
Nor is this strange, for we have Presidents for it.
Our fathers dead, their sons their courage lost:
Many of blood, of spirit few can boast.
Where now is Essex* Norris, Rawleigh, Drake?
(At whose remembrance yet proud Spain does quake)
Where Is Burleigh, Cecill, all those axletrees
Of state, that brought our foes upon their knees?
Where are such fearelesse, peerless Peers become?
All silenced? what, is all the world turnd' dumb?
Oh how has trech'rous coward fear enchanted
This plying temporizing age; and danted
Our noblest spirits? what dull heavy fate
Has lulled asleep, and stup^fi'd our state?
That few will see, at least none dare disclose
Those plots our foreign and domestic foes
Have laid to ruin us. Shall the Austrian brood
Abroad be gorged, and glutted with the blood
Of our allies and friends? nay shall they here
At home a Babel of Confusion rear;
And none speak to prevent it? is there not
Un slaughtered, or un poisoned left one Scot
Dares tell the blindfold state it headlong reeles
To Spanish thraldom upon spanish wheels?
And that those Pillars may be justly feared
Will fall on us, that we our selves have reared?
Then give him leave (for Stons sake) to speak,
whose heart, with grief, had it no ve^t, would break.
Thou therefore, sacred Mother, Christ's dear Wife,
*From whose pure breasts, I sucked the food of life)
And thou, dear Country, (in whose peaceful lap
First to receive my breath, 'twas my blessed hap
Vouchsafe t'accept, and graciously peruse
Th'abortiue offspring of an unripe Muse:
And suffer not weak insufficiency
To counterpoyse his hearts true loyalty
In your affections, who to do you good,
Would think the exhausion of his dearest blood
Great happiness; and want of liberty
Large freedom: nay, could even contented be
Or for your safety to be sacrificed
Or your salvation Anathematized.
Nor fear I censure, though strict Cato read
Whilst in the well known path of truth I tread,
And travail in her cause. The subjects weight
Repells the breath of every vain Conceit.
And for Spaines agents, and times flattering Minions
I neither pass their persons nor opinions.
For God, that does the hearts of all men see,
Knovves my intentions just and honest be.
''Tis no vainglorious humor makes me do it:
Nor does malicious envy force me to it:
But hate of Spanish treason, and true zeal
Unto the good of Church and Commonvveale.
Why therefore, armed with so just a cause,
Should I the censure fear of right-full laws?
Or once suspect a Check or prohibition
From any but a Popish packed Commisssion?
Nor can the Council take such subjects ill,
As to true Patriots have been vvellcome still.
What, ever yet, did merit condemnation,
Tending alone to public preservation?
Mistake me not (you Props of state) I pray:
Such bold presumption never yet bare sway
In my acknowled'gd weakness, as to go
About ^'informe your well tried judgments: no
I b^^ persuade and not prescribe, incite,
And not instruct your wisdoms, to what is right*
Those then of malice shall traduce my name,
By being guilty, bring themselves to shame,
Should such squint Lamian envions eyes reflect
O^ their own breasts, they would themselves correct
Beforeth would censure others but such spite
Shall never mount my Muses lowest flight.
So high this world I prize not, as to close
With falsehoods fautours, and Gods favor lose.
If friends by flattery be procured alone,
Befriend me heaven, on earth I Will look for none.
Grant therefore (God of truth) into his hands
I Never fall that holy truth withstands.
The Explanation of the Table Prefixed.
AN endless bloody war, that never yet
Cessation, truce, or peace did once admit
From the worlds Cradle, so it is hoary age
Has still been waged, with unappeased rage,
By cursed Satan, and his damned bands
Of reprobates, against Christ's church* like sands
Her foes in number are: no station's free
From fierce assaults, and furious battery,
When time began this malice first began,
Nor will it end but with the latest man
''Time shall produce. Thus justice has decreed
''Those shall be crowned in heaven, on earth must bleed.
To exercise the Churches patience, hope
And faith, God has ordaind a Turk or Pope
To persecute her saints: her sins to scourge,
And from her purer gold the dross to purge
Of vain corruption, often he tryes in flames
Her glorions Martyrs: and sometimes he tames
Herself* admiring, and applauding pride
(That on presumption of his love does ride
In to that high conceit, the Jews have told her
Since God has chose her, he is bound t'uphold her
By Neither totally no^ fully, but in the sencibility of operation.
drawing from her his supporting grace.
That see'ing in what a weak and vvretched case
She is without his help: how soon she would fall
(If grace be not her leader General)
To Heresy, or any other snare,
The tempter, to entrap her, shall prepare:
She may rely, upon his power alone
Who is the Rock of her salvation.
To be exposed thus to Satan's spleen,
Of Christ's true Church, a true mark still has been.
The church malignant, whose prodigious head
The Devil is himself, we, see, has led
The Captive world in triumph: lived at rest:
And most of nations with subjection pressed.
No streams of Martyrs blood her temples di'de:
Nor did she persecution e're abide.
His Cruelty, not to his friends, but foes,
The Prince of darkness, here in this world, shows.
Whom, but the Apostles, did he sift, like wheat?
And whom, like Paul, did he desire to beat,
Without, with Jewish scourges, and within,
With buffets of his flesh-assaulting sin?
Such barbarous tortures, who did e're endure
(Without all pity) as the saints most pure?
This bold adventurous foe, his fiery darts
Directs, with matchless cunning, at the hearts
Of them that are, the best of saints. And where
He sees the richest graces shine most clear,
There he his strongest engines does erect:
(If possible) even to subvert the elect.
Thus have we seen in heat of vvarres alarmes,
(Where bloody fields are paved with broken arms)
The foes redouble all their force and might,
To break the battles, where the gen'ralls fight.
Such was the Syrian monarchs, 1. Kin: 22. 31.
charge to bring
Captive, o^ kill none else but Isreal's King.
So Caesar thought those soldiers worthiest grace,
Whose points still levelled at their foemens face. Miles saci^n* feri.

Thus strong temptations, forcibly applied,
Have made the best of Gods own children slide.
Lot, Noah, David, Peter, foully fell;
Because their gifts, did all men's else, excel.
Adam, in Paradise, no safety found:
Nay he, that of all safety is the ground,
Escaped not unassaulted: of whose fare,
Good reason, all his servants should have share.
Stand forth then, Roman strumpet, wipe thine eyes
Pull of thy scales of blindness: yet be wise.
Ere't be too late. Then shall thon clearly see
Who the erroneous, who the true Church, be.
I will not (nor is it fitting) here discuss
Those points of doctrine, where in you from us
Are in Diameter opposed, as far
As bright truth from dark falls hood: such a war
Requires a larger and more spacious field,
Then this restrained strain can aptly yield.
Wherefore in freer method, more solute,
I leave your tenants for the schools dispute.
And yet how easy vvere't to make you know,
Humane traditions are (alas) too lovv
To mate Gods sacred word: nor may the vain
Inventions of an erring mortal brain
Brave the oracle of truth. if the Arc to check
Dagon presume, Dagon shall break his neck*
How easy were 't to prove, that saving grace,
Of our corrupted nature, must take place?
Error has Champions: it is not my intent
That Antichristian Council, which from Trent
Takes it is denomination to refell,
Since those blasphemons Cannons now do smell
Over all the world: and you your selves are feign
Many (for shame) back to revoke again.
No (were there no mark else, the Church to know)
Our truth, your falsehood, this would clearly shovv
To prove us Christ's, and aggravate your sin
We have the patients, you the agents bin
In all massacres, treasons, persecutions,
Close murders, cruel bloodshed, and dirutions
Of Cities, kingdoms woeful devastations.
Rebellions, povvderplots, and vvrong invasions,
Performed to force men's consciences, and make
Inconstant souls, with error part to take.
These are the bloody glosses of your text
Which, you well hoped, we should interpret next.
And if your projects be not timely crossed
Our freedom and religion both are lost.
For, that our safety might be vndermind,
You have not only, all your powers combined
Abroad, but even at home, prepared such way,
That we, our selves, should, our own selves, betray.
To what end else, did you (in time of danger)
You, introduce, we entertain a stranger
To Our reformed doctrine? was it for Conscience sake
To bring us to the truth? or was it to make
Entrance, for Spanish waspes, to the English hiue
While we, for conscience, with our selves should strive?
Thus simple truth, has by your cunning bill
Assaild without, falsely betrayed within.
And when religions bond's once broke asunder,
No mervaile foreign Atheism bring us under.
Which, that the Church may better take to heart,
And yet prevent that, for which else she will smart,
Her dangers here appear: that when you view them
You better may advise which way t'eschew them. A

Truths Fortress, whose fundation's laid upon
The Apostles, Prophets, and that Cornerstone Caste^^o (...) ^a verita.

VVhereon they build; morter'd and cemented
With blood of Martyrs (for the gospel shed)
Then, by degrees, raised to the present frame,
By such of ancient, and of later fame,
Whose works, and words, lives, lines, hearts hands have made
Truth flourish, error vanish, falsehood fade,
And shak'd proud Babel: stands beleaguered, here,
On all sides by her foes. Two Ports appear,
"Against which the assailants (ar'md with fury rage,
And hellish spleen, that nothing can assuage
But blood and ruin) all their engines plant,
And forces bend: here is, of plots, no want, B

Or Cunning projects: for their brains are filld
With all the stratagems that hell can yield. Port: orthe dosso.

Religions Port's beleaguered by the whore C

Of erring Babel's cursed Paramour: The Pope.

Whose right hand's armed with the fulmination
Of Kingdomes-blasting excommunication:
To send to hell, or some such place, all those
His jurisdiction, or his laws oppose.
His bull's his buckler: vvherevvith he defends
(As he makes credulous souls believe) his friends;
Pardons their sins, pulls such from Satan's pavves
As damn themselves, for his vnhallovved cause.
Next him, the Cardinals march in pompous sort: ^

VVh' would rather the defendants of the port
Corrupt, then force by conquest. This implies,
They shall not want for earthly dignityes,
And temp'rall honors, that with Rome will side
Against heaun: in worldly triumph, those shall ride:
And he, for Babels whore, will spend a soul,
Shall quaffe in fornications golden boule.
Be it so, Lord, such their revvard have here,
And plagues hereafter: but thy children dear
Now suffer, that they may be after Crovvn'd,
When they shall, in thy cup of wrath be drovvnd.
A squadron of fat Bishops marches next*
Whose arms are Pickaxes in stead of text.
Truth, by the spirit can sustain no harm: ^

Therefore they would batter't, with the fleshes arm, (...)

The last (though not the least in force) consists
Of a whole Legion of * Ignatius Priests.
Who (having learnd the undermining art
From him, that taught it first to Berthold Schwart) (...)

Doubt not to make Truth's strongest hold to fly,
With * pouderbarrells, up into the sky.
When lying, forging, and equivocation,
Too vveake, they found, to batter truth's foundation,
And that the seeming'st, reasons they could rack
From their sublimest brains, reflected back
Upon themselves, with shame, and with disgrace:
(For falsehood must, at last, to truth give place
Though never so nearly varnished) they betook
Themselves to treasons, and their books forsook,
(As (...)
Julius did his keys) with fire and svvord,
In stead of zeal, and the spiritual word,
They take the field: not only to enthrall
Men's consciences, but liberty and all.
Thus arguments for arms they have refused,
And treasons base for their best reasons ^sed:
Thus have they chose for Pallas powerful charms*
Mars his more harsh and forcible alarmes.
And not prevailing by far-strain'd conclusions,
Would put down Truth by lavvlesse vvrong confusio^s.
This Germany too sensibly has felt
And smarted for (whose soul can choose but melt
To think on it? where the title to the Crown
Of that unhappy Kingdom, tumbled down
Truth's best professors. For the plot was laid,
Before the election of the Paltz grave made,
How to defeat him. This was only done
To make him on his own confusion run.
And that they might the eyes of justice blind
With some pretense of equity: and bind
Our hands, that were engaged to support
So just a cause. How grossly did they sport
With thy mild nature? thou, whose sacred name
The title of the Prince of Peace may Claim.
How was thy soul abused with false relations;
And, hopes of ne're-meant reconciliations?
How did that damned Don, and 's agents here,
That were, of all thy subjects, placed most near
Thy nought-suspecting heart, infatuate
The wisest Prince on earth? and captivate
That judgment, whereat all the world did gaze?
Sure he that skrew'd thee into such a maze
Of error, was no Spanyard, but a devil
Sent up from hell, to work the Church such evil.
How could thou else with patience sit, and see
Truth's fall, and thine own childrens misery?
While (as it is thought) there was more treasure spent
In fruitles embassades, and complement;
Then would not only have the Paltz secured
But in it is bounds the Austrian pride immured.
Were nor for this (blessed King) and the old ones plaster,
Thou migh'st (perchance) have, yet, been Britains master.
Now Germany lies drovv'nd in her own blood,
And all that for Religions quarrel stood
Have suffered Martyrdom: and Frances King
Is set a work the Huguenots to bring
Into subjection. Yet one sore does ly
In the eye of the Pope, and 's Catholic Majesty,
Which needs must be removed before the rest
And that's our land, of Nido d'he^^^tici* ^
Heretics the nest.
(As they please term it) how they this may do,
Spaines council, and the Roman Conclaue too,
With Beelzebub, that sits as President
At Council table, have a long time spent.
With foreign forces to invade a land
So rich, so well appointed, so well manned
With high resolved spirits, that ever bore
Themselves, in vvarres, victorious heretofore,
And made good proof of perfect valor (till
Base treachery against the valiant's will
Did Generally Mislead them now of late,
And the whole world may Admire all thereat)
T'invade so stout a people, needs must be
A dangerous action, full of jeopardy.
Besides the very thought of eighty eight
Dants them, and quells such resolutions straight.
Wherefore it is safest, in such case to fly
From open war, to secret treachery.
"He that intends to bring a country under,
"Either he must, before he lighten, thunder:
"Or else raise up, and nourish in it a faction,
"May make him entrance, through their own destraction.
In eyghty eight, the former they assayed:
Then treating peace, when the had their anchores vvaigh'd,
To sail to our destruction. But (be blessed
You heavens) their svvord was turned on their own breast.
Now of the second project they make trial:
(And Spanish gold, alas, finds rare denial)
From Spaines exchequer some, some from the Of Pardons etc.
Popes
A^e fed with gold, but more with golden hopes.
This the have attempted long: and how too true
It Is the have prevaild (I fear) too late, we rue.
^i^st, seeing A Religa^^o.
Religion is the strongest Chain
To ty men's har^s together: and it is vain
To hope for conquest, whiles that Concords band
Environs (like a wall of brass) our Land:
His Holiness has learned of Machiavell,
(In whom all Popes have ever been read well)
T'advise his The Devil.
standard bearer, to devide
Truths chiefest followers: that while they do side
In factions among themselves, he may with ease
Destroy them all, even as himself shall please
By taking part with the one. Which to effect
Satan his writts does readily direct
To all the peers of darkness. Who being met,
And (capering to the Councell-table) set:
In comes the Devils Duke, great Lucifer:
When all, to make obeisance, quickly stir
Scraping their cloven feet, and lovvely bending:
Because their honors are from him depending.
Straight Beelzebub, the chosen President
After a hem (that all in pieces rent
The walls of L^mbo) an oration roared
To all the Luciferians, amply stored
With threatenings: what he said, I did not hear:
If needs you will know the cause, I was not there.
But, by the sequel, I perchance may guess
That solemnly his hate he did profess
To Truth, and all her follo'wers: and 's desire
T'enlarge his empire, and to bring it ^igher
To universal greatness. But there lay
(To curb his great designs) a rub in the way,
Truths fortress: whence he often had sustaind
Loss irrecov'rable: and seldom gaind
Ought else, but shameful falls, disgraceful foyles,
Or strong repulses. Therefore all their vviles
Of hellish policy, they now must prove,
This let, of their ambition, to remove.
All spend their censure, that, since force prevails not,
Treason must do it: that too too often fails not.
Wherefore with general voices they conclude
That fiends in show of friends, must truth delude,
And so betray her. To this cursed end,
In humane shape Arminius they send;
Got by Pelagius, and in Rome nursed up:
Whence, drunk with superstitious errors cup,
He 's sent to Leyden by the Popes direction
To blast the world with 's heresies infection,
Nor rests the ambiguons crafty monster there;
But spewes the poison of's false doctrine here:
Comes, like a protestant, in show, before;
And vows he hates the Antichristian whore;
Disclaimes her tenants: Nay none seems to be
More zealous, in the gospells cause, then he.
(Oh that false tongues were ever made so smooth,
Or lying lips should have the power to sooth,)
Tell him the doctrine of the Pope is' true
Concerning merits, he will censure you
For error straight. Say that we may attain
By nature, power salvation to gain,
By vvorking it our selves: he will reply
These doctrines are condemnd for heresy:
And yet (what positiuely he thus denies)
By necessary consequence implies.
So that observe him well: within you will find
A friars heart, as here his coule behind.
Behold, now, satan's masterpiece, t'or'e spread
The Church with Popery, so long banished.
Had he, in public, these his tenants held,
And justified, he should have been expelld
From all reformed Churches; and confuted
Had he such, Theses in the schools disputed.
Therefore, with truth, dissembling to take part
He ( Ioab like) does closely, vvound her heart.
And silly souls, entangled by him, ly
In nets of errors, that they cannot spy.
Yet though Arminius, Holla^d had infected,
Since we, his poisonous doctrine had detected,
And that blessed King, most learnedly refelld
Those false positions seduced Vorstius held:
What madness vvas't, for us, to foster here
Those errors, that our Church condemned there?
Had satan's instruments been all without,
The danger were not great: we need not doubt
So much our safety. But Da chi mi fido mi guar do Dio. Da chi mi no^ fido mi
guar ^^ro (...).
within, they lurk,
That, under name of truth's stout'st cha^pions work
Her ruin: and to back her, making shovv,
Betray her, and conspire her overthrow.
No sooner comes Arminius to untwine
The bond of concord, and to undermine
Religion, with condemned Pelagianisme
(To make way for the Pope) but factious Schism,
With senseless Atheism, cold neutrality, H ^.

Loose Epicurisme, and damned Policy
Are ready t'entertaine him: and declare
Themselves (perfidious vvretches as they are)
For him, g'ainst truth receiud. Wherefore, in have,
As he is foremost, by the devil placed
With schisms vvild fire, Riligions Port to set
In a combustion, he is straightvvay met
By messengers sent to salute him. Who
They are, I scarce can yet precisely know.
But Bishops Chapleines they should be, I deem
For, by their stately port, no less they seem.
And such is he, whose purblind Couzning eye ^

It Is objects (as't appears) does multiply,
And make two Sacraments seem sea'vn. Like him.
(But that his Carriage something is more grim)
Is he, that takes upon him to suppress
All books against his Leyden friend: unless
His sense of feeling be a little feed.
(Were I his indge) it should be so indeed.
But him that welcomes first this Heretic,
His very Intus quod latet externa pingitur in facie Ca^e a signatis.
looks proclaim a Schismatic.
He has Commission, with a false forged key
To let this monster in, and so make way
For all the rest of that accursed crew
In truths chief Martyrs blood, their hands t'mbrue.
These, these, not those at Clerkenvvell we took,
The strong foundation of our Church have shook,
And made Religion reele. Our foes we shun:
But these false feigned friends have truth undone.
Oh vipers most unnatural; thus to tear
The bowels of that mother, held you dear.
Alas, alas, too true it is I see,
All men are for themselves; few Christ, for thee.
Error prevails: and while thy sheapheards sleep
Wolves in sheep clothing, Worry all thy sheep.
Who, almost, cares which way Religion bends,
So they may compass their ambitious ends?
How sone do those that should firm Mo^ntaines be,
For truth to build on, lean to popery:
Laud Romish laws, and to disgrace endeavor,
In truth's profession, such as would persever.
So they may rise, they make their betters fall.
Thus do they ship wrack faith, love, soul and all.
Yet (blessed be God) Truth never was so distressed,
But she had still some Champions (those the best)
T'abet her quarrel. See the faiths defender, ^

VVth's brandished sword, is ready aid to lend her;
And thouhands more of soldiers stout there be,
Which never yet, to ertour, (...). 19. 18
bowed their knee,
For truths sake, would, in midst of faggots dance:
Yea Bishops some. But see a luckles chance
Befalls one Prelate: hastening to repel M

Arminius and's adherents back to hell
For fear of faction. He himself is taken
By proud Ambition: that is still the bane N

Of all religious acts, the root of evil,
The Character and darling of the devil:
And violently (I know not why) 's thrown down
Unable to resist, even bv a frown.
Me thinks it is pity, for a cause unjust
That godly gravity should ly in the dust.
But, though he fall, himself (he says) shall rise
Tu null^ plangente.
And he shall fall, when none shall wet their eyes.
How speed the rest: their well meant labor 's lost:
A bald appa'ritour has their journey crossed:
Who muzz'ling them, by virtue of his box
Extorts the spirits svvord from the orthodox.
Nor do these flattr'ing Prelates cease to bring
Such men in hatred, daily, with their King:
And falsely, that they are Calvinists, report
Only to make them odious in the court.
Nor is it unlike, some hope, by pleasing so
The Kingdoms secret bane, and Churches foe,
They may, in this golden corrupted state,
Bishoprics purchase, at an easier rate
Then the chiese-iustice-ship. Thus Error bears
Her self aloft: while Truth (bedevv'd with tears
To think upon the woeful sad events
Schisms ever bring upon the Church) laments.
For, if the monuments of formerages
We search: and studiously turn ore the pages
Of all historians: they will show us plain,
No state, or Kingdom ever did sustain
Such fatal dovvnfalls, gene'rall devastations,
Final subversions, and depopulations,
By open foes: (though never so fiercely bent) (...)

As by intestine civil broils. How went
The Grecian Monarchy to nothing? why
Lost Rome her greatness? wherefore does she ly
Buried in her own ruins (who was once
The glory of the East) an heap of stones?
But ask antiquity, how these did fall,
'T will answer, In quo discordia cives, Perduxi^ mi^eros Virgi.
discord has or'ethrowne the^ all.
Enquire of Carthage, and her rubbish towers
Will cry, would Hannos' house had never been ours.
Ask how the Thracian empire's stately seat
Became a slave to Mahomet the great,
How we lost all those Countries in the East,
And how that land our Saviors presence blessed?
Truth must reply, dissension was their fall.
And Christian princes discord lost them all.
This was spide wisely by a grave (...)
Bashaw,
And as a strong persuasion used to draw
Great Soliman to Rhodes. For while (quoth he)
The Christian princes thus divided be,
They hasten their Christia^us occas^^^ ^testinis discordijs lab^^^
destruction. 'twas too true.
This Counsel Rhodes and Hungary did rue.
"Civil dissensions are most mortal ever:
"But when religion breeds them, then they sever
"The very souls of men. This nature makes
"Become unnatural: it no notice takes
"Of father, brother, friend: but all does use
"With like Contempt, with equal hate pursues.
Which Satan, (the enemy of humane peace.
The gospells glory, and the truths increase)
Perceiving; and by long experience knowing,
That nothing keeps religion more from growing,
Then Church contentions. As the surest way
To raise up error, and make Truth decay;
He has suborned, in all ages, those
That, under Qui sub nomine Chri stiano doctri uae resisterent Christianae.
Tertul:
Christ's own name, should Christ oppose.
None's hurt, but by himself: to Christ none is
A foe so mortal, as he, that seems his.
Schisms in the church, are like, in the soul, a vvound:
To cure't no Aesculapius can be found.
They Are like * Elias cloud: though small, at first, *

Yet still increasing; and being daily nursed
With male contented humors: at the length,
They (by degrees) attain to so much strength;
Truth's suune is by them overshadowed quite,
And, like a tempest, on the church, they light,
Or'ewhelming, with a bloody, inundation
Cities and kingdoms, even to desolation.
Such sad proceedings had the Arrian error;
Which, first contemned, proved afterward a terror
To all the world. That spark, whence once it brake
To flames, made Europe, Asia, Afrike quake.
And so obscured the Churches glory over,
She never could her luster yet recover.
So was the Mahomet.
Arabian, in Heraclius days
(Whom Satan did another agent raise
Truth to disturb) when he began to broach
His damned Dogma's, fitter of reproach
And scorn reputed, then represt to b'e
By force, or Counsels censure. And thus he
(Though an unread Barbarian) after came,
By this connivence, to attain such fame
For false supposed truth (since no man could
Gainsay, as it was thought* because none would,
This nevv-spring doctrine) that it quickly grevv
Through force and juggling of this Pagan Jew
To such an height of greatness, and of power,
That from that age, unto this present hour,
His barbarous proud successors still have been
The executioners of Satan's spleen,
And heaviest scourges, for the Gospells side,
That ever Christendom did yet abide.
"So fatal it is: (oh then what state would doe'?)
"To let an error, in the church, take root.
If later times examples better take,
And in men's minds deeper impression make:
What frequent streams of blood of Christians drevv
The mad, fantastic, giddy-headed crew
Of Germane Anabaptists? to maintain
Whose gross erroneous tenants, there were slain
Thrice fifty thousand souls: who lost their breath
In that false quarrel by a timeles death
If then the obtrustion of new dogmatiques
Upon the abused Church, so deeply pricks
Her grieved heart: if it her quiet mar
And turn her happy peace to bloody war:
What Belials brats, or Bichris sons could find
In heart, to be s'vnnaturall and unkind
As to that mother, ill for good, to render
Who has been ever, of their vvellfate, tender?
Oh that such dangerous serpents ere should rest,
In The choysest mansions, of a Kingdoms breast,
Would suck her heart blood out: it were too much
In monster-moulding Africa to find such.
Who then would ere suspect a monstrous seed
And more prodigious Africa ere did breed
Should spawne in England? in so cold an air
Where matter of corruption should be rare.
That then, that does this mi'shap'd births create
Is not the sun of zeal, but fire of hate,
And slime of pride and treason: these they be
That turn a man into a prodigy.
And such, there are too many: who do hope
And strongly labor to reduce the Pope,
Us her'd b' Arminius: that themselves, in time,
To the honor of a Cardinals cap, may clime:
First let them break their necks. And let that hand
Be ever marked with the ignominions brand
Of infamous sedition, whose appeal,
For Spanish-English favor, not for zeal
To God or truth, did hither first transfer
The Belgian Heretic, to make us err.
Did we not see, of late, what sad effect
This doctrine wrought, in that pernicious sect?
Had not the States, like, to their cost, to have felt
(By the treacherous designs of Barnevelt,
His sons, and others) what religious fruits
We might expect from such seditious bruites?
If, the same danger, we had meant to shun,
Why, the same hazard, did we rashly run?
Nor were these tenants in the schools discust
(Fit places where such paradoxes must
Be controverted) but in public print*
(To make unlearned vulgar eyes to squint
From truth on falsehood) all the land about
These dangerous books are cast, to make men doubt
The truth received: and not resolving where
Safely to stand, or to what side t'adhere,
To fall as fast to Rome or atheism
As (...) Sozom: Scholis ac parietibus clausit. Aug. de C. D.
those in Arrius time to Gentilisme.
Better discretion from the heathens laws
Might be observed. For no religious cause
With them, was handled' among the vulgar sort*
And with the Turckes, his life he forfaites for it
Dares question any. Learned Varro shut
Such books in schools and private closets. But
Boue all the Apostles and the fathers were
Herein most chary. For when ever there
Sprung any difference 'tvvixt them: they never made
Saucy appeals to temprall Kings, to shade
Or bolster up their fancyes. None did write
Bitter invectiues against his opposite:
Nor clamorous bills in any princes court
Put up. but Act. 15.
lovingly they did resort
In The fear of God together: there propose
Their doubts, allege their reasons, confirm those:
And then determine from Gods sacred word
What must be follovv'd, what must be ahorr'd.
Good sheapherds lead their flocks to feeding, nigh
Those pleasing rivers, that stream (...) Sep. Ps. 23. 2
quietly
And not in whirle pooles. Those of highest place
Shall have fruition in the almighty's grace,
That draw most souls unto him. Where shall they
Become, that fright unstable souls away?
Consider this, all you, whose hot desire
Of worldy honor, far surmounts the fire
Of your cold zeal. And fix in heaven your mind*
Where, only, lasting honor, you shall find.
So shall, our Church, be happy in her seed:
So shall she be, from present dangers, freed:
So shall the Gospel, amongst us, ever flourish:
So shall our state, the true professors nourish:
So shall the God of Truth your labors bless
And your endeavors Crown with vvish'd success.
Port della Fidelita.
NOw rise up Rawleigh, help me to unfold
A mystery, shall make the blood grow cold
In all true English hearts. Which to defeat,
Those boundless brains ofthine did ever beat,
(Till Wisdom swallovved Spanish figs.) and thou
Great Lesters treacherous ghost assist me now
To unrip Treasons bowels. That (may be To true*
)
Has harbored in as great a Peer as thee,
As highly honored, and as highly placed
In Offices of weight: more highly graced.
And now you Catilines, that agents are
For Spaines designs; to hang your selves prepare.
For we already have (though late) detected
Your Treasons (blessed be God) ere they are effected.
Nay now our eyes, peace blinded long, have found
The plots, the means to work by, and the ground
Of your attempts: Whereby y' have slily sought
Our English freedom ( Traitor like) to have brought
To foreign slavish thraldom. And our land
To Have made a Province under Spaines Command*
Now have we your concealed devices spide
To weaken ours, strengthen the adverse side.
Now have we found, how the Cinque Ports of state. P

The Gate of Loy'lty. Has enclind, of late, Port della Fidelita.

(As far as yet it could procure Commission)
By the vndescry'd dark by path of Prodition
Into our British I Will to let that foe.
Whose greatest joy would be our overthrow.
This how they have attempted: and how far
Prevailed: we must enquire of Gondomar, ^*

That Magazine of craft, the Devils factour
The author of all pernicious plots, and the actour;
He, he, in time of peace, that lulled asleep
Our Solomon: Kind of (...) an ^an Rat creepes ^elly a sleeping ^s out ^utts.
Ichneum^n-like to creep
^n^o his bosom. Where too long he sat
To spy our secrets, and anticipate
Our foreknowne Counsels and attempts: that fox
Who, by his cunning wiles, picked all the locks
Of state: he that, like Phocions son, him swayed
(Which way he pleased) whom all the land obay'd*
That VVitch, whose charms enchanted us so far
As to bestow our * instruments of war ^^^sse ^i^*

To be employed against our selves (a crime
Never stupid state committed till that time)
He, he, that by procuring ^^tu^sse ^^n l^ng ^o^^iers to ^^^^n agt. ^ke ^^nd
agt. (...)* Arch ^^agt* the (...) etc. (...) one ^hers (...).
volontiers
For Spaines allies, against ours, in half seav'n years
More English blood, by English arms, did spill
In time of peace; more English vet'ranes kill
By English vet'ranes* Then in ten were slain
In time of war, in Belgia, France, or Spain.
He that brought Ravvleigh to untimely rest
For knovving how, his master, to infest
Best of all Captains living: he that made
Our justice, to his will, a very Jade.
He that with hopes of a pretended match,
Great Britane, in a purse-net thought to catch.
He, he that, all times: in all shapes was clad:
The creaft'st agent ere the Devil had;
The Spanish Philips grave Achitophel,
That Matchiavilian Oracle of Hell.
He, on this side, appears truths foremost foe:
For all his actions have approved him so.
Justly may he, Spaines colors, then advance
'Fore^h' Austrians, Flandrians, or the men of France.
For his succesfull plots have wrought those harms
They have but executed with their arms.
T'vndoe, by English means, this div'l proiected.
Truth and the Palsgraue: which he soon effected.
And therefore rightly his devise proclaims
VVhereto he always bent his fox like aims.
When foxes, muzzled lions, lead so ^ame
They dare not stir for fear of check or blame,
It Is vvondrous easy for a Spanish dog
Upon that Lions vvhelpes t'impose a Clog.
This riddle needs no Oedipus t'expound it:
For, too true, Englands only Daughter found it,
Unto her own and royal ofsprings Cost.
For his help vvanting, whom she trusted most
(That was by nature, and Religion both,
The tie of common danger, and by oath
Bound to defend her country, and Gods cause)
Forsaking her: she fell into the pavves
Of danger: and has sheltered, ever since
Under the vvings of the Lovv-Countreys Prince*
To our eternal shame: whom no regard
Of honor, nature, common faith, revvard
Reserved in heaven, for those their lives shall spend
To beat down error, and the truth defend
Could ever dravv Truth, falling, to sustain,
Or replant them in Heidelburgh again.
Oh that vvee're were forced to be disloyal,
To such a gracious Princess and so royal;
How (without indignation) can the eyes
Of heaven, such irreligious Covvardise,
And sluggish dull stupidity behold?
What made the English thus, but Indian gold. R

Had not Spaines Philips ^h of Maced. thought no gate so strong but an ass
laden with gold might pass ^t. He was not far from ^^uth I fear.
Macedonian Ass
Permitted bee'ne our Loyal gate to pass
(Driven by the incarnate diu'l) they had not bin
So deeply drenched in woe: nor we, in sin*
But things being thus: and our supplies kept back:
Our friends, the Gospel, Paltz, went all to wrack.
What could (but Cursed thirst of tempting coin)
Our safety, in their ruin, undermine:
To bring us down, what readier means could be
Then us to cause to break Confed'racy
With our allies? that, so, our strength divided,
Might broken be with ease: and we derided
For vvillfull blindness: that would not prevent
Those dangers could not be but imminent
Better had treasure vndiscover'd layne
In hell for ever: then to have been the bane (...)* Pind.

Of honorable actions: and to cause
The shameful breach of God and natures laws.
Why, why (abused statesmen) have you thus
Your selves blindfolded, to endanger us?
Could you be ignorant that the Austrian might
(...) Them. Olynt. 1.
At length, would on our shoulders heavy light?
Seeing Religion, but that sugared bait
VVherevvith, to catch men's freedoms, they lay wait,
And fish for a fifth Monarchy no other
But a cloak of Pretense, to hide and smother
Their proud ambitious ends: vvhereto t'impose.
Limits of right and title, were t'enclose
The swelling sea, confined within a grate.
Since then Religion, and invete'rate hate
Against us, (as they that have opposed most
Their great'st designs, and vveighti'st proiects crossed)
Enfor'cd, in us, a double interest
In that long plotted quarrel: why addressed
Not we, in time, our succors? what did then
The forced detention of the Englishmen
But even our friends betray, our selves pull down,
And help to advance, and spread, the Imperial Crown?
We (...) and. the same case Them. Oly. 1.
Germany at Austria's foot have layd'
Because Prince Fred'rick we refused to aid.
Spaines valor made the Imperial greatness rise
Not half so much, as English Covvardise*
A humane body (in this case) is like
Unto a states great body Politic
In the one, to keep disturbing humors low
Preserues from sickues: so to curb a foe Princip^^^ obsta.

In the other, frees from danger. Keep out fin
In it is first motions, scarce 't can e're come in.
But give it entrance, suddenly to will reign,
And hardly ever be expelled again.
See then (abused Britanies) see at length
And mend your errors: reassume that strength
Has been abated by your vain excess
Your soft effeminacy and vvantonnes.
These idle pleasures did your Courage tame,
So Cyrus, once, the (...) 2*
Lydians overcame.
Draw out those swords in peace have long time rusted,
And since how far a Spanyard may be trusted
You now perceive (who promises and vows
Not only, for his own advantage, bovves
Which way he pleases: but with perjured hand Fides non est ^enonda cum
h^reticis.

Slightly ( Lysander-like) does break the band
Of sacred oaths, expressly against the word)
Which even Turks and Pagans have abhorred
Trust him no more, be sure, no more regard him:
But, as he has deserved, so revvard him.
Nor have thy projects, with thy life, an end,
Old Spanish fox, while there is a Spanish friend
In the English Court, to execute thy will:
But stratagems of such like nature still
We must, against our state, expect. For who
But unto Spain a friend; a faithless foe
To Englands good, would give advise to break
Our peace with France, to make our party weak,
And force the affronted French in league to close
Offensive and desensiue with our foes?
Whereas the way to safeguard us, and keep
Proud Spain at such a bay, she durst not peep
Beyond her confines, was with France to hold
Good correspondence, So we might be bold
(Thus countenane'd) courage and life t'infuse
Unto the Belgians: and to make them bruise
The head of his ambition, till it Crack,
Borne, and assisted by so strong a back*
This then was but a Spanish plot, t'intangle
Our arms in civil broils: for while we wrangle
With France, designing to the Dane no aid;
His towns, the Austrian, at his foot has laid.
Beats him from Holsteyn, makes him still give ground,
And theatneth to be master of the Sound:
Which if he be, then must we make great store
Of The ships we have, for we shall never have more.
'Tvvixt brothers then, this unexpected breach,
Was not so much for malice, as to teach
Our foes the time to invade us: having thus
Pulled (like cursed Ismael) all the world on us:
Provoking some, and other friends abusing:
Witness the lavvlesse staying and perusing
The letters of that state, we ever found
To us in league of friendship, firmly bound.
How many bones, likewise, to raise up iarres
Betwixt our nearest friends the Hollanders
And us, have often been cast? that we, bereft
Of all assistance, might, alone, be left
Unto the rage of all the world exposed.
Thus have our actions aimed (if rightly nosed)
At loss of honor: and to bring our state
Amongst all nations to contempt and hate.
Nor, that remonstrance, will I fear to blame,
Although I savv prefixed the authors name;
Wherein the quarrel, Rochell to support
Religion was (poor souls) they 'le suffer for it.
This was the only way, indeed, to draw
All that are Champions for the Romish law
Against the Reformists: and to bend their spleen
Wholy at us: because we still have been
Truths ablest Patrons. Till the Gospells light
Should be (which God forbi'd) extinguesh'd quite.
This, blessed King James, thy wisdom did foresee,
And, being feared, prevent as carefully:
Lest, Civil discord from the deep vnbound'
All Christendom should in her blood be drowned.
Nor did there want a plotted gross abuse
Might give just cause, to us, to break the truce.
Our Admiral the French, some ships has lent,
Which were, he knew, against Rochell to be sent:
This could not choose, but in our stomachs breed
A secret grudge, and so it did indeed.
These ships be'ing then detained, to open flame
The spark breaks out: and quite burns down the frame
Of that Confed'racy we late had reared
Against Spaines designs, by both states justly fear'd'*
And now, a huge Armado, gives assault
To the I Will of Re, as if we meant with salt
To powder France. Our fleet environs the I Will
And yet it is not taken, all this while,
To show our courage, though, is free from dread;
And what trim stratagems of war, w'haue read,
We scorn to man the abandoned little Fort,
Or with our navy to secure a Port;
Although we rue the issue, what care they
That seek our good, the clean contrary way?
Torax (that, to the Spaniards next, does lead
A squadron of proud Monsieurs, who do tread
Their match in galliards, and in's banner bears
A Cock insulting 'cause away he fears Gallus gallicus.

A lion) kindly does a white mare send
For present, to his long expected friend.
Which was from others of that hue desery'de
By a blevv scarf before her shoulders ty'de.
These favors we requite, since they begin them,
With Pyes: pray God there were no papers in them.
What these Commanders meant, or whereunto
These missiues tended, we will leave to you
(Sage British Senate) but, I fear, you will find,
Our English leader had a French man's mind:
How, ever, else, when the I Will was compas'd round,
Had they such undisturbed entrance found?
Unless with legends you would blind our eyes
And make us think they dropped down from the skies.
Or that from the earth, like Cadmus leeth they sprung*
Or else engend'red in the air they hung:
(And that Conceit might well for current pass.
One squadron of them, seen at Wantage was)
Or make's believe because they came so soon,
They leaped down from the mountains in the Moon,
Or that sir Hugh of Bordeaux thither sent
Iuvisibly, a fayery Regiment.
Or that the were shot in Archimedes gin.
From France, and so the Island lighted in.
How ere (no English ships, or power with standing)
Ev'nas they pleased, they had a quiet landing.
Then like a storm orevvheln'd our men, that had
Against such impressions, no entrenchments made,
Of any moment, but securely lay.
As France had England been. Yet might the day
On the English side been won, had the horse gone on
With thy courageous resolution
Heroic Cunningham: or with thy heart
Whom neither loss of blood, nor stinging smart
Of raging vvounds could ere enforce to yield
( Brave Rich) oh that this pen of mine could build
An everlasting Pyramid of praise
Your fame and vvorth, above the stars, to raise.
But you not backed, the rest, to save their throats,
Did drown themselves, because they vvanted boats,
(For they had ships enough) you, that have eyes,
May read these riddles, spy these mysteries.
Let then those partial tongues, these things impute
TO inevitable fate, be ever mute.
And tell me (if you dare of speech be free,
That of your gen'ralls valor Praeco's be)
If, as you say, he ventured so in the vvarres,
When few escaped life, how could he escape from scarres?
How many French did his great provvesse kill?
What vvounds received he? what blood did he spill?
Th are not Lambs philters, nor a Beldames charms,
Can flesh and blood, secure from general harms.
But say he did: vvas't not as like as not,
That Torax present made him free from shot?
Who durst not press into the midst of's foes,
When he is sure he shall receive no blows?
But had he been so: Neque enim benefacta ma ligne, detrectare meum est. Mat.
13
(for IN de not detract
Deserved vvorth from any) was it an act
Of wholesome policy, one that was vntrayn'd
In feats of war, nor ere experience gained
In former service, and yet scorned to be
Advised by men of tried sufficiency,
So many vvorthyes should untimely lead
To ruin, vvarn'd before, unquestioned?
Once in a month, to take a leaf to task
In Machiavell: or, vvearied with a mask,
To read ones self asleep in Aelian's tacticks,
Makes not a general, but tried Morgans practicks.
Thy Holsteyn (injured Dane) had never been lost:
Had we, in thy defense, employed that host,
Commanded by some one, well known to be
Faithful, and of well tried sufficiency.
I envy honor to no loyal heart:
But from my life I could have wished to part,
So (noble Essex) thou, or thou, whose name
Adds a Rich ornament to VVarwicks fame,
Or thou (whom Newport sounds) victorious Vere,
Had (as you best deserved) led the English there.
Then France had found, our ancient British might
(Though long time laid aside) not rusted quite.
Then had not your triumphant souls, for shame,
Blushed (matchless English Hero's) that your name
We do but bear, having your courage lost:
And, of your victories, can only boast:
VVanting your hearts, your acts to imitate.
Nor had the French, then, at so easy rate,
In temples hung our ensigns, before their eyes.
As monuments of English Covvardise.
Then had there been no reason to suspect
Ourselves of treason, or as bad neglect.
Whereas it is settled now in every thought
Not French, but English our Confusion wrought,
Disloyalty, not fortune, lost the day.
So did we look on Cales, and run away.
VVhereat aimed that? but that we might give Spain
Our land (in earnest) cause t'invade again.
Nor only were three subsidies spent there,
To makes us laugh'dat: but our soldiers were
With stinking vitailes poisoned: by this plot
We vveak'ned were, and yet perceived it not.
Was not another voyage likewise barred
With a degree in the south? Who might have marred
The plate fleet, had he been in earnest sent,
Or they that set him on plain dealuig meant.
But now of late our vvaightiest expeditions
Are always frustrate by ill-meant commissions.
All plots pretended for our Kingdoms good
Ly drovvn'd and buried in our Kingdoms blood
And, as not here projected, but in Spain
On our part loose, but on our foes side gain.
Affairs, of such great consequence, of old
(When great ones did not scorn to be controlled)
Were wont to be concluded by consent
Of the states body in a Parliament,
And not by factious spirits, made alone
Of plying mettle, to be wrought upon:
Such greene-vvax council, that will only take
The impression, he that made the^ such, would make.
And so, his will, not daring to gainsay
That hates the state, they do the state betray.
Thus is our land made vveake, our treasure waste,
Our court corrupted, and our honor blasted,
Our laws are broke, our justice sold: and they
That should reform these mischiefs, give the^ way.
All symptoms of a Kingdom, that has been
Declining long, may be in England seen:
Our strength's decayed, the flovv're of all the land
Have perished under Buckinghams command.
Those that their lives, have ventured for their King,
Home, naught but labor for their pains can bring.
Hence it is, our saylours are constrained to fly.
(For want of pay) unto the enemy.
Whereby it comes to pass: a Dunkirke
fisher town,
The very name of England once could drown,
Does, with the terror of some thirty sail
At most, the power of that Kingdom quail
Which in the life of her renowned Queen
Kept all the world in avv. Who e're has seen
So strange an alteration? they that then
Did fear (...). Xerx. de Artem. in Her.
a woman, now contemn our men.
Admire it not: our merchants taken are
Under the nose of the royal men of war?
Oh that some angel would, from heaven relate
Unto our King, what wrongs are done the state
He might beleeue't. And not give ear alone
To them that nothing have to live upon
But glorious titles, and their Countries spoil,
The Kings exchequer, and the Favorites smile.
No mervaile then such Caterpillars use
Their wits, the author of these ills t'excuse.
And Papists: whom he raised in policy
Religion and the gospells bane to be.
For if he once (on whom they hang) but crack:
Their credit, state and Conscience, must to wrack,
Yet can not those gold flourishes they cast
Upon his cankered actions, blind in have
The weakest judgments. Nor is that conceit
(So often in their mouth) of any weight
Pretending it a Paradox that those.
Whom highest honors, on all sides, enclose,
Should not enjoy content: but still aspire
From highest preferments to ascend up higher*
As if the large desires of humane pride
Could be (alas) with bonds of reason ti' de.
Ambition brooks no equals: and much less
Superiors. it is imperfect happiness
(She thinks) in greatest power to be placed,
And not with so v'raigne titles to be graced.
Thus great things gained, we aim at greater things
Earls would be Dukes: and Dukes would feign be Un is Pellaeo iuveni, non
sufficit orbis.
Kings.
Should Spain (great King) but promise, to him, this
For whose sake all your Kingdom fares amiss,
(As who knovves but it has) you soon should prove
Whether your person or your Crown he love.
Then should you see, how of your power he made
Use, to abuse your self: and be a shade
For such his actions, As being rightly scanned
(You Will find) all tended to undo your land.
Your subjects riches are your strength: these he
Consumed in riot and in luxury.
Their love's the maine supporter of your state:
Which treach'rously he did alienate.
That destitute of all your peoples aid,
Your self, the state, the truth might be betrayed.
Which that he might effect, his doings all
Aimed at our foes advancement, and our fall.
''Great states affayers should allways managed be
''(If we would have them speed) with secrecy,
''Till they are ripe for practice: with all speed
''And expedition then they must proceed.
This ( Macedonian) did thy honor raise:
This, Caesar, crowned thee, with immortal praise.
But all our plots, our foes did understand
So well, they seemed proiected in their land.
Spain ever (ere our selves) knew our intention:
And therefore, still, were readyer for prevention
Then we for action. Thus at Cales and Ree
We lost our lives, and purchased infamy.
Nor can I, without horror, call to mind
Thy wrongs, poor Rochell, now with famine pined
Through our default. whose fleet your safety broke,
And forced your necks unto the tyrants yoke.
Then promising protection, and pretending
Supplies, from time to time, we would be sending,
Which were detained of purpose, till too late.
^T was we that made your case thus desperate.
For if w'had sent assistance with good will,
Why lay grave valiant Denbighs navy still,
Without empeachment of those French, that made
^He looking on) the forts and Pallisade?
Why lacked, after they should have launched, so long
Our fleetes, provision? but that all went wrong.
Search out this fault (wise King) in time: and mend it
And wheresoever treason harbors, end it.
For fear those vipers that your favors wing
Gives warmth unto, at last your heart shall sting.
Next to the insulting French, the German comes
Beating with f^ry his victorious drums:
And fleshed in blood of slaughtered Protestants,
No liberty of consultation grants;
But summons ('cause he is master of the field)
Without resistance made, Truths Fort to yield.
But stay proud Austrian, though thy conquring blade,
In seas of Christian blood, has passage made
Through which thou sailst to the desired port
Of monarchy: thy hopes may fall too short.
^Tis true: the world's well mended with thee now,
Since venice made thy humbled knees to bow.
Presume not on it: for thou shall doubtless find
The greatest labor to remain behind.
A Lion yet may stop the Eagles flight.
And take revenge on that injurious spite
The gospel has endured. If God be just,
Know tyrant, that his svvord shall never rust.
Shall he not hearken to the woeful plaints
And lamentations of his martyred saints;
And for that blood, shed for his own dear sake,
Sharp vengeance on the cruel murth'rers take?
Yes, yes, he will: and bloody Tyrants shall
Themselves, orewhelm'd Ad gene^ Cereris sin^c aede and sa^ guine pan^ etc.
Iuve. ^ sat.
with blood, like Tyrants
Nor is thy greatness built on such a ground.
But Spain will undermine 't. Who, ever, found fall.
Corrivalls in a throne, endure each other?
What ere he be, friend, kinsman, father, brother,
(When empires ly at stake) the one must down*
Such jealousies ever attend a Crown.
And think thou the^, cause thou art employed by Spain
The German princes freedom to restrain:
The empire shall by succession be derived
To the right line? no that must be deprived
To make thy founders large extents entire.
Thus thou art but the faggot, set to fire
Thy friends, and burn thy self: the be, whose sting
In others fixed her self to death shall bring.
The same (ignoble Saxon) is thy case. T

Whom envy stirred and emulation base,
Against the checks of conscience, to forsake
Truth 's cause; and part with errors friends to take.
What have thou gained hereby? first God, that knovves
The hearts of all men, heavy judgments shows,
(To curb such irreligious Atheists pride)
That, vvillfully, with earth, against heaven do side.
He loves no sinners: but such reprobates,
And gross dissemblers, from his soul he hates.
Hereby (blind Duke) what purchase have thou made?
But even a yoke, upon thine own neck laid;
And made thy children slaves. Could not foresee,
When Austria has subjected Germany,
The Empire shall by inheritance descend,
(As Boheme long has done?) then to what end
Serve the Electours? but to serve, like slaves,
Spaines Tyrants, and endure their basest braues?
By ayding thus, in friendly sort, thy foes;
And with an envyous spleen pursuing those
That were thy friends. The have cut with luckles hand
Thy right hand of. So maimed shall thou stand
Vnpityed to posterity. As one
Who, by opposing that religion
(Against his conscience) he himself professed:
On earth gained slavery, and in hell unrest.
So speed Truths foes: that dry deaths seldom see.
Such (turn coat Saxon) 's like thy end to be.
Now march on Spaines right arm: whose hardened V
skill
In feats of war, so many mouths does fill
With high encomious: as if thou, of men,
Deseru'dst, alone, to make the Worthyes ten.
Why do thou here, (whose well known name and force
Frights further then it strikes) the Trojan horse.
Bear for device? what, does it intimate
Thy Sinon craft got the Palatinate?
Yes, sure it justly may. For all know well
That since your divelish maxim rose from hell,
Of breaking oaths and leagues, when ere you please,
Y' have gained more, by such damned tricks as these,
Then by your svvords. When thou had past the Rhine
Into the country of the Palatine,
Thou knew'st thy journey like to cost thee dear
If Thurlach and Count Mansfield tarried there.
The Tiger then his wonted courage vvanted
Being by a more courageous Lion danted
See what the fox can do. Thou knevv'st so far
Our peaceful King did hate the name of war,
That rather then he would of battles hear
He Would beg for peace, or purchase't never so dear.
Therefore the Arch-duchesse sends to him with speed
An embassade, as Spinola decreed.
King James did' by persuasion soon consent
(Desiring bloods effusion to prevent)
That on condition Spinola would away.
To free the country, Mansfield should not stay.
The time's prefixed. By the style the Arch-duchesse gets
Ten days. And first Count Mansfield forvvard sets,
And marches fairly, with his army, thence
As Thurlach did; when now without defense
The Paltz was left: the Italian quit, indeed,
The land in person, as it was decreed
But left his army, with Gonzales there
Who seconded by Mounsieur Tilly were.
These, none opposing, vvast with fire and svvord,
And all the cruelty war can afford
The miserable country. Naked left
Unto the invaders fury. And bereft
Of Mansfields help (for whom in vvait they lay
But, through their sides, his valor made him way)
Then might you see, flames, frequent murders, rapes
On all sides: none the soldiers fury scapes:
But, torrent-like, the Wallon bears down all:
Not sparing young or old, or great or small.
And in contempt of God and men detaines
Perfidiously these his ill-purchas'd gains.
Our King, being made, by this Italian vvile,
The Instrument his children to beguile,
Justly, with such a base affront, incensed.
Had with his quiet nature now dispensed
(Then zealous in Gods cause, and ours were thou
Earl Pembroke, but the case is altered now)
And vows to take revenge by open war.
Which to prevent, Spaines old Too familiar with K. James.
familiar
Most cunningly corrupts the English court,
Suborning some, and those of highest sort;
In vain, their King, to credulous, to persuade
For all wrongs satisfaction should be made;
(Which never was meant, they knew.) sometimes they would fire him
With high encomions. All the world admire him
As peaces Patron: all posterityes
Him, as the Prince of peace shall memorize.
But, if his svvord were drawn: oh what a flood
Would it dravv out with it, of Christian blood?
Then should that honor he, by peace, had gained
Be lost: and with a boutefeaus title stained.
At other times his fear they would work upon
With faign'd surmises of invasion
For breach of the league, if he should succor those
That must be Spaines, because the are Austrias foe^* Hac ratione potes iustus
Rex forte videri, sed non crudelis, non potes esse pater.

Thus while too justly he does weigh the cause
They make him break the bond of natures laws.
Yet nettled something with so gross a vvrong
From one that to the Arch duchess did belong.
He sent to let her know he was abused.
She, flightly, with a Punick trick, excused
Her servants actions. Sending word vvithall
Neither Gonzales was her general
Nor Tilly, therefore by no means it lay
In her the army to command away.
(Which yet she undertook; till those had quit
The country, who had else safe guarded it)
And Spinolas army lay there. Then amain
Another posts unto the King of Spain:
He answer makes, it was not in his power
Tilly commanded for the Emperor:
To whom another's sent: and he replies
Lieutenant for Bavaria there he lies.
Bavaria this disclames: and does profess,
He took and kept it for his Holiness.
So was thy Paltz, Prince Frederick, quite forsaken
Of all thy friends, by fraud, not valor taken.
But rise thou God of Truth, awake from sleep:
How long shall thy distres'd and slaughtered sheep
Be thus by Wolves devoured? lift up thine head
And let thine enemies be scattered.
Though we have been thus backward all this while,
And let our foes (as't were) besiege our I Will;
Yet now, oh now at last, your hearts combine,
Great Caesar and grave Senate: yet now join
Your force, wits, whatsoever is yours t'abate
French, Spanish, Austrian pride; and let our state
Gain, once again, what rate so ere it cost,
(If possible) the honor it has lost.
The fire, in frost, its heat does recollect
T'expell the cold, let this conceit reflect
Upon your breasts. Let public danger bind
In public unity, your soul, and mind
So may our concord, giving life and heat
To our allies abroad, remove the seat
Of war from home. which had been done ere this,
Had not our Councels guided been amiss.
So may I live to see proud Austria sit
(perchance) as low, as poor as ever yet.
So may the Gospel flourish and regaine
It Is former splendor: and our land retain
Her ancient prosperous happiness: and rest
Neither abroad, nor yet at home oppressed.
Which that it may do: and th'unconquer'd Fort
Of Truth, for ever safely may support
Thy poor distres'd ones. Let, oh Lord, the Eye X

Of thy most watchful Providence descry
All danger may annoy't. And let it stand Y

Safe guarded with thy strong Protections Hand:
And let the Scepter of thy Power defend Z

The Scepter that defends it to the end.
FINIS.

