The Heart of the King; and the King of the Heart. OR A brief unfolding of
that remarkable PROVERB of the Royal PREACHER.

PROVERB. 21.1. The Kings Heart is in the hand of the LORD.

Written in the time of his Majesty's abode at Plimmouth, and preferred unto
him in his return from thence. ANNO 1625.

Together with a short Meditation upon 2. Sam. 24.15.

Preached at a Weekly Lecture in Deuon: in those fearful times of MORTALITY.

By J. P. Master of Arts and Minister of the GOSPEL.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, 1628.

Errata.
Page 10. line 13. read, their hearts. page 12. l. 29. r. King. p. 32. l. 2. r.
Wisd. 12. p. 51. l. 2. r. Nadab. p. 55. l. 15. r. deprive.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most gracious Sovereign,
IT might justly be censured as an intolerable rashness in your unworthy
Subject, that he being so lately pardoned for his great audaciousnesse, should
yet again presume in the same kind; had he not read charactered in your very
countenance, Quanto mayor tanto melior, August.
Quanto melior tanto mitior, that your Sonereigne Greatness made way for your
bounteous Goodness, and boundles Gentleness; and been confident that it would
graciously consider, that albeit it were an unwonted presumption for so mean a
Subject to advance in so short a space, to so high a Majesty, two several
paper-presents (as unworthy to be read, as every way unready) yet the rare
presence of so great an Highness as the eldest eye has not seen in these
parts of your Dominions, (which are not so far distant from your Royal
Mansions, as their people are nearly linked to the service of your Majesty)
together with that great and general emulation of your loyal Subjects,
striving to do your Majesty some acceptable service in this unusual
Progress, might be admitted to mediate unto your Royal favor for a renewing
of the former Pardon, and giving acceptance to the same person, who with as
much loyal respect as formerly, and with the same prostrate humility deuoteth
this his second service to your sacred self, in your Princely return from the
period of your long progress; humbly desiring the Lord of Hoasts to prosper
your Majesty's Royal Marriage, Leagues, Nauies, Armies and Iourneyes, that
they may tend to the Glory of the Almighty, the terror of your Enemies, the
assurance of your safety, the succors of your dejected Sister, and the
comfort of your devoted Subjects, amongst whom, even in that long Roll extended
in the Western Chart, there shall ever be found while life shall remain,

Your Majesty's most loyal and obedient Subject, J. P.

PROVE. 21.1. The Kings Heart is in the hand of the LORD.


IT is written in the hearts of all men by the hand of the ALMIGHTY, that
whersoeuer they are He is present with them, and acquainted with all their
ways, Psalm. 139.3. And yet those Books of Record laid up in the breasts of the
Reprobate are so blotted and spotted with sin, that they can hardly read
Gods presence in them, and much less construe it aright. Therefore he is
pleased to manifest himself in the hearts of his Elect, in a fairer Character
of a more gracious and propitious presence, and that most specially when they
are assembled in his Name, and in his House, He then promising that although
they be but two or three, yet he will be nigh them, yea amongst them, and
amidst them too, not only in the Body of his Temple, but in the very Temples
of their Bodies, in his House, and in their hearts. Prope Deus est, cum ijs
est, in ijs. Inter eos and intra eos: With them and within them. But to come
nearer. Amongst all the chosen hearts of Gods Servants, God reserueth his
choicest presence for the hearts of his chosen and anointed Servants; The
royal heart is Gods great Chamber of presence. Psalm. 82.
And amongst all godly Congregations, he is pleased to take up his special
standing in the Congregation of Gods, where Kings and Princes meet to do him
service, and to call upon his Name, by whose Name they are called. Bethel the
Kings Chapel is most significantly the House of God, and questionless, God
will be most peculiarly present with the Kings heart; for behold in this Text
he has given his Word, and his Hand for it,

The Heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord.

In the hand of the Lord is the heart of every living Creature, it being the
principal part of that admired workmanship of his own divine hand; but
specially the heart of man the principal Creature, who is the special
Masterpiece of his workmanship, as bearing his own Image, and yet more
peculiarly the heart of the King the principal man, who is more peculiarly his
Image, as being his own Vicegerent. The Kings Heart is in the hand of the LORD.

If we take the heart at the Lords hand, as he vouchsafes to take it at ours,
viz. for the whole living creature, Behold his hand is over all his works, it
fills all things living with plentiousnesse, it feeds and saves both Man
and Beast; In his hands are all the corners of the EARTH, as well as all the
corners of the HEART, as the Psalmist teaches. In his hand, says Job, is the
soul of every living thing, and the breath of all Mankind.

But in this general subordination and subjection what will be the
prerogative of man above other Creatures, or of Kings above other men?
Certainly much. The inferior creatures are in the hand of God, yet so that he
has also put them into the hands of men, Genesis 1.28.
and they have dominion over them; Inferior men are in the hand of God, yet so
that he has also delivered them into the hands of Kings, and they exercise
authority upon them. Mat. 20.25:
But as for Kings shall I say that they only are absolutely in Gods hands; I
may say absolutely that they are in Gods hands only. God has put the lives of
others into their hands, them he has reserved for his own. The Kings Heart
is in the hand of the Lord.

This was not only David's case who was a man after Gods own heart, and had so
sweet an experimental knowledge of Gods gracious tuition: Nor Salomons alone
who had so faithful an assurance of Gods favorable assistance, grounded on so
full a promise, as that God would be his Father, and he should be his Child,
and seconded with so fair a pawn as the fullness of wisdom and an
understanding heart: This is a case common to Kings, and must be pleaded by a
Proverb, The Kings Heart is in the hand of the Lord: A Proverb that carries
with it power and authority, pith and significancie, wherein ye have the hand
of the Lord, and the very heart of the King, Manum diuinam, Mentem regiam.

-- Summus vtrique
Martial.
Author adest, haec est Caesaris, illa Dei.
The Kings Heart is in the hand of the Lord.
Esaias 14.10.
But, what has God an hand? Is God also become weak as we, is he become like
unto us. It is usual with us, as to christen diverse men, so to call different
things by one and the same name: Pedem and nostrum dicimus and lecti and veli
and carminis, Seneca.
says that sage Heathen: Our weakness is the strongest reason for it that he
stands on, Quia non sufficimus vt singula singulis assignemus. So stands
the case with us men, it is nothing so with God. Has he a foot? it is to
support our infirmities: it is to tread a path for our capacities. Has he an
Hand in my Text? it is to direct our decayed knowledge; it is to lead our blind
understandings. If any therefore shall make a question how the hand may be
fastened on God, with whom things corporal can hold no proportion, The Figure
(...) must shape him an answer, by which our great God mercifully descending
and condescending unto our mean capacities, does, because we cannot understand
him in the language of Canaan, speak unto us in our own Mother Tongue, and
because we cannot read the divine Characters of his Essence, and Presence,
writes in our own hand; The Kings Heart is in the hand of the Lord.

By this hand then God leads us to the consideration of that high esteem
which he vouchsafes us, as if it were not enough for us that he had made us
like himself, He would, if it were possible, make himself like us. But here
(to speak more pertinently) God especially bears us in hand, Quam habiturus
sit circa publicas personas specialem prouidentiam: Carthus.
What an high regard he will have of Royal sublimitie. As if it were not
enough for Kings that the Host of the Lord were their Guard, the Lord of
Hoasts will be their Guardian: his hand shall mayntaine their right and manage
their affairs. The Kings Heart is in the hand of the Lord.

I will not divide or divorce the Lords hand from the Kings heart: What God
has coupled I will not put asunder. Let hand and heart go together. In the
ioynture it shall be sufficient for me to handle.

First, Gods royal Prerogative over the Heart.

Secondly, Gods Prerogative over the Heart royal.

The first of these will evidence that God carries an hand over the hearts of
all men in general.

The second, that he has an especial hand over the hearts of Kings.

And these are the general observations.

Gods prerogative over the heart consists principally in the disquisition,
and in the conversion thereof, in searching and in turning it: the former
exercised as well in the Reprobate as the Elect, the other in the Elect only:
Both most eminently in Kings and men of the highest rank.

That it is Gods prerogative to search the heart will soon appear, Psalm.
44.21.
upon a search of the Scriptures: Shall not God search this out, for he knows
the secrets of the heart, says David. The heart is the fountain of life; with
God is the fountain of life, to use in this sense the saying of the same
Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 36.9. This Well is deep and we have nothing wherewith to
draw. Our own hearts are deceitful; we can hardly ever find the depth of our
own, much less sound the Bottom of another heart. Yea, but ex abundantia
cordis os loquitur, the words which a man lets fall, By the speech as by the
pulse we may guess at the temper of the heart.
the thread of his speech like that of Ariadne's Clue, may somewhat direct us
in tracing the Maze, and following the turnings and windings of the heart. When
I hear a mouth breathing out scurrilitie and blasphemies, a mouth under whose
roof God and good men never come, but they receive a wound; what shall I say,
but that it is retayner and reporter to a wicked heart. Thus might we judge of
the temper of the heart in general, but must leave the exact search to the
hand of the Lord. We may yet be much mistaken and deceived in some external
Indices of the heart.

Many Hypocrites there are who for fear of censure, or desire of esteem,
keep their tongues cleanly, and yet there is many a foul corner in their
hearts: like those Citizens who sweep and keep their doors very near for
fear of a check from the Magistrate, and yet have many a sluttish corner in
their houses. When all is done, The Lord is the true beholder of the heart.
Homo cor ex verbis Deus verba ex cord pensat. Greg. Wisd. 1.6. Romans 1.20. 1.
Sam. 16.7. Psalm. 139.2. Acts 15.8.
Of him it is clearly seen: He sees not as man sees; for man looks on the
outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. He understands our
thoughts afar off. He sees in secret, says our Savior, Mat. 6. Therefore
Peter records in the Acts, that it is God who knows the hearts: And God
appropriateth that prerogative to himself, I the Lord search the heart. All
things, and thoughts are naked and open in his eyes: The Fig Tree leaves could
not keep Adams nakedness out of his sight. The Fig Tree could not hide
Nathaniel from his privy search. Neither Men nor Angels but by especial
revelation from him can have any hand in the search of the heart, 2. Chron.
6.30.
for he only knows the hearts of the children of men. The Heart is in the
hand of the Lord. I turn my speech to the conversion of the heart, which is
another prerogative belonging to the Almighty hand.

The heart it is, that is Primum viuens, the first part that is viuified and
quickened, both in Nature and Grace. As when Subjects are up in Rebellion, the
Prince intending to subdue them, seizes first on their strongest hold: so God
in reducing our rebel wills to his obedience, first lays hold on the heart.
Silly man is no otherwise the cause of his own conversion, then Marcus Liuius
was of the taking of Tarentum; who (as Plutarch relates) envying Fabius for
his recovering and reducing of it to the Roman obedience, Plut. in vita Fab.
Maximi.
in open Senate said, That it was himself and not Fabius that was the cause of
regaining the City: True answered Fabius, For had not thou lost it, I had
never won it. Non potuisti, o homo, in te, nisi perdere te, says Augustine;
We have gone astray like lost Sheep (says David) It is the Lord that must
seek his Servants. Psalm. 119.176.
It is our spirit that animates us in nature, but Gods Spirit quickneth us in
Grace, and creates a clean heart in us. In Nature, the agilitie of our hands
is to be attributed to our hearts. In Grace, the ability of our hearts to the
hand of the Lord: His hand leads us to saving health. Our hearts by sin
were not only wounded, but altogether dead, stone-dead, lumpes of dead flesh:
Christ Jesus that good Samaritan, came by, and powered in Oil and Wine, the
Oil of his mercy, and the red Wine that came from no other Vine, besides his
own veins. It Was only the blood of that Scape-goate who took our nature upon
him that could mollify our Adamantine hearts. We did no way prevent his
absolute work of conversion by our own wills preparation, or natural
inclination. But as Augustine said of the Soul, That it was created together
with the infusing of it, and infused into us together with the creating of it:
so must we of our will, that God in converting our hearts, makes them to will
their conversion, and in making our hearts to will their conversion, does
convert them. And thus much of the Heart with reference to men in general.

Now as all Clay is in the hand of the Potter, and yet he is most careful of
that Clay which he reserueth for vessels which shall serve for the best uses,
and which he will set at the highest rate: so God fashioneth all hearts alike
(as the Psalmist notes) and yet he is most intentive to the hearts of Kings.
And good reason. The spirits and hearts of private men, move their private
bodies; The spirits and hearts of Princely and Public persons, move
multitudes, even the whole body Politic. Therefore God inspireth the hearts
of supreme Governors with heroical gifts, and supereminent graces, fills
them with fortitude and magnanimity; and frames and fitteth them for the
managing of the weightiest affairs. The hearts of private men are in the hands
of the Lord, as the Wels of water, their motions are confined within their own
compass: The heart of the King like the rivers of water (as ye may see in the
words following the Text) from him there is to be derived the whole Weal
public: The Spirit of God moves principally on those waters.

As when the River Nilus in his inundation rises some Cubits higher then his
usual limits, it is said to be a certain presage of a future Dearth and
Famine in Egypt: so when the Kings heart swells above the Lords hand, it
will fill heavy on the whole Land.

And now from that which has been taught touching the Lords hand, both Kings
and Subjects may learn to humble themselves under Gods mighty hand, and to
present them hearts unto him with an Ecce Ancillam, Behold thine Hand-maide.

Those Kings may take correction at Gods hand, who, as though God had no
interest in their principal part, pay the use of it to their own pleasures;
who live rather like such as think Gods heart to be in their hand, then those
who consider that theirs is in his; who direct not any Prayers unto him, pray
not unto him for any directions, but making Idols of themselves, cry Fiat
voluntas nostra, let our wills be done. It is true indeed, that the Privileges
of Kings are exceeding great. They are in a great measure like unto God
himself. For such majesty he gives them, that all people, nations, and
languages tremble and fear before them; whom they will they slay, and whom
they will they keep alive, whom they will they set up, and whom they will they
put down, Dan. 5.19. Their hearts are unsearchable, Prou. 25.3. Their power is
in some sort like unto his: Prou. 30.31.
Against him there is no rising up. And (like him) they are not bound to give
men an account of their actions; For as none can stay the Lords hand, and say
unto him what do thou, Dan. 4. So, who shall say to the King what do thou.

Yet for all this, the same mouth that pronounces them Gods, tells them that
they shall dye like men: They may be as Gods to their subjects, yet must they
be subject to God. As his hand has advanced them, so must they exalt him.
This shall they do when Maximus and Optimus go hand in hand,

-- Virtus and summa potestas
Cum cocant --
When in their Kingdoms they think of Gods Kingdom. Although Caput Imperij
seem to be the more glorious Title, yet Membrum Ecclesiae is the more gracious
Name. Gratius nomen pietatis quam potestatis, says Tertullian. Apologet. cap.
34
And to speak truly, Goodness is the only true Greatness: They are great
who are great in Gods favor. So Moses and Joseph were great: Isidores
Etymology may serve to this purpose, Reges a recte agendo, says he, as if
Regere were naught else but recte agere, with him agrees Hugo Cardinalis in
his Comment, (if we apply those words to Kings in particular, which he uses
in the general) Cor Regale est, quod excussit a se iugum seruitutis malae, nec
alicui seruit, nisi Deo, cui seruire regnare est. He that rules over men must
be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2. Sam. 23 3. Rex eri^ dum been regis,
quod nisi feceris, nomen Regis in te non constabit: so wrote Eleutherius to
King Lucius.

Again, the Lords hand in this Text may serve to check those
Court-palmisters, who think that they have found the line of their preferment
in their own hands, saying in their hearts, Our hand is high, and the LORD
has not done all this, Deuteronomy 32.27. By the strength of our hand we have
done it, and by our wisdom, for we are prudent, Esaias 10.13. O they should
think of an higher hand, and consider that as they rule by Kings, so Kings
reign by God, Prou. 8. Therefore when they are exalted, they should extol
Gods hand, and lift up their own, only in praise to him: They should remember
that promotion comes unto them at the second hand, For Promotion comes
neither from the East nor from the West, nor from the South; But God is the
Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. Therefore that
should be their acknowledgement, and resolution, which was Kings David's, 1.
Chron. 29.12. Both riches and honor (says he) come of thee, and thou raignest
over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make
great, etc. Now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.

Lastly, let the same hand serve to beat down those presumptious miscreants,
who durst to lay violent hands on the Lords anointed servants. It is fabled of
the Bird Amphibia, that when the King of Fowls demanded tribute of her, she
took wing, and betook her self to the Sea, and lived among the fi^hes, etc.
Birds of this feather are our English Fugitives, the Popes Birds, who have
forsaken our Land, and betaken themselves to the Sea of Rome, breaking asunder
the bonds of their Allegiance and Religion. Their adulterous Mother Church
says unto them concerning Christ's pretended Vicar, that which Christ's
Virgin Mother said concerning Christ to the servants at the marriage in Cana,
Whatsoever he says unto you, do it: And he being (like the off spring of
Herodias) before instructed by the cursed doctrine of that bloody Mother, Mat.
14.8.
breaths out nothing but Murders, bids them aim at nothing so much, as
at the heads of the Lords Anointed. So was the Assyrian King, Isa. 10.5. And
that bloody Scythian of later times. Punientur iudicio Dei. Lactant. Diu.
Infi: lib 5. cap. vlt.


But we are to learn hence a lesson of Prayer and Supplication for Kings, and
those which are in authority; And of Patience and sufferance under the yoke of
tyranny: If our Kings tyrannize they are the scourge of God, as was Antiochus.
They are in the Lords hand to punish us, and we must leave and refer their
punishment to the same hand: And certainly, his hand shall find out all his
enemies, Psalm. 21.8. When God opens his hand, and lays it graciously on
those who are our heads, then he falls to blessing of us: when he shuts
it, and lays it grievously about our Heads, then he falls to buffetting of
us. Wherefore be our Kings good? they are the Ministers of God for our good:
Be they evil? Indignationis aduersus nos diuinae quasi ministri sunt,
Lactant. divine. Instit. lib, 5. cap. vlt.
says Lactantius. Good Kings are like fire to comfort and enlighten: Bad Kings
are as fire to consume and devour: It is not good meddling with, or laying
hands on either. What if Nabuchadnezzars heart be lifted up, must a sentence
of Deprivation be given to despoile him of his throne? Dan. 5.20 21.
No, Gods hand with the turn of an hand, must turn him a grazing, and make
his Heart like the Beasts.

Dan. 5.23.
Let Belshazzar lift up himself against the Lord of Heaven; must a censure of
Excommunication be hung up at his gate? No, the finger of the Lords hand must
write against the wall of his Palace, that hand must number his time and finish
it, Dan. 5.24.
weigh him in the balance and find him wanting, divide his Kingdom and give
it to the Medes and Persians. If the foul mouth of Herod breathe out from a
corrupt and cruel heart, threatenings against Gods Church: must a Chastell
therefore strike at his throat, or a Rauilliacke stab at his heart? No, the
Lord must lay his hand upon him: his Angels must smite him.

Horat.
Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Dei.
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of water. We must
consider that God withholdeth the waters and they dry up, also he sends them
out and they ouerturne the Earth, Job 12.15. See also, Esa. 8.7. He can cut
off the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76.12 He can change the hearts of Kings who
are set to do evil: He can exchange Kings whom he has set as the hearts in
the midst of the Bodies politic: He can alter and subvert the estates of
Kingdoms though they be set, and as it were settled in the very heart of the
Earth, like that of the Jews, Ezekiel. 5.5. He takes away Kings; He rules
over the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Magna Magnus
disponit Deus: So that we must leave those things with all our hearts, to the
disposal of Gods Almighty hand. When the righteous are in authority the
people rejoice says Solomon, Prou. 29.2. When the wicked bear rule, what
then, must the people rebel? No (as it there follows) then the people
mourn: They change their note and tune it to lachrymae: Rivers of waters run
down their eyes, Psalm. 119.136.
because of those Princes who keep not Gods Law.

Be our Kings then good or evil, God has set them as the tree of good and
evil in the midst of the Garden; It is not for man to touch them least he
dye: Nemo potentes aggredi tutus potest. Seneca.
English it in the words of holy Scripture, Who can lay hands upon the Lords
anointed and be guiltless, 1. Sam. 26. A thought against the sacred head of
Sovereignty, is an attempt against thine own: Scelus in autorem redit: like
an arrow shot against heaven, it comes down with a vengeance upon the
Shooters own head. It is like that enuenomed cup of the Monk of Swinsteed,
which (as some write) destroyed himself together with his Sovereign: Or like
that sword wherewith Cassius struck Caesar, Plut. in vit. Iulii Caesaris.
which (as Plutarch storieth) did afterward slay Cassius himself. See Psalm.
37.15. The thoughts and the dreams of some have been treasonable: But who
would have thought that their own confession should make them plead guilty?
who would have dreamed that their fancy should be punished as a fact? Si nemo
fuerit accusator, ipsi narrabunt. The Lord has bound every heart and hand with
such a tie of inviolable obedience to their Kings, that who so provoke them
to Anger, is said to sin against his own soul, Prou. 20.2. The Lord is so
tender over them, that he will not have them touched; Touch not mine Anointed,
Psalm. 105.15.

He tells us, that if the King be cursed in our thought, or in our Bed
chamber, a Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, that which has wings shall
tell the matter, Eccles. 10.20.

When by Gowries Plot, our late Lord the King was brought even to the Chambers
of death, who would have imagined that the tongue, scarce at liberty, should
have discovered that the head was in danger.

In the Powder Plot, when all things were carried in secrecy: when those
bloud-suckers sealed their cruel resolutions with receipt of the Sacrament,
therein mingling blood with their sacrifices; who would have thought that that
which had wings should have told the matter; that a Quil, that a Letter, like
that Anser Capitolinus, should have bewrayed the capital danger likely to fall
upon the whole Land? It was the hand of the Lord, that enlarged the heart of
the King, to conceive the intricate meaning of an obscure Riddle. It was his
hand that discovered deep things out of darkness, and brought to light the
shadow of Death Job 12.22. So the Catesbeian Conspiracy was disclosed much
like the Catilinarian, of whose discovery Plutarch reports thus. Plut. in
vit. Ciceronis.
At night after supper, and not long before the Massacre should have been
committed, Crassus his servant brought him a packet of letters, delivered him
by a stranger unknown, was amongst which one having no name subscribed, was
directed to Crassus, the effect of which was that there should be a great
slaughter committed in Rome by Catiline, and therefore prayed him to forbear
the City: Crassus therefore went to Cicero, partly for fear of the danger,
and partly to clear himself from the suspicion of any league between him and
the Conspirators; Cicero conuented the Senate, and caused the said letters to
be read publicly and so those letters bewrayed the Conspiracy.

Let us now change but a few names with heathenish Rome, and we shall find but
small difference in the revealing of these two Romish and hellish Conspiracies:
namely, if we put Catesby for Catiline, Monteagle for Crassus, our Cecil for
her Cicero, and our late Sovereign for her whole Senate.

Thus the Lords mighty hand has done for us great things, and holy is his
name. It has scattered the proud in the imagination of their own hearts, and
helped our Israel in remembrance of his mercy.

To contract and conclude all, and therewithal, in a nearer application of
this Text, to apply our selves unto thanks. Deuteronomy. 32.3.
Let us publish the name and the hand of our Lord: Ascribe ye greatness unto
our God: Deuteronomy. 32.9.
The Lords portion is his people, and Jacobs offspring the Lot of his
Inheritance. As for his People; with his own right hand has he gotten the
victory over the strong holds of their crooked and stubborn hearts. It was
his only hand that pierced that filme which inuolueth their hearts, making it
to send forth that cordial water of compunction, the shedding whereof
mortifieth Nature, and irrigateth the grace of their Conversion.

Deuteronomy. 32.10.12.
And as for Jacobs offspring, the Lords hand brought him back not long since,
from a desert Land: He led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye. The Lord alone did lead him and there was no strange God with
him; (that I may so apply those passages in Moses his Song, Deuteronomy. 32.) The
Lords hand fortified his Royal heart against all danger both of soul and
body, so that the Idolatrous Nation could neither detayne his person, nor
obtain their purposes. Their loose Religion did knit him faster to his Lord
and Savior: and their superstitious shows and services did the more confirm
his sacred resolution of persisting with sincerity of heart in the Orthodoxe
and Apostolical Faith. Yea, the same hand did in some sort reuerse the
purposes of our Sovereign himself, to reserve him for the accomplishment of
Gods own divine purposes. Cant. 2.1.
He who is the Rose of Sharon and the Lilly of the Valleys brought back our
Sovereign Rose from that barren soil, in whose Plot he could never have
prospered, the ground thereof being so deceitful; And now he has bedded it
with the Royal Lilly in his own fruitful Land. O let the Almighty Hand knit
up their hearts both together as one Poesy in the bundle of life, making him
always a fragrant Rose of a sweet smelling savor before God; And her the turned
Lilly unto the Lord; bearing up both of them, that they may not dash the foot
of their affections against the stone, and stumbling block of Idolatry, but
rather, may dash that in pieces against the Rock Christ Jesus.

In the next place consider we how graciously the Royal Protector of the
Sovereign heart, has inclined the royal heart of our gracious Sovereign, to
be the Protector and Auenger of his distressed Sister and Nephews in the
Netherlands, whose Land Strangers have devoured, and in whose low estate the
heart of Religion has long layen upon bleeding. Finally, let Leuies Tribe
gratefully consider, and remember how the Lord enlarged (the other day) the
heart of our graciously inclined Sovereign for the enlarging of Leuies
portion, many of whose Tribe want the corporal bread, while they prepare the
spiritual food. As soon as our Lord the King had notice from his loyal
Subjects, that there was in many barren places of his Majesty's large
Dominions, a Famine by so much greater then that in Samaria, (2. Kings 6.) by
how much the Soul is better then the Body. And that in those places, it fared
with his people as it did with those Samaritans in the 25. Verse of the
forementioned Chapter; Sacrilegious Simonyaks obtruding to them by way of sale,
an Asses head to feed their hunger-starued souls; yea an Head possessed with a
dumb spirit, whose jaw bone even while it wants motion may be said to slay
as many Souls, as Samson did Bodies with his Iaw-bone of an Ass, (Judges 15.)
heaps upon heaps, as it is in the 16. Verse of the Chapter. Having graciously
laid to heart that this was the Kings Evil, and by him only to be cured under
God; and that therefore his Subjects did cry like her in Samaria [2. Kings
6.26.] Help our Lord, O King; He soon returned a more comfortable answer then
she received there; namely, that the Parliament assembled at that time should
take special care, that for the better propagating of the Gospel in providing
able Pastors, provision should be made that as well the owners of Parsonages
Impropriate, as the Inhabitants of Parishes untaught, should allow competent
maintenance for sufficient Ministers, in those Churches, whose Cures did
nearly concern themselves in particular.

Thus the Lord has highly enriched our Sovereign with the blessings of
Solomon, so that he is wise in his youth, and as a Flood filled with
understanding: His Name is gone far, Ecclus 47.14, 16.
and for the peace and prosperity which he wishes unto Sion, he is highly
beloved and renowned.

And as for the Isles under him, the Lord has blessed them with the blessings
of the Gentiles in the last Chapter of Isaiah; Esaias 66. cap. verse. 12.14.
He has extended peace like a River, our hearts rejoice, and our bones
flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord is known toward us.

Now the same Almighty hand of the everliving God who has placed and planted
our Sovereign as the Heart in the body of this Triangled Island, reserve ever
to it self only, that little Triangle of his heart, give him an heart to love
and dread the Lord, and diligently to live and rule according to his
Commandments; that so, when he shall have finished his course, kept the
Faith, and given up the Account of his high Stewardship, he may hear that
comfortable and heart-reioycing voice pronounced unto him, Math. 25.^1.
Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a
few things; I will make thee ruler over many things: Enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord.

A BRIEF MEDITATION UPON THE FIFTEENTH VERSE OF the twenty fourth Chapter of
the second Book of Samuel.

Delivered at a weekly Lecture in Deuon: Anno 1625.

By J. P.

THOU SHALL LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTY



LONDON, Printed by William Stansby. 1626.

2. SAM. 24.15. So the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the morning even
unto the time appointed, and there dyed of the people, even from Dan to
Beersheba, seventy thousand men.


YE see even at the first sight that this Text affoordeth fit matter for the
taking up of our Meditations in these times: It makes report of a great
Pestilence spreading it self in Israel in the time, and specially for the
sin, of King David. David's heart is lifted up in the number of his people;
The Lord lifts up his hand to cut it off. He pricketh that swelling bladder
of vain and carnal confidence, with a sharp and grievous sickness.

I note in the Text these several particulars,

First, The Author or Inflicter of this mortality; The Lord.

Secondly, The Nature of it; It was a Pestilence.

Thirdly, The time in which it reigned; From the morning even to the time
appointed.

Fourthly, The Place to which it was confined; From Dan to Beersheba.

Fifthly, The Number of people which it consumed; Seventy thousand men.

First, The Author is Iehoua The Lord, set out by that great Name of his,
derived from an Hebrew word signifying Being, to show and make known his
independencie from any other, he being an eternal Being of himself. I am
that I am, Exodus 3.14. and also to manifest that he gives being to all the
creatures; whence some have well observed that the name of Iehoua the Lord, was
not used before the whole work of the Creation was finished, but is first
mentioned in the second Chapter and fourth Verse of Genesis. And lastly to give
us to understand, that God gives being and accomplishment to all his promises,
he causes them to be brought to pass, and become (as it were) things in
Esse, in Being. Therefore God tells Moses in the sixth Chapter of Exodus,
Verse the third. That he was not known unto Abraham, Isaak and Jacob by his
name Jehovah, because though they believed that he would, yet they lived not to
see that he did effectually accomplish that which he had graciously promised,
in delivering their seed from the Egyptian servitude, and inuesting them with
the possession of the Land of promise. So then, the Inflicter of this great and
terrible Pestilence was Jehovah the Lord, a great God and a terrible, as Moses
styles him; that vncaused Being, the cause of all Being, who keeps his word,
and that specially in the execution of his wrath upon sin.

Secondly, The Nature of the punishment by him inflicted was pestilentiall, The
Lord sent a Pestilence, etc. The sickness as we call it (...), viz. a most
grievous, deadly, violent and infectious disease, seizing on the spirits, and
suddenly sending to the grave: A most uncomfortable sickness, in as much as
when God visits us with it, all refrain from visiting us. Our Lovers and
friends stand aloof from this sore, and our Kinsmen stand afar off, as David
says of himself in another, and more general sense, Psalm 38.11.

Thirdly, As for the time in which the Pestilence reigned. Some say it was from
morning to midday, some for the whole three days threatened, A third sort for
half the space: The Text says it was even to the time appointed: And if we
shall think that the triduall term was abridged upon David's humiliation and
repentance; or at least that the Plague ceased before the third day ended; the
Lord being said in this Chapter to repent of the evil, forbearing in his anger
to punish, and forbidding his Angel to proceed any further, the phrase of
Scripture will be our warrant, in which Gods temporal punishments are not
ever decreed irreuocably, but determined conditionally, and if men will not
repent, he will proceed to accomplishment: yet will it not therefore follow
that Gods will depends upon man's, for it is known to him from eternity, who
they are that shall turn to him by repentance, and he is the orderer of their
ways, and the ouer-ruler of their wills, and their repentance is merely of his
grace, and from his gift.

Fourthly, The place to which the Pestilence was confined, was from Dan to
Beersheba. Dan is here taken locally for a City bounding Israel, as elsewhere
personally for a Son borne unto Jacob: It Was the utmost confine of Israel on
the North side; as Beersheba a City of Judah was on the South, toward the
Philistines: So from Dan to Beersheba, is in effect throughout all Israel.
Twere the like phrase of speech, if we of these parts should say of some
general Plague dispersed in all the Island of Great Britain, that it reigned
from the Start-point on our Southern Seas, unto Straithy-head in Scotland,
which is the farthest point stretching it self into the North Seas.

Fifthly, The number that dyed were seventy thousand men. A great Catalogue for
so small a continuance, or in so small a compass: Insomuch that if the
mortality should have held the same course which it began, but a month or
two, it is likely (by conferring the number which Ioab took of the people,
with the number which God took away by the Pestilence) that in all Israel
there would not have been a man or two left. I grant that it is apparent, that
Ioab brought not an exact number of all the people, but withal I say, it is
most probable, that all the people who fell by the Pestilence are not here
numbered, but chiefly (if not only) those whom God subtracted, and took away
from the former computation of those men of war in whom David gloried. So the
Lord punished David in the thing wherein he offended God. David gloried of the
number of his people in his pride, and God diminished them with his Plague.

Thus have I overrun the particulars to hasten to my observations. I find
many a notable Emphasis in this Text. Death is not so strange, and yet there is
notice to be taken of it: but for men to die of so strange a death as of the
pestilence, and for so many to dye of the pestilence, and that in so small a
compass of time, and within Isreal's Confines, this is that which should force
us to take a more special notice of the heavy hand of God.

The Observation which I first draw out of this Text, is this:

The pestilence is Gods special Rod, whereby he scourges the sin, and
punishes the pride of the most potent and populous Nations.

God had greatly multiplied his great mercies upon Israel, and in great mercy
had greatly multiplied Israel, made it a great and a mighty Nation, of small
beginnings; and now for David's sin of numbering, and for the number of their
sins, he begins greatly to diminish them. The Lord sent a Pestilence. The
Pestilence is his great scourge for sin. When you are gathered together in
your Cities, I will send a Pestilence among you (says the Lord) viz. for your
breach of my covenant, Leuiticus 26.25. Indeed every sickness may be said to
be Gods scourge, but the Plague, that is specialis plaga, Gods special and
proper stripe, the signs that it makes are Gods special marks, and therefore
the Word of the Lord calls it the Sword of the Lord, 1. Chron. 21.12. As
Jehovah the name by which God is here styled is peculiar to him: so the
spreading of the pestilence, which he here sends is from him alone.

We may raise other sicknesses to cast down our selves by our own surfets
and distempers, this seems to be merely of his sending, and he only to have
a finger herein. So David acknowledged when he chose to fall into the hands of
God, by the falling of his people by a Pestilence, in the Verse before the Text.

And now for use to us; Beloved, Isreal's calamity in the time of King David,
is Englands case in the time of King Charles, -- Facta est narratio de te,
Anglia, mutato nomine, cum numero.


In changing the names of the country and circuit, together with the number of
hours in which this Plague lasted, and of the people whom it consumed while it
continued, here is our case, and we have an English history.

If the Pestilence then be Gods scourge for sin, let us see what we have to
do to appease him. Once we can never go from his punishments, as we have
strayed from his Precepts: he can follow us from London to the Mount, and from
the Lands end to the midst of the Ocean: Whither can we go from his
presence? there is no way for us to fly from him, but by flying unto him, and
betaking our selves from the face of his Majesty, to the footstool of his
mercy: To amend our ways, that is the only way for us to appease his wrath,
and to end his plagues. For when we are once duly humbled for our sins, God
has attained his end and aim in punishing us, and then he will stay his hand.
Whence else does God complain by Amos, That he sent the Pestilence among the
Israelites after the manner of Egypt (as now he has sent the Pestilence among
the English after the manner of Israel) and yet they returned not unto him, Am.
4.10. Wherefore does he thus testify and contest against them by Haggai, that
he smote them and yet they turned not unto him, Hag. 2.17. True is the Son
of Syrach his acknowledgement, Thou chastnest and warnest us that leaving our
wickedness, we may believe on thee O Lord, Wisd. 1.2. Well speaks
Lactantius therefore to the purpose, Deus morum emendatione placatur, and qui
peccare desinit iram Dei mortalem facit: To cease from sin, is to make Gods
anger cease from us; and to amend our ways is the only way to avoid his
plagues. Let us then repent of the evil which we have wrought against God,
that he may repent of the evil which he has brought amongst us. Let us
repent, and not proceed in our sins; that he may repent, and not proceed with
his plagues: plagues, which though in our own particulars we feel not yet;
yet we must needs fear, and should duly compassionate in others. For is the
head sick, and do not the inferior members suffer with it; Or, if the head
City continue sick, is it like to fare well with us? May not we see our own
face in that London glass? Certain it is, that our reigning sins have made
way for this reigning sickness. Our inward corruptions bear a part in the
cause of this contagion. Our sins made a separation between God and us, ere
ever he by this sickness has made us separate one from another. Let us
therefore consider, and that with great sorrow and humiliation, the great sins
wherewith we have provoked him, equalling I am sure, if not exceeding those of
Israel.

The chief sins wherewith Israel provoked God, were,

1. Their Intemperancie and Luxury in the abuse of those outward blessings
wherewith they abounded.

2. Their Insolency and security by reason of the many victories which they
had achieved.

3. Their Ingratitude, not rendering due thanks for the benefits which they had
received.

These three were the Capital sins of Israel, in which David as Head bare a
principal part, and for which he was put to so hard a choice, that he
preferred the three days plague as the easiest punishment.

God has no way been wanting to this our Island in Isreal's blessings: She has
no way been behind Israel in those sins. He has blessed our Kingdom above
neighbor Nations, with his protection and deliverances, with peace and
plenty, with a potent people, and above all, with the powerful preaching of
his glorious Gospel. He has exalted our times above former ages, by giving
and preserving unto us Kings and Princes, for piety, wisdom, and moderation,
vnparalelled in our, or in other humane Chronicles: But how have we failed in
blessing him, in magnifying and exalting his name?

Let our fullness of bread, and vain pleasing of our selves in such infinite
variety and exquisite delicacie of feeding; our fullness of pride, and vain
glorying in the strength of our Land Forces, and in remembrance of our nauall
victories; Our unthankfulness to God for the free passage of his Gospel, in
despite of all plots and proiects to the contrary, and for his manifold and
memorable deliverances of Prince and People from treacherous invasions and
subtle circumuentions at home and abroad, our pronenesse to depart from the
Lord, and to go a whoring after strange Gods, as soon as our most religious
Prince, and now gracious Sovereign, was departed out of our Land into a
strange Nation; Our returning such cold thanks for his so blessed return into
his own inheritance. Our general discontent; our eying of Egypt, and wishing
this our Israel entrusted with, and enthralled unto a nation in some conceits
rich and mighty, but in all respects base and miserable; Let these things,
these sins, testify against us, and let this our ingratitude humble and cast
us down in a reuengefull judging of our selves, as it has called and pulled
down judgments and vengeance on us.

O the ingratitude of a sinful nation! how greatly is it increased? Is it
possible that we should not daily consider and celebrate Gods great mercy in
hindering the intended Powder Plot, that cruel and confused Parliamentarie
massacre, in which Babylons children set on work by Baals Priests, had built
the Tower of Babel again with mortar tempered with the public blood, had not
God confounded them in their own language, and discovered them by their own
private Letter. And yet woe is us, we suffer this to slip from us. Yea all
those dagges, daggers, and dangers, those pistols, poynadoes, and poisons,
fitted, whetted, and prepared, by Pope, Papists, and the Spanish faction, for
the breasts of our Royal and Religious Sovereigns, are now as it were cased,
and sheathed, and bound up in utter oblivion and unthankfulness. And is it
not just with God to vnsheathe his sword, and rescue his blessings from us, and
revenge our unthankfulness upon us?

I cannot amplify my speech as this land has multiplied her sin and
ingratitude, yet I will desire you to examine your selves with me a while in
some few points, wherein I will instance, and whereon I desire to insist, (as
the time shall permit) to the confusion of our own faces, and the clearing of
Gods proceedings with us, and our Land.

Have not we every day put off our repentance, and consequently increased our
sins; and do we wonder why God day by day cutteth off such rebels, and more
and more increases and spreads abroad the pestilence?

Have not we slighted or slandered Gods painful Ministers, who have denounced
his judgments against our sins? And what marvel if the plagues which they
threatened against us, be now entered amongst us?

Are there not amongst us many pestilent scorners of all goodness and
religion, who sit even in cathedra pestilentiae, (there the Psalmist places
them) such as term holiness, without which no man can see God, pestilent
perverseness, and peevish preciseness; such as term the Lords holy
Ambassadors (as Tertullus did Paul) pestilence it self (so sounds the
Original,) and those Preachers who pester their sweet sins, pestilent
fellows, that is a common name with them; They make them the worst of men, and
the scumme of the Earth: And what marvel if the pestilence the fiercest of
all sicknesses, and the scourge of the earth be come among us?

Does not the Extortioner take interest, and the Oppressor use violence? do
they not eat like a canker into the estates of the poor, going about and
seeking how and whom they may ouerreach and deceive? And do we wonder why the
pestilence breaks in upon us like a mighty torrent, sweepeth away our
people, and takes away our increase, going about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom it may devour?

Have not many of us uncharitably and blasphemously wished that the plague of
God would light on our Brethren? And now, how justly has it even overtaken us:
So long have oaths, curses and execrations, such as a vengeance take thee,
and, a plague on thee, and, God confound thee, come out from us like arrows
shot against heaven, till now they are ready to return and fall down with a
vengeance on our own heads. We have called for them; and now they are coming.
We have tainted the air with them, and now the air is ready to enter and
infect us.

Have not some of us heartily wished for our Brethrens deaths that we might
compass our designs, and grow great in the World; And now, how deservedly may
their death in these contagious times, be the bane of our whole Family? Is
there not the hiding (if not the plotting, as well as the packing up) of
Murders among us, (and all perhaps for the pursing of a piece of money) And
what marvel if our blood be corrupted, and our Land unpeopled, when that
blood is concealed which cries for vengeance, and leaves a Land unpurged.

Have not the creatures been perverted by us in the intemperate and lawless
use of them: and what marvel if we are now ready to be infected by them, in
their lawful and moderate use? Our swelling humor of Pride and Gluttony, in
excess of fare and apparel, swilling and swaggering in the most riotous
manner, has made way for the swelling tumor of the pestilence spreading and
raging, abroad in our Land. The clothes which should have covered our shame,
and have so shamefully discovered our pride; in steed of keeping us well and
warm, are now ready to convey contagion into us.

We have shut our doors against the poor, the poor has been separated from
his Neighbor, and now we are in danger of having our doors shut up, and our
selves separated one from another.

We have infested others with our particular examples of diverse pernicious
deeds; And now others are ready to infect us with pestilent diseases. Our
humor of corrupting others, has at length brought the corruption of the
humors on our selves.

We have not feared the contagion of Sinners who have been notoriously
incorrigible and scandalous; and now we can hardly escape those whom we justly
suspect to be infectious.

In our private familiarity we have not separated the precious from the vile,
we have adventured upon intimate acquaintance with the most pestilent persons,
and peruersest Sinners: and now those who have the very sore of the pestilence
running upon them, are ready to rush in among us.

In our private Families we have had medly Liueries, garments of Linsey-wolsey,
a mixture of bad servants with some few good ones: Some we have had of both
sorts, to bring our dessignes to pass on both sides; corrupt men, that our
corrupt ends might be compassed; and religious men, that so they might be
colored or countenanced. Wicked Iudasses there are among us, who think they
may sin with liberty, and purloyne for their commodity, under a confidence
that none can epsy them, as long as Christ's followers keep their company. And
now the sick are mingled with the sound, and the one endangered by the other.

Our ears have itched after Novelties and strange opinions, and now behold a
new and a strange contagion is come among us.

Many of us have affected Sects, Schism, and Separation, and now the sickness
has made a sore rent, and a grievous separation amongst us. It has been heard
among us that children might not be baptized, and admitted into the Church
without danger of sin: And now it may be feared that they will not be
brought into the Congregation without danger of sickness.

Platoes community has been held by some particular Libertines, and now it
may be feared that one common plague is let loose to lay hold generally upon
all places.

To draw toward a conclusion; So ill have we couenanted with our senses for
the Lords service, that now all of them strive to be unprofitable to our
selves, and are forced to acknowledge a grievous subjection to the general
contagion that reigns over the Land. The Smell has been taken with
effeminate, if not Whorish perfumes; The Ear has been tickled with vain, if
not villainous speeches; The Taste has been ouer-taken with Luxury; The Touch
tainted with Lasciviousness; The Eye has been rolled with wandering Lusts,
and altogether set upon lewdness. So slenderly have we guarded these
Cinque Ports of our Domestical Senses, that now they are ready to let in, an
open enemy, in open air, to overthrow the whole estate of our bodies; as our
Cinque Ports on the Seacoast, if they be not watched, may prove dangerous
in-lets, for our foes to enter by, and endanger the body of our State. Thus
the Lord is just, but we have done wickedly. Now once more, what is the
remedy whereby we may avoid, or induce him to auert his plagues?

To keep our Bodies from the pestilentiall infection of the plague, we observe
three special directions.

First, To hasten from places infected.

Secondly, To remove into a pure air.

Thirdly, To have the prescripts of the best Preservatives and Medicines.

We must take a like course for our souls, against that plague of sin;

First, Go out from the occasions of sin, as Peter did from the High Priests
Hall.

Secondly, Go into a pure air; get us a pure heart and a conscience purged,
to which we may retire in all danger; a heart and a conscience cleansed by the
wind of the Spirit, cooling our concupiscence, and asswaging our boiling
corruptions, and inspiring us with good motions.

Thirdly, Get us a Peter-teare, a bitter weeping, proceeding from a true faith
in Christ, and a due contrition for sin; bewayling our corruptions the causes
of these contagions. That, that is the only distilled water, which fortifieth
us against all Gods plagues. For if his scourge once induce us to penitence, it
must (considering our deserving) needs endue us with patience, and then
whatsoever befalls us, It shall go well with us, and happy shall we be.

I proceed to that which follows.

The Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the morning to the time appointed.

From the morning to the time appointed.

Hence may we gather, that

The spreading and speeding of pestilent contagions, is both appointed, and
limited by God.

He sends them, and he restrayneth them. They shall rage no longer then the
appointed time: they shall rid no more but Gods appointed and set number. Here
the people dye of the plague, and the King escapes; In the second of Kings the
twentieth Chapter, the King is sick of the plague, and the people free: here,
though the popular plague were threatened for three days space, yet it ceased
before the term was fully expired, and there, though King Hezekiah were told
from God that he should die, yet he humbling himself, was raised as it were
from his deathbed, recovered from his disease, and the Lord added to his days.

We read in Histories of diverse great and general plagues, some reigning over
all the Realm of England, as that in the year 1348. under Edward the Third,
some raging over all the Roman Empire, as that in the year 252. under Vibius
Gallus that pestilent persecutor of the Christian faith. Both which plagues,
and specially the latter, in their several times (as Historians relate)
creeping throughout all the Regions of the Earth, lasted very long, and wasted
many Millions of people: Insomuch that Cyprian taking an occasion by reason of
the greater of those two general plagues, to write his Book De Mortalitate,
says, toward the end of that Tract, Corruit iam mundus malorum infestantium
turbinibus obsessus, That the World was even wasted and went to wrack with the
boisterous storms of maladies and molestations.

Now who spreads these plagues, who beddeth the earth in this sickness, but
he who spreads the Heavens as a Curtain? He who withholds the waters
and they dry up, Job. 12.15.
and also sends them out, and they ouerturne the earth: He restrains the
pestilence, and the sore dries up, he sends it forth, and it ouerunneth the
Earth; he makes desolations in the Earth, Psalm. 46.8. Again, he makes the
plague, as he does the plague of war, in the Verse there following, to cease
unto the end of the Earth.

Many there are, who have stretched their wits to discourse how the Lord should
cause the pestilence to spread and disperse it self abroad. Diverse men refer
it to diverse means: some affirming that all those who fall by the pestilence,
are felled by the immediate stroke of Gods punishing Angel. Others conceiving,
that the evil one, who distilleth into the malicious minds of many who are
infectious a desire to infect others, as he does into the minds of the
seduced, a delight to seduce others, that he I say, conueyeth contagious
infection from one to another, deriuing it from place to place, from person to
person, by apparel, air and all those arts which he is permitted to use
against a people whom God purposes to visit.

Sure I am, here is the lamentable effect of the pestilence set down in this
Chapter, on which the present calamity of our own country makes so large a
Comment: here is laid down the prime Author that lays it on, the maine cause
that leads him on, and the means inducing him to leave off. The means of
dispersing the pestilence must be left to him also; they are in his hands who
can use what means he will to accomplish his just purposes, and to punish a
rebellious nation. For use of the point. In that God spreads the pestilence,
we see how wide they are of the truth, who impute it rather to the fate of
destiny, or the influence of malignant stars, or the confluence of much
people, or the closeness of place, or the corruption of the air, or the
inundation of waters, or the repletion of humors, then to the hand of God, who
disposes of all these at his pleasure.

Again we may learn that they do but spread a net for their own feet, who
think or seek to fly from the spreading pestilence, without flying unto God.
Alas, it is not the avoiding of places infected, nor the correcting of airs
corrupted, nor the taking of receipts prescribed, not the putting off of
clothes suspected, that can secure thee from Gods plagues. The arrow of Gods
anger can pass swiftly through the Air, and enter secretly into thy bosom,
as that arrow did into the King of Isreal's body, notwithstanding the change of
place or attire. 1. King. 22.30, 34.
It is not the change of Air or raiment, but the change of the heart by
repentance that can stand thee in stead. Though thou presently shift thy self,
shirt and all, yet there is no shifting from God; he will find thee out.
Indeed the outward means of preservation are to be sought and used, but not
relied on. When Gods arrows fly abroad, we must primarily arm our selves
with prayer and fly unto God, as Iehoshaphat did, when his enemies came
against him. If evil come upon us (says he to the Lord) as the sword,
pestilence, 2. Chron. 20.9.
etc. And we stand in thy presence and cry unto thee, thou will hear and
help: He knew that his Progenitor and Predecessor Asa had felt the smart of
the contrary practice, who did not so much pray unto God, as desire the
Physicians to practice with him, 2. Chron. 16.12.
and therefore the Lord made their helps unprofitable.

In the next place here might be drawn an use of comfort for Gods Children,
in that the sword is in the hand of their merciful father, who will not ever
be angry, but correct them in measure, and compass them with his mercy: But
there is another use to be made, and another doctrine likewise to be raised,
and therefore I will not insist on it.

The last use then, (that we may more nearly apply a point that so nearly
concerns us) serves for direction unto us all. Does the Lord spread the
pestilence among us, and send it out like a running army, wasting wheresoever
it comes, Psalm 91.6.
walking in the darkness and wasting at noone day: like a raging and devouring
rain, leaving no food: like an universal blast destroying all fruits? Does
he make his dreadful forces post hither and thither, amidst our preparations
for war, as he did among David's warlike people? What should we then do but
as weaker countries are accustomed, upon the approach of dreadful Armies;
submit our selves, send our Agents, and sue for peace. Consider we, what those
of Tire and Sidon did in the days of Herod, Act. 12. toward the end of that
Chapter: When they understood that Herod did bear an hostile mind toward
them, they sent their Ambassadors with one accord to desire peace. But as for
us, mittamus legatos doloris nostri lachrymas, let us with joint consent send
forth plentiful tears, as the only preualent oratorie of a pierced and
wounded heart. For as great floods hinder the preparations of Armies: so the
tears of humiliation stay Gods punishing hand. With tears let us join
prayers, pouring out our souls like water before the Lord. When the Lord bid
Hezekiah provide for present death, he prayed and wept sore: hereupon the Lord
hears his prayers, sees his tears heals his sore, and lengtheneth his
days. And in this Chapter, God having denounced a three days pestilence, does
yet upon David's humble petition, shorten the time, and in the time appointed
cease the plague which he threatened: They of Tire and Sidon made Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain their friend; but as for us, non Blastum, sed Christum
Intercessorem habeamus; Let us not sue or seek to those glorious Servants, and
Chamberlaines of the Almighty, who stand ever in his presence, not to
Seraphins or Cherubins, not to Saints or Angels; But as Themistocles took up
the Son of King Admet into his arms, Plut. in vit. Themistoc.
that by him he might appease the angry father: so let us take up Christ the
Son of God by the hand of faith, and set his merits between us and his
fathers wrath, that he may dull the point of his punishing sword, in the
wounds of his beloved Son. O let us make him our friend, that he may make
our peace with God; for otherwise, tears, and prayers, they are all in vain,
no better then the howling of dogs or the lowing of Oxen. Let us go out of all
confidence in our Selves, in our Worthies, in our Allies, in our Armies, in our
Nauies; and stripping our selves naked, cast our selves ouer-board into the
bottomless Sea of his mercy, as our only safeguard and salvation.

Lastly, they of Tire and Sidon in the height of blasphemous flattery, hearing
the Herodian oration, said it was the voice of God and not of Man: But let us
in the depth of a contrite penitencie, feeling the hand of God, say and
acknowledge, that it is the stroke of God and not of man; and that it is in
vain to look for any help but from him. Vna manus nobis vulnus opemque
feret. The hand that casts us down, can only raise us up. It is God that
deals with us of England now, as of old he did with Ephraim, Hos. 5.14.
taking away when none can rescue; If we shall cry unto him, how long Lord;
It may be answered, (as it follows in the next verse of the same Chapter)
till we acknowledge our offense, and seek his face: O let our hearts answer
in the Psalmists Echo, Thy face O Lord will we seek. So it follows again
in the same verse, In their affliction they will seek me early; they are the
last words of that Chapter. Then according to that ioynt-motion for a general
humiliation, in the beginning of the sixth and next Chapter; Come let us return
unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal us, he has smitten and
he will bind us up: This doing, as it there follows in the next words, After
two days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up: that is, if
we seek him early, he will soon cease his plagues; as he ceased this
general pestilence after the term of two days in the time of King David, and
as he moderated in like manner the violent rage of the Parisian massacre, in
which within three days space there fell ten thousand as it were on our right
hands, through the raging cruelty of the Romish Catholics, Psalm. 91.7^.
and yet as the Psalmist has it, it came not nigh us.

Let us go onward with the Text.

The Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time
appointed, and there dyed of the People even from Dan to Bersheba seventy
thousand men.

Seventy thousand men. Hence I gather that ofttimes the Lord God punishes
sinful man in the same thing, and in some sort after the same kind, in which
sinful man provoke the Lord God.

David is a special instance for proof of this point, here and elsewhere:
elsewhere he unsheathed the sword against Vriah, and drew the Lords sword upon
his own house. Vriam iniusto sed non inulto cruore respersit: the shedding of
Vriahs blood as 'twas undeserved, so 'twas not unrevenged, but was punished in
due time, in its own kind: Here he falls to numbering of his people, and a
number of his people fall by the pestilence: He sends about to understand
the number of his nation, and to know the end thereof: And God is about to
number his people (as he did Belshazzars Kingdom) and to finish and make an
end of it. David reckons without the Lord. It is the poor man's guise (says
the Poet) to number his small flock, Pauperis est numerare pecus: I am sure
it was great weakness in David to number his great forces, as though by their
strength, and by his own right hand he had gotten his victories, chased his
enemies, and compassed the Crown of Sovereignty. Ye may set David in this
act in opposition with Abraham: Abraham having but one Son will entrust him
with God, who tells him, that he will for a reward of his obedience
multiply his seed: David having a multitude of people will rely on their
strength, and the Lord shows by this plague that he can reduce them to
nothing: he sweepeth away upon a sudden, seventy thousand men. I suppose
there are few travelers, who hearken after strange news, but have heard of
that vulgar report in the Eastern parts, (as fabulous I think as famous)
concerning those vast stones scattered within a small compass, in that warlike
monument on the Playnes, of which they tell you, that after you have once
numbered them, if ye number again, ye shall fail of your former reckoning;
the Devil it may be increases men's superstitious and groundless credulity
by deluding the sight, or dazeling the eye: But in this wonderful pestilence,
and popular plague, dispersed in that Eastern Israel; if David had gone to
take an account of his warriers after the first numbering, he might have found a
wonderful abatement, threescore and ten thousand fallen off from the number,
and felled by the pestilence within Isreal's confines; God punishing his pride
in not reposing his alone safety and security under the mere and merciful
protection of his mighty hand. Now beloved, not to rest the proof of the
doctrine too long upon David; If considering this septinarie Decade of
Thousands, destroid and decaid in David's number, I should affirm that David
had specially offended God by his numbering, and that God is set down in the
Text, punishing him in a most special number; Those who are so curious in
observing numbers, and have such a number of curious observations touching the
seventh number, terming it with Ambrose a sacred number, and with Augustine a
number mystically portending a kind of perfection, might happily befriend me
herein: But Chrysostom. would more justly befoole me for my labor, who terms
this curiosity a fabling and a device of man's brain. God tyeth not himself
to numbers, neither should we seek to bring him to it by our abstruse
observations, and schoole-quiddities. Ne suitor vltra crepidam, We may not
think (if I may so speak) to fit him with the seauens, who fills heaven and
earth, making the one his throne, and the other his footstool. It Was chiefly
for curiosity of numbering, that so many fell of the pestilence in the Text.
Much better had it been for David (and so twere for us in this case) instead
of such a foolish and needless numbering, shortning the days and hastening the
deaths of thousands, to have desired (as else where he does) that God would
teach him to number his days; and so to apply himself unto wisdom.

All Histories divine and humane, are so full of proofs for the confirming,
and illustrating of my doctrine, that me thinks I delight to dwell longer upon
it, then ordinarily I use to do upon other Doctrines. How memorably has Gods
hand punished notoriously sinful acts in their own kind in all Ages? Do
Nabab and Abihu provoke and incense the Lord with strange Incense; God
punishes them with strange fire. Leuit. 10 1.2.
Are the Israelites not contented with the Lords feeding? Numb. 11.
he makes them leave their carcasses where they lusted after flesh. Do the
people of Jerusalem offer Incense to the Host of Heaven on the tops of their
houses? Ier. 19.13. The Caldeans shall come and set fire on that City, and
burn it together with those houses, Chap. 22.29. Do the Ammonites sacrifice
their children to Molech their Idol? themselves are forced to pass through
the Brick-kilne in all their Cities, 2. Samuel 12.31. Does that cut-finger
Adonibezek make himself sport with mangling the hands, and feet of captive
Kings? the Lord makes him, when he is taken captive, to beshrew his fingers
for it, by dipping them in the same bloody dish, and serving him with the same,
sauce, Judges 1. Do the stiff-necked Jews crucify Christ at the time of the
preparation of their Passover, It seemed good unto the most just God, that
Titus should plant his siege before Jerusalem, at the time in which the Jews
were assembled to celebrate that Feast, in which siege he also crucified diverse
thousands of them before the walls of Jerusalem, as Josephus reports. Does
the Whore of Babylon set fire unto Gods faithful witnesses? What says he,
who calls himself the faithful and true witness, Apoc. 3.14. He
acquainteth Saint John that she shall be burnt with fire, Apoc. 18.8. Does
she cast the Saints of God alive into the fire? she her self shall be cast
alive into a Lake of fire burning with Brimstone. Apoc. 19.20. Does Edward the
Second, King of England, burn with the unnatural lusts of So dome? Gods
justice suffers his unnatural Subjects to deprive him of his Souereigntie,
and to force a hot burning Spit through his fundament, into his entrails. Does
Henry the Second, King of France, protest that with his own eyes, he will see a
Protestant burnt to ashes? See how in a just Retributio^, at a Just or Tourney,
the splinter of a Spear passes through the sight of his Beauer, pierces
through his Eye, perishes his Brain, and procures his death. Does Alexander
the Sixth, Pope of Rome prepare a cup of Poison for his Cardinals, that by
destroying their persons he might enjoy what they possessed? himself unawares
is made the first taster, and dies of his own drench. Does bloody Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, defer his Dinner upon a greedy and bloody desire of
hearing certain news from Oxford of some Martyrs Dispatch, wherewithal he
might make merry? God deferreth not long the kindling of a fire in his body,
through the intolerable heat whereof he dies miserably, as he lived
mercilessely. Two other examples I find in the Martyrologie of our Church,
making mainly for the farther proof (if farther proofs yet need) of my last
proposed doctrine.

I purpose to mention no more but those. The first is of a certain Smith who
had seemed to have been sometimes a zealous professor, but left his Savior to
save his life, and forsook the faith for fear of the fire, giving no other
answer to a message brought him from a dying Martyr, by which he was exhorted
to constancy, but this, That he could not burn; What became of him? He was
afterward burnt as he went in to save his goods when his house was fired.

The other example is of a most unmerciful Churl, who willingly suffered a
poor diseased Christian Brother, to lie and dye in a ditch near unto his
house, and would by no means suffer him to be sheltred in any of his Barnes or
Back-houses, Stalls or Styes. Master Fox compares him to Dives (and well he
might) for as Dives loved the Dogs which he kept, more then Lazarus, which
lay at his gates; fed them, but cared not though he sterued: so this wicked
wretch would not afford so much as a Dogge-kennell to that distressed creature:
Now mark the miserable end of this Miser, not long after, he was found in a
Ditch, not far from that in which he left his poor Brother, not only dead,
but sticking in the stinking puddle of the ditch, GOD punishing him in the same
kind, in which he transgressed, and returning his reward upon his own head, as
the Prophet Obadiah speaks.

Thus ye have seen the Lord measuring unto men according to their own
measure, that he may be memorably known by the judgments which he executes.
Ye have seen him following men close by the heels in their own ways, to
show in despite of all cauils, that his ways are equal and his judgments
just. Ye have seen the fat Bulls of Bashan, beastly and bloody men, frying in
their own torments, like Perillus in his brazen Bull, that they might know
their tortures to be (as a Heathen speaks) Indigna passis Autoribus
dignissima, unworthy of the Martyrs who endured them, worthy of the Authors
who invented them.

It is high time to wind up the thread of my speech in a word of application.
Does the Lord then, usually confound sinful men in their own proiects, cast
them in their own play, and as it were pay them in their own coin? Beware we
then that we willingly sin in no case, since God can punish us in the same
kind. If we have sinned, let us soon judge our selves, least he suddenly
condemn us. Let us weep for sorrow, and blush for shame, lest he make us
bleed to death. O ler us not proceed in sin, least we give him a pattern by
which he may punish us.

In the second place, let us consider how we have dealt with God, when we
cast with our selves, and seem to wonder why he should thus and thus deal
with us. His judgments are always just, and sometime we may see them
manifestly marked out unto us, with the character of (...) on. He suffering us
to please our selves (...) special sin, till it procures a special
judgment proportionable thereunto: as Anacreon the Poet so long fell to his
wine, till at last he was choked with the kernel of a Grape.

Let us beloved confer Gods works with ours and see how justly he has
proceeded against us in many instances, or may at least, whenever his abused
patience shall disdain any longer to leave our prouocations unpunished.

If the corrupt Magistrate shall spare to execute Gods judgment on notorious
offenders, is it not just with God to power down judgments on his own head?
If he deny patronage to the innocent, depriving the Orphan of his due, and put
him by his portion, what can he expect but that the Lord should also put him
out of his protection?

If the sacrilegious person, and Symoniacall Patron shall prey upon God, by
pilling his Church, shall he not pull down Gods plagues upon his own house?

If the superstitious person shall add unto Gods Word out of man's inventions
shall not the Lord add unto him the plagues which are written in his Book?

If the Swearer shall as it were tear the Name of God with his teeth; shall
not the Lords curse enter into his house, Zach. 5.
rent the timber from the stones, and consume both together?

If we take away ought by Extortions, and unjust exactions, and will not
restore; (...) in justice deprive us of his blessings, (...) ^^store them also?

If we shut our ears at the cry of the poor; will not God shut his ear at
the cry of our prayer?

If we seek to Egypt for help, look for shelter from Idolatrous associates;
will not the strength of such Pharaohs be our shame, and the trust in such
shadows our confusion? Esaias 30.3.

Let us consider these things beloved; and is it not time to consider them, now
the Lord sends his messengers abroad to call us to an account. Shall we shut
our hearts always against him, even now when he is ready to shut our doors
upon us, and seal them up with his plagues, which wax so hot among us of
this Country, yea of this County? God forbid.

The Lord give us understanding, and repentant hearts; the Lord turn us unto
him, and his favorable countenance toward us: The Lord receive our Prayers,
hear our groanings, and help our griefs. etc.

To the Reader.
ANd thus Gentle Reader, I have communicated unto thy view these precedent
pape^^ which were penned (for the most part) in great want of time, a^ thou are
already advertised. Yet are they sent abroad, without adding, altering,
augmenting or amending of any material passage; that so they may follow their
original Copy, which (together with another Tract, not yet published) found
acceptance at the hands of our Dread and Dear Sovereign. In respect of whose
gracious Aspect, I have the more cause to presume of thy favor, or (if that
may not be obtained) the less reason to esteem thy Censure.


