THE LIFE OF THE HOLY AND VENERABLE MOTHER Suor Maria Maddalena DE PATSI, A
Florentine Lady, and Religious of the Order of the Carmelites. WRITTEN In
Italian by the Reverend Priest Sigr. Vincentio Puccini, who was sometimes her
Ghostly Father. And now translated into English.

Si compatimur, and conregnabimus. Romans 8. If we suffer with Christ, we shall
reign with him. Published by allowance of Superiors. ANNO M.DC.XIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST REVEREND LADY, THE LADY MARY PERCY LA.
ABBESS OF THE ENGLISH RELIGIOUS OF THE HOLY ORDER OF S. BENNET AT OUR B.
LADIES OF THE ASSVMPTION IN BRVXELLS.
MADAME,
HAVING received commandment from a dying Friend to publish this Translation of
the life of the Venerable, and holy Suor Maria Maddalena de Patsi, together
with the Preface that goes before it, under such an auow, as I should think
most fit for such a subject; I found my self cast upon the same resolution by
duty, which of my self I should have embraced, out of voluntary election, and
affection: in as much as the thing admitted of no debate, or dispute, but that
it must be presented to your Ladyship. For your Ladyship takes not up the life
of this Great and Admirable Woman upon trust, since you have read it in the
original tongue, and by means thereof you have planted, not only in your own
Religious heart, but in the hearts also of your own excellent Religious, a most
tender, and dear remembrance of her rare virtue. And besides I am in my self
so much bound to your Ladyship, as that (having nothing of mine own to present
as a token of my true desires to serve you, I account this trust to have come
into my hands very luckily since it helps me to pay my debts, without any
charge to my conscience, out of another man's goods.

It appears already, that I need not bring this Holy Woman and your Ladyship
acquainted together. That which I have to say of her goes in the Preface to
the Reader. Of your Ladyship I only ask, that you will continue to make her as
much your pattern as you may; and I wish that as you were the first of our
country, since the lamentable fall thereof, who made so high Nobility of blood
(as high perhaps as any Subject in Christendom does bear) stoop so low to
the lure of Evangelical Poverty, and other perfections: so the eminency of
your Heroical Example, may again be able to bring forlorn virtue into
request. Only I advise the world, that, unless it will amend, it come not near
your Ladyship, and the blessed company of Religious, which you have the honor
and happiness to govern. For I know not what receipt you have gotten, but I am
sure you have it there among you, to make Beauty chaste, Poverty commodious,
Obedience easy, Understanding humble, and the bitterness of Austerity, not only
sauory, but even sweet. And I beseech Jesus you may ever have it; and that by
the intercession of this great Servant of his, and your devotion to her, both
your Lad'. self, and your whole happy Congregation, may obtain as full a
measure of benediction from his divine Majesty, as is cordially desired by

Your La. most entierly devoted servant, G. B.
From Collen this 20. of April, 1619.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT was the saying of an ancient Roman, who going to dye in a valiant manner
(according to the account which then was made) and being withal desirous, that
one of the branches of his House should profit by the sight of that example;
Specta iuuenis etc. in ea enim tempora natus es. quibus firmare animum expedit
constantibus exemplis. Behold, O young man, for thou art borne in such an age,
as wherein thy mind has need to be fortifyed by such examples of constancy as
this is. How much more need have we of pregnant, and excellent examples we who
are Christians, and must therefore by answerable to the dignity, and height of
that incomparable vocation: and who withal are fallen upon such a sensual,
corrupt, and erroneous age as this, wherein well doing is so wonderfully out of
fashion. And therefore Specta iuuenis, behold, and look upon examples, which
may help thee both unto true spiritual fortitude in undertaking, and
performing that with is good, and to uncorrupted prudence in discerning, and
avoiding that which is ill.

And howsoever it be true, that through the goodness of God, we have many other
helps which (by our cooperating with his grace) may induce us much toward the
remaining in our duty, or at least returning toward him; as namely the
counsel of virtuous friends, the reading of holy books, and the observation
of Gods universal providence; yet I think there is none which does more
sweetly insinuate it self, and more effectually prevail with us, then that of
good and fit examples. Segnius irritant animum demissa per aures, quam quae
sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus: The hearing of good advise is but a dull kind
(...) insinuation, in respect of the seeing strong ^xamples. And from hence it
is, that when either good counsel is given us in private co^^erence, or by
public exhortation or prea^hing, men think that then they do the busi^es
best, when they accompany that part with ^he other. Benedictus Deus qui talia
do^a dedit hominibus: Blessed be therefore Almighty God, who has given men
such gifts as these, and who has enriched all ages with innumerable examples
of virtuous acti^ns to be admired, and has permitted such as are vicious to be
abhorred.

I propound to you therefore, toward the making of you with my self, a little
more obseruant of the good will of God, and more consideratiue of what his
grace is accustomed to work in their hearts, who truly, and operatiuely love
him, an example of a venerable, and most holy creature, by sex a woman, but in
spirit and strength of mind, more then a man. And I would not go far off for it
in respect of time, least I should be told of being unseasonable, as if so
great perfection were not compatible with such an age as this: but I bring it
to you of such ^one as dyed but in the year of our Lord 1607.

This great Servant of God was calle^ Suor Maria Maddalena de Patsi, a
Florentine Lady, of excellent beauty, of illustrious extraction, both by Father
and Mother and (which more properly was her own) of s^ eminent, and admirable
virtue, as the process^ of her life here translated will declare. Now this
life was written originally in Italian by (...) Reverend Priest, called Sigr.
Vincenti^ Puccini, and he chose to do it, in a plain an^ perspicuous manner,
without any other ornament, then that of Truth. He divided it into two parts;
the former containing an histori^ call narration of what she did, and suffered
i^ this world; the other a particular account o^ those high intelligences which
it pleased God t^ impart to her, in her several Rapts, and Excesses of mind,
which by order of Superiour^ were taken in writing by the other Religious^* as
she was uttering them. Now these grew to multiply both in so great number and
measure as that the foresaid second part, did afterward endure a division into
five, so as in all they are six parts, and they make a large volume, full of
admirable Conceptions and Expressions. Which yet because they are so high, and
full of Mysteryes, I have contented my self with translating only the first,
that being all the historical part of her life, wherein also are diverse
sufficient touches of those other, together with many most approved miracles,
whereby it pleased God to declare the sanctity ^f this his Servant.

The Author whom I named, is also a Florentine, a Gentleman of a good house,
and of a good estate, but which he is daily giving away for Gods sake; and a
man of great reputation both for his judgment, his piety, and the good example
of his life. Which yet with ^ne, is much the more considerable, because I have
understood by some who know him best, that himself (for as much as concerns
conscience) is also governed by others of great sanctity, and experience in the
way of spirit: and it is well that he is so. For though many do excellently
govern others, no creature is able to do it sufficiently for himself. But as
for his own virtue, and value, it is not a thing ^nly known to men of his own
City and Country, but to many Gentlemen, and some Noblemen of England, and
they not only Catholics, but Protestants.

This virtuous Priest, was the Ghostly Father of that holy Woman, and he
governed her soul (together with the whole Monastery where she lived) for the
space of some immediate years before she dyed. And for the greater credit of
that which is here delivered and to the end that not only no pious Catholic
may doubt thereof, but that even no prudent Protestant may have color to
quarrel or so much as question the truth of that which shall be in this book
declared, I will deliue^ some circumstances, which I assure my self, i^ the
judgment of indifferent, and moral men will serve the turn.

In the Monastery of Florence called Santa Maria de gli Angioli, there be three
score Religious women, who are though worthy (as worthy as flesh, and blood may
be to receive every day the Body of our Blesse^ Savior, in the B. Sacrament,
though indeed this cannot be worthily done by any, and i^ must suffice that it
be not done unworthily To the so often feeding upon this bread o^ Angels, they
are admitted not by any importunity, or fancy, or particular judgment o^ their
own, but by the hand of this Priest whom I have already described. In whose
government of them, if there be a^y imperfection, it is in that he may be
thought a little scrupulous, through the great light he has of the purity and
Majesty of almighty God, on the one side, and the great indecency or rather
deformity, which he discovers in the least sin on the other. Now the
passages of this Saints life, after she entered into the Monastery were
verifyed, and that upon Oath, by these other Religious women that lived with
her, in presence of their spiritual Magistrates, who had authority to take full
information thereof.

Let me further present to your consideration, discreet Reader, that at the
time of taking those Oaths, the Religious were particulerly put in mind (though
they were far from being ignorant thereof before) of the nature of an oath, and
with how much truth and reverence they were bound to swear; and that they must
not, for the converting, or saving of the whole world, tell the least officious
lie, and especially in matters of this nature; wherein as it was to be an act of
Justice, and Religion, to express a truth when they were lawfully called
thereunto: so to publish, and authorize an untruth, truth, was to commit a
grievous sin. And indeed the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church does so
much abhor all collusion, and fraud in this high kind, as that it denounces
a solemn sentence of most rigorous Excommunication, ipso facto, to be
incurred, by any that shall publish, or any way cooperate willingly toward a
false Miracle.

Now therefore that such a company of holy women, as I have here described, who
do otherwise lead a life of so great perfection, and penance, as is notorious
to the world in those parts, being directed in their conscience by such a
Ghostly Father, and being put in mind of their duty toward God, and the world,
in so express manner, by their other spiritual Governors, should in despite
of all Religion, and reason, combine, and band themselves to deceive the world,
and damn their own souls, by auowing solemn untruths; and to do all this
between four walls, and in the midst of perpetual fastings, praying, hair
cloth, disciplines, and the like, is not only improbable, but impossible. And
I shall wonder with what sense, by the Civil, or Municipall Law of any
Country, the oaths of any two honest men, or women, may be admitted to rule
the case of men's lands, and lives, and that the oaths of so many persons, and
such persons, should be rejected, in verifying of that which passed upon their
knowledge, and under their eyes. So that when this truth is told you, that the
several Chapters of this following history, were ratifyed by the subscription,
and oaths of these Religious, I assure my self that all danger of doubt will
be removed; and to the end that there be no question made, but that they did so
subscribe, and swear, I will here set down that part of the Authors Preface to
the Reader which concerns the act in law, whereby it is expressly declared.

To the end, that the truth of what is delivered in this history, might appear
more clearly, the most Reverend Monsigr. Pietro Nicolini, Vicar-Generall of
Florence, at the instance of the Governor of the Monastery, came in person to
the same place, together with the Chancellor of the Archbishoprike, upon the
14. day of April, in the year of our Lord 1609. where, calling all the
Religious of that House into their presence, who had seen with their own eyes
the actions of their Mother Suor Maria Maddalena, which are set down in this
present work, he examined them most particulerly, concerning the truth thereof.
Which Religious women, amounting to the number of threescore, who are
accustomed every morning to receive the Body of our Lord, did affirm, under
their oaths, that those things which are recounted in this life of this
servant of God, are mere, and real Truth; and many of them, did moreover say
by word of mouth, that they had seen many more particulers, then are written
there. Now therefore at the end of every Chapter of this book those Religious
women who were present, and saw the wonderful things which therein are
severally related, did subscribe the same with their own hand writing; and so
by the subscription of all these Chapters, there is a great book filled; and
in the presence of Monsigr. the Vicar General, and of the Governor of the
Monastery, and of four witnesses, there was an authentical Instrument, or
Writing, made by Sigr. Frosino, a Milanese, Chancellor of the Archbishoprike,
which public Instrument, or writing, together with the aforesaid book, full
of subscriptions is kept for eternal memory in the Monastery; and a copy of
them both (being authenticated by the said Chancellor) was entered, and is
conserved in the Roles of the Archbishopricke of Florence. And all this
diligence was used, to take from any man (that shall read the great and
wonderful things that God did work by this Mother Suor Maria Maddalena, his
beloved Spouse) the least suspicion, or doubt, of the truth thereof.

This is contained in the Authors Preface to the Reader, touching those
things that passed from the time of her entering into the Monastery, which was
in the seauententh year of her age, until the time of her death, which
happened in the one and fortith year: and for those other that are recounted
from her first use of reason, till she entered into Religion, her Mother, and
Servants, and next kindred, and Ghostly Fathers did certainly, and ionytly, and
severally auow, that which is here related, besides that her self did confess
them to be true. So that for as much as concerns the matter in fact, the
credit of the history being now settled, as I conceive it is; I will only in a
few words give an advice, or two, concerning the reading of this life, whether
it fal^ into the hands of Catholics, or Protestants.

And first let it be laid for a ground, that mirabilis est Deus in Sanctis
suis, Almighty God is wonderful in his Saints. God i^ wonderful in all his
works, and ways, bu^ he is said to be wonderful, per excellentia^, in his
Saints, as if in comparison of that wonderfullnes, the rest of his works were
not wonderful. Heerupon I would have it follow, that in the reading of Saints
Lives, men ought t^ carry themselves with great sobriety. Catholics must be
sober, and not venture to freely upon the imitation of every thing, whereof they
find an example in the life of Saints, but content themselves with the knowledge
of how litl^ themselves are worth, and with admiration o^ that which is above
their calling, or the proportion of Gods grace given to them. And for as much
as concerns practice, they must employ themselves in the purchase of those
seue^ll solid virtues, which shine so brightly in those Lives, according to the
circumstances of ^me and place; and in such cases as are que^ionable, it is not
safe to do any thing of mo^ent without the advice of their spiritual ^uides,
and Ghostly Fathers. And above all we ^ust be sure, not to despise, or censure
rashly, that which is represented by great authority, and with great Charity;
but praising Almigh^y God (according to the advice of Sales the ^ood Bishop of
Geneua, in that excellent book ^f his, which is entitled, An Introduction ^o a
devout life) for the superabundance of ^is graces powered upon others, we must
stay ^ur selves humbly in the ordinary, and (for us) ^ore assured way; less
excellent in it self, ^ut more suitable to our infirmity, and poverty wherein
yet if we converse with humility and ^delity, God will afterward raise us up to
^reatnes which is truly great. And as for Pro^estants, if any such may read
this book, I will only desire them to be that which they ^ould feign be
thought to be, that is discreet and not to oppose, upon this only reason,
because we affirm; nor to scorn things as vanities, and inventions, only
because themselu^ understand them or see them not; and finally not to be so
discourteous, even to the Omnipocency of Almighty God, as not to let him
dispose of his creatures, as is most pleasing t^ himself.

We see that he governs his servants o^ ordinary condition with great
variety, according to the several temper of their minds; some are drawn by
health, plenty, estimation, and all kind of prosperity which without sin may
be enjoyed; some others again would be as it were putrifyed by such warmth as
that, and are best kept in temper by the contraryes. So also are his Saints (in
whom nature is not destroyed, but perfected) conducted by the hand of his
admirable providence in several ways: some by Comforts, and Rapts and Ecstasies
of love and they also are in themselves of very several kinds; for some of
them bind all the senses at once, and some leave them free to some particular
purposes; even as we see, that naturally it happens sometyms in dreams. And
in like manner we also find by experience, that some men are mad outright, and
others again are so in some one particular occasion, and some again are mad
in all, unless it be only in some one wherein ^hey are of as sound discourse as
any other man.

But it pleases God to lead on other Saints by great aridityes, and
desolations of spirit: and so he makes them appear in the eyes of men to be
no more then ordinary persons; and others again he places as Lanternes and
Beakons, for all the world to behold* and take example by, through the
supernatural concourse which it pleases his divine Majesty to yield of
working many, and most undoubted miracles in confirmation of their sanctity, or
otherwise for the manifestation of his own greater glory, as it has been
abundantly seen in the case of Suor Maria Maddalena. The evidence of whose
holiness, and the testimony which it both pleased God to give unto it, has so
appeared in the eyes of the world, as that order is come from Rome to the
Religious where she lived, that they may publicly expose her Picture in their
Church, with the Voto's round about it, which are testimonies of the graces
that God has granted by means of her intercession. Now these things are
yielded to so very rarely, and never, but after a most rigorous examination of
particulers (which is taken by a Congregation of Cardinals, and other learned
and prudent, pious men deputed ever for these purposes) as that even this
circumstance alone, does much advance our certainty of her sanctity, and this
so much the more because it has been done within a dozen years after her
death. A rare example: for the Church walks on with a foot of lead in such
occasions as these, and maks not such have, but upon extraordinary inducements.

And whenever any particular is recompted, if a man shall deride it, because
only it is strange, or superior to the course of nature, or because it is
ridiculous in his opinion, and contrary to those foolish, and false grounds
which ma^s discourse being naturally both lame and blind, has framed for it
self to walk upon, he may also scoff at those particulers which are related
in the holy Scripture it self, That God condemned all mankind, for one only
man's, and woman's eating of an apple: That he brought armies of frogs into
Pharo's Court, in despite of al his guardes: That the wedge of the hatchet
leaped insta^tly up to the helm, when it was put into the water: That the
sight of a man borne blind, was given by means of applying dirt, and spittle
to his eyes: That sick persons were cured by walking only in another man's
shadow. These things, and many other like to these, are recorded in holy
Scripture, and yet no Christian man must presume so much as once to doubt
thereof. So as the only strangnes or supernaturallnes of any event, cannot
authorize any modest, and wise person to deride it; but may justly and ought in
prudence oblige him to doubt thereof, or rather to deny his assent thereto till
it be conveniently proved.

The authority therefore is that, whereupon the credit of any supernatural
thing does depend, whether it be more, or less, and not only the mere
strangnes of the thing it self. And from hence it is, that whatsoever is
recorded in holy Scripture, how wide soever it falls in respect of our
experience, or how far soever it ouershooteth in respect of reason, must
cheerfully, and undoubtedly be assented to, because it rests upon an
infallible authority, which is the Revelation of God, and the proposition of
his Catholic Church. And such an authority does declare whatsoever thing to be
as certainly true, as truth it self is true; and that no man may doubt
thereof, but upon the price of being either an Infidel or an Heretic. There
is another kind of inferior authority, standing upon humane, and moral
proof, exhibited under the Oaths of many persons, being eye witnesses, and
free from all exception, both concerning the very actions themselves of Saints,
and the miraculous works of God showed in honor of them, and by the means of
their intercession, whereof no man, that has perfect information of the
particulers, can so much as doubt without extreme imprudence, nor once deride
without profaneness.

But he that deserves to wear that Livery, will not only laugh at me,
translating here the life of this modern Saint; but will make as little
scruple to laugh at all our Saints Lives, though written by other Saints
themselves, and other most excellent persons, as S. Bonauenture writing the
life of S. Francis, S. Bernard of S. Malachias, Paulus Diaconus of S. Gregory,
S. Gregory of S. Bennet, Possidius of S. Augustine the incomparable Doctor, S.
Hierome of S. Paul the first Eremit, of S. Hilarion, Malchus, and a great
number of most holy Virgins; Cassianus of whole troops of ancient Eremits, S.
Ambrose of S. Agnes, and S. Athanasius of S. Anthony, who all relate miraculous
things of those several Saints in great abundance. As little difficulty, I
say, will he make to laugh at these, which I here relate in the person of my
Author, whilst yet whosoever he be, he cannot bring the tenth part of that
proof, whereby he would be taken for his Mothers Son, or the heir of his
Fathers land, or that the very name he is known by, is his own; which I will
offer to the eye of any indifferent man, for all that is affirmed here
concerning this great servant of God. And that any person either absurdly
incredulous, or profanely blasphemous, may see how little reason he has in
rebelling thus from the laws of human society, and planting his own either
humorous imagination, or impious assertions in place thereof, I will address
him to that excellent Treatise, De vtilitate credendi, written by that Top and
Crown of wits S. Augustine, who by a number of most pregnant reasons, and most
palpable experiments, does demo^strate it to be a point of sottish pride and
impertinency, and not of wit or judgment for men to be ever questioning or
doubting, and to admit of nothing which has passed under the testimony of
their own eyes.

We therefore that are Catholics shall make no difficulty, to embrace with a
most pious affection the belief of this history, and Protestants I hope will
find no true cause to doubt thereof. And moreover if it were but even out of
nouelty, these later, me thinks, ought to fly upon this kind of studdy, with
great appetite, for as much as concerns the understanding part; because in
their own Communion, they have in effect none at all of whom they write, and
reco^mend the lives of Saints: nay I scarce know of any ancient Saints whom yet
they will (though extremely against the very appearance of common sense)
pretend to have been of their Religion, whose lives they have written, or in
whose honor they have so much as published any Sermon, which yet they might
do, at least for admiration, or imitation, though they will not do it for
Invocation. I cannot say what the reason heerof may be unless they know not
how to re^ompt the ancient Saints Lives untruly, without being reproved, and
confuted by us; and ^hey cannot do it truly, without casting shame, and
confusion of face upon themselus, through the extreme unlikeness that would
instantly appear, both in the belief, and life of these ^ew men, who are but
like so many pretty fay^ings, being compared and ranged with those venerable,
and sacred antiquityes of the Church; which on the other side are as so many
exquisite Statues, drawn by the life of that dear Original, our B. Savior
Jesus Christ himself, of whom it was said to us, Inspice, and fac secundum
exemplar etc. Behold, and do according to this example, or ^atterne.

I confess it would be excellent sport if it were not extreme pity to see how
much these good men make of a little; and how they do not only gape, but even
gasp again, after the findinge of somewhat which may seem to carry some small
show of sanctity, in any of their own brethren, whilst they despise ours.
Wherein yet if you come to particulers, whatsoever truth they will tell you, or
even whatsoever they will but aspire unto, shall not e^tend it self beyond the
latitude, and oblig^tion o^ an hon^st moral man of any Religion As, that such
an one is no great Gamester that he is no Swearer; that he owes no man any
thing, that he enioyes a good report, an^ does his neighbors no wrong, that he
follow sermons close, and perhaps that he is stu^ious and frequents not
Tauernes, or Plays. The much they will say, and they may say it truel^ of many
whom either the precepts of good education, or the custom of good
conversation or the piety of natural inclination does dispo^ so well. And thus
much may be also most trul^ said of many men in Turkey, or Barbary who have not
so much as a belief in Christ.

But if you will further ask what heroical acts have been performed by them
what great estats they have wholly given aw^ for Gods sake, what sacrifice they
have made o^ themselves, in imitation, and union of the high oblation which our
B. Savior did ((...) much to his cost) make for us to his Eternal Father; what
corporal punishment they ha^ inflicted upon themselves what fasting, an^
prayer, and ground lodging they have used in a word what painful things they
have voluntarily undertaken, and what contentments (even not unlawful in
themselves) have been generously by them despised: if you ask them, I say, any
such question, you must be also content to make your self the answer; for
they will hardly confess the truth of having no such thing as this among them,
and they cannot prove so great an untruth, as that they have any such. Yet
(blessed be the glorious name of God) not only our Ecclesiastical historyes,
but even our present eyes, and hands, are plenae gregibus bonorum exemplorum,
full of admirable, and sublime examples, of most heroical holy men, and women.
And in this respect we are well content to be more subject to their profane and
false Criticismes, then they can well be to our true ones; since they have no
Text for us to comment upon, whereas among us there is no want in this kind.
But the Poets request was b^t reasonable, when he desired the Reader, either
not to carp at his writings, or else to utter some of his own which might be
considered of -- Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. For our parts, we find
no one thing to be of more assistance, and use in the way of spirit, then the
reading of Saints Lives, which give the bri^ to vi^e, and the spur to virtue,
opening to us a large and clear prospect upon the mercyes of God, and the
miseryes of our selves, the best of whom being compared with them, are but as
dwarfes in respect of G^ts.

And who can behold in this holy Woman the heroical exercise of all virtue
but he will admire God and be ashamed of himself? In her he shall find a most
prompt Obedience, a most voluntary and exact Poverty, a most entire Chastity, a
most ardent Charity, a most profound humility, with a perfect contempt, and
mortification of her self, and inflexible rectitude of intention and adoring
resignation to the will of God, and (which shines in her both among, and
above the rest) an insatiable thirst of suffering for the mere love of his
divine Majesty, and such a suffering, as might be pure, and without the society
of so much as any spiritual comfort. Wherein Almighty God did sometimes hear
her prayer, and she stood under all burdens, with an invincible, and even
incredible constancy, and strength of mind. And who is there now I say, that
will not tremble to compare himself to such a pattern of perfection as this
is? At least who will not admire her, and more admire God in her, especially if
he consider her life, from the 52. Chapter to the end of the book, where, as
there is less mention of her Rapts, and Miracles, so is there much more
particular relation of her virtuous, and heroical operations, whereof I had an
inclination to set down some particulers, respectively to all th^se virtues
which I here have named, but I feared to become tedious, and I hope they will
be drawn up, and drunk down more profitably (because more naturally) at the
very springes themselves where they gr^w and where I desire they may be sought.
Upon the true taste and digestion whereof, this conclusion I hope will ^esult:
that whatsoever so excellent and hero^call actions are performed, it cannot be
but ^hiefly by the ins^irations and pious affections ^mparted by Almighty God;
and that his divine Majesty (who is supreme wisdom and good^es, and who
exercises both an universal and ^et most particular providence over all his
^reatures, and much more over his holy Church (...) general) cannot in justice
concur toward the producing of such acts in a false Religion, whereby the
judgment of men may be entangled and abused. But that wheresoever he does so
concur, it may serve for a great argument to prove the truth of that
Religion, which by the performers thereof is professed; and the want thereof,
in any other congregation of pretended Christians, may not less assure us,
that it is possessed by a spirit of error.

O wretched, and thrice miserable creature that Suor Maria Maddalena was, if
the way of penance, mortification, and most voluntary suffering, both
exterior, and interior, be not the true and only way to heaven* How many
painful disciplines, rude haire-cloaths, hungry meals, sad nights, bitter
sighs and salt tears, did she with a noble and faithful heart endure, send
forth, and shed? And all in vain, if it should be true which Protestants
affirm, that faith only iustifyeth, that Christ has so suffered for us all,
as that we are not bound in our bodies to suffer with him, that these voluntary
afflictions are no better then superstitions, and that any satisfaction which
we pretend to make to God (though we protest we can make none but by virtue of
his grace in Christ) are no less then so many derogations to the infinite
value of his sacred Passion. But on the other side, O happy, and a thousand
times happy, is that excellent soul of hers, if it be both true, and evident,
that the way to heaven is narrow, and few there are that find it; and if that
of liberty be a wide, and open way, by which men run with ease upon
perdition; if heaven be such a thing as will not be gotten by one that seeks
it, tamquam aliud agens, and much less, in contrarium tendens, but he must be
careful, and studious, and laborious, and earnest, and ardent, and even
violent in the attayning thereof: Et violenti rapiunt illud.

This was ever true since the fall of Adam, and has much more been evident,
since the Redemption of Mankind was wrought by Christ our Savior, through the
mystery of the Cross, yea and through all the actions, and passions, of his
most sacred life. For though he abrogated the Judicial, and Ceremonial law of
Moses (which being but images, and shadows, must needs yield to the Truth,
and Life, which came into the world with him, or rather which was he himself)
yet not only was the Moral law not abrogated, or abridged (Non ve^i soluere
legem, sed implere) but it was expressly ratifyed, and may rather be said in
some sense to have been enlarged, by those Counsails of perfection, of
continuing in perpetual chastity (Qui potest capere capiat) of giving all to
the poor, and following Christ, and loving our enemies; which like codicills,
after a sort were annexed to his last will, and Testament by himself.

Besides, that by the blessed example of his own admirable life, those
temporal benefits which under the old law, were wont to hold so high a place,
as Riches, Plenty, Posterity, and the like, were then degraded in a manner, and
their contraryes, as Pain, Poverty, Persecution, Chastity, and Humility,
assumed into their place, when they were sanctified in the person, and by the
practice of our B. Savior. And ever since (out of the abundance of his grace,
Et de plenitudine eius accepimus omnes) the same has been done by the Saints
of his holy Catholic Church, to the wonder of the whole world, even in
despi^ht of all sensuality, and impiety. Since so man, glorious Kings, and
Queens, delicate Virgins, valiant Captains, profound Doctors have gi^en over,
in several ages, all the whole world at once, and cast the care of greatness,
of pleasure, of liberty of humane knowledge, behind their backs for ever that
they might only attend to the all-sufficient contemplation of Christ Jesus
nailed upon a Cross.

Whom, how, and with what heart can the eye of any Christians consideration
behold ^o shamefully naked, and so mercilesly scourged, so dolorously crowned,
and so impiously blasphemed for him, and me, and all mankind, without a just
indignation against ourselves, and implacable hatred of sin* and a most
ardent love toward so dear a Savior with a most tender compassion of his
v^speakable torments? At least Catholics that find not such holy affections in
themselus as th^se, will never flatter themselves with a conceit of (...) indeed
true Christians: whereas the adu^^^a^yes of the doctrine of Penance think
themselves bound to no other painful acts, but of the mind. But when I name
compassion, I mean not a mere and only affection of the mind, whereby we use
to grieve for the misery of another man, but I mean by it a kind of
joint-tenancy as it were, in suffering as he suffered, and as his Saints have
suffered, through hi^ assistance, and by his example, by fasting, and praying,
and retyring, and mortifying, and submitting our selves to affronts, and
corporal pains, for the satisfaction of Gods justice due to former sins, and
that afterward neither sensuality, nor ambition, nor any other passion may
dishonor, and defloure our souls. Now if these things be as they have been
here delivered, and as indeed they are, in what glory, I say, shall we believe
this holy, and admirable Suor Maria Maddalena de Patsi to remain whose whole
Pilgrimage in this world, may be accoumpted to have been but one continued act
of doing Penance, as by the readi^g of her life will appear: whereof as she
took the example from the best examples of antiquity, so she has delivered
over her own to all posterity. And in what obscurity, and true misery do they
remain, who being wholly blinded by their passions, and even pressed almost to
death by dangerous objects, procure to make the very reasonable part of their
souls believe, that the liberty of the Gospel of Christ does free Christians
from the ^ye of keeping his commandments, and that because Christ has
suffered for us all, therefore he has suffered all for us; and that we have no
corporal penance l^ft us by obligation to undergo, either with him, or for
our selves.

When any speech is used to them by us, concerning fasting, they tell us out of
the Scripture, that those things defile not the man that enter in, but those
others that issue out of man: when we speak to them of other pennances, they
ask us still out of Scripture, Who commanded these things at our hands? And
when we yet come further to such particulers, as carry with them any
extraordinary maceration of the body by hayre-cloathes, or the drawing of a
little blood by disciplines, or the taming of a man's self by long watches, and
the like, they stuff our ears, and they would stop our mouths, with speech
concerning those false Prophets, who are said in holy Scripture, to have
launced, and wounded themselves with knives: and others, that sacrificed their
sons, and daughters to the Devil.

It were well if once they would begin to think of what they said, and finding
that it is not to the purpose, they might give over suc^ impertinencies as
these. For concerning the first of these three places, our B. Savior himself
who gave us the example, and who by telling us how we were to carry our selves
in fasting did imply a Precept of the thing it self: he himself I say it was,
who told the Jews how man was not defiled by eating meat, with unwashed
hands (for which they taxed him) but by wicked cogitations, brought forth by
the tongue, and so powered into the ears of other men, for which he reproved
them. By this doctrine he discovered their Hypocrisy, and confounded their
presumption, but he did nothing less then disallow, either of those fasts to
which his Church should have power to oblige our consciences, or of those
others which every man in his own private devotion, should think fit to make,
either in contemplation of his love, or in union with his pains, and penance.

As impertinently do they ask us, who commanded these things at our hands?
For that was said by the Prophet to the people, which glorified themselus for
the punctuality wherewith they performed certain exterior, and ceremonial
things, when in the mean ^^me they persecuted the Prophets, they op^essed the
people, they dishonored God, by ^ayly and hourly, and grievous sins,
without any meaning to reform their lives, per^ading themselves absurdly that
they had li^erty to be as wicked as they would, so that ^ithall they carried
any appearance of piety ^n the exterior. Now, what has this objection to do
with us, who are taught by the Catholic Church, that our principal endea^our
is to be placed in the performing of the will of God, the rooting out of ill
habits, and ^he planting of solid virtue in their place; and ^et that exterior
mortifications, and pennances, ought in all reason to be imbrac^d, as means
whereby the mind may be brought back to God, and to make some poor kind of
amends, for the unlawful pleasure which we take in Creatures, to the great
offense of the Creator and especially for the love of God in Christ Jesus our
Savior who suffered so grievous things for us. We shall therefore not only be
wicked, but extremly base, if we dispose not our selves to pay the gold of his
pains, with the dross of our penance. And therefore when they ask us, Who
commanded these things at our hands? We answer with o^^ who said most
worthily, That the law of G^ commands us but a little, but the love of G^ a
great deal. Yet besides all this there are among other examples in holy
Scripture, both^ the old, and new Testament, which are pregnant proofs of what
we ought to do in the particular, and in either of them I will give o^
instance.

I mean not here to press the examp^ of the glorious Precursour and Baptist
of our (...) Savior S. John, for he was sanctified in hi^ Mothers womb, and
the life which he lead i^ the wilderness with a perpetuity of solitude,
haire-cloaths, extreme fasts and prayers, is rather to be accounted of
austerity then property of penance, because we do not know that he ever sinned
voluntarily. Besides that the admirable sanctity of his life in this kind, is
so notorious to the world, as that I may forbear al^ speech thereof: though
Melancthon, and some others of that miserable crew, would needs transform his
Camells-haire into Chamlet, and his Locusts into Lobsters. But I pass over
those blind and bold blasphemies, and the only use that I will make of S. John's
example in ^is place, is that men shall not do amiss thus (...) parallel
themselves by him, as to say, That ^one sanctified in his Mothers womb, a
^rophet, an Angel, a second Elias, an Er^ite, a Virgin, a Precursor and
Baptist of christ our Lord, and one who by his sacred te^timony was pronounced
to be the greatest which then had risen among the sons ^f men, did pass his
days and years even from his tender infancy in such a holy excess of
^ufferance, and such a general restraint of himself, even from those
contentments and ^leasures of this life, which yet in themselves are not
unlawful; and all this before the Savior of the world had manifested his own
^aynefull life, and the bitter passion of his never. enough lamented death:
what will it become us to do, and to suffer for his sake, and for our sins
which we know if we will consider them to be infinite. But in particular I
desire that the Royal Prophet David be looked upon with an attentive eye. He
pretended no such privilege as these Carpet-Caualliers of Christ do sometimes
assume, whilst they excuse themselves, either upon the tenderness of their
complexion or the contrariety of their custom, or the variety of their
employments, and vocation. (...) nature he was fair, and of deli^ate
constit^tion; b^ custom he was after his first remo^ from private fortune a
Co^rtier, and a s^uldi^ by condition he grew afterward to be: Ki^ of
extraordinary power and command, a^ witha^, o^ infinite affairs. It is true
that h^ came by the ill custo^y of his senses, to be h^ a certain beauty with
too much appetite an^ the resolution to commit adultery, made he^ design, and
execute a murder, and that withs^od ou^ circumstances as did extremely
aggrauate the fact it self Such wa^ his sinn^: now look a little upon his
penance. I^mediatly after he wa^ brought ba^ke to himself by the Prophet
Nathan, he confessed and renounce^ his fault, and fled at full speed to the
mercy of Almighty God, imploring it in most tender and dear terms. Which
though it might go for much with others, ye^ was it nothing with him for he
soon left words, and be to^ke himself to deeds, by bringing sor^h fruits
worth of penance. For one thing it is, as says the great Saint G^ey, to
bring forth fruits worthy of Innoc^^cy, and anot^er to bring them forth worthy
of Penance. He bringes them forth worthy of Innocence, who abstains ^om things
that are unlawful; but they are ^t fruits worthy of penance (which suppo^th
that a man has sinned) unless as he has ^ne somethings unlawful, so in
contemplatio^ ^hereof he be content to abstain afterward, ^en from things
which in the^selus are lawful.

But in the Prophet David, let us con^der, first, that without al doubt, he did
much ^flict himself many ways which we were never acquainted withal. For a
less perfect man ^en the Prophet David was, would not speak ^f all that past
between God, and him in that and. Next, let us duly ponder, that whatso^er is
recompted of him by himself, is as true (...) God; for the Holy Ghost did not
only make ^he pen, but guide the hand that wrote it, so (...) to make the least
doubt of the certain truth ^hereof, is to be without doubt no Christian.

By his eyes he had offended, and behold those eyes of his are now become even
sluses, and ^ud-gates of tears; which when he was in his ^d, did serve him for
a Bath and when he was (...) table, did water the wine as he was drinking (...)
Exitus aquarum deduxerunt oculi m^^, ^uia non custodierunt legem tuam.
Lachrymis meis stratum meum rigabo. P^ tum meum cum sletu miscebam. Turb^ tus
est a furore oculus meus, inuetera^ inter omnes inimicos meos. His very ey^
sight grew dim, through his considerati^ of the wrath of God, and it wasted
him in su^ sort, that even in the sight of all his enemye^ it decayed him and
made him old. He was (...) continually in lamentation, as that it brough^ him
to be nothing but skin, and bones, A vo^ gemitus mei ad haesit os meum carnime^
He was not only mortified in his drink, and (...) his lodging, but as much at
least in his meat and clothing; for he fed upon ashes, as if i^ had been
bread, Quia cinerem tamquam panem manducabam: yea he was not s^ much a
Protestant, but that he thought it (...) good way to work upon the interior,
by mean^ of the exterior, for he humbled his soul by fasting, Humiliaui
ieiunio animam mea^ and not only with fasting, but with haircloat^ or
sackecloath also, and induebam me cilicio^

Nor yet was all this all the trouble tha^ he put his body unto; for he says,
Quoniam ego in flagella paratus sum, and certainly if he were prepared for the
whip, it is not to be doubted but that the whip was sometimes prepared for him.
He had offended God by the unlawful use of Bersabees company, but now he would
be leaving both hers, and all other company, and lamenting, himself all alone
like a Pelican in the wilderness, like a solitary sparrow upon the house top,
and like a night-Rauen in that sad habitation which she chocseth. Similis
factus sum Pellicano solitudinis: factus sum sicut Nicticorax in domicilio.
Vigilaui, and factus sum sicut passer solitarius in tecto. He had certainly been
of scandal, and induced others, by his example to sin; and for this cause it
became him to be so zealous afterward of the good of others; which affected him
so far, as by the excese thereof to be grown even into a consumptio^. Tabescere
me fecit zelus meus, yea, and he would faint, and swoone, through the anguish
he conceived, for the sins that were committed by others against God.
Defectio tenuit me pro peccatoribus derelinquentibus legem tuam. His prayers in
the mean time were far from being intermitted, for in that kind he called upon
God seven times in day, and night; whereof midnight was one, and early in the
morning was another. Septies in die laude^ dixi tibi. Media nocte surgebam. In
matutinis meditabor in te.

Such a penitent was this, and far more then such a one as I have here
expressed, for I may not enlarge my self as I would; and yet he was assured by
Nathan, that God had forgiven his sin; nay himself was made Prophet of God,
and a type of Christ, and a secretary of the holy Ghost: and moreover he was a
King and he never had but one fit of that burning fever of sensuality, and
when once he had been reproved by the Prophet, he instantly reforme^ himself,
and never would, nor never did serve up the second course of sin. How much
the^ may this example confound us Catholics, wh^ offending God so much, and
(which is worse) with so many relapses, are disposed to do so little penance?
And how much more may i^ confound all Protestants, who do plainly in effect
protest against all corporal Penance, and make themselves believe, that one
single sig^ is able to set all accounts straight between Go^ and them, and at
on instant to free their soul^ (all festred with the sins of a most
lascivious enormous life) not only from the guilt of sin^ ^ut from all manner
of temporal punishment, which in the justice of God might be due unto (...).
They were best say again, that these things ^ere abrogated, as a part of the
ceremonial ^w: but I have touched that point already, and ^hey might say, that
sin as well as the Pen^ance due to sin, was taken way. As if the ^ambe were
not occisus ab origin u^un^i, and in the law of Moses they were saved (...)
less then we, by faith in Christ: they in the ^ayth of Christ to come, and we
in the faith of christ come already. But faith in Christ is so ^r from being
contrary to Penance, as that (...) true faith is there expressed, where
Pen^ance for sin is not embraced. And of the two, (...) is clear, that we are
much more obliged to ^e doing of severe Penance when we sin, ^hen they were
before the coming of Christ our ^auiour, by how much the more potent, and
^fficacious means, for the abstayning from ^ne, we have then they, by the
application ^f our Saviors blood, which so frequently (...) derived toward
us in the holy Sacra^ents of the Church.

In that which follows I bind my self (...) be very brief, and I will but
point out another penitent in the new testament, and the is S. Paul, who was
not only a doctor of the lesson of Penance, but a disciple also. When
speaking of what himself did suffer, he says A dimpleo ea quae desunt
passionum chr^sti, pro corpore eius quae est Ecclesia: fulfill those things
which were wanting to t^ sufferings of Christ, for his body which is t^ Church.
Not that the Passion of our Sauio^ was not in the belief of S. Paul, as it is
in o^ superabundantly sufficient, whose least act h^ been able, and
meritorious, to save a thousa^ and million of worlds; but that, in respect^ us,
this was still wanting: That as he suffere^ in the quality of a Head, so we, as
membe^ must also suffer, yea and corporally suffer as (...) had done; and S.
Paul affirms, that he (...) his part, was doing his duty, in supplying (...)
defect.

Again he advises, or rather descr^beth true Christians, Semper
mortificatinem Jesus Christi in corpore nostro po^tantes, vt and vita Jesus
manifestetur in co^poribus nostris. To carry always in our b^dyes the
mortification of Christ Jesus, the the life of Jesus may be manifested in our
bod^ He says not, that the mortification of Christ jesus is to be carried only
in the Mind, by ^hinking on him, nor in the Tongue, by tal^ing of him, but in
the Body of flesh and blood, (...) feeling displeasure, and pain in ours, for
^is sake, as he did in his for ours. In such sort, (...) that, according to his
holy, Apostolical do^trine, the excellency, and purity, and patience (...) the
life of Jesus, is made manifest to the ^orld, by the penance which Christians
use, ^en upon their bodies: which because it is of (...) much repugnance to
flesh and blood, it does among other proofs, establish the divinity of christ
our Savior, against Jews and Turks, and Pagans, when they see what we
suffer, and ^ith how much joy, and longanimity, we do it (...) honor of him,
whom they blaspheme, but ^e adore.

In another place he thus professes clerly (...) his own person. Itaque
curro, non tam^am in incertum, sic pugno, non tam^am aerem verbera^s: sed
castigo corpus ^eum, and in seruitutem redigo, ne cum ^js praedicauerim, ipse
reprobus efficiar. ^herfore do run, not as to obtain a price vn^taine, I so
fight, not as if I did but whip, or beat the air, but I chastize, or beat m^
body, and I bring it into subjection, least when I shall have preached
salvation to others, my self may become a Reprobate. Now if a S^ Paul, who was
converted by an express, an^ personal apparition of our B. Savior, afte^ his
Ascension, who was made an Apostle, an^ canonized by the mouth of God himself,
to b^ not only a Vessel elected for his honor, b^ even a very vessel of
Election, and that h^ should carry his name before the Kings of the earth, who
had been rapt up in Extasis, (...) high as the very third heaven it self,
when such Arcana, such deep mysteryes had been^ imparted to him, as it was not
lawful for m^ to utter, were not only still importuned, an^ even buffeted with
tentations of sense, for h^ greater humiliation, and probation, but f^ the
bringing, and keeping of his body in subjection, and servitude to his mind (for
fea^ least otherwise, in the middst of his preachin^ of salvation to others,
himself might becom^ a Reprobaee) did not only beat the air wi^ hi^ tongue,
as the Protestants, and loose C^tholikes use to do, whilst they only talk
(...) what Christ suffered, but did also beat his b^ (...), as himself
records; how will it become us (...) carry our selves in point of penance,
when ^e shall have considered of all the differences that are between S. Paul,
and us? How ^uch must we begin to suffer with Christ our Lord, who did not so
drink up the chalice of ^ribulation, but that he left certain drops (...) be
swallowed afterward by us, when first ^en they should be sanctified to us by
him? ^ow carefully must we mortify, and how wil^ngly must we punish our selves,
or at least ^ow much may we be ashamed, if we do it not? and if Protestants, or
any other libertines, ^ill still be laughing at us for our Labor, ^hilest they
laugh at us, we shall do well to ^eep for them, as S. Augustine, upon another
occasion, did for others.

So that now the examples of Scripturs, (...) both Testaments, and indeed of
the holy Church in all ages, and above all of Christ our ^nly Savior, and
Redeemer, does command us, and even urge, and force us (Charitas Christi vrget
nos) in some sort to show that ^e are in earnest, when we tell our selves that
^e believe in Christ, and that he dyed for us, that we might dye to sensuality
and sin, and live to him, either by continuing in innocence, or by doing of
Penance. For my part I know no reason why this consequence should n^ hold,
that, If you would judge your selus, you should not be judged (which are the
words of the Apostle:) so if we shall chastise, and punish our selves in this
life, it will be a great means, among others, to move God to mercy, and to
obtayn that the punishment of the nex^ may be prevented. And this is the voice
no^ only of so many Doctors, and Fathers, as hau^ had occasion to speak
heerof, but even of very reason, and common sense it self.

Least of all does that other instance o^ the false Prophets and idolaters,
make against the use of such Penance as is embraced by Catholics, in honor
of Christ our Savior, an^ in chastisement of themselves for having offended
his divine Majesty, by the transgression o^ his laws. For as God, and Belial,
have nothing common to one another; so neither ha^ their sons, and servants.
Those other by their barbarous ostentations of cruelty, did bu^ offer sacrifice
to the Devil, and thereby the^ endeavored to give reputation, both to
themselves, and to their Idolatrous worship of fals^ Gods: whereas we on the
other side, by the moderate, and secret punishment which we inflict upon our
selves, do acknowledge our frailtyes, in the only true, and ever living God,
and do obtain through his mercy (who will reward that openly, which he sees
in secret) so much grace as may, futurely make, us less offensive to him:
wherein we are justified, as has been seen by the example of the greatest
Saints of the Church of God, who have traced out this way unto us. And our
present Adversaries do not consider in the mean time, that they study not to
fasten any thing upon us in this particular, to which they also, incidently,
entitle not the Prophets, and Apostles, and all the holy Eremits, Martyrs,
Doctors, Confessors, and Virgins of the holy Catholic Church.

And indeed, if we mean to inherit the promises of Christ Jesus our Lord, and
Master, we must consider, and accept of the Legacye, which he gave to his
chosen followers, even when he was going out of this life, which was no better
then a bundle of myrrh; for he said we should grieve, and weep, and the world,
and worldly men should be well at ease, and full of joy. And though his word be
as as good as his Oath, yet to the end that, with us, it might have the better
credit, he affirmed it with great asseueration: only he told us withal, that
a time would come when our sorrow should be turned to joy: and in like manner
there is no doubt, but that their dissolute, and vicious joy, will end in
lamentable affliction, and desolation, Amen, amen dico vobis, quia plorabitis,
and flebitis vos, mundus autem gaudebit, sed tristitia vestra vertetur in
gaudium.

Wicked men at that day will be strangely at their wits end, and so extremely
out of countenance, as that they would be glad to bribe hideous montaynes, to
ouerwhelme, and hide them from the wrath of God. But such wishes or offers will
not serve their turns; for there they must appear in the eye of the whole
world and that with such a cry of lamentation, as none but the vtterers of it
are able to comprehend. There shall they have an inflexible Judge above them,
the Conscience of deserved death within them, the Memory of an ugly, and
naughty life behind them, an Eternity of unquenchable fire, and an irreparable
loss of God before them, huge squadrons of devouring spirits round about them,
and hell it self, with a swallowing, and insatiable mouth under them. Being
thus on all sides besieged, the Holy Ghost himself has been pleased, by way
of prevention to let us know, how these men (who would needs have the world at
will, and who placed their felicity in the commodityes, and pleasures of their
own, and the affliction of other folks) are to express themselves to their
own greater confusion, when they shall behold the Elect of God. Stabunt iusti
in magna constantia aduersus eos, Sap. 8^
qui se angustiauerunt, and qui abstulerunt labores eorum. Videntes turbabuntur
timore horribli, and mirabuntur in subitatione insperatae salutis, dicentes
intra se, poenitentiam agentes, and prae angustia spiritus gementes. Hi sunt
quos aliquando habuimus in derisum, and in similitudinem improperij. Nos
insensati vitam illorum aestimabamus insaniam, and finem illorum sine honor.
Ecce quomodo computati sunt inter filios Dei, and inter Sanctos sors illorum
est. Which signifies to this effect: The just shall stand with great constancy
against those who oppressed them, and have taken their labors from them. When
the wicked see them, they shall be shaken wi^h a horrible fear, and they shall
wonder to see how suddenly they are come into a despair of all salvation,
saying thus within themselves, being all wounded with grief, and sighing
deeply through the affliction of their spirit: These are the men who^ formerly
we had in scorn, and held to be fit for nothing but reproach. We senseles
persons esteemed their life to be a madness, and their end to be without honor:
but now behold how they are numbered among the sons of God, and their lot is
fallen among the Saints.

And here I will beseech both all Protestants, who laugh at the Catholic
Church, when it is subject to persecution, and when it speaks of Penance (and
therefore, in their translation of the Bible they do express, poenitentiam
agite, by the words of Repentance only, and not of doing penance, as if all
consisted in the bare affection of the mind without putting the body to any
pain at all) and all sensual Catholics also, who allow of the name, but care
not for the thing which by it is signified: I beseech them both, I say, even by
the sacred bowels of our B. Savior, and (if interest weigh more with them
then love) by the desires they have of declining that ^ake of torment, to
ponder well this place of Scripture last alleged; and to see who they be that
must perforce take those words into their mouth, at the day of judgment: that
is, whether they are to be good Catholics, who are persecuted, and who have
lead an austere life of penance, according to the Counsels of Christ our
Savior, and the practice of our holy Mother the Church; or whether they be not
Protestants, and such as will be Libertines of any other Religion.

It is evident that Catholics never let it pass their thoughts, that the life
of a Protestant, or Libertine, was to be accounted a kind of madness, according
to the state of this only world, and the discourse of flesh and blood, (whereof
that place of Scripture speaks:) for if we square things by this only rule,
and that we think not of the other better life, there is noe question but they
are the only wise and well judging men; and in conformity of this does the holy
Apostle express himself, when he says, that sins are Prudentia carnis, The
wisdom of the flesh. But Protestants, and other Libertines, are (without all
manner of contradiction) the men that count all other^ fools, who undergo any
penaltyes for their conscience, and take pains, and inflict punishment upon
themselves, that so by the infinite goodness of God, they may one day arrive to
heaven. For how often do they make themselus merry with the miseryes of other
men, and deride the patcht coats, the pennances and perpetual labors of our
religious orders, and other exemplar Catholics, who are ever procuring and
working out their salvation, in fear and trembling, according to the advice of
S. Peter? And how much do they congratulate themselves, for having so much wit,
as to hold such things as these for toys, and to prefer that which they
see, and feel, before any thing which they hear, and should believe? And
therefore since they are the men, who now esteem, and are ready to beg, such
as suffer for their conscience, and addict themselus to penance, for Idiots;
let them take heed, that hereafter they pronounce not upon themselves that
other miserable, and irreuocable sentence of being frantikes.

This venerable woman, Suor Maria Maddalena de Patsi, who (because she was so
very eminent even above her self in other ^hinges) in the delight she took in
penance has thereby induced me to entangle my self ^n speech thereof: she I
say, did not so lead her self on the blind side, but she passed her life, as
^f every day should have been her last, and so did she continue to suffer for
the pure love of God, as if every act had been her first. With unspeakable
patience, and even joy, did she bear the afflictions both of body and mind,
which it pleased the immediate hand of God to lay upon her, and with a most
heroical spirit did she out of pure love, and in union of the sufferings of
our B. Savior, put her self to so many voluntary pennances. She fasted diverse
years after a sort in bread and water only, a long time she went bare foot,
she wore but one, and the same single thin coat, in all the rigorous seasons
of the year, and of diverse years, she slept very few hours in the night, even
when she slept most, and those few either upon a sack of straw, or upon the
bare ground, she wore a girdle sometimes next her skin, all imbrodered as it
were with sharp iron nails* which the life does not so particulerly mention,
but the thing it self is extant, and many of (...) Nation have seen it.
Sometimes she would for the ouercoming of a temptation, tumble n^ked in a bed
of thorns, after the example of the great Saint Bennet, that great Father of
(...) many Saints; her disciplines of iron, and h^ so many hours of continued
prayer, were the daily entertaynment of her delicate body, an^ of her mind; and
in a word, what pain w^ there that she endured not, and what pennan^ was there
that she desired not for the love (...) God? And, which is the crown of all
this, s^ did it with admirable humility, and all other virtue, as one who made
no prime account o^ any thing corporal, but did chiefly use it, as (...)
excellent help toward the obtaining of spiritual graces.

But now, Hyems transijt, im ber a bij^ and recessit: The winter of her
affliction is a^ an end, and all storms of difficulty are ouer-blowne, and her
happy soul is feeding, an^ feasting at the table of Almighty God himself and
will be so for all eternity. What remayn^ for us to do, but to make her a
pattern for v^ to admire, and imitate according to our several vocations? Non
accepit in vano ani^am suam: She employed not the operations (...) her soul
upon toys, and trash; and so let ^very one of us say with S. Augustine,
August. Confess. l. 4. c. 11.
Noli ^sse vana anima mea, and obsurdescere in ^ure cordis, tumultu vanitatis
tuae: Do ^ot thou turn fool, O my soul, and let the ^are of thy heart grow
deaf to the tumultuous ^oyfe of vanity, that importunes thee. For in ^ie,
whatsoever diuerts from God is vanity, and ^hatsoeuer distracts from him is
worse; and ^he more we suffer in this life, the more we shall ^oy in the next,
so that we do it as we ought. Let us consider, and tremble at the story of
Dives and Lazarus, in S. Luke, if we find ^ur selves wholly carried away with
loose mirth and plenty, and sensuality, and if we have a great auersion from
sobriety, poverty, and pen^ance; for we see that Lazarus, who was the very
outcast of the world, was carried into ^he bosom of Abraham; and Dives, who
^ight be the object of men's envy, was instant^y confined to eternal torments,
and made incapable of so much as pity. And yet we read not there, of any other
reason given for this diversity, but that men must not think to find heaven
both here, and there; and that Lazarus had been poor, and miserable here,
and was then to go to a bed or bosom of everlasting rest; and Dives had
regorged in delicacyes, and was afterward to remain in that center of eternal
torments. From this later God deliver us, and to that other God conduct us; and
God inspire us, and enable v^ (after the example of this dear servant of his)
to the love, and practice of holy penance, which is the only way whereby
sinners may aryue to a good iourneyes end.

Faults escaped in the printing.
^^ge. Line. Fault. Correction. In the Preface **. (...). 5. has passed, has
not passed In the Preface *** (...) 15. heroical heroically (...) 15. 16. and
an (...) 18. whatsoever wheresoever (...). 5. dele Among others (...)bid. 16.
property properly ^lt. 20. ieiunio in ieiunio In the Preface ****. (...). 18.
his defect this defect ^. 4. in the only in the sight of the only (...). 24.
naughty nasty (...). 4. entangle enlarge

Other faults, of less moment, if any be found, are remitted, in courtesy, to
the gentle Readers own correction.

THE LIFE OF SVOR MARIA MADDALENA DE PATSI.
Of the Birth, Descendence, and Education of Suor Maria Maddalena, till she
came to the age of seven years. CHAP. I.
THE Eternal God has always showed, and does continually show himself
wonderful in his Saints; to the end, that in every age, some may be found, who
by their actions giving men assurance of his infinite goodness and providence,
may inuit them to admire, and never cease to praise his name. Bu^ particulerly
in these days of ours, h^ has appeared wonderful in Suor Maria Maddalena the
true servant of Jesus, since he did not only place her in a Religious state, as
a bright pattern of all vertue^ but was pleased that in her should shin^ a
beam of his divine power and goodness, revealing to her most high mysteries,
and making her partaker of heavenly riches here on earth. Nevertheless, because
she remaining shut up in a Monastery, they were few who saw the wonderful
things which our Lord wrought in her; I will therefore describe her life, and
death after a plain manner, to the end that as her desire was wont to be,
every one might (by looking into that glass of Goodness) be inflamed with the
heavenly fire, which was ever burning and feeding upon her purest heart.

This Suor Maria Maddalena, was borne in Florence on the second of April^ 1566.
of Camillo the son of Geri de Patsi, and of Maria the daughter of Lorenzo
Buondelmonti, two familyes most illustrious for antiquity and greatness. Her
^ame was Catharina, which afterward ^as thought not to be without mystery,
(...) like she was to Saint Catharina of Ste^a, to whom she was particulerly
de^oted. Her Mother affirmed that she had ^euer, when she was with child of
her, ^elt either any indisposition, or weight ^f the burden, nor in the
infancy and ten^er age of the child had she any of those ^combrances, which
children do vsual^ bring to such as govern them; but she ^uer received comfort
by her, partly through the grace of her countenance, and partly through the
promptitude of ^er obedience.

She had no pleasure in childish pa^imes or plays; but (notwithstanding ^at
she was affable in her conversation) ^e took withal, Note.
extreme contentment (...) hear spiritual things spoken of, and ^ith
discretion diuerted all discourses of ^orldly matters. And when she chaun^d
upon devout persons, she would be ^king them of such things as appertai^ed to
salvation of the soul, and particulerly of the mystery of the most Holy
Trinity, An admirable thing.
whereof she was so incredibly inamoured, as that the Creed of S. Athanasius
coming once into her hands, she not only read it with greedines, but carried
it to her mother with extreme contentment, as a thing of rare estimation. By
which actions wrought in so tender years, it might be inferred, what kind of
creature she was to show her self, with the help of God, in a more mature and
perfect age.

Of her Charity toward poor folks: and the Mental Prayer which she used.
CHAP. 2.
BEING come to the seventh year of her age, she began to make show of her
holy inclination. For part of her meat, such as is usually given to children,
either for breakefast or collation, when they are taught to work or read, Note.
she would already be distributing to Prisoners, and other poor people: and
she was delighted extraordinarily whenever she had opportunity of teaching
other children the Pater Noster, the Aue Maria, and such like prayers. In which
holy exercise she might spend much time in their house, in the Country,
instructing withal kind of patience and charity, the poor Countrey-maydes and
neighbors children. And to this she went with so great passion, as that once
being to return toward the City, she began to weep bitterly, for this only
reason as she confessed, that she should be disabled to teach a daughter of a
husbandmans belonging to the house, which daughter, for the recomforting of our
little one, must needs be also conducted with her to Florence.

It seems a wonderful thing, that in so tender years, she could take so
great care, as she had for the preserving of her heart in purity, and to cast
such a bridle upon her thoughts, as to keep them ever addressed to the service
and glory of Almighty God. And withal, that when she was but newly come to the
use of reason, she could exalt her understanding, and intertaine it in mental
prayer, to which she was much given; having already been instructed by her
ghostly Father, the Father Andreas Rossi of the Society of Jesus. For a
preparation thereunto, she used to read in a little book of Father Gaspari
Loarte of the same Society, and then with a lively feeling of heavenly things,
having prostrated her self on earth, and with devotion said the Hymn, Veni
sancte Spiritus, and the Consiteor, she raised her mind to most divine
thoughts, and not incombred with earthly cares, she only considered within her
self, how she might come to a religious state.

So great was the delight she took in prayer, as that the half hour which
was assigned to that effect by her ghostly Father, Note.
did often pass a whole one. When sometimes she was alone, retyring her self
into the most secret parts of the house, she gave liberty unto her soul to
discharge those amorous desires which were kindled in it toward the obteyning
of heaven. Whereupon, they of the house seeking her up and down with
diligence, would find her behind some bed, so plunged into heavenly
co^templation, and so as it were transformed in God, that she could neither
hear nor see any object. She was often interiourly stirred up by the presence
of God, to the true purchase of Euangelical perfection. Whereupon through the
light of those celestial graces, which by his Majesty were communicated to
her, whenever she heard any such words spoken, as became not the mouth of
Christians, or that they resulted not to the honor of his divine Majesty, Note.
she conceived so bitter grief, as that one night particulerly, she spent all
in tears and sighs upon that occasion, excusing nevertheless the defects of
others with abundant charity.

Of the great desire which she had to receive the B. Sacrament: and of the
pennances which she used. CHAP. 2.
BESIDES this, she was so desirous to receive our Lord Jesus being veyled under
the show of bread, that when she saw her mother, or other devout persons
communicate, she procured to come close to them, and being extremely in
appetite to receive the odor of that most sacred food, she could hardly part
from such as she knew had received it. Afterward, being entered into the tenth
year of her age, she began (with the leave of her Ghostly father) to
communicate sometimes, and she received so much delight thereby, as forced from
her the tears of joy. And on the other side, she did so afflict her self,
when by any occasion she was hindered, that in nothing she could find comfort.
Once upon Holy Thursday, being in contemplation of the sovereign love which
our Lord Jesus showed, in leaving himself unto us in the Blessed Sacrament and
no less attentively considering what she might render by way of gratitude for
so great love, she did with admirable devotion dedicate her self to Christ
Jesus by a vow of Virginity, when she was arrived but to the eleventh year of
her age. By that time she delighted in nothing, but discoursing of heavenly
things, nor did she look after any other object, but how she might be wholly
answerable to the example of her heavenly Spouse.

Therefore did she refuse soft beds, Note.
and slept often upon straw, and in the most secret places of the house, she
would be disciplining of her self. And for her greater mortification she took
secretly certain ong stalks of Orange trees, which were full of prickles, and
binding them hard about her head, she past a whole night in excessive pain,
only for the imitation of Jesus, who was crowned with piercing thorns. And
because where the divine love has dominion, there is ever kindled a desire of
doing penance more and more, therefore did this devout child exercise her
self in other acts of mortification, as sometims in her meat, not taking any
more then what was merely necessary, and scarcely that sometimes, in making
her self obedient to the unworthiest and basest person in the house, and in
many other holy actions altogether repugnant to Sense, seeking ever new
means, whereby she might become more acceptable to our sovereign Lord.

How she was left in the Monastery of S. Giouannino: and of the inspirations
which she had to become Religious in the Monastery of S. Maria de li Angeli.
CHAP. 4.
BEING aged now of fourten years, and her Father being to go in public
employment to Cortona, her parents determined (by the advice of the Reverend
Father Pietro Blanca Rector of the College of the Society of Jesus) to leave
her placed for a year in the Monastery of S. Giouannino of Florence. Which
Father because he well knew the perfection and singular spirit of this child as
also the ardent desire she had to frequent the Blessed Sacrament, resolved to
place her there, under condition that upon every Sunday and Holy Day she might
communicate at her own devotion. This being then promised very willingly by
those Reverend Mothers, she entered into the said Monastery, and passed the
year with great increase of virtue, and no less satisfaction of the said
Religious, for the lively example which every one of them took from her true
devotion. Nevertheless, there wanted not in that time, some occasions to
disturb so great a frequence of the Sacraments, but she kindling her self
more and more in so holy a desire, did not at all release the ardent purpose
she had to get ground in the service of God.

With excessive fervor she followed the exercise of Mental Prayer, Note.
and did very often, for the space of four continued hours, enjoy celestial
thoughts. And on the day of the most holy Ascension of Jesus into heaven
(whilst in a most retired part of the Monastery she was devoutly praying) the
Giver of all good things imparted to her so lively a knowledge of his divine
Bounty, that with much difficulty she was able to conteyne the joy and triumph
that in her soul she felt. Those Reverend Mothers were moved by her virtue, to
have extraordinary desire, that she would take their habit, and with particular
instance advised her to it, letting her see the good which thereby would
redound to the Monastery. Whereupon she earnestly prayed the illuminatour of
all hearts, to make her choose that place, which should be most for the service
and honor of his divine Majesty.

In the mean time, her Father and Mother being returned from Cortona, took
her home into the house, and forbear not by many ways to disturb her holy
purpose, being urged by the affection of flesh and blood, which is the usual
author of such inconueniencies; and they did so the rather, because she was
their only daughter. But she having by help from heaven, overcome all
difficultyes, and being more desirous then ever, to imitate the Incarnate Word,
in the state of holy Religion, said resolutly unto them, that she would rather
suffer her head to be strocken from her shoulders, Note.
then consent not to be Religious. Her parents hearing this, remitted all to
her Ghostly Father, who wisely counsayled her to choose some Monastery, where
both devotion, and a perfect obseruant life did flourish in the Religious, to
which her self was much inclined. There being then propounded to her the
Monastery of S. Maria de li Angioli near S. Friano of the order of the
Carmelites, and that other venerable Monastery of the Crocetto of the order of
S. Dominicke, to which later she had some inclination, because the Religious of
that place are never seen: yet at last hearing the former so highly paysed,
and especially for the frequent receiving of the B. Sacrament, which there is
used every day, she determined to go into the said Monastery for fifteen
days. And having obtained license on the Vigill of the Assumption of the B.
Virgin, she entered full of joy, and in the time of her stay there, gave an
excellent example of life.

Having diligently then considered the several Orders of Religion, she was
wholly satisfied that this was the place to which our Lord had called her.
Therefore it grieved her to go thence at all, but being forced by her parents
she must needs return home, where with a great deal of grief for the space of
three months she remained. But finally being more and more moved by Almighty
God to take the habit of Religion, on the Saturday precedent to the first
Sunday of Aduent, in the year 1582. she entered into the Monastery to
consecrate her self for ever to the service of God. And having obtained their
acceptance, she was on the eight of December in the same year, being the day
of the Conception of the B. Virgin received with great joy and satisfaction by
all the Religious. Afterward upon the thirtith of January next following, with
ardent desire of heavenly graces and extreme contempt of earthly cares, she
took the habit of the Carmelits order in the said monastery, at the hands of
the Confessor thereof Agostino Campi of Pontremoli, a Priest of great virtue
and exemplar life. And in the instant when he put the crucifixe into her hand,
the Religious singing those words of S. Paul: Mihi absit gloriari nisi in cruce
Domini nostri Jesus Christi etc. Note.
it is a wonder to tell, how she felt interiourly so great an union with our
Lord Jesus, and such a spiritual sweetness, that in all her life, as she said,
she remembered not to have found the like. Whereupon having placed in eternal
oblivion, all the commodityes of this life, and having confirmed her self more
resolutely in her holy purpose, she protested at that time to her heavenly
Spouse, that she would never thirst after any thing but him crucified, nor
aspire to any thing, but that her soul might to the uttermost of her
possibility, be instructed and devoted to do him service. After she was clad
with the sacred habit, she did with profound humility, give her self for dead
to the Mother, who was Mistress of the Nouices, Note.
and did ardently beg, that she would ever humble her, and mortify her, and at
all time contradict her will, and direct her in all her actions. A lively and
fit example for all such as thirst after an increase of Religious virtue: for
without this resignation, there is no profit to be expected in a spiritual
life.

In the year of her Nouiship she makes great proof of many virtues: of the
much desire she had to be Professed, which was accorded by her Superiors by
reason of her great sickness, from which she was freed in miraculous manner.
CHAP. 5.
HAVING at last obtained, that which so long she had desired, to be clothed
with the Religious Habit, Note.
with great devotion and fervor she submitted her self to the easy yoke of
the Holy Obedience of the Mistress of the Nouices, with such humility, as that
in the perfection of that kind of life, she seemed not a Nouice, but a
Religious woman of many years. In conuersing with her Sisters, she esteemed her
self in degree and condition inferior to them all; and although by others she
were held a Saint, yet she gave little satisfaction to her self, but was
usually her own accuser of idleness, and other defectes, in the presence of
every one of them. Moreover, she showed her self compassionate in supporting
the defects of others, and withal sweetness used to accommodate her self to
their wills. In countenance she was ever discharged, and cheerful; nor could
she be troubled through any accident, by means of the gift she had of prayer,
whereby she had already acquired so great union with God, that she had
continual fruition of his presence in her soul. By the attractiue manner of
her speech (whereof yet she was most sparing) she kindled in the hearts of
others an unspeakable desire of serving God. Much labor she used in the
mortification of her will, and in the hiding of her virtue, carrying always
her eye upon the execution of such Orders, as were common to all the Nouices,
and upon the doing of whatsoever might bring to her most humility and
mortification. By these virtues she walked on toward greater perfection,
having extreme desire to be united with her heavenly Spouse by the knot of holy
Profession.

Now the time being come when seven Nouices were to be veyled and professed,
and her time not being come that she might also make the same oblation of her
self to the eternal God, she was afflicted with much grief, though she were
somewhat recomforted with a promise, which was made her by the chief of the
Religious, that toward the end of the year her desire should be g^aunted.
The year being ended, and she again making instance with great affection to
be knit to God by the free vow of solemn Profession, it was answered that she
must expect till some other Nouices might join with her. To this she instantly
replied thus with great humility; I shall not make my Profession with others,
but you willbe constrained by a necessity which will go much against your will,
to permit that I be professed alone. It punctually came to pass as she fortould;
for hardly there had past a month, but that she (being assailed by a sharp
burning fever, and a vehement cough accompanied with extreme pain) grew into
such danger of her life, that four of the chief Physicians in the Town,
confessed jointly that they could not penetrate her disease. And Iacopo
Tronconi, one of the four by whom she was most often visited, affirmed many
times, that by all the study that he had employed, he was never able to
discover either the occasion or the quality of that sickness; and that it must
be left to God, for of man's help there was little hope. Yet failed she not to
use convenient remedies, but all in vain, since every day more and more her
life was found to be in danger. She did ever almost sit upright, not being able
to lie at length in her bed, for the perpetual cough that afflicted her, in
such sort as it allowed her very little time to restore her weak body either
with food or rest. But even then did her spiritual parts receive strength,
when being asked sometims by her sisters what she thought upon in the midst of
her cruel pains, she instantly (pointing to a Crucifixe, which was near her
bed) made this answer, I contemplate the great sufferings which that cordial
and incomprehensible love endured for my salvation; he sees my weakness, and
with that sight of his I am comforted, Note.
since all the pains and griefs which all the chosen children of God have
endured, did pass through that most holy Humanity of Christ, where they grew
to be sweet, and to be desired by us his members. Thus was the spouse of Jesus
afflicted indeed in body, but in her soul so cheerful and serene, that she
said she thought her self after a sort to ^e feeding upon the joys of heaven.

Her health being thus despayred of by the Physicians, it was resolved by the
Religious that she should make her Profession which she had so much desired.
The Confessarius therefore was conducted to her, for he would not suffer her to
rise whom he found to be so much afflicted by that sickness. Yet she confiding
in God, prayed her Sisters (after leave obtained) that they would carry her
before an Altar of the B. Virgin, where there was a little bed set up for the
performance of that holy ceremony. Which being put in execution, on the 27. of
May 1584. which was the morning of the most holy Trinity, she made in the hands
of the Father Confessarius, in presence of all the Religious her holy
Profession with greater devotion and fervor then we can imagine. After this
she was carried by force of arms into the Infirmary; and the Infirmarian was
entreated by her, that (the curtains of the bed being drawn) they would
depart out of the chamber, for she was desiro^ to take a little rest. All this
was done and a whole hour being past, when they had heard no noise in her
chamber, no so much as the Cough which used so continually to importune her;
the Infirmarian was all in a wonder at it, when with others entered in, and
opening the curtains found that she reposed well in God; for being alienated
from her senses, she was rapt into heavenly contemplations. Her face was grown
beautiful and delightful to the astonishmen^ of such as looked upon her; her
flesh was grown lively colored, and even inflamed; her eyes were fastened so
steadfastly behoulding a Crucifixe, that, upon the whole matter, she seemed no
more to be that pale and lean Suor Maria Maddalena, but even a very Angel of
heaven. In the mean time, this accident was made known to the Mother
Prioresse, whereupon she, with the rest of all the other Mothers and Sisters,
did suddenly go by one and one into the chamber, where they all saw the wonder
which God had wrought in his devout servant. And this was the first time that
she had been seen in Rapte, wherein she continued for the space of two hours.
It was not matter of less amazement to them, which happened in the forty
days which followed next; for every day in the morning as soon as she had
received the food of Angels, the same wonder was seen; she remaining
abstracted from her senses, and immersed in divine contemplations, which shall
briefly be pointed at in the first Chapter of the second part. And so it
pleased our Lord after these Ecstasies, to restore the health of her body in
miraculous manner; since without applying any further remedy, her disease so
ceased, as that she was wholly free; our Lord vouchsafing to preserve her, to
the end, that others by her example, might be much more inflamed to love him.

When she had recovered her health, she returned to the Nouiciate: and
considering the many Rapts which were granted to her by her Lord, she was
constreyned by Obedience to relate to two of the Mothers, such things as were
communicated to her by Almighty God. CHAP. 6.
GREAT was the contentment which the Nouiciate, yea all the Monastery received,
through the health miraculously recovered by this beloved child of Jesus. And
the Superiors discovering that she was guided by Almighty God in a particular
manner, and that every day more then other she profited in the obteyning of
virtue, they deliberated about drawing her out of the Nouiciate, although she
had been but lately professed, and to put her in some several place, where she
might with better opportunity serve our Lord. But when this resolution was come
to her ears, she was much afflicted, as being an enemy to all singularity, and
went suddenly to beseech the Superiors with great instance, that they would
not sever her from the other Nouices, or withdraw her from the obedience of her
Mistress, accusing her self to be the most imperfect of the^ al, and that she
had more need then others to be directed by her in the way of virtue. When her
Superiors observed this singular humility of hers, they were content to grant
her holy suite: whereupon being confirmed under the care of the Mistress, it
cannot be expressed with how much spirit she gave her self to the contemplation
of heavenly Misteryes. And if in the first year of her Nouiciate she had made
particular proof of her sanctity, she grew in doing of it afterward, not
employing her forces upon any other thing, then the procuring of those graces
which make souls acceptable in the eyes of God. She went ever thinking how she
might inflame others toward divine love, exhorting her Sisters to perform the
service of God with humility, and purity of mind. From her mouth there came
none but holy words. She would excuse the defects of others, Note.
and interpret every thing to a good end. She would never speak much, unless
she were urged by questions, and that which she said, would be full of mildnes
and charity.

In this mean time, being yet more kindled to holy actions, she was often rapt
in spirit; and was come to such a degree of perfection, that no worldly thing
could disorder the union which she had with the divine Majesty. When it pleased
God to restore her to her senses she would immediately return to her fellow
Nouices, and she proceeded toward them with so great humility and suauity,
that it seemed not to be she, who so lately had been seen to participate of
so high and heavenly Misteryes, as one who valued not much such gifts as those,
but attended only to solid virtue and the contempt of her self.

Now her Superior observing the wonders that God wrought by means of this his
true servant (since every day after the holy Communion they had seen her in
excess of mind, raised up to the understanding of so high things) they
appointed her, in virtue of holy obedience, to prevent the loosing of so great
heavenly treasures, by communicating whatsoever God should manifest unto her,
with the Reverend Mother Suor Vangelista del Giocundo her Mistress and Suor
Maria Maddalena Mori. Of these two Mothers, the first who is yet living a
Religious woman of great prudence and of no less virtue and sanctity of life,
has witnessed in particular by oaths, and writings under her hand, that she
has with her own eyes seen that which is recounted in this Story of Suor
Maria Maddalena, besides many other Religious, who in like manner have
affirmed, and do affirm the very same.

So as now Suor Maria Maddalena did relate to the said Mothers the favors and
intelligences which were communicated to her by Almighty God in those Ecstasies.
And although she extremly desired to maintain her self abject and vile in the
sight of others, yet nevertheless she always preferred holy Obedience before
any inclination of her own; and the rather she did it in this case, to be the
better assured thereby, whether or no there were any mixture of diabolical
fraud; but in this point she was satisfied by her Ghostly Father. And for the
better testifying of the truth, the Right Reverend Man Francesco Benuenuti
Governor and Confessarius of the Monastery, and Penitentiarius of the
Cathedral Church of Florence, subscribed with his own hand to four books
written by the Religious, which contain many devout and high intelligences. By
him they were delivered to be reuiewed by the Fathers of the Society of Jesus,
who gave this testimony, that there was nothing to be found in them, contrary
to the Catholic faith; but on the other side many things of perfection, and
worthy to be understood by all, to bring the^ more in love with God.

She sees the soul of Madre Suor Maria Bagnese, a Florentine, rich with the
glory of Heaven. CHAP. 7.
SVOR Maria Maddalena was wont to visit often the body of the venerable Mother
Suor Maria Bagnese a Florentine, who is buried in a case of stone within the
Chapter House of that Monastery; and there did see exhibit earnest prayers to
that holy soul, to which she was most devoted. Whereupon she obtained to see
her in heaven many times, but particulerly upon the eleauenth of July 1584. she
saw her in a most excellent manner; and being commanded in virtue of holy
Obedience, she related the Vision in these very words: I have seen in heaven a
most beautiful Throne of incomprehensible light, wherein did sit the Blessed
Mother Suor Maria Bagnese, all resplendent and full of wonderful Majesty. And
I understood that this Throne, was her virginity and purity, which gave her an
extreme ornament. I saw also, that the said Throne was all set with precious
stones; and these were all those souls which her example had brought to the
service of God; which compassing her in, round about after the manner of a
crown, did give her greater grace and beauty.

This was the relation which Suor Maria Maddalena made of that particular. But
of how great sanctity the said Madre Suor Maria Bagnese was, whosoever will,
may see in her life, which is written by the Father Alessandro Capocchi a
Dominican, a man of great holiness; as also by the Father Abbot, Don Siluano
Razzi of Camaldoli in the second part of Tuscan Saints, and by the Father Fra
Serafino his brother a Dominican, both who were men for their learning and
virtue very much to be esteemed.

Three times our Lord made her know his will was, that she should live upon
bread and water: Trial was taken of that motion by her Superiors, and with
their permission she began to execute the will of God. CHAP. 8.
ON the 21. of May 1585. this blessed Creature being then employed about the
exercises of the Monastery, and finding her self to be moved by God, she went
into the dormitory of the Nouiciate; where, at the instant that she arrived,
she was cast down to the earth with great violence; and remaining so a good
while as if she had been dead, she afterward uttered these words: O my Lord,
and what is it which thou demandest of me? Is it perhaps the exterior by the
interior? In this mean time, she understood from the Eternal Father (as
afterward in virtue of holy Obedience she told the Religious) that in her
diet, his pleasure was she should lead a particular life, susteyning her self
only by bread and water, excepting on the Sabbath days, and then she was to
use the meats of Lent; and this to be done in satisfaction of the offenses
which are committed against God by his creaturs. Afterward, she saw the reward
which is given to such as for the love of God deprive themselves of earthly
comforts. Whereupon she said thus; O how sweet and pleasant is that place, but
great are the works which they must perform who aspire thither. But if this
were sufficient, o my God, for the helping of thy creatures, I would live a
thousand years in this manner, and should hold my self to be glorious
thereby. Thy Word made me ask to do some penance for thy creatures: art thou
content with this? then is it welcome. Thou art Mighty, o my God, yet if thou
had not called me, and cast me down to the ground, I had not answered thee;
but thy will be ever done, and I rather desire to dye, then to offend the high
Purity. I am resolved to remit my self wholly unto thee; for being united to
thee, nothing can be able to trouble me. Grant me therefore this grace, O my
Jesus, that I may ever be resigned to thy holy will.

Upon the Thursday following (saying her Office with one of the Sisters) she
was in the same manner cast down to the ground, and being suddenly rapt in
spirit with her eyes fixed upon heaven she said; Adsum, adsum, adsum, Note.
here I am: and then in the person of the Eternal Father she replied; I call
thee, that thou may answer my vocation and petition, as already I have
showed thee. She instantly answered; O it is thou, who art great and powerful.
She remained in that co^templation more then half an hour, in which time it
was evident that she did extremely suffer, and so ended the Rapt. But the day
following, whilst after her manner she was with the Nouices, she was forcibly
cast down to the ground with great violence, where having lain a while without
speech, she said afterward in the person of the Eternal Father; Crastino die
nihil gustabis nisi panem and aquam, and si hoc non facies, retraham abs te
oculos meos: To morrow thou shall eat nothing, but bread and water, and if thou
perform not this, I will withdraw mine eyes from thee. But if thou will do
that which I require, and fulfill my will, and the will of my Word, who with
so much love has given himself, and does give himself to thee, I will take
pleasure in thee, as hitherto I have done. And if thou have a desire that thy
work should be grateful to me, see that it be voluntary. This exterior
operation which I require of thee, shallbe a glass for thy mind to look in;
and fear not that which the adversary will procure to do against thee, for I
will not suffer him to prevail; I will give Angels to thy soul, that they may
guard it. The Mother of my only begotten Son shallbe thy keeper, that thou
loose not the impression of the Passion of the Word, which I have graven in thy
heart. Be free from fear for thy desires shall not be known to thine enemy the
Devil, but I will fulfill them all.

After this, she remained a while in silence; but then in her own person all
resigned to the will of God, she said: Non moriar, sed adimplebo opera tua: I
will not dye, but I will perform thy works: upon which words she returned
from the Rapt. She considered then with her self, that which the Eternal
Father had commanded; Note.
and finding that she could not otherwise lead that singular manner of life
appointed by God, she resolved instantly to inform her Superiors of the whole
affair. Which she did with singular humility; and she was answered by them
(out of the great fear they had least in this there might be some mixture of
the Devils craft) that she should perform Obedience unto them; and as for her
food, she should use no other, but such as was common to all the rest; and that
they would not permit any one to be particular in her manner of life. Nor did
they this without mature deliberation, but determined among themselves to
attend the issue, as knowing well, that if it were the will of our Lord, it
would be more clearly and apparent to them. And indeed it proved as they
conceived, for the day following, the hour of dinner being arrived; and there
being set before this servant of God, such diet as was prepared for the other
Sisters, she being commanded by holy Obedience (which virtue she had ever in
particular recommendation beyond the rest) would needs begin to eat thereof,
but it was not possible for her to swallow a bit; for all that which she chewed
and procured to put down, was instantly and forcibly cast out by vomit. Many
and many times did the Superiors try her, but never would there succeed other
effect. Whereupon the Ghostly Father of the house, with Mother Prioresse, gave
her full liberty to lead that life which the supreme God imposed upon her, for
now they knew that such was his will; and that the craft or deceit of the
Devil had no part therein. So as upon the day of S. Zanobius Bishop of
Florence on the 25. of May in the year 1585. she began in the name of our
Lord, to eat bread and drink water, only excepting on Sundays when she was to
feed upon the meats of Lent, as our Lord had commanded her. And although she
felt great repugnance thus to lead a particular life against the common use,
yet nevertheless did she go through with it, as knowing that the will of her God
was such.

The Eternal Father puts her in mind of some spiritual exercises that she
was to perform; he foretells the probation that he would make of her for
five years, promising first to infuse the holy Ghost into her soul. CHAP. 9.
AT this time on the 26. of the same month and year, she was rapt according to
her custom to celestial contemplations, and remained in them two hours
without any speech at all. Being returned to her senses, she was commanded by
the usual Obedience to report that which in that time she had understood of
our Lord. Whereupon with profound humility and much grief of mind she told
them, How the Eternal Father had given her a rule of life, which she was to
hold, Note.
confirming the food only of bread and water; That she was not to exceed five
hours of sleep; that ordinarily she should take it on a sack of straw, yet not
denying but that sometimes she might repose upon a matteresse; that her words
should be of meeknes, of truth, and of Justice; That her understanding was to
be dead without troublesome considering of any thing which might concern
either her self or others; that her memory should forget all things except
the benefits received by him; that her will should desire none of these earthly
things, but only do that whereby his divine Majesty might be pleased. Finally
he would have her resign all these facultyes of mind unto his Providence, and
cast her self like a dead body into his hands. Our Lord also told her his
pleasure was, That she should enter like another Daniel into a lake of Lions,
that is, into a multitude of most horrible tentations, which were to last five
years: That by her infernal enemies she should be extremely afflicted, and
vexed. And to conclude, that after the manner of gould she should be cast into
the furnace of troubles and vexations both of body and mind, whereby she might
afterward appear more beautiful in the sight of God. She further understood,
That she was to enter into these tribulations, as into a lake, upon the next
feast of the solemnity of the Holy Ghost; and by our Lord she was certifyed,
that in all these battails she should obtain victory; for the Word, in the
lake it self would preserve her, the most sacred Virgin, S. Augustine, S.
Ang^lus the Carmelite, S. Catharine of Siena (to all whom she was particulerly
devoted) should bring her the food of spiritual comfort, which they were to
derive from the Humanity of the Word, by the vigor whereof she was to be
restored, and should not be overcome by those tentations. The Eternal Father
did also promise, That before this Probation he would infuse the Holy Ghost
into her soul, to the end that being fortifyed by such a buckler of defense
she might more cheerfully enter into this battle against the Devils. And
besides, he showed her the lake of Lions, that is, the tribulations and
tentations that she was to endure after having received the holy Ghost.
Whereupon by this spectacle she grew instantly and extremely pale, showing
excessive horror at the sight of the most ugly forms of Devils, which
appeared before her in the shape of hideous cruel beasts. But yet nevertheless
she offered her self with a cheerful heart to the Eternal Father, for the
suffering of whatsoever torments or tentations.

How she was called three times by God: and by him were given twenty Rules to
be observed by her. CHAP. 10.
THERE past not much time when once, after having communicated, she again
found her self to be called by Jesus in these words: Come hither, O my Spouse,
for I am he who drew thee out of my own understanding, and placed thee in thy
Mothers womb, where I was delighted in thee. To this vocation she suddenly
hearkened, seeking up and down the Monastery where her Jesus might be, and her
countenance was extraordinarily inflamed. In the the mean time she heard her
self called again in this manner; O come, for I am he who drew thee out of
thy Mothers womb, uniting my self to thee, and taking pleasure in thee. She
did therefore now with greater zeal proceed in the search of Jesus: but the
heavenly voice not ceasing, called her the third time with these words: Come
hither, O thou elected soul, for I will give thee a Rule and make a bound to
thy passions, for the whole time of thy life, until I bring thee to delight,
and enjoy me in the land of the living. As soon as she heard these words, she
becam immouable and abstracted into Ecstasy. At which time there were given to
her by the eternal Word, twenty rules which she was to observe throughout all
her life for her greater profit in the perfection of virtue, which she in the
person of the Word delivered in this manner.

I the Spouse of thy soul, and the Word of my Eternal Father, do give thee a
Rule in the same act of love, wherewith I granted and made thee partaker of
the greatness of my purity: o thou beloved of me who am beloved, note this Rule
which is mine and thine: mine because I prescribe it, and thine because thou
art to observe it.

1. First I require of thee, that in all thy actions internal and external
thou have an eye to that Purity, which I have made thee understand: and imagine
that every one of thy words and works are to be the last of thy life.

2. Thou shall procure to the uttermost of thy power, and of the grace which I
will give thee to have as many eyes as thou shall gain souls.

3. Thou shall never give any counsel, nor impose any commandment, although
thou have authority so to do, till first thou shall have made it known to me,
as I am hanging upon the Cross.

4. Thou shall not observe any defect, nor reprove it in any mortal creature,
till first thou shall have known, that thy self it more unworthy then that
creature.

5. Thy words shallbe sincere, true, grave and far from all flattery; and thou
shall be ever bringing me for an example to the works which are to be performed
by the Creatures.

6. Take care that with such as are thy ^qualls thy cheerefullnes do not take
away thy gravity, and that thy gravity do not diminish ^n thee Meeknes and
Humility.

7. Let all thy actions be performed with ^uildnes, and with so humble and
sweet manner that they may be like so many loadstons to draw the creatures
toward me, and let them be done with so much prudence, as that they may serve
for a rule to the members of my body, that is, to the souls of my Religious,
and to thy Neighbors.

8. Be thirsty as is the Heart after water, night and day to be exercise
Charity toward the members of my body, making the same account of the weakness
and wearines of thine own, which thou make of the ground whereon thou
treadest.

9. Thou shall force thy self, as much as I shall make thee able, to be meat
for the hungry, drink for the thirsty, a garment for the naked, a garden for
the imprisoned, and a solace for the afflicted.

10. With such as I leave in the sea of the world thou shall be prudent as the
serpent, and with mine elected souls thou shall be simple as the Dove, being
affrayd of the former as of the face of a dragon, but loving the later as so
many Temples of the holy Ghost.

11. Be ever subduing of thy Passions, and demand grace of me wherewith to do
it, who have dominion over all the creatures.

12. Thou shall condescend unto my creatures, and suffer with them, as I
whilst I was on earth proceeded with supreme charity toward them, having ever
in thine ears that sentence, which was afterward of mine Apostle, Quis
infirmatur and ego non infirmor?

13. Thou shall never fail to give any thing to any person when it is desired,
if thou have power to dispose thereof; and thou shall never deprive any creature
of any thing that has been granted to it, unless first thou consider that I
am the searcher of thy heart, and that I am one day to judge thee with power and
Majesty.

14. Thou shall esteem thy Rule and Constitutions thereof, together with the
vows, as I will have thee esteem my self; procuring to ingraue in the hearts
of all the Religious, the zeal of that state to which I have called them, and
of thy Religion.

15. Thou shall have great desire to be made subject unto all, and thou shall
have it in horror to be preferred before the meanest and least of the company.

16. Thou shall not conceive that thy comfort, repose, and solace consists in
any other thing, then in contempt and in humility.

17. Thou shall forbear to let the creatures know what thy desires are, and
what my will is, excepting those whom I have given to live with thee, and my
Christ.

18. Thou shall be in continual oblation of all thy desires and actions,
together with all my members, unto me.

19. From that hour wherein I left my pure mother, that is, from within two
hours before Sun set, thou shall be in continual oblation of my Passion, of
thy self, and of my creatures to the Eternal Father, and this shallbe thy
preparation for receiving of me sacramentally: and between the day and the
night thou shall visit my body and blood 33. times.

20. The last thing shallbe that in all the operations, which I shall suffer
thee to perform, as well internal as external, thou art to be transformed
into me.

After this she remained for some time without speech, and she proceeded in the
person of the Word, saying; This is the Rule which the beloved of thy soul in
act of love has given to thee. Therefore thou shall receive it, and such
things as are contained therein thou shall keep at thy heart, and put them in
execution, excepting only when Charity, and Obedience do hinder thee from
visiting my body, and blood. After these words she returned from the rapt. And
how exactly these Rules were observed by her, the progress of her life will
show.

The great excesses of love which she had in the contemplation of Christ Jesus.
CHAP. 11.
YET was not the vapor of this burning furnace so very hot, but sometimes the
flame increased, which made the most ardent fire of divine love even break
from her breast out of her mouth. In so much as in her Rapts fixing her most
pure understanding upon the contemplation of infinite love which mo^ed Almighty
God to do so much for the most vile creatur Man, Note the great excess of her
love to God expressed in this and the next chapter.
she could not contain her self from exclayming thus with a loud voice; O
love, O love, O God how thou love thy creatures, with pure love! O God of
love, O God of love, O my Lord, no more love, no more love, it is too much. O
my Jesus the love that thou bear to thy creatures! Yet not too much for thy
greatness, but too much for a creature, which is so vile and base. Wherefore do
thou O my God give me so much love, who am so unworthy and so vile!

Being once again in Rapt taking a Crucifixe into her hand she went running
about the Covent, and easing her heart toward the divine Word with inamoured
discourses, and inflamed desires she cried out, O love, O love, O love. This
did she with so graceful smiles, and with a countenance of top full of joy
that the very sight of her gave occasion to take unspeakable comfort.

Sometimes she would be fixing her eyes on heaven, sometimes upon the
Crucifixe, sometimes she would embrace and press it upon her heart, and kiss
it with excessive fervor; and the while she would not cease to cry, and cry
again; O love, O love, I will never cease, O my God to call thee love, the
very joy and triumph of my heart, the hope and comfort of my soul.

Then turning about to the Sisters which followed her, she would thus say on;
Know you not O dear Sisters, that my Jesus is nothing else but love, yea that
he is even as it were fond with love. Fond with love I say thou art, O my
Jesus, and I will ever say so. Thou art all amiable and joyful, thou art
recreatiue and confortatiue, thou art nutritive and unitive, thou art penance
and solace, labor and repose, life and death both at once. Finally, what is
that which is not in thee: thou art wise and cheerful, high and immense,
admirable and unspeakable, in excogitable and incomprehensible. Then she kept
her eyes still fixed upon the wounded side of the Crucifixe, wherein she seemed
to discover strange things, and spoke at large of the suprem love, which God
bears to mankind, and of the highest Misteryes, which the Incarna^e Word
wrought on earth for our redemption. And again she exclaymed, O love, O love:
then casting her eye, up to heaven she said; Give me so strong a voice, O my
Lord, that whilst I call thee Lou^, I may be heared from the East to the West,
and throughout all the parts of the world, even to Hell it self, that thou
may^ be known and reverenced as the true love. O love, O love, which only do
penetrate and transcend, which breakest and bindest, which rulest and gouernest
all things! Thou art heaven and earth, fire and air, blood and water; thou
art God and Man. And who shall ever be able, either to express or think of
thy greatness, since thou art infinite and eternal!

In these so lively excesses of Love she did often spend the whole days, so as
it seemed that she drew on apace toward an Angelical life, and that she was
fed with banqueting dishes from the table of heaven. In these acts her speech
was so devout, so inflamed, and so compassionate toward her Jesus hanging on
the Cross, that not only in name, but in deed she resembled that Maddalena,
who was so much wounded with grief upon mount Caluary, when the Word
Incarnate gave up his Spirit to his eternal Father.

Sometimes being urged by the heat of celestial fire, she would run with
speed into the Quire, and getting up to the Rood lost where there was a
Crucifixe, she would vnnayle it from the Cross with incredible agility. Then
sitting down she would keep it in her bosom, and taking of her veyles from
her head she would dry with them the sweat and blood which she seemed to see
run trickling down from the face of her beloved Spouse. And this would she
do with so great fervor of spirit, that the Religious who were present would
fear that her heart was not able to endure such an ardent fire of love. It is
an admirable thing to tell how when the Sisters had taken those veiles and
linnen-clothes wherewith she had performed those offices of devotion to the
Crucifix they found them so full of sweat, and so very wet, that it seemed as
if she had held in her arms the dead Jesus, in such sort as he was when in the
midst of those cruel torments of the Cross, he suffered death for the
salvation of mankind.

Other amorous Excesses toward Christ Jesus, whereof she discharged her heart.
CHAP. 12.
THE celestial fire of love did daily more and more increase in this deer
Spouse of Jesus, in so much that for the excessive inward heat that she felt,
she could not oftentims in the very midst of winter keep on her woollen
bodies. It was further necessary for her to have her other garments
extraordinarily loose about her, to the end that her inflamed affections might
be able to pass more freely, and oftentimes she was forced to drink cold
water, and in great quantity. Into the very water she would also thrust her
arms, and bath her face and cast part thereof into her bosom, affirming that
she found her self not only to burn, but even to consume. Then turning her
self up to heaven with inamoured countenance she often repeated these words, I
can no longer endure so great a flame. And certainly if she had not been
succored by supernatural help, impossible it had been that she could have
lived.

Besides these ardent affects, one other that was very strange may be recou^ted,
which she showed on the day of the Invention, or Finding of the Holy Cross;
when having first communicated, she stood for the space of an hour like a
strong immovable Tower, and spoke at large of the excellency and nobility of
the Cross of Jesus with most ardent affection of mind. And after, insisting
upon the contemplation of the Incarnate Word which was nailed thereon, she
began thus to exclaim; O love, O love, how ^ttle art thou known and beloved!
Note.
If thou ^anst not find a place wherein to rest, come O ^ue, come all into me,
for I shall not fail to ^eceaue thee. O you souls created by love, ^hy do you
not love this Love? And what thing is love, but only God? Deus Charitas est.
(...) love thou make me even melt and consume. Thou make me dye and yet I
live, and I ^eele pain by thy making me know how little ^hou art beloved and
known.

In the mean time she used such ^eere and pious gestures, as kindled in the
beholders an unspeakable devotion; sometimes she would spread her arms abroad,
sometimes she would clap her hands together, and never cease from saying; O
come you souls to love my love, come and love your God. But how hot this fire
of love was which burned her most pure heart might well be known by her face,
which was even like to fire it self, And so with her clothes and the veyles of
her head she was forced sometimes to fan her self for the mitigating of the
extreme heat wherein she was, and yet in the very midst of it, she would often
run with great speed, sometimes through the Covent, and sometimes throughout
the whole garden, affirming that she went up and down seeking of souls which
might know, and love this Love. When she happened to meet some one of her
Sisters in the way, she would take her by the hand, and wringing her very hard,
would say; O thou soul, do thou love this love? what shift do thou make
to live? do thou not feel thy self consume and even dye for love? And when
for a good while she had walked thus up and down, she would take into her
hands the ropes of the bells, and ringing them exclaim with a loud voice; O
you souls, come love, come love this love by whom you are so much beloved.
With these affects of her spirit it would not be credible to tell how the
minds of the Religious there present were inflamed to devotion, and withal to
wonder.

But among all her amorous excesses, which were so many, one of them was
admirable, which in one of her Raptes she expressed. She had passed a whole day
in heavenly contemplations, and spoken with so much fervor of soul of the
divine love, that she seemed some Angelical spirit, which might have been
descended from heaven to express the excellency thereof. By means of this
labor she was grown exceedingly weary and void of strength, and being
desirous to refresh, and restore her self, she took a Crucifixe into her hand,
and applying her mouth to the wound thereof, she was seen by the Religious to
swallow in the same very sort, as men use to do, when they feed upon some
delightful meat. And moreover she delivered such words, as whereby it might
clearly be understood, that she was then deliciously fed through the wounds of
Jesus. And she returned from her Rapt with such sweetness of spirit, and so
ouer-flowed with joy, as well might show that she had been nourished with
celestial Manna.

Of an Examination of her conscience that she made in Rapt, whereby the great
purity of her soul may be seen. CHAP. 13.
How diligent she was in the examination of her conscience, and how she fixed
the eye of her mind upon every little moare that might pretend to defile her
heart, may be considered by the inquiry that she made upon her self, of what
she had done that day; and she made it in a Rapt, whilst she was in the
presence of God. She began therefore lying half prostrate with her knees upon
the ground to recite those Psalms, Domine quid multiplicati sunt etc. Qui
habitat in adiuto^io etc. Which as soon as she had ended, thus she said; O my
Jesus what was the first thought which I had to day? I grieve that it was not
of thee: Note.
but I was fearful least it had been too late to call thy Spouses to praise
thee: nor was my thought to offer my self to thee, nor to honor thee.
Afterward: O my Jesus, I went to offer my self to thee in the Quire, but I
d^d not resign my self intierly and absolutely to thy will. O most bountiful
God, and what grace may I hope to receive of thee, I who did not resign my
self wholly unto thee, have mercy upon me, O Lord, although I deserve it not,
but do rather d^serue a thousand hells. Again when I went to sing praises unto
thee, I was troubled more to see that some of my Sisters were wanting in
performance of the ceremony^s, and Religious actions, then I took care to
honor thee, and to offer up my praises in union of such, as are presented by
the heavenly spirits. I may well beg thy mercy, O thou great God, when even in
that which immediately apperteines to thee, and to thy praise, I have committed
so many imperfections. When I came to receive thy body and blood, which I ought
to have done with all possible devotion, I accuse my self, that I made no
intention to do it in memory of thy Passion as thou have directed I should do:
neither yet did I think of uniting my soul to thee, but I considered what
course I might take for the quieting of my heart. I did first hear the divine
Word, but I thought more, whether it was true that we were such, as thou did
cause us to be told by thy Christ, then I did of the love which thou bear
me: and therefore O my Lord, I can ask nothing but mercy of thee. When I went
to receive thy blood in the sacrament of Penance, I did more consider what I
was to say unto thy Christ for the quietting of my heart, then I did the benefit
which thou vouchsafest to give by washing my soul in thy blood, and I did not
confide in thee that thou would give me help and grace.

O my Lord, and what were the first words that I uttered? They were words of
reprehension (this she said because being Schoole-Mistres she reprehended one
of the Nouices.) And my speech being so little sweet, and mild was the cause of
disquieting her heart, and that which is worse I wanted Charity; for when I saw
that her heart was unquiet, I did not procure to appease it, that so it might be
united to thee. Behold O my Lord, what I reap by my so great union with thee,
and by the light which thou give me. If thou gave it to some other
creature, it would be more grateful to thee. But I miserable and wretched
soul make no profit at all by it, since I fail of Charity toward thy
spouses. I beseech thee even by thy Passion to pardon me.

When afterward I went to speak with that creature (this was upon occasion of
her going to the Grate to speak with one of her Aunts, and was there Rapt in
Extasis) I accuse my self to have committed a great hypocrisy, occasioning my
self to be thought for such a one as I am not. Although I made a sign unto
thy creatures, but I deserved not that they should understand me, since I
seemed to keep my soul united unto thee, and yet thou know how often I have
wandered from thee. I seemed to be a true Religious woman, and yet thou know
the poor creature that I am: I demand mercy, O my God, for this great
hypocrisy, and I offer to thee thyn own blood, which was shed for me with so
great love: if thou send me to hell, O my Lord as I deserve, thou may justly
place me below Judas, since I have offended thee so much.

Then I went to restore my body with necessary food, but what intention had I
therein to honor thee? For I remembered not to offer unto thee so many poor
creatures, why perhaps had been long knocking at gates for a bit of bread,
which yet peradventure was not given them. And for me miserable wretched
creature, without any labor of mine, and which is more without any merit,
provision is made by the Religion, whereby my body may be sustained. And not
only did I commit this offense, but that other also in making that spouse of
thine speak so many words, and yet I knew that in that place it was not
lawful to speak at all. Behold, O my Lord, how in all my operatio^s I find
that I have offended thee: how then shall I appear in thy presence to demand
gifts and graces of thee, and to recommend thy creatures to thee, I who have so
much offended thee, that I deserve no mercy for my self? But that love which
moved thee to come down on earth, and to shed thy blood, let that move thee to
show mercy toward my soul.

When afterward I forbear to go to praise thee together with the rest of thy
Spouses, it was only through mine own fault: for when that creature wished me
not to go, I did instantly consent to the not going. O my Jesus if she had
required some act of Charity at my hands, I should not so soon have given
consent, O my Lord, how can I hope ever to come in place where I may eternally
praise thee together with those blessed spirits, since I have failed to praise
thee together with thy spouses here? I offer thee thy blood that by reason
thereof thou may have mercy on me.

And in that work which I did, what intention had I to honor thee, O my Lord,
when I grieved more for the time, which thou even in taking from me do give,
then I did for having failed to offer my soul to thee (here she means that
time when our Lord did keep her alienated from her senses.) I was careful to
give a sign to thy little virgins for the keeping of silence, but I considered
not how much more I was bound to keep my soul united to thee.

When afterward I was to have inuoked the holy Ghost, I wandered with my mind
so far off from thee, that I could not remember the manner which I was to hold
therein, so as they who have been a less time in a Religious state then my
self, had more discretion therein then I Behold, O my Jesus how I have failed
in all my operations? How then can I appear before thy goodness, having
offended thee so much? I do again make o^^er to thee of thy blood, for only in
respect of that I hope for pardon.

And how much did I fail O God, when I had that other work to do, in not
taking a little pains to move those few paces? I say I failed of that which I
was bound to do: I entreated others that they would ^o^e that charity, and in
the mean time I failed of doing it to mine own soul. I took more care that
I might not take a little pains, then I did least thou should depart from
me. In all my works I find defects, O my God, ut thou not regarding my
offenses of thine own goodness have drawn me to thee again where thou give
me so much light, as if thou auest t to any other ^ule, it would make more
profit by it then I most wretched and mis rabble creature do. Again I went to
restore my self with corporal food, neither yet did I ^all to mind the many
poor ones that want wherewith to feed themselves, whereas for me, O my Lord,
thou have so liberally provided; and now I offer thine own blood again for so
many offenses, as I have made against thee.

Alas, O my Lord, how true it is that we are in darkness, and I have not
performed any work without offending thee: what then remaynes for me to do? O
my God, though I have offended thee so much in this day, ^et will I not commit
this last and greatest offense, which were if I should not confide in thee, and
in thy mercy. I know well O Lord, that I deserve no pardon, but the blood which
thou have shed for me will make me hope in thee, and that thou will forgive me.

Having made this Examen, being in Rapt all the while, she retired her self into
a secret place of the Monastery, where she afflicted her body with a grievous
discipline. But first as soon as she returned from her said Rapt, she
recommended all the creatures to Almighty God, and offered up for them the
blood of Christ Jesus.

She remained in Extasis eight days, and eight nights, speaking of highest
Mysteryes: and every morning at the hour of Tertia, she received the holy
Ghost in several forms. CHAP. 14.
ABOVE all the Ecstasies of this beloved Spouse of Jesus, that one was admirable
which she had upon the Vigil of the holy Ghost in the year 1585. wherein she
remained eight continual days from the said Vigil, until the feast of the
Blessed Trinity, returning only to her senses for the space of two hours every
day, wherein she recyted her office, and provided for the necessity of her life,
by feeding only upon a little bread and water, and taking very little rest. In
this time she did every morning receive at the hour of Tertia the Holy Ghost
in diverse forms, of Fire, of a River, of a Dove, of a Pillar, of a Clowd, of a
Wind, and of Flaming tongues. And at the same time she became so joyful and
bright, and did speak so sublimely of the most hidden Mysteries, that it was a
thing miraculous. And yet further, whilst she was speaking in the person of
the Eternal Father, or of Christ, or of her self, her voice would be changed
in such sort, that even without understanding the words, one might have
known, that they were diverse persons which discoursed by her tongue. So many
were the spiritual intelligences, which our Lord communicated unto her in this
Rapt, as that being set down by the Religious, as she produced them, they make
a just volume, whereof is compiled an addition to the third part of her life.
But to give some pattern of the aforesaid Extasis, I say, that on the Vigil of
the holy Ghost which came that year upon the eight of June, she was called by
the Eternal Father in these words.

Come my spouse, the rest, and yet the impulse of my spirit. Whereupon she
remained suddenly abstracted from her senses, and said: Ecce venio, venio
cito, cito venio. And having been a while in contemplation she began thus to
speak in the person of the Incarnate Word. Before thou enter into the
admirable knowledge of my holy Ghost, I will make known to thee what I mean
to do with thee, therefore be attentive. Here she stayed a while, and then
resumed the discourse still in the person of the Eternal Word. Know that
until the day where you there below, do celebrate that feast, whereon thou
did so intrinsecally knit thy self to me, and I in so great abundance gave
my self to thee (which was meant of the Profession, which the year before she
had made upon the day of the most holy Trinity) thou shall be united to me in
such sort that thou shall be made partaker of divine treasures. Yet further
know, that for the space of five years (as heertofore I told thee) I will
deprive thee of the feeling of my grace, but not of my grace it self, for that
shall ever be in thee. That privation shallbe made for the glory of my Father,
for the joy of the Angels, and of all the blessed spirits which stand
assisting at the Throne of the most holy Trinity, for the example of mortal
creatures, for the greater torment of damned souls, for the confusion of
Devils, for the ease of the souls in Purgatory, and for the comfort of thy
self. I will also proceed with thee like to a valerous Captain, who before he
exalt his soldier to high honor, does put him to many proofs; and so I,
before I will exalt thee in the sight of my Father, will prove thee first. Thou
shall therefore endeavor to have in thee the knowledge of thy being nothing,
and to be ever seconding, and executing the internal inspirations which I will
give thee, as hitherto thou have done. But although thou have heretofore done
it with much endeavor, yet hereafter thou must do it with much more. Thou
shall procure to observe, nay I command thee that thou do observe interiourly,
withal sincerity, all the directions, which I have given thee. Thou shall
reprove the defects of others speaking ever all truth. I tell thee yet further
that in all the Feria's Sexta's (if thou will be attentive at the hour when I
dyed upon the Cross) thou shall receive the spirit which I rendered to my
eternal Father; and although thou feel it not, yet shall it ever descend on
thee. And as the creature cannot live without a heart, so I cannot be without
thee, whenever thou shall have the knowledge of thy being nothing, which as
long as it remaynes in thee, thou may well be confident, that thou shall ever
be united to me. And my peace shallbe with thee, although it may seem to thee,
that thou art in continual war, because in this probation, which I will make
of thee, many infernal Lions will come forth against thee, beating thee, and
giving thee torments. Nor shall they only strive to beat thee exteriourly, but
also interiourly with greater fury: yet they shall not be permitted by me to
have power to conquer thee, but thou shall ever be stored with this same grace
of mine which now thou have. Nay how much more they come toward thee with
violence, so much more shall my favorable assistance toward thee superabound,
although it is to be without any feeling comfort of thine.

To this she answered cheerfully, sufficit mihi gratia tua. And after having
been a while in silence, the discourse of the Incarnate Word followed on with
great earnestnes, and abundance of speech to this effect, There will not be
wanting such as I have appointed to favor thee (this was said by her
Patron-Saints) in bringing to thee spiritual food, and thou shall speedily
fly under the shadow of my purity, not making any motion, or operation
without that, although yet even this shallbe without the feeling of my grace.
Against the five grievous temptations by which thou shall be most assaulted,
thou shall arm thy self with the gifts, which already I have communicated to
thee. Thou shall take in the first assault my purity: In the second my heart and
thine: In the third my wounds, which thou have of me: In the fourth the crown
of thorns which I wore: In the fifth the great desire which thou have of the
salvation of my creatures. And if all the Devils in hell come with great fury
to fright thee, thou shall not yet be afraid: for as their Envy has no end, so
I will never be wanting to continue my grace in thee. And fail not thou to
relate that, which thou shall participate therein. This was meant by the high
Intelligences which he would be pleased to grant her, as afterward appeared.

After these words she having heard those heavenly directions, replied in her
own person. O thou only begotten, O Incarnate and humane Word, who can execute
thy great works! In respect of thee they are little, but for me they are
great. Upon this thought she remained a while in silence and finding her self
still to be filled more and more with the Spirit of God, she followed thus: Who
shall ever be able to resist so great assaults, but such a one as is
transformed into thee! O my God, who is blind in himself, true in speaking of
thee, and of thy creatures? He that shall converse with the creatures without
giving scandal or impediment to thy Love. The meek, the peaceable, and the
patient.

After these, and many such other intercourses of heavenly speech, which as
has been said are noted in a book apart, she added this in the person of the
only begotten Word. Fear nothing my dearest Child, for I will ever remain
with thee, and this probation which I am pleased to make of thee, shallbe an
evident sign of the certainty of the great gifts and graces which I have
granted thee. Besides it shallbe a mean of bringing thee up to greater
perfection. If thou shall be environed by great battles, not knowing which
way to turn thy self, nor conceauing that I am with thee, yet know indeed
that by me thou shall never be abandoned. To these words she answered: Sufficit
mihi gratia tua, and in excessu mentis mea non mouebor in aeternum. And thus
having humbled her self in the divine presence, after many other discourses
she yielded her self readily to the soueraign will of God, by saying: Omnia
possum in te.

She enters into the lake of Lions (that is to say, into the battle against
the Devils) and understands that she is to suffer for the good of souls.
CHAP. 15.
IN this very Rapt upon the day of the solemnity of the Holy Ghost, she was
conducted in height of spirit, and the Lake of Lions was showed, whereinto
shortly she was to enter. This was easily known by her words, and her becoming
so very pale and sad, as it moved every one to compassion. She then beheld a
number of Devils almost numberles, who with frightfull tentatio^s threatened to
assault her, and she heard most horrible rorings, as of the fiercest Lions.
Whereupon with the very anguish, having cast her self upon her knees, she
delivered words so deserving pity, as made all them weep who were present. But
because she spoke with extraordinary vehemence, her speech could not be taken,
but a little at the first which was thus.

I inuit the heaven, and the earth, and the inhabitants thereof to come and
succor me. Soon after turning her self toward God; Where is (said she) O my
God, that sun of thy grace? To me it seems obscured, thy goodness seems to be
wholly withdrawn from me: I am now abandoned like a body that has no part
wherewith to help it self, and as the trunk of a barren tree: for hearing
that thy grace is retired from me, I cannot help my self. After this it was
told her by Almighty God, that she not being able to help her Neighbors
otherwise, he was pleased that she should do it by supporting of pains and
troubles for them.

Whereupon she added. The cursed Heretics (nor can I name them in this action
otherwise) willbe an occasion to me of most bitter pains: for although they
did once receive thy holy Ghost, yet have they not continued to possess it.
And so many proud Spouses of thine which have rebelled from thee, will provoke
these raging Lions to come against me, for the increase of my anguish and
affliction. But at last (O Word) if those wretched souls will return to thee,
I would esteem my self happy, and a thousand times contented, that the
Devils should come unto my torment. I see I am round about environed with such
cruel spectacles, that I cannot conteyne my self, whilst I hear their
hideous noise, from extending also mine own voice. And if I shallbe forbidden
to do so exteriourly, yet I can never be so abridged interiourly, but that I
will exclayme so long to God, as that I willbe heard at last.

These devilish spirits, O my Jesus, would feign abolish all Faith, annihilate
humility, disgrace purity, and in lieu of my resignation unto thee, would place
in my heart a will perverted. Nor do I marvel, that since they cannot bring
this to pass, they return to me with so great fury and rage, and strive to
make so hideous noise, to the end that I may not hear the Orders which came
down to me from my God. It happens to me, as to one that expects death,
who has no less affliction when he sees the instrument which is to cut off
his head, then he has whilst he is in the act of suffering. I see well, O my
Lord, that if thou should retire the power of thy hand, these enemies would
deprive me of life. They would feign tear out my bowels, which makes them run
against me with such fury. But my Spowse has first placed in me his own
spirit, and his heart, withal those other gifts and graces, and did after place
me in this Probation and tentation, resolving that I should suffer for the
creatures, to the end that they may be converted to him.

I remember well, O Word, of certain shadows, which were given me by thee,
under which I was to fly for some space of time that I might loose the hearing
of these horrible rorings, and fearful noyses, and the seeing of this
spectacle of Devils which is so hideous. O Eternal Word, thou have brought me
into a great lake, wherein I know not which way to turn my self, where I may
not see, and hear so many fierce beasts which run with open mouth toward the
devouring of me: What therefore shall I do? It willbe best that I take courage,
and do my self honor by it, making a virtue of necessity, that is, by
glorying in the pains I endure. Redime me a caluminantibus me: Generatio mea
ablata est, and conuoluta a me: Oportet me gloriari in varijs tentationibus:
Timor and tremor venerunt super me, and contexerunt me tenebrae: Aestimata sum
tamquam mortuus a cord. O Lord cast thy right hand over me and give me
strength: Many other things she proceeded to say, and she also understood in
this Bapt, that until the day of the most B. Trinity the feeling of the divine
grace should not be wholly withdrawn from her, but that she was more to be
fortifyed by God for her spiritual comfort.

Of five tentations which for five years did afflict her. She had a sign from
God tha^ she was not deluded. And how for the space of five hours she was
beaten by Devils. CHAP. 16.
AFTER that the Omnipotent God had fortifyed this true servant of his, with so
many sovereign conceptions, and enricht her with so many graces, upon the day
of the most holy Trinity being the 16. of June in the said year 1585. when she
returned from that Rapt wherein she had remained for the space of eight days
and nights successively, he withdrew from her the delight and feeling of his
grace. Whereupon, the hideous sight of Devils, and fierce tentations did at
that time begin to afflict and fright her in such sort, that it would have
brought terror and horror to any humane creature whatsoever, though of most
innocent, and holy life. And as she had received from her most gracious God
those singular gifts which are deiuered in the second part, that is, The sacred
wounds in her soul; the crown of thorns; the being espoused by Jesus; his
heart; and the participation of his divine purity: so on the other side she
understood that she was to be assaulted by five most grievous tentations. First
in the points of Faith she was to endure many difficultyes. Secondly by
tentations of Pride. Thirdly by diverse motions of sense. Fourthly she was to
fall into so great obscurity of mind, that she might have run into many acts of
desperation, if she had not been most vigilantly careful. And lastly the
inordinate appetite, and desire of meats was extremely to assault her, with
other tentations, which were to be in a manner infinite.

Hereupon she said often afterward, that there remained not as it were any
tentation, which she had not proved; and by the excessive furiousnes thereof,
she suffered grief almost insufferable. But among these, that sorrow was most
piercing beyond al estimation which she took by the horrible sight o^ the
Devils, who were still under several apparences, discovering and representing
to her the multitude of men's enormous, and shameful sins. Besides this, she
heard now and then, such horrible skreaming and roaring in her ears, together
with hideous blasphemies, which so possessed her hearing, that oftentimes she
could hardly hearken to what the Religious would say unto her. Nor did those
devilish assaults give her over here; for sometimes the envious spirits would
throw her down the stairs, and sometyms she was cruelly bitten by the^, as by
so many venomous vipers, whereby she suffered extreme pain.

When by night, she would desire to repose her body, it is hard to express in
how great pain she consumed very usually four or five continued hours. In
this manner she passed many and many months away, so as now she was come to
the 14. of her probation, when on S. Margarets day of the year 1586. being in
the Quire in celebrating the sacred Office of the Church, she was rapt in
spirit, and she understood from her dear Jesus, that he was pleased until the
end of October following, to ease her in some sort of those tentations. So as
during that time, she was often abstracted from her senses, and enriched with
celestial treasures by the understanding of high Misteryes.

But much more was she formerly afflicted, by the great fear she had, least
the Devil should delude her. Therefore, for the securing of her, that
whatsoever happened was by the divine Will, and not accompanied with any
illusion, it pleased God (whilst once she was by excess of mind transformed
into him) to show her clearly the truth of all that process, and he gave her
this for a sign, that she should miraculously remain 15. days successively,
without taking any material food at all, excepting only the Sundays and
Thursdayes, which should occure. Upon the Thursdayes he was pleased, that she
should sustain he^ self by a little bread and water, and upon the Sundays by
some food of Lent. This (she obteyning first license of her Superiors) did
punctually execute.

At that time all her solace and comforts were placed in the holy food of the
Angels, which she received every morning, with unspeakable devotion: but
otherwise (besides the sadness which long fasting usually carries with it) she
was assaulted at that time, with most furious tentations; and once lying upon a
hard sack of straw, she was dragged and horribly beaten by the Devils, for
the space of five hours together. It seemed to her then, that she was
sometimes cu^ in pieces, and sometyms so cruelly bruzed that she was forced to
utter these doleful speeches, which S. Antony used, when he was in like manner
beaten by Devils, O my Lord, where art thou? But afterward being eased of that
agony, she was liberally rewarded by Almighty God, with heavenly graces.

She delivers a child possessed by a Devil. CHAP. 17.
SO much was our Lord pleased to show himself powerful and wonderful in this
dear servant of his, that not only he did enrich her with many celestial
gifts, and made her appear to be a heavenly spirit even here on earth; but he
would also show his wonders by making her do those things, which to the
frailty of flesh and blood are impossible. This was made evident by many
miracles, that she wrought in her life time, which as testimonies of her
sanctity are set down in the course of this Story, according to the times when
they were wrought, and the first of them was this.

The daughter of a Gentleman of Florence named Catharina, was much afflicted by
a malign spirit which possessed her body. She was brought by her Mother in the
year 1586. to this servant of God, and whilst she was speaking with her, the
child began to be tormented, as her manner was, by the Devil, in so much as
through the much pain she endured, she foamed abundantly at her mouth, and
seemed to be suffocated. But as soon as Suor Maria Maddalena, had in the name
of God, commanded the foul spirit, that he should depart, the child was
presently freed, and from that time forward was never troubled.

She speaks in a Rapt to the Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, who was
afterward Pope Leo the eleventh, and by whom she was found to be sound in
spirit. CHAP. 18.
THIS beloved soul of Jesus had understood, that the Cardinal Archbishop of
Florence, who was afterward Pope Leo the eleventh, was desirous to speak with
her of many important things, when he should come unto the Monastery, about the
election of a new Superior. And the Confessarius together with the Prioresse
having heard thereof, and fearing least the Cardinal might take some disgust, by
somewhat that she might say, they resolved to procure in dexterous manner, that
she might have no occasion of speaking with him. Note.
But to show, that no counsel though never so wisely conceived, is of force
against the will of God, it happened directly contrary to their appointment.
For Suor Maria Maddalena being gone to communicate on the 29. day of September
1586. which was the day of the Cardinals coming, she was rapt in that very
place where the election of the new Prioresse was to be made; and she was by
the spirit of God placed there with such stability, as it was not possible for
them by any means to remove her thence. And in that very place, the Cardinal
found her, after that she had remained there for the space of eleven hours; to
whom, yet in Rapt as she was, she presently began to deliver that with great
zeal, which our Lord had commanded her to say. This was somewhat concerning
the due execution of his place.
Whereunto the Cardinal made answer benignely, according to his custom but not
without great wonder. And the Hymn of Veni Creator Spiritus being sung for the
election of a new Prioresse, she returned from her Rapt, and gave her voice
amongst the rest. The ceremony being ended, the Lord Archbishop would needs
speak with her again, as he did in familiar manner, and at large,
particulerly asking about those things which a little before he had understood
of her, when she was in Rapt. She, ever as to her true Superior, with profound
humility and reverence, answered to all his demands, and conferred about many
other things, with great confidence. After which he departed much satisfied,
when first in the presence of the Mother Prioresse, and many other of the
Mothers, he had highly praised the virtue and sanctity of this their Religious
Sister.

She foretells unto the Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, that he should be
Pope: and at another time forseeth, that he should hold that place but few
days. CHAP. 19.
AMONG those discourses, which she had with the Lord Cardinal, she told him
upon occasion, that he should one day come to that highest dignity of Popedom.
Which came to pass, when in the year 1605. upon the death of Clemens Octauus
he was chosen Pope; and he called himself Leo the eleventh. Not only did she
forsee this, but said afterward in a Rapt, that he was to rule the Church of
God but a very short time; for when he past by Florence, as the Pops legate to
the King of France, she used these words; This Christ is in present possession
of a great honor, but he shall afterward ariue to the greatest, although he
shall not long stay therein; for when he would fain embrace it, then shall the
glory of it vanish out of his sight. How clearly this was verifyed, we see by
the success, for he governed the Christian Common Wealth, but six and twenty
days.

How she was perfectly resigned to God. How Jesus showed himself thrice to her
with a troubled countenance, and afterward well pleased: and of the three
offers which she made to the Eternal Father, with an Image of Jesus in her
hand. CHAP. 20.
SPEAKING once with one of the Sisters, Note.
she said in humble manner, that she desired nothing of her Lord, but that he
would take from her, her own will; and that as she knew, that by her own only
endeavor or power she could not profit according to her desire in those
virtues, which make a soul grateful to God. She had scarce ended these
words, when turning up her eyes to heaven, she was rapt in Extasis, and it was
showed to her by Jesus, how great an impediment the being guided by ones proper
will does bring to a soul; and especially of one that is Religious, who by the
vow of Obedience, has already consecrated the Will to God. She therefore
understood, how the will of Jesus was, that in nothing she was to suffer her
own Will to have dominion. This being done, she instantly took the Prioresse
by the hand, who together with many other of the Religious was there present,
and she conducted her to the Oratory, where she made fervent prayers to the B.
Virgin, beseeching her that she would get her light toward the executing of
the divine Will. After this, turning aside to the Mother Prioresse, whom still
she held by the hand, she begged of her with great earnestnes, and with many
tears, that even for the love of Jesus, she also would endeavor to deprive her
of doing her own Will. And then, Note.
prostrating herself thrice upon the ground after the manner of demanding
pardon, she returned from the Rapt.

The day following she being withal the other Religious employed in holy
exercises, she was again rapt in Extasis, and with great violence cast down
to the ground. Her countenance was already seen to be grown pale, for the
great horror that she had; and easily it might be discerned, that this
happe^ned not without some mystery. And so it was; for she seemed then to see
Jesus extraordinarily troubled, because she had made some resistance to his
divine Will. For she understood from himself, that her actions were to be
singular and that he was pleased to raise her to higher degrees of Religious
perfection: but she, being urged by an extreme desire of not appearing such,
made therein a kind of resistance in her mind; desiring rather to suffer
whatsoever kind of affliction, then to be held by others of a singular life.
Therefore our Lord showed himself again unto her as offended, and added how
it was his Will that both interiourly and exteriourly she should appear
grateful to him, and therefore that she was to make no resistance.

After dinner she was again raised to Extasis, and understood many things from
the Incarnate Word, but particulerly how she was to suffer much affliction,
thereby to grow more grateful to the Eternal Father. She was also illuminated
about many other things, apperteyning to the Constitutions of the Monastery,
which she particulerly related to Mother Prioresse. Not many days after having
left the Religious with whom then she was, and going into the Quire (being by
that time alienated from her senses) she let her self fall upon the ground,
with her arms crossed, seeing Christ Jesus, who seemed to be again of
troubled countenance. Whereupon in imitation of S. Paul, she said; O Lord, what
will thou have me do? Tell me what is pleasing to thee; and whatsoever it be I
will procure to accomplish it, so that thy bright eyes may shine upon me, and
that thy countenance toward me may no more be obscured. She added other words
all full of profound humility; and having so remained a while, she turned her
self with great joy toward a picture of the B. Virgin saying: O Maria, I do
yet once again behold those most pure and bright eyes of my Spouse, and they
look on me no more with a troubled countenance. But I beseech thee tell me, O
my Jesus, what can I have done in so short a time, whereby I may have obtained
this so dear and delicious aspect of thine? And she had scarce ended these
words, when she heard a celestial voice that said, Conformity of will;
whereupon she came to know, that by being so humbly resigned to the Will of
God, she saw her Jesus no more now offended, but benign and appeased.

In this fervor of spirit she went into the Quire to a chapel of the B.
Virgin, and opening the grates of the Altar, she took off the candlestickes,
with more agility then can be imagined. Afterward, ascending up to the Altar,
she powered forth earnest prayers to the Mother of God, that she would give her,
her son Jesus, whose Image together with her own, was there embost; and
upon the sign made, that her suit was granted, she takes into her arms that
devout Image of Jesus; and laying aside all the ornaments, said thus; I will
have thee naked, O my Jesus, for I were not able to endure thee withal thy
infinite virtues and perfections. I will have thy humanity all naked. She went
afterward with that Image, into all those three places, where he had showed
himself to be offended; and in the self same manner as a Priest does offer
the Host, so did she r^ise, by little and little, with admirable reverence that
sacred Image, toward the Eternal Father, saying in the first of these places,
Offero tibi sancte Pater Fi^ium tuum quem ab aeterno genuisti, and mihi in
terram misisti. Holy Father, I offer thy Son to thee, whom thou have
begotten before all eternity, and whom thou have sent into this world. Going
toward the second place, she added this in the way; Viuo ^go iam non ego,
viuit vero in me Christus. Dilectus meus candidus and rubicundus. I live, yet
not I, but Christ in me. My beloved is white and red. And being now where she
desired to be, she performed the same action, as before she had done in the
first place, saying: Offero tibi aeterne Pater Filium tuum, quem ab aeterno in
sinu tenuisti, and in sapientia tua generasti, and propter miseriam meam, and
misericordiam tuam in terram misisti. O Eternal Father, I offer thy Son to
thee, whom from all eternity thou did keep in thy bosom, and whom in thy
wisdom thou did beget, and whom in thy mercy thou did send into the
world for the relief of our misery. Afterward in the third place using the
self same ceremony, she also said; Offero tibi Filium tuum, aeterne Pater,
quem post resurrectionem eius ad te attraxisti, and ad dexteram tuam
collocasti. O Eternal Father, to thee I offer thy Son, whom after his
resurrection thou did draw up to thee, and did place him at thy right hand.

When she had finished these Oblations, she returned into the Quire; and
ascending up to the Altar of the B. Virgin, she gave the little child Jesus to
be kissed by all the Religious, who were come in to that devout spectacle;
reaching toward one the head of that sacred Image ^o another the breast, to
some the hands, and to others the feet; according as the spirit of God did
guide her. With these pious feruours, she did so kindle the minds of her
Sisters, both toward devotion and wonder, that there was not any one to be
found, who accompanied not her actions with tears. At last she returned from
her Rapt, wherein she had continued for three hours.

She understood from God, how his pleasure was, that she should go barefoot,
and basely clad; she performs it all, and in the bosom of an image of the B.
Virgin, she promises to observe it: she is proved by her Superiors. CHAP. 21.
ON the 5. day of July, in the year 1587. after she had served the Religious
at the table, as she went toward the dormitory of the Nouices (unto the
government of whose Mistres, she was at that time subject) she was rapt in
spirit. And having delivered a few words, suddenly she raised her self on
foot, with such gravity and cleernes of countenance, that she seemed to be some
Angelical spirit. And (having taken of her hose, and shoes, and going into
her cell) she removed every thing without exception, from of the little Altar
of her Oratory, saving only a Crucifixe: nor did she leave any thing upon her
bed, but the mattresse the sackes of straw, and a board at the head instead of
a bolster. Afterward being come to the Press where the Sisters clothes are
kept, and taking thence the poorest and most patcht coat, that she could find,
she retired into a private room, and apparelled her self therewith. And when
she saw her self so vilely clad, she fell suddenly prostrate upon the ground,
and yet fixing her eyes upon heaven with incredible devotion she recyted Te
Deum etc. Besides, making up her former clothes into a bundle being still in
Rapt, she carried them to the Prioresse, and then passing (into the Quire, went
up to the Altar of the B. Virgin, and there, in the bosom of her image (with
the pen, incke, and paper that she had brought thither for that purpose) she
wrote these words. I Suor Maria Maddalena make profession, and do promise to
God, and to his most pure Mother the Virgin Mary, to S. Catharine of Siena, and
to the Seraphicall Francis, together with all the celestial Court, Obedience,
Chastity, and Poverty in such sort, as God at this instant does make me
understand; and know it with firm purpose that I will never leave it, unless I
shall have true light, that his pleasure is otherwise, as now I understand that
it is truly he, who is pleased that I shall observe this kind of Poverty. And
therefore, confiding in his help and mercy, I make this Profession in manu
Puritatis Mariae, in the hand of the Purity of Mary. And in making of this
profession, she ever held her left hand in the hands of the Image of the B.
Virgin. She further spoke with so much spirit of holy Poverty, that she kindled
an ardent desire thereof in the heart of whosoever heard her; and turning then
again toward the B. Virgin with words of incredible tenderness, she prayed
her to keep her in continual protection, and that she would help her to execute
whatsoever our Lord had required of her.

This being said, she departed, and (returning thither, where she was taken
into this Rapt) she spoke these words; Agimus tibi Deo gratias etc. We thank
thee O God etc. Then going to Mother Prioresse, she begged of her with great
fervor of spirit, after she had prostrated her self at her feet, that she
would not hinder her from that kind of life, which by God had been prescribed
to her. The Superior answered discreetly, that the Confessarius was first to
be acquainted with it, and that she should govern her self according to his
advice. Now as soon as he had notice of it, he called the Spouse of Christ to
him; and (to try her) commanded her by Obedi^nce, that instantly she should
apparel her self as formerly she had been used to do. Upon the hearing of
these words, she readily and without delay obeyed, and though she brake forth
into bitter tears (fearing least formerly she had been deluded, as not finding
the Will of her Ghostly Father to be agreeable to that which she thought to be
the will of God) yet nevertheless she quieted her self, Note.
and being retired into a private room, she performed that which was imposed
by Obedience.

But on the morning next following, our Lord did comfort her abundantly in
the holy Communion, and letting her know, that her Ghostly Father did it to
try her spirit, he said that her so ready Obedience was grateful to him.
Whereupon she being urged by a new fervor of spirit, returned to the old
clothes, and taking the worst of them, she was putting them on, and looking up
toward heaven remaining all this while in Rapt, she said; Well yet, O my
Jesus, now that I am with thee, I will obey thee; when I shallbe there below, I
will obey them. She was seen by Mother Prioresse to take the said old clothes,
and she had hardly pronounced these very words, Suor Maria Maddalena, by
Obedience give me those cloths, and forbear to put them on, but that she,
hearing that word Obedien^e, returned from the Rapt, and offered instantly to
obey her.

In Rapt she cures a lay Sister, who then lay sick in the Monastery. CHAP. 22.
ON the thirtenth of July, of the same year, she was again rapt in Extasis,
and being gone to the Oratory of the Nouices, she fell upon her knees before an
image of the B Virgin, and soon after taking it into her arms, she went to
visit a sick lay Sister, called Suor Fed^, the daughter of Puccius of L^gnaia.
This woman was mightily afflicted with grievous sickness, and so sharp pains
over her whole body, that her sinews did shrink, and sometimes again she would
be all swollen. She did eat and sleep extremely little, and was brought to such
terms, that her health was despaired of, and they looked every hour when she
would dye. As soon as the Mother Suor Maria Maddalena, being yet in Rapt, was
arrived there, she made the sign of the Cross upon her with the Image of the
B. Virgin, which she carried with her, and having made some prayer, she said,
looking up to heaven, Thy will, O my God be done. Having spoken these words,
Note.
the pains of the sick woman did instantly cease, and she was wholly freed
from her infirmity; yea, and as soon as she had eaten somewhat, she rose out
of her bed, and returned cheerfully to perform the exercises of the Monastery.
This she her self who is yet living, has testified upon her oath.

The Devil afflicts her much exteriourly, and afterward appears to her in
the form of a most horrible beast. CHAP. 23.
IN this mean time, the Devil did procure to disturb the Peace of her mind
with most subtle and slye temptations. And he used all art, whereby to make
her believe, that the graces which had been given her by God, were but false
apparances and diabolical deceits. Nor was he content to tempt her inwardly,
but he began exteriourly, upon the 19. of July 1587. to afflict her so fiercely
that any one would have been moved to pity by seeing her. Going to rest one
evening, there came upon her so great an anxiety, and streightnes of breast and
throat, that being grown even ugly in countenance, she seemed as if then, she
were strangled: whereupon being forced to make lamentation, she uttered words
in so weak a voice, that hardly they could be heard, which yet were these; I
dye, I dye, I am suffocated. And although she were recomforted by the
Religious, yet still her torment was seen to increase, and great bunches would
rise out of her afflicted body. Having remained three hours in this labor,
she began at last to repose a little.

But the Devil left not to torment her, for shortly after, he appeared to her
in the form of a most horrible beast, which seemed to make have toward her to
devour her. The afflicted Mother, cast stones against it, and said, Depart
from m^, O thou ugly beast, and come not near me. I will thee to depart (and
then she added) in the name of Jesus; and if I can command thee, I do. She was
so astonished with this so horrible sight, that unless she had taken courage, as
knowing that it came upon her for Gods greater glory, it might have been
doubted, that the horror of it would have deprived her of life. This infernal
Monster continued two hours in tormenting her; but afterward it pleased our
Lord to free her, and to grant her many graces, which made her, in the after
battles, more secure and full of courage.

After she had been again proved by her Superiors, they knowing the will of
God by a miraculous sign, she obtained leave to go bare foot. CHAP. 24.
OUR Savior being pleased, that his beloved Spouse should go bare footed and
vilely clad, as already has been touched, he inspired her on the seventh of
August 1587. to say thus to her Ghostly Father, with incredible fervor; O
Father, who are given me by Jesus, for the guiding and safe keeping of my
soul, I being urged even by God himself, do beseech you to give me leave,
that for my use, I may have one only coat, after the pattern of my spouse,
and of his Apostles; and I tell you, my dear Father, that Jesus is he, who
will have it so, and it is not I. But the Ghostly Father to be yet better
assured, that the divine Will was such, inioyed her still to cloth her self
like the rest. Which she readily obeying, found her self to be assaulted with
so grievous pains in the soles of her feet, that she lost the use of her legs,
not being able to stand upon them. But encouraged by the Prioresse to force her
self, she came to that pass, that she was feign to go upon all four, with
her hands and knees upon the ground, and when she was to communicate, she was
carried in the arms of the Religious. Neither yet for all this, did it seem
fit to the Confessarius to give her the leave she asked. In the end her pains
growing upon her, the Prioresse, and the other Religious going toward her,
after they had recommended the matter to God by prayer, said thus; Suor Maria
Maddalena, if you judge that this be the work of God, I will you in the name
of our Ghostly Father, that you put off your hose and shoes, Note.
and that ye walk as we do. It is a wonderful thing to tell, how as soon as
she had taken them off (as if they had been gives and fetters) she was wholly
free from her pain; she went up and down speedily, and suddenly into the
Quire, to give thanks to the B. Virgin, and from thenceforth without any
impediment, she betook her self, to do the ordinary business of the Monastery,
after her accustomed manner.

Of the tentations that she had against Faith, and of many other aridityes of
spirit. CHAP. 25.
BY how much more victorious she remained after these infernal battails, so
much the more did the Devil torment her, with new temptations. Whereupon she
would often say: I know not what kind of thing I am: I know not whether I be a
living creature, or some senseles thing. At least there remains nothing in me,
that is good, but only a little desire that I have not to offend God. I am
grown to be the very receptacle of iniquity, the occasion of all mischief and
of all the offenses which are committed against God, so that sometimes I am
considering, how Jesus and the creatures can suffer me to live on earth. By
this aridity of spirit, all the exercises of Religion grew tedious to her, so
that sometimes she could hardly be drawn either into the Refectory, or into
the Quire. But when the tentation was diminished so many were her tears, her
sighs, and so great her sadness, that every one would have thought she had
committed some grievous sin. Besides, she was incredibly tempted in Faith,
and the Devil sought to persuade her, Note.
that she should not adore the B. Sacrament, and that God was not there. Nay
many tyms she found extreme difficulty to receive it; for drawing near to the
little window to communicate, she remained as it were deprived of all sense;
and to her seeming, the Devil would stand there, being resolved to kill her.
Besides, he cast it into her thought, as if there were no other life but this;
and therefore there was no cause, why she should labor and endure so much.
Sometyms she came to so great aridity of spirit, that she was scarce able to
look upon the sacred Images, and pictures. Oftentimes the Devil tempted her to
blaspheme God, and the Saints; and chiefly, when with the rest of her Sisters,
she was singing the divine Office in the Quire, at that time she heard such
blasphemies pronounced in her ears, and such horrible outcryes of Devils,
that (seeming to her by great odds to exceed the voices of her Sisters) she had
much difficulty to comply with her obligations. Whereupon, weeping often for
grief in great abundance, she turned to her Sisters, saying, Pray to Jesus for
me, that in steed of praying him, I blaspheme him not; and the Religious were
moved to much compassion by seeing this blessed soul so afflicted in the
spirit of devotion. For this reason, the Ghostly Father was often forced to
communicate her alone, that more easily she might overcome those tentations.
But hardly was she fortifyed sufficiently even by that heavenly food, for the
tentations would occure again with greater fury; the Devil indeauouring to
persuade her, that she had lost the divine grace, and therefore that the
custom of communicating did her no good, but rather that the Justice of God
was provoked so much the more to her punishment. And thus she became byond all
conceit full of dolor, and only thought how she might carry her self in those
fierce assaults. In the midst of these cogitations, it came once into her mind,
to use a remedy which against tentations she had learned of the B. Virgin. And
it was, that going to Mother Prioresse, she prayed her with great instance to
command her by holy Obedience, that she should not forbear the holy Communion,
and the exercises of the Monastery, and that she should punctually observe that
manner of life, which had been prescribed to her by God. Now Mother Prioresse
to content her, commanded her to do all by holy Obedience. And it cannot be
expressed with how great devotion and humility she answered to every particle of
that which was imposed in these words; Benedictus Deus, adding further, I will
endeavor with the help of Jesus, to do all that you have imposed. This solemn
sacrifice of her will was so grateful to God, that afterward he raised her to
many Rapts, and her heart became in the midst of so many temptations, to be full
of tranquillity and joy.

The Devil affl^ct^th her with impure temptations. The remedies which she used
against them. The B. Virgin covers her with a white veil, so as she was no
more troubled. The Devil procures to delude her, in the form of a Religious
woman. CHAP. 26.
ON the eight of September in the same year 1587. she was assaulted by a
continual sight of Devils; and by entising tentations of sense, her Chastity
was fiercely set upon; but she remembering that which S. Bennet had done upon a
like occasion, going into a room where the wood was kept, and there having
first bolted the door, she gathered together rugged sticks, and thorns, and
she tumbled therein so long stark naked, Note.
that the pain served to quench that devilish fire. Sometimes she would
afflict her with disciplines of iron, and girde her self about with a most
terrible girdle, which in coursest canuas, she had imbrodered with piercing
nayls, in such sort, that in truth the only sight thereof makes them shrink
and even tremble, who look upon it But this being found by the Mistres, she
was commanded not to use either that, or any other so rigorous mortifications,
without express license which she punctually observed from that time forward.
In exchange thereof she had recourse by ardent prayers* to the most divine
assistance; par^iculerly confiding in the intercession of the B. Virgi^, to
whom praying one day with abundant tears (that she would enable her to overcome
all impure tentations without any spot to her virginity) the Queen of Heaven
appeared to her al environed about with eternal glory, and told her that in
those so sharp battles, she had never offended his divine Majesty; nay that
with having fought so valiantly, she had ever obtained glorious victory. And
then she covered her all over with a most pure white veyle, wherewith she found
her self interiourly to be as it were restrained and bound, in token that from
the^ceforth she should never more be assaulted with tentations of Sense as in
deed it happened; for in all the course of her life she was never troubled more
in that kind, nor ever felt in her mind so much, as any one impure imagination.

On the same day, she was surprised by a burning fever, with pain in her head
and back, which afflicted her for twenty days. Notwithstanding this she never
forbear the exercise of the Monastery, but was much more kindled toward the
use of holy prayer, to which now she gave her self in extraordinary manner.
Whereupon being rapt in excess of mind, she understood from her Jesus, that
her sickness proceeded not from natural causes, but was otherwise permitted by
the will of God for her greater glory and probation.

The Devil, in the mean time, envying her so great good, and being enraged
that he could not overcome her, made her fall sometims down the stairs,
sometimes in the Quire, and sometimes in other places: but the servant of God
supporting all for the love of Jesus, was not at all hurt by it, but taking
courage to her self, she rose up fitter for new battles. Besides this, in
the midst of those fervent prayers, which oftentimes he sent up to heaven, she
found her self to be much bitten, as by venomous serpents; it seemed unto her
that the parts of her body were cut off by inches; and being forced by these
accidents, she fell down to the ground, where it was necessary for her to stay
a good while, with much pain, not being able to move any way; and partly by
her continual fever, and partly because she sustained her self with only bread
and water, she was weakened in such sort, that it seemed she must ^nstantly
faint and sown.

For this cause, by Obedience which was imposed upon her by her Superiors, she
was commanded for three weeks together, to take toward the recovery of her
strength, all kind of nutriment, excepting flesh. Which being done, and she
having recovered a little force, she instantly returned to her former life. But
the Devils forgot not to afflict her with new tentations, that so they might
discourage her from austerity, by putting thus great doubts into her mind,
that she did not perform the Will of God, and especially in going bare-foote
and in wearing one only coat, as well in Winter as in Summer. Yea, and the
better to persuade her, the Devil appeared to her at that time, in the show of
two Religious women; the one apparelled in white, Note.
the other in black, who both advertised her, that the manner of her life was
nothing grateful, and acceptable to God; nay that she offended him thereby;
and if she continued in such obstinacy, she would fall into his displeasure.
Heerewith she was much afflicted, but conferring the whole matter with Mother
Prioresse, and having made much prayer, with much fervor, she rested certain,
that those had been but deceits of the Devil, whereby to remove her from her
course begun. Heerof she was yet more assured by God, in a Rapt which she had
upon the Vigil of S. Simon and Jude, wherein she received many other spiritual
consolations.

She sees Jesus in such sort, as he was showed by Pilate to the Jews. A
little bundle of the myrrh of his Passion was granted to her, and Jesus was
put into her arms, as he was newborn. CHAP. 27.
WE must not pass over in silence a singular favor. which our Lord God
vouchsafed to this blessed soul upon the Tuesday before Lent, which came upon
the 5. of February 1585. as they were making a devout Procession in the
Monastery, to appease the divine Justice, least otherwise he might have taken
due vengeance for the many offenses, which on that day use to be committed
against him. She being rapt in Extasis, saw her heavenly Spouse expressly in
that dolorous manner, as he was when Pilate showed him to the Jews, with these
words, Ecce Homo. By which sight she being instantly kindled with great desire
to suffer, said; O my Jesus, why cannot I be she, who may suffer so many
outrages, so many scorns, and villainies, as I see those traitors put upon
thee, whilst they are showing thee to the people? Why may not I take from off
thy head, that piercing Crown, which so much afflicts thee, and put it upon
mine own, since for me thou wearest it, and for me thou suffer those pains
and torments?

After these words, she saw, that Jesus to satisfy her desire of suffering,
would give to her, as once he did to S. Bernard, a bundle of the Myrrh of his
Passion, and so did she affectuously pray that Saint, that he would dispose her
to receive it worthily, and that her mind by the blood of Jesus, might be
purified. And when she had named the instruments of the Passion by one and one,
she opened her arms, making show of receiving so great a benefit; and
afterward joining her hands in form of a Cross upon her breast, she said;
Fasciculus myrrhae dilectus meus inter vbera mea commorabitur: My beloved is as
a bundle of Myrrh which shall remain between my breasts. After this action,
she fell all trembling to the ground, making show of suffering beyond measure;
for as afterward she related by holy Obedience, in that instant she endured
most bitter torments, not only interiourly, but exteriourly also.

But she understood at the same time that her beloved Jesus had granted her
grace, whereby she might have forcible arms to resist the encounters of her
spiritual enemies, who then did much more combat with her. Neither was there
here an end of celestial favors, for our Lord God, having given her a ^ittle
bundle of Myrrh (the gift of sadness and grief) he was pleased to release the
pains, which she endured in receiving thereof, by a recompense of incomparable
joy. For she having a long time aspired to see her Jesus, in such sort, as he
was when he parted from the pure womb of Maria, not only did she remain fully
satisfied, but it was granted her, that for sometime she might hold the tender
infant in her own arms. It is too hard a task to express the unspeakable
joy which at that time she showed by her countenance, and with her words full
of loving fervor and devotion; and with what acts of humility she did
solemnize and reverence that celestial infant, and willingly I can be content
to leave it to the contemplation of such devout spirits, as shall read these
lines. It suffices for the present to add, that she being fortifyed by these
so great graces, was from thenceforth better able to resist all diabolical
temptations.

Of the sight which God gave her of her own defects: and of the great comfort
which she received by a certain act of Humility. CHAP. 28.
THE said tentations grew upon her every day, the Devil seeking some^yms to
kindle in her a desire of honor, and worldly greatness, sometimes to cast ^er
upon despair; and withal to per^wade her, that she should not weary her self
in vain, nor employ her self so without profit in leading an austere
Re^igious life. She was brought hereby to ^uch terms, as she thought that in
every ^f her actions, she offended God. Before those Image sometimes passing,
being ^urprized by extraordinary devotion, she would with tenderness, let her
self fall ^owne, and in one Rapt of two hours, ^ur Lord made her see all the
faults and ^efects though never so light, which in (...) her life she had
committed. This sight made her weep bitterly, and she said Willingly would I go
into Hell, if thereby could purchase this, that I might never hau^ offended
thee, O my God. Yet even here the tentations stayed not, nor yet did she give
over the discovery of new ways whereby she might vanquish the common enemy.
And once she prayed the Mother Prioresse, that for her greate^ mortification
she would cause her hand to be bound behind her. This act of humility was so
pleasing to God, that shortly he rapt her into Extasis, and for whole continued
week, in a manner she was comforted by the spirit of God The Devil envying her
so great happynes, appeared to her often in diverse terrible shapes. Sometimes
he represente^ to her mind, the delights of this world Sometimes he made that
appear vnt^ her for base and vile, which is so high and noble, as namely a
Religious state. Bu^ above all things, he troubled her much upon the point of
Poverty; for as ha^ been said already, she wearing no other thing upon her,
then one bare patc^ coat, the enemy could not endure so great perfection.

But the Religious Mothers, considering that she being clad with one light
coat, and that almost worn out, she would hardly be able to resist the sharp
coldes of winter; and not being willing on the other side to disturb her so
much, as to make her change it, they resolved that the Prioresse should
dexteriously find some remedy. Who in the night of S. John the Evangelist after
Mattins made her come into the midst of the Quire, and told her, that to make
her profit in holy Poverty, she was desirous that she should deprive her self
of her coat, and should apparel her self with another which was to be given
her for Gods sake, if the rest of the Mothers, and Sisters, should be so
contented. Hereupon they consenting not without abundance of tears, seeing
there before them an example of so great virtue, the Prioresse made her put off
her coat, and to put on the coat of another Sister; affirming that she gave
it her for Jesus sake, bidding her keep it till it were required again. By
this action all diabolical tentation which vexed her in the point of Poverty,
was much weakened, and she found withal, so great contentment of soul, that
being rapt in Extasis, she seemed to feel part of the joy of those blessed
spirits, which are apparelled in heaven with immortal glory. And moreo- she
had a lively feeling of how much the virtues of Humility, and Poverty ought to
be esteemed, and loved, which make the souls in heaven happy, and amiable even
here on earth.

God shows her the glory of S. Augustine, and he helps her to say her
Office. CHAP. 29.
ON the Vigil of S. Augustine in the same year of 1587. she being employed
about some business of the Monastery, after she had said with the other
Religious, as many Psalms in honor of that Saint, as the name of Augustine
contained letters, she was rapt in Extasis, and instantly began with great
fervor to beg of God, that he would show her the glory of that Saint, and that
through his merits, he would impart some grace to the Religious of that
Monastery. Her prayers were not made in vain, for instantly she saw, as might
be understood by her manner of speech, that our Lord God for the merits of that
Saint imparted to them many spiritual gifts. The evening after, she being in
the Quire at Complyn, whilst the Salve Regina was sung, she saw S. Augustine
environed with eternal glory; and then fastening her eyes on heaven, being
filled with divine splendor, she began to discourse with that Saint, with such
admirable fervor of spirit, and with so great vehemence of speech, that it was
impossible for the Religious to note her words.

But the night following, saying her Mattins with the rest, when she was come
to the midst thereof, retyring her self a little aside, she was again
alienated from her senses, and S. Augustine did in like manner appear to her,
who made an end of saying the Office with he^ as might easily be known by her
recyting of one verse, and not the other, she hearing that the Saint did utter
it. At the same time she also heard the Angelical^ melodyes, whereupon she
said; Yea this is other manner of music, then that which is made below on
earth. Having ended the Office, she began to beg of Jesus with most devout
words, That he would vouchsafe to come, and unite himself to her in the B.
Sacrament; and remaining yet still in Rapt, she went to the usual place of the
Communion, and being upon her knees, she remained there till the Ghostly Father
came to communicate the Religious and she was also commumnicated without ever
going out of the Rapt, whereby she was so much kindled with the love of God,
that she seemed even with excess of tenderness to faint, and she uttered words
so fervent and affectuous, as would have mollifyed any perverse, and stony
heart; and thus passed she that night in these devout contemplations.

She is tempted, that for the benefit of souls she would leave that Religious
state. And afterward she was tempted with Pride, and proper Estimation, and of
the remedies which she used, that she might not be overcome. CHAP. 30.
HOWSOEVER the enemy of mankind saw, that he labored in vain in striving to
remove this Spouse of Christ from her holy life, yet he ceased not with new
assaults to afflict and tempt her. For under the shadow of good, he was
desirous to persuade her, Note.
that more quietly she might serve God, if putting of the habit of Religion,
for the benefit of Souls, she would return into the world. But finding her
still more and more stable in her holy purpose, he began again to appear to
her, in fearful shapes, threatening that he would destroy her, if she
consented not to his wicked suggestion. But she contemning his threats and
rages, being inflamed with desire to serve God, to free her self from the
tentation of leaving the Religious habit, she took one day the keys of the
Monastery, and placed them in the hands of the Crucifixe, to show that she
should yield Obedience only to him, in the observation of her enclosure.

The night after, being of S. Andrew the Apostle, saying Mattins with the rest
of her Sisters, she was troubled with a most grievous tentation, to make her
self away. She went from thence to the Refectory, where she took up a knife,
and returning into the Quire, yet still in Rapt, she ascended up to the Altar
of the B. Virgin, and put it into her hands, so to obtain the grace of being
able to conquer the temptation. After this, she troad it under her feet, thereby
to put the greater scorn upon the Tempter.

Another time, she procured Mother Prioresse to tie her first in her cell for
the same purpose, and in reward of so great humility, God called her to the
knowledge of high Mysteryes, and ^rengthned her much against new com^ts. But
the threats and temptations of ^he Devil sometimes of Pride, some^imes of
forsaking her Religious habit, ^ot ceasing, she ran hastily to the Prio^esse,
and in the presence of all the Religious (with a Rope about her neck, and her
hands bound together) she deman^ed the Religious habit for Gods sake; and with
these acts of mortification and humility, she obtained the conquest. Yet
hardly overcame she any temptation, but that others would grow the more
terrible to her thereby. Being tempted, that she should not obey the
Superiors, Mother Prioresse made her promise to God, in the presence of many
Religious, perpetual Obedience. Hearing Mass somtymes she was cruelly
tormented by Devils, and with much fury sometimes thrown this way, and
sometimes that way, which the Religious so visibly seeing, were brought to
great compassion toward her. To profit yet more in virtue, she would put her
self to the performing of the most vile and ignoble exercises of the Kitchen;
and not only did she make her self obedient, and subject to the Mothers, but
even to the lay Sisters also. And for their help, she carried wood and coals,
and drew water without favoring her self at all, as if she had been the most
abject person in the Monastery. Besides that, she did these things whilst she
went barefoot, and vilely clad, as our Lord had commanded her; so that it
cannot be expressed, how much she mortifyed her self by these exercises. Having
once served the Religious at the Table, and kissed all their feet, she was
alienated from her senses, and in reward of that act, she was kissed by Jesus,
and she obtained to see S. John the Evangelist, and S. Catharine of Siena, who
bound the Devils with strait chains. Thus continued she by the space of three
years continually fighting, and by Humility obteyning victory over Pride.

For having overcome the tentations of leaving her Religious habit, she was by
Jesus apparelled interiourly with the same habit, and by him she was
communicated. CHAP. 31.
HAVING by heavenly help overcome the tentations of leaving her Religious
habit; she was much inflamed with a desire to be interiourly apparelled
therewith. And hereupon pouring forth earnest prayers to our Lord upon the
fifth of August, and reading the life of S. Diego, to whom she was devoted,
she grew to be alienated from her senses; and by her words it was known that
the Saint aforesaid did show her a white and fair habit, which came forth of
the side of the Son of God. So as now she doubled her prayers to her heavenly
Spouse, that he would be pleased to grant it to her. She also inuocated all her
Patron Saints, beseeching our Lord again that upon that day which was the
Feast of S. An Advocate of interssio^ not of Redemption.
Albertus her Advocate, he would cloth her all interiourly, to the end that
she might imitate the same Saint, with greater fervor of spirit. Her desirs
were granted; for turning her eyes toward Christ Jesus crucified, she saw
issuing out of his side, a most precious Coat, out of his right hand a
Scapulary, out of his left hand a Girdle, from his thorny head a White veil,
and from the wound of his neck which was made when he bare the Cross, a
Mantle bright and shining, beyond all possibility of imagination.

Then moved by divine spirit, she ascended up to the little Altar, where the
Crucifixe was; and whilst she fastened her eyes upon it, the Religious found
plainly by her postures and motions, that interiourly she was apparelled with
the holy Coat. Afterward with great fervor of love, she kissed the wound of
his side, from whence the Vest issued; and afterward received from every
other wound of the Crucifixe, all those several things aforesaid. The Garland,
the Light, and the Crucifixe which is given by the Priest to such as are vested
with a Religious habit, she received from the Queen of heaven. Whereof by the
words which then she uttered clear proof was given, as also by her kissing an
Image of the B. Virgin, in the same manner as she had done that of the
Crucifixe.

And it was very remarkable, that she omitted not even the least ceremony which
is used, when the habit of Religion is taken; only she uttered not the verses,
which then are usually sung; but for as much as was to be conceived, they were
sung in her hearing by the Angels of heaven; for she said, O yea, you sing
well indeed, these are other manner of musickes, then are made here below on
earth. After this she was communicated by her Jesus, not being able that
morning to receive him with the Religious, by reason of her continual Rapts.
She said the Confiteor, and Domine non sum dignus etc and the Religious that
were present saw that she opened her mouth, and made all those other
demonstrations which are usual with such as receive the Sacrament. Then being
richly full of joy, she said with incredible spirit of devotion, these words;
Dilectus meus candidus and rubicundus; Speciosus forma prae filijs hominum;
Diffusa est gratia in labijs tuis; Collocauit se in anima mea; Dilata cor meum
vt inducat omnem creaturam ad communicationem corporis and sanguinis tui; Quam
bonus Israel Deus! And taking the Crucifixe, she gave it to be kissed by all
the Religious there present; and having afterward recommended to our Lord, the
salvation of his creatures, and withal giving him thanks, for so many graces,
she returned out of the Rapt, wherein for the space of three hours she had
remained.

She brings back a But of wine, which was utterly spoiled, to the perfection
which before it had, by making a sign of the Cross upon it: and one of the
Religious who was then sick by drinking thereof was cured. CHAP. 32.
IN the same year, and about the end of the said Month, a But of wine being
utterly spoiled in the Monastery, and the Religious being poor, and ill
provided of money, it fell out to be very incommodious to them. But Suor Maria
Maddalena (being called) was commanded in virtue of Obedience by Mother
Prioresse, being Suor Vangelista del Giocondo to pray that the wine might
return to his goodness, and so the Monastery be freed from want. The Servant of
God did instantly put her self into prayer; and being rapt in spirit out of
her senses, she went speedily where the But of wine was, and as soon as ever
she made the sign of the Cross upon it, the wine returned to the former
state, and so the Monastery was served.

At that very time, one of the Religious, called Suor Maria Angela Santucci,
was sick, and so afflicted with a grievous flux, that the Physicians doubted
greatly of her recovery. But hearing speech of the said miracle, she demanded a
little of that wine, which as soon as ever she had drunk with great Faith,
she sensibly felt her disease to lessen, and soon after she grew intierly
well, to the great wonder of all the Religious. And she her self, who yet
lives, gives testimony to this miracle.

She sees the soul of one of the Religious of that Monastery depart out of
Purgatory into Heaven. CHAP. 33.
ON the third of February in the same year 1588. she being rapt in spirit, it
was granted her by God, to see the soul of one of the Religious of that
Monastery, which (after it had remained 16. days in Purgatory) all environed
with eternal glory went up to heaven. And she understood, that upon three
particular occasions, she had remained during that time in Purgatory. First,
because upon holy days, having an extraordinary curious hand with the needle
she had wrought some things without necessity. Secondly, because being an
ancient Mother in that Religion, she had failed sometimes for certain humane
respects, to advertise the Superiors of the inspirations which God had given
her for the good state of that Monastery. And thirdly, because she was too
great a lover of her kindred.

Three virtues also were discovered to her, for which the others pain had
been abbreuiated. The first was the studious care which she ever had to
conserve the purity and simplicity of her Order. The second, the great Charity
which she had showed toward all the Religious. The third, because she still
endeavored to interpret all things to a good end. She saw then, that this
blessed soul went rich in merit, to enjoy that incomprehensible felicity in
the midst of her good Angel, and S. Miniatus the Martyr, to whom in that
year she had been particulerly devoted. And now by the sight of so noble an
object as this was, she did even triumph with joy, and seemed unable to
conteyne her self, from aspyring to follow her, that she might also possess
her dear Spouse Christ Jesus.

She is much troubled by the temptations of Gluttony. CHAP. 34.
IN THIS mean time, the Devil (never ceasing to molest her) came with a
temptation of extreme Gluttony. And although any vice of this kind was wholly
contrary even to her natural inclination (besides the resolution that she had
made, to feed only upon bread and water) yet nevertheless, she was urged withal
violence by that malign spirit, sometims to take meat by stealth, sometimes to
desire those meats, which howsoever they were in themselves shut up, yet they
seemed visibly to be represented before his eyes For having occasion to pass
often by those places where the provision was kept, she would instantly see the
doors and cupbords to fly open before her, so as by occasion thereof, she was
extraordinarily troubled with that tentation.

But by how much the more she esteemed that sin to be absurdly indecent and
deformed, Note.
so much the more did the motion thereof give her cause to humiliate her self;
and she would use to say to one of her Sisters; That God Almighty could not
suffer the Devils to trouble her in any thing, which gave her greater
affliction then by that tentation of Gluttony. But yet, said she, I must be
feign to swallow down these bits, which are both sweet and bitter; sweet,
because they are made by the permission of God; and bitter for the shame and
pain which they carry in themselves. In the eating now and then of an apple
(when she was permitted to use food of Lent) she would, through the
contemplation of the beauty thereof, so diue into the providence and liberality
of him that made it, that she found no taste or savor at all in the thing it
self. With these exercises, but above all with the consideration of her own
weakness (since so vile and poor a thing, as the desire of meat, is able to
make such war against us) she (humbling her self so much the more) was daily
ouercoming all diabolical suggestions.

She is tempted with desperation of those succors which God by his Saints does
grant her: and of the remedies which she found. CHAP. 35.
YET the said suggestions did not cease. For the infernal enemy, observing her
great constancy, began furiously to tempt her with despair. And therefore, he
represented to her sometimes, that she was to be damned, and that God had
aba^doned her for her grievous sins. At other times, he would in like manner
strive to persuade her, that she was never to find mercy with God, and very
often he urged her to kill her self with her own hand s^ entising her
sometimes to thrust a knife into her throat, and sometimes to cast a halter
about her neck, and so to end her life. But she in the midst of these passages,
as afterward she told the Prioresse with abundant tears, made a vow to God,
that she would never offend him. And so our Lord was not wanting to strengthen
her in those temptations with many celestial favors. For upon the day of S.
Thomas of Aquine (being alienated from her senses) she saw him in the glory of
heaven, adorned with immortal light, and by him (as afterward she told by
Obedience) all her senses, and her heart were united, by a most precious and
delicious liquor, that he powered into her, whereby she was restored, as that
her enemies could not conquer her. She also understood in this Rapt, by that
glorious Saint, that the aridity of her spirit, was yet to increase much more,
which she could hardly believe, as thinking that already it was as much as it
could be.

But soon after, the temptations began again to assault and urge her with
such fury, that oftentimes the Prioresse commanding her to do some things under
holy Obedience, she was even as it were constreyned to refuse the doing of it
in words, although her mind were most ready to put it in execution. But yet
hardly could she have pronounced the ending of those words, but that with
tears she would protest that she would sooner dye then fail to yield
Obedience to her Superiors Whereupon she would in the hands of Mother
Prioresse make cheerfully her Profession. And our Lord at that time, to make
her profit more in holy virtue, did inspire her Superiors to double her
pennances and mortifications, which she with a cheerful mind did execute, not
without admirable example to others. And she was often rapt in Extasis, and
strengthened toward the enduring of new spiritual combats.

It happened in particular manner, upon the day of the holy Annunciata in the
same year, that being rapt in spirit, she spoke for the space of six hours,
of the Incarnation of the Word in so high manner, that whosoever had heard her,
would have been astonished.

Besides this she saw, when she was in Extasis, at several times, the glory of
many Saints in heaven, whereby she was greatly comforted. And among others, she
was often assisted by S. Diego her particular Patron, and taught by him how to
obtain victory against the Devil.

Notwithstanding all this, the dryness of spirit grew yet greater in her, Note.
so as in the midst of her temptations she took this expedient, to resort to
Mother Prioresse, and confer with her touching all things; but the Devil
opposing himself thereunto, made her often loose the way, and she purposing to
go to Mother Prioresse should find her self in other places. And besides, when
she would be going toward the Chapter House, to accuse her self publicly of
her defects, she was sometimes so disquieted by the horrible blasphemies of
Devils, which she heard sounding in her ears, that she found much difficulty
to get thither. But by the many acts of humility and reverence which she made,
she overcame all those diabolical devises, and received greater spiritual
light from Almighty God.

Of the several mortifications and humble acts which she performed for the
ouercomming of her tentations. CHAP. 36.
FOR this reason she would often kiss the feet of all the Religious. Sometimes
with her hands bound behind her, she severally of them all asked pardon for
her defects. At other times, in the presence of them all she was disciplined by
Mother Prioresse; and sometimes by some other of the Religious. Very often
being at table in the Refectory, she was called by her Superior with a loud
voice, and commanded to go round about, by the Religious, with a basket begging
a bit of bread for Gods sake; and then commanded to sit upon the ground, and so
eat the bread which she had begged. At other times she was made to prostrate
upon the ground, and all the Religious did pass over her. And once, being in
the Quire with the rest, he was caused to be bound to a post with her hands
behind her. But she re^eaued this mortification with so joyful (...) mind
(remembering in this act how Christ Jesus had been tied to a pillar) that she
was instantly rapt in spirit; and spoke so highly in that rapt, that they could
not hear her without wonder. Another time, retyring into the Quire, she took
a great Rope with which she caused her hands to be bound behind her, and she
made her self to he hoodwinked, and so to be tied to the grate of the Altar,
to the end that the Religious who were to pass that way, might be moved thereby
to vilify and laugh at her. But it proved otherwise, for they seeing so piteous
a spectacle, there was not one of them who did not find her self kindled
toward devotion; and she being asked by the Prioresse, upon what reason she
had done that act, she answered that she had done it to become thereby more
humble, and more prone to holy Obedience. She prayed her also with fervent
tears, that she would be pleased to bid the Religious that as she should be
going to that Altar for a certain devotion o^ hers, they should say such
words to he^ as these, whereby to vilify her so much the more: Suor Maria
Maddalena, this i^ come upon you for your d^fects, and because you willbe doing
of things too much after your own fashion. The Mother Prioresse satisfied her
desire heerin; and thereupon Suor Maria Maddalena demanded pardon of them all
with so great humility, that there was none of them who found not her self
tenderly affected with it; and having continued for the space of an hour in
this Mortification, she was loosed at last by Mother Prioresse, not without
extraordinary edification. In this mean time, fastening her eyes upon an Image
of the B. Virgin, she was estranged from her senses; and she understood from
her Lord, how that act of humility had been grateful to him. And by this
means a great multitude of Devils being confounded, they came about her with
so horrible outcryes, as gave her no small vexation.

She resists other tentations of the Devils, and sends them often away.
CHAP. 37.
FOR the adding of one affliction to another, there passed not much time,
before the Devil appeared to her again with hideous aspect, whilst she was
making Prayer, so that even overwhelmed instantly with great terror, she
became deadly pale. And calling first upon S. Michael the Archangell in her
aid, and turning her face up to heaven, she said; O Word, O Word, In te Domine
sper^ui, non confundar in aeternum. After which words she uttered a profound
sigh, and turning toward the Devil, said; What do thou demand of me, O thou
horrible beast? O bone Jesus, by the sight of my offenses which I see, and by
that other sight of mine enemies, me thinks, that I am even in possession of
hell. But if you, O Devils, had even swallowed me up, you should yet be forced
to deliver me back again.

Whilst thus she was tormented with this fearful spectacle, her face became
al wanne; and through the excess of that agony, her sweat distilled in great
abundance. She was then cast down to the ground with great fury, and beaten
with incredible rage. For sometimes the Devil strocke her over the head,
sometimes he cast her down precipitously, so that her face was swelled in such
sort, that for the space of many days, it was necessary for her to be under
cure. But she conforming her self to the will of God, said thus; In fine, O
thou hideous beast, when thou shall have tormented me, according to thine own
desire, what will thou have obtained thereby? Benedica^ Dominum in omni tempore,
semper laus eius in ore meo. Then rising up on her feet, and leaning against an
Altar, she was again impetuously cast down to the ground. But she having
recourse to the aid of heaven, said; Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici
eius. And then turning toward the Devils, she added; Yet can you do no more
then is permitted to you by my Spouse; I deny not, but that thou art strong, O
horrible beast, and that I of my self am weak, Note.
but my Lord stands near me, who is infinitely more strong and more
courageous then thou. Do you not observe, O you ignorant fools, that I am with
my Jesus, and that you can do me no harm? Do you not yet further observe, that
by these so many your battles, you make me become a more glorious Conqueresse?

Soon after, she drove those malign spirits away with a discipline. For
seeing her self environed by them, she cast her self upon the ground, still
striking, now on the right hand, and then on the left, with strange agility.
Afterward walking through the Oratory, where she was, with great speed she
did strike upon the benches, and upon the walls in such sort, as that she
resembled the Son of God, when he drove the sellers out of the Temple. She
saw afterward that many of those malign spirits retired themselves into all
the parts of the Monastery, to assault the other Religious with other
tentations, but they could not enter into the Chapter house, for the humble and
reverent acts which are exercised there.

Some of them she saw, where the Religious use to communicate, and where they
hear the word of God; who earnestly labored to disquiet their hearts with
earthly thoughts, to the end that they might not come to know the great union
which is made with Almighty God, by receiving that food of life. Some of them
she saw in the work house, who tempted the Religious to work negligently, and
to have no zeal to relieve the poverty of their Order. Others again she saw
in the Refectory, who incited the Religious to be at the Table without
devotion, and attention to the sacred lesson. Seeing also at another time
(whilst she was in Rapt, and the Religious were singing the divine Lauds in
the Quire) that a great multitude of Devils was at the door, ready to enter
in (and that one was already entered and stood tempting the Spouses of Christ)
the good Mother being enflamed with fervor of Spirit, went as it were flying
toward the Quire, and snatching up a Cross, she drove away therewith those
infernal spirits. But as she often saw the Devils throughout the Covent who
endeavored extremely to distract the Relious from the strait way to heaven, so
were there also showed unto her by our Lord, a greater number of holy Angels,
which gave strength and courage to their souls, whereby they might resist
temptations.

She freeth one of the Religious from a contagious disease, and cures a lay
Sister of whom the one half was senseles, from the head to the feet. CHAP. 38.
SVOR Barbara Bassi a professed Religious, had been subject for many years to
a contagious disease, almost throughout her whole body, whereby she was much
payned, and especially when she took her food. And the remedies she used, did
but tend to the increase of her torment; so as the Physicians allowed her but a
short time of life; the rather because the said sickness was such, as that by
little and little it did eat away all her flesh. Many times she had
recommended her self to the prayers of Suor Maria Maddalena, but she one day
in the year 1589. going to visit this sick person, was so inflamed with
Charity, as that with her tongue she began to lick her hands and arms, in
those places where the pestiferous evil did most afflict her, and having told
the sick person, that she must have confidence in God, Note.
and in the B. Virgin, because she should be cured away she went. And it was
admirable, how within few days she was wholly clear of that sickness, and in
such sort, as it seemed not, that in her flesh, there had been ever any
infirmity.

At the same time, there was in the Monastery a lay Sister called Suor Pace
Colombini. This woman had lost all sense in one whole side of her body, through
the excessive torment that she had felt; in so much as her flesh being deprived
of sense, might have been cut off without any pain to the patient. So as she
despayring wholly of humane help, prayed the Mother Suor Maria Maddalena, that
for the love of Jesus she would make the sign of the Cross upon her. The good
Mother, in her great humility, made some resistance, but finally being more
urged by ardent Charity, Note.
three times she signed her with the sign of the Cross. It is incredible to
tell, how immediately thereupon, the sick person was freed, and so freed, that
instantly she went about the business of the Monastery. And she her self is yet
living, and gives clear testimony to this miracle.

She sees the soul of one Religious ascend into heaven, and of another who
was suffering in Purgatory, in a particular manner. CHAP. 39.
THE same year, on the fifth of June, a Religious of that Monastery passed from
this to a better life, to whom Suor Maria Maddalena had performed great
offices of charity, during the whole time of her sickness. Her body was yet in
the Church unburied, when she, with the rest of her Sisters being employed
about their usual exercises, and being moved by God, she went toward the
grate of the Chapter House, from whence she might see the body of her dead
Sister. She was scarcely arrived thither, when being rapt in Extasis, she saw
her soul fly happily up into the joys of heaven. Whereupon, she brake out
into these words; Farewell my Sister, farewell happy soul. Thou art going up
to heaven, like purest Dove, leaving all us here below. O how glorious art
thou, and how fair, and who shallbe able to describe thy beauty? How small a
time have thou remained in those flames? Thy body is not yet buried, and thy
soul is flying up into eternal glory. Now do thou see clearly that which I
was wont to tell thee, whilst yet thou wast on earth, that thy sufferings
here, would seem nothing to thee, in respect of the glory, which Jesus had
laid up for thee in Heaven.

In the mean time it was declared to her by our Lord, how that soul, because
she had suffered extremely in this life, and for the devotion which she had to
holy Indulgences (as imparting the merits of Christ Jesus) she had stayed in
Purgatory only fifteen hours. In the mean time the body was buried, and she
returned from her Rapt, saying; Whilst burial is giving to the body in earth,
the soul is placed for all eternity in heaven.

About the same time, making prayers before the B. Sacrament, there was
represented to the eyes of her mind, the Soul of another Religious of that
Monastery, which had also passed to a better life, and it was suffering in
Purgatory for the defects thereof; and as she related, she saw it (apparelled
with a garment of fire, and a white vest underneath) adore the food of the
Angels, with great reverence. She understood afterward, how that flame which
encompassed her, and the obligation to stand an hour in the day to honor the
B. Sacrament in the Church of that Monastery, was imposed by God, in punishment
for her having negligently omitted diverse times to receive the holy Communion.
But that white Vest which gave her great consolation, was granted in reward of
her virginity, and purity, which she had still manteyned. Afterward in the
same year 1589. she saw it fly, fair and purifyed into eternal Rest.

After the five years of Probation she is taken out of the lake of Lions by
her Patron-Saints: that is, she is freed from the assaults of Devils, and
rewarded by God with infinite graces. CHAP. 40.
THE five years were passed, wherein Suor Maria Maddalena had been so
furiously assaulted by the tentations of infernal enemies, when at length her
Jesus was pleased to make an end of those afflictions, and as a Conqueresse to
reward her even in this life, with graces of imcomparable value. So as upon the
night of that admirable solemnity of the Holy Ghost on the 10. of June, in the
year 1590. being in the Quire with the other Religious in celebration of the
sacred Office, at the singing of that Canticle, Te Deum laudamus etc. she was
estranged from her senses, and in such sort remained without speech till
Mattins were at an end. Then became her countenance to be of admirable beauty,
and by the words which she uttered, it was clearly known that she then
conceived in her self celestial ardours of the Holy Ghost, by the strength
whereof, the powers of her mind were all purifyed; and she vtter^ many
sentences of the holy Scripture with admirable devotion.

At these things were present her Patron-Saints, who immediately before had
drawn her out of the Lake of Lions, that is, they freed her from those
afflictions, wherein as in a lake, she had been (as already has been said)
five continued years for her Probation, and they intierly took from the
Devils all power of afflicting her in future time, whereupon all fullfilled with
heavenly delights, she said; Eripuit me de manibus inimicorum, and ipsi confusi
sunt; Et transiui perignem and aqua^ and eduxisti me in refrigerium. These most
cruel beasts (she spoke here of the Devils) have certain ways to fright
us, whereby they thought to return to their great Devil, to give him account
of some rich gain that they had made; but my Patron-Saints do take them ^d
ruin them, because now every thing is ^rifyed in the blood of my God, and that
^herin they thought to have gotten the upper and, even by that they are the
more tormen^ed since they return without victory. And ^ho shallbe able to
conceive, O my Lord, how that which to me seemed affliction, is no affli^tion,
but triumph and glory to my soul. She ^ad no sooner ended these words, but
^he turned her self, being still in Extasis, ^owardes the Prioresse, and to
her Mistres, who were near her and wringing them with her hands, she said
with an inestimable joy of heart; It is come, and it is past (she speaks of the
time of her Probation) do you therefore help me to thank and glorify my God.
After this, she returned from the Rapt; yet so, that as soon as she had
restored her self with a little bread and water, she went again into Extasis.

Then did she see a greater light, in the midst whereof there was a troop of
her Patron-Saints, who being divided into seven couples in excellent manner,
made a noble Procession. These were (for she named them all one by one) S.
Thomas of Aquine, S. Agnes, S. John the Evangelist, S. Magdalen, S. John
Baptist, S Catharine Virgin and martyr, S. Steven, S Catharine of Siena, S.
Francis, S. Clare, S Augustine, S. Angelus a Carmelitan Martyr S. Michael the
Archangell, and her own good Angel. These she saw imediatly before, going
toward the eternal Father and from his divine breast, they took^ admirable
gifts wherewith to adorn^ her; and she understood that they were sent to her,
by her heavenly Spouse, in reward of the grievous afflictions that she had
sustained in the five years of her Probation, whereby being made even top full
with joy, she said: O my Lord, m^ thinks thou art about to reward me (if I may
so say) even for the offenses which I have committed against thee; for I see
not that I have done any thing, but offended thee. But well, well, to thee all
things are known.

After this, she made evident show that her Patron-Saintes were drawing near
her, when she said, O you my Advocates, how favorable are you unto me? And so
each couple of them (as was evident by the manner of her speech) enri^hed her
with several celestial Presents, ^etcht from heaven. One put upon her ^ead a
glorious Crown of immortal Light; Another with chains of gould a^orned her
neck; Another with a most ^ure vest on all sids did cover her; Some ^ompassed
in her hands with beautiful ^racelets; Others enricht her fingers with ringes
of inualuable price, and others (to conclude) did honor her with most precious
stones, and riches of ^eauen.

She, in the mean time, contemplated with great admiration, the sovereign
beauty of those Saints; and finding that they environed her round about, she
turned from one side to the other, and could never be satisfied in behoulding
those divine obiectes. And speaking to them, she said thus: Feign would I see
you all at once, but cannot; For if I turn to the right hand, I see not them
who are on the left; and if I look on the left, I loose the sight of them who
are on the right; and yet feign I would see all your beauties. She showed
afterward, by the manne^ of her speech, that the Saints themselves began to
make Court unto ou^ Lord, with instruments, and voices, and gestures betokening
joy, for the victory granted to his Spouse, in the time of her Probation; and
so it was an admirable thing, to see how she, with a manner full of majesty, in
acting and dancing gave signs of joy. Then she began to discourse with the
Saints by one and one, naming both themselves, and the instruments celestial
which they had in their hands. Her countenance was joyful and resplendant,
when continuing her speech in that heavenly company, she said, I will go into
all those places where my adversary has endeavored to do me hurt, to confound
him the more with all his craft.

And first, she went into a place of the Monastery where she had been
extraordinarily assaulted by the Devil; and there as soon as she arrived, by
singing and dancing she affronted Satan. At the first, speaking to the
Devils she said, I will in despite of you keep holy the day of ^ur Lord
before him, I will laugh you to scorn, and at his feet I will cast my self.
Then she ^ell upon her knees, and soon after rising added, Of that which has
happened to ^e before my God, I will glory for your greater ^aine; and thereof I
will make a Crown to wear upon my head, and humble my self to him again. O
hideous infernal Beasts, cry ^ut and howl as loud as you list, my soul
^steemeth you no more then a fly; but I will ^hanke my God for this great mercy
till I die.

She went after into other places of the Couente, and there with sweet voice
did singe, Quis nos separabit a chari^ate Christi? Tribulatio, an Angustia, an
Fames! Nemo poterit me separare a charitate Christi. And again she added:
Omnia arbitrata sum vt stercora, vt Christum lucrifa^iam. Dominus illuminatio
mea, and salus mea ^uem timebo? The^ went she speedily to an Altar of the B.
Virgin and said to her with great devotion, O most pure Maria, I offer and give
my self unto thee, not only with that purity and innocence which I received
when I consecrated my self to thee, but I give ^t thee now, being more adorned
and more purified. Receive me then, O Maria, and preserve me in thee. After
this, she returned from her Rapte, and although she had been adorned with so
singular gifts, yet nevertheless with a most profound humility she humbled
her self before the Religious, who, by that time, were come thither in great
number, and then she returned to the common affairs o^ the Monastery.

For reward of the sight of Devils which she had suffered in her Probation,
Jesus showed himself to her in three manners; promising from thence forth,
that she ever should enjoy his presence. CHAP. 31.
THE course and current of celestial Grace, stayed not here; for the Monday
following, which was the second feast of the Holy Ghost (being rapt in Extasis,
after the holy Communion) she vnderstoood how Jesus would that morning reward
her with a liberal gift, namely that from thenceforth she ever should have
before the eyes of her mind, the high presence of God, in lieu of the horrible
sight of devils, whereby in the time of her Probation she had so terribly been
frighted. And then she began to see her beloved Spouse, whereby she was at an
instant filled with such joy, as cannot be imagined, and fastening her eyes upon
him, she said; O my spouse (for so I will presume to call thee) the sight of
the Devil is not so hideous, but that thy sight is incomparably more
delightful, who art (as the Prophet says) speciosus forma prae filijs
hominu^. And as formerly there was neither time, nor place, when I had not the
fearful vision of those malign Spirits, so now, whether I go, or stand, or
labor, or speak, I shall ever see thee my beloved. And as they, besides that
they appeared to the sight of my mind, sometimes did also show themselves in
several forms to my corporal eyes; so thou also wilt not only be present to
my mind, but wilt also show thy self to the eyes of my body, thereby to make
me triumph in joy and exultation.

Our Lord did then ask of her, in what appearance she desired to see him, and
she answered; As thou art one God in three Persons, so I would be glad to see
thee in three manners: As thou wast in the time, when thou were in Egypt, I
say in thy infancy; as thou were when thy Mother lost thee in the Temple; and
lastly, as thou were when thou were prepared for thy Passion. She had no sooner
spoke these words, but this suit of hers was granted, and Jesus showed
himself to her punctually as she desired, in the time of his infancy. So as
full of joy, turning her eyes toward him, she began to speak in this manner;
O here behold my little one in the age of three or four years; O admirable
thing, thou art so very little, and yet thou art God; but thy littlenes makes
me know thy greatness. O greatness and littlenes of my God. I shall never be
satisfied in behoulding thee; O little and great God so beautiful and
attractiue. She then saw the same Jesus in the state of riper childhood, and
being then surprised with greater joy, she said; O behold my spouse, who
before showed himself to me so very little, and now I see him in the age of
twelve years, with a countenance so delightful and admirable, wherein there
shines such a grave sweetness. O my God so lovely, and gracious, to such as
taste thee!

After this she went to the Oratory where prostrating her self on earth before
the Altar of the B. Virgin with full zeal, she prayed that the lively flames
of divine love might dilate themselves in the heart of every Religious in that
Monastery. And these prayers were well made; for she understood soon after,
that God granted singular graces to that Monastery; so she being all comforted
returned shortly out of the Rapt. As soon as she had strengthened her self by
a little food, she was again abstracted from her senses, and she labored with
much desire to see the great Son of God, in the third manner, as she had
demanded. Her Jesus then appearing to her in that form, and she looking on him
with attentive eyes, said; O my Jesus I will behold thee in this flourshing
age of thine, sometimes working, sometimes praising thee, sometimes laboring
for thee; I will see thee I say, in this so beautiful, and gracious age of
thine, when thou do leave thy self to us by enduring the most sacred
Passion; I will take extreme delight to behold thee, as now the^ show thy
self, namely sitting upon that fountain, where thou wast interrogating and
illuminating. Many other discourses she had with her beloved Lord, whilst she
saw him in those three aforesaid forms, besides that in these three days of
the Holy Ghost (whereof she consumed the greatest part in Extasis) there were
communicated to her many celestial secrets, and she spoke so highly of the
greatnesses that are in God, as does exceed all humane thought. But I pass on
for greate^ breuity.

By her Prayers she obteyneth from God, space of life for the Confessarius of
the Monastery. CHAP. 42.
IN the year 1590. the Confessarius of the Monastery being grievously sick,
and near to death, having already been an^ealed, this servant of God, both
with sighs and tears, disposed her self to pray our Lord so earnestly, that
for the spiritual benefit of her Monastery he would prolonge his life, that
the said Confessarius being aged of 77. years in ^hort time, recovered his
forces so well, that he left his bed, and at the solemnity of the Corpus
Domini, which was at hand he confessed and communicated the Re^igious, to their
great comfort. And by ^his prolonging of his life, came much ^pirituall profit
to the Monastery. To ^his miracle all the Religious do give ^laine testimony,
who yet live, and were ^resent at the working thereof.

She sees the soul of her Mother ascend up to heaven; and she also sees a
good Priest who enjoys eternal happiness. CHAP. 43.
IN the Month of September, of the same year 1590. our Lord Jesus was pleased
to refresh his beloved Spouse, with an extreme consolation, for the agonyes
which were so patiently endured by her in the time of her Probation. For she
being in rapt, he showed her the soul of her mother, who 15. days before was
departed out of this life, and so being environed by eternal splendours, she
went up to heaven, accompanied by her Patron-Saints. There were given her by
her Mother three aduices, which by holy Obedience she was enjoined to declare.
First that to the uttermost of her power, she should endeavor to profit in
holy humility. Secondly, that she should be a true obseruer of Obedience: and
thirdly, that in all things she should strive to exercise Prudence. Having
given these holy counsels, her happy Mother took her self out of sight, and
went to enjoy supreme happynes.

Soon after also, she saw the soul of a venerable Priest, who for the love of
God had labored much in spiritual exercises; and he went to inhabit his
celestial Country being rich in glory. By these means, she went still
profiting in holy virtue, and was kindled more and more toward the purchase of
true felicity.

Of the manner of her life, from the time that she entered into her Probation,
until her death. CHAP. 44.
THIS courageous warrior of Jesus, being to encounter with diverse tentations,
lead a life wholly illuminated by God, and full of mortification and penance.
For in the five years of her Pro^ation, Note.
she sustained not her body otherwise in effect, then by bread and water. By
the space of three years, she being admonished by advice from heaven, went
bare footed, and consequently being of delicate complexio^, she could not
without extreme pain endure those bitter coldes of winter. So much the more,
because for her greater mortification, she employed her self as has been said
already, in those painful exercises, of drawing water, and doing of other
inferior things; and neither making any account of the rain or snow, she went
up and down, sometimes in the garden, and sometyms in other places of the
Monastery; so that through the most bitter season of the year, her flesh would
break and open in such sort, as to shed blood in great quantity; and that would
make most painful sores. Therefore out of compassion, the Religious would
sometimes swath her legs, but she caring for no such complements, with a
cheerful countenance would say; Give me leave to suffer for my sins. She
wore only one Coat, which was old, and patcht, as well in the sharp seasons of
the year, as ^t other times; so as now, and then, through the extreme could
she trembled ^n such sort, as she could hardly speak. Moreover the usual time
of feeding or sleeping she did ordinarily spend in continual prayer, or in
excesses of mind. And yet even when she would dispose her self to take any
rest, she slept in her clothes, and almo t ever upon a hard sack of straw, or
else upon the bare ground. Her sleep was extremly short; for that mind, which
was accustomed in those Nocturnal hours to transform it self often into God,
by divine contemplation, could hardly induce it self to give long repose to
the body, though it were much weakened with affliction. And yet more to exercise
her self in watching (not only in the time of her Probation, but even in the
whole course of her life, whilst she had any health) she obtained that the
Office should be ever hers, of calling the Religious to Mattins. Many times
also in the very dead of the night, she was heard to sigh and weep bitterly,
and sometimes to punish her body with sharp and severe disciplines, but she
being assisted by divine grace found her self in the midst of these
mortifications to gather strength.

When the five years of her Probation were ended, she had particular light
from our Lord, how his divine will was, that she should, according to the
custom of the Monastery, return to the use of single soaled shoes and
slippers, which she did readily fulfill, but as for hose, in her life she
never put any on again, except for a time of two years, wherein she was still
recovering out of a dangerous sickness. After her Probation ended, she began
also (being so advised from above) to take upon Sundays, not the food of Lent,
but such as was common to the Monastery; and on thursdayes to drink a little
wine, but upon other days she continued to fast with bread and water, for
twenty months afterward. But her Superiors then seeing that her forscedayly
diminished by her leading so rigorous a life, and fearing that so they might
loose the mirror of so admirable ^n example, they commanded her, by ho^y
Obedience, that she earnestly should desire grace of our Lord, that she might
be able to live according to the common use. She therefore being urged by holy
Obedience powered forth fervent prayers to the Eternal God, and obtained to
know his divine will to be this, that she wholly should resign her self to the
Obedience of her Superiors. Whereupon they ordained, that she should feed upon
common meats, wherein after her manner she obeyed readily. And verily she was in
this an admirable spectacle to all the Monastery; for still she fed her self
most sparingly, and chose for her food the meanest and poorest meats, Note.
making show with a holy kind of craft that she liked them best.

But she never gave over the use of clothing her self with one only Coat, and
that the poorest in the Monastery, except in the two years of her great
infirmity and recovery from the same; nor did she ever give over to sleep upon
a hard sack of straw in the whole time of her life. Only when she began to be
sick of that disease, which brought her afterward to her end, she was
commanded by holy Obedience to use matteresse; and when her sickness afterward
so far increased, as that she was tied to her bed, of her self she demanded
that her Superiors would permit her to rest upon a fetherbed, and to serve her
self of linen sheets; not for the ease of her body (as she privately acquainted
some of the Religious) but to the end that she might not be accounted singular,
but as the rest. And herein did evidently appear the divine providence, for
that body of hers came by little and little to so extreme extenuation, that
without fail she could not have long e^dured either upon a sack, or yet upon
a mattresse. So as in this manner this good Mother came by so prayse-worthy a
life unto her death, and thereby she being top full of merits, and of holy
operations passed on as we may piously believe, to life eternal.

She recouereth one of the Religious, who was near to death, of an incurrable
sore, and freeth another from Leprosy. CHAP. 48.
ON the 31. of December 1591. being rapt in making her prayer, when she should
have gone to be communicated with the rest, the time was past, and all the
Religious were communicated, without reflecting that she had been wanting; a
thing that never happened to her before. But our Lord who guides his servants
with a superior kind of providence, ordained that when she returned from the
Rapt she might be communicated with Suor Cherubina of Rabatta, a Religious
woman, who was grievously sick of an incurable sore. Upon this occasion the
patient found her self even possessed with a lively faith, that she was, by the
others means, to receive her health, as indeed it proved; for she was no
sooner communicated, but the Mother Suor Maria Maddalena becam^ abstracted from
her senses, and drawing near to the bed of the sick person, looking
steadfastly upon her, said thus; Ioyn^ with me, O my Sister, in the d sire of
your health. She hearing these words, who already prepared her self toward
the last passage, resigned her self to the will of God, reposing in him all
her confidence. In the mean time, the good servant of God, Note.
signing the sore of the sick person thrice with the sign of the Cross, and
making a short prayer by her, went away. An admirable thing it was, how her
excessive payns ceased in the instant, and the fever in great part was
diminished; and she found such amendment, as when the Physician and Surgeon
came, being all astonished at the accident, they affirmed jointly that the
health of that sick woman which had been despaired of, proceeded from no
other cause then the power of God, by the merits of his beloved Spouse.

In the same year, Suor Maria Benigna Orlandini a Religious Professed, was in
great danger of life by a contagious sickness, which by Physicians was held a
^eprosy, and it possessing the ears and the head, and other parts of her
person, did beyond measure afflict her. Being in ^o dangerous state she
recommended her self often to the prayers of this blessed ^oule. Whereupon she
being one morning rapt in Extasis (after having received the B. Sacrament) she
went toward ^he sick woman; and (having taken off ^he veyles from her head)
with her very ^ongue she licked the ears, Note.
and the head of the Patient, in those places where the ^oare was greatest. And
this she did with ^o great charity, that it pleased our Lord ^o restore the
others health thereby in very short time. She is yet alive, an clearly
testifyeth this miracle.

She foretells many things. CHAP. 31.
IN the same year, when the Right Reverend man Francesco Benuenuti the
Penitentiero, and a Chanon of the Church of Florence, was given by the Lord
Cardinal Archbishop of Florence to be the Governor of that Monastery, this
servant of God understood, that he was to hold the place just half as long as
the former Confessarius had done, which were 28. years. And so it fell out;
for having exercised that place with great prudence and charity for the space
of 14. years, he passed to a better life in the year 1605. with great example
of good life. And for the much devotion he had to this Monastery, he desired to
be there buried; the rather that he might participate of the fervent prayers of
those Mothers.

Within a short time after, she foretold, that our Lord had chosen a young Maid
to be a Religious in that Monastery, and that if she hearkened not to the
vocation, she would suffer much affliction in the world; and that if her Mother
should dissuade her, God would punish her also. It happened that the said young
Maid did not accept of her vocation, and thereby she lives in much affliction.
But the Mother who discouraged her, was chastized so terribly by God with a
Canker, that by little and little it infected her whole body, and she ended her
days in grievous torments.

She desired so much to suffer, that she was contented, not to receive any
spiritual consolation. CHAP. 47.
THE five years of her Probation being ended, wherein she had suffered such a
long and discomfortable combat, she remained after the manner of a gallant and
complete warrior, who beyond measure desiring to come to new proofs of valor,
forgets all trouble and danger past; and with intrepide mind to give
contentment to his Prince, does cheerfully offer upon new enterprises. In the
same manner she was so encouraged, Note.
and so in longing to suffer (forgetting how much she had formerly endured) as
she made now a kind of agreement with God, that in future time she would never
desire so much as any spiritual consolation. This she sought of our Lord, with
such unusual desire, that he granted her earnest suite; and although he had
formerly promised her that for reward of so many agonyes, and for the
continual sight which she had had of Devils she should be comforted with his
divine presence, yet this was without delight, and only, as she said, for
strength and comfort of her travails past. A plain sign of this was seen,
when shortly after she being rapt into excess of mind, according to her usual
manner, and our Lord imparting to her a lively feeling of himself, she turned
to him saying; Ah why my God, do thou break the promise which thou made to
me, I having renounced for love of thee, all the spiritual delight which I
might have in future times.

She was further so greedy of suffering that she would often say, that she
wished not to dye so soon, because in heaven there is no suffering yea so much
she was inflamed toward the desire thereof, that praying in some retired
places of the Monastery, she would hold in her hand a great candle, from which
the drops of burning wax might fall, and for the love of God she would suffer
them to pierce her naked arms and legs in such sort, as that afterward she
could hardly go; and this custom she followed both many times, and during much
time. In like manner, when in the bitterness of winter it snowed, she would be
going into the garden, and stay there for a good while together, without hose,
and her feet naked, and upon her knees would be making prayer to God. And
amongst other times, it happened once, that she stayed there in a manner one
whole day together. So as she neither thought, nor exercised her self upon any
other thing, then mortifications and acts of humility, finding ever new
inventions how to suffer; so as the going barefoot, the feeding alone upon
bread and water, the use of hair clothes, and disciplines of iron, were the
only things, which her heart (aspiring, and even panting to suffer for Christ
Jesus) would account to be desirable and precious.

She appears in Vision to one of the Religious, curing her of a Fistula. The
same woman afterward by remaining a while in the bed of Suor Maria Maddalena
was cured of a dangerous sickness. CHAP. 48.
IN the year 1592. Suor Cherubina of Rabbata, of whom already we have made
mention, being fallen sick again of a Fistula in one of her eyes, which
tormented her with intolerable pains, and recommending her self to the B.
Virgin (that patiently she might be able to endure them) one night she found
her self to be taken by the face, and she saw Suor Maria Maddalena with a
princely aspect, and how with her eyes fixed on heaven she inuoked the most
Holy Virgin and her Patron-Saints, that they would pray the eternal Father for
the recovery of the sick woman. She found afterward, that the servant of God
appeared to her, and that her eye was open where the hurt had been, which
continually for the space of six days had been shut. With that, she was in such
insufferable pain, that instantly she fainted, but soon after recovering her
self, she found that she was intierly and miraculously free.

The morning after, relating this whole story to the holy Mother, and asking
her whether or no she had been with her the night before, she answered that
corporally she had not been there, Note.
but that indeed between five and six hours of the night, she had earnestly
recommended her recovery to our Lord. So as she knew, that by these prayers,
she recovered her health, she being cured at the self same hour.

There passed not much time, when the said Religious fell yet sick again, and
was brought to such terms, that she received the Extreme Unction, expecting
every hour when she was to dye. In the mean time it seemed to her, that these
words were spoken in her mind; If thou will be whole, go into the Bed of Suor
Maria Maddalena. So as conferring about this inspiration with the Ghostly
Father (who was that Reverend man Francesco Benuenuti) with his leave she was
borne by the arms of others into the bed of the good Mother. A great wonder was
seen thereby, for she had scarce remained there a quarter of an hour, when
she found her self at an instant wholly freed from her sickness, and of her
self she arose out of the bed, giving thanks to God, who vouchsafed to grant
her so many favors, by the merits of his beloved Spouse. And this accident so
fallen out, many of the Religious who yet live do affirm upon their oath.

She has a Vision of a young Maid, who was to become Religious. CHAP. 49.
IN the same year of 1592. she saw once in a Rapt, a pure dove like that which
went out of the Arc of Noah, and sought ^ resting place. This she understood
to ^e a certain young maid, who was much inflamed with the desire of being
Religious; but as for the place she was ^ndifferent. Now she, being by the
divine providence upon her way, even at that time, to come to this Monastery,
to see if the Rules and Orders thereof could please her, she was hardly entered,
when Suor Maria Maddalena, being rapt in Extasis, knew that to be the Dove
which went flying about to seek a place of rest, She saw also the good Angel
of that Soul, who held a ladder in his hand, but did not apply it
determinately to any one place, by reason of the uncertainty, wherein the young
maid remained; and soon after, she heard our Lord say these words to the
Angel; Fasten here that ladder for to this place have I chosen her. Wherepon
the good Mother (turning toward the same young maid, who at that very instant
came where she was) said thus; The ladder is fastened here, which must carry
you up into heaven; consider it well, and fail not to become Religious in this
Monastery, if you will accomplish the will of God.

She afterward going forth of the Monastery, was so diuerted by her Parents
and friends, that being one evening in her chamber alone, she resolved to go to
her Father, and readily yield her self to his direction. And verily it was a
wonderful thing, that being even going out of her Chamber, she found her self
to be held so fast, that she was not able to stir any further; and although she
much endeavored to go forth, she was not possibly able to effect it. In the
end reflecting upon the tentation, she changed her purpose, and remained
Superior in that conflict of the Devil, by means of the prayers of Suor
Maria Maddalena, who at the self same time seeing in Rapt that the soul of
that creature (still in the form of a Dove) was striving to get out of her
hands, she begged of God both with sighs and tea^es, that he would preserve
her. But the Religious being desirous to satisfy themselves of the truth
hereof, the very next day sent to speak with the young maid, and asking what
had passed with her in the night before, she related the whole story to them,
and in all the parts thereof it was agreeable to that which Suor Maria Maddalena
had seen at the self same time.

Of the zeal which she had toward the saving of Souls. CHAP. 50.
THIS singular spirit had such an ardent charity toward the good of souls,
that it exceeded all humane conceit. Our Lord had once showed her a soul
adorned with his grace, wherewith she was so strocken in love, that from
thenceforth she did even melt with the desire she had of reducing souls to
God, and she ardently prayed him, that he would grant her many Souls, and in
the fervor of her spirit she would say; O that it were lawful for me to go
into the Indies, or amongst the Turks, I would take those little children,
Note.
and with so great affection teach them all that belongs to our holy
Religion, that whatsoever payns I might endure should be of much comfort to me.
But because she could not perform this, she would often take occasion to
speak with some of the simpler sort of the Religious and be ever instructing
them about heavenly things; and about the perfection of a Religious life, and
so great delight she took heerin, that for this she would forget both her food
and her rest. Moreover to the end that God might be pleased for her sake to
draw sinful souls unto himself, she would in the horror of the night take
severe disciplines, and imprison her flesh within piercing hair clothes.
Sometimes in the most secret places of the coue^t she would pray most ardently,
sometimes she would exhibit ^ertaine acts of humility to his divine Majesty,
whereby he might be pleased, with the lightning of his love, to pierce ^he
stony heart of sinners, reducing them ^t last to Penance.

But especially in the time of Shro^etide, when the divine goodness is most
offended, she would redouble those holy exercises, consuming sometimes the
whole nights in prayer, and continual ^amentation, oftentimes she was heard to
say these words, I beseech thee, O my Jesus, that thou will grant me so many
souls, as I am to move paces in this day. Sometims being set on fire by this
flame of Charity, she would leave Exercise wherein she was, and casting her
self upon her knees, would with sighs and tears desire of Jesus Christ, that
sinners might be converted to him. At other times she would take a Crucifixe
into her hand and after (having wholly offered her self to God) she would
discharge her self further in these words; Thou, O Lord, wast pleased to dye
upon the Cross, and to bestow all thy blood upon sinners: and I also, O Lord
would be glad to give my blood and be depriue^ of life that they might be
converted. By this means she gave desires to the Religiou^ of enduring any
pain for the reduction of souls to God. And because Jesus had showed
sometimes to her in Rapt, how hideously deformed a Soul is which lives in
darkness of sin, she would say sometimes that she saw no difference in the
vglines thereof, from that of the infernal spirits. She said she would
willingly be deprived of all the extraordinary gifts which she had received of
God, Note.
that they might be granted to her neighbors, and that for her part, it would
suffice, if she might keep her good desire of being able to love and serve his
divine Majesty. For this cause she would also deprive her self sometimes of
her dear discourses with God, that she might be a help to her Sisters; for as
she often said, she made greater account of being able to assist others, then
of all the excesses of mind, that she might have. For in these excesses, said
she, I am helped by God, but by assisting my neighbor I help God. Besides she
considered so earnestly ^he Creatures in their spiritual part, that ^he named
them not otherwise, then by ^he name of souls, not regarding any thing in
them, but the participation which they have with God, in being cre^ted after
his image.

She obtained of God by her prayers the conversion of many sinful souls.
CHAP. 51.
BUT greater signs of her zeal toward the salvation of others, were then
seen, when being in prayer, she was kindled with such desires as made her say
once; I find that now the world is grown to be in worse state then ever; for
now there is no more to be found any Charity; I have envy against the Birds of
the air, who can fly up and down where they will, and make every body hear
their sweet notes; and they can every where renew their delightful music,
without ever resting. O thou Word, so would I be able to do; I would fly
through out the world, and make my self to be hea^ by every one, that so I
might imprint this lo^ and this delight, in the hearts of thy creatures.

After this she showed by her word^ that she saw a Priest far of from the way
of God. Whereupon she gave her self to pray unto the divine Majesty with suc^
fervor of spirit, with words so affectuous, and with such abundance of tears
for the reduction of that person, that she obtained to see him in good estate.
Being for this reason grown as cherefull as may be imagined, she brake forth
into this speech; At last, O Word, my prayers have obtained their end. Yet did
not this qualify the burning fire of her great charity, but did rather kindle
it so much the more; for not content with this, she began to pray our Lord for
the conversion of other Priests, whom she saw defiled with diverse sins, and
this she urged by so devout reasons, as seemed after a sort even to convince
and oblige Almighty God to infuse divine grace into those sinful souls,
whereby they might be ^lluminated, for they still remained in ^he darcknes of
sin.

Sometimes she would say; Thou ^^est, O Lord, the need which there is of these
^oules; for if they who are the light of the ^orld remain in darkness, how much
more ^^all other creatures remain there? And if ^hey who are the salt of the
earth be vnsauou^y, and insipide, how shall they be able to sea^on others? O my
Jesus, and how shall they be ^ble to lead others on in the way to thee, if
^hemselues go on in that way which is contrary to thee? She offered her self
afterward to our Lord, to endure all the pe^altyes which these souls
deserved, so that he would deliver them from com^itting of sin. And she would
say with ^dmirable zeal; Infuse, O my Jesus, infuse ^^y blood into them, and
for my part if I ^ight endure all the pains of Purgatory so as ^ithall they
might be saved, I should be con^ent. Lay punishment I beseech thee upon me, and
give me pain interior and exterior, as (...) all best please thee. For I
cannot endure, that there should be so great ignorance where there is so great
abundance. O miserable and wretched creature that I am, why am not I able to
take upon me, and to bear all pain? Punish thou upon me, O Word, their so
great ingratitude, so great blindness and ignorance.

At last, finding that she had obtained the conversion of those sinners, she
said with excess of joy; Then let them return unto thee, like so many
wandering sheep, for all the happy souls of heaven are expecting their approach
with joy. With these feruours of Charity, she endlesly prayed the divine
Majesty for the salvation of others, and reaped the desired fruit of her
labors; for she often saw how these souls being illuminated by God with his
divine grace, did return to him with repentant hearts, by the means of her
prayers.

Of the Charity which she used toward her Neighbors. CHAP. 52.
AS her zeal was such toward the salvation of others souls, so her Charity
was no less which she employed toward them in all their other necessityes,
whether they were spiritual or corporal. She ever aspired earnestly to be
laboring about them; and then did she give particular demonstration thereof,
when any one was sick in the Monastery. So as she would be often saying to the
Infirmarian; That she had nothing to do, Note.
that she had no disposition to pray, nor could keep her mind retired inwardly
upon God; and she would secretly infer by these words, that they might give
her much contentment, if they would serve themselves of her in the government
of such as were sick. Whenever she was satisfied in this holy desire of
hers, she would use supreme diligence about them and when at any time the
sickness grew great, the good Mother would sometims by holding them up in her
arms, and sometimes feeding them, perform all the good offices which are
imaginable. Among many others this one deserves to be remembered.

There was a lay Sister, who had long been sick, and having a vein broken in
her breast, was afflicted with much infirmity, and grief. Suor Maria Maddalena
having observed this, took her into her care, and continuing so about a year,
the said Sister dyed. In that last passage it cannot be expressed what pains she
took, for she watched with her ten nights, without taking in effect any rest
at all.

It happened not long after, that another lay Sister fell sick of an incurable
soar; and it was offensive in savor beyond measure. Suor Maria Maddalena
desired to have the charge of attending her; and when she had obtained it, she
would needs with her own hands dress the soar, and when there grew any
vermin, as sometimes there did, she used al diligence in removing it, and
sometimes would apply her mouth unto it, as if she were tasting of some curious
and delicious liquor. She failed not also with deer words to exhort the sick
person to endure all with patience; assuring her that in heaven she should find
a most liberal remuneration. When these two were passed in their several
times to a better life, she performed to their bodies all the accustomed duties
before they were buried, and to that she added continual prayers, for their
souls, and by night without taking in a manner any rest, she exhibited her
fervent desires to God, that they might hasten to the fruition of eternal
glory. And she procured with great diligence, that all the Religious would
multiply their prayers, and she offered her self willingly to receive the
punishment of their faults; and she prayed to God earnestly, that she might do
so, who granting her request made her very often feel grievous pains for
many days together; by means whereof, they being endured by her with
singular patience, he showed her those souls, when they went toward the
enjoying of eternal happynes.

She sees the souls of two sinners condemned to Hell at their death. CHAP. 53.
ON the 22. of December in the year 1594. being in excess of mind, she saw
the soul of a sinner, who at that instant departed out of this life, and was
condemned to those everlasting pains. She understood afterward, how that
wretched man besides that he had lead a most wicked life, was particulerly
sentenced to those endled flames, for not having in account the spiritual
treasures of the Church, but despising both Indulgences, and all other graces,
which she tenderly powers upon her faithful children. About the same time,
she saw in like manner another soul shut up on all sides into unquenchable
fire, and condemned by the Justice of God, to the torments of Hell. Whereupon
she grew to be of an afflicted countenance and pale beyond all imagination; and
with tears and sighs turning her self to the soul, she said; Thou art now
become a firebrand of hell; and soon are thy pleasures and pastimes converted
into bitter and eternal pains: and then looking up to heaven, she said, O
eternal God, the men of this world do not consider and penetrate these
things. But upon this occasion so great was the grief and affliction of her
heart, that she wanted little of sowning by it. And these visions (as she
related afterward by her usual Obedience) were showed her by God, to the end,
that both her self and the other Religious of that Monastery, should inflame
themselves more vehemently toward the zeal of the salvation of souls
offering up for them both prayers, and pennances, to the divine Justice.

She was chosen Mistress of the young Religious, whom she did admirably help
forward in the way of spirit. CHAP. 54.
IN the year 1595. she was by common consent of all the Religious, elected
Mistress of the young Religious. It would be heard to deliver fully, with how
much zeal she addressed them toward Religious perfection, and by the virtue
which shined in her, they went forwards with great facility toward the
procuring of evangelical perfection. In this government of hers, she ever
prescribed seasonable remedies, and gave wise counsels, according to the need
of every one it being granted her by God to discern the most secret thoughts
of the mind. This was evidently seen, when once she said to one of them; If
you be silent with your mouth, be you also silent with your heart; And, That
which you are about to tell me, keep in silence. And to another who came to
her, for leave to perform certain exercises for a humane respect, she said
preventing the others words; When you come to ask leave to do these things,
you should come with purity of intention and fervor of desire; for our Lord
esteems not such sacrifices as you are about to make, but regards the
intention wherewith they are offered,

She procured also with great diligence, to establish her spiritual daughters
in true virtue, and particulerly in mortification of themselves. So as when
they went from prayer or other exercises of devotion, she would lovingly call
the^ to her, and sweetly admonish them of their defects. But as for them whom
she had observed to have received spiritual comfort in some good action, such
she would mortify, and say; That there was no solid virtue in them, since they
were impatient upon every trifle. So as sometimes, one of them who knew not well
what belonged to a spiritual life, would be troubled at her words, but then
she would lovingly admonish her, and say; You must know my child, that when you
come from making prayer you must be ready to receive disgusts and
reprehensions, whether rightfully or wrongfully, and you are to be so firm,
and so established to Almighty God, that nothing may be able to disturb your
Peace of mind; Note.
and let this be the fruit, and the comfort you seek to find in holy Prayer,
thereby to try them, and to make them know that they were not to rest upon any
sensible, though spiritual delight. When they came from prayer, some one she
would reprehend, another whom she found to be of a more ardent nature, she
would otherwise mortify, as by making her take a discipline in the presence of
some others, and the like, to the end that in the ground of humility they might
lay sound foundations of a spiritual life. Of them whom she found addicted
much to prayer, she would often send some one to sleep, another to do that
which she knew to be most contrary to her inclination, that so they might
learn to overcome their will, and become subject to the hand of others. She
endeavored with great care, that they might know the account wherein they
ought to hold the three vows, by which Religious persons were tied to God, in
that holy state. She ever exhorted them to holy Obedience, saying; That they
must obey with a cheerful countenance, and a plain heart, since they do it not
to any vile creature, but to the Almighty God himself. Note.
Nor is the will given away to creatures, but to Jesus Christ: and if you feel
(said she) any repugnance in ouercoming your will, you show but little love to
your God, since in a thing whereby you may highly honor him, as you may ever
do by denying of your selves for love of him, you will not endeavor it. Be
sorry (would she say afterward) to have spent any day wherein you have not
mortifyed your selves.

And in this sort she weakened their natural ill inclinations, and with so
great suauity of speech, inclined them to do that which was repugnant to their
own will, that all the difficulty which they found therein, did serve but to
bring comfort to their hearts. Besides, she would kindle them with so lively
words, to the observance of Poverty, and the dispropriating themselus of any,
though never so little things that it cannot be expressed. She would often use
these words of that Saint; That whatsoever was wanting to a Religious person in
this life, should be rendered with great usury in the next. She imposed upon
the^, that every month they should of set purpose examine themselves, to see if
they had any thing at al, to which they carried too much affection, and finding
that they had any, she wished them to deprive themselves thereof, for the love
of God. And so one of them having once brought to her a pair of beads, which
she did extraordinarily like, the good Mistres took them from her, and after a
long time restored them to her again, upon condition that every evening she
would bring them to her, and she continued the custom of carrying them so
long, that she learnt at last to keep things without propriety, and as only
lent by the Religion. She observed also that another carried a particular
affection to her book, wherein she had set down some spiritual remembrances,
and to make her pure in the sight of God, she bad her cast it into the fire.

Sometimes she made them change clothes with one another, to exercise them the
more in mortification. And know (said she) O my children, that you cannot live
long in Evangelical perfection, if first a thousand times in a day, Note.
you do not dye to your own commodityes. For the exercise of the soul in this
life, consists in loving, and hating; To love our God as much as is possible,
and to hate our selves as much as we can, and in this consists all
perfection. She took care that they should use all diligence, in keeping the
interior part well guarded. She would have them most zealous of the divine
service. She often called upon the^ to present God unto their eyes in all their
actions. So did she study in like manner to kindle in them, that vehement
desire which her self had, of the salvation of others, and she would often
say; You must know that we ought much to humble our selves, since peradventure
by our negligence many souls are gone into hell, Note.
which it may be would have enjoyed eternal happynes if we had been fervent in
offering up the blood of Jesus for them.

She would enjoin them, who were under her charge, that when any one of them
had spoken with little charity of her companion, she should not that evening
presume to enter into the Oratory, but remain at the door, till either she
her self had given her some other penance, or otherwise had given her leave
to enter. This penance was ordinarily, that being prostrated upon earth, she
should suffer the rest of the Sisters to set their feet upon her mouth. Note.
She would then admonish, that when one of them would speak of the other, she
was first to consider that such a one was the Spouse of the Word, the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, and Sister to the Angels, and then let her speak with that
reverence which belongs to such a one. She had particular desire, that when
the Order did grant a Recreation, her spiritual children should take it
cheerfully, yea she procured as much as possibly she could, that at such times,
they should not have any manner of disgust, whereby afterward they might be
the more inflamed ^owardes the purchase of virtue. With ^hese profitable and
laudable directions, ^he went through her office, in such sort, that she was
accounted by all the Religi^us, to be the very rule it self of living well.

Of the zeal, which she had to Gods honor, and the hatred which she bare to
sin. CHAP. 55.
THE Zeal which she had of Gods honor was so ardent, That (as she often said)
she would be glad to give her life for it a thousand times in a day. And she
would often affirm with tears, To me it seems a strange thing, and for my
part I cannot comprehend it, how there should be so few souls in the world,
Note.
which hold the honor of God in the true account of greatness, that it
deserves. But especially, considering how little diligence there is used in
frequenting the B. Sacrament of the Altar, she would be so oppressed with sorrow
an^ pain, as if with a sharp knife she ha^ been strocken to the heart; and she
would often say; Well, I am sure that one Communion made with true spirit and
feeling, is ap^ to procure, that a soul may come to great perfection of life.
At other times, being full of these celestial thoughts, she called some one of
the Religious to her, and said thus with sighs and tears; Let us pray unto
our Lord, O my Sister, that he will grant v^ light, and that we may not be so
frozen-cold in his service, and especially in frequenting that food of life,
which since it is all fire, and love, O let us even now constreyne Jesus, by
our prayers, to grant us ever in this place, (...) Pastor who may be zealous
of Gods honor* and who may have such light, as wherewithal to admit us
worthily to this celestial table.

She had moreover a most fervent zeal in saying the Divine office; and when
she went toward the Quire, she felt such joy of heart, that she seemed as one
invited to a sumptuous banquet. She endeavored always that those divine Lauds
should be said devoutly, and when she heard any of the Religious make a little
more then ordinary have, she suffered much affliction thereby; and she would
often say to them, that she had not the heart to post over the Divine Lauds
like to the other external exercises of the Monastery. Note,
Offenses made against God did ^o displease her, and caused in her such grief,
that hearing sometimes but these words Mortal Sin, she could hardly
conteyne her self, through the vehemen^y of her affliction from crying out with
(...) loud voice, giving an evident sign of ^he offense which in her heart she
felt. Being able as she was, to penetrate the ^eformity of sin, even to the
quick, so much she abhorred it, and such horror ^he had thereat, that to her
it would seem ^mpossible, to find a Christian so wicked ^s deliberately to
offend God. And 15. ^ayes before she departed this life; I go ^sayd she) out
of the world with this incapa^ity, above all the rest, that I cannot devise ^ow
to understand, by what means a creature ^an be induced to consent, and resolve
to commit a mortal sin, against the Creator. Whereby it may be well seen
how much she was illuminated by God, who had made her so zealous of his honor.

Of her great Humility. CHAP. 56.
THIS servant of God was moreoue^ a bright example of perfect humility; and she
ever had her self in so base conceit, that she thought her self good for
nothing; and would often say, tha^ therefore it seemed to her that her
Superior should speak to her in this sort Get you out of this holy place, for
you are n^^ worthy to remain in the company of the Spouses of Christ.
Therefore would she b^ turning toward the Prioresse with such a trembling, as
if she had committed some grievous fault. Sometyms she would ca^^ her self upon
her knees, at the feet of he^ Sisters, and beseech them that they would let her
know her faults. But then was he conceit of her self more base, when she was
to receive the B. Sacrament of the Altar; for in that act she would doubt,
least the Divine justice might make the earth open to swallow her up; and
(bitterly weeping) she would often say; I most vile creature, full of sins,
do presume to receive the King of glory, and in this fear she would say further
(casting her eyes to heaven) O my Lord assist me, and have mercy on me. Then
would she entreat the Religious, with great affection to pray to God for her,
that his Justice might not cast her headlong into hell. It was also necessary
sometimes, for her Ghostly Father with words of comfort to encourage her, that
she should confide in the divine Mercy.

Now the account that she made of the virtue of the other Religious was so
great, that she would kiss the ground where they had gone; and she accounted
her self to have obtained of God a space of doing Penance, by means of their
prayers; and she endeavored to help them in all the exercises which they were
to perform, how vile so ever, in reward as she said, of so great a benefit.
When she was Superior to others, she would be ever humbling her self to one
of her subjects; and then in virtue of holy Obedience, would command her to
impose upon her some rigorous penance, of what kind she would; and oftentimes
made some one of them to give her a discipline, commanding her to make no body
acquainted with it; and so by these acts of great humility, those Sisters would
remain astonished and confounded. She would also appoint, that in the evening
they should tell her of any defect committed by her in that day; and then she
would beg a penance of them.

It happened once, when she was Mistress of the Nouices, that a devout young
maid took the holy Habit. And within few days after, she called her to her,
and did communicate some of the temptations that troubled her, with so great
humility, and so many tears, as if they had been so many sins committed by
her; and she said; My child I tell you this, Note.
to the end, that you may know what kind a woman you have to your Mistres; and
^f our Lord had not called her to a Religious ^tate, she would either have
been shut up into ^ome perpetual prison, or else have ended her ^ayes no
otherwise, then by the hands of pu^^ique Justice. The she added; Pray you unto
^od for me, that he may have mercy on me, and that in the end I may be saved.
She would ^^wayes, even to her death, have one of ^he Religious expressly
deputed to accuse ^er of her defects, thereby to humble her ^o much the more in
the sight so God; and ^n the other side, she kept her virtues as ^^cret as was
possible, and felt great affli^^ion when by any means they were ^ade known.
Never would she excuse ^er self of any error. When any one ^ould recommend
some sinner to her ^rayers, she was wont to say with humi^^ty; If God should
withdraw his hand from ^e, there were not a sin so odious and so e^ormous
which I should not commit.

When she heard of the grievous sins ^f men, she would examine her own
de^^cts, though they were never so small; ^^d then make a comparison between
^^e two, esteeming hers to be much greater, through the continual grace which
she received from God. Therefore would she retire into the most hidden places of
the Monastery, and there with bitter tear^ and severe disciplines afflict
herself.

Being asked upon a time in discree^ manner by one of the Religious, if so many
graces as she had received from God, had never given her occasion of taking
pleasure in her self; Do you not know (say^ she) that none are to take the
glory of tha^ which is none of their own: how then can (...) take pleasure in
my self for the favors granted me by God, they being all of God? And with
these holy cogitations she gre^ greatly in humility.

How in a Rapt she wrought with the needle and made pictures, and other things
without the help of any light. CHAP. 57.
SO great was the union which this devout Mother had with Jesus, that wh^ she
was doing the ordinary exercises o^ the Monastery, it happened very often that
she was abstracted from her senses; and fastening her eyes upon heaven, her ^ace
would remain extaticall; so as when ^he fowed, or was cutting of gould, or
^aking in paper any Images of devotion (...) by having her mind so accustomed
to those divine contemplations) she would ^emaine in Rapt, even when she was
per^orming the things aforesaid; and yet withal she would proceed in sowing,
and ^utting, and painting, and so would con^inue very many hours together.
Wher^pon the Religious seeing these strange ^uents made often trial, whether
she ^erued her self of her own sight or no; and sometimes they shut the
windows, and at other times they bound her eyes about with a cloth. But she
being trans^ormed in God, These rochets and pictures many of our Nation have
seen.
proceeded to sow and to ^ake most rare works, and almost all ^hey which she
wrought were made in ^apt. And they were 3. Rochets which ^e so curious, as
whosoever sees them ^ay wonder at them. In like manner ^^d she make many devout
Images, and cut gold without employing any sight a^ all thereunto.

And it happened once, whilst she exercised her self in the common labour^ of
the Monastery, that she was making the bread of the community; and when her
hands were all full of past, she heard the sign given of going to receive the
holy Communion. Hereby she wa^ raised into Extasis, and being inflame^ with a
desire to unite her self to God i^ the B. Sacrament, instantly (as she wa^
with her sleeves thrust up toward the elbow) and with her hands full of past
she presents her self at the place, to receive that divine food, with the rest
o^ the Religious, without ever observing that her hands had been employed i^
that business.

In like manner it happened to he^ (although she was then in the Refector^ with
the other Religious) to take he^ food; that she hearing the sign given o^
going to the Confessarius, being alienate^ from her senses, ran even with the
fork^ in her hand, and the meat upon it, which she was to take; without ever
reflecting thereupon, and yet dispatched with the Confessarius that which she
desired. All the Religious were filled thereby with amazement, and all they who
were then present, and do yet live affirm all these things upon their oath.

Of the great purity of her Intention and Mind. CHAP. 58.
How great the purity of her mind was, most evident signs were given
throughout the whole course of her life; for she never desired any thing more,
then to make her self grateful to God by this virtue.

And when any occasion was offered, she inflamed the Religious by lively speech
to the purchase of this heavenly Jewel, and she said; That they were to
respect it in all occasions for it had power to make our very defects become
virtues acceptable in the eyes of God, and she would thus express her self;
Note.
O Purity how great wonders will thou discover to us in the other life, which
are wholly unknown to creatures; but yet not to such as seek thee. For then
will there be found persons, who were much esteemed of, to have been yet so
much inferior in this world to many others, as to have compared them
together, would have given occasion for men to laugh at them; but because they
were rich with this precious treasure, and those others poor, our Lord will
exalt these, and abase those.

Often she used to say with abundance of sighs and tears; According to the
weight of our Purity, our Lord will reward us in the next life. And for the
great estimation wherein she had this virtue, O admirable spirit.
she affirmed many times; If I thought, that with the saying of one word, for
any other end, then for the love of God (although it were without offense of
him) I might become an ardent Seraphim, I would never say it. If it happened at
any time, that she had begun any action for humane respects, she would instanly
give it over imperfect, nor would she ever have accomplished it, till first she
had reduced it to a pure and perfect end. And sometimes she wondered, that there
could be a gesture, a motion, a stirring of an eye, of such souls as are
consecrated to God, which is not ordained to that high and divine Purity.
Again being with her sisters, she would say; We fail of working with Purity,
because we want the love of God. And once being demanded by one of her Sisters,
how she might do to get that virtue; If in all things, answered she, you will
endeavor not to execute your own will, Note.
but rather choose the way of suffering then enjoying, you will find in the end
that you have wrought purely, because indeed therein we have no interest of our
own, therefore the way of suffering is a safe way, and very dear to his divine
Majesty. Many other noble aduices did she give unto her sisters concerning this
virtue, whereby much more she manifested her own mind to be most pure.

She was ever desirous to accomplish the will of God, and whilst she heard
speech thereof, was often abstracted from her senses. CHAP. 59.
SHE had ever a marvelous desire to perform the will of God. And the first
grace which she demanded of our Lord most instantly, was, as her self
confessed, To have punctually fullfilled the divine will, when she should be
come to the last point of her life. And casting her eyes often up to heaven,
she said these words; O my Lord, thou well know that even from my infancy I
have desired to please thee; and if now I thought thy will were that I should
suffer eternally in hell, I would of my self precipitate my self into those
flames to accomplish thy divine will. Sometyms being in speech with her
Sisters, she would say, That she thought there was not in the world, so
grievous an adversity or tribulation, which she could not cheerfully endure
with the only persuading her self that it was the Will of God. And so very
often she would repeat this speech; Do you not find, what sweetness this very
naked word conteyneth in it self, Will of God? She would have esteemed it a
notable defect in her self, if either for her self or for others, she had
demanded of our Lord any favor, with greater instance, then of simple
prayers. She was wont to say, to this purpose; I take joy, yea I take glory, to
do the Will of God, and not that he should do myn^; and therefore I am more
bound to God, when he hears me not, then when he hears me.

To this virtue she exhorted others also, for if you desire (said she) to
arrive in short time to great perfection, you must procure to do all your
actions in accomplishment of the will of his divine Majesty; for this holy
intention has power to sanctify your works. Being surprised with pains, she
would often say; O my sisters, how much shall we loose, because we understand
not this kind of traffic with Almighty God. Such a willingness she had to
perform the Will of God, that only with hearing it mentioned, she was
sometimes rapt in Extasis. And once it happened, that hearing one of her
Sisters say, how another of them had a very ardent desire to execute the Will
of God, She has reason (said she presently) for to do the Will of God is a
most amiable thing. With these words she was sweetly alienated from her
senses, and went up and down the Convent, inuiting the Religious that they
should say with her, That the will of God is most amiable. But this falling out
to be at a time, when they went to rest, she obtained, that all of them coming
out of the dormitory, and going into the Chapel of the B. Virgin with her
might confirm, Note.
that the Will of God was a most amiable thing, and they all protested that
intierely they would accomplish it; for which cause she retired her self every
month into some hidden place, and punctually considered if she had observed the
twenty Rules which were prescribed to her by God, as has been said. In this
action she spent a whole day, and at the end thereof, she did beat her self
grievously for the space of a whole hour, with a discipline of iron, because
it seemed unto her, that she had used negligence in performing the Will of God.

Of the fervent zeal she had toward Religions observance. CHAP. 60.
SHE bare not less affection toward the observance of her Rules; and therefore
when she saw them neglected, even in the least thing, she presently made it
known to the Superiors, without all humane respects; and earnestly prayed the
more venerable mothers of the Monastery, that they would have vigilant care
over all the Rules of holy Religion; For (said she) by neglecting the least
point of the holy Rules, not only the order of Religion is offended, but even
the apple of the eye of God; this being the house of our Lord, and beloved
deerly by him. Besides, she said of the holy Rule, That she had rather suffer
any torment, then see the least ordinatio^ thereof neglected. This she showed by
the effects; for when there was any business of the Monastery to be done (though
never so mean) this zealous Mother would wake sometimes at midnight, in the
performance of it, to the end, that the other Religious to whom they had been
committed, might comply the better with the other Ruls of the house. Therefore
being demanded sometimes, why she labored so hard, she would answer, That she
did it, to prevent time, and that so the Rules of that holy house might not be
offended. And she continued in that kind of labor throughout the whole course
of her life, and especially (through her great humility) when in office she was
Superior to others.

Amongst the rest of the Rules, she did exceedingly prize that of holy Silence;
and she would often say, how that a Religious soul could never take gust in
heavenly things, which delighted not in sweet silence; but that ever it would
be much afflicted and troubled, because by not refrayning of the tongue, many
sins would be committed. For this cause, she wished with great affection that
the state of Religion were reduced to that perfection of life, wherein it was
first planted by the Saints. And being amongst the Religious, she was wont to
say: Note.
If we could penetrate to the quick this dignity of our souls, through the
intrinsecall union which they have made Almighty God, by means of the three
solemn vows, in such sort, as a simple countrey-mayd, being assumed to royal
estate by some potent King, would be offended when she were put in mind of her
former condition; so would we also have it in extreme contempt, to suffer that
our thoughts should cast themselves away upon the consideration of humane
things; and knowing that we are made spouses of the King of all, who will
enable us to satisfy our desires to the full, and that with things not
corruptible and terrene, eternal; we would raise our selves up with a holy
kind of pride, to the contemplation of those eternal riches of the kingdom of
heaven. Therefore we do much wrong to this soul of ours, to hold it employed
upon things so base, it being able to mount with thought to the celestial
habitation of those blessed spirits.

How perfectly observed the vow of holy Obedience. CHAP. 61.
WHOSOEVER is a perfect obseruer of holy Obedience becom^ the owner, as says
S. Gregory of all the other virtues; and it seemed to have principally
flourished in this devout Mother. Nor is it found that ever either i^ public
or private manner, she procure^ to draw the will of her Superiors unto hers,
nay her will was ever in conformity with theirs, and that she judged to be well
done that was done by them. It having been told her, that by employment within
the Monastery, she might be hindered from her prayer, and from her private
conversation with God, she answered, That our Lord esteemed any little exercise
of the Religion more then any thought never so high contemplation. From hence
i^ came, that sometimes being in Rapt, and it being said to her by the
Prioresse, Su^^ Maria Maddalena come now, and do this or that, she instantly
would recover her self, though she were in Rapt and readily perform what holy
Obedience ha^ commanded. From hence also it came, that resolving to humble her
self so much the more, she knew not in a manner how to execute even those
things which were commanded her by God, but by the good leave of her
Superiors; and as has been said already, she chose rather to go many days
upon her hands and knees, then to differ in the least degree from that which in
the virtue of Obedience was imposed by her Superiors. Note.
She never considered that person which commanded her, but acknowledged therein
Christ our Lord; nor as she often said, was the Obedience performed by her from
time to time, for any reason, but only because she esteemed her self commanded
therein by divine authority.

Even her eating or resting, and all the other actions of her life, though
never so necessary, she would not accomplish at any time, but as it were by
actual Obedience; and so very much resigned was she to the will of her
Superiors, that she would not have begun any little vnasuall action, unless
by them she were moved to it. She held that day to be as it were lost, wherein
she had not submitted her will to some one of her sisters: and not to omit such
occasions, she made her self ready with extraordinary humility to obey even
her inferiors. And once she said, conferring thereabouts with one of her
Sisters, If at once you desire secretly to enrich your self in short time with
much virtue, give not over this good and profitable exercise; for toward the
giving of death to the outward man, and life to the inward man, I hold it to be
fall of efficacy.

With how great diligence she observed the holy vow of Poverty. CHAP. 62.
OF holy Poverty she was extraordinary zealous; and even before she was
Religious, she would often say; I hold all earthly things to be dust and dirt,
so that I may gain Christ Jesus. Being afterward conducted to a Religious
state, where this virtue flourishes, it cannot be expressed with words, how she
adorned her self therewith. She condoled with her self very oftrn, that even
in her necessityes she was provided for by the Monastery, nay she would weep
bitterly saying; I shall even dye without having observed holy Poverty
according to my desire. Therefore also it was, that she ever thought her self
to possess more then the other Religious; and her Superiors seeing this
inflamed desire of hers, they retained themselves often from doing her certain
^ittle courtesies, not to give her giefe thereby; and she rejoiced very much when
she wanted any thing. Once it happened whilst she was at table, by the
forgetfulness of her that served, there was no bread ^^t before her; this was so
grateful to her, that full of contentment she rose afterward without
demanding it. And being nioyned by the Prioresse for Obedience ^o declare the
cause of her mirth, she answered with profound humility, that she had never
received a greater contentment, then in the want of that bread.

On the other side, it afflicted her extremely, when she saw any of the
Religious keep any thing by her which was superfluous; and she would say, that
the vow of Poverty, would in no sort agree with a particular superfluity. Often
would she go into her cell, and with supreme diligence consider, if any thing
were there more then needed. It happened once, that her Superior having given
her a little piece of Say wherewith to mend her Habit; and seeing afterward
that she needed it not she had scruple of this act, as of a sin, and carrying
speedily the Say back to the Prioresse, she accused her self thereof with
tears, giving thanks unto our Lord, that he had preserved her so long in
life, as that she might do penance for it.

Sometimes being more kindled with the desire of this virtue, she would say,
looking up to heaven; O my God, why do thou move me in my desire to be so
poor for thee, and yet thou see that I am not suffered to go begging my
bread from door to door, wherein I should take so much pleasure: ^ay among
all contentmens, that I could have in this life, this were the greatest, that
thou would, O my Jesus, affoard me this grace, that I might die naked upon a
Cross, as for me thou did. And to her Sisters, Note.
she would say sometimes; Tell me, I pray you, what would you give, that our
Lord would grant us this most singular benefit, that when we were desirous to
eat, nothing might be given us; when we were desirous to rest, we might have
no bed; when we should have need of clothes, they might be wanting to us; I for
my part (said she) assure you, that whosoever would do me such a favor, I
would hold my self bound to present him with my very blood. O then for Gods
sake, let us procure well to penetrate this noble virtue. For whosoever
possesses it, has God in recompense. Another time she retired into the
poorest parts or the Monastery with a Crucifixe in her hand, and being on her
knees upon the naked ground (with her eyes turned up to our Lord) with tears
and sighs, she cast out these words; O me happy creature, if all that which
this body had need of, were wanting to it; nay instead of being relieved, if it
suffered insolency and misery, for love of thee O my Jesus, then indeed I might
is some part hold my self poor, for love of thee. By this zeal toward holy
Poverty she did evidently increase in the celestial fire of love toward
Christ Jesus crucified.

How she admirably kept the vow of Chastity. CHAP. 63.
SO great was the candor of her Chastity, that in this point, she was no^ as
one apparelled with flesh and blood, but rather like an Angelical spirit. For
this, she had many gifts from God, amongst which, that one was singular, which
in the time of her Probation (a^ has already been expressed) the Queen of
heaven bestowed upon her, when appearing to her, she covered her all with a
most pure veil; and told her that in the rest of her whole life, she never
more should feel any motion of sense. Hereof evident signs were seen, when
being arrived to the last days of her life, with serene countenance she said,
How she thanked God, that she had never known what belonged to any thing
against Chastity, and how she did not remember that ever she had taken delight,
but in Almighty God; and that she felt nothing at that time, which brought to
her greater quietness. Sometyms she would also say, in the very midst of her
grievous pains; Thou know well, O my Lord, that my soul has never desired
any thing but thee. She esteemed it for a notable defect to be talking of
kindred or worldly matters; it seeming as she said, that it was in no sort fit
for a Religious woman, consecrated to God by a solemn vow of Chastity, to
admit into her heart any little, little thought, or to speak words which in any
sort might be disagreeable to their state. Therefore would she interrupt the
discourses of earthly things, and draw them to matter of spirit; but yet this
she did in so excellent manner, that she never either interrupted others, or
showed to be troubled in her self.

She was seen sometimes to kiss the walls of the Monastery, with extrem
affection; and being demanded why she did it; Do you think perhaps (said she)
that I have not reason, O my Sisters, when these walls do separate me from the
unhappy world, and make sure unto me the most precious treasure that I
possess, by means whereof my soul is kindled to love Jesus, and to enjoy him
perfectly in my country. Other while she would say; If worldly men did
comprehend, how great the delights are which they may expect in the other life
who live in virginity until their death, like Hearts (who are ready to dye for
lack of water) they would run into the most severe Religious Orders, to shut
themselus up, that so they might be kept untouched and pure; for how much the
more a vineyard is hedged in with thorns, the more safe it is. And although of
this virtue she had received great light from God, and that by him she had
been often assured, that for ever she should remain entiere, yet nevertheless
she was still in extreme apprehension, least she might loose so rich a treasure.

Out of this reason, she did avoid as much as was possible, all going to the
grates of the Monastery, so much as to speak with secular persons, though they
were never so good or holy; and she would advise the Sisters concerning that
matter saying, Remember that you are consecrated to God, and a Religious shall
never come from the grate, but she willbe feign to spend much time ere she can
return to the inward peace, which formerly she had; for secular discourses do
sometimes cast dust or shadow upon the fair lilly of Chastity. When she saw
any one of the Sisters go with a cheerful countenance toward the grate, Note.
she would say in pleasant manner; I perceive you are not yet become altogether
one of ours; for the property of the Religious of Sancta Maria of the Angels,
is rather to be sorry, then to be glad when they are called for to the grates.
And contrariwise when in the sisters she discovered a kind of horror that way,
she would take extreme contentment in it, and noted it to be a particular fruit
of the B. Sacrament; and she would say, That she would gladly be to pass as
many hours in Purgatory, as she was to consume in conu^rsation with secular
persons. The hatred which she carried to the Parlatory was so great, that
sometimes not being able but to pass thereby, she used to say; From this place
the spouses of Christ draw no profit at all: for instead of quietness we have
trouble, instead of freeing our selves from tentations, they are augmented to
our hands. And all this grew from the great affection, wherewith she held holy
Virginity in high honor.

She sees the glory which a Religious woman of that Monastery enjoyed in
heaven. CHAP. 64.
ON the 29. of October in the year 1598. a Religious woman of that Monastery,
who left a great odor of sanctity, being passed to the other life, the devout
Mother who was present at her death, saw a multitude of Angels making as it
were a fair garland round about her, and expecting to conduct her soul to
heaven. After her death, the usual prayers being made for her, the servant of
God saw her in celestial glory, enjoying the supreme God, and apparelled with
a golden mantle, which she had received, in reward of her ardent charity.
Besides, for having ever conuersed and proceeded toward her neighbor with all
meeknes and sweetness she saw that in reward thereof, she received a most
delicious liquor, which distilling from the mouth of Christ Jesus, was infused
into hers, and so she had the taste of an excessive sweetness. Suor Marta
Maddalena did much rejoice in this so agreeable sight, both because she had
been very familiar with that Religious, and because she saw her in so great
height of glory, that it exceeded (as she said) the felicity of any other
Religious of that Monastery. Besides this, she understood that she had been in
Purgatory by the only space of five hours, for a very light defect which she
had fallen into, and it was, That she afflicted her self too much, when she
saw that others by her occasion were disgusted. But she, full of joy, began to
discourse of her glory, as if she would have melted in excess of love. And so
having with great confidence recommended her self and the other Rel^gious unto
her, she returned from the Rapt.

She was chosen Mother of the Nouices: The directions which she gave them.
CHAP. 65.
IN the year 1598. she was by common consent made Mistress of the Nouices;
and in October she began to execute that office, with great vigilance of care.
She endeavored that they who came to Religion, should have a desire thereunto
more then ordinary. Therefore would she be often trying them, and if she found
that they had any lively feeling of that state, she would then show them the
Rules of the Monastery, saying further; Observe well, O my children, that
whosoever willbe Religious in our Convent, must never perform their own
wills, but the contrary of that which they desire. She would also try them
with such kind of mortifications, as might touch them in the point of
estimation. And once she made two of them, being of 18. or 20. years a piece,
pronounce publicly the Christ Cross row, which children use to read; and (to
see whether they made any account of themselves) she would say also in public
manner; These are they whom the world esteems to come with so great desire of
serving God, O how much are they deceived!

Besides this, with making them ask pardon of all the Nouices, she would also
mortify them. Sometyms she would call one of them toward her, and say, This
child co^ceaueth that we have had a great good fortune by having her in our
number. These then, and other were the means, whereby she made trial of such as
came to serve God. When afterward they were accepted, she would with singular
affection receive them, and with so gracious a manner inflame them toward the
service of God, that within few days they would become most obseruant of the
Religious Rules. And when she saw them settled and resolved, she drew them with
admirable sweetness of words, to the desire of mortifying and despising
themselves; making also earnest prayers to the eternal God for that purpose.
Sometimes she would call them to her, Note.
saying; My children, let God only be sufficient for you. Take no more care
about your kindred, or any other earthly thing, for I assure you, that you shall
find in him, all true happiness, and the entire satisfaction of all your just
desires.

Again she would tell them, that she would endure any defect of theirs except
it were speaking ill of others. She exhorted them never to be discoursing
either in private or public of the world but often to examine their own
faults, and sometimes she would say to them as at unawares, That heart of yours
where is it at this instant? What is it that you think upon? And according to
the answer she would give excellent aduices, beseeching them earnestly
afterward, that they would with plainness discover their most secret
thoughts, and she would also add; If you desire, O my daughters, to come, in
short time, to great perfection, take for your Master the Crucifixe, let your
ears be attentive to his words, for continually he is speaking to your heart,
and especially then, when you have received the B. Sacrament. For this, she
would often say; What has Christ Jesus been speaking to your heart this
morning? and this custom which I have even used from my first tender years,
has been of great profit to me.

And indeed she made such account of the frequent receiving of the B Sacrament,
that she could not endure any one to deprive her self voluntarily thereof; and
would say; Thou know not, O blessed child, of what thou have deprived thy
self this morning: Know thou not, that there is not a more effectual
means toward the getting of true perfection then this B. Sacrament: and if
thou knew how to serve thy self well thereof, in few days thou would
become full of celestial love. Remember that God is immense charity, and for
love does communicate himself to souls, by means of this amorous food; yet
take heed thou receive him not by custom but with actual devotion. And being
demanded sometimes what thoughts it was fit to have in receiving of it; It may
suffice (said she) to penetrate only in some measure that it is God whom we
are about to receive. And she would say further, When you are communicated
offer up unto our Lord all the works and spiritual exercises which you are to
perform upon that day, in preparation of the sacred food which you are to
receive the day following. She told them further, that the fittest time to
profit in the perfection of spiritual life, is after the Communion. And
therefore she would not suffer the Nouices after they were communicated, to go
about ordinary business so soon.

Other Aduertisements which she gave to her Nouices. CHAP. 66.
BESIDES this, she would remember them often, that in confessing themselves,
they must be diligent by making a most punctual Examen of their life past. And
she advised them therein to use words of confusion, whereby the Sacrament might
be more grateful to his divine Majesty: when they asked leave to go and
confess themselves, she should say; Note.
Remember children that you are going to wash your selves in the blood of
Christ. She would have them examine their consciences thrice in the day, Not so
much (said she) to be able to confess themselves well, as for the taking away
of those defects, which hinder the life of the spirit. Often she would
recommend to them the divine Office, showing how this was one of the greatest
obligations which they had, and therefore they must then, entierly alienate
their mind from all earthly thoughts. And when they went to the Quire, she
would call them saying; Children, till now you have been about humane actions,
discoursing and conuersing with creatures; but now you are to perform divine
exercises, by conuersing with God himself; yet many times this is little
considered, and we hold the divine worship in less estimation, then our other
actions.

Moreover before they began the divine praises, she would have them perform
acts of humility, as reputing themselves unworthy to exercise so noble a
function. And sometyms she would say; Do you hold your selves worthy to
perform the office of the Angels? If you think so, you are in great error,
and therefore I require you instantly to depart out of the Quire; and that
(prostrate upon earth) you pray our Lord to grant you another manner of Purity
of heart, then yet you have, wherewith to celebrate the divine praises. Note.
She exhorted them very often, that whenever they said the Gloria Patri, they
should bow down their heads, and make offer to the most holy Trinity of their
lives in act of Martyrdom. And it was observed oftentims, that the good Mother
when her self did exercise the like acts, became in countenance so afflicted,
and so pale, as did even strike with a kind of honor, such as looked upon her;
for then it seemed unto her, that she gave her head to the executioner for the
faith of Christ, as (being commanded by Obedience) she confessed to her
Superiors. She considered also in what sort her Nouices did recite the
Psalms, how they were composed, if their eyes were dejected, and the like; and
with so great meeknes she conuersed with them, as made her both to be loved and
feared.

She had great care to order things so, as they might not give them any
interior disgust; for she would often say; That God comes notwith his gifts
to inhabit an unquiet heart. Note.
When any of them was interiourly afflicted with tentations of the enemy, she
would soon perceive it, and calling her, would encourage her in so deer a
manner, as would serve to comfort the most afflicted heart in the world. But
when she saw urgent reason, she would use severe punishments, nor would she
(when there was question of the greater glory of God) suffer her self to be
overcome in any thing; and she was wont to say, I will see, who can do more
either God (whose presence I hold although unworthily) or the adversary who
with his tentations procures to remove this soul from doing well.

That her Nouices should be zealous toward holy Obedience she used all
incessant diligence; and for this purpose she would impose upon them certain
things disagreable in appearance, even to reason; and she would ponder well
both what they answered, and what they did. One of them once who had difficulty
in praying, she commanded to go learn that exercise of a certain tree in the
garden; and that she should be attentive to what it said. The Nouice obedient
to that commandment, did put it presently in execution; and it is admirable to
consider, that she felt her self so inflamed in her prayer, that she could
have passed the whole night following in that action.

At another time, seeing another of her Nouices much tempted, she gave her her
own girdle, and made the Nouice put it on, whereby the tentation did immediately
cease; wherefore she said to the other Nouices, that they should so confide in
holy obedience, that by means thereof they might hope to obtain singular
gifts from God. Finding them sometimes troubled, she would say; Why do you not
cast your selves as dead persons into the hands of Obedience, for if you do not
this, you will never be able to know what belongs to the service of God. She
persuaded them to offer their will to our Lord, as a full sacrifice, assuring
the^ they would receive by it extreme contentment, nor would she endure that
any of them should oppose themselves to Obedience, saying, that so they would
deprive themselves of the merit thereof; If you desire (said she) to accomplish
the divine will, Note.
take heed you draw not by persuasions, the will of the Superiors to your
fancy, but seek their will in all simplicity, for so you shall arrive to great
perfection. In sum she did so instruct her Subjects in holy exercises of a
true Religious life, as they who are yet living, do confess, that then it was,
that they laid the true foundation of the spirit.

Her only countenance caused grief for sin in the minds of others. CHAP. 67.
IT was a strange and curious accident that chanced in the year 1599. when Suor
Maria Maddalena was Mistres of the Nouices. It happened, that one of her
Nouices was called to the grate to speak with a brother of hers, who led not
any of the best lives. And so having given her leave to speak with him, she
also as Superior went in her company, according to the custom of the
Monastery. Being both come to the grate, the young gentlemen had scarce saluted
his Sister, when instantly he went away in a fury, without using any further
speech, or so much as taking his leave. The Nouice wondered, and grieved, to
see the so hasty uncivil departure of her brother, but her own Mother shortly
after coming to visit her, she asked her said Mother, whether he had yet
acquainted her therewith: to which she answered, that his departure grew, from
his not being able to remain in the presence of the Religious woman who was in
her company; Note.
and that she having cast an eye upon him, he found himself instantly and
interiourly to be filled with so great confusion and shame, as that (being
surprised with an extraordinary inquietude) he was not able to remain in her
presence, but was forced to take himself out of sight. From that time forwards
he changed his course of life, and has ever since given good example to others

And surely this Suor Maria Maddalena, had that virtue in her most pure aspect
imparted by Almighty God; for in particular those Religious do testify who are
now living, and formerly were under her charge, that they should easily pass
over any affliction, and be wholly appeased in their mind, by seeing in her eyes
somewhat, as if it had been divine; and on the other side, being admonished or
reproved by her, they would from her very countenance take reason even of
trembling and unspeakable sorrow for their faults. And because with her only
countenance, she penetrated the minds of others so far to the quike, and
clearly saw the state wherein they were, when she was called to the Grate, she
found that she spoke to some with great repugna^ce, and to others with great
consolation, so that only by her aspect indeed Angelical, one might come to the
knowledge of her angelical life.

She shows in many things her Prophetical spirit. CHAP. 68.
IN the year 1600. being one day, according to her custom in Extasis, she saw
the Reverend Father Rectour of the College of the Society of Jesus, who at that
time was Virgilio Cepari, as he was speaking to some of the Fathers of his
College, about an hour and half after Sunset. But that which was strange is,
that (as she told instantly after by Obedience) she distinctly heard all the
speech that past between them. This was verifyed to the full the next day
following, when the said Father Rectour went to confess those Religious, as
sometimes upon extraordinary occasions he did. For the good Mother doubting
least perhaps she might have been deceived by the Devil, related to him the
whole process, and found it to be punctually true. And this is clearly
testified by the said Father who yet lives.

She foresaw at diverse times many virgins who were to be Religious in that
Monastery, besides that she saw the devotions which they should perform; and
co^ferring with the Religious, she would say; That God provided trees for that
garden which should fructify. Once particulerly about that time, she was asked
by them, if a certain Virgin who was then in the Monastery, would become in
the end Religious; She answered that she knew for certain that she would, and
that God had revealed it to her. She had indeed many difficulties afterward,
but yet in fine, overcame them al, and took the habit of Religion in that
Monastery.

She foretold very often, the death of many, but in particular of a Religious
woman of her Monastery, who was sick at the same time. Speaking one day with
Mother Prioresse about her, she said these words; Note.
You shall understand Mother, that this Sister will dye shortly. The Prioresse
was amazed at these words, that Religious being then in good health, but eight
days were not passed, before she grew very sick, and seven days after that,
she dyed.

She also fortold her own death; and in one of her grievous sicknesses,
understanding that her recovery was despaired of by the Physicians, she said
often to Mother Prioresse; Assure your self Mother that I shall not dye yet.
Moreover a year before her death, when the Physicians cou^sailled her to take
the Extreme unction without delay, she resolutly said (though with profound
humility) That the time was not yet come; and a few days before she dyed
indeed, she foretold that one of the Religious would shortly follow her. And
being desired by the Religious to pray for the recovery of her, who was already
sick, she answered, how the will of God was that she should dye, and so the
sixth day after the death of Suor Maria Maddalena, that other Religious also
passed on to a better life. Many other things also did she forsee concerning
the good estate of that Monastery, but they are passed over to avoid tediousnes.

She sees in Rapt B. Luigi Gonzaga of the Society of Jesus, amongst the Saints
of Heaven. CHAP. 69.
ON the fourth of April in the same year, being rapt in spirit, as she was
often, it was granted to her, that she might see in heaven the glory of B.
Luigi Gonzaga of the Society of Jesus, and being surprised by the sight of so
glorious an object, she began to speak thus with great pawses, interposing a
space between one and another, as the lines do afterward declare. O what glory
has Luigi the son of Ignatius! I should never have believed it to have been
so much, if my Jesus hid not showed it me. -- Me thinks there should hardly be
so much glory in all heaven, as I see that Luigi does enjoy. -- I say that
Luigi is a great Saint. -- We have Saints in the Church, who I do not think
have so much glory. (She speaks here of the Relics and Bones of Saints,
which were kept in the Reliquaries of that Church) Feign would I go throughout
the whole world, and say that Luigi the son of Ignatius is a great Saint: and
I wish I could show to every one his glory, to the end that God might be
glorified. -- He has so great glory because he operated interiourly. -- Who
can ever express the value and virtue of internal works, there is no
comparison between the internal and the external. -- Luigi whilst he was on
earth, held his mouth open toward the countenance of the Word. (She means
here that this blessed soul loved the internal inspirations, which the Word
sent to his heart, and he did execute them the best he could.) Luigi was an
unknown Martyr, because he that loves thee, O my God, knows thee to be so
great and so infinitely amiable, that it is a great Martyrdom for him to find
that he cannot love thee as he desires, and much more to find that thou art not
beloved by thy creatures, but offended. -- He made himself also of himself a
Martyr. -- O how much did he love on earth, and therefore now he enjoys God
in heaven in a greatfullnes of love. -- The Word shot through his heart, as with
a dart, when he was mortal, and now that he is in heaven, those darts do
repose in his heart, because these communications whichhe deserved by the acts
of love, and the union which he made (which were the darts) now he
understands and enjoys. She saw then, that this Saint prayed earnestly for
those who in earth had given him any spiritual help, whereupon she said; And I
also will endeavor to help souls, that if any of them go to heaven it may
pray for me, as Luigi does for such as gave him help on earth.

The Reverend Fathers of the Society of Jesus having afterward understood,
that Suor Maria Maddalena had in Rapt received so great a proof of the
sanctity of this their Beato, desired of the Monastery which great instance, a
Copy of as much as has been here delivered. And because the said Fathers have
ever given great help to this Monastery, in spiritual matters, their desires
were easily satisfied. And to the end, that this matter might remain more
authentical, they procured that it might be examined and confirmed by witness of
credit therefore at the request of the said Fathers, the Lord Archbishop of
Florence did upon the 15. of April in the year 1606 enter into the Monastery
to the good Mother, who for the sickness wherein she was, could not rise out of
her bed. He examined her particulerly about the whole matter in the presence of
the Governor of the Monastery, and of two other Priests who accompanied him,
together with Niccolo Rogetti, a public Notary of the Rota of Rome; and the
good Mother ever with profound humility and reverence, answered to all their
demands, affirming that to be true which it was said that she ^ad seen in
Rapt, concerning the glory of B. Ludouicus of Gonzaga.

But then what affliction of heart she felt (for she expected nothing less then
^o be examined about such things) cannot by any means be expressed. Note.
Nor was ^he to be recomforted (so much she did ^bhorre that her praises should
be publi^hed:) and she said (being much grieved) ^s it possible that a vile
Creature, such a one as ^ am, should be noted and written down in ^ookes, and
mentioned by the months of men! Finally for the quieting of her in some
measure, it was needful that the Confessarius should tell her, that this
happened ^y the will of his divine Majesty, to the and, that his glory might
the more appear in that of his Beato.

She reduces a Butt of wine which was spoiled, to the former goodness. She
freeth one of the Religious from the pains of the Stone, and two others from
other dangerous sicknesses. CHAP. 70.
IN the year 1602. there happened an accident, like another whereof there was
speech before. For a Butt of wine being spoiled in the Monastery, the Religious
had recourse to Suor Maria Maddalena, and she one morning (after being
communicated) went thither where the Butt was; and having made some shor^
prayer, the Wine returned miraculously to the former goodness, and the Religious
who yet live do testify this Miracle upon oath.

In the same year, Suor Catharin^ Ginori a Religious Professed, who had bee^
afflicted and tormented with the pain o^ the Stone for the space of three
years, wa^ once amongst other times, more vexe^ without taking any rest at all,
for the space of six whole days and nights; and she came in fine to those
te^ms, that she could not support the rage of her torment. But being visited by
Suor Maria Maddalena, looking toward her she said; O my Mother I b^seech you,
Note.
pray unto our Lord to mi^igate my pains, that with patience I may bear them;
for I doubt much that they may cast me upon despair. As soon as the blessed
Mother heard that word, she instantly put her self into prayer, and presently
the sick person fell a sleep, and awaking she found her self intierely tree
and whole* by the earnest prayers of the servant of God, as she her self now
living testifyeth upon her oath.

It happened another time, that Suor Maria Maddalena Mori being troubled extrem
ly with the Sciatica, which had kept her for the space of 18. months without
being able to rise out of her bed, and Suor Maria Maddalena (being in Extasis
upon good Fri^ay, in Meditation of the Misteryes of the holy Passion) the sick
person found her self touched and told interiourly, that if she were placed in
the others presence, she should be freed of her pain. Therefore she was
brought by the Religious into the presence of the devout Mother being in Rapt,
and the sick person being set upon her knees before her, that side of her was
toutcht where she felt the pain, and presently she found her self delivered
thereof and free from the infirmity, whereof she had no taste in all the rest of
her life, which is testified by many of the Religious yet living.

In like manner it came to pass, that Suor Maria Catharina Chel^s had been two
years in the hands of Physicians, and Surgeons by occasion of a horrible soar
in her right arm, which had made three holes, and by one of them a bone went
out. One day being extraordinarily oppressed with pain, she had recourse to the
Mother Suor Vangelista del Giocondo, that she would help her, who answered by
the inspiration of God, that she should go for help to Suor Maria Maddalena,
which instantly was put in execution. Now she (vnswathing the sick Arm) drew
forth the tents, by which only act the pain ceased, and in short time she
recovered her wonted health, to the wonder of those Physicians who held her
incure. This Religious who is yet living, with many others do auow this
Miracle.

Many other graces besides these, did this Monastery obtain by her merits, but
for breuityes sake they are omitted. It may suffice, that there was no one in
the monastery who received not singular benefits of God by her prayers. And
they who at the present live, have all of them testified upon oath, and do
continually auow, the marvelous things which our Lord did work by this dear
Spouse of his.

Being grievously si^ke she did not at the first excuse her self from her
rigorous manner of life; but growing to spit blood in great quantity, she
attended to the recou ry of her health. Being after cur^d, she returned to her
office. CHAP. 71.
SCARSELY had she ended her Office of the Mistres of the Nouices, and being
confirmed therein for three other years, when in the year 1602. she was
overtaken with a continual Catarre, which wrought upon her in such sort, as
wholly to deprive her of her strength, in a very short time. Yet she making
small account thereof, would never excuse her self from the rigor of the life
she led; nay she increased it by more sharp pennances: being in doubt that it
might arrive by the art of her enemy, to alienate her thereby from austerity For
this cause she would say; O how watchful ought we to be over ourselves, so
dull and cowardly is this sense of ours, which will esteem that to be weakness
and i^firm^ty, Note.
which indeed is noth ng but d^owsin^s for the getting only of some repose. And
to herself, looking on her self, she would say; I know thee well enough, and
I will never do after thy fancy, but gladly employ my self in accomplishment
of the will of God.

In the mean time her sickness increast, and in the month of Ap^ill 160^. a
vein brake in her breast, so as she cast up great quantity of blood, which
weakened her much. But for all this, nothing daunted she would never think of
restoring her self, esteeming that by the favor of God she might overcome the
inconvenience. Yet sometimes she her self would say; I am many times
considering, whether I be she, that I was or no, because heretofore, I
conceived that with a strong resolution I could overcome any difficulty, and
now the more I force my self, so much the more feeble and faint I am. Neither
wo^ld her Superiors presume having seen in her so great wonders to command
her by holy Obedience that she should go into the bed, and forbear the
austerityes of her life, though they failed not earnestly to desire it of her;
but contrary wise she made earnest prayers, mingled with salt tears to God,
that he would not permit that she should seem sick. Finally she was reduced
to such terms, that she could not take any food, nor make two paces without
much affliction, and her Superiors commanded her to go to bed. Imediatly she
did as they enjoined, such account did she make of holy Obedience, Note.
but because as has been said, she feared much that this might happen by the
stratagems of the Devil, whilst she took convenient remedies for her body,
she was much troubled in her mind.

She continued so, till the second of August with singular patience; when being
first surprised with an extraordinary accident of her cough, there followed a
very great abundance of blood which she could not forbear to cast up. The
Physicians were in some doubt least perhaps she might be suffocated with that
blood; and so continued she till the day of S. Laurence, there being found no
remedy by which her bleeding might be stayed. At that time all the Religious
stood round about her bed, even overwhelmed with affliction: but to all of them
she gave courage, and assured them confidently, that she was not then to dye
but that she must make an end of her office of Mistress of the Nouices, as
indeed it happened; for shortly after, being in great part delivered of her
infirmity, upon the feast of all the Saints, she resumed her Charge, to the joy
of the whole Monastery.

Our Lord tells her in a Rapt, that she was to suffer much till her death.
She is elected Subprioresse by the Religious, and soon after she is assaulted
by her last sickness. CHAP. 72.
UPON the day of S. John Baptist in the year 1604. she was rapt in Extasis,
this being the last Rapt which was manifested to the Religious, and she
understood by God, that from thenceforth, even to her death, she was to be
afflicted with continual sickness. She with a cheerful countenance made
answer, O my Jesus, will thou have me become as a little Infant, nay will thou
that I be borne again? And being all in admiration, she added; O how little
shall I become again, by reason of wh ch littlenes, these souls of mine will
know me no longer She would by this infer, as afterward by Obedience she
related, that by occasion of her sickness, she was now to lead a life so
different from the former, that it would seem to them a being borne again,
because she was to bear the naked cross. This succeeded punctually; for from
that time forward, she found so great poverty of spirit, as it might seem,
after a sort, that she was abandone^ by God. Yet she nevertheless was still more
earnest in the execution of the divine Will, and showed her self ready to
suffer any affliction whatsoever, and the^ shortly after returned out of Rapt.

In the mean time she ended her Office of Mistress of the Nouices; and
because new Officers were to be chosen, she (fearing very much that some other
charge might be given her) did humbly propose her case, and much desired to
repose a little in her so great weakness, and withal in respect of her sickness
which so continually called upon her. This she said not, for the ease of her
body, but to avoid all kind of superiority. The Religious being assembled among
themselves considering the great goodness of this holy Soul, they chose her by
common consent to be Subprioresse of the Monastery, in the month of October of
the same year. She accepted the Office, but with much grief of mind,
esteeming her self unable to satisfy so great an obligation, yet being resigned
to the Will of God, she instantly quieted her self, and began her charge with
singular example.

But as it pleased Almighty God, eight da^es were not past, when she being
assailed by a vehement fever and intense pains of ^he head, she was forced to
retire to bed, although she used all endeavor to rise every morning with the
other Religious to hear Mass, and to receive the food of the Angels.
Returning afterward into her cell, so weak would she be grown with it, and
so afflicted, that even for pure weakness she was like to swoune. Yet being
urged by the great devotion she carried toward that heavenly food, she
embraced every morning the same trouble; so that she was often assaulted by an
extraordinary access of a fever, even at that time. Nay even for this very
cause, she suffered every morning most bitter pains until her death; because
her body not being able to maintain it self, through the great weakness
wherein it was (unless from three to three hours it were successively fed) she
endured patiently all that misery, that she might communicate.

Sometimes being exhorted by the Religious, that for this reason she would not
frequent the B. Sacrament every morning, but by forbearing it the better attend
to the recovering of her health, the good Mother made answer; If it seem fit
to you that I forbear for my unworthiness, willingly I will be deprived; ut if
you be moved by other respects I would never ye^ld to it, though it should cost
me my life, unless the ghostly Father should impose it upon m^ly Obedience. For
me thinks that I am ^ur^, that if I had not the daily help of this most holy
Communion, I could not support the continual pains of my infirmity, together
with the great desolation of my spirit; but after I have received this food of
life, I feel much vigor toward the enduring of my afflictions.

Among the rest, one of the things that much payned her, was the being
continually in her bed; for, in that she was of an active nature, she felt
extreme mortification thereby. And she was wont to say; That our Lord could not
send her a pain to which naturally she might have more repugnance, then to
this. But yet because she knew for certain, that such was the will of God, it
cannot be expressed how much contentme^t she found, even in her greatest dolours.
Eight days before she fell sick, hearing the life of a Saint read in the
Refectory, who had suffered much for God, she did yet still kindle her self so
much toward suffering, that she earnestly again desired occasion of our Lord
to suffer agreably to his will; having entirely forgotten all the afflictions
that she had endured before. To this purpose one of her Sisters once saying to
her; Mother does not that seem to you a great affliction, which you suffered
in those five years of your Probation? But the Mother quickly answered; That
she would never account that, to have been a time of pure suffering, because
therein she had tasted of certain celestial delights which were able to
sweeten any bitterness of pain whatsoever, but that (says she) which I desire
now of God is this, that he w^ll grant me a pure suffering, Admitable strength
of mind.
and that it may be tempred with no d^light: and through the confidence which I
have in the divine goodness, I hope that before I dye, I shall obtain this
grace; for I know that these delicate meats which are so grateful to our
taste, cannot be fed upon at that beauenly table.

She is violently handled by her sickness, and she supporteth all with singular
patience. CHAP. 73.
THIS her so earnest desire of suffering was not made in vain; for to such
terms the holy Mother was reduced, that in this cross of infirmity, she
resembled after a sort her Jesus, when by the most intense pains of the Cross
he was tormented. And although in her necessity the Religious were ever present
and there was no want of any thing, yet in all this she took no comfort at
all; and she would say sometimes; That she had a heart incapable of any thing,
but anguish; and those things which were wont to bring her comfort, were now
changed into pain and grief. Her torments, together with the danger of her
life, grew to be every day, more and more; but that bred no decrease in her of
the ardent desire to grow in suffering, and in the midst of much anguish (by
moments casting up her eyes to heaven) she thanked God for having preserved her
life until that hour, wherein she tried and tasted of pure sufferance for love
of him, even as her self could have wished Sometyms considering the parts o^
her body made subject to so continual p^^nes* she said; I know w^ll that my
sinn^s are such also many, that I d^serue another manner o^ ch^ist^em^nt then
this.

Moreover the pain of her teeth did solicit her for the space of two year;
Note.
night and day, with such fury, that she was sometimes urged to break into
lamentable wo^ds, when she found no remedy that could ease her. This pain was
in such degree, that she could not touch one row of her teeth with the other,
so as when she was to take her food, the tears were forced from her eyes. And
yet further, this pain did so consume and ear into the very roots of her
teeth, that all of them by little and little fell out of her mouth, through the
excess of anguish.

If she chanced to have an appetite to one thing more then another, she
esteemed it for a notable defect to give any sign thereof; and much more to
make it expressly known. And because a Lady who was devoted to her, and most
affectionate to the Monastery, being induced by Charity, did often send thither
some meats well made, whereby the afflicted mother might in some sort restore
her self; she understanding it, made a scruple, and would not eat thereof.
But because there was the^ nothing else which might give her nutrime^t, she was
exhorted by the ghostly Father to taste of it, assuring her that she might
depose all scruple. By this means she quieted her self, yet feeling ever
great auersion in taking such meats as those, and she would often say; That
even in sickness they should not look to any other thing, Note.
but that holy Poverty might shine at all times. And so, by how much more
delicate and curiously dressed the meats were which she was to take, so much more
difficulty and pain she found in taking them; keeping ever her mind stiffly
bent upon the life of Christ Jesus, who for the reason of our salvation
rejected all contentment whatsoever.

The pa nes of her head did daily more and more torment her, and especially
upon the Fridayes, for then she always suffered extraordinary affliction,
after that* by Jesus, he crown of thorns was put upon her head, as may be
seen in the seventh Chapter of the second part. B^side^ she found oftentimes
that her body was as if it had been pierced through, by certain cruel
shoots, which tormented her like so many darts; and lastly an istue which the
Physicians had made for the lessening of her infirmity* put her to much trouble
in that weak state, and instead of easing did afflic^ her.

Upon the feeling of all these payne^ turning her eyes towar^es a Cru^ifixe she
would say; O my Lord, if thou do no^ grant me help and heart, this body of
myn^ cannot endure all these passions. She was also much troubled with a fear
which she ha^ of offending God, by the words o^ lamentation, which sometimes
she uttered; and therefore she would entreat the Religious, that they would
pray God t^ lend her force, whereby she might stand under the burden of so
great anguish, without the least offense to his divine Majesty. And so much was
her thought hereupon, that often she would say with profound humility to the
Governor of that Monastery; Father do you think that I shallbe saved, This
holy woman was no Protestant.
and he answering like a man amazed, why do you ask me such a question? the
good Mother would reply, Let me tell you Father, it is a great matter for a
creature, who never did good in her life, to appear before that high Purity of
God; and yet again she would be asking, Father do you think that I shallbe
saved? In which speech did shine her great humility, since she could be
doubtful of her salvation, who had both led such a holy life, and had been
honored even on earth by so admirable graces from God.

Of her great Patience in the pains of her sickness, and how she received the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction. CHAP. 74.
SHE having demanded of God, as has been said already, that she might purely
and solely suffer; when any thing brought the least shadow of comfort to her,
she would be seriously thinking whether in that she had not offended God, and
whether for that cause, she might not perhaps be suffering perpetually in the
next life. And being told by the Ghostly Father, that before her death it was
likely, she might feel much spiritual comfort, I ask not that, answered she,
of my Lord, but indeed I ask patience of him, Invincible spirit.
for the supporting of these payns. Whereby yet she was not afflicted so
furiously, as that she failed to exercise according to her power, the Office of
Subprioresse, giving convenient instructions to those sisters which repaired to
her. And it was an admirable thing, that none of them could even then go from
her without extreme contentment and satisfaction. Note.
But her anguish more increasing every day, she felt sometimes in her breast, as
if it had been a rasour, which would have divided her parts one from another;
sometimes in her head, as if there had been strockes with hammers, and such
other unspeakable torments, that if formerly she had not freely offered her
self to suffer, or had not had a lively notice of the nobility of suffering
for the love of Jesus Christ, her so many several anguishes, which were
excessive beyond humane conceit, would infallibly have produced words of
impatience.

Among other things, it was matter of much compassion, to consider her body so
consumed, that her bones made great holes, though her skin, and concauityes in
the bed, wherein she lay; so that when for any necessary occasion, the
Religious were to raise her up, she suffered pains that were insufferable. And
that which gives irrefragable testimony to her Purity, is, that when the
Religious were performing those aforesaid offices to her person, Note.
she would say to them; Do you think, O my Sisters, that this touching or
wrapping of mine, which you have used for my assistance, has impeached
Virgin^ty or Purity in any degree? if you think it have, I will procure to
help my self alone, or else I will remain still in the place where I am. An
evident sign, that, as she had related to her Confessarius, she had never
conceived or known any thing in her self which might be contrary to Chastity
in the least degree.

The Physicians could never find a reason, how that body might be able to keep
it self in life so long, under the burden of so many and so cruel torments.
Nay, and the Religious themselves, being all astonished would say sometimes,
that it was impossible for her to live 8. days. And yet those days did pass,
and weeks, and months; so that all human discourse was put to silence, and it
grew to be accounted miraculous (that body of hers being then reduced to such
state, that hardly the Religious had the heart to visit her, as not being able
to endure so lamentable a spectacle.) And even when they did visit her, they
could not contain their tears; they had not the power to look upon her; they
lost as it were the use of speech so as then they parted from her very often
without speaking any word unto her at all.

The Father who then had the care of the Monastery, and communicated her every
morning, did often seriously consider her, extremely fearing that she had not
force to swallow down that celestial food, as also he doubted least that act
of piety, in the bitterness of her pains, might deprive her of life.
Notwithstanding all this, she took heart by times, and would needs every day
hear the sacred Office, to which she would often listen with incredible
attention, whilst two of her Sisters were reciting it near her bed; and
sometimes she would also her self pronounce some verses. Finally, after five
months of so great infirmity, she was exhorted by the Physicians to take the
Extreme Unction, esteeming that at the most she could not pass two or three
days of life. She (as foreknowing her approaching death) did instantly resign
and prepare her self with great humility, for the taking of that holy
Sacrament. But first she did with ardent words recommend the Monastery to the
Father, who was the Governor thereof, and made him a promise, that if she went
to heaven, she would pray earnestly to God both for him and all the Religious,
that after this short life they might meet in that celestial kingdom. Note.
She then desired the Prioresse to draw all the Religious thither into her
presence; and she asked pardon of them all for her defects, and for the evil
example that she had given them, encouraging them to keep themselves true
spouses of Christ Jesus.

After this, she received of the Ghostly Father on the 13. of May in the year
1607. the Extreme Unction, and she her self did answer both to the verses,
and to the Letanies, and never removed her eye from a Crucifixe, which she
would needs hold continually in her hand. There were not then heard other then
sighs and sobbes of the Religious, who all being prostrate about the bed of
their deer Mother, made as it were a very poole of tears. As soon as she had
received this Sacrament, by the comfort which she drew from thence, she was all
clear in countenance, and seemed in a manner as if all her pains had left
her. And turning toward the Confessarius she said; Father I understand that to
morrow morning you will go to visit those Fathers the Eremits of Monte Senario,
A most holy Ermitage within 8. miles of Florence.
and now I tell you that you may go securely. Concerning me, have no doubt at
all, for you shall find me alive at your return, and I beseech you recommend
me to their prayers, whereby I much confide, that our Lord may grant me grace
that I may be saved. The Confessarius then answered that he had no mind to go,
considering the state wherein she was; she replied yet again; Go securely, for
you shall fin^^me alive. And so he having a firm hope thereof, went thither
where he had designed; and returning after three days, did find her in the
self same terms.

Having prepared her self to death, she piously renders her soul into the
hands of her beloved Jesus. CHAP. 75.
AFTER she had received the Sacrament of Holy Oil, in those 13. days of her
suruiuing, she was much more afflicted with several pains, and it seemed as
if they had al united themselves to pull her down. And that little flesh which
had been resting upon her afflicted bons, through the excess of anguish was
distilled into so great abundance of sweat as not only the sheets but even the
bed was bathed therewith, so as it was necessary for some of the Religious, to
be ever present with linen clothes wherewith to dry her. But she all this
while, attentive to the salvation of souls, thought still upon new ways how
to please the divine Majesty, Note.
and causing the Mother Prioresse to be called to her, she discoursed with her
at large of Evangelical Perfection, and of that which concerned the good of
her religion, promising her that she would give it more assistance from heaven,
then she had given here on earth. Then, to all the Mothers and Sisters she
again gave profitable remembrances amongst which she willed them in
particular; Note.
That they should love nothing but Christ Jesus, that in him they should place
all their hope, and that they should ever be desirous to suffer for the love of
God. After which words she took leave of them.

Being then near unto her last passage, the Confessarius demanding of her,
whether yet she was much afflicted and tormented with pain, she answered; You
shall understand, O Father, that there is no part of my body which is not full
of pain, yet indeed, I find a great peace in my heart. But that which gives
clear testimony of her sanctity, and of all that which in her life is written,
is that a little after turning toward the said Father she co^sulted him about
some things, to which he having given satisfaction, You shall know (says she)
that I have ever suffered my self to be guided simply by Obedience to my
Superiors, Note.
and in all my actions have had no other thing in my mind, but the presence of
God.

In the mean time, upon the 24. of May 1607. on the day of the most holy
Ascension, she had the Recommendation of the soul; and (having almost lost her
speech) yet in the midst of the sighs and tears of her Sisters, which made a
garland of grief about the poor bed whereon she lay, turning her head toward
the Confessarius she asked him, when he could give her the Viaticum, and it
being told her that after midnight her desire should be satisfied, she began in
that dolorous, but yet glorious state, to discourse with so much fervor of
spirit, of the things of heaven, Note.
that it was as if she would have melted and distilled away in the excess and
quintessence of love.

At midnight, the Father returned to her with the Viaticum, and (which till
then had never happened) he communicated her in the presence of all the
Religious. This being done, she was observed to rejoice exceedingly, and
through the great spiritual contentment of her soul, to receive strength even
in her body; but by this time, the hour of her parting out of this transitory
life drew near upon her, and of her aspiring to that Crown which once being
gotten is never lost. Therefore the Fathers was called to her at That is about
8. or 9. by our account.
twelve of the clock in the morning, that he might be present at her death, as
was much desired by her. In the same manner did they remay^e til 14. recyting
Psalms and Hymns, for the^ she had wholly lost the use of speech. But the
Ghostly Father, being yet to say Mass, and to communicate the Religious, he
departed thence; and whilst he prepared himself, he was advertised how that
holy Soul was even then going to God; so that he was much perplexed with the
doubt of what he were best to do, because if he went to the dying Mother, he
should not be able (it being then too late) either to say mass, or communicate
the Religious.

But by the providence of God it came into his mind, to send her word, that in
virtue of holy Obedience, she should respite her dying so long, as that he might
have ended Mass, and ministered the most holy Sacrament to the Religious. It is
an admirable thing, how when she received that message, she seemed to be all
revived, and strengthened, yea and not having spoken at all for many hours, she
then said instantly with a clear and cheerful voice, Note.
being accompanied with a gracious smile; Benedictus Deus. And having demanded
somewhat which might give her strength, she turned to her Sisters who there were
present, saying; I give thanks unto our Lord, that even to the very last he
has left me so desolate, Unspeakable spirit.
and without comfort. I do well content my self with any thing that pleases
him. And yet again; I offer unto him, any spiritual comfort that I might
have, so that only I my be saved. Whilst she interteyned her self with these
so great actions of spirit, the Father, withal the Religious returned to her,
and kneeling about her bed, all afflicted and full of tears, they recyted
Psalms and Hymns, to the end that her holy soul might in the midst of those
divine Lauds (which by her were so entierly loved) be received into that
celestial Country.

At 18. hours of the clock upon Friday, and expressly at that hour wherein
Christ Jesus our Lord was tormented upon the Cross with the greatest pains,
she also upon the Cross of her bitter afflictions, although with extreme
sweetness, and almost no motion at all, finished happily her life on 25. of May,
in the year 1607. that being the feast day of S. Zanobius Bishop of Florence.
Her countenance remained so fair and white, that instead of giving offense, it
did of all sides breath forth devotion, and the odor of sanctity. And that
holy soul, like unto purest done, being every way environed with glorious
light, and accompanied by squadrons of Angels, did fly as becomes us to
believe, into the bosom of God, to live happily there for all eternity. The
Mother Suor Maria Maddalena dyed in the year of her age 41. and 2. months,
and 24. days; and of her being Religious in the year 24. and 25. days.

O blessed soul, now that thou live triumphant in that happy country of
Charity, in that kingdom of love, employ I beseech thee thy fervent prayers to
the great God, for the children of thy Monastery. Thou did undergo many
labors for them, thou did bear painful burdens, that thou might with
excellent virtue discover to them the way of true happiness. And if thy zeal
were so great in this miserable and fading life, now that thou art ascended up
to heaven and art inflamed with more ardent charity, how much greater must thy
heat be in that most glorious kingdom, which was here so great in the company
of terrene and humane passions. No other thing is aspired by them, but to feel
by experience the force of thy dear and blessed help, by giving help with thy
prayers, toward those virtues which conduct the possessours of them to that
crown, of which there is difficulty in getting, but no danger in loosing.
Permit not that any time the horrible infernal Serpent, with the poison of
discord may disturb their holy purposes; nor diminish their Obedience which is
both the Mother and the Nurse of peace. Procure that these thy sisters who are
consecrated to the service of God, may be zealous according to humane
possibility toward true Religious observance, and that they may have no other
aim but to execute those Orders and Counsels tending to salvation, which they
have received from their Superiors. Confirm them I beseech thee, in such a
delightful love toward candor of mind, and internal purity, that they may
sooner consent to give their bodies to a thousand deaths, then their souls to
the spot of any one impure cogitation. Kindle thou by prayers, in the minds of
those that are Superiors, such an ardent devotion to holy Poverty, that they
may never permit the least trifle to be held in propriety, whereby the vigor of
Religious observance may the better be maynteyned, whilst in them (as there
did in the holy Apostls) may reign vnasid^s, and cor vnum. Let them never
carry inordinate affection toward themselves, but only be attentive in
seconding the good will of God, and mortifying their senses, making this life
to be nothing else, but a full measure and heap of virtue.

I will not now express my self to thee in many words, to entreat thy
prayers to the eternal God for me, who yet find my self in this valley of
tears; for I confide in that which thou did so often promise me, with
careful charity, whilst I ministered to thee the most holy Sacraments, in thy
last sickness. O blessed Soul, we all relying upon the sweet assistance of thy
prayers, do hope by the goodness of God, after this short pilgrimage of ours,
to arrive with happiness to that high hill of heaven, where thou being adorned
with immortal light, do live more triumphant and glorious, then can be
imagined by the poor thoughts of man, which are even over whelmed by the
greatness thereof.

Much people concurred to the sight of her body and the funerals; and she was
after buried with great devotion. CHAP. 76.
THE Religious therefore seeing in their presence their dear Mother deprived
of life, it cannot be expressed, what cordial sighs of affection they discharged
from their hearts, toward the blessed body, and in what abundance they did
even rain tears from their eyes. On the one side stood the Nouices, on the
other the young Religious, who had been governed by her, and those others also
who had been under her care in the Office of Subprioresse. Then all the other
Mothers together, did compass in the holy Corpse, making pious and devout
contemplations. And in that dolorous spectacle, there were heard so piteous
sighs, and so ardent sobbes, that no one could hold from tears. Neither did
they fail to do so also in the Chapter House, whither she was brought upon the
Bear after they had performed the usual sacred ceremonies, to recite devout
Hymns, and Psalms. The place whereon she lay was covered with store of
flowers, and she in the midst thereof; dead I confess, but with a face so
Angelical, as that it seemed after a sort, that the glory of her soul did even
shine in some degree through her body. At two hours before Sun set, at those
grates of the Church, which answer upon the Chapter House, there was made by
the Father, who has the charge of them, a spiritual discourse to all the
Religious, in honor of the servant of God, exalting those holy virtues whereby
on earth she had purchased a Crown in Heaven.

On the morning following, the holy body was placed in the Church, of whose
death when the voice was a little spread throughout the City, such a multitude
of people came in that it was a wonder. The people in a holy manner were
striving among themselves, now in taking with devotion of those flowers, which
upon the Blessed Corpse were scattered, now in kissing the habit wherewith it
was clad, now in touching the hearse, and now calling Suor Maria Maddalena a
Blessed woman, and a Saint; nor knew they how to depart thence, but would
enjoy, as long as it was possible, the sight of that divine countenance. And
(to satisfy the pious affection of the people) by times, it was necessary to
cover the hearse again (and that abundantly) with flowers, that every one
might depart contented.

Some were also placed for the guard of the Blessed Body, it being doubted
least the people should divide some part of it from the rest. And for the great
concourse, there was difficulty to perform the sacred Office. The Church was
open from the 15. hour of the same morning with free liberty for every one to
see the B. Mother, but fearing there would be some co^motion, it was shut
afterward, and so the doors were beaten with blows and our ears by the
earnest prayers of such as desired to see her. Therefore there was no remedy,
but to open the gate again at the Two hours before Sunset.
22. hour, and to light torches to the end, that the devout people might be
satisfied in their pious desires; and so things continued till the Sun set.
24. hour. The Church was shut after this, and the Blessed Corpse laid in a
Coffen, apparelled (for the better preserving of it from mo^thes and the like)
in a Coat, a Scapulary, and a mantle of Taffaty. At the second hour of the
night she was buried behind the high Altar, with that honor and reverence,
which belonged to so great a servant of God. Our Lord was not wanting, as he
had already done in the life of Suor Maria Maddalena, so also to show many
miracles after her death, as clear proofs of her great sanctity. And these
miracles and graces granted by Almighty God to this devout Mother, are placed
in the end of the second part of her life, as may there be seen.

Laus Deo.

