True and Wonderful. A Discourse relating a strange and monstrous Serpent (or
Dragon) lately discovered, and yet living, to the great annoyance and diverse
slaughters both of Men and Cattle, by his strong and violent poison, In Sussex
two miles from Horsam, in a wood called S. Leonards Forest, and thirty miles
from London, this present month of August. 1614. With the true Generation of
Serpents.

depiction of a fire-breathing dragon facing a crouching cat, next to a man,
woman, and dog or cow lying on the ground

Printed at London by John Trundle.

To the Reader.
THe just Reward of him that is accustomed to lie, is, not to be belieu'd when
he speaks the truth: So just an occasion may sometime be imposed upon the
Pamphleting, press, and therefore if we receive the same rewards we cannot
much blame our accusers, which often falls out either by our forward credulity
to but seeming true reports, or by false Coppies translated from other
Languages, which (though we beget not) we foster, and our shame little the
less. But passing by what is past, let not our present truth blush for any
former falsehood sake: The Country is near us, Sussex; The Time present,
August; The Subject, a Serpent; strange, yet now a neighbor to us: and it were
more then impudence to forge a lie so near home, that every man might turn in
our throats; believe it, or read it not, or read it (doubting) for I believe
e're thou have read this little All, thou will not doubt of one, but believe
there are many Serpents in England; farewell.

By A. R. He that would send better news if he had it.

True and Wonderful: A Discourse relating a strange and monstrous Serpent (or
Dragon) lately discovered and yet living, to the great anoyance (and diverse
slaughters) both of Men and Cattle, by his strong and violent Poison.
THere is nothing more miraculous in na^ture as the shalow search of humane
apprehension, then the works of the divinity specified in the Creation, being
a work beautified with distinction, order and measure, and sifted from all
confusion: yet if we more narrowly unrip the natures and qualities of the
creatures, leaving the unsearchable depth of Gods essence beyond the shoomakers
last of capacity to himself, we shall find that there is sufficient cause
for our weak admirations: And though all things were at the first created good
and seruicable to man, because God is not the author of any evil; yet since
evil sprung from the ill of Eve, many miseries have (as his curse) fallen to
man, even by those creatures which were his companions in Paradise, and made to
his great blessing and benefit, Insomuch that the Serpent which first was
familiar with Eve, and serviceable to man's use, is now turned a deadly and
fatal enemy to all his posterity, frighting the earth with monstrous and
prodigious shapes: and no doubt, in these new and presaging forms, are sent to
punish our new inventions of sin, according to the saying of a reverend
Father: Quia deliquimus in multis, August.
punimur in multis: Because we have offended in many things, we are punished in
many.

But to omit the Sanctuary of unfurnished wits, being a fugitive and tedious
circuler questions, we will apply our brief abstract, to the causes and
original of these hideous Creatures, for the understanding and capacity of
the simple; seeing, that as a learned man says; that Scire est per causas
scire. Plato.
The best way of knowledge is to know by the causes: And first of their
original.

First it is Oraculous and plain in Genesis, that God by his word created all
things sensible and insensible: Fishes, Fowls, Beasts, and creeping things,
and among them Serpents: But since the great work of the Creation, they are
engendered either naturally or prodigiously: Naturally, as says Macrobius,
Macrob.
as in Egypt Frogs and Mice, are ingendered by rain and shewres, so also are
Serpents: But I am of Aristotle's opinion, which also Pliny confirms, that
Serpents arise not from putrefaction, but by the natural act of generation. It
is a general rule, that all Beasts wanting feet, and having long bodies;
Elianus.
perform their carnal copulation, by the mutual embracing of one another: as
Lampreies and Serpents: And it is certain, that two Serpents in this action,
seem to be one body and two heads: for they are so indiuisibly united
together, and the frame of their body unapt for any other manner of Copulation.
The generation of Serpents.
And although like to Fishes, they want flower to elaborate the sperme, yet
have they two open passages wherein lies their generatiue seed; which being
spread, procures their veneriall lusts: which seed being ciaculated from the
Male, into Cells and receptacles of the Female, it is framed into an Egg, which
she hydeth in the earth, a hundredth in a cluster, about the quantity of a
birds Egg: And this is the natural proceeding of all Serpents, except Vipers,
who lay no Eggs, but hatch their young ones in their womb; but for their
prodigious generation, as it is rare, A woman that brought forth a Serpent.

Prodigious dreams of Dragons.


so is it also horrible to our nature. It is reported, that when Lucius Scipio,
and Caius Norbanus were Consuls, that the mother of Claudius in Hytruria,
brought forth a Serpent in stead of a Child.

And Faustina the Empress dreamed, when she was with child but very
prodigiously, that she brought forth two Serpents, and one of them seemed to be
more fiercer then the other, which proved allegorically true: for Comodus
afterward her youngest son was so tiranicall and barbarous, that he seemed
to be borne a prodigy to the destruction of mankind: and thus much for their
original, natural and prodigious.

The Irish ground is most happy, The Irish ground happy.
and it seems less sinful, that are free from contagion of these venomous
Creatures: but as it is true, that Non omnis fert omnia tellus, Every ground
brings not forth all kind of fruits: for this Land were happy if it were
less fertile in these contagious kind of Serpents, which I ascribe not to the
nature of the earth, but the sinful nature of men.

In Phrigia and Ethiopia are many Dragons, and Serpents, and these were as
Augustine affirms in the hollow places of the earth: and not only in
foreign and far remote-countries: but also in neighboring and nere adjoining
nations: A Dragon brought to the French King. Stiria a Town in Germany.
and first of all there was a Serpent or winged Dragon brought unto Francis the
French-King: when he lay at Sancton, Sancton.
by a countryman: who had slain the same Serpent with a spade: Chisuen also
says that in the year of our Lord, 1543 there came many Serpents with feet,
and wings, near Stiria: who wounded the inhabitants incurably.

Paris a City in France Stumphus.
Cardan writes that at Paris in France he himself saw certain Serpents with
wings: when the river Tiber ouerflowed the banckes many Serpents were
discovered.

As also in the time of Mauritius the Emperor, at what time a Dragon came over
the City after which prodigy insued a great pestilence. Now as these hidious
creatures are hurtful to man, so also are they most inamored of man: and if
there be any truth or verity to be ascribed to Histories: they have been most
passionately affected to man woman and child: which shows that it is a work
of divinity as a just punishment of our sins, to turn their affable natures
to a most ravenous and devouring cruelty,

Elianus.
And to instance this with examples, Elianus reports, that their was one Iliaua
a Thesalian Neatheard, that kept Oxen in Ossa, Dragons in love with Men.
hard by the Fountain Hemonius, that a Dragon fell in love with, for that his
yellow hair, which seemed in his amiable color to resemble Gold, and often
come creeping unto him like an amorous lover, licking his hair and face so
gently, as the man professing he never felt the like.

The like is reported of Pindus the son of Macedo King of Emuthia, who was a
man of honest disposition and a great Hunter: having lost his company in his
woonted sport in a thick and unfrequented desert, met with a Dragon of great
stature, who came toward Pindus: with the greatest part of his body except his
neck lifted up: who at the first was much amazed at so horride a spectacle, but
after remembering himself of certain birds and pieces of sacrifices which he
had about him, he gave part to the dragon, and so mittigated the fury of the
Serpent, who being smoothed with these gifts, and as it were overtaken with
the liberality of Pindus, was so inamoured of his liberal nature, that he
forsook his desert habitation, and followed Pindus like an ordinary Spaniell.

There was also a Dragon the lover of Artheolis, as Plutarche Plutarch.
writes, who came to her every night and did her no harm, but gently sliding
over her played with her till morning, departing away as soon as light appeared,
least he should be discovered.

Moreover it is observed that those Serpents are so far from doing harm,
except by some supernatural power destinate to our severe punishment for our
sins, that they have often been the preventing causes of sin, and
instruments of preservation of many men and women.

When Messalina the wife of Claudius did send certain men to take away the
life of Nero, Nero saved by a Dragon.
who was a Rival of Britanicus, a Dragon appeared out of the earth, terrifying
the murderers with such fury, that they ran away and spared Neroes life.

Again, Suetonius reports of one Telephus, Suetonius, Incest prevented by a
Dragon.
who had committed incest with his mother, had not a Dragon by divine
providence frighted the incestudus son, and parted them asunder. Therefore
says the same Author, that Draconi similis est vertus indagatrix, quae
diligenter omnia perscrutatur rimuturque studiocissime, that perfect discretion
and knowledge is allegorically said to be like the Dragon, because it
diligently searches the secret crannies of all things, and according to the
common proverb, thorough the smallest hole spies day light.

But these examples do not conclude, but that there is a secret Antipathie and
enmity betwixt Man kind and these Serpentine creatures: who indeed after the
relapse and fall of our first Parents, as a curse from God were marked out for
most noisome and infectious creatures to man and the woman's seed and
posterity: and therefore I could wish that the remedy of this our home bred
monster (which hereafter we shall more largely express) were purged with as
much breuity as the contents of Caesar's Letter to the Senate, Veni, vidi, vici:
I came, I saw, and I overcame: vox Dei, it were the word God, and not of man:
Many are the deplorable dangers writ with a tragical pen of famous Historians,
which have insued to the sad inhabitants of many famous places by these
prodigious Monsters, when the region of Heluctia began first to be purged from
these noisome beasts, Gellius. A murderer fighting with the Dragon.
there was a horrible Dragon found near a Country Town called Wilfer, who
destroyed both men and beasts by his monstrous and insatiate hunger, insomuch
that that town was called Deidwiler, that is, a Village of the Wilderness:
for all the Inhabitants had forsaken the same and fled to other places.

Also there is a memorable History of a man in the same Town (which I will
rehearse for the strangeness of the accident) that was banished for
manslaughter, who promised for his pardon to combat with the same Dragon,
which being granted, with much joy he was called home, and in the presence of
many people went out to fight with the Dragon, whom he slew and overcame
with divine assistance, where for joy he lifted up his sword imbrued in the
Dragons blood in token of victory, which blood distilled from his sword, and
caused him instantly to fall down dead. A heavy judgment of God to punish
murder in the same kind, that he who like Cyrus Cirus.
delighted in blood, should feel the curse of Tomiris, Divine Justice
miraculouslie shown.
and be choked with blood. Strange that this man who was pardoned for killing
of the Dragon, was killed by the Dragon after the Dragon was slain.

Thus blood was the sin, because it brought death, and death again brought
blood to be the revenger of the first, that the blood of man might be washed
away by the blood of man: the blood of the Dragon being vmpire betwixt, that I
may say truly, as the Poet says in another case, Sanguine succreuit, Sanguine
finis erit: as it grew so shall it end in blood. One example more, and I will
conclude this general discodrse of Serpents, and come to the particular
description of our Sussexan Serpent.

Now to the terror of the poor Inhabitants, breathing forth his noisome
poisons, whose Story deserves more lamentable tears and speedy extirpation
then the flourishinges of Oratorie, or Pen and Inke-horne cordial.
Aristotle. Philip of Maceden.


To note further the contagion of these Creatures by the noisome euaporation of
their noisome breath. In the days of Philip King of Macedon, and father to the
great Alexander, whose Tutor Aristotle was, there was a way into a mountain to
Armenia, over which the King had prayed that never man might go that way but
he might die. Wherefore Socrates to see the effect of the Kings prayer, set
his Opticke Philosophical glass, such as now a days we use to apprehend
things far distant plainly visible, to see what was in the way, and
presently he perceived two Dragons that by their breath infected the Region of
the air. Thus we set the obnoxious nature of these Serpents to Mankind,
which often in our souls best meditation receive their birth, according to the
saying of holy Augustine, that Deus exaudit ad penam cum petunt peccatoris
fomitem, that our blessings are turned into cursings, and our Pater-nosters to
punishments, when we pray fui suis, and our petitions to predictions, when our
Christianity is poisond with sin: and therefore now leaving this Serpentine
circute of this general discourse, and now come to that particular and
lamentable Story of our yet green calamity, as Aeneas said to Dido, Infandum
Regina iubes renouare dolorem.

Misery is not without a fatal echo, whose imperfect sillables in formation
thus miserably redoubles.

Veritas non quaerit angulos. Let Truth go vnmask't because her face is
unpainted, plainly and truly then: thus, there is discovered in our neighbor
County of Sussex, a strange and monstrous Serpent (a thing most noisome and
dreadful to the Inhabitants adjoining, and may with pious compassion let in
remorse at our ears, to have a fellow feeling of our neighbors misery, still
remembering this, that sin pulls down punishment, and yet there were in
Jerusalem as great sins as those on whom The Tower of Siloam fell, Luke 13.
if we search our own bosoms it is to be feared there will be found both
cause and effect, Sin and Serpent, but leaving our morrall Serpents, let us
return to the description of our Historical one.

This Serpent (or Dragon as some call it) is reputed to be nine foot or rather
more in length, and shaped almost in the form of an Axeltree of a Cart, a
quantity of thickness in the midst, and somewhat smaller at both ends, The
former part which he shootes forth (as a neck) is supposed to be an elle long,
with a white ring (as it were) of scales about it, The scales along his back
seems to be blackish, and so much as is descoured under his belly appears
to be red, for I speak of no nearer description then of a reasonable ocular
distance, for coming too near it, has already been too dearly paid for, as
you shall hear hereafter.

It is likewise discovered to have large feet, but the eye may be there
deceived, for some suppose that Serpents have no feet, but glide upon
certain ribs and scales which both defend him from the upper part of his
throat unto the lower part of his belly, and also cause them to move much more
the faster, for so does this by first drawing together and then shooting forth,
rids way (as we call it) as fast as a man can run. It is of countenance very
proud and at the sight or hearing of men or Cattle, will raise his neck
upright, and seem to listen and look about with great arrogance: There are
likewise on either side of it discovered two great bunches so big as a large
foote-ball, and (as some think) will in time grow to wings, but God (I hope)
in their and our assistance will so instruct and defend us that he shall be
destroyed before he grow so fledge.

He will cast his venom about four rod from him, as by woeful experience
it was proved on the body of a man and a woman coming that way, who afterward
was found dead, being poisoned and very much sweld, but depiction of a
fire-breathing dragon facing a crouching cat, next to a man, woman, and dog or
cow lying on the ground not prayed upon. Likewise a man going to chase it, and
as he imagined to destroy it with two Mastiue Dogs, (as yet not knowing the
great danger of it) his Dogs were both killed, and he himself glad to return
with hurt to preserve his own life. Yet this is to be noted, that neither the
man nor the Dogs were prayed upon, but slain and left whole, for his food is
thought most part of it to be in a Coniewarren, which he much frequents, and
it is found much scanted and impaired in the increase it had wont to afford:
and now speaking of a place it will be necessary for me to show where that
place is, least my truth be repulst and not received for her self.

IN Sussex there is a pretty Market Town called Horsam, near unto it a Forest
called S. Leonards Forest, and there in a vast and unfrequented place, heathie,
vaultie, full of unwholesome shades, and ouer-growne hollowes it is thought to
be bred, but wheresoever bred, certain and too true it is that there it yet
lives, so within three or four miles compass are his usual haunts,
oftentimes at a place called Faygate, and he has been seen within half a mile
of Horsam, a wonder no doubt most terrible and noisome to the Inhabitants
thereabouts, there is always in his tracke or path left a glutinous and filmie
matter (as by a small similitude we may perceive in a snailes) which is very
corrupt and offensive to the scent, insomuch that they perceive the air to be
putrified withal, which must needs be very dangerous, for though the
corruption of it cannot strike the outward part of a man, unless heated into
his blood, yet by receiving of it in at any of our breathing Organs, (the Mouth
or Nose) it is by authority of all Authors (writing in that kind) mortal and
deadly, as one thus says, Noxia serpentum est admixto sanguine pectis. Lucanus.


Neither is this Serpent (in my opinion) litterall to be received, as when it
shall please God that he shall be destroyed, that then it may be presently
forgotten, but rather to be feared as an Eclips or fearful Comet, whose
prodigious effects do always follow, for we know ye our Country being
temperate, and rather more cold then hot, does not naturally breed them, but
rather that it is sent amongst us to give us warning of some Serpentine sins
that live amongst us, which will (without penitent prevention and constant
amendment) destroy us faster and farther, then this Serpent does or can:
Holendshed.
we may read in our English Chronicle of the prodegie in the three and
twentieth year of Edward the Third, and in the year of our redemption 1349.

In Oxfordshire near a place called Chippingnorton, At Chippingnorton in
Oxfordshire.
there was a Serpent was found with two faces and two heads like women, the one
having the shape of the new Perewig and attire of that time, and another in the
fashion of the old attire, and it had also wings after the manner of our
Rere-Mice or Bats: this was a dreadful aparition no doubt, and it is to be
doubted that we are not short of that sin of newfangled Tyres now: nay, do
we not lay it in deeper colors, and lay on painting too, which perhaps they
had not? may we not fear such another Serpents appearance, or rather be
blasted without the warning piece: it were so much the happier if we were sure
of warning: and certainly it may thence be gathered, that sin was then
corrected and amended: for not many ages since our fashions were all plain and
decent, yet safely (I suppose) we may conclude of that mutable sin of
head-tyring (which has faster new forms, and more number then Hydra had
heads) as sometime Seneca did of covetousness, Etiam fuerint Antiqui.

And now speaking of covetousness, extortions, cruelty and the like, and what
sin may this prodigious Serpent be applied more aptly to them, that poisonous
devouring Serpentine son of covetousness: Let these Cormorants, but look upon
this Dragon, and they shall as apparently behold themselves in it as in those
times aforesaid the woman did in the Perewig-Serpents, they enclose grounds
where the true owner, dare not set foot in, on pain of their remaining
estates: so does this Serpent, for none dare approach his abidings, (though
none of his own) but it is the danger of their lives, he poisons four rod from
him, and there the Miser exceedes the Serpent, for he poisons many acres
distant: The Serpent deuours poor men's cattle, so does the covetous wretch,
both cattle, and chattell, goods, houses and all, his scales of defense are
said to be black and reddish, and does it not resemble the Ink and Wax,
wherein gentlemen's lands are morgagde, which afterward turns offensive to
themselves? his neck is long to ouerlooke much, and does not the Miser so? It Is
said likewise, to prey upon Conies, and do we not in this age of ours call
those fillie men that fall into their snares, Connies? and the poor Mastiffes
that were poysond, may they not be properly figured by poor men's cursses
bark't out and sent against them? but alas, they move them not, but are beaten
down and poisoned with their stronger venom.

And lastly (if they change not the copy of their Serpentine condition) they
will leave behind them at their return from this world such as the tracke of
the Serpent is, when he shifts his ground, a stench and unwholesome steame:
neither the sweet odor of poor men's prayers, nor the happy farewell of a
blessed memory, their farewels will be both a like, good for the world when
they are both gone out of it.

Auarus nisi cum moritur, nil recte facit. Seneca.
Might I not go further and apply this Serpent to the stinging tongues of
calumnious backe-biters and slanderers? do not their breaths often poison the
reputation and good names of honest men and women? let them listen to this
larum-bell too.

What if I added Drunkards, is there not a loathsome trackt left after them
wheresoever they go? nay, do they not daily throw forth their venom?
vomites not only in the fields, but in the streets, yea, the houses, nay,
their very friends bosoms are often made the receptacles of their ore-charged
stomachs.

Me thinks in two words more I could here aptly apply this Serpent to the
most common kind of Creatures, (I do not mean the Commonwealth, but the
common poverty rather) to the Serpentine sisterhoode of Brotherly, the diseased
strumpetrie of the Suburbs: (oh that the City were not free of, but free
from that Company:) is not our Serpent disciphered by a white Ring about his
neck? How think you when you see only a white Tiffanie about the neck of
one of those tugging Gally-slaues of Damnation, and all the rest poison? May
they not make themselves ready by looking into this mirror? I dare go no
further in application, and bootelesse it were unless I knew how to kill the
Serpent.

But now I will set forth two notable examples, the one of a Dragon, the other
of a Dog, and the rather I seek to set them out, that the wicked thereby may
know what they themselves are, when brute beasts shall set them all to school.

There was a man (as Pliny Pliny.
writes) which fostered up a young Dragon, Thankfulness of a Dragon to his
Master.
who seeing the same beast to wax wonderful great, feared to keep his Dragon
any longer within his house, and therefore he put him out into a wild Forest.
It happened afterward that the same man travailing on his journey through the
Forest, was beset with thieves. And now being in this distress, and looking
for no other end but death, made (as loath to depart) a great showte and an
out-crie: straight upon whose noise, and at the knowledge of his voice, the
Dragon came to him in all the have possible. Whereupon the thieves being
greatly afraid, ran clean away to save themselves harmless. Then the Dragon
conducted his Master safe out of the danger homewards, and returned to the
Forest again.

Thankfulness of a Dog to his Master.
The Dog of the Roman Fuluius is more wonderful. This Fuluius travailing by the
way, was slain with slaves that lay in wait for him. His Dog seeing his
Master dead, lay by him for the space of two days. Whereupon when the man
was missing, and search made for him: they found him dead, with his Dog lying
by him. Some maruailing to see the Dog lie there by his dead Master, stroke
him, and would have driven him from the dead corse, and could not: some seeing
such kindness in the Dog, and pitying him that he should lie there without
meat two or three days before: cast him a piece of flesh, whereupon the Dog
straight carried the meat to his Masters mouth, and would not eat any whit
himself, though he had forborne meat so long before. And last of all, when
this dead body should be cast into the river, (according to the manner of the
Romans) the Dog leapt in after, and holding up his Master so long as he
could, did choose rather to die with him, then to live without him.

I would with my conclusion I could have concluded with the death of this
terrible and noisome Creature, and that (from that general good to our
Country) I might have returned into every man's particular bosom to have
destroyed the homebred Serpents, which are indeed rather our Penates or
household Gods, then any annoyance to us, for it is our miserable estate (heaven
reuert it) rather to adore then abhor our sins and iniquities. Reuelat.
The Dragons tail has drawn after it most part of the stars of Heaven: as
reverend Bernard says, hat, Magnitudo penarum, facit multitudo peccatorum,
from the monsters of our sins, the monsters of our punishment increases.

These persons whose names are herevnder printed, have seen this Serpent,
besides diverse others as the Carrier of Horsam, who lies at the white Horse in
Southwarke, can certify the truth of all. John Steel, Christopher Holder, And
a widow woman dwelling nere Faygate.

FINIS.

