A FEAST FOR WORMS. SET FORTH IN A POEM OF THE HISTORY OF JONAH. By FRA.
QVARLES.

ad hoc.

ab hoc.

per hoc.



This Naked Pourtraiture before thine Eye,
Is Wretched, helpless MAN, MAN borne to Die:
On either side, an ANGEL does protect him
As well from EVIL, as to GOOD direct him:
The one points to DEATH, the the other to a CROWN;
Who THIS attaines, must tread the OTHER down:
All which denotes the Brief of MAN'S Estate,
That HE IS to go from HENCE, by THIS, to THAT.
AT LONDON. Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Richard Moore, and are to be sold
at his shop in Saint Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleetstreet. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT, LORD SYDNEY, Baron of Penshurst, Viscount
Lisle, Earl of Leicester, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
SIR: two things more especial have made me industrious to do your Lordship
service: The one is, the love you did bear to my (long since) deceased Father;
whom (dead) your Lordship did please to honor with your Noble remembrance. The
other is, your undeserved Favors, and Honorable Countenance toward me in
your passage through Germany, where you have left in the hearts of men, a
Pyramid of your Worth. As for the first, I am heir to that service, which my
Father, (always obseruant to your Honor) was ready to perform. As for the
second, my self, in more particular stand obliged. In respect of both, here I
dedicate my self, and these few leaves to your truly-Noble Self, hoping your
Lordship will veil my boldness in your good acceptance, and crown my labors
with your approbation:

SIR, Your Lordships truly obseruant, FRA. QVARLES.

TO THE READER.
Reader, J fairly salute thee:
I List not to tire thy patient ears with unnecessary language (the abuse of
complement.) My mouth's no Dictionary: it only serves as a needful
Commentary, upon the obscure Text of my meaning.

J have here sent thee the first fruits of an obortiue Birth. It is a dainty
subject, not Fabulous, but Truth it self.

VVonder not at the Title, ( A FEAST FOR WORMS:) for it is a Song of Mercy:
What greater FEAST than Mercy? And what are Men but WORMS?

Moreover, J have gleaned some few Meditations, obuious to the History; Let me
advise thee to keep the Taste of the History, whilst thou read the
Meditations, and that will make thee Relish both, the better.

Understanding Reader, favor me: Gently expound, what it is too late to
correct.

He le va de Golpe, Dios sea con ella.

Farewell.

THE PROPOSITION OF the whole Work.
It Is not the Record of Great HECTORS Glory,
Whose matchless Valor makes the World a Story;
Nor yet the swelling of that Romans Name,
That only Came, and Looked, and Overcame;
Nor One, nor All of those brave Worthies Nine,
(Whose Might was Great, and Acts almost Divine,
That lived like Gods, but di' de like Men, and gone)
Shall give my Pen a Task to treat upon:
I sing the praises of the KING of Kings,
Out of whose mouth, a two-edged Smiter springs,
Whose Words are Mystery, whose Works are Wonder,
Whose Eyes are Lightning, and whose Voice is Thunder,
Who like a Curtain spreads the Heavens out,
Spangl'd with Stars, in Glory round about:
It Is HE that cleft the furious waves in twain,
Making a Highway passage through the Maine:
It Is He that turned the waters into Blood,
And smote the Rocky stone, and caused a Flood:
It Is HE, that is justly Armed in his Ire,
Behind with Plagues, before with flaming Fire:
More bright then midday Phoebus, are his Eyes,
And whosoever sees his Visage, Dies.
I sing the Praises of Great Judah's Lion,
The fragrant Flower of Iesse, the Lamb of Sion,
Whose Head is whiter then the driven Snow,
Whose Visage does like flames of Fire Glow:
His Loins begirt with Golden Belt, His Eyne
Like Titan, riding in his Southern Shine,
His Feet like burning Brass, and as the noise
Of surgie Neptunes roaring, is his Voice.
This is that Paschall Lamb, whose dearest Blood
Is sovereign Drink, whose Flesh is saving Food:
His precious Blood, the Worthies of the Earth
Did drink, which (though but borne of Mortal birth)
Returned them Deities: For who drinks THIS,
Shall be received into Eternal Bliss:
Himself the GIFT, which HE himself did give,
His Stripes heal us, and by HIS Death we live:
HE acting GOD and MAN in double Nature,
Did reconcile Mankind, and Man's Creator.
I, here is a TASK indeed; if Mortals could
Not make a Verse, yet Rocks and Mountains would:
The Hills shall dance, the Sun shall stop his Course,
Hearing the subject of this high Discourse:
The Horse, and Gryphin shall together sleep,
The Woolfe shall fawn upon the silly Sheep,
The Crafty Serpent, and the Fearful Heart
Shall join in Consort, and each bear a part,
And leap for Joy, when my URANIA sings,
She sings the praises of the KING of Kings.
THE INTRODVCTION.
THat Assyria
Ancient Kingdom, that old Assure swai'd,
Showed two great Cities. Ah! but both decai'd,
Both mighty Great, but of unequal growth;
Both Great in People, and in Building, both;
But Ah! What hold is there of Earthly Good?
Now Grass grows there, where these brave Cities stood.
The name of one, Great Babylon was hight,
Through which the rich Euphrates takes her flight
From High Armaenia to the ruddy Seas, Diodor, Siculus, lib. 3. rerum antiqu.
6.4.

And stores the Land with rich Commodities.
The other Ninus, Nineveh the Great,
So huge a Fabric, and well chosen Seat, Pliny, lib. 6. cap. 26.

Dan Phoebus fiery Steeds (with Maines becurld, Strabo, lib. 16. princip.

That circundates in twice twelve hours the World)
Never saw the like: By Great King Assure. Genes. cap. 10.11. St. August lib. 15.
de ciuit. Dei. Diod. Sic. cap. 1. rerum antiqu. The Cituation of the City. The
height of the Walls. The Breadth.
Ninus hand, Ptolimaeus, lib. 6. Geograph. cap. 1.

'Twas raisd and builded, in the Assyrians Land,
Which he subdude: 'Twas placed twixt rivers twain,
Licus, and swift Tygris that runs amain:
Begirt she was with Walls of wondrous might,
Creeping twice fifty foot in measured height.
Upon their breadth, (if ought we may rely
On the report of Sage Antiquity)
Three Chariots fairly might themselves display,
And rank together in a Battell-ray:
The Circuit that her mighty Bulk embraces, The Circuit of the City.

Contains the mete of sixty-thousand paces:
Within her well-fenc't- walls you might discover
Five hundred stately Towers, The number of ber Towers. Diod. Siculus cap. 3.
rerum antiquarum.
thrice told over;
Whereof the highest draws up the eye,
As well the low'st, an hundred Cubits hie;
All rich in those things, which to state belong,
For beauty, Her beauty and strength.
Brave, and for munition, Strong:
Duly, and daily this Great work was tended
With ten thousand Workmen; The number of ber workmen. Radulf. Volateranus.
Begun, and ended
In eight years space; How beautiful! How fair
Thy Buildings! And how foul thy Vices are!
Thou Land of Assure, double then thy pride, And let thy Wells of Joy be never
dri'de,
Thou have a Palace, that is renowned so much,
The like was never, is, nor will be such.
Thou Land of Assure, trebble then thy Woe,
And let thy Tears (do as thy Cups) o'rflow;
For this thy Palace of so great renown,
Shall be destroyed, Nab. 3.15.
and sacked, and batterd down.
But cheer up, Nineveh, thine inbred might,
Has means enough to quell thy Foemans spite:
Thy Bulwarks are like Mountains, and thy Wall
Disdaines to stoop to thundering Ordnance call:
Thy watchful Towers mounted round about,
Keep thee in safety, and thy Foe-man out:
I, but thy Bulwarks aid, cannot withstand
The direful stroke of High Almighties hand;
Thy Wafer-walles at dread Iehouah's blast
Shall quake, and quiver, and shall down be cast:
Thy watchful Towers shall asleep be found,
And nod their drowsy heads down to the ground:
Thy Bulwarks are not Vengeance-proofe; thy Wall,
When Justice brandisheth her Sword, must fall:
Thy lofty Towers shall be dumb, and yield
To High Revenge; Revenge must win the field;
Vengeance cries loud from heaven, she cannot stay
Her Fury, but (impatient of delay)
Has brim'd her Vials full of deadly Bane:
Thy Palace shall be burnt, thy People slain:
Thy Heart is hard as Flint, and swollen with pride, The sins of Nineveh.

Thy murderous Hands with guiltless blood are died;
Thy silly Babes do starve for want of Food,
Whose tender Mothers thou have drench't in Blood:
Women with child, lie in the streets about,
Whose Brains thy savage hands have dashed out:
Distressed Widows weep, (but weep in vain)
For their dear Husbands, whom thy hands have slain:
By one man's Force, another man's devoured,
Thy Wives are ravished, and thy Maids deflowered,
Where Justice should, there Tor^ and Bribes are placed:
Thy' Altars defild, and holy things defaced:
Thy Lips have tasted of proud Babels Cup,
What thou have left, thy Children have drunk up:
Thy bloody sins, thine Abels guiltless blood
Cries up to heaven for Vengeance, cries aloud:
Thy Sins are ripe, and ready for the Sickle.
Here rouse thy self, my Pen, and breathe a little.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE HISTORY.
GOd Chap. 1. 1.2.
sent Jonah the Prophet, to the Nineuites, to denounce his Judgments against
them for their sins: 1.3.
but Jonah took shipping, intending to fly to Tarshish: 1.4.
God raised a Storm, which endangered the Ship: 1.5.
Whereupon the Mariners (perplexed) 1.6.
did cast Lots, to see for whose sake the Tempest was: The Lot fell upon Jonah,
1.1^.
They all consented, and cast Jonah into the Sea: 1.17.
But God provided a Whale, which received Jonah, and swallowed him, in whose
Belly he continued three Days, and three Nights: Where ( Chap. 2.2.
He praying to God) 2.10.
God at length spoke to the Whale, and the Whale did cast him upon dry Land
safe and sound: Chap. 3.1.2.
So God commanded Jonah the second time, to go and denounce his Judgments
against the Ninevites. 3.3.
So Jonah went to Nineveh 3.4.
and prophesied, that (upon the expiring of forty days) Nineveh should be
destroyed: 3.5.
Whereupon the Ninevites believed; 3.7.
And the King caused a Fast to be proclaimed, 3.10.
so that God likewise repented of the Evil that He had intended to have done
them; Chap. 4.^.
Upon which, Jonah was discontended, 4.5.
Desired to die, 4.^.
Went out of the City, and lay without the Gate, to see what would become of
Nineveh after the forty days: 4.^.
There he made him a Booth of reeds and houghes, to guard him from the
extremity of the heat of the Sun, and Wind: But the heat of the Sun, and
the feruency of the Wind strait withered it: 4.6.
Whereupon God raised up a Gourd, which gave him much content. 4.7.
But the next morning, God sent a Worm which did eat it to the ground: 4.8.
So Jonah grew again into passion, for the loss of the Gourd, wished to die,
4.9.
And justified his Anger: 4.10.
Whereupon God deputes with Jonah, framing his argument, a minore ad maius,
viz. That if thou ( Jonah) had so much compassion, and grieved so much for
the loss of a trifling Gourd, 4.11.
Should not I (that am the God of mercy) take Compassion upon so Great a City?

TO THE MOST HIGH: HIS HVMBLE SERVANT IMPLORES HIS FAVOVRABLE ASSISTANCE.
O All-sufficient God, Great Lord of Light,
Without whose Gracious aid, and constant Sprite,
No labors prosper (howsoever begun)
But fly like Mists before the morning Sun:
O raise my thoughts, and clear my Apprehension,
Infuse thy Spirit into my weak Invention:
Reflect thy Beams upon my feeble Eyes,
Show me the Mirror of thy Mysteries;
My Art-lesse Hand, my humble Heart Inspire,
Inflame my frozen Tongue with holy Fire:
Ravish my stupid Senses with thy Glory;
Sweeten my Lips with sacred Oratory:
And (thou O FIRST and LAST) assist my Quill,
That first and last, I may perform thy Will:
My sole intent's to blazon forth thy Praise;
My Ruder Pen expects no Crown of Bays.
Suffice it then, Thine Altar I have kissed:
Crown me with Glory', and take the Bays that list.
A FEAST FOR WORMS.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Word of God to Jonah came, Historia Ionae incipit.
Commanded Jonah to proclaim, The vengeance of his Majesty, Against the sins
of Nineuy.

Sect. 1
THe Dreadful Word of God, his high Decree, Chap. 1. verse. 1.

That aye remains, and cannot frustrate be,
Came down to Jonah, from the heuens above,
Came down to Jonah interp. is a Dove.
Jonah, heavens anointed Dove,
Jonah, the flower of old Amittais youth,
Jonah, the Prophet, Son, and Heir to Amittai interp* is Truth.
Truth,
The blessed Type of him, that di' de for us,
That Word came to him, and bespake him thus,
"Arise, trusse up thy Ioynes, make all things meet, Verse. 2. Gods charge to
Jonah.

"And put thy Sandalls on thy hasty feet,
"Gird up thy reins, and take thy staff in hand,
"Make no delay, but go, where I command;
"Me pleases not to send thee ( Jonah) down,
"To sweet Gath-Hepher, thy dear native Town,
"Whose tender paps, with plenty ouerflow,
"Nor yet unto thy brethren shall thou go,
"Amongst the Hebrews, where thy spredden fame
"Fore-runnes the welcome of thine honored name.
"No, I Will not send thee thither: Up, Arise,
"And go to Nineueh, where no allies,
"Nor consanguinity preserues thy blood,
"To Nineueh, where strangers are withstood:
"To Nineueh, a City far removed
"From thine acquaintance, where tha'rt not beloved:
"I send thee to Mount Sinay; not Mount Sion,
"Not to a gentle Lamb, but to a Lion:
"Ne yet to Lydia, Ier. 20.3.
but to bloody * Passur,
"Not to the land of Canan, but of Assure,
"Whose language will be riddles to thine ears,
"And thine again will be as strange to theirs;
"I say, to Nineueh, the worlds great Hall,
"The Monarchs seat, high Court Imperial:
"But terrible Mount Sinay will affright thee,
"And Pashurs heavy hand is bent to smite thee:
"The Lions rore, the people's strong and stout,
"The Bulwarks stand afront to keep thee out.
"Great Ashur minaces with whip in hand,
"To entertain thee (welcome) to his land.
"What then? Arise, be gone; stay not to think:
"Bad is the cloth, that will in wetting shrink.
"What then, if cruel Pashur heap on strokes?
"Or Sinay blast thee with her sulfurous smokes?
"Or Ashur whip thee? Or the Lions rent thee?
"P'sh; on with courage;, the Lord have sent thee:
"Away, away, lay by thy foolish pity,
"And go to Niniueth that mighty City:
"Cry loud against it, let thy dreadful voice
"Make all the City echo with the noise:
"Not like a Dove, but like a Dragon go,
"Pronounce my judgment, and denounce my Woe:
"Make not thine head a fountain full of tears,
"To weep in secret for her sins: Thine ears
"Shall hear such things, will make thine eyes run over,
"Thine eyes shall smart with what they shall discover:
"Spend not in private, those thy zealous drops,
"But hew, and hacke; spare neither trunk, nor lops:
"Make heaven, and earth rebound, when thou discharges,
"Plead not like Paul, but roar like Boanarges:
"Let not the beauty of the buildings bleare thee,
"Nor let the terrors of the Rampires fear thee:
"Let no man bribe thy fist, (I well advise thee)
"Nor foul means force thee, nor let fair entice thee:
"Ram up thine ears: Thy heart of stone shall be;
"Be deaf to them, as they are deaf to thee:
"Go cry against it. If they ask thee, Why?
"Say, God of heaven commanded thee to cry:
"In stead of prayers, and duties they should do me,
"Behold, their wickedness is mounted to me:
"The fatness of their fornication fryes
"On coals of raging lust, and upward flies,
"And makes me sick: I hear the mournful groans
"And heavy sighs of such, whose aching bones
"The oppressor grindes: Alas, their groans implore me,
"Their prayers, and their oppressions come before me:
"Behold, my children they have slain, and killed,
"And bathed their hands within the blood they spilled:
"The steame of guiltless blood makes suit unto me,
"The voice of many bloods is mounted to me;
"The vile prophaner of my sacred Names,
"He tears my titles, and mine honor maimes,
"Makes Reth'rick of an oath, swears, and forsweares,
"Recks not my Mercy, nor my Judgment fears:
"They eat, they drink, they sleep, they tire the Day
"In wanton dalliance, and delightful play.
"Heavens winged Herald Jonas, up, and go
"To mighty Nineveh, Denounce my woe;
"Advance thy voice, and when thou have advanced it,
"Spare Shrub, nor Cedar, but cry out against it:
"I come my Self with plagues, Explicit Hist.
Go thou before me,
"For all their wickedness is come before me.
Apolog. Authoris.
IT was my morning Muse; And for her sake
I thus apply my self to undertake
This serious task, (A task for Doctors Muse
To spend upon) Then let me plead excuse:
For as good Physic will not bate his force,
And (being well applied) prove never the worse,
Though given by hands, that could nor read, nor write,
That skill not how, nor need not know t'apply't:
So this (perchance) may make another keen,
Though I, and it be blunt (as whetstones been.)
Applicatio.
TO thee ( Malfido) now I turn my Quill,
That God is still that God, and will be still.
The painful Pastors take up Iona's room:
And thou the Niniuite, to whom they come.
Meditatio prima.
HOw great's the love of God unto his creature?
Or is his Wisdom, or his Mercy greater?
I know not whether: O the exceeding love
Of highest God! that from his Throne above,
Will send the brightness of his Grace to those
That grope in Darkness, and his Grace oppose:
He helps, prouides, inspires, and freely gives,
As pleased to see us rauell out our lives.
He gives us from the heap, He measures not,
Nor deals (like Manna) each his stinted lot,
But daily sends the Doctors of his Spouse,
(With such like oil as from the Widows cruse
Issued forth) in fullness, without wasting,
Where plenty may be had, yet plenty lasting.
I, there is care in heaven, and heavenly sprights,
That guides the world, and guards poor mortal wights.
There is; else were the miserable state
Of Man, more wretched and unfortunate
Than savage beasts: But O the abounding love
Of highest God! whose Angels from above
Dismount the Tower of Bliss, fly to and fro,
Assisting wretched man, their deadly foe.
What thing is Man, that Gods regard is such?
Or why should he love retchlesse Man so much?
Why? what are men? But quickened lumps of earth?
A feast for worms, A bubble full of mirth,
A looking-glass for grief, A flash, A minnit,
A painted Toombe, with putrefaction in it:
A map of Death; A burden of a song:
A winters Dust; A worm of five foot long:
Begot in sin; In darkness nourisht: Borne
In sorrow, Naked, Shiftlesse, and forlorn:
His first voice (heard) is crying for relief.
Alas! He comes into a world of grief:
His Age is sinful, and his Youth is vain,
His life's a punishment, his Death's a pain:
His life's an hour of Joy, a world of Sorrow,
His death's a winters night, that finds no morrow:
Man's life's an Houreglasse, which being run,
Concludes that hour of Joy, and so is dun.
Jonah must go: Nor is this charge alone
To Jonah given, but given to every one.
You Magistrates, arise, and take delight.
In dealing Justice, and maintaining right:
There lies your Nineueh. Merchants, arise,
Away, and to your Ships, and Merchandise.
Artificers, arise, and ply your shops,
And work your trade, and eat your meat with drops.
Paul, to thy Tents, and Peter, to thy Net,
And all must go that way which God has set.
Grant, liefest Lord, for our Dear Borrow sake,
Thy love, in sending to us, never slake:
Increase succession in thy Prophets liew,
For lo, thy Haruest's great, and Workmen few.
THE ARGUMENT.
But Jonah toward Tharsis went,
A Tempest does his course prevent:
The Mariners are sore oppressed,
While Jonah sleeps, and takes his rest.
Sect. 2
But Jonah thus bethought: The City's great, Hist. Chap. 1. verse. 3.

And mighty Ashur stands with deadly threat,
Their hearts are hardened, yt they cannot hear:
Will green wood burn, when so vnapt's the seire?
Strange is the charge: Shall I go to a place
Unknown and foreign? Aye me! hard's the case,
That righteous Israel must be thus neglected,
When Miscreants and Gentiles are respected: Prima occasio fugae.

How might I hope my words shall there succeed, 2. Occasio.

Which thrive not with the flock I daily feed?
Moreo're I weet, the Lord is wondrous kind, 3. Occasio.

And slow to wrath, and apt to change his mind
Upon the least repentance: Then shall I
Be deemed as false, and shame my Prophecy.
O heavy burden of a doubtful mind!
Where shall I go, or which way shall I wind?
My heart like Ianus, looks to and fro:
My Credit bids me, Stay; my God bids, Go:
If Go; my labor's lost, my shame's at hand:
If Stay; Lord! I transgress my Lords command:
If go; from bad estate, to worse, I fall:
If stay; I slide from bad, to worst of all.
My God bids go, my credit bids me stay;
My guilty fear bids fly another way.
So Jonah straight arose, himself bedight
With fit acoutrements, for hasty flight:
In stead of staff, he took a Shipmans weed;
In stead of going, lo, he flies with speed.
Simile.
Like as a Hawke (that ouermatcht with might,
Doing sad penance for the unequal fight,
(Answ'ring the Faulkners second shout) does flee
From fist; turns tail to Foul, and takes a tree:
So Jonah baulks the place where he was sent
(To Nineueh) and down to Ciuitas Palest
Iaffa went;
He sought, enquired, and at last he found
A welcome Ship, that was to Tharsis bound,
Where he may fly the presence of the Lord:
He makes no stay, but straightway goes aboard,
His hasty purse for bargain finds no leisure,
(Where sin delights, there is no account of treasure:)
Nor did he know, nor ask, how much his Fare:
He gave: They took; all parties pleased are:
(How thriftlesse of our cost, and pains, are we,
O blessed God of heaven, to fly from thee!)
Now have the Pilots drunk their parting cup,
And some (with Sailors tune) are hoysting up,
Others the while, the faithful Anchor wey,
The Ship, (as loath to leave her quiet key,)
Creepes easly off, and (with directed course)
She glides along the shore with gentle force;
And now the whistling wind begins to dally
With Aura's fan: Now stronger gusts do fally
Forth, rudely playing on the hollow sail,
And from the Mountains blows a lusty Gale:
She mounts the billows with a lofty grace,
And now she cuts the Deep, and scuds apace
From land; from whence (unwilling) she was driven, The Tempest

Nothing's perceived now but Sea, and heaven;
Betwixt them both, the blustering winds do play:
The waves know not which Master to obey:
For now the East wind mutin's with the West,
And now the West wind counterbuffes the East,
And now the hollow Boreas roares amain,
And vexed Notus thwarts the North again:
Thus crossely crossed, they threaten in revenge,
To force the world from off his steadfast henge.
The Guide's perplexed, and knows not what to do,
His Art's amazed, in such a maze of woe:
The Welkin storms, and rages more and more,
The Rain powr*s down, the Heavens begin to roar,
As they would split the massy earth in sunder,
From them that live above, to those live under:
The restless waves, and rolling billows beat,
As they would shoulder Neptune from his feate;
The billows seem to mount the clouds, (or higher)
The dusky clouds did flash with often fire:
Now does the Ship as high as heaven swell,
And now (o'rwhelm'd with waves) as low as hell;
The Bark no less does yield to Neptunes sway,
Than lofty Towers, when thundering Ordnance play.
The hardy Mariners begin to quail: Verse. 5.

They vere their maine sheet, and they strike their sail:
Their hair, bolts up, pale Death vsurps their cheeks,
Their mouths are full of cries, their tongues of shreeks:
They sound with endless line, and sound again:
They pumpe, and still they pumpe, but all in vain:
They row, and break their Oars: At last the assay
Each Mariner unto his god to pray.
They prayed, but winds did snatch their words away,
And lets their prayers not go to whom they pray:
But still they pray, but still the wind, and wether
Do turn both prayers, and sails they know not whither:
Their gods were deaf, their danger waxed greater,
They cast their wares out, and yet never the better:
But all this while was Jonah drowned in sleep,
And in the lower Deck was buried deep. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio secunda.
Object.
But stay: This was a strange and uncouth word:
Did Jonah fly the presence of the Lord?
What mister word is that? He that repleats
The mighty Universe, whose lofty seat's
The imperial Heaven, whose footstool is the face
Of massy Earth? Can he from any place
Be spared? or yet by any means excluded,
That is in all things? (and yet not included,)
Could Jonah find a resting any where
So void, or secret, that God was not there?
I stand amazed and frighted at this word:
Did Jonah fly the presence of the Lord?
Mount up to heaven above, Deus regnat in Coelis per gloria^.
and there he is,
Swaying the Scepter of his Kingly bliss: In terris per gratiam.

Bestride the earth beneath (with weary pace)
And there he bears the Olive branch of Grace: Apud inferos per institiam.

Diue down into the extreme Abyss of Hell,
And there in Justice does the Almighty dwell.
What uncouth Cloister could there then afford
A screene 'twixt faithless Jonah, and his Lord?
Jonah was charged, to take a charge in hand; Resolve.

But Jonah turned his back on Gods command;
Shook off his yoke, and wilfully neglected,
And what was strictly charged, he quite rejected:
And so he fled the power of his Word;
And so he fled the presence of his Lord.
Good God! how poor a thing is wretched man?
So frail, that let him strive the best he can,
With every little blast he is ouerdon.
If mighty Cedars of great Libanon,
Cannot the danger of the Axe withstand,
Lord! how shall we, that are but Bushes, stand?
How fond, corrupt, and senseless is mankind?
How faining deaf is he? How wilful blind?
He stops his ears, and sins: he shuts his eyes,
And (blindfold) in the lap of danger flies:
He sins, despaires; and then, to stint his grief,
He chooses death, to baulke the God of life.
Poor wretched sinner, travel where thou will,
Thy travel shall be burdened with thy guilt:
Climb tops of hills, that prospects may delight thee,
There will thy sins (like Wolves and Bears) affright thee:
Fly to the Valleys, that those frights may shun thee,
And there like Mountains they will fall upon thee:
Or to the raging seas (with Jonah) go;
There will thy sins like stormy Neptune flow.
Poor shiftlesse Man! what shall become of thee?
Wher'ere thou fly'st, thy gryping sin will fly.
But all this while the Ship, where Jonah sleeps,
Is vexed sore, and battered on the Deeps,
And well-nigh split upon the threatening Rock,
With many a boystrous brush, and churly knock:
God send the comfortless, an happy hour,
And shield all good men from such stormy stowre.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Pilot thumps on Ionah's breast,
And rowzeth Jonah from his Rest:
They al cast Lots, (being sore affrighted:)
The sacred Lot on Jonah lighted.
Sect. 3.
Hist. Chap. 1. verse. 6.
THe hapless Pylot finding no success,
(But that the storm grew rather more than less,
For all their toylesome pains, The Pylot awakes Jonah.
and needless prayers,
Dispairing both of life, and goods) repaires
To Ionahs drowzie Cabin; mainly calls;
Calls Jonah, Jonah; and yet louder yawles;
Yet Jonah sleeps; and gives a shrug, or two,
And snores, (as greedy sleepers use to do.)
The woeful Pylot iogs him, (but in vain.)
(Perchance he dreams an idle word, or twain;)
At length he tugs and pulls his heavy course,
And thunders on his breast, with all his force.
But (after many yawns) he did awake him,
And (being both affrighted) thus bespake him:
"Arise, The Pylots speech to Jonab.
O Sleeper, O, arise, and see,
"There Is not a twiny third, 'twixt death, and thee:
"This darksome place (thou measur'st) is thy grave,
"And sudden Death rides proud on yonder wave;
"Arise, O Sleeper, O, arise and pray,
"Perchance thy God will hear, and not say, Nay:
"Perchance thy God's more powerful then our's:
"Arise, Arise, and pray with all thy powers,
"If so be, God will have compassion on us,
"And turn away this mischief he has done us,
The sturdy Sailors (weary of their pain, Verse 7.
)
Finding their bootlesse labor lost, and vain,
Forbear their toylesome task, and wrought no more,
But wished for Death, for which they looked before;
They call a parley, and consult together,
They count their sins, (accusing one another)
That for his sin, or his, this evil was wrought:
In fine, they all prove guilty of the fault;
But yet the Question was not ended so:
One says, 'Twas thine offense, but he says, No,
But it was for thy sake, that accuses me;
Rusht forth a third (the worser of the three)
And swore it was another, which (he hearing)
Denied it flat, and said, 'Twas thine for swearing:
In came a fifth, accusing all; (replying
But little else) they all chid him for lying;
One said it was, another said 'twas not:
So all agreed, to stint the strife by Lot:
Then all was whist, and all to prayer went;
(For such a buis'nes, a fit complement)
The lot was cast; 't pleased God, by Lots to tell.
The lot was cast; The lot on Jonah fell. Exp. Hist.

Meditatio tertia.
O Sacred Subject of a Meditation!
Thy Works (O Lord) are full of Admiration,
Thy judgments all are just, severe, and sure,
They quite cut off, or else by launcing cure
The festring sore of a Rebellious heart,
Lest foul infection taynt the immortal part.
How deep a Lethargy does this disease
Bring to the slumbring Soul through careless ease!
Which once being wak't, (as from a Golden Dream)
Looks up, and sees her griefs the more extreme.
How seeming sweet's the quiet sleep of sin?
Which when a wretched man's once nuzz'ld in,
How soundly sleeps he, without fear, or wit?
No sooner, are his arms together knit
In drowzie knot, athwart upon his breast,
But there he snorts, and snores in endless rest;
His eyes are closed fast, and deaf his ears,
And (like Endymion) sleeps himself in years;
His sence-bound heart, ne answers to the voice
Of gentle warning, no, nor does the noise
Of strong reproof awake his sleeping ear,
Nor louder threatenings thunder makes him hear;
So deafe's the sinners ear, so numbed his sense,
That sinne's no corrosiue, nor no offense;
For custom breeds delight, Consuetudo peccandi tollit seasum peccati.
deludes the heart,
Beguiles the sense, and takes away the smart.
But stay; Did one of Gods elected number,
(Whose eyes should never sleep, nor eyelids slumber)
So much forget himself? Did Jonah sleep,
That should be watchful, and the Tower keep?
Did Jonah (the selected mouth of God)
In stead of roaring Judgments, does he nod?
Did Jonah sleep so sound? Could he sleep then,
When (with the sudden sight of Death) the men
(So many men) with yelling shreekes, and cries,
Made very heaven report? and shook the skies
So uncouth, that the ship it might have riu'n?
Hard must he wink, that shuts his eyes from heaven.
O righteous Israel, where, O, where art thou?
Where is thy Lamp? thy zealous Shepherd now?
Alas! the rau'nous Wolves will worr' thy Sheep;
Thy Shepheard's careless, and is fallen asleep;
Grim dogs will rowze thy Flock, and rule the roast;
Thy Sheep are scattered, and thy Shepheard's lost;
Ah weladay! whose words beseem the Altar,
Their works descent, and first begin to faulter;
And they, that should be Watch-lights in the Temple,
Are snuffes, and want the oil of good example;
The chosen Watchmen, that the Tower should keep,
Are waxen heauy-ey'd, and fallen asleep.
Lord, if thy Watch-me^ wink too much, awake them;
Although they slumber, do not quite forsake them;
The flesh is weak, say not (if dullness seize
Their heavy eyes) Sleep henceforth: Take your ease: Math. 13.41.

And we poor weakelings, when we sleep in sin,
Knock at our drowzie hearts; and never lin,
Till thou awake our sinne-congealed eyes;
Lest (drowned in sleep) we sink, and never rise.
THE ARGUMENT.
They question Jonah, whence he came,
His Country, and his peoples Name,
He makes reply: They moan their woe,
And ask his counsel what to do.
Sect. 4.
Histor. Cap. 1. v. 8. Simile.
AS when a Thiefe's appr'ended on suspect,
And charged for some supposed malifact,
A rude concurse of people, strait accrewes,
Whose itching ears even smart, to know the news,
The guilty prisoner (to himself betrayed)
He stands dejected, trembling and afraid:
So Jonah stood the Sailors all among,
Enclosed round amid the ruder throng.
As in a Summers Evening you shall hear
In Hiue of Bees (if you lay close your ear)
Confused buzzing, and seditious noise,
Such was the murmur of the Sailors voice.
"What was thy sinful fact, The Mariners speech to Jonas.
that causes this
"(Says one) wherein have thou so done amiss?
"Tell us, What is thine Art (another says)
"That thou professest? Speak man, Whence awayes,
"From what Confines came thou? (A third replies)
"What is thy Country? And of what allies?
"What, art thou borne a Jew? or Gentile? Whether?
"(Ere he could lend an answer unto either)
A fourth demands: Where has thy breeding been*
All what they asked, they all asked over again.
In fine, their ears (impatient of delay)
Becalmed their tongues, to hear what he could say.
So Jonah (humbly rearing up his eyes)
Breaking his long kept silence, thus replies: Ionahs speech to the Mariners.

"I am an Hebrew, son of Hebraei quasi Abrahaei, S. Aug lib. 1. super Genesis
Abraham,
"From whom my Land did first derive her name,
"Within the Land of Jury was I borne,
"My name is Jonah, retchlesse, and forlorn:
"I am a Prophet: ah! but woe is me,
"For from before the face of God I flee,
"From whence (through disobedience) I am driven;
"I fear Jehovah, mighty God of Heaven:
"I fear the Lord of Heaven, whose glorious hand
"Did make this stormy Sea, and massy land.
So said, their ears with double rauishment, Verse* 10.

Still hung upon his melting lips, attent,
Whose dreadful words, their hearts so near impierc't,
That from themselves, themselves were quite deuers't.
Like as in a hot Summers euentide, Simile.

(When lustful Phoebus re*salutes his Bride,
And Philomela 'gins her caroling:)
A heard of Dear are browzing in a spring,
With hungry appetite, misweening naught,
Nor in so deep a silence fearing ought:
A sudden crack, or some unthought* of sound,
Or bounce of Fowlers Piece, or yelpe of Hound,
Disturbes their quiet peace with strange amaze,
Where (senseless half) through fear, they stand at gaze:
So stand the Seamen, (as with Ghosts affrighted,)
Entraunc'd with what, this man of God recited.
Their (whilome sturdy) limbs wox faint, and lither,
Their hearts did earne, their knees did smite together:
Congealed blood usurped their trembling hearts,
Which coldly crawld about in all their parts:
Who (trembling out some broken language,) thus:
The Mariners speech.
"Why have thou brought this mischief upon us?
"What humor led thee to a place unknown,
"To seek a foreign land, Interrogatio.
and leave thine own?
"What faith had thou, Admiratio.
by leaving thine abode,
"To think to fly the presence of thy God?
"Why have thou not obeyed (but thus transgrest)
"The voice of God, Neprehensio.
whom thou acknowledgest?
"Art thou a Prophet, and do thou amiss?
"What is the cause? And why have thou done this?
"What shall we do? The tempest lends no ear
"To fruitless chat, nor do the billows hear,
"Or mark our language: waves are not attent,
"Our goods they float, and all our pains are spent:
"Our Bark's not weather-proofe, for aye to last;
"(No Fort so strong, but daily siege will wast.)
"The Lot accuses thee, thy words condemn thee,
"The waves (thy deaths-me^) strive to ouerwhelme thee:
"What shall we do? Thou Prophet, speak, we pray thee:
"Thou fear the Lord; Alas! we may not slay thee:
"Or shall we save thee? No, for thou do fly
"The face of God, and so deseru'st to dye:
"Thou Prophet, Expl. Hist.
speak, what shall we do to thee,
"That angry seas may calm, and quiet be?
Meditatio quarta.
Give leave a little to adiourne your story,
Run back a step, or twain, and look before ye:
Can he be said to fear the Lord, that flies him? Object.

Can Word confess him, when as Deed denies him?
My sacred Muse has rounded in mine ear, Resolutio.

And read the mystery of a twofold fear:
The first, a servile fear, for Judgments sake;
And thus the damned Devils fear and quake.
Thus Adam feared, and fled behind a tree:
And thus did bloody Kain fear and flee.
Unlike to this, there is a second kind
Of fear, extracted from a zealous mind,
Full fraught with love, and with a conscience clear
From base respects: It is a filial fear;
A fear whose ground would just remain, and level,
Were neither Heaven, nor Hell, nor God, nor Devil.
Such was the fear that Princely David had;
And thus our wretched Jonah feared, and fled:
He fled ashamed, because his sins were such;
He fled ashamed, because his fear was much.
He feared Jehovah, other feared he none,
Him he acknowledged; Him he feared alone:
Unlike to those men, that (befoold with error)
Frame many gods, and multiply their terror.
The Egyptians, God Apis did implore,
God Assas the Chaldaeans did adore:
Babel to the Devouring Dragon seeks,
The Arabians Astaroth; Juno the Greeks;
The name of Belus, the Assyrians hallow,
The Trojans, Vesta; Corinth, wise Apollo;
The Arginians sacrifice unto the Sun;
To Light-foot Mercury bows Macedon;
To god Volunus, lovers bend their knee:
To Pauor, those that faint, and fearful be:
Who pray for health, and strength, to Murcia those;
And to Victoria, they that fear to lose:
To Muta, they that fear a woman's tongue:
To great Lucina, women great with young:
To Esculapius, they that live oppressed:
And they to Quies, that desire rest.
O blinded Ignorance of antique times,
How blent with error, and how stuffed with crimes
Your Temples were! And how adulterate!
How clogged with needless gods! How obstinate!
How void of order, and how inconfuse!
How full of dangerous and foul abuse!
How sandy, were thy grounds, and how unstable!
How many Deities! yet how unable!
Implore these gods, that list to howl and bark,
They bow to Dagon, Dagon to the Arc:
But he to whom the seal of mercy's given,
Adores Jehovah, mighty God of Heaven:
Upon the mention of whose sacred Name,
Meek Lambs grow fierce, and the fierce Lions tame:
Bright Sol shall stop, and heaven shall turn his course:
Mountains shall dance, and Neptune slake his force:
The Seas shall part, the fire want his flame,
Upon the mention of Iehouah's Name:
A Name, that makes the roof of Heaven to shake,
The frame of Earth to quiver, Hell to quake:
A Name, to which all Angels blow their trumps;
A Name, puts frolic man into his dumps:
(Though never so blythe) A Name of high renown,
It mounts the meek, and beats the lofty down;
A Name, deuides the marrow in the bone;
A Name, which out of hard, and flinty stone,
Extracteth hearts of flesh, and makes relent
Those hearts that never knew what mercy meant.
O Lord! how great's thy Name in all the Land?
How mighty are the wonders of thy hand?
How is thy Glory placed above the heaven?
To tender mouths of Sucklings thou have given
Coerciue power, and boldness to reprove,
When elder men do what them no'te behooue.
O Lord! How great's the power of thy hand?
O God! How great's thy Name in all the Land?
THE ARGUMENT.
The Prophet does his fault discover,
Persuades the men to cast him over:
They row, and toil, but do no good,
They pray to be excused from blood.
Sect. 5.
SO Jonah framed the speech to their demand; Chap. 1. ve. 12. Iona's last will.

"Not that I seek to trauerse the command,
"Of my dear Lord, and out of mind perverse,
"TO avoid the Ninevites, do I amerce
"My self; Nor that I ever heard you threat,
"(Unless I went to Nineveh, (the great)
"And do the message sent her from the Lord)
"That you would kill, or cast me over board,
"Do I do this; It Is my deserved fine:
"You all are guiltless, and the fault is mine:
"'It Is I, it is I alone, it is I am he:
"The tempest comes from heaven, the cause from me;
"You shall not lose a hair for this my sin,
"Nor perish for the fault that mine has bin;
"Lo, I the man am here: Lo, I am He
"The root of all; End your revenge on me;
"I fled from God of Heaven; O, let me then
"(Because I fled from God) so fly from men;
"O, take me, (for I am resolved to die)
"As you did cast your Wares, so cast in Me;
"I am the man, for whom these billows dance,
"My death shall purchase your deliverance;
"Fear not to cease your fears; but throw me in;
"Alas! my soul is burdened with my sin,
"And God is just, and bent to his Decree,
"Which certain is, and cannot altered be;
"I am proclaimed a Traitor to the King
"Of heaven, and earth: The winds with speedy wing
"Acquaint the Seas: The Seas mount up on hie,
"And cannot rest, until the Traitor die;
"Oh, cast me in, and let my life be ended;
"Let Death make Justice mends, which Life offended;
"Oh, let the swelling waters me embalme:
"So shall the Waves be still, and Sea be calm.
So said, Verse. 13.
the Mariners grew inly sad,
(Though rude, and barbarous) and much ydrad,
As moved to see a Stranger (for their good)
Lay down his life, which offer they withstood,
Till they had sought with all their power and skill,
To save the man, and not the Ship to spill:
They dug, and deeply delu'd the surrow'd Seas,
With brawny arms they plough'd the watery Leas,
Hoping (in vain) by toil to win the shore,
And wrought more hard, the^ erst they wrought before.
Alas! their strength now fails, and wears away,
(For bodies wanting rest, do soon decay)
The Seas are angry, and the waves arise,
Appeased with nothing, but a Sacrifice:
Gods vengeance stormeth like the raging Seas,
Which naught but Jonah (dying) can appease.
"Bootlesse it is, to think by any deed
"To alter that, which God of heaven decreed:
" Jonah must die, it is folly to say, No;
" Jonah must die, or else we all die too;
" Jonah must die, that from his Lord did fly;
"The lot determines, Jonah then must die;
"His guilty word confirms the sacred lot,
" Jonah must die then, if we perish not.
"If Justice then it be, that he must die,
Verse. 14. The Mariners prayer.
"And we sad Actors of his Tragedy;
"(We beg not (Lord) a warrant to offend)
"O, pardon bloodshed, that we must intend.
"Though not our hands, yet shall our hearts be clear:
"Then let not stainelesse Consciences bear
"The ponderous burden of a Murders guilt,
"Or voice of harmless blood, that must be spilt;
"For lo, (dear Lord) it is thine own Decree,
"And we sad ministers of Justice be. Expl. Hist.

Meditatio quinta.
Object.
But stay awhile, this thing would first be known:
Can Jonah give himself, and not his own?
That part to God, and to his Country this
Pertaines, so that a slender third is his;
Why then should Jonah do so great a wrong,
To deal himself away, that did belong
The least unto himself? or how could he
Teach this, (THOU SHALL NOT KILL) if Jonah be
His life's own Butcher? What, was this a deed
That with the Calling he professed, agreed?
The purblind age (whose works (almost divine)
Did merely with the oil of nature shine,
That knew no written Law, ne yet no God,
To whip their conscience with a steely Rod,)
How much did they abhor so foul a fact?
When (led by Natures glimpse) they made an Act,
That what man e're is so unnatural
To kill himself, Homicida in se, insepultus abijciatur. Seneca.
should want a burial;
Can such do so, when Jonah does amiss?
What, Jonas, Isr'els Teacher! and do this?
The Law of charity does all forbid, Resolu. Non ideo sine scelere facit alter,
etc. S. Aug. lib. 1. de ciuitat, Dei. cap. 26. Judge. 16.30.

In this thing to do that, which Jonah did;
Moreo're, in charity, it is thy behest,
Of dying men to think, and speak the best;
The mighty Samson did as much as this;
And who dare say, that Samson did amiss,
If heavenly Spirit whispered in his ear
Express command to do 't? Spiritus latenter hoc iusserat. S. Aug.
then likewise hear,
Who knows of Jonah, whether, yea, or no,
A secret Spirit willed him to do so? Cum Deus iubet se iubere sine vllis
ambagibus intimat, quis inobedientiam in crimen vocat? S. Aug.

Sure is the knot that true Religion ties,
And Love that is rightly grounded, never dies;
It seems a Paradox, beyond belief,
That men in trouble should prolong relief;
That Pagans, (to withstand a Strangers Fate)
Should be neglectiue of their own estate,
Trusting their lives upon a twyny thread,
And (dauntlesse) dance about in dangers dread.
Where is this Love become in later age?
Alas! it is gone in endless Pilgrimage
From hence, and never to return (I doubt)
Till revolution wheel those times about;
Chill breasts have starved her here, and she is driu'n
Away; and with Astraea fled to heaven:
Charity, that naked Babe is gone, Caritas est infans sine pannis, dans mel api
sine pennis.

Her hony's spent, and all her store is done,
Her winglesse Bees can find out never a bloome,
And crooked Dea Litis.
Ate does usurp her room;
Nepenthe's dry, and Love can get no drink,
And cursed Ardenne flows above the brinke:
Brave Mariners, the world your names shall hallow,
Admiring that in you, that none dare follow;
Your friendship's rare, and your conversion strange:
From Paganism to Zeal? A sudden change!
Those men do now the God of heaven implore,
That bowed to Puppets, but an hour before.
Their Zeal is fervent (though but new begun)
Before their egge-shels were done off, they run,
As when bright Phoebus, in a Summer tide, Simile.

(New risen from the pillow of his Bride)
Enueloped with misty fogges, at length
Breaks forth, displayes the mist, with Southern strength;
Even so these Mariners (of Peerless mirror)
Their faith b'ing vayl'd within the mist of error,
At length their Zeal chased ignorance away,
They left their Paganism, and 'gan to pray.
Lord, how vnlimmited are thy Confines,
That still pursu'st man in his good designs!
Thy mercy's like the dew of Hermon hill,
Or like the Ointment, dropping downward still
From Aarons head, to beard; from beard, to foot:
So do thy mercies drench us round about:
Thy love is boundless; Thou art apt, and free,
To turn to Man, when Man returns to thee.
THE ARGUMENT.
They cast the Prophet over board:
The storm alay'd: They fear the Lord;
A mighty Fish him straight deuoures,
Where he remained many hours.
Sect. 6.
EVen as a member, Hist. Chap 1. ve. 15. Simile.
whose corrupted sore
Infests, and rankl's, eating more and more,
Threatening the bodies loss (if not prevented)
The Surgion (after all fair means attempted)
Cuts off, and with advised skill does choose,
To lose a part, then all the body lose;
Even so the Mariners perceiving all
Their labor spent, and the effect but small,
And of necessity that all must dye,
If Jonah leave not their society,
They took up Jonas, and with one accord,
And common aid, threw Jonas over board;
Whereat grim Neptune wiped his fomy mouth,
Held his tridented Mace upon the South;
The winds were whist, the billows daunc't no more,
The storm allayed, the heavens left off to rore,
The waves (obedient to their beheast)
Gave ready passage, and their rage surceast:
The sky grew clear, and now the glorious light
Begins to put the gloomy clouds to flight:
Thus all on sudden was the Sea tranquil,
The heavens were quiet, and the Waves were still.
As when a friendly Creditour (to get
A long forborne, Simile.
and much-concerning debt)
Still plyes his willing debtor with entreates,
Importunes daily, daily thumps, and beats
The battered Portalls of his tired ears,
Bedeafing hm with what he knows, and hears;
The weary debtor, to avoid the sight
He loathes, shifts here, and there, and every night
Seeks out Protection of another bed,
Yet ne'rethelesse (pursued and followed)
His ears are still laid at with louder volley
Of harder Dialect; He melancholy,
Sits down, and sighs, and after long fore-slowing,
(TO avoid his presence) pays him what is owing;
The thankful Creditour is now appeased,
Takes leave, and goes away content, and pleased.
Even so these angry waves, with restless rage,
Accosted Jonas in his pilgrimage,
And thundered Judgment in his fearful ear,
Presenting Hubbubs to his guilty fear:
The Waves rose discontent, the Surges beat,
And every moments death, the billows threat;
The wether-beaten Ship did every minnit
Await destruction, while he was in it:
But when his (long expected) corpse they threw
Into the deep, (a debt through trespass due)
The Sea grew kind, and all her frowns abated,
Her face was smooth to all that nauigated.
'Twas sinful Jonah made her storm and rage,
'Twas sinful Jonah did her storm assuage.
With that the Mariners astonished were, Verse. 16.

And feared Jehovah with a mighty fear,
Offering up Sacrifice with one accord,
And vowing solemn vows unto the Lord.
Verse. 17.
But God (whose breath can make the heavens shake,
And in an instant, all that force can slake,
Whose powerful word can make the earths foundation
Tremble, and with his word can make cessation,
Whose wrath does mount the waves, and toss the Seas,
And make them calm, and whist when e're he please:
This God, (whose mercy runs on endless wheel,
And pulls (like Jacob) Justice by the heel)
Prepared a Fish, prepared a mighty Whale,
Whose belly should be prisonhouse, and bail
For retchlesse Jonah. As a Garner door
Opens his double leaf, to take the store,
Wherewith the harvest quits the Ploughmans hope,
Even so the great Leuiathan set open
His beame-like Jaws, (as glad of such a boon)
And at a morsel, swallowed Jonah down.
Till Rosy-cheek't- Aurora's purple dye
Thrice dappl'd had the ruddy morning sky,
And thrice had spread the Curtains of the morn,
To let in Titan, when the Day was borne,
Jonah was Tenant to this living Grave,
Embowel'd deep in this stupendous Cave. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio sexta.
LO, Death is now, as always it has bin,
The just procured stipend of our sin:
Sin is a golden Causie, and a Road
That Is level, pleasant, that is even, and broad,
But leads at length to death, and endless grief,
To torments and to pains, without relief.
Justice fears none, but makes all afraid,
And then falls hardest, when it is most delaid.
But thou reply'st, Thy sins are daily great,
Yet thou sitt'st, uncontrolled upon thy seat:
Thy wheat does flourish, and thy barnes do thrive,
Thy sheep increase, thy sons are all alive,
And thou art buxom, and have nothing scant,
Finding no want of any thing, but want,
Whilst others, who^ the squint-e'yd world counts holy,
Sit sadly drooping in a melancholy,
With brow dejected, and downe-hanging head,
Or take of alms, or poorly beg their bread:
But Young man, know, there is a Day of doom,
The feast is good, until the reckoning come.
The time runs fastest, where is least regard;
The stone that is long in falling, falls hard;
There is a Day, a dying Day (thou fool)
When all thy laughter shall be turned to Doole,
Thy roabes to torturing plagues, and fell tormenting,
Thy whoops of Joy, to howles of sad lamenting:
Thy tongue shall yell, and yawle, and never stop,
And wish a world, to give for one poor drop,
To flatter thine intolerable pain;
The wealth of Pluto could not then obtain
A minutes freedom from that hellish rout,
Whose fire burns, and never goes out;
Nor house, nor land, nor measured heaps of wealth,
Can render to a dying man his health:
Our life on earth is like a third of flax,
That all may touch, and being touched, it cracks.
As when an Archer shoots for his sport, Simile.

Sometimes his shaft is gone, sometime it is short,
Sometimes of the left hand wide, sometimes of the right,
At last (through often trial) hits the White;
So Death sometimes with her uncertain Rouer,
Hits our Superiors (and so shootes over)
Sometimes for change, she strikes the meaner sort,
Strikes our inferiors (and then comes short)
Sometimes upon the left hand wide she goes,
And so (still wounding some) she strikes our foes;
And sometimes wide upon the right hand wends,
There with impartial shafts, she strikes our friends;
At length, (through often trial) hits the White,
And so strikes us into Eternal night.
Death is a Calendar composed by Fate,
Concerning all men, never out of Date:
Her days Dominicall are writ in blood;
She shows more bad days, then she shows good;
She tells when days, and months, and terms expire,
And shows thee strange aspects of fearful fire.
Death is a Pursiuant, with Eagles wings,
That knocks at poor men's doors, and gates of Kings.
Worldling, beware; for, lo, Death sculks behind thee,
And as she leaves thee, so will Judgment find thee.
THE ARGUMENT.
Within the bowels of the Fish,
Jonah laments in great anguish;
God heard his prayer, at whose command,
The Fish disgorg'd him on the Land.
Sect. 7.
THen Jonah turned his face to heaven, Hist, Chap. 2. ver. 1.
and prayed
Within the bowels of the VVhale, and said,
"I cried out of my balefull misery
"Unto the Lord, and he has heard my cry, Verse 2. The prayer of Jonas out of
the Whales belly.

"From out the paunch of hell I made a noise,
"And thou have answered me, and heard my voice:
"Into the Deepes and bottom thou have thrown me, Verse. 3.

"Thy Surges, and thy Waves have past upon me.
"Then Lord (said I) from out thy glorious sight
"I am rejected, and forsaken quite, Verse. 4.

"Nath'lesse while these my wretched eyes remain,
"Unto thy Temple will I look again.
"The boyst'rous waters compass me about, Verse 5.

"My body threats, to let her prisoner out,
"The boundless depth enclosed me, (almost dead)
"The weeds were wrapped about my fainting head,
"I lived on earth rejected at thine hand, Verse 6.

"And a perpetual prisoner in the Land;
"Yet thou will cause my life t'ascend at length,
"From out this pit, O Lord, my God, my Strength;
"When as my soul was ouer-whelm'd, Verse. 7.
and faint,
"I had recourse to thee, did thee acquaint
"With the condition of my woeful case,
"My cry came to thee, in thine holy Place.
Verse. 8.
"Whosoever to Vanities themselves betake,
"Renounce thy mercies, Verse. 9.
and thy love forsake.
"To thee I Will sacrifice in endless days,
"With voice of thanks, and euer-sounding praise,
"I Will pay my vows; for all the world records
"With one consent, Salvation is the Lords.
Verse. 10.
So God (whose Word's a deed, whose Breath's a law,
Whose just command implies a dreadful awe,
Whose Word prepared a Whale upon the Deep,
To tend, and wait for Iona's fall, and keep
His outcast body safe, and soul secure)
This very God, (whose mercy must endure
When heaven, and earth, and sea, and all things fail)
Disclosed his purpose, and bespake the Whale,
To redeliuer Jonah to his hand;
Whereat the Whale disgorg'd him on the Land. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio septimu.
I Well record, a holy Father says,
"He teaches to deny, that faintly prays: Quitimide ora^* docet negare.

The suit surceases, when desire fails,
But whosoever prays with feruencie, preuailes;
For Prayers the key that opens heaven gate, Luke 11.9.

And finds admittance, whether earl' or late,
It forces audience, it unlocks the ear
Of heavenly God, (though deaf) it makes him hear.
Upon a time The Commonwealth.
Babel (the Worlds fair Queen,
Made drunk with choler, and enraged with Spleen)
Through fell Disdain, derraigned War against them
That tender Homage to Jerusalem: The Church.

A Maiden fight it was, yet they were strong
As men of War; The Battle lasted long,
Much blood was shed, and spilt on either side,
That all the ground with purple gore was did:
In fine, a Soldier of Jerusalem,
Charity.
Charissa hight, (the Almner of the Realm)
Chilled with a Fever, and unapt to fight,
Into Iustitia's Castle took her flight,
Whereat great Babels Queen commanded all,
To lay their siege against the Castle wall;
But poor Fear
Tymissa (not with war acquainted)
Fearing Charissa's death, fell down, and fainted;
Dauntlesse Wisdom
Prudentia reared her from the ground,
Where she lay (pale, and senseless) in swound,
She rubbed her temples (lost in swouny shade)
And gave her water, that Faith.
Fidissa made,
And said, Cheer up, (dear Sister) though our foe
Has taken us Captives, and inthrall'd us so,
We have a King puissant, and of might,
Will see us take no wrong, and do us right,
If we possess him with our sad complaint,
Cheer up, we will send to him, and him acquaint.
Timissa (new awaked from swound) replies,
Our Castle is begirt with enemies,
And clouds of armed men besiege our walls,
Then suer Death, or worse then Death befalls
To her, (who ere she be) that stirs a foot,
Or dares attempt, this place to fally out:
Alas! what hope have we to find relief,
And want the means that may diuulge our grief?
Within that place, a jolly Matron won'd,
With fiery looks, and drawen-sword in hond,
Her eyes, with age, were waxen wondrous dim,
With hoary locks, and visage stern, and grim;
Her name Justice.
Iustitia hight; to her they make
Their moan, who (well advised) them thus bespake:
"Fair Maidens, well I wot; y' are ill bedight,
And rue the suffrance of your woeful plight,
But Pitty's fond alone, and rankles grief,
And fruitless falls, unless it yield relief:
Cheer up, I have a Messenger in store,
Whose speed is much, but faithful trust is more,
Whose nimble wings shall cleave the flitting skies,
And scorn the terror of your enemies,
Prayer
Oration hight, well known unto your King,
Your message she shall do, and tidings bring,
Provided that Math. 21.21.
Fidissa travail with her,
And so ( John 15.16.
on Christ's name) let them go together.
With that, Fidissa having taken her errant,
And good Oration, with Iustitia's Warrant,
In silence of the midnight, took their flight,
Arriving at the Court that very night;
But they were both as any fire hot, Oration feruens, velox.

For they did fly as swift, as Cannon shot,
But they (left sudden cold should do them harm)
Together clung, and kept each other warm: Oration and fides comites indiuidui.

But lo, the Kingly gates were sparr'd, and locked,
They called, but none made answer, then they knocked,
Together joining both their force in one,
They knocked amain; Yet answer there was none;
But they that never learned to take denial,
With importunity made further trial:
The King heard well, although he list not speak,
Till they with strokes the gate did wel-nie break.
In fine, the brazen gates flew open wide;
Oration moved her suit: The King replide,
Oration was a fair, and welcome ghest;
So heard her suit; so granted her request.
Frail Man, observe, In thee the practice lies,
Let sacred Meditation moralize.
Let Prayer be fervent, and thy Faith entire,
And God will grant thee more then thy desire.
THE ARGUMENT.
The second time was Jonah sent
To Niniuy: so Jonah went:
Against her crying sins he cried,
And her destruction propheci'd.
Sect. 8.
ONce more the voice of heau'ns-high-Co^mander
(Like horrid claps of heau'ns-diuiding-thunder, Hist. Chap. 3. ver. 1.

Or like the fall of waters breach (the noise
B'ing heard far distant off) such was the voice)
Came down from heaven, to Jonah new-borne-Man,
To rebaptized Jonah, and thus began;
Am I a God? Or art thou ought but Dust?
More then a man? Or are my Laws unjust?
Am I a God, and shall I not command?
Art thou a man, and dare my Laws withstand?
Shall I (the motion of whose breath shall make
Both Earth, and Sea, and Hell, and Heaven quake)
By thee (fond man) shall I be thus neglected,
And thy presumption escape uncorrected?
Thy Faith has saved thee (Jonah:) Sin no more,
Lest worse things happen after, then before;
Arise; Verse. 2. Gods second charge to Jonah.
let all the assembled powers agree
To do the message I impose on thee;
Trifle no more, and, to avoid my sight,
Think not to baulke me with a second flight.
Arise, and go to Niniuy ( the great)
Where broods of Gentiles have taken up their seat,
The Great-Queene-regent-mother of the Land,
That multiplies in people like the sand;
Away, with wings of time, (I Will not essoine thee)
Denounce these fiery Judgments, I enjoin thee.
Like as a yongling that to school is set, Simile. verse. 3.

(Scarce weaned from his dandling mothers tet,
Where he was cockerd with a stroking hand)
With stubborn heart, denies the Just command
His Tutor will's: But being once corrected,
His homebred stomack's curbed, or quite eiected,
His crooked nature's changed, and mollified,
And humbly seeks, what stoutly he denied;
So Iona's stout, perverse, and stubborn heart,
Was hardened once, but when it felt the smart
Of Gods auenging wrath, it strait dissolved,
And what it once avoided, now resolved
TO effect with speed, and with a careful hand
Fully replenished with his Lords Command,
To Nineveh he flies like a Roe,
Each step the other strives to ouergoe;
And as an arrow to the mark does fly,
So (bent to flight) flies he to Niniuy.
(Now Niniuy a mighty City was,
And all the Cities of the world did pass,
A City which over all the rest aspires,
Like midnight* Phoebe among the lesser fyers,
A City which (although to men was given)
Better beseem'd the mighty King of Heaven,
A City Great to God, whose ample wall,
Who undertakes to mete with paces, shall
Bring Phoebus thrice a-bed, e're it be dun,
(Although with dawning Lucifer begun.)
When Jonas had approacht the City gate, Verse. 4.

He made no stay to rest, ne yet to bait,
Nor yet with oil, his fainting head he 'noynts,
Nor stays to bathe his weather-beaten joints,
Nor smoothed his countenance, nor slick't his skin,
Ne craved he the Hostage of an Inn,
To ease his aching bones (with travel sore)
But went as speedy, as he fled before,
The Cities greatness made him not refuse,
To be the trump of that unwelcome news
His tongue was great with; But (like thunders noise)
His mouth flew open, and out there rusht a voice.
Iona's prophecy to the Ninevites.
When dewy-cheek't Aurora shall display
Her golden locks, and summon up the Day
Twice twenty times, and rest her drowzy head
Twice twenty more, in aged Tithons bed,
Then Nineveh this place of high renown,
Shall be destroyed, and sacked, and batterd down.
He sat not down to take deliberation,
What manner people were they, or what Nation,
Or Gent, or Saluage, nor did he enquier
What place were most convenient for a Crier,
Nor like a sweet-lipt Orator did steare,
Or tune his language to the peoples ear,
But bold, and rough (yet full of majesty)
Lift up his trumpet, and began to Cry,
When forty times Dan Phoebus shall fulfill
His Iournall course upon the Olympian Hill,
Then Nineveh ( the Worlds great wonder) shall
Startle the Worlds foundation with her fall.
The dreadful Prophet stands not to admire
The Cities pomp, or peoples quaint attire,
Nor yet (with fond affection) does pity
The approaching downfall of so brave a City:
But freely lifts his dismal voice on high,
Not caring who excepts against the Cry,
When forty Days shall be expired, and run,
And that poor Inch of time drawn out and dun,
Then Nineveh (the Worlds Imperial throne)
Shall not be left a stone, upon a stone. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio octaua.
But stay; Is God like one of us? Can he, Object.

When he has said it, alter his Decree?
Can he that is the God of Truth, dispense
With what he vowed? or offer violence
Upon his sacred Justice? Can his mind
Revolt at all? or vary like the wind?
How comes it then to pass? How might it be,
That having limited his just Decree
Upon the expiring date of forty days,
He then performs it not? But still delays
His plagues denounc't, and Judgment still forbeares,
And stead of forty Days gives many years?
Yet forty Days, and Nineveh shall perish?
Yet forty years, and Nineveh does flourish:
A change in man's infirm; in God it is strange;
In God, to change his Will, and will a Change, Resolut. Aliud mutare
voluntatem; aliud velle mutationem. Aquin. 1. quaest. 19 art. 7.

Are diverse things: When God repents from ill,
He wills a change; he changes not his Will;
The subiect's changed, which secret he kept close,
But not the mind, that so did it dispose;
Denounced Judgment God does often prevent, Mutat sententiam, sed non mutat
consiliu^, lib. 20. mor. c. 29

But neither changes counsel, nor intent:
Moreo're He seldom threatens a perdition,
But with express, or an impli'd condition:
So that, if Niniuey do turn from ill,
God turns his hand, he does not turn his Will.
The stint of Niniuey was forty days,
To cry for grace, and turn from evil ways;
To some the time is large; To others small,
To some it is many years; And not at all
To others; Some an hour have, and some
Have scarce a minute of their time to come:
Thy span of life ( Malfido) is thy space, Tempus vitae, tempus poenitentiae.

To call for mercy, and to cry for grace.
Lord! what is man, but like a worm that crawl's,
Open to danger, every foot that falls?
Death creeps (unheard) and steals abroad (unseen)
Her darts are sudden, and her arrows keen,
Uncertain when, but certain she will strike,
Respecting King, and beggar both alike;
The stroke is deadly, come it earl', or late,
And once being struck, repenting's out of date;
Death is a minute, full of sudden sorrow:
"Then live to day, as thou may dye to morrow.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Ninevites believe the Word;
Their hearts return unto the Lord;
In him they put their only trust:
They mourn in Sackcloth, and in dust.
Sect. 9.
SO said; the Ninevites believed the Word, Hist. Chap. 3. ver. 5.

Believed Jonas, and believed the Lord;
They made no pause, nor iested at the news,
Nor slighted it, because it was a Iew's
Denouncement: No, Nor did their gazing eyes
(As taken captives with such novelties)
Admire the strangers garb, so quaint to theirs,
No idle chat possessed their itching ears,
The whilst he spoke: nor were their tongues on fire,
To rail upon, or interrupt the Crier,
Nor did they question whether true the message,
Or false the Prophet were, that brought the embassage:
But they gave faith to what he said; relented,
And (changing their mis-wandred ways) repented;
Before the searching Air could cool his word,
Their hearts returned, and believed the Lord;
And they, whose dainty palats cloyed whileare
With cates, and vyands were, and luscious cheer,
Do now enjoin their lips, not once to taste
The offall bread, (for they proclaimed a Fast)
And they, whose wanton bodies once did lie
Wrapped up in Robes, and Silks, of princely Dye,
Lo now, in stead of Robes, in Rags they mourn,
And all their Silks do into Sackcloth turn.
They read themselves sad Lectures on the ground,
Learning to want, as well as to abound;
The Prince was not exempted, nor the Peer,
Nor yet the richest, nor the poorest there;
The old man was not freed, (whose hoary age
Had even almost outworne his Pilgrimage;)
Nor yet the young, whose Glass (but new begun)
By course of nature had an age to run:
For when that fatal Word came to the King, Verse. 5.

(Conuay'd with speed upon the nimble wing
Of flitting Fame) He strait dismounts his Throne,
Forsakes his Chair of State he sat upon,
Disrobed his body, and his head discrown'd,
In dust and ashes grou'ling on the ground,
And when he reared his trembling corpse again,
(His hair all filthy with the dust he lay in)
He clad in pensive Sackcloth, did depose
Himself from state Imperial, and chose
To live a Vassal, or a baser thing,
Then to usurp the Scepter of a King:
His golden cup of Honor and Authority,
Made him not drunk, and so forget mortality,
(Respectlesse of his pomp) he quite forgate
He was a King, so mindlesse of his State,
That he forgate to rule, or be obeyed;
Nor did he weild the Sword, (...) Hist.
nor Scepter swayed.
Meditatio nona.
IS fasting then the thing that God requires?
Can fasting expiate, or slake those fires
That Sin has blown to such a mighty flame?
Can sackcloth clothe a fault? or hide a shame?
Can ashes cleanse thy blot? or purge thy' offense?
Or do thy hands make God a recompense,
By strowing dust upon thy bryny face?
Are these the tricks to purchase heavenly grace?
No, though thou pine thy self with willing want;
Or face look thin, or Carkas ne*r so gaunt,
Although thou worser weeds then sackcloth wear,
Or naked go, or sleep in shirts of hair,
Or though thou choose an ash-tub for thy bed,
Or make a daily dunghill on thy head,
Thy labor is not poysd with equal Gains,
For thou have naught but labor for thy pains:
Such idle madness God reiects, and loathes,
That sinkes no deeper, than the skin, or clothes;
It Is not thine eyes which (taught to weep by art)
Look red with tears, (not guilty of thy heart)
It Is not the holding of thy hands so hye,
Nor yet the purer squinting of thine eye;
It Is not your Mimmick mouths, nor Antic faces,
Nor Scripture phrases, nor affected Graces,
Nor prodigal vp-banding of thine eyes,
Whose gashfull balls do seem to pelt the skies;
It Is no: the strict reforming of your hair
So close, that all the neighbor skull is bare;
It Is not the drooping of thy head so low,
Nor yet the lowering of thy sullen brow,
Nor howling, wherewithal you fill the air,
Nor repetitions of your tedious prayer:
No, no, it is none of this, that God regards;
Such sort of fools their own applause rewards; Matthew. 6

Such Puppit-playes, to heaven are strange, and quaint,
Their service is unsweet, and foully taint,
Their words fall fruitless from their idle brain;
But true Repentance runs in other strain;
Where sad contrition harbors, there thy heart
Is first acquainted with an inly smart,
And restless groans within thy mournful breast,
Where sorrow finds her self a welcome ghest;
It throbs, it sighs, it mournes in decent wise,
Dissolu's, and fills the Cisternes of thine eyes;
It frights thy pensive soul, with strange aspects
Of crying sins committed; It detects
Thy wounded conscience; It cries amain,
For mercy, mercy, cries, and cries again;
It vows, it sadly grieves, and sore laments,
It yernes for grace, Reformes, Returns, Repents;
I; this is Incense, whose accepted savor
Mounts up the heavenly Throne, and finds favor:
I; this is it, whose valor never fails,
With God it stoutly wrestles, and preuailes:
I; this is it, that pierces heaven above,
Never returning home (like Noah's Dove)
But brings an Oliffe leaf, or some increase,
That works Salvation, and eternal Peace.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Prince and people fasts, and prays;
God heard, accepted, liked their ways:
Upon their timely true repentance,
God reuerst, and changed his sentence.
Sect. 10.
THen suddenly, with holy zeal inflamed, Hist. Chap. 3.7.

He caused a General act, to be proclaimed,
By good advice, and counsel of his Peers;
Let neither Man, nor child, of youth, or years, The Proclamation of the
Ninevites.

From greatest in the City, to the least,
Nor Heard, nor pining Flock, nor hungry beast,
Nor any thing that draws air, or breath,
On forfeiture of life, or present death,
Presume to taste of nourishment, or food,
Or move their hungry lips, to chew the cud;
From out their eyes let Springs of water burst,
With tears (or nothing) let them slake their thurst: Verse. 8.

Moreo're, let every man (what e're he be)
Of high preferment, or of low degree,
D' off all they wear (excepting but the same)
That nature craves, and that which couers shame)
Their nakedness with sackcloth let them hide,
And mue the vest'ments of their silken pride;
And let the brave cariering Horse of war,
(Whose rich Caparisons, and Trappings are
Of sumptuous beauty, and of glorious show)
Let him disrobe, and put*on sackcloth too;
The Ox (ordained for yoke) the Ass (for load)
The Horse (as well for race, as for the road)
The burthen-bearing Cammell (strong and great)
The fruitful Kine, and every kind of Neat,
Let all put sackcloth on, and spare no voice,
But cry amain to heaven, with mighty noise;
Let all men turn the Byas of their ways,
And change their fiercer hands, to force of praise:
For who can tell, Verse. 9.
if God (whose angry face
Has long bin wayning from us) will embrace
This slender pittance of our best endeavor?
Who knows, if God will his intent persevere?
Or who can tell, if He (whose tender love,
And mercy' extends his Judgments far above)
Will change his high Decree, and turn his sentence
Upon a timely, and unfeigned Repentance?
And who can tell, if God will change the lot,
That we, and ours may live, and perish not?
So God perceived their works, and saw their ways,
Approved the faith, Verse. 10.
that in their works did blaze,
Approved their works, approved their works the rather,
Because their faith, and works went both together;
He saw their faith, because their faith abounded,
He saw their works, because on faith they grounded,
H' approved their faith, because their faith was true,
H' approved their works, because on faith they grew;
He saw their faith, and works, and so relented,
H^ approved their faith, and works, and so repented;
Repented of the plagues, they apprehended;
Repented of the Evil, that he intended:
So God the vengeance of his hand withdrew,
He took no forfeiture, although 'twere due;
The Evil, that once he meant, he now forgot,
Cancelled the forfeit bond, and did it not. Explicit Hist.

Meditatio decima.
LO, into what an ebb of low estate
The Soul, that seeks to be regenerate,
Must first decline; Before the Ball rebound,
It must be thrown with force against the ground;
The Seed cannot increase in fruitful ears,
Nor can she rear the goodly stalk she bears,
Unless bestrow'd upon a mould of earth,
And made more glorious, by a second birth:
So fares with Man; Before he can bring forth
The brave exploits of truly noble Worth,
Or hope the granting of his sins remission,
He must be humbl'd first in sad contrition;
The plant (through want of skill, or by neglect)
If it be planted from the Suns reflect,
Or lack the dew of seasonable showers,
Decays, and bears neither Fruit, or Flowers;
So wretched Man, if his repentance has
No quickening Sunshine of a lively Faith,
Or not bedewed with showers of timely tears,
Or works of mercy (wherein Faith appears)
His prayers, and deeds, and all his forged groans,
Are like the howles of Dogs, and works of Drones:
The skillful Surgeon, first (by letting blood)
Weakens his Patient, ere he does him good;
Before the Soul can a true comfort find,
The Body must be prostrate, and the Mind
Truly repentiue, and contrite within,
And loath the fawning of a bosom Sin.
But Lord! Can MAN deserve? Or can his Best
Do Justice equal right, which he transgrest?
When Dust and Ashes mortally offends,
Can Dust and Ashes make Eternal mends?
Is Heaven unjust? Must not the Recompense
Be full Equivalent to the Offense?
What mends by mortal Man can then be given
To the offended Majesty of heaven?
O Mercy! Mercy! on thee my Soul relyes,
On thee we build our Faith, we bend our eyes;
Thou fill'st my empty strain, thou fil'st my tongue;
Thou art the subject of my Swan-like song;
Like pinioned prisoners at the dying Tree,
Our lingering hopes attend, and wait on thee;
(Arraigned at Justice bar) prevent our doom;
To thee with joyful hearts we cheerely come;
Thou art our Clergy; Thou that dearest Book,
Wherein our fainting eyes desire to look;
In thee, we trust to read (what will release us)
In bloody Caracters, that name of JESUS.
What shall we then return to God of Heaven?
Where nothing is (Lord) nothing can be given;
Our souls, our bodies, strength, and all our powers,
(Alas!) were all too little, were they ours:
Or shall we burn (until our life expires)
An endless Sacrifice in Holy fires?
My Sacrifice shall be my HEART entire,
My Christ the Altar, and my Zeal the Fire.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Prophet discontented prays
To God, that he would end his days;
God blames his wrath so vnreprest,
Reproues his vnaduis'd Request.
Sect. 11.
But this displeasing was in Iona's eyes, Hist. Chap. 4.1.

His heart grew hot, his blood began to rise,
His eyes did sparkle, and his teeth struck fire,
His veins did boil, his heart was full of ire;
At last brake forth into a strange request,
These words he prayed, and mumbl'd out the rest:
Was not, O was not this my thought (O Lord)
Before I fled? Nay, was not this my Word, Verse. 2. Jonas speech to God.

The very Word, that these my lips had shaped,
When this mis-hap might well have bin escaped?
Was there, O was there not a just suspect,
My preaching would procuer this effect?
For lo; I knew of old, they tender love;
I knew the power, thou gave my Tongue, would move
Their Adamantine hearts; I knew 'twould thaw
Their frozen spirits, and breed relenting awe;
I knew moreo're, upon their true repentance,
That thou determin'dst to reuerse thy sentence;
For lo, I knew, thou were a Gracious God,
Of long forbearance, slow to use the Rod*
I knew the power of thy Mercies bent,
The strength of all thy other works out-went;
I knew thy tender kindness; and how loath
Thou were to punish, and how slow to wrath;
Turning thy Judgments, and thy plagues preventing,
Thy mind reuersing, and of Eu'll repenting:
Therefore (O therefore) through this persuasion,
I fled to Tarsish, there to make evasion;
To save thy credit ( Lord) to save mine own:
For when this blast of zeal is ouer-blowne,
And sackloth left, and they left off to mourn,
When they (like dogs) shall to their vomit turn,
They Will vilipend thy sacred Word, and scoff it,
Saying, Was that a God, or this a Prophet?
They Will scorn thy Judgments, and thy threats despise,
And call thy Prophets, Messengers of lies.
Verse. 3.
Now therefore (Lord) bow down attentive ear,
(For lo, my burthen's more then I can bear)
Make speed (O Lord) and banish all delays,
TO extinguish (now) the tapour of my days:
Let not the minutes of my time extend,
But let my wretched hours find an end;
Let not my fainting sprite thus long aby
In her frail mansion of mortality:
The thrid's but weak, my life depends upon,
O cut that third, and let my life be done;
My breast stands fair, O strike, and strike again,
For naught, but dying, can assuage my pain:
For liefer it is to dye, then live in shame,
For better it is to leave, and yield the game,
Then toil for what at length must needs be lost;
O kill me, for my heart is sore imbost;
This latter boon unto thy servant give,
For better it is for me, to dye then live.
So wretched Jonah; But Iehoua thus;
What boot's it so to storm out-ragious? Verse. 4.

Does it become my servants heart to swell?
Can anger help thee, Jonah? Do thou well? Explicit Hist.

Meditatio vndecima.
HOw poor a thing is man! How vain's his mind!
How strange, and base! And wau'ring like ye wind!
How uncouth are his ways! How full of danger!
How to himself, is he himself a stranger!
His heart's corrupt, and all his thoughts are vain,
His actions sinful, and his words profane,
His will's deprau'd, his senses all beguiled,
His reason's dark, His members all defiled,
His hasty feet are swift, and prone to ill,
His guilty hands are ever bent to kill,
His tongue's a sponge of venom, (or of worse)
Her practice is to swear, her skill to curse;
His eyes, are fierballs of lustful fire,
And outward spies, to inward foul desire,
His body is a well erected station,
But full of filth, and foul corrupted passion,
Fond love; and raging lust, and foolish fears, Virgil* Aeneid. 8. Hinc
metuunt, cupiunt, dotent, gaudentque, nec auras Recipient, clausae tenebris,
and carcere caeco.

Excessive joy, and grief o'rwhelm'd with tears
Immoderate; and covetous Desire,
And sinful anger, red, and hot as fire;
These daily clog the soul, that is fast in prison,
From whose increase, this lucklesse brood is risen,
Respectlesse Pride, and lustful Idleness,
Foul ribbauld talk, and loathsome Drunkenness,
Fruitless Despair, and needless Curiosity,
Odious Ingratitude, Double Hypocrisy,
Base Flattery, and haughty-ey'd Ambition,
Heart-gnawing Hatred, and squint-eyed Suspicion,
Self-eating Envy, Envious Detraction,
Hopeless Distrust, and too-too sad Deiection,
Reuengefull Malice, Hellish Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and light Inconstancy;
Daring Presumption, wry-mouthed Derision,
Fearful Apostacy, vain Superstition.
What heedfull watch? And what contin'all ward?
How great respect? and howerly regard,
Stands man in hand to have, when such a brood
Of furious hell hounds seek to suck his blood?
Day, night, and hour, they rebel, and wrestle,
And never cease, till they subdue the Castle.
How slight a thing is man? How frail and brittle?
How seeming great is he? How truly little?
Within the bosom of his holiest works,
Some hidden Embers of old Adam lurks;
Which oftentimes in men of righteous ways,
Burst out in flame, and for a season blaze.
Lord teach our hearts, and give our souls directions,
Subdue our Passions, Curb our stout Affections,
Nip thou the bud, before the Bloome begins;
Lord, keep all good men from presumptuous sins.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Booth for shelter Jonah made;
God sent a Gourd for better shade;
But by the next approaching light,
God sent a Worm consumed it quite.
Sect. 12.
SO Jonah (sore oppressed, Hist. Chap. 4. ver. 5.
and heauy-hearted)
From out the Cities circuit straight departed,
Departed to the Eastern borders of it,
Where sick with anguish sat this sullen Prophet;
He built a Booth, and in the Booth he sat,
(Until some few days had expired their date
With ouer-tedious pace) where he might see,
What would betide to threatened Niniuie;
A trunk that wants sap, is soon decayed;
The slender Booth of boughs and branches made,
Soon yielded to the fire of Phoebus Ray,
So dried to Dust, consuming quite away:
Whereat, the great Iehoua spoke the word,
And over Iona's head there sprang a Gourd, Verse. 6.

Whose roots were fixed within the quickening earth,
Which gave it nourishment, as well as birth;
God raised up a Gourd, a Gourd should last,
Let wind, or scortching Sun, or blow, or blast;
As coals of fire raked in Embers, Simile.
lie
Obscure, and undiscerned by the eye;
But being stird, regaine a glimmering light,
Revive, and glow, burning a-fresh and bright;
So Jonah 'gan to cheer through this relief,
And joyful was, deuoyded all his grief:
He joyed to see, that God had not forgot
His drooping servant, nor forsook him not;
He joyed, in hope the Gourds strange wonder will
Persuade the people, he is a Prophet still;
The fresh aspect did much content his sight,
The herball savor gave his sense delight;
So Jonah much delighted in his Gourd,
Enjoyed the pleasures, that it did afford:
But Lord! Verse. ^.
what earthly thing can long remain?
How momentary are they! and how vain!
How vain is earth, that man's delighted in it!
Her pleasures rise; and vanish in a minnit:
How fleeting are the joys, we find below!
Whose tides (uncertain) always ebb, and flow;
For lo! this Gourd (that was so fair, and sound)
Is quite consumed, and eaten to the ground;
No sooner Titan had vp-heau'd his head,
From off the pillow of his Saffron bed,
But God prepared a silly, silly worm,
(Perchance brought thither, by an Eastern storm)
The worm that must obey, and well knew how,
Consumed it quite, ne left it root, nor bow;
Consumed it straight, within a minut's space,
Left naught, Explicit Hist.
but (sleeping) Jonas in the place.
Meditatio duodecima.
THe Pleasures of the world, (which soon abate)
Are lively Emblems of our own estate,
Which (like a Banquet at a Fun'rall show)
But sweeten grief, and serve to flatter woe.
Pleasure is fleeting still, and makes no stay, Voluptas.

It lends a smile, or twain, and steals away.
Man's life is fickle, full of winged haste, Vita.

It mocks the sense with joy, and soon does waste.
Pleasure does crown thy youth, and lulls thy wants, Voluptas

But (sullen age approaching) straight auaunts.
Man's life is Joy, and Dolor seeks to banish, Vita.

It does lament, and mourn in age, and vanish.
The time of pleasure's like the life of man;
Both joyful, both contained in a span;
Both highly prized, and both on sudden lost,
When most we trust them, they deceive us most;
What fit of madness makes us love them thus?
We leave our lives, and pleasure leaves us:
Why what are Pleasures? But a golden dream, Voluptas, quale

Which (waking) makes our wants the more extreme?
And what is Life? A bubble full of care, Vita, quale.

Which (pricked by death) straight empties into air:
The flowers (clad in far more rich array,
Then erst was Solomon) do soon decay;
What thing more sweet, or fairer then a flower?
Nath'les, it blooms, and fades within an hour;
What thing more pleasing then a morning Sun?
And yet this pleasure every Day is dun:
But thou art heir to Croesus, and thy treasure
Being great, and endless, endless is thy pleasure;
But thou (thou Croesus heir) consider must,
Thy wealth, and thou, came from, and goes to dust;
Another's noble, and his name is great,
And takes his place upon a lofty seat;
True it is, but yet his many wants are such,
That better 'twere he were not known so much.
Another binds his soul in Hymen's knot,
His Spouse is chaste, and fair withouten spot,
But yet his comfort is bedasht, and done,
His grounds are stock't, and now he want's a son.
How fickle, and vnconstant's man's Estate!
Man feign would have, but then he knows not what;
And having, rightly knows not how to prize it,
But like the foolish Dunghill-cock imploy's it:
But who desires to live a life content,
Wherein his Cruze of joy shall never be spent,
Let him consider what may be desired, Boctius Philos. consol.

The date whereof is not to be expired:
For that is not worth the craving, to obtain
A happiness, that must be lost again;
Nor that, which most do covet most, is best;
Best are the goods, mixed with contented rest;
Gasp not for Folia vanitatis.
Honor, wish no blazing glory,
For these will perish in an ages story;
Nor yet for power, for that may be conferred
On fools, as well, as thee, that have deserved.
Thirst not for Lands, nor Money; wish for none,
For Lil^a terrae.
Wealth is neither lasting, nor our own;
Riches are fair inticements, to deceive us;
They flatter, while we live, and dying, leave us.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jonah desires to dye, The Lord
Rebukes him, He maintains his word,
His anger he does justify,
God pleads the Cause for Niniuie.
Sect. 13.
WHen ruddy Phoebus had (with morning light)
Subdued the East, and put the stars to flight, Hist. Chap. 4.^.

The Lord prepared a fervent Eastern wind,
Whose drought together with the Sun combined,
Each adding fire to the others heat,
(With strong united force) amain did beat,
And sore reflect upon the helpless head
Of fainting Jonah (that was well-nye dead)
Who turning often, and tossing to and fro,
(As they that are in torments use to do)
And (restless) finding no success of ease,
But rather, that his tortures still increase;
His secret passion to his soul betrayed,
Wishing with all his heart to dye, and said;
O kill me (Lord) or lo, my heart will riue;
For better it is for me to dye then live:
So said, the Lord did interrupt his passion, Verse. 9. Gods speech to Jonah.

Saying, How now? Is this a seemly fashion?
Does it become my servants heart to swell?
Can anger help thee? Jonah, do thou well?
Is this a fit speech? or a well-plac'd word?
What, art thou angry ( Jonah) for a Gourd?
What, if the Arabians with their ruder train
Had killed thine Oxen, Job. 2
and thy Cattle slain?
What, if consuming fire (fallen from heaven)
Had all thy servants of their lives bereauen,
And burnt thy Sheep? What, if by strong oppression
The Chaldees had usurped unjust possession
Upon thy Cammels? Or had Boreas blown
His full-mouthed blast, and cast thy houses down,
And slain thy sons, amid their iollities?
Or had thou lost thy Vineyard full of trees? ^. King. 21.15.

Or bin bereaved of thine only Sheep, 2. Sam. 12.3.

That in thy tender bosom used to sleep?
How would thine hasty spirit then bin sturr'd,
If thou art angry, Jonah, for a Gourd?
So Jonah frames his answer thus, Ionahs answer.
and says,
Lord, I do well to vex unto the death;
I blush not to acknowledge, and profess
Deserved rage, I Am angry, I confess;
'Twould make a spirit that is through frozen,
To blaze like flaming Pitch, and fry like Rozen:
Why do thou ask that thing, that thou can tell?
Thou know I Am angry, and it beseemes me well.
So said, Verse. 10.
the Lord to Jonah thus bespake;
Do thou bemoane, and such compassion take
Upon a Gourd, Gods reply.
whose seed thou did not sow,
Nor moved thy skillful hands to make it grow,
Whose beauty small, and profit was but slight,
Which sprang, and also perished in a night?
Had thou (O dust and ashes) such a care,
And inbred pity, a trifling plant to spare?
Had thou, (O hard and incompassionate,
To wish the razing of so brave a State)
Had thou (I say) compassion, to bewail
The extirpation of a Gourd so frail?
And shall not I (that am the Lord of Lords)
Whose fountaine's never dry, Verse. 11.
but still affords
Sweet streams of mercy, with a fresh supply,
To those that thirst for grace? What shall not I,
(That am the God of mercy, and have sworn
To pardon sinners, when soever they turn?
(I say) shall I disclaim my wonted pity,
And bring to ruin such a goodly City,
Whose hearts (so truly penitent) implore me,
Who day and night power forth their souls before me?
Shall I destroy the mighty Niniuie,
Whose people are like sands about the sea?
Among which are sixe-score thousand souls (at least)
That hang upon their tender mothers breast?
Whose pretty smiles did never yet descry
The dear affection of their mothers eye?
Shall I subvert, and bring to desolation
A City, (nay, more aptly termed a Nation)
Whose walls are wide, and wondrous full of might?
Whose hearts are sorrowful, and souls contrite?
Whose infants are in number, so amounting?
And beasts, and cattle, endless, without counting?
What, Jonah, shall a Gourd so move thy pity?
And shall not I spare such a goodly City? Explicit Hist*

Meditatio vltima.
MY heart is full, and knows not how to vent;
My tongue proves traitor to my poor intent;
My mind's in labor, and find's no redress;
My heart conceiues, My tongue cannot express;
My organs suffer, through a maine Defect;
Alas! I want a proper Dialect,
To blazon forth the tithe of what I muse;
The more I meditate, the more accrewes;
But lo, my faultring tongue must say no more,
Unless she step where she has trod before.
What? shall I then be silent? No, I Will speak,
(Till tongue be tired, and my lungs be weak)
Of dearest mercy, in as sweet a strain,
As it shall please my Muse to lend a vain;
And when my voice shall stop within her sourse,
And speech shall faulter in this high discourse,
My tired tongue (vnsham'd) shall thus extend,
Only to name, Dear mercy, and so end.
Oh high Imperial King, heavens Architect!
Is man a thing, befitting thy Respect?
Lord, thou art wisdom, and thy ways are holy,
But man's polluted, full of filth, and folly,
Yet is he (Lord) the fabric of thy hand,
And in his soul he bears thy glorious brand,
How-e're defaced with the rust of sin,
Which has abused thy stamp, and eaten in;
It Is not the frailty of man's corrupted nature,
Makes thee ashamed, t'acknowledge man, thy creature;
But like a tender father, here on earth,
(Whose child by nature, or abortiue birth,
Does want that sweet and favorable relish,
Wherewith, her creatures, Nature does imbellish)
Respects him ne'rthelesse; so stands the case,
'Twixt God, and sinful man: Though sin deface
The glorious portraiture that man did bear,
Whereby he loathed, and ugly does appear,
Yet God (within whose tender bowels are
Deep gulfs of mercy, sweet beyond compare)
Regards, and loves, (with reu'rence be it said)
Nay seems to dote on man; when he has strayd,
Lord, thou have brought him to his fold again;
When he was lost, thou did not then disdain
To think upon a vagabond, and give
Thine only Son to dye, that he might live.
How poor a mite art thou content withal,
That man may escape his downe-approching fall?
Though base we are, yet did not thou abhor us,
But (as our story notes) art pleading for us,
To save us harmless from our foemans jaws;
Art thou turned Orator, to plead our cause?
How are thy mercies full of admiration!
How sovereign! How sweet's their application!
Fatning the soul with sweetness, and repayring
The rotten ruins of a soul Despayring.
Lo here ( Malfido) is the feast prepared;
Fall too with courage, and let naught be spared;
Taste freely of it, Here Is no Misers feast;
Eat what thou can, and pocket up the rest:
These precious vyands are Restoritie,
Eat then; and if the sweetness make thee dry,
Drink large Carouses out of Mercies cup,
The best lies in the bottom, Drink all up:
These cates are sweet Ambrosia to thy soul,
And that, which fills the brimme of Mercies boule,
Is dainty Nectar; Eat, and drink thy fill;
Spare not the one, ne yet the other spill;
Provide in time: Thy Banquet's now begun,
Lay up in store, against the feast be done:
For lo, the time of banqueting is short,
And once being done, the world cannot restor't;
It is a feast of Mercy, and of Grace;
It is a feast for all, or hye, or base;
A feast for him that begs upon the way,
As well for him that does the Scepter sway;
A feast for him that howerly bemoanes
His dearest sins, with sighs, and tears, and groans;
A feast for him, whose gentle heart reformes;
A feast for MEN; and so a FEAST FOR WORMS
Dear liefest Lord, that feast'st the world with Grace,
Extend thy bountious Hand, thy Glorious Face:
Bid joyful welcome to thy hungry ghest,
That we may praise the Master of the Feast;
And in thy mercy grant this boon to me,
That I may dye to sin, and live to thee.
FINIS.
S. AMBROSE. Misericordia est plenitudo omnium virtutum.
THE GENERAL USE OF this History.
WHen as the Ancient world did all imbarke
Within the compass of good Noah's Arc,
Into the new-washt world a Dove was sent,
Who in her mouth returned an Oliffe plant,
Which in a silent language this related:
How that the waters were at length abated:
Those swelling waters, is the wrath of God,
And like the Dove, are Prophets sent abroad:
The Oliffe leafe's a joyful type of peace,
Whereby we note Gods vengeance does decrease;
They salve the wounded heart, and make it whole,
They bring glad tidings to the drooping soul,
Proclaiming grace to them that thirst for Grace,
Mercy to those that Mercy will embrace.
Malfido, thou, in whose distrustful breast
Despair has brought in sticks to build her nest,
Where she may safely lodge her lucklesse brood,
To feed upon thy heart, and suck thy blood,
Beware betimes, lest custom and permission
Prescribe a Right, and so she claim possession.
Despairing man, whose burden makes thee stoop
Under the terror of thy sins, and droop
Through dull despair, whose too-too sullen grief
Makes Heaven unable to apply relief,
Whose ears are dulled with noise of whips and chains,
And yells of damned souls, through tort'red pains,
Come here, and rouse thy self; vnseele those eyes,
Which sad Despair closed up; Arise, Arise,
And go to Niniuey, the worlds great Palace,
Earths mighty wonder, and behold, the ballace,
And burden of her bulk, is naught but sin,
Which (wilful) she commits, and wallowes in;
Behold her Images, her fornications,
Her crying sins, her vile abominations;
Behold the guiltless blood that she did spill,
Like Spring tides in the streets, and reeking still:
Behold her scortching lusts, and taint desire,
Like Sulfurous Aetna blaze, and blaze up hier;
She rapes, and rends, and thieves, and there is none
Can justly call the thing he has; his own;
That sacred Name of God, that Name of wonder,
In stead of worshipping, she tears in sunder;
She Is not enthralled to this sin, or another,
But like a Leper's all infected over;
Not only sinful, but in sins subjection,
She Is not infected, but a mere infection.
No sooner had the Prophet (Heavens great Spy)
Begun an onset to his greater Cry,
But she repented, sighed, and wept, and tore
Her curious hair, and garments that she wore,
She sat in ashes, and put sackcloth on,
All drencht in briny grief, all woe*begon;
She calls a Fast, proclaims a Prohibition
To man, and beast; (sad tokens of contrition)
No sooner prayed, but heard; No sooner groaned,
But pitied; No sooner grieved, but moan'd;
Timely Repentance speedy grace procured,
The sore that is taken in time, is quickly cured:
No sooner did her trickling tears, or'-flow
Her blubbered cheeks, (sly messengers of woe)
But straitwaies heaven wiped her suffused eyes,
And gently strok'd her cheeks, and bid her rise;
No faults were seen, as if no fault had bin,
Dear Mercy made a Quittance for her sin.
Malfido, rouse thy leaden spirit, Bestirre thee,
Hold up thy drowsy head, Here Is comfort for thee;
What if thy Zeal be frozen hard? What then?
Thy Saviors Blood will thaw that frost again:
Thy prayr's that should be fervent, hot as fire,
Proceed but coldly from a dull Desire;
What then? Grieve Inly, But do not dismay,
Who hear's thy prayers, will give thee strength to pray:
Though left awhile, thou art not quite given over,
Where Sin abounds, there Grace abounds more:
Alas, this is all the good that I can do thee,
To ease thy grief, I here commend unto thee
A little Book, but a great Mystery,
A great Delight, A little History;
A little branch slipped from a saving tree,
But bearing fruit as great, as great might be;
A small abridgment it is of Gods great love;
A Message sent from heaven by a Dove:
It is a heavenly Lecture, that relates
To Princes, Pastors, People, all Estates
Their seu'rall duties.
Peruse it well, and bind it to thy breast,
There rests the Cause of thy Defective rest:
But read it often, or else read it not:
Once read, is not observed, or soon forgot,
Nor is it enough to read, but understand,
Or else thy tongue, for want of wit,'s profaned,
Nor is it enough to purchase knowledge by it;
Salve heales no sore, unless the party apply it:
Apply it then; It Is hard, and mickle pains,
Do what thou can, Fac quod potes, and quod non pates, pete.
and pray for what remains.
The particular application.
THen thou, that art oppressed with sad Despair,
Here shall thou see the strong effect of Prayre:
Then pray with faith, Jonah, Chap. 2. and chap 3.10. Application.
and (fervent) without ceasing
(Like Jacob) wrestle, till thou get a blessing.
Here shall thou see the type of Christ, Chap. 1.17.
thy Savior;
Then let thy Suits be through his name, Application.
and favor.
Here shall thou find repentance and true grief
Of sinners like thy self, Chap. 3.5.
and their belief;
Then suit thy grief to theirs, Application.
and let thy soul
Cry mightily, Chap. 3.10.
until her wounds be whole.
Here shall thou see the meeknes of thy God,
Who on Repentance turns, and burns the Rod;
Repents, of what he meant, Chap. 4.
and seems sorry;
Here may thou then behold him pleading for ye:
Then thus shall be thy meed, Application.
if thou repent,
In stead of plagues and direful punishment,
Thou shall find mercy, love, and heavens applause,
And God of heaven (himself) will plead thy cause.
Here have thou then compiled within this Treasure,
First, Chap. 1.2.
the Almighties high, and just displeasure
Against foul sin, or such as sinful be,
Or Prince, or poor, or high, or low degree.
Here is descri'd the beaten Road to Faith: Chap. 3.4.

Here may thou see the force that Preaching has: Chap. 3.5.

Here is described in (brief but) full expression, Chap. 3.6.

The nature of a Convert, and his passion:
His sober Diet, which is thin, and spare,
His clothing, which is Sackcloth; and his Prayre
Not faintly sent to heaven, nor sparingly,
But piercing, fervent, and mighty cry: Chap. 3.10.

Here may thou see, how Prayer, and true Repentance
Do strive with God, prevail, and turn his sentence,
From strokes to stroking, and from plagues infernal,
To boundless Mercies, and to life Eternal.
Till Zepher lend my Bark a second Gale,
I flip mine Anchor, and I strike my sail.
FINIS.
O Dulcis saluator Mundi vltima verba quae tu dixisti in Cruce, sint vltima mea
verba in Luce; and quando amplius affare non possum, exaudi tu cordis mei
desiderium.
A Hymn to God.
WHo gives me then an Adamantine Quill?
A Marble tablet? And a David's skill?
To blazon forth the praise of my dear Lord
In deep grau'n letters, aye upon Record
To last, for times eternal process, suer,
So long, as Sun, and Moon, and Stars enduer:
Had I as many mouths, as Sands there are,
Had I a nimble tongue for every Star,
And every word I speak, a Caractere,
And every minutes time ten ages were,
To chaunt forth all thy praise it naught avail,
For tongues, and words, and time, and all would fail:
Much less can I poor Weakling tune my tongue,
To take a task befits an Angels song;
Sing what thou can, when thou can sing no more,
Weep then as fast that thou can sing no more,
Be blurre thy book with tears, and go thy ways,
For every blurre will prove a book of praise.
Thine Eye that viewes the moving Spheres above,
Let it give praise to him that makes them move:
Thou riches have; Thy Hands that hold, and have them,
Let them give praise to him, that freely gave them:
Thine Arms defend thee, then for recompense,
Let them praise him, that gave thee such defense:
Thy Tongue was given to praise thy Lord, the giver,
Then let thy Tongue praise highest God for ever:
Faith comes by hearing, and thy faith will save thee;
Then let thine Ears praise him, that hearing gave thee:
Thy heart is begged by him that first did make it,
My son, give me thy heart; Lord, freely take it:
Eyes, hands, and arms, tongues, ears, and hearts of men,
Sing praise, and let the people say, Amen.
:Tune you your Instruments, and let them vary, Psalm. 150.

Praise him upon them in his Sanctuary,
Praise him within the highest Firmament,
Which shows his power and his government,
Praise him, for all his mighty Acts are known,
Praise him according to his high Renown,
Praise him with Trump victorious, shrill, and sharp,
With Psaltry loud, and many-stringed Harp,
With sounding Tymbrell, and delightful Flute,
With (Musicks full Interpreter) the Lute,
Praise him upon the Maiden Virginalls,
Upon the clerick Organs, and Cymballs,
Upon the sweet maiestick Vyalls touch,
Double your joys, and let your praise be such;
Let all, in whom is life and breath, give praise
To mighty God of Hosts, in endless days;
Let every Soul, to whom a voice is given,
Sing Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of heaven;
For lo, a Lamb is found, that undertook
To break the seuen-fold-seale, and open the Book:
O let my life add number to my days,
To show thy Glory, and to sing thy praise;
Let every minute in thy praise be spent,
Let every head be bare, and knee be bent
To thee (dear Lamb;) Who ere thy praises hide,
O let his lips be closed, and tongue for ever ty'de.
Halelujah:
Gloria Deo in excelsis.
Eleven Pious Meditations.
1
WIthin the holy Writ I well discover
Three special Attributes of God; His Power,
His Justice, and his Mercy, All uncreated,
Eternal all, and all Vnseparated
From Gods pure Essence, yet from thence proceeding
All very God, All perfect, All exceeding;
And from that selfsame Text three names I gather
Of Great Iehoua; Lord, and God, and Father;
The first denotes him mounted on his Throne,
In Power, Majesty, Dominion;
The next descries him on his Kingly Bench,
Rewarding Evil with dreadful punishments;
The third describes him on his Mercy-seate,
Full great in Grace, and in his Mercy great;
All three I worship, and before all three
My heart shall humbly prostrate, with my knee;
But in my private choice, I fancy rather,
Then call him Lord, or God, to call him Father.
2
IN Hell no Life, in Heaven no Death there is,
In Earth both Life, and Death, both Bale, and Blis,
In Heauen's all Life, no end, nor new supplying;
In Hell's all Death, and yet there is no dying;
Earth (like a partial Ambidexter) does
Prepare for Death, or Life, prepares for Both;
Who lives to sin, in Hell his portion's given,
Who dies to sin, shall after live in Heaven.
Though Earth my Nurse be, Heaven, be thou my Father;
Ten thousand deaths let me enduer rather
Within my Nurses arms, then One to Thee;
Earths honor, with thy frowns, is death to me:
I liue-on Earth, as on a Stage of sorrow;
Lord, if thou please, end the Play to morrow:
I live on Earth, as in a Dream of pleasure,
Awake me when thou will, I wait thy leisure:
I live on Earth, but as of life bereauen,
My life's with thee, for (Lord) thou art in Heaven.
3
NOthing that ever was made, was made for nothing:
Beasts for thy food, their skins were for thy clothing,
Flowers for thy smell, and Herbs for Cuer good,
Trees for thy shade, Their Fruit for pleasing Food:
The showers fall upon the fruitful ground,
Whose kindly Dew makes tender Grass abound,
The Grass is made for beasts to feed upon,
And beasts are food for Man: But Man alone
Is made to serve his Lord in all his ways,
And be the Trumpet of his Makers praise.
Let Heaven be then to me obdure as brass,
The Earth as iron, unapt for grain, or grass,
Then let my Flocks consume, and never steed me,
Let pinching Famine want, wherewith to feed me,
When I forget to honor thee, (my Lord)
Thy glorious Attributes, thy Works, thy Word.
O let the Trump of thine eternal Fame,
Sound ever, Ever hallowed be thy Name.
4
GOd made the World, and all that therein is,
Yet, what a little part of it is his?
Quarter the Earth, and see, how small a room
Is styled with the name of Christendom;
The rest (through blinded ignorance) rebels,
O're-run with Pagans, Turks, and Infidels:
Nor yet is all this little Quarter his,
For (though all know him) half know him amiss,
Professing Christ for lucre, (as they list)
And serve the triple Crown of Antichrist;
Yet is this little handful much made lesser,
There Is many Libertines, for one Professor:
Nor do Professors all profess aright,
Among whom there often lurks an Hypocrite.
O where, and what is thy Kingdom? (blessed God)
Where is thy Scepter? where is thine iron Rod?
Reduce thy reck'nings to their total sum,
O let thy Power, and thy Kingdom Come.
5
MAN in himselfe's a little World, Alone,
His Soul's the Court, or high Imperial Throne,
Wherein as Empress, sits the Understanding
Gently directing, yet with awe Commanding:
Her Handmaid's WILL: Affections, Maids of Honor,
All following close, and duly waiting on her:
But Sin, that always enui'd man's Condition,
Within this kingdom raised up Division;
Withdrawn man's Will, and bribed his false Affection,
That This, no order has, nor That, Election;
The Will proves traitor to the Understanding;
Reason has lost her power, and left commanding,
She Is quite deposed, and put to foul disgrace,
And Tyrant Will, vsurps her Empty place.
Vouchsafe (Lord) in this little World of mine
To reign, that I may reign with Thee in thine:
And since my will is quite of good bereauen,
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
6
WHo live to sin, they all are thieves to Heaven,
And Earth; They steal from God, and take vngiuen;
Good men they rob, and such as live upright,
And (being bastards) share the free-mans Right;
They Are all as owners, in the owners stead,
And (like to Dogs) devour the childrens bread;
They have, and lack, and want what they possess,
They Are most unhappy, in their most happiness:
They are not goods, but riches, that thou have,
And not being goods, to eu'ls they turn at last.
(Lord) what I have, let me enjoy in thee,
And thee in it, or else take it from me;
My store, or want, make thou, or fade, or flourish,
So shall my comforts neither change, nor perish;
That little I enjoy, (Lord) make it mine,
In making me (that am a Sinner) thine;
It Is thou, or none, that shall supply my need,
O Lord; Give us this day our daily bread.
7
THe quick-conceited Schoolmen well approve
A difference 'twixt Charity, and Love;
Love is a virtue, whereby we explain
Our selves to God, and God to us again:
But Charity's imparted to our Brother,
Whereby we traffic, one man with another:
The first extends to God; The last belongs
To man, In giving right, and bearing wrongs;
In number, they are twain, In virtue, One;
For one not truly being, to others none.
In loving God, if I neglect my Neighbor,
My love has lost his proof, and I my labor:
My Zeal, my Faith, my Hope that never fails me,
(If Charity be wanting) naught auailes me.
(Lord) in my Soul, a spirit of Love create me,
And I will love my Brother, if he hate me:
In naught but love, lets me envy my betters;
And then, Forgive my debts, as I may detters.
8
I Find a true resemblance in the growth
Of Sin, and Man; Alike in breeding, both;
The Soul's the Mother, and the Devil Syer,
Who lusting long in mutual hot desire,
Enjoy their wills, and join in Copulation;
The Seed that fills her womb, is foul Tentation;
The sins Conception, is the Souls Consent;
And then it quickens, when it gives content;
The birth of Sin is finished in the action;
And Custom brings it to its full perfection.
O let my fruitless Soul be barren rather.
Then bring forth such a Child, for such a Father:
Or if my Soul breed Sin, (not being wary)
O let it either dye, or else miscarry;
She is thy Spouse ( O Lord) do thou advise her,
Keep thou her chaste, Let not the Fiend entice her:
Try thou my heart, Thy Trials bring Salvation,
But let me not be led into Temptation.
9
FOrtune (that blind supposed Goddess) is
Still rated at, if ought succeed amiss;
It Is she (the vain abuse of Providence)
That bears the blame, when others make the offense;
When this man's barn finds not her wonted store,
Fortune's condemned, because she sent no more;
If this man dye, or that man live too long,
Fortune's accused, and she has done the wrong;
Ah foolish Dolts, and (like your Goddess) blind!
You make the fault, and call your Saint unkind;
For when the cause of Eu'll begins in Man,
The effect ensues from whence the cause began;
Then know the reason of thy discontent,
The eu'll of Sin, makes Eu'll of punishment.
(Lord) hold me up, or spur me, when I fall;
So shall my Eu'll be just, or not at all:
Defend me from the World, the Flesh, the Devil,
And so thou shall deliver me from Evil.
10
THe Priestly skirts of A'rons holy coat
I kiss; and to my morning Muse deuote:
Had never King, in any age, or Nation,
Such glorious Robes, set forth in such a fashion,
With Gold, and Gemmes, and Silks of Princely Dye,
And Stones, befitting more then Majesty:
The Persian Sophies, and rich Shaeba's Queen
Had never the like, nor ever the like had seen;
Upon the skirts (in order as they fell)
First, a Pomegranat was, and then a Bell;
By each Pomegranat did a Bell appear;
Many Pomegranats, many Bells there were;
Pomegranats nourish, Bells do make a sound;
As blessings fall, Thanksgiuings must abound.
If thou will clothe my heart with A'rons tyer,
My tongue shall praise, as well as heart desire:
My tongue, and pen, shall dwell upon thy Story,
(O Lord) for thine is Kingdom, Power, Glory.
THe Ancient Sophists, that were so precise,
(And oftentimes (perchance) too curious nice)
Auerre, that Nature has bestowed on Man
Three perfect Souls: When this I truly scan,
Me thinks, their Learning swathed in Error, lies;
They were not wise enough, and yet too wise,
Too curious wise, because they mention more
Then one; Not wise enough, because not four;
Nature, not Grace, is Mistres of their Schools;
Grace counts them wisest, Sapere est insipere.
that are veriest Fools:
Three Souls in man? Grace does a fourth allow,
The Soul of Faith: But this is Greek to you:
It Is Faith that makes man truly wise; It Is Faith
Makes him possess that thing he never has.
This Glorious Soul of Faith bestow on me,
(O Lord) or else take thou the other three: Faith makes men less then
Children, more then Men,
It makes the Soul cry, Abba, and Amen.
FINIS.
PENTELOGIA: Or THE QVINTESSENCE OF MEDITATION.

Mors tua, Mors Christi, Fraus Mundi, Gloria Coeli, Et Dolor Inferni, sunt
meditanda tibi.

Thy Death, the Death of Christ, the Worlds Tentation, Heavens Joy, Hells
Torment, be thy Meditation.



AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Richard Moore, and are to be sold
at his shop in Saint Dunstans Churchyard. 1620.

Mors tua. 1
ME thinks, I see the nimble-aged Sire
Pass by amain, with feet unapt to tire,
Upon his head an Hower-glasse he wears,
And in his wrinkled hand, a Sith he bears,
(Both Instruments, to take the lives from Men,
The one shows with what, the other shows when.)
Me thinks, I hear the Doleful Passing Bell,
Setting an onset to his louder knell;
(This moody music of impartial Death
Who daunces after, daunces out of breath.)
Me thinks, I see my dearest friends lament,
With sighs, and tears, and woeful dryriment,
My tender Wife, and Children, standing by,
Dewing the Deathbed, whereupon I lie.
Me thinks, I hear a Voice (in secret) say,
Thy Glass is run, and thou must dye to day.
Mors Christi. 2
ANd am I here, and my Redeemer gone?
Can He be dead, and is not my life done?
Was he tormented in excess of measure?
And do I live yet? And yet live in pleasure?
Alas! could Sinners find out never a one,
More fit then Thee, for them to spit upon?
Did thy cheeks entertain a Traitors lips?
Was thy dear body scourged, and torn with whips,
So that the guiltless blood came trickling after?
And did thy fainting brows sweat blood and water?
Were thou (Lord) hanged upon the Cursed Tree?
O world of Grief! And was all this for me?
Burst forth, my tears, into a world of sorrow,
And let my nights of grief never find a morrow;
Since thou art dead ( Lord) grant thy servant room,
Within his heart, to build thy heart a Tomb.
Fraus Mundi. 3
WHat is the World? A great Exchange of ware,
Wherein all sorts, and sexes cheapning are,
The Flesh, the Devil sit, and cry, What lack ye?
When most they fawn, they most intend to rack ye;
The wares, are Cups of Joy, and Beds of Pleasure,
There Is goodly choice, down weight, and flowing measure;
A Soul's the price, but they give time to pay,
Upon the Deathbed, on the dying Day.
Hard is the Bargain, and unjust the Measure,
When as the Price so much out-lasts the Pleasure:
The Joys that are on earth are Counterfeits;
If ought be true, it is this, The are true Deceits;
They flatter, fawn, and (like the Crocadile)
Kill where they laugh, and murder where they smile:
They daily dip within thy Dish, and Cry,
Who has betrayed thee? Mastre, Is it I?
Gloria Coeli. 4
WHen I behold, and well advise upon
The Wisemans speech, Eccles. 1.
There Is naught beneath the Sun,
But vanity, my Soul rebels within,
And loathes the Dunghill-prison she is in:
But when I look to new Jerusalem,
Wherein's reserved my Crown, my Diadem,
O what a Heaven of bliss, my Soul enioyes,
On sudden rapt into that heaven of Joys!
Where ravished (in the depth of meditation)
She well discernes, with Eye of Contemplation,
The Glory of God, in his Imperial Seat,
Full strong in Might, in Majesty complete,
Where troops of Powers, Virtues, Cherubins,
Angels, Archangels, Saints, and Seraphins,
Are chaunting praises to their heavenly King,
Where Halelujah they for ever sing.
Dolor Inferni. 5
LEt Poets please to torture Tantalus,
Let gryping Vultures gnaw Prometheus,
And let Ixion turn his endless Wheel,
Let Nemesis torment with whips of Steel;
They far come short, to express the pains of those
That rage in Hell, enwrapt in endless woes;
Where time no end, nor plagues find no exemption; Ex infernis nulla redemp.

Where cries admit no help, nor place redemption;
Where fire lacks no flame, the flame no heat,
To make their torments sharp, and plagues complete;
Where wretched Souls to tortures bound shall be,
Serving a world of years, and not be Free;
Where nothing's heard, but yells, and sudden cries;
Where fire never slakes, nor Worm ever dies:
But where this Hell is placed (my Muse)) stop there,
Lord, show me what it is, but never where.
1 Mors tua.
CAn he be Fair, that withers at a Blast?
Or he be Strong, that Ayery Breath can cast?
Can he be Wise, that knows not how to live?
Or he be Rich, that nothing has to give?
Can he be Young, that is Feeble, Weak, and Wan?
So Fair, so Strong, so Wise, so Rich, so Young is Man:
So Fair is Man, that Death (a parting Blast)
Crops his fair Flower, and makes him Earth at last;
So Strong is Man, that with a Gasping Breath
He totters, and bequeaths his Strength to Death;
So Wise is Man, that if with Death he strive,
His Wisdom cannot teach him how to live;
So Rich is Man, that (all his Debts b'ing paid)
His wealth's the Winding Sheet wherein he is laid:
So Young is Man, that (broke with Care and Sorrow)
He Is old enough to Day, to Dye to Morrow:
Why bragg'st thou then, Thou Worm of Five foot-long?
The art neither Fair, nor Strong, nor Wise, nor Rich, nor Young.
2 Mors Christi.
I Thurst; And who shall quench this Eager Thurst?
I Grieve; And with my grief my Heart will Burst;
I Grieve, because I thurst without Relief;
I Thurst, because my Soul is burnt with Grief;
I thurst; And (dried with Grief) my Heart will Dye;
I Grieve, and thurst the more, For Sorrow's dry:
The more I grieve, the more my thurst appears:
Would God! I had not grieved out all my tears;
I Thurst; And yet my Griefs have made a Flood;
But Tears are salt; I Grieve, and Thurst for Blood;
I Grieve for Blood; for Blood must send Relief;
I Thurst for Blood, for Blood must ease my Grief;
I Thurst for sacred Blood of a Dear Lamb;
I Grieve to think from whence that Dear Blood came;
'Twas shed for Me, O let me drink my fill,
Although my Grief remain Entier still:
O sovereign Power of that Vermilion SPRING,
Whose Virtue, neither Heart conceiues, nor Tongue can sing.
3 Fraus Mundi.
I Love the World (as Clients love the Laws)
To manage the vprightnes of my Cause;
The World loves me, as Sheepheards do their Flocks,
To Rob, and spoil them of their fleecy Locks;
I love the World, and use it as mine Inn,
To bait, and rest my tired Carcass in:
The World loves me, For what? To make her Game;
For filthy Sin, she sels me timely Shame;
Forth from her Eyes do Springs of Venom burst,
But like a Basiliske I Will see her first;
And this my firm intended Course shall be,
To poison her, or she will poison me:
We live at Iarres, as froward Gamesters do,
Still guarding, not Regarding others Foe;
I love the World, to serve my turn, and leave her,
It Is no Deceit to Coozen a Deceiuer;
She Will not miss me, I, less the World shall miss,
To lose a World of Grief, to enjoy a World of Bliss.
4 Gloria Coeli.
EArth stands immou'd, and Fixed, Her Cituation
Admits no local Change, no Alteration,
HEAVEN always moves, renewing still his place,
And ever sees us with another Face;
EARTH stands Fixed, yet there I live opprests;
HEAVEN always moves, yet there is all my Rest:
Enlarge thy self, my SOVLE, with Meditation,
Mount there, and there bespeake thy Habitation;
Where Joys are full, and pure, not mixed with mourning,
All Endless, and from which is no returning:
No Theft, no Cruel Murder harbors there,
No Hoary-headed- Care, no sudden Fear,
No pinching Want, no (Griping fast) Oppression,
Nor Death, the stipend of our soul Transgression:
But dearest Friendship, Love, and lasting Pleasure
Aye there abides, withouten stin^, or Measure;
Fullness of Riches, Comfort sempeternall,
Excess without a surfeiting; And Life Eternal.
5 Dolor Inferni.
THe Trump shall blow, The Dead (awaked) shall rise,
And to the Clouds shall turn their wondering Eyes;
The Heaven shall open, The Bridegroom forth shall come,
To judge the World, and give the World her Doom:
Joy to the JUST, to others Endless SMART;
To those the Voice bids COME, to these, DEPART;
DEPART from LIFE, yet (dying) live for Ever;
For Ever dying be, and yet Dye Never;
DEPART like Dogs, with DEVILS take your lot;
DEPART like DEVILS, for I know you not;
Like DOGS, like DEVILS go, Go Howl, and Bark;
DEPART in DARKNESS, for your deeds were Dark;
Let roaring be your MUSIC, And your Food
Be flesh of VIPERS, And your Drink, their BLOOD;
Let FIENDS afflict thee, with REPROACH, and SHAME,
DEPART, DEPART into Eternal FLAME:
If HELL the Guerdon then of Sinners be,
(Lord) give me HELL on Earth (Lord) give me HEAVEN with thee.
-- vv -- vv -- I am Define Tibia versus.
FINIS.

