A Most strange, and true discourse, of the wonderful judgment of God.

OF A MONSTROVS, DEFORmed Infant, begotten by incestuous copulation, between
the brothers son and the sisters daughter, being both unmarried persons.

Which child was borne at Colwall, in the County and Diocese of Hereford,
upon the sixth day of January last, being the feast of the Epiphany, commonly
called Twelfth day. ^599.

A notable and most terrible example against Incest, and Whoredom.



Imprinted at LONDON, for Richard Jones. (...)

TO THE GODLY REAder, I.R. wishes health and holiness.
GOod Reader, when this matter was brought unto me, to consider of, that it
might be drawn into form for the Printers press, I was partly unwilling to
meddle with it: for as much as I know, that the sins of Incest, Onanisme,
Whoredom, Adultery and Fornication, with other Sodomiticall sins of
uncleanness and pollutions, do so outragiously reign, and are in these days
so much used in many places, with overmuch boldness and presumption, for
lack of sharp and due punishment for the same: and that such heinous and great
crimes and abuses had need to be thoroughly handled, and spoken of, by some
most worthy man, of far greater gifts and learning, the^ my self am; the
better to pearce the obdurate and stony hearts of great numbers, that are
therewith grievously infected; and to dissuade others from falling thereinto.

Yet being willing to do my country good, and to make some use of my poor
talent in this behalf, and being importuned by often entreaties of some my
friends, unto whom I could not well deny any reasonable request, who assured me
that the report thereof was delivered them in writing, by a gentleman of good
credit and worship, in the county of Hereford, and near to the place where
this happened: I thought it my part, for the benefit of others, to do what I
might herein; and, as I trust, for the good of many, and hurt of none, as
breefely and co^uenie^tly as might be, to contain it in so small a treatise,
as this is. Wherefore (good Reader) accept thereof, as of a simple admonition:
that this noble Realm, wherein we live, may not be so polluted and defiled, as
it is: but that more prayer, fasting, and restraint of fleshly lusts and
desires, with more diligent reading and hearing of the scriptures, may be used:
whereby those heinous sins, may the better be bridled and avoided in every
one of us. And especially, that the same break not out, into so great outrage,
as it does, and has done of late years: whereby god is so highly
dishonored, that by the gross iniquity of the people, he is provoked to send
such monsters, for part of punishment upon us, into the world, that may make us
ashamed of our selves, and the readyer to hate and detest sin, and by all due
means, to seek severe punishment for the same (without partiality) on such
persons, as therein from time to time shall offend. For which purpose, all
magistrates, who have authority to punish the same, ought to be careful, that
too many offenses of that kind be not redeemed by commutations: least it come
to pass that there should be much more money paid to buy out sin, then
persons punished for sin: whereby it might be doubted, whither we may say, as
master Latymer said once in a sermon, that sin is good marcha^dise, in many
Courts and Co^sistories. Which, if it should be so, the Lord in his good time
redress it, in them that use it. For by this means, as god is dishonored,
so, the Queens majesty and her government, the preachers of the Gospel and
their teaching, are slaundered and evil spoken of, by Papists, Brownists, and
others, both abroad and at home. Who, not rightly considering that the
multitude of the people breeds sin, and that toward the latter days,
iniquity shall increase, do slanderously speak of us, contrary to the
truth. Now, here follows a description of all things, whereby thou may be
fully satisfied, how, when, and where, this strange thing was done: with every
other circumstance thereto belonging. Lastly, here is an earnest admonition to
withdraw people from the sins of Whoredom and vnclea^nesse: such as I hope
shall do much good, and prevail with some, amongst many, that live wickedly
in these days. Such as it is, I do now at this time conueigh into thy hands,
committing thee, and all that look for salvation in Christ Jesus, to the
blessed tuition of the most mighty: who says, Be ye holy, for I am holy.
From my house, this 30. of April. 1600.

The Lords unworthy servant, and thine, I. R.

A TRVE DESCRIPTION of a strange monster, borne at Colwall, in the County of
Hereford. *
IT pleases God (who is wonderful in all his works) to work wonders, when men
live so wonderfully evil, as they do in this age and time. And although God
does not in such severity destroy his people, now in the time of mercy and
grace, as he did under the law, and before (as Genesis 7. and the 19. Exodus 16.
the 17. and 32. Numb. 11. and the 16. 1. Cor. 10. etc) yet is he no less angry
with sin, nor no less powerful to punish sin, then in times past he has
been: as it appears by the sundry judgments that he sends, to show the
same among men: as, plague, pestilence, war, famine, scarcity, dearth, new
sicknesses and diseases, Comets, blazing stars, flashing lights, shooting
and streamings in the air, monsters of man and beast etc Whereof, this that
we are now to describe, is not the least whereat men may greatly be
astonished, and afraid to sin; if they had any fear of God in the^. For it
is so strange a thing, as that neither man's arie can set out, nor yet the
tongue, or pen of man tell of, as it ought to be showed and set out. But as
near as we can (that have the handling of it) you shall hear and see what it
was.

The matter it self.
THere was a young maiden, a yeomans daughter of Hereford shire (whose names
for some causes we conceal) who had convenient offers of marriages, fit for
her estate: and within these two years last past, among all the rest, one
young man loved her most entirely: who, though he were none of the brauest nor
iolliest, yet a man of competent wealth, and of good name and fame in the place
where he dwelt. This young man and maiden, in time, loved one another so well
(and their friends of either side, as it should seem so liked thereof) y^ they
were contracted together, and openly asked three times in the Church (or ye
banes of matrymony between them published in the congregation) according to the
law, in that case provided: and all the people of those parts thought for
truth, that a full match in marriage, should shortly after have been
solemnized between them.

But Satan, Note ye young maidens.
the enemy of all goodness, by his instigations and instruments, wrought so in
the mind of the maiden; that shortly after this, she fell to mislike with the
man, to shun his honest company, and in the end wholly to break off from
this match: whereof, any maid indewed with modesty, would have been greatly
ashamed, and unwilling unto: especially when there was no just cause given her
on the man's part; as right well it was proved there was not.

But such is the lightness and inconstancy of a great number of this sex,
that true meaning men can not tell where to find them. They are many times in
extremes: for, either they will not at all be ruled by their parents and
friends, in marriage: but meet by stealth, and run away in a night, with him,
whom so unadvisedly they love: or else, when with their parents and friends
consent, they have assured themselves, and entangled the minds of young men;
yet upon some sinister cause they will flit and fall off again; yea, and
sometimes get a great belly by some such, match, and so break off, with all
the shame that may be. In this point, I confess, many young men (thorough the
heat and strength of lust and concupisence) have most shamefully abused, both
widows and maidens, Note y^ young ^
too too many. But the punishment of God does ever follow such, and at one time
or other so overtake them, as that they shall be driven to confess that there
is a just God in heaven, which punishes that which men do neglect to punish
in earth.

But to return to this monstrous matter, we have in hand: when this slipperie
Eele had made a shift to wind away from this man, in this last year 1599. she
dwelling as a servant, in the house of one of her Uncles by the Mothers side
(at a place called Mathenne in Worcester shire) this her Uncle had three sons
at man's estate, which were cosen germans to this maid.

Now in tract of time it fell out so, that one of these young men, her cousens,
and she fell a lusting; for, good love I cannot well call it; partly because
he was her so near kinsman: and partly for that she had promised her self
before, to another man: and especially because their lust was so hot, that
soon after the same began to be kindled, it was so set on fire, and the devil
had so blinded the eyes of these two, y^ they lay together, and she was gotten
with child by him: and God in just judgment (to show his dispeasure against
mockery with his holy institution of marriage, and his hatred of the sins of
whoredom, adultery, fornication, inceste, and all other uncleanness) made
this proud, this scornful and unconstant wench, the mother of a monster, and
not of an orderly birth. For when the time of her deliverance was come, and
that she had gone out her full 9. months (as all women do, that bring not
forth untimely birthes) she was delivered of a child, such as it was; and y^
in a house of her said Uncles, at Colwall aforementioned, the 6. day of January
last past, in Anno, 1599. And now for the further certifying of thee christian
reader, of the misshapened form of this monstrous birth, and many
particularities in sundry several limbs, members, and parts of the body of
it, with other strange circumstances appertaining thereunto, read this matter
following: which thou shall find truly set down word for word, as the same
was seen and taken in writing; at the appointment of a Gentleman of good
crevit and worship, in the presence of diverse honest and credible persons, both
men and women.

There was a young woman, a yeomans daughter, who was offered honest preferment
in marriage, about two years past, with a young man of competent wealth and
good credit: with whom she proceeded so far that ye banes of holy matrimony
were three several days, orderly according to ye Ecclesiastical laws,
proclaimed between them. And then she being possessed with some sinister
conceit, brake off with him, without any just occasion given on his part.
Afterward, this last year, she dwelling as a mayde-seruant in house with an
uncle of hers, viz. her mothers brother, at Mathenne, in ye County and
Diocese of Worcester: who then also having in his house three Sons of man's
estate, she was begotten with child by one of them: and it is credibly
reported, that two of them lived incontinently with her, being her cosen
germans. And the competent time of her childebirth approaching, upon the said
sixth day of January, 1599. she was delivered of child, in a house of her
said uncles in Colwall, in the said County and Diocese of Hereford, about
the sun setting of the same day: which child was thus disfigured.

1 The head of it was longer then the heads of other children ordinarily are,
having neither hair on the head, nor on the eie-browes.

2 Both the eyes were standing far out of the head, being unequal the one to
the other: the right eye very small, like a black sloe, sticked half out, in
the flat face (having neither eyelid nor eyepit) as it were a bullet slicking
in a plain wall. But the left eye was very big and eminent, or sticking out
as the other; yet having eye-lidds, which were distracted and drawn far
asunder, the upper eyelid upwards, and the lower eye-lidde downwards, the
insides appeering outward.

3 The nose was depressed flat to the face, without any nosthrills at all;
having at the lower end thereof, arounde button of fleshie substance about the
bigness of a nut: on either side whereof, somewhat higher then the nose, the
upper lip was slitte or hare-shorne: from which two slitts, throughout the
palate or roufe of the mouth, there passed 2. hollow trenches, each one almost
two fingers deep, even to the gullet or entrance of ye throat: which seemed
to be the passage of the nosthrils: and throughout the lower part of the mouth,
on either side of the tongue, was a like deep trench.

4 The mouth was much smaller, then ordinarily other childrens mouths are,
therein appearing no gummes nor iawbones at all, nor any lips could be
discerned.

5 The face much wrinkled and riueled, more then any other childrens faces use
to be, and very grimme to behoulde.

6 The hands had no thumbes at all, nor any outward partition of fingers; yet
it had fingers co^ered all over with one only skin, as with a mitten: the
fingers had joints as it did appear, by that it often clitched them together.

7 The finger of the left hand only (which in latin is called digitus
annularis, and in english the ring finger) had a nail, and that finger toward
the end was separated from the others.

8 There appeared in this child no evident sign of the sex, either of man or
woman, having the perfect members of neither: but urine issued out at a small
hole in ye proper place: of notes for difference, resembling some token more
proper to male, then female.

9 The knees stood up close to the belly, and the legs were fixed to the
buttockes, ye calfe of the left leg growing to the buttocke, and thigh unto
the small of the leg: but the right leg, quite down to the heel, within
two fingers breadth.

10 The right foot, almost from the midst thereof, bowed or turned toward the
left; and with a stringe of flesh was fast joined to the same, at the ends of
the great toes: which toes withal the rest of the toes were covered over with
one entier skin, as the fingers were.

11 The body, for length and bigness, exceeded the ordinary stature of other
children. When this woman was first delivered of this monstrous burden, the
Midwiues (being three in number then present) thinking it had no life, laid it
by on a few Bents: where it lay without any covering, half an hour; and then
it cried, and not before. And they hearing it cry, took it up and put clothes
about it, using it as a child ought to be used: and, thinking that it would
not live to be brought to the Church to be baptized, they sent for the
Minister and Pastor of Colwall (within whose charge it was borne) to Christen
it: who being a zealous man, and a learned Preacher, repaired thither with all
speed: and finding by his own inspection, and due examination of the persons
present at the birth of the said child, that it was thus straungely formed
and figured, and being accompanied with competent witnesses, he baptized the
said child; naming it, What god will. And after it was baptized, it lived two
days and two nights, and more; and the third day it departed this life. And
during the time it lived, it received sustenance, and had euacuation of
natural superfluities, both by urine, and siege: but in all that time it was
not perceived to sleep: and in truth it could not be discerned to close the
eyes, because it had no eyeliddes to cover them.

Thus have you heard the wonderful deformities of this monster, described unto
you in all parts, and according to the very truth, as it was.

It rests now, that we make use of it, and hear what is said in the last
part of this book: which contains in it a christian discourse against al
uncleanness, and all unclean persons that will not be reformed; with an
exhortation to al others that yet are not so defiled in part or in the whole,
and to those that have looked that way, and are desirous to repent and amend.

Beloved there be 7. things, which (as it seems to me) are the causes of all
these evils in man or woman.

1 Our Ignorance, that we do not consider the end of our creation: which is to
glorify God, by living in obedience to his laws and commandments: Thou
shall not not lust. Thou shall not commit adultery. etc.

2 We forget the end of our calling to the Gospel, and profession of Jesus
Christ: which is, to live in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life.

3 Thirdly, we look not into the fruits and effects that are required of us in
Baptism: which are, that we should die to sin, and live to righteousness:
and wherein we do willingly bind our selves to Christ, to be his faithful
soldiers and servants, to fight against sin, the world, the flesh and the
devil, under his coullors: which is the Cross and afflictions, which he and
we that are his, must suffer of wicked wordlings in this world.

4 If while we are young, our parents do not bring us up, and keep us hard
at our book (if we be of meet degree) nor at our daily labor and business,
if we be of mean estate: but do suffer the one sort, to have too much
pampering, ease, and delicacie: the other, too much Idleness, play, and
liberty also. Note
And satan will work upon us, if we have but any one of these: for true it
is, that where God gives not ye gifts of co^tinencie, or preuenteth by his
grace, every young man after sixteen or seauenteen years oulde, and every
maiden of fourteen or fifteen (say what they will to the contrary) has
motion to lust and fleshy delights: and the devil, if it be possible, will
blow with the bellowse of concupiscence in us, til ye heat of nature has set
both body and soul on fire. I will not meddle with natural Philosophy in this
point, nor show you by Aristotle's rule, how you should know this to be true;
because they that will give glory unto God, and confess the truth, do know
and find this true in them selves, that I say: unless, as is before showed,
God by his preventing grace, or with his blessed gift of continency do go
before them.

5 A fifth reason of all this outrage in the flesh, is this: that whereas by
original sin we are subject to lust, and to all other actual sins (here
taking lust for the sins of uncleanness, and not for all gross sins in
general, as the word will afford) I say whereas by original guiltynes, we
are subject to all sin whatsoever: so are we naturally encliued and desirous
of the means that may further the sin that we are most inclined unto: as
close companying together, dalyance, sight, touching, talking lewdly of the
actions of generation, writing of letters, making and reading of lewd and
wanton books, ballads of love and pamphlets that tend that way, day and night
thoughts; and some things, that for modesty sake, I neither can or will name:
all which, like swine, a number use, without all remorse of conscience and the
fear of God.

6 A sixth reason of this outrage is, that we be not thoroughly made
acquainted with Gods book, and therein exercised day and night (that is to say,
morning and evening at the least) that so we might see what God forbids, what
he commands touching chastity, purity of body and mind, what punishments
have come on men and women, for these sins, and in what acompt God has them
that live pure, and clean: of which stories, Genesis 19. and 38. Judges 20.2.
Sam. 11. Romans 1.1. Cor. 6. Gal. 5. Ephe. 5. Reave. 20. and 21. are wonderful to
consider.

7 Our neglect of wise and grave histories in this point, and of reading what
monstrous births God has sent unto many both in this Realm, and in other
places: which might make us to tremble and quake, when we shall but read and
hear of them.

M. Stubbs, in his book entitled The Anatomy of Abuses, does notably handle
this point: so does M. Hergeste, in his book entitled The right rule of
Christian Chastity, M. Batmans book, and the Theater of Gods Judgment etc. The
which books, I wish with all my heart, were daily heard, and read of our
amorous yonkers, and lewd huswiues of the world, of Courtiers, Citizens, and
Country people, with all other good like authors.

Besides, we should use all the good means, that might more fully make us to
suppress lust and sinful pleasure: as to be in good places, godly company, ye
Church also, to hear divine service and sermons etc. We do not give our
selves to good exercises, that might make us forget all such matters: as
Actiuitie, Study, reading of the holy and sacred scriptures, Fasting, Prayer,
Modesty in apparel, Looks, Gesture, and Countenance etc. But to the contrary,
a number haunt whore-houses, Theaters, and Play Houses etc. And a number (I am
ashamed to utter it) are ever talking of lewd howses, and such filthy places;
which through their naughty practices they have found out and do know: so
that, as it should seem, the Stues bank was never so common, as many Allies,
Gardens, and such out-places be. Nay, you shall hear one young Gallant say to
another; come, and I will bring thee, where thou shall have a wench of this and
that price, etc. Read I pray you Thomas Nashes book, entitled; The tears of
Christ over Jerusalem: which book, if you have any grace in you, will make you
to shed tears for your sins: I think it is the only best book that ever
he made.

An inuectiue conclusion.
O Monstrous life of men and women, what will fear you, what will amend you?
what may make you, if it be but, to ent^^ into some good consideration with
your selves, of your estate before God and man (for this sin) both in this
life, and the life to come? I would to God, I knew what would do you good,
and prevail with you: you should not then be long without it. For alas, I am
right forrie and full of woe in my heart, when I think with my self how many
thousands are lost from Christ, and cast to the devil for these and such like
sins: as also how many are beggerd and undone thereby in this life* yea,
brought into loathsome diseases and griefs, discredit of parents, kindred, and
themselves for ever, by this sin: Insomuch that the Chronicles and Histories
of times are afterward their perpetual registers of infamy, shame and
discredit.

Wherefore, to quench thy fierce and furious heat of hott and corrupt nature,
let them set before them the heat and scorching of the ever burning fire of
hell; and try but with one foot or finger in our ordinary fire, how they can
endure the unquenchable fire of hell. Then let them but come, and behold one
of these wanton dames, when she is laid and lies rotting of the French
disease (or Pox as ye term it) when one piece is ready to fall from
another, and her guts ready to fall out of her belly: when, at the best, she
is slabbering of her self with her diet drinks, her Spanish paints, her hot
house bathes etc. or if that be too too loathsome, yet let them come to them
when they are but sickly, and do look as yellowe as Rites legs, when the
small pox is on them, or when they lie groaning and crying out of inward aches
and pains. And let wicked women of all sorts in this profession, do the like
to their gallants and brave laddes, that have spent themselves, and all that
ever they had on them: and these will at the least somewhat abate the lusts
and desires of the flesh: if not kill it altogether in them. And let them add
hereunto, for brevity sake, but that one little book entitled, A Christian
Resolution: for, that perhaps (if Gods grace be granted them) will draw them
home to a better life.

Thus briefly I have showed my poor opinion, what may be a remedy in part,
for this sin in a great number, that the devil may not prevail with so many
as he does in all places: in so much, it is counted no sin, or but a small
sin, soon wiped away. Nay, would to god ye some were not grown to such a
height of sin every way, as that having no other way to shift it off, would
feign bear men in hand, that there is no God: such is the sinful wickedness
of this age and time: God, for his mercies sake, give us all grace to amend.
But my masters, you of the Macheuillian and Athest profession, be you well
assured, that if you will not believe there is a God, that does hate sin and
reward virtue, you shall one day find that, and feel that there is a devil
to plague you and torment you for (...): therefore look to it in time, and
spend not your golden times away in such sin and dotage as you do. Thus hoping
y^ a word is enough to the wise, I end. And, though perhaps this pamphlet may
want wise handling, coming under my hand; I would willingly have showed at
large, what are the particular sins of uncleanness, how they are defined,
and the proofs of scripture of it: But by reason of some especial business
that to me appertains in my place, and for some other respects, I am forced
here to conclude; wishing, that one or two of these books (as they are) might
be given into ye hands of the wicked Father and Mother of this monster; to
terrify them withal, till they do truly repent: and then I wish unto them
all the mercies of god and his Church, with other Christians, according to
Saint Paul's rule, 2. Cor. 7. Otherwise, let those, and all other like persons,
fear the sayings of these few places, 1. Cor. 6.9. Reuela. 21.6.7.

The Lord Jesus stir up all that be in authority and all other good
Christians, to pray, to punish, and seek a redress of this and all other
gross sin; that for our iniquities we be not overthrown in these aged days
of our most gracious Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth: and that the enemies of
the Gospel, nor the great enemy of all mankind prevail not against us, or our
children after us, as we have deserved. Amen.


