A True Relation, of the Lives and Deaths of the two most Famous English
Pirates, Purser, and Clinton; who lived in the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.

Together with the particul^r actions of their Takings, and undertakings

With other pleasant Passages which happened before their surprizall worth the
observing.



LONDON Printed by Io. Oaks. 1639.

The Lives and Deaths of the two most Famous Pirates, of that age wherein they
lived, (In the time of Queen ELIZABETH:) Purser and Clinton.
Together with the particular Actions of their taking, and undertakings.
Chap. 1. Of the power of Justice.
Justice is a virtue that gives no man any or the least privilege to defraude
another, of yt which he may call his own; besides she is figured like a
Uirgin, who gives to all men what is theirs, by even and equal proportions:
The Philosophers make four sorts thereof; the first they call Caelestiall
which is Divine, the second Natural, which consists in our selves; the third
Civell; the fourth Judicial: The first which is called Celestial, is defined
to be a true and exact consideration, with an humble and dutiful
acknowledgement of God. Natural Justice is that which is borne with us, and
every man has in himself by nature; that which we call Civil, consists
either of what our own best condition stirrs and prompts us to do, or what
the suffrage of the people, the the consultation of the Senate; the will and
power of Princes, or the Authority of grave and wise men, inioynes us to keep
and observe. Judicial is that which propperly belongs to the Bench, and is
grounded upon Statutes and Laws; instituted and made for the benefit and
profit of the Commonweal, to the depression of vice, and encouragement of
virtue.

Chap. 2. Wherefore the Laws were made.
NOw to see these things faithfully and punctual kept, were the Laws first
devised and ordained; the virtues whereof, are to bear sway powerfully to
restrain and forbid things gently, to punish and chastise Malefactors
severely; but errors committed by ignorance, fo censure mercifully: under these
four heads may our enjoined obedience to the Law be comprehended, which is
also by the Law strictly imposed: namely, to live honestly, to hurt no man
willingly; to render every man his own carefully, and to extort from no man
forcibly: It further tyeth us, to love our Prince loyally, to keep his Laws
cheerfully; to defend our Country valiantly, and to provide for our particular
families indulgently: Besides, the rigor of the Law was devised to no other
end, but to curb, and bridle those refractory and rebellious spirits, who else
would live without all regularity or reason; for these three things are
chiefly to be acknowledg^^, and obeyed* with all one God, one King; one Law:
and whosoever breaks one of them, transgresses in all: for God has the sole
and absolute power in himself, who says obey the King: He has also a
Uice-royall Regency from his Creator, (whose substitute he is) and He says
obey the Law; and therefore, these ministers under him, to whom power is given
to execute the law, have their authority from above; as not to be murmured at,
or any way opposed. Now, of two famous Pirates I am to frame my discourse,
Purser, and Clinton; whose irregular and and illegal lives, as they were
notoriously famous, so their deaths and ends were as remarkably infamous.

Chap. 3. All ill actions ought to be awarded.
Every bad attempt and evil performance, beget not only shame, and infamy,
which gall the conscience before death, and survive long after death; for they
are did of so deep a color, that they are very difficultly to be washed off
by oblivion: He that by any dishonest act shall lose his good name, draws
himself into a wretched and miserable predicament; for good men will not
believe him, bad men will not obey him; few men that will accompany him, no man
at all will befriend him: They that accustom themselves to swime in vice,
there is no commiseration to be taken of them if they sink in vanity.

Cicero inveighing against Cateline, says; that his naughty and infamous life,
has not only defamed himself, but so obscured the glory of his predecessors;
that though they before had been of great name and eminence, in the City and
Commonweal, yet he had drowned all their virtues in Laethe, and buried them
in dark forgetfulness: Better it is for a man to dye for virtues sake, than
to live with dishonor. To shut up all this monitory counsel in a word, I
conclude with Solon; Wretched and most unfortunate is that man, whose life the
people mourn and lamrnt; and at whose death they Clappe their hands and
rejoice.

Chap. 4. Of all the famous men of War, and Pirates which have lived: and the
occasion of Ships of War.
OF Land-theeves I have no purpose to speak at all, but only of those called
Piratae, that is, Sea-rovers; or men of War, but most commonly called Pirates:
purposing to give you a brief taste of some few forrei^^e, before I come to
those more domestic; that by comparing the one with the other, it may
manifestly appear, w ch of them have excelled or (more propperly) erceeded the
other.

Lucan remembers us of one Basilius an arch robber by Sea, and the same Author
in the list of those Marine Rovers, reckons Sextus Pompeinus the Son of
Pompey the great, in these or the like words: Sextus, of Pompey who was called
the great,
Th'unworthy Son; banished his native seat
To the Syllaean Seas: did triumph there,
A famous Pirate; such as had no Peer, etc.


One Ninus was his Uice-admirall, and under him, and by his countenance
commanded all ye Italian Seas, pillaging and robbing the maritine coasts
thereof; not only to the great hurt and damage of the Merchants, whose course
say through the Adriatic Sea, but infested sundry Coasts, by landing on diverse
continents, burning and spoiling all the Sea-bordering Towns, and Uillages;
insomuch that by this inhumane cruelty, they were left desolate and uninhabited.

Of the same function and rebellious condition was one Curpulus, deboucht in
his life, and infamous in his actions: and another called Icaron, who had not
only equald, but rather super exceeded the former in his direptions and
robberies: parraleld with these may be Rhotho, and Rhotones, both Rutenians;
who troubled both Land and Sea, with almost unheard of rapine and cruelty; to
whom we may add only Thorias, and Bezo: Many other of the like condition, who
lived in the former ages, and places remoate: I might very opportunely here
introduce, whom for brevities sake I omit, etc.

Yet to show how ancient this sea-theeving has bin, and even upon our own
Coasts: We read that King Edgar being ye thirtieth King from Brute, amongst
other of his politic actions, used in the Summer season to scower ye Seas
with certain ships of war, to free the four Seas of pirates, and robbers,
who much troubled the Land; and against winter he made provision, to lay the
said ships in sure and safe harbors, and havens; and had ever in his own
service, and billited in the houses of his Lords and Peers, a certain number
of Soldiers, Pilots, and Mariners, that were ever at present command, when the
King had any use of them; his Ship-masters also were in wages with him through
out the year, that ever attended those Ships, to see that nothing were
wanting; by means whereof he kept his Land in great peace and quietness, free
from the danger of all foreign enemies.

It is also reported of this King Edgar, by diverse approved and Authentic
Cronologers, that upon a time being at Chester, he entered the river of Dee,
and sitting in a new barge for that purpose, he himself took the charge of
the helm, and was the steares-man; and was rowed by eight Contributary Kings
which he commanded to row him up and down the Riunto ye Church of St. Thomas,
and from thence back again to his own Palace; to show that he was sole
Sovereign of so many provinces: amongst them was numbered a Roman Arch pirate,
whom he surprised; who was called Maxentius, and after was Elected Emperor,
and woare the Imperial purple.

In the year of our Redemption one thousand three hundred forty nine, and in
the five and twentieth of the Reign of King Edward the third, a great pirate
called Don Charles, suggested by King John of France (great war being then
between the two Kingdoms) with a mighty Navy of Spaniards, entered into our
English streams, and did much damage to the Land; insomuch that the King
prepared a fleet to encounter him, and met with him upon the Coast of
Winchelsee, where betwixt the two Navies was a long and terrible conflict, to
the great loss of both sides; but in the end the victory fell to his Majesty
of England, who chased his enemies, took of them 22. sail, with a great
number of prisoners.

In the year one thousand three hundred seventy, nine, in the second year of
Richard the second, who was then but a child; one Sir Oliver De Clicon a French
Pirate, committed sundry out rages, and landed in diverse places of this
Kingdom, who did much harm; and lastly entered the river Thames, and so came
up as high as Graves end, where he spoiled the Town without any resistance;
burning a great part thereof, and departed with great abundance of riches.

But in the year one thousand four hundred and, eighteen, and the sixth of
King Henry the first, certain French men of war, of whom the Uicount of
Narbon was chief Captain: committed great spoil upon our Coast, robbing our
Merchants, and pillaging ye sea Towns and Uillages, of which the King hearing,
being then at a place called Took in Normandy, he sent the Earl of March, the
Earl of Huntington, with others to scower the seas, who encountered the
foresaid pirates; and after a long and cruel fight, vanquished and overcame
them: this battle was fought upon the ninth of August, in which ye Uicount who
was admiral of the Fleet, and one Captain Mountney who was Uice admiral,
were both of them surprised and taken prisoners, in which ships they found
great treasure, which they had got by pillaging and robbing; which after served
the King to pay his soldiers.

In the third year of the Reign of King Henry the Eight, the Lord Howard
surprised at Sea, a famous pirate called Andrew Barton a Scotch-man, with two
fair shops and an hundred men in them: and in the thirty seventh year of his
Reign, were taken by the Kings ships, and those that belonged to the English
Coasts, to the number of three hundred French ships and more, which were
robbers, and pillagers at sea.

We read also in the first year of King Edward the sixth, being in the year
of our Redemption, one thousand five hundred forty and seven, in ye month of
March; Sr Andrew Dudley who was at that time Uice admiral, with the Pinnace,
and the Heart (being but small ships and single manned) had a great conflict
with three Scottish pirates, who were double manned, and had great store of
Ordnance, who met them in the narrow Seas, and obtained of them a memorable
victory; as taking many prisoners, and bringing their ships into Orwell haven,
where they long after remained.

And now at this time, in this present year one thousand six hundred thirty
seven, Captain Rainsborugh with two of the Kings ships, and three other
belonging to the Merchants, by ye help of the Moors by Land have to the great
honor of our Nation, taken in Sally, a great receptacle, and refuge for
Pirates, who preyed upon all Merchants who past through those Seas, surprising
those rebellious sea-robbers and releasing many Christian captives, who
miserably were enforced naked, and chained, to tug at the Oars of their
Galleys.

Chap. 5. Of the first acquaintance of Purser and Clinton, and how they began
their attempt to rob the Merchants Ships, and others from time to time: and of
their bold carriage, and state they kept in their Ship.
I Come now to speak of those two parties proposed for my second discourse,
(omitting many since their days, notorious for pyracy as the Dutch Danseter,
and of our owns Nation Bishop and Ward, who turned renegade, and after lived
amongst the Turks, with others:) namely Purser, so commonly called because he
had been Purser of one of her Majesty's Ships Royal, whose name was Thomas
Walton, and Clinton, who was an apprentise in the upper part of new Fish-street
Hill, who utterly abandoning his former Trade, gave his mind only to Sea,
turned Navigator, and in several Merchants ships, had made sundry Commodious
and prosperous voyages, in which he so applied himself to the Compass, that
he was able to guide or conduct any Ship to all the parts of Christendom or
further, and bring her back again.

These two being grown into familiar acquaintance, and both of them of
haughty and ambitious spirits, having diverse meetings, they at length began to
discourse betwixt themselves, that in regard of their experience and skill in
Navigation, what baseness it was in them to be no better than servants, who
had both the Judgment, and ability to command, and to be only Employed to
benefit and enrich others, whilst they in the Interim wanted themselves: They
further reasoned that service was no heritage, and that in regard they had
either of them been more than a prentiship to learn their Art, it was now
high time to be freemen of the Sea, and set up for theteselves: This was soon
concluded on, but how might be as easily compassed, there lay the difficulty.

To take often which, they often consulted together, but still when any likely
project offered it self unto them, the way to accomplish it did more and more
perplexe them: Insomuch that since likelihoods faild them, they would determine
upon impossibilities, and rather then not to be seen in the eye of the world
resolute, they would appear desperate: the one alleging that courage begun
with a deliberate constancy, and continued without change, does seldom or
never fail. The other seconding it thus, that valor Conquers the enemy before
the field be fought; and moreover, the courage of a man is seen in the
resolution of his death, concluding, that thunder terrifieth Children, and
threatenings fear fools; but nothing can affright or dismay such as are of
courage and resolution: to whom the former replide, that they were confident in
their purpose, that the dye was already cast, and it was a mean folly for a
man to fear that which he cannot shun; and who so fears every storm or
tempest, is neither fit for to be a Traveller or a Soldier.

Thus having one heartned and encouraged the other, as first to win gold and
after to wear gold (according to the Proverb) they made a voyage to
Plimmonth, where they sounded many discontented sailors, and acquainting them
with their purpose, drew them with much facility into their faction: And
promising to themselves golden mountains, who had before grazed upon barraine
mole hills, they had got a gathering together of some fifty tall fellows, every
one provided with a good Musket, and aiming at a small Bark, which lay then
well victualed, and sufficiently provided in the road, they surprised her in
the night, weighed Anchor, and away they went to Sea to try a desperate
fortune; which for the present so smiled upon them, that within few days they
met with a Spanish Merchant, well laden, and indifferently provided of
Ordnance, with other sea munition, who making no show of opposition, and the
other not minding them in regard of the smalnesse of their Bark, they came up
so close by them, that finding themselves by reason of their lowness of the
vessel, and the talenesse of the other, to be out of ye danger of her
Ordnance, they suddenly, ere the other were well aware, clapped close to her
side, and every one of them having his Musket ready charged, they boorded her
without any great resistance; a sudden fear in the one, and a predicated
resolution in the other, being greatly to their advantage.

When having siezed upon the Merchant, and the chiefest officers in the Ship,
it was easy for them to command the rest at their pleasure: the first they
locked close in a Cabin, the other they disarmed, and then Purser and Clinton
went down into the hole, to take full view of their freight and lading, and
finding it every way to answer their expectation, and that the ship it self
was very tight and serviceable to their purpose, they resolved amongst them
selves to make her their own, and in her to try a second fortune. Briefly,
they called for the Master and the owner, and putting them into their small
bark, gave them some biscuit and wine of their own store, so much as they
thought would serve to pass them into their own Country without starving, and
so hoysed sail and left them.

And now being so well accommodated with a vessel, victual, and Ordnance;
they thought themselves to be half Lords at the sea, for there was scarsly any
sail they met with, which (trusting to their courage and fortune) they did not
think themselves able to encounter with: and where those two meet and conspire
together, what is unpossible, not only to be attempted, but almost compassed.
The second they met with was a Turkish man of War, and though of no
extraordinary great burden, yet well manned, and furnished with all munition,
necessary for a Pirate and sea-robber; the one haled the other, both were alike
resolute, and neither of them willing to strike sail, and now here was thief
rob thief; a cruel fight was begun, and the victory uncertain to whom it
would fall, some were slain on both sides: but at length a fortunate shot from
the English, split the maine sail of the Turkish vessel, by which they were
made unable to sail, and being suddenly becalmed were ready to stand at the
others mercy: This put spirit in the one, and fear in the other; for fly they
could not, no stand out they were not able, and to yield they were loath; in
this detraction and demurre, came another shot from the English, and struck
the Turk between wind and water, which made all their hearts to sink as low
as their heels, and theirs of the adverse party, to mount as hye as from their
breast unto their brains, crying aloud Saint George, and a maine for the
Queen of England, and withal grapled with her, and made a bold attempt to
board her soon, but small opposition was made in the entry; for their ship
being by reason of the former leake ready to founder, they thought it more safe
to stand to the mercy of men, than to trust to the unplacable fury of the sea:
But they found small comfort in either, for the English being now Uictors, they
hanged up the Captain and prime officers of the maine yard, in regard they
found them to be Infidels, with some other; the rest they kept as slaves to
help to man both vessels, dispersing some in the one, and some into the other,
because by that means they might have the better command of them: and having
stopped the leake, and pumped the ship dry, they repaired their Mast, and now
they were Masters and owners of two sufficient and able vessels.

If they before were bold, the success of this second victory made them
insolent; and now no single ship whom they thought they were able to
over-master, could escape them unrifled and unrob'd, still changing their
vessels when they could meet with any more commodious for their use, and taking
out of them such Mariners as they thought most able to manne them, swearing
them to their own faction; till at length they had si us lusty and tall ships
at their command, and all bravely accommodated, insomuch that they had their
Admiral, Uice-admirall, and reare-Admirall, etc. Some times they kept along
the Coast of Spain, sometimes they watched in the mouth of the Straights, not
sparing Spaniard, Fleming, Frenchman, Scot, Biskaine, nay, their own
Countrymen; and still what Merchandise and commodities they robbed upon one
Coast, they vended on another, insomuch that within two or three years they
were infinitely rich, not a Saylor amongst them of what low degree soever, but
could show his Barbary Cheekens, Flemish Angels, English Rose Nobles, French
Cardecues, Italian Ducats, Spanish Pistolets, and pieces of Eight in plenty,
for the Pillage which they had got and sold.

Chap. 6. The places which they used to rob the Merchants at Sea.
THeir Randevous was some times at Gibralter, sometimes at Angeeres; then
again you should hear of their exploits in the Cumaries,, and about the
Islands of Majory and Minory, and sometimes at Cape bon Esperansa, Saint
Georges Channel, and the Irish seas, certain no where, nor constant to any
one Channel; neither was there scarce any Sea-towne, either in this our own
Kingdom, or else where, in which they would not command victual, and other
commodities which they wanted, (for their money) sending their long Boats a
shore to fetch them at their pleasure: the Magistrates of those places, fearing
to deny them, because not able to withstand them.

The end of the first Book.
The Second Part of The two most Famous Pirates, Purser and Clinton:

Showing how they were taken, and what manner of Death they suffered for their
offense.

LONDON: Printed by John Oaks. 1639.

The Second Part of the two Famous Pirates; Purser and Clinton: Showing how they
were taken; and what manner of Death they suffered for their offense.
Chapter 1. The complaint and loss of many Ships, caused the Queen to send
out her Admiral, to take them.
SO many of their insufferable Insolences, aggravated with grievous
complaints, coming to Queen Elizabeth her Majesty's Ear, who was a merciful
and gracious Princess, and who was ever a Royal incourager of all brave and
resolute spirits: She thought rather by her clemency to reclaim them, than by
her Power utterly to subvert them; and if it were possible to reduce them to
their former fidelity and obedience: and to that purpose she caused a Flyboate,
or light Horseman, to be dispatched, with her gracious pardon if they would
submit themselves; with a large promise upon her Royal word, and under her
broad Seal of their employment in her own Navy, so they would prove
themselves true and Loyal Subjects.

To cut of circumstance, this small Bark the Uice-admirall be stirred her
self, that by inquiring for them at sea of some Merchants who had paid tole to
them for their passage, and others who with no small danger had escaped them
that discovered them, about the mouth of the Straights, where they ambush for
all such as Traded in those Seas, and haling them, (and hanging out a Flag of
Truce, the Captain was commanded aboard their Admiral.

Chapter 2. The Pirates resolution what to do in this case, with the respects
they gave to the Queens Pardon or Letter.
IN which the two Arch Pirates were at that time sitting in Counsel, where they
kept a great state, and were attended as if they had been no less than two
Princes, and rival Commanders of the maine Ocean, whom he presented with their
free reputation from her Majesty, with the conditions before specified, which
at first they with great reverence seemed to respect, as by kissing the Seal,
and other signs of humility, when causing him to be entertained with all the
choice rarities aboard, they told him that after Dinner he should receive his
answer, which expecting according to the time appointed, whilst their followers
plide him with healths to her Majesty, and to some other Peers of the Realm,
they two with some others of the prime about them, retired themselves into a
private Cabin, to consult what in that case was best to be done: some thought
it was the best and surest course, to take the advantage of their free and
general pardon, others again held that it was no other than a state policy
to forfeit their Ships and goods, because uniustly extorted from others, and
withal to insinuate their lives: these things were Pro et con long debated,
but the latter prevailed, with a consideration that they were then free
Commanders at sea, and to submit themselves upon such fair and sugared promises
were but a certain entrance into their future and utter ruin: upon which
having concluded they called to the Captain, and returned unto him this answer.

True it was, that they were much bound to her sacred Majesty for so great a
grace and mercy, as to pardon offenders in that high degree; such as they
acknowledge themselves, and that they made no doubt, but that her highness in
her own Royal disposition, meant no otherwise than was there in her most
gracious Letters specified: but there was another fear and doubt to be made,
namely of the strict Court of the Admiralty, which seldom or never had any
mercy of any who had transgressed in that nature; besides, they presupposed
that many grievous complaints had been commensed against them; of which,
though many were uniustly conferred upon them, yet they were not able to clear
themselves of all: and since the least of any were of force sufficient, not
only to strip them of all their fortunes, but forfeit their necks to the
Gallows; they thought it was the safer course for them of ye two, to hazard
their fortunes bravely abroad, than by submitting themselves endanger their
lives basely at home, howsoever they held themselves much obliged to her
Majesty's great grace and goodness, etc. and with this answer they dismissed the
Captain.

Chap. 3. The relation of the Captain to the Queens Counsel of the Pirates;
with the Proclamations which was sent forth to Proclaim them Traitors.
WHo not a little glad to be so well and fairly dismissed from the hands of a
crew of such desperate and dangerous robbers, made what speed he could into
England, and before her Majesty's Counsel, delivered every circumstance before
related, who wisely perceiving in their smooth and excusive answer, a perverse
and obstrinate boldness, gave present order that Proclamation should be made
through the Kingdom, but especially in all the port Towns, and Cities
adjacent to the Sea; that they should thenceforth be held no better than
enemies unto the State, and mere rebels and Traitors to their Queen and
Country, which was accordingly with all expedition performed.

And here a pleasant accident I am loath to overpasse, in the executing of
these publications: a Pursevant by reason of riding in the wet, and thereby
catching so great a cold, that he had such an horsnesse that he could be
scarcely heard to speak twice his lengthes distant from him, agreed with a
plain and crafty Country fellow, who had a clear audable voice to speak from
his mouth, as he should dictate unto him, who coming into one of these
maritine Towns upon a market day, and in the market place set upon an empty
Cart, and he standing close behind him with the Proclamation in his hand,
prompts him as follows.

WHereas the two famous Rovers of the sea, (who thus answered him) Whereas the
two famous Rogues of the sea,

He proceeds, Purser and Clinton: who ecchoeth to him again, Who has lost
their Purses at the Clinke:

Notwithstanding her Majesty's Proclamation: Answer, Notwithstanding her
Majesty's Declaration:

Still keep out: says the pursevant. Answer. And they will not come in.

The Pursevant hearing him speak so out of order began to grow angry, and
said, I bad thee say, and still keep out: who replide again, And they will not
come in.

And why (said the Pursevant) not as well keep out? Is it not all one
(answered the fellow) For all the while they keep out, you see they do not
offer to run in.

The Pursevant said, How am I troubled with his Cocks-combe: He ecchoed to him
again, How am I troubled with this Cocks-combe: But I see there is no remedy.
But I see there is no remedy.

The Pursevant proceeded again, and said, Who have lately robbed diverse of our
ships: Who have lately robbed diverse shivers of our Chippes. Persev. Well, I see
I must endure it: Well, I see I must endure it: And flung the chiefest
Merchants over board, And flung the Merchants Cheeses over board,

Thou art a precious rascal, and I will complain of thee: Thou art a precious
rascal, and I Will complain of thee. Do I not bid thee say after me? And do I
not say after thee?

But what soever he be, man of War or Merchant: But whatsoever he be that
deals in wax, or Parchment; Who can bring in these Pirates, Ships, or heads.
Who can bring in these Picruft, or Sheep heads.

O intolerable. O intolerable.

Shall have for his reware, Shall have in that regard, A thousand pound
sterling. A thousand Steerlings (if he can tell how to catch them.)

This it is for me to be hoarse. This it is for me to be thick of hearing.

And so God save her Majesty. And so God bless her Majesty.

Why that in the end was well. Why and is not all well that ends well.

Some other discourse past betwixt them, which no doubt was much more pleasing
to the auditors in the action, than I can make plausible to the Readers in the
relation: howsoever, this fellow was a Sayler, and thought to be a favorite
of that piraticall faction. But enough of this discourse, which is as a merry
passage to please the Reader; and now I proceed in the next Chapter to tell you
how they were surprised, and by whom.

Chap. 4. The manner how they were taken, and by whom; and what manner of death
they dyed: and where.
I Have showed you their lives, I come now to make a brief expression of the
manner of their surprisall and their deaths: Her Majesty being still more and
more troubled with the complaints of their insolences and outrages, gave a
large Commission to one Captain Borrowes, who was a Noble Sea man, and at that
time Rear Admiral of her Navy Royal, to find out these Arch-rebels, and to
bring them in at what rate soever, who being of an active brain, and an
ingenious disposition, knew that Pirates were sooner to be undermined by policy
than by force, and by stratagem rather than strength; and knowing withal, that
they were at that time inbarkt in a ship which (for the swiftness of sail)
they called the Swallow, for she was able to wind and turn any ship, to
go on, and come off at her pleasure: He therefore provided himself of an
Hulke, or hoy of slow sail but great burden, and stuff it with able
Soldiers well accomodated for that design, with few or no Ordnance to be
seen, and so went upon his discovery; and having intelligence upon what Coast
they then commonly haunted, he made thither, which happened at such a time when
the Fleet was dispersed upon sundry adventures; and the Swallow in which Purser
and Clinton were then both aboard was only visible.

The Pirates had no sooner discovered her from a far, but toward her they
make with all speed possible, in hope of some great purchase; and the nearer
they approached her, the more they were encouraged by reason of her great
burden, and her drone-like sail; and coming near unto her, they hayled her,
and bid Amain for the Sea; (a phrase only used by Pirates:) she one the other
side side seemed to make from them with what have she could, and made no
resistance at all, but suffered the Pirates to lay grapples upon her, which the
Captain (I mean Burrowes) perceiving, caused double grapples to be laid upon
them, and having fastened both ships so together that they could not be
sundred, he suddenly discovered an hundred men well armed, who violently
entered the Swallow, (they being scarce half that number) and so surprised
them, and brought both their ship and men to London, where they were presently
sent to the Marshalsees, and there lay for some weeks in prison.



They were Arraigned at Saint Margerets in South-warke, convicted, and
condemned; and two days after brought by the Officers out of the Marshalsees,
(with a silver Oar borne before them) and conducted through South-warke over
the Bridge, through London, and so to Wapping, and to the place of execution
there, where they appeared as brave in habit, as bold in spirit: some of their
garments they then wore, they distributed amongst their private friends who
came to see them dye, that they might remember them after their deaths. Many
questions were asked them concerning their Piracies, which they punctually
resolved: desiring first, pardon of all men whom they had wronged, and then
remission of their sins from God, whom they had most heinously offended: when
embracing one the other in their arms, it seemed they no more joyfully lived
together than they were willing to dye together: and so being at once turned
off from the Ladder, it appeared to all the multitude that were then present,
that they could not live more irregularly, than they dyed resolutely: and so
there they hanging till from that ebb two Tides had overwhelmed their bodies,
which were after taken down, and committed to Christian burial. And thus you
have heard, the true relation of of the lives and deaths of the two most famous
English Pirates of that age, Purser and Clinton.

The chiefest and most remarkable passage in all this time, was William, Lord
Somerset, Earl of Worcester, who sent Ambassador into France, was likewise to
stand instead of her Majesty, for baptising of the Kings daughter there; her
Majesty sent with him a Font of pure gold for that same purpose, weighing three
hundred and twenty six ounces. At the Christning he gave the child to name
Elizabeth; and returned into England atter he and his train had bin royally
entertained. Likewise, at his passage by sea into England, he had notice of
diverse sea Pirates which kept the narrow seas, did much harm and outrage, by
robberies; they were so bold that they attempted the robbing of the same ship
the Earl of Worcester was in; where he lost diverse goods of great value.
Complaint was made by him to her Majesty, and forthwith was there three good
ships, whereof one was her Majesty's, called the Swallow, which was appointed
to be the Admiral, under the command of William Holstocke Esquire, Controuller
of her Majesty's ships: where he did such good service, that he scoured the
narrow Seas; and took and fired twenty ships, and Barks of sundry Nations,
which were all Pirates: as English, French, and Flemish; he apprehended in those
vessels the number of 900 men of several Nations, and sent them bound to wards
Sand witch, Dover, I Will of Wight, and Portsmouth; whereof three of them that
were in this company, robbed the Earl of Worcester: who were all shortly after
executed at the I Will of Wight; and some of them in other places. Also at the
same time, the aforesaid William Holstocke, did rescue and take from the
abovesaid Pirates fleet, other Merchants Ships, which were well fraughted with
diverse commodities, that they had newly taken, and were their prises; all which
he set free both with their goods and vessels; and for the space of three
years all was in a quiet and peaceable manner, none plundered or robbed, but a
free passage was too and fro in all parts and places of the Coasts of England.

One more strange accident I will relate, which our Histories and Chronicles
does afford for truth, which is of a terrible earthquake which happened in
London, and almost generally throughout England, that caused such amazement of
the people, as was wonderful for the time, and caused them to make their
earnest prayers unto Almighty God, for their safe deliverance in such
tempestuous storms: The great Clock bell in the Palace at Westminster,
struck of it self against the hammer with the violence of the earthquake, as
diverse clockes and bells in the City else where did the like: The Gentlemen of
the Temple being at supper, ran from the Tables, and out of their Hall in a
great maze; there did fall a piece of the Temple Church at that time, and
diverse stones from the Church of St. Paul's London: And at Christ-Church in the
Sermon time, a stone fell from the roof of the Church, and killed an
Apprentise, and hurt another, so that they both dyed in the space of four
hours: Diverse others were sore hurt, and much wounded with running out of the
Church. Likewise in this earthquake, many Chimnies in the City were fallen
down, and many houses much shaken and rent by the violence of this storm.
This earthquake continued in or about London not above one quarter of an hour,
and was no more felt or heard: But Eastward in Kent, and on the Sea coast, it
was felt three times as long. Moreover, it is credibly told of many honest men,
that five miles from Blonsdon in Wilt-shiere, a cry of hounds were heard in the
air, the self same day that the earthquake was; and the noise was so great
that was made, that they seemed to be three or four score couple of hounds:
whereat diverse Gentlemen took their Greyhounds, thinking that some had bin
hunting in the Chase, yet some of them that went out of their houses, seeing
nothing below abroad, cast up their eyes toward the skies, and there they
espied in the air five or six hounds perfectly; all which in a more ample and
large discourse, thou may find in Howes Chronicle.

Diverse other earthquakes has happened in former years, which for brevity sake
I will omit, because I fear they will prove distasteful: but let us all think
of them, and be mindful of Gods judgments, for they are not to be slighted or
cast behind us; but let us know that they be warnings sent from God, to cause
us to repent; and forsake our evil ways.

FINIS.

