AN ELEGY UPON THE TRVELY LAMENTED Death of the Right Honorable Sir JULIUS
CAESAR Knt. Master of the Rolls, And of Snt Katherins: AND One of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.

Wept. by FRA: QVA.

-- Micat inter omnes,
Iulium sidus, velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
LONDON, Printed for John Marriot. 1636.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MOST WORTHY OF DOUBLE HONOR, The Lady CAESAR, Wife
to the Right Honorable Sir JVLIVS CAESAR Knt: Late Mr. of the Rolls: AND One
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
WE are all prisoners for a debt we owe to Nature, committed to the Jail of
this transitory world: Some pay sooner: Some later: All must pay. As yesterday,
our Blessed Savior paid it: To day your dear Husband paid it: A bitter
example sweetly followed: He followed Him in his life: He followed Him in his
death: and so close in both, that as in life, he was assuredly His by Grace, so
in death he is most certainly His in Glory. Madam, my most entire affection
has performed this last service to his dear Remembrance, which I present to
your Noble hands, beseeching Almighty God to comfort you, and hereafter to
raise you to the same pitch of Glory where he is.

Madam, Your Lav faithful servant, FRA: QUARLES.

TO MY HONORABLE FRIENDS, Sir CHARLES CaeSAR Knight, Sir JOHN CaeSAR Knight,
ROBERT CaeSAR Esquire.
You Noble Brothers,
GIve me leave to make you Partners in my Dedication with this honorable Lady,
as she is Partner in your Loss: How much I am bound to this service, I appeal
to you: How much my expressions come short of his merit, I appeal to the
world. His worth and my grief, require stupifaction rather then language: Leves
loquuntur; ingentes stupent. He has left you the rich Inheritance of a rare
example, which if you truly follow, shall follow you to that glory which he
enjoyes, whose gray hairs you have brought in peace and honor to the ground.

The servant of his memory, and your virtues, FRA: QVA.

An Elegy.
LEt such invoke the Muses that have Art,
To broach their studied tears, and get by heart
Their ill-weigh'd sorrows; that can scrue their brains
To any tuneing; from Threnodian strains,
To lovesick Sonets; and from thence, can call
Their fancies to a light-foot Madrigall:
Let those invoke, whose mercenary' Affections
Are dry, and cannot give, without directions
From moist Melpomene, but stick the Hearse
With a fair texted lamentable verse,
More sorry then the Makers, trickt with flowers
Of bare Invention, which the twilight showers
Of Nature never bedewed; Let such as they
Invoke the Muses, whilst we cut our way
Through these our Alpine griefs, and sadly rise
With the sharp vinegre of suffused eyes:
Our high spring-tides are full, no need to borrow
A dropt' increase the deluge of our sorrow.
O were the trivial subject of our Tears
A private loss, where one dull Mourner bears
His single load, ingenious Grief might find
A golden Mean, and means to be confined:
A private sorrow gains a soon relief,
And grief not Common, is a common grief:
But where a sad calamity shall press
The public shoulders, what, o what redress
Can full complaints expect? What Member, first,
Shall help to bind, when every Member's burst?
Such are our sorrows; such disasters now
Enforce our melting souls to overflow
The banks of swelling Passion, which appears
A troubled Sea of Epidemick tears.
O that the hearts of men had equal scales,
To weigh that loss which my sad heart bewailes!
It Is not a Father, or a Friend, or One,
Whose death soft Nature bids us to bemone,
Which we lament; that sorrow would extend
But to our selves, and with our selves would end:
Such loss is load enough; but may be borne
On well prepared shoulders, and outworne:
But this, o this exceeds; where every breast,
Which hates not Virtue, has a Interest.
The Church has lost a Patron; and the State
Bewailes an honorable Potentate;
The King, a Counselor; the Court
Of Conscience, a just Judge; the greater Sort,
A sweet familiar; what the Poor has lost,
Reader, the Poor shall tell thee to their cost.
He was the Cripples Staff; the blind man's Eye,
The Lawyers Curb, the Clients Chauncery.
He prized the world, with things that had no price
A Paul to virtue, and a Saul to vice;
A painful Planter, for the poor to gather;
The Widows Husband and the Orphans Father.
It Is He, it is He, whose honorable Dust
Our eyes embalme, and tender to the trust
Of thanklesse earth, whose relamented death
Estates our grief, and lends a secret breath
To our faint Quill.
It Is He, whose righteous Balance did while-ere
Deal Justice so, as if Astraea were
Returned from heaven, or Saturns conquering hand
Had new regained his long usurped Command
From his deposed Son: His heart was Stone
To pleading Vice, and Wax to every Groan:
His Wisdom, Bounty, Love, and Zeal did rise,
Like those four Springs, that watered Paradise,
And with their fruitful Tides did overflow
This glorious Island, on whose banks do grow
Fair Grifit of Honor, fragrant Flowers of Peace,
Full Crops of plenty, laden with increase.
Who shares not in our grief? what eye forbeares
To be a willing Partner in our tears?
What friend of Goodness will not claim a part
In our great loss? or not entaile his heart
To plenteous Passion so, that Babes unborne
May hold our Lordships with a Clause to mourn:
But stay! what need, what need we press a tear,
When every eye becomes a Volunteire?
Thus wrapped in shades of night, in sheets of Lead,
See, see, our noble Senator lies dead;
Whom Art and Nature, and diviner Grace,
Made far more honorable then his place:
His earth-transcending thoughts, thought scorn to take
Joy in earths Honor, where few years could make
So flat a Period: His aspiring mind
Was free of heaven, disdained to be confined;
Who finding earth accustomed to deprive
Of Honor given (not having more to give)
He bid Goodnight, and sweetly fell asleep,
So left the world, so left us here to weep.
Thus died our noble Caesar, whose high story
Of earths Advancement proved his step to Glory;
Our joys go with him, whilst sad we return
To lay his Ashes in his peaceful Vrne.
Rest glorious Soul, (whose now untwisted Cable
Has past the Needles eye) whilst we bedable
Our cheeks in Brine, that even almost repine
At those eternal joys which now are thine;
O pardon those, whose floods of nature would
Even waft thee from thy Glory, if they could,
And land thee in this Vale of Tears, to taste
That bitter Potion that thy soul has past.
But we have done; our whining breath shall cease
Longer to vi'late thy invi'late peace.
Now blessed Saint, enjoy the free Reward
Of all thy works; Possess those Joys prepared
For thy fair Soul; put on the eternal Wreath
Of glory, promised to thy faithful death,
Repleat thy self with everlasting Manna,
And let thy voice exchange her late Hosanna
For joyful Allelujahs, now a Guest
Called to the Lambs perpetual Marriage feast.
FINIS.

