Certain Questions by way of Conference betwixt a Chauncelor and a Kinswoman
of his concerning Churching of Women.

1601.

Certain questions by way of conference betwixt a Chauncelor and a kinswoman
of his concerning Churching of Women.
Chauncelor. Truly Cosen I am sorry that you should thus upon a pievish
conceit of yours bring your self into this vn-necessarie trouble for a trifle
and matter of nothing as it were.


Woman. If you be sorry indeed as you pretend, then you might have let me
alone, and not have caused your Apparitor to serve me (as he did) with
Citation, for assure your self if you had not troubled me, I would never have
troubled my self about this trifle you speak of.


Chauncelor. Nay I must not do so, I must deal indifferently you know, and
not be partial though you be my kinswoman. Th'information being against you as
well as others, and your name being presented to me by the church Wardens with
other women more, if I should leave you out and proceed against them, I should
not do that which were fitting for my place and office, you know I am sworn
to do justice.


Woman. Indeed your office and place afoordes much justice, if it be well
observed, as ordinary justice as Billinsgate does love and friendship for a
box of the ear: you are sworn you say, and will not that oath of yours allow
you to show as much favor and kindness to your kinswoman in a trifle, as to a
stranger that is no kin to you in a matter of weight?


Chauncelor. O I know where you are now, I thought where you would be
straight, I knew I should hear of it, you mean mistres A.B. But in good faith
your Minister did her wrong, neither had he any law to warrant him to do that
he urged her unto: I confess she made a fault before she was married, but the
man you know made her amends, and I do not hear but that they live orderly
and well now: notwithstanding all which your hot spirited Minister (of
spite and malice as itis thought) would have put them both to open penance, if
I had not stuck close to them.


Woman. Merciful Christ, what need any witness to be produced against you,
when your own mouth does so apparantlie condemn you? The gentlewoman you
confess made a fault: and what was that fault but simple Fornication at the
least? For the which our Minister would have done that which belonged unto him,
if you would have let him, and that which I take it (by your leave) the Book
of common Prayer it self does warrant him to do, and you by your own
confession withstoode him in that good purpose of his. Now surely (my good
man) this is a sin amongst others that you must repent of, otherwise it
will be woe with you. And I pray you tell me one thing: Mistres A. B. is a
stranger to you and I am your kinswoman, her fault (cover it and shadow it as
you will) was uncleanness at the least, and that which you trouble me for, is
but a Ceremony, and as your self confess, a matter of no moment. What warrant
have you then so stiflie to stand with her in her sin, and to deal thus
sharply with me and others in a thing indifferent, or a matter of nothing?


Chauncelor. Well gentle kinswoman, seeing you are so snappish and over-busying
yourself in other folks matters that apperteine not unto you, I pray you let
me hear now how handsomely you can answer for your self.


Woman. With whose matters did I meddle I pray you, did not you first name
mistress A. B. your self?


Chauncelor. All is one for that, I know you meant her when you said, that my
oath might as well allow me to show favor to my kinswoman in a trifle, as to a
stranger in a matter of weight.


Woman. Well be it so then: If your conscience did accuse you, look you to
that: But what have you now to say to me, and what is the cause why you have
sent for me?


Chauncelor. You need not ask, you know it well enough I am sure. It is for
your foolish niceness in this trifling matter of Churching. And I pray you in
good sadness, what reason have you why you refuse to be Churched?


Woman. If it be as you say a trifle, the more to blame you to trouble your
friends in so trifling a cause: But what do you mean by Churching? Do you
mean that which is set down in the Book?


Chauncelor. Just, I mean that and none other: For law will not warrant us to
press you to any other?


Woman. No nor I think to that neither if it be well examined: But seeing you
mean that kind of Churching, The reason in a word why I refuse it is this:
Because I would be loath to show my self either Jew or Papist.


Chauncelor. Why will thanksgiving to God after Childbirth make you a lew or a
Papist?


Woman. No: Thanksgiving will not: But this manner of thankesgiving that you
would have me to observe is in truth no thanksgiving at all, but a mere
Jewish or Popish Purifying.


Chauncelor. How do you prove it to be no thanksgiving?


Woman. By the very first institution of it: For the Papists that were the
woorshipfull founders and devisers of it, and knew best their own meaning, did
in the instituting of it, give it this title: The Purification of Women after
Childbirth. Whereby it is manifest that their very drift and intent in
th'institution was only for a Purification or Purging, and therefore no
thankesgiving: Secondly, there is no one word, matter or form of
thanksgiving in the whole order of it as it is set down in the book: and
therefore it can not be that it was ordained for Thankesgivinge. though in the
title thereof it be absurdlie so called.


Chauncelor. But why do you term it a Jewish or a Popish Purifying?


Woman. It is Jewish in 2 respects: First in that the woman after she has
brought forth a child, is held unclean (as under the Law) til such time as
she has showed herself in the Temple. Secondly in that she is commanded to
offer her accustomed offeringes, which is drawn and derived from the Lamb and
young Pigeons under the Law. Popish it is in 3 respects: First in that it was
instituted and devised by the Rapistes, apishlie imitating the Jews, and
bringing in one kind of Purifying in stead of another. Secondly in that the
woman is commanded to come as near the communion table, as in the time of
popery they came to the high Altar. Lastly, in regard of the Popish offeringe,
to weete the Chrisome: For she is commanded to offer th'accustomed offeringes,
which is sete down to be the Chrisome, In which regard you may as instlie
trouble me and call me hither for not offering the Chrisome, as for not being
purifyed, and as good law you have for the one as the other, which makes me
think (as I said before) that you have no law amongst you (but only the
lawless law of your will and pleasure) to compel any woman to be Churched.


Chauncelor. Well, we will talk of that another time: but I would to God, ye
foolish women would meddle with that which belongs unto you, and which is
within the compass of your own element, and not take upon you the decision
and interpretation of the law, which ye understand not: But I pray you tell me
one thing, what if the Church now would institute and ordeyne a solemn
Purifying of women, would you not be purified?


Woman. No indeed would I not: For if I should, I should then either with the
Jews deny Christ to be come in the flesh to give an end to those shadows
which were figures of the purifying and washing away of our sins by his
blood, or else with the Papists I must deny the bloudshead and sufferings of
Christ to be the only and alone sufficient purgation, of sin, and therefore it
is that we must have a supply and be fart her helped by some Church Ceremony,
or outward form of Prayers out of the mouth of some shaveling or Priest.


Chauncelor. Yea, but see now I pray you how you are deceyved in the heat of
your zeal, look in the book there is no such matter of Purifying as you
speak of, but only of Thankesgiving.


Woman. Trust me, you say true, I had almost forgotten that it speaks not a
word indeed of Purifying. But what a iugling and blearing of th'eis of the
simple is this amongst you. May we not herein say of you and your fellows,
that ye are the most perilous instruments, and dangerous impostors that ever
Satan raised up for th'advancement and restoring again of Popery.


Chauncelor. Why so I pray you my good kinswoman? What need all this heat
among friends? You imagine belike you are among your scolding dames and
prattling huswiues at home?


Woman. No good Master Chauncelor, I know I thank God where I am, neither am
I any whitte distempered at all: But that which I have said, I may truly and
lawfully say again: In which regard well fare the Papists say I, for they
shall rise up in judgment against you, who like good fellows yet in plain
and open terms, even bare faced, as it were, do seek to seduce us, and to
draw us to their false and idolatrous woorship and service in Popery, as
namely by their Mass, Mattens, Ensong, Purification, and other such like:
Whereas you much more dangerously and even under a mask or visard as it were,
and not unlike to him that transformeth him self into an Angel of light, do
go about to draw and allure us to the self same falfe worship and service
but by cleanlier names and honester titles, as to their Purification by the
title and name of Thankesgiving, that is, to a Jewish Ceremony that should be
abolished, under the pretense and color of a service of God that should be
continued.


Chauncelor. But I pray you Cosen Puritan, is there no difference betwixt
that in Popery and ours?


Woman. The difference (as I have been told by learned men) is only in this,
That theirs is in Latin and yours in Englissh, otherwise your proper
Thanksgiving which ye call Churching, is even the very same word for word
(excepting only the Title, wherein (as I say) ye iuggle and walk a little
more covertly then they) with their Purification in Popery. And can the
changing of a name or title alter the thing it self or make it of another
nature? If ye have that gift and power amongst you, then ye may as well bring
us in the Mass under the name and title of a Communion: and so he that
refuses to go to Mass, you may serve him with a Citatio^ for not coming to
the Communion, as in the like case you do now by us, you trouble us and call
us in question for denying of Thanksgiving, because we refuse to be Purified.


Chauncelor. In good faith it is more the^ I have considered of, whether that
in Popery be so near agreeing to ours as you speak of, I believe your leaders
have misinformed you. But howsoever it be and howsoever the Papists do hold
and account of it, it makes no great matter. The Church you see now holds it
for no other then a mere Thanksgiving, which is very deeent and requisite for
every woman after so great deliverance.


Woman. What if the Church should hold our Ladies Psalter to be David's
Psalter, or t'h Aue Marie for a Prayer? Should I therefore take and use the one
for David's Psalter, and the other for a Prayer? I know the Lord is to be thanked
for all his mercies, much more for so great a blessing as Childbirth is: But as
we are to give God thanks, and are thereunto tied and bound in duty and
allegiance: so are we still to do the same according to the pleasure of him
that commands, and after the square and rule of his ordinance, and not after
the precepts, phansies and inventions of men, especially after the
prescription of the man of Sin, that is after the manner of the superstitious
and idolatrous Papists.


Chauncelor. But in faith do you not think it a decent thing, that after so
great an escape, and for the birth of a babe into the world, there should be
Thanksgiving? or would you have no differeuce betwixt reasonable creatures and
beasts, but that it should be left indifferent to unruly men to accompany
with their wives at their pleasures, without regard of their weakness and
uncleanness?


Woman. You ask me wonderful strange things: First whether it be not a decent
thing upon such a deliverance and the birth of a Babe into the world, there
should not be Thankefgiving. Secondly, whether it should be left indifferent
for men to play the beasts with their wives. Unto which I answer, that the
manner of Churching that you thus trouble us for, does not redress any of
these inconveniences: There being in it in truth no manner of Thanksgiving at
all, but only a speech or superscription of a Thankesgiving. Socondlie,
whereas by the law of God, to touch a woman in the time of her separation and
uncleanness, should be death, what punishment have you provided for this so
great and heinous enormitie? Or how does your Churching of women restrain a
carnal and licentious appetite from executing his villenous and beastly
desire? Has he not his full swindge and liberty to do what he lift for all
that? So that ye complain of dangers, disorders, and inconveniences, and yet
leave them still as you found them without cure or redress, never caring for
any thing so your idle Ceremony may be kept.


Chauncelor. A man may easelie smell (gentle Cosen) where you have been at
school, yet I have talked in my days with some of your own crew, and they hau
cheld it for a thing indifferent at the least, and have not been half so hot
in it as you, and therefore for the love I bear you, I would wish you to have
some regard of modesty and womanhood. For yea faith when you have said and
wrangled all that you can, it will be found a most decent thing.


Woman. A decent thing? What talk you of decency? I tell you I hold it fer
more then a Decent thing, even for a religious thing, and a part of my bounden
duty, if it be (as you say) a Thankesgiving and a service of God. But I pray
you tell me, because you wish me to have a regard of modesty and womanhood,
have you had any information of any mis behavior against me, either in my
speech, company, or carriage of my self, if you have, I shall thank you as my
good kinsman to admonish me of it.


Chauncelor. By my troth no: if it were not for this odd pievishnesse of
yours, (whereby you trouble both your self and your friends more then needs)
I do not (so God help me) know or hear any thing by you that deserves
reproof: and therefore I am the willinger to pull you out of it if I could.


Woman. It were well indeed if a could be pulled from my faults and you from
your swearing. But when you friend or kinsman does any thing or refrayneth
from any thing of conscience (as I may safely protest unto you in this case I
do) Then the way and means to set me straight (if I be awry) is as I take it,
the sacred Scripturs and word of God, which if you bring, or any good reason
out of it for proof and warrant of this your Churching, woe and double woe to
me if I subscribe not to it.


Chauncelor. Whop: here is a revell and ado with Scriptures, my kinswoman, you
say, refrayneth of Conscience: But from what does she refrain? forsooth from
Thankesgiving to God: Is not this pretty stuff, or is not this a warm
Conscience?


Woman. Not so: Deceive not your self, nor triumph not before the victory,
your kinswoman thanketh God she has been better taught then so. It is not from
Thanksgiving to God (as you would have it) that she refrayneth of Conscience,
but only from Jewish or Popish Purifying shadowed and varnished over with a
color or show of Thankesgiving. Thus she told you once before, and this
she tells you again and again. But I pray you let me ask you one thing.


Chauncelor. What is that?


Woman. Is not Thankesgiving a service of God?


Chauncelor. Yes: I hope no man doubts of that.


Woman. What mean you then to harp so much upon Decency and modesty? Would
you have us serve God for Dece^cie? Sometimes again you say that Churching is
a thing indifferent, a trifle, and a matter of nothing, and yet you will needs
have it to he a Thankesgiving to God. How can this hang together then, that
one and the same thing should be a matter of Dece^cie, of indifferency, or a
trifle of no moment, and yet a service of God? Is the service of God come to
that pass amongst you now?


Chauncelor. I mean only the Ceremony of it, as the Time, and th'Attyre, the
company of women, the offerings, and the feasting of neighbors and friends,
to be as things indifferent and of no moment: But not the prayers and
thanksgiving in the church, that I hold to be holy and not indifferent.


Woman. The truth is ye hold ye can not tell what amongst you: The
Ceremony sticks so near to your service, and your manner of service is so
suitable and agreeing with your Ceremony, that ye can not for your lives sever
the one from the other. Take away the Ceremony, and there is no need of your
service that I see. Therefore you may do well in my conceit, to let them both
henceforward sleep and surcease. For let the poor woman that has escaped,
be never so thankful, or let her husband (as master of the family) with his
servantes and friends give God thanks never so earnestly and Christianlie for
that deliverance, (and that even then when the remembrance of that mercy of
God is freashest in their memories) yet all this is nothing to you, nor of no
reckoning, unless the Woman may have her solemn Purification at her months
end, with her white veil or some such mark to be known by, which is a
manifest sign that albeit ye pretend Thanksgiving, yet in truth ye care
not for it, so your Popish custom and ceremony of Purifying be not broken of.


Chauncelor. Indeed it were fit that ye women should appoint the service and
ceremonies of the Church, and then belike we should be well and handsomelie
served. But I pray you tell me one thing: What if for the peace of the Church
you should give thanks after this manner as in the book is prescribed, what
discredit, danger or inconvenience would ensue to you upon that?


Woman. That is as much to say in good English, as what if for the peace of the
Church one should make show to give thanks, when in deed and in truth there
is no Thankesgiving at all? were not that a plain mocking of God, a kind of
Hypocrisy, and Profaning of the name and Religion of God?


Chauncelor. Trust me I think you are one of the perversest creatures that
ever any man dealt with. I speak not one word of a show of Thankesgiving,
but of giving thanks in deed, and look now whither you be run.


Woman. Why did you not speak of giving thanks after the manner as the Book
prescribes: and that as I have often told you, is but a show or shadow and no
truth. How am I perverse then, when I ground upon your own speeches? Now
because you ask me what inco^venience would ensue if I should for any respect
use this pretended Than ksgiving, I will show you (if you will give me leave,
and that you will with patience hear me) how I shall therein offend many and
sundry ways.


Chauncelor. As how I pray you for my learning?


Woman. Two ways I have already told you of: as first that in so doing, I
should therein show my self either Jewish or Popish.

Secondly, that in fayning to give GOD thanks, and to use no one word
tending to that end, nor looking that way, is nothing else but in a sort to
mock God to his face.


Chauncelor. Well what then?


Woman. Thirdly in so doing, I shall not only nourish, foster and maintain
many superstitious and erroneous opinions in the hearts of th'ignorant, and
so strengthen the simple in their false woorship, but also fall into diverse and
sundry most dangerous absurdities: as namely, first of all that a woman
after childbirth is unclean and unholy, contrary to The Apostles words, who
teaches us that a Woman is sanctified by bearing of children. For what may
Purifying I pray you presuppose, but some former uncleanness? Likewise, that a
woman is held for the time as an excommunicate person, and therefore most
solemnly be received again into the church. For what may Churching presuppose
but some former excluding, shutting out and cutting off?


Chauncelor. These then I perceive are some of your supposed absurdities, have
you any more of them?


Woman. Well jest as you please, I have more of them then you or any man of
your place ca^ with any conscience answer or avoyde.


Chauncelor. Let us hear them the^ I pray you, and dispatch that we may know
all our pain at once.


Woman. Why then I say further that in yielding to this Churchinge of yours, I
should by mine example condemn the primitive Church, and all the reformed
Churches in other Countries at this day, who use no such churchings: and
withal justify and approve the papists, and all other superstitious churches
that join with them in the use of it.


Chauncelor. A great piece of work, as if it were such a matter to vary and
dissent a little from Calvin or Beza, I tell you they may as well learn of us,
as we of them.


Woman. Who spoke of Calvin or Beza? I promise you I did not so much as think
of the^. I spoke only of the Primitive and Reformed churches. And albeit those
men you speak of were worthy instruments in Gods church, and such as we have
cause to thank God for: yet the Lord I know might have spread forth the light
of his Gospel, and reformed his Church, had they never lived. But this is the
manner of you all, you brood of Chauncelors and your Associates, when you can
say nothing, then you fall straight a girding and railing on Calvin or Beza,
or some such worthy man.


Chauncelor. Gentle Cosen, be not angry, I mean you no hurt yea faith. What
other inconveniences or absurdities do you find in this Churchinge, speak
your mind freely, for I am even bent to hear you.


Woman. I should therein either my self abuse, or yield to the abusing of the
word of God.


Chauncelor. How so I pray you?


Woman. I mean concerning the Psalm that is there appointed for that purpose,
vz. the 121 Psalm, which being left to the chuch by the holy Ghost for comfort
and consolation in time of distress, to apply it to Thankesgiving, contrary
to the purpose and meaning of the holy Ghost, must needs (as I say) be a
plain abusing and profaning of the word. And of it be well considered of,
it will be found to be more fit a great deal for a woman in the time of
her travel, agony and distress, then afterward when she is of strength and in
good estate.


Chauncelor. Yea faith yea faith gossippe, I doubt not if any of your precise
crew had set down that Psalm for that purpose, but you would have liked of it
well enough for all the cavills and quarrels you make against it now.


Woman. Think you so Sr: Well I see that men of your occupation may easily
be deceyved. But to deal plainly and not to dissemble with you, one
especial reason among others that draws me to dislike and refuse this Iuel
of yours (I mean your Churching) is, that in yielding thereunto, I should
justify you and your fellows in your crooked and unconscionable proceedings,
that is in urging and pressing your own Traditions before the Commandments
of God.


Chauncelor. And be these the pretty reasons that move you thus to dislike
the custom and reverent usage of our Church? Now surely it shows the
waywardnes of your conceyte, in that you prefer your own will before the
peace of the Church, which ought to be dearer unto you then thus to stand out
and endaunger your self about such trifles, and matters of nothing, that are
not worth a rush to speak of.


Woman. No are? Then I say still, The more shame for you to keep such a revell
and ado, for such things as your self confess are not worth whisteling: and
therein you show your selves to be right Scribes and Pharisees, that is,
Hypocrites, tithing mint and cumine, and leaving judgment and mercy, troubling
the children of God and those that ye cannot tuftlie charge with any crime,
for not observing your Traditions and beggarly Ceremonies, as Crossing,
Kneeling, Churching, etc. and in the mean season suffering the breakers of Gods
holy commandments (ask Mistres A. B. else, and a nombre of known Papists,
Atheistes, Charmers, Blasphemers, Prophaners of the Saboth, and such like) to
go scotfree and unpunished, as if your whole delight, careand watchfulness
were only for th'ob seruation of these bables and fruitless Coremonies of
yours.


Chauncelor. O Mrs A. B. I perceive is a great more in your eye, well I pray God
that you of the holy brotherhood that make it so dainty, do (the best of you)
live no worse then she does now, what soever she has been heretofore.


Woman. Amen say I, and better to. Indeed to do her no wrong as I hear no
great exclamation of her, for any notorious crime, so on the other side, we
that are her neighbors, may safely acquit her of any great commendation that
she has for any holy and religious course thereby to draw on others by her
example. Therefore praise her as much as you list, when you have done the best
you can, she will be found but an ordinary woman: and the special thing
that you can commend in her (for any thing I see) is this: that she is as
quietly chuchedwhe^ her time comes, as any of the rest of her neighbors.


Chauncelor. I would to God I could say so by you to Cosen, condition I had
given twenty pound yea faith, and then you might have eased us of much of this
trouble.


Woman. You may do one day, when you ca^ bring me any sufficient reason and
warrant for it out of the Scripture. And if you will but give us a tolleration
and dispensation for it till then, we will ask no more.


Chauncelor. You say well, I know your meaning. But in good truth I muze that
the Peace of the Church does no more move you.


Woman. You muze you say, that the peace of the Church does uo more move me:
And I muze likewise what you would have said if you had lived in the days of
our Savi. Christ, who defended his Disciples against the Pharisees in a verier
trifle and of far less moment then this our refusal of your Churching.


Chauncelor. Where I pray you, show me that for my learning.


Woman. What say you to the refusal of washing of hands at meat? Is not that
as small a matter as may be? And if you had been by at that time, when our
Savior so boldly defended his Disciples therein, it is like enough you would
have coumpted him for a very Trifler, or some busy Troubler of the Peace of
the Church, that would keep such a do for nothing. Sure by your dealing with
us we can conjecture none other.


Chauncelor. Tush the Comparisons are not alike.


Woman. Truly even as like as may be. The Pharisees found fault with the
Disciples for breaking a Tradition of the Elders, viz. washing of hands at
meat: and you find fault with us for breaking a much worse Tradition of
yours. You ask us often whether Churching be not a Decent thing: We ask you
again, whether washing be not both a Decent thing, a cleanly thing, and a
wholesome thing? Our Savior (you see) defended his Disciples in the breach of
that Decency of those Pharisees of that age: and his word does warrant and
defend us in the breach of this supposed Decency of your Pharisses of this
age.


Chauncelor. Nay then yea faith, if ye go to that, ye may take your selves by
the nose Mistres Cosen: For who the Devil be the right Pharisses and
Hypocrites if ye be not? Ye are so demure, and ye make it so nice and so holy
amongst you, that by the Mass a dog would not dwell with you.


Woman. I perceive if a dog dwelt with you, if you could but make him speak
once, you would quickly teach him to swear.


Chauncelor. O that is all your grace amongst you: you think your selves so
pure over other men, because you can a little bridle your selves from swearing,
and yet ye will do ten times worse and make no bones at it. As covetous, as
spiteful, and malicious ye are the most of you, as dogs. I know one of
your crew who would not swear for no good, and used ordinarily to pray with
his me^ in his chamber, and yet being at a Knights house, where he had good
entertayneme^t, they prayed so heartily amongst them, that for conscience sake
they fair thwited me of a valence of a bed, and carried that and a piece of
plate with them to the value of twenty nobles at the least.


Woman. Well though this peradventure may be one of your legend stories, for
any thing I know, yet allow it to be true, what get you by that? one sin you
know excuses not another. These were hypocrites and thieves, therefore you to
avoid this danger, will needs be swearers and ruffeans: what physike or
policy call you that to avoid Hypocrisy by plain and open iniquity?


Chauncelor. Why I do not defend swearing to be good, woman: you do not
hear me say so, I wish I could leave it with all my heart: It is but a foolish
custom and comes from me at unawares, and that many times when I think no
harm in the world.


Woman. The Apostle is against you in that: for he says, Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks: And our Savior says, That out of the heart
comes evil thoughts, and yet you can drop vile oaths amongst you (such is
your skill) and think no harm. I must needs commend you for this, by means
whereof you have brought one notable thing to pass in our Church, and I wish
for my part ye were Chronicled for it.


Chauncelor. What is that good gossipper


Woman. Why, That albeit there be many Parishes amongst us without a preaching
Minister, yet to mende the matter, there be few Dioces in the land without a
swearing Chauncelor.


Chauncelor. That is more the^ you know, good huswife. But if it were so, I do
not think but the woorst Chauncelor amongst us does more good then many of
your vpstart and busy headed Preachers, pratlers I should say.


Woman. Well, to let that rest as it is (for if there by any thing amiss, we
should do wrong to look for amends from you) you see evidentlie, that
the example which I alleged of our Savior Christ in reproving the Pharisees
and defendinge his Disciples in their refusal of that trifle of washing of
hands, is both a check to you, for thus troubling of us without cause, and a
good warrant for us to do as we do.


Chauncelor. Do I see it? I promise you I must get me better spectacles
then, then ever I could yet light on.


Woman. Well, if you do not see it, I must needs hold with you, that your
spectacles are stark naught in deed: But whether you do see it, or will not
see it, it is and ought to be a lesson of instruction to us whom you now thus
trouble: That whenever any Pharisaicall hypocrites do strictly urge and
press the keeping of their own traditions (be they never so small and
trifling) with the neglect of the commandments of God, then it is our parts
by all lawful and body means to bend our selves against them, and not to
yield to th'observation of the least of them: much less when the Traditions
shall be noisome, hurtful and superstitious, and derogatorie to the glory of
God.


Chauncelor. In good faith it was never merry world since these twatling women
became divines. I see I do but spend time with you. And yet when you have said
and done all that you can for your life, it will be found (as I have said) but
a trifle that you stand upon, whereas the peace of the Church is, or ought to
be to you a matter of great moment, and a thing that you ought daily to pray
for, if you have (as you pretend) any conscience with you, or regard of
brotherly love, with a defire to maintain unity, and to avoyde iarres and
dissentions.


Woman. We are I confess to pray for the peace of Syon: For they shall prosper
that love her. But what? Is the Church now become a maynteiner of trifles? By
your speeches so often iterated and redoubled (for you harp still on that
string) it should be so: and what indignity were that? But in deed as I have
told you the thing we stand upon (if it be rightly examined) is not in that
nature of indifferency as you would bear the world in hand it is, make of it
what you will either Thankesgiving or Purifying if it be Thankesgiving indeed,
it is my bounden duty (say I) to perform it, and a sin to leave it undone:
If it be Purifying, it is my bounden duty to avoyde it, and a sin to
practice it, because it treads under foot the sufficiency of of the death
and bloudsheading of JESUS Christ, which is th'onlie purgation of my sin. So
that turn it which way you will, it is no light matter or trifle of small
regard, as you would have it, but a thing that one way or other greatly
concerns the glory of God, and therein also you seem to me apparantlie to
cross, entangle and ensnare your self in your own speeches.


Chauncelor. How so I pray you?


Woman. I have told you already, and that so often, that I am half weary of
telling it. But sure your mind is so on your haulfpenie, that you neither
remember what I say, nor think on that you say your self. Have you not
always called this Churching of yours, a Thankesgiving? and have you not
labored by the title of it in the Book, to defend it to be a Thanksgiving
and no Purifying?


Chauncelor. Yes that I have, and so I say still.


Woman. Why then I say for shame away with this trifle and trifling of yours,
and let us hear no more of that: For Thankesgiving you know must needs be a
part of Gods woorship and service. And what an impious and ungodly thing were
it to make the holy woorship and service of God a trifle, a matter of nothing,
not worth a rush, or a thing to be done or not done at our pleasures? I
protest unto you, if it were a Thankesgiving in deed, that is such a part of
Gods woorship as he has commanded and prescribed in his word, if I should
wilfully refuse to do it, I were not worthy to be coumpted a member of his
Church.


Chauncelor. Yet still me thinks the peace of the Church does not poize and
prevail with you as it should do.


Woman. Here is a do with the Peace of the Church, and yet when ye have all
done, a man may easily see that though ye talk of it never so much, ye use
it for the most part but as a staulking horse amongst you.


Chauncelor. What mean you by that?


Why, you know well enough, that the staulkinge horse is not to blame for the
death of the foul, he does but only shadow and stand before the fouler
while he kills him: Even so do you. The Peace of the Church (as you handle
it) is a notable veil to shadow all your deformities and corruptions. If a
good Minister do not yield to your lawless and unconscionable subscription,
or if he over skippe the Cross in Baptism, Ring in Marriage, or any such
needles Ceremony, then straight you choke him with the peace of the Church,
the peace of the Church, and so you do now by us for our refusal of kneeling
and Churching.


Chauncelor. And I pray you in good earnest, why may not these and more then
these be endured and yielded unto for the peace of the Church?


Woman. If the Peace of the Church were so dear unto you as you pretend and
make show of, then would ye never for shame trouble either Ministers or people
for such odd things as those that rather hinder then further men in Religion.
But your manner is when you speak of one thing to mean another. You speak of
the Peace of the Church, but you mean still the peace of your Hierarchy, the
peace of your unruly places and offices, the Peace of all your Popish and
beggarly Ceremonies, so they may stand still untouched, if ye Chauncelyers
and your Officials may be at quiet in your rooms and jurisdictions: Little (the
Lord knows) do ye care for the peace of the Church: and that is seen not
only by your troubling of us now without cause, but by your ordinary
sile^cing, suspending and imprisoning of the best and holiest Preachers for
these trifles, and your countenancing and allowing of dumme dogs, be there
lives and behavior never so shameful.


Chauncelor. O (my good kinswoman) we have heard enough of these matters long
ago. These supposed quarrels have been answered and answered again, you come
to late yea faith with your baskett of Apples now. What a Devil should you
meddle with any of these matters? It were much fitter for such as you are, to
meddle with your spindle and your wheel, and soberlie to attend your trades and
vocations, then thus in the pride of your hearts to controlle your betters,
and to deal in Church causes which belong not unto you.


Woman. I was I thank God busied in my vocation, and so I might have been still,
had not you sommoned me thence by your officer. I know right well Church causes
belong not to such as I am to deal in, neither do I meddle withal farther
then by way of suit or co^plainte to those that have authority to redress.
And if the Peace of the Church can not move you to leave cyting and troubling
us for trifles, whom otherwise you can not charge with any crime, never blame
us if the bare sound and noise of the Peace of the Church do not at al move
us to yield to any of your trifling and fruitles Ceremonies against our
consciences.


Chauncelor. Well I am sorry you are so wilful yea faith: I perceive I shall
do no good of you.


Woman. I tell you you may easily do good of me, and easily draw me to the
bent of your bow, if you can produce and allege unto me but one only sentence
and proof out of the scriptures of God.


Chauncelor. Scripture? there is nothing with you but Scriptures. No No. It is
even the pride of your heart, and pievish singularity of your own conceyte
that does thus draw you. Why do you think no body sees any thing but your
self? or do you think there be not as sober and as honest women as you
Churched?


Woman. Then I perceive you have no Scripture in the world to persuade me
with, your only scripture is the pride of my heart, the Singularity of my
conceit, and I can not tell what. But you ask me whether as honest women as I
be not churehed? I ask you again, Whether as honest men as you have not
denied Christ. The Examples of the godly (you know) are not to be followed but
in godliness, whereas it is the common guise of you and your generation to make
a solemn gathering and calling as it were of the scabbes, imperfections and
bleamishes of the best men, and then to lay them in our dish straight as a
choakepeare to us: as for example, if ye find once that Father Latimer and
Ridley, or any such like reverend man, did wear square cappe and surplus, why
then there is no remedy but this must be proclaimed straight as an
authentical warrant to all the succeeding Ministers of the land, that they
may boldly and safely yield to the wearing of the like attire.


Chauncelor. And I promise you, It is something I tell you as light as you make
of it. Why is the example of the godly Martyrs nothing with you, and your
precise brotherhoode?


Woman. Yes it is something: but I do not think it should weigh more with us
then the example of Abraham, David, or Peter's whose steps you know we must not
follow when they slip or go awry. But will you your selves I pray you (if a
man may ask it) stand to the judgment, and be ruled by the example of the
godly Martyrs?


Chauncelor. I see no reason but we may and ought.


Woman. Why then down falls to the ground straight your lawless oath of
Inquisition, wherewith ye so plague the Church now a days, Judge by May.
Tindall else, May. La^bart, and others that suffered for the testimony of Gods
truth.


Chauncelor. Indeed Ma. Tindall and Ma. Lambart were somewhat wilful.


Woman. Just, how else? Thus ye marshall the Martyrs as it please your selves,
when they may serve your turn (be it in never so great ignorance and weakness
of theirs) then their names, their piety, and their patience are laid before
us in great and capital letters, as paternes to follow. But when they cross
you in any thing (be the same never so apparantlie warranted by the
Scriptures) then alas, they were but men, yea and many times wilful men, as
you do now most injuriously slander Mr Lambart and Mr Tindall.


Chauncelor. But to leave these circumstances and by matters, do you think it
is a sin to be Churched? speak your conscience.


Woman. As I have already said, if it be a sin to make show of
Thankesgiving, and yet to give no thanks at all: if it be a sin to abuse and
misapplie the sacred Scriptures of God to another end and purpose then it was
given by the holy Ghost: if it be a sin to strengthen and confirm the
Papist in his superstition, and the simple and ignorant in their false and
erroneous woorship: if all or any of these be sins, then do I not see how
your Churching (as it is used amongst you) can escape the stamp and brandmarke
of sin. And howsoever it may be to others, I do well assure my self it
were a sin and wickedness in me, because it is against the light of mine own
conscience grounded upon the reasons that I have alleged unto you.


Chauncelor. Why, but if you like not the Psalm in the Book which you keep
such ado at, and be so coy and conceyted, that for fear of abusing it,
forsooth you are loath to have it read to you, yet your Minister may use another
if he will, and pray as he thinks good. So you would decently and womanly
come to church at your time, as other your neighbors do, by my troth for my
part I could be content to wink at many things, and show you any favor I
could.


Woman. Then I perceive you have forgotten how in the beginning when I asked
you what you meant by Churching, you told me that which was prescribed in the
book: For law said you, would not warrant any other. And are you come now to
give us liberty to use another, so we would quietly observe your Ceremony.


Chauncelor. You say well, Is this the thanks I have for my kindness and
favor to you, in that I am contented to save you from trouble and danger, to
yield a little to your weakness, because you seem to make conscience of I can
not tell what? In good faith goship, you shall fit till your heels ache before
I offer you this favor again.


Woman. Nay but for all your chafing, I would not have you mistake me: What
favor so ever you show me, I will not by Gods grace be unthankful for it to
my power. But I understood you that you gave me even now free liberty to
speak my mind, and that you would willingly hear what soever I should say:
and I took it and do still take it, that your Sommoning and sending for me
hither, was rather in your love to confer with me and to satisfy me, then by
any rigor of your law to punish me.


Chauncelor. By my troth you hitte it right: For I was greatly beholden to
your Father, and therefore I have reason to wish you well, and in that respect
I would gladly do you what good I may.


Woman. Why, then you continue this mind to give me your free warrant to
speak in this case what I think, and to cast all the doubts and make all
th'obiections I can against you, that so you may the better resolve me in
the end?


Chauncelor. How else? In the name of God, speak you mind boldly, neither
shall you offend me with any thing you say: For I imagine you can say nothing
in this cause, but I have heard it already.


Woman. Well then, does not this (I pray you) plainly verify and confirm
that which I told you of before when I likened you to the Phariseis, vz. That
your own foolish Traditions and fruitless Ceremonies were dearer to you and of
more precious accoumpt, then the Sacred ordinance of God?


Chauncelor. How so, I conceive not that?


Woman. No? Did not you say that for my sake you would be content to winck at
the breach of the Book, and give the Minister leave to use other prayers, so I
would be content in any sort to be Churched, and keep your monethlie and
manerlie Ceremony?


Chauncelor. Why if I said so, you are the more beholden to me for that I do
not mean (I tell you) to show every body that favor.


Woman. Well, howsoever I may in this regard thank you for your love to me,
yet to deal plainly with you, I can not therein praise you for your love to
the Church, nor never shall till I see Preaching as much beholden to you as
Churching is.


Chauncelor. Why, do you think I do not prefer the preaching of the word
before any other ceremony of the Church, be it never so commendable?


Woman. It should appear no by your dealinge with our Minister.


Chauncelor. Your Minister! yea faith your Minister has no more wit then he
occupies: He knows not who is his friend nor who is his foe. I would to God he
would be his own friend once. Stand sticking and mincing it at these bables
and trifles as he does, when he might be quiet in his ministry, if he would
him self.


Woman. So might we poor women (whom you thus trouble) be quiet too if we
would be Churched: Our Minister you know is an honest man of life, and a
painful Teacher in his place, you can not charge him with any misdemeanour
for your life. He preaches amongst us with great fruit, and has won many
to the Gospel, and yet for refusal of your lawless subscriptio^ beside the
Statute, and for not wearing of your surplus, and not Crossing in Baptism, you
never let him rest among you, but one while you are doing with him in your
Court: an other while the Pursevant from the High Commission trounceth him: So
that ye make the poor man spend the better part of his poor living in
iaunceling up and down about the moon shine in the Town-dich.


Chauncelor. Why, who is this long of, gentle Cosen? Is not all this long of
himself? There be as wise and as learned as he that yield to all this you
speak of, and more then this for the peace of the Church.


Woman. But I pray you tell me, Why may you not be as kind to him in his
Ministry and Preaching, as you offer to be to me in this Ceremony of
Churching? You say you prefer the preaching of the Gospel before any
ceremony whatsoever: if you mean in deed as you say, then for Gods sake
wincke a little at the breach of the Book in him as well as you are contented
to doc in me: let not your love to me in private be greater then your love to
the Church in public. Look a little thorough your fingers, and pass by as if
you saw not his refusal of the Cross and Surplus. That so we may enjoy the
means of our salvation in peace. And if in any case you will yield to the
breach of the Book, let it be for the Gospel sake, and not for a Ceremony.


Chauncelor. In good faith, I can not tell what to say to you, with being
among the perverse, you have gotten as it were a kind of habit of
perverseness. I had rather then any gold your husband and you had never
planted your selves in that Parish: why you were well enough before, and well
accoumpted of among your neighbors, and it must needs grieve many of your good
friends to see you in these tunes now.


Moman. I may truly thank God, as for many other his mercies, so especially
for this that ever I came to this man's Ministry (whoms ye so trouble amongst
you). I was indeed a Protestant before, and thought well of myself, and yet
(if I shall not lie to you) I had no more Religion then my horse. But now I may
truly say, that as my knowledge is in some measure increased, so I never made
conscience of sinning and offending God, till I came to the place where I now
dwell. All which as I must and do attribute to God, as the Author and
Founteine, so to our Minister as the means and instrument.


Chauncelor. Indeed you have made a very worthy increase, and mended the
matter wondrous well. And all this is for nothing else but because you are come
from Churching to No Churching: what a wonderful cure and charge your Minister
has wrought in you. I believe he uses to Catechize you in nothing else but
only in Churching, you seem to be perfect in the point.


Woman. Well, I would you could tell how to discharge a good conscience in your
places, (any of you Chancelours) as well as our Minister does in his. His
ordinary teaching is (thanks be to God) in matters of more moment then you
speak of, and if you heard him once your self, I make no question but you
would say so. For mine own part I never heard him speak publikly of this
particular custom of churching in my life, further then might be gathered out
of any general doctrine of his. Indeed I confess I have had private
conference with him about it, and he has fully satisfied me.


Chauncelor. In what sort (I pray you) has he fatisfied you? may I be bold as
to crave a copy, or to be pertaker with you of your ghostly fathers
resolutions?


Woman. Why you have heard the most of them already, and I have made known to
you at large the reasons that have moved me to shake off and abandon this
foolish and superstitious custom of yours, wherewith I had well hoped you had
been satisfied.


Chauncelor. Indeed you have told me many pretty things, but yet they be such
as I have heard of before. Why, they be the common reasons of you all amongst
you. I never had any of you before me, but they have pleaded even as you do,
or to the same effect.


Woman. The more say I (under correction) have you to answer for, That
havinge had so manifest reasons laid before you so long ago, and the same so
often iterated and repeated unto you, there is yet no manner of relenting in
you, but you do still persist and go on in your course, in troubling poor
women without cause.


Chauncelor. Why you know my Lord Bushop went farther with some of you not
far from your quarters, and made the proudest of them crouch, and come on
their knees, enforcing the^ to be Churched in despite of them, and that two or
three years after they were laid. You would think I deal hardly with you,
if I should use any of you so.


Woman. Now sure it was Bushoplike done of him if he did so. But what warrant I
pray you had my Lord to make them crouch in this manner as you speak of? Does
the Book or any Law of the land authorize him to Church a woman 3 year after
she is brought to bed? show me that I pray you for my learning?


Chauncelor. Well, you have nothing to do with that. Therefore it shall be
good for you Cosen (as I have told you) to meddle with your own matters and to
be armed how to answer for your self, and not to deal in things
impertinent to your place.


Woman. Content then, you give me good counsel: But remember your self, I pray
you, that it was you that brought in the Bushop and not I. I meddled not with
him till you spoke of him. But to desire to be resolved in some things of you
is not I hope impertinent to my place, is it?


Chauncelor. No, god forbid, whatsoever you desire to be satisfied in, be bold
I pray you to propound it, and I will thank you and do my best to resolve you
as far forth as lies in me.


Woman. Why then in this Thankesgiving you speak of, who is it that you would
have give thanks?


Chauncelor. Why, the woman that has been delivered.


Woman. When is it that you would have her give God thanks?


Chauncelor. When she is strong and able to go to Church.


Woman. And not before? would you have her forgett her self, and be unthankful
till then?


Chauncelor. Nay, God forbid, I hope she has more grace then so. But I speak
of public tha^ksgiving and not of private.


woman. Why, but the blessing you see is private, and what reason is it then,
or what warrant, or what example have you out of the Scripture, that there
should be an ordinary set service in Public for every private and particular
blessing? I would feign you resolved me in that. If the Minister be in duty
bound to give God thanks for every private and particular bleshing, why not
then as well for my husbands fall of his horse, as for my deliverance? I tell
you I hold my husband a far more worthy member of the Church then my
self, and therefore I see no reason why ye should not cause him to be
Churched as well as me, and so all others in our parish that have escaped
either drowning or danger of death.


Chauncelor. Me thinks Cosen you do not rightly consider of it as you should
do. It is in my understanding another manner of thing then you take it for.
There is you must mark in the thing a double blessing: The birth of a babe
into the world being an excellent creature of God: And the deliverance and
dangerous escape of the woman. No question but the Church in this her service,
has a special reference and relation to both: In which regard it may well be
called more then a private or particular blessing?


Woman. Something you have said to the matter, and yet when it is examined it
will be found nothing. A double blessing you call it: The birth of the babe,
and the deliverance of the woman. But I say the Church in that set service of
hers has no manner of respect at all to the former of the^ that is the birth
of the child.


Chauncelor. How prove you that:


Woman. By the very practice of our Church whereof your self may be a
witness. For if the woman die before her month, there is no manner of service
nor Thanksgiving at all for the Babe, though it thrive and prosper never so
much. Therefore the Church in those her churching prayers, never regards that
at all, having prayed and given God thanks for the Babe before at Baptism.


Chauncelor. Well what of all that?


Woman. Why then you must give me leave to hold my former opinion, That for
the Church to establish a Public service for every private and ordinary
blessing (as Childbirth is) is without ground or warrant. Indeed I confess
that if the Queen or Princess of a land, in whom the whole Realm has an
interest, were delivered of a Babe, then I take it the Church had some reasons
to make a Public and general Churching or Thanksgiving to God: As I have
heard that for the birth of King Edward there was: But otherwise such an
ordinary service as yours is, for every private woman such as my self, has in
mine opinion neither legs nor foundation to stand on.


Chauncelor. O I remember now these were some of the worthy reasons that your
Minister alleged when he was before me in Mistres Winters case.


Woman. But what think you? Were they not sound reasons? or are you able by
any color of reason to answer or avoid them?


Chauncelor. Well, by your leave, your Minister (as holy as he is) played the
Ass there egregiously.


Woman. How so I pray you? Wherein? I premise you I see not but he did that
which belongs to him in all faithfulness.


Chauncelor. Why is not she his patroness I pray you, and did not her husband
give him the benefice?


Woman. What of that?


Chauncelor. Why then you must needs confess he dealt but badly with her, and
unkindly to refuse to Church her.


Woman. I see no unkindness in it in the world nor yet any undutifulness to
her, considering at what an vnconvenient time she sent for him, on the Saboth
day morning, and that in all post have, of purpose as it is thought, to pike a
quarrel to him, having conceyved a bitter displeasure against him for his
Sermon before.


Chauncelor. Alas the gentlewoma^ had thought (as she says) and had verily
purposed to have gone to Church her self ouer-night, but the weather falling
out something whette and slabbie in the morning, had it been such a matter for
him to have come down to her when she sent for him?


Woman. What at that time and hour betwixt 9 and 10 of the clock when he was
ready to go to the sermon: Had that been fit think you?


Chauncelor. Sermon me no Sermons. By the mass I would not have hazarded her
displeasure for that, knowinge that my living did depend upon it. Why might he
not have preached an other time, or have fained some excuse for that present,
that he had not ben well or so?


Woman. Nay like enough: This is even like your selves, and fully suitable to
the rest of your proceedings. What other fruits should one look for from men
of your constitution? But does not this justify that which I have so often
charged you with: That you more prize and esteem these bables of your own
hatching and invention, then the sacred ordinance of God? And is it not a
strange witcherie, that ye can be content amongst you thus to suffer the
Preaching and Ministry of the word to give place to a Jewish or Popish
ceremony?


Chauncelor. O be not angry good Cosen.


Woman. Well, ye may see (if ye will not wilfully blindfolde your selves)
what mischief and inconvenience comes by this so cross and perverse dealing of
yours. For what with the care of the Decency of Churching and your
carelessness of the necessity of Preaching, ye have almost marred all amongst
you, and brought it so to pass, that the poor ignorant people of the land
do think all the service of GOD to lie in Churching, Crossing, Kneeling, and
being houseled (as they call it) at Easter. As for Preaching, they hold that
for a superfluous and needless Ceremony: and therefore when their service is
done, they take it they may lawfully go out of the Church, though the
Minister be ready to go into the Pulpitt. And all this my good Cosen is long
of you and your associates. I must needs in all plainness tell you what I
think.


Chauncelor. Well, these be things that you and I shall not redress in have,
gentle kinswoman. We may well wish and pray for the redress: but yea faith
neither you nor al your precise brotherhood can for your lives tell how to
help it.


Woman. If we can not help it (as you say) yet it were to bad to go about to
hinder it (as you do) you speak of praying and wisshing, and yet I can not
see that you do so much as wish and desire the thing you speak of: Nay it were
well if ye did indeed wish a reformation and redress from your hearts.


Chauncelor. Why, do you think me so far gone that I do not wish well to
the Church and State wherein I live?


Woman. It seems no by your own speeches. For in your mouth you condemn the
Minister for that which in your conscience you ought to commend him for. And
what was the Ministers fault, I pray you? Forsooth he would not forsake and
give over his Preaching to Church his Patroness, Whereupon you swear, (Sermon
you no sermons) Yea and by your leave, when the matter came before you (to your
reproach be it spoken good Cosen, God forgive you for it) you took part with
the Gentlewoman against our Minister. Call you this to wish well and to desire
and pray for reformation and amendment?


Chanucelor. Tush that was but in one particular (woman) and for once only that
I would have had him ouerskipt his sermon for a future benefire both to the
Church and him self: and what hurt had it been (I pray you) for him to have
laid aside one sermon, that afterward he might have preached many sermons in
peace? As for my taking part with the Gentlewoman, that was for your Ministers
good, if you and he had eyes to see it: to the end that I might afterward
th'easilier pacify and prevail with the Gentlewoma^, who I assure you was
mightily incensed against him, and had in purpose to remove him if she
could.


Woman. Well, if your purpose and intent were good, I am glad of it, though
God (you see) do seldom bless but rather cross and curse these purposes of
yours, because you walk not with a straight foot and an upright heart. But to
let that pass and to come to our former speech of Thanksgiving, would you
have the Woman alone give God thanks for that blessing, or her friends to
join with her therein?


Chauncelor. What a question is that? Is it not fit and requisite that her
friends that love her, should join with her in so good an action?


Woman. How happens it then that ye handle the matter so amongst you in your
manner of Churching, That neither the Husband must join with his wife, nor
the Father with his daughter, nor the Son with his Mother, nor the Brother
with his Sister, nor they that are most bound in nature and by the law of GOD
to give thanks, must not at all meddle with it, nor have any thing to do with
all, as if they had no interest in that blessing at all, but were mere
strangers to it.


Chanucelor. O it is fittest in good faith that they only that were by the
woman in her anguish and travel, should be by her also at her Thankesgiving.
What a Devil should men meddle with women's matters?


Woman. You say well, men must not meddle with women's matters. But I always
took Thanksgiving to God to be a matter belonging to men as well as to women.
And if men must not meddle withal, what should the Minister deal in it, or why
should he be troubled for not meddling with this woman's business? He was not by
(you know, at the woman's travel, and therefore you might do well to exempte
him as well as you do others: For you know when the Bushop makes and
ordains a Minister, be gives him authority to Preach, to minister the
Sacraments, and to exercise Discipline, and not to Church women. This by
th'institution is no part of his office, and therefore you may the rather
pardon him if he happen to omit it.


Chauncelor. He (you know) is the mouth of the Congregation. And who should
deal in the Prayers of the Church, but only he?


Woman. I confess the Minister by his place and function ought to be as well
the mouth of God to the people to deliver us his will, as the mouth of the
people to God to lay open our wantes and to crave his assistance. But in this
case that you speak of, of your solemn Churching, or rather Purifying of
women, he is neither of both. He makes show (as I have told you) of
Thanksgiving, but gives none in deed, in so much that your selves can not
tell what to make of it for your lives, as a service that is neither fish nor
fleash, nor good read hearing: and yet ye must needs defend it and
mainteyne it, and that stiffelie: yea and many times make the Preachinge of
the word give place unto it, such is your care of the peace of the Church. God
forgive it you my good Cosen. This is a truth you know, I can not dissemble
with you.


Chauncelor. Well will you dispatch, gentle Kinswoman, and pay the Sumnor his
fees, and so I am contented for this time to dismiss you and your fellows,
till I send for you again.


Woman. Why do you mean then in deed to trouble us again? I was in good
hope rather you had been half weary and abashed of this that you have done
already. Well, seeing you speak of the Sumners fees, I must entreat you
before you go, to remember that good honest man of your own making one Ma.
Turne-peny.


Chauncelor. Why should I remember him?


Woman. Because he was once (you know) one of your graceless Apparitors at
Lichfield: And was daily so busily occupied about his fees, and so earnest to
sommon men for his unlawful gain about such like trifles, as you do now
trouble us for, that you know what followed.


Chauncelor. By my troth Cosen, it was nothing so badde as the world makes
of it: Some matter there was, and some trouble of mind the poor man had
toward his end, But yea faith we ought to judge the best.


Woman. Why did not his master (whom he served so devoutlie) sommon him at
his death to pay his fees? or did he not confess at that time, that the
Devil appeared unto him to bid him dispatch and make haste? And did he not
there-vpon end his days in great misery, to the beholders, with fearful
cries and schrikes of desperation? I am sure you will not deny this.


Chauncelor. Well, well, The man you speak of is gone before, and we must
follow after, God grant us all of his grace: Of the dead we are taught (you
know) to say the best: howsoever it is, it shall be good for you to have an eye
to your selves and your own estates, and not to stand thus gazing and gaping
upon others with whom ye have nothing to do: carry your selves peceablie as
becomes sober women. For though I show you favor now, ye must think I can
not do so always: I am overlooked my self, and thereby you know, can not do
whatI would.


Woman. The man (you say) is gone before and we must follow after: You do not
mean I hope thereby that we must follow Ma. Turne-penie either in his steps
in this life, or in his end and destiny when he went out of this life. In
either of these I tell you, we would be loath to follow him, and I trust GOD
in mercy will shield us from it. We must (you say) have an eye to our selves,
and not stand gazing and gaping upon others: and yet so to look upon others,
namely upon David as an example of mercy, or upon Saul as an example of
judgment, that thereby we may reap profitt and benefit to our selves, is not
(I think) either dangerous or unlawful. That which I spoke of the man was
not of malice, I assure you, for I know him not: but for a Caveat and warning
to such as you are to beware of the like practice, least you be overtaken with
the like judgment. He sommoned for trifles, and so do you. He prosecuted and
pursued the best and the holiest men, and so do you. He laughed and gyred and
made a scoff when he was told of his fault, and so do you. He came to a
fearful and lamentable end, and so (without repentance while mercy is
offered) may you. But you are overlooked, you say: if it be so in deed, I am
not sorry for it: for I could wish that you and your over-lookers were better
over-looked then you be, and then it were happy, and thrice happy for our
Church. The best is, (and therein is our only comfort) There is one that
over-lookes us all, and bridles both you and your overlookers: otherwise it
were double woe with us. To his blessed direction (with thanks for this time)
I leave you. And so praying you not to send for one again in haste (wishing
my self at home, and you a better office and occupation to thrine by then this)
I bid you farewell.


FINIS.

