THE MEMORY OF THE MOST WORTHY AND RENOWNED BERNARD STVART. Lord D'Aubigni
renewed.

Whereunto are added

VVishes presented to the Prince at his Creation.

By Walter Quin, Servant to his Highness.

Dignum laud virum Masa vetat mori

Hor. Od. LONDON, Printed by George Purslow. 1619.

The Preface.
THe memorable virtues and actions of the renowned Bernard Stuart, Lord
D'Aubigni, recorded in sundry histories, although but incidently, and in
several places, have invited, yea incited me by a collection of them, and of
what else I could learn concerning him by written Records and credible
relations of honorable Persons, to renew his memory. Which I did first in
French, for that from his youth he having served two French Kings, and bin the
most worthy and victorious of all the Commanders employed by them in their
wars: yet are his virtues and brave exployts more sparingly and slightly
recorded by French Writers, then by those of the Italian and Spanish Nation,
against which he warred. And now have I done the same in English, for that,
albeit he were borne of an illustrious Family in one of the Kingdoms of great
Britain, and deserved well of them both, as it is testified by good Records,
and by Lesley Bishop of Rosse, in his Latin history of Scotland: Yet is he
scarcely remembered in any other public history of either of them. But if any
that shall read his Memorial written by me in French, find it in some points
different from this, let him know that it is not in any point of history, but
only in some amplifications: which I have endeavored to better in this,
being my latter labor.

The reason which induced me thus to write, rather in verse then in prose, was,
because what I could gather being not sufficient for a competent relation of
his life in prose, I might with more liberty and congruitie, enlarge the same
in verse by di-(...)

THE MEMORY of the most worthy and renowned BERNARD STVART Lord D'Aubigni
renewed.
IF after death to men, whose virtues rare
And worthy actions memorable are,
Posterity immortal honor owe,
Which from the Muses powerful Art does flow,
For their reward; and that prouok'd thereby
Brave minds apace in virtues race may hie
To honors Goal: such fame is due by right
To Bernard, Lord of Aubigni, that bright
Like to a star did shine in Virtues sphere
Among the worthiest Knights that ever were:
Who yet has not received his honor due
In prose or verse from any of the crew
Of all those learned Clerks, that did adorn
That ancient Kingdom, wherein he was borne,
Or that, wherein he was free denizon,
And to whose Kings great service he had done.
For more then their Records, the history
Of Italy and Spain, his memory,
(Though only by the way) does celebrate:
Whereas by wars he did exasperate
And much annoy their Princes and their States,
Against the Crown of France associates.
His virtues and his acts heroical,
As also strange his fortune may we call;
Since he from forreiners among his foes
Received has greater honor, then of those,
Who him for Countries sake and his deserts
Should honor and extol with grateful hearts.
I this neglect abhorring, and inflamed
With love of his transcendent worth have framed
These verses to renew his memory,
And leave a pattern to posterity.
But of his life no Treatise having found,
Whereon with method this discourse to ground,
Like to the industrious Be, which here and there,
From sundry flowers, that growing any where
She finds, does gather Honey less or more,
Her Hony-combe that she therewith may store:
So I from sundry Nations histories.
Have of his virtues, wars, and victories,
Culled and compiled this short Memorial,
Not fabulous, nor hyperbolicall,
Though couched in verse too homely to set forth
A subject of such dignity and worth;
That such a Muse to grace it would require,
As the renowned Mantuan did inspire.
In Scotland was he borne a younger brother
To the ancient Earl of Lenox, whom no other
Of all that Kingdoms brave Nobility
Surmounted in illustrious dignity,
For that he from the Royal Stem did spring,
Ennobled with the surname of his King.
This noble Graffe foreshew'd in spring of youth
What he would prove in ages riper growth.
He comely was and graceful out wardly,
With active strength endued, and towardly
In wit and disposition: so as he
Began betimes such as he ought to be;
And to enure himself to every game
And exercise, that best his birth became,
Misspending not of time the precious treasure
In sloth, in riot, or unlawful pleasure;
Wherein we see our youths themselves to wallow:
And truly had he not begun to follow
Thus early in his springtime virtues lore,
In riper years such had not been the store
And harvest of his virtue, as it grew.
For as we see a Vessel that is new
With any liquor seasoned to retain
Long time the smack thereof; so is it plain,
That both the virtue and the vice also
Of youth, men hardly grown in years forgo:
Yea both of them do rather grow then cease
In their possessours, as their years increase.
But more then virtue vice does on us sease
Because the same our fancies best does please.
Then Bernard, being such by inclination,
As also by his virtuous education
And practice may we call both wise and blessed,
That had the skill, and will to choose the best:
Like Hercules, who being of that age
Did show himself both virtuous and sage,
When as two women in a forked way
Him met, the one fair seeming, gaudy, gay,
Perfumed, powdered, painted, by her Arts
To lust enticing the beholders hearts:
The other shamefaced, modest in attire
And truly fair and lovely, yet the fire
Of lust abating with an awful eye.
The former from the left hand shamelesly
Before her better stepping, said to him:
Brave Youth, if to this woman stern and grim
Thou care do give, and wilt her footsteps tread,
In a most irk some way she will thee lead
With great turmoile, and dangers manifold
In Summers parching heat, and Winters cold
Through many a thorny sleep and craggy ground:
Wherein no pleasing Mates are to be found,
But savage beasts, and monsters fell, to whom
In end a woeful prey thou shall become.
But if thou will resolve to go with me
In this my way, thou shall be wholly free
From all such toil and danger, passing still
Through flowrie fields and medo was, where at will
Thou may most pleasant company enjoy,
And all delightful sports without annoy:
Where Venus joined with Bacchus at thy hest
Shall entertain thee as their welcome guest.
These charming words and pleasing baits so wrought,
As to her bent well-nigh she had him brought.
But the other comely Matron, that did stand
At th'entring of the way on the right hand,
This seeing, said to him: O noble Youth,
Let not the sugared words come from the mouth
Of this deceitful Strumpet thee incline
Her steps to follow, and abandon mine.
Her beauty is but false and counterfeit,
Though to the view and sale she forth it set:
Mine see thou may, although to please thine eyes
(...) no curious Art, without disguise
True and unstained to be: which to thy view
Her inward falsehood, and my truth may show,
As painful, dreadful, dangerous my path,
Yea and pernicious she traduced has,
Hers vaunting to be pleasant and secure,
And such as might all joy to thee procure.
In both she a most shameless lier is;
For that my path, though painful, leads to bliss
And glory: yea the pains thereof are sweet,
For that with solid inward joys they meet.
Whereas her way, though pleasant she it name,
Leads to destruction, infamy and shame;
The pleasures thereof being such as beasts
Enjoy, her sports of Venus, and her feasts
Of Bacchus being poison to the health
Of mind and body, and the wrack of wealth
And honor. Both our ways, and ends (of which
No mention made was by this guilefull Witch)
They that do follow either her or me,
Such by experience find at length to be.
I therefore for thine honor and avail
Wish in aduising thee I may prevail.
Voluptuousnes and Virtue so did strive
Him after them to draw: which did him drive
Into a great quandary for a while,
His fancy to her, that would him beguile,
Inclining, but his reason to the other,
Who sought his welfare, as a loving Mother.
But Reason ruling Fancy, Virtue won
The victory: so as he soon begun
To tread her path: whereby he did attain
To endless bliss and glory, virtues gain.
Young Bernard so did Virtues counsel take;
And Vice with all her pleasant baits forsake.
He had occasion in his youth to pass
To France from Scotland, whither called he was
By John his Uncle: who before his death
Did by his will to him as heir bequeath
Of Aubigni the Lordship, with the rest
Of those demaines that he in France possessed,
And which he most deservedly had won
By valiant wise and faithful service done
To Charles then King: who having had a proof
Thereof much to his honor and behoof
(...) a conflict, chiefly in the fight
(...) wherein many a noble Knight
(...) Clarence died, to grace him more,
(...) the Arms he had before
(...) three Royal Lillies in a Field
(...) in his Coat and Shield
(...) to him a glorious ornament,
(...) House an honor permanent.
(...) Nephew bent to act his part,
(...) done by acts of Martial art
(...) and (...) went about to win,
(...) did so much excel therein,
(...) the valiant'st Knights renowned
(...) as also worthy sound,
(...) years increase,
(...) and judge, hent both in war and peace
(...) ployments. Which in peace he had,
(...) his Master with intent to add
(...) of friendship to the former band
(...) ancient league, which without breach did stand
(...) France and Scotland, thither to that end
(...) ^mbassador did him appoint and send:
(...) which his Embassy he did approve
(...) both those Kings his prudence, faith, and love.
(...) Great also grew in warfare his command
(...) When he was chosen Captain of that Band
(...) this own warlike Nation, that contained
(...) hundred men of Arms, and had obtained
(...) that honor first of all the Companies,
(...) Which of that kind did since in France arise:
(...) Whose Princes no disparagement it hold
(...) be as Captains of those Bands enrold.
(...) of this charge, and of each high degree
(...) honor worthy showed himself to be,
As did by many his brave deeds appear:
Whereof much one by right should him endeere
To all great Britain, and throughout the same
Immortal glory purchase to his Name.
Which was, that he with warlike power from France
Did come to England, Henry to advance, (...)

Long thence exiled, and but in name and show
Then Richmonds Earl: who when he overthrew
And slew the crookeback Tyrant in the field,
Rich Englands scepter gloriously did wield:
The help of this his Champion wise and stout
Both in his passage full of dread and doubt,
And in the battle having happily
Been such, as much he furthred was thereby.
It seems then to have been Heavens intent,
That he in Scotland borne, and by descent
Of Kingly race, should for a Scottish King
Sprung from that Royal Stem, whence he did spring,
Who both great Britains Scepters now does sway,
Prepare to this great Monarchy the way.
O how both Nations of this famous I Will
Are by this Union blessed! which does exile
From them all discord and unpleasant iarr's,
With all the harms and woes of former warr's,
Them tying fast with concords happy bands,
And giving them occasion hearts and hands
To join in serving both one sovereign Lord,
And for their mutual profit to afford
All fruits of love and friendship the one to the other,
As if they were the children of one Mother
Joined by this Union: for which thanks they owe
To him, from whose support such help did flow
To Royal Henry: who the Roses twain
Made one by wedlock: whence proceeds again
This second Union more then the other bless,
Made by a King sprung thence, of Kings the best,
Appointed by heavens high and blessed decree
Sole Monarch of great Britain first to be,
As well by Virtues purchase having right
Thereto, as by inheritance: whose might
Is equaled by his goodness, and good will
Is guided by Minerua's arts and skill.
Whose Prudence linked is with Piety,
With Justice, and unfeigned sincerity;
Whose Justice is by mercy qualified;
Whose courage is by wisdom modified;
Whose Majesty with modesty is decked;
Whose worth is less in show, then in effect,
Like Phoebus, whom, the brighter is his light,
The less we see, his rays so dim our sight.
And as he does to all this worldly frame
Impar^h^, beams to benefit the same:
So does our Phoebus well with all men deal,
As an efficient cause of public weal
To subjects, neighbors, and confederates,
As likewise to all other Christian states,
Since he by wisdom mediates their peace,
And thereby their commerce and wealths increase.
And as he happy in his person is,
So in his issue is he blestywis;
As in his Princely Son, both of his feature,
And phisnomie the lively pourtraiture,
As also of the beauty of his mind:
Who to all kind of virtues well inclind
Such buds of them does yield in spring of youth,
As promise us in ages riper growth
Of virtues rare and deeds Heroical
A fruitful harvest: whereby win he shall
The name and fame of Albions Charlemaine,
When in his Fathers throne he comes to reign.
Who in his Daughter fair is blessed likewise
From all the worthiest of her sex the prize
Of honor winning by her worth: whereby
She does procure to her Elector hie
Much happiness, as by her bringing forth
Such Princes, as may for their blood and worth,
When The Emperors election shall be free,
As well Elected as Electours be,
And daughters matches fit for France's flowers,
Romes Eagles spread, or Castil's stately Towers.
But cease to range thus any more, my Muse,
And by thy homely chanting to abuse
The praises of such sacred Majesty;
Though it to honor duty do thee tie,
Yea, and the present subject thee inuit:
And (going on where thou did leave) indite
To me his worthy deeds, whom we may bless
As instrument of so great happiness.
When as King Henry crowned and settled was,
Lord D'Aubigny back into France did pass:
Where by the King and his Nobility
His valor, wisdom, and felicity
In his late action was with great applause
Extolled and magnified: and for that cause
He worthy was esteemed of greater charge
And place; wherein, as in a field more large,
Or Theater, he might his Martial skill
And prowess use and exercise at will.
Whereof a fit occasion shortly came:
For Charles then King th'eighth being of that name,
Encouraged by his heat and strength of youth,
And by ambition (whose enormeous grouth
Exceeds in that age) more hardy made,
Resolved the Realm of Naples to invade:
Which to the Dukes of Aniou appertained
Some ages past, but then from them detained
Was by th'vsurping house of Aragon:
And Sforza Duke of Milain egging on
Charles to this action, him to be therein
More forward moved. But ere he would begin
He knew, that when his gifts he thus did sow,
Thence to himself such fruits should after grow
Of honor, service, and fidelity,
As he with great increase should gain thereby.
And in effect right so to pass it came:
For D'Aubigni himself did ever frame
To honor him, and serve him faithfully
In war and peace with care and industry,
And with unfeigned love and ardent zeal
Both to his good and to the Public weal.
In his Calabrian government appeared
This to be true, whiles there the helm he steered:
Where still to work his Masters good he sought:
And what he could for public good he wrought,
That people ruling with much equity,
With moderation and with lenity: (...)

So as when they his goodness tried and proved,
He was by them much honored and beloved,
Though they were Demi-Grecians, and defamed
As factious and rebellious, yea and named
Devils by a nickname old, as yet they are.
Such force have virtues eminent and rare
In Rulers, as the stubborn'st they allure,
And them to love and reverence procure.
And for his sake (so much they him respected)
They to the French the better were affected:
Nor any in that Realm surmounted them
In loyalty to the French Diadem.
The power whereof awhile there being great
Was much diminisht by the Kings retreat;
But more by reason of his dalliance
And negligence, wen he returned to France.
King Ferdinand, that had a long time houer'd
And lurk't to save himself, thereby recouer'd
Both strength and courage, and was hart'ned more
By new supplies, which from the Spanish shore
Came to assist him under the command
Of that Consaluo surnamed Hernand,
To whom as eminent in worth and fame,
The Spaniards of Great Captain gave the name.
The King his forces having with his own
Conioyn'd, and thereby the more hardy grown,
Into Calabria passes in all haste:
Where the Angeuins possessions he does waste,
And all subuerts that would his passage stop;
Like to a Torrent from a mountains top
Down falling after stormy snowes and raines,
Which ouer-flowing all the lower plains,
Trees, bridges, cottages and country towns
With violence down bears, subuerts and drownes.
But D'Aubigni, whose courage like a Rock
Or Bulwark strong did nothing fear the shock
Of this his furious force, himself prepares
Him to encounter, yea and stoutly dares
His passage finding out by wise foresight,
To meet him, hie apace, and with him fight. Guiec. l. 2. Iou. Hist. l. 3.

Near to the walls of Seminare he found
Him, and his Spanish Champion so renoun'd,
With all their army, which did his surpass
In number far: but such the valor was,
Which he himself, and all his warlike crew
Of Frenchmen and North-Britaines then did show, wise
As they defeated quite their enemies:
Whose Leaders, though themselves both stout and
They showed, yet to escape by flight were feign,
The King in danger being to be slain,
Or taken through the falling of his Steed,
When faithful Altauile in this his need
His horse to him, and for him gave his life.
Thus our brave Warrior in this warlike strife
To his immortal honor overcame
A King, and a Commander of such fame,
As was Consalue, whose worth and valiant deeds
Of Spaines renown and greatness were the seeds.
But fortune of his glorious victory,
Or rather of so great prosperity
Of the French Nation growing envious,
The course of his exploits victorious
Stopped by a sickness trouble some and long, (...) 3. Theuet des hommes
illustres enla^ie de Consalue.

Which on him seas'd: wherein as she did wrong
His glory, so much woe thereby she wrought
To the French side, which to decay was brought,
Not having Chiefetaines, able to withstand
The re-inforc'd assaults of Ferdinand,
And of Consalue, that did the French assail,
And every where against them did prevail.
The Viceroy, Lord Monpensier without doubt
Was both a noble personage and stout,
But not so circumspect and provident,
As needful was, such dangers to prevent.
Wherewith Lord D'Aubigni, that then diseased,
With sickness lay, was vexed and displeased,
As also seeing that no new supply
Came from the King, who living carelessly
In pleasure suffered by his negligence
That to be lost, which with so great expense
Of treasure, yea with care and toil sustained
Even by himself he rather bought then gained.
But this his Champion, (although ever true
And faithful to him much displeased he grew
That his affairs were in so evil estate)
Yet seeing that with providence and fate,
Which wrought this change, he should but strive in vain,
Himself in end to yield thereto was feign;
When of his long disease not wholly rid
By true relation understand he did,
How that the Lord Monpensier, having lost
The field, and with the remnant of his Host
Besieged in Atella, did agree
And solemnly capitulate that he
With all his Freuchmen should that Land forsake:
And therefore he not able head to make
To the Aragonian forces, nor to mend,
What was by others marred, did condescend,
Though much against his stomach, to be tied
To Th'articles already ratified.
And seeing that no hope to him was left,
Since he was wholly of all means bereft
Of doing service to his King, or good
To those distressed Naipolitanes, that stood
Well-minded and affected to him still;
He used his best endeavors and good will
To save that remnant of the French, that were
Suruiuing to their woes and dangers there.
Then as among the first he thither past,
So in departing was he of the last.
Much was he graced, when back to France he came,
Both by the King, and those, to whom by fame
His virtues rare and eminent were known,
Which by his worthy actions he had shown,
As Trees do show their goodness by their fruit:
Which to him chiefly made them attribute
What victories and honor had been won,
And whatsoever other good was done
In Naples by the Frenchmen, as the blame
Of all the losses, crosses, woes, and shame
By them sustained to others they imputed.
Yea by the King he was so well reputed,
As he was like to send him back again,
That Kingdom lost by arm's to re-obtaine.
But he surprised being in his flower
And strength of age by death, which does devour
As well the young and lusty, as the old,
And is as much with Kings as subjects bold;
To him succeeded Lewis the twelfth by name,
Who willing to enlarge his power and fame,
Assembled a great Army, by the force
Thereof to drive away usurping Sforze
From Milaine, which as rightful heir he claimed.
And for that Armies are as bodies maimed
Without Commanders valiant and expert,
Three did he choose, as men of best desert,
To lead his Army: (...)
whereof chief in worth
And place was D'Aubigni: who setting forth
Toward Lombardie, when thither he arrived,
Th'Vsurper of his chiefest towns deprived
By force or composition, put to flight
His Army, and himself bereft of might
And courage he compelled likewise to fly
From Milain: whither soon the King did hie,
To take possession of that goodly state,
Commanders valiant, wise and fortunate
Reputing them, who thus did him inuest,
But this our noble Knight above the rest.
Whereof sufficient proof he shortly gave;
When by this conquest he began to have
Both more desire, and greater hope, again
By Arms the Realm of Naples to obtain.
But judging nothing else so requisite
For this his purpose, as that opposite
The Ambitious Spaniard to it should not be,
The conquest of that Land he did agree
To share with him, who did thereto pretend
A title, as he did, and in his end
Of growing greater did with him consent.
And knowing well that to the same intent
He was to choose for leading of his Host
A fit Commander, such a one as most
Could further his attempt, of D'Aubigni
He made election: who both warily
And valiantly with speed did through the Lands
Of foes, and doubtful friends conduct his bands;
The Roman Columns much endammaging,
That then assisted the Arragenian King.
Whose Army in his passage comne to let
His troops from passing Gariglian he met. Du Ha^^^ au regne de Louis. ^2.

But when to pass the River he did think,
To set on them, he saw his horsemen shrink:
Whom thus he loudly did rebuke and taunt,
To egg them on. Yea lately often did vaunt,
That you alone without our footemens aid
Your enemies would daunt: yet now afraid
Of them you are: which much your honor wrongs.
O let it not be said, that in your tongues
Your courage lies, not in your hands or hearts!
But bravely act of valiant men the parts,
And show that you can do as well as speak.
His words them made, wroth with themselves, to wreake
Their anger on their Foes; whom furiously
They charged, defeated, and compelled to fly.
He Capua did besiege, and quickly take.
Auerse, and Nole durst not against him make
Resistance, but themselves did to him yield.
King Frederik would neither sword, nor shield
More use against him, so much terrified
He was, and by his Prowess damnified.
Wherefore he by experience in the reign
Of Charles well having learned, how humane
And true he was, some sent to treat with him,
That found him not in countenance sour or grimme,
Nor harsh in words, but meek and mild in both,
To help him willing, and to grieve him loath.
When they his answer back to him did bring,
It pleased him so (if ought could please a King,
That from a Throne was forced to descend)
As he resolved in vain not to defend
ABout that time King Ferdinand of Spain
Consaluo sent, with Forces to obtain
The share to him allotted in that Land:
Who so prevailed, as none could him withstand,
When as with Arms he did the same invade;
His Conquest the more easy being made
By D'Aubigni, who did subdue the King,
And stately Naples to subjection bring.
But both those Nations proud and insolent,
In humors and conditions different,
Contending for their bounds began to jar:
Whence did arise betwixt them open war.
Wherein on the French party for a while
The better having Fortune seemed to smile.
And as in former times our D'Aubigni
More stoutly, skilfully, and happily
Then any other did in war command:
So did he at this season, when in hand
He took the third part of the Host to lead
Into Calabria lately conquered
By Great Consaluo; (...)
for he thence did chase
By force the Spaniards, and in every place
Thereof prevail: wherein auail'd him much
His reputation in that country such
For Martial deeds, and civil government,
When in those parts he had commandment,
As they against the Spaniards did rebel,
And joined their Arms with his them to expel.
Yea, such as were the greatest of them all,
And of that Kingdoms Peers the principal,
Who did his worth and virtues best discern,
Joined with him: as the Princes of Salerne,
And Bisignan, with th'Erle, to whom Milet
Did appertain: whom envy did not let
From serving under his command in field:
In so great estimation him they held,
And so him loved: whereof he had a proof
Soon after to his honor and behoof. Du Hail. auregue de Louis 12. Iou. in
un. Cons. l. 2.

For Vgo de Cardon from Sicilie
With puisant Forces coming furiously
Into Calabria, therein to annoy
The French, and if he could, them to destroy,
Our worthy Warrior, who with watchful eye
Did see, yea and foresee what the enemy
Did, or intended, joined in haste together
His Forces, and with greater haste them thither
He led, where he to find his Foes did look;
And through vnhanted ways his journey took
Of purpose, unawares them to surprise:
Which wisely he effected in such wise,
As unexpected he did on them set.
Yet so their courage did Don Vgo whet
By his courageous deeds, and words, as they
His deeds did follow and his words obey.
Which made the combat, many being slain
On either side, so doubtful to remain,
As D'Aubigni, whose eye was in all parts,
Perceiving that his footemens hands and hearts
Began to faint, and that they did recoyle,
The Spanish footmen striving them to foil,
Commanded Grigni with his horsemen light
Those Spaniards to assail: which of the fight
The Fortune changed twixt both Infanteries.
But seeing that their hearts did eftfoones rise
Encouraged by their valiant men of Arms,
With his North-Britaines brave, that no alarmes
Nor Arms could terrify, he them assailed,
And breaking them, against their Host prevailed;
Which utterly in the end he put to flight.
As at this time his skill joined with his might
Made him victorious, so did it likewise
In many another warlike enterprise
Of conflicts, and of taking Towns and Forts:
Which, seeing Story shortly them reports
But as his meanest actions, I omit,
As acts of greater fame to match unfit.
But after this his famous victory
Her fickleness and mutability
Did Fortune show: for full of fraud and guile
She on the Spaniards now began to sinile,
But on the Frenchmen spitefully to frown,
And, as she raised them up, to cast them down.
He being chief Vpholder of that side,
To which this misaduenture did betide
Through Fortunes alteration, did partake
With them therein: yet could not that him make
Faint-hearted: yea, in this to his behoof
Did Fortunes frowning turn, that for a proof
It served, the more his Virtue to refine,
And for a Foil the more to make it shine.
For truly courage in adversity
Appearing greater Magnanimity
And worth in th'owner shows, then when it is
Accompanied with Fortunes seeming bliss:
As Pilots do in storms their Art and skill
Far better show, then having wind at will.
Some in renown of valiancy do flourish,
Whiles Fortune with her favors does them cherrish,
Who, if she frown on them, will play the parts
Of men dejected and deprived of hearts.
And if it chance (which seldom chance we see)
That he, who valiant is, still happy be
In his attempts: yet, in his good success
Her share and portion Fortune clayming, less
Appears his courage, then if he thereby
Should Fortune daunt and vanquish manfully.
For, though Timoleon so much favored were
By her, as evermore, and every where
He had success, so as the same to show,
A Painter him with nets Towns taking drew:
Yet was he not therefore so much esteemed,
As many Warriors not so happy deemed.
O how I much admire that worthy King,
Renowned Bruce, whom Fortune, envying
His glory, more then once in wars did cross,
And forced him to retire with grief and loss!
Yet could she never force him to forsake
His brave dessignes, nor him faint-hearted make,
Who did from all occasions great and small
Draw motives, to stir up himself withal.
For when he once a Spider weauing viewed,
That oftentimes her broken Web renewed,
Till she had weau'd it wholly; then shall I,
Said he, demean my self less constantly,
In that which does concern my countries good,
And mine own right by Fortunes spite withstood,
Then does this vermin when it thus does weaue?
No, no: for all th'affronts, that I receive
From Fortune, to her shall not make me yield,
Nor as a Coward quite my sword or shield,
Till I my foes shall vanquish, and her might,
And win the Kingdom that is mine by right.
So spoke, so did he; and though his attempt
From many dangers great were not exempt,
Yet he by valiant constancy therein
Did Fortune vanquish, and a Kingdom win.
Lord D'Aubigni, who to his Royal race
Was near in blood, and whom the heavens did grace,
As they did him, with Magnanimity
In ouercomming Fortunes enmity,
Preceyuing, that the Spaniards did begin
Upon the Frenchmen daily ground to win,
Their strength decreasing, and no new supply
From France arriving them to fortify,
Their Passions, them thus gently taxed he.
Dear kinsmen, I am grieved thus you to see
Dejected and disheartened, who should prove
Of Valiant courage, Paternes fit to move
All Noble Youths the same to imitate;
Not suffering any chance unfortunate
Your manly courage womanly to make,
Or thus your selves, like women, to betake
To tears and wailing. What? thus will ye wrong
That ancient Royal Stock, whence you are sprung,
As from it to degenerate so much,
Or wrong your Countries Honor; which is such,
As Britains have the old Romans property
And praise, to act and suffer valiantly?
Let courage then such tenderness remove
From you, and (as it much does you behoue)
Let reason, without too much grief or fear,
All Fortunes changes make you stoutly bear;
Especially in War, wherein more rife
They are, then in the remnant of our life:
Since by experience often it has been seen,
That they which have one day victorious been,
Another day, yea and perhaps the same
Have lost the field, such is Bellonas game.
And therefore as on Fortune to rely
Too much ye ought not; so you are to fly
Of her, or of your selves a base distrust:
Yea bravely strive to vanquish her ye must,
And make her by your valiancy renewed
As friendly to you, as she now is shrewd.
Thus both in deeds and words he made appear
His Courage and his Virtue bright and clear,
As well when Fortunes storms did him assail,
As when her favors most did him avail.
He prisoner in Naples did remain,
Till, when the war was ceased, to France again
He was to go with other men of worth. Iou. in vit. Cons. lib. 3.

To them Consaluo at their setting forth
Did offer horses with much courtesy
For their return: for which our D'Aubigni
Him thanking, thus did answer him: My Lord,
Since that your bounty does to us afford
To bear us horses, we would have them strong,
That they to France may carry us along,
And hither back. Consaluo what he said
Well understanding, thus him straight repaid:
Return, when it shall please you, Lords, for I
Toward you will use like liberality,
Both horses, and my Pasport giving you
As willingly, as I you give them now.
These words their quickness in conceit did show,
And Noble minds, such as are found in few.
Yet show they most his magnanimity,
Who thus could jest in his adversity.
If we the warriors of their time compare
With them, among them all they peerless are.
Such by two famous King's esteemed they were,
Soon after meeting at Sauona: where
King Lewis of France inuiting to a feast
The King of Spain, Consaluo as a guest
With him invited, and most courteously
Him using, did extol and magnify
The worthiness that did in him abound,
His Martial deeds, and victories renow'nd.
All which his jealous King did little please.
Lewis, peradventure knowing his disease,
Thus to increase it, did Consaluo grace.
King Ferdinand behind hand in this case
Was not with Lewis: but as Lewis of his train
The worthiest Warrior chose; so he again
Desirous choice of such a guest to make, Mariana hist, Hisp. l. 29.^.9.

Among the French our D'Aubigni did take
For such, and in like sort him entertained.
To whom this honor high his merits gained,
Though he a Britain were, and in degree
To Princes Dukes, and Peers that chanced to be
There at that time inferior far, so bright
Did virtue shine in this renowned Knight.
The favor of these Monarchs to these twain
Was of their matchless worth a witness plain.
But if them both we do compare together
(Which fitly may be done) both the one and the other
Were younger brethren to two Noble Lords;
To whom in what inheritance affords
Inferior being more they were then mates
To them by their own purchase of estates,
And honor made by their industrious care,
And by their virtues eminent and rare.
For industry, which both did help to raise,
Lord D'Aubigni deserves the greater praise:
Since he no Frenchman being, could in France,
By industry himself so much advance:
Where the other great in his own Country grew,
Graced by a Queen, ^abel Queen of Spain.
that him to action drew
In virtue both excelled, yet different were
In that our Bernards virtue was sincere;
Where the others having still a glistering show,
Sometimes more artificial was then true.
Both the one and the other of a noble mind,
And truly generous to have been we find.
Yet when on both malignant Fortune fround,
More courage did in D'Aubigni abound.
With Prudence both were plentifully stored:
Yet taxed and branded is the Spanish Lord
For craft and breach of faith in histories;
Which the other name no less upright then wise.
For valiancy, that like in both w^^ found,
Among the valiant'st both may be renowned.
In Martial skill they may be paralel'd,
And justly for great Captains both be held:
Although to win that name, the one Fortunes aid
Had more then the other: for Consaluo swayed
And ruled, as best him pleased, the Spanish side:
Where D'Aubigni so could not rule and guide
The French, another being then Viceroy.
Yet did he so the power he had employ,
As in both wars made for that Kingdom, none
Of all that led the French, but he alone,
Won any great and famous victory,
As witnesses that Ages history.
Whereby this truth is also testified,
That not Consaluo, so much magnified
So often victorious was in field as he.
For besides lesser conflicts, battles three
He won, the first of them at Seminare;
Wherein Consalue had of the loss his share
With Ferdinand then King; at Gariglian
The next against King Fredericks host he wanne;
The third, near to Terine: whereas but twice
Consalue in battle ranged (although the price
Thereof was all that Kingdom) vanquished
The French by Nemours, and Gonzaga led. Iou. in vit Cons. lib. 2.

This of our Warrior Iovius more does tell,
That after the mischance, which him befell
But once in war, of Fortune he complained,
That him, who had twelve victories obtained,
Since he in Britain, and in France betook
Himself to war, she thus in end forsook.
Whereby appears how this noble Knight
By silence is defrauded of his right:
As also we may well thereby observe,
That oftentimes such men as best deserve,
Are less then men of less desert respected,
And in their fame, as other wise neglected.
But this to him the rather has arrived,
For that almost continually he lived
In foreign Lands, and all his famous deeds
In them achieved: where seldom any heed's
A Strangers worthy Acts, or takes the pains
Them to record, but for reward and games:
For which respect Consalue so much renowned,
Besides the Spaniards that his praises sound,
Has had the learned Iouius him to praise:
Who by the way, the more his worth to raise,
In part the worth of D'Aubigni record's,
As of his chief Opponent: which affords
Occasion thus to paragon together
These two renowned warriors: whereof either
Did the others worth esteem and magnify,
Though different in this, that D'Aubigni,
As best it with his Masters pleasure stood,
Or most behoofull was for public good,
Alone, or joined with others in the field
Did govern, or the place to others yield.
Whereas, such was the Spaniards hauty heart,
As evermore he a Commanders part
Did strive to act: Iou. in vita Cons. lib. 3.
for which he well compared
Was to a Carracke huge, built and prepared,
Rigged, trimmed, and furnished with excessive charge,
Which well may ride aflote, or sail at large
In the deep Ocean, but cannot abide
A shallow Hav'n, or near the shore to ride.
Whereas our British Lord compared may be
To one of those Ships Royal, which we see
Near Chattam, fit to sail into the Maine
To serve her King, and to return again
Into her Hav'n, or, when a boystrous blast
At Sea does take her, near the shore to cast
Her Anchor, riding there from storms secure.
So evermore did he himself enure
Both to his duty and his fortune still,
Though free from baseness to conform his will.
By all that has been hitherto recorded
Of him, to him this praise may be afforded
Deservedly, that many did him give,
Who chanced in his company to live;
To wit, that among Warriors none they knew,
That did in War more skill and valor show;
No Councellor or Governor in Peace
More wise; and in prosperities increase
None more humane and gentle; as likewise
None in adversity that played his prize
More bravely against foes, and Fortunes spite:
So as this praise does justly me inuit,
Together with his other Merits rare,
With great Consalue in worth him to compare.
But that in matching them I may forbear
To be too tedious, after that they were
So graced by the Kings of France and Spain,
Their fortune, like to Cynthia in her waine,
Decreased, so as neither of them was
In warfare more employed: which came to pass,
Not for that they, as men with action cloyed,
Were grown unwilling so to be employed,
But through their Masters great ingratitude,
Which them from such employment did exclude;
Were it for that so great were their deserts
And service, as their Masters narrow hearts
Did them, as too much owing to them, loathe,
Or that with them by whispering slanders wroth
They were become, or did their faith distrust.
But whatsoever was the cause, so thrust
They out of favor were. But the displeasure
Of Ferdinand not having end nor measure
Against Consaluo, Lewis did soon relent,
And reconciled to D'Aubigni, he meant
Him in some famous action to employ.
But sickliness did him so much annoy,
As he therefore was counseled to repair
To Scotland, that by that his native air
He might his health recover: which advice,
And Countries love did him thereto entice.
He thither ward through England took his way:
Where Henry th'eighth by name, that then did sway
The Seepter of this Land, remembering well,
What furtherance he heard his Father tell
This Lord him gave, when to the Crown he came,
And having understood by public fame
Much of his worthy deeds, him to present
His duty to him comne with great content
Did graciously receive and entertain,
Inuiting him in England to remain
By bounteous offers: but with reverence
He thanking that great Monarch, homeward hence
Departed: where with honor and applause
The King and all estates, not without cause
His worth esteeming much, did him receive.
There shortly after death did them bereave
Of him their rare and precious ornament.
For which their loss in him they did lament:
As did his friends in France, and every where,
Enamored with his virtue, as it were
A Loadstone, drawing to him many hearts:
So as in many Ages for deserts
None was beloved and honored more, then he
In sundry Lands by men of each degree.
Yea death, which does the greatest, whiles they live
Enjoying love and honor, often deprive
Of both, yet could not him bereave of either,
As well we may by one example gather.
Which is, that the Commanders of the Host
Of Frauncis, France's Monarch, in the Coast
Of Piemont, having taken by surprise
Column a Chiefetaine other times so wise,
That he like Fabius was his Countries shield;
As prisoner himself he would not yield
To La Palisse, or Bayard, though renowned
Above the rest they were: but having found
That D'Aubigni was of the chiefest one,
He did his person yield to him alone,
As Neuew to our famous D'Aubigni,
Whom he had in the wars of Italy
Well known, and highly for his worth esteemed,
So as his Neuew for his sake he deemed
Most worthy thus by him to be affected,
And more then all the rest to be respected.
To Bernard such was his respect and love,
As death from him could not the same remove.
His worth, that did allure this worthy Knight
Thus him to love, and honor does by right
Stir up my homely Muse thus to renew
His memory with praises to him dew
Among our Britains: to whom he their own
Should be as well, as among strangers known,
Yea better, since to him they partly owe
Both th'Vnions (whence their happiness does flow)
Of both the Roses, and the Kingdoms twain,
With double thanks for this their double gain.
Whose virtuous deeds the rather I set forth,
That worthy minds may imitate his Worth,
And worthily aspire to his renown:
Which length of time shall not in Lethe drown,
Whiles of his Worth and Name, the Memory
Shall be preserved by many a History
In Roman, Tuscaue, French and Spanish scroules,
As also kept in these my English Roules.
Of his last retiring to Corstorfin.
LInternum, though obscure, the place became
Of famous Scipio's last abode, when Spain
And Carthage having conquered, with disdain
Ungrateful Rome he loathed, and left the same.
Corstorfin as obscure in show or name
Did noble Bernard for her guest retain,
From thankelesse France when he came home again,
To Scipio like in Fortune as in fame.
Linternum, whilst her venerable guest
Did her inhabit, greater Worth possessed,
Then great and wealthy Rome in all her treasure.
Corstorfin also may be said as well,
Whiles worthy Bernard deigned therein to dwell,
Of Worth to have possessed, as great a measure.
Of his burial in the same place.
Brave Bernard, of a Noble Lineage borne
In Scotland, whom such Virtues did adorn,
As did him more ennoble, and in France
Deservedly to honor high advance;
Who Englands parted Roses, and with them
The Scottish Thistle in their Royal Stem
Helped to unite; who of a Ruler wise
And valiant Warrior well deserved the prize
In Italy, chief Theater of his Worth
And Victories; whose Fame from South to North,
From East to West did through all Europe fly,
Interred does in obscure Corstorfin lie.
But I mistake: his better part is past
To Heaven, on earth his fame shall ever last.
Of the Lords of Aubigni, descended from the most noble house of Lenox.
AMong the fairest Branches that have sprouted
From the Illustrious Stock of Lenox, three
Came in successiue order Lords to be
Of Aubigni, like Mars in Arms redoubted.
The first was John, whom for his service loyal,
And valiant deeds King Charles did so regard,
As he with Princely gifts did him reward,
And to his Scutcheon add his Lillies Royal.
The next was Bernard, who such honor gained
Both by his valiant Acts and Virtues rare,
As justly we may him with them compare,
That have by Worth to Honors height attained.
The third was Robert so for valor praised
In many a fight, but chiefly in the field
Of Marignan, that Sun and Moon beheld,
As to be France's Martial he was raised.
In calmer times their Heirs occasion wanted,
Not valiant hearts, their worth in Arms to show:
And now their worthy Offspring does renew
Their honor in great Britain, there transplanted:
Where they in happy manner grow and flourish,
But chiefly he, who shines in Worth and place
Among her Peers, and whom our Soueraign's Grace
Deservedly does so advance and cherish.
These goodly branches, whom their Worth commends,
From Stem have sprouted of that Royal Tree,
Which does from storms with sheltring shadow free
Great Britain, and in height to Heaven ascends.
A short Collection of the most notable places of Histories quoted in this
Memorial.
I Have thought it meet, the better to show how this Memorial agrees with
Historical truth, to add thereunto the most notable places of Histories
quoted in the Margent, without altering the seuce of the Authors, yea, or their
words, but only in that they are translated, and in the abridgement of some
narrations, wherein other men's actions are interlaced. To the said passages I
have added nothing but the connection, and some few brief observations. Which
collection I have the rather made, for that the things contained in this
Memorial, that are of least importance and doubtfulnesse, being drawn from
Records and Relations of honorable and credible persons, the contents thereof
which are of greatest unportance, and may seem most doubtful, are testified
and auerred by these passages.

The charge which he had of a Company of men of Arms, is thus recorded by
Malingre a French Historiographer.

Charles the seventh, Hist. Chronol.
who did first institute the ordinary Companies of men of Arms in France,
crected the Company of Scottishmen of Arms of the remnant of the Scottishmen
ouer-throwne at Vernueil, which consisted of an hundred men of Arms, and two
hundred Archers, giving them the first place among the French bands of that
kind: Of which Company the said Author says, that Bernard Stuart Lord
D'Aubigni was the second Captain.

Of his Embassage to the King of Scotland, Hist. Scot^.
Lesley Bishop of Rosse makes mention in this manner: Charles the eighth sent
into Scotland Bernard Stuart Lord D'Aubigni, and Doctor Mallart his
Ambassadors, to renew the ancient League between the two Kings and Nations.

Of his coming to England with King Henry the seventh, Ibid.
the said Lesley writes thus: He commanded those Forces, that accompanied the
Earl of Richmond into England, and did him good service against the Usurper,
King Richard. So as the said Earl being crowned King, did therefore ever after
favor the Scottish Nation.

The same is confirmed by the foresaid Malingre, Hist. Chronol.
who affirms, That he was the Kings Lieutenant general of the Army, which
was sent to England, to assist Henry the seventh, against Richard the third.

Of his Embassage to the Pope, Guicciardin writes thus: In his Hist. of Italy.
l. 1.
King Charles sent to the Pope four Ambassadors: to wit, Bernard D'Aubigni a
Chiefetaine, being a Scottishman by Nation, one of the Treasurers of France,
the President of the Parliament of Proumce, and Peron de Basche.

Where is to be noted, that among men of such dignity he had the first place.
Yea, he was of such reputation, as Paulus Iouius does name no other Ambassador
but him, writing of his Embassage in this wise:

To the Pope was sent for Ambassador, Hist. l. 1.
Bernard D'Aubigni a Scottishman, of the Royal Family of the Stuarts, a
renowned Warrior: who had direction in his journey to Rome to treat with John
Bentiuoli, then Lord of Bononia, Hercules D'Este, Duke of Ferrara, Peter de
Medices, Chief Commander of the Common wealth of Florence, and Pandulpho
Petrucci of Siena: As also coming to those Cities to learn what power they
had, and how they were pitulation of Atella, ( whereby the Frenchmen, after a
great ouer-throw, the Duke of Monpensier being their General, were bound to
depart out of the Kingdom of Naples) Consaluo returned into Calabria, Hist.
Hisp. 126. ^^.
the greatest part whereof was in his absence brought under the French yoke by
D'Aubigni a most valiant and stirring warrior, but a man of valor and
wisdom more approved, then fortunate, for that he had to deal with so strong
an Adversary: whose diligence pressing him every where, he was constrained to
yield to the Articles of agreement made with common consent by the Frenchmen,
and leaving Italy, to return into France.

Of the enterprise of Milllain, Auregne (...) Louis 12.
Du Haillan has these passages that follow: The King had assembled an Army of
five and twenty thousand footmen, and of six thousand horsemen. He gave the
conduct of them to Bernard Stuart, Lord D'Aubigni, Lewis of Luxenbourg, Lord of
Ligni, and John Giacomo Triuulcio; all men of great experience and sufficiency
in the Mystery of Arms.

D'Aubigni assaulting Nona with his troops, took it at the first assault. The
City of Dertona was yielded immediately after to him.

And they of Pauia fearing the misfortune of the Alexandrians, did not make
longer resistance.

Paulus Iouius naming D'Aubigni the principal Leader in this enterprise, Hist.
epit. l 17.
says, That Sforza being astonished by the news which he had of the defeat
of his Army, and of the taking of Alexandrta, was quite dis-heartned: and
leaning Milain, fled to the Emperor Maximilian: and that soon after, King
Lewis having received the most pleasing news of this victory, came to Milain;
and that all the Towns of Sforza's dominion, with the City of Genua, yielded
to him.

Of the enterprise of Naples, Du Haillan has written that which follows in
sundry places: D'Aubigni departed from Milain with twenty thousand footmen,
and four thousand Horsemen. Au. Regnt de Louis 12.
He took the Castles of the Lords of the house of Columna well fortified, some
by force, and some by composition.

When he came to pass the River of Gariglian, the Frenchmen were molested by
the Enemies Army. But the Lord D'Aubignt lowdly reproching to the French
Horsemen their arrogant boasting a little before, that they alone without the
help of the Footmen, would overcome their enemies, they set on them so
courageously, as at the first encounter they put them to flight.

Soon after Naples yielded, and King Frederic did capitulate with the Lord
D'Aubigni, that the King should give him a certain yearly Pension. He had
leave also to carry away his moueables, and contented himself with the Lord
D'Aubigni's Letters to the King, and without any other assurance, came into
France to the King, who gratified him not only with the pension promised to
him, but also gave him many good towns, houses, and fair gardens.

The affairs of Naples being ended, the King was troubled with no other care,
but of settling the state thereof, which (as it happens in time of war) was
very much shaken. To which end he commanded five Ciuilians, of honest life,
and good reputation, to be admitted into the Senate. And some telling the Lord
D'Aubigni of the learning of Iouianus Pontanus, he fell into such a liking of
him, as sending for him, the next day he bestowed on him great and rich
Presents, and offered him a place in the Senate, with the five already chosen.

Hitherto Du Haillan makes no mention of the Duke of Nemours, but ascribes to
the Lord D'Aubigni what soever was done, either in war, or in settling the
State. But he says, That after, the King gave the chief authority to Lewis
of Armaignac, Duke of Nemours.

As for the discord, which fell between the Frenchmen and Spaniards, for the
confines of that Kingdom divided between both their Kings, Hist. Hisp. li.
(...)
Marian says, That after the taking of Naples, there arose discord betwixt
both Nations, as it must needs have come to pass, they being in conditions,
manners, and fashions extremely different.

Of the Lord D'Aubignies journey into Calabria, going to war against the
Spaniards, Iouius writes in this manner: D'Aubigni, who had next to the Duke
of Nemours the greatest authority in the Army, went to Calabria with the third
part thereof, being there much renowned, both for having in the time of King
Charles with great moderation and mildness governed that Nation Demi-Grecian,
and for that by his Martial prowess he overcame King Ferdinand, and Consaluo
in a memorable battle: So as in all men's judgment he was preferred before all
other French Commanders. For which respects, there were many beholding and
well-affected to him in particular, besides them which were of the Angeuine
faction. The principal of those were the Princes of Bisignan, and Salerne, and
the Earl of Mileto, who revolted from the Spaniards, as soon as the two Kings
fell at variance. The Lord D'Aubignies coming was much desired by them,
desiring as much to help him in the War with their service and means, which
were more then mean. They, together with others of the same part, invited him
by letters and messages to hasten his coming, and to show the Banners of
France to that people, ready to follow them. Wherefore, satisfying their
desire, as soon as he came, he found himself not deceived in the expectation
which he had of their affection and service. For both in Cosenza their chief
City, and in all the other Towns of that Province, the gates were opened to
him, and the Spanish Garrisons and Officers driven out of them; so as with very
little bloodshed he wanneall the Country, even to the very straits of Messina.

The battle of Terine, and his victory is set forth by the said Iouius. Don
Hugo de Cardona, with an Army which he brought from Sicilie, having much
annoyed the French party in Calabria: the Lord D'Aubigni went to encounter him,
having in his Army the Princes of Besignan and Salerne with their troops,
Grigni with his light Horsemen, and Malherbe with his Gascoyne Archers, and
three Companies of Heluetians. But his principal strength consisted in his men
of Arms, among which was most eminent a wing of Scottish-men, which were his
familiars, and faithful to him. The enemies informed of his preparation, did
not expect him til two days after they had notice thereof. But this expert and
vigilant Captain beguiled their expectation. For with French expedition
marching night and day, through ways little hanted, he showed himself to
them the next morning, and forth with set on them. The Spaniards sustained
couragioully the assault, so as the combat was alike fierce and bloody on both
sides. D'Aubigni seeing this, commanded Grigni with his wing to rush upon the
Spanish and Sicilian Infantery; which he doing disordered them. On the other
side, the Enemies Horsemen, by the encouragement and example of Cardona,
sustained the assault of the Calabrians, with like slaughter on both parts. But
D'Aubigni advancing his troops, the Spanish and Sicilian Cauallery not being
able to resist the Scottish-men of Arms, was defeated, and therewithal the
Infantery was overthrown and cut in pieces. Grigni a most valiant Knight was
slain in the combat, and D'Aubigni himself being in like danger, was rescued
by means of John Duke of Albany, calling others to succor him, as Du Haillan
testifies.

As concerning the overthrow which he had not long after this victory, Du
Haillan relates it to this purpose: Au Regne ^^ Lours 12.
Don Hugo de Cardona, having repaired his Army, increased the same with a new
supply of five thousand, so that his Army consisted of eight thousand men in
Arms. And albeit the Lord D'Aubigni knew the advantage they had in number,
nevertheless, being confident in his own sufficiency, and the tried valor of
his Soldiers, and weary of waiting for new supply from the King, he resolved
to try the fortune of war. In vit. Cons. l. 2
But his Army was defeated, and he himself being in danger to be slain, was
rescued by a troop of Scottishmen, whose valor in this fight Iouius
commends, as also he tells how D'Aubigni was rescued by them.

In naming the General of the Spaniards in this battle, Mariana and Iouius
differ from Du Haillan: for they call the General Ferdinand Andrada.

Guicciardin makes mention of his defeat in these words: D'Aubigni was
defeated and taken in the same place, (...)
wherein some years before, he had with so much glory overcome and
discomfited King Ferdmand and Consaluo: So unconstant is the prosperity of
Fortune. He was one of the most excellent Captains that Charles brought into
Italy, and of a free and noble disposition. And this his misfortune proceeded
only from a too earnest desire of victory.

This testimony of Guicciardin, (who is held to be sparing, yea, niggardly in
commending any man) especially being given in the time of his misfortune,
makes much for his bonour. But the too great earnestness whereof he seems
to tax him, is by Mariana (though otherwise as tarte in censuring as he is)
accounted warlike policy, Hist. Hisp. l. 27. (...)
howbeit wanting success: for he tells, That by the death of Porto Carrero
General of the Spanish Army, chancing at that time, there arising a jealousy
between the chief of the Army about the succeeding to him, and the Soldiers
being discontented for want of pay, D'Aubignt having intelligence thereof, and
hoping thereby to win advantage, did then offer them battle, albeit he
failed in the success.

It is likewise probable, that he was rather moved to fight, seeing the decay
of the Frenchmen, and the Spaniards prevailing, as also the Kings slacknesse in
sending thither supply of men or money, the said King being (as Du Haillan
says) so niggardly and pinching, that it is the common opinion, that fearing
he should spend money in vain, he suffered the Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy
of Milain to be lost.

Iouius says, That after this overthrow, In vit. Cons. l. ^
D'Aubigni with drew himself into the Fortress of Angitola, complaining of
Fortune, which had so deceived him, having been til then invincible, and
twelve times been victorious in battle, since he began to be a Warrior in
France and Britain.

Whence we may gather, that many of his military actions and victories are
wrapped in oblivion.

The same Iouius tells, In vit. Cons. l. 2
That whiles he was besieged in the said fortress, the Duke of Nemours having
been slain, and his Army defeated by the Spantards at Cirignola, and
Consaluo's letters touching this victory, having been sent to the Spanish
Commanders that besieged him, and by them to him, he said, that he perceived
Fortune to be very opposite to the French part; and therefore judging it folly
and wilfulness to withstand her, he promised that he would yield himself, if
that were true, which was written. Whereof being certified by Messengers, which
he had purposely sent out to know the truth, he came out of the Castle
apparelled in cloth of Tissue, and with a cheerful and merry countenance
yielded himself, upon condition that all those of his company should be set at
liberty, and himself only kept in free custody. And it is said, that he
sharply reproved two young Lords, his Kinsmen, (who were after renowned
Warriors) for that more faintly, then was fit for men, namely, for them being
Scottishmen, and of the Blood Royal, they did bewail the unfortunate success
of the war, not remembering, that valiant men should never be dis-heartned,
but seek by afresh endeavor of virtue revived and grown invincible, to
recover Fortunes favor.

A witty conceit of his and Consaluo's return to him, In vit. Cons. l. 3
whereof I have made mention, are contained in this relation of the same
Author: When the Frenchmen, after Gayeta was yielded, were ready to depart from
the Kingdom of Naples, Consaluo offering horses to many of them, D'Aubigni
their Commander said to him, smiling: Sir, let us then(...)

THese Wishes following, directed and presented to the Prince's Highness at
his Creation, I have put to the press rather now, then heretofore; for that I
thought them, being contained in so few leaves, less fit to be published
apart under the shelter of his Princely Name, then now, when as they add
somewhat to the precedent Memorial dedicated to his Highness. And I have the
rather at this time published them, how homely and unpolished soever they be,
because I hope that the Worthiness both of their honest Subject, and Princely
Object will make them not to seem at any time unseasonable.

To the Prince's Highness.
THee to instruct it is not here my drift, (prove, GREAT PRINCE: I only wish
that such thou As Thee to be thy Royal Fathers Love And Wisdom teaches in
his ROYAL GIFT.

WISHES PRESENTED TO THE PRINCE'S Highness at his CREATION.
NOW that each loyal heart of kingdoms three
Does joyfully congratulate with thee,
Most worthy Prince, in this thy Honor new,
Which by thy birthright does to thee accrue,
All wishing thee all joy and happiness,
Their inward joy all striving to express
With cheerful countenance and applauding words,
With Bone-fires, Triumphs, Musical accords;
And some with Muses Panegyricke strains;
Though I come short of them, whose happy veins
Of Poetry can make thy Fame to flourish,
Yet since thy worth and favor to me nourish
My love to thee, and cherish my desire
To honor thee, as fuel does the fire,
I must at this thy new advancement use,
To show my joy, the chaunting of my muse.
But since it is too homely to set forth
In any Panegyrike verse thy worth,
I leave the task of acting such a part
To them who can it act with better Art,
That thou may Justice do, and love it too,
Since Tyrants for their ends often Justice do:
And that thy sword of Justice do not spare
Such crimes, as heinous and malicious are:
That thou her Balance equally do weigh,
Not suffering spleen or favor it to sway:
That men accused may have this just refuge,
That thou will hear both parties ere thou judge:
That in rewards as well as punishment,
Thy Justice men's deserts to weigh be bent:
That it may give to every man his own,
Nor favor more the Courtier then the Clown:
And that thou see they, as thy self, beiust,
Whom to do Justice, thou shall put in trust:
That spiders webs they make not Laws betoken,
Which catching smaller flies, by wasps are broken:
That to their suitors grieuance and decay,
They may not frustrate Justice by delay,
Nor by renewing Suites, like Hidra's heads,
To cramme the Crew, that writes, reports, and pleades:
That from pretense of Conscience and Law,
Decrees against them both they may not draw:
That th'Vnder-Rulers of thy flocks may fear
To flea them, or unjustly them to sheare:
That as the members do the head defend,
And it to them does health and safety send;
So may thy subjects Thee, thou them protect,
And may thy Justice none of them neglect:
That, when thou shall thy Royal Sire succeed,
Thy Justice may thee love and glory breed.
But for that Justice is a kind of rack,
If Mercy make it not with measure slack,
I wish that thou do Clemency embrace,
As best resembling God in such a case:
That men to love thee rather thou allure
By Mercy, then by rigor awe procure:
That thou sometime thy Clemency extend,
Where there is hope the offender will amend;
And when as thence no public scandal grows,
Nor wrong to any private person flows;
Or when the fault concerns thee in such wise,
As thence to thee no danger may arise:
That rather in thine own, then others wrong,
To true remorse thy mercy do belong:
That wilful malice with far greater terror
Thou punish, then weak frailty or blind error:
That thou, as above slanders reach, contemn
The Sland'rer, making him himself condemn,
As Philip, Julius, August, Antonine,
Vespasian did; whose glory still does shine:
That thou delight men to relieve and spare;
But punish them with grief that guilty are;
Yet temper so in Country, Court, and City
Thy Mercy, as it prove not foolish pity:
That when thou shall this Virtue put in ure,
With honor, safety it may thee procure.
Then wish I, that, as Justice thou shall cherish,
And Clemency her sister, so thou nourish
Faith in performing promises, the prop
Of Justice, and of Honors height the top:
That for a certain truth thou understand
This Virtue rare to be the surest band
Of friendship, commerce and society,
And truest badge of moral honesty;
That thou in word and practice it observe,
And never from it be induced to swerue:
And that not only for thy wished ends
Thou keep thy promise, or for love to friends,
But also to thy foes for Virtues sake;
Whereby of foes thy friends thou may them make:
That thou but for some urgent cause be loath:
T'ingage thy self by word, but more by oath:
But that, when thou shall do it, no respect
Thy plighted faith induce thee to neglect;
So as thy promise just and lawful be,
Which ever to be such thou must foresee:
That thy respect of honesty and fame
May win thee of a faithful Prince the name:
That such perfidious counsel thou detest,
As would remove this Virtue from thy breast,
Since not the purchase of a Diadem
Can counteruaile the loss of such a gem.
And since no virtue to a Prince or King
More love does purchase then his Bounty, spring
And fountain of his bountiful rewards,
And Princely gifts; thy honor who regards,
Cannot but wish thee to be liberal,
And so do I: yet wish I therewithal,
That Judgment may thy Bounty so direct,
As therein be no notable defect,
Nor great excess; both which extremities
Are vices that do blind men's inward eyes,
And make them without measure spend or spare:
Wherefore I wish that with a heedefull care
Thou to the golden mean thy self apply,
In being frugall, and not niggardly;
As also that thou spend with a due measure,
And not exhaust by lauishing thy treasure:
That ordring so thy Bounty by proportion,
Thou never need supply it with extortion:
That Thrift thy Bounties treasurer thou make:
That men of merit may thereof partake;
To wit, such as for service done deserve,
Or they who can thee and their country serve:
That thy rewards for service place may have
Before thy gifts, as equity does crave:
Yet that thy Bounty also thou extend
To men distressd, and for thy honor spend
In all occasions, that may it advance,
And namely in the princely maintenance
Of thine Estate and Court in every thing,
Which might neglected stain to honor bring:
And that too much thou do not give to any,
That thou thereby mai'st give the more to many:
That impudence and importunity
May not extort thy Liberality:
But that thou freely most on them bestow,
Who best deserve, although in asking slow:
And that to such as by thy gifts would thrive,
Much rather, then to Spend-thrifts, thou do give:
That, where t'impart thy bounty thou have reason,
Thou do not long delay, but give in season:
That as by others rather, then by thee,
That should be done which may distasteful be;
So merely from thy self thy Bounty flow,
That men may thanks to thee, not to others ow:
That, as to many thou shall liberal prove,
So God to thee be in his grace and love.
Moreover, since a Prince not only decked
Must be with virtues, that may him direct
To rule in peace, but must be armed likewise
With Fortitude against each enterprise
Of Foes, or Rebels, that would make a breach
Of peace in his estate, or yet impeach
His honor with insufferable wrongs,
This Virtue is my wishes eeke belong's,
Most noble Prince, since it belongs to thee,
Their worthy Object, whom I wish to be
A second Magnus, or first Maximus,
As thou art borne to be first Carolus
Of Kingdoms three: which that thou may defend,
And them repress, that would thy hurt intend,
I wish thou be as stout and valiant found,
As Charlemaigne for valor most renowned:
A son Altesse.
CHarles, qui fais honneur a ta Principaute,
Non moins qu'a t'honnorer d'elle sert la puissance,
Maintenant qu' inuesti tu yes, par naissance
'Digne heritier estant d'une haute Royaute;
Pour tes faueurs and dons, amor and Loyaute
Te debuant, ce beau iour, qui d'honneur accroissance
Te done, ie celebre auec reiouissance,
Et te rens par ma Muse humble hommage and feaute.
Ce que dignement fair en Hymns ou Cantiques
Ne ponuant par ses verse, and chansons trop Rustiques,
D' elle aid ie le fai par mes Voeus and Souhaits;
Priant, qu'apres ton Pere en la Grande Bretagne
Tu regnes longuement un autre Charlemagne,
Grand en merit, and gloire, and plein d'heur a iamais.
Ad eundem Illustrissimum Principem.
NOn tibi delato, Princeps, tam laetor honor,
Quam magis excelsum quod mereare decus.
Nam gener is qui iure tui, ceu more vetusto,
I am tibi conting it, sit lices amplus hones;
Maiori tamen esse parem te, quae indolis altae
Virtutis (...) tuae das, document a docent:
Quae precor augescant, possis vt semper honores
Crescentes meritis anteuenire tuis.
In nomen Illustrissimi Principis: Carolus Princeps Walliae Anagramma: Clarus
in pace, praelio, lusu. Acrostichis vtrum que continens.
CArolus incedit tam re, quam nomine Clarus,
Auctus honor noue, defert quem pectore Laeto
Rex illi genitor que; vnde vrbs laetatur, and Aula,
Omnis eitriplicis gratatur and Incola Regni.
Laeto hine applausu quisque, and modulamine Vocis,
Vultu hilari, and cunctis animo quae gaudia Sentit
Significare modis gestit: sibi debita Iure
Princeps eximia quae sint facit indole Noster.
Regem spondet eum namque haec fore tempore Pacis
Institia, Pietate, fide, tum Palladis Art,
Necnon magnanimo, sed miti, pectore Clarum;
Commoda curantem populorum, his ceu pater Esset;
Egregium belleque Ducem, cuirobore Pectus
Polleat inuicto, gestarum Encomia Rerum
Sint cui grande decus parituraque nomen in Aeuum,
Virtutis specimen cum class per aequora Late
Victor praebuerit, terraque hostilibus Instans
Armatus cuneis hosts superauerit Omnes.
Laudem hancipse tuus praesagit, Carole, Lusus:
Ludis Eques tu, sieve Pedes, tuae viuida Virtus
Inde futura patet: successu haec Numina Summa
Aetheris esse meis dent Omina consona Votis.
FINIS.

