LET QVILIBET BEWARE OF QVODLIBET.

To the true English hearted reader.
Whereas the right Hon. the L. Keeper, signified in ^uild hall, that some
Invasion was pretended by the spaniard, and supposeing it might be against
England, Her Majesty (according to her motherly and princely care) is minded
to prepare forces accordingly. It is therefore necessary, that the state were
made acquainted with those dangerous, seditious, and treasonable points, which
(under the pretense of contention between secular priests and I^suits) are
published, To prepare papists to rebellion. Some few whereof are here collected
and set d^wne in the priests their own words the short notes upon some of
them being printed in a different letter.

LET QVILIBET, BEVVARE OF QVODLIBET.
To omit their often and grievous chargeing of our Church with heresy and
Schism. Let us wislye (to prevent a mischeife) examyne their dealeinge with
our state, for they are not a fraid to write as follows. viz.

Execution of Justice slaundred:

1 It is true that toward the number of 50 Prists and Catholics of all sorts
with in the compass of 10. years ( meaneing from 80. to 90.) were put to
death we say upon our knowledges (concerning the most of the^) for their
consciences but our adversaries affirm for treason. Important considerations
page. 29. line. 21.

2 They (speakeing of wisemen) cast their eyes a side, to Turks, to Persians,
and to all pagan provinces, to see if they can espy any one sect, profession,
or professors of religion, tossed, turmoyled, and tormented, as the English
are, and through all this wast Macrocosme, they find not one pattern or
example left to posterity to be recorded like ours. Quodlibets page 274. line.
33.

3 The afliction of Catholics in England has bine indeed very
extraordinary, and many an innocent man has lost his life. Quod. page 276. line
37.

Authority of the Parliament diminished.

4 The 5. statue there made (speakeing of a parliament held by Jesuits) was
concerning calumniation, not much unlike that statute of Association. Quod p.
95. l. 10. Note that Association enacted is scornefully compared. The reason is
evident. To wit because it binds faithful subjects to set themselus
against such competitors, as shall attempt any thing against the Queen or,
state.

5 If Princes should take from the Church all temporal possessions, it would
little avail, to bring in our distinctions. How parliaments may give what
they list to the Church, and churchmen, but they can take nothing from them or
the church Quod. page 294. l. 24. Note that it is said our distinctions.

The Popes authority advanced above her Majesty's.

6 It being affirmed, that A praemunire was incurred, and treason upon treason
committed, in procuring the Archpriests authority from the Pope, yet the
priests their appeal to the Pope, is justified for these (among other reasons)
1. To whom the Iniurye is done, to him the right of revenge does accrewe: But
the Popes holiness was injured by the Jesuits their suggestions in obtaining
that authority, ergo. As if her Majesty were not hereby injured. 2. The
Jesuits in procuring that authority: made it a matter of state, but the
seculars in appealing made it a matter of conscience. As if the Pope had in
matters of conscience authority above her Majesty. 3 Jesuits boulster out that
authority, and their treasonable practices upon his holiness authority ergo,
none other to appeal to, for Justice against them. As though the Queen had
not authority to judge treasonable practices of Jesuits. Quod. page 171 line 13.

7 The Seculars being charged with schism, to clear themselves do thus say,
All appeal is intrinsically an acknowledgeing of authority, in the highest
degree to the party appealed unto. Answer to a Iesuited gentleman p. 24. l. 1.
But they Seculars appeal to the Pope: ergo they acknowledge his authority in
the highest degree.

8 I know that (iure ecclesiastico, and by authority and sentence of the Popes
holiness) much more may be done than I will here speak off. But yet I think
it will prove (in the end) the best course for men not to do so much as they
may. Many things are lawful (viz. Excommunication of Princes) which are not
expedient in this irriligious and most unfortunate age Quod. page 293. line 27.
and page 158. line 21.

9 Unto the writings not only of Parsons but of Thomas Aquinas also, and other
scholemen, and learned Papists. All avouching that subjects may and ought
depose Princes with holding popish religion, if they had force enough, it is
thus answered. Lo what doctrine is this to be divulged in this so dangerous an
age, I leave to others to conceit these things in as good sense as may make
for our general safety, and common good of the Catholic cause. Quod. pa.
296. l. 34. So that it appears, how cuningly priests would wright this
doctrine, in the hearts of their proselites, by them to be practiced, when they
may have hope to prevail.

10 Haueing most impudently affirmed that Pius Quintus his Bull was called in
again (whereas the truth is, that Gregory 13. was only content, that it
should not bind papists: who durst not but iobey her Majesty's laws, upon
c^ndition they should rebel when time might serve, but her Majesty was left
excommunicated) here Watson the priest and writer of the Quodlibets,
discovers himself in these words: Amongst many examples of the fatherly
compassion of the Popes holiness, toward the inhabitants and princes of this
land, in times of eminent common wealths danger, the chief (since the Norma^
conquest) was showed in the reigns of King Hen. the 2 and his son K. John.
Against whom haueing used his fatherlye correction (as Pastor universal over
the whole flock of Christ, for their great tyranny used toward their natural
subjects, yet upon repentance etc. Surrendered up the crown of England to
King John and his heirs and successors, from off the head of Cardinal
Pandulphus, who had sit inthronized 3 days theirwith, in the popes right.
Thowsands there are in England which desire as much, and will be ready to lay
their lives to pledge for it, that if any Lancastrian forrenner shall get
possession of this land, yet would this Pope Clement the 8 (according to his
predecessors example) revoke and force him, or her, to retire, and withal
would of his mere mercy (a gift appropriated to S. Peter's chair) grant to
our nation, to choose a King of our own native soil, upon like submission of
former princes in this, and other kingdoms. Qoud. 327. l. 24. Note what
authority to the Pope is attributed, and what submission of our stat is
required.

11 We wish with all our hearts (and groan every day at the contrary) that her
Majesty, had continued in her obeydience, to the sea apostolic as Q. Mary
her sister (of famous memory) had left her a worthy example Import. consi. page
5. l. 3.

12 They labor by their appeal, for securety to her Majesty's person, for
quiet to the state, for avoydance of all invasions, for cutting off all
consperacyes, state tamperings, and exasperating libels, and for assurance of
freedom from their heavy persecutions Quod. p. 171 l. 27: As if these things
could not be without their appeal, but if this be not prejudicial to her
Majesty and state, what is*

Alteration of state conceined.

13 Their wits (meaneing priests and papists) being occupied with conceits of
the premises (viz. Ease and security) makes many one wish in their hearts for
a change. Quod. page 152. line 27.

13 This land as well by the suppression of Abbeys as by sundry other dangers
wherein it stands, especially by popular doctrine of Jesuits, is brought to ly
open to the spoil of who that first can catch it Quod. p. 186. line 11. Note
this seditious giueing of hope to traitors and Invadours, but withal examine
that popular doctrine which is this, and so called in the margent where it is
set down.

15 By this (meaneing a point of Iesuitisme) the popular multitude may depose
their princes and choose others at their pleasure, By this no difference shall be
put in their choice, upon any right or title to crowns, or kingdoms, by
birth or blood, or other wise than as the father (forsooth) shall approve it,
by this althings must be wrought, and framed, conformable to the opportunity of
times and occasions as verba gratia. they people have a right and interest in
the^ to do what they list in choice of a king: marry yet lymitted by reason,
of the times occasions now offered to one of these two, the King of Spain or
the Lady Infanta. And then again the times and occasions changing, after a
Spaniard is settled in the crown, it must be holde^ for a mistakeing, yet
such, as seeing it cannot be helped, the people must beware hereafter, of ever
attempting the like again by this a check must be given to the publishers of
such paradoxes. After that a dispensatio^ procured for restoreinge the
offender, and then all shall be well everafter. Quod. page 68. l. 11. Here
remember the seculars opinion of chusinge a King of our own nation set down
in the end of the 10 article, and if you find it to differ but a little (if any
thing) from the Jesuits opinion, touching the authority of the multitude etc,
then consider whether the Priests do not conspire with the Jesuits as in a
conceit of alteringe the state, so in takeinge a course to bring their
purpose to pass, which must be co^trolled after their purpose is effected.
viz. In their politic inveighing against Jesuits alreaedy in disgrace,
theirby to draw our stat in hope of mainteineyng a supposed contention to
favor them, that by their proceedinge practice may (in time) bring in popery
again, as further appears in the 17 article.

16 The many libertyes, free education, and great wealth of nobles, gentlemen
and other subjects considered, especially, In that an English nature, even in
the meanest member of the body political (s^il. in the comminalty) is in this
respect noble, free of high courage, and not able to endure lingering deaths,
torments, gustes and greifes, as other people are, that notwithstanding
subjects, as well noble as ignoble, should should be put to those exigents,
that catholics have been a long time put unto: the world has mused and
admired at it Quod page 270. line 30. Is not this an instigation to rebellion?

17 The latter does urge against the former (viz. Jesuits against seculars)
that it is their falt if they be not of strength enough. For if all would slide
one way: they are able to match their adversaries at al assayes. Quod. page 208.
line 20 Here we perceive the Jesuits mind: with whom most papists are said to
concur: let us now mark and consider they priests their opinion and purpose.

n8. If we our selves, within our selves, banish religion: why may not we our
selves, within our selves, by the proceeding practice of the Seminaries: bring
it in again, the peotestant being now no more unlikely to be a voyded, than
the catholic was then. Ans. to a Iesuited gent. page 54. lin. 31. and p. 66.
l. 28. Does it not appear that change of religion is one: and the same end of
priests and Jesuits: their wicked practices? But read: and consider what is
acknowledge viz.

Conspiracy of priests and Jesuits.

19. All mainteineyng (speakeing of papists in general) one and the same
opinion: concerning what might be done by a postolical authority and power:
and never talkeyng what is necessary. Quod. p. 277. li. 17. Whereby it is
evident, that howsoever Priests and Jesuits seem otherwise to disgrace: yet
here in they iumpe: That her Majesty is to be held lawfully excommunicated by
the Pope: when it shall be expedient so to do. But let this full confession
following be diligently considered.

20 The Seminaries were willinge at the first to color hyde, and conceal all,
making the Jesuits cause, attempts, intends practices their own in every
thing, until at last they were entangled by penal laws. page 6. line 25 of
the preface to the Quod.

21 Lastly it is to be noted, that howsoever the seculars do grevosly charge
the Jesuits, and other (executed for the same) with horrible treasons and
fellonies, denied in other popish books, yet (in the end) they conclude thus.
Whatsoever is written or contained in these books we submit all to the
censure and Judgment of our holy mother the catholic Romain Church Import.
consi. page 43. and Quod. p. 361. lin 12. which does imply, that Papists knows
these traitorous books to be written against Jesuits but of policye, and that
priests are ready to unsay all, when the Pope shall either require the same, or
else, pronounce those treasons and felonies, to be holy practices of popish
zeal, where of more is said in the 15. article.


