PVRCHAS, his Paradise. A SERMON Preached at Lismore in Ireland, upon Sunday
the 18. of December, 1634.

Preached, and now presented as the Lord Dungarvans welcome into Ireland.

By Ambrose Purchase Priest.

LONDON. Printed by Robert Raworth, and are to be sold at his house in
Smithfield, 1635.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Richard Lord Viscount Dungarvan, together with his
much honored and Virtuous Lady: A. P. Wishes a portion of grace here, and
perfection of glory hereafter.
Right honorable and my very good friends.
BEcause the desire of man is so insatiable, that Ea saepe numero desiderat
quibus maxim abundat, I hope I shall find pardon, who already having
experience of your courtesies, do farther presume upon your clemencies; once
desiring your honors to view and read that which already you have heard: It is
no new Present, I presume to present, but the ancient portion of your
inheritance, that which your forefathers are already possessed sessed with,
Paradise it self; From whence, although it were part of his policy My Uncle
Mr. Purchase
(who styles himself the Pilgrim) to fetch Religion, and follow her about the
world, yet shall it be (God willing) the endeavor of my pains, to follow you
both, with all other truly Religious, to Paradise back again, where your
honors shall be received with honor far surmounting all dignity, for there
shall ye be honored of the Deity; God will then, and there, please to honor
you, because ye have honored Him here. They that are here instruments of His
honor, shall hereafter be made partakers of His glory, this you may see more
plainly in these following meditations, the occasion of which meditations,
upon this Text was, the late long wished, and at length, prosperous arrival of
your Lordsh and your noble Lady. The joy throughout the Land was great, so
soon as they heard of your Lordships safe arrival, in a secure haven; but how
far greater will the joy be, when yeshal once safely arrive at that secure
heaven, whither ye are as often called to arise and come away: but in this your
Pilgrimage to paradise, methinkes I hear some Romish well read Catholic (that
would feign be your Pilate) telling you that St. Brandon, sailed thither, from
Ireland in less then 3. days; yet I presume to say, that neither of both your
Honors, in sailing to Ireland, were out of the way; sure, I believe, St.
Brandon had a more tedious passage from Ireland to Paradise, then by report he
had, for as I remember, the same Historian tells me, that he met with that
divelish Pirate Judas by the way, and he we know spared not One, ten thousand
times more innocent. But leaving this their Paradise, to them that enjoy it, I
again wish your Honors, the fruition of that Patrue penitent upon the Cross,
purchased in a shorter space -- This day shall thou etc. where all your
mourning shall be turned into mirth, your fasting into feasting, your sighing
into singing Alleluiah, with Him in the highest heaven; which that God in his
good time would effectually accomplish, faithfully prays.

Your honors, firmly and faithfully obliged; Ambrose Purchase.

Canticl. 2. 13. Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away.
IT was the parable of Pythogoras, Cor ne edito, eat not thy Heart, which
parable, although in it self it be obscure; yet by the Sunshine of
friendship, the Mist of obscurity is dispersed, and the true meaning of the
Author thus plainly to be discerned; that those which want friends to reveal
secrets, or open themselves unto, are devourers of their own hearts. So great
an Enemy to man is this his secret hatred, or aversation to society, that it
causes him to degenerate; degenerating to participate of the nature of Savage
Beasts, to become a Caniball, a Murderer not of others but of himself.

If affliction should aim at me, and I fall in company, a Friend may raise me
again, but vae soli, woe unto Eccles. 4. 10.
him that is alone; woe unto him that is given over unto himself, for he
falls, and there is not a second to lift him up.

The Proverb saying; One man's deemed none, means, Life is death where men do
live alone.

Misery, it looks merrily, so long as it may repair to such as will afford
it mercy; for it eases a grieved heart to see his friend pity him, who in
pitying does partake with him; And therefore not unfitly did the Romans call
friends Participes curarum.

I will here show you two notable examples of the use of Friends, and trial of
Friendship; The first betwixt Jonathan and David, whose souls were knit
together with the band of Amity: Jonathan you may see, in the first of Samuel.
19. 2. would not keep his own fathers counsel when it was against David his
Friend, but revealed the plot to David; Saul, my Father, goes about to slay
thee: Yea, and he wrought so for him in his absence, that he brought him again
into the presence of Saul, his Father, as in time past. verse 7.

Secondly, observe what would have become of the man sick of the Palsy (in
the 5. of Saint Lukes Gospel and 18. verse) if he had had no Friends, he was
too feeble of himself to crowd into the house, yea, his Friends, though men of
ability, yet at first could find no way to help him; but at last, although it
were through the tyleing, they found way to let down miserum out miserecordem.

Here I cannot omit a third example, and Tyb. ad Seianum, haec pro amicitia
nostra, non occultaui.
that of Tiberius Caesar, with whom Sejanus had ascended, to that height of
Friendship, that they two were reckoned as a pair of Friends, and the whole
Senate did dedicate an Altar to Friendship, as to a Goddess, in respect of the
great and entire Friendship betwixt these two. So dear and precious is Trve
Friendship, that when a man cannot find comfort in any other Cordial
whatsoever, then this is a Cordial comfort to him, That he has a Friend will
ease his heart by taking part with him. A man may Francis Lord Verulam.
take Sarza to open the Liver, Steel to open the Spleen, Flower of Sulphur
for the Lungs, Castoreum for the Brain, but no receipt opens the Heart but a
true Friend to whom a man may boldly impart whatsoever lies upon the Heart to
oppress it.

We now see of what use a good Friend is, and what need there is of him; but I
confess it is a difficult thing for us in this deceitful Defficilia quae
pudera.
time, to find out such a Friend; but what if such a Friend should come and
proffer us this kindness, as with Jonathan, to knit His soul to the souls of
us, that are David's, the beloved of the Lord; would we not accept of this
Friend-like proffer? So it is, that Christ has proffered Himself, and has
promised, that if we will unite our selves with Him, in this league of Amity,
that although we have so highly offended His Father, and by our inventions
plucked His wrath upon our heads; Yet he will undertake to satisfy His
Justice, appease this His wrath, and avert His ire. Although by our depraved
nature, we have deprived our selves of His presence; Yet He will plead so
well for us, that we shall again be admitted into His presence, as in times
past.

It was the speech of an Emperor (as I take it upon his deathbed) That he had
Severus.
had all things, and now would give all things to be found in Christ: Now we
have on the contrary Christ freely offering Himself; and using all means
possible to win us unto Himself, inuiting us to the participation of His
treasures; And because we shall know that we are not Friends, in the meanest
rank, or degree of Friendship, He is pleased not only to distinguish, but
also to dignifie us by a more near, dear, and familiar title, as, His sister,
His spouse, Cantic. 5. 1. Such as without whom, He will neither eat, or
drink; but if He has eaten, they must do so too: I have eaten my Hony-combe
with my Honey, I have drunk my Wine with my milk; eat O Friends, yea, drink
abundantly O beloved. Cantic. 5. 1. Yea, to say more, we are such friends, as
without whom, He will not live; but because He lives, we shall live also,
John 14. 19. No marvel then, if He does so often inuit us, since we are so
nearly contracted, to rise up out of this Dungeon of Misery, and to lie down
with Him, in His Palace of Mercy. No less then twice in this one chapter,
are we invited by Himself. First in the Tenth Verse, My beloved spoke, and
said unto me, Rise up my Love, my fair one, and come away. And again, in this
Thirteenth Verse. Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away. Which words, are
the words of that wise and Lovely King Solomon, inuiting his new Spouse to come
with him from the place she then did reside in, to His Princely Palace in
Jerusalem, but in the Mystery, behold a greater, a wiser, and far more
lovely then Solomon is here. Non minus amans quam amor; Says Saint Bernard:
No less loving then Love it self; Here is Christ the true Bridegroom
courteously inuiting His Spouse, the Church, that is, every true believer (Vos
estis Templum Dei, says Saint Paul) To forsake the World and the Flesh; which
as Aquin. says, fitly may be termed, Cubilia Leonum, and Montes Pardorum, The
hellish dens of devilish Lions, and mighty Mo^ntaines of bloody Leopards,
Canti. 4. 5. These would Christ have his Spouse to forsake, and come and live
with Him in His heavenly Jerusalem, or abide with Him on His Holy Mountain,
Psalm. 15. 1.

In the words, there are these parts; Text.


1. A Taxation. 2. A Compellation. 3. An Inuitation.
1. Taxavit cum vexatione. 2. Appellavit cum appropriatione. 3. Inuitavit cum
immutatione.
First, A Taxation. Arise.
Here may some couzening conceited Opinonist begin to cavell in this sort;
Will CHRIST allow His Church no ease? To which I answer, He will, and does
solemely charge, those that have to do with the Church, not to disturb the
quietness thereof, as Cantic. 2. 7. I charge you Oh Daughters of Jerusalem, by
the Roes, and by the Hindes of the fields, that ye stir not up, nor waken my
Love, until she please. But yet He will not allow her to take her ease in
wickedness, nor yet to be lulled in the silken cradle of security; but when
He sees this, then He calls to her to arise, and come away, Arise my love, my
fair one, etc.

Here can I not give Anger its proper definition, because I cannot term it a
passion in Him, who is not subject to any, but it is rather here, A calm
resolution in God, to punish or prevent sin in us; It is not with God, as it is
with diverse of us, who after we are once angry, will scarce ever be pleased
again; but in Him is rather compleately fulfilled that ancient and true Miner
apud Eurip. laudat (...)
Proverb, Quo major eo placabilior; By how much the greater, by so much the
sooner pleased: For we are never so soon sorrowful for offending Him, But He
is as soon merciful to forgive us: But because the Anger of God is here
expressed in one word; I dare not stay to spend many in the exposition of the
same; but only let us hence observe; That although His anger is contained in
one word, Yet His Love is not fully expressed, but in many; My Love, my fair
one, etc.

Although His anger lasts but a while, yet His Love endures for ever.

My Love, my Fair one, etc. Let us here take notice how God is pleased to
dignifie his Church, and honor her with those familiar titles and terms of
Love and Faire-One; She Is lovely and fair because She Is His: Many are the
pledges of his sincere affection toward Her, by which She becomes lovely and
fair, Venerunt mihi pariter omnia bona cum illa, wisd. 7. Love Tokens.
11. These the pledges of his love or affection are of three sorts.

1. Either, Dona naturae. Hugo de S. vici.
2. Or, Dona gratiae, 3. Or, Dona gloriae.
The gifts of Nature are, Memory, Reason, and Will, wherewith we excel brute
beasts.

The gifts of Grace are, Faith, Hope, and Charity, with which we overcome the
Devil.

The gifts of Glory, eternal and trve Happiness, Dr. Rawlinson.
happy and eternal Truth, trve and happy Eternity, whereby we are made equal
with the Angels, or as the same Author says in another place, in token of His
love He gives her, Monile in Pectore. Annulum in Digito. Dotem in jure
Hereditario.
1. A Brooch upon her Breast. 2. A Ring upon her finger. 3. A royal dowry for
her inheritance.
1. In pectore ratio. 2. In manu operatio. 3. In dote utriusque remuneratio.


The Brooch (says he) is Reason, the mother of Discourse; The Ring to grace
her hand is Good-workes; and the recompense of both is her inheritance of a
Kingdom.

These things I believe

I answer, out of Baudwins words, Accepit naturaem and communicavit gratiam,
that is, When Christ became incarnate, then thou becamest incorporate, that is,
When Christ took upon Him thy humane nature, then did He impart unto thee his
Divine.

Seeing then, that

This we do, when we prefer the pleasures of the world before the Love of
God; and therefore it pleases the Holy Ghost, in Scripture, to call us
Adulterers, when we thus set our Affections upon the world, or any thing
therein: Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, James 4.
know ye not that the amity of this world is enmity with God. Let us know we
must not set up our rest here.

Sunt pennae volucres Roet. de con. lib. 4. metr. 1
mihi,
Quas sibi cum velox men's induit.
Terras perosa despicit.
If we enter with our selves into serious contemplation; we shall find this
to prove but a place of desolation, and therefore we ought to be more sensible
and careful of our own elevat on; Discite in hoc mundo Ambrose. lib. de virg.
supra mundum esse, Et si corpus geritis volitat, in vobis, ales interior; quid
ergo te in terram deijcis. Since thou have the liberty of wings, why do thou
clog thy self with the cares of this world; what is there in the world that
should thus delude us? If we be to day in as high promotion as Haman was with
King Ahasuerus, may we not have as sudden a fall, if we have great store of
wealth; Riches have wings, and fly away, Haud vllas portabis opes Acharontis
ad vndas.
inopem me copia fecit, says the Poet: And on the contrary, If we have Christ,
with Him we shall have all things. Omnia habemus Ambrose.
Christ's, and omnia in nobis Christus: Love not therefore this world 1 Ioh. 2. 15
nor the things that are in this world, We count it not a slight fault for a
Woman to set her love and affection upon another man, when she is contracted
or married to a Husband, yea, we count it an indignity and dishonor, and the
reason is, because God has so dignified and pleased so to honor that estate
in which they are united, and yet this is but a type of the union, betwixt
Christ and His Church.

In these respects has God pleased to honor that estate.

1. Authoritate instituentis. Paeraldus sum: virturum.
2. Loco in quo institutum est. 3. Tempore; in quo homo nondum pec caverat. 4.
Antiquitate.
I. It was God Himself Authoritate.
that first did institute it, Genesis 2. 28. there it is evident that God himself
brought them first together.

Secondly, It was instituted in Paradise, Loco.
and it is worthy our observation, and it makes greatly to the honor of
marriage, to consider that this alone was instituted in Paradise; for from
hence may we note the happiness of those that marry in the Lord, for they are
not only married one to another, but Christ is married unto them.

Thirdly, it was in Tempore.
the time of man's innocence, the happiest time that ever man enjoyed or lived
in, when God, with all the rest of his Creatures, were at peace with him before
there needed any reconciliation, because there was never any disagreement.

Fourthly, it was the first order that God Antiquitate.
did institute after man's Creation; and as it was the first that God the Father
did institute: So did Christ God the Son, please to grace and dignifie it
with the first miracle that ever he wrought on earth, which was at a marriage
in Cana of Galile, where he turned the water into Wine. John 2. 6.

Thus highly does God please to esteem of the contract which passes betwixt
man and woman, as thus to dignifie it, where He Himself was but a guest; and
shall we think he will less esteem of that contract where He Himself is
Bridegroom.

Since it has pleased him out of his love Use.
so to honor us, let not us be wanting in our love and respect again toward
Him: Let not the consideration of this His infinite love to us, cause us to
slack our love to Him, because it comes so far short of His; for He knows
what we are able to do and expects no more; affectum non effectum requirit
Deus, Ambrose.
God looks that willingness should usher in all our obedience, Non intuetur
Deus quantum quis valeat, sed quantum velit, quic-quid vis, and non potes
factum computat; Let us therefore willingly love Him again, because he has
loved us first.

It was one of the plagues and tortures wherewith that cruel Tyrant Mezentius
did use to murder men:

(Mortua quinetia^ iungebat corpora vivis, Componens manibusque manus at que
oribus ora) To tie the living and dead together and cast them both into a
dungeon, there to continue till they were both in one case. By this cruel
tyranisme is figured unto us, those matches, or marriages, where love is
wanting; which often happens by these occasions; First, when marriage is
without the consent of either of the parties requisite and therefore essentiale
quiddam in matrimonio est consensus, for as Catullus says, Virginitas non tota
tua est ex part parentum est, Altera pars patri data pars est altera matri,
Tertia sola tua est.

Secondly, when the quod subito ex^^itur flu^^^at subito.
parties are too hasty, and so rashly adventure before affection on both sides
is settled; we have an old saying, which is very certain, deliberandum est diu
quod statuendum est semel, for this affected dispatch is one of the most
dangerous enemies to serious business that can be: It is like to that which the
Phisicians call Praedigestion, Homer. quem versum. M. Tullius itae convertie
turda and sera nimis sed fama and laud perennis.
or hasty digestion, which is sure to fill the body full of Crudities and
secret seeds of diseases, (...).

Is it not reason that quo significatur ea quae sero contingunt magnifica
plerunque and diuturna esse solere.
we should, negotium suscipere cunctanter, when we must in suscepto permanere
constanter.

Thirdly, when the Dowry is rather married then the Wife, with a huic habeo,
non tibi: I have thee for this thing; and not for thy self.

Now in this spiritual Marriage, none of these consents are wanting. First
here is the consent of God the Father, who gave His only begotten Son, etc.
He was willing that Christ, who so entirely loved us, should unite us unto
Himself.

Secondly, there is, the consent of Christ our Bridegroom, who gave Himself,
etc.

Now there wants none but our consent, which; if we respect our own good,
we cannot deny? I remember Palingenius, concluding upon necessity, Ergo vxor
ducenda est, gives this advice, Prius tamen aspice quae sit.

Precipue matris mores aduerte patrisque, Nam,

Qualis quaeque arbos, tales solet edere fructus.

Now I have already showed you the lineage of this our Spiritual Bridegroom,
that He is the only begotten Son of God.

Secondly, here is not in Him an ovet-hastie rashness, for although He
loves us rather then his life; as sufficiently He has witnessed by his
death, yet He mooveth our affection toward himself by degrees.

Thirdly, He sues not for the Dowry, for alas what have we poor miserable
souls that may move Him, to set His love or affection upon, I can see no
reason of His Love, but His love it self, Stat pro ratione voluntas.
His mere good will is the only cause, and all He looks for again, is our
good will; Nec is aliud quaerit, nec illa aliud habet, Neither Bamard.
does he seek for any thing else, neither have we any thing else to give Him.

It was answered by one of the old Philosophers in Laertius, being asked when a
young man should marry, (...), not as yet; when an old man, (...), not at all:
But let us contrariwise learn to remember our Creator in the days of our
youth, old or young, let us know it is now time, yea, and high time to give
consent upon so reasonable conditions; Yea, it is now a case of necessity, Si
non sponte vi pares coactus
either we must yield to be espoused to Christ, who does dearly love us, or
else we must be contracted to the Devil, who does deadly loath us; Let us now
judge whether it be better to be beloved of a friend, or loathed of a fiend.

Justin says, That this our Antagonist, the Devil, is Dei Simia, Gods Ape,
and indeed this word Ape, does very well agree with him in this respect; Even
as the Ape by kindness kills her whelpe; with too much love, and lulling in
her arms: So will not Satan then deny us help, when as his help may yield
us greater harms.

Amando occidit, his love is their death, whoever they are, he once comes to
hug, or embrace; not much unlike to Ammon, who after he had once deflowred his
sister Tamar, he hated her ever after; And we shall find, that what show of
love soever this our Enemy has made to us before, Yet his hatred after, will
be far greater, Dionisius the elder, noted very well, when seeing his mother
very old, and overstriken in years, desirous to marry a young stripling; that
although it were in her power to violate the Laws of Syracusa, yet not to
violate the law of Nature: So let me tell you; That although it may seem easy
in your conceit, to violate the laws of men, yet shall it not be easy to
violate the laws of God, by whose edict it stands decreed; That either we
must be His Spouse, or the Devils harlot; with the one we shall find Treasure
incomparable, with the other trouble intolerable, of the one, we shall find a
precious treasure, of the other a pernicious traitor; We can desire no more
then the first, if we refuse the last, and we can deserve no less then the
last, if we refuse the first.

I believe not that we can justly tax Olimpias the mother of Alexander, for
banishing a noble woman of Macedonia, from her Court, because she preferred
wealth before virtue, in marrying a rich fool; No more can we tax God of
injustice, if He bannish us from His princely palace, where we should have
been crowned, if we had espoused him the King of heaven, if we neglecting
him, become harlots to that old spiritual fornicatour, the Devil before
mentioned.

My Love, and fair one, etc. Hence let us take notice that we are His, and no
others, My beloved is mine, and I am His; Verse, 16. Yea, if we rightly
consider it, we are more His then our own; and therefore we should have
always a greater care to please Him, then to please our selves.

Hence also may we observe the happiness of true believers above others; They
alone shall participate of this His extraordinary Love, whereas others shall be
excluded this heavenly Paradise, as Harlots, not worthy to be received, but
rather to receive their portion with the Devil, and his Angels for ever.

My Love, etc. Here we see, He pleases to speak in the singular number, to
let us understand that He has but one Love, but one true Church, as therefore,
he will admit of no other, no more ought we: There shall be but one
Sheepherd, and one sheepfold. We read of none but wicked Lamech before the
flood, that had more wives then one, and him Iovinnian called a Monster,
because he made two ribs of one; Yea, and another observes, that the name of
his second wife did signify a shadow, because that she was not a wife, but
the shadow of a wife, So in like manner, there is but one Catholic Church, the
Roman, some think, no better then Lamech's second wife, but the shadow of a
wife; but admit her Christ's spouse, yet she has many foul faults in her,
much levitie and wantonness, which God amend: But because this will deprive me
of my intended discourse, I therefore leave it, and come again to the same
words before handled.

My Love and fair one, etc. Here is both a likely portion, and a lovely
proportion; she is both lovely and beautiful. Here is His love expressed to
his church in many more words then his Anger, which lasts but a while, but
this His love shall endure for ever, She is not now his sister only, but His
Spouse also; not only His Spouse, but also His Love; and not His Love alone,
but His Faire-one; Fair, first in respect of Her Beauty; secondly, in respect
of her Order Cant. 4. 1. Behold, thou art fair my Love, behold, thou art fair.

First, in respect of Her Beauty; The inward gifts of Grace do shine more
brightly in Her; Her jmage which was before by nature defaced, is now again
revived; Christ in Her does now behold her former perfection, and therefore,
when He had reckoned Her beautiful parts in particular, as, Thine That is
Zeal and Knowledge. Iun:
Eyes are like the Doves, etc. * They two Breasts are as two young Roes that are
twins, feeding among the Lillies: He concludes in the 7th. verse. of the 4th.
Chap. Thou are all fair my Love, and there is no spot in Thee.

Secondly, in respect of Order, which is the Beauty of every thing, for where
no Order is, there is deformity, and where Order is observed, there is
comelines. If you hear but an eloquent Oration, will ye not judge the beauty
the beauty thereof, rather to consist in the curious composing, or knitting
together of those Rhetorical flowers, the^ in the flowers or sentences
themselves. It is so in every Society; An Army mixed together is a confused
multitude, but in their Order, a beautiful company. It is reported of the
Queen of Sheba, that came so far to see Solomon, that when she beheld the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his Ministers, and their
apparel, and his Cup-bearers, etc. There was no more spirit in her, 1 King.
10. 4, 5. She was ravished here, with the very Order and decency of him that
was but a type of Christ and his Church, then whose Order, nothing is more
beautiful. Wherein, every one affects not Supremacy, but some bare one
Office, and some another; some Apostles, some Prophets, some workers of
Miracles, some Hear, some read, some Preach, some Pray, every one do
something in their Order.

Thus having mixed her Beauty with order, you see in what a beautiful order the
Church remains.

Lastly, invitavit cum A solitudine seculi; ad solicitudinem Caeli.
immutatione -- Come away, we ought not now to tarry, when God calls, Si
deserveris coronaberis, si manseris laniaberis. It is the king of heaven that
calls us, who are ready to run into the mouth of the devouring Lion: Let us
therefore run hastily toward Him, and cry Him mercy, that we have been so
long disobedient, and have so long stopped our ears at His call; let us now
run and carry with us, Gemitum in pectore; Singulttm in gutture, Fletum in facie.

Groans in our breast, Sighs in our throats, Tears in our eyes; let there no
longer be need for Him to cry, How long would I, but ye would not? But let us
now have to meet Him who comes not to lead us out of prison, to the place of
execution, but to a place of joy inexpressible, to the promised Paradise, which
as he is willing, so also is he able to bestow upon us.

There are but three kingdoms, Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and he is Lord and
Master of them all. First He is Lord of Heaven, ad donandum, to reward us with.
Secondly, He is Lord of Earth, ad dominandum, to rule and govern it: and
thirdly, He is Lord of Hell, ad domandum to vanquish it.

And this is that Lordly Bridegroom, betwixt whom and us, the Covenants were
drawn in Baptism, and have often since bin sealed and confirmed in the Lords
Supper. Let us therefore hasten with this our princely Bridgeroome, unto our
coronation; which although it cannot be comepleately finished till our Souls
shall have forsaken these earthly Tabernacles; Yet then shall we, without
molestation, enjoy that united peace with God, in piety, and with our selves in
security: although we shall neuermore enjoy the communion of His affliction; yer
shall we evermore enjoy the union of His affection. In the mean time let us
labor and endeavor, since he has been so loving to us, daily to increase our
love again toward Him; This our love to Him must be expressed

1. Cord. 2. Corpore.
First in the heart, there true Love out to be founded, that it may endure so
long as the heart does, which is primum vivens, but ultimum moriens.

Secondly, Corpore. By the body is here meant, all outward respect, and
reverence, we have given Him our souls, and shall we deny Him our bodies; He
has given Himself both to us, and for us, and shall we keep back any thing
from Him; He has not only promised us a crown hereafter, but has crowned us
here, Ezech. 16. 12. He has set a Jewel on our Forehead, and earerings in
thine ears, and a beautiful Crown upon thy Head.

In time of Peace, a Crown of White-roses of Innocence.

In Persecution, a crown composed of the Re-roses of Martyrdom.

Now we are crowned here, if we desire to be crowned hereafter; We must
arise out of this Haven of misery, and arive at the Heaven of Mercy; And then
shall there not be need for this our Lordly Bridegroom to call again the
third time,

Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away.
FINIS.

