A new DiaLOGE CALLED THE ENdightment against mother Mess.

Matthew the vi. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down
and Cast in to the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them

FOR What so ever ye have spoken in darkness, that same shall be herd In the
light, and that which ye have spoken in the ear even in secret places,
shall be preached Even on The top, of the house

Luke the.xii. IF ANY man worship the beast and his. Image and receive his
mark In his forhead or on his Hand the same shall drink the wine of the
wrath of God which is powered In the coppe of his wrath and he punyssheth In
fire and brymstone before the holy Angels and before the Lame.

John reuelacion.xiiii. Chaptre. THE NAmes of the speakers in this enditment
GODS vuord the he^ Judge The overseers of her. Veryte and knoleg her accusers
Vuisdom the sergent Daniell the crier The tvuelf Apostels panild on a quest of
her Ve^dicta dei and final desperacion mother Mess and her surtise master
Couetus. master stifneck Antipus the layler


A NEVVE DIALOGE CALLED the enditement against mother mess. Verite begins,
BRother knowledge ca^ste thou tell me what news is now abroad among the
people concerni^g gods word. knowledge brother veryte I here no news but yt
it shall florysh according to gods will for eany thing that I ca^neperceyue.
Verite. But as I understand brother knowledge there is many people offended
with it that it should be so. knovledg. Al though they he offended brother
veryte yet it is but a folly to spurn against ye prycke. Verite. Verylye that
is true for that that the heavenly father has not plantyd, shall be plucket up
by the rotes and cast into hell fire yet they have no grace but repyne at that
thing yt will not be. know What remedy brother verite sei^g they will be
obstackle against the truth. Verite. Yes brother knowledge there is remedy it is
your part to preach unto them the veryte with a meke spryte and if eany man be
over takin of afaute, as saint paul says i^ ye.vi. to ye galatheans you which
are spryttuall inform him with a meke spryt, and consider thine own self.
That thou be not tempted so well as he. know. brother verite I have preched
unto them the true word of god, as the lord has taught yt me, and I have
traueled from contre to contre with much pai^es and persecucio^ for christ's name
sake and I have also declared there abhomynacio^ and filthy doctri^e unto them
desyring them gentlye to leave yt, and cleave unto the verite and I has also
prayed unto ye lord to open there blind hearts, that the true knowleg of thrist
might enter in, upon the which brother verite I thank my lord god, whom I
has served from my youth there has been some that has forsakyn there
abhomynacion and has received the veryte of Christ contrary wysse there has
been other that has been styphenecked wythestonding the verite with persecucio^
and murder, oh brother v^rite the lord is mi Judge, I has preached on to the^
ye swet promise and lively doctrine of Jesus christ with as gentyl a spryt as heart
may think declaring unto them, there abhominacion and fylthy doctrine, yet will
they be styfenecked pharyses still, but now I thank my lord god the sercher of
al secretis, that it has pleased him to Inflame our noble king with his h^ly
sprite by the which he has contrary to there minds plucked down the
greatest part of there abominable Idolatri intending no less by gods grace,
then for to cote it up al by the hard rotes how be yt brother veryte I will
show you yt there is one abhominacio yt sittith sore in men's concience that we
must see a remedy for for the Gospels sake, which is the mother of al
myschef* and the abhominacio^ of desolatio^. Verite, why brother knowleg what
is her name ca^ you tell. knovledg. yes truly her name ^s as I understand
mother mess a woman that has brought the people in to a deuely she trade.
Verite. where i^ and i^ what trade has she brought the^, I prai you tell me
knov. truly she has brought the^ i^ such a trade that she has set her self
in the sear where the living god of heaven should sit, morouer brother verite
she vaunce her self to be a god of gods ye an more then a god, for where as
God is the omnipotent father of heaven and the everlasting God without
beginning and without ending the creator of heauin and earth and al other
things whereby he can not create him self, yet will this blasphemous mounster
make the people beleaue that she can creat and make god, where as god can not
make him self for he has nether beginning nor endinge. Also brother verity
she says she can deliver the sely souls that has been long pitously punished
in the pains of purgatori from there pains and torments, moreover she says
she can make fair wether and rain and heal all sickness, and bring dampened
soles out of hell, also she says she can purchase remission of sins by the
offering up again of Christ's bodi and blood and ca^ with five words make both
god and man whereby she would make God parciall a liar and no god which is plain
heresy treason and trayterly spoken for by her saying god ca^ be no god without
her help whereby she would take the crown and honor from god and set it upon
her self and furthermore she teaches the people with her filthy doctrine and
subtle conueyaunce making them believe, ye exccepte they do hear and se her
play in her iuglyng garments and that in the morning eueridai they should not
prosper nor go forward in their business where about they go, also where as I
with the doctrine of Jesus Christ had brought a few to the true knowledge. she
has with her fylthy tradicions and wicked laws compellid them with persecucion
and cruelte, to fall from the verite, and to cleave unto her fylthy doctrine,
and if there were eany that would not deny Jesus christ but stycke to his
houlsom doctrine they should strayt ways with cruel persecucion suffer death,
wherefore yt is time she where rotted out from the christyance and and rested of
treason, theft and murder, as she has deseruid no leasse Verite, well brother
knowledge sei^g yt is as you have spoken I would desyer you to go to my brother
wisdom the Sarge^t des^ring him ernestly to make a narowe search for her, and
tach her of treason theft and murder. knov brother verite it shall not need for
he comith yender my think. veryte. truly he does indede knouv. what brother
wisdom aworde with you I pray. wisd. sir what is your plesur yt you will have
with me know brother wisdom my brother veryte and I does straytly command
you, to tach mother mess of treason theft and murder, and lay her fast i^
newgat yt she may be forth co^mi^g at al times. vuisd.. sir it shall be don by ye
grace of god with al mi heart with as much speed as I may. Verit. I pray you
brother wisdom let it be so. Vuisd. brother knowleg I pray you where is her
most abydi^g and come^ trade where I may lay wait for her. Knovu brother
wisdom her most abidi^g is at pouls or i^ sei^t feithe^ perish under pouls
church or at ludgate in saint martens, perish and if you chance not of her
there walk unto saint pulckers church and if you look well you shall Find her
In one of those plasys wytheoute fail wisd. Well brother knowledge seeing it
is your mind and my brother verytis to gether I will do my dyligens as much as
I may veryt. I and we desire you heartily to do so. wisd. Sir it shall be don.
Knov. Brother veryte I have no dought but that he shall take her tyght well al
though it belong first Wherefore I beseech ye lord be his speed. very. I men I
pray you lord. wisd. Mother mess I charg you i^ the kings name to deliver
from you your honor and I tach you herein ye king of heavens name, of treason
theft and murder. Mess. whi thou lurden, who made ye so bold to tuch me, thy
fingers shall rot of vuisd. No no Mother mess ye world is not now as it has been, it is not your Ca^kerd doctrine ye shall make me leave of houlde therefore be
content, and make no more ado but come your wais with me, Mess Whi I pray you sir
what be you, and what is your name, yt you have a^ octorite to tach me, for yt
thing ye I am not gilty i^. wisdo, truly my name is wisdo^e, I am an officer
apoi^ted to ye heavenly king to search out al wikednes. M^sse. Na the^ I have
seruid a good seincte i^ deed am I at this point now, I pray you master
wisdo^e, who is my accusers. vuysd. Truly your accusers be these veryte and
knowleg me^ of a godli understanding Mess Verite and knowleg. vuis. Yea truli
Mess. Na the^ mary I am like to suppe my porege i^ newgate, well master wisdom
seeing it is so as you have spoken what remedi but I would desire you this I
know well sergantes be good fellows and for monei will do aplesur at a need
wherefore if you will let me escape now at this time I will give you for your
ge^tlenes you choice of three things, Vuisdo. what things be those I pray you
hartly Mess. mary that be these, a bisshopryk a benefit or a C, ^i. to dri^k,
whether of these three things ye will and you shall have for my suertes yt shall se
you paid M, stifnec and M. couetus yese be substa^cial ye kno very well and I
dar say they will not se me cast away for a little for they be my very fri^des
and ye may be sur of this ye if these twain cobbes stick unto me there is a
great sort moore in corners that will put to their portion yt love me full
well I thank the^ wherefore master wisdom saying you have such sufficient
surties I trust you will let me go, vuis, nay truly we depart not so as for
these two parties I know the^ very well they be not the men yt I will trust
unto nor non such as they be but now I know who is your vpholders let the^ take heed or else they are like to knit the knot yt you shall knit. Mes. by the mass
I have fysshed well now in deed why ca^ not these two honest me^ before named
bale me out if need be. vuysd no v^r^ly no such as they be but if ye bring
honest men to me ye love god and his word and will be bound for your forth coming
at al times I a^ content to let you go. else not, Mes. nay then I am like to go
in deed, well M, sergeau^t I would desyr you of charytie to let me go for Gods
sake if you will not let me go for none other man's sake, vuisdo. no no mother
mess I know it is not Gods will that I should do eanye such charity.
Mess. no is. wisdom no verelye., Mess. Then do with me what ye will. vuisd.
come on your wais you shall go with me, Mess. I am not very well content.
vuisd what sayste thou. Mess. marye I say I am very well content, wis antipus
I do command you in the ki^gs name to lay this woman fast in newgate that she
may be forth commi^g to morrow at ye Sescione house. Antipus. sir it shall be
done with all my heart Vuisd. look that you do so and make her sure. Antip.
mother mess I am sori of your troble. Mess. what remedi. Antip. suerly I can
not tell, but if I could I would but such fare as I have you be welcome to it
so long as you be here. Mess. sir I thankyou heartily. vuisd. Brother knowledge
and veryte you must be at the sesscio^ howsse at.viii. of the clock to morrow
to put your inditment against mother mess. knouv. and I pray you brother
wisdom have you gotten her. Vuisd. I verily that I have. Knouv, now the liui^g
god be praised, we will not fayl by the grace of god, but we will be there. gods
Vuord the. luge. Inquere daniel if there be eanye man that has eanye matter to
be entreated of this dai i^ this Sesscione house let him bri^ge it in. and
enter it and he shall be heard. Dany if there be any that has any matter in
this sescions house, let him enter his accione for my lord judge is ready to
hear yt Judge. danyell call forth that woman there Danye, mother mess stand
forth at the bare here. Mess here my lord Dany. hold up your hand, Judge.
call forth the quest danyell. Dany: 0000 yes all them that be charged of the
queaste of mother mess my lord command you straytly to apeare at youreical
i^ge in pain of his hey dyspleasure 0000 yes, Simon Peter and andrew come
forth and apere at your calling. Ans, hear my lord, Dany. James zebede and
John his brother com forth and apere at your calling. Ans. hear my lord Dani.
philip and bartlemew co^ forth and apeare at your calli^g. Ans. hear my lord
Dani. thomas and matthew co^ forth and apeare at your calli^g, Ans* hear mi
lord Dany: James and thadeus com forth and apere at your calling. Ans hear my
lord Danye, simo^ of cane and mathias come forth and apere at your calli^g Ans
hear mi lord. Dany. stand forth hear all xii and harkenne what shall be laid
to this woman's charge. Peter when will my lord. Judge. Danyell make a cry to
know whether hear be eany that have eanye thing to lay to this woman's charg
ye or no Daniel. if there be eany man yt has eany thing to lay to this woman's
charge, let him entir his matter for my lord Judge is readito hear yt. know. my
lord hear is a woman that has committed open treason theft and murder Judge:
how say thou woman why answers not you to thy complaint: Mess. my lord I do
deny it, they are not able to prove it, nor no such things as they lay unto
my charge. Veryte: and it please you my lord that thing that my brother
knowledge has laid to her charge is true and we are able to prove yt. Mess.
Where in have I committed this open treason theft and murder that you lai unto
my charge. I am she that has been of a long continuau^ce, instituted and made
by christ and his apostles and aprouid by diverse, holy doctors and for the
space af this, vi C. years I have been taken and hallowed among the cheafest as
a woman most necessary for the peoples saluatyon and seeing that I am
sprituall and Allowed by so many holy fathers ordained by the holy scryptures
and aproued by diverse holy doctors, my think my lord you should not allow ye
accusations of these two men but punish them ye other meughte take an ensample
thereby. know. my lord if it please you to hear my brother verity and I we will
prove yt thing true that we have laid unto her charge for where as I said that
she is a traitor it is true my lord by her own words, for where as paul
says in the.x. to the Hebrews that we are sanctified by the offering up of
the body of Jesus Christ ones for all, yet this blasphemous monster is readi
daily with her priests ministering and often times offreth one manner of offerings
which ca^ never take away sins but this man Jesus Christ the son of god when
he had offered for sins. one sacrifice which is of value for ever sat him
down on the right hand of God and from hensforth tarteth till his foes be made
his fotestole for with one offering has he made parfect for ever the^ that are
sa^tified, and thus we he taught in saint Paul's doctrine therefore it is not
for us nor no other creatur to believe this wicked womans doctrine for she says
that she can offer up the body of Christ every day to take away sin which is
blaspheme and treason for saint-Paule says in the.vii. to the Hebrews that he
did that ones for all when he offerred up him self wherbi by her doctri^e she
does crucify Christ every day anew which is to be known and thought yt she is
a utter enime to god and his word ye and amore worse traitor then whas Judas
which betrayed christ, for Judas when he had once betrayed hi^ and delivered
him in to the hands of his enymis, strait way he knew he had done wyckedly and
through dispaier he whente and hanged him self, but this traiterly woman is
not content with crucifieng him once or twyse a day, or one day, but she will
crucifi him v C. times eueridai in the year and think yt al to litell and not
only that but she causes ye people to believe with cruel persecucio^ yt it is
necessary for ma^s salvation and thus I prove her no leasse then a tretor, with
does crucifi christ a new also athef which robith god of his honor, and as for
murderi^g she does not only sle the^ with her damnable doctrine to go from ye
truth of our salvation unto her false doctrine to our condempnacion but also
all them that would not believe it to be true and stycke to their opinion
with cruel persecutyon suffered death, As Rychard Hunne, Roberte King, Johan
Debinham, Nycolas Marshe, Thomas Sax^e: Thomas Hitto^ Thomas Bylney Richard
Bifelde with Teukesbery and colyns. Willya^ Leton george bainham Ihon frith Iho^
La^bert Wulia^ Tindale, Robert Barnes with Gerard and Hiero^. and v C more yt she
has shed of innocent blood and by this I prove her a traitor: a thief and a
murderer and I a^ sure your lordshyp will not say nay unto it. Iug no truly yt
I will not if it be so: how say thou woman is it so speade, Mess. my lord if
it plese your lordship in deed I offer a sacrifice for the si^nes of ye people
and for all syknes diseses and evil chaunses and for faier wether and rain which
is christ's bodi and blod but they can not prove by ye, that I am neither
traitor, thief nor murderer for the scriptures bear me in that that I do.
Knou, Why Esai the prophet in his first chapter says yt the lord does abore
your Sacrifice even at his very heart and will you compel him to take it
whether he will ye or no, and if he had delighted in sacrifices as David says
in his myserere I would have given it the Lord but thou delighteste not in
none sacrifice lord here David declares how he has no pleasure in them
which is sufficient enough to prove you false in that poi^t, and where as you
say that the scriptures bear you in it. I prai you in what place of scryptures
do you bear your self I could never read that there was any mess in Christ nor
his Apostles time. Mess No what though the nam be not mentioned in the
Scriptures yet the thing it self is mentioned there for in me is Christ him
self in ye form of bread and wine made by such words as is taken out of ye
scripturs which christ left for us, as in Mat.xxvi. Mar, xiiii. and Lu.xxii.
and also as paul declares in the.i. epistell to ye Cor.xi. chap wherein he
says yt the lord Jesus the sam night in which he was betrayed took bred and
thanked and brake and said take ye and eat ye this is mi bodi which is broken
for you now then if Christ does say, this is my body will you sai it is not
his body. Verity. no verily that I will not: but yet my lord shall rightly
know both thou and thy doctrine to be false supersticion, for where as you say
yt christ is in ye In ye form of bread and wine after the words spoken taken
out of, scripture which is as much to sai hoc est corpus meum this is my body
truth it is ye christ said this is my body but first you shall know ye when
christ sat among the twelve Apostles having ye bodi yt ye virgin marye bare
and that same body yt ye virgin mary bare, took ye bread i^ his hand gave
thanks brake it and gave it to his disciples now you shall know that ye
scripture says that Jesus christ becam in all points like unto man sauinge
sin, now I ricken that one man's body can be but in one place at one time,
how think you mother mess Mess. I mary yt is true a man's body can be but In
one place at one time in deed verytie. Well then when the Descyples had
received the bread of the body that the Vyrgynne marye bare, where was that
body then, had they Eat it up, or was it still present before them, Mess No
theye had not eat it up but it was still present before them. Veriti. Well
then That same body after it had Suffered death and rose again yt assended up
to heaven and let him down on the right hand of his father and there tarieth
till his foes, be made his footstool, now that body is in heaven you will
grant me this. Mess. I verelye yt is true. veryt. How chanse it the^ that
you will make the People believe that ye Substance of bred and wine is turned
from his kind unto the very Body of Christ that the Vyrgyn marye hate
after these words spoken, this is my body, not that only but you make
thereof a sacryfyce for the remyssyon of sin both for qwick and dead which
is great blaspheme to the blood of christ and they that would not so believe
should suffer most cruel pain and death, where by ye have crucified christ
anew in his members being no leasse the^ amourderer and a there yt robs god
of his honor. Mess. why sir god is omnipotent. Veryte I verily that is truth,
Mess why then he may do all things and seeing he is almighty speaki^g these
words hoc est cor pusmeum, this is my body why should you then be repugnant
against the truth, and say that yt is not his Body, where as he says him
self that yt is his body, and this I am sure of my Lord that all them that
louithe me and he that is in me, which is god him self, as I know there is a
great meanye does, they will say no lease but that I am ordained of God and
that in seeing me, they se god him self which mad them and died upon the cross
for them all, and if they receue me, they receive their maker the body of
christ fleashe blod and bone as yt hanged on the cross, and thus all them that
fauerithe and louithe me wilbeleue no leasse, Iug why I perceive now thou have
spoken against god and his word heresy and blaspheme. Knouvlege. I truly my
lord she word make ye word of god of non effect for by her saying god
dwells in temples made wtston. yea and she techeth the people to believe no
less the^ lo Mess why my lord sei^g yt I am made by god and his apostles
ordained to be ma^s saluatyon I think there is no man yt loves me but will
say yt where as I am there is god for ye scripturs prophesied that messyas
should come which should save ye people and I am she, and my abidyng is in
Temples of stone which is gods temple so well as mine, for look where as I am
there is he. knou Why the woman of samaria prophesied messiah to be a he and not
a shewher as she said, I wotwell messiah shall com which is called christ when
he is com, he shall tell us altogether here she callyth him a he and not a she
messiah and where as you say yt god dwellith in temples made of stone you shall
know ye. s. steven says that god dwells not in temples made with hands also,
s. paul says no less to the xvii. af the acts ye god which made the world
and all that are in it dwells not in temples made with hand neither is
worshipped with men's hands as solomon says in the third book of the kings the
vi, Chaptre that he builded him a house. howbeit he that is hygheste dwells
not in the temples made with hands as says the Prophet Esaye. Heaven is my
seat and the earth is my fotestoole what house will ye build for me says
the Lord or what place is it that I should rest in has not my hands made al
these things? now this blasphemous woman does cause the people to beleaue that
he dwells in temples made with hands causing ye people to take her falls gods
for the lyning god where as these honest me^ does witness ye contrary which is
suffitient inogh I trust my lord to prove her false i^ yt poi^t and whereas she
says my lord yt he that receives her after the consecration meaning the
bread and wine two false gods receaueth the body of Christ flesh blood and
bone, but after such a fashion took the Jews the word of God in the. vi, of
Johan when he said the bread that I will give is my flesh which I will give
for the life of the world now the Jews took it grossly and strove among them
selves saying how can this fellow give his fleash to eat, as does this woman
these words of christ, this is my body, takin the bare leter nothing
consideri^g the closing up there of where as he says so often as you shall eat
this breo and drink of this cup it shall show the lords death till he com and
if he be there as this woman says as I know he is not, let this nam sacrament
be clean abolisshed for he makes yt but asynification of the death of christ
and not christ him self but rather you must prove the Scripturs false which
callithe yt a sacrament or else prove your self to be the Antechrist that
Christ bid us beware of which should exalt him self in the seat where the
lyui^g god should sit, which is in man's consience and these to be two false
gods which you sai is the living god, and if the Scrypturs be true you be
atraitor a these and a murderer, and if they be not true a prove them your
self. Mess. sir I can not deny but that the scripturs be true. Judge. then
thou condemnyst thy self a knowledgynge by thyn own words to be giltye in
that these two honest men dolay to thy charg. Peter. my Lord if yt please you
the accussacions of these two men is true, and she is gyltye in the thing that
they lay unto her charge, wherefore my lord yt shall not neade to panyell a
queaste of her, for she has condemned her self, by her own words, and all
we twelve breathern will grant there unto no leasse. Judge. Why what think ye
is she gyltye or vngyltye. Peter. gyltye my lord, and if yt please your
lordship or any other man, to look in the.vi. of baruc the prophet you should
know wether she or that, that is i^ ^^rbe a god ye or no, Judge. well woman by
the word of god thou art condemned unto death for treason theft and murder,
and seeing thou art so thou shalt dye the death Stifnec my lord my brother
couetus. and I would desire your lordeshyp that you would be so good as to let
her go unto the place from wence she came first. Judge. no that she shall not
for yt way chance that she may do much harm in the weye as she gotthe,
Stifnec my lord if yt please you to set two honest men to over se her my
brother couetes and I wylbe glad to bear there costs what so ever yt be. Judge.
Well at your desyer she shall go, but ye shall be bownde unto me that you shall se
her convied over Stifnec. my Lord that we will with all our hearts, but we
would desire your lordship that you would be so good lord as to leat her contynu
till the parlemente be paste, and then will we se thie your commandment
fullfylled. Iug, well I am content that she shall abide with you till the
perlement bedone, then vendicta dei and fynall dessperation shall have the over
seeing of her to se her convied to her father the pope again, and for thy part
vendicta dei, se thou that she trauelith with much pain and persecucion and
let not my wrath never depart from her but hang thou still over her head for
ever and let her never have no prosperyte but all ways in sorrow and care, and
se that she crepith not i^to no man's house in eany wise as I know she will, if
thou take not good head therefore wait narowlye upon her and specially a
bowghte Powlles a monge her fryndes there, and Ludgate and sayncte pulckers,
and se that she carries with her, her two brother supersticyon and Idolatry, and
for thy part fynall desperacyon, so that she be brought to her Journeys end
with owght Soker or comfort and that she never return again wiles the world
indureth but always to abide In un comfortable pain as a thing desperate of
all comfort never to obtain mercy. final, My lord vendicta dei and I shall se
this your commandment fulfilled unto the vttermoste. Judge. I pray you
heartily do so and take her with you.

NOw gentle audience where as I have with just cause condemned this mounster
by gods word perceiving no less then that she is the abho^minacion of
desolacion and the great babylon the mother of whoordome, and has set her
self in the sete where god should sit as saint John says in his reuelacyon
the xvii. Chaptre the waters says ye Angel unto saint John which you saweste,
where the whore sytteth are people and folk and nations and though and in that
seat should the living god sit, which is in men's conscience and I perseiue yt
she has taken the honor unto her self, which should be due only unto the
lord I can do no leasse of conscience but: Judge her a thief which robithe god
of his honor not only this could satisfye her wicked desire, but she has
caussed the people with her doctrine to beleaue that she was the living god,
and a mediator betwixt the rather of heaven and them to pacifye his wrath,
where as sayncte paul says in the ix, to the hebrews that yt is christ that
pacifieth his fathers wrath and not that he is entered in to holy places that
are made with hands which are but similituds of true things but he is entered
into very heaven for to apere now i^ ye sight of god for us not so offere him
self often as this woman does, making the people to believe that she offerith
him up every day a sacrifis for the quick and the dead to take away sin where
as saint paul says in the vii. To the hebrews that he ded yt once for all
when he offerid up him self, and in the.ix. Chaptre folowinge says saint
Paul with ought shedi^g of blood there is no remission of sin by the which by
her doctrine, she crucifyeth christ every day a new, and not only in her
doctrine but also she persecuteth him a fresh in his faithful members if they
would not beleaue her false doctrine, and tak her to be their god by the which
she is a traitor and murderer and yt thing yt is left unto us for a memorial of
the death of christ and a worthy sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ she says it is god hi^ self the bread and wine I mean two false goods
causynge the people to do homage and worship unto them, where as christ bad them
eat it and drink yt, and not to worship yt to make there of a god. I could
bring In diverse points of Scripture to prove the^ false gods and plain
Idolatrye to worship them, but I differ yt unto the neaxt time, desyringe all
christen men to beware of this wicked sprite for she is the rosse coloread
whore that saint John spoke of In his reuylacio^s the xvii. chap which is full
of blaspheme, that the kings and i^ habiters of ye earth have drunk of ye wine
of her fornicacio^ but fear not says sayncte John in his ii, Chapter for ye
shall have tribulacion and this wicked sprit the devil shall cast you in to
presone but be faithful says christ unto the death and I will give you a
crown of everlasting life which life shall endure for ever be fervent
therefore my Brethren and repent says saint Johan in the third of his
reuelacion be hold says Christ I stond at the door and knocked if any man
hear my voice and open the door. I will come in unto him and will suppe with
him and he with me and saying he has like a merciful father promised us this
merciful promise, let us therefore repent and be feruente to open the door
our hearts I mean which is locked up in unbelieve that he may enter in and
there is no dout then but that he will suppe with us and we with him unto the
which supper I beseech the lord bring us all unto, Amen.

Finis.
You subictes of baal say what ye will kick spurn and wise, as much as you may
make as many Gods as you can it shall not skyll yt a^ lenth with out dowght
you shall what your play.
A true proverb, and spoken may it be.

B^ the false subtle antechrist moth^r mess.

The nyer the Church the further from God.

(quod). W. P.

A fawt escaped in the first leaf the first page every tree Mathewe the.vi.
Read Mathewe vii

ImPrYnted
AT LONDON BY VVYLLYam Hill, And Wyllaym Seres. Dwelling in Paul's Church yeard
At the sign of the grene Hill* ANNO. M. D. XLVIII. The.xvii. day of decembre.
Cum Gratia et Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum


