THE COMMVNICANTS DUTY.

SET FORTH IN EIGHT Sermons, preached at Kings-Lynne in Norfolk.

By THOMAS PURCHASE, Master of Arts.

2 CHRONICLES. 35. verse 6. Sanctify your selves, and prepare your brethren, that
they may do according to the Word of the Lord. LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON,
for Walter Edmonds, dwelling at the sign of the Crown within Lud-gate. 1639.

To The Right Worshipful and his worthy friends, Mr. Thomas Milner, Major; Mr.
Thomas Grimell, Alderman, Mr. Ioshuo Green Alderman, with all the Society of
that ancient Incorporation of Kings Lynne. Grace and Peace, etc.
Right Worshipful.
THat of Artaxexres King of Persia, was never too highly set and prised, which
said; that it was of no less kingly bounty and humanity, to accept of little
things, then to give great: I have received great things from you, and now what
have I to offer unto you, but even these poor Meditations? which if it shall
please you to accept, you shall more enrich and fill my desire by this
receaving, then by giving. For to an honest mind it is sweeter to be regarded,
then rewarded, and what greater reward can be given unto him that striveth to
be thankful, then to find himself accepted in that, in which he seeks
most to please? Accept them I pray you favorably, and censure them charitably:
for my part I intend especially (though I be of all men most unworthy) to
further Christ's Kingdom, which if it may, I have my desire: howsoever I shall
leave it to the blessing of God, and your worthy Patronage. Now the God of all
consolation, according to the riches of his mercy, bless you and yours with
all external, internal, and eternal blessings of his spirit, that all your
actions may be prosperous, your troubles few, your comforts many, your life
long, your death blessed, your elections sure, and yur salvations certain.
Amen.

Yours in the Lord JESUS. Tho. Purchase.

To The Reader.
CHristian Reader, you have in the eight Sermons the Communicants Duty set
forth at large; now for the help of their memories who desire to attain to a
particular and distinct knowledge of the heads delivered, I have collected the
sum of them out of the former Sermons, and here set them down by themselves,
they are truths which every Christian should endeavor to make his own: be
persuaded therefore to use a little diligence in these things, which are
matters of so great moment. First study them, to get a particular and distinct
knowledge of them, committing them to memory.

Secondly, be well grounded in the truth of them by infallible testimonies of
holy Scripture.

Thirdly, make that use of them in thy life, as God in his word directs thee,
that so thou may be happy as well in doing as in knowing.

Thou see what is thy task. Arise then, and be doing, and my prayers shall
be, that the Lord would be with thee, that thou may increase in wisdom, and
abound in the mysteries of godliness, and in all holiness.

Thine in Christ Jesus. Tho. Purchase.

The First SERMON.
1 Corinthians 11. CHAP. 28. VERSE. But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
THE blessed Apostle St. Paul, perceiving what was in the Corinthians. In this
Chapter reproves them very sharply, as may be read from the beginning of it,
unto the 17 verse. In the verses following he insistes upon the Doctrine of the
Sacrament, and their carelesnes in not preparing of themselves to come unto it.
This corruption of theirs he

First, propoundes.

Secondly, confutes.

In the propounding of it, he taxes them with two vices.

First, want of Charity, in the 18 verse. 1 Corin. 11. 18.
When you come together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among
you, and I partly believe it. There were divisions among them even then, when
they were to aproach unto the table of the Lord: this did he hear, and partly
believe.

Secondly, he taxes them not only for the want of Charity, but also of
Sobriety and Temperance, in the 21 verse. in eating, says he, every one takes
before other his own Supper: and one is hungry, and another is drunken 1 Cor.
11 21.
.

Now the blessed Apostle having propounded their vices, he comes in the second
place to confute them, and in this he shows a dislike of their curses,
saying, Have ye not houses to eat, and to drink in? or despise ye the
Church of God, and shame them that have not? what shall I say to you? shall I
praise you in this? I praise you not 1 Cor 11 22.
.

Now in his confuting, he takes an occasion to put them in mind of the first
institution of the Lords Supper.

I have received, says he, of the Lord that which also, I delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took Bread: 1
Cor. 11. 23.
, And here he sets down two things.

First, what the Sacrament is.

1 In the substantial parts of it. 2 In the simple actions. 3 In the relative
actions. 4 What the end is 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25, 26.
.
Secondly, In the second place he sets down what is to be done before they
come to the Table of the Lord, they must examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup. So that we may now see, who they be, that are to be admitted to
the Table of the Lord, even those who after good examination and trial, have
found themselves fit.

In the words there is a double injunction to a double duty.

First, touching examination.

Secondly, touching our participation after examination.

In the first injunction there is.

First, the duty that is enjoined, Examination.

Secondly, the party nominated, A man. Let a man says the Text examine.

A man, this notes the fitnes, a man that has discretion.

A man's self, this the propriety of the action.

In the second injunction for the matter of participation, So let him eat of
that Bread, and drink of that Cup, you have three things.

First, the note of dependency, in the word, so.

Secondly, the actions, Eating and Drinking.

The words being divided, let us come to the sense and meaning of them, Let us
see.

First, what it is to examine

Secondly, why it is said let a man examine.

Thirdly, why a man's self.

Fourthly, why so let him eat, and so let him drink.

Quaest. What it is to examine.

Resp. The word in the original is (...), and it is sometimes taken in the
best sense, for a good trial, sometimes in the worst sense, for a bad trial.

First, when in the worst sense it is used for a bad trial, it is in our
English tongue properly called tempting. Now Tempting is an using of an evil
means to effect an evil end, that is to try if men will thereby be persuaded
to do that, that is evil. And thus was CHRIST led by the Spirit into the
Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, that is, to be tried by those means
he then used if happily he might be persuaded to sin, and do that, that
was evil.

Secondly, in a good sense it is a lawful trial, What it is to examine.
an using of a lawful means to a good purpose. So that to examine is nothing
but to use all lawful means to come to the true knowledge of our estate.

It is a diligent searching and trying of a man's self, whether he be fit to
come to the Table of the Lord, or no.
Quaest. Why is it said, a man, Let a man examine?

Res. It is said a man, to note.

First, that children are Why a man must examine.
not to be admitted unto Gods Table, a man, that is, a man that has
discretion and understanding, so that in the second place it notes.

Secondly, That mad men and fools are not to be admitted, without some
demonstration of that Hunger, Knowledge, and preparation thereunto, as may
sometimes though unusually fall out.

Thirdly, that unbaptised persons are not to be admitted, a man first entered
must he be into Gods Family, before he presume to sit at Gods Table.

Fourthly, lazy Christians, that is, all such who are either, utter
neglectors, or lazy practisers of this duty; these are not to be admitted,
without exhortation to reformation.

Quaest. Why it is said let a man examine himself.

Resp. It is said a man's self, Why a man must examine himself.
to let us see, that the true examiner is the self examiner: many are diligent
in examining others, and taxing them with their censures, who in the mean time
do utterly neglect themselves; they can soon espy the least mote that is in
their brothers eye, but will not see the beam that is in their own: seldom
do we look after the corruption of our own hearts, like her in the Poet, who
never went from home, but she put on her eyes, that she might see the faults
of others; but when she came home she put them off, that she might not see
her own. Many are like unto foolish men who run to quench their neighbors
house, when their own flames about their ears; whereas it concerns all to
say, what have I done? it is the Will of the Lord that every man examine
himself, not his neighbor; that office he reserves to himself, or his
public Ministers.

Now good reason is there why a man must examine himself.

First, because no man

Secondly, because every man must be saved Habbakuck, shall live by his Habba.
2. 4.
Faith g.

Thirdly, because that every one must answer for his own sins.

Quaest. Why is it said, so let him eat, and so let him drink.

Resp. This is added to Why he must eat and drink.
let us see that a man being prepared, by no means must forbear, he must
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. True it is that many vain things
are pretended, some pretend their weakness, and unworthiness. Can any man's
weakness, exempt him from that which GOD has ordained, as a means to
increase his strength? and is any man's unworthiness so great as God is not
worthy of his best service? True it is that no man of himself is able to come
to this Table: the Prodigal child confesses he is not worthy to be called his
Fathers son; the Centurion that he is not worthy that CHRIST should come under
his roof; John the Baptist the greatest that is borne of woman, was unworthy
to unloose the latchet of our Saviors shoes; yet all these were received and
approved of God. The Apostles were not worthy to suffer rebuke for the Name of
CHRIST; yet they rejoiced in this, that they were accounted worthy Acts 5. 41.
: let it be sufficient for us that we are accounted worthy, so that having
examined your selves, hear the advice which David gave Solomon 1 Chro. 22. 16.
, Up and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee.

The Text being divided and the words explained, two Meditations offer
themselves to our consideration.

Meditation. 1.

That whosoever would Conclusions or Meditations.
come as a worthy guest unto the table of the Lord, he must examine himself
before he come.

Meditation 2.

That the self examiner must be a receiver; it is not left indifferent for
him to come or not to come, but commanded, Let him eat of that Bread and
drink of that Cup.

Meditation 1.

That whosoever would The first Conclusion, or Meditation.
come as a worthy guest unto the Table of the Lord, he must examine himself
before he come. This is the Apostles injunction, and this is every man's duty.
The blessed Sacrament is for those who after good examination, and trial find
themselves fit. I would have Christians in examining and searching to imitate
men that search for hid treasures: they will search

1. Narrowly. How Christians mus search.
2. Laboriously. 3. Willingly. 4. Constantly. 5. They will use the help of
others.
Thus must every man do, that comes to the Table of the Lord.

First, He must search Narrowly, There are many secret corners, many turnings
in our hearts, many failings; these must all be found out.

Secondly, He must search Laboriously. The woman that lost the groat, what
pains took she to find it? she did light a candle, sweep the house, and
sought Luke 15. 8
diligently, till she found it. Thus must we do with our hearts never give
over till they have found all. Gather your selves together, yea gather your
selves 2 Zeph.
.

Thirdly, They must search Willingly; not like those who go about it, as if
they cared not whether they found or no, but go we must with a willing mind.

Fourthly, They will search Constantly, they will not give over till they have
found, so must we continue searching, for the heart is deceitful.

Fifthly, use we must the help of others. The woman in the Gospel, did light
a candle, swept the house Luke 15 8.
: Let us use all the helps that may be, as the light of the Word of the Lord,
the company of the Saints, John, a burning and a shining light. We may think
all is well, but these will tell us, as it was told Simon Magus, that we are in
the gall of bitterness. We shall find the blessed Apostle urging this 1 Cor.
11 31.
Judge your selves, and if we would be careful to judge our selves, the Lord
will not bring upon us such things, as he has brought upon those, who have
not examined themselves: he says, many for this cause are weak, and sickly
among you, and many sleep 2 Cor. 13. 5.
. The way to prevent these is to judge our selves, by examining ourselves, for
so says the Apostle, examine your selves, prove your selves. A wise man is
diligent to know the estate of the flocks, and will look well to the herds
Prove. 27. 23.
: a wise Christian will be as diligent to find out the estate of his soul;
he will search and try his ways Lament. 3. 40.
.

We may read how that a stranger to the commonwealth of Israel might not
eat of the holy things, in the time of the Law Lev. 22. 10.
: and surely a stranger to the life of grace, ought not to taste of the holy
things in the Sacrament, in the time of the Gospel.

The Lord was strict concerning them who were to appear before him, at Mount
Sinai, in so much that if the beast did but touch the Mountain, he must be
stoned to death Exodus 19. 13.
. If the Lord was thus strict concerning those, O what shall become of those,
who dare approach into Christ's presence, and come to his Table with beastly
affections! shall not the y be liable to judgment? if the Chamber was trimmed,
wherein the Passe-over was celebrated, and the Supper instituted Mark. 14 15.
, how should the Chambers of our Souls be cleansed from profaneness, and
adorned with grace? The Disciples feet were washed before they did eat, and
shall not our hearts? If the Lord did thus expostulate with a wicked man, for
taking his Word into his mouth, saying, What have thou to do to take my Word
into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50. 16.
will he not be angry with those, who take his body and blood into their
polluted mouths?

3. Good reason there is why we must examine Reasons for examination.
our selves before we come.

First, because we are Pro 23. 1.
, more careful ought we to be of coming unto the Table of the Lord.

Secondly, because God Math. 22 11, 12.
; he says not, as S. Crysost. well observed, how satest thou down? but
howcommest thou? so that it must be looked unto beforehand, according to that
of Solomon, look to thy foot when thou entrest into the House of the Lord
Eccle. 5. 1.
.

Thirdly, because the curse

Fourthly, because Cor. 11. 18.
. O thae there were in us such hearts to fear God and do what he commands!
then should it be well with us, and with ours for ever Deuteronomy 5. 29.
.

Fifthly, if we come without examination, we come unworthily, and so are
Guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord JESUS 1 Cor. 11 27.
. To be guilty of death, or the shedding of the blood of an innocent man is a
grievous sin, therefore David when he had killed Vriah prayed, deliver me
from blood-guiltinesse, O Lord Psalm. 51. 14.
. O then what is it to be guilty of the Blood of the Son of God?

Sixthly, because whosoever come without examination, Eat and drink damnation
to themselves, not discerning the Lords Body 1 Cor. 11 29.
.

Now it is a fearful thing to be damned, to have no communion with God, no
participation in any of the blessings of God 2 Thessalonians 1. 9.
.

Now for application.

If it be so, that whosoever would come worthily, must come preparedly; then
conclude we may that the estate of many is lamentable, and their condition
miserable: many adventure to come without preparation, and what is this, but to
eat condemnation to themselves?

That all men are bound to know the Word of God and to be skillfull in the
Scriptures; that thereby they may be made able to try their hearts, and to
examine themselves Ioh 5* 29
: especially there is required of us knowledge in the doctrine of the Law; not
only to be able, like children, to rehearse the words, but to know the end and
meaning of them Romans 3. 20.
.

That many are debarred Who are debarred from the Table of the Lord.
of the Lord.

1. Children, Infants, who understand not what the Spirit speaks, what God
the Father offers, what the Son performs, what Faith receives, what it is
to eat spiritually, and to be nourished by him effectually.

2. All Naturalls, and mad men so continuing.

3. All such as are come to years, and have the common use of natural gifts,
yet if they neither have the knowledge of God nor of themselves, nor the
knowledge of the doctrine of the Sacrament, these are not to be admitted.

4. All such as have knowledge, yet if they remain profane, ungodly, and
malicious, such are not to be admitted, until exhorted, and persuaded to
amendment.

5. All such are excluded who are without God in the world, all Atheists,
Infidels, Turks.

That all must examine. eat or drink, walk or talk, sleep, something is
done, and shall we do nothing before we receive? hear what is said in the
Scripture, kill the Passe-over, and sanctify your selves, and prepare your
brethren, that they may do according to the Word of the Lord 2 Chro. 35. 6.
. Commune with your own heart, says the Prophet David Psalm. 4. 4.
. Let the profit that will come unto you, move you to examine. Let the

First, Comfort. Secondly, Fruit. Thirdly, Benefit.
The Comfort is great, the Fruit that is excellent, the benefit unspeakeable;
they receive Christ, remission of sins, assurance of eternal life: and if
the profit will not move you, let the danger terrify you, least ye be guilty
of the body, and blood of Christ 1 Corin. 11. 27, 29.
.

Quest. Seeing then that examination is so necessary, what is it that every man
must examine himself of?

Answ. There are five What must be examin^d*
things every Receiver must examine himself of.

First, Knowledge. Secondly, Faith. Thirdly, Repentance. Fourthly, Obedience.
Fifthly, Love.
1. The first thing the Receiver must examine himself of, is of his knowledge.

Now knowledge to be examined is twofold.

First, General knowledge.

Secondly, Special knowledge.

The General knowledge to be examined is threefold.

First, Concerning God.

Secondly, Concerning our selves.

Thirdly, Concerning the Covenant of grace.

The first general knowledge to be examined, is concerning God. And this
knowledge is either

First, Concerning Gods nature, or,

Secondly, Concerning Gods works.

First he must examine his knowledge concerning the nature of God, and that thus.

First, whether he know that God is.

Secondly, Whether he know that this God is a God glorious in his Nature.

Thirdly, Whether he know that this God, glorious in Nature, be three in
persons.

Fourthly, That this glorious God, three in Persons, is but one in Essence.

Our first knowledge to be examined is this, whether we know that God is,
that there is a God.
This must be known Heb. 11. 6
, God is.
there is abundance of Atheisin in the world. The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God Ps. 14. 1.
. Many that deny the providence of God, they say that he is kept up in Heaven,
and beholds not the things done here below, as not worthy enough for him; they
say, he is God, but not quoad nos, they say, he does not see, neither does the
God of Jacob regard; but he that made the eye, shall not he see, says the
Psalmist? he that made the ear, shall not he hear Psalm. 94. 7, 8, 9.
? Some deny God in their practice, though they know that God is, yet in their
lives they are Atheists; they do not the will of God, they love not God, nor
fear God, nor call upon his name, whereas this knowledge is required.

The second knowledge to be examined concerning God, is concerning Gods Nature.
Whether we know that God is glorious in it; that he is so there is no question
to be made; but that all men know this, cannot be affirmed. Good reason
therefore have all to examine themselves, whether they know that God is.

First, Incorporeall, that he is beyond all the perfection of bodily things,
that he is a Spirit Ioh. 4. 24.
.

Secondly, Eternal, a God without any beginning: he is a God that has his
Being from himself, therefore must needs have it from everlasting; he is a
God that was never without this being; before the Mountains were made, and
before thou had formed the earth, and the world, even from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art our God Psa. 90 1. Revel. 1. 8 Heb. 8 13.
.

Thirdly, Incomprehensible, that he is a God infinitely immense, and
incomprehensible: the heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to
contain him 1 Kin. 8. 27.
. I fill heaven, and earth, says the Lord Iere. 23. 24.
.

Fourthly, Immutable. A God that is without shadow of change, he is Jehovah,
and therefore cannot be mutable Iam. 1 17
.

Fifthly, Omnipotent, so as nothing is impossible to him Ps. 115. 3.
, that there is no created power that can hinder God from working: the nations
they are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the
balance, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing, all nations before him
are as nothing, they are counted unto him less than nothing Is. 40. 15. 16. 17.
.

Sixthly, Omniscient, a God that knows all things universally, and perfectly,
a God whose eyes are in every place Pro. 15. 3.
.

That he is All-sufficient, Immortal, that he is holy, and most merciful Io.
26. 6 7, 8 9.
. 1 Timothy 1. 7 Psalm. 5. 4. Exodus 39. 6, 7.


The end of the first Sermon.
The Second SERMON.
1 COR. 11. 18. Let a man examine himself, etc.
THE first general knowledge to be examined, you heard, was concerning God,
whether we now.

First, That God is, that there is a God.

Secondly, That this God is most glorious in his nature; Incorporeall,
Eternal, Incomprehensible, Omnipotent, Omniscient, All-sufficient, Immortal,
Holy, Merciful.

Now this knowledge is necessary, if we did but consider the Fruits of it. For
whosoever thus knows God.

First, He will always adore, and fear this great, and glorious Majesty Romans
11. 33. 36.
.

Secondly, He will set his heart and affections upon him, he will love him with
all his soul, and all his might Deuteronomy. 30 6.
.

Thirdly, He will serve him with all possible affection, put on he will all
the beauties of the best holiness he can get, when he comes into his presence
Joh. 4. 24
.

Fourthly, He will hate sin, and strive all possible imitation of his
holiness 1 Peter. 1 15, 16.
.

Fifthly, It will make him always remember him Genesis 17. 1.
.

Sixthly, He will fear no evil, nor enemy; for he knows that GOD knows
them, and what it is they intend: it is the Lord that said, be strong and of a
good courage, be not afraid: for the Lord thy God is with thee wheresoever
thou go, says the Omniscient God to Joshua Josh. 1-9. 43. Isa. 3. 1.
,

Now the third thing to be examined concerning God is, whether we know that
he is three in persons. Certain it is that he is distinguished into three
persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

But many are ignorant God is three in Persons.
of this, therefore it concerns receivers to examine.

First, Whether they know that there is more than one Person, God said let us
make man Genesis 1. 26.
.

Secondly, Whether they know that the Persons are three in number, There are
three that bear record in heaven, and these three are one John 5. 7
.

Whosoever knows this, whenever he comes to worship God, he will make
conscience of it, that he rob not any of the Persons of their glory.

The last thing to be examined concerning God God is one in essence.
is, whether we know that he is one in essence. Though there be but one God,
yet such is the ambition of man as that he affects the honor that is due unto
God, and so makes more Gods: such was that ambition of Herod when he was
delighted with that cry of the people, the voice of God, and not of man Acts.
12. 22.
. Thus it is with man naturally that he seeks himself, and his own honor,
and so forgets to give honor, to whom honor is due Josh. 7. 18.
.

Whosoever has this knowledge, he will.

First, Love the Lord alone, and love him above all; and this he will show by
serving him only, for he is Lord only, and he must be loved with all our
heart, and withal our soul, and all our might Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 5.
.

Secondly, He will repent, that ever he relied upon any other, then upon him
Deuteronomy. 32 37, 38, 39.
.

Thirdly, He will use but one Mediator to him, for there is one God, and one
Mediator, between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus.

Thus much concerning the examination of our knowledge of the nature of God:
now every receiver must examine his knowledge concerning the Works of God. For
as he is marveilously glorious in his nature, so is he also great in his
Works.

Now the knowledge is.

First, Concerning Gods Creation.

Secondly, Gods providence.

For the Creation, the knowledge to be examined is sixe-fould.

First, Concerning the Worlds beginning.

Secondly, Concerning the Worlds Maker.

Thirdly, Concerning the matter whereof all was made.

Fourthly, All made by his Word only.

Fifthly, All were made good.

Sixthly, All were made freely, and not of necessity.

First, Our knowledge The World had a beginning.
to be examined is concerning the beginning of the World. Sure it is,

That the World had a beginning.
There was a time when the World was not; it was not etereall Genesis 1. 1.
, In the beginning God created the Heavens and the earth. If it had a
beginning, then it could not be from eternity: it is the saying of the Apostle,
that he chose us in him, before the foundation of the World. Ephesians. 1. 4.


Thus knowledge will bring us to another and that is, that the World shall have
an end. The Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat, the earth and the Works that are therein shall be
burnt up, all these things shall be dissolved Pet. 2 3. 10, 11.
. And this confirms the former, for quicquid finem habet, id etiam aliquo
tempore initium habuisse constat, whatsoever has an end, that also sometime
had a beginning.

The second thing to be examined is whether we know that the World and all
things therein was made by God made the World.
God.

God made the World 1 Genesis 1.
. In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. God made the World,
and all things that are therein Act. 17. 24
. By him were all things created, which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth
Col. 1. 16
.

Now this brings us to to the knowledge of many things.

First, That all things All things had one principle.
had one principle, one cause, the Lord. To have two eternal positive beings,
two principles, a good and a bad; the good to make light, the bad darkness;
the good health, the bad sickness, this is absured. The Scripture tells us, it
is GOD that made the World and all things therein: and this must be known that
although GOD made the World, yet God made not the evil that are in the World;
he that planteth a Tree, planteth not a Worm in the Tree, but there it
breeds.

God created the World, there was no death, no sickness; these came by the
sins of men, and Angels. He that made man, Ab Angelo usque ad vermiculum S.
Aug.
made him after his own Image, but man has sought out many inventions Eccl.
7* 31.
. Further God made all things that has positive beings; sin has not, being
the absence of that good, that should be in the soul.

Secondly, That God God only can Create.
only can create. It is beyond the power of any Creature, it is a work of an
infinite power, to bring light out of darkness, man out of the dust: and who
can do this, but the Lord?

Thirdly, This will Creation must be considered.
cause us to spend some time in consideration of the Creatures, who have such a
Maker: for the eternal power, and invisible things of God, are seen by the
Creation of the World Romans 1. 20.
.

Fourthly, This will stir us up to praise the Lord: as David, I will praise
the Lord, for I am wonderfully, and fearfully made Psalm. 139 14.
.

The next thing to be known is, that all were made of nothing.
They were not made of things, which did appear Heb. 11. 3. All things were
made of nothing.
know we must that God made them of nothing, no matter praeexistent; creation
has nothing for its matter, in this it differs from natural generation, which
cannot bring a thing out of nothing.

Now this will teach us,

First, To admire the power, and goodness of God, who is able to draw such an
excellent frame out of nothing.

Secondly, To trust unto him, he can work without means, he can do
whatsoever he will.

The next thing is, that All were made by his Word.
all these were made by his Word only.
He spoke and it was created; he said let it be, and it was Psalm. 33. 6.
. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by
the breath of his mouth.

In the fifth place, we must All things were made good.
know, that all things in their Creation were made good.
God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good Genesis 31.
. By this we are brought.

First, To consider of the misery that sin has brought upon the Work of
God, especially upon man: all things were made valde bona, but what has sin
done?

Secondly, To know that the Creatures, that are now hurtful unto man, were not
so by Creation, but by the fall of man.

Thirdly, That whatsoever befalls us, we must call to rememberance our sins.

The sixth principle to be examined God made all things freely.
is Gods making of all things freely, not out of necessity Psa. 115. 3.
.
I all things were made successively, and not in a moment; In six days the
Lord made Heaven and earth Ex. 20. 11.
. All things were not made at once, but one after another. This knowledge will
bring us to the consideration of.

First, The glorious attribute of God, his Wisdom; in the Creation God began
with things that were least perfect, as Elements, light, beasts.

Secondly, This will teach us to proceed from that, that is good unto better,
till we come to be perfect men in Christ,

Thirdly, That God did not create any thing that was needful for others,
before he had made things to sustain them: before man, all things for man.

Forthly, If God did thus for us before we were, before we had a being, that
he will not now forsake us, being made; he will now have a special care of us.

Thus much for the knowledge of Gods first Work, the Work of Creation. The
second is concerning the providence of God, and here our knowledge to be
examined is concerning.

First, Gods knowing and noting of all things.

Secondly, God upholding and governing them.

Thirdly, Gods providence reaching to all of them.

Fourthly, Gods special care and respect of man.

Fifthly, That the good or evil, that befalls man, is not without the
providence of the God of man.

First our knowledge to be God knows and takes notice of all things.
examined, is concerning Gods knowing and noting of all things.
That God, that made all things, still knows and takes notice of all things
that he made; the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good Prove. 15 3.
. Neither is there any Creature which is not manifest in his sight, all things
are naked and open unto his eyes with whom we have to do Heb. 4 13.
.

The second thing to be examined God upholds, govern^, and disposes of the
world.
is, Gods upholding, and governing of all things.
This must be known, that God upholds, governes and disposes of the World, so
as all things in the World continue through him. They continue even unto this
day by thine ordinances, for all are thy servants, says the Psalmist Ps. 119.
9. 1.
, He gives life, and breath, and all things, for in him we live, we move, and
have our being Act. 17. 25. 28.
.

The third principle to be examined is, of Gods Gods providence reaches to all
things smalest things.
providence reaching to all of these.
The providence of God reaches to all things, even the smallest things are
governed and upheld by him. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing? and one
of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father, says the LORD Math.
10 29, 30.
, Yea and all the hairs of your Head are numbered. He it is that covers the
heavens with Clouds, and prepares rain for the Earth, and makes the grass
to grow upon the Mountains. He gives Beasts their food, and to the young
Ravens that cry. He gives Snow like Wool and scatters the hoary frost like
ashes; he casts forth his Ice like morsells, who can abide the cold thereof?
he sends his Word and melts them, he causes the Wind to blow, and the
Waters, flow Psa. 147 8, 9, 16, 17.
.

The next principle to be examined Of all Creatures God has most care of man.
is concerning Gods care and respect of man.
Of all the Creatures that God made, he has most care, and respect of man: his
delights are with the children of men Pro 8. 31
. And here our knowledge to be examined is threefold.

First, Concerning Gods care in providing great things for man.

Secondly, His care in watching over him, and his.

Thirdly, His care in disposing, and ordering of all things, all Acts for his
good.

First, we must examine our knowledge concerning Gods care in providing for
man.
The God of Heaven, provides good and great things for man. The good
Samaritaine is said to have compassion on the wounded man, and went to him, and
bound up his wounds; pouring in Wine and Oil, and set him on his own beast,
and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him; and when he departed he
took out two pence, and gave them to the Host, and said unto him, take care of
him Luke 10 33, 34, 35.
.

The Lord JESUS CHRIST under the person of the Samaritaine, brings the hurt
and wounded man, which is the sinner, into the Inn, which is the Church, where
he delivers to the Host, which is the Angel or Minister of the Church those
two pence of his word and Sacraments, giving him charge of him till he come
again; which charge must be continued, till his second coming.

Now the care of God in providing is either,

First, Temporal, for the outward man.

Secondly, Spiritual, for the inward man.

First his care temporal for God provideth for our body.
the outward man, this must be known.
He provides for the bodies of men, Children, says he, have ye any meat?
they said no, and he said cast out the Net on the right side of the Ship;
and ye shall find; they did so, and they were not able to draw it up for the
multitude of Fishes. Johh 21. 5, 6.
.

A Raven shall bring Elias meat, Peter shall not want money to pay tribute,
he must cast forth and take a Fish with money. God provids for our souls.


Secondly, his care for the inward man, the soul; God provides for that.

First, He is a royal God a royal Bridegroom.
Bridegroom, that provids the best apparel for his Spouse: I clothed thee
with broidred work, and shod thee with badgers skin, and I girded thee about
with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk, I decked thee with ornaments,
and put bracelets upon thine hands, and a chain on thy neck, and I put a
Jewel on thy forehead, and eare-rings in thy ears, and a beautiful Crown
upon thy head; thou wast decked with gould and silver. Eze. 16. 10, 11, 12
? This is a metaphor expressing the graces, wherewith the Lord JESUS adorneth
the soul of his people.

Secondly, He is a royal Feast-maker, making great and choice provision God a
royal Feast-maker.
to set before his guests. He shall make a feast of fat things, a feast of
wines on the the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees well
refined Isa. 25. 6.
.

Thirdly, He is a Royal God a royal General.
General, who provides much for his army, the Lord has provided, and laid in
much for his; his Word, his Sacraments, Himself; I they have armor also, the
armor of God Ephesians. 6. 14. 15, 16, 17.
, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit, the Breast Plate of
Righteousness; the Shield of Faith. He makes for them provision

First, Of comforts.

Secondly, Of graces.

First, Of comforts. The Lambs (the young Christians) he will put them into
Provision of comforts.
his bosom, those that are with young (that have breeding fits) he will gently
lead them q: Isa. 41. 1
He is sent to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty unto the
Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; and for those
that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness Isa 62. 1, 2 3.
Provision of graces. Cleansing.
.

Secondly of graces.

First, Art thou defiled with sin? he has provided cleansing grace.

Secondly, Art thou Healing.
wounded? he has provided healing grace.

Thirdly, Art thou dead in trespasses and sins? he Quickening.
has provided quickening grace: himself died that we might live.

Fourthly, Art thou in a Directing. ^.
wilderness not knowing what path to take? he has directing grace.

Fifthly, Art thou in the Protecting.
midst of enemies? he has protecting grace for thee.

Sixthly, Art thou at Saving grace.
deaths door? he has provided also saving grace.

Secondly, our knowledge must be examined concerning Gods watching over us and
ours.
The God of Heaven watches over, and preserves the sons of men, He that
keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps: God it is that preserves us.

First, From dangers, God preserves from dangers:
that they come not, no evil shall happen unto thee, nor plague come nigh thy
dwelling Psalm. 91. 9. 10.
: He it is preserved David from the violent hands of Saul.

Secondly, In dangers, In dangers.
though they come, yet they shall not ruin us: he it is says Job, that shall
deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee. In
famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the
sword Job 5. 19. 20. 21. 22.
. He it was that provided for the Widow of Sarepta, he preserved the three
Worthies, that preserved Daniell in the den, and it is he that has
preserved the Church from Abel unto this day.

Thirdly, By dangers; By dangers.
though they come, and prevail, yet all shall be for our good: what can we
conceive to be more dangerous than to be swallowed up of a Whale? yet Jonas by
that was preserved.

Now as God watches God watches over us, and ours.
over us, so also over ours, for he himself says, I am thy God, and the God
of thy seed.

As Gods care is seen in providing good things for God orders, and disposes
all things and acts for man's good.
man, in watching over man; so also God is careful to order and dispose of all
things for man's good: The God of Heaven orders and disposes of all things, and
all acts for man's good.

First, All things are ordered, so says the Apostle, all things shall work
together All things.
for the good of those that love the Lord Romans 8. 28.
.

First, Natural things Natural things.
shall work for man's good: as the reflection of the Sunbeames on the water,
what more natural? yet the Moabites rising early in the morning, and the Sun
shining upon the water, they saw the water on the other side as red as blood,
and they said it is blood, the Kings are surely slain, and they have smitten
one another; now therefore Moab to the spoil, and they came to the camp of the
Israelites, and they arose and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before
them 2 Kings 3. 22, 23, 24. Artificial things.
.

Secondly, Things artificial, those shall work for their good, witness those
Trumpets and Lamps, they blew the Trumpets, and held Judge. 7. 20, 21.
the lamps in their left hand, and the host ran, and cried, and fled.

Thirdly, Things necessary, Necessary things.
as the fire, the sea; the same fire that burned those that took up Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego hurt not them Dan 3. 22, 23, 27.
: the same sea that drowned Pharaoh, made a passage for the Israelites.

Fourthly, things contingent; Things contingent.
that Pharaohs daughter should go out to wash her self in a river, that she
should discern a Child in the bulrushes, that she should put it to nurse, and
that the nurse should be the mother, and that she should adopt it for her
son, what more contingent than all these? yet God did all.

Fifthly, Real things, Real things
they shall work for their good also.

Sixthly, Imaginary Imaginary things.
things, The Lord made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of Chariots,
and a noise of Horses, even the noise of a great host, and they said, they of
Israel has hired against us the Kings of the Hittites, and the Kings of the
Egyptians to come upon us, wherefore they arose and fled 2 King 7. 6. 7.
. An imagination, for there was no such thing as an army.

Now, as it is required God disposes of all acts for man's good.
that we know, how that God that made man, disposes of all things for man's
good, so also that he disposes of all acts also, acts of all sorts; Acts
voluntary, acts in voluntary, gracious acts, sinful acts. The selling of
Joseph into Egypt was a most sinful act, yet it did good; for he was sent
thither to preserve life Genesis 45. 5. 6. 7. 8.
. The Jews envied Christ, Judas betrayed him, Pilate condemned him, sinful
acts; they procured his death, his death the salvation of the world. So good is
God, as that he would not suffer evil, if that he could not work good out
of evil when he would.

The next thing to be examined, is, whether we know that whatsoever befalls
man, it is not without the providence of God.
Shall there be any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it Amos 3. 6
.

The last thing to be known is.
That the God of Heaven that made man, does whatsoever God does whatsoever he
will.
pleases him in heaven and earth Ps. 115. 3.
.

Whosoever has this knowledge of Gods providence, it will so work with him,
as that he will.

First, Cast all his care upon God.

Secondly, Patiently take whatsoever comes from God.

Thirdly, Seek all good things at the hands of God.

Fourthly, Acknowledge all good to come from the hands of God.

Fifthly, Observe the Works of God, and make known the deeds of God Psalm.
106. 1, 2. 5.
.

Sixthly, For ever be afraid to offend God, and so to come before to the Table
of God.

Thus much for the first general knowledge to be examined, which is
concerning God, what he is in his Nature, what he is in his Works; in his Work
of Creation, and his Work of providence.

The second general knowledge we are to examine our selves of, is concerning
our selves, but before we come to this examination, let us examine our
knowledge concerning,

First, The Rule of our knowledge.

Secondly, The means of our knowledge.

Thirdly, The motives unto knowledge.

First for the Rule of our The Rule of knowledge is the Word.
knowledge, this must be known.
And this is the revealed Will of God taught us in his Word Math. 11 27.
, for as the Wisdom of man, where there are dangerous ways, takes a course
for the safeguard of things: so the Lord our God considering what we might run
into, has as it were raled himself in, least we should err, he has given
us a Rule to direct us.

If it were a humane Rule, it should stand in need of humane commendation; but
it is a divine Rule, and therefore brings Infallible.
commendation with it. It is a Rule.

First, Infallible. Heaven and earth, says our blessed Savior, shall pass
away, but my Word shall not pass away Math 24. 35. Unchangeable.
.

Secondly, Unchangeable: the books that were Scripture, are Scripture still,
and shall be Gal. 1. 8.
.

Thirdly, Undoubted. Undoubted
It is a known Word, and a true; this the Children of God know John 10 27.
, the Popes whistle cannot call them away. Now the Word being such a Rule that
we may profit by it,

First, Let us labor for skill, to use it.

Secondly, Let us have it always at hand, in our hearts, in our houses Deuteronomy. 6
6.
.

Thirdly, Let us admit of nothing unless it be tried by this Rule, prove all
things, says the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 5 21.
. we must search the Scriptures daily Acts 17. 11.
.

The End of the second SERMON.
The Third SERMON.
1 Corinthians 11. CHAP. 28. VERSE. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
WE have heard how necessary it is that we examine our knowledge concerning
God, before we come to the Table of the Lord; the Rules, the Means, the
Motives more propounded. The first we have finished, now for the second, the
Means of knowledge. The means of knowledge.
Now the means to come to this true knowledge of God, is

First, Reading and meditating of the Word of God in private.

Secondly, Diligent hearing of the Word publicly preached and read.

Thirdly, Conference.

Fourthly, Prayer.

The first means to be used that we may come to the knowledge of God, is
Reading and Meditating of the word in private.
Reading the Word, an Gods word must be read.
excellent means for knowledge.

This is the Rule of a Christians knowledge, therefore must needs be a means:
true it is that there are many lets, and impediments, that hinder us, as

First, The Devil.

Secondly, The Papists.

Thirdly, Parents who will not teach it their children; hence it is that many
children have so often said, if my Parents had thought it so necessary, they
would have made us acquainted with it.

Fourthly, Spenders of time in vain books more than Scripture.

Fifthly, Evil company; many though they can read yet they suffer evil
comapny to draw them from it.

But many will say,

Ob. We cannot read.

Ans. Thou may get others to read unto thee: he that is blind will have
another to lead him, he that is lame will have a crutch to help him.

Ob. I was neglected when I was young, now I am old, and it is too late.

Ans. Though thy Parents or others neglected thee, thou must not therefore
neglect thy self, and thou art not so old but thou may begin to learn.

Ob. Many can read, and will not.

Answ. True it is, too many, therefore for such I will propound two things.

First, The matter of the Scriptures, heavenly mysteries.

Secondly, the Author of the Scriptures, the Lord himself, who is blessed for
evermore, he that is the fountain of all knowledge.

Ob. We are great, and have many employments, and have no time to spare.

Answ. Was not David great, a King? yet did he spend much time in the
Scriptures, Thy law is my delight, it is my meditation continually. Theodosius
the Emperor could not take his fill of these in the day, but when all were
gone from him he would have his candle burning, and reading the Word; and
though thou have many employments, thou may spare some time to read.

Ob. Many do read the Scriptures often, and yet they know not God as they
should.

Answ. True, they do so, and the fault is in themselves; they read not, as
they should read.

Quest. Where is the fault?

Answ. They read not wisely.

Quest. What must be done that we may read wisely? We must read wisely


Answ. To wise reading three things is required,

First, Reverence.

Secondly, Order.

Thirdly, Judgment.

First, there is required Reverence, and that because 1 Reverence


First, of the matter, heavenly indeed.

Secondly, of the Author, the most glorious God.

Secondly, there is required Order, and Method, 2 Order.
because of the profit.

Whatsoever book we take in hand, we must begin at the beginning of it, and
continue until we come to the end of it: so shall we carry the sum and
drift before us; again, we must begin with the easiest, and plainest books
first.

Thirdly, Judgment and 3 Judgment
discretion is required to wise reading, and that in respect,

First, Of the time.

All time is not to be 1 Time for Reading.
spent this way, we have callings, and these must be followed; yet they that
fear the Lord, they will so divide the time, as that once a day at least they
will read the Word of God.

Secondly, of the sense 2 Sense and meaning.
and meaning, that so the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, may the better
be understood.

Thirdly, of the end and 3 The end of reading.
use of reading: this will cause us to make the best use of our reading, even
turn reading into working.

The second means to bring us to the knowledge of God, is the We must hear
the word preached.
Word publicly preached, the hearing of it; for this end the Lord himself
ordained it.
Now the Devil strives to keep men off this way as the other, he knows that
this brings ruin to his Kingdom. Hence it is, that so many cry out against
preaching; the Devil would not have this weapon to fight against him: but for
all the barking of the enemy, the Ministers of God must cry aloud, they must
not spare, they must lift up their voice like a trumpet Isa. 1. 85.
; Preach we must, be instant in season, and out of season 2 Timothy 4. 1.
.

Quest. Do all that hear Sermons know God as they ought?

Answ. They do not, and the fault is not in the word, We must hear wisely
but in them that hear the word, they hear not wisely.

Quest. What must we do to hear wisely?

Answ. Two things must be looked unto.

First, Something before we hear.

Secondly, Something when we are hearing.

First, Something must We must prepare before we hear.
be done before we hear; now this is preparation, and this consists

First, In removing lets, and impediments that hinder from hearing.

Secondly, In using helps and means that may further us.

It concerns every man Lets to be removed.
that would hear as he ought, to remove the lets that hinder from hearing, as,

First, Intemperance in eating and drinking, and pampering of the body. It is
the Lords advise, Take heed of surfeting and drunkenness, which oppress the
heart: A full body has oftentimes a foul soul, and the body at such a time
is more apt to sleep than to hear.

Secondly, Pride and selfe-conceitednesse. It is ordinary for men to say they
know as much as the Preacher; this is to be wise in their own conceits, and
the Wiseman tells us those are fools Pro. 26. 12.
. Admit many know as much as the Minister, yet so long as he puts it not in
practice, they must still hear.

Thirdly, Prejudice against the person of the teacher. If we love not the
person of the teacher, we will not relish his doctrine 1 King. 22. 8.
.

Fourthly, Prejudicate opinions.

The second thing to hear well, is use of helps and means that may further
us in hearing: the means is Use of means to help our hearing.


First, Meditation. Secondly, Prayer.
First means is meditation.
There is not any business 1 Meditation.
that we go about, but we will premeditate before, much more in this great
matter, meditation is to be used.

First, Let us meditate of the place whither we are to go, saying with Jacob,
how fearful is this place, it is no other than the house of God, this is the
gate of Heaven Genesis 28, 17
.

Secondly, Meditate we must of the person, into whose presence we are to go,
even the presence of the Lord of Hosts.

Thirdly, Of the Word we are to hear, into Gods presence we come to hear Gods
Word.

Fourthly, Of the great need we stand of the Word. Our hearts are like
parched and dry grounds, barren of all good fruit; naked and stripped of all
beauty, and therefore have need of the dew of Heaven to fall upon us: we all
stand guilty in Adam before God of eternal death, and therefore have need of
the Charter of Salvation to set us free, and what is that but faith? and how
come we by faith? by hearing the Word preached Romans 10. 17.
.

Fifthly, Meditate we must, that as the rain does not fall upon the earth in
vain Heb 6. 7
: so this divine dew, these drops of the Word, the Sermons we hear, we are
the better for them, or the worse; for the word of God, if it be not the savor
of life unto us, it will be the savor of death: it is a two-edged sword, with
one edge it cuts away all sin from the good, with the other all excuse from
the bad.

Sixthly, Meditate we must, that the Word we hear shall Judge us at the
great day.

The second help to be used, is 2 Means is Prayer.
Prayer to Almighty God, that he would be pleased to bless us in hearing.
We have all of us eyes and ears by nature, but in regard of these Divine
things they are shut. Hence it is that our blessed Savior says in the
Gospel, Let him that has ears to hear, hear. It is an excellent thing to
have a seeing eye, and a hearing ear, therefore David prayed, open thou my eyes
that I may see the wondrous things contained in thy Law Psalm. 119. 18.
. I, it is the Lord that opened the heart of Lydia Act. 16. 14.
. Now pray we also must for our Ministers, that the Lord would be pleased to
assist them in speaking, that he would give unto them the door of utterance;
the more the Minister is assisted, the greater will our benefit be. We are
careful to pray for the Pilate on the Sea, for if he miscarry, we lose our
lives; for the Physician, that he mistake not the disease; we pray for Kings,
and Princes, that under them we may live a quiet and a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty 1 Timothy ^ 2.
; and shall we not pray for our Teachers? And thus much, for that, that is
required before we hear, some thing there is required when we hear: What is
required in the act of hearing.
in the act of hearing.

There are many things required, as

First, Reverence, and this 1 Reverence
either inward or outward, the reverence of the soul and body; the inward
reverence may be seen in Cornelius Acts. 10. 33.
: we are all, said he, here present before God, to hear all things that are
commanded thee of GOD, with all inward reverence: the outward reverence you may
see in the eight of Nehemia, where the people all stood up, and lift up their
hands, and bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the
ground Nehe. 8. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7.
.

Secondly, Attention. Hear we must and hearken Isa. 1. 2.
. We must hearken what the Lord our God will speak, not a word but we must
hear Psa. 85. 8.
, Judgment as well as mercy; but here is the misery, whilst GOD has the ear,
the Devil has the heart.

The third duty is submission. 3 Submission.

A yielding and captivating of our judgments thereunto, and that this may be
the better done, we must search the Scriptures, whether the things we hear
be warranted. Thus did the men of Berea, they searched the Scriptures, whether
the things were so Acts 17. 11.
. We must not believe every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God John. 1. 4. 1.
. If the things delivered be the Word of God, we are bound to believe them,
and submit our selves unto them.

The next duty is Fear.
Whilst we hear, there must be a holy awe and fear 4 Fear.
in the affections: to him will I look that is of an humble spirit, and that
trembles at my Words Isa. 66. 2.
, Serve the Lord with fear, says the Psalmist, and rejoice with trembling
Psalm. 2. 11
. If the Lion roar all the beasts of the Forest tremble: JESUS CHRIST is the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he it is that speaks unto us, let us therefore
fear: he is a Lion, and a Lamb; a Lion to those that will not tremble, a
Lamb to those that will.

The last duty is cheerful Cheerful alacrity.
Alacrity.
Which quickens the languishing stomachs of our souls that we loath not the
Word, this Alacrity you shall find in the people in the eight of Nehemia; who
were attentive and cheerfully attentive from morning until midday Nehe. 8. 3.
. This also may be seen in the people that followed CHRIST, and continued with
him three days.

Here was their alacrity, but alas we are not tied to follow CHRIST three
days together, but one day in seven, and that not in the desert, but in the
Temple, and what do we? we sleep, and talk, and look about us, and
oftentimes are gone before Sermon be ended. If one should bring Commendation
from a great friend, we would never be weary of hearing him speak; but the
Minister may speak again and again from the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the chief
friend, and how coldly are we affected? this argues that we love others more
then CHRIST, earthly things more then Heavenly: whereas if there were this
alacrity in us, we would love the Word above all things, then Gold, fine Gold;
it would be sweeter to our mouths then the Honey and the honey Comb. Thus much
for the second means to come to the true knowledge of God.

The third follows, Conference.
But how is this neglected Conference.
? some are ashamed like those who had rather die, then tell the Physician of
their Disease; others hate it, and had rather do any thing then confer whereas
the Scripture calls upon us to exhort one another daily, whilst it is called
to day Heb. 3 13.
. Two are better then one, if one fall, the other may help him up; if one be
ignorant, another may instruct him: two eyes are better then one; look into
the book of God, you shall find this commanded, the word shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall teach them, and shall talk of them Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7.
. This is made a mark of those that fear the Lord, that they spoke one unto
another; and it is said, that the Lord heard them, I and there was a Book of
remembrance Mala. 16. 17.
.

The last means to come to the true knowledge of God is Prayer, earnest Prayer.
For what is all without Prayer.
this? to read the Word in private, to hear it publikly preached, to confer,
nothing without Prayer; this is that, that fetches a blessing, all other
means must be helped out by this, this is therefore placed in the last place,
that we may see all the rest without it will do no good.

And know we must that all our Prayers must be sent up to God in the Mediation
of CHRIST: Nam quid dulcius quam genitorem Aug.
in nomine unigeniti Pray in the name of Christ.
invocare? What is sweeter than to call upon the Father in the name of his
only begotten Son? And thus Prayers must be powered out with fear and With
fear.
reverence: our hearts must be raised from the dunghill of the Earth, to the
glorious throne of Heaven, as the Prophet says let our hearts be lifted up
Lamen. 41.
. Our gestures must be reverent and humble, and kneeling is the fittest
gesture Gesture must be reverent. With fervency.
in Prayer: And they must be delivered with fervency, for the Prayer of the
righteous avayleth much, if it be fervent. Yea, in Prayer we must be diligent:
S. Paul would have the Thessalonians to pray always 1 These. 5. 17.
, Nay Indesinenter orare, to pray without ceasing: it is said of the primitive
Church that they continued with one accord in Prayer; One calls Prayers, Gods
Grasshoppers, Gods Nightingales, who praise him in the day, and pray in the
night: and good men will pray always Pray always.
with all manner of Prayers and supplications in the spirit Ephesians. 6. 18.
. O stir up thy heart that is dull, rowze it up to God, Prayer is a sacrifice
to God: Music unto the Angels, a banquet to the saints, an help to them that
pray, a remedy for the penitent, a weapon against the enemy; Te orante fugit
demon. When thou prayest, the devil takes him to his heels and is gone:
resist the devil (by Prayer) and he will fly from you. Will thou carry al
things patiently? be a man of Prayers. Will thou root up vices, and be
enriched with virtues? be a man of Prayers. Will thou overcome troubles? be a
man of Prayers. Will thou know the subtilty of Satan, and vanquish his
temptations? be a man of Prayers. Will thou trample under feet thy corrupt and
evil affections? be a man of Prayers. never knew a man of much praying, a man
of much sin; no, not of the superstitious sort, touching the gross sin of
the World. Per preces charitas pascitur, fides augetur, spes corroboratur,
spiritus exhilaratur, cor pacatur, detegitur veritas, vincitur tentatio,
renovantur sensus, totus homo immutatur and fit melior; by Prayer Charity is
fed, Faith increased, Hope strengthened, the Spirit exhilarated, the Heart
pacified, Verity discovered, Temptation vanquished, the Senses renewed, and the
whole man altered and bettered. Look to this, to pray in the spirit, pray from
the Pray in the spirit.
heart, not from the lips: from the soul not the mouth only. The Jews
prayed with their lips, but not with their hearts: therefore God complains
of them, saying, this people draw near unto me^ with their lips, but their
hearts are far from me Isa. 29. 13
. The Prayer that comes not from the heart and spirit, it is a Key-cold
Prayer: it is frozen before it comes halfe-way to Heaven. David, to note his
earnestnes in Prayer, said that he roared, he spoke not, but roared, cried out
Psa. 38.
: and indeed the Spirit of God is a crying Spirit, not a cold Spirit. Oh that
all men knew this! that all had learned that not all Prayers, but spiritual
Prayers are accepted of God, but we are ignorant, and will be ignorant still,
filthy, and will be filthy still; but let us amend this fault, and learn at
last to pray: God has promised us al good things under his Hand and Seal; but
yet with a condition, so that we pray truly, and ask them as we should.

The first Motive.
The last thing is the Motive unto Knowledge.

The excellency of it in it Motive 4. excellency of it.
self; it is compared unto light: the people that sat in darkness have seen
the light ^sa. 9. 2.
. The light it comes from the Sun, this light comes from the Sun* of
righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The second Motive.
The good it will do unto It will do good to us.
our selves. O how comfortable will it be to know God to be good and gracious,
full of loving kindness, abundant in goodness and truth! How will it terrify
us, to know that he is an angry God against sin and sinners! he that walks
without Knowledge, he is in continual danger. As he that walks in dangerous
places without a light, may loose his life: so he that walks without this
Knowledge, may loose his soul.

The third Motive.
The good it inables us We will do good to others.
to do unto others. We will strive to bring others to this knowledge of God
also. This makes us Physicians of our brethrens souls, our brethrens pilats to
guide them in the right way.

The fourth Motive.
The end of our being, This is the end of our being.
for this end did GOD make us that we might know him here, and have eternal
happiness hereafter.

Thus much for the first general Knowledge we are to examine our selves of,
the second follows, and that is concerning our selves. Now this Knowledge to
be examined is threefold.

First, Concerning our first estate of Innocence.

Secondly, Our fall.

Thirdly, The curse of God due unto us by reason of that estate.

First, we must examine our Knowledge concerning our first Estate of
Innocence, and here there are two Principles that we must examine our Knowledge
of.

1. Principle.

That the God of Heaven made man at the first after his own Image.

2. Principle.

That this Image of God, God made made man after his Image.
after which man was made, consisted in Knowledge, holiness and righteousness.

It concerns us to examine our Knowledge concerning the first.

1. That we might admire the mavelous love of God unto man, which appears

First, In the time when The time when man was made
he made man; he made him last, even when he had provided all things for him
Genesis 2. 7 The place man was put in.
.

Secondly, In the place where God put him, in paradise Genesis 2. 8
.

Thirdly, In the manner of making him.

First, For his body: he did not say let it be, but as it were framed all with
his own Hands, the man of the dust, the woman of the Ribb.

Secondly, For his soul that was inspired, he breathed the breath of life into
him Genesis 2 7
.

And observe we may, that in both he says, let us make man calling all the
Trinity to the care and workmanship.

Secondly, It concerns us to examine our Knowledge concerning this, that so
all of us might earnestly endeavor.

First, To Know God.

Secondly, To fear God.

Thirdly, To resemble God.

Fourthly, To praise the Workmanship of God, for these were the end of man's
Creation.

Thirdly, this must be known that so we might have the more care of our
immortal souls, that God has breathed into us. It will not profit a man to
win the whole Word, and loose his own soul Math. 16 26.
.

Lastly, this Knowledge will teach us,

1. Not to wrong man, for he is the Image of God Genesis 9. 6.
.

2. To lament our fall.

The second Principle to be examined is that this Image of God after which man
was made, consisted chiefly in Knowledge, holiness and righteousness. God
made man righteous Eccl. 7. 31.
: This all must know.

The second general Man's fall.
Knowledge to be examined concerning man, is of man's fall. This must be known
that all men are Principle.
wholly corrupted with sin through Adams fall, there is none righteous no not
one Romans 2. 10.
. Every imagination of the thought of his heart evil Genesis 6. 5
. Now this came by the fall of Adam, by one man sin entered into the World
Romans 5. 12.
. Adams sin was the cause, by it we are all defiled, and deprived of the
glory of God.

And the Knowledge of this will make us.

First, Take heed to the fountains of all apostasy.

Secondly, Look unto our selves, and make conscience even of lesser sins; we
see what the eating of an apple did.

Thirdly, To get our armor, and make all the provision we can against the
Devil, for he it is that thirsts after man's ruin.

Fourthly, It will teach us humiliation: for eternal shame* lies upon our
nature, by this vile offense, both in respect of our loss, and the fearful
displeasure of God.

The End of the Third SERMON.
The Fourth SERMON.
1 Corinthians 11. CHAP. 28. VERSE. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
WE have heard what it is, that every man must examine himself of that would
come worthily to the Table of the Lord, he must examine his Knowledge, his
Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Love; the Knowledge to be examined was either

First, General, or

Secondly, Special.

The general Knowledge

Concerning
1. God. 2. Our selves, 3. The Covenant of Grace.
Our Knowledge concerning God to be examined was concerning,

First, His essence.

Secondly, His Works.

Our Knowledge concerning our selves was concerning,

First, Our first estate, Innocence.

Secondly, Our fall.

Thirdly, The Curse of God due unto us by reason of the fall.

The two former of these we have finished, it remains that we speak of the
latter, the Curse of God due by reason of it. Gods Curse


Now the Curse is threefold.

First, Gods Curse in this life.

Secondly, Gods Curse in the end of this life.

Thirdly, Gods Curse for ever after this life is ended.

First what Gods Curse Gods Curse in this life.
is in this life.
Now this Curse is a Curse extending.

First, To man's soul.

Secondly, To man's body.

Thirdly, to man's goods.

Fourthly, To man's good name.

Souls Curse.
The Curse of God to man's Soul, is madness, blindness hardness Deuteronomy. 28 65.
.

Bodies Curse.
The Curse of God to the Body, is weakness, diseases, aches, pains Deuteronomy. 28
21. 22 27.
.

Curse to goods.
The Curse of God to the goods, is losses, and hindrances Deuteronomy. 18. 16, 17.
.

Curse to good name.
The Curse to the good name it is discredit.

The second is, what the Gods curse in the end of this life.
Curse is in the end of this life.
Which is nothing but death the separation of the Soul from the Body.

The last is Gods Curse due Gods Curse after this life is ended.
to man after this life is ended,
And this is eternal death in Hell, where he shall always be dying and never
dead; seek he shall death as a benefit, and never shall find it. This is
fearful and lamentable, if we do but examine our Knowledge concerning three
things.

First, the degrees of it.

Secondly, The place of it.

Thirdly, The continuance of it.

First the degrees of Gods The degrees of Gods curse in Hell.
Curse after this life is ended.
First, the damned they have no communion with God, nor participation in any of
the blessings of God. They shall be punished with everlasting perdition from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
.

Secondly, They have Union with the Devil, with whom they have an eternal,
fearful fellowship. He shall say to them on his left hand, go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels Math* 25. 41.
.

Thirdly, Their bodies shall suffer unexpressible torments, which are expressed
by their lying in fire and brimstone Isa. 30. 3. 16 Luc. 23
.

Fourthly, They are inwardly affected with incredible horror and torment of
conscience, arising from the sense of Gods anger, for their sins Romans 2. 9.
10.
.

The second is concerning The place of it.
the place where this shall be.
The place is fearful, a place that in Scripture has diverse names, to
intimate the horror of it, as Hell, the great Pit, bottomless gulf, prison,
darkness, utter darkness, and many other terrible titles Mat. 22. 13.
.

Thirdly concerning the Rev. 20. 1. The continuance of Gods curse in Hell.
continuance of it.
Know we must that the torments of the damned in Hell are everlasting: the
damned must go into everlasting fire Rev. 14. 11.
.

The Knowledge of Gods Curse due to us, will bring us.

First, To a Knowledge of the danger we are in by reason of sin, danger in
life, danger in death, danger after death: if we did know this as we ought, we
would not be so angry, when the Minister shows the danger, we would not rage
so when the curses are applied to us, we would not be like the Horse and Mule
which have no understanding.

Secondly, The Knowledge of this would bring us to righteous living, these will
draw us to repentance, and seeing that we are so undone by the first Adam, we
will have to seek release from this misery by the second Adam, for there is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ Rom 8. 1
.

Thirdly, This will compel us to a careful practice of duties, especially of
six.

First, Of admiration, to Admiration
admire the exceeding riches of the tender kindness, and mercy of God, and the
great love, wherewith he has loved us, that has forgiven us so great a debt,
and freed us from such unspeakable confusion.

Secondly, Of Looking Loooking
upon the Lord JESUS, who has done all for us, paid our debts, and suffered
the uttermost in our rooms, who was wounded Isa. 53 3. 5.
.

Thirdly, Of warning, that we are warned to sin Warning.
no more, we will be watching that we be not deceived through the
deceitfulness of sin. Pitying.


Fourthly, Of pitying; with all compassion to pity those with whom we
converse, that yet live in sin, laboring to the uttermost of our power to
draw them out of this fire.

Fifthly, Of enduring and Enduring.
that of all sorts of afflictions, knowing that the Lord, if it pleased him,
might lay greater upon us.

Sixthly, Of remembering Remembering.
of our miseries, and to love the Lord always, and rejoice in him.

Thus much for the knowledge concerning God, and, concerning our selves, the
last general Knowledge to be examined is concerning the Covenant of Covenant
of grace.
grace, wherein God has promised to be our God, and we to be his people; by
which we have deliverance from our former evil, and the glad tidings of
salvation through Jesus Christ.

Now for the second Knowledge to be examined, and that is, the special
Knowledge, concerning the nature of the Lords Supper, as our Knowledge

First, What it is.

Secondly, why it is so called.

Thirdly, The causes of it.

Fourthly, The end of it.

First it concerns every man that comes to Gods Table The Lords Supper
described.
that he know, what the Lords Supper is.
Namely a Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment and growth by faith in CHRIST
to eternal life.

Secondly why it is called W^y so called.
the Lords Supper, as
Because it was ordained 1 Cor. 11. 22.
.

Because it was instituted in remembrance of the this do says he as ye do it
in remembrance of me 1 Cor. 11. 25.
.

Because in the primitive Acts ^0 7. The principal cause.
.

Thirdly we must know the causes of it, as
First, The cause principal.

Secondly, the cause isntrumental.

Thirdly, The cause material.

The cause principal is God.

Because he only can

First, Commanding to Minister and receive it.

Secondly, Promising that whosoever receives and believes shall be saved.

The Isntrumental cause Cause isntrumental. Cause material.
of it is the Minister.

The Material cause twofold,

1. The outward sign. 2. The inward thing signified.
The outward sign The outward sign.
is twofold.
First, The Elements of Bread and Wine.

Secondly, The actions of the Minister and Receiver.

First, the Elements of Bread and Wine.
And here is a question to be answered.

Quaes. Why the Lord Jesus Why bread.
Christ did make choice of Bread and Wine rather than any other elements, to
be Signs of the Sacrament of his Body and Blood.

Resp. For good Reasons, the Analogy and proportion that is between them
showing the same.

And thus it holds.

First, Bread is the principal supporter of man's life; now as Bread is of
natural life, so the Lord Jesus is of our spiritual: bread in regard of the
strength of it, it is called The Staff of Bread Lev. 26. 26. Reason.
. Because as the weak and wearied man is stayed up by the staff, so the weak
body is strengthened by bread: so says the Psalmist, he brings forth of the
earth bread that strengthens man's heart Psalm. 104. 15. S. Aug.
: upon which words Saint Augustine after his Allegorical manner of exposition
applies it unto Christ, saying, quem panem? What Bread? and answers, Christum,
Christ.

Secondly, Bread takes away corporal hunger, and as bread takes away corporal
hunger, so the Lord Jesus takes away spiritual.

Thirdly, Bread profits none but such as are hungry, it does no good unto
them that are filled, and glutted; the Lord Jesus profits none, but those who
hunger and thirst after righteousness.

Quaes. Why Wine? Why wine.


Resp. First, Wine is the sweetest liquor proceeding from the Vine; the Lord
Jesus the most sweetest liquor. He is the true Vine, his blood is sweet indeed
Ioh. 15. 1 7.
.

Secondly, Wine cheereth up the heart of man Ps. 104. 15
; the promises of the Lord Jesus cheer up the soul, and revives it.

Thirdly, Wine mundi fies, and cleanses the wounds of the body; the blood of
Christ cleanses the soul.

Fourthly, Wine takes away fearfulness, and causes boldness; the blood of
the Lord Jesus by faith assures us of Gods favor, eases us of the Curse of the
Law, makes us constant in the confession of Christ.

This the Analogy and proportion is, so that Wine The Cup no to be denied
cannot without great wrong be denied unto the people: the Papists do it, who
like the false Mother, would have the child divided; the Lord is the true
Mother, and cannot endure it: what man will endure in his ordinary refreshing
to have the Cup taken from him? the blood of Christ is the special price of
our Redemption, for we were not redeemed with corruptible things, but the blood
of the Son of God, as a Lamb unspotted and undefiled. Our blessed Lord says 1
Pet. 1. 18.
. drink ye all of this 1 Corin. 11 25.
, they will not do it; and what is this but to damme up the Fountain Christ
has set open for Judah, and Jerusalem? but herein they deal with Christ and
his Church as in other matters, they account the Scripture not the perfect rule
of faith, but patch it up with their Traditions, they make Christ but half a
Savior: I persuade my self if the people should deal with their Priests in
their offerings accondingly, it would either cool their devotion, or work a
reformation.

Now for the actions of the Minister, The Ministers actions represent the
actions of God.
and Receivers.
First, The actions of the Minister, these actions are four, and they
represent the actions of God.

First, the taking of the Bread and Wine into his hands signifies the pointing
out of Christ by God, for the office of Mediatorship.

Secondly, The blessing and consecrating of these Elements to an holy use,
signifies the actual sending of Christ, and the holy anointing of him, and
setting him apart for that work.

Thirdly, The breaking of the Bread, and the effusion of the Wine signifies the
breaking of Christ's Body on the Cross, and the shedding of his Blood.

Fourthly, The delivering of these outward Elements to the Receivers signifies
Gods offering of Christ unto all that will receive him.

Secondly, The actions of the Receiver, these represent the actions of the The
receivers actions represent the actions of the soul.
soul, and inward man, for as the outward man receives the outward Elements,
so the inward man receives Christ.

First, The taking of Bread and Wine, with the outward hands of the body,
signifies the taking of Christ with the inward hand of the soul.

Secondly, The eating of the Bread, and the drinking of the Wine, signifies a
peculiar applying of Christ unto our souls, that even as Bread and Wine being
digested in the stomachs of our bodies is conjoined to the body, and made a
part and member of the body: so Christ received and digested in the Will and
Affections is united to us, and we to him, he becomes our Head, and we his
members; and as the receiving of outward food does strengthen the body, and
makes it fit for natural actions: so the receiving of Christ the spiritual
food does strengthen the inward man, and makes it fit for spiritual duties.

Secondly, Now there is the inward thing signified, and this whole Christ with
all his benefits.

The last thing we must The end why it was instituted.
examine our Knowledge of, is concerning the end of the Lords Supper, and here
the question to be propounded, is,

Quaes. Why the Lords Supper was instituted.

Resp. For two ends. For Christ to be a memorial of his death.


First end is in regard of Christ.

Second end is in regard of us.

First the end in regard of Christ, is, For to be a memorial of his death 1
Cor. 11. 25.
. Secondly, the ends in respect of For us to be 1 Sign. 2 Seal. 3 Means.
us, are three.
First, To be a sign, and that to represent.

Secondly, To be a seal, and that to confirm.

Thirdly, To be a means, and that to conveigh Jesus Christ unto us with all his
benefits.

And thus much for the general and special knowledge that every Receiver must
examine himself of. Now come we to the second thing to be examined, and that
is faith; for every man receives so much as he believes he receives. Gold is
a precious thing, and therefore men dig deep into the mine to find it, and
labor much in the fire to purify and refine it, saving Faith is a precious
thing, so Saint Peter calls it 2 Pet. 1. 1. Faith must be examined.
.

Therefore every Christian ought, by examination, to dig into their hearts to
find it, and by the Word, as by fire, to try whether it be a saving faith, or
no. This is that, that puts life into us; I, the life of God, for till then our
cogitation is darkened, and we are strangers from the life of God, he that
believes in him, shall not be condemned, but he that believes not is
condemned already Ioh. 3. 18
, because he believes not. A Tree lives not without moisture, nor a Bird
without air, nor a Fish without water, nor a Salamander without fire: so the
soul lives not without faith, the just does live by his faith Hab. 2.
. This is the Spirit and Soul of the inward man; we have a name to live, yet
are we dead if we want faith. I live by faith in the Son of God, says the
Apostle. Gal. 2. 20
Our care therefore must be with Saint Paul, that we be found, having the
righteousness of Christ by faith Phil 3. 9.
, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Romans 8. 1.
.

It concerns all men to know that until they be believers, they belong not
to God: for as the Eagle refuses her birds till they can mount, and soar to
the Sun; and as the Raven acknowledges not her young ones, till they be
black; so God rejects me^, and receives none till they believe: none are the
sons of God but the faithful, the rest are bastards. I confess there be
degrees in Degrees in Faith.
Faith.

The first is a rudiment Smoking flax Mat. 12. 20.
.

The second is a weak faith; him that is weak in faith says S. Paul, receive
unto you Romans 14 1.
.

The third is (...), assurance Abraham, who above hope believed, under hope
Romans 4. 18.
. But no Faith is abominable, and may easily be discerned from a weak Faith,
as a sick man may be known from a dead: so a weak Faith from no Faith. Even
a desire of Faith is a token of Faith: for Gods Spirit works that; but no
Faith is accursed: he that believes not, is condemned already. A desire of
Faith a token of Faith.
Faith is Gods Gate, whereby God enters into our soul; the light that found
the lost groate; the purifier of the heart; the conqueror in the race; the
pole-starre for the Sayler; the life of the soul: and by Faith CHRIST dwells
in our hearts. O help us Lord, we believe, O help our unbeleefe; he must
believe that comes to Gods Table: and as is our Faith, so is our blessing. Now
this Faith that brings a blessing, the holy Ghost adorneth it with many
Epithetes, he calls it.

First, Rich Faith 1 Pet. 1.
. Secondly, Holy Faith Jud. 20.
. Thirdly, strong Faith 1 Pet. 5. 8.
. Fourthly, Saving Faith 2 Ephesians. 8.
. Fifthly, Pure Faith Acts 15. 9.
. Sixthly, Precious Faith 1 Pet. 1. 7.
.
So that if either we regard Riches, Strength, Holiness, Salvation, Purity,
let us look to Faith, which has all graces in it; as Paradise had all fruits
in it, as lapis Jndicus has all cures in it.

Let us see some reasons Reasons why Faith must be examined
why every receaver must examine his faith.

1. Because without this trial

How shall a man know whether his Faith be a saving Faith or no.

A saving Faith may be How to know a saving faith Resp.
thus known.

First, A saving Faith will save those that have it, they are kept through the
power of God unto salvation 2 Ephesians. 8.
. But every Faith will not save them that have it: for if this could be, then
the Devils would be saved, who believe, and tremble James 2 19
, but S. Jude tells us* that they are reserved in chains in darkness Jud* 6.
.

Secondly, A saving faith never fayles those that have it, I have prayed, says
our blessed Savior, that thy Faith may never fail thee Lu. 22. 23.
. Now there is a temporary Faith in some who believe for a time, and if
temptation come they fall away, and none that fall away finally can be saved,
because it is impossible that they should be renewed again by Repentance Heb 6.
4. 5, 6.
.

Thirdly, A saving Faith is a lively Faith, it makes those that have it live
the life of grace Gal. 3. 11.
. Saint James tells us of a dead Faith James 2. 20, 26.
.

Why we must examine our Faith, because else a man shall be in the number though
they had it not at one time; yet they might have it at another, but this cannot
be.

First, The Apostle tells us that all men have not Faith 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
. And no wonder, for all men have not that, that is inferior to a saving
Faith, and more common then a saving Faith, an historical Faith, or belief of
the Gospel 1 Cor. 1. 23.
,

Secondly, All men have not a saving Faith, because very few have it, so it is
said, when the Son of man comes shall he find Faith on the earth Luke 18
8.
? he says not, that when he shall come again he shall find no Faith at
all in the earth, for he shall find as many kinds of Faith as there be kinds
of Religion in the World; neither means he that he shall find no saving
Faith, for he shall find it in many who shall then be alive at his coming 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 16.
. But the meaning is, that when Christ shall come to judgment, he shall find
few in the earth, that have a saving Faith in comparison of them, that have it
not.

Thirdly, All men have not a saving Faith, because all men shall not be saved,
for as many as are saved are saved by Faith Romans 9. 27.
. Now that all shall not be saved it is plain for though the number of Israel
were as the sand, yet but a remnant shall be saved.

Fourthly, All men have it not, because

First, Some make Shipwreck of it 1 Timothy 1 19
.

Secondly, Some depart from it, and deny it 1 Timothy 4. 1.
.

Thirdly, Many cast it off 1 Timothy 6 10.
.

Fourthly, Many err, and are reprobate concerning it 2 Timothy 3 8.
.

We must examine our Faith, because the Lord God tries we may see in Abraham,
who was tried Heb. 11. 17.
. God tried Abraham and will try us; but I neither teach nor think that God
does, or will try the Faith of all Christians with so great a trial as was
Abraham's.

Examine we must our

First, Because no grace is acceptable to God without this Heb. 11. 6.
.

Secondly, Because no grace so necessary for this life, and the life to come.
All good things are ours by promise, the promise is made ours by Faith, and it
is Faith only that lays hold on Christ.

Thirdly, Because it is to be desired and used above all other graces: above
all, says the Apostle, take the shield of Faith Ephesians. 6. 16
.

Where note, that the Apostle contenteth not himself with a bare exhortation,
but with weighty reasons presses his exhortation both behind and before.

First, Before comparatively, preferring it before all other graces and above
all.

Secondly, Behind simply, declaring the virtue and efficacy of it, whereby ye
shall be able to quench.

But it will be objected.

1. We are ignorant and cannot examine; to examine requires, wisdom,
knowledge, understanding.

True it is, many are ignorant, but all are not so, and though many be
ignorant, and simple, yet that little wit and understanding that they have, if
they would employ it, they might do much craving Gods blessing upon the use of
the means: again they have a light to direct them, the light of Gods Word.

True, but the Word is hard and difficult, so that
Have you not teachers, Ministers? resort to them:

We have Trades and occupations,
Many who make this they thrive, and shall there be no time spent to know how
they thrive, and grow in grace? many have great trading and employments, so
that it may be in the six days they cannot, let such do it on the seventh,
the LORDS Day.

The End of the Fourth SERMON.
The Fifth SERMON.
1 Corinthians 11. CHAP. 28. VERSE. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
HAving showed the necessity of the examination of our faith, and answered some
objections; It now concerns all to know what saving faith is, or faith in
Christ.

Now saving Faith is a Faith described.
grace of the Spirit of God, wrought in the heart of a sinner, whereby he
trusts in the Lord Jesus for eternal blessedness.

And here we must take notice,

First, that it is a grace of the Spirit of God.
So that it is not only God that works it in those that have it, but also that
the Lord in grace, mercy, favor, works it.

First, it is God that God works Faith.
works it.
It is his gift, he is called by the Apostle, the Author, and finisher of our
faith Heb. 12. 2.
; as the Athenians were called, Inventrices and perfectrices omnium
doctrinarum, the inventers, and perfecters of all good learning. The Romans
had their learning from the Grecians, and the Grecians from the Egyptians, and
the Egyptians from the Chaldees, and they from Adam, Seth, Noah, and the old
Patriarchs: but the Church has all her Learning, Religion, and faith from God;
he gave it at the first, and he confirmed it: he gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for gathering
together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification
of the body of Christ, til we meet together in the unity of Faith, and
Knowledge of the Son of God. Saint Luke having spoken of Stephens Faith,
notes the cause of it, that Stephen was full of the Spirit; for God works it
by his Spirit Acts 7. 22.
: all good works are the fruits of the Spirit, therefore says the Apostle; the
fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, faith Gal. 5. 22.
: and it is reckoned up among the gifts of the Spirit; to another is given
faith (says the Apostle) by the same spirit 1 Cor. 12. 9.
. Every good, and perfect gift comes from above 1 Jam. 17
. And that which is said of Lydia, is true of all the faithful, that the Lord
opened the heart of Lydia, so that she beleev^d And Christ says that this is
the Work of God Ioh 6. 29.
, that ye believe not the Work of the Father alone, of the Son alone, or of
the holy Ghost alone, but of the whole Trinity; for this is one of the Works
of God which are said to be ad extra, and therefore attributed to all the three
Persons.

First, To the first Person where Christ says, no man can come unto me, (that
is believe) except the Father draw him Joh 6. 44
.

2 To the second Person, where the Apostle calls Jesus, the Author and
finisher of our faith Heb 12. 2.
.

3 To the third Person, where the Apostle, reckons Faith amongst the fruits
of the Spirit Gal. 5. 22
.

Secondly God works faith God in mercy works faith.
of his mere good will.
So says our blessed Savior; it is so Father, because thy good pleasure was
such Mat. 11. 26.
.

Now the end at which God aimed in working Gods ends in working faith.
this grace is twofold.

First, The setting forth of his own glory.

Secondly, The salvation of mankind; and therefore Saint Peter calls
salvation, the end of our faith.

Now the Knowledge of this will

First, Humble us, in letting of us see that it is not in our power, that Faith
is not hereditary: God begins it, and increases it, and finisheth it. The
Apostles prayed, Lord increase our faith Luke 17.
. Now the means to get this Faith is double,

1 Outward. Means to get faith.
2 Inward.
First, Outward. 1 Outward. The Word.

The outward means is the Word; hereupon says the Apostle, how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard Romans 10 14.
? and thereupon thus concludes, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word preached Romans 10 8.
, And hereupon it is called the Word of Faith; Ephesians. 1. 13
and Paul says of the Ephesians, that they believed, after they heard the
Gospel, and finely says S. Chrysostom Acc enditur S. Chryso^t.
fldei lampas igne Divini verbi; the Lamp of our Faith is lighted by the fire
of the Divine Word. And this Faith, is wrought in us, both by reading and
preaching of the Word, and both are commended, and ordained of God. The Word a
means p Deuteronomy. 3. 9.


1. For reading, God himself commands it P, and by reading S. Augustine was
converted: for he confesses of himself, that being inclined to the heresy
of the Manichees, he heard a voice, saying Toll and lege, take up and read;
meaning the Book of God; which he presently did, and so by reading was
converted: for surely the reading of the Word is a means appointed of God, to
the begetting of faith, and raising up the kingdom of God in the hearts of men;
so that to say that bare reading, is bare feeding, and a thing unable to work
faith in us, is to avouch a great untruth.

Secondly, For the Word The especial means ordinary is preaching.
preached. This is the especial ordinary means, and the most powerful usual
means: this is that which the Scripture lays down: how shall they believe
in him, of whom they have not heard? how shall they hear without a preacher
Romans 10. 14.
? and again, it pleased God by preaching to save Gal. 3. 1.
; reading is profitable, but preaching does profit more than reading does.
Spice, when it is whole smells sweetly, but when it is broken, and bruised by
the hand of the Apothecary, it smells a great deal more: so is the Word read
of us, or to us, sweet as the honey, and brings the light of life to many; but
if the spiritual Apothecary break it, and bruise it, cut it, and divide it,
as the Lord has appointed by preaching, then reaches the savor of such
heavenly sweet to many more, in a fuller measure, by reason of the blessing God
gives unto it. The Eunuch read, but he understood not; but when Philip
preached unto him, the sweet brake out to his lasting good Acts 8.
.

Secondly, the means is The inward means for faith, the Spirit of God.
inward whereby faith is wrought in us, and this is the blessed Spirit of God,
which softneth and opens our hearts, and makes them as good ground, that
when the seed of the Word is cast into them, it takes deep rooting, and
brings forth the blessed fruit of faith. The Apostle says that his preaching
was in demonstration of the Spirit, that their faith might 1 Cor. 2 4. 5
be in the power of God, and the preaching of the Gospel is termed a
ministration of the Spirit 2 Cor. 3.
: yea, he uses this phrase, the Spirit of faith 2 Cor. 8 15.
, because that faith is wrought inwardly by the spirit. Thus ye see that faith
is wrought inwardly in us by the spirit, outwardly by the Word.

Now to propound a question and answer it.

Quaes. How the Gospel How the Gospel works faith
works faith?

Resp. When the Gospel is preached.

First, That commands us to believe in Christ, and promises salvation, and when
we come to hear; the Spirit of God moves us for to hear, and he opens our
hearts as he did the heart of Lydia.

Secondly, Upon diligent hearing, the Lord inlightens the mind to conceive and
understand the way of salvation.

Thirdly, Upon this inlightning, the great God persuades us to believe Act. 15.
7 1 Cor. 3. 4
.

Fourthly, After this God inclines the heart to be affected with the goodness of
the things promised (which is salvation) and to hunger and thirst after
righteousness.

Fifthly, The Lord persuades the heart to trust in the Lord Jesus for salvation.

Now as this knowledge serves to humble us, so it will bring us to this
knowledge, that faith is not common, this confutes the Atheists confuted.
Atheists, that think and say so: all of them say that they believe, but faith
is a gift, yea, a most rare gift of God; God sent his Patriarchs in the
ancientest age of the world, and could find no faith: he sent his Prophets in
a latter generation, and could find no faith: last of all he sent his own
Son, a man approved of God, and approved his doctrine with miracles, and
signs following, and could find no faith, and when the Son of man shall
come, shall he find faith on the earth Luke 18. 8
?

We read but of two believers in the host of Israel Number. 14.
.

But of eight in all the old world 1 Pet. 3. 20.
.

But of one family that believed in all Asia 2 Timothy 1. 26.
.

But of a hundred and twenty in all Christ's time Act. 1. 15
.

But of a few in all Sardis Rev. 3. 4.
.

Caro and sanguis non dant fidem, sed Pater in Coelis; Flesh and blood give not
faith, but the Father in heaven. Many boast of faith, but if they have any, it
is the Devils faith. Nay, many believe not so much as the Devil does; but say
with the fool, non est Deus, non est Demon, non est infernus, non est Coelum:
there is no God, no Devil, no hell, no heaven. And in that some few believe,
it is by grace, not by nature.

Secondly, it is said in the description wrought in the heart of a sinner; and
this must not be understood indefinitly of any sinner, or every sinner, for

First, The Devils are sin ners, and yet they cannot have a saving faith, and
the reason is because they have no saving promise.

Secondly, Reprobates are sinners, and they have it not, because it belongs
only to the elect.

By sinners then understand such as know and believe themselves to be sinners,
and have need of Christ, and Gods mercy; such as use all means to have
Christ, that are undone without him, these are they in whose hearts the Lord is
pleased to work this grace.

Thirdly, it is said whereby a sinner trusts in the Lord Jesus, that is, rests,
relies, builds upon him, cast himself upon the Lord for salvation; the sinner
owes a debt, which must be paid, now Christ has promised to pay it, he
believes it, and trusts in him, knowing whosoever trusts in him shall be saved.

Lastly it is said for eternal blessedness. Which consists in our deliverance
from all hellish, and eternal torments, and the enjoying of everlasting
happiness for soul and body; it is called blessedness, because it
comprehends all that can make a man perfectly* blessed, Eternal, because it
never shall have an end.

Thus much for faith.

The third thing that we are to Repentance to be examined.
examine before we come to the Table of the Lord, is Repentance.
Now the Reason is, because there is a Repentance A false Repentance.
in the World, like true re-Repentance, but is not; all is not gold that
glisters.

First, There is a Repentance which causes a kind of remorse, this was in
Saul, he lift up his voice, and wept 1 Samuel 24 15. 16. 17.
.

Secondly, There is a Repentance which confesses sin; this was in Judas, I
have sinned, says he Mat. 27. 3.
; in Pharaoh, I have sinned, the Lord is righteous, I and my people are wicked
Exodus 9. 27.
.

Thirdly, There is a Repentance also which causes praying and fasting, this was
in Ahab.

Fourthly, There is a Repentance which comes to restitution. Judas brought
again the silver Mat. 27. 34.
.

Now all this may be, and yet no true Repentance, so that we may be
deceived, and take that for true Repentance that is not true Repentance that
changes the heart. Where there is true Repentance, there is an aptness to
ascend, the affections are set on heaven and heavenly things Col. 3. 2.
, if there were neither heaven nor hell, such would be holy, it is meat and
drink to them to do their Fathers Will, they will grow in grace, and in
Knowledge. But seeing that there is a false Repentance like true Repentance,
let us see what true Repentance is. Repentance may thus be described
Repentance descr^bed.
to be,

A present turning, from all evil to all good, wrought by God in the hearts of
all that shall be saved.
In which description we may spend time in examining of many things, as.

First, In examining our Knowledge concerning the Act of Repentance.

Secondly, The time of Repentance.

Thirdly, The terms of Repentance.

Fourthly, The Author of Repentance.

Fifthly, The subject of Repentance.

First concerning Repentance Repentance Act is turning.
Act.
Now the Act of Repentance, or form of it, is turning.

Obs. True Repentance is a turning. By the sin of our nature and practice we
have turned our selves away from God and cannot see his face, and favor
toward us, now it is Repentance that turns us back again; let us search and
try our ways, says the Prophet, and turn again unto the Lord La. 3. 40.
. It is not only a turning but is more.

First, It is a whole turning. Repentance turns wholly.


Secondly, It is a continual turning.

First, it is a whole turning, the whole man turns.

Reason, because the Genesis 6.
. The imaginations of his heart are evil, all the imaginations of it are evil.

Secondly as it is a whole turning, so it is a continual Turns continually.
turning.
True Repentance is a continued act of turning, a Repentance never to be
repented of, a turning never to turn again to folly: if this were not, the
remedy would be short of the disease, for the whole man is turned from God by
sin, and Repentance must turn the whole man back again.

Now the knowledge of this will teach us two things.

First, That man has ever something within him to turn from: a flesh still
resisting the Spirit, many temptations of Satan, many wicked fashions of the
World.

Secondly, That he can never get near enough to God in this life, nor ever
turn so near him, as once he was, and therefore he must proceed on till he
do attain.

The second thing to Repentance time, to day.
examine our Knowledge of concerning Repentance is the time. Repentance time.
Now the time of Repentance is present, so that,

Obs. True Repentance is speedy Repentance, he that repents truly, repents
speedily, to day whilst it is called to day. The first thing the godly-man will
set about, is to repent, he looks,

First, At God. Secondly, At himself. Thirdly, At oaths. Fourthly, At his
sins.
First, he looks at GOD True Repentance looks at God.

First, Commanding, to day to hear his voice Psalm. 95. 7.
. First to seek the Kingdom of God Math. 6. 33.
.

Secondly, Grieving; sin greives his blessed spirit: now the godly will
greive God no more, I as his Spirit to morrow will be more grieved, so his
patience will be more abused, and his wrath increased.

Secondly as Repentance looks True Repentance looks at men's selves.
at God, so also at a man's self, and so begins betimes.
Reas. 1. Because before Repentance, we can neither pray, nor hear, nor
receive the Sacrament, to our comfort: whosoever will have any thing to do
with God, or expects any thing from God, must wash, and make clean, so says
the Lord by the Prophet, wash you, make you clean put away the evil of your
doings from before my eyes Isa. 1 61, 17, 18.
. Then come let us reason together, then come and pray, come and hear, come
and receive.

Reas. 2. Because to morrow we shall be more unfit, qui non est hodie Cras
minus aptus erit. To morrow,

First, The heart will be more hardened. Secondly, The conscience more seared.
Thirdly, The will more crooked. Fourthly, Corruption more rooted.
Thirdly Repentance looks True Repentance looks at others.
at others.
That they might be brought into the way. That so there might be one
Sheepe-fold, and one Shepherd, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Lastly Repentance looks True Repentance looks at sin.
at sin.
And sees it is good to begin betimes; the longer it is before we repent, the
more sins we have to repent of.

First, More in number.

Secondly, More in strength.

Sin is still ingendring, and grows more fruitful. The godly man therefore
will not procrastinate. It is Satan that tempts men with a delay, he dares not
say that Repentance is not needful, only to deceive the simple, he craves a
delay, and so steals the time away, till all the time be past, in which men
should repent.. And in this snare many a one perishes, that whereas in their
youth, they will not repent, but put if of till they be old, in their old age
they cannot repent.

Us. The Knowledge of this time, will set us about the work, we know that in
things pertaining to the body delay is dangerous: if a wound be not looked unto
before it rot, it becomes uncurable; if fire be not quenched intime, it becomes
unque^chable; meat if not presently salted, it is unsavory; if a moate fall
into the eye, or a thorn be in the foot, we make haste to get it out. In
things pertaining to the health of the soul, delay is more dangerous. It is
God (beloved) that says, Hodie, to day; the Devil that cries, Cras, to
morrow, it was offered by Moses to Pharaoh, when shall I pray for thee? and he
said to morrow it is offered by God to man, when will thou that I have mercy on
thee? in effect it is answered by many, not till my old age. Miserable was
Pharaoh who delayed Moses but one day, more miserable are we who delay the
Lord for many years: we think Repentance is soon had, spend we do our
days in sin, and think that in the latter end, Lord have mercy on us, will
serve the turn, but we are deceived. David having sinned it cost him many a
deep sigh, many an earnest, and importunate request, before he could see any
thing but Gods angry Face against him for his fault Psa. 51. 1. 2.
. O have mercy; says he, upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy compassions, blot* out my transgressions.
Mark but what a piercing Prayer, what a feeling and passionate suite, and yet
David as a man not satisfied, not speeding as he desired, sets to it again a
fresh, saying, purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I
shall be whiter then Snow Psa. 51. 7.
. Though that he was not out of hope, yet was he not come to that full
comfort, and feeling he looked for; and shall we think to speed better then
David did? or have a more quick access to the Throne of grace then he had? let
us not be deceived, God is not mocked: what is this but a mere mocking of
God, to think that we may sin, I, do what we will, and after all to go to
heaven presently, have we not rather cause to fear that judgment that is
threatened, When you stretch forth your hands, I will hide my eyes, and when you
make many prayers I will not hear Isa. 1. 15. Motives to repent.
?

Now to move us to this speedy work, know we must what

1. Dangers.

Secondly, Difficulties.

Thirdly, Doubts there are.

First think of the dangers.
First, Dangers in regard of the uncertainty of life.

Secondly, Dangers inregard of the uncertainty of the means of grace.

Thirdly, Dangers inregard of the uncertainty of a blessing upon the means,
though enjoyed.

First, danger is great Danger of delay 3. fold
in regard of the uncertainty of life, no man has a lease of his life, we may
dream of many years as the Glutton did, when that might they may fetch away
the soul, he was called a fool, and so proved: thou that deferrest to day,
what do thou know but that thou may be dead before tomorrow? it is the wise
man's saying, boast not of to morrow, for we know not what to morrow may bring
forth Pro 27. 1
. For ought thou know, this day may be with child with thy Death:
doubtless, brethren, there are many now in Hell that thought to have repented.
As Trajan was marching forth with his Army, a poor woman solicited him, to do
her justice upon the murderers of her only son, I will do thee justice,
says the Emperor, when I return; but said woman, what if my Lord never
return? how far soever we here run out, we hope to make all good when
Repentance comes, but what if Repentance never comes? it is the gift of God, it
is not in our own power, therefore the true repenter bestirres himself; he
presently summons all the powers and parts, the tongue to praying, the feet to
walking, the hands to working, the eyes to weeping, and the heart to groaning;
there is no need of bidding that soul, go, for it runs

First, To the Word of GOD for direction.

Secondly, To the heart for remorse and compunction.

Thirdly, To God for grace and pardon.

Whosoever puts of Repentance may expect sudden death, for it is the Lord
that threatens it, I, he will wound them suddenly Psa. 64 7.
.

The End of the Fifth SERMON.
The Sixth SERMON.
1 Corinthians 11. CHAP. 28. VERSE. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
REpentance being described, we insisted upon the Act or Form of Repentance,
turning, the time also of Repentance. It is a present turning. Because many
dangers, many doubts, many difficulties.

First, The danger is great.

First in regard of the uncertainty Life uncertain.
of life.
We may be dead before to morrow.

Secondly in regard of the Means uncertain.
uncertainty of the means.
Though that we have time, yet there is danger in regard of the means of
grace this may be taken from us; true it is that the LORD can work Repentance
without means if it pleases him, yet he uses means 2 Timothy 2 26.
. And may take away the means at his pleasure, he may send a Famine, not of
Bread or of Water but a Famine of the Word of the Lord Amos 8. 11, 12.
.

Thirdly in regard of Blessing uncertain.
the uncertainty of a blesssing.
Suppose life and means be certain, yet there is a danger, in regard of the
uncertainty of a blessing upto the means. What can the Angels of Heaven do,
the Ministers on earth do? nothing, unless the Lord be pleased to bless.
We must strive, it is God that gives Repentance These. 2. 25.
. What and if God will not? What better are we for all Sermons? the worse we
are, for the heart is made fat, and the ear heavy, and the eyes are shut, that
we may not hear with our ears, see with our eyes, un derstand with our
hearts, and and be converted, and hea led Isa. 6. 9. 10.
. Many are like unto old hollow Oaks, the rain falling on them rots them, but
makes the tender Oaks grow: would it not be a dishonor to the Wisdom of
God, that men should follow their own lusts as long as they list, and then
have grace at their beck?

Now in dangers, there are Difficulties. Something to be done.
difficulties.
First, Because it is more to repent, than we take it to be, it is the turning
of the heart, now this is not easy, we want strength, I, to man it is
impossible.

Let us but consider.

First, What must be done, when we do repent: we are to recount all our
sins, that we may recant them, and this we know that the longer it be
before the account be cast up, the harder it will be to make it.

Secondly, We are to turn to God, now the longer we are from God the harder
it will be to turn unto God; the conscience will be ready to say, upon what
acquaintance? the Devil will say, will God give thee entertainment? Now there
Something to be left.
is something to be left, as the World, and sin: now by delay sin is more
strengthened, and multiplied? for every Act of sin strengthens the habit, and
one habit another, and so vis unita fortior.

Lastly as many dangers, many difficulties, so also many doubts.
Doubts concerning Doubts.


1. The Sincerity.

2. The acceptance of our service, so weakly done the soul is apt to
question, whether it be true? and whether the Lord will accept of such
service? for if we repent out of love to God, we would have repented sooner,
for love love defers not Genesis 34 19.
, May we not fear that the Lord will never be contented with the Devils
leavings? this will the Lord never do.

We have done with the Repentance Terms: ^
act of Repentance, and the time of Repentance, come we now to the terms of
Repentance.

First, the termius a quo, from what it is that repentance Whence.
turns. It turns from all sin, from all evil (says the description,) so
that we may conclude

Obs. That the object of The object of Repentance is all sin.
true repentance is all sin, not one sin, or many sins, but all sin. True
repentance looks at*

1. God. 2. Christ. 3. Satan. 4. Sin.
First, True Repentance Repentance looks at God.
looks at God.
First, At the command of God, he calls, and commands the repentance of all
sins, to cast away from us all our transgressions Ezekiel 18. 31.
, to put away all these things, wrath, anger, filthy speaking out of our mouths
Col. 3. 8. 9.
.

Secondly, True Repentance looks at God as forgiver, he forgives all manner of
sin and blasphemy whatsoever Mat 12 31. 32.
. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon Isa. 55. 7.
, and the reason is given. For my ways, says the Lord, are not as your ways,
neither my thoughts as your thoughts, for as the Heavens are higher than the
Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts, than your
thoughts Isa. 55 8. 9.
.

Secondly, true Repentance looks Repentance looks at Christ.
at Christ, and so turns from all sin.
Jesus Christ suffered for all sin as well as one, he is the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the World. 1 John 29
.

Thirdly, true Repentance looks at Satan, and so turns Repentance looks at
Satan.
from all sin.
One sin unrepented of gives him a great deal of advantage; he cares not
how sure the house is made, so long as there is one within that opens the door.

Lastly, True Repentance looks Repentance looks at sin.
at Sin, and turns from all evil.
One sin separates from God, as well as many; one hole in a ship enough to
sink it, one wound in the body enough to kill it, one sin in the soul to
damn it.

True Repentance turns
First, From all outward actions, it will allow of no sinful act.

Secondly, From all evil words, frivolous and idle speeches, filthy
communications, oaths Coloss. 3 8.
.

Thirdly, True Repentance will go farther, and search the Chambers of the
heart, and turn every thought that hinders the work of grace. Woe unto them
that cleanse the outside only.

Now this Knowledge will let us see.

First, How many are deceived Not sufficient to abstain from sin outwardly.
, who think if they abstain from sin outwardly, all is well; whereas a man
abstaines from sin sometimes, because he cannot commit sin, and now his
sin turns from him, not he from it. I, sometimes fear, or shame, or other
sinister respects may cause a man to forbear, whereas his heart and mind is
as foul and filthy as before: if there be a retaining of a disposition to
sin, if there be an affection and love unto evil, this is a repentance to
be repented of.

Secondly, That the lopping, and cutting off of Not sufficient to loppe and cut
off some sin.
some sins is not sufficient, this is not Repentance, we must to the root,
our hearts must be purged, and all must be put away. The Apostle says, put
away all these things Coloss. ^
: if we mark but the Catalogue, it shows that we must forsake all sort of
sins.

First, Inward sins as well as outward, anger, wrath, says the Apostle.

Secondly, Lesser sins as well as greater, filthy speaking must be put off.
we must deal with sin as God does with the mighty, that is, put them down
from their seats.

3. That true Repentance sets it self against sin.

First, Universally.

Secondly, Sincerely.

First, against sin universally, True Repentance sets it self against all
sin.
against all sin.
Reas. Because all sin is contrary to grace.

1: Against his own sins: that which he does, he allows not Romans 7. 15. The
godly repents his own sins.
.

First, Against the smallest sins, the hypocrite will start at great sins,
and outrageous evils, as murder, drunkenness, but the godly repents of those
which the world counts no sins, as unprofitablenesse under the means, petty
oaths, rash anger; and whereas many think thought free, the godly man in
repenting, repents the wandering, and disorder of his thoughts.

Secondly, Against his secret sins, he knows well that the Lord sees all.

Thirdly, Against profitable sins, no Agag will he spare.

2. The godly man sets The godly sets himself against the sins of others.
himself against the sins of other men; if he can he will hinder them, if he
cannot, he will grieve and mourn for them. Rivers of tears ran down David's
eyes, because men kept not the Law of God, but the wicked are so far from
repenting for the sins of others, that they cannot repent their own.

Now as a godly man sets himself The godly set against sin sincerely
against all sin universally, so also against all sin sincerely.
First, He will renew his Repentance often.

Secondly, He will repent of every particular sin; David of his murder,
Saint Peter of his denial, Saint Paul says, I was a persecutor, but the
hypocrite repents in gross.

Thus much for the terminus a quo.

Now to the second term, terminus True repentance turns to all good.
ad quem, whither it turns? it is said in the description, to all good.
Obs. That true Repentance turns not only from all evil, but to all good.
First to God, the chiefest good La. 3. 40.
. Let us search and try our ways, says the Scripture, and turn again unto
the Lord: return unto me, says the Lord Ier. 4. 1.
; the prodigal will go to his father Lu. 3. 15.
.

Now good Reason there is why it turns to God.

Reas. 1. Because by sin they have turned against God, sin is not only a
turning from God, but against God Hos 6. 1.
.

Reas. 2 Because it is God only that pardons sin, and on this condition he
does it.

Now the Knowledge of this, will let us see

First, That it is not sufficient to cease to do evil; learn to do well
Isa. 1. 16. 17.
: it is not enough to put off the old man, unless we put on the new Ephesians. 4 22
, turn we must from the power of Satan to serve the living God.

Secondly, That true Repentance is the consecrating of a man's self wholly to
God 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
.

From the Act or form of Repentance, the time and terms we come to the Author
of Repentance, and that is the Lord. So that from hence we may observe

Obs. That Repentance is Gods, it is his grace, Repentance is Gods gift
only God can Work it.

It is Gods both for the beginning, progress and consummation. It is God that
gave the Gentiles repentance unto life Acts 11. 28.
. Waiting, says the Apostle, if at any time God would give them Repentance 2 Timothy 2. 25.
. Hence it is that the Church goes unto God for it, saying convert thou me O
Lord, and J shall be converted Ier. 31. 18.
, again turn us O Lord unto thee, and we shall be turned Cant. 6. 21.
. It is only God that can work it.

Reas. 1. Because there are such strong resistances, and enemies of grace
within us, and without us; it must therefore be the Spirit of power and
fortitude only that must conquer them; the strong man has taken hold, and
only a stronger can cast him out.

Reas. 2. Because there is such strength of lusts, and numberless excuses of
sin and sinners, as only the Spirit can convince of sin.

First, It is God that changes the heart, and brings it unto good, he it is
that will purge us, this is not in our own power to do, it is the Churches
prayer, Convert us, O Lord Ier. 3. 18.
, so that no power of themselves.

Secondly, He draws us unto Christ, for no man, says Christ, can come to me
except my Father draw him Ioh 6. 44.
.

God is the worker, men are instruments; Paul may plant, and Apollo water, but
God that gives the increase. Paul preached at Philippi, but God opened the
heart of Lydia, Peter preached to Cornelius and others, but the holy Ghost
brought down the Unction, and made them Christians.

Now this Knowledge, that God is the Author of Repentance will teach us many
things.

1. That no man can repent No man can repent when he will.
when he will, this flower grows not in our Gardens; if that the Lord by his
Spirit draw us not, we can never run after him.

Object. Why have we so many Commandments to repent, if it be not in our power
to repent?

Resp. Deus jubet quae non possumus, ut noverimus quid ab eo petere debeamus,
says S. Augustine, God commands what we cannot do, that we may know what to
ask of him. I, this God does to let us see, not what by Nature we can do, but
what we in Duty should do, and that by his assistance we may be enabled to
perform.

Ob. God gave Jezabel space to repent of her fornication: hence the Papists
gather that man has free will to do that that is good before God; for, say
they, God gave space of time to repent, therefore she had power to repent, the
giving of that power was in vain else.

Resp. It does not follow because God gave time to repent, therefore she had
power to repent: which we may see, if we do but consider the ends for which
God gives men space, and time of repentance, I, and commandment also so to
do. The ends be two.

First, That in that time of Repentance, which he allotteth unto men, he may
give his children grace, whereby they may obey his Commandments, and repent.

Secondly, He gives Commandment and time that men may see what they should
do, not what they can do, and that the wicked may be without excuse at the
Day of Judgment, and so ashamed of Bishop Cooper.
themselves. Man cannot do it of himself, it is a work full of miracles, it
makes the dead to rise, the blind to see, the dumb to speak, and who can
work these but the Lord? as one sheep cannot heal another, but their help
comes from the Shepherd: so the true health of our souls comes from the
great Sepheard of Israel; he that tamed the Lions, and restrained the fire
from burning, he it is that must tame our wild affections, and moderate the
fire of our desires.

Secondly, The Knowledge, that God is the Author Ascribe unto God the glory of
conversion.
of Repentance, will teach us unto whom to ascribe all the glory of our
conversion, even to the Lord, for he it is that has done it, of our selves we
can do nothing that is good, we must be changed by the Spirit.

Object. Does not God promise, at what time soever a sinner repents of his
sin, I will put all his wickedness out of my Remembrance.

Resp. True, the Lord most comfortably (blessed be his name for it) says, at
what time a sinner repents of his sin, he will pardon; but he does not
say that a sinner may repent when he will, God has promised to all repentants
pardon, but not to all delinquents repentance.

3. This Knowledge in the third place will teach The means of grace is not to
be neglected.
us to be careful that we neglect not the present means of grace offered
unto us, as though we had God at command, and could repent whenever we
please. beloved, let none deceive you, deceive not your own souls, it is the
mere Gift of God, we cannot make one hair of our head white or black, and
do we think we can change our corrupt hearts?

Look but into the Scriptures and see how many when they would have repented,
were rejected, I, though they sought it with tears; and what comfort is this
to thee who have not repented, neither do thou know, whether that God will
give thee grace to repent, or not?

Objection. The theife repented at the last, and was received to mercy.

Resp. True, what then? if that I may but have time when I am dying, to say
Lord have mercy upon me, I shall be saved; but what if thou shall not have so
much time? thou art not sure of it, death has taken many a one away suddenly,
so that they have not spoke one word: again, what if thou have so much time?
many shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, and he shall say unto them, depart from
me, I know you not Mat 7. 22
. The Thief was saved, for he repented, his fellow had no grace to repent, and
was damned. O beware, least trusting too late Repentance at thy last end on
earth, thou be not driven to repent too late without end in hell.

Lastly, this Knowledge will cause us to serve God God must be served freely.
freely, for if God has wrought in any of us, if our wills be freed by grace
unto righteousness, then will we serve God freely, and cheerfully, we will
then obey the Lord willingly. The godly man knows that the fruit that is
cudgelled down, is ill tasted, and little worth: so is that obedience men must
be driven unto with blows, it is an evil soldier that follows his Captain
with sighing, an evil servant that obeyes his master with grudging; God must
have all done in love, and he rewards a cheerful servant.

Now if any of you find in your selves at any time an indisposition, and
backwardness to holy duties, call then to mind with what liveliness you have
followed your lusts, and be ashamed and humbled, that you cannot with as much
forwardnes serve the Lord.

The End of the Sixth SERMON.
The Seventh SERMON.
1 COR. 11. CAHP. 28 VER. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
THE first observation from the Text was that whosoever would come worthily
must examine diligently, this has been proved, examination discribed, also it
has been showed what every man must examine himself of, namely Knowledge,
Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Love: we have finished the three former
Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, it remains that we now speak of Obedience,
this must be examined before we come, so that we will.

First, Describe obedience.

Secondly, show the rules of Obedience.

Thirdly, The motives to obedience.

The first thing is the Description of Obedience.

We must know what Obedience is.

Obedience is a virtue, Obedience description.
whereby we wholly subject our selves unto God in souls and bodies, to do
whatsoever he commands, and leave undone whatsoever he forbids.

I will not insist upon Obedience Rules.
the description, but come to the second thing, The Rules, which comprehend the
nature of true obedience: the Rules.

1. Universality. 2. Alacrity. 3. Sincerity. 4. Constancy.
Rule 1. The first Rule of Obedience is universality, so that this must be
known.

That true Obedience is True obedience is universal.
Universal.
True Obedience has an eye to all Gods Commandments; God commands, therefore
must we obey; he commands all, therefore we must obey all, even the lesser
as well as the greater. O says the Lord that there were in them such a heart,
to fear me, and to keep my Commandments! not ^ Commandment Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
, Every Commandment must be observed, and if we will not be ashamed we
must have respect unto all Psalm. 119 6.
. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law and yet offend in Jam. 2. 10
one point, he is guilty of all. Cursed is every one that continues not in
all the Works of this Law to do them Deuteronomy. 27 26.
. Now the Knowledge of this will bring us to know, who offends.

First, Such as labor Offenders.
not to acquaint themselves with totality of Knowledge, they that neglect
Knowledge will neglect Obedience, where is there a man like David who makes the
Law of the Lord his delight day and night? know we must that ignorance will not
excuse us, and a particular knowledge will never bring forth a general
obedience.

Secondly, Such as know much yet make no conscience of doing much, these are
manglers of Obedience Kings 2. 51. 8.
. Herod will do many things gladly, but he will not leave his Herodias Mat.
20. 2 20.
. Many will part with some sins, but not with all. Now here a question is to
be propounded and answered.

Quaest. Whether any man is able to keep the Commandments of God?

Res. Man is to be considered Man able to keep the Commandments.
two ways. As a natural man, and as a regenerate man. Now every regenerate
man and woman is in some measure made able to keep the Commandments of God,
and to practice the good duties he requires of him; it is the Lords speech,
let your hearts be perfect with the Lord your God, to walk in his Statutes,
and to keep his Commandments 1 Kings 8. 61.
. In this stands the perfection of the uprightness of the heart, to walk in
Gods Statutes, and keep his Commandments.

The Second rule of Obedience is Alacrity.
So that this must be True obedience is cheerful obedience.
known, that whosoever obeyes God truly, obeyes him cheerfully. That, that
is said of giving alms may be applied to all other Christian duties; it is
said the Lord loves a cheerful giver, so the Lord loves a cheerful Prayer,
Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: now the Angels do the Will of
God cheerfully, and so must man. David says, of the Sun placed in the
Firmament, that it rejoices like a mighty Giant to run his race, it has a
kind of Alacrity and cheerefulnes to run the course, and to do the office
appointed. Now as Solomon would have us to learn somewhat of the Pismire Pro.
6. 6.
. And our blessed Savior from the Lillies and Fowls Math. 26. 28.
. So we may not unfitly be bidden to go to the Sun and learn, gladly and
cheerfully to serve the Lord.

Obedience third Rule is True obedience is sincere.
Sincerity.
So that this must be known that true Obedience is sincere Obedience: he that
serves God truly, serves him heartily. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy
heart, Mat. 22. 37.
. He must have the heart, and the whole heart, it is the saying of David,
blessed is the man in whose heart are thy ways Psa. 84. 5.
. My son give me thy heart says the Lord. God be thanked, says the
Apostle, that ye were the servants of sin; but ye have obeyed from the
heart that form of doctrine, which was delivered you Romans 6. 17.
. The godly man is the same inwardly, and in his heart, that he is outwardly,
and makes a show off, he knows that God takes no delight in those who draw
near unto him with their lips, when their hearts are far from him. A godly man
has more goodness within him then, he can make show off, A good man out of
the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things Mat. 12. 35.
. The godly man whatsoever he does, or outward professions he makes of good
things, his chief care is to be religious within, he is such a one as makes
conscience of all his thoughts, he is most troubled with his inward
corruptions, this he knows that if the heart be reformed, it will be easy
to reform the words and works Math. 23 26.
.

In the particular duties of Gods worship it concemes all to be careful of the
heart:

1. In Preaching. 2. In Hearing. 3. In Praying. 4. In Singing.
First in Preaching. In Preaching the heart is to be looked to.

That we may be able to say with Saint Paul, God is my witness, whom I serve
with my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son Romans 1. 9
.

Secondly in hearing. Hear with the heart.

The heart must also be looked unto, the heart must be drawn up unto the
ear, like Lidia, our hearts must be opened, that we attend to the things
which are spoken.

Thirdly in Prayer. Pray with the heart.

The heart must be looked unto, Praying always, with all Prayer, and
supplication, and how it is said, in the spirit Ephesians. 6 8.
.

Fourthly in singing of Psalms. Sing with the heart.

The heart also must be ready, that we may sing with grace in our hearts unto
the Lord Col. 3. 16
.

Quaest. But is there no hypocrisy in the godly Hypocrisy in the best.
man? is there no want of this inward truth of heart in his obedience?

Res. There is hypocrisy in the best, all the sons of Adam are infected with
this contamination, some more, some less; whosoever goes about to clear
himself in this, he is the worst hypocrite of all: and this we must know,
that though all are infected with it, yet here is the difference, all have
hypocrisy, hypocrisy has some aliud habere peccatum, aliud haberi a peccato,
it is one thing for a man to profess sin and another thing for sin to possess
a man. Now though a regenerate man may find this in him, yet may he comfort
himself in it.

First, That this is a matter of grief, and humbling unto him, feeling this in
him, and having his heart away in any outward service.

Secondly, That his care and desire in obeying God, has ever been to do it
heartily, and so could never hypocrite say.

This must all know, for by the knowledge of this that it is not

First, Hypocritical obedience. Hypocritical Obedience not regarded.


Secondly, Constrained sincerity that will serve the turn.

First, For hypocritical obedience: eye-service may be pleasing unto men,
because they know not the heart, but to God it can not. The proud Pharisee may
make a fair show, but God can pull of the mask, and discover him. All outward
works an hypocrite may do, only he fails in the heart, and because of that
he is lost every where; it is man that judges the heart by the works, but
the LORD judges the works by the heart. O therefore take heed of hypocrisy,
least you have your portion with them in Hell. Men and women solace your selves
in your devotions; hear, read, pray, receive, but look you have the heart
along with you, for without the heart all is lost. Know this that the
ostentation of man shall meet with the detestation of God.

Secondly, Now if hypocrisy Constrained sincerity nothing.
cannot content God, what can constrained sincerity do? He that obeys God
because he cannot choose, would not obey the LORD if he could.

The fourth Rule of Obedience
And this must every receiver know,

That true Obedience is constant obedience. True obedence is constant.


Whosoever obeyes God truly, will obey God constantly: there is scarce any
good thing in Gods Child, but may seem to be in the hypocrite, save only
this constancy in obedience, so that this teaches us

First, That sound and constant obedience is in the regenerate.

Secondly, That it is only in the regenerate, in no other.

First, constant obedience is in the regenerate. The righteous, says the wise
man, is an everlasting foundation Pro. 10 25.
. I, such as are planted in the house of the Lord will bring forth fruit in
their age Psalm. 92 13. 14.
.

But it may be objected.

Ob. 1. That in many regenerate men there are great intermissions, and giving
over of good duties, the fruits of grace have been straightly intercepted, and
broke of in them.

He that had come to David, when after his adultery he would have killed
Vriah, and Peter when he forswore his Master and that with curses, he would
have been able to discern no more fruits of grace, nor conscience of duty to
God in them; then in Saul or Judas.

Resp. That though in the time of temptation, or spiritual desertion the case
may be thus with the godly, for a time, yet he cannot continue so, but shall
recover himself, and do his first works again, according to that saying,
he will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever Psalm. 55. 22.
.

Ob. 2. There are many that have good hearts in whom there is great
inconstancy, often omitting of good duties, which they should perform, they
have not always that alacrity in Prayer and holy exercise, as sometimes they
have.

Res. Certain it is that many a good man may decay in the measure of his
practice, and good duties, even through a natural decay of his spirit, by age,
or by sickness.

Secondly, He may loose that heat and fervency of spirit that sometimes he
had, this may be seen in the Angel of the Church of Ephesus Rev. 2. 4
. The first love was lost, and yet much grace was there. Beloved, without daily
watchfulnes and stirring up of our selves, it will not be possible to keep
our selves from this decaying in our love; yet this we must know, that in
every regenerate man ordinarily, unless it be in case of temptation or
spiritual The godly perform good duties of conscience though not always with
the l^ke ch^erfulnes.
dissension, you shall find four things:

First, That he does still perform good duties of conscience toward God,
though not with that cheerefulnes as at other times, he still keeps his way,
and goes on, though not so fast, greiving for his decays, striving against
his dullness, and this the Lord takes great delight in, and he is not
unrighteous to forget our work and love Heb. 6. 10. The godly go on and
persevere.
.

Secondly, That the godly man does not rest in any thing that he has done,
but goes on, and is careful to persevere, and continue unto the end, and this
may be seen in David and Paul.

First, in David. I will praise the Lord, says he, while I live, and sing unto
God while I have my being Psa. 146. 2.
. Thy Statutes Lord, will I keep even unto the end Psa. 119 112.
.

The second in S. Paul. Brethren, says he, I count not my self to have
apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press
toward the mark Phil. 3. 13. The godly fear falling
.

Thirdly, That the godly man lives in fear least he should fall away before
his death, and having begun in the spirit should end in the flesh.

Fourthly, That his desire The godly desire the continuance of means.
is that he may continue under the means of grace. One thing, says David,
have I desired of the Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the
days of my life Psalm. 27. 9.
.

This is the godly man's care, that he may keep judgment, and do
righteousness at all times Psalm. 106 3.
. That he may fear always.

Now let us examine our Knowledge concerning the motives to obedience, and here
it concerns all men to know that God is constant in love unto us.

The first Motive.
That God is constant in his love to us: he has loved God constant in his Love.
us, and he does love, us, and he will love us; he will never give over.

Motive the second.
The wicked man continues The wicked constant in sin.
in sin; nothing will make them forsake it, the mercy of God will not allure
them, nor the judgments of God terrify them; but for all that is done, this
they will do, even break the laws of God and his just commandments behind
their backs.

Motive the third.
All Creatures serve and obey him: there is no Creature All Creatures obey God.
that God made, but in his Kind yields some delight and content unto God that
made them, he rejoices says the Psalmist, in all the Works of his hands Psa.
104. 31.
. And is it not a shame that man, whom he made above all to take pleasure and
delight in, that man should not obey him?

Motive the fourth.
God is a royal play master, God a royal play master.
in keeping the commandments of God, there is great reward; in our fathers
house there is bread enough: the wicked they shall have nothing but husks; his
children shall have bread, I, bread enough. God is always paying his children
wages, and never thinks they have wages enough, he it is that gladeth us daily
with his benefits Psa. 68. 19.
. God to us has given his Son, and with him all things: his Face was
buffeted, his Cheeks nipped, his Eyes blinded, his Hands nailed, his Side
lanched with a Spear: he was as water powered out, all his Bones were out of
joint, his Heart like wax molten within the midst of his Bowels, his
strength was dried up like a potsheard, his tongue did cleave to his Jaws, and
he was brought unto the dust of death Psalm. 22. 14, 15.
. Non ergo caput, faciem, oculos, manus, cor illi trademus, ut illi serviamus?
must we not therefore give him, Head, Hands, Eyes, Face, and Heart to serve
him? we must not give our Members, Weapons of unrighteousness to sin: what
then? we must give our selves to God, and our Members of righteousness to
serve God.

Thus much for the fourth thing every receaver must examine, namely Obedience.

Now come we to the fifth and that is, Love. Our love toward God, and
reconciliation of our selves toward our neighbors, for in vain shall we
pretend Knowledge, boast of Faith, glory of Love to God must be examined.
Repentance, if we fail in our love.

First we must examine this, Our love to God, for if any man love him not, let
him be Anathema, Maranatha 1 Cor. 16. 22.
.

Every receiver must know,

First that God has commanded God commands love.
this, that we may know whether we do love him, and might keep our selves in
his love Deuteronomy. 6 5 Deuteronomy. 11 12.
. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, says he, and again what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear him, and love him? this by our Lord, and
Savior is called the great Commandment, the commander is great, the object is
great, the use of the duty is great, and their reward is great, that care to
do it.

Secondly, God does love us, and it is a matter of equity that we Matter of
equity to love.
should requite love with love again, for though we cannot love him, as we
ought, and as he loves us; yet must we love, for ours is an ascending, his a
descending love; and love descending is more, is more natural, more fervent
and vehement, then love ascending, as we see in Parents who love their
children better, then their children love them: besides God loved us when we
were his enemies Ephesians. 2.
: durus est animus, qui si dilectionem nolebat impendere, nolet rependere; S.
Augu. S. Augu.
his heart is Oak, not flesh, but Flint, that though he will not begin to
love, yet finding Love, will show no love.

Thirdly, examine we Loves commodity.
must, because of the commodity, for if this be in us, then

First, our Faith produces those good duties which we owe unto God, for Faith
is as one hand receiving, Love as the other giving, for Faith works by Love
Gal. 6. 6.
. Nec faciunt bonos, vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores, such as our
love is, such is our life; an holy love, an holy life, an earthly love, an
earthly life: if a man's love be set on God, his life must needs be good; and
though this be certain, that a man is justified by Faith Romans 3.
, yet this is as certain, that the life of a man is justified by love.

Secondly, having this love we may know in what estate we are in. Saint
Augustine says, Duas S. Augu.
civitates duo faciunt amores: Jerusalem facit amor dei, Babyloniam amor
seculi; interroget ergo se quisque quid amat, and inveniet unde sit civis. Two
loves make two Cities: the love of God makes Jerusalem, the love of the World
Babylon; therefore let but every man examine what he loves, and he shall see
in what estate he is, and to what City he belongs. As a man by looking upon a
Dial, may know the motion of the Sun in Heaven; so by looking upon the thing
he loves, he may know in what he stands; whether he belong to Babylon or
Jerusalem, to Heaven or Hell, to God or the Devil.

Thirdly, The love of Love ingenders love.
the godly will be engendered in us.

Fourthly, This love is Love as strong as death.
as strong as death; for as death does kill the body, so our love to God does
mortify our love to the World and dispels rancor, wrath, malice, and as the
rising of the Sun does chase away the darkness of the night: so the love of
God drives away the inordinate love of Worldly vanities.

Now it is not sufficient to know that God must be loved, but we must also
know how God is to be loved.

This our Savior shows Matt. 22 37. How God is to be loved.
. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind.

First we must love him God must be loved with all the heart.
with all our heart. Now to love God withal the heart, is to love him with all
our affections, joying and delighting in none but in him; for he loves not God
that delights in any What it is to love God with the heart. S. Aug.
thing more then God, as S. Augustine says truly, Minus te amat, qui aliquid
tecum amat, quod non prop ter te amat; he loves thee not, who loves any thing
with thee, which he loves not for thee.

Secondly, we must love God must be loved with all the soul.
God with all our soul: enduring rather a separation of the soul from the
body, than that our soul should be separated from God, who is the Soul of
the soul, and the comfort both of soul and body.

Thirdly, God must be loved with all our mind, so that our cogitations must be
fixed upon him, and ruled by him; his word should direct our Reason, our Reason
rule our Wills, that so we may say with the Apostle, we live not, but God
does live within us,. A Christians chiefest care should be how to perform this
duty to God, how to love him, as the Church said; I am full of love, I am sick
of love Cant. 5. 8. All owe this debt to God.
. This is that all men should do, this they owe to God, but few pay it, or if
they do, it is with Cracked money, not current in Gods Exchequer, for our love
to God is cold, Man's love to God cold and dead.
yea plain dead; and that appears in the breach of the first Table: we are
bankrupts both in piety toward God, and charity toward men, we love the World
and our pleasures more then God, we worship not God in spirit and in truth, we
swear and blaspheme the name of God, we profane and pollute the Sabbaths of
God, we come seldom to the house of God: how can we say that we love God? the
love of God stands Love stands in keeping the Commandments.
in the keeping of his Commandments: so says our Savior; he that has my
Commandments and keeps them, is he that loves me: and again if any man
love me, he will keep my Word and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and dwell with him: and again, he that loves me not, keeps not my
words John. 14. 21. 23, 26.
. He speaks positively, and privatively.

The blessed and undivided Trinity will dwell with that man, who loves God
truly; but till we serve God in holiness and righteousness, till we pray
diligently, hear his Word attentively, receive the Sacraments penitently,
keep the Lords day's religiously, use his name reverently, let us be ashamed
to say that we love God; nunc regnum dei, non est in verbis, sed in vertute:
the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Many Christians are mutilated
and lame; either they want an ear, and cannot hear God, or they want a tongue
and cannot praise God, or they want an heart, and cannot love God.

These Atheists are a disgrace to Religion, a Moth in the garment of the
Church, monsters in nature, devils in shape of men, as CHRIST said of Judas;
hollow Trees, not holy Trees. Beloved, it is a most honorable thing An
honorable thing to love God
to be a lover of God: it was one of Abraham's greatest titles of honor, to be
called the friend of God; it is a most blessed thing, to be a lover of God;
they that love the Lord, shall be as the Sun that rises in his strength.

There is nothing in the Nothing can give rest to the soul but God.
World that can give rest unto the soul, but God: the heart of man is like the
needle of the cumpasse, that trembles still until it come at the Pole. The
soul of a wicked man is in a sling, now that which is in a sling is violently
tossed about, so is the soul when it is not upon the proper object, God. It
was the saying of the rich gluttan, soul take thy ease, thou have goods laid
up for many years: and David cried, return my soul to thy rest Luke 12. 19.
116. Psalm. 7.
. The first put his soul from the right object, but the second when he said,
return my soul to thy rest, he put it up on the right object.

Now a question may be asked.

Quaest. Whether God is to be loved for his benefits, or for himself?

Resp. God is to be God is to be loved for himself.
loved for himself: benefits in respect of our infirmities may be motives to
stir us up to love God, but he is to be loved for himself. Hypocrites serve
God for gain, what shall it profit us, say they, if we pray unto him? they
measure all their Religion by profit, it is vain they say to Job. 21. 15
serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and that
we have walked mournefully before the Lord of Hosts Mal. 3. 14
? These are like unto little children, who will not say their Prayers, unless
you promise them their breakfast, and to these men gain is godliness.

A second question to be propounded is.

Quest. Whether the hatred of God, or the ignorance of God be the greater sin?

Res. In diverse considerations the hatred of God may be a greater sin then
the ignorance of God: and ignorance again, a greater sin then the hatred.

First, That is the greatest sin that is most opposite, to the great God, now
hatred of God being opposite to the Love of God must needs be the greater sin.

Secondly, If ye will consider ignorance as opposite to the vision of God,
wherein our blessedness consists, then the ignorance of God is a greater
evil, then the hatred of God, for to see God is a more excellent thing then to
love him; though in Termino* they cannot be severed.

The End of the Seventh SERMON.
The Eighth SERMON.
1 Corinthians 11. CHAP. 28. VERSE. But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.
WE heard in the former Sermon that whosoever would come worthily to Gods
Table, must examine himself narrowly before he comes; examine he must, his
Knowledge, his Faith, his Repentance, his Obedience, and lastly his love. Four
of these I have insisted upon at large, entrance has been made into the last,
which is Love: Love to God, Love to man. For the Love to God, that we have
finished, now it remains that we spend some time on our love to man.

Now every receiver Love to man must be examined.
must examine this Knowledge concerning this, for

We all come to one Table.

All eat of the same Bread, drink all of the same Cup.

Baptized all into the same baptism.

Branches all of the same Vine.

Sheep of the same Shepherd.

Children of the same father.

Fellows of the same household.

Heirs of the same kingdom.

Members of the same body.

Professors of the same faith.

Obtainers of the same promise.

Partakers of the same hope.

Now it is a shameful thing, and full of infamy, and reproach, to see the
Branches of the same Vine, Sheep of the same Shepherd, Children of the same
Father, to contend and strive one against another.

Beloved, there is but little love: where are those noble pair of lovers David
and Jonathan, who had but one soul: Eusebius and Pamphilus, Martyrs, who had
but one name: Pilades and Orestes, who had but one life, the one being dead,
the other died also: Ruth and Naomi, who had but one grave: Saint Basil, and
Saint Nazienzen, of whom it is said, anima una erat inclusa in duobus
corporibus, one soul was included in two bodies? Marriage makes two bodies
one, but love makes two souls one, yea many souls, many bodies, but one.

The Heathens were wont to say of the men of the Primitive Church, ecce ut
invic em se diligunt, behold how they love one another? they knew Christians by
that badge, but we may say, ecce ut invicem. se ^derunt; behold how they hate
one another? not Christians, but Wolves, Lions, Leopards, Devils, nay worse:
for one Lion eats not another, and the Devils strive not among themselves,
but maintain their Kingdom. Let Tigers, and Bears, and Leopards tear one
another; let Scythians and Cannibals eat one another, who know not God, nor
good humanity, let them be without natural affections; but let us love one
another, and let the Apostle his precept be our practice; be of one mind,
one suffer with another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not
rendering evil for evil, not rebuke for rebuke; but contrariwise bless,
knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should be heirs of blessing 1
Pet. 3. 8. 9.
.

In no quality do we resemble God more, than in this, Love, God the Father is
Love, God the Son is Love, God the Holy Ghost is Love; God the Father in love
gave the Son, God the Son in love gave himself, God the holy Ghost in love
applies all this to us.

Now good reason have Kind of love.
we to examine our love to man, for there are diverse kinds of love.

First, The Atheists love, Atheists love.
and this comes from profit, or from pleasure, which love men as the dog does
the bone; but this love proceeds not ex cordepuro a pure heart, therefore it
is a love condemned.

Secondly, the Gamesters, Gamesters love.
Drunkards love: for to gloss, play, eat, drink, game, be no good works,
therefore this is not to love.

Thirdly, There is carnal Carnal love.
love, and this is condemned, for love in man may be a vice as well as a grace;
it is a vice, when it is set upon a wrong object, or is disordered, and that
three ways.

1. When we love things unlawful, as sin.

2. When we love things lawful, but too much, as the world.

3. When love is turned into lust, and so it is the mother of fornication,
adultery, incest, and such like.

Fourthly, There is a Christian love.
Christian love, we must love one another in the Lord, and for the Lord: this
love is the badge of Christ's Disciples: by this shall all men know that you are
my Disciples indeed, if ye love one another as I have loved you John 13.
. To this Saint Peter exhorts, above all things have fervent love among your
selves, for love shall cover a multitude of sins 1 Pet. 4.
, non expiando, non veniam prom^rendo, sed fraterne condonando, non vindicando,
non diffamando; not by purging, or satisfying for sin, not by deserving
pardon, and binding God to forgive sin, but by brotherly forgiving
trespasses, not revenging our selves, nor defaming others.

There is another love condemned, the love of Schismatic.
Heretics and Schismatic love, in cathedra unitatis, Deus posuit doctrinam
veritatis, in the chair of unity God has put the doctrine of verity: they
agree as the false Prophets did, not in the Lord, but against the Lord. Papists
boast much of their Council of Trident, and how they agree in all meetings.
Alas a few Bishops of Italy conspired together, but thirty eight Bishops in
all, not like the Council of Nice, where were three hundred and eighteen, or
of Arimine, where were six hundred Bishops: nor like the Council of
Constance, where were four Patriarks twenty nine Cardinals, two hundred
threescore and ten Bishops, forty seven Archbishops, five hundred threescore
and four Abbots and Doctors at the deposing of Benedict the third.

But our love let it be as it should be, Christian love: let us love as
brethren, Our love must be Christian.
and then the God of love and peace shall be with us: and if enemies will not
be pacified, recommend the cause to God till we meet in heaven, where all
injury shall be forgotten: and in the mean while I beseech you (as S. Paul
did the Saints of Corinth, I beseech you I say) by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no dissension among
you, but that ye be knit together in one mind, and in one judgment 1 Cor. 1.
10.
: and whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love Phil. 4. 8.
, think on these things, and the God of Love, and peace shall be with you 1
These. 3. 12.
, and the Lord increase your love, and make it abound more and more one toward
another. Christ's Commandment is all love, his Spouse is all loving: and John
will preach nothing but love, and we must follow after love, and above all
have fervent love among our selves, for that shall cover a multitude of sins.

Seeing therefore it is not all love that is commended, it stands us in hand to
examine our love, for none receive worthily but such whose love is.

1. Holy. Loves properties.
2. Just. 3. True. 4. Constant.
First, the Receivers love Holy Love.
must be holy love.
It must be for God, and not against God, under God, and not above God; for he
loves not God, that loves not his neighbor with God, whom he loves not for
God: and he that loves his neighbor more than God, is unworthy of God, and
makes his neighbor to be his God.

Secondly, The Receivers Just love.
love must be Just.
We must not love one another in evil, but in good, and for good, pacem cum
hominibus, bellum cum vitiis: we must have peace with men, war with their
vices; we must love their persons, but hate their manners if they be evil.

Thirdly, The Receivers True love.
love must be true love.
We must not love in word, and in tongue, but in work, and in truth 1 Ioh 3.
18.
; nemo potest veraciter esse amicus ho minis, nisi primitus fuerit amicus
ipsius veritatis, S. Augustine, no man can be S. Aug.
a true lover of man, unless first he be a lover of the truth. We must love
one another, not for their riches, honors, greatness, but for themselves:
their good must be sought, not their goods: we must not love one another as
Dogs do bones, for the flesh that is on them, or as men do Trees, for their
fruit; but we must love them for themselves, for this, that they are men, but
especially, for that they are virtuous and good men.

Lastly the Receivers love Constant love.
must be constant.
With some, friends are like flowers, no longer regarded then whiles they are
fresh. Many men's love is like the harlots love, who love while there is lucre;
and when gifts go hence, their love goes hence: they are like the puttocks in
the fable, that followed the old Wife bearing meat to the market, but forsook
her homeward when her meat were sold. En ego non paucis quondam munitus
amicis. A man shall be loved in prosperity but in adversity, as Rats forsake
an house when it is ready to fall, so his lovers and his friends will forsake
him. Thus our love should be holy, just, true, constant, this is true
Christian love, wherein men should keep themselves; this is like unto the
Sun unto the World, a Candle unto the house, a light for our journey, a line
for our life, and a rule for our reprehensions. Si diligis, fac quicquid vis:
if thou be in love, do what thou will; speak or be silent, exhort or
rebuke, call or cry, so it be in love, all is well.

Beloved, much is gotten by love, there is much comfort in love, I, love is the
fulfilling of the Law. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.


First, Reductive.

Secondly, Effective.

Thirdly, Formaliter.

First Reductive.
Because love is the fulfiling of all the Commandments.

Secondly Effective.
For he that loves the Love is beneficial.
Lord, is ready always to obey him.

Thirdly Formaliter.
For all actions should be referred to the glory of God.

As the benefit is great The estate of those that love not, miserable.
where there is love, so the misery of such as love not is great also.

First, They are children of darkness, and all under the bondage of the first
death, and in danger of the second.

Secondly, They can never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: every one can say
a murderer shall not be saved, now the Lord hates a man that loves not his
brother as a murderer; and the Apostle says, that no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him 1 John. 3 15.
. I will conclude with the saying of S. Peter: the end of all things is at
hand, be sober therefore, and watch unto Prayer; this is good, but not
sufficient, and above all things, says he, have fervent charity, for charity
shall cover a multitude of sins 1 Pet. 4. 7, 8.
. It is love that hides the blemishes of our sinful nature, and the same
Apostle calls upon us to give all diligence, to add to our Faith, virtue; and
to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to temperance, patience; and to
patience, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity Pet 2. 1. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.
. And the reason is given because if this be in us, we shall not be barren, and
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, but he that lacks
these things, is blind and cannot see far of, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins 2 Pet 1. 9
.

We have finished the first conclusion, that whosoever would receive worthily
must examine narrowly. Come we to the second.

That the self examiner must be a receaver. Let The examiner must be a
Receiver.
him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup.

Do this, says our Savior 1 Cor. 11 24.
. So that it is not left indifferent for a man to come, or not to come, but
commanded; I, if that we look but into the Book of God, we shall find that
such as were bidden to the Wedding, and would not come, made light of it, were
destroyed as well as he that came without his Wedding garment Mat. 22. 4. to
13.
. O that we would consider,

First, Who it is that calls, cries! It is the Lord by the mouth of the
Minister, he it is that bids his guests, shall he cry come, and shall we not
come? shall he call, and shall not we answer? he it is that bids, and shall
we make excuses? send his Messingers to prepare, and shall not we come where
all things are prepared?

Secondly, Consider that besides calling, bidding, sending, he offers himself,
and what a fearful thing is this to contemn this blessed Sacrament?

When Moses called Dathan and Abiram to come up to the Lord, they answered
presumptuously, we will not come Number. 16. 12.
. When the King in the Gospel had invited many, and sent his servants at
supper time, to say to them that were bidden, come, for all things are now
ready, they all with one consent began to make excuse Luke 14. 16, 17. 18.
. Beloved, does not the Lord call us, as Moses Dathan and Abiram, to come up?
and do we not as they did, say, we will not? this we not only say, but do.
Does he not invite us, I, the Table is covered, the supper is ready, yet how
do we slight it? Many will come, but it is to look on, not receave, what is
this, Beloved, but to have the Minister of CHRIST in derision? our Savior did
not say, let a man examine himself, and stay at home, or examine himself, and
look on, but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread,
and drink of that Cup. With what face then, with what countenance or
conscience, can these come to the house, and Table of God? But it may be
objected.

Ob. 1. That often receiving Of enreceaving no more then needs
is more then needs.

Res. Those that make this objection, show to the World, what spirit they are
of, for besides, the Word of God requiring of us often to receive, have we not
our own wantes crying out unto us, I and that aloud, that we have need to
come? and surely, if ever any of these had tasted of any sweetness at the
Table of God, they would never have objected so absurdly, or argued, I have
often received, therefore need to receave no more, but rather I have often
received therefore will receave again. There is almost none so absurd as to
say I have been often at the Church therefore I will be seen there no more, I
will hear no more because I have heard a little; but as he that knows what
it is to hear, will hear often, so he that knows what it is to receave the
blessed Sacrament, will not content himself with receaving, but will receave
often.

Ob. 1. It may in the second Often receiving without profit a sign we are not
good.
place be objected, we have often come and received, but we profit not by it,
we are never the better, therefore we will receive no more

Res. True it is, that many come, and come often, and are no better, but the
worse for coming; this is a sign that they are not good, yet God forbid that
we should so hardly conclude of all that say they can feel no such comfort at
the Receiving of the blessed Sacrament, for howsoever some do not for the
present, and in the Act find it, yet they may find comfort, and have comfort.
And here it will stand us all in hand to consider of five particulars, and to
have them in mind.

1. That to forbear coming will make us worse than we are.

2. That it is one thing to have grace, and another thing to feel grace.

3. That every man must with conscience submit himself to Gods ordinance.

4. That no man was ever made better by not coming to the Sacrament.

5. That it is a dangerous thing to stint God, to limit God.

First, it concerns all to consider of this.

That if they should not come to the Table of the Lord, it is to be doubted,
Not coming to the Sacrament makes men worse.
that albeit they should not feel themselves any whit the better, by their
coming to it, they should feel themselves many degrees the worse, and albeit
that they feel not themselves after their receiving as good as they desired,
yet if they come not at all, they shall be sure to find themselves worse than
they were.

Secondly, Consider we One thing to h^ve grace and feel grace.
must that it is one thing to have grace, and another thing to feel grace: for
a man may have grace, and not feel it, especially in time of temptation, as a
man may have life in him, though many times he know it not; the godly man he
lives by faith, not by feeling.

Thirdly, Consider we We must submit with conscience to Gods ordinance.
must, that every man must submit himself with conscience to the ordinance of
God, and if thus they do, they may assure themselves that in the Lords good
time they shall find comfort: for as they that are sick, will go to the
physician, take his directions, stay his time, and in all things be ruled by
him, so must every poor sinner that expects comfort for his soul, he must
stay the Lords time, who knows when it will do us the most good, and stand us
in most stead?

Fourthly, consider we Withdrawing makes not men better.
must of this, that no man was ever made better by withdrawing of himself:
Beloved, if this could be proved, then something might be said, but I dare say
that it was never known that any man was either richer in grace, stronger in
faith, by keeping of himself from the ordinance of God.

Fifthly, Consider we God must not be stinted.
must that it is a dangerous thing to stint God, to limit him, take heed we
must of setting God a time, as now Lord, or to morrow Lord, let me feel
comfort, like the unruly patient that will not be cured, unless he be cured
out of hand. O beloved, God will try faith, and patience, to know whether we
will depend on him or no.

Ob. 3. Some will object again, that they would often come to Gods Table, but
that they have so many infirmities, and manifold imperfections, and these they
say do discourage them; their measure of faith, and grace they say is so
little, that they are afraid to come, least they should come unworthily.

Resp. If that these things Imperfection^ must not hinder us.
proceed from a good ground, these are not to be slighted, as the other, but
we should rather put to our helping hand, and put our shoulders under to help
them bear the burden: this indeed is true love, and compassion to pity the
souls of our brethren; it is said of our blessed Savior, that a bruised reed
shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench Mat. 12. 20.
. Christians must use all the means that may be to nourish the weak ones,
those that are weak in grace: as we must warn them that are unruly, so we
are commanded to comfort the feeble; our imperfections though many, must not
keep us back, seeing that the Lord accounts us worthy, and invites us to come
unto him.

And here Receivers may conclude of four things.

First this, that the feeling Feeling a want of grace with grief is grace.
of the want of grace, with a grief for that want, is grace, for such as are
altogether graceless, and senseless do not find at any time any defect of
grace in them selves.

Secondly this, that no We must not please our selves in our wants.
man must please himself in his own wants, nor nourish the weakness that is
in himself; for albeit God condemns no man for his wants, nor withholds his
grace from him for his imperfections, yet must not man make much of them, nor
delight in them, nor think himself the better for them.

Thirdly this, that it is a Temptation of Satan dangerous, concerning want of
grace.
dangerous temptation of Satan against our souls, when as he counsels and
persuades any man to withdraw himself from the Communion, for w^nt of grace;
if he have any in sincerity, albeit it be but in the least measure, I, but as a
grain of mustard seed, it will not be labor lost, if that we would but think
of the persons for whom the Supper was instituted, we shall find that it was
for the weak not for the strong; for the poor, not for the rich: shall any man
now reason so absurdly, that because he is hungry, therefore he will not eat,
because thirsty, therefore he will not drink, because wounded, therefore
cares not for the Physician? would not every one condemn these for unwise
men? beloved, it is no better than a divellish temptation, that because we are
weak in grace, therefore we will not receive the strength of grace.

Fourthly and lastly, that the Lord Jesus Christ came Christ came ^o save
sinners.
into the world to save sinners, to redeem that, that was lost. Let a man
therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup.

FINIS.
The Table
The sum of the first Sermon.
WHat it is to examine, Page 7. Why a man must examine. 9. Why a man must
examine himself. 10. Why a man must eat, must drink. 13. Whosoever would
come as a worthy guest must examine before he comes. 15. How Christians must
examine and search. 17. Men must examine narrowly. 17. Laboriously. 17.
Willingly. 18. Constantly. 18. Use the help of others. 18. Reasons for
examination. 22. Their estate lamentable who come without preparation. 25. All
men are bound to know the Word of God. 25. Who are debard from coming to the
Table of God. 26. All men must examine themselves. 27. Motives to move us to
examine. 28. What it is every man must examine himself of. 29. Knowledge must
be examined. 29. General, special Knowledge. 29. Knowledge concerning God.
30. Knowledge concerning Gods nature. 30. There is a God. 31. God is glorious
in nature. 33. Jncorporeall. 33. Eternal. 33. Incomprehensible. 34. Immutable.
34. Omnipotent. 34. Omniscient. 35.
The sum of the second Sermon.
THe necessity of this general Knowledge. 3^. The fruits of it. 38. God is
three in persons. 40. One in essence. 41. God to be loved alone and above all.
42. No other to be called upon but the Lord. 42. One mediator to be used to
him. 42. Our knowledge is to be examined concerning Gods Works. 43. Gods Work
of Creation. 43. The world had a beginning. 43. God made it. 46. All things had
one principle. 46. God only can Create. 48. The Creatures to be considered.
48. God to be praised. 48. All things were made of nothing. 49. Gods Power is
to be admired. 49. God to be trusted unto. 49. All things were made by the
Word of God. 50. All things were made good. 50. God made all things freely. 52.
All things were made successively. 52 Knowledge must be examined concerning
the Providence of God. 53. God knows, and takes notice of all things. 54. God
upholds, governes, and disposes of all things. 55. Gods providence reaches to
all things, even the smallest. 56. Of all Creatures God takes most care of man.
58. God provides great things for man. 59. God provides temporal things. 61.
God provides spiritual. 61. God a royal Bridegroom. 62. A royal
feast-maker. 63. A royal general. 63. God provides comforts. 63. God provides
graces. 63. 64. Cleansing. 64. Hearing. 64. Quickening. 64. Directing. 65.
Protecting. 65. Saving. 65. God watches over us, and ours. 65. God preserves
us from dangers. 66. God preserves us in dangers. 6. God preserves us by
dangers. 67. God orders and disposes of all things, and all acts for man's good.
67. Natural things shall work for man's good. 68. Artificial things. 68.
Necessary things. 69. Contingent things. 69. Realland imaginary. 70. All acts
shall be for man's good. 70. It is God that does whatsoever he will. 72.
Knowledge must be examined concerning our selves. 73. Rule of Knowledge
concerning God. 74 The Rule is the Word of God. 74. Its infallible. 75.
Unchangeable. 75. Undoubted. 75.
The sum of the Third Sermon.
Means of knowledge. 80. The word must be read and meditated on. 81. We must
read wisely. 85. Read with reverence. 85. Order is required in reading. 85.
Judgment requisite. 86. Means of knowledge the word publicly preached. 87.
We must hear wisely. 88. What must be done before hearing. 88. Lets must be
removed, and helps used. 89. 90. 91. 93. Reverence is required in the act of
hearing. 95 Attention required. 96. Submission. 96. Fear. 97. Cheerful
alacrity. 98. Conference a means of knowledge. 101. Prayer a means. 102.
Prayer must be sent to God in the mediation of Christ. 103. Pray with fear.
103. Our gesture in prayer must be reverent. 104. Prayer must be fervent. 104.
We must pray always. 104. Pray in the spirit. 105. Motives to knowledge. 108.
The excellency of it. 108. It does good to us. 109. It will make us do good to
others. 110. It is the end of our being to know God. 110. Knowledge must be
examined concerning our state of innocence. 111. God made man after his Jmage.
111 What this consisted in. 112 The time when man was made. 112 The place man
was put in. 112 The manner of making him. 112 The necessity of this knowledge.
113 Man's fall. 115
The sum of the Fourth Sermon.
KNowledge must be examined concerning the Curse due to man by reason of his
fall. 121 What the Curse is in this life. 121 What it is in the end of this
life 123 What it is after this life is ended. 123 What this knowledge will
bring Christians unto. 127 What the Lords Supper is. 131 Why it is so called.
131 The cause of it. 132 The outward sign of it. 133 Why he took bread. 134
Why wine. 135 The Cup not to be denied. 137 The actions of the Minister,
represent the actions of God. 138 The actions of the Receiver represent the
actions of the soul, and inward man. 140 The inward thing signified. 141 The
end why it was instituted. 141 Faith must be examined. 143 Degrees in faith.
145 A desire of faith a token of faith. 146 Reasons why faith must be examined.
148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155. Objections answered. 155 156 157
The sum of the Fifth Sermon.
FAith described. 162 God works it. 163 God works it of his mere good will.
166 Gods end in working faith 166 What the knowledge of this will bring us
unto. 167 Means to get this faith. 167 The Word a means. 168 The Word read.
168 The especial means ordinary is preaching. 169 The inward means the
Spirit of God. 171 How the Gospel works faith. 172 Repentance must be
examined. 178* 179 What it is. 180 Repentance act. 181 Repentance turns
wholly. 182 Continually. 183 Repentance time. 184 True Repentance looks at
God. 185 At man. 186 At others. 187 A^ sin. 188 What this knowledge works.
189 Motives to repent. 192 Dangers of delay. 193
The sum of the sixth Sermon.
DIfficulties. 203 Doubts. 204 Repentance terms. 205 The object of Repentance
all sin 206. 207. 208. 209 Not sufficient to abstain from sin outwardly. 210
Not sufficient to lop and cut off some sin. 211 Reasons why Repentance sets
it self against all sin. 212 The penitent sinner sets himself against the
sins of others. 213 Sets against sin sincerely. 214 True repentance turns to
all good. 215 Repentance is the gift of God. 217 God is the worker, men the
instruments. 219 No man can repent when he will. 220 The glory of conversion
must be ascribed to God. 223 Means of grace not to be neglected. 224 God must
be served freely. 227
The sum of the Seventh Sermon.
OBedience must be examined. 232 Obedience described. 232 Obedience Rules: 233
True obedience is universal. 234 Man able to keep the Commandments. 236 True
obedience is cheerful. 237 Sincere. 239 Inpreaching the heart must be looked
to. 241 Hear with the heart. 242 Pray with it. 242 Sing with it. 242
Hypocrisy in the best. 243 Hypocritical obedience not regarded. 244
Constrained sincerity nothing. 246 True obedience is constant. 247 Objections
answered. 248. 249 The godly perform good duties of conscience though not
always with the like cheerfulness. 250 The godly go on, and persevere. 251
The godly fear falling. 252 The godly desire the continuance of means. 252
Motives to obedience. 253. 254. 255 Love must be examined. 257 God commands
Love. 258 God loves us. 258 Loves commodity. 260 Love ingenders love. 262 Love
as strong as death. 262 How God is to be loved. 263 What it is to love God with
the heart. 263 God must be loved with all the heart. 264 All owe this debt to
God. 263 Man's love to God cold and dead. 263 Love stands in keeping the
Commandments. 264 An honorable thing to love God. 266 Nothing can give rest
to the soul out God. 266 God is to be loved for himself. 267
The sum of the Eighth Sermon.
REasons why love must be examined. 274. 275 Kinds of Love. 279. 280. 281 Our
love must be Christian. 283 Loves properties. 287 Christ came to save sinners
309 Love is the fulfilling of the Law 291 Love is beneficial. 292 The estate
of those that do not love, miserable. 292 The self examiner must be a
receiver. 295 Often receiving no more then needs. 298 Often receiving without
profit a sign we are not good. 300 To forbear coming will make men worse. 301
Its one thing to have grace, another thing to feel grace. 301 Every man must
with conscience submit to Gods Ordinance. 301 No man was ever made better by
not coming. 301 Its a dangerous thing to limit God. 301. 340 Imperfections
must not hinder us. 305 Feeling a want of grace with grief, is grace. 306 We
Tempiation of Satan dangerous concerning the want of grace. 307 Christ came to
save sinners 309
The end of the Table.

