THE KINGS TOWER, And TRIVMPHANT ARCH OF LONDON.

A Sermon preached at PAVLS Cross, August. 5. 1622.

By SAMVEL PVRCHAS, Bacheler of Divinity, and Parson of Saint Martins Ludgate,
in London.

LONDON Printed by W. STANSBY, and are to be sold by Henry Fetherstone. 1623.

THE KINGS TOWER, AND Triumphant Arch of LONDON.
Turris salutum Regis sui.

2. Sam. 22.51. He is the Tower of salvation for his King.


THis day Luc. 4.21
(said our Savior of another prophecy) is this Scripture fulfilled in your
ears. 2. Reg. 7.9.
This day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace (said the Lepers.)
Not so you, who, being silent, speak; and your Liueries seem to proclayme
some great deliverance. Luc. 19.9.
Salvation seems this day come to your house: nay, the House and Tower of
salvation came this day to the King, then in the House of Traitors: and we are
here assembled in his house, to praise him, who was not only a Tower of
salvation to his King, but of confusion to his enemies. Verse. 27. b. c.
With the pure, thou will show thy self pure, and cum peruerso peruerteris,
verse. 27. As the Tower of Siloam Luc. 13.4.
upon those eighteen Inhabitants of Jerusalem, or the Wall of Aphek 1. Reg.
20.30.
on the Aramites: so did this Tower fall on the Traitors, and Salust. Cat.
incendium ruina extinxit, and buried them, and their fire, fetched from Hell,
in the ruins.

The many profits of festival institutions and solemnities.
This day is the two-and-twentieth Anniuersarie of that deliverance from Gowries
conspiracy. Whereof we observe the festiuall-solemnitie, that the time it
self may be a Text, to quicken our Memory; Memory may awaken Consideration;
Consideration may excite Admiration; Admiration might incite Thankfulness;
Thankfulness may swell into extaticall Jubilees of joys Deuteronomy. 16.11, 14. Neh.
8.9.
, Te Deum's, Hallelujah's, in the best habit of our Bodies and Souls, to be a
glimpse and taste of Heaven it self. This is the true nature of a feast, to be
a representative Heaven: as Saint Bernard; Nihil ita proprie in terris
repraesentat coelestis habitationis statum, sicut alacritas laudantium Deum. A
feast is the lay-mans History, the Witness of Times, Light of Truth, Life of
Memory, Mistress of Life: whereby our Fides has a kind of vides, our hopes
have cheerful tastes of happiness, and (like David) from the passed, 1. Sam.
17.37.
argues to future Deliverances. Love, thus feasted, feasts again; entertayning
GOD, with praises; his King, with more observance and allegiance;
fellow subjects, with mutual duties; and the needy, with charitable
beneficence; Esth. 5.22.
which was always wont to be an invited Guest at feasts, and principal
ingredient of thankfulness.

Such feasts, GOD and good Governors appointed in the Law; as those of Moses
declare, with the addition of Temporary, in 2. Sam. 6.19.
David's fetching home the Arc, Salomons 1. Reg. 8.65.
consecrating the Temple: or Anniuersarie, as Esth. 9.17.
Mordecai's lots, and Maccabees 1. Macc. 4.56.
dedication. Joy made David 2 Samuel 6.14.
not go, but dance before the Arc: and his tongue here speaks not Sentences,
but tuneth Songs, Verse. 1. b. c.
verba carminis hujus. Wherein, if joyful thankfulness has made us to lift
up our simpler, to a more festival, and oratorian, style, let no 2. Sam. 6.21.
Michol scoff. (It is before the Lord, therefore will I play before the Lord)
nor impute it to selfe-conceited arrogance, or King-pleasing flattery; that,
Fellonie; this, Treason; both, in this place, also Sacrilege. It Exodus 3.5.
is holy ground, where we must put off such shoes.

Herod. l. 1.
If the son of Croesus, a Heathen, being dumb, spoke, to obtain the
delivery of a King; shall not dumb Zachary Luc. 1.68.
open his mouth, with a Benedictus, for delivery obtained? Ordinary words for
ordinary things, actions and times: the highest are due for the highest, and
for him that is Eccles. 5.8.
higher then the highest, even ordinance (if we had it) to resound the Tower of
saluations for his KING. Open Psalm. 51.15.
thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show and sing thy praise. And while
Psalm. 45.1.
I speak of the things, which I have made touching the King, let my tongue be
the pen of a ready Writer.

These words are the close, and passionate Epiphonema of this (...), or
triumphant song of David, in this place, and again, in the eighteenth Psalm,
repeated, to show the necessity of his thankfulness for full deliverance from
Saul Verse. 1. b. c.
and all his enemies: wherein he has strayned his invention to so high a note,
that the bests Poets (my best Reason, being Judge) come not near his
descriptions of Perils, of Majesty, of magnificent delivery, victory,
triumph: but in a small plot, what needs a long survey? At once he speaks al
in this clause, HE IS A TOWER OF SALVATION FOR HIS KING; a Thesis applied to
the Hypothesis, David and his seed for ever, in the words following.

The words of our Text are, in the original, (...)
three; in the English, six; Tower of salvation for his King; which yield so
many steps (like those 1. Reg. 10.19.
of Salomons throne) to our consideration. For [HE IS] in the beginning is not
expressed, and yet is the expressure of the Text; is invisible, and withal the
life and soul of the whole. Once; [HE IS] is set upon the Throne, and dwells
in light 1. Tim. 6.16.
inaccessible, as the Lord on the top Genesis 28.13.
of Jacobs ladder: it is enough for Angels, and Men, Ministers, and Hearers, to
ascend and descend the six steps; Deliverance, Omnimodam salutem, (Trem.) or
magnificans, salutem, but salutes; magnificans salutes: good Divinity,
whatsoever be the Grammarnicetie. He is magnificent in his deliueries,
multiplieth saluations, and makes them as many, as great. The word must
exceed rule, (Pluralia raro Pubes atque salus) if it express his
superexceeding saluations, which does not deliver alone, but exalt; as a King,
which to his pardon adds new Charters of Honors, Lands, Offices. Or else,
against such an Enemy, such a World, such a Hell of Enemies, little and few
deliverances were not deliverance: it requires magnificans salutes,
magnificent, munificent saluations, as our vulgar English reads, Great
prosperity gives he, not great deliverance alone. Thirdly, this also is not
enough, he He is the salvation, in his superessentiall essence (or saluations
in the plurality of persons, as 2. Sam. 7.23. Dij iuerunt ad redimendum; a
mystery of the Trinity salvation in the abstract. But (fourthly) because our
eyes Herodot.
which got a Kingdom by seeing the Sun first, looked not to the East, but to
a high tower in the West, which his rising beams first saluted: so) for the
heavenly Kingdom, is this abstract made concrete to us, in the metaphore
Tower, Turris salutum: in this resemblance may we see the salvation of God
(qui scrutatur majestatem, opprimetur a gloria) which otherwise would dazzle
and blind our prying, staring eyes.

And though GOD be a Tower to all, To his, his peculiar. And, lastly, that the
King may be a Treasury and Tower of salvation to others, He, who is good to
all, is a Tower of salvation to the Tower of all his, the King. Turris salutum
Regis sui, He is a Tower of salvation for his King. Above this Tower is only
the cross, immensitie, and eternity: Super Imperatorem non est nisi Deus, qui
fecit Imperatorem. Quantus Deus, qui deos facit?

Thus for the ascent of our Text. The latitude of it (latum mandatum tuum
nimis, Psalm. 119.96.
says the Psalmist) is from Jerusalem to London, from David, to all Kings,
yea, from Zion to the worlds end; First and literally to David and his seed:
the whole history of David, in the two books of Samuel, and the first of
Chronicles, this Psalm, twice repeated, with others, are Commentaries of the
Text, for his person: as the rest of the Bible-historie, for his feed. We
should power water into the Sea, and abuse your patience, to expatiate at large
in this sense. Secondly, this is true in mystical David, our King, that is,
Christ, and his seed, all Christians; who, together with him, are not the
seeds, Gal. 3.16 10.15.1. Ep. 2.15.21 1. Cor. 12.12.
as many, but the seed, as one; one Vine, one Temple, one new Man, one Christ.
And in this sense we will first handle it ascending-wise, and after that, come
to a third application, descending this Scala coeli, to Kings, the David's of
their Countries, especially Christian Kings, the Heads of the Tribes of Israel,
His Kings, over His People, most especially This King over This People, whom
the GOD of Jacob long preserve, The defender of the Faith. This indeed is most
proper to the day: and therefore in the other sense (fertile enough for many
Sermons) we will be more sparing, then otherwise we would; in the little Map
of this Text, beholding our Catholic Commons, and Christian Immunities, the
rather to incite us to observe the Royal Prerogative in the last place, for
which the Text was chosen, Verbum dici, in die suo.

First, He is a tower of salvation, that is, gives great deliterance to us
all, as to his Kings. JESUS gives Ieshugnoth, that is, is named Savior, Mat.
1.21
because he saves his people (his Kings) from their sins. For God is the
entitie and immensitie of Goodness, Greatness, Blessedness: which in
fellowship with him, we enjoy; Ps. 36.9.
In thy light, shall we see light; Ps. 16.11.
in thy presence is fullness of joy, etc. Isa. 59.2.
But your inquities (says Isayah) have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you. Neither can any separate our sins
(these Separaters of us from God;) every Creature owing all it is, has, can,
to the Creator, To. 11.36. Reu. 4.11.
in whom, by whom, and for whom, it is, and was created: And therefore he
which had made man Genesis 1.27
after Gods Image, made himself after man's Image, to free us from that Image
of the Ephesians. 4.22.
old man, and Reu. 12.9
old Serpent, which sin had portrayed in our souls and body throughout. 2.
Cor. 5.21.
He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.

In sin are four things; the fault, 1. Ioh. 3.4
(...), 1. Cor. 15.59.
The strength of sin is the Law, thereby broken, and taking hold of the
forfeiture; Secondly, Reatus, the guilt, which is a Latitat, Out-lawrie, Wit
of Rebellion, an Arrest out of all Courts, which our own consciences will and
shall execute. The third is macula, whereby the Sinner, as a selfe-prisoner
under the arrest of Conscience, is cast in Irons, and further polluted and
entangled in the cords and corruption of his own sin, the old remaining and
new Actions and Indictments, as new sores breaking out, are entered against him
every day: The fourth is Poena, the final punishment and curse, Mat. 25.41.
Ite maledicti. O the miseries of that Sinner, easelesse, endless,
remediless, where he shall ever be dying, and his death never be dead. How
sweet were salvation to such an apprehension? and how sweet is he, that
preuents the apprehension with deliverance? Blessed Ps. 32.1, 2
is the man, whose wickedness (culpa) is forgiven, and whose sin (reatus) is
covered; which has a Supersedeas from Suite, from Arrests, a Protection. Yea,
blessed is the man, to whom the Lord does not impute iniquity (gives a pardon,
quoad poenam) and in whose spirit there is no guile; the macula is emaculata,
and he is now in another predicament; Ps. 119.1.
Beati immaculati in via.

The deliverance from sin delivers from Hell, Death, the Devil, and all
Actions and Suits betwixt God and the Soul; delivers Col. 1.13.
from the power of darkness, and translateth into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, the Savior Mat. 1.21
of his people from their sins: who now, remoto prohibente, does secondly,
exaltare, adds new Privileges, and becomes a second Adam, the Author, by
Regeneration, of a new life to us, not only giving great deliverance to his
King, Reu. 1.5.
washing us in his blood from our sins, and by his death, crucifying this
death in us, that sin may neither be imputed to us, nor reign in us, but
adding great prosperity, by his Spirit and the virtue of his Resurrection
animating, actuating, and formalizing us into one Mystical Body with
himself, renewing us into a new Creature, and transforming us, by his Word and
Spirit, into the image and likeness of himself: that as by carnal
generation, 2. Co. 3. vlt.
we have received humane nature and corruption, which is the putting on of the
old man, from the first Adam: Romans 5. vlt.
so by spiritual Regeneration, from the second, we may put on the new man,
and be made (as Peter 2. Pet. 1.4.
calls it) partakers of the Divine Nature; that we may not live (says Gal.
2.20.
Saint Paul) but he may live in us; whereby we are Ephesians. 5.30
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; and because he lives, we shall live
also, a life begun in grace, and growing into endless glory; when our vile
bodies shall be made like the Firmament, Dan. 12. Ph. 3. vlt.
shine as the Stars, like the Sun in his brightness, yea, like the Son of
Righteousness himself, shall be made like his own glorious body, and with their
reunited spirits, in eternal society of Saints and Angels, shall enjoy Ps.
16.11.
fullness of joy at his right hand, and pleasures for evermore.

And will he neglect, in a miserable Wardship, his Sons and Heirs No; 1.
Tim. 4.8
Godliness has the promises of this life, and that which is to come. Our Text
says, magnificans salutes, he gives great deliverance and great prosperity
both; great prosperity, in body and soul both; and both in this life, and
that which is to come both. And Romans 8.32
He that has given us his own Son, how shall he, but with him (the Heir
of all things) give us all things? all which we can see, or hear, or
conceive, nay more then all these 1. Cor. 2.9.
has God prepared for them, that love him. He is DEVS ad salutes (says David)
which he expounds by Ps. 68.18.
leading captivity captive, receiving gifts for men, and loading us with
benefits, even to a Selah, a note above Ela, the highest tune of our Song, of
our conceit. So (Ion. 2.9.) Ieshugnathah, saluations of the Lord, which the
Grammarians observe, cum duobus signis foemininis, Tau and He, ad augendum
sensum, salus and salus. Even as they note also on the word, Ashre (blessed)
that it is both abstract and plural, to show the perfection of beatitudes,
which God gives, which is, secretis malis omnibus cumulata bonorum complectio:
such is Ieshugnoth here, a deliverance from all evils, and secondly, an
exaltation to all good. He is Magnificans salutes; his name, in both, is
wonderful; wonderful great, wonderful many are his saluations. We Ephesians. 2.19.
were strangers and forreiners; he has made us by his saluations, free of the
heavenly Jerusalem, Citizens with the Saints, yea, and of the household of GOD;
his Domestics and Servants in ordinary; which the Queen of Sheba applauded
in Salomon's servants, 1. Re. 10.8
Blessed are thy men, that stand in thy presence, and hear thy wisdom. Mat.
12.42
But a greater, then Solomon, is here; and here, in his presence are you
assembled, to hear his wisdom to salvation. But of servants, some are
Slaves, and Tenants in villainage: he has exalted us above the name of
servants; Job. 15.15
henceforth (says he) I will call you friends. Friends in Alliance and
Consanguinitie, are more then friends: but, says he, of such, Mat 12.49
Lo here my Brother, my Sister, my Mother: lo here, even they, which hear
his word and do it. Yea, but Amor descendit: true; in us, it is weak in the
ascending and collateral lines: but here is also a descent; Heb. 2.13
Lo here am I, and the children, which thou have given me. Children! sweet
pledges; other selves! but yet one is the Heir, and Gauell-kind-tenure
weakeneth the greatest Inheritance. Not so here, all the Heirs, all have all,
and are haeredes ex ass: the Inheritance is a transcendent beyond the
Predicaments of substance and quantity too, and therefore indivisible, Col.
1.12.
the Inheritance of the Saints in light, which, as the light is communicable,
without diminution, as well to millions of millions, as to two or three
beholders. Son and Romans 1.17
heir of God, coheire with Christ! is there a sweeter name? yea, the love of
women is prouerbiall; the Wife in the bosom sometimes gets a Monopoly, and
this interceding Moon ecclipseth the Sun's light to his dearest Progeny: Be
it so, yet this also is ours; he Hos. 2.19
has espoused us to him for ever. How does he himself sing his Amoretti, if
not Epithalamion, his loves, in that Song of Songs? how did he put on our
nature, in his Incarnation, to woo us? and put it off (as it were) in his
Passion, to win us? Yea, the Deuill's Job. 2.4.
skin for skin, and Wife for life, lies not here; he has made us of r his
flesh and bone, and one with himself, in mystical unity; and, in more then
miraculous charity, has not cut off the member for the head, but has
permitted, committed, the head to die for the members: Romans 4.25
he died for our sins, he rose again for our justification: he Psalm. 68.18.
ascended to give gifts unto us; and Heb 1.3.
is set down at the right hand of GOD, to make intercession for us sinners, to
take possession, for us mortals, Ioh. 14.2.
in his fathers house, where are many mansions, that Ioh. 17.24.
whereas he is, we may be also.

The third observation is, that he is not only a Savior in deliverance, and
prosperity, but Salus, salvation. Of the Judges it is said, Neh. 9.27.
Dedisti eis saluatores. Obadiah says of Ministers, by whom ye believe, Obad.
verse. 21. 1. Cor. 3.5.
Ascendent saluatores: and they were men of Belial, which denied this to the
King, 1. Sam. 10.27.
How shall this man save us? and we are bid Act. 2.40.
save our selves, Act. 2. These save as Instruments, but originally Psalm 3.9.
Salvation is the Lords, as essentially as Deity, Isa. 43.11
I, even I, am the LORD, and beside me there is no Savior. He is Salutare,
Psalm. 95.1
Inbilemus Deo salutari nostro, the sun of salvation; yea, in another extent,
he is salus, Psalm. 27.1
He is my light, and my salvation. Psalm. 35.3
Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. He is (as Tremellius reads it)
omnimoda salus; Alijs, dimensa; huic, immensa salus; Others save imperfectly,
as This salvation, savior, pleases to impart; sometimes, and some persons, in
some measure, in some manner, and soon are at some end of their saving: yea,
the King here needs a Tower of salvation for himself. But He is Salvation
it self, infinitely perfect, perfectly infinite, totus, tota salus, the Alpha
and Omega, spring and sea, center and circumference of salvation. Col. 1.19.
In him it pleased the Father, that all fullness should dwell, even Col. 2.9.
the fullness of the Godhead bodily: Act. 4.12
Neither is there salvation in any other. The Virgin, whom some salute
Saluatrix, begins her Magnificat, with GOD, my savior: he is magnificans
salutes, he is magnifica salus. Factus Psalm. 118.14, 21.
est mihi in salutem, says David twice in the 118. Psalm; most properly, for
Job. 1.14
Verbum caro factum est, The Word, which is supersubsisting salvation, was made
flesh, did assume into personal subsistence the humane nature, and, factus est
in salutem, is become salvation, by coming in the flesh. And thus this
inaccessible abstract is made a sensible concrete, a treasury of salvation,
his manhood being the cisterne, into which the waters Isa. 12.3.
of salvation ever flow, and ouerflow from the immense fountain of the Deity,
and by the Word and Spirit, are, as by the conduits, from that cisterne,
conveyed to our Faith* and we out Job. 1.16.
of his fullness receive grace for grace who is salus and salus, salvation and
salvation, Psalm. 84.11.
grace and glory. JESUS is this Ieshugnoth, Physician and Physike too, our
Redeemer and Savior; yea, our salvation and redemption, the price which was
paid for us; Isa. 53.5.
in his stripes we are healed, there is liberatio; and Phil. 1.21
to me to live is Christ: Gal. 2.20.
I live not, but he lives in me; There is grace, the first part of
exaltation: And Reu. 21.22.
the Lamb is the Temple, Sun, and light of that City: and all the sealed
and saved, innumerable numbers, cry Reu. 7.10
Salvation to our God, which sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb; this
is the second part of exaltation, our superexaltation (...): Dedit se in
meritum, dahit se in proemium; Bern.
He gave himself to buy us, he will give himself to crown us. Nothing else
could save from infinite evil of sin, and therefore 2. Cor. 5.21.
he was made sin for us, to save his people from their sins; was betrayed
to his enemies, to deliver us from ours, and Phil. 2.7.
exinaniuit se (or as Tertullian reads it, exhausit, as Beza, ex Omni,
seipsum ad nihil redegit) to exalt us: and is therefore exalted, that he may
be 1. Cor. 1.
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, justification, redemption: Once; he is
Col. 3.
all in all; which Saint Paul makes the state of salvation, That God shall be
All in All. O Ephesians. 3.18.
the height, 1. Cor. 15.
the breadth, the depth, the length, O the love, the salvation of Christ, that
passes knowledge! but, oh the height, the breadth, the depth, the length, the
sin of man, that passes knowledge! some so careless, as to neglect it, as the
carnal worldling; and some so wilfully wicked, that they reject it, as the
obdurate sinner; and some so given to Numeration, Addition, Multiplication, and
Division, of and among Saviors, and Sauiouresses, that this salvation is not
an abstract, but a distract; they make a subtraction and fraction (almost, a
cipher) of it. And Plaut and Ter. Adelph
ipsa si cubiat Salus seruare prorsus non potest hanc familiam, may be said of
them, Ion. 2.8.
which observe lying vanities, and forsake their own mercy. For Ion. 2.9.
Salvation is the Lords, and salvation it self, Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I, and ye would not? no more, then a
Tower of salvation saves straglers.

The fourth observation, Turris salutum. Prou. 9.1
Wisdom has built her house, and hewn her seven Pillars. Nay, wisdom was
built a house, and in the incarnation assumed humanity, the Temple of Deity,
so called Job. 2.21.
by himself. Tower and Temple, both Metaphors designing him, that is both
strong, and holy; the seven Pillars are Reu. 5.6.
septem lumina, septem cornua, seven spirits, Job. 3.34.
the spirit not by measure.

Man is a sensitive creature, The manifold use of Scripture metaphors.
and has nothing in intellectu, quod non prius in sensu: and therefore GOD (as
the Parent, that lispeth to teach the Infant) stoopeth to our infirmities, as
in the Sacraments, (which are visible words) so in the figures and mystical
allegories of the Law, Gal. 4.24.
(...); 1. Cor. 10.11.
(...): and in the parables, and metaphors of the Gospel, spiritual things
are put in sensible habites, that we may see (at least) Exodus 33.23.
his hinder parts, and may Psalm. 34.8.
taste, how sweet the Lord is, that Gal. 3.1.
Christ may be evidently set forth, and (as it were) among us crucified, and
we may at once 1. Ioh. 1.1
both hear, and see, and handle the Word of life. To sensual Man, nothing
more sensible and palyne, nothing more piercing and powerful, nothing more
pleasing and insinuating, nothing more settling and memorable, nothing more
accommodate to common use, then heavenly things in borrowed liueries of
metaphorical speech, whereby we may find monitors and instructers in and
from all our affairs; and not at Church alone but in our houses; yea, our
houses and Churches themselves may preach edification, as that word, as this
text are witnesses. For our houses are (say some) our Castles; I am sure,
Castles and Towers are houses, spacious and specious houses Dan. 4.30
for the honor of the King, and for the house of the Kingdom. This migdol is
Psalm. 18.50.
magdil, magnificans, a magnificent house, such he has built the World, a
public Seneca de luxu Romans
versatilia laquearia; the Sun, the day light; the Moon and Stars,
night-lamps; the several regions, several rooms; Psalm. 104.3.
the beams of his chambers are laid in the waters; the earth, the floor; the
sea, a mote; the surface of the earth, an embroydered carpet; the fruits,
provision; rivers, woods, sands, deserts, and other partition of Countries,
partition-walls; winds, raynes, meteors, wild-beasts, and creatures, are game
for body and mind; the tamer beasts, fishes, fowls, natural slaves, and
houshold-seruants; the worlds riches are lauta supellex, our household
furniture. He has made Thee also an house, a magnificent house, and Job. 4.1^.
we dwell in houses of clay, but materiam superauit opus. This body is a
natural See of this the authors Pilgrim, c. 5, 6, 7.
house to the soul: the arms, and legs, as out houses; the belly, breast,
and head, as three courts of this goodly Palace; the belly or lower court, as
offices; the breast, as the hall, great-chamber, presence, chapel, where the
heart receives and performs her services; the head or third court is a
natural Tower of this Palace, mounted on a Mount, another City in this City
of Man, a Capitol at least, a Senate House, or Councell-chamber, a Microcosme,
of the Microcosme, a Heaven to this little Earth, and abridgement both of the
greater and less Worlds. This house is Luc. 139.14.
fearfully and wonderfully made, where every Room is animated, living,
moving, and both room to receive, and officer to act and perform all things;
sees those that come to see it; hears the hearers, and speaks to the
speakers.

But as the Fox deals with the Badger, defiling his new-built house, and
making him to forsake it: so has the Devil breathed his venom, and left his
filthy, Foxie, Harpie-excrements in us, that now it is become Luc. 11.21.
the Palace of and become a Tower and, by taking the infirmities, repaired the
ruins and breaches of this house, caused by the fall, and rebuilt for the
habitation of God by the Spirit. Ephesians. 2. vlt.
He made himself a Tower, to make us a Temple, and 1. Pet. 2.5.
spiritual house of living stones, to offer sacrifices to God, acceptable by
Jesus Christ: and he made himself a Temple, to make us Towers, Matt. 16.18.
against which the gates of a contrary Tower (the force and Forts) of Hell
should not prevail. And though some part of this Tower must have a fall, yet
is it for an everlasting reparation, and 2. Cor. 5.1.
we know (says Saint Paul) that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. A house now, nay, not a house of precious Matter, but of Earth;
nor that as God made it, but as we have marred it, Martial.
Ours (sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus) no, not worthy the name of a
house, but a Tabernacle, and that (not which may, but) which must be dissolved,
is always in dissolution: We have a building of for a Tabernacle, a building;
for ours, a building of God; for earthly, Heavenly; for this in dissolution, an
eternal house: and this is the supernatural house of glory. Of this natural
house in the creation (to omit that common Hall of the world) of the
diabolical, in the fall, spiritual in grace, supernatural in glory, and of
that divine house, or Tower of salvation, which Christ made, and was made, for
us, symbolical house of Salomons Temple, and Moses Tabernacle did give
instructions, supercelestiall house, Hebr. 9.24.
into which, that is, into the true heavens Christ, our high Priest, is entered
through the veil of his flesh, to appear in the presence of God for us, and
to be an super-supercelestiall house to us. These three Courts of the
Tabernacle represented, The curtains of the Tabernacle drawn, and her
mysteries vnveiled.
the first, Nature, which must be mortified and cleansed, as the Lauer, and
Altar signified; the second Court, the new man, or state of grace; in that,
was, in this is the golden Lamp of Faith, the shew-bread-table of charity;
and the golden Altar of perfume before the veil, the hope of the Saints, now
saving and entering into that, Hebr. 6.19, 20.
which is within the veil, whither the forerunner is for us entered, even
Jesus, not into the Holies made with hands, the figures of the true, but into
heaven it self: where Number. 17.8.
Aarons rod, blossoming from a dry stick, shows the Ezech. 37.10.
resurrection of these dry bones; Hebr. 9.4, 5.
the pot of lasting Manna, food of eternity; the Cherubim, angelical
society; the Exodus 32.16.
Tables, written by Gods finger, perfect sanctity; the Oracle, fullness of
illumination. None, but Priests, might enter the former; none, but the high
Priest, this, to show, that none but Reu. 1.6.
Kings and Priests to God are in actual state of grace; none, but Christ, is
ordinarily yet admitted to fullness Reu. 6.10.
of glory. This natural house is magnificent; yea, when it is diabolical, it
is called a Palace; when spiritual, a Temple for God; when celestial, a
building of God. Of God was that symbolicall; with God is the supercelestiall;
and that divine, in the Incarnation, and now super-supercelestiall in
Glorification, is with God, and is God. All magnificent houses! When God
himself is the house and building, it must needs be beyond all names of
magnificence: and so we have it here, He is the Tower of salvation.

Hearken you that love buildings; here is a house readie-built, to be sold, to
be given: Pro. 17.16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of the fool, to buy wisdom, and he
has no heart, to buy, to build, to edify himself? How many build themselves
out of doors? and how many are spued out of their own houses, queasie with
want of fire, as the Master is with store of smoke? How many are racked and
rent, with racked rents? How many fashion mongers are afraid for the fashion,
or are grieved to see their houses cut in fashion, when themselves could not?
But this house is of best fashion, easiest price, has all commodities of a
house; yea, exceedes a House, it is a Tower; exceeds a Tower, it is a Tower of
salvation; exceedes salvation, it is of saluations, of royal saluations. A
Tower is a House of Houses: (Pauperum tabernas, Horace.
said the Poet, Regumque turres:) it is not only a house for habitation, but
royal for the King, and therefore is, or ought to be, spacious for circuit,
specious for beauty, stately for situation, strong with fortification, rich
with provision, armed with munition, guarded with soldiers, mounted with
bulwarks, towred with turrets, battailed for out-looking artillery, enclosed
with ditches, pleasant with walks and gardens, terrible with vaults and
prisons, commodious with mints and work houses. Once, Nature and Art in Towers
conspire to procreate those double Twins, Offense and defense, pleasure and
profit, riches and strength, or (as the Text, magnificans salutes) magnificence
and safety. The Tower of this City is famous in most of these, but could not
be a Tower of safety to the King, when Wat Tiler, with a rabblement of
Raskalls, imposed what they list; Tho. Walsing. hist. Angl. Ric. 2.
and from the King. and his Tower, fetched the Archbishop (then Chancellor)
even from the Altar, and the Treasurer, with others, and cut off their heads.
So it may be with this Tower, but not so with the Tower of his King: He is a
Tower of saluations for his King, mounted on a Hill Exodus 19.13. Heb. 12.20.
, (no beast may come near) whose Matter is immateriall Simplicity, whose
Space is Immensitie, whose Ditch is Immutabilitie, whose Wall is Omnipotence,
whose Situation is Eternity, whose Architecture is Wisdom, whose Warders are
Selfe-sufficience, whose Munition is Perfection, whose Provision is Providence,
whose Beauty is Glory; Ordnance, his Word; Battlements, Omniscience, Turrets,
Blessedness; Bulwarks, Justice; Mints, Mercy; Windows, Light of his
Countenance; Gates, Grace; Walks, Love; Garden, Joy; and is not without his
Isa. 30.33.
Tophet, his Prison-vault; But what should I say more* he is more then can be
told by telling, or described by description: his all is I. ^.M, and every of
these, Exodus 3.14.
are all of these. What will he not give to that man, to that King, to whom he
gives himself, to be (...) of salvation for his King?

And thus are we come to the fifth step [ for his.] for there are (...), Ephesians.
2.12
without Christ, without hope, without God, in the World: they are his, but he
is not theirs, their God, their Salvation, their Tower; but Heb. 12.29.
a consuming fire, and they Isa. 47.14
as stubble. All things are his; First, his creatures; Reu. 4.11
for his wills sake they are and were created: Secondly, His, by conservation,
preserved by his goodness; Act. 17.28
In him, we live, move, and have our being. Thirdly, his, by disposition; Mat.
20.15.
may he not do with his own, what he will: the sudden Job 34.38.35.
lightnings say to him, Lo, we are here. Fourthly, his, in final reference,
To. 11.36.
all things are of him, and for him. Fifthly, Christ has other tenures, and
kinds of right; as first, of Gift; Secondly, of Purchase; Thirdly, of Descent;
all are borne in his Manor. Fourthly, of Conquest; he has triumphed over 2.
Cor. 4.4
the God of the World. Fifthly, of Subjection, in Christians, which profess his
Name in the Word and ^acraments, are his in external proferson, are his
Proper, his Servants, Freemen, Friends, Kindred, Children, Heirs, Spouse,
Members. All things are his in all they have; but (says Saint Gregory) Ipse,
Greg. in Ez. b. 8.
sibi semper similis, dissimiliter tangit dissimilia. The Elements are his, in
their imperfect existence; torpid things, in being; vegetables, in growing;
sensitiues, in sense; Man, in reason, was his, till he did insanire cum
ratione, and became, by sin, the Deuil's slave; not only dust now, but, by a
fire from Hell, consumed into the ashes of himself. Ephesians. 1.
But ex massa corrupta, he has elected some to be his, his peculiar, his
Saints, his Kings, elected, predestined, adopted, called, justified,
sanctified in his Son, who is naturally and eternally his, and we, in, by,
and for him: and none, but the Spouse, may sing, Cant. 6.3.
I am my Welbeloued's, and my well-beloved is mine, nor Reu. 4.11.
the new Song, Apoc. 4. nor Reu. 7.10.
the Song of salvation, Apoc. 7. but they, that are sealed, and have 2. Tim.
2.9.
thi^ Seal, The Lord knows who are his: which is all one with this, A Tower
of salvation to his.

Sixthly, His what? his King: so before; so our Text. Romans 9.6, 7.
They are not all Israel, which are of Israel, nor all the seed of Abraham,
children. 2. Tim. 2.20.
In a great house, are vessels of honor and dishonor. Our Grandees have their
Yeomanrie and Gentry to serve them, both free: our Ancestors, also Villains,
as other Slaves. But this King is Reu. 19.16
a King of Kings, all his Subjects are Kings, yea, and Priests too, in
spiritual sense. Joh. 8.35.
The servant abides not in the house always, but Free men, and Kings do:
howsoever, even there 1. Cor. 15.41.
one star differs from another in glory. His service is perfect freedom,
and Christian Loyalty is perfect Royalty. Mal. 1.14
I am a great KING says the Lord of Hosts: and no marvel; for the least of
his faithful servants are Kings of no less, then three whole Worlds. Three
whole Worlds are the right and Royalty of every right and Loyal Christian, who
(which the Pope does proudly) may challenge a Triple (invisible) Crown.
Listen, poor Artificers, to this Gospel, to these good tidings, hear,
believe, obey, the Gospel, and live, yea, and reign; enjoy a threefold
Kingdom, all beyond names of time, and one also beyond all space of place.
Awaken, you rich men, which listen after great purchases; which make others
poor; yea, which make your selves poor, to make your selves rich, which live
poor, to die rich, and buy some patch of the World, Nihil auaro Se vilius.
with making your selves patches, and the vilest things, that you, and the
World have. Be no Pedlers, be Royal Merchants; three Kingdoms, three Worlds!
give me a Chapman. And lest out of your own use and guiltiness ye suspect
me of fraud, see the proof and goodness of them. The first of these is this
Universe; a large Kingdom, to which Great Alexander's would have been but a
petie-petie principality, not enough for a Peer of this Kingdom.

Off with thy Harpies-hands and fancie-frenzies, Anabaptist, we remove not
the Land ma^es, nor confound Proprieties. Down with thy
Magnifico-mouse-births, Ennius.
sententious Mountebanke, wordie Paradoxicall Stoicke, Simia quam similis,
turpissima bestia nobis? Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu? He, and
he only, is rich, free, wise, a King: where is his evidence? he has dreamed
of that, which is indeed the Inheritance of grace, not nature, and therefore
ours, because Christ. Heb. 1.2.
the heir of all things, is ours: and therefore not ours in subuerting
Propriety, because Mat. 5.17
Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it: and where were, Thou
shall not steal, if all had propriety in all?

All things are yours (says S. Paul) and you, Christ's, and Christ, GOD'S:
Inuert the Order, and see your Pedigree and right; All things are GOD'S: 1.
Cor. 3.22.23.
and Ioh. 3.35.
The Father has loved the Son, and given him all things. Ioh. 3.16
God so loved the World, that he gave his Son, and Romans 8.32
with him, all things, as appurtenances to the freehold. Isai. 9.6.
To us a Son is given, and Ioh. 1.12.
to as many, as receive him, he gives power to be the Sons of GOD (and
therefore heirs, coheires) even, as many as believe in his Name.

The Christian has the Universe, but in an Universal tenure: Seneca de Benef.
l. 7. c. 4.
which he enjoys thus; his mind by contemplation; his conscience, in
liberty; his body, in lawful use of what God sends, q sanctified by the Word
and Prayer; his heart, with contentedness, supplying all defects, and fixing
it self on God, which is ours, whatsoever else be wanting, by whose only will
and providence, other things are wanting, and which gives himself, before he
take away any thing, and takes away other things, that he might make us
capeable of himself. This is Manna of all tastes, we need not Exo. 36.3
the fleshpots of Egypt: this is generous Wine, what care I, if I have no
troubled Ale? this is delightsome light, which having viewed I cannot, I care
not much for baser Objects. Christian liberty frees not from duties, to do
what we list, but gives a lust to do our duties, and like the Sun, shines
through Air and Water, without corrupting them, and, as the soul, fills the
bodily members, not consuming, but consummating, and perfecting them: it adds
Sanctity, dissolueth not Propriety. Once, God is the Tower of his King, and
the World is the Towre-hill, Psalm. 16.5. and 119.57.
Court, or Liberties: and if he be our portion, needs must it: whereas the
ungodly, because he has not God, has a Humane and Civil, not a Spiritual,
right, and his conscience is polluted in the use of that, which he calls his
own: like Cain, Genesis 4.12.
a Vagabond in his own ground. Tit. 1.15.
To the impure all things are impure.

The second World, whereof this Tower of salvation makes thee King, is thy
self, less in quantity, then the former, but greater in value: for that was
made with his Word, Ps. 33.9.
Dixit, and facta sunt omnia, but The Word himself was made a man for man, and
dixit multa, and gessit mira (says Saint Bernard) and pertulit dura, Bern. de.
dil. Deo.
that he might re-giue us our selves. And if a man be not sui compos, what can
the World benefit him? any otherwise, then the great Inheritance of a Fool,
Madman, or Infant? which, being sui impotes, are, with all that they have, at
other's disposition: or what right has he, more then a slave, whose all is his
Lords? Others are Infants, Fools, Mad, and Slaves to the Devil, the World,
the Flesh; the true Christian is Lord of himself, though he be a Slave, and
is both King, and Kingdom too in this Microcosme. The Regions and Climates of
this World, are his bodily members; the Subjects, every particle of body, and
faculty of mind, every action, and passion; the Freedom is the will freed;
the Law is Gods Word; Reason is the Court; Conscience, Judge; the Affections,
Sheriff and Iusticers, to put in execution; the external Senses, Officers;
Common-sence, Clerk; Fantasy, Crier; Memory, Register; the Court continual
in selfe-sessions. And were it not for this selfe-authoritie, whereby a man
commands himself, and does good or bad willingly, there were neither Virtue
nor Vice: in which respect, the Slave, being 1. Co. 7.22
the Lords Freeman, willingly, and for conscience, is subject to do and suffer
his Superiors will, Ephesians. 6.7.
as serving the Lord, and not man. And he, that is thus King of himself, is
Lord of Fortune, ( Cic. Parad
suis ea cuique fingitur moribus;) of Death, (it is but like 1. Sam. 17.51.
Goliahs Sword, his own Executioner, and kills the remainder of death in
us:) of the Devil, Heb. 2.14
who has the power of death; of the World, whereof he is God, that his
Concubine; and of our Lusts, the Bawdes: the Traitors being exiled and
executed, the Devil and the World have no power. Thus that Noble Army of
Martyrs did what they might, and when, by Gods countermand, they might not do,
they suffered; and by willing suffering, tormented their Tormenters, and
conquered their Conquerours. O Noble Army of Martyrs! their names written in a
second red, shining brighter every day: the other in the dust, that I descend
no lower. In all these things, the Philosophers talk, walk, stalk it, like a
King in a Play, but were (...), as they called Act. 17.18
Saint Paul, and mocked at the Mysteries of this State, which they knew not.

And how then could they know that third Kingdom and World, merely
supernatural, and supermundane? it is not for Athenian Owls, but Heavenly
Eagles to face that Sun, and fly in such light. The Reuersion is here made
sure by Faith, and Christ, leaving his pledge with us, his Spirit, is gone
thither with our pledge, and in our nature has taken possession. Of which,
having said somewhat before, here we cannot say much: save only, that it is
beyond what we can say or think, a World of Worlds; in substance, not subject
to alteration, corruption, passion, motion; in quantity, Job. 14.2.
many dwelling places, Re. 21.16.
the walls twelve thousand furlongs; in quality, a Paradise, fair, shining,
delightsome; the Ibid. v. 18.
streets of pure Gold, shining like unto clear Glass; a mere transcendent,
where all are Kings of all these three Worlds; and the King of Kings shall
dwell with them, and be all in all unto them.

Thus you see a threefold Kingdom of a threefold World, in a threefold
tenure, beyond all, which Littleton conceived: a cosmopoliticall, of the
universe, a microcosmicall, of thy self; a heavenly, of the world to come; al
having this right, He is the Tower of salvation to his King. And now are we
come to the sixth step of the Throne, but may not sit down: Solomon is coming,
and we must descend, to make way for him: lest if we stay any longer in this
height, with Peter, in the transfiguration, Luc. 9.33
we say, we know not what. Let us consider our mortality, and Gods
providence, in setting a political King over us, that we may learn this
duty, lest we lose that dignity. A good Servant will prove a good Master,
and a good Subject is thereby the more capable of that threefold World and
Kingdom.

AS we ascended therefore before, we will now descend, that our method may
teach subjection: even of Christ himself it is said, Luc. 2.51
Descendit cum eis, and erat subditus.) Descent is the humble mother of
Obedience, as contrariwise, Rebellion is called Insurrection. Here then we
first are at that, which is first and supreme, King: The second step in our
descent is that, which in Kings themselves ascends, and is first, His: the
third is that which in buildings is supreme, a Tower: the fourth is that which
in his is supreme, Salvation: the fifth is the profound Vault or Tower under
ground, which undermines all underminers, and vaultworkers, a great Tower of
great deliverance: the sixth, a supreme Turrer of altitude and exaltation, great
prosperity. All supreme, and pleading for the Kings supremacy; supreme office;
a King: supreme Kingdom, to be his, his subject, and his King over his people:
supreme salvation, and supreme Tower, supreme profunditie, and supreme altitude
for his King. If the Pope could out of these three words gather as much for his
supremacy, he had a fairer color for his triple Crown: but that is from the
triple-headed Cerberus, and the triple gates of Hell, the Devil, World, Flesh,
against which this Tower of salvation is erected for his King.

The King is first in every division, and here in ours. HE IS, appertains to
the King of Kings: 1. Sam.
he is the Crown; the head that wears it, is the head of the Tribes, the
King. 1. Cor. 12.26.
If one member be honored (if the head be crowned) let all the members rejoice
with it, that this Psalm, 133.2.
precious ointment of salvation upon the Head, may run down to the beard (the
Court and City) yea, the skirts of his clothing (his remotest subjects:)
Exceeding glad shall we be of his salvation.

A King is a sacred name, not to be (intrate, Heracl.
nam hic Dij sunt; Psalm. 82.6
Ego dixi, Dij estis) it requires ample both observance and observation.
First, our Text says, King, not Kings, (...), it is spoken not of Kings, as
many, but of the King, as one: not now in the former Catholic sense to be
considered, nor to be construed to a later Cacolike, where the Pope is
concurring with Kings, and, at least, in spiritualibus (the least part of his
care) supreme over Kings. Thus to assume, is to presume, and GOD, the Tower of
salvation for his King, will be a Tower of desolation for Anti-kings, not his,
but the Devils, who is Job 41.34
Rex filiorum superbiae. It is contrary to the definition of a King; Potestas
Regia (says Zeno) quae nulli obnoxia; Zen. ap. D. Laert.
to the nature of a head (as he is called, verse. 44.) A body with diverse heads
is a Monster: an Amphisboena is a Serpent, a monstrous Serpent; Gerion, a
monstrous Giant; Cerberus, a Hell-dogge. The seed of the Serpent, hellishly,
giantly, serpently monstrous, is a many-headed body. A King is the Sun in
his Sphere, Sol, quia solus: Two Suns are prodigious and portentuous: one is
but a meteor, and soon disparent. Our Henry the second, who would see his
son crowned in his life; Edward and Richard the second, which must see their
seconds first, (secundi illi, parum secundi;) can testify this. But our King
is singular; singular indeed, one, and one alone, which alone post orbem
conditum has enjoyed all this triple Kingdom and present Sovereignty, in
natural and quiet possession. One God, one truth, one King in one Kingdom.

Secondly, a King is masculine, which the Grammarians call the more worthy
gender. It was a miracle of Divine providence, that we can attribute so much to
a Woman's memory: She was singular, and her mind masculine, Ruth 3.11.
Mulier virtutis, and Prou. 31.10.
Fortis, as Prou. 31. It would disgrace her, to say, she was a fourth Grace, (
Horat.
Choros ducit Venus) or a tenth Muse, for Arts: She was Isreal's Iud. 4.4.
Deborah, for the spirit of counsel, and Ib. v. 21.
Iael, for the spirit of fortitude, fastening to the ground the head of Sisera,
grounding and confounding all temporal Enemies and Rebels: yea, as more then
Iael, like another Hercules, she prevailed against the thee-crowned Cerberus,
and was Iud. 9.53
the woman, who slew Abimelech, who will needs be Father and King too (as the
name imports) Prince and Pastor of Pastors, and Princes; Iud. 9.15.
that bramble, which before devoured the Cedars of Lebanon, and with his
bellowing Bulls affrighted all Christian Kings and Emperors: Many Psalm. 22.12.
bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round. Pius the
fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth sent their bulls, fire-breathing indeed (as
it is in the Fable of Hercules) but this is not a Fable, that the Bulls and
Brambles prevailed not with all their fire against this Tower. God was Turris
salutum Reginae suae: and when Iud. 9.53.
Abimelech would have fired the Tower, Glorious Elizabeth was the Woman, which
threw a piece of a mil-stone on his head, (of that millstone, Reu. 18.21.) and
brake his skull, and ever since, we see him fallen, struggling, and setting his
Armour-bearers a-work, in purpose of revenge, in event, frustrate: and who
knows how soon? (whether, even now?) other of the Reu. 17.12.
ten horns which had given their Kingdoms to the Beast, and became her
Armour-bearers, shall hate the Whore, and dispatch Abimelech, which never
before had received so orderly, so glorious, and irrecouerable a wound, as
this, by a Woman? Our eyes saw her, in crosses and conquests, another David; in
peace, and building the Temple, Solomon; in provident Justice, Iehoshaphat; in
Reformation, Hezechiah; in restoring the Law, hidden in a strange Tongue, and
lost in the Temple, (in the Schools, and Scholies) Josias; and when 1. Macc.
1.56.
Antiochus had burnt the Law (Antichrist, the translated Scriptures) she was a
Judas Macchabaeus, to restore it, and dedicate the Temple: in all these, all of
them; in length of a glorious Reign, more then any of them; in Sea-exploits, O
quam te memorem Virgo? she tamed the invincible Armada in eighty eight; Dux
foemina facti; not she, but 1. Cor. 15.10.
the grace of GOD: Tibi militat ether. God was then a Tower of salvation
indeed (against those Sea-Towres, Claudian.
and Castles) for his Queen; Psalm. 18.14.
He shot his Ordnance, and disappointed and dispatched them. She was the
Queen 1. Reg. 101.
of the South, which visited heavenly Solomon, learned his Truth, offered her
Gold, and rarities to the Temples service, and reformation of the Church. Her
Drake, first of any General, encompassed the Globe; and her Cauendish was the
last, that happily performed it. Her days (said Astronomers) yielded a new
Star, Camden. Elizab.
which began in November, exceeded Jupiter, and at last ascendendo disparere
coepit; the Emblem of her self, her exceeding glorious Reign, which began
in November, and about the same time of the year, with the other, also
ascended to a higher Kingdom. If that be (...), this is a miracle; a Virgin, a
Mother, a Virgin Mother she was, of a numerous Issue of innumerable Subjects,
so esteeming, so esteemed; of her needy neighbors; of her Countries peace,
Religion, Arts, Arms, Plantations, Commerce; a Mother of a Man, not a
Man-child, but a Man in ripest maturitie, whom her heart conceived (but
concealed, till due time of birth) her just Heir, that neither she nor we,
might be distracted with conceit of a rising Sun: nay She, our Sun, set,
and we were not at a set, had no night, no evening, and, which is more, no
morning, but a Psalm. 19.5
Sun that had rejoiced, as a Giant to run his course, first appeared unto
us in our Zenith, and began to shine in midday-brightnesse. His Majesty
succeeded to all, which in her was hereditarie, and (lest you should think I
have exceeded in a digression) in other things many exceeded. Her memory is
crowned with those funeral Cypresses, which how did his presence turn into
festival Laurels? So we thought then, when our hearts, eyes, ears, tongues,
strove to exceed each other in expectations, acclamations, ecstasies, Psalm.
12.6.1.
We were as they that dream. Yea (as the Disciples, Luc. 24.41.
which believed not for joy) we were so rapt with this sudden resurrection, as
it were, of our happiness, which we so much, so long feared; would die with
her, and be buried in her Grave, that (like the Woman in the Gospel) Ioh.
16.21.
We remembered no more the anguish, for joy, that a Man was borne into the
World: and lest we should be ouer-ioyed (like those Disciples, which Luc.
24.41.
believed not for joy) God seasoned it with his Rod, and exacted tears to
attend her Funeral. And let us take heed, that a worse pestilence, the spirit
of ingratitude, have not possessed some, which at first liked their Manna, but
since (I know not how) it has grown Exodus 16.20.
full of worms, with the keeping, or rather they are full of worms, with the
continuance of their Manna to them, (which still is the same) and Number. 11.5.
long for Leekes and Onions: as Ioh. 3.20
they, that evil do, are weary of the Sun, and say, when will it be night?
Once, thou have still thy peace, and therefore can not hold thy peace,
murmurer; thou have still thy Religion, but art irreligious; have still thy
plenty, and surfettest of fullness; have still thy Learning, and Act. 26.24
Learning makes thee mad; have still thine Arms, if thou have such lust to
use them, God grant the Stage be never nearer. Can thou tell what thou
would have, thou diseased male-contented mind? the want of sickness is a
wanton sickness. Those things, which God gave by Queen ELIZABETH, he has
confirmed, and made more mature, settled, masculine, by King JAMES: and if the
epidemicall diseases of the times, or if thine own sins make some
alteration, S. T. M. hist. Ric. 3.
be not thou effeminate and querulous: and, for me, let Shaw's reward befall
me, if I speak it with Shaw's mind, and let this place be witness. And yet
is Genesis 9.22
Cham worse then he, which scoffeth at his Fathers nakedness; and he worse
then Cham, that being drunk himself, laugheth at his Father.

If we ascend from Grammar to Logic, a King is (thirdly) a name of relation:
Rex sine regno, vacua qui regnat in aula, is but a name, and fuit, is mortuus
est; imo habui, the beggars theme. So Agag is called, 1. Sam. 15.32.
when he had lost his Kingdom, and called for by the name of King, even, when
he was to lose himself. Our King was a King, before ours; and of that Kingdom,
whose nearness caused the worst remoteness. This back-doore in the North is
closed, and that Temple of Ianus, so long open, is now shut faster, then ever;
those bordering Harpies (monstrum, Virgil.
horrendum, inform) and their nests, and ayries of spoil, are gone; which but
bordered on the confines of Humanity, and in humane shape, were ravenous
beasts, to whom Theft and Murder were virtues. He gave, when he took, a
Kingdom, the School of his youth in royal Arts, Virgil.
and now, Tros, Tyriusque illi nullo discrimine aguntur.

Fourthly, a King is a name of differing quality, and quantity; and sometimes
Rex is a diminutiue in both: Rex sine regione, as the American Caciques and
Weroances, the Reguli vaguli, nuduli of the Savages: and little better were the
ancient Britains, when Caesar reckoned four, in a piece of Kent. Even in a
Bee-hiue, there is a King over those Cerea regna. But now the Hebrides,
Orchades, and other dispersed Islands, the Scots, the Picts, the Welsh
Triarchie, the Saxon and English Heptarchie, all these, before esteemed another
World, are now one Kingdom, under one King. And Ireland, where sometime
Treason had her Throne, with whom to rebel, was but to enter into action;
Moresine hist. of Irel.
where Wars had made a Wilderness, and wilder Nature, Boggs and Marshes
(how often drunk with the best English blood?) now submits to the same
Scepter in peace, and commits her self to our Language, Discipline,
Customs, Habitation. Yea, and how great a part of wide and wild America, is
now-new-encompassed with this, with His Crown?

And as in extension, so in intension, in the fifth place, Rex, a King, is a
quale quantum, and in longitude reaches to all parts ( An nescis longas
Regibus esse manus?) in latitude, to all causes; in altitude, to all persons;
in profunditie, to all soliditie, excluding every unnatural vacuum of
privileges, and prauileges, which may any way exempt the members from the head.
One said, he was Rex Regum, Maximilian.
and meant of such as would do what they list; subjects so punctual, and
lineall, that they leave the King but superficial. Herein also we have a
real, a royal King, whose power attingit a fine vsque ad finem fortiter, Sap.
2.
and disponit omnia suauiter; whose prerogative may not be exposed (it is a
sacred mystery) to every 1. Sam. 6.19.
Beth-shemit's eye, nor touched with 2. Sam. 6.7.
Vzzahs too too officious hand.

Sixthly, a King is genus generalissimum, in proper and full sense, it is like
the Oil, wherewith they are anointed, which is always uppermost, knows none
vndership, but to God, and abhors Secular, or Pontifical Superior; not as
Herod, and others, who were Reges, sub Rege. Thus then the subject agrees in
highest strain, with his Majesty a King, singular, masculine, real, regal,
absolute over his own, and independent of any over him. But all this may a
Heathen King be, and yet not be His, excluded this Tower of salvation for his
King; not so much advanced as to be as one of his people. To be his, and his
King, is a double prerogative: such was David, such is Ours: though (I
confess) that he, which is not his in eternal election, may be His King.

HIS, first, institutione potestatis, as we say and pray, Thine is the
Kingdom, and power, and glory: The powers, that be, Romans 13.1.
are ordained of God; not, as some blaspheme, a King is but a creature of man's
creation. Yea, Gods power, Reinolds.
as it shines in all powers, so, most of all, Monarchy is the most vine and
express Image of the Divine.

Secondly, His King, he is, Constitutione personae. We have before freed our
selves from elective, conditional, or whatsoever is not absolute, in the just
Quantum, and highest key of King: and have confined our selves to men of David's
rank, neither the Peoples King, nor the Peers King, nor the Priests King, nor
his own King, as Absalom; but His, Gods King, holding of him potestatem juris,
and jus potestatis. Pro. 8.16.
Per me Reges regnant (says Wisdom) and Dan. 4.32
the most High (says Daniel to and of Nebuchadnezzar, though a Heathen) rules
in the Kingdom of men, and gives it, to whomsoever he will. This Christus
Dominus does give to these Christi Domini their power; whether by humane
election, or lot, or extraordinary vocation, or that which can be ascribed to
none else, Natural descent. Where any enter by the window, and not by the
lawful Ioh. 10.9.
door, and have eaten Genesis 3.6.
the forbidden fruit, by the Serpents suggestion, for a Psa. 82.6.
Dij estis, without an Ego dixi, making themselves devils, to make themselves
gods; the Potestas is Gods, though the Potens and modus adipiscendi, are of 2.
Cor. 4.4
the God of this world: he is his (Gods) King, according to his will,
manifested, not in Scripture, but in event, Qui efficit voluntatem suam, vtique
bonam, Aug. Enchirid.
per malorum hominum voluntatem malam: which can punish a King and People for
sin, by a worse sinner, Isa. 10.5.
the rod of his wrath, which, after he has beaten his children, he can cast
into the fire. Here then, we have, if any Nation, his King, whose challenge is
from God, Act. 17.24, 25.
the Lord and Giver of life, Sceptra per innumeros missa tuetur auos: the seed
of David, of innumerable Kings; who, where others were hasty for him, had the
patience to stay himself, and to suspend jus, till justa, his just birthright,
till another just death-rites.

His King, Thirdly, singulari cura, as the most special part of his goods; his
peculiar Treasure, Ier. 22.24
his signet on his right hand; they Zach. 2.8.
that touch this Jewel, touch the Apple of his Eye, whereof he has
principal care above others, for others, against others, as, this day,
appeared, The Tower of salvation for his King,

His, fourthly, dispositione, not only disposing him to, but in the place:
when he would exalt Saul to be King, 1. Sa. 10.9
he gave him another heart; and when he would deiect him, 1. Sam. 16 14.
an evil spirit from the Lord, troubled him. Pro. 21.1.
As the Rivers of water, so the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he
turns it whither-soeuer he will; by immission of good thoughts; by just
permission of evil; as in Ahab, by 1. Reg. 22.22.
the lying spirits in his prophets, which yet chose to believe, before
Michajah. He sends a King Acts 13.22.
after his own heart (as David) when the people are after his heart: but if
the people 1. Sam. 8.7
will not have God to be their King, even by their King he can punish them, as
in Saul; or suffer them to bring mischief upon themselves, punishing sin
with sin, as in 1. Reg 12.30.
Jeroboam; or denying a King altogether: Anarchie is the worst Tyranny; Iud.
17.6. and 18.1.
There was no King in Israel, is the preface of some miserable story, and
sometime the end too, 19.1.25.21.25.
as the Alpha and Omega of Mischief. A head-lesse body is heed-lesse,
senseless, life-lesse: propter peccata terrae, the King is often changed. Pro.
28.2.
Let them, that will have their King better, first amend themselves, and pray
for the King: Haec sunt militiae nostrae, for he is His. And for our King, as
he disposed him to us, and us to him, with such mutual content: so he has
filled his heart with 1 Re. 3.9
wisdom and understanding to judge his people; for who else were able to
judge this thy so great people, (says Solomon;) which in our King, in the
height of reason, appeared this day; when his Reasons wrought so powerfully on
Gowry, that in the Act of Disloyalty, and the bloudiest part of Treason, he
had Act. 26.28
almost persuaded him to become a Christian, a Subject: and beyond all reason,
and humane capacity, above, yea, against Art, to construe those words in the
Letter, to bring to light the abstrusest work of Darkness, the Masterpiece
of Treason, and Monster-prize of Sathanicall Stratagems, Reu. 9.11.
King Abaddons Tower of Desolation: but he was a Tower of salvation for his
King, to reveal Mysteries, by which, to grind the Powlder-plot to poulder,
and to blow it up with a Terrile blow. A King, his King, 1. Sam. 10 11.
among the Prophets; Ps. 18.23.
This was the Lords doing, and was marvelous in our eyes.

Fifthly, his King, subordinatione, his Lieutenant, his Steward: the people are
his, Exodus 19.5
his peculiar above all people, though all the Earth be his: he is their King,
and has set him over his kingdom to rule it. To him he is accountable, of
whom he receives; under whom, he executes power: that also limited by his
Law, either in Commission, to command for God, as he is Custos vtriusque
Tabulae, or in permission of things, naturally indifferent, to be disposed by
his wisdom, for the common good, and to lose their indifferency in use, upon
his command, or prohibition. 2. Cor. 10.8
His power is to edification, not to destruction, nor ought he to countermand
the Law of his King, any more, then his Deputy, may his; a Petie-constable,
the express command of the Lord Mayor; or he, of the King: or the foot, or
hand, the order of the head. Yet even in such cases, we are not to Romans 13.2.
resist the power, but must suffer, where we cannot do, the will of the King:
and with Act. 26.25
words, and behavior of truth, and soberness, Act. 5.29.
obey GOD, rather then man.

This for instruction, as for the use of it, Blessed be God, that in the
present state, we know nothing imposed upon the liberty of conscience,
howsoever nicetie proves scrupulous, or wantonness wilful.

Lastly, his King he is, retributione, who is the Reu. 19.16
King of Kings: Rom, 14.4
he stands, or falls to his own Master: who, if he be Lu. 19.17
faithful in a little, and temporal Kingdom, can make him Ruler in a
greater, and eternal. Otherwise, without thy doing wrong, He shall suffer
right: Eccles 5.8
He that is higher, then the Highest, regards: Isa. 30.33.
Tophet is prepared of old, it is prepared for the King: Wisd. 6.6.
Potentes potenter tormenta patientur. The head is not to be judged by the
hands, much less, punished, or cut off; a thing unnatural, furious,
monstrous; the offended people to dispose, or depose the King, is to make him
subject to innumerable Kings, to make all Kings, and thererefore none; a thing
unreasonable, and implying contradiction: the Supreme Judge to be obnoxious to
inferior Tribunals, were contrary to order; not Legal, not Regal, not
Regular. To forget that we are his Subjects, if he have forgotten to be his,
Gods, King, is contrary to all Religion, in the Law and Gospel. In the Law,
Ephesians. 6.2.
Honor thy Father, is the first Commandment, with promise, first of the
second Table, and the claspe of both: nor may Cain's or Cham's Posterity
reject it, because they were bad. Ezech. 18.2.
The Fathers sour Grapes must not thus edge the children's teeth. Nero, a
tyrannical Father, and Pilate, a popular pleaser, in the Gospel, are obeyed,
and commanded to be obeyed, by Christ himself, and his Apostles, to
extremity of sufferings. Romans 13.1
The powers were of God, and from above, when the vessels, which contained
them, could not contain themselves, Iam. 3.15
were earthly sensual, deuillish, in their unjust profits, filthy pleasures,
bloody persecutions. Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, though thou seem to see a
Eccles. 10.16.
vae regno, cuius Rex est puer; except, with 1. Reg. 2.9.46.
Shimei, thou will have thy curses written with thine own blood. Job 13.7.
Nunquid Deus indiget mendacio vestro, vt pro illo loquamini dolos? says Job;
Needs God thy false Treason, to give right reason to the World? is this faith,
to be perfidious, to make haste, and to see thy self righted? Is this hope,
not to expect with patience? is this Charity, 1. Cor. 13.7
to believe nothing? to hope nothing? to endure nothing? is this humility, to
Isa 14.14
make thy self equal to the highest? Correcter, Directer, and in place of God
himself, to the King? Even a busy Malapert Tongue is a strife, a string Psalm
11.2. and 57.4.
shoots Arrows, and lifts up a Sword against the King, to assault him in
his Tower of salvation, which Ps. 31 20.
will keep him safe from the strife of Tongues. But to write and preach, is to
plant Ordnance against this Tower, and, with Giants, to fight against God, The
Tower of salvation for his King.

When Hist. Ed. 2. T. de la More.
Adam of Hereford preached at Oxford, and took his Text 2. Reg. 4.19.
Caput meum doleo, that the members might depose their Head, Edward the Second;
T. Walsing.
and when the Necromanticall Head spoke at Oxford, in the days of Richard the
Second; Pedes eleuabuntur super caput, as it soon after fell out; the Doctrine
was one and the same, 1. Tim. 4.1
a Doctrine of Devils, as well in the Pulpit, and mouth of a Bishop, as in the
Deuill's own Necromanticall Head and Dialect. And if any since, in that fertile
field of the Lord, has sown any such infoelix lolium, Mat. 13.28.
it is the Enemies doing: for the Master had there sown, (and made it a
Seminary of) good seed.

And that Traitors are the Devils Disciples, the usual appellation of
Scripture makes plain, calling them 1. Sam. 10 27. 2. Sam. 20.1 2. Chron.
13.1.
the sons of Belial: and so accordingly Gowry, the Arch-traitour, was a son
of Belial, a Consulter with Necromancers, and daily wearer of Magical
Characters; his Oracle deceiving him with loss of life, being wounded to the
heart, without loss of blood, till those Characters were taken away Judge. 5.31
So let thine Enemies perish^, O God, and be thou still a Tower for thy King.

But this is yet the last Lesson, and highest form in the School of the
Devil, to make Treason, Religion; Religion, sure not a religando, of
fastening, but of religendo, of choosing again and again King and Religion
too; a refigendo, of loosing the strongest bonds, the Oath of God; the Devils
Religion, which under pretense of Injustice, whispered Rebellion to our Genesis
3.5.
Parents in Paradise. And a mark of Antichrist it remains, 2. These. 2.4.
To oppose and exalt himself, above all, that is called GOD, or (...), that
is, Kings and Emperors: of which, from Thomas Becket (sainted for this
Quarrel) unto the Poulder-plot, we have Examples more then enough; though our
Neighbour-Countries bleed more fresh, because He has been the Tower of
salvation for his Queen, and is for his King. I marvel not at Rome, a City
founded in blood, hater of the name, expeller of the power of Kings, hatcher of
so many King-hating Locusts, and lastly, of Jesuits, who have found
distinctions ( Reu. 2.24.
the deepnesse of Satan) to make it tolerable, nay lawful, nay commendable,
nay meritorious of Heaven, to kill the Kings of the Earth. But is there any of
ours, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
that have gone out from us, and are not of us, whose intemperate zeal has
eaten Gods House, and distempered to giddiness, and wheeled round from one
extremity to another? I know not how, extremes have contrary affects, and yet
often, like effects: like Iud. 15.4.
Samsons Foxes, they look opposite, but have a stinking fiery conjunction:
such (if there be such) are these, which bow the crooked stick right, with
another extreme of crookedness (as Plato told Diogenes, Alio fastu) whose
Wildfire burns in Water, Laert.
whose Hellfire burns and yet is darkness, such is the Treason of Religion,
and Religion of Treason.

I am weary of this subject, this hell-bred Genesis 3.15
seed of the Serpent: I will flee Tower of refuge; and, lo, here in my Text,
A Tower of salvation. Salvation is invisible, and therefore has made it self
sensible in this Towre-resemblance. A Tower is most conspicuous; but having
been before so long a Surveior, we must not now dwell on this Tower. Two
things it imports; the weakness of the strongest of men, and Gods ready
presence, and saving defense. For the first, His King is a man: homo sum,
Terent.
humani a me nihil alienum, is true of Kings: He needs a house: the
injurious elements would not know him from another man; a royal House, that
he be not imprisoned at home: a strong House, a Castle, to defend him from
enemies: a Tower, a magnificent House, for architecture, artifice, prospect,
site, strength, capacity, provision, munition, and the rest. Yet what are all
these against the invisible Enemies, against which his Tower must be a holy
House, and Temple? Neither is there found among men scarce a house strong
enough against men, even where Nature and Art have conspired: (what Castle so
impregnable, but Iron or Gold has taken?) but against Devils, and deuillish
men, God alone can be (such is man's frailty) a Tower of salvation; and he
alone will be (such is Gods goodness) nay, Reu. 1.8.
Is, Was, and is to Come (no Verb is expressed, that all this may be
expressed, Exodus 3.14.
I AM is his Name) the Tower of salvation, the House, Palace, Castle, Tower,
Temple, all in all for his King. This day, these six and fifty years, are
witnesses. This Tower is with him, in him, over him, about him, wheresouer He
eats, sleeps, rides, consulteth, in all things is immutably moving with
him and for him.

Salvation is a sweet Name, and this, the sweetest Salvation, even in the
abstract: yea, superintellectuall salvation, not a quality, but
supersubstantiall, GOD himself; which being beyond speech, we will not lose
our selves, and your patience, to speak of. Only this, in the application;
Psalm. 124 1.
If the Lord himself had not been a Tower of salvation to his King, when the
Gowries, and their accomplices, this day, rose up against him, how was his escape
possible? where honest Simplicity was closed in the trap of guile, where
Nakedness was assaulted with armed violence, where one alone had so many
doors made fast upon him, so many rooms betwixt him, and possibility of
help, so many Traitors against one Innocent, that is, so many incarnate
Devils against one Man. 2. Chr. 20.12.
I know not what to do (said King Iehoshaphat) but our eyes are toward thee:
and David here, 1. Sam. 22 5, 6, 7.
When the floods of Belial made me afraid, the cords of Hell compassed me; In
my distress, I called upon the Lord, he bowed the Heavens, and came down
(yea, the heart of one, set to kill him, to be his help) and bowed the necks
of his enemies under him. And, Psalm. 73.25, 26.
Whom have I in Heaven, but thee? and there is none on earth, that I desire
beside thee. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. Mat. 3.9.
He raised of stones children to Abraham, and said unto him, Genesis 15.1
Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great reward. His
shield then, which he upon his knees there acknowledged, and every Tuesday
since, reviueth it in his weekly devotions; his reward since, on an other
Tuesday-intended treachery, the super superlatiue of treasons, when King and
Kingdom had the neck on the block ( Pro. 16.10.
Diuinatio in labijs Regis) God gave his King, not only a divine spirit, with
Daniel, Dan. 5.14, 17.
to read the mystical writing, but to reuerse it; to reuerse it? yea, to
inuert it upon themselves, to recover us, before we were sick, and to bury
them in their own vault. Turris salutum, he is a Tower of saluations,
magnificans salutes, which we before observed out of a twofold translation,
to be both privation and habit. Great deliverance, and great prosperity
gives he to his King.

Ps. 22.10.
I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly,
says David. Even before his deliverance thence, a Tower of deliverance was he
to his King, stronger then the royal Palace, where the Queen at supper was
assaulted, sclopeto in pectus intentato, Camden. hist. E.K.
her Secretary taken from her presence, and in the next room slain, crying,
Iustitia, justitia; her Majesty made meanewhile a prisoner. Had not this Tower
protected, how could that tenderness have escaped abortion? and our hopes had
been dead before they were born. Following broiles, in his minority,
murdered his Father, imprisoned, deposed, chased away his Mother, exposed her
friends to spoil, and in a little space consumed two Regents or Protectors of
his nearest blood, his Uncle, and Grandfather: and when all these Strong sunk
under that weight, how could Weakness and Infancy escape, had not He given
great deliverance? As himself, in the womb, escaped, who is our Head, so his
Kingdom, then in the womb to him, and not come to the birth, hardly escaped
abortion, Anno 1588. A great and divine deliverance (if ever any) when such a
Fleet of so long and ample preparations, that it was surnamed Invincible, with
such purposed Landforces from the neighbor- Belgian shore, amiddest such
opportunities, as the League abroad, and our wants almost of Air and Water,
and, till the enemy supplied, of fire, when those vasa iniquitatis bellantia
were freighted with instruments of cruelty, Genesis 49.5.
and manned with a people, whose Progenitors had given experience of
vnmanning, and almost vnpeopling a World: where our goods, liberties,
consciences, lives, all were in danger: then did Ps. 68.1.
God arise, and his enemies were scattered. This Armada venit, vidit, Fugit:
Isa. 37.29
He put a hook in the nose, and a bridle in the lips of the Land-Armie, and
made Iud. 5.20.
the Stars in their courses fight against Sisera; the brute Elements, against
that brutum fulmen of Rome, and designs of his adherents. They neither Esa.
37.33, 34.
came into any City of this Kingdom, to shoot an Arrow, nor came before it
with Shield, nor cast a bank against it: by the way that he came, nay, by
way-lesse ways, did the Enemy return; nay, how few returned, to tell their
own miseries? Ibid. v 22
The Virgin, the daughter of Zion laughed, and in this place, in the greatest
congregation, honored the Tower of our salvation. I cannot forget the
memorable Apophthegme of his Majesty; then sensible of that deliverance, that
had the Enemy prevailed he could look for none other benefit from him, then
what Polyphemus promised Ulysses, Camd.
scilicet, vt caeteris deuoratis, postremus deglutirerur. Was not his Majesty
delivered in all the manifold deliverances of Queen ELIZABETH, from bloody
conspiracies? which, taking effect, could not but bring all things in those
times, into combustion, and miserable confusion, and must have wounded him
through her side. For what fidelity could be expected from Traitors? or right
from them, whom Religion had made contrary to right, to Religion? The Italian
and Spanish invasions of Ireland, the insurrections and costly rebellions of
the Irish then, did in their event, as by the present calmes, and quiet
possession appears, proclaim great deliverance for his King. And is not be a
Tower of salvation for his King, if we compare him with States and Fates
abroad? The Turkish Moon twice eclipsed in a short space, and once put out in
obscure darkness. Moscouia it self made a Moon, in manifold chances and
changes. Poland in invading, invaded: Sweden, and Denmark in the North, and
since, Italy and France in the South; Germany and Bohemia in the East, filled
with wars, tumors and rumors of wars, whiles we Psalm. 32.7.
are compassed with Songs of deliverance. Step but over the Threshold, and see
two great Henry's bleeding under the hands of base butchers, where were many
helpers against one traitor; in the midst of his camp, one; in the midst
of his best City, the other; both in the midst of their strength: and
compare it with two Gowries, men of honorable birth and place (that I mention
no other aid) having the King alone in their own house; secluded from all
seeming possible help, and Deuteronomy. 32.31.
let his enemies be Judges, whether GOD himself gave not great deliverance to
his King.

O August, blessed be thou among months; famous for the flight, and fight
with the Elements, of the Armada, Anno 1588. Gowries conspir. Anno 1600
famous for this our secular Iubilee, let thy fifth day be the quintessence of
days; let it be written in Gold, that had near been written in Blood, as the
Lady of days: and let this holy Act be acted in this holy Theater, many-many
anniuersaries. And thou Princess of the week, Tuesday, (as Ignatius calls
the Lord's Day, Queen of days, and the birthday of the World) be thou happy
for temporal deliverances, and not the day of Mars, or Mors any longer. Psalm.
1^8.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice, and be glad in it.
And thou, November, be Queen of months, and King too: still sing the memory
of thy Queen; still ring the presence of thy King: let thy fifth be the fifth of
fifts, and beyond Elixirs and quintessences, the first of all firsts, Quantum
inter stellas argentea luna minores) yea, as the Sun, above both Moon and
Stars; which was designed to the revolution of that horrid Chaos, when our
Sun, Moon, and Morning-starre; King, Queen, and Prince, our whole Firmament
and Parliament of Stars, 2. Sam. 21.17.
the light of Israel, and all our Isreal's lights had with a Hellish dampe, a
terrible lightning and thunder from the belly of Hell, been at once extinct,
had not that terrible blow made it not terrible by the Spirit of understanding
in our King. It was not his natural Genius, nor ingenious Art, (how great
soever;) it was the Tower of salvation, that had 1. Sam. 17.37.
delivered him from the Lion and the Bear, and would now deliver from this
Giant of treasons; that Dan. 2.28
reuealeth deep and secret things, and honored the King, with great
deliverance. He was a Tower of salvation for his King, and made him a Tower of
salvation for his; that now God has made us his, by that Divine instinct and
revelation, above, against Reason, and Art (as himself confessed;) not his
inheritance alone, but as the Genesis 47.23.
Egyptians were Pharao's new purchase, so God in another kind, has made us
obliged for Life, Liberty, Religion, All, unto the King. For had not that
Giantly progeny of the Earth, the sons of Reu. 17.6
the Whore, drunken with blood of Saints, (Contemtrix Superum, saeuaeque
auidissima caedis which now in printed Books deny any Papist to have had a
hand in it, In libr. impress. Louanij, 1621.
the very forehead of impudence) blown up all, had not our Phoebus, with
rays, more then humane, dispersed the mists of that Python, and opened Sphinx,
that Monsters Ridle, penetrated the Labyrinthian Cauernes of that Minotaure,
cut that Gordian-knot, which Art could not unloose, and so blew up the terrible
blow, and Blowers, and ground the Powder Plot to powder?

To This, which no age, no deliverance (merely temporal) can parallel, I
might add (to usher it) those of Watson and Cobham, and the rest; and (to
follow it) his deliverances from his late sickness; from water, the ninth of
January last; and other perils: wherein I might use the words of the Prophet,
Isa. 43.1.
Haec dicit Dominus, creans te, IAACOB, Meus es tu; when thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
Great deliverances gives he to his King every day: for what extraordinary
guard, circumspection, fear, force, retiredness, iealousies, executions? what
within? without him? even in this last and worst age? when Treason has filled
Press and Pulpit, and rewards attend those, which not only neglect, contemn,
resist, but murder Kings? a Theme, fit for the Popes Holiness to make a
Panegyrike upon, which Xistus Quintus did for the Friar that murdered the
French King, with as good devotion, as their solemn Procession was made for
the French bloody Massacre! Foelix scelus virtus vocatur.

But our GOD has given, has magnified has given not stupendous deliueries
alone, but Jubilees of prosperity. Great prosperity gives he to his King, in
those deliueries; in delivering him from his Enemies; in delivering his Enemies
to him; Psalm. 7.15
Inciderunt in foueam, quam fecerunt. The Gowries, this day, prevailed not,
failed of, and died in their cursed attempt; and so of the rest. Escape, with
victory and triumph too, is great prosperity. And great prosperity has he
given him in his own Royal person, in his Issue, in his Kingdoms. His
personal prosperities, as I know not best (being 1. Sam. 23.23.
the least of the thousands of Judah) yet we all know so much, as I had rather
praise God for them, who has given such prosperities to his King, then
displease men; some thinking I say too little; others backbiting, that I
flatter. Once, Royal Ancestrie, almost innumerable; a Reign, almost as long
as his life; (how seldom equalled, since Britain had a King? which, O thou,
his salvation, long and long continue^) his first being immediate Heir and
Possessor of this present Monarchy; his more Subjects; more Alliance and
Confederates, more Revenues, more complete Power, his Fame, further extended
then any of his Predecessors, are a truth; but those external (called bona
fortunae by the Philosopher) vix ea nostra voco. His bodily prosperities, in
masculine Sex, in a strong constitution, a constant health, dum vires, annique
sinebant, and that without Aesculapius his help; his abilities for exercises,
disports, discourse, studies; promising (if our sins prevent not) the hopes
of many years; these also are great prosperities, yet bodily. But the mind of
a man is the man; and herein great (and almost more then great) prosperities
gives he to his King: liberal in the liberal Arts; (but these are rudimenta,
non opera) beyond Plato's King, not a Philosopher alone, but a Divine; in both
these then exercising a Kingdom, when, like Apollo in the midst of the
Muses, the Schools of both Universities; yea, the Universities of both
Kingdoms saw him present and President: whom the lawyers have seen a King on
the Tribunal in science and conscience of the law; the Star Chamber admiring
the shining of a present Sun. For the Councell-table, I am not worthy to
gather the crummes: and the Grooms will drive me from Parliament Sessions; I
leave them to higher conceits. Yea, but he has fraylties too, may some say: I
answer, it is frailty, to make such objection: for these 2 Cor. 4.7.
treasures are in an earthen Vessel, such as must return (Serus o redeas) to
earth again: Soles occidere and redire possunt, This Sun must go down,
these Gods Psalm. 82.7.
must die like men! I answer, herein this Sol is not solus: we see, and joy
to see the Issue of his body, and his Issues Issue in both Sexes, hopeful and
glorious; in which respect, we say, and pray without a figure, Dan. 6.21
O King, live for ever, and reign for ever. Psalm. 128.3.
Let his Table be compassed with these Oliue-branches, and their heads be
crowned with Laurel.

And now are we come to the great prosperities of his Realms: in which
behold, first, that Trinity of England, Scotland, Ireland, made an Unity;
Fecit eas in gentem vnam* No foreign Enemy creeping in at the Irish window as
before, or Irish Traitor starting into a Scottish covert; no borderer at the
threshold, nor other leaping out of the Northern backside for France. We
need no wall (as of old) against the Picts: the Ocean it self is our wall
round about to guard us; stretches out his lovely arms and creekes, to enrich
us; insinuates his Sinus, bays, bosoms, and harbors, to embrace us; melts
himself in liquid loves, and mustereth waves, sands, tides, all his forces, as
becomes the great Ditch of this Tower of salvation, for his King, and his
Kingdoms.

Scotland, Hist. H. 7. L.S. Alb.
according to Henry the Seuenth's Prophecy, is now come into England, and
nearer the Sun, has thawed those frozen, inueterate, hereritarie quarrels;
cannot find Frontiers, or Marches; has lost the Barbarism of Borderisme; has
washed her face from civil uncivil blood and filth; has extinguished
natural unnatural feuds; has reformed her unformed Rites; has ordered her
Clergy in Orders; has allayed Laicke Distempers; has Doctorall Seats,
Episcopal Sees, Grave Councillors, Gallant Courtiers; and has gone over to
Ireland, to plant there Civility: Whence all this? our Text answers, Great
prosperity gives he to his King, and he, to that Kingdom.

Ireland has been an Ire-land, a Fire-land, whose Wildfire burned in their
Bogges: in the Mists and Fogges of Idle-busie Spirits, wild untamed
Inhabitants, who had gotten the Monopoly of Venom from all other Irish
Creatures. But now she grows every day English, and that Ire-land of Ireland,
those Northern Hiberna, the Boyling-pot of the North (Omne malum ab Aquilone)
has boiled out her Kerne froath, with Oneale and Tyrone morsels, and ecte noua
rerum facies, there, there may London be seen, Derrie and Colrane, like Genesis
29.16.
Rahell and Leah, London's Two Daughters; with twelve Towns, the issue of the
twelve Companies, like Genesis 30.3, 9.
Bilhah, and Zilpah, to do them service, and bring forth loyal Posterity to
Jacob. Where she could spare no venom from her men; where the Earth it self
grew queasie with crude humors, and the water sanke into Boggie swounds, and
trembling-quagmires, as amazed at the savage feritie of the Inhabitants, the
Whirle-pooles, and Quicksands of our brauest blood, the curse of our gentlest
Mothers; Psalm. 107.36.
There makes he the hungry (the needier English) to dwell, and prepare Towns
and Cities for Habitations, Ibi nunc Londonia cernes
Moenia, surgentes gentes, mores, res, omnia Nostra.
Hence now, as Constantine, first Christian Emperor, from Northern Britain,
and as now our Constantine from the North of Britain, so let hence, from the
North of Ireland, flow Civility and Religion, to that whole Island. Let the
Sun, as in the longest Summer days, rise out of the North, and our Northern
London be a happy Mother of Language, Arts, Subjection, that the Irish Harp
may forget Romish, and be tuned English, and Ps. 96.1.
sing a new Song to God, who has been a Tower of salvation to his King, and
made him the Tower of these great hopes, and happiness to that Kingdom: and
bless, O Lord, hereto his Majesty's present Designs with great prosperity.

And if we ship our selves from Ireland for England, and touch at Wales by the
way, how does it now after so long a time glory in the title of our glorious
hope, a gracious Prince? how has it enlarged her bowels of love and service,
and sympathised with His Candid Mind, in silver Mines, the second of Metals
correspondent to our second light and now first breaking forth to look upon
the first of our hopes, our Happy Prince? For England, We least can see things
nearest, and wood for trees cannot by some be discerned. It is spacious, and
wide, I will apply me to my present Auditorie: I have the Map, the Center, the
Heart, at least the beauteous Face of England before me. That which the Face
is to the Body; the Eye, to the Face, the Sight, to the Eye, that is London to
England; and as the Spirits to the Eye, so should this holy place be to London.

Hail, London, aue, (...), salve, Ps. 122.7.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces; O nimium
foelix, bona si tua noris. Great prosperity gives he to his King, and where
should he bestow it; but in the Repositorium and Chamber of his Kingdom? Ps.
122.5.
There has he set the Thrones for Judgment, the Thrones of the house of
David. The Tower of thy King is in the East for thy safety; the Bower, and
Palace of thy King is in the West, for light and Majesty: in the midst is
thy Guild Hall, for Justice: besides thee, is Westminster Hall, that brings
the whole Kingdom to thee, and makes thy Terms and Vacations, as another
Thames, ebbing and flowing, ( Reu. 17.1.15.
Many people are compared to many waters.) How many Gentlemen, and Noblemen
walk with thee into the S. Martines Lane and all the Suburbs.
fields? How many Lawyers sit on thy Skirts and Suburbs? How many Countrymen,
and men of many Countries, in thy Shops, and Markets, Keys, and Custom House?
How many Companies combined into one company, and now here one Congregation?
How many Storehouses of Provision? How many Warehouses of Wealth? How many
Hospitals for Poor? How many Hals for Rich? How many Temples for Devotion? to
omit thy Gresham-colledge within thee, and that Chelsey-colledge in thy
Borders, a Tower of Sion intended against the Tower of Babylon (and the Quarrie
of these our building stones, the very Place to our Arguments and these
Meditations.) How has London enlarged it self beyond the walls, the butts and
bounds of Art? Beyond the Thames, the bounds of Nature? Beyond her self, as it
were, sowing Londons in the Fields and Villages, beautified by her retrying
Palaces? Pars minima est ipsa puella sui. Thy Bridge is a multitude of Towers,
whose Ambition seems to scorn so base a Foundation, as Earth, and with a
Miracle of Art (like the Babylonian Pensile Gardens) not only joins City
and Borough, but is another City of Borough betwixt both; aspireth into the
Air, domineereth over the water, and with a multitude of captiued subject
fires takes revenge on that fire, which sometimes destroyed her Forest, that
is, turned her Timber into Stone: which marries with a happy conjunction two
Shires, and is the Semicircled Marriage-ring, with twenty Semicircled Arches
embossed, and with so many Piles, as Jewels, adorned. How has the Water
conspired with Art and Man's help, to make a new journey to London, and with a
new River sweetened and cleansed thy Streets and Houses? Midletons River.
How are thy Moore-fields, nor Moore, nor Fields any more, but pleasant Walks,
and, in comparison of the former, a petty Paradise? Thy Smith-field, has
washed her sootie, muckie, filthy face, and is made lovely. Thine Exchange also
has multiplied. What shall I say? Inopem te, at least, Britains Bursse.
inopem me copia fecit. When were thou so long together, delivered from the
devouring Pestilence? Have thou not so many Liueries, as the Liuerie of thy
Freedom? So many Scarlets, as Banners and Ensigns of thy Power? The Diligence
of Officers, Prudence of Counselors, Gravity of Aldermen, Hospitality of
Magistrates, Magnificence of Pompes, Sanctity of Courts, to adorn thee? I
could add thy varieties of Materials and Fashions of Attire, if thou did not
here by mis-fashion and deforme thee: thy Buildings also now becoming (Towers
indeed:) And, si Magister artis, ingenique largitor, Venture, I could number the
numberless deaths whence thou live, and (which herein is lawful) empanell a
Iewrie, not of Butchers but of Shambles, enough to astonish the whole Western
World! thy Flesh-markets there (besides thy flesh in Markets, and other
scattered places, not so conspicuous, with Fowls, Fish, Fruits, and other
belly Provision) out-vying any City, yea, many whole Kingdoms of the World.
And if I would present a sensual stranger with a sensible raritie of London,
not elsewhere to be paralleld, no not to be elsewhere credited, I would here
begin. But here, Romans 14.17.
it is time hereof to make an end. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink. 1.
Cor. 6.13
Meats are for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy both
it and them: though this require thankful acknowledgement to have thy fed
beasts, except we be fed beasts. Milk and Honey, Oil, and Wine, are not the
best gifts, not given always to the best. How many Men-shambles, Hell-shambles
has the Devil made, Yea, made the Belly a God, by Flesh-shambles and full
feeding? Ph. 3.
We will take Sanctuary in thy Churches? O thy Pulpits, O their Divinity!
herein I am at amaze: both Universities, Court, and Country, all come to This
place to pay their holy Tribute: and yet, had thou none but thine own store,
since the Apostles days, thou art incomparable, a very Nonesuch. I will not
frown, I may not weep, and show my self humane in thy Divines plaints and
complaints: it is a Festival, and we must rejoice. And, oh, that thy Paul
might put on Festival Apparel, and rejoice too! his Brother Peter, in the
West, may be more Royal, as Princeps Apostolorum, and chief of the twelve,
and has met with an Honorable Lord keeper, who has sealed him a renewed
Charter, and made him first (as first called) to begin the health of
reparation. But Paul is 1. Tim. 2.7
Doctor Gentium, and, I am sure, has 1. Cor. 15.10.
labored more abundantly then they all. O Paul's, what shall I say for thee? Of
thee, I may say, as Phranza, Georg. Phranza Chron. l. 3. c. 17.
of Saint Sophie, S. Sophies Church in Constantinople.
a terrestrial Heaven, a Cherubicall Chariot, another Firmament, beyond all
names of Elegance (Manasses Constant. Manasses ap. Pontan.
adds) Which I think the very Seraphim do admire with veneration; thy
spiritual part still, thy Divinity Lectures, thy Cross Sermons, (the Oil
scarce suffices for thine Euening-Lampes, These also much improued now by the
present Deane and C^^ons, often labors th^rein.
) but now, alas, thy stones! But I forget my self, it is a Festival; be of
good cheer, thou have a King, which has visited and pitied thy ruins, and
is still loath to see thee in the dust: thou have a Prelate, the Successor
(post tot secula) of thy Founder, who grieueth to see Paul's Faith not to
produce Works, and OUR FATHERS conscience, behind the inscience of PATER
NOSTER. Behold, now the stones themselves speak, and are at hand to promise
thy Reparations at hand: and I hope, Mat. 3 9.
God is raising children to Abraham of these stones, who will thrust the stone
out of their hearts, and bestow it on These walls.

O London, which art rich at home, and need none other World, then
Britain, how have thou extended thy Trade into all parts of Europe?

Coeli and soli bonis omnibus donata, thou have twice, with thy long Arms,
embraced the whole Globe; art made delicate with Russian Furs; fed, when need
is, with Corn from Danske, and Poland; whom the Germans present with rare
Artifices; Italians, with Silks, Stuffes, Veluets; the French and Spaniard,
with Wines and Oil; the Belgians, with Wares for thy Peace, and Wars for thy
superfluous blood; the Mountains of Norway, descend that thy houses may
ascend; Narue and the Easterlings are thy Calkers and Riggers for thy Ships;
Iseland, New-foundland, and the North-seas furnish thee with Fish; Turkey, with
Carpets; Barbary and the Negroes, with Gold, and Creatures for thy pleasure:
the Northwest has opened her various passages to thee, and if Nature denied
not, would give the thorow-fare: Greenland melts her huge Whale-monsters, to
do thee service: the Islands, which Nature had almost lost in the Ocean, are
found out by thy Mariners: the Red Sea has been awed, and the Turks afraid,
lest thou should stop up that mouth of Mahomet: the Mogoll's, Persian's,
Moscouite's, large Dominions are thy thorow-fare, thy Staples: Thou have
strewed thy Factories along the East even to Iapan, and sown and reaped
Wealth and Honor in the Ocean. How do the most remote parts send in their
Commodities both for thy profit and pleasure? while, by the way, Saldania,
Saint Augustines, Saint Helena, and other places yield refreshing to thy
Merchants and Mariners; Siam, sends the Lignum Aloes, Benjamin, rich Stones;
Socodanna, Diamonds; China, Raw Silk, Porcellane, Taffata, Veluets, Damask,
Musk, Sewing-gold, Embroydered Hangings; Macassar, and Patania, Bezars; Baly,
Slaves for thy Merchants Indian uses; Timore, White-sanders and Wax, Banda,
Nutmegs and Oil; the Molucca's, Cloves; Iapan, Dies, Salt-peeter, Silver;
Guinnee, dying-wood, Oyster-trees, Guinny-pepper; Zocotora, Ciuet-cats, and
Aloes; Arabian Red-Sea-Moha, Indian and Arabian Commodities; Cambaya, Cloth,
Carpets, Quilts, Spikenard, Turbith, Cinnamon; Surat, Indicoe's Callicoes,
Pintadoe's, Chadois, Shashes, Girdles, Cannakens, Treckanees, Senabafs, Aleias,
Patolla's, Sellas, Greene-ginger, Lignum Aloes, Suckets, Opium, Sal-armoniacke,
and abundance of Drugges; Balsora, Pearls; Zeilon, Cinnamon; Iambe, great
grained Pepper; as Priaman, Passaman, best Pepper, and Gold; the East of
Africa, Gold and Amber-greese. These, with many more, conspire to make thee
Great. Thou have not, as of old, visited the New-world, but have made (not
Ireland alone, but) Bermuda's frequent and populous; Virginia, to multiply in
Towns and Hundreths; besides, New England, New Foundland, and other thy
Plantations; O magnae spes altera Brittaniae. Virginia! I will repeat of thee,
which I said before of thy Royal Godmother, which named thee Virginia, O quam
te memorem virgo? thy lovely cheeks, alas, lately blushed with
Virginian-English blood: but how soon? and thy blush being turned to
indignation, thou shall wash, have washed thy feet in the blood of those native
unnatural Traitors, and now becommest a pure English Virgin; a new other
Britain, in that new other World: and let all English say and pray, GOD
BLESS VIRGINIA.

But whence this London-greatnesse? Great prosperities gives he to his King,
and his Cares, his Opportunities, his Charters, Commissions, Confederacies; his
Peace, which he has received from his Predecessor, and educated to maturitie;
his arts of ruling, his ruling of our Arts, whereby the Bees work luckily and
Waspes and Drones are expelled; his Faith, whereof he is Defender, and which
(as a Shield) has defended him; his Prosperity, which GOD, magnificans
salutes, has given him, and he, to London, is the mean of all thy means: O
Melibaee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit; his GOD, the Tower of his King, has
enclosed thee in the Towre-liberties. Psalm. 48.12.
Go about London, and tell her Towers, how many and great prosperities?) mark
well her Bulwarks, and consider her Palaces.

If any yet complain, are they not worse then those Murmurers who can find no
fault with Number. 11.5.6.
Manna, but because they have it, or good, in Number. 11.5.6.
Leekes or Cucumers, so admirable, but because they have a mind to quarrel?
Want of sickness, (I said before) is a wanton sickness, and fullness breeds
surfeit: else would not the delicate Papist complain of persecution, if he did
but think what 2. Reg. 9.22.
his mother Iezabel does, where she may have 1. Reg. 21.8.
Ahabs Ring. Nor would we long for War, if we could but present to our
imagination the misery of War; a very Hell upon Earth, and compendium of all
mischiefs. Think what it is to see thy House fired; thy Goods seized; thy
Servants fled, Mater^nus, hist. Belg.
thy Wise ravished before thy face, and then hung up by the heel (modesty
forbids the rest) thy Daughter crying to thee for help in one corner, while
thy little Son is tossed on another Pike, and the Sword at thine own throat,
and that the least of thy sorrows. Dulce bellum inexpertis, were then too late
a lesson, and the name of Peace would then be sweetest Music.

Sin is the worst Treason against the State, 1. Reg. 18.18.
the troubler of Israel, and this none of the least of sins, to be
censorious of those whom God has called Gods: especially now, where is so much
cause of thankfulness, where, by our King, as Gods immediate instrument, we
enjoy whatsoever might have been blown up, or shaken and lost by the
Gunpowder Treason; which again I remember, as more then answer to all
objections, though Hell have never enough. For us, Prou. 30. Tertul.
rather let us pray for the KING, Vitans prolixam, Imperium securum, Domum
tutam, Exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, (I may add) Subditos gratos, non
querulos, morigeros, non morosos: and that GOD will still and still be a Tower
of salvation for his KING: and praise ye him for his salvation, for this
salvation to his King, this Gowry- deliverance to his Anointed. Such mercies
continue He to this our David, and to his Seed for evermore. Amen and Amen.

FINIS.
READER. I subscribe to my Sermon* It was loath to preface to another Book:
for such is this, of my old friend Master A. C. with whom I would no new
strife, about that which before was public to another kind. His
Loue-spectacles made his eyes (admit^ed to my notes) to ouersee, his hands to
copy it and to procure others hands to present it to th^^e: an honor I never
deigned to any Sermon of mine, how onerous soever to the Press^ otherwise. Who
now also am in travel these twenty months of that which twenty years since
and more, was conceived. The Parent dyi^g, in stead of a Juno Lucina, The Poets
feign Baccus a Traveler over the World, borne of Jupiters thigh, etc.
I have played the Jupiter; and because my brain could not breed a Minerua, I
have found in my heart, and hands, and every where, entertaynment for the
forming, growing, ripening of this Bouncing Bacchus (a ^r^u^ller indeed with an
Army of Travelers) which my travel with Tr^uels and Travelers I mention to
obtain thy help especially the midwifery of thy p^ayers* for the perfecting
of so stupend^ous a bir^h (still sticking, and like to endure many month
pressure in the passage) which then perh^ps to such as will give him education,
may in recompense gave a world of the Worlds rarities.

Thine in the Lord. S. P.


